













































Instructions for ACL-2013 Proceedings


Qualia Relations in Metaphorical Noun-Noun Compounds 

 

Zuoyan Song  
School of Chinese Language and Lit-

erature, 
Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 

China,100875 
meszy@163.com 

 Qingqing Zhao 
School of Chinese Language and Lit-

erature, 
Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 

China,100875 
 874540721@qq.com  

  
  

Abstract 

This paper aims to find out the qualia roles in-
volved in metaphorical noun-noun compounds 
in Mandarin Chinese. Metaphor concerns the 
resemblance between things. From the per-
spective of qualia structure proposed by Gen-
erative Lexicon, the resemblance in metaphor-
ical compounds can be interpreted in the way 
that a compound and its metaphorical compo-
nent share the same quale role. A preliminary 
investigation shows that no matter which con-
stituent (the modifying noun or the head noun) 
takes on a metaphorical meaning, only three 
qualia roles are found in metaphorical com-
pounds, which are FORMAL, 
CONSTITUTIVE and TELIC, ordered from 
the most to the least frequent. AGENTIVE 
role is excluded. Among the values of 
FORMAL role, shape is the most frequent. 
CONSTITUTIVE role mainly relates to body 
part terms. TELIC role is mainly concerned 
with artifactual type nouns. Also, this study 
reveals some fine-grained distinctions between 
nouns of different types.  

1 Introduction 
It is clear that there are many types of nominal 
compounds, but as it is well known that the ma-
jority are composed of two nouns, i.e. noun-noun 
compounds. Compounds of this type present the 
result of productive compounding processes 
(Packard 2002:85; Li and Thompson 1981).  In 
noun-noun compounds, the most common con-
struction is modifier-head with the head on the 
right. The relatedness between the meaning of a 
compound and those of its components is always 
a hot topic and there are numerous studies are 
available, among which, the most innovative are 

works within the Generative Lexicon (GL) per-
spective. 

In GL, Qualia structure contains four basic 
qualia roles (Pustejovsky 1995:85-86):  

• Constitutive role: The relation between an 
object and its constituents or proper parts. 
e.g. material, weight, parts and component 
elements. 

• Formal role: That which distinguishes the 
object within a large domain. 
e.g. shape, color, orientation, magnitude, 
dimensionality and position.  

• Telic role: purpose and function of the ob-
ject. 
i.e. purpose that an agent has in performing 
the object and built-in function or aim which 
specifies certain activities. 

• Agentive role: factors involved in the origin 
or “bringing about” of an object. 
e.g. creator, artifact, natural kind and causal 
chain. 

The qualia are taken as representing an essential 
component of word meaning, capturing how 
language speakers understand objects and rela-
tions in the world and providing the minimal 
explanation for the linguistic behavior of lexical 
items.  

Under the theoretical framework of qualia 
structure, Johnston and Busa (1999) analyze the 
nominal compounds in English and Italian and 
propose Qualia Modification observing the rela-
tional structure between modifiers and heads in 
compounds. They focus on three types of qualia 
modification: TELIC, AGENTIVE and 
CONSTITUTIVE. Bassac and Bouillon (2013) 
offer a detailed analysis of the telic relationship 
in nominal compounds both in French and in 
Turkish. Recently, the approach of qualia modi-



fication has been adopted in several research 
works to analyze Chinese compound nouns. Lee 
et al. (2010) demonstrate the qualia modification 
in noun-noun compounds found in Chinese as 
well as a couple of other languages like German, 
Spanish, Japanese and Italian. Wang and Huang 
(2011) specifically investigate the modifier-head 
type in compound event nouns. Song and Qiu 
(2013) examine the qualia relations in the nomi-
nal compounds containing verbal elements 
(NCCVs) and identify some productive com-
pounding patterns. Unlike previous studies, 
which focus on the qualia relation between the 
two elements in a compound, this study also pays 
attention to the qualia relation between a com-
pound and its components. 

Following the generative perspective in works 
mentioned above, this paper aims to investigate 
the qualia roles involved in a special class of the 
noun-noun compounds in Mandarin Chinese, 
which contain metaphorical nouns. Huang (2008) 
first introduces qualia roles into the analysis of 
metaphorical noun-noun compounds and gives 
some examples. Based on more data, we will 
make a deeper analysis from both quantitative 
and qualitative perspective.  

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 introduces the data and method. Sec-
tion 3 and section 4 demonstrate the qualia roles 
involved in noun-noun compounds containing 
metaphorical modifiers and heads respectively. 
Section 5 summarizes the paper.  

2 Data and Method 
Different from qualia modification which focus 
on the modifiers, this work expects to reveal 
what qualia information a metaphorical compo-
nent can contribute to the compound no matter it 
is a modifying noun or a head noun. Metaphor is 
an imaginative way of describing something by 
referring to something else which is the same in 
a particular way. It emphasizes the resemblance 
between things. From the perspective of qualia 
structure proposed by Generative Lexicon, the 
resemblance in metaphorical compounds can be 
interpreted in the way that a compound and its 
metaphorical component share the same quale 
role. For example, compound shisun ( 石 笋 
stone-bamboo shoot) ‘stalagmite’ is not a bam-
boo shoot but a stone in the shape of bamboo 
shoot. Sun specifies the formal role of shisun. In 
other words, shisun and sun share the same for-
mal role. More precisely, they share the same 
value of the formal role, namely shape. 

According to Packard (2002:220), Metaphori-
cal Lexicalization refers to words whose compo-
nents lose their original meaning and take on a 
related, figurative or metaphorical interpretation, 
while the grammatical relationships within the 
compound continue to obtain. There are two 
types of metaphorical Lexicalization can be dis-
tinguished: that which occurs at the component 
level (component metaphorical lexicalization) 
and that which occurs at the level of the gestalt 
word (word metaphorical lexicalization). In 
component metaphorical lexicalization, one or 
both of the individual word components take on 
a metaphorical meaning, while the overall mean-
ing of the compound continues to be a composi-
tional sum of the meanings of its metaphorical 
parts. Our study will focus on component meta-
phorical compounds which are composed of two 
nouns and have modifier-head structure. These 
metaphorical compounds can be further divided 
into two types. Conceptual metaphor acts upon 
the modifying noun in one type and the head 
noun in the other type. 

Of course, metaphor and metonymy can act 
simultaneously upon the meaning of a noun-noun 
compound, as suggested by Goossens (1995), 
who created the term metaphtonymy to refer to 
this phenomenon. He identified two types of 
metaphtonymies: metaphor from metonymy and 
metonymy within metaphor. Exactly speaking, 
the compounds examined in this paper are all 
metaphtonymic compounds. That is to say, me-
tonymy is also at work in these compounds. 
Compounds Containing Metaphorical modifier 
involve CATEGORY FOR PROPERTY meton-
ymy. “Metaphor from metonymy” is at work in 
these compounds. Mojing  (墨镜 ink-glasses) 
‘sunglasses’ is such an example, where mo (ink) 
refers metonymically to the color of ink , and the 
compound as a whole is a metaphor ( it refers 
metaphorically to something black). On the other 
hand, Compounds Containing Metaphorical head 
involve SPECIFIC FOR GENERIC metonymy. 
“Metonymy within metaphor” is at work in these 
compounds. For example, in the compound (石
狮 stone-lion) ‘stone lion’, shi (狮) refers meto-
nymically to something lion-shaped (SPECIFIC 
FOR GENERIC metonymy), and there is also a 
metaphor at work, by which a lion is linked to an 
artifact. 
     The interaction of metaphor and metonymy 
are complicated, we will not go into details since 
this is not the focus of this paper. More discus-



sion can be seen in Warren (1992), Geeraerts 
(2002), Benczes (2006), among others. 

Generally, the compounds for our analysis 
come from Modern Chinese Dictionary (version 
6), which are disyllabic, and each noun in a 
compound is either a natural type or an 
artifactual type and refers to a physical object1. 
First, a total of 666 metaphorical compounds are 
selected, out of which, 480 (72%) contain meta-
phorical modifiers and 186 (28%) contain meta-
phorical heads. Then, the qualia role in every 
compound is annotated. Finally, statistical analy-
sis was performed. 

In the following two sections, these two types 
will be examined one by one. 

3 Compounds Containing Metaphorical 
Modifiers 

In the compounds of this type, the modifying 
noun is used metaphorically. It does not refer to 
an object but some properties of the object, i.e. a 
quale role of the modifier. More precisely, modi-
fying noun specifies some characteristic of head 
noun.  

Such compounds bear a metaphorical relation-
ship between the modifying noun and the com-
pound: the entity denoted by the compound (or 
N2) is metaphorically understood through the 
entity denoted by N 1. N1 is a metaphorical de-
scription of N2.This metaphorical relationship 
can be based upon a number of features, relations 
or functions. In other words, the modifying noun 
and the compound share the same quale role or 
the same value(s) of a quale role. Our examina-
tion shows that there are three qualia roles can be 
seen in compounds of this type, among which 
FORMAL is the most common, followed by 
CONSTITUTIVE and TELIC. Their distribution 
information is summarized in Table 1. 

 
FORM CONS TELIC 
165(89%) 11(6%) 10(5%) 

 
Table 1: Distribution of qualia roles in compounds 

containing metaphorical modifiers 

3.1 FORMAL Qualia Modification 
In these compounds, metaphorical nouns modify 
the formal role of the head noun by exploiting 
their own formal role. As shown in table 2, the 

                                                 
1  Compounds containing deverbal nouns (e.g.meipi) and 
trisyllabic compounds (e.g.jiqiren) are not in the scope of 
statistics. To illustrate our point, some of these compounds 
are analyzed in this paper. 

values of the formal role vary wildly from noun 
to noun, including shape, color, size and so on. 
The most common formal values are shape (63%) 
and color (15%). For example, luanshi (卵石), 
which literally means ‘egg stone’, refers to egg-
shaped stone. Luanshi ‘boulder’ is similar to luan 
‘egg’ in shape. xuecheng (血橙) ‘blood orange’ 
denotes a kind of orange which is as red as blood. 
Some metaphorical modifying nouns can activate 
more than one values of the FORMAL role as 
seen in compound yican (蚁蚕) ‘cockscomb’, in 
which yi indicates the size, color as well as  the 
shape of silkworms.  
 
luan-
shi 

egg -stone ‘boulder’ shape 

ta-lou tower-
building 

‘tower build-
ing’ 

shape 

qiu-guo ball-fruit ‘cone’ shape 
xing-
yan 

almond- 
eyes 

‘almond- eyes’ shape 

lang-
gou 

wolf-dog ‘wolf-dog’ shape 

chuan-
xie 

boat-shoe ‘boat-shaped 
shoes’ 

shape 

yi-can ant-
silkworm 

‘newly-hatched 
silkworm’ 

size,shape, 
color 

mo-jing ink-glasses ‘sunglasses’ color 
xue-
cheng 

blood-
orange 

‘blood orange’ color 

hua-
xian 

flower-
thread 

‘colored thread’ color 

niu-wa bull-frog ‘bullfrog’ sound 
feng-
niao  

bee-bird ‘hummingbird’ sound and 
feeding 
method  

mi-zao honey- 
jujube 

‘jujube’ taste 

 
Table 2: The formal values in metaphorical modifier 

 
yi                                           can                         

 
 
 
 
 

Color(red) Color 
Shape Shape 
size size 

 
Figure 1: Mapping between the formal roles of yi and 

can 
The metaphor-base modifiers such as luan and 

xue are used as adjectives. But they are quite 
different in qualia modification. Adjectives such 
as elliptical and red directly modify some as-
pects of the head noun. Metaphor-base modifiers, 
on the other hand, make reference to the 
FORMAL role of the head noun through their 



own FORMAL role. In other words, to get the 
qualia role of the head noun, we have to get the 
qualia role of the modifying noun. For instance, 
the formal role of the modifier yi is mapped onto 
the head can as illustrated in Figure 1. 

3.2 CONSTITUTIVE Qualia Modification 
The CONSTITUTIVE quale explains the relation 
between an object and its constituents, or proper 
parts. In the compound erfang (耳房,ear-room) 
‘side room’, er specify the relation between 
erfang and zhengfang (正房 , principle-room) 
‘principal room’. Side rooms are on the sides of 
the principle room, just as the ears are on the 
sides of the head. This information is encoded in 
the CONSTITUTIVE role of er. Different from 
FORMAL qualia modification in 2.1, which in-
dicates the similarity between objects in attrib-
utes, CONSTITUTIVE modification shows the 
parallelism between two pairs of objects in rela-
tionship as shown in (1) 
 

(1) on_ the _sides_ of <er ‘ear’, tou ‘head’>   
on_the_sides_of<erfang ‘side room’, 
zhengfang ‘principle room’>   

 
Therefore, there is a location-located relation-

ship between the two constituents of the com-
pound: the modifier specifies the location of the 
head noun. Object metaphorically stands for its 
position in a relation. More examples include 
jiaozhu (脚注 ) ‘footnote’, jiaodeng (脚灯) ‘foot-
light’, weizhu (尾注 tail-note) ‘endnote’ and 
meipi (眉批 eyebrow-comment) ‘head note’. The 
modifying nouns in these compounds are all 
body-part terms. It is not hard to understand 
since the relation Is_a_part_of is proposed as a 
defining element for this type of nouns (Lenci et 
al. 2000).  

3.3 TELIC Qualia Modification 
In these compounds, the modifying noun and 
compound noun share similar TELIC role. For 
instance, compound fangche (房车 , house-car) 
‘recreational Vehicle’ refers to a car which is 
similar to a house in function. fang modifies the 
purpose of che, which is to live in. While in non-
metaphorical compounds, TELIC qualia modifi-
cation exhibits a used_for relation, in metaphori-
cal compounds it presents a used_as relation. For 
example, caidao (菜刀 vegetable-knife) ‘cleaver’ 
is used for cutting vegetables, whereas fangche is 
used as a house. In fact, fangche is a house as 
well as a car, which is used both for living and 

transportation, although it essentially belongs to 
Vehicles. 

Pustejovsky(1995:142-148) proposes that a 
lexical item is able to inherit information accord-
ing to the qualia structure it carries from multiple 
parents. For example, dictionary can inherit dif-
ferent roles from different types as shown in (2). 
 
(2) Dictionary is_formal book 

Dictionary is_telic reference 
Dictionary is_agent compiled-material 

 
In terms of multiple inheritance, the inheritance 
relations in fangche can be illustrated by figure 2. 
 fangche inherits telic role from both fang and 
che. 
 
(3) fangche is_formal che 

fangche is_telic che 
fangche is_telic fang 
 

 
 fang ‘house’ che ‘car’ 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

Figure 2: Multiple inheritance in fangche 
 

Note that both fang and che are typical artifactual 
types which relate with concepts making refer-
ence to TELIC (purpose or function), or 
AGENTIVE (origin) (Pustejovsky 2001, 2006).  

Another typical example is zhahe ( 闸 盒
floodgate-box) ‘fuse box’, which can cut the 
lights off just as a floodgate can dam up water. 

4 Compounds Containing Metaphorical 
head 

FORM CONS TELIC 
336(70%) 87(18%) 54(12%) 

   
Table 3: Distribution of qualia roles in compounds 

containing metaphorical head 
 

This section will focus on compounds where it is 
the second, headed noun that is understood met-
aphorically. There are also three qualia roles 
involving in compounds of this type, which are 
FORMAL, CONSTITUTIVE and TELIC, or-
dered from the most to the least frequent. Table 3 
shows the frequencies of the qualia roles. 

TT
F  

fangche ‘recreational Vehicle’ 



Unlike other noun-noun compounds, which 
usually involve only one qualia relation, com-
pounds of this type can present two qualia roles, 
because the head nouns also indicate qualia in-
formation. In addition to referring to an object, 
the metaphorical head noun stands for some 
property, relation or function of an object as the 
metaphorical modifier does. In the case of shishi, 
shi ‘stone’ and shi ‘lion’ show CONSTITUTIVE 
role and FORMAL role of the compound respec-
tively (see 4.1). 

4.1 FORMAL Roles 
Different from the metaphorical modifying 
nouns, which can indicate various values of for-
mal role, the majority of the metaphorical head 
nouns (81%) are extended towards the reading 
‘shape or image of an object’. The object that is 
denoted by the head noun is understood to be an 
image of that object, i.e. not an instance of the 
object itself. For instance, shishi (石狮 stone-lion) 
‘stone lion’ is not a real lion but a thing resem-
bling a lion in appearance and made of stone. 
The head noun Shi is interpreted as the shape of 
an object.  

Generally speaking, this pattern of metaphori-
cal compounds seems to be morphologically 
productive. Nouns like hua (花) ‘flower’, qiu (球) 
‘ball’, yan (眼) ‘eye’, si (丝) ‘silk’, ta (塔) ‘tow-
er’, zhu (柱) ‘post’ and xing (星) ‘star’ often oc-
cur at the head position and form a group of 
compounds. What is common in these nouns is 
that shape is one of the prominent features of the 
objects denoted by them regardless of natural 
type or artifactual type nouns. Some compounds 
containing hua and qiu are shown in (4) and (5). 
 
(4)-花 hua‘flower’:  
雪花 xue-hua (snow-flower) ‘snowflake’ 
水花 shui-hua (water-flower) ‘water spray’  
火花 huo-hua (fire-flower) ‘spark’  
浪花 lang-hua (wave-flower) ‘spindrift 

 /spray/waves’  
纸花 zhi-hua (paper-flower) ‘paper flower’  
绢花 juan-hua3 (silk-flower) ‘silk flower’ 
 
(5)-球 qiu‘ball’： 
火球 huo-qiu (fire-ball) ‘fire ball’ 
雪球 xue-qiu (snow-ball) ‘snowball’ 
血球 xue-qiu (blood-ball) ‘blood cell’ 
棉球 mian-qiu (cotton-ball) ‘cotton ball’ 
煤球 mei-qiu (coal-ball ) ‘eggette’. 
 

Note that hua (花) ‘flower’ tends to be metaphor-
ically extended towards color reading when it 
serve as modifying noun as compound huaxian 
‘coloured thread’ shows (see table 1). When 
serving as head noun, however, it is much more 
likely to be interpreted as the shape of a flower. 
    Of course, besides shape, metaphorical head 
nouns can reveal other values of the formal role. 
For instance, songtao (松涛  pine-billow) ‘the 
soughing of the wind in the pines’ is resembling  
billows in sound. 

The interpretation of such compounds as 
shishi and xuehua typically involves a shift from 
object to image, and seems to be triggered by the 
combination of lexical entries. Consider, for ex-
ample, the compound shishi ‘stone lion’. Some 
property that is normally understood in the inter-
pretation of lion is excluded when it is modified 
by stone, i.e. a stone lion cannot be a natural kind. 
This interpretation effect is called Metonymic 
Type Coercion (MTC) in Kluck (2007). Accord-
ing to our preliminary investigation, TELIC and 
CONSTITUTIVE qualia modification nouns are 
most likely to lead to MTC.  

4.1.1 TELIC qualia Modification 

The compound jiqiren 2  (机器人machine-man) 
‘robot’ denotes a kind of machine in the shape of 
a man. ren is a natural type which has no specific 
TELIC role. When combining with jiqi, it gets a 
TELIC role and AGENTIVE role since jiqi is a 
typical artifactual type. The noun ren has to be 
interpreted as a type that does not conflict with 
the TELIC role, i.e. an image. Therefore, the 
compound is an artifactual type, too. This is also 
an example of multiple inheritance (see figure 2). 
Similarly, wanjuche (玩具车 playing-utensil-car) 
‘toy car’ is not a car but a toy in the shape of a 
car. In compound jiqiren, a TELIC role is im-
posed on the natural type noun ren. In the case of 
wanjuche, however, the normal TELIC role of 
che (‘transportation’) is, at least in part, replaced 
by the TELIC role of wanju ( ‘ playing’) .   

It is worth noting that wanjuche and fangche 
are quite different in that a toy car is a toy in the 
shape of a car but a recreational Vehicle is a car 
that has some functions of a house. It is easy to 
tell the difference from figure 2 and figure 4. 

 
 
 

                                                 
2 We found no similar examples in bisyllabic com-
pounds.  



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Figure 3: Multiple inheritance in jiqiren 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 4: Multiple inheritance in wanjuche 
   

4.1.2 CONSTITUTIVE Qualia Modification 

In the compound shishi ‘stone lion’, the modify-
ing noun shi ‘stone’ is used to specify a subpart 
of or the material of the denotation of the head 
noun, which is usually not contained in a lion. So, 
the head noun shi ‘lion’ is reanalyzed to an im-
age of a lion. More similar examples are given in 
(6) and (7).   
 
(6)石羊 shiyan  (stone-sheep) ‘stone sheep’ 

泥人 niren (clay-man) ‘clay figurine’ 
纸花 zhihua (paper-flower)‘paper-flower’ 
纸鹤 zhihe (paper-crane) ‘paper-crane’ 

(7)石笋 shisun (stone-bamboo shoot) ‘stalag-
mite’  

雪花 xue-hua (snow-flower) ‘snowflake’ 
 

While stone and clay are natural substances 
which can be used as material, paper is 
artifactual material. All the compounds in (6) are 
artifactual types, which are interpreted structural-
ly as ‘objects that are shaped like N2 and made of 
N1’. For example, niren is shaped like a man and 
made of clay. On the other hand, the compounds 
in (7) are all natural types, which are interpreted 
structurally as ‘objects that are shaped like N2 
and composed of N1’. For example, xuehua is 
shaped like a flower and composed of shui. 

4.2 CONSTITUTIVE Role 

A F 

jiqiren ‘robot’ 

jiqi ‘machine’ ren‘ man’ 

T 

Some body part nouns like jiao (脚) ‘foot’, tou  
(头) ‘head’ and ding (顶) ‘the peak of a head’ 
can occur in the head position and metaphorical-
ly extended towards the reading ‘the position of 
the body part’. For Instance, yejiao(页脚 page-
foot) ‘footer’ is at the bottom of a page, just as a 
foot is at the bottom of a man. The relation be-
tween mei(眉‘eyebrow’) and ren(人‘person’) is 
also similar to the relation between yemei(页眉
‘header’) and ye (页‘page’) as shown in  (8) and 
(9). 

A F 

wanjuche ‘toy car’ 

wanju ‘toy’ che ‘car’ 

T 
 
(8)At _the_bottom_of <jiao ‘foot’, ren ‘person’> 

At_the_bottom_of<yejiao ‘footer’, ye ‘page’>  
 
(9)At_the_top_of <mei ‘eyebrow’, ren ‘person’> 

At_ the_ top_ of <yemei ‘head’, ye ‘page’>  
 

Generally speaking, body parts terms can 
serve as both modifier and head nouns with a 
location meaning as seen in meipi (眉批) and 
yemei（页眉）. However, there are some excep-
tions. As a head noun, er assumes a metaphorical  
meaning ‘something shaped like an ear’ as seen 
in yin’er (银耳 silver-ear) ‘tremella’ and mu’er 
(木耳 wood-ear) ‘agaric’. The CONSTITUTIVE 
role that is activated in modifier position while 
the FORMAL role (shape) is activated in the 
head position. In other words, both 
CONSTITUTIVE and FORMAL roles of er are 
salient. On the other hand, xin ‘heart’ can stand 
for a central location only in the head position as  
jiaoxin (脚心 foot-heart) ‘the underside of the 
arch of the foot’ and dixin (地心 earth-heart) ‘the 
earth’s core’ shows.  

4.3 TELIC Role 
In some compounds, the head nouns can show 
the TELIC role of the compound. For example, 
naoqiao (脑桥 brain-bridge) ‘pons’ denotes a 
part of the brain acting as a bridge, which is used 
for connecting different sides. Similar com-
pounds include chiqiao (齿桥 tooth-bridge) ‘re-
tainer’, shangu (扇骨 fan-bone) ‘the ribs of a 
fan’, zhijin (纸巾 paper-towel) ‘facial tissue’, 
zhiqian (纸钱 ‘paper money’)  and bimao (笔帽 
pen-cap) ‘cap of a pen’ 

It is noted that the metaphorical head nouns in 
these compounds are either artifactual types or 
body part nouns. Moreover, their FORMAL roles 
are often activated as well. That is, the compari-



son is based on function and possibly shape. 
Consider the compound zhijin. It is not only used 
as a towel, but also looks like a towel. Likewise, 
shangu looks like a rib and bimao looks like a 
cap. 

5 Conclusion and Discussion 
In previous sections, we examine the qualia roles 
involved in metaphorical noun-noun compounds. 
Compared to non-metaphorical noun-noun com-
pounds, these compounds demonstrate two major 
characteristics. 

First, no matter which constituent (the modify-
ing noun or the head noun) takes on a metaphori-
cal meaning, only three qualia roles are found in 
these compounds, which are FORMAL, 
CONSTITUTIVE and TELIC, ordered from the 
most to the least frequent. AGENTIVE role is 
excluded. 

 
(10)FORMAL>CONSTITUTIVE>TELIC 
 

From these observations, we can infer that 
metaphor emphasizes the resemblance between 
things in physical properties (e.g. shape, color, 
sound), location relation and function rather than 
origin. Among the values of FORMAL role, 
shape is the most frequent. It is reasonable since 
it is an attribute that can be perceived most di-
rectly through the senses. Shape is the primary 
way we recognize what an object is. 
CONSTITUTIVE role mainly relates to body 
part terms. TELIC role is mainly concerned with 
artifactual type nouns and body part terms.  

Second, in compounds containing metaphori-
cal head, the qualia roles of the compound not 
only can be activated by the modifier but also by 
the head noun, because the head noun as well as 
the modifying noun can indicate qualia infor-
mation. 

Also, this study reveals some fine-grained dis-
tinctions between nouns of different types. First 
of all, different nouns highlight different qualia 
roles or different values of a quale role. On this 
view, TELIC role are salient for artifactual nouns 
such as house, car and bridge. CONSTITUTIVE 
role (especially part/whole relation and location 
relationship) is prominent in body part terms like 
head, foot and heart. Shape and color are typical 
features of a flower in that we often creates a 
comparison between an object and a flower 
based on shape or color, as the examples of  
huaxian and zhihua show. 

Secondly, artifactual type nouns are quite dif-
ferent from natural type ones. Metaphorical 
artifactual type nouns, especially those in head 
position, often exhibit both FORMAL role and 
TELIC role as seen in compounds zhijin and 
shangu. 

It is particularly interesting that although both 
zhuancha  ( 砖茶 brick-tea) ‘brick tea’ and 
chazhuan (茶砖)  refer to the same object and 
zhuan takes on a metaphorical meaning in both 
compounds, they have different meaning. While 
zhuancha means ‘tea that is shaped like a brick’, 
chazhuan means ‘a brick-like object made of tea’. 
zhuan plays different role in these two nouns. In 
modifier position, it only describes an object, but 
in head position, it also refers to an object.  

In this paper, we only discuss metaphorical 
noun-noun compounds. For further study, we 
will extend the generative lexicon perspective to 
metaphorical noun-noun phrases. 

Acknowledgments 
This work is partially supported by the National So-
cial Science Foundation of China (No. 10CYY032), 
the Open Project Program of Shandong Key Labora-
tory of Language Resource Development and Appli-
cation and Major Project of National Social Science 
Foundation (No. 12&ZD227).We are grateful to the 
two anonymous reviewers for highly constructive 
input. 

References  
Bassac, Christian and Pierrette Bouillon. 2013. The 

Telic Relationship in compounds. In: Pustejovsky 
et al.(eds),Advances in Generative Lexicon Theory 
Text, Speech and Language Technology Volume 
46:109-126. 

Benczes,Réka.2006.Creative Compounding in Eng-
lish. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John benjamins. 

Geeraerts, Dirk.2002. The Interaction of Metaphor 
and Metonymy in Composite Expressions. In: 
René Dirven and Ralf Pörings (eds.), Metaphor 
and Metonymy in Contrast, pp435-65. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter.  

Goossens, Louis. 1990. Metaphtonymy: The Interac-
tion of Metaphor and Metonymy in Expressions for 
Linguistic Action. Cognitive Linguistics, 1.3: 323–
340. 

Huang, Jie.2008. A Cognitive Perspective to Semantic 
Interpretation of Metaphtonymic Noun-Noun 
Compounds in Chinese and English. Foreign Lan-
guage Education,  29.4:25-29. 

Johnston, Michael and Federica Busa. 1999. Qualia 
Structure and the Compositional Interpretation of 



Compounds. In: E. Viegas (ed). Breadth and Depth 
of Semantics Lexicons, pp. 67-187. Dordrecht, 
Kluwer. 

Kluck,Marlies.2007. Optimizing interpretation from a 
Generative Lexicon: a case study of Metonymic 
Type Coercion in modified nouns. 4th International 
Workshop on Generative Approaches to the Lexi-
con (GL 2007), Paris : France (2007) 

Lee, Chih-yao, Chia-hao Chang, Wei-chieh Hsu and 
Shu-kai Hsieh. 2010. Qualia Modification in Noun-
Noun Compounds: A Cross-Language Survey. In: 
Proceedings of the 22nd Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics and Speech Processing 
(ROCLING-2010), pp.379-390. 

Lenci, Alessandro, Busa F., Ruimy N, et al. 2000. 
SIMPLE Work Package 2 – Linguistic Specifica-
tions, Deliverable D2.1. ILC-CNR, Pisa, Italy. 

Li, Charles N. and Thompson, S. A. 1981. Mandarin 
Chinese: A Functional Reference Grammar. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.1981. 

Packard, J.L. 2000.The Morphology of Chinese. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.  

Pustejovsky, James. 1995.Generative Lexicon. MIT 
Press, Cambridge. 

Pustejovsky, James.2001.Type Construction and the 
Logic of Concepts, In: Bouillon, P., Busa, F. (eds.) 
The Syntax of Word Meanings, pp.91-123. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Pustejovsky, James. 2006.Type Theory and Lexical 
Decomposition. Journal of Cognitive Science 
6:39–76. 

Song, Zuoyan and Likun Qiu. 2013. Qualia Relations 
in Chinese Nominal Compounds Containing Ver-
bal Elements. International Journal of Knowledge 
and Language Processing. 4(1):1-15. 

Wang, Shan and Chu-Ren Huang. 2010. Adjectival 
Modification to Nouns in Mandarin Chinese: Case 
Studies on “cháng+ noun” and “adjective+ 
túshūguan”. In: Proceedings of Pacific Asia Con-
ference on Language, Information and Computa-
tion. Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. 

Wang, Shan and Chu-Ren Huang. 2011. Compound 
Event Nouns of the ‘Modifier-head’ Type in Man-
darin Chinese. In: Proceedings of the 54th 
PacificAsia Conference on Language, Infor-
mation,and Computation. Nanyang Technological 
University, Taiwan. 

Warren, Beatrice. 1992. Sense Developments. A con-
trastive study of the development of slang senses 
and novel standard senses in English [Stockholm 
Studies in English 80].Stockholm: Almqvist and 
Wiksell International. 

 

 

 
 


