










































A Noisy Channel Model Framework for Grammatical Correction


Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning: Shared Task, pages 109–114,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Noisy Channel Model Framework for Grammatical Correction

L. Amber Wilcox-O’Hearn
Department of Computer Science

University of Toronto
amber@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

We report on the TOR system that partic-
ipated in the 2013 CoNLL shared task on
grammatical correction. The system was
a provisional implementation of a beam
search correction over a noisy channel
model. Although the results on the shared
task test set were poor, the approach may
still be promising, as there are many as-
pects of the current implementation that
could be optimised. Grammatical correc-
tion is inherently difficult both to perform
and to evaluate. As such, possible im-
provements to the evaluation are also dis-
cussed.

1 Introduction

Grammatical correction covers many subproblems
including spelling correction, lexical choice, and
even paraphrasing. There is a sense in which syn-
tax is separable from semantics and discourse. A
sentence may be parsable in a language, even if it
is nonsensical. On the other hand, many errors that
we consider a matter of grammar, such as some
instances of determiner choice, are only incorrect
because of the semantic or discourse properties of
the sentence in its context.

Another complexity is that there are degrees of
grammatical correctness. Some sentences are not
parsable, but others are just awkward sounding, or
unconventional.

So a grammatical error may manifest in a mes-
sage that doesn’t code a meaning in the language
at all, and the task becomes inferring a plausible
meaning and coding it correctly. This is analogous
to non-word spelling errors. Alternatively, it may
result in a meaning that is not exactly what was
intended. This is more like a real-word spelling
error.

In either case, the implication is that in order to
detect and correct a grammatical error, we must be

able to infer the intended meaning. This points to
the depth of the problem.

1.1 Confusion Sets

A common and useful way to construe error cor-
rection, including grammatical correction, is to
first classify sets of alternatives that are mutu-
ally confusable. This is typically done at the
lexical level, though the idea is generalizable to
multiword expressions, constructions, or phrases.
Then the text under examination is searched for
instances of members of these confusion sets. Fi-
nally a heuristic is used to decide whether one of
its alternatives would have been a more appropri-
ate choice in its context. Within this framework,
there are different approaches to these steps.

In choosing our confusion sets, we wanted to
be flexible and extensible. Therefore, we did not
want to depend on corpora of errors with annotated
corrections to infer alternatives. So we collected
general statistics from corpora that were assumed
to be correct, and used those to evaluate proposed
corrections to observed sentences. This approach
is not unique to this model. It is seen, for exam-
ple, in (De Felice and Pulman, 2007), (Tetreault
and Chodorow, 2008), and (Gamon et al., 2009),
among others.

However, the main difference between our sys-
tem and previous ones is that we do not select our
confusion sets in advance of statistical modelling.
That is, although the confusion sets we used were
based on POS tagsets, there was no classifying or
learning to discriminate among members of a con-
fusion set before the task. The aim of this choice
was to make our system more general and flex-
ible. We can now modify our confusion sets at
runtime without retraining any models. The provi-
sional confusion sets we used are somewhat arbi-
trary, but this can be changed independently of the
rest of the system.

Although our system was not competitive at this

109



stage, it provides a preliminary basis for further
experiments.

The remainder of this paper describes the
framework and the initial implementation of that
framework that was used in the shared task, as
well as future improvements to the model. We
also discuss the difficulty in evaluating such sys-
tems. All of the code used to generate our submis-
sion is freely available for examination and use on
GitHub (Wilcox-O’Hearn and Wilcox-O’Hearn,
2013).

2 Overview of the system

We approach grammatical error correction using a
noisy channel model. Such a model is also used by
(Park and Levy, 2011) and (West, Park, and Levy,
2011). One appealing aspect of this model is that it
makes explicit the cost of error, such that a correc-
tion must not only be more likely than the observa-
tion to be proposed, but it must be more likely even
given that errors are less likely than non-errors to
a degree specified by the properties of the channel.
In practice this can mitigate false positives that re-
sult from overconfidence in a language model.

A grammatical error is treated as a transforma-
tion of some original, correct sentence, S, gener-
ated by a language model M . We attempt to re-
cover the original sentence by hypothesizing pos-
sible transformations that could have resulted in
the observed sentence S′. If we estimate that it is
more likely that S was generated by M and trans-
formed into S′ than that S′ was generated by M
and left unchanged, we propose S as a correction.

In this preliminary implementation of the
framework, we use a combination of word and
POS n-gram models as the language generation
model, while POS tags form the basis of our chan-
nel model.

To generate sentence hypotheses that can in-
clude multiple interacting errors interleaved with
non-errors while putting a bound on the size of the
search space, we use a left-to-right beam search.
This differs from the beam search used by Dal-
heimer and Ng (2012a). In their work, the search
space is constructed by generating variations of
the entire sentence. Just as here, at each iteration,
they make every variation appropriate at a single
position, but they evaluate the whole sentence con-
taining that correction. Although sentences that
require multiple interacting corrections will ini-
tially have a low score under this method, a large

enough beam width will allow the corrections to
be made one at a time without being lost from
consideration. In our model, by evaluating par-
tial sentences from left-to-right, we hope to lessen
the need for a large beam width, by holding off in-
tegration of the continuation of the sentence, and
letting it unfold in a way that more closely mimics
human sentence comprehension.

2.1 The language model

To model language generation, we used an inter-
polation of two n-gram models, a trigram model
based on regular word types, and a 5-gram model
of POS tags. The data for these models was
derived by combining the corrected version of
the NUCLE corpus (Dalheimer, Ng, and Wu,
2013) with a randomly chosen selection of ar-
ticles from Wikipedia as provided by the West-
bury Lab Wikipedia corpus (Shaoul and Westbury,
2010), which we tokenised using NLTK (Bird,
Loper, and Klein, 2009) to match the format of
the shared task. The precise set of articles used
is included in our GutHub repository (Wilcox-
O’Hearn and Wilcox-O’Hearn, 2013). We used
SRILM 1.7.0 (Stolcke, 2002) to generate a mod-
est trigram model of 5K words. We then passed
the same data through the Stanford POS tagger
v3.1.4 (Toutanova, Klein, Manning, and Singer,
2003) and again through SRILM to produce a POS
5-gram model.

2.2 The channel model

The channel model provides a definition of trans-
formations that could have been applied to a sen-
tence before we observed it. Our system consid-
ers only transformations of single words, specif-
ically, only single word insertions, deletions, and
substitutions. This cannot represent every gram-
mar error we might encounter, but makes a good
first approximation, and it represents all errors in
this iteration of the shared task. To simplify the
description and implementation, we equivalently
consider the empty string to be a valid word in-
cluded in some substitution (confusion) sets, and
define the channel as one that sometimes replaces
a word with one of the alternatives in its confu-
sion set. The probability of such replacement is a
parameter α to be inferred.

As explained in the introduction, one goal of our
system is to allow flexible confusion sets that do
not need to be fully specified in advance of learn-
ing statistics about them. Therefore, we define our

110



confusion sets in terms of the standard POS tagsets
as given by the Stanford tagger, using a notion of
closed vs. open word classes.

2.2.1 Closed Classes

For our purposes, a closed word class is a set of
words that has a relatively small, finite number
of members. We composed the following closed
classes out of POS tagsets for the purposes of this
task:

• DT ∪ {ǫ},

• MD ∪ {ǫ},

• IN ∪ TO ∪ {ǫ},

• a hand-built class called AUX, consisting of
‘be’, ‘do’, ‘have’, and ‘get’ verbs, ∪ TO ∪
{ǫ}.

We then restricted each class to the k most fre-
quently occurring words within it. Our provisional
system used k = 5.

In the standard tagset, the set TO contains only
the word “to”. We have put “to” into two dif-
ferent classes, because the same word form rep-
resents both the preposition and infinitive verb
marker. Although the second such class is labelled
“AUX”, it does not correspond directly to the
standard definition of auxiliary as given by gram-
mars of English. First, “to” does not meet all of
the properties of auxiliaries. For example, because
it does not occur with a subject, it cannot partici-
pate in subject-auxiliary inversion. On the other
hand, although modals are traditionally a subclass
of auxiliaries, we have left them separate as de-
fined in the tagset.

The intuition guiding those decisions was based
on grammatical function and patterns of alterna-
tives. Verb forms in English often consist of a
closed class word w, followed by a main verb, the
form of which combines with the particular w to
indicate the tense and aspect. In other words, w
functions as a verb form marker, and doesn’t carry
other information. Modals, in contrast, have uni-
form grammatical co-occurrence patterns, essen-
tially all being followed by bare infinitives. They
have the semantic function of expressing modality,
and are alternatives to one another.

Ultimately, which words are best classed as al-
ternatives should be determined empirically.

2.2.2 Open Classes

We used two open classes specific to this task,
verbs and nouns.

The verb errors of this year’s task included verb
form and subject-verb agreement. Ideally, to find
candidates for the confusion set of a verb v, we
would want to produce morphological variations
of v whose POS tag is different from that of v.
This was approximated with the following heuris-
tic. We defined the prefix of v to be the initial
characters of v, including least the first character,
and not any of the final four, except when the first
character was one of those. We collected all words
in the vocabulary starting with that prefix, whose
stem given by the NLTK Porter stemmer matched
the corresponding stem of v and that had appeared
at least once with a POS tag indicating a verb of a
different form from that of v.

Similarly, the only noun errors under consider-
ation were noun number errors, meaning a change
from singular to plural or vice versa. We used the
same prefix and stem-matching heuristic as in the
verb case to find opposite-numbered nouns for this
task.

3 The correction process

In order to detect multiple interacting errors, we
would like to consider every possible variation of
every word in the sentence. To mitigate the combi-
natorial expense, we use a beam search as follows.

Proceeding word-by-word through the sen-
tence, we keep a list of the n most likely sentence
beginning fragments. Our provisional system used
n = 5. When we reach the observed word w, then
for each sentence fragment si in the list, we com-
pute the estimated probability that the correct sen-
tence next contained w′ instead of w, using our
n-gram probability estimate P (w′|si), and that the
channel model transformed it to w, by dividing the
probability of error α by the number of variations
in the confusion set of w′, C(w′). We also esti-
mate the probability that w was the original word.
Because our closed classes each include the empty
string, every empty string in the observed sentence
could have been produced by the deletion of a
member of any of the closed classes. Therefore,
we also consider the possibility of inserting each
word x, from each closed class. In total, the fol-
lowing probabilities are estimated:

(no error)
p = P (w|si)× (1− α)

111



and for each word x in each closed class, other
than the empty string:

(a deletion, no substitution)
p = P (xw|si)× α/|C(x)| × (1− α)

and for each variation of w, w′:

(a substitution)
p = P (w′|si)× α/|C(w

′)|

and for each variation of w, w′, and each word x
in each closed class, other than the empty string:

(a deletion and a substitution)
p = P (xw′|si)× α/|C(x)| × α/|C(w

′)|

The n most likely such extended fragments are
then kept for the next iteration. Finally, at the end
of the sentence, the sentence with the highest prob-
ability is returned as the correction. Probabilities
are treated as per-word perplexity in order not to
penalise longer sentences.

4 Evaluation

The shared task was evaluated using a section of
the NUCLE corpus (see (Dalheimer, Ng, and Wu,
2013)), and the corresponding corrections as anno-
tated by English instructors. The types of correc-
tions ranged from simple and well-defined, such as
the addition, removal, or exchange of an article or
determiner, to the entire rephrasing of a sentence.
Sometimes the corrections were strictly grammat-
ical, in that the original was not well-formed En-
glish. Some were more stylistic; what the student
had written was awkward, or sounded disfluent,
even if it could have been parsed acceptably. This
is appropriate and consistent with the nature of the
problem. However, it does make evaluation almost
as challenging as the task itself.

Often if a sentence has grammatical errors,
there are many different ways to repair the error.
Teams were encouraged to submit alternative cor-
rections when it was believed that their systems’
output ought to be considered valid, even if it did
not match the particular annotation given by the
grader.

Another problem with the evaluation, however,
actually stemmed from the simplification of the
task. Because grammatical correction is inher-
ently difficult, and because some of the difficulty
increases gradually by type as just described, the
task for this year was made more moderate by se-
lecting only 5 error types from the 27 types defined

in the corpus. However, this resulted in two diffi-
culties.

The first was that some error types were closely
related. Errors of verb form, verb tense, verb
modal, and subject-verb agreement may have
overlapping interpretation. Those error types are
not necessarily distinguishable by our method.

For example, there is a sentence in the test set:

Firstly , security systems are improved in many ar-
eas such as school campus or at the workplace .

which is corrected to:

Firstly , security systems have improved in many
areas such as school campus or at the workplace .

with the annotation of verb tense error type, and
thus not part of this task.

On the other hand, there is also a sentence:

... the electric systems were short circuited...

which is corrected to:

... the electric systems short circuited...

with the annotation of verb form error type, and
thus part of this task.

Second, sometimes an annotation not evaluated
in this task that resulted in a change of word form
was necessarily accompanied by changes to words
that were included in the task. This meant that in
order for the system to match the gold annotations,
it would have to propose a sentence that was gram-
matically incorrect. This is suboptimal. Although
it could sometimes be mitigated by the alternative
correction appeal process, that may not have been
adequate to address all such occurrences. More
accurate scoring might be obtained if only the sen-
tences that do not contain other correction types
are included in the test set.

An example of this is the sentence:

Take Singapore for example , these are installed...

The annotation corrects this sentence to:

Take Singapore for example , surveillance is in-
stalled...

However, the replacement of these with surveil-
lance is not in the task, so to get it correct, a sys-
tem would have to hypothesize:

Take Singapore for example , these is installed...

112



Evaluation Prec. Rec. F-meas.
Original task 0.1767 0.0481 0.0756
Strict 5 types 0.2079 0.0568 0.0892
With alternatives 0.3067 0.0877 0.1364

Table 1: Results

5 Results

The results of our system were not competitive.
Table 1 lists our scores on the original annotation
(line 1), and after alternative answers were consid-
ered (line 3). It also shows what our system would
have scored if only the sentences in the test set
which contained no errors types other than those
specified for the task were included (line 2).

6 Future Work

There are several simple steps that we expect will
improve our system.

First, the language models could be improved.
They could use corpora better matched to the data
set, and they could have larger vocabulary sizes.
We also observe that the POS models, because of
their inherently small vocabulary, seem to be im-
paired by the backoff paradigm. In this case, if a
sequence is unattested, it is unlikely that the proba-
bility is better estimated by ignoring the beginning
of it. Rather, it is likely to indicate an error. Since
error detection and correction is precisely what we
are attempting, it may be that backoff smoothing
is detrimental to the POS models. This hypothesis
should be tested empirically.

Second, there are several parameters that could
be tuned for better performance, including for ex-
ample, α, the probability that the channel inserts
an error, the beam width n, and the thresholds for
the number of alternatives considered in a closed
class.

The stemmer we used was not a very sophis-
ticated proxy for morphological analysis, and it
made errors in both directions that affected our re-
sults.

Finally, there are more classes of error that
could be easily included in the sets we have de-
fined. Because they interact, our system may per-
form better when the allowable transformations
are more comprehensive and can complement one
another.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the assistance of
Zooko Wilcox-O’Hearn, who contributed code,
analysis, and review, and by Graeme Hirst who
provided encouragement and advice.

References
Bird, Steven, Edward Loper and Ewan Klein 2009.

Natural Language Processing with Python. O’Reilly
Media Inc.

Dahlmeier, Daniel, and Hwee Tou Ng. A beam-search
decoder for grammatical error correction. Proceed-
ings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2012.

Daniel Dahlmeier, Hwee Tou Ng 2012. Better Eval-
uation for Grammatical Error Correction. Proceed-
ings of the 2012 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (NAACL 2012). (pp. 568 572). Montreal,
Canada.

Daniel Dahlmeier, Hwee Tou Ng, Siew Mei Wu 2013.
Building a Large Annotated Corpus of Learner En-
glish: The NUS Corpus of Learner English. To ap-
pear in Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Innova-
tive Use of NLP for Building Educational Applica-
tions (BEA 2013). Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

De Felice, Rachele, and Stephen G. Pulman. 2007
Automatically acquiring models of preposition use.
Proceedings of the Fourth ACL-SIGSEM Workshop
on Prepositions. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 2007.

Gamon, Michael, et al. Using contextual speller tech-
niques and language modeling for ESL error correc-
tion. Urbana 51 (2009): 61801.

Hwee Tou Ng, Siew Mei Wu, Yuanbin Wu, Christian
Hadiwinoto, Joel Tetreault 2013. The CoNLL-2013
Shared Task on Grammatical Error Correction. To
appear in Proceedings of the Seventeenth Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning.

Albert Park and Roger Levy 2011. Automated whole
sentence grammar correction using a noisy channel
model. Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies. Volume 1, pp 934-944.

Shaoul, C. and Westbury C. 2010 The
Westbury Lab Wikipedia Corpus Edmon-
ton, AB: University of Alberta (downloaded
from http://www.psych.ualberta.ca/ westbury-
lab/downloads/westburylab.wikicorp.download.html)

A. Stolcke 2002 SRILM – An Extensible Language
Modeling Toolkit. Proc. Intl. Conf. on Spoken Lan-
guage Processing, vol. 2, pp. 901-904, Denver.

113



Tetreault, Joel R., and Martin Chodorow. The ups and
downs of preposition error detection in ESL writ-
ing. Proceedings of the 22nd International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics-Volume 1. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, 2008.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher Manning,
and Yoram Singer. Feature-Rich Part-of-Speech
Tagging with a Cyclic Dependency Network. Pro-
ceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003, pp. 252-259.

West, Randy, Y. Albert Park, and Roger Levy. Bilin-
gual random walk models for automated grammar
correction of esl author-produced text. Proceedings
of the 6th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for
Building Educational Applications. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2011.

L. Amber Wilcox-O’Hearn and Zooko Wilcox-
O’Hearn 2013. gc https://github.com/lamber/gc/
tree/d4bc96f03263b8ed00b9629f22dfe0950b37129b

114


