










































Information Mining from Islamic Scriptures


The 4th Workshop on South and Southeast Asian NLP (WSSANLP), International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 66–71,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Information Mining from Muslim Scriptures 

 

 

Abdul Rauf Saeed 

PUCIT, University of the Punjab 

Lahore, Pakistan  

bsef09m037@pucit.edu.pk 

Syed Waqar Jaffry 

PUCIT, University of the Punjab 

Lahore, Pakistan 

swjaffry@pucit.edu.pk 

 

 

Abstract 

There are billions of believers of various reli-

gions in the world and Islam is the second 

largest religion having 1.6 billion followers. 

The primary written sources of religious be-

liefs and practices of Muslims are the Quran 

and the Hadith (saying and practices of their 

prophet Muhammad Peace Be Upon Him). 

Written text of the Quran and the Hadith 

books is of manageable size and hence state of 

the art text mining techniques can easily be 

applied on it. In this paper first a comprehen-

sive review of existing applications offering 

various type of the Quran and the Hadith in-

formation retrieval is presented then a frame-

work based on text mining techniques is pro-

posed. Finally an application is developed to 

demonstrate the Quran and the Hadith infor-

mation retrieval framework. This application 

is evaluated with the help of an end user as-

sessment questionnaire. It is recorded that end 

users have observed salient advantages of the 

designed application.  

1 Introduction 

There are several living religions in the world 

and the Islam is the second largest religion with 

respect to its followers (Ali, S. R., Liu, W. M., 

Humedian, M., 2004). Millions of Muslims (be-

lievers of Islam) receive their inspirations for the 

primary source of their religious beliefs and daily 

practices from the holy book “Quran” and say-

ings of their prophet Muhammad (PBUM) called 

“Hadith”. Textual data stored in the Quran and 

the Hadith books is not huge and could be 

processed efficiently using the state of the art 

text analytic techniques. These machine based 

text processing techniques have the potential to 

summarize, analyze and effectively present dif-

ferent concepts present in these books. In this 

paper an initial effort based on research and im-

plementation of a framework is presented which 

can help in processing and understanding this 

data. This paper also includes end users evalua-

tion and author‟s conclusion and future work 

regarding this ongoing project. It is believed that 

this work would be useful for the researchers, 

and implementers who want to conduct similar 

research and development. 

2 Related Work 

The related work done on this field is very li-

mited and can be extended further. Currently, 

most of the Quran and Hadith information re-

trieval systems are not well-formed as these sys-

tems search on basis of book name, volume 

number and the Hadith number and in case of the 

Quran it is the Surah (chapter) name or number 

and verse number. These kinds of systems are 

using primitive type of parameterized informa-

tion retrieval. There are various systems like 

“The Islamic Search”, “SearchTruth”, “Al-

lah.pk”, “Islamic City”, “IslamicSearch.org” and 

“IntoIslam” etc. The features of these systems 

and their working are briefly discussed as fol-

lows. 

 

 The Islamic Search (TheIslamicSearch, 
2013): It is an Islamic information retrieval 

system that takes a query from the user and 

it did not give results from Quran or Ha-

dith but from the web by searching query 

with respect to some Islamic keywords 

(such as “Islamic”, “Hadith”, “Quran”, “Is-

lam” etc.). So, basically, it is not a infor-

mation retrieval system based on the Quran 

and the Hadith but it is based on Google 

web search engine. 

 SearchTruth (SearchTruth, 2013): It is a 
system that searches on the basis of exact 

keyword and the substring matching. For 

example, if we will search word “ski” in-

stead of “sky”, it will give Hadith or verse 

contains “asking”.  

66



 Allah.pk (Allah.pk, 2013): It is a search 
engine that searches the results on the basis 

of exact keyword matching. If the user en-

ters wrong spelling or any word that is not 

present in the Quran or the Hadith, it will 

display no record found. Its plus point is 

that user can search in Arabic also and its 

results both in Arabic verse and its English 

translation. 

 Islami City (IslamiCity, 2013): is a search 
engine that searches on the basis of key-

words and give results. The searching only 

involves exact string matching in transla-

tion of the Quran. In results, the Arabic 

verse, its translation and phonetic verse is 

shown as well. 

 Into Islam (intoIslam, 2013): is search en-
gine similar to “The Islamic Search” in 

which user‟s query is searched through 

Google search API. 

These are the well-known information retriev-

al systems based on the text of Quran and Ha-

dith. It is observed that these all systems lack 

even primitive preprocessing and result ranking 

techniques used in information retrieval systems. 

Web Search Engines like Google are the exam-

ples of information retrieval systems. Hence the 

framework presented in this paper uses stemming 

and related algorithms to create inverted index 

and term frequency and inverted document fre-

quency (TF-IDF) for result ranking. Furthermore 

proposed system uses synonyms for user query 

expansion to generated relevant results. 

3 Methodology 

This section provides a brief about the metho-

dology followed in this research which includes 

data collection, preprocessing and the methods 

used for storage, searching and ranking of the 

results. 

3.1 Data Collection 

Three books of Hadith and the Quran are used. 

Hadith books include Sahih-Bukhari, Sahih-

Muslim and Sunan-abi-Dawood. Texts for these 

books are taken from (Bihar Anjuman, 2013). 

3.2 Data Pre-processing 

In data pre-processing, first these books are 

converted from pdf files to text files in order to 

use these files in programming easily (Conver-

tonlinefree.com, 2013). An online converter is 

used to convert the pdf files to text files. Fur-

thermore, names of narrators are extracted from 

these Hadith books after tokenizing the words in 

file. Porter Stemmer algorithm (Porter, 1980) is 

used to stem the words.  

After creating an index for Narrators the pri-

mary data set is again used to extract candidate 

keywords by applying RAKE keyword extrac-

tion algorithm. RAKE (Rapid Automatic Key-

word Extraction) algorithm is used for extracting 

keyword from individual documents. In this al-

gorithm, text is basically split on the basis of stop 

words and then a score is assigned to each phrase 

in the document. Stop words are the words that 

have higher frequency in text but they are just 

useless and cannot be used as a keyword for 

searching in the text such as (is, am, a, are, in 

etc.). After keyword extraction, the inverted in-

dex is created. Inverted index is a structure in 

which data is stored as key/value pair. In this 

structure, extracted keywords are placed as key 

and the list of indexes (locations in respective 

data file) is placed as value. 

3.3 Method 

There are three basic modules in this frame-

work that are Hadith searching, Quran searching 

and searching from the both modules. 

The first module is to search the Hadith. In 

this module, the user selects the book, narrator 

name and then enters query. As the user clicks 

„search‟ button, the narrator name and query 

words are passed to a function where the query 

words are preprocessed. Preprocessing consists 

of conversion of text to upper case, removal of 

stop words, obtaining list of synonyms for each 

word and then stemming of each word. When the 

query is preprocessed the system gets the query 

word by word and gets the index(es) of each 

word and of its synonyms from the inverted in-

dex table. After getting the indexes, the system 

searches for the index values in Hadith books. 

After getting index value, it extracts whole Ha-

dith and check the Narrator name. If it gets the 

combination of “NARRATED” and “NARRA-

TOR NAME” in any line, it starts storing the 

Hadith in a variable and adds the variable in a list 

and again start searching for next index until the 

end of indexes. Now the list contains all the Ha-

dith that is narrated by narrator selected by the 

user and related to user query. The list is then 

iterated for calculating the TF-IDF of all selected 

Hadith. The formula for calculating TF-IDF is 

mentioned below: 

 

TF-IDF = TF(t, d) * IDF(t, D) 

67



TF (t, d) = frequency of token t in document d 

 

IDF (t, D) = log (|D| / {d in D, t in d}) 

 

Where,  

 t = token (word) 

 d = a specific document 

 D = all documents 

In the above formula TF is equal to the ratio of 

frequency of each query word and its synonym in 

each Hadith to overall frequency of word in all 

Hadith. IDF is calculated by taking ratio of total 

Hadith to the count of Hadith in which the spe-

cific word found and then taking log of this ratio 

returns the IDF. Now, TF-IDF is calculated by 

taking product of TF and IDF for each word and 

Hadith. The list data is then sorted in descending 

order of their TF-IDF score and the final results 

are shown to the user. 

In Quran searching, the user selects the Surah 

of Quran and then enters the query. The query is 

then pre-processed as mentioned above and the 

TF-IDF is calculated between query words and 

verses of the Quran.  The verses are then sorted 

in descending order of TF-IDF score and finally 

the results are shown.  

In searching from Quran and Hadith, both 

above mentioned methods are applied together. 

Detailed follow chart of the system is depicted in 

figure 1. 

 

Figure 1. System Flow Diagram 

4 Results  

Results are measured on the basis of efficiency 

and usability. The following sections provide the 

details about results of both types. 

4.1 Efficiency  

For efficiency, time is noted for five cases, 

when number of query words range from one to 

five. The graph in figure 2 shows the time taken 

in seconds (y-axis) for the number of words in 

user query (x-axis).  Here it can be observed that 

relationship between query size and the time tak-

en by the system is linear. 
 

             
Figure 2. Performance 

4.2 Usability 

Usability results generated through a survey 

on Schneider Man‟s Principles based question-

naire (Shneiderman‟s, B. 2004). Questionnaire 

contains six questions with three options scaled 

to 0, 0.5 and 1. The following table shows results 

of questionnaire filled by ten participants, here 

column header should be read as, A: User ID, B: 

Layout Consistency, C: Easy to Understand, D: 

Organization of Actions, E: Error Prevention, F: 

Memorability, G: User Control, H: Informative 

Feedback, I: Use of Up to date Art. 
 

A B C D E F G H I 

1 1 1 1 1 0.5 1 0.5 1 

2 1 1 1 1 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 

3 1 0.5 1 1 0.5 0.5 1 0.5 

4 1 0.5 1 1 1 0.5 0.5 1 

5 1 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 1 

6 0.5 0.5 1 1 0.5 0 0 0.5 

7 1 1 1 1 0.5 0.5 1 0.5 

8 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 

9 0.5 0.5 0 0 0.5 1 0.5 0.5 

10 1 1 0.5 0.5 1 0.5 0.5 1 

Table 1. Usability Survey Results 

68



Results of this survey shows that users are more 

satisfied with first four indictors (B: Layout Con-

sistency, C: Easy to Understand, D: Organization 

of Actions, E: Error Prevention) as compared to 

last four (F: Memorability, G: User Control, H: 

Informative Feedback, I: Use of Up to date Art). 

In future extensions specific consideration would 

be given to improve these factors. A usability 

graph generated from above table id shown in 

figure 3. This graph shows the variations of dif-

ferent questions by different participants. 

5 Discussion 

This work is a step to contribute in the field of 

text mining to process religious information par-

ticularly from Islamic Scriptures e.g. Quran and 

Hadith. In this paper searching of the Quran and 

Hadith with the options of synonyms matching 

and stemming the words has been introduced. 

For example, if a text contains „happy‟ for five 

times and „glad‟ for twenty times then user 

would be interested to view all these twenty five 

results, if s/he queries „happy‟. Also if search for 

the word „pray‟ is generated then system will 

give results which contain the words like „prays‟, 

„praying‟ and „prayed‟. These two things make 

this work novel as current Quran and Hadith 

search engines do not offer such functionalities. 

This research work can spawn several ideas 

and can provide a basis for further research on 

text mining in religious text. The extraction of 

information from Quran is a very vast task as it is 

believed that Quran and Hadith covers guidelines 

related to all aspects of human life including nat-

ural and related sciences beside the religious 

guidelines of morality and ethics. Hence this re-

search of extracting information from Quran and 

Hadith has importance beyond religious bounda-

ries. 

6 Recommendations and Future Work 

Some of the enhancements in current work in-

clude the better visualization of query results and 

the addition of more search options that can 

make user‟s experience more informative and 

rewarding. Such extensions might include, para-

metric, and chronological search support. Fur-

thermore perspectives of different narrators and 

historians might be included and mined to pro-

vide different opinions of religious scholars on 

user‟s desired subject of search. Also current 

search can be extended from byword phrases to 

NLP query interface where the user can enter any 

query and system can detect the syntax as well as 

semantics of query in order to make the search 

results more relevant. In future this system can 

also be extended and multi-lingual support can 

be provided so that users can easily view and 

search results according in their native language. 

Another interesting future extension is to make a 

comparison among different Hadith and Verses 

to find out their mutual conflict or resemblances 

The Quran and the Hadith text can also be clus-

tered among different hierarchies which can pro-

vide relations between concepts described in the 

text.  

References  

Alkhatib, M. 2010. Classification of Al-Hadith Al-

Sharif Using Data Mining Algorithm, Proc. of Eu-

ropean, Mediterranean & Middle Eastern Confe-

rence on Information Systems, Abu Dhabi.  

Al-Kabi, M.and Al-Sinjilawi, S. 2007, A comparative 

study of the efficiency of different measures to clas-

sify Arabic text, University of Sharjah Journal of 

Pure and Applied Sciences, volume 4, No. 2.  

Ali, S. R., Liu, W. M., Humedian, M. 2004. Islam 

101: Understanding the Religion and Therapy Im-

Figure 3. Usability Statistics 

69



plications. Professional Psychology: Research and 

Practice, Vol 35(6), 635-642. 

Allah.pk. 2013. The Multilingual Quran & Hadith 

Search Engine, retrieved: 10-July-13. 

Bihar Anjuman. 2013. Bihar Anjuman – My RAH-

BAR, retrieved: 17-June-13. 

intoIslam.com, 2013. intoIslam - Islamic Search En-

gine, retrieved: 10-July-13. 

IslamiCity.com, 2013. Islam & The Global Muslim 

eCommunity, retrieved: 10-July-13. 

Jbara, K. 2010. Knowledge Discovery in Al-Hadith 

Using Text Classification Algorithm, Journal of 

American Science, 6(11). 

Porter, M. 1980. An Algorithm for Sufix Stripping, 

Program, Vol. 14(3), pp. 130-137. 

SearchTruth.com, 2013. Search Engine: Search in the 

Quran م كري قران ال -and Hadith, retrieved: 10-July ال
13.  

Shneiderman, B. 2004. Designing for fun: how can 

we design user interfaces to be more fun? interac-

tions 11(5), 48-50. 

TextMiningTheQuran.com. 2013. Wiki textmining-

thequran, retrieved: 17-June-2013. 

TheIslamicSearch.come, 2010. ISLAMIC SEARCH 

powered by GOOGLE - Islamic Search Engine, re-

trieved: 10-July-13.  

Convertonlinefree.com 2013. Free online PDF to 

TEXT converter, retrieved: 17-June-2013. 

Appendix A: Questionnaire for Usability 

Survey 

1. Is Layout, color scheme, capitalization, font 
and menus consistency achieved in designing 

the interfaces? 

 Yes     

 No 

 Up to Some Extent 

2. Interface design and navigations are easy to 
understand for the diversified set of users? 

 Yes     

 No 

 Up to Some Extent 

3. For searching from anything, the actions per-
formed are in sequence and organized (e.g. for 

searching, first click on searching option then 

select searching type then input fields and do 

search)? 

 Yes     

 No 

 Up to Some Extent 

4. Is there any mechanism for preventing any type 
of error (syntax or semantic error) like drop 

down list, autocomplete, suggestions etc.? 

 Yes     

 No 

 Up to Some Extent 

5. Is User feeling easy to do new things that what 
he/she is not told? 

 Yes     

 No 

 Up to Some Extent 

6. Is User feeling easy in reversal of step i.e. 
going back to previous states easily?  

 Yes     

 No 

 Up to Some Extent 

7. Is User feeling that he/she can easily control 
the system? 

 Yes     

 No 

 Up to Some Extent 

8. Is the display is simple i.e. user can memorize 
the steps easily? 

 Yes     

 No 

 Up to Some Extent 

9. Is the system giving response for every action 
either it is modest or complex depends on ac-

tion? 

 Yes     

 No 

 Up to Some Extent 

10.  Any up-to-date art/technique is used in this 
system? 

 Yes     

 No 

 Up to Some Extent 

Appendix B: System Screen Shots 

 

Figure 4. Main Screen 

70



 

Figure 5. The Hadith Search Interface 

 

Figure 6. The Quran Search Interface 

 

Figure 6. Search Results 

71


