










































Event and Event Actor Alignment in Phrase Based Statistical Machine Translation


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 36–44,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Event and Event Actor Alignment in Phrase Based Statistical Machine 

Translation 

 

Anup Kumar Kolya
1
, Santanu Pal

1
 

1
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering  

Jadavpur University 

Kolkata-700 032, India 

{anup.kolya, santanu.pal.ju}gmail.com 

     Asif Ekbal
2
, Sivaji Bandyopadhyay

1 

2
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering  

IIT Patna,  

Patna-800 013, India 

asif@iitp.ac.in, sivaji_ju_cse@yahoo.com 

 

  

 

Abstract 

This paper proposes the impacts of event and event 

actor alignment in English and Bengali phrase based 

Statistical Machine Translation (PB-SMT) System. 

Initially, events and event actors are identified from 

English and Bengali parallel corpus. For events and 

event actor identification in English we proposed a 

hybrid technique and it was carried out within the 

TimeML framework. Events in Bengali are identified 

based on the concept of complex predicate structures. 

There can be one-to-one and one-to-many mappings 

between English and Bengali events and event actors. 

We preprocess the parallel corpus by single tokeniz-

ing the multiword events and event-actors which re-

flects some significant gain on the PB-SMT system. 

We represent a hybrid alignment approach of events 

and event-actors in both English-Bengali training cor-

pus by defining a rule based aligner and a statistical 

hybrid aligner. The rule base aligner assumes a heu-

ristic that the sequence of events and event actors on 

the source (English) side are also maintained in the 

target (Bengali) side. The performance of PB-SMT 

system could vary depending on the number of events 

and event-actors that are identified in the parallel 

training data. The proposed system achieves signifi-

cant improvements (5.79 BLEU points absolute, 

53.02% relative improvement) over the baseline sys-

tem on an English-Bengali translation task. 

1 Introduction 

Event and event actor alignment play a very cru-

cial role to improve the translation quality in a 

machine translation system. A translated sen-

tence is not a satisfactory and proper translation 

until we properly combine event and event actor 

in sentence level task. Recently, event related 

works are becoming popular in the machine 

translation field. Sentence-aligned parallel bilin-

gual corpora are very useful for applying ma-

chine learning approaches to machine translation. 

But, most of these works have been focused on 

European language pairs and some of the Asian 

Languages such as English-Japanese and Eng-

lish-Chinese. In this work, we have added event 

and event-actor alignments as additional parallel 

examples with the English-Bengali parallel cor-

pus. The entire task is divided into three steps, 

first, we identify event and event actors on the 

both side of the parallel corpus, second, we align 

events and event actors using a rule based and a 

statistical alignment method and finally, the 

identified multiword events and event actors are 

single tokenized on the both side and then the 

prior alignment of event and event actors are ap-

plied on the English-Bengali PB-SMT system for 

further improvement. 

The identification of events on English side, 

we have followed the guidelines of TimeML 

view (Pustejovsky et al., 2003a). TimeML 

defines events as situations that happen or occur, 

or elements describing states or circumstances in 

which something obtains or holds the truth. 

These events are generally expressed by tensed 

or un-tensed verbs, nominalizations, adjectives, 

predicative clauses or prepositional phrases. In 

the sentences, almost all events are involved with 

the event actor, either active or passive. Event 

actor identification in English is facilitated by the 

available free resources and tools such as 

Stanford Parser, VerbNet (Kipper-Schuler et al, 

2005) .In detail research works related to English 

event and event actor identification can be found 

in (Kolya et al., 2010). 

We have defined Complex Predicates as 

events (Das et al., 2010) in Bengali. Complex 

Predicates (CPs) in Bengali consists of both 

compound verbs and conjunct verbs. Complex 

Predicates contain [verb] + verb (compound 

verbs) or [noun/ adjective/adverb] +verb 

(conjunct verbs) combinations in South Asian 

languages (Hook, 1974).  

In the next step, we identify event actors of 

event from Bengali language. We have 

36



considered the same guidelines for event actor 

identification in Bengali as those proposed for 

event actor identification in English. For Bengali 

event actor identification, we have used two 

available lexical engines, namely Name Entity 

Recognizer (NER) (Ekbal and Bandyopadhyay, 

2009) and shallow parser
1
. The accuracy of the 

Bengali NE recognizer (NER) is poorer 

compared to English NER because (i) there is no 

concept of capitalization in Bengali (ii) some 

Bengali common nouns are also often used as 

named entities. Similarly, the Bengali shallow 

parser faces such kinds of difficulties. Overall, 

Bengali is morphologically rich language and has 

very limited such kind of resources. 

The major challenge is to develop an event 

alignment system between a resource-rich 

language like English and a resource-poor 

language like Bengali. The proposed system is 

relying on the design of rules and the availability 

of large amounts of annotated data. But, building 

of large amount data is a time consuming, labour 

intensive and expensive task. 

The main motivation of this work is the 

scarcity of sufficient works related to event 

alignment. To the best of our knowledge this is 

the first time that the event alignment approach is 

applied for the English-Bengali language pair. 

Given a set of parallel sentences, we identify 

events and event actors in both the sides. The 

events and event actors in both sides of the 

parallel corpus are assigned appropriate tags 

(event: e and event actor: ea).  Thereafter we 

align the English events and event actors with 

Bengali events and event actors.  The alignment 

has been carried out by single tokenizing the 

multi word events and event-actors on both sides 

of the parallel corpus. Thereafter the alignment 

of events and event actors in the parallel English-

Bengali sentences is carried out based on two 

approaches:  (i) rule based approach and (ii) 

hybrid statistical approach. The rule based 

approach fails to align the causal sentences that 

include the cause-effect constructs. The positions 

of the cause and the effect clauses may change 

their position in the target sentence. The 

positions of the cause and the effect clauses may 

change their position in the target sentence. Such 

types of parallel sentences are event aligned 

using the hybrid statistical approach. We attempt 

to achieve good accuracies for event 

                                                 
1  
http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/showfile.php?filename=downloads/shallow
_parser.php 
 

identification and event actor identification for 

both the languages which is reflected as the 

improvement of the English-Bengali PB-SMT 

system performance. The hybrid approach also 

validates the correctness of the alignment of the 

rule based system. 

The remainder of the paper is organized as 

follows. Next section briefly elaborates the 

related work. The proposed system is described 

in Section 3.  Section 4 states the tools and 

resources used for the various experiments. 

Section 5 includes the results obtained, together 

with some analysis. Section 6 concludes and 

provides avenues for further work. 

2 Related Works  

The works related to alignment are mostly de-

veloped for machine translation task. Some 

works in sentence alignment can be found in 

(Brown, 1991) and (Gale and Church, 1993). 

(Chen, 1993) developed a method which was 

slower but more accurate than the sentence-

length based Brown and Gale algorithm. (Wu, 

1994) used an approach which was adopted from 

Gale and Church‘s method for Chinese. They 

used a small corpus-specific bilingual lexicon to 

improve alignment accuracy in texts containing 

multiple sentences of similar length. (Melamed 

1996, 1997) also proposed a method based on 

word correspondences.  (Plamondon, 1998) de-

veloped a two-pass approach, in which a method 

similar to the one proposed by Melamed identi-

fies points of correspondence in the text that con-

strain a second-pass search based on the statisti-

cal translation model. (Moore, 2002) developed a 

hybrid sentence-alignment method using sen-

tence length-based and word-correspondence-

based models. This model is fast, very accurate, 

and requires that the corpus be separated into 

words and sentences. In the hybrid model, they 

used the sentence pairs that are assigned the 

highest probability of alignment to train a modi-

fied version of IBM Translation Model 1 

(Brown, 1993). (Fung, 1994) presented K-vec, an 

alternative alignment strategy, that starts by es-

timating the lexicon. Moore (2003) used capitali-

zation cues for identifying NEs on the English 

side and then applied statistical techniques to 

decide which portion of the target language cor-

responds to the specified English NE. A Maxi-

mum Entropy model based approach for Eng-

lish—Chinese NE alignment has been proposed 

in Feng et al. (2004) which significantly outper-

forms IBM Model 4 and HMM. A method for 

37



automatically extracting NE translingual equiva-

lences between Chinese and English based on 

multi-feature cost minimization has been pro-

posed in Huang et al. (2003). 

3 System Description 

In our system, initially we have identified Event 

and Event Actor from English-Bengali parallel 

corpus. Then, we have established Rule base 

event and event-actor Alignment Model, and Sta-

tistical Hybrid based Alignment model for the 

experiment setup. 

3.1 English Event Identification  

Our approach for event identification is based on 

a hybrid approach. The system is combined with 

Support Vector Machine (SVM
2, 4

), semantic role 

labeling (SRL) (Gildea et al, 2002; WorldNet
7
 

and several heuristics. 

Hybrid event identification system 

Some lexical rules have been used to identify the 

de-verbal event words more accurately, in addi-

tion with SVM, SRL, WordNet based approach-

es. Rules are extracted on the basis of detailed 

analysis of suffixes and the morphological mark-

ers of de-verbal derivations like „expedition‘ and 

‗accommodation‟ in the source side of the cor-

pus. Initially, Stanford Named Entity (NE) tag-

ger
3
 is passed on the English side of the training 

corpus. The output of the system is tagged with 

Person, Location, Organization and Other clas-

ses. The following cue sets or rules are applied 

for event extraction:  

Cue-1: The morphologically de-verbal nouns are 

usually identified by the suffixes like ‗-tion‘, ‘-

ion‘, ‘-ing‘ and ‘-ed‘ etc. The non-NE nouns that 

end with these suffixes are considered as the 

event words. 

Cue 2: After searching verb-noun combination 

from the test set, non-NE noun words are consid-

ered as the events.  

Cue 3: The non-NE nouns occurring after (i) the 

complements of aspectual PPs headed by prepo-

sitions, (ii) any time-related verbs and (iii) cer-

tain expressions are considered as events. 

The performance of the event extraction sys-

tem has been reported with the precision, recall 

and F-measure values of 93.00%, 96.00% and 

94.47%, respectively on the TempEval-2 corpus. 

                                                 
3http://chasenorg/~taku/software/yamcha 
4http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/CRF-NER.shtml 

3.2 Event-Actor identification  

It has been observed from the detailed text analy-

sis that almost all events are associated with 

some actors (―anything having existence (living 

or nonliving)”), either active or passive. More 

generally, event actions are associated with per-

sons or organizations and sometimes with loca-

tions. In this section, it has been shown how 

event actors are identified for the events.  

Subject Based Baseline Model 

The input English sentences with event con-

structs are passed through the Stanford Parser to 

extract the dependency relationships from the 

parsed data. The output is checked to identify the 

predicates, ―nsubj‖ and ―xsubj‖ so that the sub-

ject related information in the ―nsubj‖ and 

―xsubj‖ predicates are considered as the probable 

candidates of event actors. Other dependency 

relations are filtered out.  

Syntax Based Model 

 The syntax of a sentence in terms of its argu-

ment structure or sub-categorization information 

of the associated verb plays an important role to 

identify the event actors of the events in a sen-

tence.  

(a) Syntax Acquisition from Verbnet 

Using VerbNet (Kipper-Schuler et al, 2005), a 

separate rule based argument structure acquisi-

tion system is developed in the present task for 

identifying the event actors. The acquired argu-

ment structures are compared against the extract-

ed VerbNet frame syntaxes. If the acquired ar-

gument structure matches with any of the ex-

tracted frame syntaxes, the event actor corre-

sponding to each event verb is tagged with the 

actor information in the appropriate slot in the 

sentence. 

(b) Argument Structure Acquisition Frame-

work 

To acquire the argument structure, Stanford Par-

ser parsed event sentences are passed through a 

rule based phrasal-head extraction system to 

identify the head part of the phrase (well-

structured and bracketed) level argument struc-

ture of the sentences corresponding to the event 

verbs.  

SRL for Event Actor Identification 

Semantic Role Label (SRL) plays an important 

role to extract target argument relationship from 

38



the semantic role labeled sentences. Here, the 

argument is considered as an event actor and the 

target is identified as the corresponding event. 

Let us consider the following example: 
[ARG1 A military coup] [TARGET followed], during 

which [ARG1 Allende] [TARGET committed] suicide 

rather than surrender to his attackers. 

In the first trace, [A military coup] is 

identified as the event actor <eActor> of the 

corresponding event word [followed]. In the 

second trace, [Allende] is the event actor 

<eActor> of the corresponding event 

[committed]. So using the SRL technique, the 

event and the corresponding event actor are 

found. The original F-scores of the event actor 

identification systems for the subject based and 

syntax based models are 65.98% and 70%, 

respectively. Adding the SRL technique for 

event actor identification, the F-score of the 

system further improves to 73%. 

3.3  Bengali Event Extraction 

The sentences are passed through an open source 

Bengali shallow parser
1
. The shallow parser 

gives different morphological information (root, 

lexical category of the root, gender, number, per-

son, case, etc.) that helps in identifying the lexi-

cal patterns of Complex Predicates (CPs). 

Bengali sentences were POS-tagged using the 

available shallow parser. We have 

extracted{verb(v)+verb(v), (noun(n)+verb(v)) 

and (adjective(adj)+verb(v))} lexical complex 

predicates pattern. The complex predicate (v+v) 

pattern is considered as the compound verb and 

(n+v) and (adj+v) patterns are considered as 

conjunct verbs (ConjVs). These compound and 

conjunct verb patterns are used as the possible 

candidates for event expressions.  

Identification of Complex Predicates (CPs) 

In the Bengali side, generally complex predicates 

follow some patterns such as conjunct verbs 

(e.g.,   [mere phela] ‗to kill‘): 

adjective/adverb/noun +verb pattern or 

compound verbs (e.g.,   [bharsha kara] 

‗to depend‘): verb + verb pattern. To identify 

such complex Predicates (CPs) in Bengali, 

Morphological knowledge is required. 

Compound verbs consist of two verbs – a full 

verb followed by a light verb. The full verb is 

represented either as conjunctive participial form 

-  [–e] or the infinitive form -  [–te] at the 

surface level. The light verb bears the inflection 

based on tense, aspect and person information of 

the subject. On the other hand, each Bengali 

conjunct verb consists of adjective, adverb or 

noun followed by a light verb. These light verbs 

are semantically lightened, polysemous and 

limited into some definite candidate seeds (Paul, 

2010).  

The other types of predicates presents in 

Bengali language follow the same lexical pattern 

like the compound verb but the Full Verb and 

Light Verb behave as independent syntactic 

entities (e.g,   niye gelo ‗take-go‘). Such 

complex predicates are termed as Serial Verb 

(SV). 

Das et al. (2010) analyzed and identified the 

categories of compound verbs (Verb + Verb) and 

conjunct verbs (Noun /Adjective/Adverb + Verb) 

for Bengali. We adapted their strategy for 

identification of compound verbs as well as 

serial verbs (Verb + Verb + Verb) in Bengali. 

3.4 Bengali Event Actor Identification 

Here, events are associated with either active or 

passive event actors in Bengali like in English 

language. Similarly, event actions are associated 

with persons or organizations and sometimes 

with locations. Initially, sentences that do not 

have any event words are discarded.  

Bengali Name Entity Recognizer (NER) and 

Bengali shallow parser are employed to detect 

the event actors from the sentences. The baseline 

system for identifying event actor is developed 

based on the person, organization and location 

information which are recognized by Bengali 

NER. Then, Bengali shallow parser has been 

used to improve the performance of event actor 

identification. In the following two sections, it 

has been shown in details how event actors are 

identified for the events in Bengali language by 

applying the above two techniques. 

Name Entity based Approach 

 Here, Bengali named entities are identified from 

parallel corpus. After identification of Bengali 

NEs and Bengali events from the sentences, fol-

lowing heuristics rules are introduced for event 

actor identification:  

(i) If sentence is having only one NE and one or 

more than one events then this single NE is se-

lected as the event actor for all events. 

(ii) If sentence is having multiple NEs and only 

one event, then all the NEs are selected as the 

event actors for the single event. 

(iii) If there exists multiple NEs and multiple 

events in a sentence, then <event, actor> pairs 

39



are formed by considering an event and its clos-

est possible NE as the event actor in the sen-

tence. 

Example: <ea> < ></ea> <e>  

</e>,       . 

<ea>  </ea> <e>  </e>. 

Shallow Parsing approach 

Bengali pronouns (PRP) are not identified by the 

Bengali NER. The shallow parser is used to iden-

tify the pronouns in a sentence that can play the 

role of event-actor of event. Initially, the input 

Bengali sentences are passed through the shallow 

parser to extract phrase and POS information 

from the parsed data. Here, noun phrases (NP) 

and verb phrases (VP) are only considered from 

the parsed output. From noun phrases, the word 

with the pronoun (PRP tag) is extracted as the 

event actor of the corresponding event expressed 

in the verb phrase (VP). 
 

<ea> /PRP/NP </ea> NN/NP VM/VP 

JJ/NP  <ea> /PRP/NP</ea>  NN/NP 

/VM/VGF  /VAUX/VGF NN/NP 

JJ/NP JJ/JJP 

 

3.5 Rule based event and event-actor 
Alignment Model 

The rule based alignment model aligns the iden-

tified events and event-actors between the Eng-

lish and Bengali parallel sentences. Here it is 

observed that that event-actors associated with 

events appear as contiguous sequence of words 

in a sentence. For example, ―travelers” is an 

event actor of the event word “discover” in the 

English side which is aligned with ― ‖, 

the event actor of the event word <  

> in the Bengali side. ―Discover‖ is an 

event group with the syntactic structure event 

actor “travelers” which can be determined de-

terministically given the phrase (NP, VP) and 

POS tags information. 
 
Ex-(a) ...adventurous/JJ travelers/NNS will/MD discov-

er/VB an/DT ethereal …… 

Ex-(b) …   <  > 

…..  

During event and event actor alignment the 

following issues are observed between the 

English and the Bengali language:  

(i) It aligns both one-to-one and one-to-many 

alignments between word forms. 

(ii) In the English and Bengali side event actors 

are identified by noun (NN), proper noun (NNP) 

and pronoun (PRN) based word from the noun 

phrase. Then the alignment has been done on 

both sides. 

(iii) In event alignment, English side event words 

are generally verb(VB) and noun(NN) while the 

internal structure of Bengali event words are 

combination of compound verbs (VM-Vaux) and 

conjunct words (NN-VAUX,ADJ-VUX). 

(iv) In event alignment, English event words are 

generally aligned to a group of Bengali event 

words. Light verbs are added with the main verb 

which increases the number of words in Bengali 

with respect to English event word in the sen-

tence. Similarly for English event words, the 

auxiliary verb is considered as a part of it. The 

following alignment from Example (a) above 

bears testimony to the above.  

   

 will discover   . [abiskar korbe] 

 

Example 2:  Adventurous <ea> traveler </ea> 
will<event> discover</event> an ethereal landscape 

that <event> lingers </event> in the memory. 
 

  <ea>  </ea> <event>  

 </event>    <event>   

</event> . 

In the above parallel sentence, the event actor 

―traveler‖ on the English side is aligned with 

― ‖ on the Bengali side. The 

corresponding events associated with the event 

actor are ―discover‖ and ―lingers‖ on the English 

side which are aligned with ―  ‖ and 

―   ‖ respectively in the Bengali side. In 

order to get the correct alignment, identification 

of event actors and events orders should be 

correct. Thus the following parallel phrase 

translation entries are generated. 

 

Traveler ↔  [vramonkari] 

will discover ↔   [abiskar korbe] 

Lingers ↔   [mone rakhar] 

 

(v). It has been observed that the order of event 

actor with event in English and Bengali language 

are same in most of the cases. Correct identifica-

tion of event words in Bengali side correspond-

ing to English side plays an important role in the 

event word alignment. In the example 2, it is 

easy to align, but in some cases the word align-

40



ment complexity increases when the order of the 

events and the event actors does not follow the 

same sequence in the English and the Bengali 

parallel sentences.  

The complexity is further increased due to the 

non-availability of large bilingual corpus and the 

presence of inflectional variations in Bengali. So 

sometimes it is difficult to correctly align event 

words to the target words. Once these alignments 

are obtained, then we validate the alignment with 

statistical hybrid based alignment model.  

3.6  Hybrid based Alignment model 

Initially an English-Bengali phrase based statisti-

cal translation model has been developed which 

has been trained with the same EILMT tourism 

domain corpus of 22,492 sentences. The above 

rule based event actor alignments are validated 

by translating both the event and the event actor. 

From the above knowledge we get a link be-

tween the event and the event actor on both 

sides. Even the alignment details are also availa-

ble. . From this point of view, we can conclude 

that if we know any of the translation of either 

the event or the event actor then we can align 

with the target event and event actor relation.  

Using this heuristics, we have translated event or 

event actor and matched with the target Bengali 

event or event actor which has been provided by 

the rule based system as described in section 4. A 

string level edit distance matric has been used to 

validate the bilingual even-actor relations. After 

alignment of event and actor words from English 

side, we collect token position number of the 

event words with event tag from the sentence. 

We follow the Timex3 guideline for event word 

identification, so English side event words are 

mainly single word based token. Position of the 

single token number is added with event tag <e>. 

For the identification of event actors in the Ben-

gali side, we follow the guidelines of English 

event actor <ea> identification that is already 

defined in Rule no (ii) in section 4. On English 

side after identification of event word in a sen-

tence, we have added auxiliary dependent verb 

with it as defined in rule no (iv).  

After identification we have pre-processed the 

single tokenized corpus by replacing space with 

underscore (‗_‘). We have used underscore (‗_‘) 

instead of hyphen (‗-‘) because there already 

exists some hyphenation words in the corpus.  

The use of Underscore (‗_‘) character also 

facilitates the de-tokenizing the single-tokenized 

events or event-actors at decoding time. 
 

Amidst[0] such[1] solitude[2], adventurous[3] <ea> 

travelers[4] </ea> will[5]<e> discover[6]</e> an[7] 

ethereal[8] landscape[9] that[10] <e> lingers[11] 

</e> in [12]the[13] memory[14]. 

 

After considering depending auxiliary verb 

Amidst[0] such[1] solitude[2], adventurous[3] <ea> 

travelers[4] </ea> <e> will_discover[5]</e> an[6] 

ethereal[7] landscape[8] that[9] <e> lingers[10] 

</e> in [11]the[12] memory[13]. 

 

[0] <ea> [1]</ea> <e> 

_ [2] </event> [3] [4] 

[5] <event>  [6]</event> . 

 

We collect the token position number of event 

word(s) and actor(s) from both sides of the 

parallel sentence. Finally we get a sentence level 

source-target event-event actor-actor alignment.  

 

For example, 4-1 5-2 11-6 
 

We have also generated source-target event 

and event-actor alignment level parallel example 

which has been added as additional parallel 

example with the training data. Now we retrain 

the PB-SMT system using moses toolkit (Koehn 

et at., 2003). The sentence level positional 

alignment information helps us for updating and 

correcting the alignment table which has been 

generated during the training phase using grow-

diag-final-and algorithm. The rest of the process 

has been followed as described in the state-of-art 

system. 

This approach also helps us to align the event 

and event-actor relation which cannot be aligned 

by the rule based system. In this approach we 

have translated the identified source events or 

event-actors. The translated events or event-

actors are matched with the corresponding target 

side events and event-actors by using string level 

edit-distance method.  

4 Tools and Resources 

A sentence-aligned English-Bengali parallel cor-

pus containing 23,492 parallel sentences from 

the travel and tourism domain has been used in 

the present work. The corpus has been collected 

from the consortium-mode project ―Development 

of English to Indian Languages Machine Trans-

lation (EILMT) System
4
‖. The Stanford Parser

5
, 

                                                 
4  The EILMT project is funded by the Department of Elec-

tronics and Information Technology (DEITY), Ministry of 

41



Stanford NER, CRF chunker
6
 and the Wordnet 

3.0
7
 have been used for identifying the events 

and the event-actors in the source English side of 

the parallel corpus.  

The sentences on the target side (Bengali) are 

POS-tagged by using the tools obtained from the 

consortium mode project ―Development of 

Indian Language to Indian Language Machine 

Translation (IL-ILMT) System
8
‖. 

The effectiveness of the present work is 

demonstrated by using the standard log-linear 

PB-SMT model as our baseline system. The 

GIZA++ implementation of IBM word alignment 

model 4, phrase-extraction heuristics described 

in (Koehn et al., 2003), minimum-error-rate 

training (Och, 2003) on a held-out development 

set, target language model trained using SRILM 

toolkit (Stolcke, 2002) with Kneser-Ney 

smoothing (Kneser and Ney, 1995) and the 

Moses decoder (Koehn et al., 2007) have been 

used in the present study. 

5 Experiments and Evaluations 

We have randomly identified 500 sentences each 

for the development set and the test set from the 

initial parallel corpus. The rest are considered as 

the training corpus. The training corpus was fil-

tered with the maximum allowable sentence 

length of 100 words and sentence length ratio of 

1:2 (either way). Finally the training corpus con-

tained 22,492 sentences. In addition to the target 

side of the parallel corpus, a monolingual Benga-

li corpus containing 488,026 words from the 

tourism domain was used for the target language 

model. We experimented with different n-gram 

settings for the language model and the maxi-

mum phrase length and found that a 4-gram lan-

guage model and a maximum phrase length of 7 

produce the optimum baseline result. The base-

line model (Experiment 1) has scored 10.92 

BLEU matric points that is described in Table 3. 

We carried out the rest of the experiments using 

these settings. Initially we identified event actor 

relation on both sides of the parallel corpus by 

developing an automatic Event actor Identifier. 

The system achieves Recall, Precision and F-

                                                                          
Communications and Information Technology (MCIT), 

Government of India. 
5 http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml 
6 http://crfchunker.sourceforge.net/ 
7 http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ 
8   The IL-ILMT project is funded by the Department of 

Electronics and Information Technology (DEITY), Ministry 

of Communications and Information Technology (MCIT), 

Government of India. 

Score values of 82.06%, 72.32% and 75.73% 

respectively for Bengali event identification in 

training corpus.  

In the Bengali event actor evaluation frame-

work, we have randomly selected 500 sentences 

from the Bengali corpus for testing.  Each 

sentence is having around maximum100 words. 

We have manually annotated these 500 sentences 

with event actor tag as the reference data. The 

evaluation results for Bengali event-actor 

identification in the training corpus are shown in 

Table 1.  
 

Type Baseline 

Model 

Combination of 

NER and Shal-

low Parser 

Model 

Precision 51.31 58.12 

Recall 56.74 55.90 

F-measure 53.89 56.99 

Table 1: Evaluation results of Bengali event actor 

identification 

 

Training 

set 

English Bengali 

T U T U 

Event 8142 3889 20174 7154 

Actor 21931 12273 17107 11106 

Table 2: Event and Event-actor Statistics (T - Total 

occurrence, U – Unique)  
 

Table 2 shows the statistics of events and 

event actors in the English and Bengali corpus. 

In the training corpus, 44.5% and 47.8% of the 

event actors are single-word event actors in 

English and Bangla respectively, which suggests 

that prior alignment of the single-word event 

actors, in addition to multi-word event actors 

alignment, should also be beneficial to word and 

phrase alignment. 

Our experiments have been carried out in three 

directions (i) Initially we single tokenized the 

identified events and event-actors on both sides 

of the parallel corpus (ii) we added the  single 

tokenized event and event-actor alignment as an 

additional parallel data with the training corpus 

and (iii) we updated the word alignment table 

using hybrid word alignment technique. The 

table 3 shows that the successive evaluation of 

different experimental settings of PB-SMT 

system. Experiment 1 reports the baseline model 

score of the PB-SMT system. In experiment 2, 

we preprocessed the parallel corpus by single 

tokenizing the events and event actors, this 

42



makes significant gain over baseline system. 

Rest of the experiments (3, 4, 5 and 6) has been 

carried out with single tokenization of event and 

event actors along with their alignments. 

Experiment 3 and 4 reports that the alignment of 

events and event actors are added with the 

parallel corpus also improve the MT system 

performance. In experiment 5, both event and 

event actor alignments are combined together as 

additional parallel data with the training corpus, 

produced 5.51 (50.45%) BLEU point relative 

improvement over the baseline system. While in 

experiment 6, we updated the alignment table 

using event and event-actor alignment the 

performance has increased significantly with 

5.79 (53.02%) BLEU point relative improvement 

over baseline system. 

 

Experiments No. BLEU NIST 

Baseline 1 10.92 4.13 

Single tokenized Event and Event-Actor  2 12.68 4.33 

Experiment 

2 

Event actor alignment as addition-

al parallel data 

3 15.23 4.47 

Event alignment as additional par-

allel data 

4 13.48 4.37 

Event and event actor alignment as 

additional parallel data 

5 16.43 4.51 

event actor alignment (by updating 

word alignment table) † 

6 16.71 4.54 

Table 3:   Evaluation results (The ‗†‘ marked systems produce best score) 

 

6 Conclusions and Future work 

The present work shows how three approaches 

(i) single tokenization of event and event-actors 

on both sides of the parallel corpus (ii) alignment 

of event and event-actor added as an additional 

training data with the parallel corpus and (iii) 

updating the word alignment table directly by 

event-actor and event alignment boost up the 

performances of the overall system. The method 

also reduces data sparsity problem. The single 

tokenization helps us to bound multi word events 

and event-actors into a single unit. On manual 

inspection we see that the translation output 

looks better than the baseline system output in 

terms of better lexical choice and word ordering. 

On experiment 3 and 4 our systems achieve 5.51 

BLEU points absolute, 50.45% and 5.79 BLEU 

points absolute, 53.02% relative improvement 

over the baseline system on an English-Bengali 

translation task. The event and event actor 

alignment performance is also reflected indirect-

ly by increasing the MT performance. The fact 

that only 28.5% of the testset event-actors appear 

in the training set, yet prior automatic alignment 

of the event and event actors brings about so 

much improvement in terms of MT quality, sug-

gests that it not only improves the event and 

event actor alignment quality in the phrase table, 

but word alignment and phrase alignment quality 

must have also been improved significantly. 

Our future work will be focused on post edit-

ing the MT output using event and event-actor 

relation. As event and event-actor plays an im-

portant role in terms of discourse, we can reorder 

the output target sentences according to the oc-

currences of event on the source side. We will 

also focus to upgrade our system for paragraph 

translation.  In future we can add temporal ex-

pression and location of event with event-actor 

as attributes. These attributes of event can further 

improve the performance machine translation 

result. 

 

Acknowledgement 

The work has been carried out with support from 

the project ―Development of English to Indian 

Languages Machine Translation (EILMT) 

System - Phase II‖ funded by Department of 

Information Technology, Government of India. 

References  

Brown, P.F., Della Pietra, S. A., Della Pietra, V. J., 

Mercer, R.L.(1993). The Mathematics of Statistical 

Machine Translation: Parameter Estimation. Com-

putational Linguistics 19(2) 263–311. 

 Brown, P.F., Lai, J.C. and Mercer, R.L. (1991). 

Aligning Sentences in Parallel Corpora. In Pro-

ceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Asso-

43



ciation for Computational Linguistics,Berkeley, 

California 169–176. 

Chen, S.F.: 1993. Aligning Sentences in Bilingual 

Corpora Using Lexical Information. In Proceed-

ings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the ACL, Co-

lumbus, Ohio (1993) 9–16. 

 Das,D., Pal,S. Mondal,T. Chakroborty,T. and Bandy-

opadhyay,S.:Automatic Extraction of Complex 

Predicates in Bengali . MWE 2010 Workshop, 

Coling 2010, Beijing, China.  

Ekbal, A. and Bandyopadhyay,S.(2009)."Voted NER 

system using appropriate unlabeled data". In pro-

ceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP-2009 Named Enti-

ties Workshop (NEWS 2009), Suntec, Singapore, 

pp. 202-210. 

Feng, Donghui, Yajuan Lv, and Ming Zhou. 2004. A 

new approach for English-Chinese named entity 

alignment. In Proc. of the 2004 Conference on 

Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-

cessing (EMNLP-2004), Barcelona, Spain, pp. 372-

379. 

Fung,P. and CHURCH, K.: ―K-vec.(1994). A New 

Approach for Aligning Parallel Texts. In COLING-

94: 15th International Conference on Computation-

al Linguistics, Kyoto: Aug., 1096--1102. 

 Gale,W.A., Church, K.W.: A program for Aligning 

Sentences in Bilingual Corpora. In Proceedings of 

the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association for 

Computational Linguistics, Berkeley, California 

(1991) 177–184. 

Gildea, D. and Jurafsky, D. (2002). Automatic Label-

ing of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics, 

28(3):245–288 . 

Hook, P. (1974). The Compound Verbs in Hindi. The 

Michigan Series in South and South-east Asian 

Language and Linguistics. The University of Mich-

igan. 

Huang, Fei, Stephan Vogel, and Alex Waibel. 2003. 

Automatic extraction of named entity translingual 

equivalence based on multi-feature cost minimiza-

tion. In Proc. of the ACL-2003 Workshop on Multi-

lingual and Mixed-language Named Entity Recog-

nition, 2003, Sapporo, Japan, pp. 9-16. 

 Kipper-Schuler and K.: VerbNet.(2005). A broad-

coverage, comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. the-

sis,Computer and Information Science Dept., Uni-

versity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,PA . 

Kneser, Reinhard, and Hermann Ney. 1995. Improved 

backing-off for m-gram language modeling. In 

Proc. of the IEEE Internation Conference on 

Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing 

(ICASSP), vol. 1, pp. 181–184. Detroit, MI. 

Koehn, Philipp, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu. 

2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proc. 

of HLT-NAACL 2003: conference combining Hu-

man Language Technology conference series and 

the North American Chapter of the Association for 

Computational Linguistics conference series,  Ed-

monton, Canada, pp. 48-54. 

Koehn, Philipp, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris 

Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Ber-

toldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Mo-

ran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alex-

andra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: 

open source toolkit for statistical machine transla-

tion. In Proc. of the 45th Annual meeting of the As-

sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL 

2007): Proc. of demo and poster sessions, Prague, 

Czech Republic, pp. 177-180. 

Kolya, A.  Das, D.  Ekbal A. and Bandyopadhyay, 

S.(2011). A Hybrid Approach for Event Extraction 

and Event Actor. In RANLP,12-14 September, 

Hissar, Bulgaria PP.592-597. 

Melamed, I.D.(1996). A Geometric Approach to 

Mapping Bitext Correspondence. IRCS Technical 

Report 96-22, University of Pennsylvania. 

Melamed, I.D.(1997).A Portable Algorithm for Map-

ping Bitext Correspondence. In Proceedings of the 

35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-

putational Linguistics, Madrid, Spain 305–312 

Moore, Robert C. (2002), Fast and Accurate Sentence 

Alignment of Bilingual Corpora.AMTA,  135-144. 

Moore, Robert C. 2003. Learning translations of 

named-entity phrases from parallel corpora. In 

Proc. of 10th Conference of the European Chapter 

of the Association for Computational Linguistics 

(EACL 2003), Budapest, Hungary; pp. 259-266. 

Och, Franz J. 2003. Minimum error rate training in 

statistical machine translation. In Proc. of the 41st 

Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics (ACL-2003), Sapporo, Japan, pp. 

160-167. 

Paul, S. (2004). An HPSG Account of Bangla Com-

pound Verbs with LKB Implementation. Ph.D dis-

sertation, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad. 

Pustejovsky,J., Castano,J., Ingria, R.Sauri,R., Gai-

zauskas,R., Setzer,A., Katz, and Radev.(2003). 

TimeML: Robust Specification of Event and Tem-

poral Expressions in text. In Proceedings of the 

Fifth International Workshop on   Computational 

Semantics (IWCS-5), Tilburg. 

 Stolcke, A. SRILM—An Extensible Language Mod-

eling Toolkit. Proc. Intl. Conf. on Spoken Lan-

guage Processing, vol. 2, pp. 901–904, Denver 

(2002). 

 

44


