










































Narrative Composition: Achieving the Perceived Linearity of Narrative


Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 103–104,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Narrative Composition: Achieving the Perceived Linearity of Narrative

Pablo Gervás
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Ciudad Universitaria, 28040 Madrid, Spain

pgervas@sip.ucm.es

The last few years have seen an increased in-
terest in narrative within the field of Natural Lan-
guage Generation (Reiter et al., 2008; Elson and
McKeown, 2010; Siddharthan et al., 2012; Lester,
2012). Narrative is generally acknowledged as a
fundamental mode of presenting and communicat-
ing information between humans, with different
manifestations across media but with a very signif-
icant presence in textual form. Yet efforts in Nat-
ural Language Generation research have generally
side stepped the issue. Aside from the pioneer-
ing work of (Callaway, 2002) and an early attempt
to bridge the gap between narratology and natu-
ral language generation (Lönneker, 2005), the field
had mostly avoided narrative until recent times.
Two possible arguments may be considered as an
explanation of this: one based on the need to re-
strict initial work within a field to the simpler chal-
lenges before tackling the difficult ones, and an-
other based on an assumption that the peculiarities
of narrative have already been covered by existing
work. Both arguments can be shown to be inap-
propriate.

With respect to the first argument, the field of
natural language generation has for many years
operated under the tacit assumption that state of
the art technology can only aspire to generating
texts within a limited range of domains and genres.
These have over the years been defined in different
ways, but in spite of changes, literary texts have
usually been considered to be outside the range
of possible candidates. From an engineering point
of view, this kind of restriction made sense when
the field was starting, for two important reasons.
One, the technological solutions available at the
time for the various tasks involved in natural lan-
guage generation were in their infancy, and the lin-
guistic complexity of literary text might have been
beyond their scope. Two, natural language gener-
ation arose from a desire to extend the studies that
had been carried out for computational analysis of

language to the task of generation, and what was
known about language from a computational point
of view concerned simple texts. Most of the stud-
ies on language and computation had applied sim-
ilar simplifying assumptions. However, such re-
stricting assumptions are no longer necessary and
may be inhibiting progress. In terms of technol-
ogy, the field has matured significantly over the
intervening years. The current state of the art pro-
vides a wide range of solutions that may be well
suited to address some of the more complex phe-
nomena involved in literary text. Additional ob-
jections may be made on the grounds that we do
not know enough about these phenomena. Such
objections, however valid they might have been
originally, are no longer valid either. Many of
the phenomena that were considered beyond com-
putational treatment (metaphor, emotion, tempo-
ral reasoning, dialogue...) have been the subject
of serious and sustained study over the same time
period. Many approaches to their computational
modelling and treatment have become available.
More to the point, the last few years have seen
a rise of interest on literary text within the natu-
ral language processing community. This is ev-
idenced by the number of workshops addressing
topics related to literature: Workshop on Com-
putational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity at
NAACL HLT 2009 and 2010, Computational Lin-
guistics for Literature Workshop at NAACL HLT
2012 and 2013, Computational Models of Narra-
tive events held as AAAI Fall symposium in 2010,
as LREC workshop in 2012, and as satellite work-
shop of CogSci 2013, just to name a few.

With respect to the second argument, the recent
reappearance of narrative as a research topic for
NLG should be enough to dispel the notion that
all its problems have already been solved. Narra-
tive has many peculiarities that set it apart from
other kinds of text, and the body of work address-
ing narrative as a research topic within NLG has

103



at most uncovered and staked out a set of prob-
lems and challenges that area waiting further ex-
ploration. Of these various open problems in the
treatment of narrative, my talk will focus on the
problem of narrative composition.

Research on narrative is plagued by the diffi-
culty of establishing a definition of the term that
is both sufficiently formal to act as foundation for
scientific rigour, and sufficiently rich to cover the
fundamental aspects that people associate with the
term. At the present stage of development, tenta-
tive definition need to be established, to be later
confirmed on the basis of empirical work and suc-
cesful evaluation of results. The talk will out-
line some of the possibilities that must be con-
sidered (arising from established definitions in the
field of narratology) and some of the restrictions
that arise from the computational nature of the
task. From the combination of these constraints,
a working model of narrative structure will be out-
lined. However, it is clear that such a model must
document the relation between a semantic descrip-
tion of the content of the narrative (what is usually
termed the fabula) and its rendition as a sequential
discourse. The task of narrative composition will
be specified as the task of constructing such a dis-
course (or discourse plan) for a given semantic de-
scription of fabula. This discourse should be sus-
ceptible of being converted into text and it should
appropriately conveys the set of events in the fab-
ula in such a way that satifies a number of tra-
ditionally accepted requirements (like having an
identifiable theme, a certain temporal and causal
coherence, a recognisable set of characters...). A
number of basic narratological concepts will be
described where they provide tools for breaking
down the task into computationally tractable sub-
problems. Of particular interest is the concept
of focalization, which is used by narratologists to
describe the way certain segments of a narrative
follow a particular character, and which provides
a useful computational representation of both the
granularity and the shift in focus employed during
the process of converting the semantics of the fab-
ula into a linear discourse.

As part of the talk, narrative composition will be
framed in terms of the accepted task breakdown
for natural language generation, considering that
it may involve a combination of content determi-
nation and discourse planning that cannot be seg-
regated into separate subtasks. The talk will also

discuss the relation of the task of narrative compo-
sition with a number of existing research problems
such as story generation (which could correspond
to the construction of fabula but is sometimes sim-
plified down to construction of a discourse di-
rectly) and creativity (which has been addressed
with respect to story generation but may also con-
stitute a fundamental ingredient of the composi-
tion task).

Acknowledgments

The work on which this talk is based was partially
supported by the Ministerio de Educación y Cien-
cia (TIN2009-14659-C03-01).

References
Charles B. Callaway. 2002. Narrative prose genera-

tion. Artificial Intelligence, 139(2):213–252.

David K. Elson and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2010.
Tense and aspect assignment in narrative discourse.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Natural Lan-
guage Generation Conference, INLG ’10, pages 47–
56, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

James Lester. 2012. Expressive nlg for next-
generation learning environments: language, affect,
and narrative. In Proceedings of the Seventh Inter-
national Natural Language Generation Conference,
INLG ’12, pages 2–2, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Birte Lönneker. 2005. Narratological Knowledge for
Natural Language Generation. In Graham Wilcock,
Kristiina Jokinen, Chris Mellish, and Ehud Reiter,
editors, Proceedings of the 10th European Workshop
on Natural Language Generation (= ENLG 2005),
pages 91–100, Aberdeen, Scotland, August.

Ehud Reiter, Albert Gatt, François Portet, and Marian
van der Meulen. 2008. The importance of narra-
tive and other lessons from an evaluation of an nlg
system that summarises clinical data. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth International Natural Language
Generation Conference, INLG ’08, pages 147–156,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Advaith Siddharthan, Matthew Green, Kees van
Deemter, Chris Mellish, and René van der Wal.
2012. Blogging birds: generating narratives about
reintroduced species to promote public engagement.
In Proceedings of the Seventh International Natural
Language Generation Conference, INLG ’12, pages
120–124, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

104


