










































Building a German/Simple German Parallel Corpus for Automatic Text Simplification


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Predicting and Improving Text Readability for Target Reader Populations, pages 11–19,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Building a German/Simple German Parallel Corpus
for Automatic Text Simplification

David Klaper Sarah Ebling Martin Volk
Institute of Computational Linguistics, University of Zurich

Binzmühlestrasse 14, 8050 Zurich, Switzerland
david.klaper@uzh.ch, {ebling|volk}@cl.uzh.ch

Abstract

In this paper we report our experiments
in creating a parallel corpus using Ger-
man/Simple German documents from the
web. We require parallel data to build a
statistical machine translation (SMT) sys-
tem that translates from German into Sim-
ple German. Parallel data for SMT sys-
tems needs to be aligned at the sentence
level. We applied an existing monolingual
sentence alignment algorithm. We show
the limits of the algorithm with respect to
the language and domain of our data and
suggest ways of circumventing them.

1 Introduction

Simple language (or, “plain language”, “easy-to-
read language”) is language with low lexical and
syntactic complexity. It provides access to infor-
mation to people with cognitive disabilities (e.g.,
aphasia, dyslexia), foreign language learners, Deaf
people,1 and children. Text in simple language
is obtained through simplification. Simplification
is a text-to-text generation task involving multiple
operations, such as deletion, rephrasing, reorder-
ing, sentence splitting, and even insertion (Coster
and Kauchak, 2011a). By contrast, paraphrasing
and compression, two other text-to-text generation
tasks, involve merely rephrasing and reordering
(paraphrasing) and deletion (compression). Text
simplification also shares common ground with
grammar and style checking as well as with con-
trolled natural language generation.

Text simplification approaches exist for vari-
ous languages, including English, French, Span-
ish, and Swedish. As Matausch and Nietzio (2012)
write, “plain language is still underrepresented in

1It is an often neglected fact that Deaf people tend to ex-
hibit low literacy skills (Gutjahr, 2006).

the German speaking area and needs further devel-
opment”. Our goal is to build a statistical machine
translation (SMT) system that translates from Ger-
man into Simple German.

SMT systems require two corpora aligned at the
sentence level as their training, development, and
test data. The two corpora together can form a
bilingual or a monolingual corpus. A bilingual
corpus involves two different languages, while a
monolingual corpus consists of data in a single
language. Since text simplification is a text-to-
text generation task operating within the same lan-
guage, it produces monolingual corpora.

Monolingual corpora, like bilingual corpora,
can be either parallel or comparable. A parallel
corpus is a set of two corpora in which “a no-
ticeable number of sentences can be recognized as
mutual translations” (Tomás et al., 2008). Paral-
lel corpora are often compiled from the publica-
tions of multinational institutions, such as the UN
or the EU, or of governments of multilingual coun-
tries, such as Canada (Koehn, 2005). In contrast, a
comparable corpus consists of two corpora created
independently of each other from distinct sources.
Examples of comparable documents are news ar-
ticles written on the same topic by different news
agencies.

In this paper we report our experiments in cre-
ating a monolingual parallel corpus using Ger-
man/Simple German documents from the web. We
require parallel data to build an SMT system that
translates from German into Simple German. Par-
allel data for SMT systems needs to be aligned at
the sentence level. We applied an existing mono-
lingual sentence alignment algorithm. We show
the limits of the algorithm with respect to the lan-
guage and domain of our data and suggest ways of
circumventing them.

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows: In Section 2 we discuss the methodologies
pursued and the data used in previous work deal-

11



ing with automatic text simplification. In Section 3
we describe our own approach to building a Ger-
man/Simple German parallel corpus. In particu-
lar, we introduce the data obtained from the web
(Section 3.1), describe the sentence alignment al-
gorithm we used (Section 3.2), present the results
of the sentence alignment task (Section 3.3), and
discuss them (Section 3.4). In Section 4 we give
an overview of the issues we tackled and offer an
outlook on future work.

2 Approaches to Text Simplification

The task of simplifying text automatically can be
performed by means of rule-based, corpus-based,
or hybrid approaches. In a rule-based approach,
the operations carried out typically include replac-
ing words by simpler synonyms or rephrasing rel-
ative clauses, embedded sentences, passive con-
structions, etc. Moreover, definitions of difficult
terms or concepts are often added, e.g., the term
web crawler is defined as “a computer program
that searches the Web automatically”. Gasperin et
al. (2010) pursued a rule-based approach to text
simplification for Brazilian Portuguese within the
PorSimples project,2 as did Brouwers et al. (2012)
for French.

As part of the corpus-based approach, machine
translation (MT) has been employed. Yatskar et al.
(2010) pointed out that simplification is “a form of
MT in which the two ‘languages’ in question are
highly related”.

As far as we can see, Zhu et al. (2010) were the
first to use English/Simple English Wikipedia data
for automatic simplification via machine transla-
tion.3 They assembled a monolingual compara-
ble corpus4 of 108,016 sentence pairs based on
the interlanguage links in Wikipedia and the sen-
tence alignment algorithm of Nelken and Shieber
(2006) (cf. Section 3.2). Their system applies a
“tree-based simplification model” including ma-
chine translation techniques. The system learns
probabilities for simplification operations (substi-
tution, reordering, splitting, deletion) offline from

2http://www2.nilc.icmc.usp.br/wiki/
index.php/English

3English Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.
org/; Simple English Wikipedia: http://simple.
wikipedia.org/.

4We consider this corpus to be comparable rather than
parallel because not every Simple English Wikipedia article
is necessarily a translation of an English Wikipedia article.
Rather, Simple English articles can be added independently
of any English counterpart.

the comparable Wikipedia data. At runtime, an in-
put sentence is parsed and zero or more simplifica-
tion operations are carried out based on the model
probabilities.

Specia (2010) used the SMT system Moses
(Koehn et al., 2007) to translate from Brazilian
Portuguese into a simpler version of this language.
Her work is part of the PorSimples project men-
tioned above. As training data she used 4483 sen-
tences extracted from news texts that had been
manually translated into Simple Brazilian Por-
tuguese.5 The results, evaluated automatically
with BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and NIST
(Doddington, 2002) as well as manually, show that
the system performed lexical simplification and
sentence splitting well, while it exhibited prob-
lems in reordering phrases and producing subject–
verb–object (SVO) order. To further improve her
system Specia (2010) suggested including syntac-
tic information through hierarchical SMT (Chi-
ang, 2005) and part-of-speech tags through fac-
tored SMT (Hoang, 2007).

Coster and Kauchak (2011a; 2011b) trans-
lated from English into Simple English using En-
glish/Simple English Wikipedia data. Like Spe-
cia (2010), they applied Moses as their MT sys-
tem but in addition to the default configuration al-
lowed for phrases to be empty. This was moti-
vated by their observation that 47% of all Simple
English Wikipedia sentences were missing at least
one phrase compared to their English Wikipedia
counterparts. Coster and Kauchak (2011a; 2011b)
used four baselines to evaluate their system: in-
put=output,6 two text compression systems, and
vanilla Moses. Their system, Moses-Del, achieved
higher automatic MT evaluation scores (BLEU)
than all of the baselines. In particular, it outper-
formed vanilla Moses (lacking the phrase deletion
option).

Wubben et al. (2012) also worked with En-
glish/Simple English Wikipedia data and Moses.
They added a post-hoc reranking step: Follow-
ing their conviction that the output of a simplifi-
cation system has to be a modified version of the
input,7 they rearranged the 10-best sentences out-
put by Moses such that those differing from the

5Hence, the corpus as a whole is a monolingual parallel
corpus.

6The underlying assumption here was that not every sen-
tence needs simplification.

7Note that this runs contrary to the assumption Coster and
Kauchak (2011a; 2011b) made.

12



input sentences were given preference over those
that were identical. Difference was calculated on
the basis of the Levenshtein score (edit distance).
Wubben et al. (2012) found their system to work
better than that of Zhu et al. (2010) when evalu-
ated with BLEU, but not when evaluated with the
Flesch-Kincaid grade level, a common readability
metric.

Bott and Saggion (2011) presented a monolin-
gual sentence alignment algorithm, which uses a
Hidden Markov Model for alignment. In contrast
to other monolingual alignment algorithms, Bott
and Saggion (2011) introduced a monotonicity re-
striction, i.e., they assumed the order of sentences
to be the same for the original and simplified texts.

Apart from purely rule-based and purely
corpus-based approaches to text simplification,
hybrid approaches exist. For example, Bott et al.
(2012) in their Simplext project for Spanish8 let a
statistical classifier decide for each sentence of a
text whether it should be simplified (corpus-based
approach). The actual simplification was then per-
formed by means of a rule-based approach.

As has been shown, many MT approaches to
text simplification have used English/Simple En-
glish Wikipedia as their data. The only excep-
tion we know of is Specia (2010), who together
with her colleagues in the PorSimples project built
her own parallel corpus. This is presumably be-
cause there exists no Simple Brazilian Portuguese
Wikipedia. The same is true for German: To date,
no Simple German Wikipedia has been created.
Therefore, we looked for data available elsewhere
for our machine translation system designated to
translate from German to Simple German. We dis-
covered that German/Simple German parallel data
is slowly becoming available on the web. In what
follows, we describe the data we harvested and re-
port our experience in creating a monolingual par-
allel corpus from this data.

3 Building a German/Simple German
Parallel Corpus from the Web

3.1 Data
As mentioned in Section 1, statistical machine
translation (SMT) systems require parallel data.
A common approach to obtain such material is
to look for it on the web.9 The use of already

8http://www.simplext.es/
9Resnik (1999) was the first to discuss the possibility of

collecting parallel corpora from the web.

available data offers cost and time advantages.
Many websites, including that of the German gov-
ernment,10 contain documents in Simple German.
However, these documents are often not linked to a
single corresponding German document; instead,
they are high-level summaries of multiple German
documents.

A handful of websites exist that offer articles
in two versions: a German version, often called
Alltagssprache (AS, “everyday language”), and
a Simple German version, referred to as Leichte
Sprache (LS, “simple language”). Table 1 lists the
websites we used to compile our corpus. The num-
bers indicate how many parallel articles were ex-
tracted. The websites are mainly of organizations
that support people with disabilities. We crawled
the articles with customized Python scripts that lo-
cated AS articles and followed the links to their LS
correspondents. A sample sentence pair from our
data is shown in Example 1.

(1) German:
Wir freuen uns über Ihr Interesse an unserer
Arbeit mit und für Menschen mit
Behinderung.
(“We appreciate your interest in our work
with and for people with disabilities.”)

Simple German:
Schön, dass Sie sich für unsere Arbeit
interessieren.
Wir arbeiten mit und für Menschen mit
Behinderung.
(“Great that you are interested in our work.
We work with and for people with
disabilities.”)

The extracted data needed to be cleaned from
HTML tags. For our purpose, we considered text
and paragraph structure markers as important in-
formation; therefore, we retained them. We subse-
quently tokenized the articles. The resulting cor-
pus consisted of 7755 sentences, which amounted
to 82,842 tokens. However, caution is advised
when looking at these numbers: Firstly, the tok-
enization module overgenerated tokens. Secondly,
some of the LS articles were identical, either be-
cause they summarized multiple AS articles or be-
cause they were generic placeholders. Hence, the

10http://www.bundesregierung.de/Webs/
Breg/DE/LeichteSprache/leichteSprache_
node.html (last accessed 15th April 2013)

13



Short name URL No. of parallel art.

ET www.einfach-teilhaben.de 51
GWW www.gww-netz.de 65
HHO www.os-hho.de 34
LMT www.lebenshilfe-main-taunus.de 47
OWB www.owb.de 59

Table 1: Websites and number of articles extracted

actual numbers were closer to 7000 sentences and
70,000 tokens.

SMT systems usually require large amount of
training data. Therefore, this small experimen-
tal corpus is certainly not suitable for large-scale
SMT experiments. However, it can serve as proof
of concept for German sentence simplification.
Over time more resources will become available.

SMT systems rely on data aligned at the sen-
tence level. Since the data we extracted from the
web was aligned at the article level only, we had
to perform sentence alignment. For this we split
our corpus into a training set (70% of the texts),
development set (10%), and test set (20%). We
manually annotated sentence alignments for all of
the data. Example 2 shows an aligned AS/LS sen-
tence pair.

(2) German:
In den Osnabrücker Werkstätten (OW) und
OSNA-Techniken sind rund 2.000 Menschen
mit einer Behinderung beschäftigt.
(“In the Osnabrück factories and
OSNA-Techniken, about 2.000 people with
disability are employed.”)

Simple German:
In den Osnabrücker Werkstätten und den
Osna-Techniken arbeiten zweitausend
Menschen mit Behinderung.
(“Two thousand people with disability work
in the Osnabrück factories and
Osna-Techniken.”)

To measure the amount of parallel sentences
in our data, we calculated the alignment di-
versity measure (ADM) of Nelken and Shieber
(2006). ADM measures how many sentences are
aligned. It is calculated as 2∗matches(T1,T2)|T1|+|T2| , where
matches is the number of alignments between the
two texts T1 and T2. ADM is 1.0 in a perfectly
parallel corpus, where every sentence from one

text is aligned to exactly one sentence in another
text.

ADM for our corpus was 0.786, which means
that approximately 78% of the sentences were
aligned. This is a rather high number compared to
the values reported by Nelken and Shieber (2006):
Their texts (consisting of encyclopedia articles and
gospels) resulted in an ADM of around 0.3. A pos-
sible explanation for the large difference in ADM
is the fact that most simplified texts in our corpus
are solely based on the original texts, whereas the
simple versions of the encyclopedia articles might
have been created by drawing on external informa-
tion in addition.

3.2 Sentence Alignment Algorithm
Sentence alignment algorithms differ according to
whether they have been developed for bilingual or
monolingual corpora. For bilingual parallel cor-
pora many—typically length-based—algorithms
exist. However, our data was monolingual. While
the length of a regular/simple language sentence
pair might be different, an overlap in vocabulary
can be expected. Hence, monolingual sentence
alignment algorithms typically exploit lexical sim-
ilarity.

We applied the monolingual sentence alignment
algorithm of Barzilay and Elhadad (2003). The al-
gorithm has two main features: Firstly, it uses a
hierarchical approach by assigning paragraphs to
clusters and learning mapping rules. Secondly,
it aligns sentences despite low lexical similarity
if the context suggests an alignment. This is
achieved through local sequence alignment, a dy-
namic programming algorithm.

The overall algorithm has two phases, a train-
ing and a testing phase. The training phase in turn
consists of two steps: Firstly, all paragraphs of the
texts of one side of the parallel corpus (henceforth
referred to as “AS texts”) are clustered indepen-
dently of all paragraphs of the texts of the other

14



side of the parallel corpus (henceforth termed “LS
texts”), and vice versa. Secondly, mappings be-
tween the two sets of clusters are calculated, given
the reference alignments.

As a preprocessing step to the clustering pro-
cess, we removed stopwords, lowercased all
words, and replaced dates, numbers, and names
by generic tags. Barzilay and Elhadad (2003) ad-
ditionally considered every word starting with a
capital letter inside a sentence to be a proper name.
In German, all nouns (i.e., regular nouns as well as
proper names) are capitalized; thus, this approach
does not work. We used a list of 61,228 first names
to remove at least part of the proper names.

We performed clustering with scipy (Jones et
al., 2001). We adapted the hierarchical complete-
link clustering method of Barzilay and Elhadad
(2003): While the authors claimed to have set a
specific number of clusters, we believe this is not
generally possible in hierarchical agglomerative
clustering. Therefore, we used the largest num-
ber of clusters in which all paragraph pairs had a
cosine similarity strictly greater than zero.

Following the formation of the clusters, lex-
ical similarity between all paragraphs of corre-
sponding AS and LS texts was computed to es-
tablish probable mappings between the two sets
of clusters. Barzilay and Elhadad (2003) used
the boosting tool Boostexter (Schapire and Singer,
2000). All possible cross-combinations of para-
graphs from the parallel training data served as
training instances. An instance consisted of the
cosine similarity of the two paragraphs and a string
combining the two cluster IDs. The classifica-
tion result was extracted from the manual align-
ments. In order for an AS and an LS paragraph
to be aligned, at least one sentence from the LS
paragraph had to be aligned to one sentence in the
AS paragraph. Like Barzilay and Elhadad (2003),
we performed 200 iterations in Boostexter. After
learning the mapping rules, the training phase was
complete.

The testing phase consisted of two additional
steps. Firstly, each paragraph of each text in the
test set was assigned to the cluster it was clos-
est to. This was done by calculating the cosine
similarity of the word frequencies in the clusters.
Then, every AS paragraph was combined with all
LS paragraphs of the parallel text, and Boostexter
was used in classification mode to predict whether
the two paragraphs were to be mapped.

Secondly, within each pair of paragraphs
mapped by Boostexter, sentences with very high
lexical similarity were aligned. In our case, the
threshold for an alignment was a similarity of 0.5.
For the remaining sentences, proximity to other
aligned or similar sentences was used as an indi-
cator. This was implemented by local sequence
alignment. We set the mismatch penalty to 0.02,
as a higher mismatch penalty would have reduced
recall. We set the skip penalty to 0.001 conform-
ing to the value of Barzilay and Elhadad (2003).
The resulting alignments were written to files. Ex-
ample 3 shows a successful sentence alignment.

(3) German:
Die GWW ist in den Landkreisen Böblingen
und Calw aktiv und bietet an den folgenden
Standorten Wohnmöglichkeiten für
Menschen mit Behinderung an – ganz in
Ihrer Nähe!
(“The GWW is active in the counties of
Böblingen and Calw and offers housing
options for people with disabilities at the
following locations – very close to you!”)

Simple German:
Die GWW gibt es in den Landkreisen Calw
und Böblingen.
Wir haben an den folgenden Orten
Wohn-Möglichkeiten für Sie.
(“The GWW exists in the counties of Calw
and Böblingen. We have housing options for
you in the following locations.”)

The algorithm described has been modified in
various ways. Nelken and Shieber (2006) used
TF/IDF instead of raw term frequency, logistic re-
gression on the cosine similarity instead of cluster-
ing, and an extended version of the local alignment
recurrence. Both Nelken and Shieber (2006) and
Quirk et al. (2004) found that the first sentence
of each document is likely to be aligned. We ob-
served the same for our corpus. Therefore, in our
algorithm we adopted the strategy of uncondition-
ally aligning the first sentence of each document.

3.3 Results
Table 2 shows the results of evaluating the algo-
rithm described in the previous section with re-
spect to precision, recall, and F1 measure. We in-
troduced two baselines:

15



Method Precision Recall F1

Adapted algorithm of Barzilay and Elhadad (2003) 27.7% 5.0% 8.5%
Baseline I: First sentence 88.1% 4.8% 9.3%
Baseline II: Word in common 2.2% 8.2% 3.5%

Table 2: Alignment results on test set

1. Aligning only the first sentence of each text
(“First sentence”)

2. Aligning every sentence with a cosine simi-
larity greater than zero (“Word in common”)

As can be seen from Table 2, by applying the
sentence alignment algorithm of Barzilay and El-
hadad (2003) we were able to extract only 5%
of all reference alignments, while precision was
below 30%. The rule of aligning the first sen-
tences performed well with a precision of 88%.
Aligning all sentences with a word in common
clearly showed the worst performance; this is be-
cause many sentences have a word in common.
Nonetheless, recall was only slightly higher than
with the other methods.

In conclusion, none of the three approaches
(adapted algorithm of Barzilay and Elhadad
(2003), two baselines “First sentence” and “Word
in common”) performed well on our test set. We
analyzed the characteristics of our data that ham-
pered high-quality automatic alignment.

3.4 Discussion
Compared with the results of Barzilay and El-
hadad (2003), who achieved 77% precision at
55.8% recall for their data, our alignment scores
were considerably lower (27.7% precision, 5% re-
call). We found two reasons for this: language
challenges and domain challenges. In what fol-
lows, we discuss each reason in more detail.

While Barzilay and Elhadad (2003) aligned En-
glish/Simple English texts, we dealt with Ger-
man/Simple German data. As mentioned in Sec-
tion 3.2, in German nouns (regular nouns as well
as proper names) are capitalized. This makes
named entity recognition, a preprocessing step to
clustering, more difficult. Moreover, German is
an example of a morphologically rich language:
Its noun phrases are marked with case, leading
to different inflectional forms for articles, pro-
nouns, adjectives, and nouns. English morphol-
ogy is poorer; hence, there is a greater likelihood

of lexical overlap. Similarly, compounds are pro-
ductive in German; an example from our corpus
is Seniorenwohnanlagen (“housing complexes for
the elderly”). In contrast, English compounds are
multiword units, where each word can be accessed
separately by a clustering algorithm. Therefore,
cosine similarity is more effective for English than
it is for German. One way to alleviate this problem
would be to use extensive morphological decom-
position and lemmatization.

In terms of domain, Barzilay and Elhadad
(2003) used city descriptions from an encyclope-
dia for their experiments. For these descriptions
clustering worked well because all articles had the
same structure (paragraphs about culture, sports,
etc.). The domain of our corpus was broader:
It included information about housing, work, and
events for people with disabilities as well as infor-
mation about the organizations behind the respec-
tive websites.

Apart from language and domain challenges we
observed heavy transformations from AS to LS in
our data (Figure 1 shows a sample article in AS
and LS). As a result, LS paragraphs were typi-
cally very short and the clustering process returned
many singleton clusters. Example 4 shows an
AS/LS sentence pair that could not be aligned be-
cause of this.

(4) German:
Der Beauftragte informiert über die
Gesetzeslage, regt Rechtsänderungen an,
gibt Praxistipps und zeigt Möglichkeiten der
Eingliederung behinderter Menschen in
Gesellschaft und Beruf auf.
(“The delegate informs about the legal
situation, encourages revisions of laws, gives
practical advice and points out possibilities
of including people with disabilities in
society and at work.”)

Simple German:
Er gibt ihnen Tipps und Infos.

16



Figure 1: Comparison of AS and LS article from http://www.einfach-teilhaben.de

(“He provides them with advice and
information.”)

Figure 2 shows the dendrogram of the cluster-
ing of the AS texts. A dendrogram shows the re-
sults of a hierarchical agglomerative clustering. At
the bottom of the dendrogram every paragraph is
marked by an individual line. At the points where
two vertical paths join, the corresponding clusters
are merged to a new larger cluster. The Y-axis is
the dissimilarity value of the two clusters. In our
experiment the resulting clusters are the clusters
at dissimilarity 1 − 1−10. Geometrically this is a
horizontal cut just below dissimilarity 1.0. As can
be seen from Figure 2, many of the paragraphs
in the left half of the picture are never merged
to a slightly larger cluster but are directly con-
nected to the universal cluster that merges every-
thing. This is because they contain only stopwords
or only words that do not appear in all paragraphs
of another cluster. Such an unbalanced clustering,
where many paragraphs are clustered to one clus-
ter and many other paragraphs remain singleton
clusters, reduces the precision of the hierarchical
approach.

4 Conclusion and Outlook

In this paper we have reported our experiments in
creating a monolingual parallel corpus using Ger-
man/Simple German documents from the web. We
have shown that little work has been done on au-
tomatic simplification of German so far. We have
described our plan to build a statistical machine
translation (SMT) system that translates form Ger-
man into Simple German. SMT systems require
parallel corpora. The process of creating a parallel
corpus for use in machine translation involves sen-
tence alignment. Sentence alignment algorithms
for bilingual corpora differ from those for mono-
lingual corpora. Since all of our data was from
the same language, we applied the monolingual
sentence alignment approach of Barzilay and El-
hadad (2003). We have shown the limits of the al-
gorithm with respect to the language and domain
of our data. For example, named entity recogni-
tion, a preprocessing step to clustering, is harder
for German than for English, the language Barzi-
lay and Elhadad (2003) worked with. Moreover,
German features richer morphology than English,
which leads to less lexical overlap when working
on the word form level.

17



Figure 2: Dendrogram of AS clusters

The domain of our corpus was also broader than
that of Barzilay and Elhadad (2003), who used city
descriptions from an encyclopedia for their exper-
iments. This made it harder to identify common
article structures that could be exploited in clus-
tering.

As a next step, we will experiment with other
monolingual sentence alignment algorithms. In
addition, we will build a second parallel corpus for
German/Simple German: A person familiar with
the task of text simplification will produce simple
versions of German texts. We will use the result-
ing parallel corpus as data for our experiments in
automatically translating from German to Simple
German. The parallel corpus we compiled as part
of the work described in this paper can be made
available to interested parties upon request.

References
Regina Barzilay and Noemie Elhadad. 2003. Sentence

alignment for monolingual comparable corpora. In
Proceedings of EMNLP.

Stefan Bott and Horacio Saggion. 2011. An un-
supervised alignment algorithm for text simplifica-
tion corpus construction. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Monolingual Text-To-Text Generation,
MTTG ’11, pages 20–26, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Stefan Bott, Horacio Saggion, and David Figueroa.
2012. A Hybrid System for Spanish Text Simpli-

fication. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on
Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Tech-
nologies, pages 75–84, Montréal, Canada, June.

Laetitia Brouwers, Delphine Bernhard, Anne-Laure
Ligozat, and Thomas François. 2012. Simplifica-
tion syntaxique de phrases pour le français. In Actes
de la conférence conjointe JEP-TALN-RECITAL
2012, volume 2: TALN, pages 211–224.

David Chiang. 2005. A Hierarchical Phrase-based
Model for Statistical Machine Translation. In ACL-
05: 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 263–270, Univer-
sity of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

William Coster and David Kauchak. 2011a. Learn-
ing to simplify sentences using Wikipedia. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Monolingual Text-To-
Text Generation, MTTG ’11, pages 1–9, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA.

William Coster and David Kauchak. 2011b. Simple
English Wikipedia: a new text simplification task.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies: short papers - Volume 2,
HLT ’11, pages 665–669, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

George Doddington. 2002. Automatic Evaluation
of Machine Translation Quality Using N-gram Co-
occurrence Statistics. In HLT 2002: Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference, Proceedings of the
Second International Conference on Human Lan-
guage Technology Research, pages 138–145, San
Diego, California.

18



Caroline Gasperin, Erick Maziero, and Sandra M.
Aluisio. 2010. Challenging choices for text sim-
plification. In Computational Processing of the Por-
tuguese Language. Proceedings of the 9th Interna-
tional Conference, PROPOR 2010, volume 6001
of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence (LNAI),
pages 40–50, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. Springer.

A. Gutjahr. 2006. Lesekompetenz Gehörloser: Ein
Forschungsüberblick. Universität Hamburg.

Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored Translation Models.
In EMNLP-CoNLL 2007: Proceedings of the 2007
Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and Computational Natural
Language Learning, pages 868–876, Prague, Czech
Republic.

Eric Jones, Travis Oliphant, Pearu Peterson, et al.
2001. SciPy: Open Source Scientific Tools for
Python.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation.
In ACL 2007, Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 177–180, Prague, Czech Republic.

Kerstin Matausch and Annika Nietzio. 2012. Easy-to-
read and plain language: Defining criteria and re-
fining rules. http://www.w3.org/WAI/RD/
2012/easy-to-read/paper11/.

Rani Nelken and Stuart M. Shieber. 2006. Towards ro-
bust context-sensitive sentence alignment for mono-
lingual corpora. In Proceedings of 11th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 161–168.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a Method for Automatic
Evaluation of Machine Translation. In 40th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Proceedings of the Conference, pages 311–
318, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Chris Quirk, Chris Brocket, and William Dolan. 2004.
Monolingual machine translation for paraphrase
generation. In Proceedings Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing.

Philip Resnik. 1999. Mining the Web for Bilingual
Text. In 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Proceedings of the Con-
ference, pages 527–534, University of Maryland,
College Park, Maryland, USA.

Robert E. Schapire and Yoram Singer. 2000. BoosTex-
ter: A boosting-based system for text categorization.
Machine Learning, 39(2–3):135–168.

Lucia Specia. 2010. Translating from complex to
simplified sentences. In Computational Process-
ing of the Portuguese Language. Proceedings of the
9th International Conference, PROPOR 2010, vol-
ume 6001 of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence
(LNAI), pages 30–39, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
Springer.

Sander Wubben, Antal van den Bosch, and Emiel
Krahmer. 2012. Sentence simplification by mono-
lingual machine translation. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Long Papers - Volume 1, ACL
’12, pages 1015–1024, Jeju Island, Korea.

Mark Yatskar, Bo Pang, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil, and Lillian Lee. 2010. For the sake of sim-
plicity: Unsupervised extraction of lexical simplifi-
cations from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the An-
nual Meeting of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
365–368.

Z. Zhu, D. Bernhard, and I. Gurevych. 2010. A
monolingual tree-based translation model for sen-
tence simplification. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 1353–1361.

19


