










































Translation of "It" in a Deep Syntax Framework


Proceedings of the Workshop on Discourse in Machine Translation (DiscoMT), pages 51–59,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 9, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Translation of “It” in a Deep Syntax Framework

Michal Novák, Anna Nedoluzhko and Zdeněk Žabokrtský
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Malostranské náměstı́ 25, CZ-11800

{mnovak,nedoluzko,zabokrtsky}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

We present a novel approach to the trans-
lation of the English personal pronoun it
to Czech. We conduct a linguistic analysis
on how the distinct categories of it are usu-
ally mapped to their Czech counterparts.
Armed with these observations, we design
a discriminative translation model of it,
which is then integrated into the TectoMT
deep syntax MT framework. Features in
the model take advantage of rich syntac-
tic annotation TectoMT is based on, exter-
nal tools for anaphoricity resolution, lex-
ical co-occurrence frequencies measured
on a large parallel corpus and gold coref-
erence annotation. Even though the new
model for it exhibits no improvement in
terms of BLEU, manual evaluation shows
that it outperforms the original solution in
8.5% sentences containing it.

1 Introduction

After it has long been neglected, retaining cohe-
sion of a text larger than a single sentence in Ma-
chine Translation (MT) has recently become a dis-
cussed topic. Correct translation of referential ex-
pressions is in many cases essential for humans to
grasp the meaning of a translated text.

Especially, the translation of pronouns attracts
a higher rate of interest. In the previous works
of Le Nagard and Koehn (2010), Hardmeier and
Federico (2010) and Guillou (2012), it has been
shown that current MT systems perform poorly in
producing the correct forms of pronouns. As re-
gards English, the personal pronoun it is the most
complicated case. Not only can it corefer with al-
most any noun phrase (making it hard to pick the
correct gender and number if the target language is
morphologically rich), but it can also corefer with
a larger discourse segment or play the role of a
filler in certain grammatical constructions.

In this work, we turn our attention to the transla-
tion of the English personal pronoun it into Czech.
Even if we ignore morphology and merge all re-
lated surface forms into one, we cannot find a
single Czech expression that would comprise all
functions of the English it. Moreover, there is no
simple one-to-one mapping from categories of it
to Czech expressions. For instance, one would ex-
pect that the translation of it which is coreferen-
tial with a noun phrase has to agree in number and
gender with the translation of its antecedent. How-
ever, there are cases when it is more suitable to
translate it as the demonstrative pronoun to, whose
gender is always neuter.

The aim of this work is to build an English-to-
Czech translation model for the personal pronoun
it within the TectoMT framework (Žabokrtský et
al., 2008). TectoMT is a tree-to-tree translation
system with transfer via tectogrammatical layer,
a deep syntactic layer which follows the Prague
tectogrammatics theory (Sgall, 1967; Sgall et al.,
1986) Therefore, its translation model outputs the
deep syntactic representation of a Czech expres-
sion. Selecting the correct grammatical categories
and thus producing a concrete surface form of a
deep syntactic representation is provided by the
translation synthesis stage, which we do not focus
on in this work.

The mapping between it and corresponding
Czech expressions depends on many aspects. We
address them by introducing features based on
syntactic annotation and anaphoricity resolver out-
put. Furthermore, we make use of lexical co-
occurrence counts aggregated on a large auto-
matically annotated Czech-English parallel corpus
CzEng 1.0 (Bojar et al., 2012). Coreference links
also appear to be a source of valuable features.1

In contrast to the related work, we prefer a dis-
criminative model to a commonly used generative

1However, we excluded them from the final model used
in MT as they originate from gold standard annotation.

51



model. The former allows us to feed it with many
syntactic and lexical features that may affect the
output, which would hardly be possible in the lat-
ter.

2 Related Work

Our work addresses a similar issue that has been
explored by Le Nagard and Koehn (2010), Hard-
meier and Federico (2010) and Guillou (2012).
These works attempted to incorporate informa-
tion on coreference relations into MT, aiming to
improve the translation of English pronouns into
morphologically richer languages. The poor re-
sults in the first two works were mainly due to im-
perfect automatic coreference annotation.

The work of Guillou (2012) is of special interest
to this work because it is also focused on English
to Czech translation and makes an extensive use
of the Prague Czech-English Dependency Tree-
bank 2.0 (PCEDT). Instead of automatic corefer-
ence links, they employed gold annotation, reveal-
ing further reasons of small improvements – the
number of occurrences in the tranining data weak-
ened by including grammatical number and gen-
der in the annotation and availability of only a sin-
gle reference translation.

The first issue is a consequence of the assump-
tion that a Czech pronoun must agree in gen-
der and number with its antecedent. There are
cases, though, when demonstrative pronoun to fits
better and grammatical categories are not propa-
gated. Keeping grammatical information on its
antecedent may in this case result in probably not
harmful but still superfluous partitioning the train-
ing data.

Our work deals also with the second issue, how-
ever, at the cost of partial manual annotating.

The most significant difference of our work
compared to the abovementioned ones lies in the
MT systems used. Whereas they tackle the issue
of pronoun translation within the Moses phrase-
based system (Koehn et al., 2003), we rely on the
translation via deep syntax with TectoMT system
(Žabokrtský et al., 2008). Our approach is more
linguistically oriented, working with deep syntac-
tic representations and postponing the decisions
about the concrete forms to the synthesis stage.

3 Linguistic Analysis

In English, three main coarse-grained types of
it are traditionally distinguished. Referential it

points to a noun phrase in the preceding or the fol-
lowing context:

(1) Peter has finished writing an article and
showed it to his supervisor.

Anaphoric it refers to a verbal phrase or larger dis-
course segments (so-called discourse deixis).

(2) Peter has discussed the issue with his su-
pervisor and it helped him to finish the ar-
ticle.

Pleonastic it has no antecedent in the preced-
ing/following context and its presence is imposed
only by the syntactic rules of English.

(3) It is difficult to give a good example.

From the perspective of Czech, there are also
three prevailing types of how it can be translated.
The most frequent are personal pronouns or zero
forms.2 In Prague tectogrammatics theory zero
anaphors are reconstructed on the tectogrammat-
ical layer. Same as expressed personal pronouns,
they are represented by a node with the #PersPron
symbol, e.g.

(4) Bushova vláda oznámila, že se svůj plán
#PersPron pokusı́ vzkřı́sit.

The Bush administration has said it will
try to resurrect its plan.

The second typical possibility is the Czech demon-
strative pronoun to (= it, this), which is a form of
a pronoun ten in its neuter singular form, e.g.

(5) Analytik řekl, že to byla tato možnost
požadavku, která pevnějšı́m cenám po-
mohla.

The analyst said that it was the possibility
of this demand that helped firm prices.

In many cases, it has no lexical counterpart in
the Czech translation, the English and Czech sen-
tences thus having a different syntactic structure.
These are cases like, for instance:

(6) Obchodnı́ci uvedli, že je obtı́žné nové
emise REMIC strukturovat, když se ceny
tolik měnı́.

Dealers noted that it’s difficult to struc-
ture new Remics when prices are moving
widely.

2Czech is a pro-drop language.

52



Figure 1: The mapping of the types of English it
to Czech translations.

There are also some other possibilities of how it
can be translated into Czech, such as the repeti-
tion of the antecedent noun, different genders of
the demonstrative ten (=it, this) in the anaphoric
position, using synonyms and hyperomyns. How-
ever, these cases are not so frequent and they rarely
cannot be converted to one of the three broader
categories.

The correspondence between the course-
grained types of English it and its possible Czech
translations is not one-to-one. As seen from
Figure 1, a personal pronoun/zero anaphora
translates to the referential it (see example 4) and
no lexical counterpart is used when translating the
pleonastic it (see example 6).

However, all types of it can be translated as a
neuter demonstrative to. The typical case “it refer-
ring to VPs/larger discourse segments = to” was
demonstrated in (5).

The mapping “referential it = to” is common for
cases where the referent is attributed some further
characteristics, mostly in constructions with a verb
to be like “It is something.”, such as (7).3 This
is an interesting case for Czech, because a gen-
der and number agreement between the antecedent
and the anaphoric to is generally absent.

(7) Some investors say Friday’s sell-off was a
good thing. “It was a healthy cleansing,”
says Michael Holland.

Někteřı́ investoři řı́kajı́, že pátečnı́
výprodej byla dobrá věc. “Byla to zdravá
očista,” řı́ká Michael Holland.

The “cleft sentences” (see example 8) and some
other syntactic constructions are the case when
pleonastic it is translated into Czech with the
demonstrative to.

3We suspect that it holds also for he/she/they but such a
claim is not yet empirically supported. For the sake of sim-
plicity, we conduct our research only for it.

(8) But it is Mr. Lane, as movie director, who
has been obsessed with refitting Chaplin’s
Little Tramp in a contemporary way.

Ale je to Lane jako filmový režisér, kdo je
posedlý tı́m, že zmodernizuje Chaplinův
film “Little Tramp (Malý tulák)”.

In some cases, both translations of pleonastic it
are possible: neuter demonstrative to or a different
syntactic construction with no lexical counterpart
of it. Compare the examples from PCEDT where
it with similar syntactic function was translated by
changing the syntactic structure in (9) and using a
neuter to in (10):

(9) “It was great to have the luxury of time,”
Mr. Rawls said.

“Bylo skvělé, že jsme měli dostatek času,”
řekl Rawls.

(10) “On days that I’m really busy,” says Ms.
Foster, “it seems decadent to take time off
for a massage.”

“Ve dnech, kdy mám opravdu mnoho
práce,” řı́ká panı́ Fosterová, “to vypadá
zvrhle, když si vyhradı́m čas na masáž.”

4 Translation via Deep Syntax

Following a phrase-based statistical MT approach,
it may be demanding to tackle issues that arise
when translating between typologically different
languages. Translation from English to Czech is a
typical example. One has to deal with a rich mor-
phology, less constrained word order, changes in
clauses bindings, pro-drops etc.

In this work, we make use of the English to
Czech translation implemented within the Tec-
toMT system, first introduced by Žabokrtský et al.
(2008). In contrast to the phrase-based approach,
TectoMT performs a tree-to-tree machine transla-
tion. Given an input English sentence, the trans-
lation process is divided into three stages: analy-
sis, transfer and synthesis. TectoMT at first con-
ducts an automatic analysis including POS tag-
ging, named entity recognition, syntactic parsing,
semantic role labeling, coreference resolution etc.
This results in a deep syntactic representation of
the English sentence, which is subsequently trans-
ferred into Czech, with the translation of lexical
and grammatical information being provided via
several factors. The process proceeds with a rule-

53



based synthesis stage, when a surface Czech sen-
tence is generated from its deep syntactic struc-
ture.

Deep syntactic representation of a sentence fol-
lows the Prague tectogrammatics theory (Sgall,
1967; Sgall et al., 1986). It is a dependency
tree whose nodes correspond to the content words
in the sentence. Personal pronouns missing on
the surface are reconstructed in special nodes.
Nodes are assigned semantic roles (called func-
tors) and grammatical information is comprised in
so called grammatemes. Furthermore, tectogram-
matical representation is a place where corefer-
ence relations are annotated.

4.1 Model of it within TectoMT

The transfer stage, which maps an English tec-
togrammatical tree to a Czech one, is a place
where the translation model of it is applied. For
every English node corresponding to it, a feature
vector is extracted and fed into a discriminative re-
solver that assigns one of the three classes to it –
PersPron, To and Null, corresponding to the
main Czech types introduced in Section 3.

If labeled as PersPron, the English node
is mapped to a Czech #PersPron node and the
English coreference link is projected. During
the synthesis, it is decided whether the pronoun
should be expressed on a surface, its gender and
number are copied from the antecedent’s head and
finally the correct form (if any) is generated.

Obtaining class To makes things easier. The
English node is only mapped to a Czech node con-
taining the pronoun ten with its gender and num-
ber set to neuter singular, so that later the correct
form to will be generated.

Last, if it is assigned Null, no corresponding
node on the Czech side is generated, but the Czech
counterpart of the governing verb is forced to be in
neuter singular.

5 Prague Czech-English Dependency
Treebank as a source of data

The Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank
(Hajič et al., 2011, PCEDT) is a manually parsed
Czech-English parallel corpus comprising over 1.2
million words for each language in almost 50,000
sentence pairs. The English part contains the en-
tire Penn Treebank–Wall Street Journal Section
(Linguistic Data Consortium, 1999). The Czech
part consists of translations of all the texts from

the English part. The data from both parts are
annotated on three layers following the theory of
Prague tectogrammatics – the morphological layer
(where each token from the sentence gets a lemma
and a POS tag), the analytical layer (surface syn-
tax in the form of a dependency tree, where each
node corresponds to a token in the sentence) and
the tectogrammatical representation (see Section
4).

Sentences of PCEDT have been automatically
morphologically annotated and parsed into ana-
lytical dependency trees.4 The tectogrammatical
trees in both language parts have been annotated
manually (Hajič et al., 2012). The nodes of Czech
and English trees have been automatically aligned
on analytical as well as tectogrammatical layer
(Mareček et al., 2008).

5.1 Extraction of Classes

The shortcomings of the automatic alignment
is particularly harmful for pronouns and zero
anaphors, which can replace a whole range of con-
tent words and their meaning is inferred mainly
from the context. The situation is better for verbs
as their usual parents in dependency trees: since
they carry meaning in a greater extent, their auto-
matic alignment is of a higher quality.

Thus, we did not search for a Czech counterpart
of it by following the alignment of it itself. Using
the fact that the verb alignment is more reliable
and functors in tectogrammatical trees have been
manually corrected, we followed the alignment of
the parent of it (a verb) and selected the Czech sub-
tree with the same tectogrammatical functor as it
had on the English side. If the obtained subtree
is a single node of type #PersPron or ten, we as-
signed class PersPron or To, respectively, to the
corresponding it. This approach relies also on the
assumption that semantic roles do not change in
the translation.

The automatic acquisition of classes covered
more than 60% of instances, the rest had to be la-
beled manually. During the annotation, we obeyed
the following rules:

1. If a demonstrative pronoun to is present in the
Czech sentence or if a personal pronoun is
either present or unexpressed, assign the in-
stance to the corresponding class.

4The English dependency trees were built by automati-
cally transforming the original phrase-structure annotation of
the Penn Treebank.

54



2. Otherwise, ignore the Czech translation pro-
vided in the corpus and follow the most sim-
plistic possible translation which would still
be correct. Assign the instance to the class
which fits it the best.

Note that it may happen that none of the three
options fits, because it is either an idiomatic ex-
pression or larger structural modifications are re-
quired. Such cases are very rare and we left them
out of the data.

The manual annotation was a bottleneck. We
managed to tag the complete testing data, but were
only able to annotate more than just 1/6 of the
training data due to time reasons. We only use
a corresponding proportion of the automatically
labeled training instances in order to respect the
overall distribution.

5.2 Extraction of Features

Given the linguistically supported observation on
both manually and automatically annotated tree-
banks, we designed features to differentiate be-
tween the ways it is translated.

Since this work focuses on MT with transfer via
deep-syntactic layer, it is possible for the proposed
features to exploit morphological, syntactic and a
little of semantic information present on various
annotation layers.

Unlike the target classes, which have to be as-
signed as accurately as possible, extracted fea-
tures must follow the real-world scenario of MT
– the only information that is given is the source
sentence. Thus, whereas extracting classes may
exploit the gold standard linguistic annotation, it
cannot be employed in feature extraction. We ex-
tract them from text automatically annotated by
the same pipeline that is used in the TectoMT anal-
ysis stage.

However, there is an exception where we violate
this approach – coreference. Performance of state-
of-the-art coreference resolvers is still far from the
ideal, especially for distinguishing between pro-
nouns referring to noun phrases and those refer-
ring to clauses or wider discourse segments. Sim-
ilarly to the work of Guillou (2012) we wanted
to isolate the problem of translating referential
expressions from the task of resolving the entity
they refer to. Therefore, we opted for extracting
the coreferential features from the gold annotation
projected onto automatically analyzed trees. Note
that the results achieved using these features have

to be considered an upper bound for a given set-
ting.

Although the mapping between Czech transla-
tion of it and English categories of it does not al-
low to translate it directly, the category of it es-
timated by an anaphoricity resolver might be a
promising feature. We therefore constructed a bi-
nary feature based on the output of a system iden-
tifying whether a pronoun it is coreferential or
not. We employed the NADA resolver (Bergsma
and Yarowsky, 2011)5 exploiting the web-scale n-
gram data and its tree-based extension presented
in (Veselovská et al., 2012).

Some verbs are more likely to bind with it that
refers to a longer utterance. Such it is quite con-
sistently translated as a demonstrative to. This
motivated incorporating a parent lemma of an oc-
currence of it into the feature set. However, the
training data is too small to be a sufficient sample
from a distribution over lexical properties. Hence,
we took advantage of the automatically annotated6

Czech-English corpus CzEng 1.0 (Bojar et al.,
2012) that comprises more than 15 million sen-
tence pairs. In the manner described in Section
5.1, we collected co-occurrence counts between
a functor that the given it possesses concatenated
with a lemma of its verbal parent and a Czech
counterpart having the same functor (denoted as
csit). We filtered out all occurrences where csit
was neither #PersPron nor ten. Then, for both val-
ues of csit a feature is constructed by looking up
counts for a concrete occurrence in the collected
counts and quantized into 4-5 bins (Bansal and
Klein, 2012) following the formula:

bin(log(
count(functor : parent ∧ csit)

count(functor : parent)count(csit)
)).

Linguistic analysis carried out in Section 3 sug-
gests the following syntax-oriented features re-
lated to the verb to be. Some nominal predicates
tend to be translated as to, even though it is usually
coreferential in such expressions (see example 7).
So the corresponding binary feature fires if it is a
subject and its parent is the verb to be having an
object (Figure 2a).

Similarly, adjectival predicates that are not fol-
lowed by a subordinating clause connected with

5A probability value returned by this tool was binarized at
a threshold 0.5

6Using the same annotation layers as in PCEDT and Tec-
toMT, i.e. in accordance with the Prague tectogrammatics
theory.

55



Figure 2: Syntactic features capturing typical con-
structions with a verb be.

the main clause by the English connectives to or
that are usually referential and translated as to,
too. We proposed a feature describing these cases,
illustrated in Figure 2b.

In contrast, if an adjectival predicate is followed
by a subordinating clause with the verb being finite
and connected to the main clause by a conjunction
that, in majority of cases it is a pleonastic usage of
it translated as a null subject (see example 6). A
schema of the feature is depicted in Figure 2c.

Being definitely pleonastic, it in cleft sentences
is expressed in Czech either by to or by sentence
rearranging (see example 8). We target this phe-
nomenon by another feature being fired if it is a
subject of the verb to be and if this verb has an ob-
ject and is followed by a relative clause (see Figure
2d).

Finally, we designed two features exploiting
coreference relations. The first one simply indi-
cates if it has an antecedent, while the second fires
if any of the antecedents in the coreferential chain
is a verb phrase. As we noted above, these fea-
tures are based on the gold standard annotation of
coreference.

5.3 Data Description

The data for training and testing a discriminative
translation model of the personal pronoun it were
extracted from PCEDT with classes and features
obtained as described in Section 5.1 and 5.2, re-
spectively. Due to the limited amount of manually
annotated training data, the training set extracted
from sections 00 – 19 was reduced from 5841 to
940 instances, though. The testing set was an-
notated thoroughly, thus containing 543 instances
extracted from sections 20 – 21. Every instance
represents an occurrence of it in PCEDT. The dis-

Class Train Test

PersPron 576 322
To 231 138
Null 133 83

Table 1: Distribution of classes in the data sets.

tribution of target classes in the data is shown in
Table 1.

6 Experiments

Experiments were conducted in two settings that
differ in the usage of features extracted from gold
coreferential relations.

To mitigate a possible error caused by a wrong
classifier choice, we built several models based on
various Machine Learning classification methods.
If not explicitly mentioned, the methods below are
applied with default parameters:

• Vowpal Wabbit (Langford, 2012). Binary
logistic regression with one-against-all strat-
egy for handling multiple classes. The opti-
mum has been found using the online method
(Stochastic Gradient Descent). We varied the
parameters of the number of passes over the
data and the L2 regularization weight.

• AI::MaxEntropy.7 Multiclass logistic re-
gression.8 The optimum has been found us-
ing the batch method (L-BFGS).

• sklearn.neighbors.9 k-nearest neighbors
classifier with the parameter k being varied.

• sklearn.tree. Decision tree classifier.
• sklearn.SVC. Support Vector Machines with

one-against-one strategy to handle multiple
classes. We varied the choice of a kernel.

The accuracy evaluated on both training and test
sets is shown in Table 2 (columns Acc:Train and
Acc:Test). The baseline resolver simply picks the
most frequent class in the training set, which is
PersPron. For both experimental settings, the
standard deviation measured on the test set is less
than 1% in total, if the method’s best configuration
of parameters is taken and the result on decision
trees, which we did not tune, is excluded. This
shows that all classifiers are consistent in their de-
cisions.

7http://search.cpan.org/˜laye/
AI-MaxEntropy-0.20/

8In the field of NLP also called Maximum Entropy.
9All classifiers labeled as sklearn.* are implemented in

the Scikit-learn Python library (Pedregosa et al., 2011).

56



all feats all feats + coref
ML Method Acc:Train Acc:Test BLEU Acc:Train Acc:Test

Baseline 60.70 59.30 0.1401 60.70 59.30
Original TectoMT – – 0.1404 – –
Vowpal Wabbit (passes=30) 90.62 75.69 – 90.83 75.87
Vowpal Wabbit (passes=20) 89.99 76.43 0.1403 90.20 76.98
Vowpal Wabbit (passes=10) 87.78 76.24 – 87.78 76.61
Vowpal Wabbit (passes=30, l2=0.001) 71.23 66.11 – 83.03 77.16
Vowpal Wabbit (passes=20, l2=0.001) 82.19 74.95 – 78.19 74.40
Vowpal Wabbit (passes=10, l2=0.001) 75.03 70.17 – 72.81 70.17
Vowpal Wabbit (passes=30, l2=0.00001) 90.52 75.69 – 90.94 76.06
Vowpal Wabbit (passes=20, l2=0.00001) 89.99 76.43 – 90.09 76.98
Vowpal Wabbit (passes=10, l2=0.00001) 87.67 76.24 – 87.67 76.61
AI::MaxEntropy 85.99 76.61 0.1403 86.09 76.98
sklearn.neighbors (k=1) 91.57 71.64 – 93.36 72.19
sklearn.neighbors (k=3) 84.62 72.01 – 84.93 71.82
sklearn.neighbors (k=5) 84.93 74.77 0.1403 84.72 75.87
sklearn.neighbors (k=10) 82.51 73.30 – 83.14 75.87
sklearn.tree 93.36 73.66 0.1403 94.10 71.82
sklearn.SVC (kernel=linear) 90.83 75.51 0.1402 91.15 76.80
sklearn.SVC (kernel=poly) 60.70 59.30 – 60.70 59.30
sklearn.SVC (kernel=rbf) 71.23 68.69 – 73.76 71.27

Table 2: Intrinsic (accuracy on the training and test data) and extrinsic (BLEU score) evaluation of
translation model of it in configuration with (all feats) and without gold coreferential features (all feats
+ coref).

By introducing linguistically motivated features
exploiting the deep-syntactic description of the
sentence, we gained 17% in total over the base-
line. Moreover, adding features based on the gold
coreference annotation results in a further 0.5%
improvement.

7 Evaluation on MT

Although intrinsic evaluation as performed in Sec-
tion 6 can give us a picture of how accurate the
translation model might be, the main purpose of
this work is to integrate it in a full-fledged MT
system. As explained in Section 4, this component
is tailored for TectoMT – an MT system where the
transfer is provided through a deep-syntactic layer.

The extrinsic evaluation of the proposed method
was carried out on the English-Czech test set for
WMT 2011 Shared Translation Task (Callison-
Burch et al., 2011).10 This data set contains 3,003
English sentences with one Czech reference trans-
lation, out of which 430 contain at least one occur-
rence of it.

Since this test set is provided with no annota-
tion of coreferential links, the model of it that is
involved in experiments on the end-to-end transla-
tion was trained on a complete feature set exclud-

10http://www.statmt.org/wmt11/test.tgz

ing the coreferential features using the Machine
Learning method that performed best in the intrin-
sic test, i.e. AI::MaxEntropy (see Section 6).

The new method was compared to the rule-
based approach originally used in TectoMT, which
works as follows. In the transfer stage, all occur-
rences of it are translated to a demonstrative ten.
In the synthesis stage, another rule is fired, which
determines whether ten is omitted on the surface.
Then, omitting it corresponds either to a structural
change (Null class) or an unexpressed personal
pronoun (a subset of PersPron class). It makes
this original approach difficult to compare with the
scores in Table 2, as the translation model of it
is applied in the transfer stage, where we do not
know yet if a personal pronoun is to be expressed
or not. Thus, we consider it the most appropriate
to use final translated sentences produced by two
versions of TectoMT in order to compare the dif-
ferent way they handle it.

The shift from the original settings to a new
model for it results in 166 changed sentences. In
terms of BLEU score, we observe a marginal drop
from 0.1404 to 0.1403 when using the new ap-
proach.11 Other classifiers achieved the same or

11For comparison, the best system so far – Chimera (Bojar
et al., 2013) achieves 0.1994 on the same test set. Chimera
combines Moses, TectoMT and rule-based corrections.

57



new better than old 24
old better than new 13
both equally wrong 9
both equally correct 4

Table 3: The results of manual evaluation con-
ducted on 50 sentences translated by TectoMT in
the original settings (old) and with the new trans-
lation model for it (new)

similar score which correlates with the findings
from intrinsic evaluation (see Table 2). It accords
with a similar experience of Le Nagard and Koehn
(2010) and Guillou (2012) and gives another evi-
dence that the BLEU metric is inaccurate for mea-
suring pronoun translation.

Manual evaluation gives a more realistic view.
We randomly sampled 50 out of the 166 sentences
that differ and one annotator assessed which of
the two systems gave a better translation. Table
3 shows that in almost half of the cases the change
was an improvement. Including the sentences that
are acceptable for both settings, the new approach
picked the correct Czech counterpart of it in 22%
more sentences than the original approach. Since
the proportion of the changed sentences accounts
for almost 39% of all sentences containing it, the
overall proportion of improved sentences with it is
around 8.5% in total.

8 Discussion

Inspecting the manually evaluated translation for
types of improvements and losses, we have found
that in none of the changed sentences the original
system decided to omit ten (obtained by the rule)
on the surface. It shows that the new approach
agrees with the original one on the way of omit-
ting personal pronouns and mainly addresses the
overly simplistic assignment of the demonstrative
ten.

The distribution of target classes over cor-
rected sentences is almost uniform. In 13 out
of 24 improvements, the new system succeeded
in correctly resolving the Null class while in
the remaining 11 cases, the corrected class was
PersPron. It took advantage mostly of the
syntax-based features in the former and sugges-
tions given by the NADA anaphoricity resolver in
the latter.

Examining the errors, we observed that the ma-
jority of them are incurred in the structures with

“it is”. These errors stem mostly from incorrect
activation of syntactic features due to parsing and
POS tagging errors. Example 11 (the Czech sen-
tence is an MT output) shows the latter, when the
POS tagger erroneously labeled the word soy as an
adjective. That resulted in activating the feature
for adjectival predicates followed by that (Figure
2c) instead of a feature indicating cleft structures
(Figure 2d), thus preferring the label Null to the
correct To.

(11) SOURCE: It is just soy that all well-known
manufacturers use now.

TECTOMT: Je to jen sójové, že známı́
výrobci všech použı́vajı́ teď.

9 Conclusion

In this work we presented a novel approach to
dealing with the translation of the English personal
pronoun it. We have shown that the mapping be-
tween the categories of it and the ways of trans-
lating it to Czech is not one-to-one. In order to
deal with this, we designed a discriminative trans-
lation model of it for the TectoMT deep syntax MT
framework.

We have built a system that outperforms its pre-
decessor in 8.5% sentences containing it, taking
advantage of the features based on rich syntactic
annotation the MT system provides, external tools
for anaphoricity resolution and features capturing
lexical co-occurrence in a massive parallel corpus,

The main bottleneck that hampered bigger im-
provements is the manual annotation of the train-
ing data. We managed to accomplish it just on 1/6
of the data, which did not provide sufficient evi-
dence for some specific features.

Our main objective of the future work is thus
to reduce a need for manual annotation by dis-
covering ways of automatic extraction of reliable
classes from a semi-manually annotated corpus
such as PCEDT.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the Grant
Agency of the Czech Republic (grants
P406/12/0658 and P406/2010/0875), the grant
GAUK 4226/2011 and EU FP7 project Khresmoi
(contract no. 257528). This work has been using
language resources developed and/or stored and/or
distributed by the LINDAT-Clarin project of the
Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic
(project LM2010013).

58



References

Mohit Bansal and Dan Klein. 2012. Coreference Se-
mantics from Web Features. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the ACL: Long Papers – Vol-
ume 1, pages 389–398, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Shane Bergsma and David Yarowsky. 2011. NADA:
A Robust System for Non-Referential Pronoun De-
tection. In DAARC, pages 12–23, Faro, Portugal,
October.

Ondřej Bojar, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Ondřej Dušek, Pe-
tra Galuščáková, Martin Majliš, David Mareček, Jiřı́
Maršı́k, Michal Novák, Martin Popel, and Aleš Tam-
chyna. 2012. The Joy of Parallelism with CzEng
1.0. In Proceedings of LREC 2012, Istanbul, Turkey,
May. ELRA, European Language Resources Associ-
ation.

Ondřej Bojar, Rudolf Rosa, and Aleš Tamchyna. 2013.
Chimera – Three Heads for English-to-Czech Trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the Eight Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation. Under review.

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
and Omar Zaidan. 2011. Findings of the 2011
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation, pages 22–64, Edinburgh,
Scotland, July. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Liane Guillou. 2012. Improving Pronoun Translation
for Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings
of the Student Research Workshop at the 13th Con-
ference of the EACL, pages 1–10, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová, Petr Sgall,
Silvie Cinková, Eva Fučı́ková, Marie Mikulová, Petr
Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiřı́ Semecký, Jana Šindlerová,
Jan Štěpánek, Josef Toman, Zdeňka Urešová, and
Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2011. Prague Czech-English
Dependency Treebank 2.0.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová, Petr
Sgall, Ondřej Bojar, Silvie Cinková, Eva Fučı́ková,
Marie Mikulová, Petr Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiřı́
Semecký, Jana Šindlerová, Jan Štěpánek, Josef
Toman, Zdeňka Urešová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský.
2012. Announcing Prague Czech-English Depen-
dency Treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of the 8th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2012), pages 3153–3160. ELRA.

Christian Hardmeier and Marcello Federico. 2010.
Modelling Pronominal Anaphora in Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In Marcello Federico, Ian Lane,
Michael Paul, and François Yvon, editors, Proceed-
ings of the seventh International Workshop on Spo-
ken Language Translation (IWSLT), pages 283–289.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical Phrase-based Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Conference of the NAACL HLT
– Volume 1, pages 48–54, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

John Langford. 2012. Vowpal Wabbit.

Ronan Le Nagard and Philipp Koehn. 2010. Aid-
ing Pronoun Translation with Co-Reference Resolu-
tion. In Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation and MetricsMATR,
pages 252–261, Uppsala, Sweden, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Linguistic Data Consortium. 1999. Penn Treebank 3.
LDC99T42.

David Mareček, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, and Václav
Novák. 2008. Automatic Alignment of Czech and
English Deep Syntactic Dependency Trees. In Pro-
ceedings of the Twelfth EAMT Conference, pages
102–111.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron
Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, Alexan-
dre Passos, David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher,
Matthieu Perrot, and Édouard Duchesnay. 2011.
Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830,
November.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects. D. Reidel Publishing Company,
Dordrecht.

Petr Sgall. 1967. Generativnı́ popis jazyka a česká
deklinace. Academia, Prague, Czech Republic.

Kateřina Veselovská, Giang Linh Nguy, and Michal
Novák. 2012. Using Czech-English Parallel Cor-
pora in Automatic Identification of It. In The Fifth
Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Cor-
pora, pages 112–120.

Zdeněk Žabokrtský, Jan Ptáček, and Petr Pajas. 2008.
TectoMT: Highly Modular MT System with Tec-
togrammatics Used as Transfer Layer. In Proceed-
ings of the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 167–170, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

59


