










































Semantic Technologies in IBM Watson


Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Teaching Natural Language Processing, pages 85–92,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Semantic Technologies in IBM WatsonTM

Alfio Gliozzo
IBM Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
gliozzo@us.ibm.com

Or Biran
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027

orb@cs.columbia.edu

Siddharth Patwardhan
IBM Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
siddharth@us.ibm.com

Kathleen McKeown
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027

kathy@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
This paper describes a seminar course de-
signed by IBM and Columbia University
on the topic of Semantic Technologies,
in particular as used in IBM WatsonTM

— a large scale Question Answering sys-
tem which famously won at Jeopardy! R©

against two human grand champions. It
was first offered at Columbia University
during the 2013 spring semester, and will
be offered at other institutions starting in
the fall semester. We describe the course’s
first successful run and its unique features:
a class centered around a specific indus-
trial technology; a large-scale class project
which student teams can choose to par-
ticipate in and which serves as the ba-
sis for an open source project that will
continue to grow each time the course is
offered; publishable papers, demos and
start-up ideas; evidence that the course can
be self-evaluating, which makes it poten-
tially appropriate for an online setting; and
a unique model where a large company
trains instructors and contributes to creat-
ing educational material at no charge to
qualifying institutions.

1 Introduction

In 2007, IBM Research took on the grand chal-
lenge of building a computer system that can per-
form well enough on open-domain question an-
swering to compete with champions at the game of
Jeopardy! In 2011, the open-domain question an-
swering system dubbed Watson beat the two high-
est ranked players in a two-game Jeopardy! match.
To be successful at Jeopardy!, players must re-
tain enormous amounts of information, must have

strong language skills, must be able to understand
precisely what is being asked, and must accurately
determine the likelihood they know the right an-
swer. Over a four year period, the team at IBM
developed the Watson system that competed on
Jeopardy! and the underlying DeepQA question
answering technology (Ferrucci et al., 2010). Wat-
son played many games of Jeopardy! against cel-
ebrated Jeopardy! champions and, in games tele-
vised in February 2011, won against the greatest
players of all time, Ken Jennings and Brad Rutter.

DeepQA has applications well beyond Jeop-
ardy!, however. DeepQA is a software architec-
ture for analyzing natural language content in both
questions and knowledge sources. DeepQA dis-
covers and evaluates potential answers and gathers
and scores evidence for those answers in both un-
structured sources, such as natural language doc-
uments, and structured sources such as relational
databases and knowledge bases. Figure 1 presents
a high-level view of the DeepQA architecture.
DeepQA utilizes a massively parallel, component-
based pipeline architecture (Ferrucci, 2012) which
uses an extensible set of structured and unstruc-
tured content sources as well as a broad range of
pluggable search and scoring components that al-
low integration of many different analytic tech-
niques. Machine Learning techniques are used to
learn the weights for each scoring component in
order to combine them into a single final score.
Watson components include a large variety of state
of the art solutions originating in the fields of Nat-
ural Language Processing (NLP), Machine Learn-
ing (ML), Information Retrieval (IR), Semantic
Web and Cloud Computing. IBM is now aggres-
sively investing in turning IBM Watson from a re-
search prototype to an industry level highly adapt-
able system to be applied in dozens of business ap-

85



Figure 1: Overview of the DeepQA architecture

plications ranging from healthcare to finance (Fer-
rucci et al., 2012).

Finding that particular combination of skills in
the entry-level job market is hard: in many cases
students have some notion of Machine Learning
but are not strong in Natural Language Processing;
in other cases they have background in Knowledge
Management and some of the basics of Semantic
Web, but lack an understanding of statistical mod-
els and Machine Learning. In most cases semantic
integration is not a topic of interest, and so un-
derstanding sophisticated platforms like Apache
UIMATM (Ferrucci and Lally, 2004) is a chal-
lenge. Learning how to develop the large scale in-
frastructure and technology needed for IBM Wat-
son prepares students for the real-world challenges
of large-scale natural language projects that are
common in industry settings and which students
have little experience with before graduation.

Of course, IBM is interested in hiring entry-
level students as a powerful way of scaling Wat-
son. Therefore, it has resolved to start an ed-
ucational program focused on these topics. Ini-
tially, tutorials were given at scientific conferences
(NAACL, ISWC and WWW, among others), uni-
versities and summer schools. The great number
of attendees (usually in the range of 50 to 150)
and strongly positive feedback received from the
students was a motivation to transform the didac-
tic material collected so far into a full graduate-

level course, which has been offered for the first
time at Columbia University. The course (which
is described in the rest of this paper) received very
positive evaluations from the students and will be
used as a template to be replicated by other part-
ner universities in the following year. Our ultimate
goal is to develop high quality didactic material
for an educational curriculum that can be used by
interested universities and professors all over the
world.

2 Syllabus and Didactic Material

The syllabus1 is divided equally between classes
specifically on the Watson system, its architec-
ture and technologies used within it, and classes
on more general topics that are relevant to these
technologies. In particular, background classes on
Natural Language Processing; Distributional Se-
mantics; the Semantic Web; Domain Adaptation
and the UIMA framework are essential for under-
standing the Watson system and producing suc-
cessful projects.

The course at Columbia included four lectures
by distinguished guest speakers from IBM, which
were advertised to the general Columbia commu-
nity as open talks. Instead of exams, the course
included two workshop-style presentation days:
one at the mid term and another at the end of the

1The syllabus is accessible on line http://www.
columbia.edu/˜ag3366

86



course. During these workshops, all student teams
gave presentations on their various projects. At the
mid-term workshop, teams presented their project
idea and timeline, as well as related work and the
state-of-the-art of the field. At the final workshop,
they presented their completed projects, final re-
sults and demos. This workshop was also made
open to the Columbia community and in particu-
lar to faculty and affiliates interested in start-ups.
The workshops will be discussed in further detail
in the following sections. The syllabus is briefly
detailed here.

• Introduction: The Jeopardy! Challenge
The motivation behind Watson, the task and
its challenges (Prager et al., 2012; Tesauro et
al., 2012; Lewis, 2012).

• The DeepQA Architecture Chu-Carroll et
al. (2012b), Ferrucci (2012), Chu-Carroll et
al. (2012a), Lally et al. (2012).

• Natural Language Processing Background
Pre-processing, tokenization, POS tagging,
named entity recognition, syntactic parsing,
semantic role labeling, word sense disam-
biguation, evaluation best practices and met-
rics.

• Natural Language Processing in Watson
Murdock et al. (2012a), McCord et al. (2012).

• Structured Knowledge in Watson Murdock
et al. (2012b), Kalyanpur et al. (2012), Fan et
al. (2012).

• Semantic Web OWL, RDF, Semantic Web
resources.

• Domain Adaptation Ferrucci et al. (2012).

• UIMA The UIMA framework, Annotators,
Types, Descriptors, tools. Hands-on exercise
with the class project architecture (Epstein et
al., 2012).

• Midterm Workshop Presentations of each
team’s project idea and their research into re-
lated work and the state of the art.

• Distributional Semantics Miller et al.
(2012), Gliozzo and Isabella (2005).

• Machine Learning and Strategy in Watson

• What Watson Tells Us About Cognitive
Computing

• Final Workshop Presentations of each
team’s final project implementation, evalua-
tion, demo and future plans.

3 Watson-like Architecture for Projects

The goal of the class projects was for the stu-
dents to learn to design and develop language tech-
nology components in an environment very sim-
ilar to IBM’s Watson architecture. We provided
the students with a plug-in framework for seman-
tic search, into which they could integrate their
project code. Student projects will be described
in the following section. This section details the
framework that was made available to the students
in order to develop their projects.

Like the Watson system, the project framework
for this class was built on top of Apache UIMA
(Ferrucci and Lally, 2004)2 — an open-source
software architecture for building applications that
handle unstructured information.

The Watson system makes extensive use of
UIMA to enable interoperability and scale-out of a
large question answering system. The architecture
(viz., DeepQA) of Watson (Ferrucci, 2012) defines
several high-level “stages” of analysis in the pro-
cessing pipeline, such as Question and Topic Anal-
ysis, Primary Search, Candidate Answer Genera-
tion, etc. Segmentation of the system into high-
level stages enabled a group of 25 researchers at
IBM to independently work on different aspects
of the system with little overhead for interoper-
ability and system integration. Each stage of the
pipeline clearly defined the inputs and outputs ex-
pected of components developed for that particu-
lar stage. The researchers needed only to adhere
to these input/output requirements for their indi-
vidual components to easily integrate them into
the system. Furthermore, the high-level stages in
Watson, enabled massive scale-out of the system
through the use of the asynchronous scaleout ca-
pability of UIMA-AS.

Using the Watson architecture for inspitration,
we developed a semantic search framework for the
class projects. As shown in Figure 2, the frame-
work consists of a UIMA pipeline that has several
high-level stages (similar to those of the Watson
system):

2http://uima.apache.org

87



Figure 2: Overview of the class project framework

1. Query Analysis

2. Primary Document Search

3. Structured Data Search

4. Query Expansion

5. Expanded Query Analysis

6. Secondary Document Search

The input to this system is provided by a Query
Collection Reader, which reads a list of search
queries from a text file. The Query Collec-
tion Reader is a UIMA “collection reader” that
reads the text queries into memory data struc-
tures (UIMA CAS structures) — one for each
text query. These UIMA CASes flow through the
pipeline and are processed by the various process-
ing stages. The processing stages are set up so
that new components designed to perform the task
of each processing stage can easily be added to the
pipeline (or existing components easily modified).
The expected inputs and outputs of components in
each processing stage are clearly defined, which
makes the task of the team building the component
simpler: they no longer have to deal with man-
aging data structures and are spared the overhead
of converting from and into formats of data ex-
changed between various components. All of the
overhead is handled by UIMA. Furthermore, some
of the processing stages generate new CAS struc-
tures and the flow of all the UIMA CAS structures
through this pipeline is controlled by a “Flow Con-
troller” designed by us for this framework.

The framework was made available to each of
the student teams, and their task was to build

their project by extending this framework. Even
though we built the framework to perform seman-
tic search over a text corpus, many of the teams
in this course had projects that went far beyond
just semantic search. Our hope was that each team
would be able to able independently develop inter-
esting new components for the processing stages
of the pipeline, and at the end of the course we
would be able to merge the most interesting com-
ponents to create a single useful application. In the
following section, we describe the various projects
undertaken by the student teams in the class, while
Section 5 discusses the integration of components
from student projects and the demo application
that resulted from the integrated system.

4 Class Projects

Projects completed for this course fall into three
types: scientific projects, where the aim is to
produce a publishable paper; integrated projects,
where the aim is to create a component that will be
integrated into the class open-source project; and
independent demo projects, where the aim is to
produce an independent working demo/prototype.
The following section describes the integrated
projects briefly.

4.1 Selected Project Descriptions

As described in section 3, the integrated class
project is a system with an architecture which, al-
though greatly simplified, is reminiscent of Wat-
son’s. While originally intended to be simply a
semantic search tool, some of the student teams
created additional components which resulted in
a full question answering system. Those projects

88



as well as a few other related ones are described
below.

Question Categorization: Using the DBPedia
ontology (Bizer et al., 2009) as a semantic
type system, this project classifies questions
by their answer type. It can be seen as a sim-
plified version of the question categorization
system in Watson. The classification is based
on a simple bag-of-words approach with a
few additional features.

Answer Candidate Ranking: Given the answer
type as well as additional features derived by
the semantic search component, this project
uses regression to rank the candidate an-
swers which themselves come from semantic
search.

Twitter Semantic Search: Search in Twitter is
difficult due to the huge variations among
tweets in lexical terms, spelling and style, and
the limited length of the tweets. This project
employs LSA (Landauer and Dumais, 1997)
to cluster similar tweets and increase search
accuracy.

Fine-Grained NER in the Open Domain: This
project uses DBPedia’s ontology as a type
system for named entities of type Person.
Given results from a standard NER system,
it attempts to find the fine-grained classifica-
tion of each Person entity by finding the most
similar type. Similarity is computed using
traditional distributional methods, using the
context of the entity and the contexts of each
type, collected from Wikipedia.

News Frame Induction: Working with a large
corpus of news data collected by Columbia
Newsblaster, this team used the Machine
Linking API to tag entities with semantic
types. From there, they distributionally col-
lected ”frames” prevalent in the news do-
main such as ’[U.S President] meeting with
[British Prime Minister]’.

Other projects took on problems such as Sense
Induction, NER in the Biomedical domain, Se-
mantic Role Labeling, Semantic Video Search,
and a mobile app for Event Search.

5 System Integration and Demonstration

The UIMA-based architecture described in section
3 allows us to achieve a relatively easy integra-
tion of different class projects, independently de-
veloped by different teams, in a common archi-
tecture and expose their functionality with a com-
bined class project demo. The demo is a collab-
oratively developed semantic search engine which
is able to retrieve knowledge from structured data
and visualize it for the user in a very concise way.
The input is a query; it can be a natural language
question or simply a set of keywords. The output
is a set of entities and their relations, visualized
as an entity graph. Figure 3 shows the results of
the current status of our class project demo on the
following Jeopardy! question.

This nation of 200 million has fought
small independence movements like
those in Aceh and East Timor.

The output is a set of DBPedia entities related to
the question, grouped by Type (provided by the
DBPedia ontology). The correct answer, “Indone-
sia”, is among the candidate entities of type Place.
Note that only answers of type Place and Agent
have been selected: this is due to the question cate-
gorization component, implemented by one of the
student teams, that allows us to restrict the gener-
ated answer set to those answers having the right
types.

The demo will be hosted for one year fol-
lowing the end of the course at http://
watsonclass.no-ip.biz. Our goal is to
incrementally improve this demo, leveraging any
new projects developed in future versions of the
course, and to build an open source software com-
munity involving students taking the course.

6 Evaluation

The course at Columbia drew a relatively large au-
dience. A typical size for a seminar course on a
special topic is estimated at 15-20 students, while
ours drew 35. The vast majority were Master’s stu-
dents; there were also three PhD students and five
undergraduates.

During the student workshops, students were
asked to provide grades for each team’s presen-
tation and project. After the instructor indepen-
dently gave his own grades, we looked at the cor-
relation between the average grades given by the
students and those give by the instructor. While

89



Figure 3: Screenshot of the project demo

90



Team 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Instructor’s grade B+ B C+ A- B- A+ B B- B+ A B-
TA’s grade B+ B B A B- A B- B+ B+ A C+
Class’ average grade B/B+ B+/A- B/B+ A- B/B+ A- B+ A-/A B+/A- A-/A B/B+

Table 1: Grades assigned to class projects

the students tended to be more “generous” (their
average grade for each team was usually half a
grade above the instructor’s), the agreement was
quite high. Table 1 shows the grades given by the
instructor, the teaching assistant and the class av-
erage for the midterm workshop.

Feedback about the course from the students
was very good. Columbia provides electonic
course evaluations to the students which are com-
pletely optional. Participation in the evaluation for
this course was just under 50% in the midterm
evaluation and just over 50% in the final eval-
uation. The scores (all in the 0-5 range) given
by the students in relevant categories were quite
high: “Overall Quality” got an average score of
4.23, “Amount Learned” got 4, “Appropriateness
of Workload” 4.33 and “Fairness of Grading Pro-
cess” got 4.42.

The course resulted in multiple papers that are
or will soon be under submission, as well as a few
projects that may be developed into start-ups. Al-
most all student teams agreed to share their code
in an open source project that is currently being
set up, and which will include the current question
answering and semantic search system as well as
additional side projects.

7 Conclusion

We described a course on the topic of Semantic
Technologies and the IBM Watson system, which
features a diverse curriculum tied together by its
relevance to an exciting, demonstrably successful
real-world system. Through a combined architec-
ture inspired by Watson itself, the students get the
experience of developing an NLP-heavy compo-
nent with specifications mandated by the larger
architecture, which requires a combination of re-
search and software engineering skills that is com-
mon in the industry.

An exciting result of this course is that the
class project architecture and many of the student
projects are to be maintained as an open source
project which the students can, if they choose,
continue to be involved with. The repository and
community of this project can be expected to grow

each time the class is offered. Even after one class,
it already contains an impressive semantic search
system.

Feedback for this course from the students
was excellent, and many teams have achieved
their personal goals as stated at the beginning of
the semester, including paper submissions, opera-
tional web demos and mobile apps.

Our long term goal is to replicate this course in
multiple top universities around the world. While
IBM does not have enough resources to always
do this with its own researchers, it is instead go-
ing to provide the content material and the open
source code generated so far to other universities,
encouraging professors to teach the course them-
selves. Initially we will work on a pilot phase
involving only a restricted number of professors
and researchers that are already in collaboration
with IBM Research, and eventually (if the posi-
tive feedback we have seen so far is repeated in
the pilot phase) give access to the same content to
a larger group.

References
C. Bizer, J. Lehmann, G. Kobilarov, S. Auer, C. Becker,

R. Cyganiak, and S. Hellmann. 2009. DBpedia—
Crystallization Point for the Web of Data. Journal
of Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on
the World Wide Web, 7(3):154–165, September.

J. Chu-Carroll, J. Fan, B. Boguraev, D. Carmel,
D. Sheinwald, and C. Welty. 2012a. Finding Nee-
dles in the Haystack: Search and Candidate Gener-
ation. IBM Journal of Research and Development,
56(3.4):6:1–6:12.

J. Chu-Carroll, J. Fan, N. Schlaefer, and W. Zadrozny.
2012b. Textual Resource Acquisition and Engineer-
ing. IBM Journal of Research and Development,
56(3.4):4:1–4:11.

E. Epstein, M. Schor, B. Iyer, A. Lally, E. Brown, and
J. Cwiklik. 2012. Making Watson Fast. IBM Jour-
nal of Research and Development, 56(3.4):15:1–
15:12.

J. Fan, A. Kalyanpur, D. Gondek, and D. Ferrucci.
2012. Automatic Knowledge Extraction from Doc-
uments. IBM Journal of Research and Development,
56(3.4):5:1–5:10.

91



D. Ferrucci and A. Lally. 2004. UIMA: an Ar-
chitectural Approach to Unstructured Information
Processing in the Corporate Research Environment.
Natural Language Engineering, 10(3-4):327–348.

D. Ferrucci, E. Brown, J. Chu-Carroll, J. Fan,
D. Gondek, A. Kalyanpur, A. Lally, J. W. Murdock,
E. Nyberg, J. Prager, N. Schlaefer, and C. Welty.
2010. Building Watson: An Overview of the
DeepQA project. AI magazine, 31(3):59–79.

D. Ferrucci, A. Levas, S. Bagchi, D. Gondek, and
E. Mueller. 2012. Watson: Beyond Jeopardy. Arti-
ficial Intelligence (in press).

D. Ferrucci. 2012. Introduction to “This is Wat-
son”. IBM Journal of Research and Development,
56(3.4):1:1–1:15.

A. Gliozzo and T. Isabella. 2005. Semantic Domains
in Computational Linguistics. Technical report.

A. Kalyanpur, B. Boguraev, S. Patwardhan, J. W.
Murdock, A. Lally, C. Welty, J. Prager, B. Cop-
pola, A. Fokoue-Nkoutche, L. Zhang, Y. Pan, and
Z. Qiu. 2012. Structured Data and Inference in
DeepQA. IBM Journal of Research and Develop-
ment, 56(3.4):10:1–10:14.

A. Lally, J. Prager, M. McCord, B. Boguraev, S. Pat-
wardhan, J. Fan, P. Fodor, and J. Chu-Carroll. 2012.
Question Analysis: How Watson Reads a Clue. IBM
Journal of Research and Development, 56(3.4):2:1–
2:14.

T. Landauer and S. Dumais. 1997. A Solution to
Plato’s Problem: the Latent Semantic Analysis The-
ory of Acquisition, Induction and Representation
of Knowledge. Psychological Review, 104(2):211–
240.

B. Lewis. 2012. In the Game: The Interface between
Watson and Jeopardy! IBM Journal of Research and
Development, 56(3.4):17:1–17:6.

M. McCord, J. W. Murdock, and B. Boguraev. 2012.
Deep Parsing in Watson. IBM Journal of Research
and Development, 56(3.4):3:1–3:15.

T. Miller, C. Biemann, T. Zesch, and I. Gurevych.
2012. Using Distributional Similarity for Lexical
Expansion in Knowledge-based Word Sense Disam-
biguation. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, pages 1781–
1796, Mumbai, India, December.

J. W. Murdock, J. Fan, A. Lally, H. Shima, and
B. Boguraev. 2012a. Textual Evidence Gathering
and Analysis. IBM Journal of Research and Devel-
opment, 56(3.4):8:1–8:14.

J. W. Murdock, A. Kalyanpur, C. Welty, J. Fan, D. Fer-
rucci, D. Gondek, L. Zhang, and H. Kanayama.
2012b. Typing Candidate Answers Using Type Co-
ercion. IBM Journal of Research and Development,
56(3.4):7:1–7:13.

J. Prager, E. Brown, and J. Chu-Carroll. 2012. Spe-
cial Questions and Techniques. IBM Journal of Re-
search and Development, 56(3.4):11:1–11:13.

G. Tesauro, D. Gondek, J. Lenchner, J. Fan, and
J. Prager. 2012. Simulation, Learning, and Op-
timization Techniques in Watson’s Game Strate-
gies. IBM Journal of Research and Development,
56(3.4):16:1–16:11.

92


