










































Mining for Domain-specific Parallel Text from Wikipedia


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, pages 112–120,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Mining for Domain-specific Parallel Text from Wikipedia

Magdalena Plamadă, Martin Volk
Institute of Computational Linguistics, University of Zurich

Binzmühlestrasse 14, 8050 Zurich
{plamada, volk}@cl.uzh.ch

Abstract

Previous attempts in extracting parallel
data from Wikipedia were restricted by the
monotonicity constraint of the alignment
algorithm used for matching possible can-
didates. This paper proposes a method for
exploiting Wikipedia articles without wor-
rying about the position of the sentences in
the text. The algorithm ranks the candidate
sentence pairs by means of a customized
metric, which combines different similar-
ity criteria. Moreover, we limit the search
space to a specific topical domain, since
our final goal is to use the extracted data
in a domain-specific Statistical Machine
Translation (SMT) setting. The precision
estimates show that the extracted sentence
pairs are clearly semantically equivalent.
The SMT experiments, however, show that
the extracted data is not refined enough to
improve a strong in-domain SMT system.
Nevertheless, it is good enough to boost
the performance of an out-of-domain sys-
tem trained on sizable amounts of data.

1 Introduction

A high-quality Statistical Machine Translation
(SMT) system can only be built with large quan-
tities of parallel texts. Moreover, systems special-
ized in specific domains require in-domain train-
ing data. A well-known problem of SMT systems
is that existing parallel corpora cover a small per-
centage of the possible language pairs and very
few domains. We therefore need a language-
independent approach for discovering parallel sen-
tences in the available multilingual resources.

This idea was explored intensively in the last
decade with different text sources, generically
called comparable corpora, such as news feeds,
encyclopedias or even the entire Web. The first

approaches focused merely on news corpora and
were either based on IBM alignment models (Zhao
and Vogel, 2002; Fung and Cheung, 2004) or em-
ploying machine learning techniques (Munteanu
and Marcu, 2005; Abdul Rauf and Schwenk,
2011).

The multilingual Wikipedia is another source
of comparable texts, not yet thoroughly explored.
Adafre and de Rijke (2006) describe two meth-
ods for identifying parallel sentences across it
based on monolingual sentence similarity (MT
and respectively, lexicon based). Fung et al.
(2010) approach the problem by combining recall-
and precision-oriented methods for sentence align-
ment, such as the DK-vec algorithm or algorithms
based on cosine similarities. Both approaches
have achieved good results in terms of precision
and recall.

However, we are interested in real applica-
tion scenarios, such as SMT systems. The fol-
lowing approaches report significant performance
improvements when using the extracted data as
training material for SMT: Smith et al. (2010)
use a maximum entropy-based classifier with
various feature functions (e.g. alignment cover-
age, word fertility, translation probability, distor-
tion). Ştefănescu et al. (2012) propose an algo-
rithm based on cross-lingual information retrieval,
which also considers similarity features equivalent
to the ones mentioned in the previous paper.

The presented approaches extract general pur-
pose sentences, but we are interested in a spe-
cific topical domain. We have previously tackled
the problem (Plamada and Volk, 2012) and en-
countered two major bottlenecks: the alignment
algorithm for matching possible candidates and
the similarity metric used to compare them. To
our knowledge, existing sentence alignment al-
gorithms (including the one we have employed
in the first place) have a monotonic order con-
straint, meaning that crossing alignments are not

112



allowed. But this phenomenon occurs often in
Wikipedia, because its articles in different lan-
guages are edited independently, without respect-
ing any guidelines. Moreover, the string-based
comparison metric proved to be unreliable for
identifying parallel sentences.

In this paper we propose an improved approach
for selecting parallel sentences in Wikipedia arti-
cles which considers all possible sentence pairs,
regardless of their position in the text. The selec-
tion will be made by means of a more informed
similarity metric, which rates different aspects
concerning the correspondences between two sen-
tences. Although the approach is language and
domain-independent, the present paper reports re-
sults obtained through querying the German and
French Wikipedia for Alpine texts (i.e. moun-
taineering reports, hiking recommendations, arti-
cles on the biology and the geology of mountain-
ous regions). Moreover, we report preliminary re-
sults regarding the use of the extracted corpus for
SMT training.

2 Finding candidate articles

The general architecture of our parallel sentence
extraction process is shown in Figure 1. We
applied the approach only to the language pair
German-French, as these are the languages we
have expertise in. In the project Domain-specific
Statistical Machine Translation1 we have built an
SMT system for the Alpine domain and for this
language pair. The training data comes from the
Text+Berg corpus2, which contains the digitized
publications of the Swiss Alpine Club (SAC) from
1864 until 2011, in German and French. This
SMT system will generate the automatic transla-
tions required in the extraction process.

The input consists of German and French
Wikipedia dumps3, available in the MediaWiki
format 4. Therefore our workflow requires a pre-
processing step, where the MediaWiki contents
are transformed to XML and then to raw text.
Preprocessing is based on existing tools, such as
WikiPrep5, but further customization is needed in
order to correctly convert localized MediaWiki el-
ements (namespaces, templates, date and number
formats etc.). We then identify Wikipedia articles

1http://www.cl.uzh.ch/research en.html
2See www.textberg.ch
3Accessed in September 2011
4http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/MediaWiki
5http://sourceforge.net/projects/wikiprep/

Figure 1: The extraction workflow

available in both languages by means of the inter-
language links provided by Wikipedia itself. This
reliable information is a good basis for the extrac-
tion workflow, since we do not have to worry about
the document alignment.

Upon completion of this step, we have extracted
a bilingual corpus of approximately 400 000 ar-
ticles per language. The corpus is subsequently
used for information retrieval (IR) queries aiming
to identify the articles belonging to the Alpine do-
main. The input queries contain the 100 most fre-
quent mountaineering keywords in the Text+Berg
corpus (e.g. Alp, Gipfel, Berg, Route in German
and montagne, sommet, voie, cabane in French).
This filter reduces the search space to 40 000
articles. Although we have refined our search
terms by discarding the ones occurring frequently
in other text types (e.g. meter, day, year, end),
we were not able to avoid a small percentage of
false positives. Once we extract the Alpine com-
parable corpus, we proceed to the extraction of

113



parallel sentences, which will be thoroughly dis-
cussed in the following section. See (Plamada and
Volk, 2012) for more details about the extraction
pipeline.

3 Finding parallel segments in Wikipedia
articles

The analysis of our previous results brought into
attention many ”parallel“ sentence pairs of dif-
ferent lengths, meaning that the shared trans-
lated content does not span over the whole sen-
tence. As an example, consider the following sen-
tences which have been retrieved by the extraction
pipeline. Although they both contain information
about the valleys connected by the Turini pass, the
German sentence contains a fragment about its po-
sition, which has not been translated into French.

DE: Der Pass liegt in der äusseren, besiedelten
Zone des Nationalpark Mercantour und stellt den
Übergang zwischen dem Tal der Bévéra und dem
Tal der Vésubie dar.
FR: Le col de Turini relie la vallée de la Vésubie
à la vallée de la Bévéra.

If this sentence pair would be used for MT
training, it would most probably confuse the sys-
tem, because noisy word alignments are to be ex-
pected. Our solution to this problem is to split
the sentences into smaller entities (e.g. clauses)
and then to find the alignments on this granular-
ity level. The clause boundary detection is per-
formed independently for German and French, re-
spectively, following the approach developed by
Volk (2001). The general idea is to split the sen-
tences into clauses containing a single full verb.

Our alignment algorithm, unlike previous ap-
proaches, ignores the position of the clauses in the
texts. Although Wikipedia articles are divided into
sections, their structure is not synchronized across
the language variants, since articles are edited in-
dependently. We have encountered, for example,
cases where one section in the French article was
included in the general introduction of the Ger-
man article. If we would have considered sec-
tions boundaries as anchor points, we would have
missed useful clause pairs. We therefore decided
to use an exhaustive matching algorithm, in order
to cover all possible combinations.

For the sake of simplicity, we reduce the prob-
lem to a monolingual alignment task by using an
intermediary machine translation of the source ar-

ticle. We decided that German articles should al-
ways be considered the source because we expect
a better automatic translation quality from German
to French. The translation is performed by our in-
house SMT system trained on Alpine texts. The
algorithm generates all possible clause pairs be-
tween the automatic translation and the targeted
article and computes for each of them a similarity
score. Subsequently it reduces the search space by
keeping only the 3 best-scoring alignment candi-
dates for each clause. Finally the algorithm returns
the alignment pair which maximizes the similarity
score and complies with the injectivity constraint.
In the end we filter the results by allowing only
clause pairs above the set threshold.

We defined our similarity measure as a
weighted sum of feature functions, which returns
values in the range [0,1]. The similarity score
models two comparison criteria:

• METEOR score
We used the METEOR similarity metric be-
cause, unlike other string-based metrics (e.g.
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002)), it considers
not only exact matches, but also word stems,
synonyms, and paraphrases (Denkowski and
Lavie, 2011). Suppose that we compute the
similarity between the following sentences in
French: j’ aimerais bien vous voir and je
voudrais vous voir (both meaning I would
like to see you). BLEU, which is a string-
based metric, would assign a similarity score
of 52.5. This value could hardly be con-
sidered reliable, given that the sentence ta
voiture vous voir (paired with the first sen-
tence) would get the same BLEU score, al-
though the latter sentence (EN: your car see
you) is obviously nonsense. On the other
hand, METEOR would return a score of 90.3
for the original sentence pair, since it can
appreciate that the two pronouns (je and j’)
are both variations of the first person singular
in French and that the predicates convey the
same meaning.

• Number of aligned content words
However, METEOR scores can also be mis-
leading, since they rely on automatic word
alignments. Two sentences are likely to re-
ceive a high similarity score when they share
many aligned words. However, the align-
ments are not always reliable. We often saw

114



sentence pairs with a decent Meteor score
where only some determiners, punctuation
signs or simple word collocations (e.g. de
la montagne (EN: of the mountain)) were
matched. As an illustration, consider the fol-
lowing sentence pair and its corresponding
alignment:

Hyp: les armoiries , le désir de la ville de
breslau par ferdinand i. le 12 mars 1530 a
Ref: le 19 juin 1990 , le conseil municipal
rétablit le blason original de la ville

2-4 3-5 5-12 6-13 7-14 13-0

Although the sentences are obviously not se-
mantically equivalent (a fact also suggested
by the sparse word alignments), the pair re-
ceives a METEOR score of 0.23. We decided
to compensate for this by counting only the
aligned pairs which link content words and
dividing them by the total number of words
in the longest sentence from the considered
pair. In the example above, only one valid
alignment (7-14) can be identified, therefore
the sentence pair will get a partial score of
1/18. In this manner we can ensure the de-
crease of the initial similarity score.

Additionally, we have defined a token ratio fea-
ture to penalize the sentence length differences.
Although a length penalty is already included in
the METEOR score, we still found false candidate
pairs with exceedingly different lengths. There-
fore we decided to use this criterion as a selec-
tion filter rather than including it in the similarity
function, in order to increase the chances of other
candidates with similar length. Even if no other
candidate will pass all the filters, at least we ex-
pect the precision to increase, since we will have
one false positive less.

The final formula for the similarity score be-
tween two clauses src in the source language and,
respectively trg in the target language is:

score(src, trg) = w1 ∗ s1 + (1− w1) ∗ s2 (1)

where s1 represents the METEOR score and s2 the
alignment score.

The weights, as well as the final threshold are
tuned to maximize the correlation with human
judgments. We modeled the task as a minimiza-
tion problem, where the function value increases

by 1 for each correctly selected clause pair and
decreases by 1 for each wrong pair. The solu-
tion (consisting of the individual weights and the
threshold) is found using a brute force approach,
for which we employed the scipy.optimize
package from Python. The training set consists
of an article with 1300 clause pairs, 25 of which
are parallel and the rest non-parallel. We chose
this distribution of the useful/not useful clauses
because this corresponds to the real distribution
observed in Wikipedia articles. In the best con-
figuration, we retrieve 23 good clause pairs and 1
wrong. This corresponds to a precision of 95%
and a recall of 92% on this small test set.

However, we can influence the quantity of ex-
tracted parallel clauses by manually adjusting the
final filter threshold. Figure 2 depicts the size vari-
ations of the resulting corpus at different thresh-
olds, where the relative frequency is represented
on a logarithmic scale. We notice that the rate of
decrease is linear in the log scale of the number
of extracted clause pairs. We start at a similarity
score of 0.2 because the pairs below this thresh-
old are too noisy. The data between 0.2 and 0.3
is already mixed, as it will be shown in the fol-
lowing sections. However, since this data segment
contains approximately twice as much data as the
summed superior ones, we decided to include it in
the corpus.

Figure 2: The distribution of the extracted clause
pairs at different thresholds

Table 1 presents German-French clause pairs
with their corresponding similarity scores. On
the top we can find rather short clauses (up to
10 words) with perfectly aligned words. One ex-
pects that the decrease of the values implies that

115



Nr. French clause German clause Score
1 mcnish écrit dans son journal : mcnish schrieb in sein tagebuch : 1.0
2 son journal n’ a pas été retrouvé sein tagebuch wurde nie gefunden 0.950
3 elle travailla pendant plusieurs se-

maines avec lui
während mehrerer wochen arbeitete sie
mit ihm zusammen

0.840

4 en 1783, il fait une première tentative
infructueuse avec marc théodore bourrit

paccard startete 1783 zusammen mit marc
theodore bourrit einen ersten, erfolglosen
besteigungsversuch

0.717

5 en 1962, les bavarois toni kinshofer,
siegfried löw et anderl mannhardt
réussirent pour la première fois l’ as-
cension par la face du diamir

1962 durchstiegen die bayern toni
kinshofer, siegfried löw und anderl
mannhardt erstmals die diamir-flanke

0.623

6 le 19 août 1828 il tenta, avec les deux
guides jakob leuthold et johann wahren
l’ ascension du finsteraarhorn

august 1828 versuchte er zusammen mit
den beiden bergführern jakob leuthold
und johann währen das finsteraarhorn zu
besteigen

0.519

7 le parc protège le mont robson, le
plus haut sommet des rocheuses cana-
diennes

das 2248 km2 große schutzgebiet er-
streckt sich um den 3954 m hohen mount
robson, dem höchsten berg der kanadis-
chen rocky mountains

0.470

8 la plupart des édifices volcaniques du
haut eifel sont des dômes isolés plus ou
moins aplatis

die meisten der vulkanbauten der
hocheifel sind als isolierte kuppen
vereinzelt oder in reihen der mehr oder
minder flachen hochfläche aufgesetzt

0.379

9 le site, candidat au patrimoine mondial,
se compose d’ esplanades-autels faits
de pierres

die stätte, ein kandidat für das unesco-
welterbe, besteht aus altarplattformen aus
steinen und erde, gestützt auf einer un-
terirdischen konstruktion aus bemalten
ton-pfeilern

0.259

10 qu’ un cas mineur ayant un effet limité
sur la santé

wie sich diese substanzen auf die gesund-
heit auswirken,

0.200

Table 1: Examples of extracted clause pairs

the clauses contain less or even no translated frag-
ments. A manual inspection of the extracted pairs
showed that this is not always the case. We have
found clause pairs with almost perfect 1-1 word
correspondences and a similarity score of only
0.51. The ”low” score is due to the fact that we
are comparing human language to automatic trans-
lations, which are not perfect.

On the other hand, a comparable score can be
achieved by a pair in which one of the clauses
contains some extra information (e.g. pair num-
ber 7). The extra parts in the German variant
(2248 km2 große - EN: with an area of 2248 km2;
3954 m hohen - EN: 3954 m high) cannot be
separated by means of clause boundary detection,
since they don’t contain any verbs. This finding

would motivate the idea of splitting the phrases
into subsentential segments (linguistically moti-
vated or not) and aligning the segments, similar
to what Munteanu (2006) proposed. Nevertheless,
we consider this pair a good candidate for the par-
allel corpus.

Pair number 8 has the same coordinates (i.e. an
extra tail in the German variant), yet it receives a
lower score, which might disqualify it for the final
list, if we only look at the numbers. In this case,
the low score is caused by the German compounds
(Vulkanbauten, Hocheifel), which are unknown to
the SMT system, therefore they are left untrans-
lated and cannot be aligned. However, we argue
that this clause pair should also be part of the ex-
tracted corpus.

116



Score Average sentence length
range German French

[0.9− 1.0] 4 4.26
[0.8− 0.9) 4.87 5.04
[0.7− 0.8) 6.47 6.65
[0.6− 0.7) 10.78 10.71
[0.5− 0.6) 12.09 11.51
[0.4− 0.5) 11.91 11.80
[0.3− 0.4) 11.28 11.22
[0.2− 0.3) 11.22 11.01

Table 2: The average sentence length for different
score ranges

The last pair is definitely a bad candidate for a
parallel corpus, since the clauses do not convey the
same meaning, although they share many words
(avoir un effet - auswirken, sur la santé - auf die
Gesundheit). A subsentential approach would al-
low us to extract the useful segments in this case,
as well. There are, of course, pairs with similar
scores and poorer quality, therefore 0.2 is the low-
est threshold which can provide useful candidate
pairs. At the other end of the scale, we consider
pairs above 0.4 as parallel and everything below
as comparable. As a general rule, a high threshold
ensures a high accuracy of the extraction pipeline.

Table 2 presents the average length (number
of tokens) of the extracted clauses for different
ranges of the similarity score. We notice that the
best ranked clauses tend to be very short, whereas
the last ranked are longer, as the examples in ta-
ble 1 confirm. However, the average length over
the whole extracted corpus is below 10 words, a
small value compared to the results reported on
Wikipedia articles by Ştefănescu and Ion (2013).
This finding is due to the fact that we are aligning
clauses instead of whole sentences.

We expected the German sentences to be usu-
ally shorter than the French ones (or at least have
a similar number of words), since they are more
likely to contain compounds. This fact is con-
firmed by the first part of the table. A turnaround
occurs in the range (0.5,0.6), where the German
sentences become slightly longer than the French
ones, since they tend to contain extra information
(see also table 1).

4 Experiments and Results

The conducted experiments have focused only on
the extraction of parallel clauses and their use in a

SMT scenario. For this purpose, we have used as
input the articles selected and preprocessed in the
previous development phase (Plamada and Volk,
2012). Specifically, the data set consists of 39 000
parallel articles with approximately 6 million Ger-
man clauses and 2.7 million French ones. We were
able to extract 225 000 parallel clause pairs out of
them, by setting the final filter threshold to 0.2.
This means that roughly 4% of the German clauses
have an French equivalent (and 8% when reporting
to the French clauses), figures comparable to our
previous results on a different sized data set. How-
ever, the quality of the extracted data is higher than
in our previous approaches.

To evaluate the quality of the parallel data ex-
tracted, we manually checked a set of 200 au-
tomatically aligned clauses with similarity scores
above 0.25. For this test set, 39% of the ex-
tracted data represent perfect translations, 26% are
translations with an extra segment (e.g. a noun
phrase) on one side and 35% represent misalign-
ments. However, given the high degree of paral-
lelism between the clauses from the middle class,
we consider them as true positives, achieving a
precision of 65%. Furthermore, 40% of the false
positives have been introduced by matching proper
names, 32% contain matching subsentential seg-
ments (word sequences longer than 3 words) and
27% represent failures in the alignment process.

4.1 SMT Experiments

In addition to the manual evaluation discussed in
the previous subsection, we have run preliminary
investigations with regard to the usefulness of the
extracted corpus for SMT. In this evaluation sce-
nario, we use only pairs with a similarity score
above 0.35. The results discussed in this sec-
tion refer only to the translation direction German-
French. The SMT systems are trained with the
Moses toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007), according to
the WMT 2011 guidelines6. The translation per-
formance was measured using the BLEU evalua-
tion metric on a single reference translation. We
also report statistical significance scores, in order
to indicate the validity of the comparisons between
the MT systems (Riezler and Maxwell, 2005). We
consider the BLEU score difference significant if
the computed p-value is below 0.05.

We compare two baseline MT systems and sev-
eral systems with different model mixtures (trans-

6http://www.statmt.org/wmt11/baseline.html

117



lation models, language models or both). The first
baseline system is an in-domain one, trained on the
Text+Berg corpus and is the same used for the au-
tomatic translations required in the extraction step
(see section 3). The second system is purely out-
of-domain and it is trained on Europarl, a collec-
tion of parliamentary proceedings (Koehn, 2005).
The development set and the test set contain in-
domain data, held out from the Text+Berg corpus.
Table 3 lists the sizes of the data sets used for the
SMT experiments.

Data set Sentences DE Words FR Words
SAC 220 000 4 200 000 4 700 000
Europarl 1 680 000 37 000 000 43 000 000
Wikipedia 120 000 1 000 000 1 000 000
Dev set 1424 30 000 33 000
Test set 991 19 000 21 000

Table 3: The size of the German-French data sets

Our first intuition was to add the extracted sen-
tences to the existing in-domain training corpus
and to evaluate the performance of the system. In
the second scenario, we added the extracted data
to an SMT system for which no in-domain paral-
lel data was available. For this purpose, we exper-
imented with different combinations of the mod-
els involved in the translation process, namely the
German-French translation model (responsible for
the translation variants) and the French language
model (ensures the fluency of the output). Besides
of the models trained on the parallel data available
in each of the data sets, we also built combined
models with optimized weights for each of the in-
volved data sets. The optimization was performed
with the tools provided by Sennrich (2012) as part
of the Moses toolkit. We also want to compare
several language models, some trained on the indi-
vidual data sets, others obtained by linearly inter-
polating different data sets, all optimized for min-
imal perplexity on the in-domain development set.
The results are summarized in table 4.

A first remark is that an out-of-domain lan-
guage model (LM) adapted with in-domain data
(extracted from Wikipedia and/or SAC data) sig-
nificantly improves on top of a baseline system
trained with out-of-domain texts (Europarl, EP)
with up to 1.7 BLEU points. And this improve-
ment can be achieved with only a small quantity
of additional data compared to the size of the orig-
inal training data (120k or 220k versus 1680k sen-
tence pairs). When replacing the out-of-domain

Translation Language model BLEU
model score
Europarl TM EP LM 9.45
Europarl TM EP+Wiki LM 10.39
EP+Wiki TM EP+Wiki LM 10.37
Europarl TM EP+Wiki+SAC LM 11.22
EP+Wiki TM EP+Wiki+SAC LM 11.74
EP+WMix TM EP+Wiki+SAC LM 10.40
SAC TM SAC LM 16.71
SAC+Wiki TM SAC+Wiki LM 16.51
SAC+WMix TM SAC+Wiki LM 16.37

Table 4: SMT results for German-French

translation model with a combined one (includ-
ing the Wikipedia data set) and keeping only the
adapted language models, we can observe two ten-
dencies. In the first case (using a combination
of out-of-domain and Wikipedia-data for the lan-
guage model), the BLEU score remains approxi-
mately at the same level (10.37-10.39), the differ-
ence not being statistically significant (p-value =
0.387).

The addition of quality in-domain data for the
LM from the previous configuration brings an im-
provement of 0.5 BLEU points on top of the best
Europarl system (11.22 BLEU points). Given that
all other factors are kept constant, this improve-
ment can be attributed to the additional transla-
tion model (TM) trained on Wikipedia data. More-
over, the statistical significance tests confirm that
the improved system performs better than the pre-
vious one (p-value = 0.005). To demonstrate
that these results are not accidental, we replaced
the Wikipedia extracted sentences with a random
combination thereof (referred to as WMix) and re-
trained the system. Under these circumstances,
the performance of the system dropped to 10.40
BLEU points. These findings demonstrate the ef-
fect of a small in-domain data set on the perfor-
mance of an out-of-domain system trained on big
amounts of data. If the data is of good quality, it
can improve the performance of the system, other-
wise it significantly deteriorates it.

We notice that the performance of a strong in-
domain baseline system (SAC) cannot be heav-
ily influenced (either positively or negatively) by
translation and language model mixtures combin-
ing existing in-domain data with Wikipedia data.
In terms of BLEU points, the mixture models
trained with ”good” Wikipedia data cause a perfor-

118



mance drop of 0.2, but the significance test shows
that the difference is not statistically significant (p-
value = 0.08). On the other hand, the TM includ-
ing shuffled Wikipedia sentences causes a perfor-
mance drop of 0.34 BLEU points, which is statis-
tically significant (p-value = 0.013). We can con-
clude that the quantity of the data is not the deci-
sive factor for the performance change, but rather
the quality of the data. The Wikipedia extracted
data set maintains the good performance, whereas
a random mixture of the Wikipedia data set causes
a performance decrease. Therefore the focus of
future work should be on obtaining high quality
data, regardless of its amount.

5 Conclusions and Outlook

In this paper we presented a method for extract-
ing domain-specific parallel data from Wikipedia
articles. Based on previous experiments, we fo-
cus on clause level alignments rather than on full-
sentence extraction methods. Moreover, the rank-
ing of the candidates is based on a metric com-
bining different similarity criteria, which we de-
fined ourselves. The precision estimates show that
the extracted sentence pairs are clearly semanti-
cally equivalent. The SMT experiments, however,
show that the extracted data is not refined enough
to improve a strong in-domain SMT system. Nev-
ertheless, it is good enough to overtake an out-of-
domain system trained on 10 times bigger amounts
of data.

Since our extraction system is merely a proto-
type, there are several ways to improve its per-
formance, including better filtering for in-domain
articles, finer grained alignment and more so-
phisticated similarity metrics. For example, the
selection of domain-specific articles can be im-
proved by means of an additional filter based on
Wikipedia categories. The accuracy of the extrac-
tion procedure can be improved by means of a
more informed similarity metric, weighting more
feature functions. Moreover, we can bypass the
manual choice of thresholds by employing a clas-
sifier (e.g. SVMlight (Joachims, 2002)). Addi-
tionally, we could try to align even shorter sen-
tence fragments (not necessarily linguistically mo-
tivated).

We are confident that Wikipedia can be seen as
a useful resource for SMT, but further investiga-
tion is needed in order to find the best method to
exploit the extracted data in a SMT scenario. For

this purpose, quality data should be preferred over
sizable data. We would therefore like to experi-
ment with different ratio combinations of the data
sets (Wikipedia extracted and in-domain data) un-
til we find a combination which outperforms our
in-domain baseline system.

References
Sadaf Abdul Rauf and Holger Schwenk. 2011. Paral-

lel sentence generation from comparable corpora for
improved SMT. Machine Translation, 25:341–375.

Sisay Fissaha Adafre and Maarten de Rijke. 2006.
Finding similar sentences across multiple languages
in Wikipedia. Proceedings of the 11th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 62–69.

Michael Denkowski and Alon Lavie. 2011. Meteor
1.3: Automatic metric for reliable optimization and
evaluation of machine translation systems. In Pro-
ceedings of the EMNLP 2011 Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation.

Pascale Fung and Percy Cheung. 2004. Mining very-
non-parallel corpora: Parallel sentence and lexicon
extraction via bootstrapping and EM. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP.

Pascale Fung, Emmanuel Prochasson, and Simon Shi.
2010. Trillions of comparable documents. In Pro-
ceedings of the the 3rd workshop on Building and
Using Comparable Corpora (BUCC’10), Malta.

Thorsten Joachims. 2002. Learning to classify text
using Support Vector Machines. Kluwer Academic
Publishers.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL
on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
ACL ’07, pages 177–180.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Machine Transla-
tion Summit X, pages 79–86.

Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2005. Im-
proving machine translation performance by exploit-
ing non-parallel corpora. Computational Linguis-
tics, 31:477–504, December.

Dragos Stefan Munteanu. 2006. Exploiting compara-
ble corpora. Ph.D. thesis, University Of Southern
California.

119



Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, ACL ’02, pages 311–318,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Magdalena Plamada and Martin Volk. 2012. Towards
a Wikipedia-extracted alpine corpus. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth Workshop on Building and Using
Comparable Corpora, Istanbul, May.

Stefan Riezler and John T. Maxwell. 2005. On some
pitfalls in automatic evaluation and significance test-
ing for MT. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop
on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for
Machine Translation and/or Summarization, pages
57–64, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Rico Sennrich. 2012. Perplexity minimization for
translation model domain adaptation in statistical
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 13th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 539–
549, Avignon, France. Association For Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Jason Smith, Chris Quirk, and Kristina Toutanova.
2010. Extracting parallel sentences from compa-
rable corpora using document level alignment. In
Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
403–411, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Dan Ştefănescu and Radu Ion. 2013. Parallel-Wiki:
A collection of parallel sentences extracted from
Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 14th Conference
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational
Linguistics (CICLing 2013).

Dan Ştefănescu, Radu Ion, and Sabine Hunsicker.
2012. Hybrid parallel sentence mining from com-
parable corpora. In Mauro Cettolo, Marcello Fed-
erico, Lucia Specia, and AndyEditors Way, editors,
Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European
Association for Machine Translation EAMT 2012,
pages 137–144.

Martin Volk. 2001. The automatic resolution of prepo-
sitional phrase - attachment ambiguities in German.
Habilitation thesis, University of Zurich.

Bing Zhao and Stephan Vogel. 2002. Adaptive parallel
sentences mining from web bilingual news collec-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining, ICDM ’02, pages 745–
748, Washington, DC, USA. IEEE Computer Soci-
ety.

120


