










































A Hybrid Statistical Approach for Named Entity Recognition for Malayalam Language


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 58–63,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

A Hybrid Statistical Approach for Named Entity Recognition for 
Malayalam Language

                                             
              Jisha P Jayan               Rajeev R R Elizabeth Sherly

jisha.jayan@iiitmk.ac.in       rajeev@iiitmk.ac.in         sherly@iiitmk.ac.in 
  

Abstract

Named-Entity Recognition (NER) plays a sig-
nificant  role in classifying or locating atomic 
elements  in  text   into  predefined  categories 
such as the name of persons, organizations, lo-
cations, expression of times, quantities, mone-
tary values, temporal expressions and  percent-
ages.  Several  Statistical  methods with super-
vised and unsupervised learning have applied 
English and some other Indian languages suc-
cessfully.   Malayalam has a distinct feature in 
nouns  having  no  subject-verb  agreement, 
which is of free order, makes the NER identi-
fication a complex process. In this paper, a hy-
brid approach combining rule based machine 
learning with statistical approach is proposed 
and implemented, which shows 73.42% accu-
racy. 

1 Introduction

Named-Entity Recognition (NER)  is a subtask 
of information extraction that seeks to locate and 
classify atomic elements in text into predefined 
categories such as the name of persons, organiza-
tions, locations, expression of times, quantities, 
monetary values, temporal expressions, percent-
ages, etc. There are different supervised and un-
supervised  learning  approaches  for  NER using 
statistical methods like HMM, Decision Forest, 
Maximum Entropy, SVM, Conditional Random 
fields  etc.  The  term  Named  Entity  was  intro-
duced in the sixth Message Understanding Con-
ference (MUC-6).  In fact, the MUC conferences 
were the events that have contributed in a deci-
sive way to the research of this area. It has pro-
vided the  benchmark for named entity systems 
that  performed a variety of  information extrac-
tion tasks (Mansouri et al., 2008).

The named entities are generally nouns. 
NER although a seemingly simple task, but a dif-
ficult  task to  find,  and once found,  difficult  to 
classify.  For  example,  locations  and  person 
names can be the same, and follow similar for-

matting.  NEs are typically not registered in gen-
eral-purpose  lexical  resources  while  generic 
terms are expressed. NEs are subject to perma-
nent  changes  and  show  syntactic  behaviour 
which is  specific  to them.  NEs, generic  terms 
and its  various  forms are  used interchangeably 
and form chains of co-referring items.

Malayalam  belongs  to  the  Dravidian 
family of languages and is one of the four major 
languages of this family with a rich literary tradi-
tion,  inflectionally  adding  of  suffixes  with  the 
root or the stem word forms rich in morphology. 
The language must be certainly being older, but 
linguistic  research is  yet  to  be discovering un-
mistakable evidence to prove its antiquity.  NER 
tasks are still difficult and in infancy in many In-
dian languages, and is more in Malayalam.

2 Related Works 

In recent years, automatic named entity recogni-
tion and extraction systems have become one of 
the  popular  research  areas  that  a  considerable 
number of studies have been addressed on devel-
oping  these  systems.  They  can  be  categorized 
into three classes namely, Rule based NER, Ma-
chine  Learning  based  NER  and  Hybrid  based 
NER (Wu et  al.,  2006).   Hand-made  or  Rule-
based focuses on extracting names using human-
made rules set. 

Generally the system consist of set of patterns 
using  grammatical,  syntactic  and  orthographic 
features in  combination with dictionaries  (Budi 
et  al.,  2003).  These approaches are relying on 
manually  coded  rules  and  manually  compiled 
corpora.  These kinds of  models have better re-
sults  for  restricted domains,  are capable  of  de-
tecting  complex  entities  that  learning  models 
have difficulty with. However, the rule-based NE 
systems lack the ability of portability and robust-
ness, and furthermore the high cost  of the rule 
maintains  increases  even  though  the  data  is 
slightly  changed.  These type of approaches  are 
often domain and language specific and do not 

58



necessarily adapt well to new domains and lan-
guages.

Generally  the system consist  of   set  of 
patterns using grammatical , syntactic and ortho-
graphic features in combination  with dictionar-
ies (Budi et al., 2003).  These approaches are re-
lying  on  manually  coded  rules  and  manually 
compiled corpora.  These kinds  of  models  have 
better results for restricted domains, are capable 
of detecting complex entities that learning mod-
els have difficulty with. However, the rule-based 
NE systems lack the ability of portability and ro-
bustness,  and  furthermore  the  high  cost  of  the 
rule maintain increases even though the data is 
slightly  changed.  These type of approaches  are 
often domain and language specific and do not 
necessarily adapt well to new domains and lan-
guages.
     There are two types of machine learning mod-
els that are used for NER called   Supervised and 
Unsupervised  machine learning model.   Super-
vised learning involves using a program that can 
learn to classify a given set of labeled examples 
that are made up of the same number of features. 
Each example is thus represented with respect to 
the different feature spaces. The learning process 
is  called  supervised,  because  the  people  who 
marked up the training examples are teaching the 
program the right distinctions.  
   In  recent  years  several  statistical  methods 
based on supervised learning method were pro-
posed.  Bikel et. al. proposed a learning name-
finder based on hidden Markov model (Bikel et 
al. , 1998) called Nymbel, while Borthwick et. al. 
investigates  exploiting  diverse  knowledge 
sources  via  maximum entropy in  named entity 
recognition (Borthwick et al. , 1998).  
      A tagging of unknown proper names system 
with  Decision  Tree  model  was  proposed  by 
Bechet et. al. (2000), while Wu  et. al. ( 2006) 
presented  a  named  entity  recognition  system 
based on support vector machines. 
        Unsupervised learning method is another 
type of machine learning model, where an unsu-
pervised model  learns without any feedback. In 
unsupervised learning, the goal of the program is 
to build representations from data. These repre-
sentations can then be used for data compression, 
classifying, decision making, and other purposes. 
Unsupervised learning is not a very popular ap-
proach for NER and the systems that do use un-
supervised  learning  are  usually  not  completely 
unsupervised. In these types of approach, Collins 
et. al.(1999) discusses an unsupervised model for 

named entity classification by use of unlabeled 
examples of data.
    Koim et. al. (2002) proposed an unsupervised 
named entity classification models and their en-
sembles that uses a small-scale named entity dic-
tionary and an unlabeled corpus for  classifying 
named entities.  Unlike  the  rule-  based method, 
these types of approaches can be easily port to 
different domain or languages. 

VijayaKrishna et al. (2008) also experi-
mented  with  Conditional  Random Field  (CRF) 
models for a domain focused Tamil Named Enti-
ty Recognizer for tourism domain. Their obser-
vation resulted that  Conditional Random Fields 
is well suited for Named Entity recognition for 
Indian  languages,  but  it  is  tested  only  for  the 
noun phrases.  
    Sujan Kumar Saha et al.  of IIT, Kharagpur 
used a hybrid approach for their NER task in In-
dian Languages. The hybrid techniques include 
Maximum  Entropy  model  (MaxEnt),  language 
specific rules and gazetteers. For their work they 
have  considered  5  Indian  languages  –  Hindi, 
Bengali, Oriya, Telugu and Urdu. 
      Kishorjit Nongmeikapam et al. (2011), has 
explored  the  NER  task  for  Manipuri  in  their 
work  -  CRF  Based  Name  Entity  Recognition 
(NER) in Manipuri: a highly agglutinative Indian 
Language  using  Conditional  Random  Field 
(CRF). 
     In Hybrid NER system, the approach is to 
combine rule- based and machine learning-based 
methods, and make new methods using strongest 
points from each method.  In this  family of ap-
proaches Mikheev et. al. proposed a Hybrid doc-
ument  centered  system,  called  LTG  system 
(Mikheev et al. , 1998) Sirihari et. al.(2000) in-
troduced  a  hybrid  system  by  combination  of 
HMM,  MaxEnt,  and  handcrafted  grammatical 
rules. 

Statistical  methods  work  by  using  a  proba-
bilistic  model  containing  features  of  the  data 
which are similar  to the rule-based approaches. 
The features of the data, which could be under-
stood as rules set for the probabilistic model, are 
produced by learning the resulting corpora with 
correctly marked named entities. The probabilis-
tic model then uses the features to calculate and 
identify  the  most  probable  named  entities.  As 
such, if the annotated features of the data are tru-
ly reliable, the model would have a high proba-
bility  in  finding  almost  all  the  named  entities 
within a text.

59



3 Statistical Apporach 

The statistical (Brants, 2000) methods are mainly 
based on the probability measures including the 
unigram,  bigram,  trigram  and  n-grams.   TnT- 
Trigrams n Tags is a very efficient statistical part 
of speech tagger that can be trained on any lan-
guage with any tagset. The parameter generation 
component trains on tagged corpora. The system 
uses several techniques for smoothing and han-
dling of unknown words.  TnT can be used for 
any language, adapting the tagger to a new lan-
guage, new domain or new tagset  very easy. 

The tagger is implemented using Viterbi 
algorithm  for  second  order  Markov  models. 
Spanish TnT is a statistical approach, based on a 
Hidden Markov Model that uses the Viterbi algo-
rithm with beam search for fast processing. 
       The Viterbi algorithm is used to compute the 
most  likely  tag  sequence  in  O(W  x  T2)  time 
where T is the number of possible part-of-speech 
tags and W is the number of words in the sen-
tence.  It performs the maximum likelihood prob-
ability calculation using the parameters from lex-
icon file and n-gram file.  The algorithm sweeps 
through  all  the  tag  possibilities  for  each  word 
computing the best sequence leading to each pos-
sibility. The key that makes this algorithm effi-
cient is that the usage of best sequences leading 
to the previous word because of the Markov as-
sumption. 

TnT is trained with different smoothing 
methods and suffix analysis. The parameter gen-
eration component trains on tagged corpora. The 
system  uses  several  techniques  for  smoothing 
and handling of unknown words. Linear interpo-
lation is the main paradigm used for smoothing 
and the weights are determined by deleted inter-
polation. To handle the unknown words, suffix 
trie and successive abstraction are used.   
      TnT's  greatest advantage is its speed, impor-
tant both for fast tuning cycle  when dealing with 
large corpora. The strong side of TnT is its suffix 
guessing  algorithm that  is  triggered  by  unseen 
words.  From the training set  TnT builds  a trie 
from the endings of words appearing less than n 
times in the corpus, memorizes the tag distribu-
tion for each matrix.  A clear advantage of this 
approach is  the probabilistic  weighting of each 
label,  however,  under default  settings the algo-
rithm proposes a lot  more possible  tags than a 
morphological analyzer would.

4 Proposed Work 

Malayalam language  treats the named entities as 
Nouns and so they are Noun Phrases. All Noun 
Phrases  are  not  named  entities  and   can  have 
morphological inflections as Malayalam is mor-
phologically rich. This makes a single named en-
tity to appear as different words in different con-
text. Malayalam  lacks capitalization information 
for named entities and one named entity can ap-
pear with different meaning in another context. 
For example, consider the word  ‘Kavitha’ is a 
common noun with the meaning name of a per-
son and ‘poem’ and also a Proper Noun. The free 
word order of the language is also posing prob-
lems as NEs can appear in subject and object po-
sitions. The language construct has no Subject-
Verb agreement and there exists a free word or-
der so that  named entities can appear in any po-
sition.   Therefore, Malayalam requires properly 
tailored method for identification of NER and we 
propose  a  supervised  machine  learning method 
using TnT based on a Hidden Markov Model and 
Viterbi algorithm. 

5 Implementation 

The major steps involved in NER are Corpus se-
lection, POS Tagging, NER Tagging, training the 
corpus using the  TnT to create   lexicon and the 
ngram  files.  Based  on  these  language  models 
generated, the raw corpus with  POS annotation 
are tagged.  Rules are used in some cases where 
there occurs the inner and outer tags. The archi-
tecture used for recognizing the named entities in 
Malayalam is shown in Figure1.

5.1 Tagging 

 The Named entity hierarchy is divided into three 
major classes; Entity Name, Time and Numerical 
expressions. The Name hierarchy has eleven at-
tributes. Numeral Expression and time have four 
and three attributes respectively. Named Entities 
are tagged using the tagset developed for Indian 
Language  Machine  Translation  and  CLIA 
projects of DEITY, Government of India.  This 
tagset is hierarchical in nature and the first level 
tags consist of ENAMEX, TIMEX and NUMEX. 
The first level tags of ENAMEX consists of 11 
tags with 46 subtags and 20 tags under the sub-
tags . NUMEX has 4 subtags whereas  TIMEX 
has 7 subtags.

60



Examples

<ENAMEX  TYPE="LOCATION" 
SUBTYPE_1="PLACE" 
SUBTYPE_2="STATE">
1.1 േേരളതിെെെ NNP
</ENAMEX>
<ENAMEX  TYPE="LOCATION" 
SUBTYPE_1="WATERBODIES">
<ENAMEX  TYPE="LOCATION" 
SUBTYPE_1="PLACE">
2.1 േേകല NNP
</ENAMEX>
2. കടല്തീരം NN
</ENAMEX>

There  are  several  occasions  where  embedded 
tags are used. For example: 
ഇനയന  ഇനസിറയൂട്   ഓഫ് 
ഇനഫരേേഷന  െടക്േോോളജി  ആനഡ് 
േോേോജ്െേന് - േകരള 
( Indian Institute of Information Technolo­
gy   and   Management­Kerala),   where 
"ഇനയന (   Indian)   "   takes   the   tag   GPE 
and  "േകരള (Kerala)" takes the tag State while 

other tokens take no NER tags, but as a whole 
this  refers  to  an Institute  with its  Tag Institute 
under  Facility.  In  these  cases,  there  occurs  the 
need for writing the rules to identify the same as 
an Institute. The hybrid approach is more useful 
in such cases. 

6 Experiments and Results

Under  the  same domain,  a  comparison  on  two 
supervised  taggers  namely  TnT and SVM was 
conducted. In our experiment, for known words, 
SVM shows better performance but for unknown 
words TnT outperformed.   However, for embed-
ded tags, it is required to generate rules that com-
bining with TnT shows better result.  So our pro-
posed  hybrid  supervised  machine  learning  ap-
proach  with the  combination  of  TnT and Rule 
based is a good strategy for NER especially for 
embedded tags. 

The  corpus was tagged using the  NER 
tagset for Malayalam.  The TnT was learned us-
ing the tagged corpus. When learned, the dictio-
nary file was created for the corpus.  Once learn-
ing process is done, then the input text file was 
given to the tool and tagging was performed. The 
system gives an accuracy of 73.42% . 

61



The accuracy can be increased by increasing the 
amount  of  training  data.  The  detailed  observa-
tions are given in the Table 1. The performance 
of NER system in Malayalam is computed based 
on the parameters-Precision, Recall and F-Mea-
sure.  Recall is defined as the number of correct 
tags in the document marked up by our proposed 
NER system over the total number of annotated-
tags present in the document. The main purpose 

of recall is to measure how well our system can 
perform the recognition of entity names.  Preci-
sion is defined as the number of correct tags in 
the file marked up by our system over the total 
number of tags being marked up. 

 Precision=Correct NEs / Total NEs identified by 
the System

62



 Recall = Correct NES/ Gold standard NEs in the 
System

                 

7  Conclusion

Many natural language processing appli-
cations require finding Named Entities  in textual 
documents. Named  Entity  Recognition  plays  a 
significant  role  in  various  language  processing 
applications such  as  Question  Answering  and 
Summarization  Systems,  Information  Retrieval, 
Machine Translation, Video Annotation, Seman-
tic Web Search and Bioinformatics.  Considering 
the  various  issues  like  classifying  ambiguous 
strings correctly, detecting the boundaries of an 
NE correctly, categorizing NERs, and availabili-
ty of Unicode data, the proposed hybrid model 
achieves 73.42% accuracy. The domains consid-
ered for tagging were health and tourism. Accu-
racy can be further increased by increasing the 
number  of  words  in  the  training  corpus.  The 
work  shows  that  a  hybrid  statistical  approach, 
combining TnT and rule  based   suit  better  for 
highly  morphologically  and  inflectionally  rich 
languages like Malayalam.

References
Alireza Mansouri, Lilly Suriani Affendey, Ali Ma-
mat,IJCSNS  International  Journal  of  Computer 
Science  and  Network  Security,  VOL.8  No.2, 
February 2008

Y.C. Wu, T.K. Fan, Y.S. Lee, S.J Yen, ``Extracting 
Named Entities Using Support Vector Machines", 
Spring-Verlag,Berlin Heidelberg, 2006.

I. Budi, S. Bressan, "Association Rules Mining for 
Name  Entity  Recognition",Proceedings  of  the 
Fourth International Conference on Web Informa-
tion Systems Engineering, 2003.

D.M. Bikel, S. Miller, R. Schwartz, R, Weischedel, 
"a High-Performance Learning Name-finder", fifth 
conference on applied natural language processing, 
PP 194-201, 1998.

A. Borthwick, J. Sterling, E. Agichtein, and R. Gr-
ishman. Exploiting diverse knowledge sources via 
maximum  entropy  in  named  entity  recognition. 
1998.

F.  Bechet,  A.  Nasr  and  F.  Genet,  "Tagging  Un-
known Proper  Names  Using  Decision  Trees",  In 
proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, 2000.

Y.C. Wu, T.K. Fan, Y.S. Lee, S.J Yen, ``Extracting 
Named Entities Using Support Vector Machines", 
Spring-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2006.

Collins,  Michael  and  Y.  Singer.  "Unsupervised 
models  for  named  entity  classification",  In  pro-
ceedings of the Joint SIGDAT Conference on Em-
pirical  Methods  in  Natural  Language  Processing 
and Very Large Corpora, 1999.

Sujan Kumar Saha,Sanjay Chatterji,Sandipan Dan-
dapat,Sudeshna  Sarkar,Pabitra  Mitra  2008.A  Hy-
brid Approach for Named Entity Recognition in In-
dian  Languages,  Proceedings  of  the  IJCNLP-08 
Workshop on NER for South and South East Asian 
Languages, pages 17--24,       Hyderabad, India, 
January  ,  Asian  Federation  of  Natural  Language 
Processing

J.  Kim,  I.  Kang,  k.  Choi,  "Unsupervised  Named 
Entity Classification Models and their Ensembles", 
Proceedings of the 19th international conference on 
Computational linguistics, 2002.

A.  Mikheev,  C.  Grover,  M.  Moens,  "Description 
OF THE LTG SYSTEM FOR MUC-7",  In  Pro-
ceedings  of  the  seventh  Message  Understanding 
Conference (MUC-7), 1998.

R. Sirhari, C. Niu, W. Li, "A Hybrid Approach for 
Named Entity and Sub-Type Tagging" Proceedings 
of  the  sixth  conference  on  Applied  natural  lan-
guage  processing ,Acm Pp. 247 - 254 , 2000.

T. Brants. TnT --- A Statistical Part of-Speech Tag-
ger. In Proceedings of the 6th Applied NLP Con-
ference (ANLP-2000), pages 224--231, 2000.

Yassine  Benajiba,  Mona Diab,  and Paolo  Rosso. 
2009.Arabic  Named  Entity  Recognition:  A  Fea-
ture-Driven  Study.  IEEE Transactions  on  Audio, 
Speech, and Language Processing, VOL. 17, NO. 
5, July 2009

Kishorjit  Nongmeikapam,  Laishram  Newton 
Singh,  Tontang Shangkhunem,  Bishworjit  Salam, 
Ngariyanbam  Mayekleima  Chanu,  Sivaji  Bandy-
opadhyay.2011. CRF Based Named Entity Recog-
nition  in  Manipuri:  A  highly  agglutinative  lan-
guage. Proceeddings   of 2nd National Conference 
on Emerging Trends and Applications     in Com-
puter Science, March 2011

VijayaKrishna  R.  and Sobha  L.  Domain  focused 
Named Entity Recognizer for Tamil using Condi-
tional  Random  Fields.  Proceedings  of  the 
IJCNLP-08  Workshop  on  NER  for  South  and 
South East Asian Languages, pages 59--66, Hyder-
abad, India, January 2008.

63


