










































Predicting TV Audience Rating with Social Media


IJCNLP 2013 Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Social Media (SocialNLP), pages 1–5,
Nagoya, Japan, 14 October 2013.

Predicting TV Audience Rating with Social Media 

 

 

Wen-Tai Hsieh 

Institute for Information Industry  

wentai@iii.org.tw 

 

Seng-cho T. Chou 

National Taiwan University 

chou@im.ntu.edu.tw 

Yu-Hsuan Cheng 

Institute for Information Industry  

joelcheng@iii.org.tw 

Chen-Ming Wu 

Institute for Information Industry  

cmwu@iii.org.tw 

 

  

 

Abstract 

 

In Taiwan, there are different types of TV pro-

grams, and each program usually has its 

broadcast length and frequency. We accumu-

late the broadcasted TV programs’ word-of-

mouth on Facebook and apply the Back-

propagation Network to predict the latest pro-

gram audience rating. TV audience rating is an 

important indicator regarding the popularity of 

programs and it is also a factor to influence the 

revenue of broadcast stations via advertise-

ments. Currently, the present media environ-

ments are drastically changing our media con-

sumption patterns. We can watch TV pro-

grams on YouTube regardless location and 

timing. In this paper, we develop a model for 

predicting TV audience rating. We also pre-

sent the audience rating trend analysis on 

demo system which is used to describe the re-

lation between predictive audience rating and 

Nielsen TV rating. 

1 Introduction 

As social media websites develop, more and 

more people are sharing their thoughts on these 

types of websites (such as Facebook). Many en-

terprises noticed this trend, and started creating 

fan pages on Facebook to interact with the cus-

tomers in order to create a simple channel for 

interaction to consolidate customer loyalty. Cur-

rently, many television companies have creates 

fan pages for shows that they are broadcasting, 

and use the role of editor to announce upcoming 

plots or actor information to interact with the 

viewers and get responses from them, in order to 

try to increase ratings; higher rates help bring in 

more advertising revenues for the television 

company.  

Because these types of social media web-

sites, such as Facebook, have already become a 

part of people’s everyday life, this research will 

try to use the contents generated in the TV pro-

gram fan pages by viewers and the editor (in-

cluding Posts, Likes and Comments etc.) and the 

Artificial Neural Network to perform forecasts 

on program ratings. If television companies can 

find out ratings information in advance, they can 

use this as a basis to negotiate the advertising 

period and fees with advertisers; it can also help 

the television channel observe the benefits of 

operating program fan pages, and then decide 

whether to reinforce fan page management or 

add additional interactions with the fans and fur-

ther increase ratings and profits.  

This research constructed a program ratings 

forecast module based on Back-propagation 

Network. This model uses various information 

on fan pages of completed broadcasting pro-

grams and the actual ratings to perform the train-

ing for the Artificial Neural Network, and then 

uses the trained Artificial Neural network to per-

form a ratings forecast for upcoming programs. 

2 Preliminary 

2.1 Artificial Neural Network 

The Artificial Neural Network uses a large num-

ber of simple artificial neurons that mimics the 

biological neural network’s processing, transmit-

ted and learning process and abilities in order to 

implement the biological neural network’s in-

formation processing system. The architecture of 

a common 3-layered neural network is shown in 

the figure below: 

1



 
Figure 1. 3-layered neural network 

 

The Back-propagation Network used in this 

research is a supervised learning network. It uses 

the error that each epoch generated during train-

ing, and adjusts each neuron’s weight using a 

gradient descent to minimize training errors to 

adapt to the data of the training data set, and ap-

ply the unseen data to the trained network to per-

form a forecast. The correction method of Error 

is as follows: 






 















k

t t

ttk

kk
w

ww
1

1


         (1) 

In which ℇ is the sum of the accumulated er-
rors of each epoch, η is the learning rate, and in 

order to make the update of 𝑤 more gentle and 
avoid oscillation, that is why α (momentum) is 

quoted to accelerate convergence. 

Currently, many researchers has used the 

back-propagation method to train their network 

to perform forecasts; Ismail and Jamaluddin uses 

BPN to perform forecast to the electricity load 

demand, and the result showed that when Sig-

moid is used as the activation function, the fore-

cast data was closer to the actual data. Baboo and 

Shereef also used 3-layered back-propagation 

neural network to perform weather forecasts, and 

the result also showed that BPN has excellent 

generalization capacity. 

2.2 Social Network 

Although Facebook has been very popular as a 

web service, there has not been considerable 

published research on it. Huberman and others [2] 

studied the social interactions on Twitter to re-

veal that the driving process for usage is a sparse 

hidden network underlying the friends and fol-

lowers, while most of the links represent mean-

ingless interactions. Java et al [1] investigated 

community structure and isolated different types 

of user intentions on Twitter. Jansen and others  

have examined Twitter as a mechanism for 

word-of-mouth advertising, and considered ar-

ticular brands and products while examining the 

structure of the postings and the change in senti-

ments. However the authors do not perform any 

analysis on the predictive aspect of Twitter. 

3 Training Model 

The sources of the data used in this research are 

the number of posts, likes, comments and shares 

etc. of each post in the various program fan pag-

es, and the counts of these from the fan page ad-

ministrators and fans were calculated separately. 

The data from a total of 4 fan pages were used 

(Office Girls, Love Forward, The Fierce Wife, 

and King Flower, in which King Flower is a pro-

gram that is still currently airing); the ratings da-

ta of historic programs were provided by the tel-

evision companies.  

 This research mainly focuses on a TV drama 

that airs once a week, and collects the number of 

discussions on the fan page every week and the 

corresponding ratings for the episode aired each 

week to use as the training and test data; the data 

includes 10 properties: #Page Posts, #Page posts 

comments, #Page posts likes, #page posts shares, 

#Fans posts, #Fans posts comments, #Fans posts 

likes, #Fans posts shares, previous episode TVR, 

and 1st episode TVR. In which, the number of 

comments is the number of unrepeated response 

count for each post, used to lower the effects on 

the forecast results caused by vast responses due 

to special events. In order for the data to be able 

to be used by the Back-propagation Network 

back-propagation, all the data were normalized 

before training and testing so that they are be-

tween 0 and 1, and then the data were inputted to 

perform training or testing. In order to acquire 

the 1st episode TVR, forecast was not performed 

for the ratings of the first episode. 

 In consideration of the duration of the plot 

being discussed in to fan page, this research used 

a sliding window to integrate the data to create 

sums of data accumulated within 3 weeks and 1 

week to use as the input data.  

 D. Meyer & R. J. Hyndman’s recommenda-

tion was used for the percentage value of TVR, 

and Arcsine transformation was performed to 

prevent heteroscedasticity from happening.  

 The architecture of the neural network is as 

shown in the figure below: 

2



 
Figure 2. Training Model  

4 Experiments 

This research used the Cross Validation method 

to perform experiments. Four out of five pro-

grams were picked out every time to use as train-

ing data; 70% of the training data is used for 

training and 30% is used for testing. Finally, the 

fan page data from the last program was used to 

perform forecast for the ratings of every episode 

of the program, then use mean absolute error 

(MAE) and mean absolute percentage error 

(MAPE) to compare and evaluate the forecast 

model.  

For learning rate (η), momentum (α) and error 

tolerance (τ), it was discovered after the experi-

ment that when η=0.7,α=0.3 and  τ=0.06, the 

forecast performance was most ideal.  

The number of episodes and ratings of each 

program are shown in the table below: 

 
Drama Name #Episode Max TVR (%) Min TVR (%) 

Office Girls 25 7.33 2.78 

Love Forward 22 2.67 1.97 

The Fierce Wife 23 9.80 0.91 

King Flower 8 2.14 1.29 

Table 1. Episode of each program 

 

The forecast results of each program were 

measured with its Mean Absolute Error (MAE) 

and Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE); 

the results are shown as in the table below (the 

accumulation of one week is abbreviated as C1 

and the accumulation of three weeks is abbrevi-

ated as C3): 

 
Drama Name MAE (C1/C3) MAPE (C1/C3) 

Office Girls 0.2946 / 0.5115 5.73% / 10.47% 

Love Forward 0.1775 / 0.2042 7.59% / 8.99% 

The Fierce 

Wife 
0.4090 / 0.4861 11.37% / 23.71% 

King Flower 0.1969 / 0.1959 11.19% / 17.10% 

Table 2. Episode of each program 

 
MAPE(%) Evaluation 

MAPE ≤ 10% High Accuracy Forecasting 

10% ≤ MAPE ≤ 20% Good Forecasting 

20% ≤ MAPE ≤ 50% Reasonable Forecasting 

MAPE > 50% Inaccurate Forecasting 

Table 3. Lewis’ MAPE definition 

 

From the table above it can be seen that the 

performance of the value data of the accumula-

tion of one week is better than the accumulation 

of three weeks; and according to Lewis’ (1982) 

definition of the MAPE value, the performance 

of the value data of the accumulation of one 

week are all between the high accuracy forecast-

ing and good forecasting. This shows that using 

the various data from fan pages to perform future 

ratings forecasts is feasible. The forecast table of 

each program is shown in the figures below: 

 

 
Figure 3. Rating forecast of Office Girls 

 

 
Figure 4. Rating forecast of Love Forward 

3



 
Figure 5. Rating forecast of The Fierce Wife 

 

 
Figure 6. Rating forecast of King Flower 

 

From the various figures above and the perfor-

mance of the MAPE value, it can be seen that the 

results from using the Back-propagation Net-

work back-propagation to perform forecasting 

matches the actual ratings in most cases, in 

which performance was optimal when the accu-

mulated data of one week was used to perform 

the training and testing; only two sets fell be-

tween the good forecasting interval, and the rest 

all fell between the high accuracy forecasting 

interval. 

 

5 Discussion 

We also discovered some problems during the 

experiment process. For example, in episode 17 

of Office Girls, episode 2 of Love Forward and 

episode 4 of King Flower, the ratings were obvi-

ously overrated; in which Office Girls and King 

Flower were each affected by the premiere and 

finale of other programs from other television 

companies, therefore, viewership was divided. In 

the future, if television companies can take the 

initiative to provide the current status and special 

events (premiere and finale) of program broad-

cast from other television channels, this should 

be able to lower this type of error. As for Love 

Forward, the fan page administrators posted arti-

cles such as “If you like it, then press 

Like/Share”, resulting in the number of Likes 

and Shares to vastly increase and further cause 

the ratings to be overrated. Therefore, in the fu-

ture, keyword detection for the content of these 

types of articles is necessary to lower the effects 

caused by these large amounts of Likes and 

Shares. In addition, the ratings of episodes 21 

and 22 of Miss Rose suddenly dropped without 

facing premieres or finales of other programs or 

special events; therefore, in-depth probing for the 

various elements which affected their ratings is 

needed. 

6 Conclusion 

This research used the back-propagation Net-

work and the number of posts, likes, comments 

and shares on the fan pages of various TV dra-

mas to try to find their relationships to ratings. 

First of all, the various data information from the 

fan pages of 4 TV dramas were collected, and the 

number of repeated respondents in the same arti-

cle was filtered out in order to avoid large 

amount of increased responses due to special 

events (such as quizzes or Facebook Meeting 

Rooms etc.) from affecting the forecast of ratings. 

Because the discussion of plots will not centered 

in one day, the sliding window method was used 

to generate the experiment data sets, and were 

divided into two data sets: the accumulation of 

the previous week and the accumulation of the 

previous three weeks. Then the data were nor-

malized and the cross validation method was 

used to perform forecast module training and 

testing for every program. The result showed that 

using Facebook fan page data to perform ratings 

forecasts for unaired programs should be feasible. 

 

Acknowledgments 

This study is conducted under the "Social Intelli-

gence Analysis Service Platform" project of the 

Institute for Information Industry which is subsi-

dized by the Ministry of Economy Affairs of the 

Republic of China. 

References  

Akshay J., Xiaodan S., Tim F. and Belle T.. Why we 

twitter: understanding microblogging usage and 

communities. Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 

4



1st SNA-KDD 2007 workshop on Web mining and 

social network analysis, pages 56–65, 2007  

Bernardo A. Huberman, Daniel M. Romero, and Fang 

Wu. Social networks that matter: Twitter under the 

microscope. First Monday, 14(1), Jan 2009. 

B. Jansen, M. Zhang, K. Sobel, and A. Chowdury. 

Twitter power: Tweets as electronic word of mouth. 

Journal of the American Society for Information 

Science and Technology, 2009. 

Denny M. and Rob J. H.. The accuracy of television 

network rating forecasts: The effects of data aggre-

gation and alternative models, Model Assisted Sta-

tistics and Applications Vol. 1, No. 3, pp.147-155, 

2006. 

Lewis, C. D. Industrial and Business Forecasting 

Method. London: Butterworth Scientific Publishers. 

S. Santhosh B. and I.Kadar S.. An Efficient Weather 

Forecasting System using Artificial Neural Net-

work, International Journal of Environmental Sci-

ence and Development, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 321-326, 

2010. 

Zuhaimy I. and Faridatul A. J.. A Backpropagation 

Method for Forecasting Electricity Load Demand, 

Journal of Applied Sciences Vol. 8, No. 13, 

pp.2428-2434, 2008. 

 

5


