










































Morphological annotation of Old and Middle Hungarian corpora


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 43–48,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Morphological annotation of Old and Middle Hungarian corpora

Attila Novák1,2 György Orosz2 Nóra Wenszky2
1Research Institute for Linguistics, Hungarian Academy of Sciences

Benczúr u. 33., Budapest, Hungary
2MTA-PPKE Natural Language Research Group

Faculty of Information Technology, Pázmány Péter Catholic University
Práter u. 50/a, Budapest, Hungary

{novak.attila,oroszgy}@itk.ppke.hu, wenszkynora@gmail.com

Abstract

In our paper, we present a computational
morphology for Old and Middle Hungar-
ian used in two research projects that aim
at creating morphologically annotated cor-
pora of Old and Middle Hungarian. In ad-
dition, we present the web-based disam-
biguation tool used in the semi-automatic
disambiguation of the annotations and the
structured corpus query tool that has a
unique but very useful feature of making
corrections to the annotation in the query
results possible.

1 Introduction

One of the aims of two parallel OTKA projects of
the Research Institute for Linguistics of the Hun-
garian Academy of Sciences1 is to create mor-
phologically analyzed and searchable corpora of
texts from the Old Hungarian and Middle Hungar-
ian period. In the course of the projects, the Hu-
mor Hungarian morphological analyzer (Novák,
2003; Prószéky and Novák, 2005) was extended
to be capable of analyzing words containing mor-
phological constructions, suffix allomorphs, suf-
fix morphemes, paradigms or stems that were used
in Old and Middle Hungarian but no longer exist
in present-day Hungarian. In the sections below,
we describe how the morphological analyzer was
adapted to the task, the problems we encountered
and how they were solved. We also present the
automatic and the manual disambiguation system
used for the morphosyntactic annotation of texts
and the corpus manager with the help of which
the annotated corpora can be searched and main-
tained.

1Hungarian historical generative syntax [OTKA
NK78074], and Morphologically analysed corpus of Old and
Middle Hungarian texts representative of informal language
use [OTKA 81189]

2 Preprocessing

The overwhelming majority of extant texts from
the Old Hungarian period are codices, mainly con-
taining texts translated from Latin. The texts se-
lected for the Corpus of Informal Language Use,
however, are much closer to spoken language:
minutes taken at court trials, such as witch tri-
als, and letters sent by noblemen and serfs. In
the case of the latter corpus, metadata belonging to
the texts are also of primary importance, as these
make the corpus fit for historical-sociolinguistic
research.

2.1 Digitization
All the texts selected for our corpora were orig-
inally hand-written. However, the basis for the
digitized version was always a printed edition of
the texts published earlier. The printed texts were
scanned and converted to a character stream us-
ing OCR. This was not a trivial task, especially
in the case of Old Hungarian texts, owing to the
extensive use of unusual characters and diacrit-
ics. In the lack of an orthographic norm, each
text applied a different set of characters; moreover,
the printed publications used different fonts. Thus
the only way to get acceptable results was to re-
train the OCR program2 for each text from scratch
since the out-of-the-box Hungarian language and
glyph models of the software did not fit any of our
texts. Subsequently, all the automatically recog-
nized documents had to be manually checked and
corrected, but even so, this workflow proved to be
much faster than attempting to type in the texts.

2.2 Normalization
The next step of preprocessing was normalization,
i.e. making the texts uniform regarding their or-
thography and phonology. Normalization, which

2We used FineReader, which makes full customization of
glyph models possible, including the total exclusion of out-
of-the-box models.

43



was done manually, in our case meant modern-
ization to present-day orthography. Note that this
also implies differences in tokenization into indi-
vidual words between the original and the normal-
ized version. During this process, which also in-
cluded segmentation of the texts into clauses, cer-
tain phonological dialectal variations were neu-
tralized.

Morphological variation, however, was left un-
touched: no extinct morphemes were replaced by
their present day counterparts. We also retained
extinct allomorphs unless the variation was purely
phonological. In the case of potential irresolvable
ambiguity, the ambiguity was preserved as well,
even if it was due to the vagueness of the orthog-
raphy of the era.

An example of this is the non-consistent mark-
ing of vowel length. The definite and indefinite
3rd person singular imperfect of the frequently
used word mond ‘say’ was mondá ∼ monda re-
spectively, but accents are often missing from the
texts. Furthermore, in many texts in the corpus,
these two forms were used with a clearly differ-
ent distribution from their present day counterparts
mondta∼mondott. Therefore, in many cases, nei-
ther the orthography, nor the usage was consistent
enough to decide unambiguously how a certain ap-
pearance of monda should be annotated concern-
ing definiteness.

Another example of inherent ambiguity is a di-
alectal variant of possessive marking, which is
very frequent in these corpora and often neutral-
izes singular and plural possessed forms. For ex-
ample, cselekedetinek could both mean ‘of his/her
deed’ or ‘of his/her deeds’, which in many cases
cannot be disambiguated based on the context
even for human annotators. Such ambiguous cases
were annotated as inherently ambiguous regarding
number/definiteness etc.

2.3 Jakab’s databases

Some of the Old Hungarian codices (Jókai (Jakab,
2002), Guary (Jakab and Kiss, 1994), Apor (Jakab
and Kiss, 1997), and Festetics (Jakab and Kiss,
2001)) were not digitized using the OCR tech-
nique described above, as these were available in
the form of historical linguistic databases, created
by Jakab László and his colleagues between 1978
and 2002. However, the re-creation of the origi-
nal texts out of these lexical databases was a dif-
ficult task. The first problem was that, in the

databases, the locus of word token occurrences
only identified codex page, column and line num-
ber, but there was no information concerning the
order of words within a line. The databases also
contain morphological analyses, but they were en-
coded in a hard-to-read numerical format, which
occasionally was incorrect and often incomplete.
Furthermore, the categorization was in many re-
spects incompatible with our system. However, fi-
nally we managed to re-create the original texts.
First the order of words was manually restored
and incomplete and erroneous analyses were fixed.
Missing lemmas were added to the lexicon of the
adapted computational morphology, and the nor-
malized version of the texts was generated using
the morphology as a word form generator. Finally,
the normalized texts were reanalyzed to get analy-
ses compatible with the annotation scheme applied
to the other texts in the corpora.

3 The morphological analyzer

The digitized and normalized texts have been an-
alyzed with an extended version of the Humor
analyzer for Hungarian. The lexicon of lemmas
and the affix inventory of the program have been
augmented with items that have disappeared from
the language but are present in the historical cor-
pora. Just the affix inventory had to be supple-
mented with 50 new affixes (not counting their al-
lomorphs).

Certain affixes have not disappeared, but their
productivity has diminished compared to the Old
Hungarian era. Although words with these mor-
phemes are still present in the language, they are
generally lexicalized items, often with a changed
meaning. An example of such a suffix is –At,
which used to be a fully productive nomen actio-
nis suffix. Today, this function belongs to the suf-
fix –Ás. The (now lexicalized) words, however,
that end in –At mark the (tangible) result of an ac-
tion (i.e. nomen acti) in present-day standard Hun-
garian, as in falazat ‘wall’ vs. falazás ‘building a
wall’.

One factor that made adaptation of the morpho-
logical model difficult was that there are no reli-
able accounts on the changes of paradigms. Data
concerning which affix allomorphs could be at-
tached to which stem allomorphs had to be ex-
tracted from the texts themselves. Certain mor-
phological constructions that had already disap-
peared by the end of the Old Hungarian era were

44



rather rare (such as some participle forms) and of-
ten some items in these rare subparadigms have al-
ternative analyses. This made the formal descrip-
tion of these paradigms rather difficult.

However, the most time consuming task was the
enlargement of the stem inventory. Beside the ad-
dition of a number of new lemmas, the entries of
several items already listed in the lexicon of the
present-day analyzer had to be modified for our
purposes. The causes were various: some roots
now belong to another part of speech, or in some
constructions they had to be analyzed differently
from their present analysis.

Furthermore, the number of pronouns was con-
siderably higher in the examined period than
today. The description of their extensive and
rather irregular paradigms was really challenging
as some forms were underrepresented in the cor-
pora.

Some enhancements of the morphological an-
alyzer made during the corpus annotation projects
were also applicable to the morphological descrip-
tion of standard modern Hungarian. One such
modification was a new annotation scheme ap-
plied to time adverbials that are lexicalized suf-
fixed (or unsuffixed) forms of nouns, like reggel
‘morning/in the morning’ or nappal ‘daytime/in
daytime’, quite a few of which can be modified by
adjectives when used adverbially, such as fényes
nappal ‘in broad daylight’. This latter fact sheds
light on a double nature of these words that could
be captured in an annotation of these forms as spe-
cially suffixed forms of nouns instead of atomic
adverbs, an analysis that is compatible with X-bar
theory (Jackendoff, 1977).

4 Disambiguation

With the exception of already analyzed sources
(i.e. the ones recovered from the Jakab databases),
the morphological annotation had to be disam-
biguated. The ambiguity rate of the output of
the extended morphological analyzer on historical
texts is higher than that for the standard Humor
analyzer for present-day corpora (2.21 vs. 1.923

analyses/word with an identical (high) granularity
of analyses). This is due to several factors: (i) the
historical analyzer is less strict, (ii) there are sev-
eral formally identical members of the enlarged
verbal paradigms including massively ambiguous
subparadigms like that of the passive and the fac-

3measured on newswire text

titive,4 (iii) a lot of inherent ambiguities described
above.

The workflow for disambiguation of mor-
phosyntactic annotation was a semi-automatic
process: an automatically pre-disambiguated ver-
sion of each text was checked and corrected manu-
ally. For a very short time, we considered using the
Jakab databases as a training corpus, but recover-
ing them required so much development and man-
ual labor and the analyses in them lacked so much
distinction we wanted to make that we opted for
creating the training data completely from scratch
instead.

4.1 The manual disambiguation interface
To support the process of manual checking and
the initial manual disambiguation of the training
corpus a web-based interface was created using
JavaScript and Ajax where disambiguation and
normalization errors can be corrected very effec-
tively. The system presents the document to the
user using an interlinear annotation format that is
easy and natural to read. An alternative analysis
can be chosen from a pop-up menu containing a
list of analyses applicable to the word that appears
when the mouse cursor is placed over the problem-
atic word. Note that the list only contains gram-
matically relevant tags and lemmas for the word
returned by the morphological analyzer. This is
very important, since, due to the agglutinating na-
ture of Hungarian, there are thousands of possible
tags (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: The web-based disambiguation interface

The original and the normalized word forms as
well as the analyses can also be edited by clicking
them, and an immediate reanalysis by the morpho-
logical analyzer running on the web server can be
initiated by double clicking the word. We use Ajax
technology to update only the part of the page be-
longing to the given token, so the update is imme-
diate. Afterwards, a new analysis can be selected
from the updated pop-up menu.

4This ambiguity is absent from modern standard Hungar-
ian because the passive is not used any more.

45



As there is an inherent difference between the
original and normalized tokenization, and be-
cause, even after thorough proofreading of the nor-
malized version, there may remain tokenization
errors in the texts, it is important that tokens and
clauses can also be split and joined using the dis-
ambiguation interface.

The automatic annotation system was created in
a way that makes it possible that details of the
annotation scheme be modified in the course of
work. One such modification was e.g. the change
to the annotation of time adverbs mentioned in
Section 3 above. The modified annotation can
be applied to texts analyzed and disambiguated
prior to the modification relatively easily. This
is achieved by the fact that, in the course of re-
analysis, the program chooses the analysis most
similar to the previously selected analysis (based
on a letter trigram similarity measure). Neverthe-
less, the system highlights all tokens the reanaly-
sis of which resulted in a change of annotation, so
that these spots can be easily checked manually.
For changes in the annotation scheme where the
simple similarity-based heuristic could not be ex-
pected to yield an appropriate result (e.g. when
we decided to use a more detailed analysis of de-
rived verb forms as before), a more sophisticated
method was devised to update the annotations: old
analyses were replaced using automatically gener-
ated regular expressions.

4.2 Automatic disambiguation

While the first few documents were disambiguated
completely manually using the web-based tool,
we soon started to train and use a tagger for pre-
disambiguation applying the tagger incrementally,
trained on an increasing number of disambiguated
and checked text. First the HMM-based trigram
tagger HunPos (Halácsy et al., 2007) was used.
HunPos is not capable of lemmatization, but we
used a straightforward method to get a full anal-
ysis: we applied reanalysis to the text annotated
only by the tags assigned by HunPos using the
automatic similarity-based ranking of the analy-
ses. This approach yielded quite good results, but
one problem with it was that the similarity-based
ranking always prefers shorter lemmas, which was
not appropriate for handling the case of a fre-
quent lemma ambiguity for verbs with one of the
lemma candidates ending in an –ik suffix and the
other lacking a suffix (such as dolgozik ‘work’ vs.

(fel)dolgoz ‘process’). Always selecting the –ik-
less variant is not a good bet in the case of many
frequent words in this ambiguity class.

Recently, we replaced HunPos with another
HMM-based trigram tagger, PurePos (Orosz and
Novák, 2012), that has many nice extra features. It
can process morphologically analyzed ambiguous
input and/or use an integrated analyzer constrain-
ing possible analyses to those proposed by the an-
alyzer or read from the input. This boosts the pre-
cision of the tagger dramatically in the case of lan-
guages like Hungarian and small training corpora.
The fact that PurePos can be fed analyzed input
makes it easy to combine with constraint-based
tools that can further improve the accuracy of the
tagging by handling long distance agreement phe-
nomena not covered by the trigram model or sim-
ply removing impossible tag sequences from the
search space of the tool.

PurePos can perform lemmatization, even for
words unknown to the morphological analyzer
(and not annotated on the input) learning a suffix-
based lemmatization model from the training cor-
pus along with a similar suffix-based tag guessing
model, thus it assigns a full morphological anal-
ysis to each token. It is also capable of generat-
ing an n-best list of annotations for the input sen-
tence when using beam search instead of the de-
fault Viterbi decoding algorithm.

4.3 Disambiguation performance

We performed an evaluation of the accuracy of
PurePos on an 84000-word manually checked
part of the historical corpus using five-fold cross-
validation with a training corpus of about 67000
words and a test corpus of about 17000 words in
each round. The ratio of words unknown to the
MA in this corpus is rather low: 0.32%.

The average accuracy of tagging, lemmatiza-
tion and full annotation for different versions of
the tagger are shown in Table 1. In addition to
token accuracy, we also present sentence accu-
racy values in the table. Note that, in contrast to
the usual way of evaluating taggers, these values
were calculated excluding the always unambigu-
ous punctuation tokens from the evaluation. The
baseline tagger uses no morphological information
at all. Its current lemmatization implementation
uses suffix guessing in all cases (even for words
seen in the training corpus) and selects the most
frequent lemma, which is obviously not an ideal

46



solution.
The disambiguator using morphology performs

significantly better. Its clause-level accuracy is
81.50%, which means that only every fifth clause
contains a tagging error. The tag set we used in
the corpus differentiates constructions which are
not generally differentiated at the tag level in Hun-
garian corpora, e.g. deictic pronouns (ebben ‘in
this’) vs. deictic pre-determiners (ebben a házban
‘in this house’). Many of these can only be dis-
ambiguated using long-distance dependencies, i.e.
information often not available to the trigram tag-
ger. Combination of the tagger with a constraint-
based tool (see e.g. Hulden and Francom (2012))
would presumably improve accuracy significantly.

In the rightmost column, we listed a theoreti-
cal upper limit of the performance of the current
trigram tagger implementation using 5-best output
and an ideal oracle that can select the best annota-
tion.

baseline morph 5-best+o
token Tag 90.17% 96.44% 98.97%

Lem. 91.52% 98.19% 99.11%
Full 87.29% 95.90% 98.53%

clause Tag 62.48% 83.81% 93.99%
Full 54.68% 81.50% 91.47%

Table 1: Disambiguation performance of the tag-
ger

5 Searching the corpus

The web-based tool we created as a corpus query
interface does not only make it possible to search
for different grammatical constructions in the
texts, but it is also an effective correction tool. Er-
rors discovered in the annotation or the text ap-
pearing in the “results” box can immediately be
corrected and the corrected text and annotation
is recorded in the database. Naturally, this latter
functionality of the corpus manager is only avail-
able to expert users having the necessary privi-
leges.

A fast and effective way of correcting errors in
the annotation is to search for presumably incor-
rect structures and to correct the truly problematic
ones at once. The corrected corpus can be ex-
ported after this procedure and the tagger can be
retrained on it.

The database used for the corpus manager is
based on the Emdros corpus manager (Petersen,

2004). In addition to queries formulated using
MQL, the query language of Emdros, either typed
in at the query box or assembled using controls
of the query interface, advanced users can use
a custom-made corpus-specific query language
(MEQL), which makes a much more compact for-
mulation of queries possible than MQL. It is e.g.
extremely simple to locate a specific locus in the
corpus: one simply needs to type in the sequence
of words one is looking for. Queries formulated
in MEQL are automatically converted to MQL
queries by the query processor.

The search engine makes it possible to search
inside sentences, clauses, or texts containing
grammatical constructions and/or tagged with
metadata matching the criteria specified in the
query. Units longer than a sentence can also be
searched for. The context displayed by default for
each hit is the enclosing sentence with focus words
highlighted. Clauses may be non-continuous:
this is often the case for embedded subordinate
clauses, but the corpus also contains many injected
parenthetical coordinate clauses and many exam-
ples where the topic of a subordinate clause pre-
cedes its main clause with the net effect of the
subordinate clause being interrupted by the main
clause. The query example in Figure 2 shows a
sentence containing several clauses with gaps: the
clauses enclosed in angle brackets are wedged be-
tween the topic and comment part of the clauses
which they interrupt. Emdros is capable of repre-
senting these interrupted clauses as single linguis-
tic objects with the interrupting clause not being
considered part of the interrupted one.

6 Conclusion

In our paper, we described the most important
steps of the creation of a morphological annota-
tion framework for the analysis of Old and Mid-
dle Hungarian extant texts consisting of a mor-
phological analyzer, an automatic disambiguation
tool and an intuitive web-based manual disam-
biguation tool. Certain problems arising during
this process were discussed together with their so-
lution. We also presented our corpus manager,
which serves both as a structured corpus query tool
and as a correction tool.

The morphological analyzer is used for the an-
notation of the constantly growing Old and Mid-
dle Hungarian corpora. Part of these corpora are
already searchable by the public. The Old Hun-

47



Figure 2: The query interface

garian Corpus is available at http://rmk.nytud.hu,
while the analyzed part of the Historical Corpus
of Informal Language Use can be searched at
http://tmk.nytud.hu.

Acknowledgments

Research reported in this paper was supported by
the research project grants OTKA NK78074 and
OTKA 81189. In addition, we gratefully acknowl-
edge support by the grants TÁMOP-4.2.1./B-
11/2/KMR-2011-002 and TÁMOP-4.2.2./B-10/1-
2010-0014. We would also like to thank anony-
mous reviewers of the paper for their helpful com-
ments and suggestions.

References
Péter Halácsy, András Kornai, and Csaba Oravecz.

2007. HunPos: an open source trigram tagger. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL
on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
ACL ’07, pages 209–212, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Mans Hulden and Jerid Francom. 2012. Boost-
ing statistical tagger accuracy with simple rule-
based grammars. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Confer-
ence Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Mehmet Uğur Doğan, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mar-
iani, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), Is-
tanbul, Turkey. European Language Resources As-
sociation (ELRA).

Ray Jackendoff. 1977. X-bar-Syntax: A Study of
Phrase Structure. Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 2.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

László Jakab and Antal Kiss. 1994. A Guarÿ-kódex
ábécérendes adattára. Számı́tógépes nyelvtörténeti
adattár. Debreceni Egyetem, Debrecen.

László Jakab and Antal Kiss. 1997. Az Apor-kódex
ábécérendes adattára. Számı́tógépes nyelvtörténeti
adattár. Debreceni Egyetem, Debrecen.

László Jakab and Antal Kiss. 2001. A Festetics-kódex
ábécérendes adattára. Számı́tógépes nyelvtörténeti
adattár. Debreceni Egyetem, Debrecen.

László Jakab. 2002. A Jókai-kódex mint nyelvi
emlék: szótárszerü feldolgozásban. Számı́tógépes
Nyelvtörténeti Adattár. Debreceni Egyetem, Debre-
cen.

Attila Novák. 2003. Milyen a jó Humor? [What
is good Humor like?]. In I. Magyar Számı́tógépes
Nyelvészeti Konferencia, pages 138–144, Szeged.
SZTE.

György Orosz and Attila Novák. 2012. PurePos – an
open source morphological disambiguator. In Pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Nat-
ural Language Processing and Cognitive Science.,
Wroclaw, Poland.

Ulrik Petersen. 2004. Emdros — a text database en-
gine for analyzed or annotated text. In In: Proceed-
ings of COLING 2004. (2004) 1190–1193.

Gábor Prószéky and Balázs Kis. 1999. A unification-
based approach to morpho-syntactic parsing of ag-
glutinative and other (highly) inflectional languages.
In Proceedings of the 37th annual meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics on Com-
putational Linguistics, ACL ’99, pages 261–268,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Gábor Prószéky and Attila Novák. 2005. Compu-
tational Morphologies for Small Uralic Languages.
In Inquiries into Words, Constraints and Contexts.,
pages 150–157, Stanford, California.

48


