








































Informativeness Constraints and Compositionality

Olga Batiukova
Spanish Philology Department

Autonomous University of Madrid
Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain

volha.batsiukova@domain

James Pustejovsky
Computer Science Departament

Brandeis University
Waltham, Massachusetts, USA
jamesp@cs.brandeis.edu

Abstract
In this paper we examine the role that
compositional mechanisms and lexical se-
mantics play in the determination of in-
formativeness at the phrasal and clausal
level. While the computation of the “rel-
evance” of an utterance is largely de-
termined by pragmatic factors (such as
quantity), we argue that phrasal infor-
mativeness can, in many cases, be com-
puted compositionally and independently
of pragmatics. To illustrate this, we focus
on the well-documented contrast between
predicative and derived participial modi-
ficational constructions in English (build
a house results in well-formed sentences,
while *a built house does not). In our anal-
ysis, informativeness within an NP is com-
puted in terms of minimal model genera-
tion (Blackburn and Bos, 2008), using the
semantics associated with the qualia of the
head noun; that is, modification is infor-
mative whenever a qualia value is not sat-
isfied in all models.

1 Introduction
This paper studies the contrast in acceptability of
certain past participle-noun (PP-N) modification
constructions and their corresponding verb-noun
predicates (V-N), as illustrated in (1):

(1) a. buy a ticket vs. *a bought ticket
b. eat a sandwich vs. *an eaten sandwich
c. feel sympathy vs. *a felt sympathy
d. give an answer vs. *a given answer
e. hear a noise vs. *a heard noise
f. make a mistake vs. *a made mistake
g. play the piano vs. *a played piano
h. read the newspaper vs. *a read newspaper
i. win the prize vs. *a won prize
j. write a book vs. *a written book
k. see the movie vs. *a seen movie

This is surprising, given the semantic similarity
between verb argument selection and the corre-
sponding modification operation. For example,
both elements in the pairs below are well-formed.

(2) a. paint a house vs. a painted house

b. spill the milk vs. the spilled milk
c. poison the food vs. poisoned food

The question immediately arises as to why such
a distinction in grammaticality should exist, as
well as what the constraints affecting the well-
formedness of these constructions might be. This
topic has been approached from two different
perspectives in the literature, which we review
briefly before presenting our proposal: (a) an
aspect-based approach; and (b) a pragmatically-
determined informativeness approach.

According to the aspect-based approach (argued
for in Bresnan (1995), Langacker (1991), Valin
(1990), Embick (2004)), a PP-N construction is
grammatical if the participle denotes the resultant
state of the verb from which it is derived. How-
ever, most unacceptable combinations in (1) meet
this requirement: they are either achievements
(given answer, made mistake) or accomplishments
(bought ticket, eaten sandwich, written book).

Grimshaw and Vikner (1993) introduce an ad-
ditional requirement in their study of obligatory
adjuncts in passives: each of the subevents of the
event structure of the verb has to be identified by
an argument. The only overt argument of PP-N
constructions is usually the theme, which is in-
volved in both subevents if the event is complex
(e.g., the ruined shirt is an accomplishment com-
posed of a process and a resultant state, both of
which are related to shirt). Creation predicates are
one exception, because the theme is related to the
resultant state only (the object does not exist until
the event is completed). This is why a second ele-
ment, an adjunct, is needed to identify the process
subevent, e.g., an expertly written book.

Under this assumption, in the rest of the ex-
amples in (1) one argument should be enough
to guarantee the acceptability of the construction,
which is obviously not what we get.1 Grimshaw

1See Jung (1997) and Ackerman and Goldberg (1996) for
a detailed criticism of aspect-based approaches.



and Vikner (1993) do mention an alternative ap-
proach to this issue in the conclusion of their study,
where they suggest that the obligatory adjunct
phenomenon is a matter of satisfying the require-
ment that one ‘say something’.2 This ‘say some-
thing’ requirement has been interpreted in Jung
(1997) as a general pragmatic condition on pre-
supposition and assertion in passives: “The predi-
cate must assert more than what is presupposed by
the subject”. As definite NP subjects bear an ex-
istential presupposition, the reference to their cre-
ation violates the Say Something Condition. Any
adjunct providing new information will qualify as
compulsory in this situation. Compare the exam-
ples in (3):

(3) a. A house was built / * This house was built / This
house was built to our specification.

b. A picture was taken / * This picture was taken /
This picture was taken to my liking.

Following similar assumptions, the account by
Ackerman and Goldberg (1996) is also pragmati-
cally motivated. It is based on the Gricean maxim
of Quantity (‘make your contribution as infor-
mative as required for the current purposes of
exchange; do not make your contribution more
informative than is required’) and Horn’s R-
principle (‘make your contribution necessary; say
no more than you must’) (Levinson (2000) and
Horn (1996)). They claim that “adjectival past
participles (APP) can only occur if they are con-
struable as predicating an informative state of the
head noun referent”. This claim is based on two
constraints:

1. Non-redundancy constraint: If the referent of the
head noun, N, implies a property P as part of its frame-
semantic or encyclopedic knowledge, then the APP is
not allowed to simply designate P; it must be further
qualified.

2. Paradigmatic Informativeness constraint: An APP
phrase is not felicitous if it is based on a superordinate
level verb which contrasts with semantically more spe-
cific predicates (troponyms).

The non-redundancy constraint clearly accounts
for cases in (1): all the newspapers are meant to
be read, sympathy only arises when it is felt some-
how, and so on. The addition of an adverb (4),
an adjectival or nominal modifier ((5) and (6)),
as well as certain morphological elements (deriva-
tional affixes, as in (7)) makes the property de-
noted by the participle more specific and renders
the whole construction informative:

(4) a. *bought ticket vs. {recently / illegally / their al-
ready / the most} bought ticket

b. *eaten sandwich vs. {quickly / half / partially}
eaten sandwich

2D. Pesetsky, p.c.

c. *felt sympathy vs. {suddenly / heart / deep / in-
stantly} felt sympathy

d. *given answer vs. {previously / frequently / com-
monly / the above} given answer

e. *heard noise vs. {barely / abnormally / repeat-
edly} heard noise

f. *made mistake vs. {stupidly / easily / often /
widely} made mistake

g. *played piano vs. {beautifully / passionately /
badly / gently} played piano

h. *read newspaper vs. {carefully / widely / the
most} read newspaper

i. *won prize vs. {easily / rightly / fraudulently}
won prize

j. *written book vs. {well / poorly / engangingly /
intelligently / newly / vividly} written book

k. *seen movie vs. {last / little / never before /
rarely} seen movie

(5) a. *manufactured aircraft vs. {contemporary /
American} manufactured aircraft

b. *published books vs. {recent / foreign} published
books

(6) a. ??trained people vs. science-trained people
b. *shaped fish vs. angle-shaped fish

(7) ??arranged rendezvous vs. pre-arranged rendezvous
The Paradigmatic Informativeness constraint is

designed to explain the cases in (8), where a verb
denoting a particular manner of performing the ac-
tion is preferred to the less specific superordinate
verb:

(8) a. *cut meat vs. sliced / chopped meat
b. *told secret vs. disclosed / confessed secret
c. *given funds vs. donated / sacrificed funds

Note, however, that some of these examples are
odd even if we add adverbial modifiers:

(9) a. ?quickly told secret
b. ?recently given funds
c. ?secretly taken shirt

While both constraints proposed in Ackerman
and Goldberg (1996) seem to be on the right track,
the notions they are based on (frame-semantic and
encyclopedic knowledge) are left rather vague.
Many things can be ascribable to encyclopedic
knowledge. As for frame-semantic content, this
can extend to an unrestricted repertoire of spe-
cific semantic and situational parameters (roles
and otherwise). This vagueness and unrestrict-
edness makes it difficult to formalize both con-
straints and how to apply them .

In a move to remedy this vagueness, Goldberg
and Ackerman (2001) propose a more general re-
quirement for modification and predication con-
structions: they must be informative in the con-
versational context. One way the utterance can be
informative is by containing a focus (provided by
negation, modality, tense, aspect, adjunct, indef-
inite subject, etc.) that conveys something non-
presupposed.

(10) a. The house was built.
b. The house was not built. NEGATION
c. The house {should/might} be built. MODALITY



d. The house {will be / has been} built.
TENSE/ASPECT

e. The house was built {last year}. ADJUNCT
f. A house has been built. INDEFINITE

As the adjectives and participles in modification
constructions have less linguistic information as-
sociated with them than verbs (there is neither
tense nor modality, and the array of aspectual in-
terpretations is very limited), it is more difficult to
provide a focus for a successful assertion (relative
acceptability is indicated by ′ >′):

(11) a. #This house was built. > #a built house
b. #That book was read. > #the read book
c. #The television progam was watched. > #the

watched program
While we acknowledge that much of the “infor-

mativeness” of lexical choice in an utterance can
be determined only after most contextual variables
are already fixed, we argue that there are composi-
tional aspects to the calculation of informativeness
that have not been adequately appreciated.

In the remainder of the paper, we show that a
significant part of what is called “informativeness”
can be accounted for compositionally. Follow-
ing Konrad (2004) and Blackburn and Bos (2008),
we utilize minimal model generation as part of
the compositional computation, where we assume
that a linguistic expression should be consistent
within a discourse and informative relative to what
is known. In model-theoretic terms, consistent
means ‘satisfied in at least some models or situ-
ations’ (cf. the formal definition in the next sec-
tion). Within the compositional construction of
an utterance itself, we can compute consistency as
type satisfaction (Pustejovsky, 2013), as assumed
within typed functional languages. An expression
is informative on the other hand, if it is ‘not satis-
fied in all models and with all assignments’. Our
treatment of informativeness is based on the se-
mantics provided by the qualia, a structured rep-
resentation of the meaning parameters encoded by
lexical items (Pustejovsky, 1995): that is, when-
ever a qualia value is not attested in all possible sit-
uations involving a given expression (i.e. not sat-
isfied in all models), the expression will be judged
informative. We outline the basic ideas behind this
approach in the section below.

2 General Hypothesis and Predictions
Our starting assumption relates to the definition
of semantic predication and argument selection.
We believe that the contrast in acceptability be-
tween predication and modification constructions
involving the same elements (cf. the examples in
(1)) can be better accounted for if we assume that

both constructions are instances of semantic pred-
ication. The main difference is that in a V-N con-
struction the verb is the predicate projecting the
argument structure, imposing selectional require-
ments on its arguments, while in a modification
construction the noun is the head, yet it projects
its argument structure as well. A brief motivation
of this step is in order.

Verbs and deverbal nominals are traditionally
considered as prototypical relational items bearing
the predicative force: they select for certain kinds
of elements (arguments) compatible with them,
which complete and specify their meaning. Chom-
sky (1993), Goldberg (1998), Dowty (1979), Croft
(2005), among others, assume a verb-centered bias
toward how arguments are identified in the phrase
and sentence, be they verbs or relational nouns.

As is well known, the Generative Lexicon fo-
cuses to open up the channel of relation identifi-
cation and argument selection through the intro-
duction of non-verb based argument associations,
i.e., the Qualia Structure roles associated with the
nouns constituting arguments and adjuncts in the
sentence. The four parameters encoded in the
Qualia Structure are AGENTIVE (factors involved
in the origin or creation of entities and events,
such as build for house), CONSTITUTIVE (inter-
nal constituency of the whole, such as constituent
parts of material entities), FORMAL (the distinc-
tive features of entities, such as spatial orienta-
tion, size, shape, dimensionality, color, etc., and
the taxonomic relations, e.g., a house is a build-
ing), and TELIC (purpose and function of entities
and events, such as reading for book).

The Qualia Structure can be regarded as sim-
ilar in many respects to the Argument Structure
for verbs. In a fashion similar to Argument Struc-
ture realization, the Qualia roles do not need to be
expressed overtly in order to be accessible for in-
terpretation. Just as the verb eat presupposes that
its direct object denote a kind of food even when
not overtly expressed, nouns may encode “hidden”
relations along with unexpressed arguments; e.g.,
the relation of inalienable possession denoted by
the noun hand, as being a part of a body, to men-
tion just one of the syntactically relevant semantic
relationships. Artifactual nominals, in addition,
refer to the event which brought them about and
to the activity they are meant for: e.g., house pre-
supposes a creation event, as well as a functional
value associated with its purpose.



As we anticipated at the end of the previous sec-
tion, qualia are crucially involved in the composi-
tional calculation of consistency and informative-
ness of linguistic expressions. A consistent utter-
ance describes a realizable situation, that is, repre-
sentable as a first-order formula satified in at least
some models. All the arguments must be consis-
tent with the predicate, in the sense of “seman-
tically compatible” (e.g., male is consistent with
the semantics of the noun bachelor, while mar-
ried is not). This applies to both arguments (in the
strict sense of the term) and adjuncts. Inconsis-
tent combinations should not be present in natural
data. Informative utterances are a subset of con-
sistent utterances, whose denotation is ruled out in
at least some situations. Hence, while both male
and funny are consistent with bachelor, only funny
bachelor is an informative phrase, since not all
bachelors are funny.

In typed functional languages, consistency is
defined as type satisfaction: the argument must
have the type required by the predicate or func-
tion. In GL, four predicative compositional mech-
anisms have been identified: type matching or
pure selection, accommodation, coercion by intro-
duction and coercion by exploitation (Pustejovsky,
2011; Asher and Pustejovsky, 2013). Type match-
ing takes place when the type required by the verb
is directly satisfied by the argument (e.g. read a
book: book is phys • info and read is phys •
info → (e → t)).3 Accommodation allows com-
bining a predicate with an argument whose hyper-
nym satisfies its selectional requirements through
type inheritance (e.g. the beer spoiled: spoil is
phys⊗T τ →t, and it can be combined with beer:
liquid ⊗T drink, because liquid ⊆ phys and
drink ⊆ τ ). Coercion mechanisms are activated
when the type a function requires is imposed on
the argument type. In these cases, the qualia act
as type shifting operators, allowing an expression
to satisfy new typing environments through intro-
duction or exploitation. In enjoy a coffee, for ex-
ample, both mechanisms are consecutively acti-
vated: enjoy needs a direct object typed as event,
and coffee must first be wrapped with the type
event through introduction (coffee:event), and af-

3The following notation is used in this paragraph: τ and
T refer to the telic role, and • (the dot) and ⊗ (the tensor)
are type constructors. The dot builds the dot objects, such
as book above, and the tensor introduces agentive and telic
information to the head type to derive artifactual types, e.g.
beer.

terwards the value in the telic role of coffee is ex-
ploited to turn it into coffee:drink event.

To make our computation of consistency and in-
formativeness more explicit, we adopt a strategy
of model generation (Blackburn and Bos, 2008;
Konrad, 2004).4 The consistency of an expres-
sion, λx[F (x)](A), after function application of
F over A, can be checked by determining whether
the set of first-order formulas resulting from the
application are satisfiable (i.e., there is a modelM
corresponding to this set). The informativeness of
a function application can be similarly defined: a
function application, λx[F (x)](A), is informative
if and only if the set of first-order formulas result-
ing from the application is not satisfied in all mod-
els,Mi.

We are now in position to take a closer look
at the informative contribution of consistent ar-
guments to the semantics of the resulting expres-
sion. Clearly, non-required arguments (adjuncts)
are always informative, since they contribute ad-
ditional information not deducible from the predi-
cate meaning. Required arguments are a necessary
part of the logical form of the predicate, but they
may be left unexpressed in syntax for different rea-
sons, due to anaphoric binding for example. Here
we are interested in required arguments whose se-
mantic content is incorporated in the predicate, i.e.
the default arguments of the classical GL (Puste-
jovsky, 1995). These arguments can only appear
when their denotation is informative with respect
to the head, i.e., when there is a model and assign-
ment where the resulting expression is not true.
When uninformative, they are left unexpressed or
shadowed by the predicate.

Shadowed arguments are assigned a very gen-
eral interpretation, which has the same level of
specificity of the semantic type imposed by the
predicate. For instance, the default argument of
eat is interpreted out of context as ‘something
eadible’ (indefinite and non-specific) rather than a
specific kind of food, and the default way of com-
ing into being of a sheep is to be born rather than
cloned.

The asymmetry in informativeness-determined
acceptability of V-N predicative constructions and
PP-N modification constructions emerges when
the nominal argument is required by the verb and
is informative with respect to it, but the verb (its

4We discuss the details of the mechanism elsewhere,
Pustejovsky and Batiukova (forthcoming).



participial form) is a default argument of the noun,
and it fails to be informative: eat a sandwich is in-
formative because many other things can be eaten
(i.e., sandwich is more specific than the type se-
lected by eat, which is FOOD). At the same time,
eaten sandwich is uninformative because all the
sandwiches are meant to be eaten: eat is the de-
fault argument (or default telic, in terms of qualia)
of sandwich, it is uninformative with respect to the
nominal head and therefore must be shadowed.

Even though the semantic mechanisms under-
lying predication and modification are different,
we suggest that the same compositional principles
are at play as far as consistency and informative-
ness of the argument with respect to the syntactic
head is concerned. Predication is typically viewed
as function application, whereby the predicate is
applied to an argument in order to obtain a truth
value. In the classical GL, modifying adjectives
have been analyzed as typed functions applied to a
particular quale of the head noun by means of se-
lective binding or subselection. For example, good
targets specifically the event description encoded
in the telic role, and long can refer to one of the
dimensions of a physical object or to the duration
of the event referred to in one of the qualia of the
head noun:

(12) a. good teacher: a teacher who teaches well; a good
knife: a knife that cuts well

b. long shadow: a shadow having greater extension
than usual; long vowel: a vowel whose pronounci-
ation has a certain duration

Modifications introduced in recent versions of
the theory suggest that the selectional mechanisms
involved in verbal constructions can be applied to
adjectival modification as well. In both kinds of
constructions, type adjustment is guided by the
Head Typing Principle, according to which the
typing of the head must be preserved in any com-
position rule (Asher and Pustejovsky, 2013).

In both modification and predication construc-
tions, the argument must be informative with re-
spect to the syntactic head, hence the degree of
informativeness of the construction is crucially de-
termined by the mechanism involved in the combi-
nation of both elements: type matching gives rise
to expressions with a very low degree of informa-
tiveness (which can even be zero or nonexistent),
since the semantics of the argument is largely in-
cluded in the meaning of the predicate. The com-
positional mechanisms of accommodation and in-
troduction are always informative, the former less
than the latter, since the argument is basically a

subtyped version of the required type. As far as
coercion is concerned, introduction is always in-
formative, since the argument is wrapped with a
new type, not entailed by argument’s semantics.
Note that exploitation is never inherently informa-
tive, since the semantic content is entailed by the
argument’s semantics.

From what has been said in this section, we
can make the following generalizations and pre-
dictions, which will be tested in the following sec-
tions:

- The degree of informativeness of the PP-N combina-
tions must be determined compositionally: the same
modifier can be redundant or informative depending on
the semantics of the head noun.

- Acceptable PP-N combinations cannot refer to the de-
fault qualia values of the head noun, such as physical
parameters or internal constituency of the denoted en-
tity. In addition, artifact-denoting nouns should not be
compatible with modifiers referring to default function
or origin.

- Whenever a priori uninformative PP-N combinations
appear in natural data, this is due to the intervention
of one of the rescue mechanisms: (1) the default in-
formative mechanism is the contrastive reading, which
presupposes a binary partition of the set of discourse el-
ements (e.g. a BUILT house as opposed to non-existent
or partially built houses)5 and (2) the presence of an
additional modifier attached to the construction, as in
(4).

3 Source of data
The data analyzed in this study were extracted
from the enTenTen12 corpus (using Word Sketch,
cf. Kilgarriff et al. (2004)) and supplemented by
introspective data. The search queries were de-
fined for past participles followed by a noun. Two
types of sequences were filtered out in the initial
and the final position, respectively: the auxiliary
have, to discard the present perfect forms, and
postponed nouns, which give rise to compounds
(as in associated e-mail address). Two types of
forms were obtained this way: adjectival and par-
ticipial deverbal -ed forms (e.g., baked, broken,
employed, seen, etc.), and denominal adjectival
forms ending in -ed, which will be referred to
as pseudo-participles: winged (as in winged air-
craft), sanded (as in sanded dust), etc. The de-
cision of including deverbal adjectives along with
true participles was motivated by the fact that the

5A reviewer points out that the possibility of contrastive
interpretation for uninformative constructions indicates that
pragmatics ultimately determines whether an expression is
informative or not. We believe that this is not the case, since
lexical semantics and pragmatics operate on different levels:
pragmatics can not explain why certain word combinations
(e.g. eated sandwich) are uninformative, because it has no
access to the internal structure of words, but it can make them
acceptable in context by expanding the universe of discourse
(e.g. by including the non-consumed sandwiches therein).



limit between these two categories is not clearly
defined in many cases. As a matter of fact, the
same item in a similar distribution was classifed in
enTenTen12 as a past participle in some instances
and as an adjective in others (cf. illustrated, dam-
aged, introduced, etc.). We also included the de-
nominal derivatives, since the exact categorial na-
ture of the prenominal modifier is not crucial for
us. The main goal is to identify the constraints
on informativeness operating in modification con-
structions.

In this study we compare nouns differing with
respect to two sets of features, natural / artifac-
tual and count / mass: water, dust, sand (natural,
mass), wine (artifact, mass), tree (natural, count),
aircraft (artifact, count). A total of 3350 PP-N
pairs were extracted for tree, 777 for sand, 1241
for dust, 9350 for water, 3098 for aircraft and
7743 for wine. The annotation of the extracted
pairs involved judging the grammaticality of the
PP-N constructions without additional modifiers
(of the kind illustrated in (4)-(7)), annotating the
PP modifiers as default and non-default, and iden-
tifying the qualia roles they bind. For space rea-
sons, only a small sample of all the attested PP-N
combinations is explicitly referred to in what fol-
lows. We are particularly interested in the behav-
ior of the PPs that bind one of the qualia roles,
in order to test the hypothesis of qualia informa-
tiveness as formulated above: the modifier can not
refer to the default qualia values of the head unless
subtyped or given a contrastive reading.

4 Qualia Informativeness: Formal and
Constitutive

All the nouns in our sample are compatible with
PPs referring to the distinguishing physical prop-
erties of the denoted entities, whenever these prop-
erties are not default. Colored and shaped refer to
a default attribute of most physical objects, there-
fore they need to be subtyped to be informative:

(13) a. *(deeply / garnet / beautifully) colored wine
b. *(naturally / white, brightly) colored sand
c. *(red / mud / orange / non-) colored dust
d. *(green / brightly / unusually) colored tree
e. *(white / vibrantly / oddly) colored aircraft
f. *(nicely / strangely / beautifully) shaped tree

If there is no modifier, colored is interpreted as
‘artificially or unusually colored’ for natural enti-
ties (sand, dust, and tree). This is the only pos-
sible interpretation of colored water, too, but for
a different reason: water lacks the color attribute,
therefore it is always informative.

(14) a. For this you may need colored sand
b. small quantities of what looks like colored dust

c. consider buying a colored tree and decorating it
with dazzling lights

d. Allow each egg to stay in the colored water for
increasingly more time

The same can be said about PPs referring to the
internal constituency of both naturals and artifac-
tuals: default constitutive attributes are shadowed
unless subtyped:

(15) a. *(suitably / properly / similarly / specially / ADS-
B) equipped aircraft

b. *(wide / narrow) bodied aircraft
c. *(full / light / heavy) bodied wine 6

d. *(large / goof / coarse) grained sand
e. *(un- / well / strongly / firmly) rooted tree
f. *(thickly / fully / sparsely /low) branched tree

The default argument can only appear unmod-
ified if it yields a contrastive interpretation. The
following example, for instance, can only be inter-
preted as ‘branched tree as opposed to trees with-
out branches’:

(16) in the shape of a branched tree

Combinations with non-default constitutives are
informative, hence acceptable: not all aircrafts
have wings (e.g. the helicopters do not) and not
trees have leafs (e.g. coniferous trees do not).

(17) a. winged aircraft
b. leafed tree

5 Qualia Informativeness: Agentive
Markedness for origin and function is a prominent
part of the lexical semantics of artifactuals as op-
posed to natural types: artifacts are entities created
with a specific purpose or as a result of a purpose-
driven activity. The default agentive value en-
coded in the lexical entry of artifactual nominals
must be further specified in order to yield an in-
formative construction:

(18) a. *(poorly / locally / well / excellently / sustainably
/ your own) made wine7

b. *(mass / commercialy / exclusively / locally) pro-
duced wine

c. *(Soviet / commercially) made aircraft
d. *(newly / technically /recently / fully) developed

aircraft
e. *(commercially / domestically) produced aircraft

The same holds for metonymic interpretations,
as in (19): strictly speaking, wine does not grow,
but the grapes do (i.e., grown does not bind the
agentive of wine directly, but through consecutive
applications of exploitation of the agentive: wine
is made of grapes or grape juice, which in turn
come into existence by the process of growing).

(19) *(locally / organically) grown wine

6When applied to wine, bodied does not refer to its inter-
nal structure or ingredients. Rather, it describes the taste.

7Made wine can refer to a specific kind of alcoholic bev-
erage, different from wine.



When the participle describes a specific, non-
default way of creating the artifact, the combina-
tion is informative:

(20) Grahm defines this as a crafted wine.
Unlike artifacts, natural kinds are underspeci-

fied for origin. However, it can be referred to ex-
plicitly with the same restrictions as for artifacts.

(21) a. air-born dust
b. melted water
c. *(farm / seed / field / container) grown tree 8

When naturally-occurring entities are produced
artificially, the reference to origin becomes infor-
mative (by the mechanism of introduction, which
always generates informative combinations, as ar-
gued in section 2):

(22) a. {manufactured / produced} sand
b. produced water
c. {ready / badly} made tree
d. {created / planted} tree

6 Qualia Informativeness: Telic
Following our hypothesis stated above, the activ-
ity associated with the telic quale of an object,
when used in the PP-N construction, should be
(modally) uninformative relative to the head.

(23) a. *(locally) eaten meat
b. *(rarely) driven car
c. *(seldom) watched film

We can account for this by constructing a mini-
mal modal model, capturing the modal subordina-
tion inherent in the Telic value. Minimal model
construction can reflect the modal subordination
inherent in the telic role, following Blackburn
and Bos (2008).9 Informally, this says that the
bare participial modifiers in (23) are uninforma-
tive, relative to the minimal modal models gener-
ated from the telic values for each of the respective
head nouns. According to this analysis, artifact-
denoting nouns in general should not be compat-
ible with default telic arguments. Again, the pre-
diction seems to be borne out, as seen in (24).

(24) a. *(commonly / widely / most often) drunk wine
b. *(remotely / carelessly / frequently / previously)

flown aircraft
Natural kinds are underspecified for function

(the telic role). However, they can be routinely
recategorized to refer to some kind of convention-
alized use, as seen in drinking water, eadible fruit,
etc. These combinations are possible due to qualia
introduction, and hence their informativeness. In
(25), used water and used sand are interpreted as
‘used before for human activity, not clean’. Used
tree, in turn, refers to the Christmas tree when
there is no modifier:

8This example is acceptable without modifier if grown
refers to the size of the tree rather than to its origin.

9See Pustejovsky and Batiukova (forthcoming) for more
details.

(25) a. The used water is fed back into the source for re-
heating.

b. There is potential for used sand to contain toxic or
harmful ingredients.

c. Make it a resolution this new year to keep your
used tree out of a landfill.

Our hypothesis predicts an inverse relationship
between the degree of lexical-semantic specificity
of different groups of nominals and the range of
modifiers they are compatible with: since the arti-
factual types have more lexical-semantic informa-
tion associated with them than the naturals, they
are expected to reject a greater number of modi-
fiers due to the informativeness constraint. This
prediction can be tested statistically by calculating
what percentage of PP-N combinations require an
additional modifier in order to be informative. Al-
though a much larger data sample is needed to get
reliable results, we can say that this prediction is
borne out for the six nominals examined here. The
percentage of PP-N pairs with an additional mod-
ifier is higher when the head is an artifactual type:
tree-31.43%, sand-31.02%, dust-22.08%, water-
19.05%, aircraft-44.19%, wine-34.94%.
7 Conventionalized Attributes
A significant portion of what we know about
events and their associated participants is not en-
coded linguistically (i.e., it does not affect the syn-
tactic behavior of lexical items) and is not directly
encoded in the lexical structures (the argument
structure, the event structure or the qualia struc-
ture). Some aspects of such information, however,
may be prominent both cognitively and statisti-
cally. This is what is called conventionalized at-
tributes in Pustejovsky and Jezek (2008) or Gen-
eralized Event Knowledge in a recent trend in psy-
cholinguistics (McRae and Matsuki, 2009). Here
are some examples:

(26) a. *(moderately) priced wine
b. *(high / top) rated wine
c. *(full / heavy / light) bodied wine
d. *(strategically / conveniently) placed tree
e. *(well / professionally / badly) maintained aircraft

These attributes seem to behave similarly to true
arguments: whenever a conventionalized attribute
is entailed by the semantics of the head noun, it
must be shadowed unless subtyped.
8 Data Summary
The following tables summarize the cases dis-
cussed in sections 4-6, with some additional
corpus examples added for illustrative purposes.
Even though only a small sample of all the ana-
lyzed data is reflected here, the validity of the over-
all predicted pattern has been confirmed in a thor-
ough manual data analysis: default modifiers can



only appear without an adjunct when the sentence
has a contrastive reading or as a consequence of
coercion by introduction.

The following types of modifiers are included in
the second column for all the qualia roles (‘F/C’
means ‘formal/constitutive’, ‘A’ ‘agentive’, and
‘T’ ‘telic’): modified defaults, unmodified defaults
with a contastive or coerced interpretation, and
non-default subtyped modifiers.
Qualia PP Modifier Examples

F/C
Modified default colored, shaped, rooted,

branched, formed, headed,
crowned

Contr./C-E default colored, branched, curved
Subtyped leafed, unrooted

A
Modified default
Contr./C-E default grown, made, created, planted,

cultivated, cloned
Subtyped

T
Modified default
Contr./C-E default used, harvested
Subtyped

Table 1: Tree
Qualia PP Modifier Examples

F/C
Modified default colored, grained
Contr./C-E default colored
Subtyped bleached

A
Modified default
Contr./C-E default manufactured, produced, exca-

vated, eroded, obtained
Subtyped

T
Modified default
Contr./C-E default used
Subtyped

Table 2: Sand
Qualia PP Modifier Examples

F/C
Modified default colored
Contr./C-E default colored
Subtyped embedded, sanded, tinged, pet-

rified

A
Modified default
Contr./C-E default generated, manufactured
Subtyped air-born

T
Modified default
Contr./C-E default
Subtyped

Table 3: Dust
Qualia PP Modifier Examples

F/C
Modified default
Contr./C-E default colored, scented, flavored, at-

omized, crystallized
Subtyped

A
Modified default
Contr./C-E default produced, harvested, extracted
Subtyped melted

T
Modified default
Contr./C-E default used, utilized, ingested
Subtyped

Table 4: Water
9 Conclusion
The goal of this paper has been to prove that the
notion of informativeness (traditionally ascribed

Qualia PP Modifier Examples

F/C
Modified default colored, equipped, bodied,

shaped
Contr./C-E default
Subtyped winged, twin-engined, armed

A
Modified default made, developed, produced,

constructed, manufactured,
created

Contr./C-E default manufactured
Subtyped

T
Modified default used, flown, operated, utilized
Contr./C-E default used, utilized
Subtyped

Table 5: Aircraft

Qualia PP Modifier Examples

F/C
Modified default colored, bodied
Contr./C-E default aromatized
Subtyped

A
Modified default made, produced, grown, cre-

ated, farmed, harvested
Contr./C-E default
Subtyped crafted

T
Modified default drunk, consumed
Contr./C-E default
Subtyped

Table 6: Wine

to the pragmatic domain and not sufficiently for-
malized before in the literature) can be accounted
for compositionally at the phrasal and clausal
level, and that the degree of informativeness of a
given expression can be calculated by combining
the model generation strategy with some of the
basic notions of GL: first and foremost, the val-
ues provided by the qualia structure, as well as
the GL typology of arguments (including default
and shadowed). We suggested that, for a construc-
tion to be acceptable, it must be consistent (re-
alizable in at least some situations) and informa-
tive (not satisfied in at least some situations). The
contribution of an argument to the construction is
only informative if it does not refer to an inher-
ent property of the syntactic head (be it a verb,
as in predicative constructions, or a noun, as in
modification constructions); in terms of qualia in-
formativeness, it must not refer to default qualia
values of the syntactic head. We also proposed
that the degree of informativeness of a given con-
struction is crucially determined by the composi-
tional mechanism involved in its derivation, and
ranked the type satisfaction mechanisms accord-
ingly: introduction is the most informative one,
and type matching and exploitation are zero infor-
mative. We showed that this approach is borne out
by corpus data by examining naturally occurring
PP-N combinations.



Ongoing research elaborates on the formal de-
tails of the mechanism outlined in this paper and
extends its application to a wide range of linguis-
tic phenomena whose properties are determined
by the general informativeness requirement.

Acknowledgments
The contribution by Olga Batiukova was partially financed

by the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness of Spain

under Grant No. FFI2012-33807.

References
F. Ackerman and A.E. Goldberg. 1996. Constraints

on adjectival past participles. In A.E. Goldberg, edi-
tor, Conceptual Structure, Discourse and Language,
pages 17–30. CSLI Publications.

N. Asher and J. Pustejovsky. 2013. A type compo-
sition logic for generative lexicon. In Advances in
Generative Lexicon Theory, pages 39–66. Springer.

P. Blackburn and J. Bos. 2008. Computational seman-
tics. THEORIA. An International Journal for The-
ory, History and Foundations of Science, 18(1).

J. Bresnan. 1995. Lexicality and argument structure.

N. Chomsky. 1993. Lectures on government and bind-
ing: The Pisa lectures, volume 9. Walter de Gruyter.

W. Croft. 2005. Logical and typological arguments for
radical construction grammar. Construction Gram-
mars: Cognitive grounding and theoretical exten-
sions, pages 273–314.

D. Dowty. 1979. Word meaning and Montague gram-
mar: The semantics of verbs and times in genera-
tive semantics and in Montague’s PTQ, volume 7.
Springer.

D. Embick. 2004. On the structure of resultative par-
ticiples in english. Linguistic Inquiry, 35(3):355–
392.

A.E. Goldberg and F. Ackerman. 2001. The pragmat-
ics of obligatory adjuncts. Language, 77(4):798–
814.

A. Goldberg. 1998. Semantic principles of predica-
tion. Discourse and Cognition: Bridging the Gap,
CSLI Publications, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA, pages 41–54.

J. Grimshaw and S. Vikner. 1993. Obligatory ad-
juncts and the structure of events. In E. Reuland
and W. Abraham, editors, Knowledge and language,
volume II, pages 145–159. Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers, Dordrecht.

L. Horn. 1996. Presupposition and implicature. The
handbook of contemporary semantic theory, pages
299–319.

Y. Jung. 1997. Obligatory adjuncts. Texas Linguistic
Forum, 38:161–171.

A. Kilgarriff, P. Rychlỳ, P. Smrž, and D. Tugwell.
2004. The sketch engine. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh EURALEX International Congress. Lori-
ent, France: Universite de Bretagne-Sud, pages
105–116.

K. Konrad. 2004. Model generation for natural lan-
guage interpretation and analysis, volume 2953.
Springer.

R. Langacker. 1991. Foundations of Cognitive Gram-
mar. Stanford University Press.

S. Levinson. 2000. Presumptive meanings: The theory
of generalized conversational implicature. The MIT
Press.

K. McRae and K. Matsuki. 2009. People use their
knowledge of common events to understand lan-
guage, and do so as quickly as possible. Language
and linguistics compass, 3(6):1417–1429.

J. Pustejovsky and O. Batiukova. forthcoming. Com-
positionality and information.

J. Pustejovsky and E. Jezek. 2008. Semantic coercion
in language: Beyond distributional analysis. Italian
Journal of Linguistics, 20(1):175–208.

J. Pustejovsky. 1995. Generative Lexicon. Cambridge
(Mass.): MIT Press.

J. Pustejovsky. 2011. Coercion in a general theory of
argument selection. Linguistics, 49(6):1401–1431.

J. Pustejovsky. 2013. Type theory and lexical decom-
position. In Advances in Generative Lexicon The-
ory, pages 9–38. Springer.

R. Van Valin. 1990. Semantic parameters of split in-
transitivity. Language, 66:221–260.


