










































Adapting a Parser to Clinical Text by Simple Pre-processing Rules


Proceedings of the 2013 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2013), pages 98–101,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Adapting a parser to clinical text by simple pre-processing rules

Maria Skeppstedt
Dept. of Computer and Systems Sciences (DSV)

Stockholm University, Forum 100, 164 40 Kista, Sweden
mariask@dsv.su.se

Abstract
Sentence types typical to Swedish clini-
cal text were extracted by comparing sen-
tence part-of-speech tag sequences in clin-
ical and in standard Swedish text. Parsings
by a syntactic dependency parser, trained
on standard Swedish, were manually ana-
lysed for the 33 sentence types most typ-
ical to clinical text. This analysis re-
sulted in the identification of eight error
types, and for two of these error types, pre-
processing rules were constructed to im-
prove the performance of the parser. For
all but one of the ten sentence types af-
fected by these two rules, the parsing was
improved by pre-processing.

1 Introduction

Input speed is often prioritised over completeness
and grammatical correctness in health record nar-
ratives. This has the effect that lower results are
achieved when parsers trained on standard text are
applied on clinical text (Hassel et al., 2011).

Syntactic annotations to use for training a parser
on clinical text are, however, expensive (Albright
et al., 2013) and treebanking large clinical corpora
is therefore not always an option for smaller lan-
guages (Haverinen et al., 2009). There are studies
on adaptation of standard parsers to the biomedical
domain, focusing on overcoming difficulties due
to different vocabulary use (Candito et al., 2011).
How to overcome difficulties due to syntactic dif-
ferences between standard and clinical language
is, however, less studied. The aim of this study
was therefore to explore syntactic differences be-
tween clinical language and standard language and
to analyse errors made by the parser on sentence
types typical to the clinical domain. To exemplify
how this knowledge can be used, two simple pre-
processing rules for improving parser performance
on these typical sentences were developed.

2 Method

To find sentence types typical to the clinical do-
main, a comparison to standard text was con-
ducted. The used clinical corpus was: free-text
entries from assessment sections, thus mostly con-
taining diagnostic reasoning, that were randomly
selected from the Stockholm EPR corpus1 (Dalia-
nis et al., 2009); and the used standard corpus
was: Läkartidningen (Kokkinakis, 2012), a jour-
nal from the Swedish Medical Association.

The comparison was carried out on part-of-
speech sequences on a sentence level. The part-
of-speech tagger Granska (Carlberger and Kann,
1999), having an accuracy of 92% on clinical text
(Hassel et al., 2011), was applied on both cor-
pora, and the proportion of each sentence tag se-
quence was calculated. ’Sentence tag sequence’
refers here to the parts-of-speech corresponding to
each token in the sentence, combined to one unit,
e.g. ’dt nn vb nn mad’ for the sentence ’The pa-
tient has headache.’. Pronouns, nouns and proper
names were collapsed into one class, as they often
play the same role in the sentence, and as terms
specific to the clinical domain are tagged inconsis-
tently as either nouns or proper names (Hassel et
al., 2011). As sentences from Läkartidningen not
ending with a full stop or a question mark are less
likely to be full sentences, they were not included,
in order to obtain a more contrasting corpus.

A 95% confidence interval for the proportion of
each sentence combination was computed using
the Wilson score interval, and the difference be-
tween the minimum frequency in the clinical cor-
pus and the maximum frequency in the standard
language corpus was calculated. Thereby, statis-
tics for the minimum difference between the two
domains was achieved.

1This research has been approved by the Regional Ethical
Review Board in Stockholm (Etikprövningsnämnden i Stock-
holm), permission number 2012/834-31/5.

98



A total of 458 436 sentence types were found
in the clinical corpus. Of these, there were 1 736
types significantly more frequent in the clinical
corpus than in the standard corpus, not having
overlapping confidence interval for the propor-
tions. 33 sentence types, to which 10% of the sen-
tences in the corpus belonged, had more than 0.1
percentage points difference between minimum
frequency in the clinical corpus and maximum fre-
quency in the standard language corpus. For each
of these 33 sentence types, 30 sentences were ran-
domly extracted and the dependency parser Malt-
Parser (Nivre et al., 2009), pre-trained on Tal-
banken (Nivre et al., 2006) using the algorithm
stacklazy (Nivre et al., 2009), was applied to these
part-of-speech tagged sentences. Error categories
were manually identified, using MaltEval (Nilsson
and Nivre, 2008) for visualisation.

Given the identified error categories, two pre-
processing rules were constructed. These were
then evaluated by applying the same pre-trained
parser model on pre-processed sentences as on
original sentences. A manual analysis was per-
formed on a subset of the sentences that were dif-
ferently parsed after pre-processing.

3 Results

Although only one sentence type was a full sen-
tence (nn vb pp nn mad), most sentences were
correctly parsed. Omitted words could be inferred
from context, and therefore also the intended syn-
tax. Eight error types, to which most errors be-
longed, were identified: 1) Abbreviated words
ending with a full stop interpreted as the last word
in a sentence, resulting in an incorrect sentence
splitting. 2) Abbreviations incorrectly labelled as
nouns by Granska, resulting in sentences exclu-
sively containing nouns. 3) Adjectives not recog-
nised as such (often because they were abbrevi-
ated), resulting in AT relations being labelled as
DT relations. 4) A general adverbial relation in-
correctly assigned an adverb of place or time rela-
tion or vice versa. 5) The first word in compound
expressions parsed as a determiner to the second.
6) nn pp nn pp nn mad sentences for which a
preposition had been incorrectly attributed. 7) The
sentence type nn jj (noun adjective), for which
most evaluated sentences were incorrectly parsed.
8) An omitted initial subject, resulting in the ob-
ject incorrectly being parsed as the subject of the
sentence.

Pre-processing rules were constructed for error
types 7) and 8). As a verb in the middle of nn
jj-sentences (in most cases copula) was left out,
the first pre-processing rule added copula in the
middle of these sentences. The second rule added
the pronoun I as the first word in sentences starting
with a verb, as this was the most frequently left
out subject, along with the slightly less frequent
omission, patient. The rules were not applied on
sentences ending with a question mark.

10 (out of 33) sentence types were affected by
the two rules. The proportion of those receiving a
different parsing after pre-processing is shown in
the column Changed in Table 1. A subset of these
sentences, for which the parsing was changed, was
manually classified as either incorrect (= contain-
ing at least one parsing or labelling error) or com-
pletely correct.

For sentences classified as incorrect, a more
granular comparison between the original and the
modified parsing was carried out. For these sen-
tences, the difference in average unlabelled (UAS)
and labelled (LAS) attachment score between the
pre-processed and the original parsing was com-
puted. A positive value indicates that although the
pre-processing resulted in some incorrectly parsed
sentences, these sentences were improved by pre-
processing. The sentence types vb pp nn nn mad
and vb pp nn pp nn mad were thus slightly im-
proved by the pre-processing, although they had a
low proportion of correctly parsed sentences.

A negative value for attachment score differ-
ence, on the other hand, indicates that parsing for
the incorrectly parsed sentences was impaired by
pre-processing. As these figures only apply to sen-
tences incorrectly parsed after pre-processing, this
means that although e.g. the type vb ab nn mad
has negative UAS and LAS difference, this only
applies to the 3 sentences that were incorrectly
parsed by the pre-processed version.

With one important exception, sentences modi-
fied by pre-processing, were either a) given a com-
pletely correct parsing and labelling in between
64% and 100% of the cases, or were b) slightly
improved by pre-processing. A reasonable sim-
plification in this case is that there can only be
one correct parsing of a sentence, as although
there might be occurrences of syntactically am-
biguous sentences, it is unlikely that their inter-
pretation is not given by the context in the closed
domain of language used for diagnostic reasoning.

99



Given this simplification, this means that a sen-
tence was transformed from an incorrectly parsed
sentence to a correctly parsed sentence in 64% or
more of the cases, when pre-processing was ap-
plied. The difference in attachment score shows
that the parsing is not drastically degraded for the
rest of the sentences, although it mostly changed
to a worse parsing. The overall effect of apply-
ing pre-processing is therefore positive. Sentences
of the type vb nn pp nn mad is the important ex-
ception to this positive effect, important as 54% of
the sentences belonging to this type received a dif-
ferent parsing after pre-processing and as 0.39%
of the sentences in the corpus belong to this type.
Only 61% of the pre-processed sentences of this
type had a correct unlabelled parsing and only
32% had a correct labelled parsing. Many of these
sentences were similar to Writes a prescription of
Trombyl, for which of Trombyl incorrectly is given
the word write as the head after pre-processing.

Almost all of the sentences of the type nn jj mad
were correctly parsed when a copula was inserted
between the noun and the adjective. Of the other
types of sentences that improved, many improved
by an incorrectly labelled subject relation being
changed to an object relation. There were, how-
ever, also improvements because some adverbs of
place and time were correctly labelled after the
pre-processing rules had been applied.

4 Discussion

Even if quantitative data is given in Table 1, the
core of this study has been to use a qualitative ap-
proach: searching for different categories of errors
rather than determining accuracy figures, and in-
vestigating whether pre-processing has a positive
effect, rather than determining the final accuracy.

The next step is to apply the findings of this
study for developing a small treebank of clinical
text. A possible method for facilitating syntactic
annotation is to present pre-annotated data to the
annotator (Brants and Plaehn, 2000) for correction
or for selection among several alternatives. As the
overall effect of applying pre-processing were im-
proved parsings, the pre-annotation could be car-
ried out by applying a model trained on standard
language and improve it with the pre-processing
rules investigated here. The other identified error
types also give suggestions of how to improve the
parser, improvements that should be attempted be-
fore using a parser trained on standard language

for pre-annotation. Error types 1), 2) and partly
3) were due to abbreviations negatively affect-
ing part-of-speech tagging and sentence splitting.
Therefore, abbreviation expansion would be a pos-
sible way of improving the parser. That available
medical vocabularies also could be useful is shown
by error type 5), which was due to the parser fail-
ing to recognise compound expressions.

Of the sentences in the corpus, only 10%
belonged to the analysed sentence types, and
even fewer were affected by the evaluated pre-
processing rules. It is, however, likely that the two
developed pre-processing rules have effects on all
sentence types lacking a verb or starting with a
verb, thus effecting more sentence type than those
included in this study. This is worth studying,
as is also syntactic differences for shorter part-of-
speech sequences than sentence level sequences.

Another possible method for domain adaptation
would be to adapt the training data to construct a
model more suitable for parsing clinical text. In-
stead of applying pre-processing, sentences in the
training data could be modified to more closely re-
semble sentences in clinical text, e.g. by removing
words in the treebank corpus to achieve the incom-
plete sentences typical to clinical text. Differences
in vocabulary has not been included in this study,
but methods from previous studies for bridging
differences in vocabulary between the general and
medical domain could also be applied for improv-
ing parser performance.

For supplementing a treebank to also include
sentences typical to clinical text, some of the
methods investigated here for extracting such sen-
tence types, could be employed

5 Conclusion

Sentence types typical to clinical text were ex-
tracted, and eight categories of error types were
identified. For two of these error types, pre-
processing rules were devised and evaluated.
For four additional error types, techniques for
text-normalisation were suggested. As the pre-
processing rules had an overall positive effect on
the parser performance, it was suggested that a
model for syntactic pre-annotation of clinical text
should employ the evaluated text pre-processing.

Acknowledgements

Many thanks to Joakim Nivre and to the four re-
viewers for their many valuable comments.

100



Sentence # % # % Correct # Incorrect pp UAS(LAS)
type In test Changed Manually unlabelled unlabelled difference am-

classified (labelled) (labelled) ong incorrect
a) vb nn mad 1181 30% 40 100 (100)% 0 (0)

vb jj nn mad 317 13% 32 100 (94) % 0 (2)
nn jj mad 316 100% 200 94 (94) % 12 (12)
vb ab nn mad 256 33% 31 90 (90) % 3 (3) -25 (-25) pp
vb pp nn mad 674 5% 27 100 (85) % 0 (4) (-19) pp
vb ab pp nn mad 222 21% 30 100 (70) % 0 (9) (+7) pp
vb pp jj nn mad 207 7% 14 100 (64) % 0 (5) (-16) pp

b) vb pp nn nn mad 197 5% 9 22 (11) % 7 (8) 0 (+10) pp
vb pp nn pp nn mad 232 5% 12 75 (4) % 3 (12) 0 (+2) pp

c) vb nn pp nn mad 813 54% 28 61 (32) % 11 (19) -20 (-15) pp

Table 1: In test: Number of sentences in test set of this type. Changed: Proportion of sentences that
received a different parsing after pre-processing had been applied. Manually classified: Number of man-
ually classified sentences. Correct: Proportion of sentences that were correctly parsed (and labelled)
after pre-processing had been applied. # Incorrect: Number of incorrectly parsed (and labelled) sen-
tences after pre-processing. UAS (LAS) difference: For these incorrect sentences: The difference in UAS,
unlabelled attachment score, (and LAS, labelled attachment score) before and after pre-processing. (For
sentence types with more than 90% correct sentences, this difference was not calculated.)

References
Daniel Albright, Arrick Lanfranchi, Anwen Fredrik-

sen, William F Styler, 4th, Colin Warner, Jena D
Hwang, Jinho D Choi, Dmitriy Dligach, Rod-
ney D Nielsen, James Martin, Wayne Ward, Martha
Palmer, and Guergana K Savova. 2013. Towards
comprehensive syntactic and semantic annotations
of the clinical narrative. J Am Med Inform Assoc,
Jan.

Thorsten Brants and Oliver Plaehn. 2000. Interactive
corpus annotation. In LREC. European Language
Resources Association.

Marie Candito, Enrique H. Anguiano, and Djamé Sed-
dah. 2011. A Word Clustering Approach to Domain
Adaptation: Effective Parsing of Biomedical Texts.
In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference
on Parsing Technologies, pages 37–42, Dublin, Ire-
land, October. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Johan Carlberger and Viggo Kann. 1999. Implement-
ing an efficient part-of-speech tagger. Software–
Practice and Experience, 29:815–832.

Hercules Dalianis, Martin Hassel, and Sumithra
Velupillai. 2009. The Stockholm EPR Corpus -
Characteristics and Some Initial Findings. In Pro-
ceedings of ISHIMR 2009, Evaluation and imple-
mentation of e-health and health information initia-
tives: international perspectives. 14th International
Symposium for Health Information Management Re-
search, Kalmar, Sweden, pages 243–249.

Martin Hassel, Aron Henriksson, and Sumithra
Velupillai. 2011. Something Old, Something New

- Applying a Pre-trained Parsing Model to Clini-
cal Swedish. In Proceedings of NODALIDA’11 -
18th Nordic Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, Riga, Latvia, May 11-13.

Katri Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Veronika Laippala, and
Tapio Salakoski. 2009. Parsing Clinical Finnish:
Experiments with Rule-Based and Statistical De-
pendency Parsers. In Kristiina Jokinen and Eck-
hard Bick, editors, Proceedings of NODALIDA’09,
Odense, Denmark, pages 65–72.

Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2012. The journal of the
Swedish medical association - a corpus resource for
biomedical text mining in Swedish. In The Third
Workshop on Building and Evaluating Resources for
Biomedical Text Mining (BioTxtM), an LREC Work-
shop. Turkey.

Jens Nilsson and Joakim Nivre. 2008. Malteval:
An evaluation and visualization tool for dependency
parsing. In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Language Resources and Evaluation. LREC, pages
161–166.

Joakim Nivre, Jens Nilsson, and Johan Hall. 2006. Tal-
banken05: A Swedish treebank with phrase struc-
ture and dependency annotation. In Proceedings of
the fifth international conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2006), pages 24–26.

Joakim Nivre, Marco Kuhlmann, and Johan Hall.
2009. An improved oracle for dependency parsing
with online reordering. In Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Parsing Technologies,
IWPT ’09, pages 73–76, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

101


