















































%


Influence of modality markers on the conditional interpretation  

 of the German preposition ohne 

 

 

Claudia Roch 

Department of Linguistics 

Ruhr-Universität Bochum 

Bochum, Germany 

roch@linguistics.rub.de 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper investigates the impact of 

modality markers on the conditional 

interpretation of the German preposition 

ohne (‘without’). It tackles the question 

whether it is the preposition itself that 

possesses a conditional sense or whether it 

may be due to a modal context that the 

interpretation arises. The paper presents an 

annotation study for modality factors (e.g. 

mood, modal auxiliary verbs, modal 

adjectives, modal adverbs, modal 

infinitives, negation) in the context of these 

sentences. The statistical analysis of the 

data has been carried out by means of a 

correspondence analysis in order to identify 

the relevant factors for the conditional 

interpretation. The results suggest that 

primarily the verb mood has an influence. 

1 Conditional interpretation of ohne 

Conditionality can be expressed by a variety of 

linguistic means. The most typical form is the 

conditional sentence that is signaled by the 

subordinators if… then… and establishes a relation 

between a condition in the antecedent and a 

depending state of affairs in the consequent. The 

conditional relation belongs to a subgroup of CCC 

relations, as they are sometimes referred to 

(Kortmann, 1997), standing for conditionals, 

causals, and concessives. But although 

conditionality is an attested interclausal relation, 

there are examples in which the same relation is 

expressed by prepositional phrases, e.g. (1). 
 

(1) Ohne     größere Wanderung ist es kaum 
Without bigger   hike             is   it hardly 

möglich die Insel kennenzulernen. 

possible the island to.get.to.know 

‘Without a long hike it is almost impossible 

to get to know the island.’ 

 

The paraphrase of (1) as a conditional sentence 

stresses the conditional relation: “If there is no 

long hike, it is almost impossible to get to know the 

island.” In the paraphrase the subordinated if-

clause expresses the condition in the antecedent, 

while the matrix clause expresses the depending 

state of affairs in the consequent. As the 

preposition ohne carries an inherent negation, the 

negation become explicit in the paraphrase with 

the if-clause. In the former example (1) solely the 

ohne-PP constitutes the antecedent and expresses 

the condition, which is precisely a negative 

condition. Negative condition is defined by 

Kortmann (1997:86) as “If not p, q: The coming of 

about q depends on the nonfulfillment of p.” 

But should the preposition ohne (‘without’) 

hence be attributed a negative conditional interpre-

tation? The preposition ohne expresses that some-

thing is lacking or absent in general. The set of all 

senses and subsenses (which are indicated by the 

underscore) for German ohne can be found in 

Table 1 (cf. Müller and Roch, 2012). Examples are 

provided in English. 



meaning example 
absence He likes the house without a garden. 

modal 

_instrument 

 

He opened the door without a key. 

_manner He walked all the way without shoes.  

participation 

_comitative 

 

He went home without his brother. 

restrictive He paid 200 $ without the taxes. 

statement 

governed 

He must be at home without doubt. 

He can do without water a few days. 

 
Table 1: Prepositional meanings of ohne/‘without’ 

 

From the lexical resources of German it is 

reasonable to assume a conditional interpretation. 

The dictionary of Kempcke (2000) and the 

dictionary of prepositions by Schröder (1986) list 

conditional interpretations for ohne. But I will 

argue that there are actually four different 

interpretations in the class of CCC relations 

possible for ohne. The interpretations are 

exemplified in Table 2 with examples from 

English. The examples are relatively similar, 

because only minor changes in mood and tense of 

the verb or the addition of an adverb is required in 

order to arrive at one of the other interpretations 

within this subclass. 

 

CCC 

meaning 

example 

conditional Without a hike it is impossible to get 

to know the island. 

causal Without the hike (which was 

cancelled) we did not get to know 

the island. 

concessive Even without the hike (which was 

cancelled) we got to know the island. 

conditional-

concessive 

Even without a hike it is possible to 

get to know the island. 

 
Table 2: CCC relations of ohne/ ‘without’ 

 

Nevertheless, one has to ask what the semantic 

contribution of the preposition is. There are three 

hypotheses available. First, one could suppose that 

ohne possesses a conditional aspect of meaning 

which goes in accordance with the dictionaries. 

Secondly, it would also be possible that the 

preposition has one of its typical other inter-

pretations like ‘privation’ or ‘negation’. Third 

option is that ohne does not carry any meaning at 

all in these sentences and is semantically vacuous. 

For the German preposition bei, Grabski and Stede 

(2006) assume that instead of showing a 

conditional interpretation, the preposition is left 

lexically underspecified. According to them the 

conditional relation is only interpreted by the 

speaker. It is a slightly different case with ohne, as 

it adds at least the negation. 

Clearly, if the second or third option pertains, 

we have to ask how the conditional interpretation 

arises in the first place. A possible solution would 

be to assume that conditionality arises from other 

factors in the clause, either lexical or construc-

tional. If this solution is viable, the conditional 

interpretation of ohne could be regarded as a 

pseudo interpretation instead of listing it as one of 

the senses of the preposition. 

2 Modality markers in context 

In connection with these considerations we can 

crucially observe that the conditional interpretation 

is mostly accompanied by a modal sentence 

context. One can observe a wide range of modality 

markers as e.g. subjunctive mood, modal auxiliary 

verbs, modal adjectives, modal adverbs, the modal 

infinitive etc. All these modality markers have of 

course an influence on the factual status of a 

sentence as they leave it open whether some 

statement is or becomes a fact in the world. The 

negation also occurs quite frequently in the context 

of these sentences. It is an important factor as well 

as it changes the validity of a statement. Apart 

from that generic readings are also frequent and 

must be taken into account. The following exam-

ples for the conditional interpretation of ohne shall 

exemplify the prominence of modality contexts. 
 

(2) Ohne      technische Kenntnisse  
Without technical knowledge  

kann                   man das nicht reparieren. 

can.MODAUX      one  this  not.NEG  repair 

‘Without technical knowledge one cannot 

repair it.’ 

(3) Er hätte           vielleicht  
He have.SBJV maybe.MODADV  

ohne     Fehlurteil      eines  Kampfrichters  

without misjudgment of.a    referee 

seinen ersten Sieg erreichen können. 

his      first victory achieve can.MODAUX 

‘Without the misjudgment of a referee he 

maybe could have achieved his first victory.’ 



In example (2) modality markers are the modal 

auxiliary verb können (‘can’), and a negation. The 

sentence also exhibits a generic interpretation 

which is indicated by the German pronoun man 

(‘one’). Modality is signaled in example (3) by the 

subjunctive mood in the verb (German Konjunktiv 

II), by the modal adverb vielleicht (‘maybe’) and 

the modal auxiliary verb können again. The 

occurrences of modality markers and negation etc. 

are noticeable in the examples. It stands to 

question what their influence is and whether they 

may establish the conditional interpretation. The 

aim of the paper for the moment is to identify the 

influencing modal factors of the interpretation. The 

explanation of the data is left for future work. 

3 Annotation of modality factors 

In order to shed some light on these questions we 

present a corpus study, which investigates the 

influence of modality markers on the conditional 

interpretation. Annotation has been carried out 

manually for 1332 sentences with an ohne-PP. The 

data set is a part of the NZZ (Neue Zürcher 

Zeitung) newspaper corpus and already contained 

annotations for preposition meanings of ohne 

provided in the Bochum preposition project
1
. Table 

3 gives the exact numbers of the preposition 

meaning distribution in the data sample
2
. 

 

preposition meaning number of sentences 
1_participation    51 

2_causal   28 

3_conditional 514 

4_conditional_concessive   67 

5_concessive 66 

6_modal 308 

7_governed 

8_restrictive 

    8 

9 

9_absence 280 

10_statement     1 

 
Table 3: Distribution of preposition meanings 

                                                           
1 http://www.linguistics.rub.de/~kiss/dfg_projekt.html 
2 The meaning ‘10_statement’ does not appear in the analysis, 

as it has too few instances and was excluded during 

aggregation. The subsenses exemplified in Table 1 are not 

distinguished as they are not relevant for the task at hand. The 

sample is not balanced, but results have proven to be stable 

with 2000 sentences. As the annotation of the whole dataset of 

4216 sentences is not complete the findings must be 

considered preliminary. 

The following list contains the relevant factors 

for the annotation and the respective values that 

can be chosen inside a category. The category 

‘mood_tense’ is a combination of the German 

mood (indicative, imperative, conjunctive I, 

conjunctive II (subjunctive)) and tense form of the 

verb (present, preterite, perfect, pluperfect, future I 

and future II, including infinitives that have no 

tense). The values for ‘mood_tense’ can become 

‘no’ if there is no verb available in the sentence. 

The category ‘modal_marker’ is also in need of 

explanation. It subsumes the different markers 

modal auxiliary verb, modal adjective, modal 

adverb, and modal infinitive. It becomes ‘mod’ as 

soon as one of the modality markers is present, else 

it must be ‘no_mod’. 

 

 mood_tense: {Ind, Imp, KonI/II, no_Pres, 
Pret, Perf, Plu, FutI/II, Inf, no} 

 negation: {neg, no_neg} 

 modal_marker: {mod, no_mod}  

(‘mod’ if modal auxiliary verb, or modal 

adjective, or modal adverb, or modal 

infinitive = yes, else ‘no_mod’) 

 generic_specific_reading: {gen, spec} 

An annotation example for the modality factors 

is presented in (5). The annotations belong to the 

sentence in (1) which is repeated once again in (4): 

 

(4) Ohne     größere Wanderung ist es kaum 
Without bigger   hike             is it hardly.NEG 

möglich                  die Insel kennenzulernen. 

possible.MODADJ   the island to.get.to.know 

‘Without a long hike it is almost impossible 

to get to know the island.’ 

 

(5) Annotations for example (4) 

 mood_tense (ist): Ind_Pres 

 negation (kaum): neg 

 modal_marker (möglich): mod (modal 
adjective = yes) 

 generic_specific_reading: gen 

http://www.linguistics.rub.de/~kiss/dfg_projekt.html


4 Correspondence Analysis (CA) 

Correspondence analysis (CA, Benzécri, 1973; 

Clausen, 1998) has been chosen for the statistical 

analysis. It is a method of multivariate statistics 

and is suitable to handle categorical variables, like 

those introduced in (5). Correspondence analysis 

produces a low-dimensional map in which 

associations between variables become visible. 

There are several implementations of corres-

pondence analysis in the R environment available, 

e.g. in the ca package by Nenadić and Greenacre 

(2007) or in the languageR package by Baayen 

(2008) via the function corres.fnc.  

As the standard input format correspondence 

analysis takes a cross tabulation. In the present 

case it is a cross tabulation of the variable 

‘preposition meaning’ and an interactive variable
3
 

of all annotated factors. The interactive variable 

combines the annotations in one large variable of 

the general form ‘mood_tense.negation.modal_ 

marker.generic_specific_reading’. The aim of the 

analysis is to reveal the hidden associations 

between the variables. The focus is of course on 

the conditional interpretation, and whether there 

are associations with the annotated modality 

markers. 

Table 4 contains the principal inertias and a 

scree plot (obtained from the ca package) for the 

data. Inertia must be understood as variance. The 

values indicate how well a dimension explains the 

variation in the distances between categories in the 

map. The scree plot is a test that can be used to 

obtain the appropriate number of dimensions. It 

means that all dimensions before a clear break in 

the plot are considered relevant.  

 
Principal inertias (eigenvalues):  
dim  value  %  cum%  scree plot  

1  0.450588  47.9  47.9  *************************  

2  0.152640  16.2  64.1  ********  

3  0.117962  12.5  76.7  ******  

4  0.077014  8.2  84.9  *** 

5  0.060756  6.5  91.3  ***  

6  0.043893  4.7  96.0  **  

7  0.020953  2.2  98.2   
8  0.016715  1.8  100.0   
Total 0.940503  100.0    

 
Table 4: Principal inertias (eigenvalues) of CA 

 

                                                           
3 Cf. Clausen, 1998 for the term ‘interactive variable’. 

So due to this plot we should definitely include 

the first three dimensions in the analysis.  

In the resulting map of correspondence analysis 

in Figure 1 the black labels represent the 

prepositional meanings (cf. Table 3) while the grey 

labels display the annotated combined modality 

factors. What immediately catches the eye is that 

Figure 1 shows a clear separation between the 

conditional interpretation and the other 

interpretations of ohne on the first axis. The 

interpretation of the map yields two important 

observations. The mood feature ‘subjunctive’ 

(German Konjunktiv II) is grouped in the map 

together with the conditional interpretation. It 

appears only in the positive space of the first axis. 

One can also say that these categories “correspond 

in space”, so we can assume that these variables 

are associated. Second observation is that the 

feature ‘no_negation’ is found in the map in a 

group with all the other interpretations of ohne. 

The opposite feature ‘negation’ occurs with the 

other interpretations only in a few exceptions. In 

the same area with the conditional interpretation, 

however, we find both values for negation, so 

negation is not required for a conditional 

interpretation, but it occurs quite seldom with the 

other interpretations of ohne. The features 

‘modality_marker’ and ‘generic_specific_reading’ 

cannot clearly be set aside in the map, so it must be 

left open, whether these factors have any influence 

on the conditional interpretation. The corres-

pondence analysis in the present case cannot 

explain the influence of these variables. 

5 Conclusion 

Correspondence analysis has proven a useful 

method to make associations between categorical 

variables visible. For the conditional interpretation 

of the preposition ohne it could be shown that there 

is a considerable influence of the subjunctive mood 

of the verb. Future studies with more data and 

reassessment of the factors will maybe reveal more 

insights into how the conditional interpretation 

arises.  

Acknowledgments 

The ideas presented in this paper have benefitted 

from discussions with Tibor Kiss and the helpful 

suggestions of three anonymous reviewers whom I 

would like to thank. 



Figure 1: First two dimensions of CA 

 

References 

Harald Baayen. 2008. Analyzing Linguistic Data. A 

Practical Introduction to Statistics Using R. 

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Jean-Paul Benzécri. 1973. L’analyse des données. 

Volume II. L’analyse des correspondances. Dunod, 

Paris. 

Sten-Erik Clausen. 1998. Applied Correspondence 

Analysis. An Introduction. Quantitative Applications 

in the Social Sciences, 121. Sage Publications, 

Thousand Oaks, CA. 

Michael Grabski and Manfred Stede. 2006. “Bei”: 

Intraclausal Coherence Relations Illustrated With a 

German Preposition. Discourse Processes 41(2). 

Günter Kempcke. 2000. Wörterbuch Deutsch als 

Fremdsprache. De Gruyter, Berlin. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bernd Kortmann. 1997. Adverbial Subordination: A 

Typology and History of Adverbial Subordinators 

Based on European Languages. De Gruyter, 

Berlin/New York. 

Antje Müller and Claudia Roch. 2012. 

Präpositionsannotation – Manual. Bochum, Ms. 

Oleg Nenadić and Michael Greenacre. 2007. 

Correspondence Analysis in R, with Two- and Three-

dimensional Graphics: The ca Package. Journal of 

Statistical Software 20(3). 

Jochen Schröder. 1986. Lexikon deutscher 

Präpositionen. VEB Verlag Enzyklopädie, Leipzig. 


