



















































IMHO: An Exploratory Study of Hedging in Web Forums


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, pages 309–313,
Metz, France, 22-24 August 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

IMHO: An Exploratory Study of Hedging in Web Forums

Liliana Mamani Sanchez
Trinity College Dublin

mamanisl@scss.tcd.ie

Carl Vogel
Trinity College Dublin
vogel@tcd.ie

Abstract

We explore hedging in web forum con-
versations, which is interestingly different
to hedging in academic articles, the main
focus of recent automatic approaches to
hedge detection. One of our main results
is that forum posts using hedges are more
likely to get high ratings of their useful-
ness. We also make a case for focusing
annotation efforts on hedges that take the
form of first-person epistemic phrases.

1 Introduction

Computational linguistics research in hedging, use
of linguistic expressions whose contribution to
sentence meaning is a modulation of the accuracy
of the content they embed, and speculation detec-
tion has been done intensively in the domain of
scholarly texts. The interest created in this do-
main has expanded to some extent to other do-
mains such as news and reviews. Automatic pro-
cessing of speculation requires at some stage the
annotation of words or phrases conveying uncer-
tainty (Vincze et al., 2008). More complex en-
deavours imply the annotation of various elements
of context involved in the expression of hedging
(Rubin et al., 2005; Wiebe et al., 2005).

In web forums where users’ contributions play
a vital role in the forum dynamics, such as mutual
support forums that are part of the ecosystem of
technology company supports for users, exploring
the features that make a contributor outstanding
is relevant.1 A user shows a distinctive behavior
by writing useful posts that help other users in the
problem that first motivated their participation in

1Throughout, we use “web forum” to refer to such ecosys-
tems: we speculate that their informal nature makes our ob-
servations generalize to other sorts of web forum in which
solutions to problems are not the focal point; even general
discussion forums can be witnessed to trigger community
weighting of contributions.

the forum. This paper emerges from our interest
in finding features that predict which contributors
will be most appreciated.

Many lexical and grammatical devices aid
hedging (expressions such as epistemics verbs,
modals, adjectives, etc. name but a few) as do non-
lexical devices such as conditionals. We deem sin-
gular first person epistemic phrases as hedges that
can help to identify the subject of a hedging event.
We analyze the correlation between the use of
epistemic phrases (vs. other types of hedges) and
the probability of posts containing these hedges of
being considered useful by the forum community.
We also explore whether epistemic phrases consti-
tute a distinctive feature that support user classifi-
cations. In §2, we described the function of hedges
according to a hedging classification framework
and in relation to the domain of web forums. Then
§3 describes the profiling work done and discusses
the main findings. We conclude in §4.

2 Functions of hedging

The research by Hyland (1998) is one of the broad-
est studies about hedging functions in scientific
articles, and which makes use of categories that
have strong relationship, at face value, to the like-
lihood that the reader of hedged material will find
the material sufficiently useful or sufficiently well
expressed to prompt the reader to rate highly the
message containing the material, whether with an
explicit facility to record kudos or otherwise. Hy-
land proposed a poly-pragmatic classification of
hedges based on their indicating function: reader-
oriented, writer-oriented, attribute and reliability.
Briefly, attribute and reliability hedges both re-
late to the accuracy of the message conveyed. At-
tribute hedges relate to the conformity of the de-
scribed situation with encyclopedic expectations
(1), while reliability hedges relate to the level of
certainty of the speaker about the propositional
content (2). In a different dimension, reader ori-

309



ented hedges are composed with the concern that
the “reader” accept the truth of the embedded
content (3), thereby presupposing the “writer’s”
commitment to the content, while writer oriented
hedges disclaim commitment to the content (4).

(1) Protypical mammals are land-dwellers.
(2) Probably, respected ancient Greeks

thought whales to be fish.

(3) I think that if you reboot, the changes will
take effect.

(4) Based on what you’ve said, you seem
right.

Applying this classification scheme not to schol-
arly prose but to web forums, it seems likely that
readers in technical forums would prefer the accu-
racy of attribute hedges (1) over the relative uncer-
tainty of reliability hedges (2), and that the reader
oriented hedges (3) supply comfort in the implica-
tion of both the quality of the embedded claims
and the absence of arrogance. This research is
attempting to test these hypotheses by assessing
the relationship between the likelihood of posts re-
ceiving kudos and the quantity of hedges in these
categories that the posts contain.

Unfortunately, answering the question is com-
plex, because it is not in all cases obvious whether
a linguistic expression contains a hedge or what
function the hedges serve when they do exist.
Therefore, we attempt a partial answer to the ques-
tion by examining those hedge expressions which
can be processed with some reliability using au-
tomated means. Consider the taxonomy of lin-
guistic expressions in Fig. 1. The boxed regions
of this taxonomy are amenable to automatic pro-
cessing. Further, epistemic hedges with first-
person singular subjects relate strongly to reader
oriented hedges (3) in Hyland’s taxonomy. The
non-phrasal hedges are heterogeneous in function.

Figure 1: A taxonomy of linguistic expressions.
Linguistic Expressions

epistemic hedges other expressions

non−phrasal

lexical

phrasal

1st person singular other

conditionals ...

...

...

We do not claim this separation of hedging
markers can fully account for pragmatic and se-
mantic analysis of hedging in web forums, but we
are confident this classification supports reliable
annotation for quantificational assessment of cer-
tainty and hedging in this informal domain. We
base our profiling experiments (§3) on this func-
tional separation of hedging markers.

3 Profiling posts by hedging

3.1 Description of the forum dataset

The dataset we used created out of a forum that
is part of customer support services provided by
a software vendor company. Although we were
not able to confirm the forum demographics, we
can infer they are mostly American English speak-
ers as the forum was set up first for USA cus-
tomers. Some other features are best described by
Vogel and Mamani Sanchez (2013). Our dataset
is composed of 172,253 posts that yield a total
of 1,044,263 sentences. This dataset has been
intensively “cleaned”, as originally it presented
a great variety of non-linguistic items such as
HTML codes for URLS, emoticons, IP addresses,
etc. These elements were replaced by wild-cards
and also user names have been anonymised, al-
though some non-language content may remain.

A forum user can give a post “kudos” if he/she
finds it useful or relevant to the topic being ad-
dressed in a forum conversation.2 We counted
the number of kudos given to each post. There
are four user categories in the forum: {employee,
guru, notranked, ranked}.3 A poster’s rank de-
pends, among other factors, on the number of
posts they make and their aggregate kudos.

3.2 Epistemic phrases versus other hedges

We created two lexicons, one composed by first
person singular epistemic phrases and one by non-
phrasal hedges. Initially, a set of epistemic phrases
where taken from Kärkkäinen (2010): {I think, I
don’t know, I know, etc.} and from Wierzbicka
(2006). The non-phrasal hedge lexicon was cre-
ated from words conveying at least some degree of
uncertainty: {appear, seem, sometimes, suggest,
unclear, think, etc.}, taken from Rubin (2006).
Additional hedges were included after the pilot

2A user may accord kudos for any reason at all, in fact.
3In the forum we studied, there are actually many ranks,

with guru as the pinnacle for a non-employee; we grouped
the non-guru ranked posters together.

310



annotation. The lexicons are composed by 76
and 109 items, respectively. There are many
other hedge instances that are not included in
these lexicons but our experiment restricts to these
items. Epistemic phrases include acronyms such
as “IMHO”, “IMO” and “AFAIK” that we deem
meet functions described in §2.

A pilot manual annotation of hedges was con-
ducted on in order to verify the viability of auto-
matic annotation. Our automatic annotation pro-
cedure performs a sentence by sentence matching
and tagging of both kinds of hedging. The pro-
cedure uses a maximal matching strategy to tag
hedges, e.g. if “I would suggest” is found, this
is tagged and not “suggest”. This automatic tag-
ging procedure does not account for distinctions
between epistemic and deontic readings of hedges,
nor between speculative or non-speculative uses of
non-phrasal hedges. 107,134 posts contain at least
one hedge: 34,301 posts contain at least one epis-
temic phrase; 101,086, at least one non-phrasal
hedge; 28,253, at least one of each.

3.3 Methods of analysis
In §3.1 we showed there are two ways to charac-
terize a post: 1) By its writer category and 2) by
the number of times it gets accorded kudos. We
devise a third characterisation by exploring epis-
temic phrases and non-phrasal hedge usage in in-
dividual posts as a whole, tracking use of both
types of hedge in each post. We devised three
discretization functions (DF) for assigning a la-
bel to each post depending on the type of hedges
contained within. The DFs take two parameters,
each one representing either the relative or bina-
rized frequency non-phrasal hedges and epistemic
phrases (nphr or epphr). DF1 relies on the oc-
currence of either type of hedge; a post is of a
mixed nature if it has at least one of each hedge
type. DF2 is based on a majority decision depend-
ing on the hedge type that governs the post and
only assigns the label hedgmixed when both types
of hedges appear in the same magnitude. DF3
expands DF1 and DF2 by evaluating whether ei-
ther majority or only one type of hedge is found,
e.g. we wanted to explore the fact that even when
non-phrasal hedges domain one post, an epistemic
phrase is contained as well, in contrast to when
only non-phrasal hedges occur in a post.

D
F1

epphr==0 epphr>0
nphr ==0 nohedges epphrasal
nphr >0 nonphrasal hedgmixed

D
F2

nphr=0 & epphr=0 nohedges
nphr > epphr nonphrasal
nphr < epphr epphrasal
nphr =epphr hedgmixed

D
F3

epphr=0 epphr>0
nphr=0 nohedges epphronly

nphr>0 nonphronly
nphr > epphr nonphrmostly
nphr < epphr epphrmostly
nphr =epphr hedgmixed

We computed four measures for each post based
on these functions, m1 is calculated by using DF1
having raw frequencies of hedges as parameters,
m2 and m3 result from applying DF3 and DF2
respectively to frequencies of hedge type averaged
by the corresponding lexicon size, and m4 is cal-
culated from DF3 over hedge frequencies aver-
aged by post word count. Other measures are also
possible, but these seemed most intuitive.

We were interested in the extent that hedge-
based post categories correlate with a post’s kudos
and with a post’s user category as tests of hypoth-
esis outlined in §2. We want to know which cor-
relations hold regardless of the choice of intuitive
measure and which are measure dependent.

3.4 Results and discussion

1.
40

1.
45

1.
50

1.
55

1.
60

M
ea

n 
of

 k
ud

os

epphrasal

hedgmixed

nohedges

nonphrasal

epphrmostly

epphronly

hedgmixed

nohedges

nonphrmostly

nonphronly

epphrasal

hedgmixed

nohedges

nonphrasal

epphrmostly
epphronly

hedgmixed

nohedges

nonphrmostly

nonphronly

m1 m2 m3 m4

Figure 2: Design plot with the mean of kudos of
each kind of post per each measure.

In Fig. 2, we show how the different hedge-
based classifications of posts (m1, m2, m3, m4)
relate to the average kudo counts for posts. Each
measure is shown in an individual scale.4 The hor-
izontal line represents the average of kudos for
all posts so we can observe which categories are
above/below the mean. Comparison and contrast

4For this comparison, we dropped extreme outliers in the
number of kudos and hedges, and we calculated these mea-
sures only in posts that had at least one kudo attribution.

311



of the relationship between categorisation of posts
with each mi and mean kudos is interesting. For
example, when epistemic phrases dominate a post
(epphrmostly), there is the greatest mean of ku-
dos visible with the measure m2. The second
highest positive effect is of non-phrasal hedges
dominating a post (nonphrmostly) in m2 and m4.
The next strongest effect occurs when both of
hedges types appear in a post (hedgmixed in m1
and m3) and when they have about the same av-
erage density (m4), followed by when non-phrasal
hedges appear exclusively in a post. While there is
no consensus across the different scales that epis-
temic phrase-dominated posts are the most likely
to obtain kudos, still their occurrence has a posi-
tive effect in the average of kudos obtained. There
is low probability of kudos when only epistemic
phrases appear and the lowest probability when no
hedge occurs.5 Thus, we argue that the four mea-
sures are jointly and individually useful.

employee guru notranked ranked

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

ep
ph

ra
sa

l
he

dg
m

ix
ed

no
he

dg
es

no
np

hr
as

al
ep

ph
ra

sa
l

he
dg

m
ix

ed
no

he
dg

es
no

np
hr

as
al

ep
ph

ra
sa

l
he

dg
m

ix
ed

no
he

dg
es

no
np

hr
as

al
ep

ph
ra

sa
l

he
dg

m
ix

ed
no

he
dg

es
no

np
hr

as
al

m1

P
er

ce
nt

ag
e 

of
 p

os
ts

 p
er

 h
ed

ge
 ty

pe

Figure 3: Percentages of m1-hedge types in each
user category.

The relationship between hedge use and user
category is depicted (for m1) in Fig. 3. While
for all four user roles, epistemic phrases are exclu-
sively present in the lowest percentage of posts,
their contribution is shown in posts with mixed
hedge types. Posts with only non-phrasal hedges
are the most frequent across all user categories.
We had predicted no significance in this respect

5The contribution of epistemic phrases to the likelihood
of kudos could be due to other factors such as the use of first
person in general. We profiled the use of pronouns “I” and
“my” and we found a negative correlation between frequency
of these pronouns and the number of kudos per post. There
is a small but not significant correlation restricting to those
posts with non-zero kudos.

since non-phrasal hedges could map into any of
Hyland’s functions, however our intuition was
wrong as there is a significant difference (p<0.05)
in the proportions of posts per hedge type category
when making comparisons across user categories
one to one. Only when comparing proportions of
hedge type posts by gurus and notranked users
is there no significant difference in hedgmixed,
nonphrasal and nohedges posts.6 Employees and
ranked users have the highest rates of use of mixed
hedges. Ranked and guru posts have the high-
est ratios of exclusively epistemic phrase hedges,
meeting expectations. Employees have the low-
est ratio of user of epistemic phrases on their own,
this presumably since they frequently write posts
on behalf of the company so they are least likely
to make subjective comments: their posts have the
lowest percentage of use of “I” and “my”.

These two approaches to assessing associations
between different classifications of forum posts re-
veal that posts using hedges are the most likely to
be accorded kudos and that guru and ranked users
are the most frequent users of epistemic phrases
in general. This lends support to the view that
first person singular epistemic phrases, the epit-
ome of reader-oriented hedges, are predictive of
coarse grained rank in the forum.

4 Conclusions and future work

We have found that the hedges used contribute to
the probability of a post getting high ratings. Posts
with no hedges are the ones awarded least kudos.
We have still to test the correlation between epis-
temic phrases and other types of hedges when they
both are found in a single post. We think that au-
tomatic methods should focus in first person epis-
temic phrases as they show writer’s stance at the
same time as softening their commitment or antic-
ipating reader’s response. Following the annota-
tion described here, manual annotation work is un-
der way, where epistemic phrases and non-phrasal
hedges constitute two distinct categories. Our on-
going work seeks other ways to measure the con-
tribution of these categories to reader expression
of appreciation of posts and whether hedge us-
age creates natural user categorizations. We also
study other types of web forum dialogue to explore
whether hedging follows similar trends.

6A two-sample test of proportions was used to test the
significance of differences between amounts of hedge type
posts for each category.

312



Acknowledgements

This research is supported by the Trinity College
Research Scholarship Program and the Science
Foundation Ireland (Grant 07/CE/I1142) as part
of the Centre for Next Generation Localisation
(www.cngl.ie) at Trinity College Dublin. This pa-
per has benefited from input from the anonymous
reviewers and from Ron Artstein.

References
Ken Hyland. 1998. Hedging in Scientific Research Ar-

ticles. Pragmatics & beyond. John Benjamins Pub-
lishing Company.

Elise Kärkkäinen. 2010. Position and scope of epis-
temic phrases in planned and unplanned american
english. In New approaches to hedging, pages 207–
241. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Victoria Rubin, Elizabeth Liddy, and N. Kando. 2005.
Certainty identification in texts: Categorization
model and manual tagging results. In James G.
Shanahan, Yan Qu, and Janyce Wiebe, editors, Com-
puting Attitude and Affect in Text. Springer.

Victoria L. Rubin. 2006. Identifying Certainty in Texts.
Ph.D. thesis, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY.

Veronika Vincze, Gyorgy Szarvas, Richard Farkas, Gy-
orgy Mora, and Janos Csirik. 2008. The BioScope
corpus: biomedical texts annotated for uncertainty,
negation and their scopes. BMC Bioinformatics,
9(Suppl 11).

Carl Vogel and Liliana Mamani Sanchez. 2013. Epis-
temic signals and emoticons affect kudos. Cognitive
Infocommunications (CogInfoCom), 2012 IEEE 3rd
International Conference on, pages 517–522.

Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie.
2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and emo-
tions in language ANN. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 39(2/3):164–210.

A. Wierzbicka. 2006. English: meaning and culture.
Oxford University Press, USA.

313


