


































RDFization of Japanese Electronic Dictionaries and LOD

Seiji Koide
Research Organization of Information

and Systems
2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo

koide@nii.ac.jp

Hideaki Takeda
National Institute of Informatics

2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo
takeda@nii.ac.jp

Abstract

This paper describes the practice and the
reality of OWL conversion of Japanese
WordNet and Japanese dictionary IPAdic.
The outcomes of OWL conversion are
linked to DBpedia Japanese dataset us-
ing lexical word matching. The difficulty
originating from the specialty of Japanese,
which is shareable by non-English lan-
guages, is focused. The potential of LOD
in linguistics is also discussed. The goal of
our study on Linguistics by LOD is to pro-
vide an open and rich environment in lin-
guistics that propels multi-lingual studies
for linguistics researchers and bottom-up
style ontology buildings for ontologists.

1 Introduction

The traditional study of linguistics in Japanese is
somehow domestic and not open so far to unre-
lated people. Linguistics by Linked Open Data
(LLOD) has a potential to break this tradition and
to open linguistic resources to broad researchers
unlimited within linguistics. However, Japanese
linguistic LOD embraces special difficulties that
arise from specialties of the nature of Japanese.
These difficulties are not only limited to Japanese
but also common to non-English languages.

In this paper, we describe the practice and the
reality of OWL conversion of Japanese WordNet
and Japanese dictionary IPAdic. To make the out-
comes into LOD, we linked the entities of them to
DBpedia Japanese and made them accessible on
WWWs.

In the next section, we summarize what is LOD
and address the benefit of LLOD along with the
introduction of DBpedia Japanese. Our work of
RDFization of Japanese WordNet and linkage to
DBpedia Japanese are described in Section 3. Sec-
tion 4 introduces the RDFization of IPAdic and the

linkage to DBpedia Japanese. Section 5 presents
the publication of our work as LOD. Related work
is discussed in Section 6, and Section 7 finally
gives the summary and the discussion for future
work.

2 LOD and DBpedia

2.1 Linguistic LOD and Five Stars
In Linked Open Data (LOD), Tim Berners-Lee,
the inventor of the Web and Linked Data initia-
tor, suggested a five-star deployment scheme.1 In
this view, there was no LOD resource for Japanese
linguistics up to this study. EDR (Yokoi, 1995)
by Japan Electronic Dictionary Research Center
and lately NICT, GoiTaikei (Ikehara, et al., 1997)
by NTT, and a Japanese corpora by National In-
stitute for Japanese Language and Linguistics2

are provided in machine readable forms but not
in free use. However, the property of Japanese
WordNet (Isahara, et al., 2008), IPAdic/NAIST-
jdic (Matsumoto, et al., 1999), and UniDic (Den,
et al., 2008) is in free use.

Based on the five-star scheme for LOD, we can
deduce the condition of making LOD of a domain
as follows.

1. Are materials in the domain open (free in
use)?

2. Is the structure of materials disclosed being
sufficient for RDFization?

3. Is it possible to name the components by con-
trollable URIs?

4. Is it possible to make linkage to other re-
sources?

Therefore, Japanese WordNet, IPAdic/NAIST-
jdic, and UniDic deserve the conversion to

1See http://5stardata.info/.
2See, http://www.ninjal.ac.jp/corpus_

center/kotonoha.html.

64



RDF/OWL data format in order to let them turn
data resources in LOD, namely making URIs
of all components in dictionaries with control-
lable domain names and letting them enable to
be referenced on the webs (i.e., dereferenceable).
Whereby, we can enjoy Japanese linguistic re-
sources in the new paradigm of LOD.

We propose the benefit of LLOD as follows.

• Enables the sharing of linguistic resources.

• Enables the comparison of linguistic re-
sources among them over silos of different
dictionaries in their own definitions.

• Enables the usage of linguistic resources with
other non-linguistic resources (e.g., DBpe-
dia).

• Enables the development of ontologies start-
ing at the lexical level for multiple vocabu-
lary sets.

2.2 DBpedia Japanese as LOD Hub
DBpedia Japanese is a database generated from
Japanese Wikipedia using DBpedia Information
Extraction Framework (DIEF).3 Although there
was significant delay in the deployment of DBpe-
dia Japanese, it was launched in 2012 by our col-
leagues at National Institute of Informatics (NII).
Since then, all LOD resources in Japan are being
linked to the DBpedia Japanese and it has become
the hub of LOD-cloud in Japan as English DBpe-
dia (Bizer, et al., 2009) is in the world. In Japan,
there are currently 23 data sets linked directly or
indirectly to DBpedia Japanese, which contains
77,445,359 triples, at the time of writing this pa-
per.

3 RDFization of Japanese WordNet and
Links to DBpedia Japanese

3.1 Practice of RDFization
In addition to RDF syntax4 and RDF semantics5,
we have discovered some pragmatics on RDFiza-
tion in LOD. General ones over diverse domains
are described in Heath and Bizer (2011). In this
section, we describe more specific practices in
RDFization of Japanese resources.

3https://github.com/dbpedia/
extraction-framework/wiki/
The-DBpedia-Information-Extraction-Framework

4http://www.w3.org/TR/
rdf-syntax-grammar/

5http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-mt/

3.1.1 Normalization of UNICODE
As known by the popular picture of Semantic
Web Layer Cake6, UNICODE is the proper char-
acter encoding set of Semantic Web and LOD.
However, it is not known that strings in an RDF
graph should be in Normal Form C (NFC) of UNI-
CODE.7 Otherwise, serious problems may hap-
pen in Japanese and other non-English languages.
For example, ‘ö’ that is located in Basic Plane 0
is encoded to U+00F6 but it is also printed by
octets U+006F (Latin small letter o) + U+0308
(combining dieresis). Then, we may miss string
matching “Gödel” between one that consists of
U+00F6 and the other that consists of U+006F +
U+0308. The same thing can happen in case of
Plato (Πλάτων) in which ‘ά’ may be U+03AC,
or the combination of U+03B1(Greek small letter
alpha) and U+0301(combining acute accent). In
Japanese, ‘が’(U+304C) may be represented by {
か +゛ }, and ‘ぷ’(U+3077) may be represented
by {ふ +゜ }. The normalization of NFC solves
this ambiguity of character strings in UNICODE.

3.1.2 Supplementary Ideographic Plane in
UNICODE

Several extended kanji characters are located in
Supplementary Ideographic Plane of UNICODE,
which is implemented by surrogate pairs, and
these extended kanji characters has been used for
Japanese person names before the age of electron-
ics. For example, ‘𠮷’ (U+20BB7) is very similar
to basic kanji ‘吉’ (U+5409), and ‘丈’ (U+2000B)
is similar to basic kanji ‘丈’ (U+4E08), but many
computer systems cannot print out the extended
kanji characters in Supplementary Ideographic
Plane. Then, Wikipedia titles a page for a pro-
boxer to “辰吉丈一郎” instead of his proper name
“辰𠮷丈一郎”, and then guides us to the page8,
even if we, on top of Wikipedia, search a page with
the proper name “辰𠮷丈一郎”. We must take care
of extended kanji characters with surrogate pairs
in data resources.

3.1.3 URI vs. IRI
N-Triples9 is a line-based, plain text format for en-
coding an RDF graph, but the character encoding

6http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Semantic_Web_Stack

7http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-mt/
#graphsyntax

8http://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/辰吉丈一郎
9http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-testcases/

#ntriples

65



in string is designated to 7-bit US-ASCII. So, non-
ASCII characters must be made available by \-
escape sequences, such as ‘\u3042’ for Japanese
hiragana ‘あ’ (U+3042).10

RDF/XML syntax11 designates %-encoding for
disallowable characters that do not correspond to
permitted US-ASCII in URI encoding, in spite that
the UNICODE string as UTF-8 is designated to
the RDF/XML representation. Therefore, the dis-
allowed URL http://ja.dbpedia.org/page/辰
吉丈一郎must be escaped as http://ja.dbpedia.
org/page/ %E8%BE%B0%E5%90%89%E4%B8%88%E4%

B8%80%E9%83%8E in RDF/XML syntax.
Turtle12 and JSON-LD13 allow IRIs. We expect

every platform for Semantic Web and LOD can
process format files of Turtle and JSON-LD, and
then the revised edition of RDF/XML will allow
IRIs in near future.

At the end, we will be able to choose URIs if
we focus on the international usability of the data,
or IRIs if we take care of domestic understand-
ability. The RFC3986, the standard of URI, says
for the design of URI, “a URI often has to be re-
membered by people, and it is easier for people to
remember a URI when it consists of meaningful
or familiar components.” This statement can be
rephrased with replacing IRI for URI.

3.2 RDFization of English WordNet

The WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) is a collection of
sets of synonymous words or synsets, in which
each synset, a set of synonymous words, is asso-
ciated with semantic properties and values such as
hypernym, hyponym, holonym, meronym, etc.

In 2006, W3C issued W3C Working Draft on
RDF/OWL Representation of WordNet (van As-
sem, et al., 2006a), and then the authors of the
draft actually made the conversion of WordNet to
the RDF/OWL representation language for Word-
Net 2.0 (van Assem, et al., 2006b).

In the data files of English WordNet, each line
of synsets includes the synonymous words with a
sense number associated to the polysemous word
for this sense. Thus, the W3C Working Draft of
WordNet reflects this many to many relation be-
tween synsets and polysemous words by setting
word senses.

10Hiragana are characters that represent Japanese sylla-
bles. A syllable is composed of a consonant plus a vowel.

11http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-rdf-syntax/
12http://www.w3.org/TR/turtle/
13http://www.w3.org/TR/json-ld/

After the W3C proposal for OWL conver-
sion of WordNet, the Princeton WordNet was
updated to version 2.1, in which new relations
of instanceHypernym and instanceHyponym has
been introduced, and now the latest version is
3.0. In following the updates of WordNet, the
RDF schema for WordNet 2.0 should be reused
to 2.1 and 3.0, according to one of rules for
the best practice in LOD. Only for two new
properties, wn21schema:instanceHyponymOf and
wn21schema:instanceHypernymOf should be de-
fined in WordNet 2.1. On the other hand,
the namespaces of every instance of words,
word senses, and synsets may be updated to
wn21instances or wn30instances, de-
pending on the version numbers in order to dis-
tinguish the version of data, even if the content of
an entry was not updated in a new version.

3.3 RDFization of Japanese WordNet
The latest Japanese WordNet is built on top of
Princeton’s English WordNet 3.0 by adding ap-
propriate Japanese words to the content of Prince-
ton WordNet 3.0 on the framework of the Word-
Net. A polysemous Japanese word is related
to more than one English synset via Japanese
word senses as usual in the WordNet manner.
Thus, we set up the namespace for Japanese
WordNet to wnja11instances. According
to the W3C proposal for OWL conversion of
WordNet, we converted Japanese WordNet to
OWL. Here, wnja11instances:word-犬 (dog) is
made and linked to both wnja11instances:word
sense-犬-noun-1 and wnja11instances:word
sense-犬-noun-2. Furthermore, the former is
linked to wnja11instances:synset-spy-noun-1
and the latter is linked to wnja11instances:
synset-dog-noun-1. Japanese word “犬” means
“dog” and “spy”, but does not mean “frump” in
English. However, because of depending on the
English WordNet framework, the Japanese vocab-
ulary is not comprehensive yet, and Japanese spe-
cific concepts are still not completed.

3.4 Linking Japanese WordNet to DBpedia
Japanese

Since both English WordNet and English
Wikipedia are the most famous comprehensive
language resources, there are many studies
how the combination contributes to build better
language resources. We have also investigated
how Wikipedia Japanese can enrich Japanese

66



WordNet. The result of investigation suggests that
it is not easy to build clean hypernym/hyponym
relationship by merging two ontologies that are
independently built. We think the reason is
partly from inaccurate ontology buildings of the
Japanese WordNet Developers, and partly from
immature methodology of ontology building.

English WordNet itself includes ontological
ambiguity between concepts and instances. For
instance, synset-European Central
Bank-noun-1 is not linked via
instanceHyponymOf but linked via
hyponymOf to synset-central bank-
noun-1, although European Central Bank is
regarded as an instance of concept central bank
from the ontological view. White House as an
executive department of American government is
also not defined as instance of executive depart-
ment but White House as residence is defined as
an instance of residence. These facts suggest that
English WordNet adopts some tacit knowledge
of instances and classes. However, there is no
explicit explanation about it, and it is not common
in the community of ontology. Thus, we have no
accurate and rational method on a firm foundation
to merge WordNet to another ontology, whereas
we have several similarity-based studies on
ontology merging. They show much room for
improvement. On the other hand, it is well known
that DBpedia and its terms in the infoboxes are
not sufficient to conceive of the infoboxes as
ontology.

Therefore, we have here simply linked en-
tities between Japanese WordNet and DBpedia
Japanese not ontologically but literally, i.e., we
link word noun entities of WordNet to DBpedia
resources using property skos:closeMatch,
where words in WordNet and resource names in
Wikipedia share the same strings. Starting at the
literal connection, the way of re-arranging and
merging two ontologies will be studied step by
step in bottom-up style, from lexicality to mean-
ing, morphology to semantics, and linguistics to
ontologies.

In linking Japanese WordNet to DBpedia
Japanese, we decided to use only nouns of
Japanese WordNet. One reason is that most re-
sources in DBpedia are categorized as nouns,
whereas there are categorically three types of IRIs
in DBpedia, i.e., resource, property, and page of
Wikipedia. Therefore, we selected resource IRIs

Table 1: WN-ja Link Number to DBpedia-ja
DBpedia # links # WN nouns rate
resources 33,636 65,788 51.1%

Table 2: DBpedia-ja Link Number to WN-ja
DBpedia # of links # of IRIs rate
resources 33,636 1,395,329 2.4%

for candidates of linking.
The other reason is to avoid needless ambiguity.

Japanese verbs are categorized into several types
of conjugate forms. One type verb is composed of
one or more (typically two) kanji characters (root)
+ “する” (conjugational suffix) for positive14, e.g.,
“散歩する” (stroll), etc. Then, these roots are
mostly nouns. It is obvious that a Japanese noun
and a Japanese verb that shares morphemic root
with the noun should be discriminated. However,
Japanese WordNet does not distinguish them and
then marks part-of-speech ‘verb’ to morphemic
roots. Thus, word “散歩” is marked as noun and
verb. This ambiguity will create needless links, if
we link verbs in Japanese WordNet to DBpedia in
addition to nouns.

Table 1 shows the statistics of linking data of
Japanese WordNet to DBpedia Japanese, and Ta-
ble 2 shows the statistics of linking data of DBpe-
dia Japanese to Japanese WordNet. The lexically
exact mapping produces one by one and inversely
equivalent matching between both.

4 RDFization of IPAdic and Links to
DBpedia Japanese

4.1 OWL Conversion of IPAdic

In the RDFization of IPAdic 2.7.0, we encoun-
tered one typical problem in RDF, that is, the
domain and range problem. Every property in
RDF restricts the class of its subject and ob-
ject of a given triple in a context. For in-
stance, a property of wn20schema:sense desig-
nates an instance of wn20schema:Word for sub-
ject and an instance of wn20schema:WordSense
for object, and vice versa on wn20schema:word.
In the conversion of IPAdic, the adoption of prop-
erties defined in WordNet 2.0 schema will result
in forcing the classification to WordNet classes
on IPAdic entries. Therefore, we newly defined
a schema, in which properties of IPAdic which

14and + “しない” for negative

67



are similar to WordNet but whose namespace is
different from WordNet.15 In other words, we,
instead of wn20schema:word and wn20schema:
sense, defined and used ipadic27schema:word
and ipadic27schema:sense, of which the do-
main and range are ipadic27schema:Word and
ipadic27schema:WordSense.

In addition, we reflected the information of
parts of speech, connection costs, lemmas, and
word readings of IPAdic into the schema. In
this RDFization process, we recognized that a
lemma and a reading represented by katakana16

for a kanji word should be assigned to a sense but
not the word. Thus, we defined the domain of
ipadic27schema:reading as ipadic27schema:
WordSense in order to reflect such Japanese sense
structure in IPAdic, whereas there is no descrip-
tion of senses or means. We generated entities of
word senses from words in order to enable the as-
signment of lemmas and readings to them.

4.2 Linking IPAdic to DBpedia Japanese
The outcomes of the conversion of IPAdic are
linked to DBpedia Japanese with literal match-
ing between noun words in IPAdic and resource
names of DBpedia. In spite of the creation of word
senses in the IPAdic, the connection of IPAdic en-
tries as sense is suppressed, because there is no ex-
plicit evidence on senses in IPAdic for connecting
to DBpedia Japanese. The connection from word
senses of IPAdic to DBpedia is left as work in near
future.

Table 3 shows the number of links and the rate
from IPAdic to DBpedia Japanese, and Table 4 for
the number of links and the rate from DBpedia
Japanese to IPAdic.

Table 3: IPAdict Link Number to DBpedia-ja
DBpedia # linked # IPAdic nouns rate
resources 54,735 197,479 27.7%

5 Publishing as LOD

As a means of registration at the Data Hub17, DB-
pedia Japanese has been published as the Japanese

15Truly, we can set only classes and properties newly re-
quired, and add them to an existing set of WordNet proper-
ties, since RDF semantics allows that an instance is classified
into multiple classes. However, it will be easy to cause mis-
understanding and misusage by users.

16Katakana is a Japanese syllabary like hiragana but it is
ofen used to represent loanwords and imitative words.

17http://datahub.io/

Table 4: DBpedia-ja Link Number to IPAdic
DBpedia # linked # IRIs rate
resources 54,735 1,456,158 3.8%

hub of LOD with CC-BY-SA license. It is avail-
able from our site18 to access the data derefer-
enceablly, make a query at a SPARQL endpoint,
and dump the zip files. This DBpedia Japanese
includes the links to Japanese WordNet in lexical
level.

Japanese WordNet and IPAdic have also been
published under a CC-BY-SA license, same as
DBpedia Japanese, from our sites.19 The dump
files are also available at our repository. 20

It is critical as LOD to make all entities deref-
erenceable. We acquired the domain names word-
net.jp and ipadic.jp to obtain controllable domain
names for Japanese WordNet and IPAdic, and then
SPARQL endpoints are opened with http://
wordnet.jp/ and http://ipadic.jp/ in
addition of making the entries dereferenceable.

6 Related Work

As described so far in this paper, this work is
the first attempt of LOD on Japanese linguistic
resources. However, several studies in Semantic
Webs related to dictionaries and ontologies have
been completed before the advent of LOD. Koide,
et al. (2006) performed OWL conversion of EDR
and Princeton WordNet 2.1 according to the W3C
working draft on OWL conversion. The converted
files were open and down-loadable but there was
no dereferenceable web site and no SPARQL end-
point, as things in the pre-LOD age.

An LOD site for words and characters in multi-
linguistics were opend by de Melo and Weikum
(2008).

YAGO (Suchanek, et al., 2008) is the first
substantial study of automatic ontology construc-
tion from two comprehensive English resources,
Wikipedia and WordNet. YAGO conceives of
Wikipedia as knowledge about facts. Then, a se-
mantic model like RDFS, which is closed within
DBpeida (called YAGO model),21 is used for cap-
turing facts in DBpedia with reifying the fact.

18http://ja.dbpedia.org/
19http://wordnet.jp/ and http://ipadic.

jp/
20http://lod.ac/dumps/wordnet/20130724/

and http://lod.ac/dumps/wordnet/20130724/
21The elemental model in Semantic Webs must be open.

68



Each synset of WordNet becomes a class of
YAGO. The Wikipedia category hierarchy is aban-
doned, and only the leaves are used for the fac-
tual information extraction. The lower classes ex-
tracted from Wikipedia conceptual category are
connected to higher classes extracted from Word-
Net. Therefore, YAGO takes care of the quality of
types of individuals and there is no way to improve
the ontology of WordNet. The automatic ontol-
ogy construction in higher classes and the merging
of multiple-ontologies that may contain inconsis-
tency is still an open problem.

Ontology alignment is critical to obtain one
united resource from two inconsistent resources
with different coverages, different ontological
structures, and different semantics. There are
many studies on ontology alignment up to now.22

However, these studies show immaturity on sci-
ence and methodology of ontology building. Cur-
rently, similarity of lexical texts, synonym sets,
and hypernym/hyponym tree structure is only
a way to merge multiple linguistic resources.
Hayashi (2012) proposed a new method to com-
pute cross-lingual semantic similarity using syn-
onym sets.

7 Conclusion and Feature Work

In this paper, we described the practice, real-
ity, and difficulty of RDFization on two dis-
tinct Japanese dictionaries, Japanese WordNet and
IPAdic, together with the benefit of and the expec-
tation to LLOD. In this LLOD attempt, the linkage
is realized on the surface level of lexicality. The
linkage between word senses of WordNet and dis-
ambiguated DBpedia resources will be studied in
near future, and the connection from word senses
of IPAdic to DBpedia, too.

The power of LOD resides in the nature of
openness and commonality. Thus, LLOD is the
nature of linguistics because of the commonality
of linguistics. We believe that the outcomes of
LLOD will be infrastructure in each society of
countries and the international world in future.

References
C. Bizer, J. Lehmann, G. Kobilarov, S. Auer, C. Becker,

R. Cyganiak, and S. Hellmann. 2009. DBpedia - A
Crystallization Point for the Web of Data, J. Web
Semantics, 7(3):154–165.
22See http://ontologymatching.org/

publications.html

Gerard de Melo, Gerhard Weikum. 2008. Language as
a Foundation of the Semantic Web, 7th International
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC2008), Poster.

Yasuharu Den, Junpei Nakamura, Toshinobu Ogiso,
Hideki Ogura. 2008. A proper approach to Japanese
morphological analysis: Dictionary, model, and
evaluation, The 6th Edition of Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference (LREC-2008),
Marrakech.

Christiane Fellbaum (ed.). 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press.

Yoshihiko Hayashi. 2013. Computing Cross-Lingual
Synonym Set Similarity by Using Princeton An-
notated Gloss Corpus, Proc. Global Wordnet
Conf.(GWC2012), Matsue, 134–141 Tribun EU.

Tom Heath and Christian Bizer. 2011. Linked Data:
Evolving the Web into a Global Data Space, Morgan
& Claypool.

Satoru Ikehara, et al. 1997. Goi-Taikei — A Japanese
Lexicon, Iwanami Shoten, Tokyo.

Hitoshi Isahara, Francis Bond, Kiyotaka Uchimoto,
Masao Utiyama, and Kyoko Kanzaki. 2008. De-
velopment of Japanese WordNet, The 6th Edition of
the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC-2008), Marrakech.

Seiji Koide, Takeshi Morita, Takahira Yamaguchi,
Hendry Muljadi, Hideaki Takeda. 2006. RDF/OWL
Representation of WordNet 2.1 and Japanese EDR
Electric Dictionary, 5th International Semantic Web
Conference (ISWC2006), Poster.

Yuji Matsumoto, Akira Kitauchi, Tatsuo Yamashita,
and Yoshitaka Hirano. 1999. Japanese Morpho-
logical Analysis System ChaSen version 2.0 Manual,
NAIST Technical Report, NAIST-IS-TR99009.

Fabian M. Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, Gerhard
Weikum. 2008. YAGO: A Large Ontology from
Wikipedia and WordNet, Web Semantics: Science,
Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, 6:203–
217, Elsevier.

Mark van Assem, Aldo Gangemi, and Guus Schreiber.
2006. RDF/OWL Representation of WordNet,
W3C Working Draft, http://www.w3.org/
TR/wordnet-rdf/.

Mark van Assem, Aldo Gangemi, and Guus Schreiber.
2006. Conversion of WordNet to a standard
RDF/OWL representation, Proc. (LREC-2006).

Toshio Yokoi. 1995. The EDR Electronic Dictionary,
Commun. ACM, 38(11):42–44.

69


