




















New Measures to Investigate Term Typology by
Distributional Data

Jussi Karlgren
from

Kungliga Tekniska Högskolan
and

Gavagai, Stockholm

jussi@kth.se

ABSTRACT
This report describes a series of exploratory experiments to establish whether terms of different
semantic type can be distinguished in useful ways in a semantic space constructed from
distributional data. The hypotheses explored in this paper are that some words are more variant
in their distribution than others; that the varying semantic character of words will be reflected in
their distribution; and this distributional difference is encoded in current distributional models,
but that the information is not accessible through the methods typically used in application of
them. This paper proposes some new measures to explore variation encoded in distributional
models but not usually put to use in understanding the character of words represented in them.
These exploratory findings show that some proposed measures show a wide range of variation
across words of various types.

KEYWORDS: Term typology, distributional semantics.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 311 of 474]



1 Words and terms in use — general requirements for a language model

For text analysis tasks such as information retrieval, terminology mining, or conceptual mod-
elling, words and terms naturally lend themselves as surrogates for documents or representa-
tions of concepts. A necessary component in any system for text analysis is a representation,
explicit or implicit in the text analysis process, for the concepts expressed in text by computation
over the terms that express them. Since the lexical variation is great, such a representation must
select or weight or consider the words, terms, and constructions judiciously, typically based on
observable characteristics of the items in the text collection under consideration, sometimes
consulting language resources compiled elsewhere such as lexica or ontologies.

Target notions for the usefulness of a word or term for some typical text analysis tasks are e.g.
representativeness for some topic, specificity in discriminating between documents of different
topics, and topicality in general, meaning how likely its appearance in a text is evidence of
it being a carrier of text topic. (Spärck Jones, 1972; Hisamitsu et al., 2000; Katz, 1996)
A representation or language model, whether probabilistic, geometric, or symbolic, should
obviously be designed to capture the target notions most relevant for the task at hand. The
three characteristics given above are not immediately observable in themselves — they are
derived from observed distributional behaviour of words and terms in text and discourse and
from an understanding of what topic is, extratextually.

But, aside from a word’s potential usefulness for a task, it will have semantic characteristics
which usually are acknowledged by the community of language users: terminological vagueness,
abstraction, indefiniteness, and change over time are obvious, ubiquitous, and salient character-
istics of words and terms in human language, but seldom afforded any place in computation.
Any language model, whether it addresses hands-on tasks in information access application,
machine translation, dialogue systems or other application area for human alnguage processing
or if it built to elucidate the workings of human communicative behaviour in the abstract should
be expected to address those semantic characteristics which are most obvious to human users
of language.

What character can words and terms then have, observably? An observable difference between
words and terms is their distribution over semantic neighbourhoods. Some words and terms
are focussed and specific; others are inspecific and spread over several usage patterns. In this
initial paper we propose some measures to explore this distributional variation.

2 Experiments on word distributions

These first experiments concern the behaviour of words. Terms are frequently composed of
several words in conventional fixed configurations (Smadja, 1993; Justeson and Katz, 1995)
and the arguments and experiments given here can be generalised to multi-word terms and even
constructions, but for practical reasons these initial experiments are performed on single-token
words. The distribution of words is here studied in two text collections — a collection of
newprint from Reuters comprising 200 million words in short news telegrams, and one month
of collected English-language blog text comprising 189 million words in short blog posts.

Our hypotheses are (1) that some words are more variant in their distribution than others — an
assumption that is not difficult to defend; (2) that the varying semantic character of words will
be reflected in their distribution; and (3) this distributional difference is encoded in current
distributional models, but that the information is not accessible through the methods typically
used in application of them.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 312 of 474]



abstract terms
ability adventure amazed anger anxious awe bad beauty belief brave brutal calm chaos charity childhood clarity comfort communication compassion confidence content courage crime

curious customer death deceit dedication defeat delight democracy despair determined dictatorship disappointment disbelief disquiet disturbance education ego elegance energy

enhancement enthusiasm envy evil excited failure faith faithful fascination fear forgive fragile frail free freedom friend friendship generous glitter good grace gracious grief happiness happy

hate hatred hearsay helpful helpless home honest hope hurt idea imagination impression improvement infatuation inflation insanity intelligence jealousy joy justice kindness knowledge

laughter law liberty life loss love loyal loyalty luck lucky luxury mature maturity memory mercy moral motivation move movement music need opinion opportunity pain patience peace

peculiar peculiarity pleasure poor poverty power pride principle real reality refreshment relief restoration rich rumour sacrifice sad sadness sanity satisfaction self-control sensitive service

shock silly skill sparkle speculation speed strength stupid success surprise sympathy talent thrill tired tolerance trust unemployment upset warm weak weakness wealth wisdom worth

Swadesh terms
i you we this that who what not all many one two big long small woman man person fish bird dog louse tree seed leaf root bark skin flesh blood bone grease egg horn tail feather hair head

ear eye nose mouth tooth tongue nail foot knee hand belly neck breast heart liver drink eat bite see hear know sleep die kill swim fly walk come lie sit stand give say sun moon star water

rain stone sand soil cloud smoke fire ashes burn path mountain red green yellow white black night hot cold full new good round dry name

Figure 1: Abstract and Swadesh terms used in the experiment

To test the hypotheses under consideration we established two word lists to provide a basis
for differentiating behaviour of different types of word. We initially took the 100 word list
by Swadesh with cross-linguistically translatable words as an example of concrete and fairly
invariant concept references. (Swadesh, 1971) We added a list of some 160 abstract terms
taken from various author guides.1 The terms used are given in Figure 1.

2.1 Simple distributional measures

For practical semantic tasks such as search engines, topic modelling, or text categorisation,
term usage is computed from their occurrence statistics. The typical search engine categorises
terms according to their potential information content inasmuch can be determined from its
distribution over a document collection, the target task being to separate documents from each
other using search terms as a criterion. This sort of computation serves well to distinguish
topical from non-topical words. Table 2.1 shows how the Okapi BM25 formula (Robertson and
Zaragoza, 2009), the base for many, or even most, practical search engines today weights terms
differentially depending on their topical qualities based on a combination of term frequency
within documents, the number of documents the term appears in often with a document length
factor added in to compensate for the effect of long documents on term frequency counts.

In general, formulæ such as BM25 do a good job of taking out words with a broad and
uninteresting distribution, as well as infrequent words. Words with a low BM25 tend to be
function words, misspellings, and unusual compounds. Words with a high BM25 score will be
trade marks, names, and technical terms. This serves the needs of a topical search engine well.

A more principled approach to modelling word distribution is the three-parameter burstiness
model formulated by Slava Katz (Katz, 1996). His model uses occurrence statistics to estimate α,
the likelihood of encountering a term, γ the likelihood of its being topical if encountered, and B,
the burstiness of the term, if established as topical. These estimates are handily calculated with
α being the observed relative frequency of the term, γ the observed number of documents where
the term occurs more than once, and B the average frequency of a term in those documents

1Author guidelines tend to issue blanket warnings to aspiring writers, discouraging abstract and vague vocabulary,
irrespective of if it would be warranted or not.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 313 of 474]



Newsprint
average t f id f BM25

and 4.29 2.92e-7 3.20
it 2.74 6.45e-7 5.61

...
food 1.72 2.09e-5 13.2
hunger 1.50 0.000453 14.8
eat 1.21 0.000653 12.3
beef 2.40 8.50e-5 10.56
seafood 1.43 0.00239 10.56
barbecue 1.19 0.0149 2.97
jerky 1.00 0.0454 0.841

Table 1: Search engine measures for some sample words for news text.

Newsprint
α γ B
p̂(occurrence) p̂(topical i t y) p̂(burst iness)

and 0.270 0.819 6.20
it 0.177 0.589 3.52

...
food 0.0123 0.347 3.09
hunger 0.000616 0.319 2.59
eat 0.0000545 0.159 2.3
beef 0.00236 0.613 3.29
seafood 0.000131 0.242 2.79
barbecue 0.0000239 0.121 2.57
jerky 0.00000907 0 0

Table 2: Katz measures for some sample words for news text.

where its frequency is over 1. Katz’ α is high for frequent and low for infrequent words; Katz’
γ is high for words that are likely to be repeated and thus likely to be topical in the contexts
where it is used; for Katz’ burstiness we find very high scores for function words, high scores
indicative of technical terms and trade marks and low burstiness scores for hapax legomena
and misspellings, as exemplifed in Table 2.1. A word such as music will has in our present data
set an observed likelihood of 0.38 of being repeated once seen in text, and thus, following Katz’
estimate, a relatively high probability of being a topical term in discourse; a word such as stupid
an observed repeat likelihood of 0.09 and a lower attendant estimated probability of being
topical.

2.2 Variation in local context size

As a first test we collected the variation in the immediate neighbourhood of the words under
consideration. For each word, we tabulated its occurrences and its immediately adjacent words

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 314 of 474]



#different words/#observations
blog text newsprint

eat 0.09 0.35
sun 0.18 0.58

...
talent 0.91 0.95
gossip 1.10 1.56

Table 3: Number of neighbours in local context

in a window of two words to the left and to the right. We find that function words such as
and it, vague terms such as good, and very general verbs such see have a more wide range of
neighbours than do more referentially specific terms such as frail soil or defeat.

Table 3 gives some examples of terms ranging from 0.09 to 1.56. The theoretical maximum
of this score is 4 for a completely dispersed neighbourhood: with two words collected to the
left and two to the right, if every observation has all those four words different the score will
be 4. The table of results is sorted by score, and subsequent rank sum tests show significant
differences between the Swadesh terms and the abstract and vague term list, with the former
having a more focussed and presumably semantically more constrained neighbourhood. (Mann
Whitney U, p> 0.95) This gives us reason to experiment further, to see how their neighbourhood
evaloves, related to the two different types of word and to their respective occurrence statistics
over a growing number of observations.

2.3 Variation in a semantic space

In the following experiments a distributional semantic space representation is used. Distri-
butional semantic models are based on the assumption that similarity in meaning between
entails similarity in usage and thus in the distribution of the words under consideration over
a text collection. This assumption holds, as shown in numerous word semantic evaluation
experiments. The model in these experiments is built from the two data sets given above using
a standard implementation of the random indexing framework (Kanerva et al., 2000) using
1000-dimensional ternary vectors of density 3. Each word encountered in the text is at time
of first observation accorded one randomly generated index vector. The distributional context
of a word is then represented with another 1000-dimensional context vector, into which, for
each occurrence of the word, are added the index vectors of adjacent words in the immediate
left and right contexts (Sahlgren et al., 2008). This context vector will over time, after a
number of observations, capture the close distributional neighbourhood of the word in all
occurrences encountered thus far. Words with similar contextual distributions will converge
towards similar context vectors. The context in these experiments are modelled by a 2+ 2
window which has been shown by previous work to best capture tight semantic relations such
as synonymy (Sahlgren, 2006). This setting is naturally an obvious one to vary in future
experiments — is the semantic variation more noticeable in the tight semantic relations or in
the broader more associative relations given by a broad window.

This context vector constitutes the basic data on which the following experiments are performed.
This model is a fairly general distributional model and is used not for its specific characteristics
but for processing convenience. It is reasonable to assume that most results would in the main

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 315 of 474]



honest 25
person 74

education 85
law 96

Table 4: Number of second-order neighbours for some selected words

translate to any more sophisticated semantic space or probabilistic language model.

2.3.1 Semantic tightness: Overlap

In a semantic space, the meaning of a word is determined by its neighbours. This first measure
computes the number of second order-neighbours by taking the ten nearest neigbours to a
word and then the ten nearest neighbours for each of those neighbours. If the ten closest
neighbours of the ten closest neighbours overlap well, the neighbourhood is semantically well
connected. If they do not, the neighbourhood is semantically diverse. The minimum score is
10, the maximum is 110, if all terms have ten different nearest neighbours. A graph of how
the number of neighbours evolves as text is being processed is shown in Figure 2 and some
example words are given in Table 4. The range of variation for words with a score starting to
flatten out is between about 20 and 90 and do so at about a hundred occurrences. Rank sum
tests show significant differences between the Swadesh terms and the abstract and vague term
list, with the former having a larger average number of second-order neighbours, in partial
contradiction to the above result of local neighbourhood size given in Table 3. (Mann Whitney
U, p > 0.95) Presumably this shows that the while the immediate distributional neighbourhood
of the concrete Swadesh words is close, the words used with it are of a general character.

Figure 2: Semantic tightness measured by the number of second order neighbours among the
ten nearest neighbours.

2.3.2 Semantic tightness: Angle-at-10

This measure is computed by taking cosine between the target word and its tenth nearest
neighbour in the word space. If the word has few semantically similar words, this measure
should remain close to 0; if this measure is closer to one, there is a tighter semantic context
around this word. A graph of how this measure evolves as text is processed is shown in Figure 3
and some example words are given in Table 5. The range of variation for words with a score

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 316 of 474]



Figure 3: Semantic tightness measured by the cosine to the tenth neighbour.

know→ f eel 0.37
bad → substandard 0.24
peace→ harmony 0.20

Table 5: Cosine to the tenth neighbour for some selected words

starting to flatten out is between about 0.15 and 0.5 — the latter is already a noteworthy score
of closeness in this type of model. Rank sum tests show significant differences between the
Swadesh terms and the abstract and vague term list, with the former having a lower cosine score
to the tenth neighbour, again in partial contradiction to the above result of local neighbourhood
size given in Table 3. (Mann Whitney U, p > 0.95) Presumably this shows that the constrained
neighbourhood may not extend to as many as ten neighbouring words.

2.3.3 Semantic wobble

The third measure we propose is how much the position of the word changes with additional
information as new observations of the word are encountered. This measure is computed
by taking the cosine between the position of the word in word space before and after each
observation. This measure thus captures the semantic impact of the latest observation. A graph
of how this measure evolves as text is processed is shown in Figure 4. The great majority of
words converge relatively rapidly towards values of over 0.9, indicating that their meaning
remains stable in this implementation. Some vary more: group, position, and break with rather
less specific semantics have lower scores than words such as election and university.

2.3.4 Converging to known synonym

For words with very obviously identifiable synonyms — a small minority of terms in human
language — a measure of convergence can be used to test the quality of the implementation
at hand. Semantically very similar words should be assumed to relatively rapidly converge
towards each other — meaning that their representations in this implementation should find
each other after not too many occurrences. As an example, words such as he and she as well as
man and woman should be expected to end up with similar representations. This assumption is
borne out by data from this experiment as shown in Table 6 with the notable exception of the
delay for man to match with woman as its closest synonym in blog text, where various names

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 317 of 474]



Figure 4: Semantic wobble measured by divergence from centroid.

blog text newsprint
first occurrence stable occurrence first occurrence stable occurrence

he→ she 12 37 216 384
she→ he 21 34 4 5

woman→ man 214 284 4 4
man→ woman 228 562 40 74

Table 6: Number of occurrences until most reasonable synonym is established

and synonyms such as guy confound the process.

3 Conclusion

This first — quite explorative — study is intended to provide a first basis for measures beyond
first-order term and document frequency as a measurement of terminological specificity. Some
of the proposed measures appear to give purchases to separate terminology quite broadly: the
range of variation shows promise for semantically useful distinctions to be made. A notable
observation is that by most measures, words appear to find their semantic position in but a few
mentions. Most words are fairly consistent in their meaning, even in the more fluid material
given by blog authors.

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by Vetenskapsrådet, the Swedish Research Council through a grant for
the project “Distributionally derived grammatical analysis models”.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 318 of 474]



References

Hisamitsu, T., Niwa, Y., and Tsujii, J.-i. (2000). A method of measuring term representativeness:
baseline method using co-occurrence distribution. In Proceedings of the 18th conference on
Computational linguistics, pages 320–326, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Justeson, J. S. and Katz, S. M. (1995). Technical terminology: some linguistic properties and
an algorithm for identification in text. Natural Language Engineering, 1:9–27.

Kanerva, P., Kristofersson, J., and Holst, A. (2000). Random indexing of text samples for latent
semantic analysis. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
CogSci’00, page 1036. Erlbaum.

Katz, S. (1996). Distribution of content words and phrases in text and language modelling.
Natural Language Engineering, 2(1):15–60.

Robertson, S. and Zaragoza, H. (2009). The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and
beyond. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, 3:333–389.

Sahlgren, M. (2006). The Word-Space Model: Using distributional analysis to represent syn-
tagmatic and paradigmatic relations between words in high-dimensional vector spaces. PhD
Dissertation, Department of Linguistics, Stockholm University.

Sahlgren, M., Holst, A., and Kanerva, P. (2008). Permutations as a means to encode order
in word space. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
CogSci’08, pages 1300–1305, Washington D.C., USA.

Smadja, F. (1993). Retrieving collocations from text: Xtract. Computational Linguistics,
19:143–177.

Spärck Jones, K. (1972). A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its application in
retrieval. Journal of Documentation, 28:11–21.

Swadesh, M. (1971). The origin and diversification of language. Aldine, Chicago. Edited by
Joel Sherzer post mortem.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 319 of 474]


