










































Cross-Lingual Metaphor Detection Using Common Semantic Features


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Metaphor in NLP, pages 45–51,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Cross-Lingual Metaphor Detection Using Common Semantic Features

Yulia Tsvetkov Elena Mukomel Anatole Gershman
Language Technologies Institute

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA

{ytsvetko,helenm,anatoleg}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

We present the CSF - Common Semantic Fea-
tures method for metaphor detection. This
method has two distinguishing characteristics:
it is cross-lingual and it does not rely on the
availability of extensive manually-compiled
lexical resources in target languages other than
English. A metaphor detecting classifier is
trained on English samples and then applied to
the target language. The method includes pro-
cedures for obtaining semantic features from
sentences in the target language. Our exper-
iments with Russian and English sentences
show comparable results, supporting our hy-
pothesis that a CSF-based classifier can be ap-
plied across languages. We obtain state-of-
the-art performance in both languages.

1 Introduction

Metaphors are very powerful pervasive communica-
tion tools that help deliver complex concepts and
ideas simply and effectively (Lakoff and Johnson,
1980). Automatic detection and interpretation of
metaphors is critical for many practical language
processing tasks such as information extraction,
summarization, opinion mining, and translation. In
this paper, we focus on the automatic metaphor de-
tection task. This problem gained much attention
in natural language processing research mostly us-
ing the detection principles articulated by the Prag-
glejaz Group (2007). According to these princi-
ples, a lexical unit (a word or expression) is used
metaphorically if its contextual meaning is different
from its “basic contemporary” meaning. To apply

this method, we need to be able to determine the ba-
sic meaning of a lexical unit and then test if this in-
terpretation makes sense in the current context.

Several approaches to automatic detection of
metaphors have been proposed (Gedigian et al.,
2006; Krishnakumaran and Zhu, 2007; Shutova et
al., 2010), all of which rely on the availability of
extensive manually crafted lexical resources such
as WordNet, VerbNet, FrameNet, TreeBank, etc.
Unfortunately, such resources exist only for a few
resource-rich languages such as English. For most
other languages, such resources either do not exist
or are of a low quality.

To our knowledge this work is the first empiri-
cal study of cross-lingual metaphor detection. We
present the Common Semantic Features (CSF) ap-
proach to metaphor detection in languages without
extensive lexical resources. In a target language
it requires only a dependency parser and a target-
English dictionary. We classify sentences into lit-
eral and metaphoric using automatically extracted
coarse-grained semantic properties of words such as
their propensity to refer to abstract versus concrete
concepts, animate entities, artifacts, body parts, etc.
These properties serve as features for the key re-
lations in a sentence, which include Subject-Verb-
Object (SVO) and Adjective-Noun (AN). A clas-
sifier trained on English sentences obtains a 0.78
F -score. The same classifier, trained solely on
English sentences, achieves a similar level of per-
formance on sentences from other languages such
as Russian; this is the central contribution of this
work. An additional important contribution is that in
Russian we obtain the necessary semantic features

45



without recourse to sophisticated non-English lexi-
cal resources. In this paper, we focus on the sen-
tences where verbs are used metaphorically, leaving
Adjective-Noun relations for future work. Based on
our examination of over 500 metaphorical sentences
in English and Russian collected from general news
articles, we estimate that verb-based metaphors con-
stitute about 40-50% of all metaphors.

We present and discuss our experiments with
three sets of features: (1) features corresponding to
the lexicographer file names defined in WordNet
3.0 (Fellbaum, 1998), (2) features based on abstract-
ness vs. concreteness computed using Vector Space
Models (VSM), and (3) features based on the types
of named entities, if present. Our main target lan-
guage in these experiments has been Russian, but we
also present preliminary experiments with Spanish.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 con-
tains an overview of the resources we use; Sec-
tion 3 discusses the methodology; Section 4 presents
the experiments; in Section 5, we discuss related
work, and we conclude with suggestions for future
research in Section 6.

2 Datasets

We use the following English lexical resources to
train our model:

TroFi Example Base1 (Birke and Sarkar, 2007) of
3,737 English sentences from the Wall Street Jour-
nal. Each sentence contains one of the seed verbs
and is marked L by human annotators if the verb
is used in a literal sense. Otherwise, the sentence
is marked N (non-literal). The model was evalu-
ated on 25 target verbs with manually annotated 1
to 115 sentences per verb. TroFi does not define the
basic meanings of these verbs, but provides exam-
ples of literal and metaphoric sentences which we
use to train and evaluate our metaphor identification
method.

WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) is an English lexical
database where each entry contains a set of syn-
onyms (a synset) all representing the same con-
cept. This database is compiled from a set of

1http://www.cs.sfu.ca/ anoop/students/jbirke/

45 lexicographer files2 such as “noun.body” or
“verb.cognition” identified by a number from 0 to
44, called lexicographer file number (henceforth
lexFN ). The lexFN of each synset is contained in
the database. We use lexFNs as coarse-grain se-
mantic features of nouns and verbs.

MRC Psycholinguistic Database3 (Wilson, 1988)
is a dictionary containing 150,837 words with up to
26 linguistic and psycholinguistic attributes rated by
human subjects in psycholinguistic experiments. It
includes 4,295 words rated with degrees of abstract-
ness; the ratings range from 158 (highly abstract)
to 670 (highly concrete). We use these words as a
seed when we calculate the values of abstractness
and concreteness features for nouns and verbs in our
training and test sets.

Word Representations via Global Context is a
collection of 100,232 words and their vector rep-
resentations.4 These representations were extracted
from a statistical model embedding both local and
global contexts of words (Huang et al., 2012), in-
tended to capture better the semantics of words. We
use these vectors to calculate the values of abstract-
ness and concreteness features of a word.

3 Methodology

We treat the metaphor detection problem as a task
of binary classification of sentences. A sentence
is represented by one or more key relations such
as Subject-Verb-Object triples and Adjective-Noun
pairs. In this paper, we focus only on the SVO rela-
tions and we allow either the S part or the O part to
be empty. If all relations representing a sentence are
classified literal by our model then the whole sen-
tence is tagged literal. Otherwise, the sentence is
tagged metaphoric.

2See http://wordnet.princeton.edu/man/lexnames.5WN.html
for a full list of lexicographer file names.

3http://ota.oucs.ox.ac.uk/headers/1054.xml
4http://www.socher.org/index.php/Main/Improving-

WordRepresentationsViaGlobalContextAndMultipleWordPrototypes

46



3.1 Model

We classify an SVO relation x as literal vs.
metaphorical using a logistic regression classifier:

p(y | x) ∝ exp
∑

j

λjhj(y, x),

where hj(·) are feature values computed for each
word in x, λj are the corresponding weights, and
y ∈ {L,M} refer to our classes: L for literal and
M for metaphoric. The parameters λj are learned
during training.

3.2 Features

An SVO relation is a concatenation of features for
the S, V, and O parts. The S and O parts contain
three types of features: (1) semantic categories of a
word, (2) degree of abstractness of a word, and (3)
types of named entities. The V part contains only
the first two types of features.

Semantic categories are features corresponding
to the WordNet lexFNs, introduced in Section 2.
Since S and O are assumed to be nouns,5 each has
26 semantic category features corresponding to the
lexFNs for nouns (3 through 28). These categories
include noun.animal, noun.artefact, noun.body,
noun.cognition, noun.food, noun.location, etc. The
V part has 15 semantic category features corre-
sponding to lexical ids for verbs (29 through 43),
for example, verb.motion and verb.cognition. A lex-
ical item can belong to several synsets with different
lexFNs. For example, the word “head” when used
as a noun participates in 33 synsets, 3 of which have
lexFN 08 (noun.body). The value of the feature
corresponding to this lexFN is 3/33 = 0.09.

For a non-English word, we first obtain its most
common translations to English and then select all
corresponding English WordNet synsets. For exam-
ple, when Russian word `ãîëîâà' is translated as
‘head’ and ‘brain’, we select all the synsets for the
nouns head and brain. There are 38 such synsets (33
for head and 5 for brain). Four of these synsets have
lexFN 08 (noun.body). Therefore, the value of
the feature corresponding to this lexFN is 4/38 =
0.10. This dictionary-based mapping of non-English

5We currently exclude pronouns from the relations that we
learn.

words into WN synsets is rather coarse. A more dis-
criminating approach may improve the overall per-
formance. In addition, WN synsets may not always
capture all the meanings of non-English words. For
example, Russian word `íîãà' refers to both the
‘foot’ and the ‘leg’. WN has synsets for foot, leg
and extremity, but not for lower extremity.

Degree of abstractness According to Turney et al.
(2011), “Abstract words refer to ideas and concepts
that are distant from immediate perception, such as
economics, calculating and disputable.” Concrete
words refer to physical objects and actions. Words
with multiple senses can refer to both concrete and
abstract concepts. Evidence from several languages
suggests that concrete verbs tend to have concrete
subjects and objects. If either the subject or an object
of a concrete verb is abstract, then the verb is typi-
cally used in a figurative sense, indicating the pres-
ence of a metaphor. For example, when we hear that
“an idea was born”, we know that the word “born”
is used figuratively. This observation motivates our
decision to include the degree of abstractness in our
feature set.

To calculate the degree of abstractness of English
lexical items we use the vector space representations
of words computed by Huang et al. (2012) and a sep-
arate supervised logistic regression classifier trained
on a set of abstract and concrete words from the
MRC dataset. Each value in a word’s vector is a fea-
ture, thus, semantically similar words have similar
feature values. Degrees of abstractness are posterior
probabilities of the classifier predictions.

For non-English words, we use the following pro-
cedure. Suppose word w has n English transla-
tions whose degrees of abstractness are a1, a2, . . . an
in decreasing order. If the majority is deemed
abstract then ABSTRACT (w) = a1, otherwise
ABSTRACT (w) = an. This heuristic prefers the
extreme interpretations, and is based on an observa-
tion that translations tend to be skewed to one side or
the other of “abstractness”. Our results may improve
if we map non-English words more precisely into the
most contextually-appropriate English senses.

Named entities (NE) is an additional category
of features instrumental in metaphor identification.
Specifically, we would like to distinguish whether
an action (a verb in SVO) is performed by a human,

47



an organization or a geographical entity. These dis-
tinctions are often needed to detect metonymy, as in
“the White House said”. Often, these entities are
mentioned by their names which are not found in
common dictionaries. Fortunately, there are many
named entity recognizers (NER) for all major lan-
guages. In addition, Shah et al. (2010) showed
that named entities tend to survive popular machine
translation engines and can be relatively reliably de-
tected even without a native NER. Based on these
observations, we decided to include three boolean
features corresponding to these NE categories: per-
son, organization, and location.

4 Experiments

We train two classifiers: the first to calculate the de-
gree of abstractness of a given word and the second
to classify an SVO relation as metaphoric or literal.
Both are logistic regression classifiers trained with
the creg regression modeling framework.6 To min-
imize the number of free parameters in our model we
use `1 regularization.

4.1 Measuring abstractness

To train the abstractness classifier, we normalize ab-
stractness scores of nouns from the MRC dataset
to probabilities, and select 1,225 most abstract and
1,225 most concrete words. From these words, we
set aside 25 randomly selected samples from each
category for testing. We obtain the vector space rep-
resentations of the remaining 1,400 samples and use
the dimensions of these representations as features.
We train the abstractness classifier on the 1,400 la-
beled samples and test it on the 50 samples that were
set aside, obtaining 76% accuracy. The degree of ab-
stractness of a word is the posterior probability pro-
duced by the abstractness classifier.

4.2 Metaphor detection

We train the metaphor classifier using labeled En-
glish SVO relations. To obtain these relations,
we use the Turbo parser (Martins et al., 2010) to
parse 1,592 literal and 1,609 metaphorical man-
ually annotated sentences from the TroFi Exam-
ple Base and extract 1,660 sentences that have
SVO relations that contain annotated verbs: 696

6https://github.com/redpony/creg

literal and 964 metaphorical training instances.
For example, the verb flourish is used literally in
“Methane-making bacteria flourish in the stom-
ach” and metaphorically in “Economies flourish in
free markets”. From the first sentence we extract
SVO relation <bacteria, flourish, NIL>,
and <economies, flourish, NIL> from the
second. We then build feature vectors, using feature
categories described in Section 3.

We train several versions of the metaphor classi-
fier for each feature category and for their combina-
tions. The feature categories are designated as fol-
lows:

• WN - Semantic categories based on WordNet lexFNs
• VSM - Degree of abstractness based on word vectors
• NE - Named Entity categories

We evaluate the metaphor classifiers using 10-fold
cross validation. The results are listed in Table 1.

Feature categories Accuracy
WN 63.7%
VSM 64.1%
WN+VSM 67.7%
WN+NE 64.5%
WN+VSM+NE 69.0%

Table 1: 10-fold cross validation results of the
metaphor classifier.

Our results are comparable to the accuracy of
64.9% reported by Birke and Sarkar (2007) on the
TroFi dataset. The combination of all feature cate-
gories significantly improves over this baseline.

4.2.1 English metaphor detection
We compute precision, recall and F -score on a

test set of 98 English sentences. This test set consists
of 50 literal and 48 metaphorical sentences, where
each metaphoric sentence contains a verb used in a
figurative sense. The test sentences were selected
from general news articles by independent collec-
tors. Table 2 shows the results.

In this experiment, the WN group of features con-
tributes the most. The addition of NE, while not im-
proving the overall F -score, helps to reduce false
positives and better balance precision and recall.
The VSM features are considerably weaker perhaps

48



Feature categories Precision Recall F -score
WN 0.75 0.81 0.78
VSM 0.57 0.71 0.63
WN+VSM 0.66 0.90 0.76
WN+NE 0.78 0.79 0.78
WN+VSM+NE 0.68 0.71 0.69

Table 2: Evaluation of the metaphor classifier on
the test set of 50 literal and 48 metaphoric English
sentences from news articles.

because we used single model vector space repre-
sentations where each word uses only one vector that
combines all its senses.

4.2.2 Russian metaphor detection
In a cross-lingual experiment, we evaluate our al-

gorithm on a set of 140 Russian sentences: 62 literal
and 78 metaphoric, selected from general news arti-
cles by two independent collectors. As in English,
each metaphoric sentence contains a verb used in a
figurative sense. We used the AOT parser7 to ob-
tain the SVO relations and the Babylon dictionary8

to obtain English translations of individual words.
The example sentence in Figure 1 contains one SVO
relation with missing O part. We show the set of fea-
tures and their values that were extracted from words
in this relation.

The results of the Russian test set, listed in Ta-
ble 3, are similar to the English results, supporting
our hypothesis that a semantic classifier can work
across languages. As in the previous experiment, the
WN features are the most effective and the NE fea-
tures contribute to improved precision.

Feature categories Precision Recall F -score
WN 0.74 0.76 0.75
VSM 0.66 0.73 0.69
WN+VSM 0.70 0.73 0.71
WN+NE 0.82 0.71 0.76
WN+VSM+NE 0.74 0.72 0.73

Table 3: Evaluation of the metaphor classifier on
the test set of 62 literal and 78 metaphoric Russian
sentences from news articles.

While we did not conduct a full-scale experiment
7www.aot.ru
8www.babylon.com

with Spanish, we ran a pilot using 51 sentences: 24
literal and 27 metaphoric. We obtained the F -score
of 0.66 for the WN+VSM combination. We take it as
a positive sign and will conduct more experiments.

5 Related work

Our work builds on the research of Birke and Sarkar
(2007) who used an active learning approach to cre-
ate an annotated corpus of sentences with literal
and figurative senses of 50 common English verbs.
The result was the TroFi Example Base set of 3,737
labeled sentences, which was used by the authors
to train several classifiers. These algorithms were
tested on sentences containing 25 English verbs not
included in the original set. The authors report F -
scores around 64.9%. We used this dataset for train-
ing and evaluation, and Birke and Sarkar’s (2007)
results as a baseline.

In a more recent work, Turney et al. (2011) sug-
gested that the degree of abstractness of a word’s
context is correlated with the likelihood that the
word is used metaphorically. To compute the ab-
stractness of a word, the authors use a variation
of Turney and Littman’s (2003) algorithm compar-
ing the word to twenty typically abstract words and
twenty typically concrete words. Latent Semantic
Analysis (Deerwester et al., 1990) is used to mea-
sure semantic similarity between each pair of words.
A feature vector is generated for each word and a
logistic regression classifier is used. The result is
an average F -score of 63.9% on the TroFi dataset,9

compared to Birke and Sarkar’s (2007) 64.9%. In
another experiment on 100 adjective-noun phrases
labeled as literal or non-literal, according to the
sense of the adjective, this algorithm obtains an av-
erage accuracy of 79%. While we obtain compara-
ble results, our work extends this method in several
important directions. First, we show how to apply
a metaphor classifier across languages. Second, we
extend our feature set beyond abstractness criteria.
Finally, we propose an alternative technique to mea-
sure degrees of abstractness.

9Turney et al. (2011) report on two experimental setups with
TroFi, our setup is closer to their first experiment.

49



Îáùåñòâî çðååò äåñÿòèëåòèÿìè .

‘Society ripens over decades’

SVO = <Îáùåñòâî, çðååò, NIL>

Subject Verb

WN

noun.group 0.54
noun.state 0.23
noun.possession 0.15
noun.location 0.08

verb.change 0.75
verb.body 0.125
verb.communication 0.125

VSM Abstractness 0.87 Abstractness 0.93

Figure 1: Features extracted for a Russian test sentence classified as metaphoric by our model.

6 Conclusions and future work

We presented CSF – an approach to metaphor de-
tection based on semantic rather than lexical fea-
tures. We described our experiments with an ini-
tial set of fairly coarse-grained features and showed
how these features can be obtained in languages that
lack extensive lexical resources. Semantic, as op-
posed to lexical features, are common to all lan-
guages which allows a classifier trained to detect
metaphors in one language to be successfully ap-
plied to sentences in another language. Our results
suggest that metaphors can be detected on a con-
ceptual level, independently of whether they are ex-
pressed in Russian or English, supporting Lakoff
and Johnson’s (1980) claim that metaphors are parts
of a pervasive conceptual system.

Our current work has been limited to the detection
of figurative SVO relations, which account for about
half of all metaphors in English and Russian. Other
languages such as Farsi have a greater proportion of
metaphors based on figurative use of adjectives and
nouns. We plan to include more relations and ex-
pand our set of semantic features as part of the future
research.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Chris Dyer for his invaluable advice.
We are also grateful to the three anonymous reviewers for
their constructive suggestions. Supported by the Intelli-
gence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via
Department of Defense US Army Research Laboratory
contract number W911NF-12-C-0020. The U.S. Govern-
ment is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for
Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright
annotation thereon. Disclaimer: The views and conclu-

sions contained herein are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official
policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of
IARPA, DoD/ARL, or the U.S. Government.

References

Julia Birke and Anoop Sarkar. 2007. Active learning for
the identification of nonliteral language. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Computational Approaches to
Figurative Language, FigLanguages ’07, pages 21–28.

Scott C. Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, Thomas K. Lan-
dauer, George W. Furnas, and Richard A. Harshman.
1990. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Jour-
nal of the American Society of Information Science,
41(6):391–407.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. Language, Speech and Com-
munication. MIT Press.

Matt Gedigian, John Bryant, Srini Narayanan, and Bran-
imir Ciric. 2006. Catching metaphors. In Proceedings
of the 3rd Workshop on Scalable Natural Language
Understanding, pages 41–48.

Pragglejaz Group. 2007. MIP: A method for identify-
ing metaphorically used words in discourse. Metaphor
and Symbol, 22(1):1–39.

Eric H. Huang, Richard Socher, Christopher D. Manning,
and Andrew Y. Ng. 2012. Improving word representa-
tions via global context and multiple word prototypes.
In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, ACL 2012.

Saisuresh Krishnakumaran and Xiaojin Zhu. 2007.
Hunting elusive metaphors using lexical resources. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational ap-
proaches to Figurative Language, pages 13–20.

George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1980. Conceptual
metaphor in everyday language. The Journal of Phi-
losophy, pages 453–486.

50



André F. T. Martins, Noah A. Smith, Eric P. Xing, Pe-
dro M. Q. Aguiar, and Mário A. T. Figueiredo. 2010.
Turbo parsers: dependency parsing by approximate
variational inference. In Proceedings of the 2010 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, EMNLP ’10, pages 34–44.

Rushin Shah, Bo Lin, Anatole Gershman, and Robert
Frederking. 2010. SYNERGY: a named entity recog-
nition system for resource-scarce languages such as
Swahili using online machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the Second Workshop on African Language
Technology, AfLaT 2010, pages 21–26.

Ekaterina Shutova, Lin Sun, and Anna Korhonen. 2010.
Metaphor identification using verb and noun cluster-
ing. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics, pages 1002–1010.

Peter D. Turney and Michael L. Littman. 2003. Measur-
ing praise and criticism: Inference of semantic orien-
tation from association. ACM Transactions on Infor-
mation and System Security, 21(4):315–346.

Peter D. Turney, Yair Neuman, Dan Assaf, and Yohai
Cohen. 2011. Literal and metaphorical sense iden-
tification through concrete and abstract context. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’11, pages
680–690.

Michael Wilson. 1988. MRC Psycholinguistic Database:
Machine-usable dictionary, version 2.00. Behav-
ior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
20(1):6–10.

51


