




















Baltic and Nordic Parts of the European Linguistic 
Infrastructure 

Inguna Skadiņa1, Andrejs Vasiļjevs1, Lars Borin2, 
Krister Lindén3, Gyri Losnegaard4, Sussi Olsen5, Bolette S. Pedersen5,  

Roberts Rozis1, Koenraad De Smedt4 

(1) Tilde, Vienibas gatve 75a, Riga, Latvia 

(2) University or Gothenburg,  Box 100, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden 

(3) University of Helsinki,  Unioninkatu 40, Helsinki, Finland 

(4) University of Bergen, Postboks 7800, 5020 Bergen, Norway 
(5)  University of Copenhagen,  CST, Njalsgade 140, 2300 Copenhagen S 

metanord@tilde.lv 

 

ABSTRACT 

This paper describes scientific, technical, and legal work done on the creation of the linguistic 

infrastructure for the Nordic and Baltic countries. The paper describes the research on assessment 

of language technology support for the languages of the Baltic and Nordic countries, work on 

establishing a language resource sharing infrastructure, and collection and description of linguistic 

resources. We present improvements necessary to ensure usability and interoperability of language 

resources, discuss issues related to intellectual property rights for complex resources, and describe 

extension of infrastructure through integration of language-resource specific repositories. Work on 

treebanks, wordnets, terminology resources, and finite-state technology is described in more detail. 

Finally, our approach on ensuring the sustainability of infrastructure is discussed. 

KEYWORDS: language resources and tools, linguistic infrastructure, under-resourced languages, 

multilinguality, treebanks, wordnets, terminology banks. 

 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 195 of 474]



1 Introduction 

The previous decades of research in language technologies (LT) have produced numerous language 

resources and tools for languages of the Nordic and Baltic countries. At the same time, not only 

are there major gaps in availability of the key resources, but the existing ones are often hard to find 

and difficult to use. Resources are dispersed among different institutions and local repositories, and 

they are often coded in proprietary formats lacking interoperability and uniformity. There are also 

restricted or unclear intellectual property rights.  These factors are major stumbling blocks for the 

development and research of language technology.  

To overcome these difficulties, the Nordic and Baltic countries play a leading role in pan-European 

activities regarding the creation of the European open linguistic infrastructure. Major progress is 

achieved by the CLARIN 1  (Váradi et al., 2008) initiative creating a language resource 

infrastructure for research in humanities. Another complementary infrastructure is under 

development by the META-NET network2 focusing on the practical needs of developers, users, 

and researchers of multilingual resources.  

The Baltic and Nordic countries are active participants in both — CLARIN and META-NET — 

networks. Official languages of these countries (Danish, Estonian, Finnish, Icelandic, Latvian, 

Lithuanian, Norwegian, and Swedish), as well as other languages spoken in these countries, are 

under-resourced in respect to availability of at least some of the key language technologies or 

resources. Thus, such initiatives as CLARIN and META-NET are essential for identification, 

documentation, and making widely available the language resources for these languages, and these 

initiatives provide significant support in filling essential gaps in resources and technologies. 

In the META-NET network, work on the creation of an open European linguistic infrastructure 

and making language resources widely available was performed through four projects supported 

by the European Commission: CESAR (Central and Eastern European countries), METANET4U 

(Southern European countries and the United Kingdom), META-NORD (Baltic and Nordic 

countries), and T4ME (initiator and coordinator of META-NET network). In this paper, we 

describe our experience and work done on building the Baltic and Nordic parts of the European 

linguistic infrastructure in the META-NORD project (Vasiļjevs et al., 2011; Skadiņa et al., 2011), 

which included the following major tasks: 

 Research on the language technology landscape in the Nordic and Baltic countries in terms 

of language use, language technology and resources, and main actors. 

 Work on identification and collection of language resources in the Baltic and Nordic 

countries and documenting, processing, linking, and upgrading them to agreed standards 

and guidelines. 

 Research and practical work on consistent approaches, practices, and standards that ensure 

wider accessibility,  easier access, and reuse of quality language resources. 

 Research and development work done on linking and validating the Nordic and Baltic 

wordnets, harmonisation of multilingual Nordic and Baltic treebanks, consolidation of 

multilingual terminology resources across European countries, and development of 

mature and language independent tools. 

 Issues related to intellectual property rights (IPR) for the sharing of language resources. 

                                                                    
1  Common Language Resources and Technology Infrastructure, http://www.clarin.eu  
2  http://www.meta-net.eu  

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 196 of 474]



 Work on building and operating broad, non-commercial, community-driven, inter-

connected repositories, exchanges, and facilities that can be used by different categories 

of user communities.  

2 Language technology landscape  

Important steps towards the creation of a linguistic infrastructure are an assessment of the state of 

the art of the language technology field, identification of existing language resources, assessment 

of resources, and understanding the needs of potential users. Reports on the national language 

technology landscape3 for each official language spoken in the Nordic and Baltic geographical area 

(Danish, Estonian, Finnish, Icelandic, Latvian, Lithuanian, both Norwegian varieties Nynorsk and 

Bokmål, and Swedish) describe and analyse the situation of the language community and the 

position of the language service and language technology industry. These reports also contain 

general facts about the language (number of speakers, official status, dialects, etc.), particularities 

of the language, recent developments in the language, language cultivation, language in education, 

international aspects, as well as the role of the language on the Internet.  

The reports also present assessment of language technology support and the core application areas 

of language and speech technology (e.g., language checking, web search, speech interaction, 

machine translation, etc.), and describe the situation with respect to these application areas. For 

each language, language resources and tools (LRT) are assessed based on the following criteria: 

quantity, availability, quality, coverage, maturity, sustainability, and adaptability. The results 

indicate that only with respect to the most basic tools and resources, such as tokenisers, PoS 

taggers, morphological analysers/generators, reference corpora, and lexicons/terminologies, the 

status is reasonably positive for all languages. However, tools for information extraction, machine 

translation, and speech recognition, as well as resources such as parallel corpora, speech corpora, 

and grammar, are rather simple and have limited functionality for some of the languages. For the 

most advanced tools and resources, such as discourse processing, dialogue management, semantics 

and discourse corpora, and ontological resources, most of the languages either have nothing of the 

kind, or their tools and resources have a quite limited scope. 

This assessment of language technology support clearly demonstrates that for languages of the 

Baltic and Nordic countries, where the community of language resource creators and users is small, 

even a modest increase in the availability and quality of language resources is appreciable for 

technology developers, researchers, and end users. 

In addition, detailed analysis and comparison of language technologies and resources across 

30 European languages was carried out within the framework of META-NET. The comparison 

presents the situation for four key areas: machine translation, speech processing, text analysis, and 

resources. This study puts three small languages of the Nordic and Baltic region – Icelandic, 

Latvian, and Lithuanian – in the last cluster, defined as having major gaps for all of the four key 

areas (see Table 1). The relative ranking of the remaining five languages is slightly higher, although 

none of them comes close to the “larger” languages (English, French, Spanish, and German). 

“Moderate” support is provided only for Finnish in speech technologies and for Swedish with 

respect to language resources.  

Besides objective limitations in the size of the LRT creator and user community, there are other 

obstacles which put some languages in the “upper” cluster, while others remain in the “bottom”. 

                                                                    
3 These reports, also called Language White Papers, are available at http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers.  

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 197 of 474]



Among them is a lack of continuity in research and development funding. For instance, due to 

limited funding, Latvian language technology support does not reach the quality and coverage not 

only of that for English, but also for many under-resourced languages of the Baltic and Nordic 

region with a smaller number of speakers. In many cases, targeted national research and 

development activities are urgently needed to fill LRT gaps. 

Speech processing 

Excellent Good Moderate Fragmentary Weak/None 

  English Czech, Dutch, 
Finnish, French, 

German, Italian, 

Portuguese, 
Spanish 

Basque, Bulgarian, Catalan, 

Danish, Estonian, Galician, 

Greek, Hungarian, Irish, 

Norwegian, Polish, Serbian, 
Slovak, Slovene, Swedish 

Croatian, Icelandic, Latvian, 

Lithuanian, Maltese, Romanian 

Machine Translation 

Excellent Good Moderate Fragmentary Weak/None 

 English French, Spanish Catalan, Dutch, German, 
Hungarian, Italian, Polish, 
Romanian 

Basque, Bulgarian, Croatian., 

Czech, Danish, Estonian, 
Finnish, Galician, Icelandic, 

Irish, Latvian, Lithuanian, 

Maltese, Norwegian, Portuguese, 
Serbian, Slovak, Slovene, 

Swedish 

Text Analysis 

Excellent Good Moderate Fragmentary Weak/None 

 English Dutch, French, 
German, Italian, 

Spanish 

Basque, Bulgarian, Catalan, 

Czech, Danish, Finnish, 

Galician, Greek, Hungarian,  
Norwegian, Polish, 

Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, 

Slovene, Swedish 

Croatian, Estonian, Icelandic, 

Irish, Latvian, Lithuanian, 

Maltese, Serbian 

Resources 

Excellent Good Moderate Fragmentary Weak/None 

 English Czech, Dutch, 
French, German, 
Hungarian, Italian, 

Polish, Spanish, 

Swedish 

Basque, Bulgarian, Catalan, 

Croatian, Danish, Estonian, 
Finnish, Galician, Greek, 

Norwegian, Portuguese, 

Romanian, Serbian, Slovak, 
Slovene 

Icelandic, Irish, Latvian, 

Lithuanian, Maltese 

TABLE 1: Availability of LRT for languages of the Baltic and Nordic countries4. 

The need for large amounts of data and the complexity of language technology systems make it 

vital to develop both an open infrastructure and a more coherent research cooperation in order to 

spur greater sharing and reuse of language resources. 

                                                                    
4 The table is also available at http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/key-results-and-cross-language-comparison  

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 198 of 474]



3 META-SHARE infrastructure in the Baltic and Nordic countries 

For distribution and sharing of language resources, the distributed online platform META-SHARE 

(Piperidis, 2012) is used. It consists of independent META-SHARE nodes set up in different 

countries and interlinked into a federated repository. This freely accessible distributed online 

infrastructure provides facilities for describing, storing, preserving of language resources, and 

making them publicly available. Among various language data that can be considered useful for 

different purposes, META-SHARE places a strong focus on language data that are important in 

language technology development for building applications that are useful to EU citizens, primarily 

in their everyday communication and information search needs. META-SHARE is intended for 

providers and users of language resources and technologies such as LT developers, researchers, 

students, translators, technical writers and others.  

Currently, META-SHARE nodes are set at the following organisations in the Baltic and Nordic 

countries: Tilde5 (Latvia), University of Gothenburg6 (Sweden), University of Helsinki7 (Finland), 

Institute of Lithuanian Language8 (Lithuania), University of Copenhagen9 (Denmark), Norwegian 

National Library10 (Norway), and University of Tartu11 (Estonia). According to the architecture of 

META-SHARE, these nodes are networked, and the content of the individual LR repository is 

harvested into the managing META-SHARE node, which for the META-NORD consortium is set 

at Tilde. In a managing node, information about catalogued language resources is collected and 

synchronised with other managing nodes across Europe, thus providing access to the full catalogue 

of the pan-European infrastructure12. 

Besides META-SHARE repositories, we have a natural interest to integrate into our infrastructure 

several existing collections and databases of specific linguistic resources, such as term banks and 

treebanks. These repositories are collections of language resources, where each individual resource 

is a candidate to be listed in the META-SHARE catalogue. This could be done manually by 

entering all resource descriptions in the META-SHARE editor or by exporting the metadata from 

the respective repository, converting it into META-SHARE compliant schema (Gavrilidou et al., 

2012), and importing into META-SHARE node. However, such approaches are time-consuming 

and need regular manual updates. 

Our proposed and implemented solution for this infrastructure is to integrate complex linguistic 

resources or repositories of resources by adapting them to relevant data access and sharing 

specifications and interlinking them with META-SHARE. This means that a language resource-

specific repository could seamlessly become a part of the META-SHARE network by enabling the 

harvesting of metadata through the META-SHARE communication protocol and ensuring the 

mapping of the respective data categories.  

For this approach to work the metadata model of the language resource-specific node must include 

all the data categories that are mandatory in the META-SHARE repository, as well as include 

additional attributes required for the synchronization, such as unique ID, creation and modification 

date and revision number.  

                                                                    
5 http://metashare.tilde.com/ 
6 http://spraakbanken.gu.se/metashare/  
7 http://metashare.csc.fi/  
8 http://meta-share.lki.lt/  
9 http://metashare.cst.dk/  
10 http://metashare.nb.no/ 
11 http://metashare.ut.ee/ 
12 META-SHARE described in details in  Piperidis (2012). 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 199 of 474]



The integration of a language resource-specific node with META-SHARE is implemented via 

proxy: it connects to a META-SHARE managing node just like any other META-SHARE node – 

the LR metadata provider is proxied to the rest of the META-SHARE network. Integration of a 

language resource-specific node with META-SHARE allows users to access a specific resource 

located on a remote repository directly via a link supplied to META-SHARE.  

META-NORD project piloted extension of the META-SHARE infrastructure with resource-

specific nodes by integrating distributed terminology database EuroTermBank as described in the 

Section 5.3. 

4 Identification, collection, and description of language resources in META-
SHARE 

During the last two years, more than 500 resources and tools have been identified and made 

available by the META-NORD consortium. These include a broad range of different resources for 

different languages and language pairs that are suitable for a range of different LT purposes. 

Statistical breakdown of the language resources for META-NORD languages available from 

META-SHARE platform is summarized in Table 2. 

Danish Estonian Finnish Icelandic Latvian Lithuanian Norwegian Swedish 

68 67 86 70 69 38 47 151 

TABLE 2: Language resources and tools for META-NORD languages documented in 

META-SHARE platform. 

The criteria for the selection of resources included: availability, popularity, suitability of resources 

for technology and product/application development, fitness for multilingual purposes, longevity, 

quality, and extensibility.  

Initially, the main focus has been on written resources, however, recently there has been an 

increased effort to also include a certain number of audio/video resources and tools. Table 3 shows 

the distribution of tools and resources available through META-SHARE for the Baltic and Nordic 

languages. 

Lexical resources (excl. wordnets & speech) 211 
Corpora (excl. treebanks & speech) 182 
Tools (excl. speech) 43 

Language description (grammars) 2 

Treebanks 31 

Resources for speech 28 
WordNets 12 

 Total 509 

Table 3: META-NORD tools and resources identified and made available through 

META-SHARE. 

Considerable work documenting, processing, linking, and upgrading these resources to agreed 

standards and guidelines has been performed as described in sections 4.1 and 4.2 below. 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 200 of 474]



Activities dealing with multilingual wordnets, treebanks, and terminology (cf. Sections 5.1–5.3) 

provide examples of how these goals of interoperability in content have actually been achieved for 

several of the provided resources. 

4.1 Metadata model for the description of language resources 

Bird and Simons (2003) have proposed a very useful taxonomy for discussing language 

documentation and description. Although originally framed in the context of linguistic description, 

their 'seven dimensions of portability' are quite useful also when discussing language resource 

interoperability for language technology purposes. Here, language resource metadata and widely 

accessible metadata repositories are absolutely essential, addressing – directly or indirectly – four 

of their seven dimensions, namely discovery, access, citation, and rights. 

All of the contributed language resources are consistently identified and described using a metadata 

standard developed as a part of the META-SHARE initiative (Gavrilidou et al. 2011, 2012; Desipri 

et al. 2012). The standard, which draws heavily on experiences from previous efforts – such as the 

OLAC (Bird and Simons 2001) and CLARIN CMDI (Broeder et al. 2010) metadata schemas – 

defines a minimal set of descriptors which must be specified for any resource, but also allows for 

supplying much richer information if desired, including free-form narrative descriptions. It is 

published in the form of an XML schema. Using the META-SHARE metadata editor makes it easy 

to describe resources using the META-SHARE metadata schema, since the editor, for example, 

provides listings of the controlled vocabularies of the metadata schema. 

Uploading a large number of diverse language resources and tools and the concomitant creation or 

conversion of the associated metadata by several large European projects have constituted a kind 

of empirical acid test of the appropriateness and usefulness of the META-SHARE schema. We are 

happy to report that it has passed this test successfully. For the ‘baseline’ cases, metadata creation 

has on the whole been straightforward and unproblematic, and the META-SHARE community 

online support13 has generally been able to help in many of the more non-obvious cases. 

Of course, it has inevitably turned out that the schema does not cover everything. For instance, it 

was discovered that it caters less well for complex multilingual resources, such as the mixed-

language variety text corpora collected in Norway (with articles written in the two official written 

Norwegian varieties, Bokmål and Nynorsk, in the same newspaper), as well as for the multilingual 

treebanks and linked wordnets (see section 5). This issue, in fact, touches on several design 

decisions made for the META-SHARE metadata schema at the very beginning, having to do, for 

example, with how language information is encoded and with the structuring of the metadata 

records themselves. Because of the work in CESAR, METANET4U, META-NORD, and T4ME 

projects, the issues arising in connection with the description of complex language resources have 

been brought to the forefront and will be addressed in future releases of the META-SHARE 

metadata schema. 

4.2 Improving usability and interoperability of language resources  

An important focus of our work has been on enhancing the interoperability of language resources 

and tools by upgrading selected resources to agreed standards. The upgrading activities have 

included the following: 

                                                                    
13 http://www.meta-share.org/portal/ (Note that for some reason all issues listed there are labelled “unanswered”, although 

most of them actually have answers which can be seen if you click on the heading of an issue to open the discussion 

thread for that issue.) 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 201 of 474]



Improvement of resource documentation, both formally structured (as META-SHARE 

metadata) and narrative documentation. For many resources, the narrative documentation has been 

much improved; the partners have in several cases spent a considerable amount of time writing and 

improving resource documentation, as well as – in practice, very important for wider 

interoperability – on producing documentation in English. Also, for increased user-friendliness, an 

XSL stylesheet (developed in the CESAR sister project) is routinely used to automatically convert 

META-SHARE metadata into a more human-readable form - from XML into a more human-

readable textual rendering (which however does not add any information to that already present in 

the XML metadata). 

Technical format conversion, e.g., a proprietary corpus format into TEI (Text Encoding 

Initiative14) or an idiosyncratic lexicon format into LMF 15 (Lexical Markup Framework; ISO 

24613:2008; Francopoulo et al. 2006). Several partners have converted their lexical resources into 

LMF, e.g., the STO Danish dictionary lexical database, the SweFN++ Swedish lexical macro 

resource, the Norwegian SCARRIE lexicon, and the Lithuanian Standard language lexical 

database. Terminology resources, such as the Icelandic Term Bank and UHR’s Termbase for 

Norwegian higher education institutions, have been converted into TBX16 format (Term Base 

eXchange; ISO 30042:2008; Melby 2012).  

Most of the corpus resources uploaded are now available in TEI-compatible formats. A specific 

example of how this format harmonisation has enhanced interoperability is the relative ease17  with 

which the open-source Korp corpus processing and presentation platform, developed in Sweden at 

the University of Gothenburg (Borin et al. 2012)18, has been deployed in Finland by the University 

of Helsinki for their Finnish corpora19. 

Content model conversion/mapping/linking, e.g., harmonising POS tagsets among corpora, or 

linking word senses among lexical resources with different sense granularities. The Danish STO 

lexicon, the Swedish lexicons developed at Språkbanken, University of Gothenburg, and Swedish 

corpus annotations have been partly linked to the ISOCAT DCR  (Data Category Registry; ISO 

12620:2009; Windhouwer and Wright 2012), although no explicit attempt has been made to use 

the same categories across the languages, except in the specific cases discussed below in sections 

5.1–5.3. Several partners (e.g., the Icelandic and Swedish partners) have taken advantage of their 

work on harmonising content and upgraded their corpus resources, adding consistent linguistic 

annotations to corpora that previously were either unannotated or used several different annotation 

schemes. 

Ensuring that language resources and tools adhere to standard formats is a necessary prerequisite 

for resource interoperability. As always, the proof of the pudding is in the eating, and the outcomes 

of investing a limited, quite reasonable amount of time on horizontal action lines (see section 5 

below) – where selected resources have been interlinked between languages of the Nordic and 

Baltic countries – demonstrate clearly that the upgrading activities have successfully achieved their 

objectives. 

                                                                    
14 http://www.tei-c.org 
15 http://www.lexicalmarkupframework.org/ 
16 http://www.ttt.org/oscarStandards/tbx/ 
17 The characterisation “relative ease” is impressionistic, based on a comparison with practical experience from earlier 

attempts to deploy another piece of corpus software both at Gothenburg and Helsinki, for which obviously much less effort 

had been spent on issues of interoperability and modularity during its development. 
18 http://spraakbanken.gu.se/korp/#lang=eng 
19 http://korp.csc.fi/#lang=en 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 202 of 474]



As a means to upgrade existing resources in the META-NORD consortium to agreed standards, 

various lexical resources have been upgraded to the Lexical Markup Framework (LMF). One 

example is University of Gothenburg’s 21 lexical resources which have all been upgraded to LMF.  

As reported in Borin et al. 2012, this lexical infrastructure has one primary lexical resource SALDO 

as a pivot to which all other resources are linked.  

Upgrading some of the more semantically orientated resources to LMF turned out to be quite 

complicated. The main obstacle being that, even though the framework contains mechanisms for 

specifying semantic information, the model is based upon the assumption that lexical entries are 

formal entities expressing one or more senses, not semantic entities having one or more formal 

realisations. For example, the Swedish Framenet has the semantic frame as the natural conceptual 

unit, but to be able to fit the information into LMF, the frame had to be split into several entries. 

Searching these resources can be done from the web page http://spraakbanken.gu.se/karp, and all 

of the resources can be downloaded from http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/resources/lexicon.  

Another example is the multilingual dictionary ISLEX 20 with modern Icelandic as the source 

language and Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish as target languages.  ISLEX has been upgraded to 

LMF in the META-NORD project by the Icelandic partner, University of Iceland (cf. Helgadóttir 

& Rögnvaldsson forthcoming). When converting multilingual dictionaries into LMF format, a 

special record would usually be made for each sense of every word in all the languages of the 

dictionary. A so-called “Sense Axis” would then be used to link closely related senses in different 

languages. For ISLEX, however, another course was taken: special records were made for each 

sense of the words in the source language, Icelandic, which in turn had translations for that sense 

in each of the target languages.  

Finally, it should be mentioned that the upgrade of the Danish lexical database STO21 (built on 

PAROLE22) has been completed by the University of Copenhagen. This database provides an 

‘intensional’ morphological description meaning that each word form is not explicitly listed 

anywhere but the lexical entry is associated with a morphological pattern. In other words, the word 

forms are created on demand. Even if an intensional morphological description is possible in LMF, 

an extensional description of the morphology, where all word forms are created when dumping 

data from database to LMF, was chosen as the most user-friendly approach. In some aspects, the 

predefined LMF schemata did not correspond with the structure of the linguistic information in the 

STO, and various kinds of generalisation or nested information had to be expressed in new ways 

by means of features which have made it easier to get an overview of the lexical entries. 

Furthermore, the LMF nomenclature is much closer to general linguistic terminology. In LMF for 

example, STO data categories such as ‘description’ and ‘construction’ are called ‘subcategorisation 

frame’ and ‘syntactic argument’ respectively, concepts much easier for a user to comprehend.  

4.3 Approach to intellectual property rights 

Collecting Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) for a corpus often requires that permissions are 

acquired from multiple parties in order to make copies of the copyrighted parts of the corpus. 

Copies for personal use are often readily available from many sources but the right to distribute 

                                                                    
20 The ISLEX dictionary can both be searched and downloaded from http://www.malfong.is/index.php?pg=islex&lang=en. 

21 A Danish lexical database developed by the University of Copenhagen, Centre for language technology (Braasch et al.  

2004). Samples and documentation of the STO-LMF lexicon can be found at http://cst.ku.dk/english/sto_ordbase/. 
22 PAROLE was an EU project running from 1996-1998 with the aim of creating large, generic, and re-usable Written 

Language Resources for all EU Languages. 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 203 of 474]



such copies is not (see, e.g., Oksanen and Lindén (2012)). In this section, we look at a practical 

solution for multilingual treebanks in META-SHARE created within the project. 

The right to distribute linked multilingual treebanks requires a right to copy and distribute a 

collective work, so the most practical solution is that one party collects the rights to copy and 

distribute all parts of the work, after which that party can sign for all the others. This is not that 

much different from collecting a corpus of several books and their annotations. In our case, the 

multilingual corpora were open-source or the rights already allowed distribution via META-

SHARE, so the only work that needed to be given an explicit right to be copied and distributed 

were the hand-made annotations and cross-lingual links. Since the cross-lingual linking of the 

multilingual treebanks was done during the project, the ownership of the links belonged to the 

project parties. Only the annotations that had been done before the project or with separate funding 

needed to be provided with an explicit license for META-SHARE to distribute them. For the 

treebanks, we chose CC-BY as the common license. 

5 Horizontal action lines 

Besides identification and description of linguistic resources in the Baltic and Nordic countries, a 

particular focus in our work was on the following linguistic resources and tools: treebanks, 

wordnets, terminology, and finite-state techniques. We call this work ‘horizontal action lines’, as 

these activities focus on a particular resource type and aim to harmonise, link across languages, 

and make these resources available through a common interface. 

5.1 Treebanks 

The horizontal action on treebanking has been aimed at improving the accessibility of treebanks 

and harmonising and linking treebanks across languages. Special regard was taken to the Nordic 

and Baltic languages which are under-resourced in this respect, but the action was also a truly open 

initiative inclusive of other languages and addressing needs of other META-NET members. 

Efforts were focused on the annotation, harmonisation, curation, documentation, and licensing of 

treebanks. To reach these goals, we collaborated extensively with the INESS project, 23 which 

provided state-of-the-art tools based on an advanced server-based solution and a user-friendly web 

interface for browsing, search, visualisation, and download. The resources which were made 

available by the action include a number of monolingual treebanks and two parallel treebanks based 

on multiple alignments of monolingual treebanks. 

One notable outcome was the Sofie Parallel Treebank, based on the Norwegian novel Sofies verden 

(Gaarder 1991), which is linguistically rich and professionally translated in many languages. Some 

monolingual treebanks previously existed for text selections from this material, but not all were 

accessible. Annotations developed by the Nordic Treebank Network (NTN) were obtained from 

Tekstlaboratoriet (University of Oslo), and those that were deemed suitable were integrated in 

INESS. An additional new treebank was constructed for Norwegian. Annotations for the bigger 

European languages — German and English (the latter from SMULTRON24) were included for 

completeness, as well as a Georgian annotation by Paul Meurer. Intellectual property rights were 

cleared for both source texts and annotations, but for Finnish no permission has been obtained. 

Although the amount of annotated material varies between languages and is somewhat limited (52 

                                                                    
23 http://iness.uib.no 
24 http://www.cl.uzh.ch/research/paralleltreebanks/smultron_en.html 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 204 of 474]



to 1052 sentences), the number of pairwise alignments is high. The Sofie Parallel Treebank 

currently consists of 26 aligned language pairs and is open to new languages. 

A small parallel treebank was also constructed from a single document selected from the JRC 

Acquis Multilingual Parallel Corpus of EU/EEA law texts,25 which provides materials from a 

different genre in both the official EU languages and some non-official European languages. The 

Acquis Parallel Treebank is also rather small (73 to 122 sentences depending on the language), but 

it currently consists of 21 aligned language pairs. Even if the Sofie and Acquis treebanks are based 

on relatively small texts, they demonstrate the potential of aligning treebanks across many 

languages. These parallel treebanks are documented in META-SHARE and are available for 

download on the INESS website. 

Besides the monolingual treebanks which form the basis of the two parallel treebanks, the INESS 

infrastructure provides access to other treebanks in several languages. Among treebanks in the 

linguistic area of the Baltic and Nordic countries, we mention the Icelandic Parsed Historical 

Corpus (73,014 sentences), FinnTreebank3 (170,000 tokens), Turku Dependency Treebank 

(88,418 tokens), the Faroese Parsed Historical Corpus (3,713 sentences), and the INESS 

Norwegian treebank (about 5000 analysed sentences and still expanding). Treebanks for other 

languages outside this linguistic area include Abkhazian, Bulgarian, Georgian, Hungarian, 

Northern Sami, Polish, Tamil, Turkish, Urdu, Wolof, and the classical languages (Ancient Greek, 

Church Slavic, Classical Armenian, Latin, and Gothic). 

The different types of treebanks (Lexical-Functional Grammar, Dependency Grammar, 

Constituency Annotation) are accommodated in standard formats (TigerXML, CoNLL-X, CG3-

dependency, Penn Treebank II bracketing, and XLE prolog). Treebanks can be explored (searched, 

browsed, and viewed), aligned with other treebanks, and downloaded, all from a uniform web 

interface. A screenshot is presented in Figure 1. 

Drawing on the obtained experience, INESS will sustain the treebanking action and continue to 

pursue good practices for documentation and IPR clearance. We encourage treebank developers to 

clear rights with rights holders of source texts prior to annotation and promote the use of explicit 

licenses wherever possible.  

The metadata description of treebanks remains problematic, in particular for parallel treebanks 

which are complex resources, since META-SHARE does not provide for adequate description of 

such resources. A more appropriate treatment of complex resources will need attention in future 

work. 

The mechanisms for linking external resource portals with META-SHARE (described in Section 3) 

make it possible to dynamically list each specific resource in META-SHARE and can be applied 

to other language resource-specific portals such as INESS. 

                                                                    
25 http://ipsc.jrc.ec.europa.eu/index.php?id=198 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 205 of 474]



 

5.2 Wordnets  

The multilingual wordnet initiative has dealt with the pilot linking and validation of wordnets 

between the Nordic and Baltic languages. One central aim has been to perform a tentative 

comparison and validation of the linked wordnets, a related aim being to make the mono- and 

multilingual wordnets visible for further validation and comparison via a common web interface.  

To this end, four pilot bilingual wordnets, each of 1,000 synsets, have been compiled using 

Princeton Core WordNet26 as an Interlingua: Danish-Swedish, Danish-Finnish, Estonian-Finnish, 

and Finnish-Swedish.  

In general, the semi-automatically linked wordnets are judged to be of a rather good quality, even 

if translations are not always 100% precise. An average of 2.2% errors and 7.0% slight mismatches 

have been reported from the individual validations. There does not appear to be a systematic bias 

to the errors. Though of course, some errors are systematically biased due to false friends, however, 

others seem to be just random errors. Most of the slight mismatches derive from diverging opinions 

on the understanding of what a synset should contain. Not surprisingly, wordnets that have been 

compiled via translations from Princeton WordNet have many senses per synset (just as Princeton 

WordNet), whereas wordnets that are monolingually compiled and based rather on synonymy 

registrations in conventional dictionaries have much less. A majority of the reported mismatches 

in the links are derived from exactly this discrepancy, since translations seem to be become more 

imprecise when a synset contains many word senses (Pedersen et al., 2013).  

Apart from compiling the bilingual wordnets, all of the involved wordnets have undergone 

extensions and upgrades, including the Icelandic WordNet and the Norwegian WordNet, of which 

the latter has been developed from scratch during the project period (based on the Danish wordnet 

                                                                    
26 http://wordnetcode.princeton.edu/standoff-files/core-wordnet.txt 

Figure 1: INESS web interface for treebanking, shown with the first sentence of the 

Norwegian Sofie treebank annotated in LFG. 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 206 of 474]



DanNet). All six monolingual wordnets and the four bilingual ones have been made available via 

META-SHARE27, and the linked wordnets are viewable from the WordTies28 web interface. 

Future work includes an extension of the web interface to include more wordnets, as well as the 

generation of a broader comparison and validation of the wordnets included, i.e, broader than the 

ones provided via the 1,000 common links. We plan to include multilingual links for the full Core 

WordNet (5,000 synsets) for browsing and validation. 

A broader comparison and validation of the wordnets would furthermore be fruitful and should be 

made feasible when the web interface is extended to include multilingual links for the full Princeton 

Core WordNet. Several discrepancies have been registered during the linking – other than the 

aforementioned different approach to the interpretation of the synset – such as discrepancies in 

taxonomical structure. Some have used an expert perspective, for example on animals, and thereby 

compiled a relatively deep taxonomy (i.e., the Finnish WordNet), whereas others have used a 

layman perspective adapted from a dictionary which is much more flat (i.e., the Danish wordnet). 

The number and selection of relations in the wordnets also differ; some have included only 

Princeton relations, others include EuroWordNet (Vossen, 1998) relations (i.e., Estonian and 

Danish), and others have adapted relations from other lexical projects, including qualia relations 

such as used_for and made_by relations (Danish and Norwegian WordNet). 

5.3 Terminology resources 

This task addressed a growing demand to consolidate distributed terminology resources across 

languages and domains and thus, has extended an open linguistic infrastructure with multilingual 

terminology resources.  

Major progress in consolidating distributed terminology resources was accomplished by the 

EuroTermBank platform (Vasiļjevs and Schmitz, 2006). Our intention was not to duplicate 

resources stored on EuroTermBank, but to interconnect this content-specific Language Resource 

repository with META-SHARE. Using the approach described in the Section 3, we enabled 

harvesting of EuroTermBank metadata and integrated EuroTermBank within the META-SHARE 

infrastructure. This interlinking yielded 99 additional terminology resources now listed in META-

SHARE. These resources themselves are available in EuroTermBank for online search. 

As EuroTermBank provides specific facilities for searching, representing, and using terminology 

data, we use this platform for depositing new resources identified and collected in our work. As a 

result, EuroTermBank was extended from 2.3 to 2.8 million terms internally by adding 

43 terminology collections to EuroTermBank – LKI (Lithuanian) terminology, EASTIN 

terminology of Assistive Technology, and 41 collection from Icelandic Termbank. Three other 

terminology collections remain in the negotiation stage. One external term base (BFT) was 

connected to EuroTermBank during this activity, two other (STRUNA — Croatian term bank, 

PIRARC – Multilingual database of Road Terms) remain in the negotiation stage. BFT is the Bank 

of Finnish Terminology in Arts and Sciences provided to META-SHARE by the University of 

Helsinki. This resource has been integrated for one-stop terminology search with EuroTermBank 

and, through interconnection of EuroTermBank with META-SHARE, is also listed in the META-

SHARE catalogue. 

The most outstanding result was achieved by Icelandic partners who succeeded at negotiating with 

41 author whose work is contained in the Icelandic terminology bank. The rights to share for 

                                                                    
27 Note, however, that Norwegian WordNet actually includes two wordnets, one for Bokmål and one for Nynorsk. 
28 http://wordties.cst.dk  

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 207 of 474]



download were negotiated through a long and exhaustive process of negotiations. The resulting 

content was converted to the industry standard TBX format of terminology interchange, and both 

were uploaded to the META-SHARE network, as well as imported for centralised online lookup 

by users of the EuroTermBank terminology portal.  

5.4 Finite-state techniques  

To promote the development of language-independent natural language processing software, 

HFST–Helsinki Finite-State Technology29 is included in CLARIN and META-NET. HFST is a 

framework for compiling and applying linguistic descriptions with finite-state methods. HFST 

currently collects some of the most important finite-state tools for creating morphologies and 

spellcheckers into one open-source platform and supports extending and improving the 

descriptions with weights to accommodate the modelling of statistical information. HFST offers a 

path from language descriptions to efficient language applications. Here, we have focused on 

making the HFST library available to the developers of new tools, new features in existing tools, 

or new language applications. 

HFST is primarily designed for creating and compiling morphologies, which have been 

documented, for example, in Lindén et al. (2009; 2011; 2012). HFST contains open-source replicas 

of xfst, lexc, and twolc, which are well-known and well-researched tools for morphology building 

(see Beesley and Karttunen, 2003). The tools support both parallel and cascaded application of 

transducers.   

There are a number of tools for describing morphologies. Many of them start with the item-and-

arrangement approach in which an arrangement of sublexicons contains lists of items that may 

continue in other sublexicons. A formula for compiling such lexical descriptions was documented 

in Lindén et al. (2009). To realise the morphological processes, rules may be applied to the finite-

state lexicon. In addition, HFST also offers the capability to train and apply part-of-speech taggers 

on top of the morphologies using parallel weighted finite-state transducers on text corpora (Lindén 

et al., 2012). 

Using compiled morphologies, a number of applications have been created, e.g., spellcheckers for 

nearly 100 languages and hyphenators for approximately 40 different languages. The spellcheckers 

were derived from open-source dictionaries and integrated with OpenOffice and LibreOffice, e.g., 

a full-fledged Greenlandic spellchecker, which is a polyagglutinative language, is currently 

available for OpenOffice via HFST. By adding the tagger capability, we have also created an 

improved spelling suggestion mechanism for words in context (Lindén et al., 2012). 

Some additional applications, such as synonym and translation dictionaries as well as a framework 

for recognising multi-word expressions for information extraction using HFST, have also been 

developed. 

6 Conclusions and continuing activities  

As described in this paper, a fully functional LR infrastructure is established in the Nordic and 

Baltic countries as a part of the pan-European META-NET network. This infrastructure will greatly 

support researchers, developers, and users providing information and access to variety of 

monolingual and multilingual resources for the languages of the Nordic and Baltic countries. 

                                                                    
29 http://hfst.sf.net 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 208 of 474]



The cornerstone of the long-time viability of the developed infrastructure is the involvement of the 

following main national and/or regional actors: 

 Producers, i.e., 'competence centres', typically public research centres, language institutes 
and academies, as well as private content owners like media companies and publishing 

houses. 

 Aggregators, i.e., 'data centres' (repositories), usually supported by national and/or regional 
authorities. 

 Sponsors, i.e., public authorities, research agencies, language councils, companies with 
language resource needs. 

 Individual and institutional users from the research and industry sectors. 

The META-SHARE infrastructure relies on the operation of interlinked META-SHARE nodes that 

are distributed and autonomously maintained by the participating institutions. As META-SHARE 

is a distributed platform, its sustainability depends on the willingness and ability of participating 

institutions to run META-SHARE nodes and to provide related services.  

By signing letters of intent (indicating commitment, but not legally binding), we have committed 

to sustain the infrastructure by hosting and making available the META-SHARE repository of LRs 

through the META-SHARE network and providing technical and/or user support services for a 

period of at least 2 years.  

In addition, the clearinghouse concept (a service centre for collection, classification and 

distribution of language resources) is considered for cooperation on long-term storage of resources 

with other similar service centres in other European countries, using cost-sharing principles. 

Inclusion of new actors and countries in the business model will be further elaborated in 

cooperation with the best practices of other META-SHARE centres. In most of the Baltic and 

Nordic countries, national centres promoting LR availability have already been established. 

Specific plans for the curation of META-SHARE nodes and specific types of LRs are provided: 

 Treebank resources are maintained and disseminated through the INESS project 
coordinated by the University of Bergen.  

 Terminology resources are taken care of by EuroTermBank, which is maintained and 
supported by Tilde.  

 The interlinked wordnet resources are maintained and disseminated nationally under 
coordination of the University of Copenhagen.  

 In Norway, the National Library has set up a META-SHARE node and will continue to 
run it as a part of its efforts in CLARINO (the Norwegian CLARIN project). 

 The University of Iceland is working on the formation of a national consortium, consisting 
of the University of Iceland, the Árni Magnússon Institute, the Reykjavik University, the 

National and University Library, and a few others, to maintain an Icelandic national 

repository of language resources. 

Acknowledgements  

The META-NORD project has received funding from the European Commission through the ICT 

PSP Programme, grant agreement no. 270899. Many thanks to colleagues in META-NORD partner 

organizations: Jolanta Zabarskaitė from the Lithuanian language institute, Eiríkur Rögnvaldsson 

and Sigrún Helgadóttir from the University of Iceland and Kadri Vider from the University of 

Tartu. 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 209 of 474]



References 

Beesley, K. and Karttunen, K. (2003). Finite State Morphology, CSLI publications. 

Bird, S. and Simons, G. (2001). The OLAC metadata set and controlled vocabularies. In 

Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Sharing Tools and Resources for Research and 

Education, pages 7–18.  

Bird, S. and Simons, G. (2003). Seven dimensions of portability for language documentation and 

description. Language 79(3), pages 557–582. 

Borin, L., Forsberg, M., Roxendal, J. (2012). Korp – the corpus infrastructure of Språkbanken. In 

Proceedings of LREC 2012, pages 474–478. 

Borin, L., Forsberg, M., Olsson. L., Uppström, J. (2012). The open lexical infrastructure of 

Språkbanken. Proceedings of LREC 2012, pages 3598-3602. 

Braasch, A. and Olsen, S. (2004). STO: A Danish Lexicon Resource - Ready for Applications. In 

Fourth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, Proceedings, Vol. 

IV. Lisbon, pages 1079-1082. 

Broeder, D., Kemps-Snijders, M., Van Uytvanck, D., Windhouwer, M., Withers, P., Wittenburg, 

P., Zinn, C. (2010). A data category registry- and component-based metadata framework. In 

Proceedings of LREC 2010, pages 43–47.  

Desipri, E., Gavrilidou, M., Labropoulou, P., Piperidis, S., Frontini, F., Monachini, M., Arranz, V., 

Mapelli, V., Francopoulo, G., Declerck, T. (2012). Documentation and user manual of the  

META-SHARE metadata model. http://www.meta-net.eu/meta-share/META-

SHARE%20%20documentationUserManual.pdf. 

Francopoulo, G., George, M., Calzolari, N., Monachini, M., Bel, N., Pet, M., Soria, C. (2006). 

Lexical Markup Framework (LMF). Proceedings of LREC 2006, pages 233–236.  

Gavrilidou, M., Labropoulou, P., Piperidis, S., Speranza, M., Monachini, M., Arranz, V., 

Francopoulo, G. (2011). Specification of metadata-based descriptions for language resources 

and technologies. T4ME deliverable D7.2.1. http://www.meta-net.eu/public_documents/t4me/ 

META-NET-D7.2.1-Final.pdf . 

Gavrilidou, M., Labropoulou, P., Desipri, E., Piperidis, S., Papageorgiou, H., Monachini, M., 

Frontini, F., Declerck, T., Francopoulo, G., Arranz, V., Mapelli, V. (2012). The META-SHARE 

metadata schema for the description of language resources. Proceedings of LREC 2012, pages 

1090–1097.  

Helgadóttir, S., Rögnvaldsson, E. (forthcoming). Language Resources for Icelandic, Workshop on 

Nordic Language Research Infrastructure, NODALIDA 2013, Oslo. 

Lindén, K., Silfverberg, M., Pirinen, T. (2009). HFST tool for morphology: An efficient open-

source package for construction of morphological analyzers. In State of the Art in Computational 

Morphology, Mahlow, C. and Piotrowski, M. (eds.). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin 

Heidelberg, pages 28-47. 

Lindén, K., Silfverberg, M., Axelson, E., Hardwick, S., Pirinen, T. (2011). HFST—Framework for 

Compiling and Applying Morphologies. In Systems and Frameworks for Computational 

Morphology. Mahlow, C. & Piotrowski, M. (eds.). Springer, Vol. 100,  pages 67-85. 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 210 of 474]



Lindén, K., Axelson, E., Drobac, S., Hardwick, S., Silfverberg, M., Pirinen, T. A. (2012). Using 

HFST for Creating Computational Linguistic Applications. In Computational Linguistics 

Applications, Piasecki, M., and Przepiórkowski, A., Springer-Verlag. 

Melby, A.K. (2012). Terminology in the age of multilingual corpora. Journal of Specialized 

Translation 18, pages 7–29. 

Oksanen, V. and Lindén, K. (2012). Building shared language research environments inside the 

European Union: How to optimize the system based on experiences from real life. In First 

Thematic Conference on the Knowledge Commons. Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.  

Pedersen, B. S., Borin, L., Forsberg, M., Kahusk, N., Lindén, K., Niemi, J., Nisbeth, N., Nygaard, 

L., Orav, H., Rögnvaldsson, E., Seaton, M., Vider, K., Kaarlo, V. (2013) Nordic and Baltic 

wordnets aligned and compared through “WordTies”. In Proceedings of Nodalida 2013 (in 

press). 

Piperidis, S. (2012). The META-SHARE Language Resources Sharing Infrastructure: Principles, 

Challenges, Solutions. In Proceedings of the Eight International Conference on Language 

Resources and Evaluation (LREC'12), Istanbul, Turkey, pages 36-42. 

Skadiņa, I., Vasiljevs, A., Borin, L., de Smedt, K., Linden, K., Rognvaldsson, E. (2011). META-

NORD: Towards Sharing of Language Resources in Nordic and Baltic Countries. In 

Proceedings of Workshop on Language Resources, Technology and Services in the Sharing 

Paradigm (LRTS), Chiang Mai, Thailand, pages 107-114. 

Váradi, T., Krauwer, S., Wittenburg P., Wynne, M., Koskenniemi, K. (2008). CLARIN: common 

language resources and technology infrastructure. In Proceedings of the Sixth International 

Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. 

Vasiļjevs, A., Pedersen, B.S., de Smedt, K., Borin, L., Skadiņa, I. (2011). META-NORD: Baltic 

and Nordic Branch of the European Open Linguistic Infrastructure. In NODALIDA 2011 

workshop Visibility and Availability of LT Resources, NEALT Proceedings Series, Vol.13, pages 

18-22. 

Vasiļjevs, A. and Schmitz, K.D. (2006). Collection, harmonization and dissemination of dispersed 

multilingual terminology resources in an online terminology databank. In Proceedings of TSTT 

2006, Third International Conference on Terminology, Standardization and Technology 

Transfer, pages 265-272. 

Vossen, P. (ed.) (1998). EuroWordNet: A Multilingual Database with Lexical Semantic Networks. 

Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

Windhouwer, M.A. and Wright, S.E. (2012). Linking to linguistic data categories in ISOcat. In  

Chiarcos, C., Nordhoff, S., Hellmann, S. (eds), Linked Data in Linguistics, pages 99–107. 

Berlin: Springer. 

 

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 211 of 474]


