










































Constructional Intensifying Adjectives in Italian


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 132–137,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Constructional Intensifying Adjectives in Italian 
 
 

Sara Berlanda 
Università Roma Tre 

Via Ostiense, 234 
Rome, Italy 

sara.berlanda@gmail.com 

 
 

 

  

Abstract 

Grading is a primary cognitive operation that 
has an important expressive function. Infor-
mation on degree is grammatically relevant 
and constitutes what Lazard (2006) calls a 
primary domain of grammaticalization: Ac-
cording to typological studies (Cuzzolin & 
Lehmann, 2004), many languages of the 
world have in fact at their disposal multiple 
grammatical devices to express gradation. In 
Italian, the class of superlativizing structures 
alternative to the morphological superlative is 
very rich and consists, among others, of ad-
verbs of degree, focalizing adverbs and proto-
typical comparisons. This contribution deals 
with a particular analytic structure of superla-
tive in Italian that is still neglected in the liter-
ature. This is what we will call Constructional 
Intensifying Adjectives (CIAs), adjectives 
which modify the intensity of other adjectives 
on the basis of regular semantic patterns, thus 
giving rise to multiword superlative construc-
tions of the type: ADJX+ADJINTENS. A com-
parative quantitative corpus analysis 
demonstrates that this strategy, though para-
digmatically limited, is nonetheless widely 
exploited: From a distributional point of view, 
some of these CIAs only combine with one or 
a few adjectives and form MWEs that appear 
to be completely lexicalized, while some oth-
ers modify wider classes of adjectives thus 
displaying a certain degree of productivity. 

1 Introduction 

The functional category of degree formally ex-
presses the intensity with which a property or, to a 
lesser extent, a state of affairs, applies to an entity.   

Adjectives are gradable words par excellence 
and, indeed, all adjectival inflections in languages 
– except those expressing agreement with the head 
– have to do with grading (Croft, 1991: 134-135). 
Even when gradation is not realized through mor-
phology, languages show numerous alternative 
analytical forms for expressing the extent to which 
the quality expressed by the adjective applies to an 
entity.  

In this paper we will focus on a particular strate-
gy of absolute superlative in Italian: The absolute 
superlative indicates that the quality expressed by 
the predicate is present at the highest degree, with-
out making any comparison with other entities 
(1a), or at least to a very high degree on the scale 
of the corresponding values  (Sapir, 1944), (1b): 

1) a. Questo libro è bellissimo.   
  ‘this book is very beautiful’ 

  b. Il tuo bambino è molto vivace. 
  ‘your child is very lively’ 

Due to the “human fondness of exaggeration” 
(Bolinger, 1972), the array of processes employed 
to realize the superlative degree is very wide, both 
cross- and intralinguistically. As for morphological 
strategies, the highest grade is generally formed by 
means of reduplication or affixation; however, the 
most common process to form the superlative 
among the world’s languages is the use of an un-
bound lexeme. Indeed, “almost every language has 
a word meaning roughly very which, preposed or 
postposed, combines with the adjective” (Cuzzolin 
& Lehmann, 2004: 1215). 

Section 2 briefly describes the most exploited 
analytical and synthetic superlative forms in Ital-
ian, which will be part of the quantitative compari-
son carried out in our research, and then focuses on 
CIAs, a multiword strategy still largely unexplored 

132



1 

A
ff

ix
es

 superlative suffixation 
Adj + -issimo (or irregular superlative suffixes) 

bellissimo 'very beautiful', acerrimo 'very bitter' 

2 superlative prefixation 
stra-/ultra-/arci-/super-/… + Adj 

straricco 'very rich', arcinoto 'very famous' 

3 

In
te

ns
if

ie
rs

 

adverbs of quantity molto buono 'very good', troppo stupido 'very stupid' 

4 adverbs of degree terribilmente solo 'terribly lonely' 

5a resultative adverbs particolarmente comodo 'particularly comfortable' 

5b adverbs of completeness interamente solo 'completely lonely' 

6 indexical expressions così brusco 'very abrupt' 

7 multiword adverbs del tutto nuovo 'totally new' 

8 prototypical comparisons 
NX+Adj+come+NProtoype 

NX pieno come un uovo 'full as an egg' 

‘Tab.1 Absolute superlative forms in Italian’ 

in the literature. In Section 3 the tools and the 
methodology used for data extraction and analysis 
will be introduced; the results will be presented 
and discussed in Section 4. The conclusion (Sec-
tion 5) offers an overview of possible future devel-
opments of the present research. 

 

2 The Absolute Superlative in Italian 

2.1 Adverbial Devices 

Italian, like other Romance languages, forms the 
absolute superlative with the Latin-derived suffix   
-issimo (Tab.1 #1) or with some intensifying pre-
fixes derived from Greek or Latin, limited to col-
loquial varieties (Tab.1 #2).  

Adjectives can also be graded by means of lexi-
cal elements (‘degree words’ (Bolinger, 1972), 
‘degree modifiers’ (Kennedy & Nally, 2005) or 
‘adverbs of degree’) which intensify them by scal-
ing upwards the property they express. As Klein 
(1998: 26-27) suggests, the class of intensifiers 
comprises elements that, from a crosslinguistic 
perspective, always seem to derive from the same 
sources. Consequently, in Italian as in many other 
languages, the prototypical intensifiers are repre-
sented by the closed class of adverbs of quantity 
(Tab.1 #3). Then we find derived adverbs of de-
gree in –mente (Tab.1 #4), “implicitly grading” 
(Bosque, 1999) since they contain the feature of 
‘maximum’ in their semantics. Similarly, resulta-
tive adverbs, which include the subset of those de-

noting completeness, assume a grading function 
after a “semantic bleaching” (Lorenz, 2002) of the 
original lexical motivation that their morphology 
would suggest (Tab.1 #5a,b). 

Adverbs derived from indexical and compara-
tive expressions are other common devices capable 
of attributing the highest degree (Bolinger, 1972) 
(Tab.1 #6), as well as the large class of multiword 
adverbs (Tab.1 #7), and the so-called prototypical 
comparisons (Guil, 2006) – formally similative 
constructions relating two entities, one of which is 
prototypical with respect to a particular property, 
and in which the comparison with a prototype trig-
gers a hyperbolizing, and thus superlativizing, in-
terpretation (Tab.1 #8). 

 
2.2 Constructional Intensifying Adjectives 

Intensifiers forming the absolute superlative in 
Italian (cf. list in Tab.1) are generally adverbial 
and preferably occur in pre-adjectival position. 

CIAs, on the other hand, are adjectives that in-
tensify their adjectival head by placing themselves 
in the typical position of prepositional comple-
ments, as in (2): 

2) [ADJX + ADJINTENS]MW-AbsSup 

There are about a dozen constructional adjec-
tives that are employed to attribute the value of 
maximum degree to the adjective they combine 
with, leading to superlative MWEs: 

133



3) Bagnato fradicio, ‘soaking wet’; sudato fradicio 
‘very sweaty’; ubriaco fradicio, ‘dead-drunk’; buio 
fitto, ‘very dark’; buio pesto, ‘very dark’; morto 
stecchito, ‘stone dead’; nuovo fiammante, ‘brand 
new’; incazzato nero, ‘very pissed off’; innamorato 
pazzo, innamorato cotto, innamorato perso, ‘crazy 
in love’; pieno zeppo, ‘crammed full’; ricco 
sfondato, ‘very wealthy’; sporco lurido, ‘very 
dirty’; stanco morto, ‘dead tired’; stufo marcio, ‘sick 
and tired’.1 

While some of these CIAs can hardly be used to 
intensify adjectives other than the ones that nor-
mally select them lexically, there are others which 
show a certain degree of productivity. So CIAs can 
either be used to form a single, fixed MWE or to 
modify wider classes, as shown in (4): 

4) a. X ADJ + perso > innamorato perso ‘crazy in 
love’, sbronzo perso ‘dead-drunk’, …  
b. X ADJ + marcio > ubriaco marcio ‘dead-
drunk’, spocchioso marcio ‘very arrogant’, … 
c. X ADJ + fradicio > geloso fradicio ‘very gea-
lous’, innamorato fradicio ‘crazy in love’, …2 

The phenomenon of grading an adjective by us-
ing another adjective is also known to other lan-
guages – also limited to few adjectives. Evidence 
of similar constructions can be found in Spanish 
(5a), English (5b), German (5c), Afrikaans (5d)  
and Dutch (5e): 

5) a. Sp. histerica perdida, ‘extremely hysterical’; 
quieto parado ‘extremely quiet’ (Guil, 2006); 
b. Eng. dead-tired (Bolinger, 1972); bored stiff 
(Cacchiani, 2010);  
c. Ger. schwerreich, ‘very rich’; gesteckt voll, 
‘crammed full’; 
d. Afr. dolgelukkig, ‘very happy’; malverlief, 
‘madly in love’;  
e. Dut. doodmoeg, ‘very tired’ (Klein, 1998). 

But while in Italian and Spanish the components 
of these MWEs tend to keep part of their morpho-

                                                           
1 We provide below the translation of the CAIs only:  
Cotto, ‘cooked’, (fig.) ‘very much in love’; fiammante, ‘flam-
ing’, (fig.) ‘new’; fitto, ‘thick’, ‘dense’; fradicio, ‘soaked’, 
‘rotten’; lurido, ‘filthy’; marcio, ‘rotten’; morto, ‘dead’; nero, 
‘black’, (fig.) ‘very angry’; pazzo, ‘crazy’; perso, ‘lost’; pesto, 
(fig.) ‘dense’; sfondato, ‘bottomless’, (fig.) ‘limitless’; stec-
chito, ‘skinny’, (fig.) ‘dead’; zeppo, ‘packed’. 
2 Even if these CIAs happen to modify similar classes of ad-
jectives, there seem to be differences in their semantics, hav-
ing marcio and fradicio a more negative connotation than 
perso. 

syntactic and phonological autonomy (i.e. agree-
ment and accent), in the other languages they ra-
ther give rise to compound words. 

 

3 Data Extraction 

3.1 Corpora and Tools  

The data used in our analysis were extracted 
from two of the main corpora of written Italian, 
namely CORIS-CODIS (120 million tokens) and 
LaRepubblica (380 million tokens), both lemma-
tized and morphosyntactically annotated. Starting 
from these resources, a list of superlatives formed 
with CIAs was built and intensifiers able to modify 
more than one base adjective were isolated. The 
automatic identification was facilitated by the 
strong syntactic cohesion of the investigated struc-
tures: CIAs occur always in post-adjectival posi-
tion and the resulting superlative MWEs never 
admit any insertion between the two composing 
elements.  

We then cross-checked the data in GRADIT 
(GRAnde Dizionario ITaliano dell’uso), used as a 
gold standard to verify the results and the lexico-
graphical status of every combination. 

The objects of the present research mostly be-
long to colloquial Italian and, in general, to a non-
standard variety. In order to verify their effective 
vitality in the Italian lexicon, we considered it 
worthwhile to exploit the web as a corpus in the 
case of intensifiers that were scarcely represented 
in the corpora. 

Sketch Engine (Kilgarriff et al., 2004) was also 
used as a basis for our comparative analysis: 
‘Word sketch’ tables were in fact employed to ver-
ify the most frequent superlativizing strategies for 
each ADJX. 

 

3.2 Methodology 

Firstly, occurrences of each MW superlative in 
(3) were compared to the occurrences of the gen-
eral intensifying strategies (cf. Table 1) applicable 
to the same adjective.  

When useful and possible, such comparison was 
differentiated depending on ADJX and further ex-
tended to each one’s most typical intensification 
device – according to the data suggested by Sketch 
Engine tables – and to the superlative  obtained by 
combining ADJX with the adverbial intensifier cor-

134



‘Tab.2 Data from CORIS-CODIS (here CC) and LaRepubblica (here LaR) standardized to 100%’ 
 

responding to the ADJINTENS. To give an example, 
occurrences of pieno zeppo were compared to 
those of pienissimo, molto pieno, tanto pieno, ... 
(cf. Tab.1) but also to those of completamente pie-
no and pieno fino all’orlo, which Sketch Engine 
indicates as the most typical modifications of this 
adjective; since an adverb derived from zeppo does 
not exist (>*zeppamente), this last comparison was 
not possible in this specific case (cf. however in-
namorato pazzo ~ innamorato pazzamente). 

 

4 Comparative Quantitative Analysis 

4.1 Distribution 

The comparative quantitative analysis showed 
that CIAs are generally much exploited as com-
pared to their rival strategies, even though we 
mainly considered a written variety of Italian. As 
we can notice from Tab.2, MWEs as buio pesto, 
pieno zeppo, stufo marcio, morto stecchito, bagna-
to fradicio, ubriaco fradicio seem to be the most 
used strategies compared to other superlative de-
vices for the same ADJX taken individually.  

In other cases, (buio fitto, incazzato nero, sudato 
fradicio), this MW strategy seems to compete 
against the “canonical” means of intensification, 
i.e. morphological superlative and degree adverbs, 
or appears just slightly less frequently than those 

(stanco morto). Cases where the CIAs are scarcely 
represented seem to depend on the fact that they 
belong to some particularly marked expression (as 
for the MWE sporco lurido, ‘very filthy’, which is 
diatopically marked). A comparison with web data 
suggests that they have however a pretty high 
number of occurrences in proportion to the other 
strategies. 

These results appear of even greater interest if 
one considers that the analyzed corpora were writ-
ten. Furthermore, while the occurrences we count-
ed for the patterns in (3) reflect pretty accurately 
the effective number of uses (since they are fixed 
and easily identifiable), the margin of error for the 
alternative strategies is higher, since they have of-
ten been computed together with occurrences be-
longing to similar but not equal syntactic 
structures3.  

It is also worth noting that in cases like nuovo 
fiammante or ricco sfondato, where the modified 
adjective is highly polysemic, the great differences 
with the alternative superlatives taken into account 
is mainly due to the fact that the intensifier here 
acts on the grade of ADJX only in one of its possi-
ble senses, while the traditional strategies appear 

                                                           
3 This is particularly true for the web data, where the search 
tools do not allow to automatically exclude some interfering 
constructions, such as the verbal MWE essersi innamorato 
pazzo, ‘to fall crazy in love’. 

135



more “neutral” in this sense and tend to modify the 
ADJX’s degree in all or most of its senses. 

 
4.2 Productivity 

At a second stage, we tested whether CIAs in (3) 
could extend their grading function to other adjec-
tives. As a result, the intensifiers in (4) were isolat-
ed. In cases like nero and fradicio, the intensifier 
combines with the synonyms of the main bases (for 
example, arrabbiato and incavolato, both syno-
nyms of incazzato, can occur with nero). Further-
more, regarding fradicio, its use can not only be 
extended metaphorically and metonymically to the 
whole semantic field of bagnato (cf. its bases in 3) 
but it can also be employed with adjectives denot-
ing emotions or behaviours (maybe for one of its 
senses’ synonymy with marcio, which already 
modifies the same category): Geloso/emozionato/... 
fradicio. 

 

4.3 CIAs as Constructions: Semantic Models 

CIAs are primitive or participial modifiers de-
noting a quality which triggers the intensity of the 
modified adjective’s quality according to two main 
abstract semantic schemes: 

a) Semantic feature copying (Lorenz, 2002). The 
two adjectives of the construction share the same 
property and are thus associated to the same grad-
ing scale; but ADJINTENS is on a higher position, 
since it represents the implicit superlative of ADJX. 
See bagnato fradicio, innamorato cotto, pieno zep-
po among others. This highly iconic pattern gives 
rise to completely specified constructions which 
often appear as already registered in the lexicon.   
b) Metonymic/metaphoric scale association. The 
extreme degree of intensity is here expressed by 
the contiguity between two scales that are normally 
associated to different semantic fields. Thanks to a 
semantic shift, the property of one scale is per-
ceived as designating the maximum grade of a 
property which actually identifies a different scale 
of values. A typical example is the metaphorical 
process “NEGATIVE FEELING - DARK 
COLOUR”, according to which nero represents the 
highest expression of being incazzato. Other ex-
amples are buio pesto, buio fitto, stufo marcio. A 
subclass of this group is formed by couples of ad-
jectives which display a metonymical “CAUSE – 
EFFECT” relation. If we talk about an innamorato 

pazzo, we intend somebody who is so much in love 
to become/look like crazy. 

The origin of these modifiers, which especially 
in this latter case seem to be very productive, is 
clearly propositional (Bosque, 1999): Their status 
of intensifiers is fulfilled by means of a formerly 
“consecutive” interpretation (stanco morto, ‘dead 
tired’ indicate somebody who is so tired that she 
is/looks as if she was dead). 

 

5 Conclusions 

We focused on CIAs as lexical elements which 
contribute to the creation of superlative construc-
tions. As revealed by the distributional analysis, 
this strategy, though paradigmatically limited, is 
nevertheless extremely interesting given its large 
exploitation if compared to its competing strate-
gies. As for the productivity, semantic regularities 
where noticed in the relation between the compo-
nents of each MWE, and the schemas which under-
lie the most productive patterns were identified.  

As this kind of word formation seems to func-
tion through analogy or semantic contiguity (Siller-
Runggaldier, 2006), it is legitimate to think that it 
appears firstly in the discourse space and then into 
the system (in Coseriu’s sense; cf. Coseriu, 1962). 
That’s why a direct follow up of this research 
could be that of extending the analysis to other 
corpora representative of those language varieties 
which are more sensitive to experimentation.4 

Moreover, the computational comparison be-
tween competitive superlative constructions could 
be deepened in order to understand which kind of 
syntactic or pragmatic constraints influence the use 
of different strategies: In this perspective a collo-
structional analysis (Stefanowitsch and Gries, 
2003) ought to be more informative of the data 
extracted so far. Such a method could also profita-
bly be extended to the analysis of analogous inten-
sification strategies applied to different parts of 
speech. Indeed, many nouns show intensification 
patterns comparable to the one presented here 
(freddo polare, idiota completo) and also some 
verbs exists which are often intensified by means 
of oblique uses of some particular adjectives 
(studiare duro, lavorare sodo). 

                                                           
4 First experiments with the web-derived corpus Paisà (250 
million tokens) showed however that this corpus is considera-
bly closer to written than to spoken language. 

136



References  

Paul K. Andersen. 1992. Gradation. In William Bright 
(Ed.), International Encyclopedia of Linguistics , Vol. 
2:79. Oxford University Press, New York, Oxford. 

Dwight Bolinger. 1972. Degree Words. Mouton, Den 
Haag. 

Ignacio Bosque. 1999. El sintagma adjetival. Modifica-
dores y complementos del adjetivo. Adjetivo y parti-
cipio. In Ignacio Bosque and Violeta Demonte (Eds.), 
Gramática descriptiva de la Lengua Española, Vol. I: 
217-230. Espasa Calpe, Madrid. 

Karl Bühler. 1983[1934]. Teoria del linguaggio. Ar-
mando, Roma. 

Silvia Cacchiani. 2009. Lexico-functional categories 
and complex collocations. The case of intensifiers. In 
Ute Römer and Rainer Schulze (Eds.), Exploring the 
Lexis-Grammar Interface: 229-246. John Benjamins, 
Amsterdam. 

Silvia Cacchiani. 2010. A CL perspective on complex 
intensifying adjectives. In TEXTUS 2010/3:601-618. 

Eugenio Coseriu. 1962. Teoría del lenguaje y lingüísti-
ca general. Gredos, Madrid. 

William Croft. 1991. Syntactic Categories and Gram-
matical Relations: The Cognitive Organization of In-
formation. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 

Pierluigi Cuzzolin and Christian Lehmann. 2004. Com-
parison and gradation. In Gerd Booij et al. (Eds.), 
Morphologie. Ein internationales Handbuch zur Fle-
xion und Wortbiltung, 2:1212-1220. Mouton de Gruy-
ter, Berlin. 

Charles J. Fillmore, Paul Kay and Catherine O’Connor 
1988, Regularity and idiomaticity in grammatical con-
structions: The case of let alone. In Language, 64:501-
538.  

Adele Goldberg. 2006. Constructions at work. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford. 

José Manuel González Calvo. 1984. Sobre la expresión 
de lo superlativo en español. In Anuario de Estudios 
Filológicos. Cáceres, VII:173-205. Universidad de 
Extremadura. 

Pura Guil. 2006. Modificatori dell’aggettivo. In Ema-
nuela Cresti (Ed.), Prospettive nello studio del lessico 
italiano, Atti SILFI 2006, Vol. 2:491-496. FUP, Fi-
renze.  

Christopher Kennedy and Louise McNally. 2005. Scale 
Structure, Degree Modification, and the Semantics of 
Gradable Predicates. In Language, 81:345-381. 

Adam Kilgarriff, Pavel Rychly et al. The Sketch En-
gine. In Proc EURALEX 2004:105-116. Lorient, 
France. 

Henny Klein. 1998. Adverbs of Degree in Dutch and 
Related Language. John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 

Gilbert Lazard. 2006. La quête des invariantes inter-
langues. La linguistique est-elle une science? Honoré 
Champion, Paris. 

Alessandro Lenci, Nicoletta Montemagni and Vito Pir-
relli. 2005. Testo e computer. Elementi di linguistica 
computazionale. Roma, Carocci.  

Gunter Lorenz. 2002. A corpus-based approach to the 
delexicalization and grammaticalization of intensifiers 
in Modern English. In Ilse Wischer and Gabriele Die-
wald (Eds.), New Reflections on Grammaticalization. 
John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 

Edward Sapir. 1944. Grading: A Study in Semantics. In 
Philosophy of Science, 11:93-116. 

Heidi Siller-Runggaldier. 2006. Le collocazioni lessica-
li: strutture sintagmatiche idiosincratiche? In Emanue-
la Cresti (Ed.), Prospettive nello studio del lessico 
italiano, Atti SILFI 2006, Vol. 2:591-598. FUP, Fi-
renze. 

Raffaele Simone. 2010. Verbi sintagmatici come cate-
goria e costruzione. In Monica Cini (Ed.), Verbi sin-
tagmatici: 13-30. Peter Lang, Berlin. 

Anatol Stefanowitsch and Stefan. Th. Gries. 2003. Col-
lostructions: Investigating the interaction of words and 
constructions. In International Journal of Corpus Lin-
guistics, 8.2: 209-43. 

Tullio De Mauro (Ed.). 1999. GRADIT = Grande dizio-
nario italiano dell’uso. UTET, Torino. 

Corpora and Tools 

CORIS-CODIS – CORpus di Riferimento di Italiano 
Scritto. http://corpora.dslo.unibo.it/TCORIS. 

LaRepubblica Corpus. http://sslmit.unibo.it/repubblica.  
Paisà. Corpus. http://www.corpusitaliano.it. 
Sketch Engine. http://www.sketchengine.co.uk. 
 

137


