










































Using character overlap to improve language transformation


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 11–19,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using character overlap to improve language transformation

Sander Wubben
Tilburg University

P.O. Box 90135
5000 LE Tilburg
The Netherlands

s.wubben@uvt.nl

Emiel Krahmer
Tilburg University

P.O. Box 90135
5000 LE Tilburg
The Netherlands

e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl

Antal van den Bosch
Radboud University Nijmegen

P.O. Box 9103
6500 HD Nijmegen

The Netherlands
a.vandenbosch@let.ru.nl

Abstract

Language transformation can be defined
as translating between diachronically dis-
tinct language variants. We investigate the
transformation of Middle Dutch into Mod-
ern Dutch by means of machine transla-
tion. We demonstrate that by using char-
acter overlap the performance of the ma-
chine translation process can be improved
for this task.

1 Introduction

In this paper we aim to develop a system to para-
phrase between diachronically distinct language
variants. For research into history, historical lin-
guistics and diachronic language change, histori-
cal texts are of great value. Specifically from ear-
lier periods, texts are often the only forms of in-
formation that have been preserved. One prob-
lem that arises when studying these texts is the
difference between the language the text is writ-
ten in and the modern variant that the researchers
who want to study the texts know and speak them-
selves. It takes a great deal of deciphering and in-
terpretation to be able to grasp these texts. Our aim
is to facilitate scholars such as historians who do
not possess extensive knowledge of Middle Dutch
who are studying medieval texts. We do this by at-
tempting to generate literal translations of the sen-
tences in the text into modern language. In par-
ticular we focus on the task of translating Middle
Dutch to modern Dutch. The transformation be-
tween language variants, either synchronically or
diachronically, can be seen as a paraphrase and a
translation task, as it is often impossible to catego-
rize two languages as either variants or different
languages.

We define Middle Dutch as a collection of
closely related West Germanic dialects that were
spoken and written between 1150 and 1500 in the

area that is now defined as the Netherlands and
parts of Belgium. One of the factors that make
Middle Dutch difficult to read is the fact that at
the time no overarching standard language existed.
Modern Dutch is defined as Dutch as spoken from
1500. The variant we investigate is contempo-
rary Dutch. An important difference with regular
paraphrasing is the amount of parallel data avail-
able. The amount of parallel data for the vari-
ant pair Middle Dutch - Modern Dutch is sev-
eral orders of magnitude smaller than bilingual
parallel corpora typically used in machine trans-
lation (Koehn, 2005) or monolingual parallel cor-
pora used for paraphrase generation by machine
translation (Wubben et al., 2010).

We do expect many etymologically related
words to show a certain amount of character
overlap between the Middle and Modern variants.
An example of the data is given below, from the
work ’Van den vos Reynaerde’ (‘About Reynard
the Fox’), part of the Comburg manuscript that
was written between 1380-1425. Here, the first
text is the original text, the second text is a
modern translation in Dutch by Walter Verniers
and a translation in English is added below that
for clarity.

“Doe al dat hof versamet was,
Was daer niemen, sonder die das,
Hine hadde te claghene over Reynaerde,
Den fellen metten grijsen baerde.”

“Toen iedereen verzameld was,
was er niemand -behalve de das-
die niet kwam klagen over Reynaert,
die deugniet met zijn grijze baard.”

“When everyone was gathered,
there was noone -except the badger-
who did not complain about Reynaert,
that rascal with his grey beard.”

11



We can observe that although the two Dutch
texts are quite different, there is a large amount
of character overlap in the words that are used.
Our aim is to use this character overlap to compen-
sate for the lower amount of data that is available.
We compare three different approaches to trans-
late Middle Dutch into Modern Dutch: a standard
Phrase-Based machine translation (PBMT) ap-
proach, a PBMT approach with additional prepro-
cessing based on Needleman-Wunsch sequence
alignment, and a character bigram based PBMT
approach. The PBMT approach with preprocess-
ing identifies likely translations based on character
overlap and adds them as a dictionary to improve
the statistical alignment process. The PBMT ap-
proach based on character bigrams rather than
translating words, transliterates character bigrams
and in this way improves the transformation pro-
cess. We demonstrate that these two approaches
outperform standard PBMT in this task, and that
the PBMT transliteration approach based on char-
acter bigrams performs best.

2 Related work

Language transformation by machine translation
within a language is a task that has not been stud-
ied extensively before. Related work is the study
by Xu et al. (2012). They evaluate paraphrase sys-
tems that attempt to paraphrase a specific style of
writing into another style. The plays of William
Shakespeare and the modern translations of these
works are used in this study. They show that their
models outperform baselines based on dictionar-
ies and out-of-domain parallel text. Their work
differs from our work in that they target writing
in a specific literary style and we are interested in
translating between diachronic variants of a lan-
guage.

Work that is slightly comparable is the work by
Zeldes (2007), who extrapolates correspondences
in a small parallel corpus taken from the Modern
and Middle Polish Bible. The correspondences are
extracted using machine translation with the aim
of deriving historical grammar and lexical items.
A larger amount of work has been published about
spelling normalization of historical texts. Baron
and Rayson (2008) developed tools for research in
Early Modern English. Their tool, VARD 2, finds
candidate modern form replacements for spelling
variants in historical texts. It makes use of a

dictionary and a list of spelling rules. By plug-
ging in other dictionaries and spelling rules, the
tool can be adapted for other tasks. Kestemont et
al. (2010) describe a machine learning approach
to normalize the spelling in Middle Dutch Text
from the 12th century. They do this by converting
the historical spelling variants to single canonical
(present-day) lemmas. Memory-based learning is
used to learn intra-lemma spelling variation. Al-
though these approaches normalize the text, they
do not provide a translation.

More work has been done in the area of trans-
lating between closely related languages and deal-
ing with data sparsity that occurs within these lan-
guage pairs (Hajič et al., 2000; Van Huyssteen
and Pilon, 2009). Koehn et al. (2003) have shown
that there is a direct negative correlation between
the size of the vocabulary of a language and the
accuracy of the translation. Alignment models
are directly affected by data sparsity. Uncommon
words are more likely to be aligned incorrectly to
other words or, even worse, to large segments of
words (Och and Ney, 2003). Out of vocabulary
(OOV) words also pose a problem in the trans-
lation process, as systems are unable to provide
translations for these words. A standard heuristic
is to project them into the translated sentence un-
translated.

Various solutions to data sparsity have been
studied, among them the use of part-of-speech
tags, suffixes and word stems to normalize
words (Popovic and Ney, 2004; De Gispert and
Marino, 2006), the treatment of compound words
in translation (Koehn and Knight, 2003), translit-
eration of names and named entities, and advanced
models that combine transliteration and transla-
tion (Kondrak et al., 2003; Finch et al., 2012)
or learn unknown words by analogical reason-
ing (Langlais and Patry, 2007).

Vilar et al. (2007) investigate a way to han-
dle data sparsity in machine translation between
closely related languages by translating between
characters as opposed to words. The words in the
parallel sentences are segmented into characters.
Spaces between words are marked with a special
character. The sequences of characters are then
used to train a standard machine translation model
and a language model with n-grams up to n = 16.
They apply their system to the translation between
the related languages Spanish and Catalan, and
find that a word based system outperforms their

12



letter-based system. However, a combined sys-
tem performs marginally better in terms of BLEU
scores.

Tiedemann (2009) shows that combining
character-based translation with phrase-based
translation improves machine translation quality
in terms of BLEU and NIST scores when trans-
lating between Swedish and Norwegian if the
OOV-words are translated beforehand with the
character-based model.

Nakov and Tiedemann (2012) investigate the
use of character-level models in the translation be-
tween Macedonian and Bulgarian movie subtitles.
Their aim is to translate between the resource poor
language Macedonian to the related language Bul-
garian, in order to use Bulgarian as a pivot in or-
der to translate to other languages such as English.
Their research shows that using character bigrams
shows improvement over a word-based baseline.

It seems clear that character overlap can be used
to improve translation quality in related languages.
We therefore use character overlap in language
transformation between two diachronic variants of
a language.

3 This study

In this study we investigate the task of translating
from Middle Dutch to Modern Dutch. Similarly
to resource poor languages, one of the problems
that are apparent is the small amount of parallel
Middle Dutch - Modern Dutch data that is avail-
able. To combat the data sparseness we aim to use
the character overlap that exists between the Mid-
dle Dutch words and their Modern Dutch counter-
parts. Examples of overlap in some of the words
given in the example can be viewed in Table1. We
are interested in the question how we can use this
overlap to improve the performance of the transla-
tion model. We consider three approaches: (A)
Perform normal PBMT without any preprocess-
ing, (B) Apply a preprocessing step in which we
pinpoint words and phrases that can be aligned
based on character overlap and (C) perform ma-
chine translation not to words but to character bi-
grams in order to make use of the character over-
lap.

We will first discuss the PBMT baseline, fol-
lowed by the PBMT + overlap system and the
character bigram PBMT transliteration system in
Section 4. We then describe the experiment with
human judges in Section 6, and its results in Sec-

tion 7. We close with a discussion of our results in
Section 8.

Middle Dutch Modern Dutch
versamet verzameld
was was
niemen niemand
die de
das das
claghene klagen
over over
Reynaerde Reynaert
metten met zijn
grijsen grijze
baerde baard

Table 1: Examples of character overlap in words
from a fragment of ’Van den vos Reynaerde’

4 Language transformation Models

4.1 PBMT baseline

For our baseline we use the Moses software to
train a phrase based machine translation (PBMT)
model (Koehn et al., 2007). In general, a statistical
machine translation model normally finds a best
translation Ẽ of a text in language F for a text
in language E by combining a translation model
P (F |E) with a language model P (E):

Ẽ = arg max
E∈E∗

P (F |E)P (E)

In phrase-based machine translation the sen-
tence F is segmented into a sequence of I phrases
during decoding. Each source phrase is then trans-
lated into a target phrase to form sentence E.
Phrases may be reordered.

The GIZA++ statistical alignment package
(Och and Ney, 2003) is used to perform the word
alignments, which are later combined into phrase
alignments in the Moses pipeline to build the
language transformation model. GIZA++ imple-
ments IBM Models 1 to 5 and an HMM word
alignment model to find statistically motivated
alignments between words. We first tokenize our
data. We then lowercase all data and use all sen-
tences from the Modern Dutch part of the cor-
pus to train an n-gram language model with the
SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002). Then we run the
GIZA++ aligner using the training pairs of sen-
tences in Middle Dutch and Modern Dutch. We

13



execute GIZA++ with standard settings and we
optimize using minimum error rate training with
BLEU scores. The Moses decoder is used to gen-
erate the translations.

4.2 PBMT with overlap-based alignment

Before using the Moses pipeline we perform a
preprocessing alignment step based on character
overlap. Word and phrase pairs that exhibit a large
amount of character overlap are added to the par-
allel corpus that GIZA++ is trained on. Every time
we find a phrase or word pair with large overlap it
is added to the corpus. This helps bias the align-
ment procedure towards aligning similar words
and reduces alignment errors. To perform the pre-
processing step we use the Needleman-Wunsch
algorithm (Needleman and Wunsch, 1970). The
Needleman-Wunsch algorithm is a dynamic pro-
gramming algorithm that performs a global align-
ment on two sequences. Sequence alignment is
a method to find commonalities in two (or more)
sequences of some items or characters. One of-
ten used example is the comparison of sequences
of DNA to find evolutionary differences and sim-
ilarities. Sequence alignment is also used in lin-
guistics, where it is applied to finding the longest
common substring or the differences or similari-
ties between strings.

The Needleman-Wunsch algorithm is a se-
quence alignment algorithm that optimizes a score
function to find an optimal alignment of a pair of
sequences. Each possible alignment is scored ac-
cording to the score function, where the alignment
giving the highest similarity score is the optimal
alignment of a pair of sequences. If more than
one alignment yields the highest score, there are
multiple optimal solutions. The algorithm uses
an iterative matrix to calculate the optimal solu-
tion. All possible pairs of characters containing
one character from each sequence are plotted in
a 2-dimensional matrix. Then, all possible align-
ments between those characters can be represented
by pathways through the matrix. Insertions and
deletions are allowed, but can be penalized by
means of a gap penalty in the alignment.

The first step is to initialize the matrix and fill in
the gap scores in the top row and leftmost column.
In our case we heuristically set the values of the
scores to +1 for matches, -2 for mismatches and
-1 for gaps after evaluating on our development
set. After initialization, we can label the cells

in the matrix C(i, j) where i = 1, 2, ..., N and
j = 1, 2, ...,M , the score of any cell C(i, j) is
then the maximum of:

qdiag = C(i− 1, j − 1) + s(i, j)
qdown = C(i− 1, j) + g
qright = C(i, j − 1) + g

Here, s(i, j) is the substitution score for let-
ters i and j, and g is the gap penalty score. If i
and j match, the substitution score is in fact the
matching score. The table is filled this way recur-
sively, filling each cell with the maximum score of
the three possible options (diagonally, down and
right). After this is done, an optimal path can
be found by performing a traceback, starting in
the lower right corner of the table and ending in
the upper left corner, by visiting cells horizontally,
vertically or diagonally, but only those cells with
the highest score. After this process we end up
with an alignment.

We use the Needleman-Wunsch algorithm to
find an optimal alignment of the Middle Dutch
- Modern Dutch sentence pairs. We regard each
line as a sentence. In case of rhyming text, a
frequent phenomenon in Middle Dutch text, lines
are usually parts of sentences. We then consider
each line a string, and we try to align as many
characters and whitespaces to their equivalents in
the parallel line. We split the aligned sentences
in each position where two whitespaces align and
we consider the resulting aligned words or phrases
as alignments. For each aligned word or phrase
pair we calculate the Jaccard coefficient and if that
is equal or higher than a threshold we add the
aligned words or phrases to the training material.
We heuristically set this threshold to 0.5. By using
this method we already can find many-to-one and
one-to-many alignments. In this way we help the
GIZA++ alignment process by biasing it towards
aligning words and phrases that show overlap. Ta-
ble 2 illustrates this process for two lines.

4.3 Character bigram transliteration

Another somewhat novel approach we propose
for Language Transformation is Character-based
transliteration. To circumvent the problem of

14



Middle Dutch: hine hadde+ ++te claghene over Reynaerde ,
Modern Dutch: di+e ++niet kwam klag+en+ over Reynaer+t ,

Jaccard 0.4 0.14 0 0.63 1 0.70 1

Middle Dutch: +den fe++llen met++ten grijsen baerde .
Modern Dutch: die+ deugniet met zijn grijze+ baard+ .

Jaccard 0.50 0.09 0.50 0.71 0.8 1

Table 2: Alignment of lines with Jaccard scores for the aligned phrases. A + indicates a gap introduced
by the Needleman Wunsch alignment.

OOV-words and use the benefits of character over-
lap more directly in the MT system, we build
a translation model based on character bigrams,
similar to (Nakov and Tiedemann, 2012). Where
they use this approach to translate between closely
related languages, we use it to translate between
diachronic variants of a language. The sentences
in the parallel corpus are broken into charac-
ter bigrams, with a special character representing
whitespaces. These bigrams are used to train the
translation model and the language model. An ex-
ample of the segmentation process is displayed in
Table 3. We train an SRILM language model on
the character bigrams and model sequences of up
to 10 bigrams. We then run the standard Moses
pipeline, using GIZA++ with standard settings to
generate the phrase-table and we use the Moses
decoder to decode the bigram sequences. A num-
ber of sample entries are shown in Table 4. As a
final step, we recombine the bigrams into words.
The different sizes of the Phrase-table for the dif-
ferent approaches can be observed in Table 5.

original segmented
Hine #H Hi in ne e#
hadde #h ha ad dd de e#
te #t te e#
claghene #c cl la ag gh he en ne e#
over #o ov ve er r#
Reynaerde #R Re ey yn na ae er rd de e#
, #, ,#

Table 3: Input and output of the character bigram
segmenter

5 Data Set

Our training data consists of various Middle Dutch
literary works with their modern Dutch transla-
tion. A breakdown of the different works is in

#d da at t# en n# #d da aa ar
#d da at t# et t# #s st
#d da at t# et t# #s
#d da at t# ie et t# #s st
#d da at t# ie et t# #s
#d da at t# la an n#
#d da at t# le et t#
#d da at t# n# #d da aa ar ro
#d da at t# n# #d da aa ar
#d da at t# n#
#d da at t# rd da at t#
#d da at ts s# #d da at t#
#d da at ts si i# #h he eb bb be en
#d da at ts #d da at t#
#d da at ts #w wa at t#
#d da at tt tu #w wa at t# #j

Table 4: Example entries from the character bi-
gram Phrase-table, without scores.

system lines
PBMT 20,092
PBMT + overlap 27,885
character bigram transliteration 93,594

Table 5: Phrase-table sizes of the different models

Table 6. All works are from the Digital Library of
Dutch Literature1. “Middle Dutch” is a very broad
definition. It encompasses all Dutch language spo-
ken and written between 1150 and 1500 in the
Netherlands and parts of Belgium. Works stem-
ming from different centuries, regions and writers
can differ greatly in their orthography and spelling
conventions. No variant of Dutch was considered
standard or the norm; Middle Dutch can be con-
sidered a collection of related lects (regiolects, di-
alects). This only adds to the problem of data

1http://www.dbnl.org

15



sparsity. Our test set consists of a selection of
sentences from the Middle Dutch work Beatrijs,
a Maria legend written around 1374 by an anony-
mous author.

source text lines date of origin
Van den vos Reynaerde 3428 around 1260
Sint Brandaan 2312 12th century
Gruuthuuse gedichten 224 around 1400
’t Prieel van Trojen 104 13th century
Various poems 42 12th-14th cent.

Table 6: Middle Dutch works in the training set

Middle Si seide: ’Ic vergheeft u dan.
Dutch Ghi sijt mijn troest voer alle man
Modern Ze zei: ’ik vergeef het je dan.
Dutch Je bent voor mij de enige man
PBMT Ze zei : ’ Ik vergheeft u dan .

Gij ze alles in mijn enige voor al man
PBMT + Ze zei : ’ Ik vergheeft u dan .
Overlap dat ze mijn troest voor al man
Char. Bigram Ze zeide : ’ Ik vergeeft u dan .
PBMT Gij zijt mijn troost voor alle man
Middle Dat si daer snachts mochte bliven.
Dutch ’Ic mocht u qualijc verdriven,’
Modern omdat ze nu niet verder kon reizen.
Dutch ’Ik kan u echt de deur niet wijzen,’
PBMT dat ze daar snachts kon bliven .
’ Ik kon u qualijc verdriven , ’
PBMT + dat ze daar s nachts kon blijven .
Overlap ’ Ik kon u qualijc verdriven , ’
Char. Bigram dat zij daar snachts mocht blijven .
PBMT ’ Ik mocht u kwalijk verdrijven ,

Table 7: Example output

6 Experiment

In order to evaluate the systems, we ran an exper-
iment to collect human rankings of the output of
the systems. We also performed automatic evalu-
ation.

6.1 Materials

Because of the nature of our data, in which sen-
tences often span multiple lines, it is hard to eval-
uate the output on the level of separate lines. We
therefore choose to evaluate pairs of lines. We ran-
domly choose a line, and check if it is part of a
sensible sentence that can be understood without
more context. If that is the case, we select it to in-
clude in our test set. In this way we select 25 pairs
of lines. We evaluate the translations produced by
the three different systems for these sentences. Ex-
amples of the selected sentences and the generated
corresponding output are displayed in Table 7.

6.2 Participants

The participants in this evaluation study were 22
volunteers. All participants were native speakers
of Dutch, and participated through an online in-
terface. All participants were adults, and 12 were
male and 10 female. In addition to the 22 partici-
pants, one expert in the field of Middle Dutch also
performed the experiment, in order to be able to
compare the judgements of the laymen and the ex-
pert.

6.3 Procedure

The participants were asked to rank three different
automatic literal translations of Middle Dutch text.
For reference, they were also shown a modern (of-
ten not literal) translation of the text by Dutch au-
thor Willem Wilmink. The order of items to judge
was randomized for each participant, as well as the
order of the output of the systems for each sen-
tence. The criterium for ranking was the extent to
which the sentences could be deciphered and un-
derstood. The participants were asked to always
provide a ranking and were not allowed to assign
the same rank to multiple sentences. In this way,
each participant provided 25 rankings where each
pair of sentences received a distinct rank. The pair
with rank 1 is considered best and the pair with 3
is considered worst.

system mean rank 95 % c. i.
PBMT 2.44 (0.03) 2.38 - 2.51
PBMT + Overlap 2.00 (0.03) 1.94 - 2.06
char. bigram PBMT 1.56 (0.03) 1.50 - 1.62

Table 8: Mean scores assigned by human subjects,
with the standard error between brackets and the
lower and upper bound of the 95 % confidence in-
terval

7 Results

7.1 Human judgements

In this section we report on results of the exper-
iment with judges ranking the output of the sys-
tems. To test for significance of the difference
in the ranking of the different systems we ran re-
peated measures analyses of variance with system
(PBMT, PBMT + Overlap, character bigram MT)
as the independent variable, and the ranking of the
output as the dependent variable. Mauchly‘s test
for sphericity was used to test for homogeneity of

16



PBMT PBMT +
overlap

char.
bigram
PBMT

X2

2.05 2.59 1.36 16.636**
2.77 1.82 1.41 21.545**
2.50 1.27 2.23 18.273**
1.95 1.45 2.59 14.273**
2.18 2.36 1.45 10.182**
2.45 2.00 1.55 9.091*
2.91 1.77 1.32 29.545**
2.18 2.27 1.55 6.903*
2.14 2.00 1.86 0.818
2.27 1.73 2.00 3.273
2.68 1.68 1.64 15.364**
2.82 1.95 1.23 27.909**
2.68 2.09 1.23 23.545**
1.95 2.55 1.50 12.091**
2.77 1.86 1.36 22.455**
2.32 2.23 1.45 9.909**
2.86 1.91 1.23 29.727**
2.18 1.09 2.73 30.545**
2.05 2.09 1.86 0.636
2.73 2.18 1.09 30.545**
2.41 2.27 1.32 15.545**
2.68 2.18 1.14 27.364**
1.82 2.95 1.23 33.909**
2.73 1.95 1.32 21.909**
2.91 1.77 1.32 29.545**

Table 9: Results of the Friedman test on each of
the 25 sentences. Results marked * are significant
at p < 0.05 and results marked ** are significant
at p < 0.01

variance, but was not significant, so no corrections
had to be applied. Planned pairwise comparisons
were made with the Bonferroni method. The mean
ranking can be found in Table 8 together with the
standard deviation and 95 % confidence interval.
We find that participants ranked the three systems
differently, F (2, 42) = 135, 604, p < .001, η2p =
.866. All pairwise comparisons are significant at
p < .001. The character bigram model receives
the best mean rank (1.56), then the PBMT + Over-
lap system (2.00) and the standard PBMT system
is ranked lowest (2.44). We used a Friedman test
to detect differences across multiple rankings. We
ran the test on each of the 25 K-related samples,
and found that for 13 sentences the ranking pro-
vided by the test subjects was equal to the mean
ranking: the PBMT system ranked lowest, then the

PBMT + Overlap system and the character bigram
system scored highest for each of these cases at
p < .005. These results are detailed in Table 9.
When comparing the judgements of the partici-
pants with the judgements of an expert, we find
a significant medium Pearson correlation of .65
(p < .001) between the judgements of the expert
and the mean of the judgements of the participants.
This indicates that the judgements of the laymen
are indeed useful.

7.2 Automatic judgements

In order to attempt to measure the quality of the
transformations made by the different systems au-
tomatically, we measured NIST scores by compar-
ing the output of the systems to the reference trans-
lation. We do realize that the reference translation
is in fact a literary interpretation and not a literal
translation, making automatic assessment harder.
Having said that, we still hope to find some effect
by using these automatic measures. We only re-
port NIST scores here, because BLEU turned out
to be very uninformative. In many cases sentences
would receive a BLEU score of 0. Mauchly‘s test
for sphericity was used to test for homogeneity of
variance for the NIST scores, and was not signifi-
cant. We ran a repeated measures test with planned
pairwise comparisons made with the Bonferroni
method. We found that the NIST scores for the dif-
ferent systems differed significantly (F (2, 48) =
6.404, p < .005, η2p = .211). The average NIST
scores with standard error and the lower and up-
per bound of the 95 % confidence interval can be
seen in Table 10. The character bigram translit-
eration model scores highest with 2.43, followed
by the PBMT + Overlap model with a score of
2.30 and finally the MT model scores lowest with
a NIST score of 1.95. We find that the scores
for the PBMT model differ significantly from the
PBMT + Overlap model (p < .01) and the charac-
ter bigram PBMT model (p < .05), but the scores
for the PBMT + Overlap and the character bigram
PBMT model do not differ significantly. When
we compare the automatic scores to the human as-
signed ranks we find no significant Pearson corre-
lation.

8 Conclusion

In this paper we have described two modifications
of the standard PBMT framework to improve the
transformation of Middle Dutch to Modern Dutch

17



system mean NIST 95 % c. i.
PBMT 1.96 (0.18) 1.58 - 2.33
PBMT + overlap 2.30 (0.21) 1.87 - 2.72
char. bigram PBMT 2.43 (0.20) 2.01 - 2.84

Table 10: Mean NIST scores, with the standard
error between brackets and the lower and upper
bound of the 95 % confidence interval

by using character overlap in the two variants. We
described one approach that helps the alignment
process by adding words that exhibit a certain
amount of character overlap to the parallel data.
We also described another approach that translates
sequences of character bigrams instead of words.
Reviewing the results we conclude that the use of
character overlap between diachronic variants of a
language is beneficial in the translation process.
More specifically, the model that uses character
bigrams in translation instead of words is ranked
best. Also ranked significantly better than a stan-
dard Phrase Based machine translation approach
is the approach using the Needleman-Wunsch al-
gorithm to align sentences and identify words or
phrases that exhibit a significant amount of char-
acter overlap to help the GIZA++ statistical align-
ment process towards aligning the correct words
and phrases. We have seen that one issue that
is encountered when considering the task of lan-
guage transformation from Middle Dutch to Mod-
ern Dutch is data sparseness. The number of lines
used to train on amounts to a few thousand, and
not millions as is more common in SMT. It is
therefore crucial to use the inherent character over-
lap in this task to compensate for the lack of data
and to make more informed decisions. The char-
acter bigram approach is able to generate a trans-
lation for out of vocabulary words, which is also
a solution to the data sparseness problem. One
area where the character bigram model often fails,
is translating Middle Dutch words into Modern
Dutch words that are significantly different. One
example can be seen in Table 7, where ’mocht’
is translated by the PBMT and PBMT + Overlap
systems to ’kon’ and left the same by the charac-
ter bigram transliteration model. This is probably
due to the fact that ’mocht’ still exists in Dutch,
but is not as common as ’kon’ (meaning ’could’).
another issue to consider is the fact that the char-
acter bigram model learns character mappings that
are occurring trough out the language. One exam-

ple is the disappearing silent ’h’ after a ’g’. This
often leads to transliterated words of which the
spelling is only partially correct. Apparently the
human judges rate these ’half words’ higher than
completely wrong words, but automatic measures
such as NIST are insensitive to this.

We have also reported the NIST scores for the
output of the standard PBMT approach and the
two proposed variants. We see that the NIST
scores show a similar patterns as the human judge-
ments: the PBMT + Overlap and character bigram
PBMT systems both achieve significantly higher
NIST scores than the normal PBMT system. How-
ever, the PBMT + Overlap and character bigram
PBMT models do not differ significantly in scores.
It is interesting that we find no significant corre-
lation between human and automatic judgements,
leading us to believe that automatic judgements
are not viable in this particular scenario. This is
perhaps due to the fact that the reference transla-
tions the automatic measures rely on are in this
case not literal translations but rather more loosely
translated literary interpretations of the source text
in modern Dutch. The fact that both versions are
written on rhyme only worsens this problem, as
the author of the Modern Dutch version is often
very creative.

We think techniques such as the ones described
here can be of great benefit to laymen wishing to
investigate works that are not written in contem-
porary language, resulting in improved access to
these older works. Our character bigram translit-
eration model may also play some role as a com-
putational model in the study of the evolution of
orthography in language variants, as it often will
generate words that are strictly speaking not cor-
rect, but do resemble Modern Dutch in some way.
Automatic evaluation is another topic for future
work. It would be interesting to see if an automatic
measure operating on the character level correlates
better with human judgements.

References
Alistair Baron and Paul Rayson. 2008. VARD 2: A

tool for dealing with spelling variation in historical
corpora. In Proceedings of the Postgraduate Confer-
ence in Corpus Linguistics, Birmingham, UK. Aston
University.

A. De Gispert and J. B. Marino. 2006. Linguistic
knowledge in statistical phrase-based word align-
ment. Natural Language Engineering, 12(1):91–
108.

18



Andrew Finch, Paul Dixon, and Eiichiro Sumita. 2012.
Rescoring a phrase-based machine transliteration
system with recurrent neural network language mod-
els. In Proceedings of the 4th Named Entity Work-
shop (NEWS) 2012, pages 47–51, Jeju, Korea, July.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jan Hajič, Jan Hric, and Vladislav Kuboň. 2000. Ma-
chine translation of very close languages. In Pro-
ceedings of the sixth conference on Applied natural
language processing, pages 7–12. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Mike Kestemont, Walter Daelemans, and Guy
De Pauw. 2010. Weigh your words—memory-
based lemmatization for Middle Dutch. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 25(3):287–301, Septem-
ber.

Philipp Koehn and Kevin Knight. 2003. Feature-rich
statistical translation of noun phrases. In ACL ’03:
Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting on Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–
318, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Philip Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics on Human Language Technology-
Volume 1, pages 48–54. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris C.
Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, Brooke
Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard Zens,
Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Constantin,
and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit
for statistical machine translation. In ACL. The As-
sociation for Computer Linguistics.

P. Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for statis-
tical machine translation. In MT summit, volume 5.

Grzegorz Kondrak, Daniel Marcu, and Kevin Knight.
2003. Cognates can improve statistical translation
models. In HLT-NAACL.

Philippe Langlais and Alexandre Patry. 2007. Trans-
lating unknown words by analogical learning. In
EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 877–886. ACL.

Preslav Nakov and Jörg Tiedemann. 2012. Combin-
ing word-level and character-level models for ma-
chine translation between closely-related languages.
In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers), pages 301–305, Jeju Island, Korea,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

S. B. Needleman and C. D. Wunsch. 1970. A general
method applicable to the search for similarities in
the amino acid sequence of two proteins. Journal of
molecular biology, 48(3):443–453, March.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Maja Popovic and Hermann Ney. 2004. Towards the
use of word stems and suffixes for statistical ma-
chine translation. In LREC. European Language Re-
sources Association.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM - an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In In Proc. Int. Conf. on
Spoken Language Processing, pages 901–904, Den-
ver, Colorado.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2009. Character-based PSMT for
closely related languages. In Lluı́s Marqués and
Harold Somers, editors, Proceedings of 13th An-
nual Conference of the European Association for
Machine Translation (EAMT’09), pages 12 – 19,
Barcelona, Spain, May.

Gerhard B Van Huyssteen and Suléne Pilon. 2009.
Rule-based conversion of closely-related languages:
a dutch-to-afrikaans convertor. 20th Annual Sympo-
sium of the Pattern Recognition Association of South
Africa, December.

David Vilar, Jan-Thorsten Peter, and Hermann Ney.
2007. Can we translate letters? In Second Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 33–
39, Prague, Czech Republic, jun. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Sander Wubben, Antal van den Bosch, and Emiel
Krahmer. 2010. Paraphrase generation as mono-
lingual translation: Data and evaluation. In
B. Mac Namee J. Kelleher and I. van der Sluis, ed-
itors, Proceedings of the 10th International Work-
shop on Natural Language Generation (INLG
2010), pages 203–207, Dublin.

Wei Xu, Alan Ritter, Bill Dolan, Ralph Grishman, and
Colin Cherry. 2012. Paraphrasing for style. In
COLING, pages 2899–2914.

Amir Zeldes. 2007. Machine translation between lan-
guage stages: Extracting historical grammar from a
parallel diachronic corpus of Polish. In Matthew
Davies, Paul Rayson, Susan Hunston, and Pernilla
Danielsson, editors, Proceedings of the Corpus Lin-
guistics Conference CL2007. University of Birming-
ham.

19


