



















































A Finite-State Approach to Translate SNOMED CT Terms into Basque Using Medical Prefixes and Suffixes


Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Finite State Methods and Natural Language Processing, pages 99–103,
St Andrews–Sctotland, July 15–17, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Finite-State Approach to Translate SNOMED CT Terms into Basque
Using Medical Prefixes and Suffixes

Olatz Perez-de-Viñaspre, Maite Oronoz, Manex Agirrezabal and Mikel Lersundi
IXA NLP Group

University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU
operezdevina001@ikasle.ehu.es

Abstract

This paper presents a system that gener-
ates Basque equivalents to terms that de-
scribe disorders in SNOMED CT. This
task has been performed using Finite-State
transducers and a medical prefixes and
suffixes lexicon. This lexicon is composed
of English-Basque translation pairs, and it
is used both for the identification of the af-
fixes of the English term and for the trans-
lation of them into Basque. The translated
affixes are composed using morphotactic
rules. We evaluated the system with a
Gold Standard obtaining promising results
(0.93 of precision). This system is part of
a more general system which aim is the
translation of SNOMED CT into Basque.

1 Introduction

SNOMED Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) (Col-
lege of American Pathologists, 1993) is consid-
ered the most comprehensive, multilingual clini-
cal healthcare terminology in the world. It does
not exist in Basque language, and we think that the
semi-automatic translation of SNOMED CT terms
into Basque will help to fill the gap of this type
of medical terminology in our language. By its
translation we have a double objective: i) to offer a
medical lexicon in Basque to the bio-medical per-
sonnel to try to enforce its use in the bio-sanitary
area, and ii) to access multilingual medical re-
sources as the UMLS (Unified Medical Language
System) (Bodenreider, 2004) in our language.

Basque is a minority language in its standard-
ization process and persists between two power-
ful languages, Spanish and French. Although to-
day Basque holds co-official language status in the
Basque Autonomy Community, during centuries it
was out of educational and sanitary systems, me-
dia, and industry.

We have defined a general algorithm (see sec-
tion 2) based on Natural Language Processing
(NLP) resources that tries to achieve the trans-
lation with an incremental approach. The first
step of the algorithm is based on the mapping of
some lexical resources and has been already devel-
oped. Considering the huge size of SNOMED CT
(296,000 active concepts and around 1,000,000
descriptions in the English version dated 31-01-
2012) the contribution of the specialized dictio-
naries has been limited. In the second step that is
specified in this paper, we have used Finite State
Machines (FSM) in the form of transducers to gen-
erate one-word-terms in Basque taking as a ba-
sis terms from the English release of SNOMED
CT mentioned before. The generation is based
on the translation by means of medical suffixes
(i.e. -dipsia, -megaly) and prefixes (i.e. episio-,
aesthesi-) and in their correct composition, con-
sidering morphotactic rules. (Lovis et al., 1995)
stated that a big group of medical terms can be
created by neologisms, that is, concatenations of
existing morphosemantic units understood by any-
body. This units usually have Greek and Latin ori-
gins and their meaning is known by the specialists.
(Banay, 1948) specified that about three-fourths of
the medical terminology is of Greek origin.

In this work we take advantage of these features
to try to translate terms from the Disorder sub-
hierarchy of SNOMED CT. This corresponds to
one of the 19 top level hierarchies of SNOMED
CT, to the one called Clinical Finding/Disorder.
In our general approach, we prioritized the trans-
lation of the most populated hierarchies: Clinical
Finding/Disorder (139,643 concepts), Procedure
(75,078 concepts) and Body Structure (26,960
concepts). Using lexical resources, we obtained
the equivalents in Basque of the 19.32 % of the
disorders. In this work we will try to obtain the
one-word-terms that are not found in dictionaries.

There are several general-purpose libraries for
99



the creation of transducers as XFST (Karttunen
et al., 1997), Nooj1 or AT&T’s FSM (Mohri et
al., 2006). We have used Foma, a free software
tool to specify finite-state automata and transduc-
ers (Hulden, 2009).

In the rest of the paper the translation algorithm
is briefly described in section 2. The use of finite
state machines in order to obtain Basque equiva-
lents is explained in section 3. Finally, some con-
clusions and future work are listed in section 4.

2 Translation of SNOMED CT

The general algorithm (see figure 1) is language-
independent. It could be used to translate any term
if the linguistic resources for the input and output
languages are available.

Figure 1: Schema of the Algorithm.

In the first step of the algorithm (see numbers 1-
2-4 in Figure 1), some specialized dictionaries and
the English, Spanish and Basque versions of the

1http://www.nooj4nlp.net/NooJManual.pdf

International Statistical Classification of Diseases
and Related Health in its 10th version (ICD-10)
are used. For example for the input term “abortus”
all its Basque equivalents “abortu”, “abortatze”
and “hilaurtze” are obtained.

The second phase of the algorithm is described
in this paper in section 3. When a term is not
found in the dictionaries (number 3 in Figure 1)
generation-rules are used to create the translation.

In the case that an output is not obtained in
the previous phases (number 8 in the algorithm),
chunk-level generation rules are used. Our hy-
pothesis is that some chunks of the term will be al-
ready translated. The application should generate
the entire term using the translated components.

In the last step, we want to adapt a rule-
based automatic translation system called Matxin
(Mayor et al., 2011) to the medical domain.

We want to remark that all the processes fin-
ish in the 4th step. That is, we store the gener-
ated translations with the intention of using them
to translate new terms.

3 Finite-State Models and Translation

This section exposes the system that obtains
Basque equivalent terms from English one-word-
terms based on FSMs.

3.1 Translation process
The generation of Basque equivalents is per-
formed in two phases: the identification of the af-
fixes first, and the translation and composition of
the affixes secondly. All the linguistic information
is stored in lexica and 31 rules are written for the
process (1 for identification, 1 for translation and
28 for morphotactics).

Figure 2 shows the Finite State Transducer for
the identification of the affixes. The lexica of the
affixes is loaded (1-6) and then any prefix (the “*”
symbol indicates 0 or more times) followed by one
unique suffix is identified. The letter “o” may be
also identified as it is used to join medical affixes.
The “+” symbol is used for splitting the term.

1 read lexc prefixes.lex
2 define PREFALL
3 define PREF PREFALL.u ;
4 read lexc suffixes.lex
5 define SUFALL
6 define SUFF SUFALL.u ;
7 regex [[[PREF 0:%+] (o 0:%+)]* SUFF] ;

Figure 2: Rules for the affix identification.

The combination of the finite state transducers
100



for the translation and for the composition using
morphotactics is shown in Figure 3. First, the lex-
ica for the translation task is loaded (1-4), then
28 rules for the morphotactics are defined (simpli-
fied in the rule numbered 5). The translation rule
(shown in rule number 6) is composed of the word-
start mark (the ˆ symbol), the prefix followed by
the optional linking “o” letter zero or more times,
and a single compulsory suffix; finally the trans-
ducer combines the translation and the morphotac-
tic finite state transducers (7).

1 read lexc prefixes.lex
2 define TRANSPRE
3 read lexc suffixes.lex
4 define TRANSSUF
5 define MORPHO ...
6 define TRANS (%ˆ ) [[[TRANSPRE %+] (o:o %+)]*
TRANSSUF] ;
7 regex TRANS .o. MORPH ;

Figure 3: Rules for the affix translation.

Figure 4 shows the whole process with an ex-
ample. First, we identify the prefixes and suffixes
of the English input term by means of the trans-
ducer that marks those affixes (schiz+encephal+y).
Then, we obtain the corresponding Basque equiv-
alent for each part and we form the term (es-
kiz+entzefal+ia).

Input term: schizencephaly
Identified affixes: schiz+encephal+y
Translated affixes: eskiz+entzefal+ia
Output. Basque term: eskizentzefalia

Figure 4: Basque term generation.

As we said before, in order to obtain a well
formed Basque term, we apply different morpho-
tactic rules. For example, in Basque, words start-
ing with the “r” letter are not allowed, and an “e”
is needed at the beginning. Figure 5 shows an ex-
ample where the translated prefix “radio” needs
of the mentioned rule, obtaining “erradio”.

Input term: radionecrosis
Identified affixes: radio+necr+osis
Translated affixes: radio+nekr+osi
Basque term: erradionekrosi

Figure 5: Morphotactic rule application.

3.2 Resources
In order to identify the English medical suffixes
and prefixes we have joined two lists: the “Med-

ical Prefixes, Suffixes, and Combining Forms”
from Stedman’s Medical Dictionary (Stedman’s,
2005) and the “List of medical roots, suffixes and
prefixes” from Wikipedia (Wikipedia, 2013). We
obtained a list of 826 prefixes and 143 suffixes.

For the translation task, we have manually
checked the Basque equivalents of the previ-
ously mentioned medical suffixes and prefixes list
in specialized dictionaries such as Zientzia eta
Teknologiaren Hiztegi Entziklopedikoa (Dictio-
nary of Science and Technology) (Elhuyar, 2009),
Euskalterm (UZEI, 2004) and Erizaintzako Hizte-
gia (Nursing Dictionary) (EHUko Euskara Zerb-
itzua and Donostiako Erizaintza Eskola, 2005).

By means of checking the behavior of the pre-
fixes and suffixes in the English and Basque terms
we have manually deduced the appropriate Basque
equivalent. Table 1 shows an example of obtaining
the equivalent of the “encephal” prefix, deducing
that “entzefal” is the most appropriate equivalent.

English terms Basque terms
echoencephalogram ekoentzefalograma
encephalitis entzefalitis
encephalomyelitis entzefalomielitis
leukoencephalitis leukoentzefalitis
... ...

Table 1: The translation of the “encephal” prefix.

From all the prefixes and suffixes listed, we are
able to deduce 812 prefixes and 139 suffixes for
Basque. Those are currently being supervised by
an expert to give them the highest confidence pos-
sible. This technique allows the inferring of new
medical terms not appearing in dictionaries.

3.3 Results

We selected the one-word-terms of the Disor-
der sub-hierarchy of SNOMED CT. This sub-
hierarchy with terms representing disorders or dis-
eases is formed by 107,448 descriptions, being
3,979 one-word-terms. Even this last quantity is
low considering the whole sub-hierarchy, we must
take into account that the influence of those one-
word-terms is very high, appearing around 79,000
times among all the descriptions.

The total one-word-term set has been split into
two sets, one for defining and developing the sys-
tem and another one for evaluating it. The evalua-
tion set is composed of the 885 one-word-terms
that have been previously translated in the first

101



step of the algorithm (see section 2). That is
we have the correct English-Basque pairs as Gold
Standard. For the development set we have se-
lected the remaining 3,094 one-word-terms.

As mentioned before, in this paper we show the
results obtained from the translation of the medi-
cal prefixes and suffixes forming the terms. That
is, we have only translated the terms that have
been completely identified with the medical pre-
fixes and suffixes. For example, terms with the
suffix “thorax” have not been translated as it does
not appear in the prefixes and suffixes list. That is,
the “hydropneumothorax” term has not been trans-
lated even though the “hydro” and “pneumo” pre-
fixes have been identified.

In Table 2 we show the quantities and percent-
ages of the terms that have been completely iden-
tified in both sets. Our set of the one-word-terms
has not been cleaned up to remove the words with-
out any medical affix. Thus, the percentages from
the table will never reach 100 per cent.

Total Identified Percent
Development 3,094 834 26.96%
Evaluation 885 309 34.92%

Table 2: Quantities of completely identified terms.

From the 885 terms in the evaluation set, 728
terms contain at least one medical prefix or suffix,
being 309 completely identified. The results ob-
tained in this fist approach are shown in Table 3
by means of True Positives (TP), False Negatives
(FN), False Positives (FP), Precision (Prec.), Re-
call (Rec.) and F-measure (F-M). A recall of 0.41
is obtained (287 correctly identified from 706 TP
and FN) and a precision of 0.93 (287 out of 309).
The recall will be increased in the future, includ-
ing not completely identified terms in the system.
Thus, we can conclude that the results obtained are
very good concerning precision.

Total TP FN FP Prec. Rec. F-M
728 287 419 22 0.93 0.41 0.56

Table 3: Precision and recall of the evaluating set.

Moreover, the quality of the results obtained is
also very good. We have been able to give cor-
rect equivalents to complex terms such as “hyper-
prolactinemia”, that has five medical prefixes and
suffixes (“hyper+pro+lact+in+emia”).

We have also analyzed the incorrect results in
order to be able to improve the system. For exam-
ple, the prefix “myc” has been translated as “miz”,
but we realized that whenever the prefix is fol-
lowed by an “o”, it should be “mik” in order to
generate a correct Basque term. Many of the mis-
takes are easily rectifiable for the final purpose of
translating SNOMED CT.

4 Conclusions and future work

We implemented an application that generates
Basque terms for diseases in English, by means
of finite-state transducers. This application is one
of the phases in the way to translate SNOMED CT
into Basque. In order to translate the medical pre-
fixes and suffixes, we have manually generated the
translation pairs for 951 prefixes and suffixes, ob-
taining a very useful resource for Basque.

The FSTs exposed in this paper could be eas-
ily applicably to other languages whether an affix
lexicon with its translation is defined and the mor-
photactic rules adapted to the target language.

As we have seen in section 3.3, most of the En-
glish terms have not been identified completely
and that prevented the translation of them. To cope
with this problem we have two developing paths:
the deduction of new suffixes and prefixes from
specialized dictionaries (Hulden et al., 2011); and
the implementation of transliteration transforma-
tions to those parts (Alegria et al., 2006).

We have only applied the transducers to the Dis-
order sub-hierarchy, and we will have to check
the results we can obtain applying it to the Find-
ing sub-hierarchy and to the Procedure and Body
Structure hierarchies. We found terms such as
“electroencephalography” or “oligomenorrhea” in
those hierarchies, formed with medical prefixes
and suffixes identified for this task.

The promising results obtained will contribute
to the translation of the whole SNOMED CT, but
also to the normalization of Basque in the bio-
sanitary domain, as new terms are generated.

References
I. Alegria, N. Ezeiza, and I. Fernandez. 2006. Named

Entities Translation Based on Comparable Corpora.
In Multi-Word-Expressions in a Multilingual Con-
text Workshop on EACL06, pages 1–8.

G. Banay. 1948. An introduction to medical termi-
nology, Greek and Latin derivations. Bulletin of the
Medical Library Association, 36(1):1–27, Jan.

102



O. Bodenreider. 2004. The Unified Medical Language
System (UMLS): integrating biomedical terminol-
ogy. Nucleic Acids Research, 32:267–270.

College of American Pathologists. 1993. The Sys-
tematized Nomenclature of Human and Veterinary
Medicine: SNOMED International.

EHUko Euskara Zerbitzua and Donostiako Erizaintza
Eskola. 2005. Erizaintzako Hiztegia. EHU. Argi-
talpen Zerbitzua.

Elhuyar. 2009. Elhuyar Zientzia eta Teknologiaren
Hiztegi Entziklopedikoa. Elhuyar Edizioak & Eu-
skal Herriko Unibertsitatea.

M. Hulden, I. Alegria, I. Etxeberria, and M. Maritx-
alar. 2011. Learning word-level dialectal varia-
tion as phonological replacement rules using a lim-
ited parallel corpus. In EMLP 2011: Dialects2011,
pages 39–48.

M. Hulden. 2009. Foma: a Finite-State Compiler and
Library. In Proceedings of EACL 2009, pages 29–
32, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

L. Karttunen, T. Gaál, and A. Kempe. 1997. Xerox
Finite State Tool.

C. Lovis, Pa. Michel, R. Baud, and Jr. Scherrer. 1995.
Word Segmentation Processing: A Way To Expo-
nentially Extend Medical Dictionaries. MEDINFO,
8:28–32.

A. Mayor, I. Alegria, A. Dı́az de Ilarraza, G. Labaka,
M. Lersundi, and K. Sarasola. 2011. Matxin, an
Open-source Rule-based Machine Translation Sys-
tem for Basque. Machine Translation, 25:53–82.

M. Mohri, F. Pereira, M. Riley, and C. Allauzen. 2006.
AT & T FSM Library Finite-State Machine Library.
Technical report, AT&T Labs-Research, NJ, USA.

Stedman’s, 2005. Stedman’s Medical Dictionary,
chapter Medical Prefixes, Suffixes, and Combining
Forms. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, twenty-
eighth edition edition.

UZEI. 2004. Euskalterm Terminologia Banku
Publikoa. http://www.euskadi.net/
euskalterm.

Wikipedia. 2013. List of medical roots, suffixes
and prefixes – Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.
php?title=List_of_medical_roots,
_suffixes_and_prefixeso.

103


