










































Using a Keyness Metric for Single and Multi Document Summarisation


Proceedings of the MultiLing 2013 Workshop on Multilingual Multi-document Summarization, pages 64–71,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using a Keyness Metric for Single and Multi Document Summarisation

Mahmoud El-Haj
School of Computing and

Communications
Lancaster University

United Kingdom
m.el-haj@lancaster.ac.uk

Paul Rayson
School of Computing and

Communications
Lancaster University

United Kingdom
p.rayson@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract

In this paper we show the results of
our participation in the MultiLing 2013
summarisation tasks. We participated
with single-document and multi-document
corpus-based summarisers for both Ara-
bic and English languages. The sum-
marisers used word frequency lists and
log likelihood calculations to generate sin-
gle and multi document summaries. The
single and multi summaries generated by
our systems were evaluated by Arabic
and English native speaker participants
and by different automatic evaluation met-
rics, ROUGE, AutoSummENG, MeMoG
and NPowER. We compare our results to
other systems that participated in the same
tracks on both Arabic and English lan-
guages. Our single-document summaris-
ers performed particularly well in the auto-
matic evaluation with our English single-
document summariser performing better
on average than the results of the other
participants. Our Arabic multi-document
summariser performed well in the human
evaluation ranking second.

1 Introduction

Systems that can automatically summarise docu-
ments are becoming ever more desirable with the
increasing volume of information available on the
Web. Automatic text summarisation is the process
of producing a shortened version of a text by the
use of computers. For example, reducing a text
document or a group of related documents into a
shorter version of sentences or paragraphs using
automated tools and techniques.

The summary should convey the key contri-
butions of the text. In other words, only key
sentences should appear in the summary and the

process of defining those sentences is highly de-
pendent on the summarisation method used. In
automatic summarisation there are two main ap-
proaches that are broadly used, extractive and ab-
stractive. The first method, the extractive sum-
marisation, extracts, up to a certain limit, the
key sentences or paragraphs from the text and or-
ders them in a way that will produce a coherent
summary. The extracted units differ from one
summariser to another. Most summarisers use
sentences rather than larger units such as para-
graphs. Extractive summarisation methods are
the focus method on automatic text summarisa-
tion. The other method, abstractive summarisa-
tion, involves more language dependent tools and
Natural Language Generation (NLG) technology.
In our work we used extractive single and multi-
document Arabic and English summarisers.

A successful summarisation approach needs a
good guide to find the most important sentences
that are relevant to a certain criterion. Therefore,
the proposed methods should work on extracting
the most important sentences from a set of related
articles.

In this paper we present the results of our par-
ticipation to the MultiLing 2013 summarisation
tasks. MultiLing 2013 was built upon the Text
Analysis Conference (TAC) MultiLing Pilot task
of 2011 (Giannakopoulos et al., 2011). MultiL-
ing 2013 this year asked for participants to run
their summarisers on different languages having a
corpus and gold standard summaries in the same
seven languages (Arabic, Czech, English, French,
Greek, Hebrew or Hindi) of TAC 2011 with a
50% increase to the corpora size. It also intro-
duced three new languages (Chinese, Romanian
and Spanish). MultiLing 2013 this year intro-
duced a new single-document summarisation pilot
for 40 languages including the above mentioned
languages (in our case Arabic and English).

In this paper we introduce the results of our

64



single-document and multi-document summaris-
ers at the MultiLing 2013 summarisation tasks.
We used a language independent corpus-based
word frequency technique and the log-likelihood
statistic to extract sentences with the maximum
sum of log likelihood. The output summary is ex-
pected to be no more than 250 words.

2 Related Work

2.1 Automatic Summarisation

Work on automatic summarisation dates back
more than 50 years, with a focus on the English
language (Luhn, 1958). The work on Arabic au-
tomatic summarisation is more recent and still not
on par with the research on English and other Eu-
ropean languages. Early work on Arabic summari-
sation started less than 10 years ago (Conroy et al.,
2006; Douzidia and Lapalme, 2004).

Over time, there have been various approaches
to automatic text summarisation. These ap-
proaches include single-document and multi-
document summarisation. Both single-document
and multi-document summarisation use the sum-
marisation methods mentioned earlier, i.e. ex-
tractive or abstractive. Summarising a text could
be dependent on input information such as a user
query or it could be generic where no user query
is used.

The approach of single-document summarisa-
tion relies on the idea of producing a summary
for a single document. The main factor in single-
document summarisation is to identify the most
important (informative) parts of a document. Early
work on single-document summarisation was the
work by Luhn (1958). In his work he looked
for sentences containing keywords that are most
frequent in a text. The sentences with highly
weighted keywords were selected. The work by
Luhn highlighted the need for features that reflect
the importance of a certain sentence in a text. Bax-
endale (1958) showed the importance of sentence-
position in a text, which is understood to be one
of the earliest extracted features in automatic text
summarisation. They took a sample of 200 para-
graphs and found that in 80% of the paragraphs
the most important sentence was the first one.

Multi-document summarisation produces a sin-
gle summary of a set of documents. The docu-
ments are assumed to be about the same genre and
topic. The analysis in this area is performed typi-
cally at either the sentence or document level.

2.2 Corpus-based and Word Frequency in
Summarisation

Corpus-based techniques are mainly used to com-
pare corpora for linguistic analysis (Rayson and
Garside, 2000; Rayson et al., 2004). There are
two main types of corpora comparisons, 1) com-
paring a sample corpus with a larger standard
corpus (Scott, 2000). 2) comparing two corpora
of equal size (Granger, 1998). In our work we
adopted the first approach, where we used a much
larger reference corpus. The first word list is the
frequency list of all the words in the document (or
group of documents) to be summarised which is
compared to the word frequency list of a much
larger standard corpus. We do that for both Ara-
bic and English texts. Word frequency has been
proven as an important feature when determining
a sentence’s importance (Li et al., 2006). Nenkova
and Vanderwende (2005) studies the impact of fre-
quency on summarisation. In their work they in-
vestigated the association between words that ap-
pear frequently in a document (group of related
documents), and the likelihood that they will be
selected by a human summariser to be included in
a summary. Taking the top performing summaris-
ers at the DUC 20031 they computed how many of
the top frequency words from the input documents
appeared in the system summaries. They found the
following: 1) Words with high frequency in the
input documents are very likely to appear in the
human summaries. 2) The automatic summaris-
ers include less of these high frequency words.
These two findings by Nenkova and Vanderwende
(2005) tell us two important facts. Firstly, it con-
firms that word frequency is an important factor
that impacts humans’ decisions on which content
to include in the summary. Secondly, the overlap
between human and system summaries can be im-
proved by including more of the high frequency
words in the generated system summaries. Based
on Nenkova’s study we expand the work on word
frequency by comparing word frequency lists of
different corpora in a way to select sentences with
the maximum sum of log likelihood ratio. The log-
likelihood calculation favours words whose fre-
quencies are unexpectedly high in a document.

2.3 Statistical Summarisation

The use of statistical approaches (e.g. log-
likelihood) in text summarisation is a common

1http://duc.nist.gov/duc2003/tasks.html

65



technique, especially when building a language in-
dependent text summariser.

Morita et al. (2011) introduced what they called
“query-snowball”, a method for query-oriented
extractive multi-document summarisation. They
worked on closing the gap between the query and
the relevant sentences. They formulated the sum-
marisation problem based on word pairs as a max-
imum cover problem with Knapsack Constraints
(MCKP), which is an optimisation problem that
maximises the total score of words covered by a
summary within a certain length limit.

Knight and Marcu (2000) used the Expectation
Maximisation (EM) algorithm to compress sen-
tences for an abstractive text summarisation sys-
tem. EM is an iterative method for finding Maxi-
mum Likelihood (ML) or Maximum A Posteriori
(MAP) estimates of parameters in statistical mod-
els. In their summariser, EM was used in the sen-
tences compression process to shorten many sen-
tences into one by compressing a syntactic parse
tree of a sentence in order to produce a shorter but
maximally grammatical version. Similarly, Mad-
nani et al. (2007) performed multi-document sum-
marisation by generating compressed versions of
source sentences as summary candidates and used
weighted features of these candidates to construct
summaries.

Hennig (2009) introduced a query-based la-
tent Semantic Analysis (LSA) automatic text sum-
mariser. It finds statistical semantic relationships
between the extracted sentences rather than word
by word matching relations (Hofmann, 1999).
The summariser selects sentences with the highest
likelihood score.

In our work we used log-likelihood to select
sentences with the maximum sum of log likeli-
hood scores, unlike the traditional method of mea-
suring cosine similarity overlap between articles
or sentences to indicate importance (Luhn, 1958;
Barzilay et al., 2001; Radev et al., 2004). The
main advantage of our approach is that the auto-
matic summariser does not need to compare sen-
tences in a document with an initial one (e.g. first
sentence or a query). Our approach works by cal-
culating the keyness (or log-likelihood) score for
each token (word) in a sentence, then picks, to a
limit of 250 words, the sentences with the highest
sum of the tokens’ log-likelihood scores.

To the best of our knowledge the use of corpus-
based frequency list to calculate the log-likelihood

score for text summarisation has not been reported
for the Arabic language.

3 Dataset and Evaluation Metrics

3.1 Test Collection

The test collection for the MultiLing 2013 is avail-
able in the previously mentioned languages.2 The
dataset is based on WikiNews texts.3 The source
documents contain no meta-data or tags and are
represented as UTF8 plain text les. The multi-
document dataset of each language contains (100-
150) articles divided into 10 or 15 reference sets,
each contains 10 related articles discussing the
same topic. The original language of the dataset
is English. The organisers of the tasks were re-
sponsible for translating the corpus into differ-
ent languages by having native speaker partici-
pants for each of the 10 languages. In addi-
tion to the news articles the dataset also provides
human-generated multi-document gold standard
summaries. The single-document dataset contains
single documents for 40 language (30 documents
each) discussing various topics and collected from
Wikipedia.4

3.2 Evaluation

Evaluating the quality and consistency of a gen-
erated summary has proven to be a difficult prob-
lem (Fiszman et al., 2009). This is mainly because
there is no obvious ideal, objective summary. Two
classes of metrics have been developed: form met-
rics and content metrics. Form metrics focus on
grammaticality, overall text coherence, and organ-
isation. They are usually measured on a point
scale (Brandow et al., 1995). Content metrics are
more difficult to measure. Typically, system out-
put is compared sentence by sentence or unit by
unit to one or more human-generated ideal sum-
maries. As with information retrieval, the per-
centage of information presented in the system’s
summary (precision) and the percentage of impor-
tant information omitted from the summary (re-
call) can be assessed. There are various mod-
els for system evaluation that may help in solving
this problem. This include automatic evaluations
(e.g. ROUGE and AutoSummENG), and human-
performed evaluations. For the MultiLing 2013
task, the summaries generated by the participants

2http://multiling.iit.demokritos.gr/file/all
3http://www.wikinews.org/
4http://www.wikipedia.org/

66



were evaluated automatically based on human-
generated model summaries provided by fluent
speakers of each corresponding language (native
speakers in the general case). The models used
were, ROUGE variations (ROUGE1, ROUGE2,
ROUGE-SU4) (Lin, 2004), the MeMoG varia-
tion (Giannakopoulos and Karkaletsis, 2011) of
AutoSummENG (Giannakopoulos et al., 2008)
and NPowER (Giannakopoulos and Karkaletsis,
2013). ROUGE was not used to evaluate the
single-document summaries.

The summaries were also evaluated manually
by human participants. For the manual evalua-
tion the human evaluators were provided with the
following guidelines: Each summary is to be as-
signed an integer grade from 1 to 5, related to the
overall responsiveness of the summary. We con-
sider a text to be worth a 5, if it appears to cover
all the important aspects of the corresponding doc-
ument set using fluent, readable language. A text
should be assigned a 1, if it is either unreadable,
nonsensical, or contains only trivial information
from the document set. We consider the content
and the quality of the language to be equally im-
portant in the grading.

Note, the human evaluation results for the En-
glish language are not included in this paper as by
the time of writing the results were not yet pub-
lished. We only report the human evaluation re-
sults of the Arabic multi-document summaries.

4 Corpus-based Summarisation

Our summarisation approach is a corpus-based
where we use word frequency lists to compare cor-
pora and calculate the log likelihood score for each
word in the list. The compared corpora include
standard Arabic and English corpora in addition
to the Arabic and English summarisation datasets
provided by MultiLing 2013 for the single and
multi-document summarisation tasks. The subsec-
tions below describe the creation of the word lists
and the standard corpora we used for the compar-
ison process.

4.1 Word Frequencies

We used a simple methodology to generate the
word frequency lists for the Arabic and English
summarisation datasets provided by MultiLing
2013. The datasets used in our experiments were
single-document and multi-document documents
in English and Arabic. For the multi-document

(a) Arabic Sample (b) English Sample

Figure 1: Arabic and English Word Frequency List
Sample

dataset we counted the word frequency for all the
documents in a reference set (group of related arti-
cles), each set contains on average 10 related arti-
cles. The single-document dataset was straightfor-
ward, we calculated word frequencies for all the
words in each document. Figure 1 shows a sam-
ple of random words and their frequencies for both
Arabic and English languages. The sample was se-
lected from the MultiLing dataset word frequency
lists. As shown in the figure we did not eliminate
the stop-words, we treat them as normal words.

4.2 Standard Corpora

In our work we compared the word frequency list
of the summarisation dataset against the larger
Arabic and English standard corpora. For each
of the standard corpora we had a list of word fre-
quencies (up to 5, 000 words) for both Arabic and
English using the frequency dictionary of Ara-
bic (Buckwalter and Parkinson, 2011) and the Cor-
pus of Contemporary American English (COCA)
top 5,000 words (Davies, 2010).

The frequency dictionary of Arabic provides a
list of the 5,000 most frequently used words in
Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) in addition to
several of the most widely spoken Arabic dialects.
The list was created based on a 30-million-word
corpus of Arabic including written and spoken ma-
terial from all around the Arab world. The Ara-
bic summarisation dataset provided by MultiL-
ing 2013 was also written using MSA. The cor-
pus of contemporary American English COCA is
a freely searchable 450-million-word corpus con-
taining text in American English of different num-
ber of genres. To be consistent with the Arabic

67



word frequency list, we used the top 5000 words
from the 450 million word COCA corpus.

5 Summarisation Methodology

In our experiments we used generic single-
document and multi-document extractive sum-
marisers that have been implemented for both
Arabic and English (using identical processing
pipelines for both languages). Summaries were
created by selecting sentences from a single doc-
ument or set of related documents. The following
subsections show the methods used in our exper-
iments, the actual summarisation process and the
experimental setup.

5.1 Calculating Log-Likelihood
We begin the summarisation process by calculat-
ing the log likelihood score for each word in the
word frequency lists (see Section 4.1) using the
same methodology described in (Rayson and Gar-
side, 2000). This was performed by constructing a
contingency table as in Table 1.

Corpus
One

Corpus
Two

Total

Frequency
of Word

a b a+b

Frequency
of other
words

c-a d-b c+d-a-b

Total c d c+d

Table 1: Contingency Table

The values c and d correspond to the number of
words in corpus one and corpus two respectively.
Where a and b are the observed values (O). For
each corpus we calculated the expected value E
using the following formula:

Ei =

Ni
∑
i
Oi∑

i
Ni

Ni is the total frequency in corpus i (i in our
case takes the values 1 (c) and 2 (d) for the Multi-
Ling Arabic Summaries dataset and the frequency
dictionary of Arabic (or MultiLing English Sum-
maries dataset and COCA corpus) respectively.

The log-likelihood can be calculated as follows:

LL = 2 ∗ ((a ∗ ln( a
E1

)) + (b ∗ ln( b
E2

)))

5.2 Summarisation Process

We used the same processing pipeline for both the
single-document and multi-document summaris-
ers. For each word in the MultiLing summari-
sation dataset (Arabic and English) we calculated
the log likelihood scores using the calculations de-
scribed in Section 5.1. We summed up the log
likelihood scores for each sentence in the dataset
and we picked the sentences (up to 250 word limit)
with the highest sum of log likelihood scores. The
main difference between the single-document and
multi-document summarisers is that we treat the
set of related documents in the multiling dataset
as one document.

6 Single-Document Summarisation Task

MultiLing 2013 this year introduced a new single-
document summarisation pilot for 40 languages
including (Arabic, Czech, English, French, Greek,
Hebrew, Hindi, Spanish, Chinese, Romanian
...etc). In our case we participated in two lan-
guages only, English and Arabic.

The pilot aim was to measure the ability of au-
tomated systems to apply single document sum-
marisation, in the context of Wikipedia texts.
Given a single encyclopedic entry, with several
sections/subsections, describing a specific subject,
the pilot guidelines asked the participating sys-
tems to provide a summary covering the main
points of the entry (similarly to the lead section of
a Wikipedia page). The MultiLing 2013 single-
document summaries dataset consisted of (non-
parallel) documents in the above mentioned lan-
guages.

For the English language, there were 7 partici-
pants (peers) including a baseline system (ID5).
The Arabic language had 6 participants including
the same baseline system.

7 Multi-Document Summarisation Task

The Multi-document summarisation task required
the participants to generate a single, fluent, rep-
resentative summary from a set of documents de-
scribing an event sequence. The language of the
document set was within a given range of lan-
guages and all documents in a set shared the same
language. The task guidelines required the output
summary to be of the same language as its source
documents. The output summary should be 250
words at most.

68



The set of documents were available in 10 lan-
guages (Arabic, Czech, English, French, Greek,
Hebrew, Hindi, Spanish, Chinese and Romanian).
In our case we participated using the Arabic and
English set of documents only.

For the English language, there were 10 partic-
ipants (peers) including a baseline (ID6) and a
topline (ID61) systems. The Arabic language had
10 participants as well, including the same base-
line and topline systems.

The baseline summariser sorted sentences based
on their cosine similarity to the centroid of a clus-
ter. Then starts adding sentences to the summary,
until it either reaches 250 words, or it hits the end
of the document. In the second case, it continues
with the next document in the sorted list.

The topline summariser used information from
the model summaries (i.e. cheats). First, it split all
source documents into sentences. Then it used a
genetic algorithm to generate summaries that have
a vector with maximal cosine similarity to the cen-
troid vector of the model summary texts.

8 Results and Discussion

Our single-document summarisers, both English
and Arabic, performed particularly well in the au-
tomatic evaluation. Ranking first and second re-
spectively.

Tables 2 and 3 illustrate the AutoSummEng
(AutoSumm), MeMoG and NPowER results and
the ranking of our English and Arabic single-
document summarisers (System ID2).

System AutoSumm MeMoG NPowER
ID2 0.136 0.136 1.685
ID41 0.129 0.129 1.661
ID42 0.127 0.127 1.656
ID3 0.127 0.127 1.654
ID1 0.124 0.124 1.647
ID4 0.123 0.123 1.641
ID5 0.040 0.040 1.367

Table 2: English Automatic Evaluation Scores
(single-document)

The evaluation scores of our single-document
summarisers confirm with (Li et al., 2006) and
(Nenkova and Vanderwende, 2005) findings, were
they found that word frequency is an important
feature when determining sentences importance
and that words with high frequency in the input

System AutoSumm MeMoG NPowER
ID3 0.092 0.092 1.538
ID2 0.087 0.087 1.524
ID41 0.055 0.055 1.418
ID42 0.055 0.055 1.416
ID4 0.053 0.053 1.411
ID5 0.025 0.025 1.317

Table 3: Arabic Automatic Evaluation Scores
(single-document)

System Score
ID6 3.711
ID3 3.578
ID2 3.578
ID4 3.489
ID1 3.467
ID11 3.333
ID21 3.111
ID51 2.778
ID5 2.711
ID61 2.489

Table 4: Arabic Manual Evaluation Scores (multi-
document)

documents are very likely to appear in the hu-
man summaries, which explains the high correla-
tion between our single-document and the human
(model) summaries as illustrated in the evalua-
tion scores (Tables 2 and 3). The single-document
summaries were evaluated automatically only.

Our Arabic multi-document summariser per-
formed well in the human evaluation ranking sec-
ond jointly with System ID2. Table 4 shows the
average scores of the human evaluation process,
our system is referred to as ID3. On the other
hand, we did not perform well in the automatic
evaluation of the multi-document summarisation
task for both English and Arabic. Our systems did
not perform better than the baseline. The auto-
matic evaluation results placed our Arabic and En-
glish summariser further down in the ranked lists
of systems compared to the human assessment.
This is an area for future work as this seems to
suggest that the automatic evaluation metrics are
not necessarily in line with human judgements.

The low automatic evaluation scores are due
to two main reasons. First, we treated the set
of related documents (multi-documents) as a sin-
gle big document (See Section 5.2), this penalised

69



our summaries as selecting the sentences with the
maximum sum of log likelihood score lead to
many important sentences being overlooked. This
can be solved by running the summariser on each
document to suggest candidate sentences and then
selecting the top sentence(s) of each document to
generate the final summary. Second, we did not
work on eliminating redundancies. Finally, the
log-likelihood score might be improved by the in-
clusion of a dispersion score or weighting to exam-
ine the evenness of the spread of each word across
all the documents.

9 Conclusion

In this paper we presented the results of our par-
ticipation in the MultiLing 2013 summarisation
task. We submitted results for single-document
and multi-document summarisation in two lan-
guages, English and Arabic. We applied a corpus-
based summariser that used corpus-based word
frequency lists. We used a list of the 5,000 most
frequently used words in Modern Standard Ara-
bic (MSA) and English. Using the frequency dic-
tionary of Arabic and the corpus of contemporary
American English (COCA).

Based on the automatic evaluation scores, we
found that our approach appears to work very well
for Arabic and English single-document summari-
sation. According to the human evaluation scores
the approach could potentially work for Arabic
multi-document summarisation as well. We be-
lieve that the approach could still work well for
multi-document summarisation following the sug-
gested solutions in Section 8.

References
R. Barzilay, N. Elhadad, and K. McKeown. 2001. Sen-

tence Ordering in Multidocument Summarization.
In Proceedings of the First International Conference
on Human Language Technology Research, HLT’01,
pages 1–7, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

P. Baxendale. 1958. Machine-made index for technical
literature: an experiment. IBM Journal of Research
and Development, 2(4):354–361.

R. Brandow, K. Mitze, and Lisa F. Rau. 1995.
Automatic Condensation of Electronic Publications
by Sentence Selection. Inf. Process. Manage.,
31(5):675–685.

T. Buckwalter and D. Parkinson. 2011. A Frequency
Dictionary of Arabic: Core Vocabulary for Learn-
ers. Routledge, London, United Kingdom.

J. Conroy, J. Schlesinger, D. O’Leary, and J. Goldstein.
2006. Back to Basics: CLASSY 2006. In Pro-
ceedings of the 6th Document Understanding Con-
ferences. DUC.

M. Davies. 2010. The Corpus of Contemporary Amer-
ican English as the First Reliable Monitor Corpus
of English. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
25:447–464.

F. Douzidia and G. Lapalme. 2004. Lakhas, an Ara-
bic Summarising System. In Proceedings of the 4th
Document Understanding Conferences , pages 128–
135. DUC.

M. Fiszman, D. Demner-Fushman, H. Kilicoglu, and
T. Rindflesch. 2009. Automatic Summarization
of MEDLINE Citations for Evidence-based Medical
Treatment: A Topic-oriented Evaluation. Jouranl of
Biomedical Informatics, 42(5):801–813.

G. Giannakopoulos and V. Karkaletsis. 2011. Au-
toSummENG and MeMoG in Evaluating Guided
Summaries. In The Proceedings of the Text Analysis
Conference, MD, USA. TAC.

G. Giannakopoulos and V. Karkaletsis. 2013. Sum-
mary evaluation: Together we stand npower-ed. In
Alexander Gelbukh, editor, Computational Linguis-
tics and Intelligent Text Processing, volume 7817 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 436–450.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

G. Giannakopoulos, V. Karkaletsis, G. Vouros, and
P. Stamatopoulos. 2008. Summarization Sys-
tem Evaluation Revisited: N–Gram Graphs. ACM
Transactions on Speech and Language Processing
(TSLP), 5(3):1–39.

G. Giannakopoulos, M. El-Haj, B. Favre, M. Litvak,
J. Steinberger, and V. Varma. 2011. TAC 2011 Mul-
tiLing Pilot Overview. In Text Analysis Conference
(TAC) 2011, MultiLing Summarisation Pilot, Mary-
land, USA. TAC.

S. Granger. 1998. The computer learner corpus: A
versatile new source of data for SLA research. pages
3–18.

L. Hennig. 2009. Topic-based multi-document sum-
marization with probabilistic latent semantic analy-
sis. In Proceedings of the International Conference
RANLP-2009, pages 144–149, Borovets, Bulgaria,
September. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

T. Hofmann. 1999. Probabilistic latent semantic in-
dexing. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual inter-
national ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, SIGIR ’99,
pages 50–57, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

K. Knight and D. Marcu. 2000. Statistics-Based Sum-
marization – Step One: Sentence Compression. In
Proceedings of the Seventeenth National Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and Twelfth Conference

70



on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence,
pages 703–710, Menlo Park, CA. AAAI Press.

W. Li, B. Li, and M. Wu. 2006. Query Focus Guided
Sentence Selection Strategy.

C. Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A Package for Automatic
Evaluation of Summaries. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Text Summarization Branches Out
(WAS 2004), pages 25–26. WAS 2004).

H. Luhn. 1958. The Automatic Creation of Literature
Abstracts. IBM Journal of Research and Develop-
ment, 2(2):159–165.

N. Madnani, D. Zajic, B. Dorr, N. Ayan, and J. Lin.
2007. Multiple Alternative Sentence Compressions
for Automatic Text Summarization. In Proceedings
of the 7th Document Understanding Conference at
NLT/NAACL, page 26. DUC.

H. Morita, T. Sakai, and M. Okumura. 2011. Query
Snowball: A Co-occurrence-based Approach to
Multi-document Summarization for Question An-
swering. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies: short papers
- Volume 2, HLT’11, pages 223–229, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

A. Nenkova and L. Vanderwende. 2005. The impact of
frequency on summarization. Microsoft Research,
Redmond, Washington, Tech. Rep. MSR-TR-2005-
101.

D. Radev, H. Jing, M. Sty, and D. Tam. 2004.
Centroid-based Summarization of Multiple Docu-
ments. Information Processing and Management,
40:919–938.

P. Rayson and R. Garside. 2000. Comparing corpora
using frequency profiling. In Proceedings of the
workshop on Comparing corpora - Volume 9, WCC
’00, pages 1–6, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

P. Rayson, D. Berridge, and B. Francis. 2004. Ex-
tending the cochran rule for the comparison of word
frequencies between corpora. In Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on Statistical analysis
of textual data (JADT 2004, pages 926–936.

M. Scott. 2000. Focusing on the text and its key
words. In Burnard, L. and McEnery, T. (eds.) Re-
thinking language pedagogy from a corpus perspec-
tive: papers from the third international conference
on teaching and language corpora, pages 103–121.

71


