





























Primitives of Events and the Semantic Representation

Hongzhi Xu
The Department of CBS

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
hongz.xu@gmail.com

Chu-Ren Huang
Faculty of Humanities

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
churenhuang@gmail.com

Abstract
The event structure (aktionsart) is a wide-
ly discussed issue for the representation of
verbal semantics in languages. However,
there is still problems for the classifica-
tion of verbs into state, activity, accom-
plishment, achievement and semelfactive.
It is also not clear where are the differ-
ences of them embedded in terms of lex-
ical, semantic or syntactic levels. In this
paper, we will give a discussion on the
primitives of events from an ontological
point of view. We suggest that event types
should be discussed in the usage level of
language. Based on the Generative Lexi-
con theory, we provide a semantic repre-
sentation of verbs which can give a bet-
ter explanation how the semantics of verb-
s and the composition with their comple-
ments can determine the event type they
denote.

1 Introduction

According to Vendler (1967), events can be di-
vided into four classes: state, activity, accom-
plishment and achievement. Smith (1991) pro-
posed a fifth class called semelfactive (instanta-
neous events), such as knock, kick. Some diag-
nostics are used to distinguish them. For example,
states and achievements cannot appear in progres-
sive aspect, while accomplishment and activities
do. The so-called imperfective paradox is used to
discriminate activity and accomplishment. For ex-
ample, he is running entails that he has run, but
he is building a house doesn’t entail he has built a
house. In addition, activities doesn’t allow in time
adverbial, while achievement does. For example,
*he run in five minutes is unacceptable, while he
built a house in one month is acceptable.

Regardless of how many categories there are,
it has been observed that the event type of verbs

are affected by their complements, as discussed in
(Dowty, 1991; Verkuyl, 1993; Tenny, 1994; Rit-
ter and Rosen, 2000). For example, (1a) and (2a)
denote activities, while (1b), (2b) and (2c) denote
accomplishments. It seems that the discussion of
event types has been mixed from the lexical lev-
el to the usage level of language. If a verb that
has been classified as accomplishment can also ex-
press activities, then what is the purpose to do verb
classification?

(1) a. He is eating sandwiches.
b. He is eating a sandwich.

a. He is running.
(2) b. He is running to school.

c. He is running 1000 meters.

Degree achievement verbs, such as cool,
strengthen as discussed in (Jackendoff, 1996; Hay
et al., 1999) failed to be classified into the four
categories as they take both in and for time adver-
bials as shown in (3). Some other verbs, such as
eat, clean and water as discussed in (Harley, 1999)
also have this problem as shown in (4) to (6). Ac-
cording to Hay (Hay et al., 1999), there is a telic-
ity implicature for these verbs. Such implicature
could be cancelled when taking for time adverbial.
We agree with this explanation. However, we still
need to know how pragmatic factors can give dif-
ferent interpretations.

(3) a. He cooled the soup in one minute.
b. He cooled the soup for one minute.

(4) a. He ate in one minute.
b. He ate for one minute.

(5) a. He watered the flower in one minute.
b. He watered the flower for one minute.

(6) a. He cleaned the house in one hour.
b. He cleaned the house for one hour.



Another problem of most of the previous dis-
cussion is that their analyses are language depen-
dent and thus will not expose the insight of what
events are from an ontological point of view. The
imperfective paradox actually utilizes the meaning
carried by the perfective aspect. However, it does-
n’t apply in Chinese. In Chinese, the perfective
aspect is ambiguous in that it can denote both the
start of a process, either an activity or an accom-
plishment, and the finishing of it. For example, ta
pao le (he has run) means either he has finished
running or he has started running. So we cannot
say that ta zai pao (he is running) entails ta pao le
(he has run). Similarly, ta chi le na ge han bao (he
has eaten that sandwich) means either he ate the
entire sandwich or he took some bites on it.

Even for English, the imperfective paradox test
is also problematic. If we take knit for example, he
is knitting entails he has knitted, and he is knitting
a sweater doesn’t entail he has knitted a sweater.
It seems that knit qualifies both activity and ac-
complishment. Should we treat knit as polysemy?
Actually, the difference of knit and build is that
knitting itself can denote an action, while building
always requires an object. According to the Gen-
erative Lexicon theory (Pustejovsky, 1995). The
argument of verb knit has a default value, while
build doesn’t. So, the argument of build must be
realized explicitly.

The evidence suggests that event type is affect-
ed by many factors, and to do event classifica-
tion in the lexical level is difficult and not enough.
On the other hand, it is more important to discuss
which elements or parts of the meaning of verbs
allow them to behave differently from each other,
and is there any rules to follow in order to pre-
dict the behavior of verbs based on their semantic
representation. In this paper, we will discuss the
primitives of events from an ontological point of
view. Within the GL framework, we will give a se-
mantic representation for verbs which can predict
the behavior when combined with different com-
plements.

In Section 2, we will discuss different event
types from an ontological point of view. In Sec-
tion 3, we will present the primitives of events and
show how these primitives can be combined to-
gether to produce different event types. In Sec-
tion 4, we will discuss factors that affect even-
t types and give the semantic representation for
verbs, based on which we can make better pre-

diction on what kind of events they can denote.
Section 5 is the conclusion.

2 Ontological Event Types

Although the classification of verbs in terms of
event types is difficult, the definitions of the
Vendler’s terms, namely state, activity, accom-
plishment and achievement, are quite clear. From
now on, we will use his terms from ontological
point of view which is independent on a specific
language. The term event will be used to denote
any kind of the four types. The term process will
be used to denote activity and the first part of ac-
complishment without the final state as is used in
GL theory (Pustejovsky, 1995).

Events are located in time axis. When talk-
ing about events, we always bear a reference time
in mind, which is by default the speaking time.
When we stand at different positions to a certain
event in time axis, we will have to use different
ways to describe it. On the other hand, we can de-
scribe an event from different perspectives, which
will form different aspects. For example, we can
describe the start point, end point and the instant
state of any point between them. We can also de-
scribe the duration of an event, the duration from
the start point to a middle point etc. This is how we
understand and describe events with our language
from an ontological point of view. We would like
to claim that the perspectives to describe events
are universal across languages, although may be
realized in different ways. Let’s discuss some ex-
amples in English as follows.

(7) He became angry just now.
(8) He started running at 9:00am.
(9) He will start building a house tomorrow.
(10) He stopped being angry when he got the

money.
(11) He will stop running in an hour.
(12) He stopped building the house.
(13) He was angry just now.
(14) He was running from 9 to 10.
(15) He is building a house now.
(16) He has been angry for hours.
(17) He had been running for hours when y-

ou came.
(18) He has been building the house since

last year.
(19) He was angry yesterday.
(20) He ran yesterday.
(21) He built the house last year.



In the above sentences, (7) to (9) describe the s-
tart of an event (state, activity or accomplishment),
which is called inchoative for states and inceptive
for activities and accomplishments. (10) to (12)
describe the end of an event, which is called ter-
minative or completive. (13) to (15) describe an
instant state of the whole events. Note that, al-
though (14) takes a durative time complement, it
actually means that at each point in the interval
it is true that he is running; (16) to (18) describe
the duration from the start point to a reference time
which is in the middle of the whole event duration.
(19) to (21) describe three whole events. In other
words, (19) is a bounded state; (20) is a bound-
ed activity; (21) is a real accomplishment which
implies that the final goal has been accomplished.

2.1 Activity and accomplishment
(14) and (15) both express an ongoing process.
The difference is that there is a goal/target encod-
ed in (15). However, syntactically, they behave the
same. For example, they take time point or dura-
tive complements and don’t take for and in time
adverbials. In terms of truth condition, (14) and
(15) are also similar. Although (15) include a goal
which is carried by the object, the truth condition
doesn’t include the achievement of the goal. Oth-
erwise, the truth value of (15) will be dependent
on future which is not true considering that (15)
can also be true even if he gave up building the
house in future. In this sense, we argue that (14)
and (15) denote the same kind of event from the
ontological point of view.

2.2 Achievement and accomplishment
Achievements and accomplishments are differen-
t. Achievements are instantaneous, such as ar-
rive, die, kill, break (inchoative), while accom-
plishments take a time duration. Some causative
verbs behave similar to achievement verbs, such
as kill and break (causative), e.g. they don’t ap-
pear in progressive. However, they are differ-
ent in that achievements are logically instanta-
neous. They describe pure changes of state, while
causative verbs entail an action (Engelberg, 2001).
Causative verbs, such as kill and break, can be
treated as a special kind of accomplishment, where
the process part is perceived as instantaneous (ter,
1995; Verkuyl, 1993). It is possible that some
accomplishment verbs can denote instantaneous
events. For example, he ate a bug accidently does-
n’t entail a noticeable process, as it is incompatible

with progressive: *he is eating a bug accidently.

Based on headedness theory by Puste-
jovsky (1995), arrive and die are right headed
verbs with the left process shadowed. We suggest
that the process are not encoded at all. For
example, he died doesn’t mean he was killed.
The latter one certainly entails a cause which
is not expressed explicitly. For the former one,
it is similar to say that he became dead, which
doesn’t obviously entail a cause. We should not
exclude the possibility that some verbs can denote
pure change of state. An evidence for this claim
can be observed from Chinese compound sha
si (kill to death), composed by sha (kill) and si
(dead/die/death). This shows that sha (kill) is
an activity verb, which do have a goal to make
something die. So, it is also possible to say sha bu
si (kill not to death) meaning that one can try to
kill someone but he may not die in the end.

The headedness theory is aimed to explain
the causative/inchoative alternation phenomena.
However, it is not intuitive in terms of human’s
perception of linguistic knowledge. We still need
to test whether people notice the headedness when
using different verbs. Although the principle of
GL theory is to treat logical polysemy as unique
while different meaning could be generated by
some devices. We should not exclude the possi-
bility that some verbs only describe a pure change
of state in some context without any process en-
coded. We will discuss this issue further in the
next section.

2.3 Activity and semelfactive

Semelfactives such as knock, kick, vibrate are ac-
tually a special kind of activity which is perceived
as instantaneous and implies no change of state.
Instantaneous verb should not appear in progres-
sive aspect. However, this is not exactly true. For
example, he is kicking the tree. In this case, it actu-
ally describes an activity with iterative sub events.
Then, what is the difference between kick and run?
Actually, kick is the lexicalization of one action,
while run is the lexicalization of the whole iter-
ative activity. For example, he knocked the door
twice describes two individual knocks. But he ran
twice only means that he performed two indepen-
dent running activities, rather than two steps.



3 Primitives of Events

Generalizing the different event types we dis-
cussed above, we found two primitives: state and
change of state. For state, the definition here is dif-
ferent from that of previous literatures. States can
be further divided into two different types: static
state and dynamic state. A static state is a prop-
erty of an object with a specific value at a certain
time. Dynamic state refers to the state of being in
a process, such as (14) and (15). Borer (1996) also
argued that the progressive expresses an event as
a state. Actually, some phrases can also express
such dynamic state, such as he is at work.

3.1 State

The homogeneity can differentiate the dynamic s-
tate from the static state. For dynamic state, there
are always a series of sub events which can be de-
scribed with different predicates. Dynamic state
can be iterative (e.g. vibrating) or non-iterative
(e.g. building a house). Formally, the static state
and dynamic state can be represented as in (1) and
(2).

static(e) |= λP [P (e) ∧ ∀e′≺e[P (e′)]] (1)

dynamic(e) |=λP [P (e) ∧ ∃e′≺e∃P ′ [P ′ ̸= P
∧P ′(e′)]]

(2)

3.2 Change of state

Change of state is then defined a change from one
state to another as in (3). We can get four differ-
ent kinds of changes of state: static-static, static-
dynamic, dynamic-static, dynamic-dynamic. The
static-static change refers to inchoative, such as
die (alive to dead), break (unbroken to broken),
recognize (unrecognize to recognize), become red
(non-red to red). Static-dynamic change refers to
inceptive, such as start running. The dynamic-
dynamic change in real world is relatively rarely
lexicalized. However, there do exist such kind of
evets. For example, he continued to read the book
after washing clothes. The dynamic-static change
refers to terminative or completive, it usually de-
scribes an ending of an dynamic state, such as fin-
ish, end etc.

change(e) |=λe1λe2[state(e1) ∧ state(e2)
∧holds(e1, t < time(e))
∧holds(e2, t > time(e))]

(3)

3.3 Complex events and lexicalization

Based on the two primitives, we claim that some
words in language describe pure states, and some
describe changes of state. There are also words
that can describe complex events that are made up
of more than one primitive. For example, an ac-
complishment is made up of a bounded dynamic
state and a final static state. The phrase start up
describes a special kind of accomplishment that is
made up of a bounded dynamic state and a final
dynamic state. For example, the machine started
up and is working now.

Theoretically, for a event that is made up of
three states state0, state1 and state2, there will
be eight cases. If we also consider whether state0
and state2 are the same, then there will be anoth-
er four cases. All the twelve cases are shown in
Table 1. Some of the combination may not cor-
respond to any words or some examples of real
events. Theoretically, any combination is possible
to be lexicalized if the combination denotes a w-
hole meaningful event. In addition, the sub states
in the combination may overlap. However, this is
not the focus of this work and it is a different per-
spective to discuss event structure. The extended
event structure in GL can deal with this problem
very well.

3.4 The in and for time adverbials

The semantics of in and for time adverbials can be
represented as (22) to (25). The difference of in
and at is that, in describes the duration from a po-
tential standing point to a future change of state,
while at doesn’t include the standing point infor-
mation. Similarly, the difference of for and at for
a state is that, for described the duration of the s-
tate, while at only describe a certain time point at
which the state holds, but the duration information
is not included.

For accomplishments and achievements, the in
time adverbial actually modifies the duration from
a reference time to the culminations of the events.
For accomplishments, it is also possible to de-
scribe the dynamic state part. So, (24) and (25)
also apply to the dynamic process of an accom-



combination exemplar words example setences
s0 s1 s2 / he fainted to death
s0 s1 s0 faint he fainted for a while
s0 s1 d0 / he got nervous before the examination/
s0 d0 s1 build he built a house
s0 d0 s0 run he ran for a while
s0 d0 d1 / the engine started up
d0 s0 s1 / he sat down after running
d0 s0 d1 /
d0 s0 d0 pause the match paused for a while
d0 d1 s0 / the car slowed down until stopped
d0 d1 d2 / the car slowed down
d0 d1 d0 insert they inserted an advertisment during the TV program.

Table 1: Complex events with three states. s is for static state, d is for dynamic state

plishment. For example, the perfective progres-
sive in English actually works in this way, e.g. he
has been building a house for one month.

In summary, the in time adverbial is related to
change and focus on time duration from a refer-
ence time to it; the for time adverbial is related
to state either static or dynamic. For a bounded
durative state, there are two potential changes of
state, start and end. So, we can predict that the in
time adverbial can refer to both the start and the
end. For example, the class will start in ten min-
utes and the class will end in ten minutes are both
acceptable.

(22) [Change] will happen in [time duration].
(23) [Change] happens at [time point].
(24) [State] lasts for [time duration].
(25) [State] is true at [time point].

4 Semantic Representation of Events

As mentioned above, static state and dynamic s-
tate can be discriminated based on the homogene-
ity. Activity and semelfactive can be differentiat-
ed from Accomplishment and achievement based
on whether they have an final change of state or
not. Activity is different from semelfactive that it
has a longer time duration. Accomplishment and
achievement are different in that accomplishment
include a dynamic state while accomplishment on-
ly describes a change of state and is thus logically
instantaneous.

So, duration and change of state are two impor-
tant factors to differentiate different event types.
Duration information is actually embedded in the
start time and end time of an event, which should
be an external factor that is based on the time sys-

tem. We can define functions such as start fn to
get the start time of an event. So, for semantic rep-
resentation, we should only focus on the second
factor. How change of state is expressed has been
widely discussed in literatures, namely semanti-
cally or syntactically (e.g. resultatives). In this
section, we will give a discussion on how mean-
ing of verbs based on the two primitives and their
arguments can affect the event types.

4.1 Semelfactive and activity

The semantic representation of kick is shown in
(4). The semelfactive kick is the lexicalization of
the predicate kick act. However, run act as shown
in (6) is not lexicalized as run, which is the lexical-
ization of a series of run acts, such as stepping as
shown in (7). The progressive aspect of semelfac-
tive verb kick denotes an activity with iterative sub
events of kick acts as in (5). Here, we introduce
an operator while(x)[y], which means that event
y repeats until x becomes false. x actually encodes
the conditions that control the process. The kick-
ing event is controlled by the intention of the agent
meaning that the agent performing the kicking act
again and again until he doesn’t want to. In this
case, it is of the same event type as running.

kick act |=λeλxλy∃z[animal(x) ∧ phy obj(y)
∧foot(z) ∧ part of(z, x)
∧touch(e, x, y, z)]

(4)



he is kicking the door.

|= ∃e∃x∃y∃w[human(x) ∧ door(y)
∧proposition(w)
∧while(w)[∃e′ ≺ e[kick act(e′, x, y)]]]

(5)

run act |=λeλxλyλz[animal(x)
∧location(y) ∧ location(z)
∧run step(e, x, y, z)]

(6)

run |=λeλx∃w[animal(x) ∧ proposition(w)
∧while(w)[∃e′∃y∃z[location(y)
∧location(z) ∧ run act(e′, x, y, z)]]

(7)
He is running.

|= ∃e∃x∃w[human(x) ∧ proposition(w)
∧λw[run(e, x)](w)]]

(8)
The run act is not elementary. The movements

of arms and legs both could be treated as run acts.
However, by this definition, we can represent a
non-iterative activity as an iterative one. For ex-
ample, the process of building a house could also
be represented as an iterative activity with a defi-
nition of build act. However, this abstract concep-
t could be implemented with more details when
needed.

We should also note that we only describe the
main part of the semantic representation to show
how event primitives work. The difference of run
and walk is not described in (7). But it is pos-
sible to add this information to it. For example,
there must be some moment that both of the feet
are over the ground for running, while no such mo-
ment should exists for walking. The difference of
progressive and perfective is not described neither.
As we have discussed, progressive only describe
an instant state, which is a slice of the whole event.
This means that the reference time is actually af-
ter the start of the process while before its end. In
other words, the speaker noticed the happening of
some instantaneous actions, e.g. kick act, run act
etc.

4.2 Activity and accomplishment
Similar to kick act and run act, we can define
eat act as (9). Based on the while(x)[y] predicate,
the final change of state of accomplishments actu-
ally gives another constraint in x. So, for event de-
noted by (11), the final disappearance of the sand-
wich ends the eating process. Basically, the verb

eat denotes a human action which has a shadowed
argument, e.g. food. When taking an explicit ob-
ject, the default value of the shadowed argument
is substituted with the new value through a λ con-
version. This rule also applies to other activities
verbs with such argument, such as knit.

eat act |=λeλxλy[animal(x) ∧ phy obj(y)
∧holds(existing(y), t < time(e))
∧holds(!existing(y), t > time(e)]

(9)

eat |=λeλx∃y[human(x) ∧ phy obj(y)
∧while(existing(y))[
∃e′∃y′[eat act(e′, x, y′)]]]

(10)

He is eating a sandwich.

|= ∃e∃x∃y[human(x) ∧ sandwich(y)
∧λy[eat(e, x)](y)]

(11)
Similarly, we can give the semantic representa-

tion for build act and build. The difference is that
the condition for performing build act is the ex-
isting rather than disappearance of the object. In
addition, the object must be explicitly assigned.

Now, let’s discuss the examples (1) and (2) re-
peated below. First, the resultatives (2b) and (2c)
are explicit conditions that control the running
process. This is how an activity verb can denote
an accomplishment. (12) and (13) show how the
external argument can cooperate with activity ver-
b run and form an accomplishment. The qualia
unification operation in GL can also explain (2b).
However, it has a problem to explain (2c). On the
contrary, the generic NP sandwiches in (1a) does-
n’t provide a quantity limitation that could control
the eating action. In this way, an accomplishment
verb can also denote activities.

(1) a. He is eating sandwiches.
b. He is eating a sandwich.

a. He is running.
(2) b. He is running to school.

c. He is running 1000 meters.

He is running to school.

|= ∃e∃x∃y[human(x) ∧ school(y)
∧λw[run(e, x)](!at(x, y))] (12)



He is running 1000 meters.

|= ∃e∃x∃w[human(x) ∧ distance(w)
∧λw[run(e, x)](w < 1000m)]] (13)

Finally, we come back to the examples from (3)
to (6) repeated below. We agree with Hay (1999)
that the telicity interpretation is give by pragmatic
factors. We suggest that factor is actually encod-
ed in the telic role of the verbs. For example, the
telic role of cool is make something cool; the tel-
ic role of eat is to be not hungry; the telic role
of water is to make something not dry; the telic
role of clean is to make some place clean. The
telic role is different from the formal role in that
the purpose or function is not necessary to qual-
ify the predict. Even though the purpose is not
completely achieved for some reason, the process
doesn’t change meaning that it can be described
with the same predicate. According to the Coop-
erative Principle (Grice, 1991), if the sentence he
watered the flower is uttered, it should imply that
the listener doesn’t have to do it any more. Since,
the implicatures could be cancelled, examples (26)
to (29) are all acceptable.

(3) a. He cooled the soup in one minute.
b. He cooled the soup for one minute.

(4) a. He ate in one minute.
b. He ate for one minute.

(5) a. He watered the flower in one minute.
b. He watered the flower for one minute.

(6) a. He cleaned the house in one hour.
b. He cleaned the house for one hour.

(26) He cooled the soup, but it is still hot.

(27) He ate but still hungry.

(28) He watered the flower, but it is still dry

(29) He cleaned the house, but it is still dirty.

4.3 Achievement and accomplishment
Achievements as we suggested only denote
changes of sate. The verb arrive could be repre-
sented as (14). Such verbs can appear in progres-
sive as in (30) and (32). In our opinion, this should

be an syntactic issue, i.e. expressing a near future
event with progressive. So, the sentence (31) ex-
presses the same meaning as (30).

arrive |=λeλx∃y[human(x) ∧ location(y)
∧holds(!at(x, y), t < time(e))
∧holds(at(x, y), t > time(e))]

(14)

(30) He is arriving.

(31) He will arrive soon.

There are two cases for collectives either in sub-
ject or object position. The first is that the verb re-
quires collective subject or object, such as crowd,
disperse etc. The second is that all the individuals
in the collective are doing the same kind of even-
t, such as (32). However, (32) is ambiguous, the
first meaning is similar to (30), which express a
forerunning stage. The second meaning is that ev-
ery guest arrives one after another, which denotes
an iterative event composed by a series of achieve-
ments. The meaning of (32) can be represented as
(15).

(32) The guests are arriving.

|= ∃e∃X∃y[guest set(X) ∧ location(y)
∧while(∃x ∈ X[!at(x, y)])[
∃e′ ≺ e[arrive(e′, x)]]]

(15)

4.4 Causative and accomplishment
Causative verbs such as kill and break are usually
treated as instantaneous. For example, (33) also
has similar interpretation to (30). However, they
are different from pure change of state verbs. So,
in progressive, they will have different interpreta-
tions. For example, the progressive in (33) can
also refer to the action part, which for some rea-
son takes a noticeable time duration. This inter-
pretation is shown in (16). However, for the pure
change of state verb arrive, there is no arrive act
defined.

(33) He is killing a dog.

|= ∃e∃x∃y[human(x) ∧ dog(y)
∧while(alive(y))[
∃e′ ≺ e[kill act(e′, x, y)]]]

(16)



Such causative verbs, when taking massive ob-
ject, also have different interpretations. For ex-
ample, (34) could have a similar interpretation as
(33) or can be interpreted as (17) which is similar
to (32).

(34) He is killing the bugs.

|= ∃e∃X∃y[bug set(X) ∧ human(y)
∧while(∃x ∈ X[alive(x)])[
∃e′ ≺ e[kill(e′, y, x)]]]

(17)

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we discussed different event types
from an ontological point of view. We have shown
that the concept of event type should not exist
in lexical level. Then, we presented two primi-
tives based on which all different kinds of events
could be composed. We also discussed factors that
could affect the types of events and how one type
of event could be changed into another. Finally,
we give semantic representation for different kind-
s of verbs and exemplar events. It is shown that
our representation can give a better prediction on
event types verbs can denote.

Acknowledgments

The work is supported by a General Research
Fund (GRF) sponsored by the Research Grants
Council (Project no. 543810 and 544011).

References
Hagit Borer, 1996. Morphological Interfaces, chapter

Passive without theta grids. Stanford: Center for the
Study of Language and Information.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argu-
ment selection. Language, 67(3):547–619.

Stefan Engelberg. 2001. The semantics of the progres-
sive. In Proceedings of the 2001 Conference of the
Australian Linguistic Society, pages 1–8.

H.P. Grice. 1991. Logic and conversation. Pragmatic-
s: A Reader, New York, pages 305–315.

Heidi Harley. 1999. Denominal verbs and aktionsart.
MIT Working Papers in Linguistics, 35:73–85.

Jennifer Hay, Christopher Kennedy, and Beth Levin.
1999. Scalar structure underlies telicity in ”de-
gree achievements”. In Tanya Matthews and Devon
Strolovitch, editors, Proceedings of Semantics and
Linguistic Theory IX, pages 127–144. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University.

Ray Jackendoff. 1996. The proper treatment of mea-
suring out, telicity, and perhaps even quantification
in english. Natural Language and Linguistic Theo-
ry, 1(4):305–354.

James Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon.
Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Elizabeth Ritter and Sara Thomas Rosen, 2000. Events
as Grammatical Objects, chapter Event structure
and ergativity, pages 187–238. Stanford: Center for
the Study of Language and Information.

Carlotta Smith. 1991. The Parameter of Aspect. Dor-
drecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Carol Tenny. 1994. Aspectual Roles and the Syntax-
Semantics Interface. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.

Meulen Alice G.B. ter. 1995. Representing Time in
Natural Language: The Dynamic Interpretation of
Tense and Aspect. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Zeno Vendler. 1967. NY: Linguistics in Philosophy
Ithaca. Cornell University Press.

Henk Verkuyl. 1993. A theory of Aspectuality. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.


