










































Utilizing State-of-the-art Parsers to Diagnose Problems in Treebank Annotation for a Less Resourced Language


Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop & Interoperability with Discourse, pages 19–27,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Utilizing State-of-the-art Parsers to Diagnose Problems in Treebank
Annotation for a Less Resourced Language

Quy T. Nguyen
University of Information

Technology, Ho Chi Minh City
quynt@uit.edu.vn

Ngan L.T. Nguyen
National Institute

of Informatics, Tokyo
ngan@nii.ac.jp

Yusuke Miyao
National Institute

of Informatics, Tokyo
yusuke@nii.ac.jp

Abstract

The recent success of statistical pars-
ing methods has made treebanks become
important resources for building good
parsers. However, constructing high-
quality annotated treebanks is a challeng-
ing task. We utilized two publicly avail-
able parsers, Berkeley and MST parsers,
for feedback on improving the quality of
part-of-speech tagging for the Vietnamese
Treebank. Analysis of the treebank and
parsing errors revealed how problems with
the Vietnamese Treebank influenced the
parsing results and real difficulties of Viet-
namese parsing that required further im-
provements to existing parsing technolo-
gies.

1 Introduction

Treebanks, corpora annotated with syntactic struc-
tures, have become more and more important
for language processing. The Vietnamese Tree-
bank (VTB) has been built as part of the national
project “Vietnamese language and speech process-
ing (VLSP)” to strengthen automatic processing of
the Vietnamese language (Nguyen et al., 2009).
However, when we trained the Berkeley parser
(Petrov et al., 2006) in our preliminary experiment
with VTB and evaluated it using the corpus, the
parser only achieved an F-score of 72.1%. This
percentage was far lower than the state-of-the-art
performance reported for the Berkeley parser on
the English Penn Treebank of 90.2% (Petrov et
al., 2006). There are two possible reasons for this.
First, the quality of VTB is not good enough to
construct a good parser that included the quality of
the annotation scheme, the annotation guidelines,
and the annotation process. Second, parsing Viet-
namese is a difficult problem on its own, and we
need to seek new solutions to this.

Nguyen et al. (2012) proposed methods of
improving the annotations of word segmentation
(WS) for VTB. They also evaluated different WS
criteria in two applications, i.e., machine trans-
lation and text classification. This paper focuses
on improving the quality of parts-of-speech (POS)
annotations by using state-of-the-art parsers to
provide feedback for this process.

The difficulties with Vietnamese POS tag-
ging have been recognized by many researchers
(Nghiem et al., 2008; Le et al., 2010). There is lit-
tle consensus as to the methodology for classifying
words. Polysemous words, words with the same
surface form but having different meanings and
grammar functions, are very popular in the Viet-
namese language. For example, the word “cổ”
can be a noun that means neck/she, or an adjec-
tive that means ancient depending on the context.
This characteristic makes it difficult to tag POSs
for Vietnamese, both manually and automatically.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows:
a brief introduction to VTB and its annotation
schemes are provided in Section 2. Then, previ-
ous work is summarized in Section 3. Section 4
describes our methods of detecting and correcting
inconsistencies in POSs in the VTB corpus. Eval-
uations of these methods are described in Section
5. Finally, Section 6 explains our evaluations of
the Berkeley parser and Minimum-Spanning Tree
(MST) parser on different versions of the VTB
corpus, which were created by using detected in-
consistencies. These results from evaluations are
considered to be a way of measuring the effect
of automatically detected and corrected inconsis-
tencies. We could observe difficulties with Viet-
namese that affected the quality of parsers by ana-
lyzing the results from parsing.

Our experiences in using state-of-the-art parsers
for treebank annotation, which are presented in
this paper, should not only benefit the Vietnamese
language, but also other languages with similar

19



Label Name Example
N Common noun nhân dân {people}
Np Proper noun Việt Nam {Vietnam}
Nc Classifer noun con, cái, bức {*}
Nu Unit noun mét {meter}
V Verb ngồi {sit}
A Adjective tốt {good}
P Pronoun tôi {I}, hắn {he}
L Determiner mỗi {every}, những {*}
M Number một {one}
R Adverb đã, sẽ, đang {*}
E Preposition trên {on}
C Conjunction tuy nhiên {however}
I Exclamation ôi, chao, a ha {*}
T Particle ạ, ấy, chăng {*}
B Foreign word internet, email
Y Abbreviation APEC, WTO, HIV
S Affix bất, vô, đa {*}
X Other

Table 1: VTB part-of-speech tag set

characteristics.

2 Brief introduction to VTB

The VTB corpus contains 10.433 sentences
(274.266 tokens), semi-manually annotated with
three layers of WS, POS tagging, and bracketing.
The first annotation is produced for each annota-
tion layer by using automatic tools. Then, the an-
notators revise these data. The WS and POS an-
notation schemes were introduced by Nguyen et
al. (2012). This section briefly introduces POS tag
set and a bracketing annotation scheme.

VTB specifies the 18 different POS tags sum-
marized in Table 1 (Nguyen et al., 2010a). Each
unit in this table goes with several example words.
English translations of these words are included in
braces. However, as we could not find any appro-
priate English translations for some words, these
empty translations have been denoted by asterisks
(*).

The VTB corpus is annotated with three syn-
tactic tag types: constituency tags, functional
tags, and null-element tags. There are 18 con-
stituency tags in VTB. The functional tags are
used to enrich information for syntactic trees, such
as where functional tag “SUB” is combined with
constituency tag “NP”, which is presented as “NP-
SUB” to indicate this noun phrase is a subject.
There are 17 functional tags in VTB. The head
word of a phrase is annotated with functional tag
“H”.

The phrase structures of Vietnamese include
three positions: <pre-head>, <head>, and <post-
head> (Vietnamese grammar, 1983; Nguyen et al.,

2010c). The head word of the phrase is in the
<head> position. The words that are in the <pre-
head> and <post-head> positions are modifiers of
the head word.

There is a special type of noun in Vietnamese
that we have called Nc-noun in this paper. Nc-
nouns can be classifier nouns or common nouns
depending on their modifiers. For example, the
Nc-noun “con” is a classifier noun if its modifier
is the word “cá {fish}” (“con cá”, which means
a specific fish, similar to “the fish” in English).
However, the Nc-noun “con {child}” is a common
noun if its modifier is the word “ghẻ” (“con ghẻ”,
which means “stepchild” in English). We found
that Nc-nouns always appeared in the head posi-
tions of noun phrases by investigating the VTB
corpus. There is currently little consensus as to
the methodology for annotating Nc-nouns (Hoang,
1998; Nguyen et al., 2010b; Nguyen et al., 2010a).

3 Summarization of previous work

Nguyen et al. (2012) described methods of detect-
ing and correcting WS inconsistencies in the VTB
corpus. These methods focused on two types of
WS inconsistency, variation and structural incon-
sistency, which are defined below.

Variation inconsistency: is a sequence of tokens
that has more than one way of being segmented in
the corpus.

Structural inconsistency: occurs when different
sequences have similar structures, and thus should
be split in the same way, but are segmented in dif-
ferent ways in the corpus. Nguyen et al. (2012)
pointed out three typical cases of structural in-
consistency that were analyzed as classifier nouns
(Nc), affixes (S), and special characters.

Nguyen et al. (2012) analyzed N-gram se-
quences and phrase structures to detect WS in-
consistencies. Then, the detected WS inconsis-
tencies were classified into several patterns of in-
consistencies, parts of which were manually fixed
to improve the quality of the corpus. The rest
were used to create different versions of the VTB
corpus. These data sets were evaluated on auto-
matic WS and its applications to text classification
and English-Vietnamese statistical machine trans-
lations to find appropriate criteria for automatic
WS and its applications.

Their experiments revealed that the
VAR_FREQ data set achieved excellent re-
sults in these applications. The VAR_FREQ data

20



set was the original VTB corpus with manually
corrected structural inconsistencies in special
characters and selected segmentations with higher
frequencies in all detected variations. There-
fore, we used the VAR_FREQ data set in our
experiments.

4 Methods of detecting and correcting
inconsistencies in POS annotations

We propose two kinds of methods of detecting
and correcting inconsistencies. They correspond
to two different types of POS inconsistency that
we call multi-POS inconsistency (MI) and Nc in-
consistency (NcI), which are defined as follows.

Multi-POS inconsistency: is a word that is not
Nc-noun and has more than one POS tag at each
position in each phrase category.

Nc inconsistency: is a sequence of Nc-noun and
modifier, in which Nc-noun has more than one
way of POS annotation in the VTB corpus.

We separated the POS inconsistencies into these
two types of inconsistencies because Nc-nouns
are special types of words in Vietnamese. The
methods of detecting and correcting NcIs were
language-specific methods developed based on the
characteristics of Vietnamese. However, as the
methods for MIs are rather general, they can be
applied to other languages.

4.1 General method for multi-POS
inconsistencies

Detection method (MI_DM)
Our main problem was to distinguish MIs

from polysemous words, since polysemous words
should not be considered inconsistent annotations.
Our method was based on the position of words in
phrases and phrase categories. This idea resulted
from the observation that polysemous words have
many POS tags; however, each word usually has
only one true POS tag at each position in each
phrase category. For example, when a phrase cat-
egory is a verb phrase, the word “can” in the pre-
head position of the verb phrase “(VP (MD can)
(VB can))” should be a modal, but the word “can”
in the head position should be a verb. Further, the
word “cut” in the head position of a noun phrase
“(NP (DT a) (JJ further) (NN cut))” should be a
noun, but the word “cut” in the head position of
the verb phrase “(VP (VB cut) (NP (NNS costs)))”
should be a verb. This may be more frequent in
Vietnamese because it is not an inflectional lan-

guage i.e., the word form does not change accord-
ing to tenses, word categories (e.g., nouns, verbs,
and adjectives), or number (singular and plural).

The method involved three steps. First, we
extracted words in the same position for each
phrase category. Second, we counted the num-
ber of different POS tags of each word. Words
that had more than one POS tag were determined
to be multi-POS inconsistencies. For example, in
the following two preposition phrases, “(PP (E-
H của) (P chúng_tôi1)) {of us}” and “(PP (C-H
của) (P hội_nghị)) {of conference}”, the words
“của {of}” appear at the head positions of both
phrases, but they are annotated with different POS
tags, preposition (E) and conjunction (C). There-
fore, they are MIs according to our method.

It should be noted that this method was applied
to words that were direct children of a phrase.
Embedded phrases, such as “(PP (E của) (P
chúng_tôi))” in “(NP (M hai) (Nc-H con) (N mèo)
(PP (E của) (P chúng_tôi))) {our two cats}”, were
considered separately.

Correction method (MI_CM)
A multi-POS inconsistency detected with the

MI_DM method is denoted by “w|P1-f1|P2-
f2|...|Pn-fn AC”, where Pi (i = 1, 2, ..., n) is a POS
tag of word w, fi is the frequency of POS tag Pi,
and AC is applying condition of w. Our method
of correcting the POS tag for POS inconsistency
“w|P1-f1|P2-f2|...|Pn-fn AC” involves two steps.
First, we select the POS tag with the highest fre-
quency of all POS tags of “w|P1-f1|P2-f2|...|Pn-fn
AC” (Pmax). Second, we replace POS tags Pi of
all instances (w|Pi) satisfying condition AC with
POS tag Pmax. For MIs, the AC of word w is its
phrase category and position in the phrase.

For example, “toàn bộ|L-27|P-2” is a multi-
POS inconsistency in the pre-head position of a
noun phrase. The frequency of POS tag “L” is 27
and the frequency of POS tag “P” is 2. There-
fore, “L” is the POS tag that was selected by the
MI_CM method. We replace all POS tags Pi of
instances “toàn bộ|Pi” in the pre-head positions
of noun phrases with POS tag “L”.

4.2 Language-specific method for classifier
nouns

Detection method
As mentioned in Section 2, an Nc-noun can be

1We used underscore “_” to link syllables of Vietnamese
compound words.

21



annotated with POS tag “Nc” or “N” depending
on the modifier that follows that Nc-noun. Ana-
lyzing the VTB corpus revealed that Nc-nouns had
two characteristics. First, an Nc-noun that is fol-
lowed by the same word at each occurrence is usu-
ally annotated with the same POS tag. Second, an
Nc-noun that is followed by a phrase or nothing at
each occurrence is annotated with the same POS
tag. Based on these two cases, we propose two
methods of detecting NcIs, which we have called
NcI_DM1 and NcI_DM2. They are described be-
low.

NcI_DM1: We counted Nc-nouns in VTB that
had two or more ways of POS annotation, satis-
fying the condition that Nc-nouns are followed by
a phrase or nothing. For example, the Nc-noun
“con” in “(NP (M 2) (N-H con)) {2 children}” is
followed by nothing or it is followed by a prepo-
sitional phrase as in “(NP (L các) (N-H con) (PP
(E-H của) (P tôi))) {my children}”.

NcI_DM2: We counted two-gram sequences
beginning with an Nc-noun in VTB that had two
or more ways of POS annotation of the Nc-noun,
satisfying the conditions that two tokens were all
in the same phrase and and they all had the same
depth in a phrase. For example, the Nc-noun
“con” in the two-gram “con gái {daughter}” was
sometimes annotated “Nc”, and sometimes anno-
tated “N” in VTB; in addition, as “con” and “gái”
in the structure “(NP (Nc-H con) (N gái) (PP (E-
H của) (P tôi))) {my daughter}” were in the same
phrase and have the same depth, “con” was an
NcI.

Correction method
We denoted NcIs with “w|P1-f1|P2-f2|...|Pn-fn

AC” similarly to MIs. We also replaced the POS
tag of Nc-nouns with the highest frequency tag.
The only differences were the applying conditions
that varied according to the previous two cases of
NcIs.

• For Nc inconsistencies detected by the
NcI_DM1 method, AC is defined as follows:
w is an Nc-noun that is followed by nothing
or a phrase.

• For Nc inconsistencies detected by the
NcI_DM2 method, AC is defined as follows:
w is an Nc-noun that must be followed by a
word, m.

5 Results and evaluation

We detected and corrected MIs and NcIs based
on the two data sets, ORG and VAR_FREQ. The
ORG data set was the original VTB corpus and
VAR_FREQ was the original corpus with modifi-
cations to WS annotation. This setting was made
similar to that used by Nguyen et al. (2012) to
enable comparison.

There are a total of 128,871 phrases in the VTB
corpus. The top five types of phrases are noun
phrases (NPs) (representing 49.6% of the total
number of phrases), verb phrases (VPs), preposi-
tional phrases (PPs), adjectival phrases (ADJPs),
and quantity phrases (QPs), representing 99.1% of
the total number of phrases in the VTB corpus. We
analyzed the VTB corpus based on these five types
of phrases.

5.1 Results for detected POS inconsistencies

Tables 2 and 3 show the overall statistics for
MIs and NcIs for each phrase category. The sec-
ond and third columns in these tables indicate the
numbers of inconsistencies and their instances that
were detected in the ORG data set. The fourth and
fifth columns indicate the numbers of inconsisten-
cies and their instances that were detected in the
VAR_FREQ data set. The rows in Table 3 indicate
the number of NcIs and the number of instances
detected with the NcI_DM1 and NcI_DM2 meth-
ods.

According to Table 2, most of the MIs occurred
in noun phrases, representing more than 72% of
the total number of MIs. All NcIs in Table 3 are
also in noun phrases. There are two possible rea-
sons for this. First, noun phrases represent the ma-
jority of phrases in VTB (represent 49.6% of the
total number of phrases in the VTB corpus). Sec-
ond, nouns are sub-divided into many other types
(common noun (N), classifier noun (Nc), proper
noun (Np), and unit noun (Nu)) (mentioned in Sec-
tion 2), which may confuse annotators in anno-
tating POS tags for nouns. In addition, the high
number of NcIs in Table 3 indicate that it is diffi-
cult to distinguish between Nc and other types of
nouns. Therefore, we need to have clearer annota-
tion guidelines for this.

5.2 Evaluation of methods to detect and
correct inconsistencies

We estimated the accuracy of our methods which
detected and corrected inconsistencies in POS tag-

22



Phrase
ORG VAR_FREQ

Inc Ins Inc Ins
NP 792 28,423 752 27,067
VP 221 10,158 139 10,110

ADJP 64 1,302 61 1,257
QP 4 22 4 22
PP 14 5,649 13 5,628

Total 1,095 45,554 969 44,084

Table 2: Statistics for multi-POS inconsistencies
for each phrase category in VTB. Number of In-
consistencies (Inc) and Number of Instances (Ins).

Detection method
ORG VAR_FREQ

Inc Ins Inc Ins
NcI_DM1 52 3,801 51 3,792
NcI_DM2 338 2,468 326 2,412
Total 390 6,269 377 6,204

Table 3: Statistics for Nc inconsistencies in head
positions of noun phrases in VTB.

ging by manually inspecting inconsistent annota-
tions. We manually inspected the two data sets
of ORG_EVAL and ORG_POS_EVAL. To cre-
ate ORG_EVAL, we randomly selected 100 sen-
tences which contained instances of POS incon-
sistencies in the ORG data set. ORG_EVAL con-
tained 459 instances of 157 POS inconsistencies.
ORG_POS_EVAL was the ORG_EVAL data set
with corrections made to multi-POS inconsisten-
cies and Nc inconsistencies with our methods of
correction above.

Detection: We manually checked POS incon-
sistencies and found that 153 cases out of 157 POS
inconsistencies (97.5%) were actual inconsisten-
cies. There were four cases that our method de-
tected as multi-POS inconsistencies, but they were
actually ambiguities in Vietnamese POS tagging.
They were polysemous words whose meanings
and POS tags depended on surrounding words, but
did not depend on their positions in phrases. For
example, the word “sáng” in the post-head posi-
tions of the verb phrases VP1 and VP2 below, can
be a noun that means morning in English, or it can
be an adjective that means bright, depending on
the preceding verb.

VP1: (VP (V-H thắp) (A sáng) {lighten bright}
VP2: (VP (V-H đi) (N sáng) {go in the morning}
Correction: Table 4 shows results of com-

parison of the POS tags for 459 instances in
ORG_EVAL and those in ORG_POS_EVAL.
These results indicate that there are instances
whose POS tags are incorrect in ORG_EVAL
but correct in ORG_POS_EVAL (the third row

ORG_EVAL ORG_POS_EVAL No. of Instances
correct correct 404

incorrect correct 41
correct incorrect 11

incorrect incorrect 3
Total 459

Table 4: Comparison of POS tags for 459
instances in ORG_EVAL with those in
ORG_POS_EVAL.

PoPOS Counts Examples
Nc-N 385 người {the, person}
N-V 186 mất mát {loss}

N-Np 176 Hội {association}
N-A 144 khó khăn {difficult}
V-A 92 phải {must, right}

Table 5: Top five pairs of confusing POS tags.

in Table 4), and there are instances whose POS
tags are correct in ORG_EVAL but incorrect in
ORG_POS_EVAL (the fourth row in Table 4).
The results in Table 4 indicate that, the number
of correct POS tags in ORG_POS_EVAL (445 in-
stances, representing 96.9% of the total number of
instances) is higher than that in ORG_EVAL (415
instances, representing 90.4% of the total number
of instances). This means our methods of correct-
ing inconsistencies in POS tagging improved the
quality of treebank annotations.

5.3 Analysis of detected inconsistencies

We analyzed the detected POS inconsistencies to
find the reasons for inconsistent POS annotations.
We classified the detected POS inconsistencies ac-
cording to pairs of their POS tags. There were
a total of 85 patterns of pairs of POS tags. Ta-
ble 5 lists the top five confusing patterns (PoPOS),
their counts of inconsistencies (Counts), and ex-
amples. It also seemed to be extremely confus-
ing for the annotators to distinguish types of nouns
(Nc and N, and N and Np) and distinguish nouns
from other types of words (such as verbs, adjec-
tives, and pronouns).

We investigated POS inconsistencies and the
annotation guidelines (Nguyen et al., 2010b;
Nguyen et al., 2010a; Nguyen et al., 2010c) to
find why common nouns were sometimes tagged
as classifier nouns and vice versa, and verbs were
sometimes tagged as common nouns and vice
versa, and so on. We found that these POS in-
consistencies belonged to polysemous words that
were difficult to tag.

The difficulties with tagging polysemous words

23



were due to four main reasons: (1) The POS of a
polysemous word changes according to the func-
tion of that polysemous word in each phrase cate-
gory or changes according to the meaning of sur-
rounding words. Although polysemous words are
annotated with different POS tags, they do not
change their word form. (2) The way polysemous
words are tagged according to their context is not
completely clear in the POS tagging guidelines.
(3) Annotators referred to a dictionary that had
been built as part of the VLSP project (Nguyen et
al., 2009) (VLSP dictionary) to annotate the VTB
corpus. However, this dictionary lacked various
words and did not cover all contexts for the words.
For example, “hơn {more than}” in Vietnamese is
an adjective when it is the head word of an adjec-
tival phrase, but “hơn {over}” is an adverb when it
is the modifier of a quantifier noun (such as “hơn
200 sinh viên {over 200 students}”). However, the
VLSP dictionary only considered “hơn” to be an
adjective (“tôi hơn nó hai tuổi {I am more than
him two years old}”). No cases where “hơn” was
an adverb were mentioned in this dictionary. (4)
There are several overlapping but conflicting in-
structions across the annotation guidelines for dif-
ferent layers of the treebank. For example, the
combinations of affixes and words they modify to
create compound words are clear in the WS guide-
lines, but POS tagging guidelines treat affixes as
words and they are annotated as POS tags “S”.
For words modifying quantifier nouns, such as
“hơn and gần {over and about}”, the POS tagging
guidelines treat them as adjectives, but the brack-
eting guidelines treat them as adverbs. Therefore,
our method detected multi-POS inconsistencies as
“hơn|A-135|R-51”, “gần|A-102|R-5” at the pre-
head positions of noun phrases. Since the frequen-
cies of the adjective tags were greater than those of
adverb tags (fA > fR), these words were automati-
cally assigned to adjective POS tags (A) according
to our method of correction. These were POS in-
consistencies that our method of correction could
not be applied to, because the frequency of incor-
rect POS tags was higher than that of actual POS
tags.

6 Evaluation of state-of-the-art parsers
on VTB

We carried out experiments to evaluate two pop-
ular parsers, a syntactic parser and a dependency
parser, on different versions of the VTB corpus.

Some of these data sets were made the same as the
data settings for WS in Nguyen et al. (2012). The
other data sets contained changes in POS annota-
tions following our methods of correcting incon-
sistencies presented in Section 4. We could ob-
serve how the problems with WS and POS tag-
ging influenced the quality of Vietnamese parsing
by analyzing the parsing results.

6.1 Experimental settings

Data. Nine configurations of the VTB corpus
were created as follows:

• ORG: The original VTB corpus.

• BASE, STRUCT_AFFIX, STRUCT_NC,
VAR_SPLIT, VAR_COMB, and
VAR_FREQ correspond to different set-
tings for WS described in Nguyen et
al. (2012).

• ORG_POS: The ORG data set with correc-
tions for multi-POS inconsistencies and Nc
inconsistencies by using the methods in Sec-
tion 4.1 and 4.2.

• VAR_FREQ_POS: The VAR_FREQ data set
with corrections for multi-POS inconsisten-
cies and Nc inconsistencies by using the
methods in Section 4.1 and 4.2.

Each of the nine data sets was randomly split
into two subsets for training and testing our parser
models. The training set contained 9,443 sen-
tences, and the testing set contained 1,000 sen-
tences.

Tools
We used the Berkeley parser (Petrov et al.,

2006) to evaluate the syntactic parser on VTB.
This parser has been used in experiments in En-
glish, German, and Chinese and achieved an F1 of
90.2% on the English Penn Treebank.

We used the conversion tool built by Johans-
son et al. (2007) to convert VTB into dependency
trees.

We used the MST parser to evaluate the depen-
dency parsing on VTB. This parser was evaluated
on the English Penn Treebank (Mcdonald et al.,
2006a) and 13 other languages (Mcdonald et al.,
2006b). Its accuracy achieved 90.7% on the En-
glish Penn Treebank.

We made use of the bracket scoring program
EVALB, which was built by Sekine et al. (1997),

24



Data sets Bracketing F-measures
ORG 72.10
BASE 72.20
STRUCT_AFFIX 72.60
STRUCT_NC 71.92
VAR_SPLIT 72.03
VAR_COMB 72.46
VAR_FREQ 72.34
ORG_POS 72.72
VAR_FREQ_POS 73.21

Table 6: Bracketing F-measures of Berkeley
parser on nine configurations of VTB corpus.

Data set UA LA
ORG 50.51 46.14
BASE 53.90 50.14
STRUCT_AFFIX 54.00 50.25
STRUCT_NC 53.88 49.96
VAR_SPLIT 53.95 50.14
VAR_COMB 53.93 50.27
VAR_FREQ 54.21 50.41
ORG_POS 54.20 50.37
VAR_FREQ_POS 57.87 53.19

Table 7: Dependency accuracy of MSTParser on
nine configurations of VTB corpus. Unlabeled
Accuracy (UA), Labeled Accuracy (LA).

to evaluate the performance of the Berkeley parser.
As an evaluation tool was included in the MST
parser tool, we used it to evaluate the MST parser.

6.2 Experimental results

The bracketing F-measures of the Berkeley parser
on nine configurations of the VTB corpus are
listed in Table 6. The dependency accuracies of
the MST parser on nine configurations of the VTB
corpus are shown in Table 7. These results indicate
that the quality of the treebank strongly affected
the quality of the parsers.

According to Table 6, all modifications to WS
inconsistencies improved the performance of the
Berkeley parser except for STRUCT_NC and
VAR_SPLIT. More importantly, the ORG_POS
model achieved better results than the ORG
model, and the VAR_FREQ_POS model achieved
better results than the VAR_FREQ model, which
indicates that the modifications to POS inconsis-
tencies improved the performance of the Berkeley
parser. The VAR_FREQ_POS model scored 1.11
point higher than ORG, which is a significant im-
provement.

Dependency accuracies of the MST parser
in Table 7 indicate that all modifications to
POS inconsistencies improved the performance
of the MST parser. All modifications to WS

APSs CCTs and Freq
A M N NP-79|ADJP-27
A V VP-56|ADJP-78|NP-2

Table 8: Examples of ambiguous POS sequences
(APSs), their CCTs, and frequency of each CCT
(Freq)

inconsistencies also improved the performance
of the MST parser except for STRUCT_NC.
The VAR_FREQ_POS model scored 7.36 points
higher than ORG, which is a significant improve-
ment.

6.3 Analysis of parsing results

The results for the Berkeley parser and MST
parser trained on the POS-modified versions of
VTB were better than those trained on the origi-
nal VTB corpus, but they were still much lower
than the performance of the same parsers on
the English language. We analyzed error based
on the output data of the best parsing results
(VAR_FREQ_POS) for the Berkeley parser, and
found that the unmatched annotations between
gold and test data were caused by ambiguous POS
sequences in the VTB corpus.

An ambiguous POS sequence is a sequence of
POS tags that has two or more constituency tags.
For example, there are the verb phrase “(VP (R
đang) (A cặm_cụi) (V làm)) {* (be) painstak-
ingly doing}” and the adjectival phrase “(ADJP (R
rất) (A dễ) (V thực_hiện)) {very easy (to) imple-
ment}” in the training data of VAR_FREQ_POS.
As these two phrases have the same POS sequence
“R A V”, “R A V” is an ambiguous POS se-
quence, and VP and ADJP are confusing con-
stituency tags (CCTs). We found 42,373 occur-
rences of 213 ambiguous POS sequences (repre-
senting 37.02% of all phrases) in the training data
of VAR_FREQ_POS. We also found 1,065 oc-
currences of 13 ambiguous POS sequences in the
parsing results for VAR_FREQ_POS. Some ex-
amples of ambiguous POS sequences, their CCTs,
and the number of occurrences of each CCT in the
training data of VAR_FREQ_POS are listed in Ta-
ble 8.

We classified the detected ambiguous POS se-
quences according to pairs of different CCTs to
find the reasons for ambiguity in each pair. There
were a total of 42 pairs of CCTs, whose top three
pairs, along with their counts of types of am-
biguous POS sequences, and examples of ambigu-

25



Pairs of CCTs Counts Examples
NP-VP 61 P V N, ...
VP-ADJP 54 R A V, A V N, ...
ADJP-NP 52 A M N, ...

Table 9: Top three pairs of confusing constituency
tags

Pairs of CCTs 1 2
NP-VP M, L ,R ,V N, R, M, P, A
VP-ADJP A, R N, R
ADJP-NP N, R R, M, A, L

Table 10: Statistics for POS tags at pre-head posi-
tion of each phrase category.

ous POS sequences are listed in Table 9. We
extracted different POS tags at each position of
each phrase category for each pair of CCTs, based
on the ambiguous POS sequences. For example,
the third row in Table 9 has “R A V” and “A V
N”, which are two ambiguous POS sequences that
were sometimes annotated as VP and sometimes
annotated as ADJP. The different POS tags that
were extracted from the pre-head positions of VPs
based on these two POS sequences were “R, A”
and “R” was the POS tag that was extracted from
the pre-head positions of ADJPs based on these
two POS sequences. These POS tags are important
clues to finding reasons for ambiguities in POS se-
quences.

Table 10 summarizes the extracted POS tags at
pre-head positions for the top three pairs of CCTs.
For example, the POS tags in row NP-VP and col-
umn 1 are in the pre-head positions of NP and the
POS tags in row NP-VP and column 2 are in the
pre-head positions of VP. By comparing these re-
sults with the structures of the pre-head positions
of phrase categories in VTB bracketing guidelines
(Nguyen et al., 2010c), we found many cases that
were not annotated according to instructions in the
VTB bracketing guidelines, such as those accord-
ing to Table 10, where an adjective (A) is in the
pre-head position of VP, but according to the VTB
bracketing guidelines, the structure of the pre-head
position of VB only includes adverb (R).

We investigated cases that had not been anno-
tated according to the guidelines, and found two
possible reasons that caused ambiguous POS se-
quences. First, although our methods improved
the quality of the VTB corpus, some POS anno-
tation errors remained in the VTB corpus. These
POS annotation errors were cases to which our
methods could not be applied (mentioned in Sec-

tion 5). Second, there were ambiguities in POS
sequences caused by Vietnamese characteristics,
such as the adjectival phrase “(ADJP (R đang)
(N ngày_đêm) (A đau_đớn)) {* day-and-night
painful}” and the noun phrase “(NP (R cũng) (N
sinh_viên) (A giỏi)) {also good student}” that had
the same POS sequence of “R N A”.

Therefore, POS annotation errors need to be
eliminated from the VTB corpus to further im-
prove its quality and that of the Vietnamese parser.
We not only need to eliminate overlapping but
conflicting instructions, which were mentioned in
Section 5.3, from the guidelines, but we also have
to complete annotation instructions for cases that
have not been treated (or not been clearly treated)
in the guidelines. We may also need to improve
POS tag set because adverbs modifying adjectives,
verbs and nouns are all presently tagged as “R”,
which caused ambiguous POS sequences, such as
the ambiguous POS sequence “R N A” mentioned
above. If we use different POS tags for the adverb
“đang”, which modifies the adjective “đau đớn
{painful}”, and the adverb “cũng”, which modi-
fies the noun “sinh viên {student}”, we can elimi-
nate ambiguous POS sequences in these cases.

7 Conclusion

We proposed several methods of improving the
quality of the VTB corpus. Our manual evalua-
tion revealed that our methods improved the qual-
ity of the VTB corpus by 6.5% with correct POS
tags. Analysis of inconsistencies and the annota-
tion guidelines suggested that: (1) better instruc-
tions should be added to the VTB guidelines to
help annotators to distinguish difficult POS tags,
(2) overlapping but conflicting instructions should
be eliminated from the VTB guidelines, and (3)
annotations that referred to dictionaries should be
avoided.

To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the
first report on evaluating state-of-the-art parsers
used on the Vietnamese language. The results ob-
tained from evaluating these two parsers were used
as feedback to improve the quality of treebank an-
notations. We also thoroughly analyzed the pars-
ing output, which revealed challenging issues in
treebank annotations and in the Vietnamese pars-
ing problem itself.

26



References
Anna M. D. Sciullo and Edwin Williams. 1987. On

the definition of word. The MIT Press.

Fei Xia. 2000. The part-of-speech tagging guidelines
for the penn chinese treebank (3.0).

Minh Nghiem, Dien Dinh and Mai Nguyen. 2008. Im-
proving Vietnamese POS tagging by integrating a
rich feature set and Support Vector Machines. Pro-
ceedings of RIVF 2008, pages: 128–133.

Phe Hoang. 1998. Vietnamese Dictionary. Scientific
& Technical Publishing.

Phuong H. Le, Azim Roussanaly, Huyen T. M. Nguyen
and Mathias Rossignol. 2010. An empirical study of
maximum entropy approach for part-of-speech tag-
ging of Vietnamese texts. Proceedings of TALN
2010 Conference. Montreal, Canada.

Quy T. Nguyen, Ngan L.T. Nguyen and Yusuke Miyao.
2012. Comparing Different Criteria for Vietnamese
Word Segmentation. Proceedings of 3rd Workshop
on South and Southeast Asian Natural Language
Processing (SANLP), pages: 53–68.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2007. Extended
Constituent-to-dependency Conversion for English.
Proceedings of NODALIDA, Tartu, Estonia, pages:
105–112.

Ryan Mcdonald and Fernando Pereira. 2006a. On-
line Learning of Approximate Dependency Parsing
Algorithms. Proceedings of 11th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EACL 2006, pages: 81–88.

Ryan Mcdonald, Kevin Lerman and Fernando Pereira.
2006b. Multilingual Dependency Analysis with
a Two-Stage Discriminative Parser. Proceedings
of Tenth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL-X), Bergan, Norway,
pages: 216–220.

Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux and Dan
Klein. 2006. Learning accurate, compact, and in-
terpretable tree annotation. Proceedings of 21st In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics and the 44th annual meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages: 433–440.

Thai P. Nguyen, Luong X. Vu and Huyen T.M. Nguyen.
2010a. VTB part-of-speech tagging guidelines.

Thai P. Nguyen, Luong X. Vu and Huyen T.M. Nguyen.
2010b. VTB word segmentation guidelines.

Thai P. Nguyen, Luong X. Vu, Huyen T.M. Nguyen,
Hiep V. Nguyen and Phuong H. Le. 2009. Build-
ing a large syntactically-annotated corpus of Viet-
namese. Proceedings of Third Linguistic Annota-
tion Workshop, pages: 182–185.

Thai P. Nguyen, Luong X. Vu, Huyen T.M. Nguyen,
Thu M. Dao, Ngoc T.M. Dao and Ngan K. Le.
2010c. VTB bracketing guidelines.

Vietnamese grammar. 1983. Social Sciences Publish-
ers.

27


