









































Where Things Happen:
On the Semantics of Event Localization

James Pustejovsky

Computer Science Department
Brandeis University
Waltham, MA USA

Abstract. The problem of temporally situating events in language has
been approached by a number of philosophical techniques, including
Davidson’s particularist theory of event individuation [6, 5] and Kim’s
property exemplification theory [16]. Both of these theories have been
developed within linguistic semantic traditions, as well (cf. [24, 2] and
others). However, the problem of event localization (spatially situating
events) has not been discussed as extensively in the semantics literature.
In this paper, I discuss the procedures for identifying where events, as
expressed in natural language, are located in space. Aspects of the se-
mantics of event localization have been recently proposed, including the
notion of the “shape” of a movement [8, 39], as well as treating movement
verbs as “path creation” predicates [29]. In this paper, I build on these
and some additional observations to outline a more general semantics
of event localization. I then outline a procedure that extends the path
metaphor used for motion predicates, distinguishing between the event
locus and the spatial aspect of an event. In the process, I discuss how
localization is supervenient upon the participants in the events.

Keywords: Spatial Language, Event semantics, Qualitative spatial reasoning

1 Introduction

This paper discusses an issue of some importance to both qualitative spatial
reasoning (QSR) as well as natural language semantics. The aim of this brief
note is to discuss procedures for identifying where events, as expressed in nat-
ural language, are located in space. While much fundamental work has been
done on modeling the topological and orientatational relations between objects
viewed as regions ([30, 3, 7, 1]), the theoretical foundations for a similar calculus
of relations for locating eventualities is less developed. Similarly, in linguistic
semantics research, the question of where events are spatially located has also
been generally neglected, when compared to the effort devoted to the temporal
and aspectual interpretation of eventualities. Some notable exceptions to this
involve the analysis of motion events, where identification of the path is an in-
herent aspect of the semantics of the predicate and associated composition with
spatial prepositional phrases ([8, 38, 23, 39, 29]).



This paper presents some of the issues pertaining to the semantics of event
localization. For the purpose of this paper, event localization will refer to the
process of identifying the spatial extent of an event, activity, or situation, what
we refer to as its minimum embedding space. The focus here will be on the inter-
pretation of natural language descriptions of events, and not on event recognition
and classification from other modalities, such as sensor arrays or visual input.
We argue that the localization of an event appears to depend on three major
semantic factors: (i) the internal structure of the event; (ii) its semantic type;
and (iii) the specific role that the event participants play in the event. Local-
ization can be defined as the computation of the minimum embedding space,
the event locus, for the participants in an event. This is the minimum bound-
ing region within which the event transpires, including all relevant participants.
Within this space, it is often the case that a relative location is linguistically sin-
gled out, what we call the spatial aspect of the event. As we demonstrate, when
this happens, a semantic distinction is introduced between the locus (figure)
and its aspect (ground). We outline the localization procedure for both motion
and some non-motion predicates in language, somewhat informally, due to space
limitations.

2 Previous Work on Locating Events

To begin, consider the distinction typically made in linguistics in how time and
space are interpreted semantically. In earlier philosophical discussions, it was
widely assumed (e.g., Vendler [37]) that events are interpreted relative to times,
while objects are interpreted relative to locations. For example, the eventualities
in (1) can each be temporally situated, giving rise to distinct interpretations in
tense, aspect, or genericity.

(1) a. Maria left for Warsaw.
b. Piotr finished his book.
c. Fred was eating a sandwich.
d. Barbara had invited me before Eva wrote me.
e. Americans like pizza and beer.
f. Dinosaurs roamed the earth.

Vendler distinguishes such temporal localizations for events from object localiza-
tions. Consider the sentences in (2), where the objects participate in an inherent
spatial relation, which can be temporally anchored.

(2) a. My dog is in the backyard.
b. There’s milk in the glass.
c. The projector is on the table.
d. The screen is behind me.

Yet, just as it is possible to temporally anchor the spatial relations in (2), it is
clear that language allows for events to be anchored in space with regularity (cf.
(3)).



(3) a. The party was in the basement.
b. The committee held a vote in the conference room.
c. The dog walked on the carpet with his dirty paws.
d. Sophie danced in her bedroom.

Still, Vendler (1967) believed that the predicative operations involved in locating
objects in space should not be associated with events. This “to each their own”
philosophy forces the spatial properties of events (as well as the temporal aspects
of objects) to be derivative in nature. We return to this below, with Davidson’s
([6]) introduction of events as first-class objects in semantics.

Briefly, two approaches to temporal anchoring can be distinguished: (i) time
as modality; and (i) the method of temporal arguments. For the former ap-
proach, a sentence such as John was happy is treated as a proposition scoped
by an operator, P : P (happy(john)) ([25, 15, 22]). The method of temporal argu-
ments reifies the temporal index which is used to anchor the evaluation of the
proposition:

(4) ∃t[hungry(john, t) ∧ t < now]

This method was first explored in Russell [33] and Kim [17], but did not become
common until McCarthy and Hayes [21] incorporated it into the situation cal-
culus for automatic reasoning systems. By individuating the proposition as an
event, Davidson’s proposal is similar, in that it employs the “method of argu-
ments” with an additional parameter, e.

The methods available for locating events in space are similar to those em-
ployed for time: namely, using a modality or adding an argument. Treating space
as a modality has been explored since Rescher and Garson [32]. For example, to
express the location in the sentence, John met Mary, a modal operator Pα can
be employed, denoting, e.g., “some location other than here”:

(5) Pα(meet(john,mary))

The method of spatial arguments proposes a location argument to a relation, as
shown below:

(6) ∃l[meet(john,mary, l) ∧ in(l,Boston)]

This has been standard within situation calculus fragments for naive theories
of physics (e.g., Hayes [10]), and is the starting point for defining topological
relations within the qualitative spatial reasoning (QSR) community [30, 3] as
well.

It is also the approach taken by Davidson [5] in his semantics of action sen-
tences. Starting with the assumption that an event is a first-order individual, e,
participating in the argument structure of a predicate, P (x1, . . . , xn, e), David-
son identifies the location of an event as a relation between the event variable
and an introduced location argument, l, e.g., loc(e, l). For example, consider the
sentence and logical form below, ignoring for now, issues of tense.



(7) a. John sang in a field.
b. ∃e∃l[sing(j, e) ∧ in(e, l) ∧ field(l)]

Regardless of the specific spatial relation present (on, under, in back of), David-
son’s program is focused on relating the event to an object or location, rather
than actually localizing the action itself. To illustrate this, consider the sentences
in (8) and the predicated locations of the contained events.

(8) a. Mary ate her lunch under a bridge.
b. The robbery happened behind the building.

Notice that the events are positioned relative to the other objects and are not
actually located in space.

Because of their grammatical and semantic import, linguistic interest in iden-
tifying the locations of events has focused largely on motion verbs and the role
played by paths. Jackendoff [12, 14] elaborates a semantics for motion verbs in-
corporating explicit reference to the path traversed by the mover, from source to
destination (goal) locations. Talmy’s ([34, 35]) work develops a similar conceptual
template, where the path followed by the figure is integral to the conceptualiza-
tion of the motion event frame. Hence, the path can be identified as the central
element in defining the location of the event. Related to this idea, both Zwarts
[38] and Pustejovsky and Moszkowicz [29] develop mechanisms for dynamically
creating the path traversed by a mover in a manner of motion predicate, such
as run or drive. Starting with this approach, the localization of a motion event,
therefore, is at least minimally associated with the path created by virtue of the
activity.

In addition to capturing the spatial trace of the object in motion, several
researchers have pointed out that identifying the shape of the path during motion
is also critical for fully interpreting the semantics of movement. Eschenbach et
al [8] discusses the orientation associated with the trajectory, something they
refer to as oriented curves. Motivated more by linguistic considerations, Zwarts
[39] introduces the notion of an event shape, which is the trajectory associated
with an event in space represented by a path. He defines a shape function, which
is a partial function assigning unique paths to those events involving motion or
extension in physical space. This work suggests that the localization of an event
makes reference to orientational as well as configurational factors. Zwarts also
points out that the scalar semantics of degree predicates (such as widen) can be
analyzed through the use of path composition rules [39], as well.

Beyond the work mentioned above, there has been little effort to articulate a
general semantics for event localization that incorporates non-motion predicates.
In this paper, I will propose some initial thoughts on what such a model should
look like. The approach I take here is based on two distinct but interacting
observations. First, I extend the path metaphor to non-movement events. This
forces us to look at the various regions associated with the event participants, and
the interactions between the participants. Secondly, I draw a distinction between
the “relative spatial anchoring” of Davidson’s analysis, and the actual event



localization, which is the minimal location within which the action or event takes
place. I argue that this is analogous to the distinction between an event’s tense
and its aspect within the temporal domain. On this view, Davidson’s relative
locational interpretation can be viewed as the reference location of the event,
i.e., the spatial aspect. Similarly, the actual region encompassing the event is
analogous to the tense (event time), and it is this region that we refer to as the
event locus.

In the next section, we will see that the determination of the event locus
is supervenient on the participants of the event, but not as transparently or
predictably as might be expected.

3 A Procedure for Event Localization

As mentioned above, there are two observations that will be spelled out in this
section: (i) the path metaphor can be extended to account for the localization
of many non-movement activities; and (ii) event localization is formally analo-
gous to grammatical tense, while spatial adjunction is analogous to grammatical
aspect.

While Davidson’s theory of action has had enormous influence on the way
linguists and cognitive scientists approach the modification of events, including
spatial predication, alternative views were voiced as early as Kim [18]. Moti-
vated in large part by his theory of event identity, contra Davidson [6], Kim
incorporated localization as an integral component to the definition of an event.
Assume that an event is a structured object, exemplifying a property (or n-adic
relation), at a time, t, as illustrated in (9).

(9) [(x1, . . . , xn, t), P
n]

We can identify the location of an object in the event as: loc(x, t) = rx. Then,
for purposes of event identity, we can construe an event with its localization as:

(10) [(x1, . . . , xn, rx1 , . . . , rxn , t), P
n] or = [([xi], [rxi ], t), P

n]

Accorindg to Kim [19], what we are calling the event localization, le, is superve-
nient on the object locations, rx1 , . . . , rxn , as defined above. This is a significant
step beyond Davidson’s approach since it introduces the supervenience of the
event participants directly into consideration of the event location. However,
since this problem was not as central to Kim’s general program for defining
property exemplication in the role of causation, this line of inquiry is not further
developed in his or his colleagues’ subsequent works, leaving most of our ques-
tions unanswered. First, how are the individual participant regions, xi, composed
or combined to create the proper minimum embedding space over the course of
an event? Second, which participants are relevant in the composition of the em-
bedding space for the event and which should be ignored? Finally, what happens
when the participants to events are abstract objects or complex types? This is



unfortunate, since this perspective on locating events merits further considera-
tion.

The approach adopted by Zwarts [38, 39] can be seen as developing some
of Kim’s original insights into localization, as applied to movement predicates.
Similarly, the generalization of the path metaphor, as taken up in [29, 20] can
be viewed as essentially an extension of these ideas, as well. For the present
discussion, we adopt the analysis given in [29] to introduce the localization of
a motion event. First, we assume that path verbs such as arrive and leave are
inherently different from basic manner-of-motion predicates, such as move, roll,
and walk, in that they make explicit reference to the location that is being moved
away from or toward along an explicit path, p. Manner verbs assume a change of
location while making no explicit mention of a distinguished place. Path verbs
can be identified as transitions, while manner-of-motion verbs can be seen as
processes. Adopting the analysis of manner-of-motion predicates from [29], we
say that a process “leaves a trail” as it is executed. For motion verbs such as
walk or run, this trail is the created object of the path which the mover traverses.
This argument is unexpressed in the syntax but present in the inspection of any
state or trace of the process. Following [29], we treat the path as a program
variable, p̂, to the motion verb, dynamically creating the trail as an ‘initiated”
object from the resource locations, z, as illustrated below:

(11) a. move: eN → (eA ⇀ (eN → s× s))
b. λzλ⇀p̂λx[walk(x, z, p̂)]

We can identify the event localization for a motion predicate as the minimum
embedding space, µ, for the moving object, x, traced over the course of the event.
This includes both the path, p̂, and the object localization for x, rx. We denote
this composition as p̂⊗ rx. For an event, e, with participants, xi, the minimum
embedding space can be computed, somewhat informally, as follows:

(12) a. rxi : The Kimian spatial extent of an object, xi;
b. p̂: The path created by the motion in e;
c. Re: an embedding space (ES) for e, defined as a region containing p̂ and
rxi in a specific configuration, p̂⊗ rxi ;
d. µ, the event locus: the minimum embedding space for e.1

Now that we have established where a motion event is localized, i.e., its lo-
cus, we consider how a reference location can be introduced relative to the locus.
As mentioned before, we refer to this region as the spatial aspect for the event,
because it appears to function in much the same way as grammatical aspect in
the temporal domain. Let us spell out this comparison. Tense is an ordered k-
partitioning of the temporal domain, DT ; further, it is a nominal ordering (past,
present, future). Now, grammatical aspect can be seen as a binary partitioning
relative to this partition. This is one way of interpreting Reichenbach’s (1947)

1 Where µ can be defined as:
∀e∀Re∀µ[[ES(Re, e) ∧Min(µ,Re)]↔ [µ ⊆ Re ∧ ∀y[y ⊆ Re → µ ⊆ y]]].



calculus, utilizing Event (E), Reference (R), and Speech (S) times for classi-
fying tense-aspect combinations in language [31]. To illustrate just part of this
system, notice how Event and Reference times align to distinguish three relative
orderings:

(13) a. Simple Past: E = R, R < S. John ateE,R dinner.
b. Past Perfect. E < R, R < S. John had eatenE dinner before noonR.
c. Past Progressive: R ⊆ E, E < S. John [was eatingE ]R dinner.

In a similar fashion, event localization as expressed in language can be seen as
involving both an initial partitioning over the spatial domain, DS , creating an
event locus (le), as well as an optional subsequent partitioning relative to this
partition, generating a spatial aspect (or reference location, lr) [4]. Movement
events provide a simple illustration of this process, since the locus is a fairly
direct composition of the path p̂ and the mover x, p̂⊗ rxi .2 There are two basic
strategies available to motion verbs for referencing spatial regions pertaining to
an event, and in the process create a partition relative to the locus. These are
presented below in (14).

(14) a. analytic aspect: verb selects a spatial argument;
Mary left the room. John entered the hall.
b. synthetic aspect: verb is modified through PP adjunction;
Mary swam in the pool. John walked to the corner.

Path predicates that select a spatial sub-region of the locus as an argument are
examples of the strategy in (14a) above, while both manner of motion and path
predicates license PP adjunction in (14b). Some examples of how the locus is
distinguished from spatial aspect are presented below.

(15) a. Simple Locus: le = lr. John walkedle,lr .
b. Relative Aspect: le <d lr. John walkedle under the treelr .
c. Embedded Aspect: le ⊆ lr. John walkedle in the buildinglr .
d. Completive Aspect: EC(le, lr), end(lr, p̂). John arrivedle homelr .

John walkedle to the parklr .
3

e. Ingressive Aspect: EC(lr, le), begin(lr, p̂). John walkedle from the parklr .

As pointed out in [29], we can characterize the locus as being telic or atelic,
depending on the nature of p̂ (which is dependent on the verb in composition
with the PP).4 In the next section we illustrate how the localization procedure
extends to non-movement events.

2 Support for this comes from a somewhat related analysis, where Reichenbach’s ref-
erence frame for the temporal domain is extended to spatial frames of reference
Tenbrink [36]. That analysis , however, does not extend to event localization.

3 Spatial distinctions associated with arrive and enter, as well as to and into are
acknowledged but not discussed in the present paper (cf. [12, 13, 23, 9, 39]).

4 Besides the atelicity associated with source PPs, is the distinction between telic and
atelic prepositions [38]: a. Mary swam to the beach; b. Mary swam towards the beach.



4 Non-Movement Event Localization

In this section, we briefly consider what is required to extend the localization
procedure to non-movement events. The discussion will be somewhat program-
matic in nature, due to space limitations. Since the path metaphor has already
been applied to the semantics of creation and destruction predicates [27, 28]
within the dynamic logic framework outlined in [29], we begin our discussion
with this semantic class. On this view, verbs of change, such as build, knit, de-
stroy, and break, can be seen as involving the creation or destruction of an object,
seen as the path resulting from the event. For a verb such as knit (John knitted
a sweater.), this path is the created object brought about by order-preserving
transformations as executed in the directed process [28].

Thus, the event localization for creation predicates can be analyzed as the
minimum embedding space for the created object traced over the course of the
event, along with the other event participants. This is the created object as
path, p̂, in composition with the object localization of the agent argument, x,
i.e., p̂ ⊗ rx. Applying this to other creation predicates, this also accounts for
the dynamically changing spatial extent of a table or a house, as it is being
constructed over a period of time (16).

(16) a. Simple Locus: le = lr. John builtle,lr a housep̂.
b. Embedded Aspect: le ⊆ lr. John builtle a tablep̂ in the basementlr .

Notice that in (16b), the locus of the building event is determined relative to
the embedding reference location, lr, making no commitment as to where the
created object, p̂, is located after the build event; e.g., the table may have gone
into the kitchen when done.5 Compare this to our interpretation of (17).

(17) John build a fence in the backyard.

The intented final placement of the created artifact is not captured by the event
localization procedure, but is rather part of the world knowledge or qualia struc-
ture associated with the object [26].

One closely related verb class that should be briefly mentioned here is the
class of placement predicates. These include verbs such as put, place, and plant.
Notice that the localization of the event in (18) is similar to a path predicate,
such as enter.

(18) Mary planted a tree in the ground.

Here, the locus is composed of the path, p̂, taken by the plant, x, while the
spatial aspect is an argument selected by the predicate, i.e., lr is the ground,
where end(lr, p̂). The semantics of the predicate ensures the entailment rx ⊆ lr;
the plant ends up “in” the ground.

One problem that arises with the procedure for event localization for causative
predicates (such as the change predicates above) concerns the nature of the agent
argument. Namely, when the causal argument is itself an event (or complex type),
the supervenience strategy fails. Consider the following pair of sentences in (19).

5 This is consistent with the syntactic attachment of the PP.



(19) a. Atelic Relative Aspect: le <d lr.
The storm approachedle the shorelr .

b. Embedded Aspect with event agent: le ⊆ lr.
The storm destroyedle the boat in the harborlr .

While the sentence in (19a) treats the storm as a region in motion and has
predictable event localization properties, the sentence in (19b) illustrates that
the locus is not supervenient on the entire object localization of the causing
argument (the storm), but of the local effects of this event: that is, the locus is
restricted to within the harbor, le ⊆ lr, where lr is the harbor. This would no
be possible if the locus were supervenient on the rx associated with the storm,
which would engulf the entire region. Notice that such a “locality” effect is also
operative in other causative examples, such as that below:

(20) The sun killed the grass on the lawn.

With such cases, it appears that the effects of distal causation are computed
locally (through a sort of transitivity operation), leaving the locus of the event
to be proximate to the resulting state.

As our final verb class, we consider briefly perception predicates, such as see
and hear. These pose a particularly interesting challenge to the procedure pre-
sented here because, following [11, 26], such verbs select for event complements.
This introduces the problem of identifying two event distinct loci in a perception
report. Consider the sentences below in (21).

(21) a. John saw an eagle in his backyard.
b. Mary heard an alarm down the street.

Following these analyses, we can distinguish the locality of the experiencing event
from the event being perceived, where each seems to have a localization inde-
pendent of the other. Hence, “the eagle in the backyard” is the event perceived
by John, in his kitchen or wherever. Similar remarks hold for (21b), where the
events have distinct loci. This is an area of considerable complexity, and merits
further research, as the discussion here does it no justice.

5 Conclusion

In this brief note, I hope to have demonstrated that determining the location of
an event is an area of research that has not been pursued as systematically as
temporal localization of events or object localization. Contrary to a Davidsonian
relativist view on localization, I introduce the distinction between an event’s
locus and its aspect, making an analogy to the distinction in the temporal domain
between tense and aspect, or event and reference time. In the process, I have
employed Kim’s original notion of object supervenience to an extended path
metaphor for the location of an event. Many issues remain to be addressed. One
of the most significant gaps in the present analysis is the role of the affordance
space associated with artifactual objects, in order to determine the appropriate
region associated with the appropriate use of objects. Further examination is also
required to clarify the role of locality in the broader class of causative predicates.



Acknowledgements

This research was supported by a grant from the NSF (NSF-IIS 1017765). I
would like to thank Zachary Yochum and Marc Verhagen for their comments
and discussion. All errors and mistakes are, of course, my own.

References

1. Bennett, B., Galton, A.: A unifying semantics for time and events. Arificial Intel-
ligence 153, 13–48 (2004)

2. Chierchia, G.: Structured meanings, thematic roles, and control. Properties, types,
and meaning 2, 131–166 (1988)

3. Cohn, A.G., Renz, J.: Qualitative spatial representation and reasoning 46, 1–2
(2001)

4. Coventry, K.: Saying, seeing and acting: The psychological semantics of spatial
prepositions. Psychology Press (2004)

5. Davidson, D.: Intending. Essays on actions and events pp. 83–102 (1980)
6. Davidson, D.: The logical form of action sentences. Essays on actions and events

5, 105–148 (1967)
7. Egenhofer, M., Mark, D.: Modeling conceptual neighborhoods of topological line-

region relations. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 9(5),
555–565 (1995)

8. Eschenbach, C., Habel, C., Kulik, L., et al.: Representing simple trajectories as
oriented curves. In: FLAIRS-99, Proceedings of the 12th International Florida AI
Research Society Conference. pp. 431–436 (1999)

9. Galton, A.: Qualitative Spatial Change. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2000)
10. Hayes, P.J.: Naive physics I: Ontology for liquids. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers

Inc. (1989)
11. Higginbotham, J.: The logic of perceptual reports: An extensional alternative to

situation semantics. The Journal of Philosophy pp. 100–127 (1983)
12. Jackendoff, R.: Semantics and Cognition. MIT Press (1983)
13. Jackendoff, R.: Parts and boundaries. Cognition 41(1), 9–45 (1991)
14. Jackendoff, R.S.: Semantic structures, vol. 18. MIT press (1992)
15. Kamp, J.: Tense logic and the theory of linear order. s.n. (1968),

http://books.google.com/books?id=FURDAAAAIAAJ
16. Kim, J.: Events as property exemplifications. Action theory pp. 159–177
17. Kim, J.: On the psycho-physical identity theory. American Philosophical Quarterly

3(3), 227–235 (1966)
18. Kim, J.: Events and their descriptions: some considerations. Essays in honor of

Carl G. Hempel pp. 198–215 (1969)
19. Kim, J.: Causation, nomic subsumption, and the concept of event. The Journal of

Philosophy pp. 217–236 (1973)
20. Mani, I., Pustejovsky, J.: Interpreting Motion: Grounded Representations for Spa-

tial Language. Oxford University Press (2012)
21. McCarthy, J., Hayes, P.: Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of ar-

tificial intelligence. Stanford University (1968)
22. Montague, R.: The proper treatment of quantification in ordinary english. Ap-

proaches to natural language 49, 221–242 (1973)



23. Muller, P.: A qualitative theory of motion based on spatio-temporal primitives.
In: Cohn, A.G., Schubert, L., Shapiro, S.C. (eds.) KR’98: Principles of Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning, pp. 131–141. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco,
California (1998)

24. Parsons, T.: Events in the Semantics of English. A Study in Subatomic Semantics.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (1990)

25. Prior, A.: Time and modality. 1957. My present modification of the position there
stated owes much to PT Geach’s criticism in the Cambridge Review p. 543 (1957)

26. Pustejovsky, J.: The Generative Lexicon. Bradford Book, Mit Press (1995)
27. Pustejovsky, J., Jezek, E.: Scale shifting and compositionality. In: Proceedings

of Scalarity in Verb-Based Constructions. Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf,
Germany (2011)

28. Pustejovsky, J., Jezek, E.: Verbal patterns of change. In: Osswald, R., Löbner, S.
(eds.) Scalarity in Verb-Based Constructions. Oxford University Press (2013)

29. Pustejovsky, J., Moszkowicz, J.: The qualitative spatial dynamics of motion. The
Journal of Spatial Cognition and Computation (2011)

30. Randell, D., Cui, Z., Cohn, A.: A spatial logic based on regions and connections. In:
Kaufmann, M. (ed.) Proceedings of the 3rd Internation Conference on Knowledge
Representation and REasoning. pp. 165–176. San Mateo (1992)

31. Reichenbach, H.: Symbolic logic. Berkeley: University of California (1947)
32. Rescher, N., Garson, J.: Topological logic. The Journal of Symbolic Logic 33(4),

537–548 (1968)
33. Russell, B.: The principles of mathematics. WW Norton & Company (1903)
34. Talmy, L.: How language structures space. In: Pick, H., Acredolo, L. (eds.) Spatial

Orientation: Theory, Research, and Application. Plenum Press (1983)
35. Talmy, L.: Towards a cognitive semantics. MIT Press (2000)
36. Tenbrink, T.: Reference frames of space and time in language. Journal of Prag-

matics 43(3), 704–722 (2011)
37. Vendler, Z.: Linguistics in philosophy. Cornell University Press Ithaca (1967)
38. Zwarts, J.: Prepositional aspect and the algebra of paths. Linguistics and Philos-

ophy 28(6), 739–779 (2005)
39. Zwarts, J.: Event shape: Paths in the semantics of verbs (2006)


