



















































Evaluating (and Improving) Sentence Alignment under Noisy Conditions


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 484–493,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013 c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Evaluating (and Improving) Sentence Alignment under Noisy Conditions

Omar Zaidan
Microsoft Research, USA
ozaidan@cs.jhu.edu

Vishal Chowdhary
Microsoft Research, USA

vishalc@microsoft.com

Abstract

Sentence alignment is an important step
in the preparation of parallel data. Most
aligners do not perform very well when
the input is a noisy, rather than a highly-
parallel, document pair. Evaluating align-
ers under noisy conditions would seem to
require creating an evaluation dataset by
manually annotating a noisy document for
gold-standard alignments. Such a costly
process hinders our ability to evaluate
an aligner under various types and lev-
els of noise. In this paper, we propose
a new evaluation framework for sentence
aligners, which is particularly suitable for
noisy-data evaluation. Our approach is
unique as it requires no manual labeling,
instead relying on small parallel datasets
(already at the disposal of MT researchers)
to generate many evaluation datasets that
mimic a variety of noisy conditions. We
use our framework to perform a compre-
hensive comparison of three aligners un-
der noisy conditions. Furthermore, our
framework facilitates the fine-tuning of a
state-of-the-art sentence aligner, allowing
us to substantially increase its recall rates
by anywhere from 5% to 14% (absolute)
across several language pairs.

1 Introduction

Virtually all training pipelines of statistical ma-
chine translation systems expect training data to
be in the form of a sequence of parallel sentence
pairs. This means that a pair of parallel documents
must first be segmented into a sequence of aligned
sentence pairs, discarding or combining sentences
when needed, and aligning sentences as appropri-
ate. The performance and output of an SMT sys-
tem is directly dependent on the amount and qual-

ity of available training data. Therefore, it is crit-
ical to perform this sentence alignment step prop-
erly, ensuring both high recall (to have as much
training data as possible) and high precision (to
avoid noisy training data).

While sentence aligners achieve excellent per-
formance on highly-parallel, clean data, the task is
much more difficult under noisy conditions. Some
prior work has investigated evaluation under noisy
conditions (see section 6), but the major focus of
prior work has been the clean-data scenario, where
accuracy rates exceed 98% (e.g. Simard et al.
(1993), Moore (2002)). For one thing, this meant
that the various sentence alignment algorithms dif-
fer only slightly in absolute terms. Similarly, fine-
tuning any one of those algorithms might not seem
to have an impact on performance. More impor-
tantly, this also meant that we do not have a clear
understanding of how well these algorithms would
perform under noisy conditions.

Arguably, there was little need to examine sen-
tence alignment of noisy datasets in early MT re-
search, since almost all training data came from
high-quality, highly-parallel sources, such as UN
documents or parliamentary proceedings.1 How-
ever, recent efforts have attempted to utilize web
resources and non-perfectly-parallel texts, such as
Wikipedia articles and news stories (e.g. Resnik
and Smith (2003), Utiyama and Isahara (2003),
Munteanu and Marcu (2005), and Smith et al.
(2010)). Such resources naturally contain signifi-
cantly more noise, at a level that would render sen-
tence alignment a much less straightforward task.

Because sentence alignment algorithms had
usually been evaluated under a clean-data sce-
nario, there are fewer empirical results to guide
those who wish to extract parallel data from noisy

1Also, parallel datasets created explicitly for MT research
(by having a source corpus translated into the target language)
would be already sentence-aligned by mere construction if
the source side is split into sentences beforehand.

484



sources. Furthermore, there is also no easy way
to fine-tune an aligner of interest. For building
the Microsoft Translation service, we are con-
tinuously mining inherently-noisy web resources,
from which we extract MT training data for dozens
of the world’s languages. Therefore, having a
principled method to evaluate and fine-tune our
aligner was critical.

In this paper, we describe our framework for
evaluating sentence alignment under noisy con-
ditions. We use this framework to examine and
evaluate the Moore alignment algorithm (Moore,
2002), which was empirically shown to be state-
of-the-art under clean conditions, and which we
regularly use to extract parallel data from web re-
sources to create training data. We perform a com-
prehensive comparison of this aligner against two
other algorithms, and furthermore use our frame-
work to fine-tune the algorithm along dimensions
of interest (such as the aligner’s search parame-
ters) by quantitatively evaluating how the aligner’s
performance is affected by such changes.

The paper is organized as follows. We briefly
define sentence alignment and existing approaches
in section 2. We then discuss the evaluation of
alignment algorithms in section 3, and present our
evaluation framework. In section 4, we perform a
comparative assessment of three alignment algo-
rithms using our framework, illustrating the dif-
ferences between them under noisy conditions. In
section 5, we present two additional applications
of our framework, namely fine-tuning an aligner
and performing training data cleanup. Finally, we
give an overview in section 6 of prior work that
has tackled the specific issue of evaluating sen-
tence aligners.

2 Sentence Alignment

Sentence alignment is the process by which a pair
of parallel documents lacking explicit sentence
links are used to extract a parallel dataset consist-
ing of sentence pairs that are translations of each
other. Specifically, let S and T be the document
pair to be aligned, with S composed of the sen-
tence sequence s1, s2, ..., sm, and T composed of
the sentence sequence t1, t2, ..., tn. A sentence
alignment of S and T is a segmentation of each
of S and T into p sequences s′1, s

′
2, ..., s

′
p and

t′1, t
′
2, ..., t

′
p such that the following holds about the

segmentation of S: (a similar set of conditions ex-
ist that correspond to T )

• s′i = CS [a, b) for some 1 ≤ a ≤ b ≤ m ∀i

• s′1 = CS [1, b) for some b >= 1

• s′p = CS [a,m) for some a <= m

• If s′i = CS [a, b), then s′i+1 = CS [b, c)

• If s′i = CS [x, x), then t′i = CT [y, z) such
that y 6= z

Above, CS [a, b) is the concatenation of
sa, sa+1, ..., sb−1, which indicates the possibility
of aligning multiple source sentences to a single
sentence (or combined sequence of sentences) on
the target side. Note that CS [a, a) is the empty
string, which indicates deletion on the target side
(i.e. a target sentence is aligned to the empty
string). The last condition disallows aligning an
empty string to another empty string, thus elimi-
nating the possibility for an infinite segmentation
sequence.

Note that the result of this segmentation is q
(non-empty) sentence pairs, where q <= p (and
naturally q <= m and q <= n). The deleted sen-
tences, each aligned with an empty string, are left
out of the resulting parallel corpus.

2.1 Approaches to Sentence Alignment
Tiedemann (2007) and Santos (2011) each pro-
vide a broad overview of sentence alignment, giv-
ing a timeline of relevant research and discussing
algorithms and performance metrics for sentence
alignment. In general, there are two main ap-
proaches to sentence alignment: length-based and
lexical-based.

In length-based alignment approaches (e.g.
Brown et al. (1991), Gale and Church (1991), and
Kay and Röscheisen (1993)), the aligner relies on
a probabilistic model that describes the source-
to-target sentence length ratio for a pair of corre-
sponding sentences. Such a model would account
both for the average or typical length ratio as well
as its variance. The aligner proceeds to align sen-
tence pairs such that the output would be highly
likely under the length ratio model.

In lexical-based alignment approaches (e.g.
Chen (1993), Melamed (1997), Simard and Pla-
mondon (1998), Menezes and Richardson (2001),
and the LDC alignment tool, Champollion (Ma,
2006)), the aligner relies on a probabilistic model
that describes the lexical similarity between a pair
of sentences. The model could either be a fully-
trained translation model, or a simpler bilingual

485



lexicon that finds corresponding word pairs. In
contrast to length-based algorithms, lexical-based
approaches typically require external bilingual re-
sources, and usually perform better.

Previous work on sentence alignment varies
across a few other dimensions as well. Some
lexical-based algorithms build the needed bilin-
gual resources from the very dataset that is to
be aligned, whereas other approaches assume that
such resources are externally provided. Another
dimension is the need to provide anchor points
within the text to be aligned, such as in the form
of paragraph-level alignment. Such anchor points
are typically needed to restrict the search space to
a manageable size.

Another group of aligners take a hybrid ap-
proach, relying both on sentence length and lexical
similarity (e.g. Zhao and Vogel (2002)). One no-
table example is the algorithm by Moore (2002),
which has the benefit of relying only on the in-
put data when training the lexical similarity model,
rather than needing external resources (bilingual
lexicon or parallel training data) for that purpose.
The Moore algorithm is a state-of-the-art algo-
rithm, and has been used, for example, to align
the data for the Europarl corpus (Koehn, 2005),
and is often a strong baseline in papers propos-
ing new alignment algorithms (e.g. Braune and
Fraser (2010)). In section 4, we use our pro-
posed framework to evaluate Moore’s algorithm,
and compare it against two other aligners, illustrat-
ing our framework’s utility as a comparative tool.

3 Evaluating Sentence Alignment
Algorithms under Noisy Conditions

In much of the prior work mentioned above in 2.1,
and in other comparative evaluation work (e.g.
Simard et al. (1993), Langlais et al. (1998), and
Véronis and Langlais (2000)), sentence align-
ment algorithms were evaluated using a manually-
created gold-standard dataset. This is done by
taking a parallel dataset, and manually annotating
sentence pairs that are translations of each other
(and should therefore be aligned). This evaluation
dataset is provided as input to the aligner, which
is evaluated based on the precision and recall of
its output, as measured against the set of hand-
annotated sentence pairs.

While this is a reasonable approach that mir-
rors the evaluation model in many other tasks
within machine learning (i.e. to manually create

an evaluation set with gold-standard labels, based
on which the learner’s output is judged), it suffers
from some drawbacks.

For one thing, all the difficulties of creating an
evaluation dataset apply here as well. Most signif-
icantly, manually labeling sentence pairs is costly
and time-consuming. This problem is magnified
in the context of machine translation, since one
should ideally evaluate a sentence alignment algo-
rithm under several language pairs, rather than a
single one, requiring the creation of several evalu-
ation sets, rather than a single one.

Furthermore, prior work usually used a fairly
clean dataset to annotate, on which it is relatively
easy for an aligner to achieve very high precision
and recall rates. This means that differences be-
tween algorithms are sometimes fairly small in ab-
solute terms, making it difficult to attribute such
differences to the algorithms themselves or to sta-
tistical noise.

The noisy-data scenario is extremely important
in the web domain. The web is a huge repository
of parallel documents that machine translation
systems leverage for training data, and we continu-
ally extract content from noisy online sources. Un-
like the above evaluation setup, we are concerned
with scenarios where the data has a relatively high
degree of noise, where by ‘noise’ we mean both
non-perfect translations but also additional content
on one side that is not translated at all. Both kinds
of noise should be dealt with appropriately: the
first introduces imperfect training data, while the
second could eliminate good translations, or might
send word alignment into a frenzy.

Because prior work mostly focused on the
clean-data scenario, it is unknown whether previ-
ous evaluations would hold for noisy input. This
makes it difficult to judge how these algorithms
would compare to each other under more noisy
conditions, or when any other experimental di-
mension is varied, such as domain and the lan-
guage pair in question.

3.1 Creating Noisy Datasets for Evaluation
Purposes

How can we create a noisy-data scenario under
which to evaluate a sentence alignment algorithm?
One approach is to mimic prior work: in a dataset
that is known to be noisy, have an annotator select
the sentence pairs that should be aligned to each
other. However, this approach would be expensive

486



and time-consuming.
We propose a completely different approach.

Rather than attempting to annotate corresponding
sentences in a dataset that is known to be noisy,
we deliberately introduce noise into a dataset that
is already perfectly-aligned (and for which, as a
consequence, we already know the sentence cor-
respondence).

Specifically, we start with a parallel dataset
D that we know to be perfectly-aligned. Such
datasets are abundant and readily available for MT
researchers in the form of a myriad of tuning and
test datasets across many language pairs and do-
mains. We introduce noise into D (using any of
the methods described below and detailed in sub-
section 4.2) to obtain a modified dataset D′. The
source side of D′ is a subset of the source side of
D (possibly reordered), and the same holds for the
target side. Since we know what the correct sen-
tence alignments are in D, we also know, by mere
construction, what the correct alignments in D′ are
as well. This allows us to easily compute precision
and recall of a sentence alignment algorithm when
it is given D′ as input, without the need to collect
a single annotation.

We employ several methods to create a noisy
dataset D′ from a perfectly-aligned dataset D:2

• Clean dataset. The source and target sides of
D′ are exactly the unaltered source and target
sides of D. This represents the easiest test set
for a sentence aligner, as the test set consists
entirely of 1-to-1 mappings, all of which fall
exactly along the search matrix diagonal.

• Random deletions. The source side of D′ is
a subset of the source side of D, where the
number of discarded sentences is determined
by a source deletion rate dels. For example,
for a dataset D with 1000 sentences on the
source side and dels = 0.10, the source side
of D′ consists of 900 randomly-chosen sen-
tences from the source side of D (with no re-
ordering). The target side of D′ is created
similarly, using a target deletion rate delt.
Note that the deletion on the target side is
done independently from the deletion on the

2In a few of our experiments, we make use of two datasets
(that are non-overlapping and non-related), say D1 and D2,
to create D′. The way we frame the creation of D′, as a map-
ping from a single dataset D, still applies here: D is simply
the concatenation of D1 and D2.

source side. That is, the probability of delet-
ing the ith sentence on the target side is delt,
regardless of whether the ith sentence on the
source side was deleted or not.

• Random combinations. The source and tar-
get sides of D′ are the same as those from
D, but with random consecutive pairs of sen-
tences combined into a single sentence. The
degree to which sentences are combined is
determined by source and target combination
rates combs and combt. For example, for a
dataset D with 1000 sentences on the source
side and combs = 0.10, 100 sentence pairs
(each consisting of consecutive sentences)
are chosen randomly, and each pair is com-
bined into a single sentence, yielding a set
of 900 source sentences in D′. The goal of
this scenario is to test the aligner’s ability to
recover 1-to-many and many-to-1 mappings,
rather than focusing solely on 1-to-1 map-
pings.3 As with random deletions, the combi-
nation processes on the source side and on the
target side are independent from each other.

• Randomized order. The source side of D′
consists of the source side of D, but in ran-
dom order. The target side of D is also ran-
domized.

• Length-aligned from same dataset. The
source side of D′ is exactly the same as the
source side of D. The noise is introduced
into the target side, where all the target sen-
tences from D are preserved, but they are re-
ordered. The reordering is not completely
stochastic. Rather, an attempt is made to have
the sentences length-aligned as much as pos-
sible. This is somewhat of an adversarial sce-
nario, since a length-based alignment method
would align too many sentences that are com-
pletely unrelated to each other.

• Different datasets. The dataset D′ is formed
by taking two datasets D1 and D2, and align-
ing the source side of D1 with the target side
of D2, and vice versa. A good sentence
aligner would deem that the source and tar-
get sides are unrelated, yielding a very low
alignment rate.

3With high enough combination rates, many-to-many
mappings arise as well.

487



4 Experimental Results

Even though this paper is not mainly concerned
with comparing aligners to each other, we utilize
our proposed framework and apply it to three dif-
ferent aligners as a demonstration. In this section,
we describe the aligners to be compared, and pro-
vide specific details about how our test sets were
generated. We then describe the metrics we use,
and present results based on these metrics.

4.1 Sentence Aligners

The first aligner (LEN) is a length-based aligner
based on the algorithm described in Brown et al.
(1991). It segments the source and target sides
by finding the highest-likelihood segmentation ac-
cording to a model describing the relationship be-
tween source sentence length and target sentence
length. In particular, this relationship is modeled
using a Poisson distribution that has as its mean
the length ratio observed in the dataset to align.4

The second aligner (MRE) is based on Moore’s
algorithm (Moore, 2002), which makes use of the
length-based aligner’s output to build a tentative
model 1. Moore’s algorithm takes the output from
this “first phase” and builds a bilingual lexicon that
allows it to compute translation model scores. For
a given pair of sentences, the likelihood that they
are translations of each other is now computed
based not only on their lengths, but also on their
lexical similarity.

The third aligner (MRE+) is similar to the sec-
ond aligner, but uses a much stronger translation
model. The stronger translation model is simply
the translation system that has already been built
for that particular language pair and now helps
aligning new data. While this requires the avail-
ability of external resources, this setup closely re-
sembles the resources we have, given our parallel
training datasets. We note here that our evaluation
datasets have no overlap with the data used to train
the translation models used by MRE+.

4.2 Noisy Dataset Generation

For random deletions, we use six different dele-
tion rates (from 0.00 to 0.25, with 0.05 incre-
ments), both on the source side and the target side,
for a total of 35 test sets. For random combi-
nations, we use four different combination rates
(from 0.00 to 0.15, with 0.05 increments), both

4Note that we follow Moore (2002) in using a Poisson
distribution instead of the Gaussian of Brown et al.

on the source side and the target side, for a to-
tal of 15 test sets. Note that we do not consider
the case when both deletion/combination rates are
0.00, since that mimics the clean-dataset scenario.

For the length-aligned scenario, we align each
source sentence with a randomly-selected sen-
tence from the target side that is closest in length
to that source sentence. (We take the target-to-
source length ratio into consideration, and multi-
ply the source length by that ratio before trying to
find the closest-length target sentence.) If several
target sentences have lengths that are equally close
to the desired length, we pick one at random.

We note here that if the source sentences are
processed sequentially, there will be a clustering
of overly long target sentences at the bottom of
the dataset, since such sentences are never chosen
based on length – they are simply too long. There-
fore, we process the source sentences in random
order rather than sequentially, to avoid this clus-
tering of long sentences.

4.3 Performance Metrics
We report the following metrics for quantitatively
evaluating and describing the output of the sen-
tence aligner:

• Precision: of the sentence pairs produced
by the aligner, what percentage are sentence
pairs in the gold-standard dataset D?

• Recall: of the sentence pairs in the gold-
standard dataset D, what percentage are pro-
duced by the aligner?

• Alignment rate: what proportion of the sen-
tences in the input dataset D′ were aligned
by the aligner? Due to the possibility that the
source and target sides of D′ have different
sizes, there are two alignment rates, and we
report their average.5

Higher precision and higher recall are, by defi-
nition, indicators of better performance. This can-
not be said of the alignment rate. For instance,
consider the noisy deletion scenario of 3.1 above.
By mere construction of D′, there will be source
(resp. target) sentences that should not be aligned
to anything on the target (resp. source) side, since
we deliberately deleted the corresponding sen-
tence. In such cases, an alignment rate of 100%

5Of course, the dataset returned by the aligner always has
source and target sides of equal sizes.

488



Language Test Scenario LEN MRE MRE+
Pair

Clean (no noise) 100%, 82%, 82% 100%, 85%, 85% 100%, 99%, 99%
dels = delt = 0.05 100%, 46%, 44% 99%, 71%, 68% 100%, 96%, 91%

EN-ES combs = combt = 0.05 100%, 39%, 38% 99%, 66%, 64% 100%, 92%, 89%
Randomized 0%, 0%, 1% 0%, 0%, 4% 34%, 1%, 4%
Length-aligned 0%, 0%, 82% 0%, 0%, 15% 0%, 0%, 7%
Clean (no noise) 100%, 55%, 55% 100%, 60%, 60% 100%, 89%, 89%
dels = delt = 0.05 99%, 27%, 26% 99%, 44%, 42% 100%, 82%, 78%

EN-AR combs = combt = 0.05 99%, 22%, 21% 99%, 41%, 39% 99%, 77%, 74%
Randomized N/A, 0%, 0% 17%, <1%, <1% 26%, <1%, 1%
Length-aligned 0%, 0%, 59% 0%, 0%, 9% 5%, <1%, 2%
Clean (no noise) 100%, 66%, 66% 100%, 72%, 72% 100%, 97%, 97%
dels = delt = 0.05 100%, 40%, 39% 99%, 56%, 55% 100%, 92%, 88%

EN-CH combs = combt = 0.05 99%, 35%, 34% 99%, 52%, 50% 99%, 87%, 82%
Randomized 0%, 0%, <1% 0%, 0%, <1% 29%, <1%, 2%
Length-aligned 0%, 0%, 62% 0%, 0%, 13% 2%, <1%, 5%
Clean (no noise) 100%, 68%, 68% 100%, 72%, 72% 100%, 95%, 95%

Average dels = delt = 0.05 100%, 38%, 36% 99%, 57%, 55% 100%, 90%, 86%
(over the combs = combt = 0.05 99%, 32%, 31% 99%, 53%, 51% 99%, 85%, 82%
3 LP’s) Randomized 0%, 0%, <1% 6%, <1%, 2% 30%, 1%, 2%

Length-aligned 0%, 0%, 68% 0%, 0%, 12% 2%, <1%, 5%

Table 1: Results of the comparative experiment of the three aligners. For brevity, we report the results
for only five scenarios (per language pair and aligner) out of the more than fifty scenarios we propose.
Each cell contains three percentages: precision, recall, and alignment rate. The N/A precision value for
LEN in the EN-AR randomized scenario indicates the aligner produced no output.

for example (i.e. all input sentences were aligned
to some other sentence) is indicative of pervasive
alignment rather than good performance.6

Hence, alignment rate is not a performance
measure in the conventional sense, as it is not an
objective to be maximized or minimized. Still, it is
a useful descriptor that sheds light on the aligner’s
behavior, as we see in the next subsection.

4.4 Results

We carried out experiments covering three lan-
guage pairs: English-Spanish, English-Arabic,
and English-Chinese. The comparative experi-
ment is quite telling, and the results (Table 1) point
to consistent and noticeable differences between
the three examined aligners. While all aligners
have very high alignment precision rates in non-
adversary scenarios, always exceeding 99%, the
difference is in how well they recover sentence
pairs that should be aligned to each other, illus-

6Even an oracle aligner with perfect precision and recall
will almost surely have an alignment rate less than 100% (or
even 90%) when D′ is constructed using high deletion rates.

trated by significant differences in recall rates.
The clearest trend is that the length-based al-

gorithm (LEN) performs worse than Moore’s al-
gorithm (MRE), which in turn benefits quite a bit
when it’s aided by an external strong translation
model (MRE+). It is worth pointing out that the gap
between MRE and MRE+ is typically larger than the
gap between LEN and MRE, suggesting the impor-
tant of external bilingual resources to aid the sen-
tence aligner.

The results of the adversary scenarios (random-
ized and length-aligned) are particularly interest-
ing. Looking at precision and recall alone, it might
seem that there is not much to separate the three
algorithms. For example, they all have 0% pre-
cision and 0% recall in the length-aligned EN-ES
scenario (fifth row of Table 1). However, looking
at the alignment rate, we find that LEN was prone
to over-aligning the data, having an (unnecessarily
very high) alignment rate of 82%. On the other
hand, MRE and MRE+, have much lower alignment
rates of 15% and 7%, respectively. This means
that they would introduce only a fraction of the

489



bad data that LEN would, which is a great advan-
tage for MRE and especially MRE+.

5 Applications of the Evaluation
Framework

In the previous section, we utilized our framework
to perform a comparison between three different
aligners, by evaluating them under various noisy-
data circumstances. In this section, we use our
framework in two more applications relevant to
sentence alignment and machine translation.

5.1 Fine-tuning Aligner Parameters

We explore using the evaluation setup to fine-tune
the parameters of the MRE+ algorithm. Lacking
a principled way to evaluate the aligner’s output,
it was not possible to fine-tune the aligner’s var-
ious parameters. Now, equipped with our eval-
uation framework, it is possible to quantitatively
determine the effect of changing the value of any
parameter, and pick the best value. This is prefer-
able to accepting whatever default parameters are
in already place, which are more than likely suit-
able for a specific domain, dataset, or low-to-
nonexistent noise.

5.1.1 Experimental Design
We fine-tune the parameters of the MRE+ algo-
rithm by optimizing its performance on a tuning
dataset generated using the noisy deletion setup,
and then measure its performance on a different
evaluation set that was also generated using the
noisy deletion setup. We investigate two cases,
one with dels = delt = 0.05, and one with
dels = delt = 0.20, to examine the benefit of
fine-tuning both under a relatively low noise level
and under a relatively high noise level.

We optimize the performance of the MRE+ algo-
rithm along three dimensions:

• Prior probabilities (PRIOR). As explained
in section 2, sentence alignment is essentially
a segmentation of the source and target sides
of the parallel dataset. In addition to relying
on length similarity and lexical correspon-
dence, the MRE+ aligner also relies on a set of
prior probabilities for each insert/delete/align
action it could take. By default, the probabil-
ity assigned to deletion and insertion was set
at 0.02. It is reasonable to assume that this
might be too low, especially for highly-noisy

input data, and so this is the first dimension
that we optimize.

• Search beam size (SIZE). The algorithm also
pays attention to the location of a candidate
sentence pair. While positional similarity
does not play a direct role in computing the
alignment probability, the aligner does prune
the search space based on location. For ex-
ample, when considering a sentence half-way
through the source side, only sentences that
are close to the half-way point in the target
side will be considered. How far the aligner
is willing to deviate from the diagonal7 is a
tunable parameter, making it our second di-
mension.

• Alignment threshold (THRESHOLD). The
aligner assigns a probability to each sentence
pair it considers for alignment, reflecting its
confidence that the sentence pair should be
aligned. By default, the aligner eliminates
any sentence pair that fails to meet a thresh-
old of 0.99. This alignment threshold is the
third dimension we optimize, as it should be
lowered or increased to reflect our confidence
in the translation model and/or the variability
of the length-correspondence model.

5.1.2 Experimental Results
The results in Tables 2 and 3 show the benefit of
optimizing the aligner’s parameters. It is bene-
ficial to optimize the prior probabilities and the
alignment threshold, as indicated by higher recall
rates compared to the default values. On the other
hand, the tuning of the search beam size had mini-
mal impact. This indicates that the mistakes made
by the sentence aligner are usually model errors
rather than search error.

The effect of optimizing the prior probabilities
is more pronounced in the high-noise scenario (Ta-
ble 3), where it proves to provide the most gain
over the baseline. Contrast this with the low-noise
scenario (Table 2), where optimizing the align-
ment threshold is at least equally important, if not
more so. This is to be expected, since the de-
fault prior of 0.02 in the high-noise scenario sig-
nificantly underestimates the amount of deletion
that has actually taken place, making the prior the
most important parameter to optimize.

7If we were to create a grid of alignment probabilities, this
pruning of the search space means that grid cells far off the
diagonal of this grid are never considered.

490



Tuned EN-ES EN-AR EN-CH
parameter(s)
None 95.7% 82.4% 92.0%
PRIOR 96.2% 85.6% 93.5%
SIZE 95.8% 82.8% 92.0%
THRESHOLD 96.8% 86.7% 92.9%
All 97.1% 87.5% 93.7%

Table 2: Results of the MRE+ fine-tuning experi-
ment for the 0.05 deletion rate scenario. For clar-
ity, we show only recall rates – all precision rates
are 99% or higher.

Tuned EN-ES EN-AR EN-CH
parameter(s)
None 87.8% 68.1% 81.9%
PRIOR 92.7% 81.5% 88.4%
SIZE 88.0% 68.8% 82.3%
THRESHOLD 89.3% 70.4% 84.3%
All 93.0% 82.8% 90.6%

Table 3: Results of the MRE+ fine-tuning experi-
ment for the 0.20 deletion rate scenario. For clar-
ity, we show only recall rates – all precision rates
are 98% or higher.

It is worth pointing out the work of Yu et al.
(2012), who perform a comparative study of sen-
tence aligners, and show that Moore’s algorithm
does not perform as well as other aligners on a
noisy dataset. As they provide no details regarding
the values of the various parameters of Moore’s
algorithm, one can assume that they used default
values and performed no tuning. Of course, such
tuning would not have been easy to perform, given
the lack of a tuning dataset. This is exactly why
we propose our evaluation framework, so that fu-
ture researchers would not have to guess parame-
ter values or accept default values if they believe
that would lead to suboptimal performance. Given
the results of our experiments, it is conceivable
that the performance of Moore’s algorithm in Yu
et al.’s work (and other algorithms they examined
as well) might have been improved had their pa-
rameters been optimized.

5.2 Using Sentence Alignment to Filter
Training Data

Much of our training data comes from noisy
sources, both online and otherwise. Due to the vast
amount of data, it is not possible to go through it to

discard noisy sentence pairs. Now, equipped with
a better understanding of our sentence aligner and
its performance, we use it to trim down our train-
ing data by eliminating sentence pairs to which the
aligner does not assign a high weight.

5.2.1 Experimental Design
We provide our current training data as input to the
sentence aligner, and treat the output of the aligner
as a filtered version of our data, since sentences
that are discarded (not aligned) by the aligner tend
to be noisy data. To evaluate the effectiveness
of this process, we compare models trained with
pre-filtered data vs. ones trained with the filtered
data. We examine how the filtering affects the
data and model size, since trimming those down
would speed up training and translation. This is
especially relevant for us given the large number
of language pairs for which we train models. To
ensure the translation quality doesn’t degrade, we
measure the effect on translation quality for two
in-house evaluation datasets.

We consider three scenarios:

• No filtering. As a baseline, we use our train-
ing data as-is to train the MT system, without
any filtering.

• Uniform filtering. We provide our training
data as input to the sentence aligner, and use
the aligner’s output as the training data to
train the MT system. (We refer to this as
‘uniform’ filtering in contrast to the next sce-
nario.)

• Filtering ‘web’ datasets. Here, we apply
sentence alignment filtering only to certain
hand-picked datasets that we believe to con-
tain a relatively high level of noise. The
datasets are not picked by inspecting their
content, but simply by deciding that any
dataset that came from online sources (aka
‘web’ data) should undergo filtering.

5.2.2 Experimental Results
We performed our filtering experiments on two
systems, Arabic-English and Urdu-English, with
the results displayed in Tables 4 and 5, respec-
tively. In all cases but one, the BLEU score went
up or down by less than a quarter of a point, indi-
cating general stability in performance quality.

This line of experiments is still in progress. We
plan to carry out another set of experiments where

491



Scenario Data Model Test1 Test2
Size Size BLEU BLEU

No filtering 100% 100% 31.44 30.57
All filtered 94.8% 96.7% 31.29 30.34
Web only 96.6% 96.0% 31.54 30.52

Table 4: Results of the data filtering experiments
for the Arabic-English system.

Scenario Data Model Test1 Test2
Size Size BLEU BLEU

No filtering 100% 100% 38.03 13.32
All filtered 81.6% 85.9% 38.19 13.13
Web only 99.1% 99.1% 37.80 12.78

Table 5: Results of the data filtering experiments
for the Urdu-English system.

the prior deletion probability is customized for
each portion of our training data, based on our
belief of how noisy that portion of the dataset is.
We are also expanding the experiments to include
more language pairs.

6 Related Work

Singh and Husain (2005) evaluate several sentence
alignment algorithms. Their work does have a hint
of proposing a fuller evaluation framework, in that
they have one test scenario where noise is added to
their test set (in the form of adding sentences from
another, unrelated dataset). Another major differ-
ence from our work is that they rely on manual
evaluation of the output, as is the case for much of
prior work.

Moore does point out that the error rates ob-
tained by his algorithm are very low partly because
the data being aligned is highly parallel, there-
fore making it “fairly easy data to align” (Moore
(2002), p. 142). He therefore presents one ad-
ditional experiment where a single block of sen-
tences is deleted from one side of the input to
mimic a noisy condition. While this is similar in
spirit to our noisy deletions scenario, it introduces
only a very small amount of noise in practice. This
is because the deleted sentences are all sequential
rather than being at different positions in the cor-
pus, are all on one side of the corpus, and since
the deletion rate was very low (varied up to only
3.0%). Case in point, the resulting dataset was still
very easy to align, with error rates that remained
below 2.0% even for the baseline aligner.

Yu et al. (2012) use the BAF dataset (Simard,
2006) as an evaluation dataset, since it is known
to contain a relatively high degree of 0-1 and 1-0
beads (what they call “null links”), and use that
dataset specifically to evaluate an alignment al-
gorithm customized to handle noisy data. Simi-
larly, Rosen (2005) evaluates several aligners us-
ing three datasets, one of which is characterized
as being more noisy than the others.

Abdul-Rauf et al. (2012) compare several algo-
rithms to each other, across several datasets, in-
cluding the noisy BAF dataset. However, they do
not propose a full framework for evaluating sen-
tence alignment itself, and instead emphasize the
differences in performance of MT systems trained
on the aligned data.

There is a good amount of prior work deal-
ing with filtering noisy data from parallel datasets.
Taghipour et al. (2010) propose a discriminative
framework to filter noisy sentence pairs from par-
allel data, and apply it to a Farsi-English dataset.
Denkowski et al. (2012) briefly describe a filter-
ing method to clean up training data for a French-
English system submitted to WMT 2010, relying
on deviations from typical values for certain sta-
tistical measures to identify noisy sentence pairs.

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed a new evaluation frame-
work for sentence aligners, which is specifically
designed with noisy-data conditions in mind. Our
approach is unique in that it requires absolutely
no manual labeling, and relies on parallel datasets
that are already in existence. We provide sev-
eral methods to deliberately introduce noise into a
dataset that is already perfectly-aligned, thus cre-
ating a whole host of evaluation test sets quickly
and at no cost.

Our framework allows us and other researchers
to easily compare and contrast several aligners to
each other. Furthermore, our framework can be
used to improve the performance of an aligner by
facilitating the fine-tuning of any or all of its hy-
perparameters.

References

Sadaf Abdul-Rauf, Mark Fishel, Patrik Lambert, San-
dra Noubours, and Rico Sennrich. 2012. Extrin-
sic evaluation of sentence alignment systems. In
Proceedings of LREC Workshop on Creating Cross-

492



language Resources for Disconnected Languages
and Styles, CREDISLAS, pages 6–10.

Fabienne Braune and Alexander Fraser. 2010. Im-
proved unsupervised sentence alignment for sym-
metrical and asymmetrical parallel corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING: Poster Volume, pages 81–89.

Peter F. Brown, Jennifer C. Lai, and Robert L. Mercer.
1991. Aligning sentences in parallel corpora. In
Proceedings of ACL, pages 169–176.

Stanley F. Chen. 1993. Aligning sentences in bilingual
corpora using lexical information. In Proceedings of
ACL, pages 9–16.

Michael Denkowski, Greg Hanneman, and Alon Lavie.
2012. The CMU-Avenue French-English transla-
tion system. In Proceedings of the NAACL Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 261–
266.

William A. Gale and Kenneth W. Church. 1991. A
program for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora.
In Proceedings of ACL, pages 177–184.

Martin Kay and Martin Röscheisen. 1993. Text-
translation alignment. Computational Linguistics,
19(1):121–142.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of MT Summit, pages 79–86.

Philippe Langlais, Michel Simard, and Jean Véronis.
1998. Methods and practical issues in evaluating
alignment techniques. In ACL/COLING, pages 711–
717.

Xiaoyi Ma. 2006. Champollion: A robust parallel text
sentence aligner. In Proceedings of LREC, pages
489–492.

I. Dan Melamed. 1997. A portable algorithm for map-
ping bitext correspondence. In Proceedings of ACL,
pages 305–312.

Arul Menezes and Stephen D. Richardson. 2001. A
best-first alignment algorithm for automatic extrac-
tion of transfer mappings from bilingual corpora. In
Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Data-Driven
Methods in Machine Translation, pages 39–46.

Robert C. Moore. 2002. Fast and accurate sen-
tence alignment of bilingual corpora. In Stephen D.
Richardson, editor, AMTA 2002: From Research to
Real Users, pages 135–144. Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg.

Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2005. Im-
proving machine translation performance by exploit-
ing non-parallel corpora. Computational Linguis-
tics, 31(4):477–504.

Philip Resnik and Noah A. Smith. 2003. The web
as a parallel corpus. Computational Linguistics,
29(3):349–380.

Alexandr Rosen. 2005. In search of the best method
for sentence alignment in parallel texts. In Proceed-
ings of SLOVKO.

André Santos. 2011. A survey on parallel corpora
alignment. In Proceedings of MI-Star, pages 117–
128.

Michel Simard and Pierre Plamondon. 1998. Bilin-
gual sentence alignment: Balancing robustness and
accuracy. Machine Translation, 13:59–80.

Michel Simard, George F. Foster, and Pierre Isabelle.
1993. Using cognates to align sentences in bilin-
gual corpora. In Proceedings of the Conference of
the Centre for Advanced Studies on Collaborative
Research: Distributed Computing - Volume 2, pages
1071–1082.

Michel Simard. 2006. The BAF: A corpus of English-
French bitext. In Proceedings of LREC, pages 489–
494.

Anil Kumar Singh and Samar Husain. 2005. Com-
parison, selection and use of sentence alignment al-
gorithms for new language pairs. In Proceedings of
the ACL Workshop on Building and Using Parallel
Texts, pages 99–106.

Jason R. Smith, Chris Quirk, and Kristina Toutanova.
2010. Extracting parallel sentences from compara-
ble corpora using document level alignment. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL, pages 403–411.

Kaveh Taghipour, Nasim Afhami, Shahram Khadivi,
and Saeed Shiry. 2010. A discriminative approach
to filter out noisy sentence pairs from bilingual cor-
pora. In Proceedings of International Symposium on
Telecommunications, pages 537–541.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2007. Improved sentence alignment
for movie subtitles. In Proceedings of Recent Ad-
vances in Natural Language Processing.

Masao Utiyama and Hitoshi Isahara. 2003. Reliable
measures for aligning japanese-english news articles
and sentences. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 72–79.

Jean Véronis and Philippe Langlais. 2000. Evaluation
of parallel text alignment systems: The ARCADE
project. In Jean Véronis, editor, Parallel Text Pro-
cessing: Alignment and Use of Translation Corpora,
pages 369–388. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Qian Yu, Aurélien Max, and François Yvon. 2012.
Revisiting sentence alignment algorithms for align-
ment visualization and evaluation. In Proceedings
of the LREC Workshop on Building and Using Com-
parable Corpora, pages 10–16.

Bing Zhao and Stephan Vogel. 2002. Adaptive paral-
lel sentences mining from web bilingual news col-
lection. In IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining, pages 745–748.

493


