



















































QCRI-MES Submission at WMT13: Using Transliteration Mining to Improve Statistical Machine Translation


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 219–224,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013 c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

QCRI-MES Submission at WMT13: Using Transliteration Mining to
Improve Statistical Machine Translation

Hassan Sajjad1, Svetlana Smekalova2, Nadir Durrani3,
Alexander Fraser4, Helmut Schmid4

1Qatar Computing Research Institute – hsajjad@qf.org.qa
2University of Stuttgart – smekalsa@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

3University of Edinburgh – dnadir@inf.ed.ac.uk
4Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich – (fraser|schmid)@cis.uni-muenchen.de

Abstract

This paper describes QCRI-MES’s sub-
mission on the English-Russian dataset to
the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. We generate improved
word alignment of the training data by
incorporating an unsupervised translitera-
tion mining module to GIZA++ and build
a phrase-based machine translation sys-
tem. For tuning, we use a variation of PRO
which provides better weights by optimiz-
ing BLEU+1 at corpus-level. We translit-
erate out-of-vocabulary words in a post-
processing step by using a transliteration
system built on the transliteration pairs
extracted using an unsupervised translit-
eration mining system. For the Russian
to English translation direction, we apply
linguistically motivated pre-processing on
the Russian side of the data.

1 Introduction

We describe the QCRI-Munich-Edinburgh-
Stuttgart (QCRI-MES) English to Russian and
Russian to English systems submitted to the
Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation. We experimented using the standard
Phrase-based Statistical Machine Translation
System (PSMT) as implemented in the Moses
toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007). The typical pipeline
for translation involves word alignment using
GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003), phrase extraction,
tuning and phrase-based decoding. Our system is
different from standard PSMT in three ways:

• We integrate an unsupervised transliteration
mining system (Sajjad et al., 2012) into the
GIZA++ word aligner (Sajjad et al., 2011).

So, the selection of a word pair as a correct
alignment is decided using both translation
probabilities and transliteration probabilities.

• The MT system fails when translating out-of-
vocabulary (OOV) words. We build a statis-
tical transliteration system on the translitera-
tion pairs mined by the unsupervised translit-
eration mining system and transliterate them
in a post-processing step.

• We use a variation of Pairwise Ranking Op-
timization (PRO) for tuning. It optimizes
BLEU at corpus-level and provides better
feature weights that leads to an improvement
in translation quality (Nakov et al., 2012).

We participate in English to Russian and Rus-
sian to English translation tasks. For the Rus-
sian/English system, we present experiments with
two variations of the parallel corpus. One set of
experiments are conducted using the standard par-
allel corpus provided by the workshop. In the sec-
ond set of experiments, we morphologically re-
duce Russian words based on their fine-grained
POS tags and map them to their root form. We
do this on the Russian side of the parallel corpus,
tuning set, development set and test set. This im-
proves word alignment and learns better transla-
tion probabilities by reducing the vocabulary size.

The paper is organized as follows. Section
2 talks about unsupervised transliteration mining
and its incorporation to the GIZA++ word aligner.
In Section 3, we describe the transliteration sys-
tem. Section 4 describes the extension of PRO
that optimizes BLEU+1 at corpus level. Section
5 and Section 6 present English/Russian and Rus-
sian/English machine translation experiments re-
spectively. Section 7 concludes.

219



2 Transliteration Mining

Consider a list of word pairs that consists of either
transliteration pairs or non-transliteration pairs.
A non-transliteration pair is defined as a word
pair where words are not transliteration of each
other. They can be translation, misalignment,
etc. Transliteration mining extracts transliteration
pairs from the list of word pairs. Sajjad et al.
(2012) presented an unsupervised transliteration
mining system that trains on the list of word pairs
and filters transliteration pairs from that. It models
the training data as the combination of a translit-
eration sub-model and a non-transliteration sub-
model. The transliteration model is a joint source
channel model. The non-transliteration model as-
sumes no correlation between source and target
word characters, and independently generates a
source and a target word using two fixed uni-
gram character models. The transliteration mining
model is defined as an interpolation of the translit-
eration model and the non-transliteration model.

We apply transliteration mining to the list of
word pairs extracted from English/Russian paral-
lel corpus and mine transliteration pairs. We use
the mined pairs for the training of the translitera-
tion system.

2.1 Transliteration Augmented-GIZA++

GIZA++ aligns parallel sentences at word level. It
applies the IBM models (Brown et al., 1993) and
the HMM model (Vogel et al., 1996) in both direc-
tions i.e. source to target and target to source. It
generates a list of translation pairs with translation
probabilities, which is called the t-table. Sajjad
et al. (2011) used a heuristic-based transliteration
mining system and integrated it into the GIZA++
word aligner. We follow a similar procedure but
use the unsupervised transliteration mining system
of Sajjad et al. (2012).

We define a transliteration sub-model and train
it on the transliteration pairs mined by the unsuper-
vised transliteration mining system. We integrate
it into the GIZA++ word aligner. The probabil-
ity of a word pair is calculated as an interpolation
of the transliteration probability and the transla-
tion probability stored in the t-table of the differ-
ent alignment models used by the GIZA++ aligner.
This interpolation is done for all iterations of all
alignment models.

2.1.1 Estimating Transliteration Probabilities
We use the algorithm for the estimation of translit-
eration probabilities of Sajjad et al. (2011). We
modify it to improve efficiency. In step 6 of Al-
gorithm 1 instead of taking all f that coocur with
e, we take only those that have a word length ra-
tio in range of 0.8-1.2.1 This reduces cooc(e) by
more than half and speeds up step 9 of Algorithm
1. The word pairs that are filtered out from cooc(e)
won’t have transliteration probability pti(f |e). We
do not interpolate in these cases and use the trans-
lation probability as it is.

Algorithm 1 Estimation of transliteration proba-
bilities, e-to-f direction
1: unfiltered data← list of word pairs
2: filtered data←transliteration pairs extracted using unsu-

pervised transliteration mining system
3: Train a transliteration system on the filtered data
4: for all e do
5: nbestTI(e) ← 10 best transliterations for e accord-

ing to the transliteration system
6: cooc(e)← set of all f that cooccur with e in a parallel

sentence with a word length in ratio of 0.8-1.2
7: candidateTI(e)← cooc(e) ∪ nbestTI(e)
8: for all f do
9: pmoses(f, e) ← joint transliteration probability of e

and f according to the transliterator
10: Calculate conditional transliteration probability

pti(f |e)← pmoses(f,e)∑
f′∈CandidateTI(e) pmoses(f ′,e)

2.1.2 Modified EM Training
Sajjad et al. (2011) modified the EM training of
the word alignment models. They combined the
translation probabilities of the IBM models and
the HMM model with the transliteration proba-
bilities. Consider pta(f |e) = fta(f, e)/fta(e) is
the translation probability of the word alignment
models. The interpolated probability is calcu-
lated by adding the smoothed alignment frequency
fta(f, e) to the transliteration probability weight
by the factor λ. The modified translation probabil-
ities is given by:

p̂(f |e) = fta(f, e) + λpti(f |e)
fta(e) + λ

(1)

where fta(f, e) = pta(f |e)fta(e). pta(f |e) is ob-
tained from the original t-table of the alignment
model. fta(e) is the total corpus frequency of e.
λ is the transliteration weight which is defined as
the number of counts the transliteration model gets
versus the translation model. The model is not

1We assume that the words with very different character
counts are less likely to be transliterations.

220



very sensitive to the value of λ. We use λ = 50
for our experiments. The procedure we described
of estimation of transliteration probabilities and
modification of EM is also followed in the oppo-
site direction f-to-e.

3 Transliteration System

The unsupervised transliteration mining system
(as described in Section 2) outputs a list of translit-
eration pairs. We consider transliteration word
pairs as parallel sentences by putting a space af-
ter every character of the words and train a PSMT
system for transliteration. We apply the transliter-
ation system to OOVs in a post-processing step on
the output of the machine translation system.

Russian is a morphologically rich language.
Different cases of a word are generally represented
by adding suffixes to the root form. For OOVs
that are named entities, transliterating the inflected
forms generates wrong English transliterations as
inflectional suffixes get transliterated too. To han-
dle this, first we need to identify OOV named en-
tities (as there can be other OOVs that are not
named entities) and then transliterate them cor-
rectly. We tackle the first issue as follows: If
an OOV word is starting with an upper case let-
ter, we identify it as a named entity. To correctly
transliterate it to English, we stem the named en-
tity based on a list of suffixes ( , , , , , )
and transliterate the stemmed form. For morpho-
logically reduced Russian (see Section 6.1), we
follow the same procedure as OOVs are unknown
to the POS tagger too and are (incorrectly) not re-
duced to their root forms. For OOVs that are not
identified as named entities, we transliterate them
without any pre-processing.

4 PRO: Corpus-level BLEU

Pairwise Ranking Optimization (PRO) (Hopkins
and May, 2011) is an extension of MERT (Och,
2003) that can scale to thousands of parameters.
It optimizes sentence-level BLEU+1 which is an
add-one smoothed version of BLEU (Lin and Och,
2004). The sentence-level BLEU+1 has a bias
towards producing short translations as add-one
smoothing improves precision but does not change
the brevity penalty. Nakov et al. (2012) fixed this
by using several heuristics on brevity penalty, ref-
erence length and grounding the precision length.
In our experiments, we use the improved version
of PRO as provided by Nakov et al. (2012). We

call it PROv1 later on.

5 English/Russian Experiments

5.1 Dataset

The amount of bitext used for the estimation of the
translation model is ≈ 2M parallel sentences. We
use newstest2012a for tuning and newstest2012b
(tst2012) as development set.

The language model is estimated using large
monolingual corpus of Russian ≈ 21.7M sen-
tences. We follow the approach of Schwenk and
Koehn (2008) by training domain-specific lan-
guage models separately and then linearly inter-
polate them using SRILM with weights optimized
on the held-out development set. We divide the
tuning set newstest2012a into two halves and use
the first half for tuning and second for test in or-
der to obtain stable weights (Koehn and Haddow,
2012).

5.2 Baseline Settings

We word-aligned the parallel corpus using
GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) with 5 iterations
of Model1, 4 iterations of HMM and 4 iterations
of Model4, and symmetrized the alignments us-
ing the grow-diag-final-and heuristic (Koehn et al.,
2003). We built a phrase-based machine transla-
tion system using the Moses toolkit. Minimum er-
ror rate training (MERT), margin infused relaxed
algorithm (MIRA) and PRO are used to optimize
the parameters.

5.3 Main System Settings

Our main system involves a pre-processing step
– unsupervised transliteration mining, and a post-
processing step – transliteration of OOVs. For the
training of the unsupervised transliteration min-
ing system, we take the word alignments from
our baseline settings and extract all word pairs
which occur as 1-to-1 alignments (like Sajjad et
al. (2011)) and later refer to them as a list of
word pairs. The unsupervised transliteration min-
ing system trains on the list of word pairs and
mines transliteration pairs. We use the mined pairs
to build a transliteration system using the Moses
toolkit. The transliteration system is used in Algo-
rithm 1 to generate transliteration probabilities of
candidate word pairs and is also used in the post-
processing step to transliterate OOVs.

We run GIZA++ with identical settings as de-
scribed in Section 5.2. We interpolate for ev-

221



GIZA++ TA-GIZA++ OOV-TI

MERT 23.41 23.51 23.60
MIRA 23.60 23.73 23.85
PRO 23.57 23.68 23.70
PROv1 23.65 23.76 23.87

Table 1: BLEU scores of English to Russian ma-
chine translation system evaluated on tst2012 us-
ing baseline GIZA++ alignment and translitera-
tion augmented-GIZA++. OOV-TI presents the
score of the system trained using TA-GIZA++ af-
ter transliterating OOVs

ery iteration of the IBM Model1 and the HMM
model. We had problem in applying smoothing
for Model4 and did not interpolate transliteration
probabilities for Model4. The alignments are re-
fined using the grow-diag-final-and heuristic. We
build a phrase-based system on the aligned pairs
and tune the parameters using PROv1. OOVs are
transliterated in the post-processing step.

5.4 Results
Table 1 summarizes English/Russian results on
tst2012. Improved word alignment gives up to
0.13 BLEU points improvement. PROv1 improves
translation quality and shows 0.08 BLEU point
increase in BLEU in comparison to the parame-
ters tuned using PRO. The transliteration of OOVs
consistently improve translation quality by at least
0.1 BLEU point for all systems.2 This adds to a
cumulative gain of up to 0.2 BLEU points.

We summarize results of our systems trained on
GIZA++ and transliteration augmented-GIZA++
(TA-GIZA++) and tested on tst2012 and tst2013
in Table 2. Both systems use PROv1 for tuning
and transliteration of OOVs in the post-processing
step. The system trained on TA-GIZA++ per-
formed better than the system trained on the base-
line aligner GIZA++.

6 Russian/English Experiments

In this section, we present translation experiments
in Russian to English direction. We morphologi-
cally reduce the Russian side of the parallel data in
a pre-processing step and train the translation sys-
tem on that. We compare its result with the Rus-
sian to English system trained on the un-processed
parallel data.

2We see similar gain in BLEU when using operation se-
quence model (Durrani et al., 2011) for decoding and translit-
erating OOVs in a post-processing step (Durrani et al., 2013).

SYS tst2012 tst2013

GIZA++ 23.76 18.4
TA-GIZA++ 23.87 18.5*

Table 2: BLEU scores of English to Russian ma-
chine translation system evaluated on tst2012 and
tst2013 using baseline GIZA++ alignment and
transliteration augmented-GIZA++ alignment and
post-processed the output by transliterating OOVs.
Human evaluation in WMT13 is performed on
TA-GIZA++ tested on tst2013 (marked with *)

6.1 Morphological Processing

The linguistic processing of Russian involves POS
tagging and morphological reduction. We first tag
the Russian data using a fine grained tagset. The
tagger identifies lemmas and the set of morpholog-
ical attributes attached to each word. We reduce
the number of these attributes by deleting some
of them, that are not relevant for English (for ex-
ample, gender agreement of verbs). This gener-
ates a morphologically reduced Russian which is
used in parallel with English for the training of
the machine translation system. Further details on
the morphological processing of Russian are de-
scribed in Weller et al. (2013).

6.1.1 POS Tagging

We use RFTagger (Schmid and Laws, 2008) for
POS tagging. Despite the good quality of tagging
provided by RFTagger, some errors seem to be un-
avoidable due to the ambiguity of certain gram-
matical forms in Russian. A good example of
this is neuter nouns that have the same form in
all cases, or feminine nouns, which have identi-
cal forms in singular genitive and plural nomina-
tive (Sharoff et al., 2008). Since Russian sentences
have free word order, and the case of nouns can-
not be determined on that basis, this imperfection
can not be corrected during tagging or by post-
processing the tagger output.

6.1.2 Morphological Reduction

English in comparison to Slavic group of lan-
guages is morphologically poor. For example, En-
glish has no morphological attributes for nouns
and adjectives to express gender or case; verbs in
English have no gender either. Russian, on the
contrary, has rich morphology. It suffices to say
that the Russian has 6 cases and 3 grammatical
genders, which manifest themselves in different

222



suffixes for nouns, pronouns, adjectives and some
verb forms.

When translating from Russian into English, a
lot of these attributes become meaningless and ex-
cessive. It makes sense to reduce the number of
morphological attributes before the text is sup-
plied for the training of the MT system. We ap-
ply morphological reduction to nouns, pronouns,
verbs, adjectives, prepositions and conjunctions.
The rest of the POS (adverbs, particles, interjec-
tions and abbreviations) have no morphological at-
tributes and are left unchanged.

We apply morphological reduction to train,
tune, development and test data. We refer to this
data set as morph-reduced later on.

6.2 Dataset

We use two variations of the parallel corpus to
build and test the Russian to English system. One
system is built on the data provided by the work-
shop. For the second system, we preprocess the
Russian side of the data as described in Section
6.1. Both the provided parallel corpus and the
morph-reduced parallel corpus consist of 2M par-
allel sentences each. We use them for the estima-
tion of the translation model. We use large train-
ing data for the estimation of monolingual lan-
guage model – en≈ 287.3M sentences. We follow
the identical procedure of interpolated language
model as described in Section 5.1. We use new-
stest2012a for tuning and newstest2012b (tst2012)
for development.

6.3 System Settings

We use identical system settings to those described
in Section 5.3. We trained the systems sepa-
rately on GIZA++ and transliteration augmented-
GIZA++ to compare their results. All systems are
tuned using PROv1. The translation output is post-
processed to transliterate OOVs.

6.4 Results

Table 3 summarizes results of Russian to English
machine translation systems trained on the orig-
inal parallel corpus and on the morph-reduced
corpus and using GIZA++ and transliteration
augmented-GIZA++ for word alignment. The sys-
tem using TA-GIZA++ for alignment shows the
best results for both tst2012 and tst2013. The im-
proved alignment gives a BLEU improvement of
up to 0.4 points.

Original corpus
SYS tst2012 tst2013

GIZA++ 32.51 25.5
TA-GIZA++ 33.40 25.9*

Morph-reduced

SYS tst2012 tst2013

GIZA++ 31.22 24.30
TA-GIZA++ 31.40 24.45

Table 3: Russian to English machine translation
system evaluated on tst2012 and tst2013. Human
evaluation in WMT13 is performed on the system
trained using the original corpus with TA-GIZA++
for alignment (marked with *)

The system built on the morph-reduced data
shows degradation in results by 1.29 BLEU points.
However, the percentage of OOVs reduces for
both test sets when using the morph-reduced data
set compared to the original parallel corpus. We
analyze the output of the system and find that the
morph-reduced system makes mistakes in choos-
ing the right tense of the verb. This might be one
reason for poor performance. This implies that the
morphological reduction is slightly damaging the
data, perhaps for specific parts of speech. In the
future, we would like to investigate this issue in
detail.

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we described the QCRI-Munich-
Edinburgh-Stuttgart machine translation systems
submitted to the Eighth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation. We aligned the parallel cor-
pus using transliteration augmented-GIZA++ to
improve the word alignments. We built a phrase-
based system using the Moses toolkit. For tun-
ing the feature weights, we used an improvement
of PRO that optimizes for corpus-level BLEU. We
post-processed the output of the machine transla-
tion system to transliterate OOV words.

For the Russian to English system, we mor-
phologically reduced the Russian data in a pre-
processing step. This reduced the vocabulary size
and helped to generate better word alignments.
However, the performance of the SMT system
dropped by 1.29 BLEU points in decoding. We
will investigate this issue further in the future.

223



Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their helpful feedback and suggestions. We
would like to thank Philipp Koehn and Barry Had-
dow for providing data and alignments. Nadir
Durrani was funded by the European Union Sev-
enth Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) un-
der grant agreement n ◦ 287658. Alexander Fraser
was funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
grant Models of Morphosyntax for Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. Helmut Schmid was supported
by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft grant SFB
732. This publication only reflects the authors
views.

References
Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J.

Della Pietra, and R. L. Mercer. 1993. The mathe-
matics of statistical machine translation: parameter
estimation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2).

Nadir Durrani, Helmut Schmid, and Alexander Fraser.
2011. A joint sequence translation model with in-
tegrated reordering. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Port-
land, USA.

Nadir Durrani, Helmut Schmid, Alexander Fraser, Has-
san Sajjad, and Richárd Farkas. 2013. Munich-
Edinburgh-Stuttgart submissions of OSM systems at
WMT13. In Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Mark Hopkins and Jonathan May. 2011. Tuning as
ranking. In Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Philipp Koehn and Barry Haddow. 2012. Towards
effective use of training data in statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Seventh Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, Montréal,
Canada.

Philipp Koehn, Franz J. Och, and Daniel Marcu. 2003.
Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proceed-
ings of the Human Language Technology and North
American Association for Computational Linguis-
tics Conference, Edmonton, Canada.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, Demonstra-
tion Program, Prague, Czech Republic.

Chin-Yew Lin and Franz Josef Och. 2004. OR-
ANGE: a method for evaluating automatic evalua-
tion metrics for machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 20th international conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics, Geneva, Switzerland.

Preslav Nakov, Francisco Guzmán, and Stephan Vo-
gel. 2012. Optimizing for sentence-level BLEU+1
yields short translations. In Proceedings of the
24th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, Mumbai, India.

Franz J. Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic
comparison of various statistical alignment models.
Computational Linguistics, 29(1).

Franz J. Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Sapporo, Japan.

Hassan Sajjad, Alexander Fraser, and Helmut Schmid.
2011. An algorithm for unsupervised translitera-
tion mining with an application to word alignment.
In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Conference of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, Port-
land, USA.

Hassan Sajjad, Alexander Fraser, and Helmut Schmid.
2012. A statistical model for unsupervised and
semi-supervised transliteration mining. In Proceed-
ings of the 50th Annual Conference of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, Jeju, Korea.

Helmut Schmid and Florian Laws. 2008. Estimation
of conditional probabilities with decision trees and
an application to fine-grained pos tagging. In Pro-
ceedings of the 22nd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics - Volume 1, Manchester,
United Kingdom.

Holger Schwenk and Philipp Koehn. 2008. Large and
Diverse Language Models for Statistical Machine
Translation. In International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing, Hyderabad, India.

Serge Sharoff, Mikhail Kopotev, Tomaz Erjavec, Anna
Feldman, and Dagmar Divjak. 2008. Designing
and evaluating a russian tagset. In Proceedings of
the Sixth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation.

Stephan Vogel, Hermann Ney, and Christoph Tillmann.
1996. HMM-based word alignment in statistical
translation. In 16th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Marion Weller, Max Kisselew, Svetlana Smekalova,
Alexander Fraser, Helmut Schmid, Nadir Durrani,
Hassan Sajjad, and Richárd Farkas. 2013. Munich-
Edinburgh-Stuttgart submissions at WMT13: Mor-
phological and syntactic processing for SMT. In
Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical
Machine Translation, Sofia, Bulgaria.

224


