










































Identifying Pronominal Verbs: Towards Automatic Disambiguation of the Clitic 'se' in Portuguese


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 93–100,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identifying Pronominal Verbs: Towards Automatic
Disambiguation of the Clitic se in Portuguese

Magali Sanches Duran♥, Carolina Evaristo Scarton♥,
Sandra Maria Aluı́sio♥, Carlos Ramisch♠

♥ University of São Paulo (Brazil)
♠ Joseph Fourier University (France)

magali.duran@uol.com.br, carol.scarton@gmail.com
sandra@icmc.usp.br, carlosramisch@gmail.com

Abstract

A challenging topic in Portuguese language
processing is the multifunctional and ambigu-
ous use of the clitic pronoun se, which impacts
NLP tasks such as syntactic parsing, semantic
role labeling and machine translation. Aiming
to give a step forward towards the automatic
disambiguation of se, our study focuses on the
identification of pronominal verbs, which cor-
respond to one of the six uses of se as a clitic
pronoun, when se is considered a CONSTITU-
TIVE PARTICLE of the verb lemma to which
it is bound, as a multiword unit. Our strategy
to identify such verbs is to analyze the results
of a corpus search and to rule out all the other
possible uses of se. This process evidenced
the features needed in a computational lexicon
to automatically perform the disambiguation
task. The availability of the resulting lexicon
of pronominal verbs on the web enables their
inclusion in broader lexical resources, such as
the Portuguese versions of Wordnet, Propbank
and VerbNet. Moreover, it will allow the revi-
sion of parsers and dictionaries already in use.

1 Introduction

In Portuguese, the word se is multifunctional. POS
taggers have succeeded in distinguishing between se
as a conjunction (meaning if or whether) and se as
a pronoun (see Martins et al. (1999) for more details
on the complexity of such task). As a clitic1 pro-

1A clitic is a bound form, phonologically unstressed, at-
tached to a word from an open class (noun, verb, adjective, ad-
verbial). It belongs to closed classes, that is, classes that have
grammatical rather than lexical meaning (pronouns, auxiliary
verbs, determiners, conjunctions, prepositions, numerals).

noun, however, se has six uses:

1. marker of SUBJECT INDETERMINATION:
Já se falou muito nesse assunto.
*Has-SE already spoken a lot about this matter.
One has already spoken a lot about this matter.

2. marker of pronominal PASSIVE voice (syn-
thetic passive voice):
Sugeriram-se muitas alternativas.
*Have-SE suggested many alternatives.
Many alternatives have been suggested.

3. REFLEXIVE pronoun (-self pronouns):
Você deveria se olhar no espelho.
*You should look-SE on the mirror.
You should look at yourself on the mirror.

4. RECIPROCAL pronoun (each other):
Eles se cumprimentaram com um aperto de mão.
*They greeted-SE with a handshake.
They greeted each other with a handshake.

5. marker of causative-INCHOATIVE alternation2:
Esse esporte popularizou-se no Brasil.
*This sport popularED-SE in Brazil.
This sport became popular in Brazil.

6. CONSTITUTIVE PARTICLE of the verb lexical
item (pronominal verb):
Eles se queixaram de dor no joelho.
*They complained-SE about knee pain.
They complained about knee pain.

2Causative-inchoative alternation: a same verb can be used
two different ways, one transitive, in which the subject position
is occupied by the argument which causes the action or process
described by the verb (causative use), and one intransitive, in
which the subject position is occupied by the argument affected
by the action or process (inchoative use).

93



Clitic se uses Syntactic
function

Semantic
function

SUBJECT INDE-
TERMINATION

NO YES3

PASSIVE
YES YES3

REFLEXIVE
YES YES

RECIPROCAL
YES YES

INCHOATIVE
YES NO

CONSTITUTIVE

PARTICLE

NO NO

Table 1: Uses of the clitic se from the point of view of
syntax and semantics.

The identification of these uses is very important
for Portuguese language processing, notably for syn-
tactic parsing, semantic role labeling (SRL) and ma-
chine translation. Table 1 shows which of these six
uses support syntactic and/or semantic functions.

Since superficial syntactic features seem not suffi-
cient to disambiguate the uses of the pronoun se, we
propose the use of a computational lexicon to con-
tribute to this task. To give a step forward to solve
this problem, we decided to survey the verbs un-
dergoing se as an integral part of their lexical form
(item 6), called herein pronominal verbs, but also
known as inherent reflexive verbs (Rosário Ribeiro,
2011). Grammars usually mention this kind of verbs
and give two classical examples: queixar-se (to com-
plain) and arrepender-se (to repent). For the best of
our knowledge, a comprehensive list of these multi-
word verbs is not available in electronic format for
NLP uses, and not even in a paper-based format,
such as a printed dictionary.

An example of the relevance of pronominal verbs
is that, in spite of not being argumental, that is, not
being eligible for a semantic role label, the use of se
as a CONSTITUTIVE PARTICLE should integrate the
verb that evokes the argumental structure, as may be
seen in Figure 1.

The identification of pronominal verbs is not a
trivial task because a pronominal verb has a nega-

3In these cases, the clitic may support the semantic role label
of the suppressed external argument (agent).

Figure 1: Sentence The broadcasters refused to apologize
includes pronominal verbs negar-se (refuse) and retratar-
se (apologize) that evoke frames in SRL.

tive definition: if se does not match the restrictions
imposed by the other five uses, so it is a CONSTI-
TUTIVE PARTICLE of the verb, that is, it composes a
multiword. Therefore, the identification of pronom-
inal verbs requires linguistic knowledge to distin-
guish se as a CONSTITUTIVE PARTICLE from the
other uses of the the pronoun se (SUBJECT INDE-
TERMINATION, PASSIVE, REFLEXIVE, RECIPRO-
CAL and INCHOATIVE.)

There are several theoretical linguistic studies
about the clitic pronoun se in Portuguese. Some of
these studies present an overview of the se pronoun
uses, but none of them prioritized the identification
of pronominal verbs. The study we report in this pa-
per is intended to fill this gap.

2 Related Work

From a linguistic perspective, the clitic pronoun
se has been the subject of studies focusing on:
SUBJECT INDETERMINATION and PASSIVE uses
(Morais Nunes, 1990; Cyrino, 2007; Pereira-Santos,
2010); REFLEXIVE use (Godoy, 2012), and IN-
CHOATIVE use (Fonseca, 2010; Nunes-Ribeiro,
2010; Rosário Ribeiro, 2011). Despite none of these
works concerning specifically pronominal verbs,
they provided us an important theoretical basis for
the analysis undertaken herein.

The problem of the multifunctional use of clitic
pronouns is not restricted to Portuguese. Romance
languages, Hebrew, Russian, Bulgarian and oth-
ers also have similar constructions. There are

94



crosslinguistic studies regarding this matter reported
in Siloni (2001) and Slavcheva (2006), showing
that there are partial coincidence of verbs taking
clitic pronouns to produce alternations and reflexive
voice.

From an NLP perspective, the problem of the
ambiguity of the clitic pronoun se was studied by
Martins et al. (1999) to solve a problem of catego-
rization, that is, to decide which part-of-speech tag
should be assigned to se. However, we have not
found studies regarding pronominal verbs aiming at
Portuguese automatic language processing.

Even though in Portuguese all the uses of the clitic
pronoun se share the same realization at the surface
form level, the use as a CONSTITUTIVE PARTICLE of
pronominal verbs is the only one in which the verb
and the clitic form a multiword lexical unit on its
own. In the other uses, the clitic keeps a separate
syntactic and/or semantic function, as presented in
Table 1.

The particle se is an integral part of pronominal
verbs in the same way as the particles of English
phrasal verbs. As future work, we would like to in-
vestigate possible semantic contributions of the se
particle to the meaning of pronominal verbs, as done
by Cook and Stevenson (2006), for example, who try
to automatically classify the uses of the particle up in
verb-particle constructions. Like in the present pa-
per, they estimate a set of linguistic features which
are in turn used to train a Support Vector Machine
(SVM) classifier citecook:2006:mwe.

3 Methodology

For the automatic identification of multiword
verb+se occurrences, we performed corpus searches
on the PLN-BR-FULL corpus (Muniz et al., 2007),
which consists of news texts extracted from a ma-
jor Brazilian newspaper, Folha de São Paulo, from
1994 to 2005, with 29,014,089 tokens. The cor-
pus was first preprocessed for sentence splitting,
case homogenization, lemmatization, morphologi-
cal analysis and POS tagging using the PALAVRAS
parser (Bick, 2000). Then, we executed the corpus
searches using the mwetoolkit (Ramisch et al.,
2010). The tool allowed us to define two multilevel
word patterns, for proclitic and enclitic cases, based
on surface forms, morphology and POS. The pat-

terns covered all the verbs in third person singular
(POS=V*, morphology=3S) followed/preceded by
the clitic pronoun se (surface form=se, POS=PERS).
The patterns returned a set of se occurrences, that
is, for each verb, a set of sentences in the corpus in
which this verb is followed/preceded by the clitic se.

In our analysis, we looked at all the verbs tak-
ing an enclitic se, that is, where the clitic se is at-
tached after the verb. We could as well have in-
cluded the occurrences of verbs with a proclitic se
(clitic attached before the verb). However, we sus-
pected that this would increase the number of occur-
rences (sentences) to analyze without a proportional
increase in verb lemmas. Indeed, our search for pro-
clitic se occurrences returned 40% more verb lem-
mas and 264% more sentences than for the enclitic
se (59,874 sentences), thus confirming our hypothe-
sis. Moreover, as we could see at a first glance, pro-
clitic se results included se conjunctions erroneously
tagged as pronouns (when the parser fails the cate-
gorial disambiguation). This error does not occur
when the pronoun is enclitic because Portuguese or-
thographic rules require a hyphen between the verb
and the clitic when se is enclitic, but never when it
is proclitic.

We decided to look at sentences as opposed to
looking only at candidate verb lemmas, because we
did not trust that our intuition as native speakers
would be sufficient to identify all the uses of the
clitic se for a given verb, specially as some verbs
allow more than one of the six uses we listed herein.

For performing the annotation, we used a table
with the verb lemmas in the lines and a column for
each one of the six uses of se as a clitic pronoun.
Working with two screens (one for the table and the
other for the sentences), we read the sentences and,
once a new use was verified, we ticked the appro-
priate column. This annotation setup accelerated the
analyses, as we only stopped the reading when we
identified a new use. The annotation was performed
manually by a linguist, expert in semantics of Por-
tuguese verbs, and also an author of this paper.

After having summarized the results obtained
from corpus analysis, we realized that some cliti-
cized verb uses that we know as native speakers did
not appear in the corpus (mainly reflexive and recip-
rocal uses). In these cases, we added a comment on
our table which indicates the need to look for the use

95



in another corpus aiming to confirm it.
For example, the most frequent cliticized verb,

tratar-se has no occurrence with the meaning of to
take medical treatment. We checked this meaning in
another corpus and found one example: O senador
se tratou com tecido embrionário. . . (*The senator
treated himself with embryonic tissue. . . ), proving
that our intuition may help us to improve the results
with specific corpus searches. A comparative multi-
corpus extension of the present study is planned as
future work.

The strategy we adopted to analyze the sentences
in order to identify pronominal verbs was to make a
series of questions to rule out the other possible se
uses.

Question 1 Does the se particle function as a
marker of PASSIVE voice or SUBJECT INDETERMI-
NATION?

In order to answer this question, it is important to
know that both uses involve the suppression of the
external argument of the verb. The difference is that,
in the pronominal PASSIVE voice, the remaining NP
(noun phrase) is shifted to the subject position (and
the verb must then be inflected according to such
subject), whereas in SUBJECT INDETERMINATION,
the remaining argument, always a PP (prepositional
phrase), remains as an indirect object. For example:

• Pronominal PASSIVE voice:
Fizeram-se várias tentativas.
*Made-SE several trials.
Several trials were made.

• SUBJECT INDETERMINATION:
Reclamou-se de falta de hygiene.
*Complained-SE about the lack of hygiene.
One has complained about the lack of hygiene.

Question 2 Is it possible to substitute se for a si
mesmo (-self )?

If so, it is a case of REFLEXIVE use. A clue for
this is that it is always possible to substitute se for
another personal pronoun, creating a non-reflexive
use keeping the same subject. For example:

• Ele perguntou-se se aquilo era certo.
He asked himself whether that was correct.

• Ele perguntou-me se aquilo era certo.
He asked me whether that was correct.

Question 3 Is it possible to substitute se for um ao
outro (each other)?

If so, it is a case of RECIPROCAL use. A clue for
this interpretation is that, in this case, the verb is al-
ways in plural form as the subject refers to more than
one person. RECIPROCAL uses were not included in
the corpus searches, as we only looked for cliticized
verbs in third person singular. However, aiming to
gather data for future work, we have ticked the table
every time we annotated sentences of a verb that ad-
mits reciprocal use. The reciprocal use of such verbs
have been later verified in other corpora.

• Eles se beijaram.
They kissed each other.

Question 4 Has the verb, without se, a transi-
tive use? If so, are the senses related to causative-
inchoative alternation? In other words, is the mean-
ing of the transitive use to cause X become Y?

If so, it is a case of INCHOATIVE use, for example:

• A porta abriu-se.
The door opened.

Compare with the basic transitive use:

• Ele abriu a porta.
He opened the door.

It is important to mention that verbs which allow
causative-inchoative alternation in Portuguese may
not have an equivalent in English that allows this al-
ternation, and vice-versa. For example, the inchoa-
tive use of the verb tornar corresponds to the verb
to become and the causative use corresponds to the
verb to make:

• Esse fato tornou-se conhecido em todo o
mundo.
This fact became known all around the world.

• A imprensa tornou o fato conhecido em todo o
mundo.
The press made the fact known all around the world.

If the verb being analyzed failed the four tests, the
clitic se has neither semantic nor syntactic function
and is considered a CONSTITUTIVE PARTICLE of the
verb, for example:

96



• Ele vangloriou-se de seus talentos.
He boasted of his talents.

Therefore, we made the identification of pronom-
inal verbs based on the negation of the other possi-
bilities.

4 Discussion

The corpus search resulted in 22,618 sentences of
cliticized verbs, corresponding to 1,333 verb lem-
mas. Some verbs allow only one of the uses of
the clitic se (unambiguous cliticized verbs), whereas
others allow more than one use (ambiguous cliti-
cized verbs), as shown in Table 2. Therefore, a
lexicon can only disambiguate part of the cliticized
verbs (others need additional features to be disam-
biguated).

The analysis of the verbs’ distribution reveals that
10% of them (133) account for 73% of the sentences.
Moreover, among the remaining 90% verb lemmas,
there are 477 hapax legomena, that is, verbs that oc-
cur only once. Such distribution indicates that com-
putational models which focus on very frequently
cliticized verbs might significantly improve NLP ap-
plications.

Contrary to our expectations, very frequently
cliticized verbs did not necessarily present high pol-
ysemy. For example, the most frequent verb of our
corpus is tratar, with 2,130 occurrences. Although
tratar-se has more than one possible use, only one
appeared in the corpus, as a marker of SUBJECT IN-
DETERMINATION, for example:

• Trata-se de uma nova tendência.
It is the case of a new tendency.

Despite being very frequent, when we search for
translations of tratar-se de in bilingual (parallel)
Portuguese-English corpora and dictionaries avail-
able on the web,4,5,6 we observed that there are sev-
eral solutions to convey this idea in English (deter-
mining a subject, as English does not allow subject
omission). Six examples extracted from the Com-
para corpus illustrate this fact:

4http://www.linguateca.pt/COMPARA/
5http://www.linguee.com.br/

portugues-ingles
6http://pt.bab.la/dicionario/

portugues-ingles

se uses Unamb. Amb. Total

SUBJECT INDE-
TERMINATION

17 6 23

PASSIVE
467 630 1097

REFLEXIVE
25 333 358

INCHOATIVE
190 64 254

RECIPROCAL
0 33 33

CONSTITUTIVE

PARTICLE

83 104 187

Total 782 1170 1952

Table 2: Proportion of unambiguous (Unamb.) and am-
biguous (Amb.) verbs that allow each se use.

• Trata-se de recriar o próprio passado.
It’s a question of re-creating your own past.

• Mas o assunto era curioso, trata-se do casa-
mento, e a viúva interessa-me.
But the subject was a curious one; it was about her
marriage, and the widow interests me.

• Não há mais dúvidas, trata-se realmente de um
louco.
There’s no longer any doubt; we’re truly dealing
with a maniac.

• Trata-se realmente de uma emergência, Sr.
Hoffman.
This really is a matter of some urgency, Mr Hoff-
man.

• Trata-se de um regime repousante e civilizado.
It is a restful, civilized régime.

• Trata-se de um simples caso de confusão de
identidades, dizem vocês.
(??) Simple case of mistaken identity.

In what concerns specifically pronominal verbs,
our analysis of the data showed they are of three
kinds:

1. Verbs that are used exclusively in pronominal
form, as abster-se (to abstain). This does not
mean that the pronominal form is unambigu-
ous, as we found some pronominal verbs that
present more than one sense, as for example the
verb referir-se, which means to refer or to con-
cern, depending on the subject’s animacy status
[+ human] or [− human], respectively;

97



2. Verbs that have a non-pronominal and a pro-
nominal form, but both forms are not related,
e.g.: realizar (to make or to carry on, which
allows the passive alternation realizar-se); and
the pronominal form realizar-se (to feel ful-
filled);

3. Verbs that have pronominal form, but accept
clitic drop in some varieties of Portuguese
without change of meaning, as esquecer-se and
esquecer (both mean to forget)

We did not study the clitic drop (3), but we un-
covered several pronominal verbs of the second kind
above (2). The ambiguity among the uses of se in-
creases with such cases. The verb desculpar (to
forgive), for example, allows the REFLEXIVE use
desculpar-se (to forgive oneself ), but also consti-
tutes a pronominal verb: desculpar-se (to apolo-
gize). The verb encontrar (to find) allows the RE-
FLEXIVE use (to find oneself, from a psychological
point of view) and the PASSIVE use (to be found).
The same verb also constitutes a pronominal verb
which means to meet (1) or functions as a copula
verb, as to be (2):

1. Ele encontrou-se com o irmão.
He met his brother.

2. Ele encontra-se doente.
He is ill.

In most sentences of cliticized verbs’ occurrences,
it is easy to observe that, as a rule of thumb:7

• SUBJECT INDETERMINATION uses of se do not
present an NP before the verb, present a PP af-
ter the verb and the verb is always inflected in
the third person singular;

• PASSIVE uses of se present an NP after the verb
and no NP before the verb;

• INCHOATIVE uses of se present an NP before
the verb and almost always neither a PP nor a
NP after the verb;

• CONSTITUTIVE PARTICLE uses of se present
an NP before the verb and a PP after the verb;

7Syntactic clues do not help to identify REFLEXIVE verbs.
The distinction depends on the semantic level, as the reflexive
use requires a [+ animate] subject to play simultaneously the
roles of agent and patient.

• RECIPROCAL uses of se only occur with verbs
taking a plural inflection.

Problems arise when a sentence follows none of
these rules. For example, subjects in PASSIVE use
of se usually come on the right of the verb. Thus,
when the subject appears before the verb, it looks, at
a first glance, to be an active sentence. For example:

• O IDH baseia-se em dados sobre renda, esco-
laridade e expectativa de vida.
*The HDI bases-SE on income, education and life
expectancy data.
The HDI is based on income, education and life ex-
pectancy data.

These cases usually occur with stative passives
(see Rosário Ribeiro (2011, p. 196)) or with ditran-
sitive action verbs8 when a [− animate] NP takes
the place usually occupied by a [+ animate] NP. Se-
mantic features, again, help to disambiguate and to
reveal a non-canonical passive.

The opposite also occurs, that is, the subject, usu-
ally placed on the left of the verb in active voice,
appears on the right, giving to the sentence a false
passive appearance:

• Desesperaram-se todos os passageiros.
*Fell-SE into despair all the passengers.
All the passengers fell into despair.

Sometimes the meaning distinctions of a verb are
very subtle, making the matter more complex. In
the following sections, we comment two examples
of difficult disambiguation.

4.1 Distinguishing Pronominal PASSIVE Voice
from Pronominal Verbs

The verb seguir (to follow) conveys the idea of obey-
ing when it has a [+ human] subject in the active
voice (an agent). The passive voice may be con-
structed using se, like in (2). Additionally, this verb
has a pronominal active use, seguir-se, which means
to occur after, as shown in (3):

1. Active voice:

• [Eles]Agent seguem [uma série de conven-
ções]Theme - thing followed.
They follow a series of conventions.

8Ditransitive verbs take two internal arguments: an NP as
direct object and a PP as indirect object.

98



2. PASSIVE voice:

• Segue-se [uma série de conven-
ções]Theme - thing followed.
A series of conventions are followed.

3. Pronominal verb – active voice:

• [A queda]Theme - thing occurring after seguiu-
se [à divulgação dos dados de desemprego
em o paı́s]Theme - thing occurring before.
The drop followed the announcement of unem-
ployment figures in the country.

The preposition a introducing one of the argu-
ments in (3) distinguishes the two meanings, as the
PASSIVE voice presents an NP and not a PP imme-
diately after or before the verb.

4.2 Distinguishing REFLEXIVE, INCHOATIVE
and PASSIVE Uses

The verb transformar, when cliticized, may be in-
terpreted as a PASSIVE (to be transformed), as a RE-
FLEXIVE (to transform oneself ) or as an INCHOA-
TIVE use (to become transformed). The PASSIVE
voice is identified by the subject position, after the
verb (1). The difference between the REFLEXIVE (2)
and INCHOATIVE (3) uses, on its turn, is a semantic
feature: only a [+ human] subject may act to be-
come something (REFLEXIVE use):

1. PASSIVE:
Transformou-se o encontro em uma
grande festa.
The meeting was transformed into a big party.

2. REFLEXIVE:

• A mulher jovem transformou-se em uma
pessoa sofisticada.
The young woman transformed herself into a
sophisticated person.

3. INCHOATIVE:

• O encontro transformou-se em uma gran-
de festa.
The meeting transformed into a big party.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

The lexicon gathered through this research will par-
tially enable disambiguating the uses of the clitic
pronoun se, as there are several verbs that allow only

one of the se clitic uses. For the other verbs, whose
polysemy entails more than one possible use of se, it
is necessary to add further information on each verb
sense.

The analysis we reported here evidenced the need
for enriching Portuguese computational lexicons,
encompassing (a) the semantic role labels assigned
by each verb sense, (b) the selectional restrictions
a verb imposes to its arguments, and (c) the alter-
nations a verb (dis)allows. The semantic predicate
decomposition used by Levin (1993) has proved to
be worthy to formalize the use of se in reflexive con-
structions (Godoy, 2012) and we think it should be
adopted to describe other uses of the pronoun se.
Another alternative is to construct a detailed com-
putational verb lexicon along the lines suggested
by Gardent et al. (2005), based on Maurice Gross’
lexicon-grammar.

The data generated by this study can also be used
to automatically learn classifiers for ambiguous uses
of the clitic se. On the one hand, the annotation
of uses can be semi-automatically projected on the
sentences extracted from the corpus. On the other
hand, the findings of this work in terms of syntac-
tic and semantic characteristics can be used to pro-
pose features for the classifier, trying to reproduce
those that can be automatically obtained (e.g., sub-
categorization frame) and to simulate those that can-
not be easily automated (e.g., whether the subject
is animate). For these future experiments, we in-
tend to compare different learning models, based on
SVM and on sequence models like conditional ran-
dom fields (Vincze, 2012).

As languages are different in what concerns al-
lowed alternations, the use of clitic se in Portuguese
becomes even more complex when approached from
a bilingual point of view. Depending on how differ-
ent the languages compared are, the classification of
se adopted here may be of little use. For example,
several verbs classified as reflexive in Portuguese,
like vestir-se (to dress), barbear-se (to shave) and
demitir-se (to resign) are not translated into a re-
flexive form in English (*to dress oneself, *to shave
oneself and *to dismiss oneself ). Similarly, typical
inchoative verb uses in Portuguese need to be trans-
lated into a periphrasis in English, like surpreender-
se (to be surprised at), orgulhar-se (to be proud of )
and irritar-se (to get angry). Such evidences lead

99



us to conclude that it would be useful to count on
a bilingual description not only of pronominal, but
also of the other se uses.

The results of this work are available at www.
nilc.icmc.usp.br/portlex.

Acknowledgments

This study was funded by FAPESP (process
2011/22337-1) and by the CAMELEON project
(CAPES-COFECUB 707-11).

References
Eckhard Bick. 2000. The parsing system Palavras.

Aarhus University Press. 411 p.
Paul Cook and Suzanne Stevenson. 2006. Classifying

particle semantics in English verb-particle construc-
tions. In Proceedings of MWE 2006, pages 45–53,
Sydney, Australia.

Sonia Maria Lazzarino Cyrino. 2007. Construções com
SE e promoção de argumento no português brasileiro:
Uma investigação diacrônica. Revista da ABRALIN,
6:85–116.

Paula Fonseca. 2010. Os verbos pseudo-reflexos em
Português Europeu. Master’s thesis, Universidade do
Porto.

Claire Gardent, Bruno Guillaume, Guy Perrier, and In-
grid Falk. 2005. Maurice gross’ grammar lexicon and
natural language processing. In Proceedings of the
2nd Language and Technology Conference, Poznań,
Poland.

Luisa Andrade Gomes Godoy. 2012. A reflexivização no
PB e a decomposição semântica de predicados. Ph.D.
thesis, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais.

Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions: a preliminary investigation. The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, USA.

Ronaldo Teixeira Martins, Gisele Montilha, Lucia He-
lena Machado Rino, and Maria da Graça Volpe Nunes.
1999. Dos modelos de resolução da ambiguidade cat-
egorial: o problema do SE. In Proceedings of IV
Encontro para o Processamento Computacional da
Lı́ngua Portuguesa Escrita e Falada (PROPOR 1999),
pages 115–128, Évora, Portugal, September.

Jairo Morais Nunes. 1990. O famigerado SE: uma
análise sincrônica e diacrônica das construções com
SE apassivador e indeterminador. Master’s thesis,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas.

Marcelo Muniz, Fernando V. Paulovich, Rosane
Minghim, Kleber Infante, Fernando Muniz, Renata
Vieira, and Sandra Aluı́sio. 2007. Taming the tiger
topic: an XCES compliant corpus portal to generate

subcorpus based on automatic text topic identification.
In Proceedings of The Corpus Linguistics Conference
(CL 2007), Birmingham, UK.

Pablo Nunes-Ribeiro. 2010. A alternância causativa
no Português do Brasil: a distribuição do clı́tico SE.
Master’s thesis, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
do Sul.

José Ricardo Pereira-Santos. 2010. Alternância pas-
siva com verbos transitivos indiretos do português do
Brasil. Master’s thesis, Universidade de Brası́lia.

Carlos Ramisch, Aline Villavicencio, and Christian
Boitet. 2010. Multiword expressions in the wild?
the mwetoolkit comes in handy. In Proceedings of
the 23rd COLING (COLING 2010) - Demonstrations,
pages 57–60, Beijing, China.

Sı́lvia Isabel do Rosário Ribeiro. 2011. Estruturas
com “se” Anafórico, Impessoal e Decausativo em Por-
tuguês. Ph.D. thesis, Faculdade de Letras da Universi-
dade de Coimbra.

Tal Siloni. 2001. Reciprocal verbs. In Online Proceed-
ings of IATL 17, Jerusalem, Israel.

Milena Slavcheva. 2006. Semantic descriptors: The
case of reflexive verbs. In Proceedings of LREC 2006,
pages 1009–1014, Genoa, Italy.

Veronika Vincze. 2012. Light verb constructions in the
szegedparalellFX English–Hungarian parallel corpus.
In Proceedings of LREC 2012, Istanbul, Turkey.

100


