








































Generative Lexicon Theory and Linguistic Linked Open Data

Fahad Khan Francesca Frontini Riccardo Del Gratta Monica Monachini Valeria Quochi
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale ”A. Zampolli”

Via Moruzzi 1, Pisa, Italy
name.surname@ilc.cnr.it

Abstract

In this paper we look at how Generative
Lexicon theory can assist in providing a
more thorough definition of word senses
as links between items in a RDF-based
lexicon and concepts in an ontology. We
focus on the definition of lexical sense
in lemon and show its limitations before
defining a new model based on lemon and
which we term lemonGL. This new model
is an initial attempt at providing a way of
structuring lexico-ontological resources as
linked data in such a way as to allow a rich
representation of word meaning (follow-
ing the GL theory) while at the same time
(attempting to) re-main faithful to the sep-
aration between the lexicon and the ontol-
ogy as recommended by the lemon model.

1 Introduction

The linked data movement aims to make it eas-
ier to publish and to use collections of data stored
at different online locations by providing a stan-
dardized way of structuring, describing, and inter-
linking this data. One of the main tools in the
linked data movement’s arsenal is the Resource
Description Framework (RDF)1 a general purpose
language which organises data on the basis of
subject-predicate-object triples. These triples are
used to link together data stored at different loca-
tions using Unique Resource Idenfiers. The RDF
model also serves as the basis for Web Ontology
Language (OWL)2 a family of formal knowledge
representation languages of varying degrees of ex-
pressivity developed for the purpose of building
ontologies.

For the Language Resources and Technology
(LRT) community the popularity of linked data

1http://www.w3.org/RDF/
2http://www.w3.org/OWL/

makes it far easier to carry out its traditional aims
of standardising, linking, and re-using linguistic
data. This has led to a trend towards the conver-
sion of existing lexicons using the RDF format
and other linked data tools. It also opens up the
way for a greater linking up of distributed lexical
and ontological resources offering both greater ac-
cess to the knowledge explicitly stated in a lexicon
as well as increased possibilities for inferring new
knowledge from associated ontologies (Smrž and
Sinopalnikova, 2003).

In this paper we look at lemon, an increasingly
popular RDF-based model for sharing lexical in-
formation online. We focus in particular on how
lemon handles the link between the lexical entries
contained in a lexicon and the associated seman-
tic data in an ontology. We examine some of the
shortcomings of lemon in this respect and suggest
an altered version of lemon, lemonGL, which at-
tempts to present a more accurate model of the in-
teraction between lexical entries and their mean-
ings. This model is based on Generative Lexicon
theory (GL) which treats lexical senses as complex
structured semantic objects which can enter into a
range of generative semantic operations with other
senses in order to generate meanings for linguistic
expressions.

In the next section, Section 2.1 we look at the
lemon view of senses, and argue that it leads to dif-
ficulties when it comes to modelling logical poly-
semy. In Section 2.2 we give a brief overview of
the GL approach to word senses. In Section 3, we
look at a previous example of the conversion of a
GL inspired lexical resource, PAROLE-SIMPLE-
CLIPS, using lemon, and explore some of the is-
sues related to that conversion. We give a defini-
tion of lemonGL in Section 4. In the final section
we present our conclusions.



2 lemon and GL

2.1 lemon senses and their limitations
lemon is a model that provides an RDF-based stan-
dard for publishing lexical data online (McCrae et
al., 2011). As such it has fast gained both accep-
tance and widespread popularity within the LRT
community3. At its heart lemon defines a set of
core modules that help to describe the basic as-
pects of the entries in most lexicons such as those
aspects relating to morphology, the phrase struc-
ture of complex expressions, and the syntactic
frames associated with predicative lexical items.
It also allows the addition of semantic information
to any given lexical entry by mapping the entry to
a concept in an ontology via an intermediate lex-
ical sense object. This is all based on the idea of
semantics by reference and entails a clear sepa-
ration between the linguistic and ontological lev-
els of a lexical resource as well as facilitating the
“plugging-in” of different ontologies into the same
lexicon – this turns out to be particularly useful
when it comes to modelling the meanings of terms
in different domains.

We now provide a brief overview of the the-
oretical basis for the lemon treatment of lexical
senses and references as developed in (Cimiano et
al., 2012) and as also presented in (McCrae et al.,
2010).

Within the lemon framework, each lexical en-
try l in a lemon lexicon L can be mapped to an
concept c in an ontology O via a lemon lexical
sense object, σ(l,c). The definition of a lemon lex-
ical sense object given in (Cimiano et al., 2012)
presents three different, complementary, facets to
each lemon word sense. These are as follows.

Firstly, a lemon sense object σ(l,c) can be
viewed as representing “a subset of the uses of
the lexical entry l in which l can be understood as
meaning concept c”, or in other words as a disam-
biguated lexical entry. So that for example given
the lexical item bank, and a concept bank within
an ontology where it is taken to mean something
like an incline at the side of a body of water, we
can view the sense object σ(bank,bank) as stand-
ing for the set of uses of the word bank where it
has a meaning corresponding to this geographical
sense. Secondly, we can understand the sense ob-
ject σ(l,c) as the “reification” of a pairing between
the lexical entry l and the ontological element c

3See http://lemon-model.net/index.html for more details.

where σ(l,c) is defined as valid if there exists evi-
dence of at least one instance of the lexical item l
being taken to mean c. Finally, σ(l,c) can also be
seen as the hypothetical full meaning of the lexi-
cal entry l, such that if this full meaning were to be
added to the ontology as a concept then it would
be a subtype of c.

The foregoing tripartite definition of a lexical
sense object seems to suggest that each time we
are able to match the meaning of a lexical entry
l to a concept c in an ontology we are also per-
mitted to create a new lemon lexical sense object
that will serve to mark this pairing of word and
meaning. It is also clear that lemon sense ob-
jects only play a limited role at the intersection
of a lexicon and an ontology and correspondingly
carry very little structure (although as we will see
there is provision in lemon for subsenses as well
as for mappings between senses and representa-
tions of syntactic frames). All of which leaves us
with a reasonably clear division of labour: the lex-
icon should contain all the morpho-syntactic data
that relates to a lexical entry, whereas the ontology
should contain most if not all of the “purely” se-
mantic data associated with the entry, with lemon
sense objects serving to map between these two
layers.

This view of the sense relation between a lexi-
cal entry and an ontological concept can be seen
however to lead to difficulties when it comes to
modelling examples of logical polysemy. Fol-
lowing (Pustejovsky, 1995, 28) we define logical
polysemy as any (syntactically realised) category-
preserving semantic ambiguity where the different
senses of a word have meanings that overlap or
that otherwise clearly depend on one another. For
example take the following two sentences.

• She walks through the door.

• She paints the door.

These sentences demonstrate that the noun door
can be taken to mean either an aperture allowing
passage (as in the first sentence) or a physical ob-
ject occupying such an aperture (as in the second).

But then, according to the lemon model, given
any ontology that distinguishes between these two
concepts (i.e., between door as aperture and door
as physical object) as c1, c2 respectively, and given
a lexicon with an entry for door which we wish
to map to the aforementioned ontology, there
should be at least two distinct lemon sense objects



σ(door,c1) and σ(door,c2) mapping between the lexi-
con and the ontology. Indeed one could argue that
even were there just one concept c in our ontol-
ogy O representing the meaning of the word door
in a vague enough way to cover both meanings of
door then we would still be justified in creating at
least two different sense objects since both of the
instances of door given above represent different
full hypothetical concepts though with the same
reference, c, in O.

In other words the lemon model seems to ne-
cessitate what Pustejovsky calls a sense enumera-
tion lexicon: that is a lexicon in which the multiple
senses of each word are stored separately4. Puste-
jovsky argues in (Pustejovsky, 1995) that the sense
enumerative approach to lexicon design is prob-
lematic precisely because it fails to capture several
important aspects of the phenomena of logical pol-
ysemy. This inadequacy is addressed under three
different heads in (Pustejovsky, 1995).

Firstly, the sense enumerative approach makes
it extremely awkward to deal with the creativity of
word use. For example an adjective like fast is able
to appear in different, potentially novel, contexts
and to have different (though related) meanings in
each: fast in the phrase a fast car means some-
thing different from the use of fast in the phrase a
fast motorway, which in turn has a different mean-
ing from fast in a fast programmer or a fast song.
Indeed the possibilities seem open ended, and a
simplistic sense enumerative approach in which
lexical sense entities are multiplied at every turn
seems at the very least impracticable. Secondly,
a basic sense enumerative approach fails to cap-
ture the relatedness, or in Pustejovsky’s terms, the
permeability of word senses. For example if we
create a distinct sense apiece for the word lamb
when taken to mean a young sheep and when it is
taken to mean the meat of a young sheep, respec-
tively, then its hard to see how to relate these two
senses under a basic sense enumerative approach.
Certainly lemon sense relations like equivalent, in-
compatible, narrower, or broader fail to capture
the close relationship between these two different
meanings of lamb. Thirdly, verbs like forget can
have different syntactic realisations each of which
seem to require a separate sense.

All of this would tend to suggest that another,
more nuanced approach to sense relations is in or-

4Although this might also entail that, for instance, so
called complementary related senses are stored under a single
entry.

der – or at the very least it means that if a sense is
to serve as an intermediary between a lexical item
l and its meaning as a concept c then it might not
be enough to regard the sense as merely a simple
atomic pairing of a word and meaning.

One could argue however that rather than
adding extra structure to the sense object there
should be sufficient information within the ontol-
ogy to derive c as a meaning for l, assuming that an
already existing lexical sense pairing (l, c′) exists,
and that c can be somehow derived from c′. So
that, for example, given the meaning of the lexical
entry of lamb as a young sheep in the ontology and
given other (commonsense) knowledge contained
in the ontology representing the fact that the flesh
of young sheep is edible and is commonly eaten by
humans, it should be possible to derive the correct
sense of lamb in the following sentence.

• I had some delicious lamb last night.

However, since most types of systematic poly-
semy are only semi productive5 and since accord-
ing to many (although by no means all) semantic
theories, only limited aspects of commonsense or
world knowledge are necessary for disambiguat-
ing most cases of logical polysemy, this would ne-
cessitate organising the concepts in an ontology
in a particular (theory specific, linguistically mo-
tivated) way or, in some cases anyway, enriching
the kinds of relations that can hold between senses.
Thus we might include a relation between senses
to represent the fact that they can take part in a
systematic polysemic alternation (although, sim-
ply adding a polysemy relation between systemat-
ically related senses only partially solves the issue,
as we would still lack the explanation of how the
senses are related; i.e. what the specific dimen-
sions of meaning involved are).

This strategy is problematic however for a num-
ber of reasons many of which relate to the fact
that it seems to necessitate a certain sort of lin-
guistically based organisation of our ontology in
order to make efficient use of the information held
therein; it thus very obviously blurs the distinction
between what is contained in a lexicon and what is
contained in corresponding ontologies. This strat-
egy would also call for a major redefinition of the

5For instance even though the word for a young sheep and
the word for the meat of a young sheep are the same in En-
glish and even though this is the case for many other animals
it is not true of cows and beef.



role played by a lemon lexical sense object be-
tween a lexical entry l and a concept c so that it
represents something along the lines of, say, the
concept c’s being a prototypical/common reading
of l. In Section 3 we discuss an attempt to convert
a GL inspired lexical resource PAROLE SIMPLE
CLIPS with lemon using just this kind of strategy.

Another sort of strategy and one which we will
discuss in some detail below is to give lemon
senses additional structure so that as well as pro-
viding a link to a reference in an ontology they en-
able a more efficient access to particular kinds of
“explanatory” information such as are necessary
for disambiguating the meanings of polysemous
words. This would effectively create an intermedi-
ate layer between the lexicon and the ontology and
would have the benefit of retaining most of the rest
of the lemon syntax as well as mimimizing our as-
sumptions as to the structure of the ontology and
thereby helping to maintain – at least to a substan-
tial extent – the lemon-inspired lexicon-ontology
distinction described above6. We will detail one
potential theoretical foundation for this kind of ap-
proach in the next section. We present a model
based on this strategy in Section 4.

2.2 The Generative Lexicon Approach
Generative Lexicon theory (GL henceforth) is a
theory of lexical organisation that treats senses not
as atomic units but instead as formal entities with a
complex internal (conceptual) structure which can
be described using four different levels of repre-
sentation. These levels are as follows:

• The argument structure - An elaboration of
the type and number of logical arguments as-
sociated with the entry, along with associated
syntactic information;

• The event structure - A specification of the
event structure associated with the entry;

• The qualia structure - A specification of the
four qualia roles associated with the entry,
see below;

• The lexical inheritance structure - The
place of the lexical entry within a wider type
system.

For each lexical entry GL foregrounds four differ-
ent, representative, aspects of word meaning, the

6Although as we will see it does necessitate some level of
reduplication of what is contained in the ontology.

so called qualia roles, which along with a num-
ber of generative mechanisms are, or so the pro-
ponents of this approach would claim, sufficient
to handle most cases of logical polysemy and cre-
ative sense modulation in context. These four
qualia roles are regarded as being the modes of ex-
planation for a lexical item and also as generalis-
ing the idea of verbal argument structure to apply
to nominals, etc. They are defined as follows:

• The formal: that which specifies the hierar-
chical relations of an entity with other enti-
ties;

• The constitutive: that which specifies what
an entity is made of, its relations with its var-
ious components;

• The telic: that which specifies the function or
purpose of an entity;

• The agentive, that which specifies the origin
of an entity, how it came about.

Pustejovsky (Pustejovsky, 1995) uses these four
qualia roles (and the notion of a complex type)
along with the information contained in the other
representative levels in a lexical entry, as well as a
number of generative semantic mechanisms such
as type coercion and co-composition, to show how
it is possible to disambiguate a variety of differ-
ent kinds of logical polysemy without having to
resort to the division of a word sense into sepa-
rate senses for each shift in meaning such as is, as
we have seen, characteristic of the sense enumera-
tive approach. It is further argued in (Pustejovsky,
1995) that the kind of linguistic knowledge neces-
sary for disambiguating instances of logical poly-
semy is distinct from the general common sense or
pragmatic knowledge that is useful in, say, disam-
biguating instances of homonymous words such as
bank, since in the former case rather than choos-
ing between two or more different “contrastive”
meanings we instead focus on diverse aspects of a
single, complex meaning. This idea will play an
important role in our proposed model.

As we noted above the knowledge contained in
the qualia structure represents a set of basic build-
ing blocks for structuring and generating the con-
cepts expressed by a word sense. The qualia struc-
ture can therefore be seen as the main interface to
the knowledge of the world such as might be rep-
resented by an ontology. We will expand on this
in what follows below.



3 Converting PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS
with lemon

In this section we briefly detail an attempt made
in previous work to convert a GL based lexical re-
source, PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS (PSC), into the
RDF format using lemon; full details of the con-
version are available at (del Gratta et al., 2013)7.
PSC is a multi-layered Italian language lexicon
built up within the framework of three successive
projects: the EU-funded PAROLE (Ruimy et al.,
1998) and SIMPLE (Lenci et al., 2000) and the
Italian national project CLIPS. In particular, the
conversion focused on the Italian SIMPLE lexi-
con, i.e., the lexical semantic layer of the PSC lex-
ical database. As the model used by SIMPLE was
strongly informed by GL its conversion is of par-
ticular interest for our discussion here.

Each lexical sense object or semantic unit
(USem for short) in SIMPLE is described using
the four different qualia roles, although in this in-
stance the qualia roles are represented as binary
relations between the USem in question and other
USems in the SIMPLE semantic layer. These
relations together comprise a so called extended
qualia structure. This is a hierarchy of relations
arranged at the top level under the four original
qualia roles and structured in such a way as to
build upon the notion of qualia structure found in
the GL literature. For example, the USem corre-
sponding to the semantic type Vehicle is associated
with the agentive relation created by, the con-
stitutive relations made of, has as part, and the
telic relation used for; the formal role is given by
the is a relation.

The first part of the conversion of PSC was to
define and build the top level ontology which had
been described in the specifications of the project
and used as a framework for the SIMPLE semantic
layer encoding but which hadn’t originally been
implemented as a separate ontological resource
(see (Toral and Monachini, 2007)). Next the SIM-
PLE lexical database, i.e., the set of USems and
the relations which held between them, were con-
verted using the lemon model. The main prob-
lem here was the fact that the USems in SIM-
PLE took part both in conceptual relations con-
cerning the meaning and reference of their associ-
ated lexical entries, such as for example that a cer-
tain kind of tree produces a certain kind of fruit, as

7The conversion is incomplete: so far only the nouns have
been converted.

well as purely sense based relations such as syn-
onymy. This all needed to be disentangled in or-
der to maintain a separation between the lexicon
and the ontology and to thus properly adhere to
the philosophy of lemon.

Briefly, the solution adopted was to use lemon
to model the purely lexical part of the resource and
then to convert the semantic layer of SIMPLE into
an OWL ontology (subsequently linked to the top
level ontology). This meant that a new lemon lexi-
cal resource was created in which each lexical en-
try was related to its corresponding USem via the
lemon sense relation. Each one of these USems
was duplicated twice, once as a lemon sense ob-
ject and once as an object which was then added
to the ontology previously constructed.

This posed some interesting questions about the
status of the qualia relations which were now fully
transformed into ontological relations. While it
is true that the qualia structure encodes knowl-
edge about the world, the relations represented by
the qualia structure present only a limited range
of the kinds of commonsense knowledge that we
might put in an ontology. How then is it possi-
ble to distinguish between those relations that are
relevant for lexical semantics and those that are
just part of encyclopedic knowledge (and which
are therefore relevant to language understanding
at a more pragmatic level)? The top level ontol-
ogy in PSC was designed with a focus on structur-
ing the semantic layer of a lexical resource and in
fact its design closely follows the notion of qualia
structure as found in the GL literature. Therefore
there was no neccessity to try and separate out that
part of the PSC ontology which dealt with “lin-
guistic” knowledge from the rest. But things in
general won’t always be so straightforward: we
may not be able in other situations to depend on
such a closely “linguistic” structuring of ontologi-
cal knowledge.

4 lemonGL

In this section we present lemonGL a RDF-based
model that builds upon the lemon model by pre-
senting a more nuanced version of lexical senses,
one that falls in broadly line with the view pre-
sented in GL theory. lemonGL is an initial at-
tempt at providing a way of structuring lexico-
ontological resources as linked data in such a way
as to make it easier to access those aspects of a
lexical entry’s meaning that best serve as modes



of explanation for that entry (according to GL the-
ory) while at the same time (attempting to) re-
main faithful to the separation between the lex-
icon and the ontology as recommended by the
lemon model. In what follows we will describe
the lemonGL model and explain where it diverges
from lemon before presenting an example to illus-
trate its use.

lemonGL differs from lemon essentially only in
its definition of lexical senses and in the kinds
of relations into which a lexical sense enters. In
lemonGL a lexical sense object is still connected
to a lexical entry via a lemon sense relation which
can in turn link the lexical entry to a concept to an
ontology that provides a meaning for the lexical
entry. On the other hand, a lemonGL lexical sense
object has a complex structure of its own, and each
sense object can be related to an ArgumentStruc-
ture object via an hasArgumentStructure relation;
to an EventStructure object via an hasEventStruc-
ture relation both of which are in turn related to
GLArgument objects; and to a QualiaStructure ob-
ject via a hasQualia relation. This QualiaStruc-
ture is related in its turn to a Quale object via the
hasAgentive, hasFormal, hasTelic and hasConsti-
tutive relations. These extra objects then provide
a sort of middle layer, or an interface, between the
lexical entry and the ontology that serves to isolate
certain aspects of the entry’s meaning as contained
within the ontology.

Figure 1: A diagram of the lemonGL model.

This might seem a little like overkill: if the
meaning of a lexical entry l is determined by a
concept c in an ontology O along with the net-
work of relations that c enters into with other items
in the ontology, then what is the purpose of trans-
ferring or duplicating a subset of this information
into the lexicon? The answer is that it helps to
preserve the division between the language spe-
cific information in the lexicon and the (relatively
speaking) language independent conceptual infor-
mation contained in the ontology.

As discussed above, in GL theory a word’s
qualia structure serves to specify the central modes
of explanation associated with that word – as
distinguished from other more general, common
sense, one could say, more purely ontological,
knowledge – and that the knowledge encoded in
qualia structures is used in dealing with instances
of logical polysemy. In fact one could argue that
the qualia information is part of a lexical entry
in the same way that a verbs argument structure
is part of a verb’s lexical information and that it
therefore doesnt really belong in the ontology.

Another option would be for a separate, lin-
guistically motivated ontology to hold this kind of
knowledge which could then be somehow linked
up with other ontologies, but this solution is un-
economical both from the theoretical and the prac-
tical point of view. Theoretically it would imply
that human beings have a subset of their encyclo-
pedic knowledge duplicated as part of their lin-
guistic knowledge; practically speaking it would
involve a lot of duplication of labour. With re-
spect to the interaction between the linked data
movement and the LRT community it seems nec-
essary to be able both to easily access and to build
upon the large amount of formalised knowledge
that is currently becoming available online, while
at the same time retaining the ability to set the
boundaries as to what is relevant to lexical seman-
tics. The lemonGL model then attempts to struc-
ture word senses in a way that maintains a Puste-
jovskian linguistic versus commonsense knowl-
edge distinction.

We now present an example modelled using
lemonGL to illustrate its potential use. We will
be using RDF turtle syntax to present our exam-
ple8. The example concerns the noun wine which
we will represent with the following feature struc-

8http://www.w3.org/TeamSubmission/turtle/



ture9.

WINE

ARGS =

[
ARG1= x
D-ARG1 = y

]
EVENTS =

[
D-E1= e

]
QUALIA =

[
FORMAL= liquid(x)
AGENTIVE= make(e, y, x)

]


Here the argument structure has two logical ar-

guments, x and y and the event structure has one
event argument e, all of which are found in the
qualia expressions in the qualia structure: these ar-
guments can be understood to play the same role
as the bound variables x, y and e in the following
lambda expression:

λxλyλe[liquid(x) ∧make(e, y, z)].

Only two of the qualia roles are instantiated.
The first, the formal quale here expresses the fact
that wine is a type of liquid using the liquid pred-
icate; the second quale, by referring to the make
predicate and the variables mentioned previously,
to expresses the fact that there is a process of cre-
ation associated with each instance of a wine “en-
tity”.

In order to represent this feature structure using
lemonGL we will first assume that our (OWL) on-
tology contains the following definitions.
:hasMadeObject rdf:type owl:ObjectProperty ;
rdfs:range :Made_Object ;
rdfs:domain :Make_Event .
:hasMaker rdf:type owl:ObjectProperty ;
rdfs:domain :Make_Event ;
rdfs:range :Maker .
:makes rdf:type owl:ObjectProperty ;
rdfs:range :Made_Object ;
rdfs:domain :Maker .
:Made_Object rdf:type owl:Class .
:Make_Event rdf:type owl:Class .
:Maker rdf:type owl:Class .
:liquid rdf:type owl:Class .

The following lines of RDF structure the sense
of the lexical entry for wine in the lexicon into an
argument structure, an event structure and a qualia
structure:
:wine rdf:type lemon:LexicalEntry ,
owl:NamedIndividual ;
lemon:sense [rdf:type lemon:LexicalSense ;
lemonGL:hasArgumentStructure :wine_arg_str;
lemonGL:hasEventStructure :wine_ev_str ;
lemonGL:hasQualia :wine_qua_str].

9The feature structure for wine is taken from (Pustejovsky,
1998). Also note that the OWL/RDF code used in the ex-
amples has been made up for the purpose of demonstration,
and is not drawn from an existing resource. We have not so
far converted any non trivial lexical resource into RDF using
lemonGL.

We refer to the argument structure associated
with the lexical sense of the entry for wine using
the identifier wine arg str. We specify that the
first argument associated with wine arg str has
the ontological type of Made Object, whereas
the second argument has the ontological type of
Maker.
:wine_arg_str rdf:type Glemon:ArgumentStructure ,
owl:NamedIndividual ;
lemonGL:hasArgument
[lemonGL:reference ontology:Made_Object ] ,
[lemonGL:reference ontology:Maker] .

Next we specify that the ontological type of the
event associated with the event structure of the
sense object is a Make Event.
:wine_ev_str rdf:type lemonGL:EventStrucuture ,
owl:NamedIndividual ;
lemonGL:hasEvent
[lemonGL:reference ontology:Make_Event ].

Finally we specify that the agentive role for the
qualia structure associated with the sense object
refers to a make relation in our ontology, and that
the formal role has the ontological type of liquid.
:wine_qua_str rdf:type lemonGL:QualiaStructure ,
owl:NamedIndividual ;
lemonGL:hasAgentive
[lemonGL:reference ontology:makes] ;
lemonGL:hasFormal
[lemonGL:reference ontology:liquid ].

The following figure presents the example
schematically:

Even though we have somewhat altered the
lemon framework, the changes we propose are far
from drastic. Indeed, as is helpfully illustrated
by the representation of the verb to give in the
lemon cookbook (McCrae et al., 2010), lemon
senses can have subsenses which can in turn be
mapped onto lemon Argument objects which are
themselves linked to a Frame object. This paral-
lel between our GL-inspired representation of the
noun wine in lemonGL and the representation of



a verb like give in lemon is no surprise since, as
we’ve described above, one of the motivations be-
hind GL theory was to provide what is in essence
an argument structure for nominals (Pustejovsky
and Boguraev, 1993). On the other hand, as we
have striven to show throughout this paper, the no-
tion of sense in lemon stands in need of substan-
tial revision and part of this means providing extra
functionality for other part of speech categories.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we’ve tried to argue for a revised
notion of a sense object in lemon, one that both
makes it easier to model a range of important lin-
guistic phenomena and that enables the practical
implementation (to some extent) of an important
and influential theory of lexical semantics. We
plan to continue this work by using lemonGL to
model existing lexical resources, developing the
language further as the need arises, and also to in-
vestigate the extent to which lemonGL makes it
easier to reason about such resources.

We have discussed the desirability of maintain-
ing a separation between lexical and ontological
knowledge. We believe by adding what is ef-
fectively an intermediary layer between the lexi-
con and the ontology we have created a model for
lexical-ontological resources which preserves this
separation as far as possible (by limiting what we
can assume about the structure of the ontology)
while still enabling us to handle the phenomena of
logical polysemy.

To take a more general view, we feel that it is
of the utmost importance, given the current popu-
larity of LLOD as well as the great potential that
it holds out, that the GL community become more
active in the definition of the models that are defin-
ing the structure of LLOD lexicons and their con-
nections to existing or new conceptual resources.
In particular it is important that models that are
too geared towards sense enumeration do not be-
come predominant to the detriment of more realis-
tic models of lexical semantics, and that the avail-
able lexicon representation schemes allow for the
real complexity of lexical semantic relations to be
fully represented.

References
Philipp Cimiano, John McCrae, Paul Buitelaar, and

Elena Montiel-Ponsoda, 2012. On the Role of
Senses in the Ontology-Lexicon.

Riccardo del Gratta, Francesca Frontini, Fahad Khan,
and Monica Monachini. 2013. Converting the pa-
role simple clips lexicon into rdf with lemon. Se-
mantic Web Journal (Under Review).

Alessandro Lenci, Nuria Bel, Federica Busa, Nico-
letta Calzolari, Elisabetta Gola, Monica Monachini,
Antoine Ogonowski, Ivonne Peters, Wim Peters,
Nilda Ruimy, Marta Villegas, and Antonio Zam-
polli. 2000. Simple: A general framework for the
development of multilingual lexicons. International
Journal of Lexicography, 13(4):249–263.

John McCrae, Guadalupe Aguado de Cea, Paul
Buitelaar, Philipp Cimiano, Thierry Declerck,
Asuncin Gmez Prez, Jorge Gracia, Laura Hollink,
Elena Montiel-Ponsoda, Dennis Spohr, and Tobias
Wunner, 2010. The Lemon Cookbook. http://lemon-
model.net/lemon-cookbook.pdf.

John McCrae, Dennis Spohr, and Philipp Cimiano.
2011. Linking lexical resources and ontologies on
the semantic web with lemon. In Proceedings of
the 8th extended semantic web conference on The
semantic web: research and applications - Volume
Part I, ESWC’11, pages 245–259, Berlin, Heidel-
berg. Springer-Verlag.

James Pustejovsky and Branimir Boguraev. 1993.
Lexical knowledge representation and natural lan-
guage processing. Artif. Intell., 63(1-2):193–223.

James Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

James Pustejovsky. 1998. The semantics of lexical
underspecification.

N. Ruimy, O. Corazzari, E. Gola, A. Spanu, N. Calzo-
lari, and A. Zampolli. 1998. The european le-parole
project: The italian syntactic lexicon. In Proceed-
ings of the First International Conference on Lan-
guage resources and Evaluation, pages 241–248.

Pavel Smrž and Anna Sinopalnikova. 2003. Present-
day lexical knowledge bases - what they are and
what they need. In Proceedings of the Eight In-
ternational Symposium on Social Communication,
pages 100–105, Santiago de Cuba. Center of Ap-
plied Linguistics of the Santiago de Cuba’s branch
of the Ministry of Science, Technology and the En-
vironment.

Antonio Toral and Monica Monachini. 2007. Simple-
owl: a generative lexicon ontology for nlp and
the semantic web. In Workshop of Cooperative
Construction of Linguistic Knowledge Bases, 10th
Congress of Italian Association for Artificial Intelli-
gence.


