










































Events are Not Simple: Identity, Non-Identity, and Quasi-Identity


Proceedings of the The 1st Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation, pages 21–28,
Atlanta, Georgia, 14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Events are Not Simple: Identity, Non-Identity, and Quasi-Identity  
 

Eduard Hovy 
Language Technology Institute 

Carnegie Mellon University 
5000 Forbes Avenue 

Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 
hovy@cmu.edu 

 

Teruko Mitamura 
Language Technology Institute 

Carnegie Mellon University 
5000 Forbes Avenue 

Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 
teruko@cs.cmu.edu 

 

Felisa Verdejo 
E.T.S.I. Informática, UNED 

C/ Juan del Rosal, 16 
(Ciudad Universitaria) 
28040 Madrid, Spain 

felisa@lsi.uned.es 
 

                Jun Araki Andrew Philpot 
                  Language Technology Institute Information Sciences Institute 

                  Carnegie Mellon University University of Southern California 
                5000 Forbes Avenue 

                 Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 
4676 Admiralty Way 

Marina del Rey, CA 90292, USA 
       junaraki@cs.cmu.edu philpot@isi.edu 

 
Abstract1 

Despite considerable theoretical and computa-
tional work on coreference, deciding when two 
entities or events are identical is very difficult.  
In a project to build corpora containing corefer-
ence links between events, we have identified 
three levels of event identity (full, partial, and 
none). Event coreference annotation on two cor-
pora was performed to validate the findings.    

1 The Problem of Identity 

Last year we had HLT in Montreal, and this year 
we did it in Atlanta.   

Does the “did it” refer to the same conference or 
a different one?  The two conferences are not iden-
tical, of course, but they are also not totally unre-
lated—else the “did it” would not be interpretable.   

When creating text, we treat instances of entities 
and events as if they are fixed, well-described, and 
well-understood.  When we say “that boat over 
there” or “Mary’s wedding next month”, we as-
sume the reader creates a mental representation of 
the referent, and we proceed to refer to it without 
further thought.   

However, as has been often noted in theoretical 
studies of semantics, this assumption is very prob-
lematic (Mill, 1872; Frege 1892; Guarino, 1999).  
Entities and (even more so) events are complex 
composite phenomena in the world, and they un-
dergo change.  

                                                             
1 This work was supported by grants from DARPA and NSF, 
as well as by funding that supported Prof. M. Felisa Vedejo 
from UNED Madrid. 

Since nobody has complete knowledge, the au-
thor’s mental image of the entity or event in ques-
tion might differ from the reader’s, and from the 
truth.  Specifically, the properties the author as-
sumes for the event or entity might not be the ones 
the reader assumes. This difference has deep con-
sequences for the treatment of the semantic mean-
ing of a text.  In particular, it fundamentally affects 
how one must perform coreference among entities 
or events.   

As discussed in Section 6, events have been the 
focus of study in both Linguistics and NLP (Chen 
and Ji, 2009; Bejan and Harabagiu, 2008, 2010; 
Humphreys et al., 1997).  Determining when two 
event mentions in text corefer is, however, an un-
solved problem2.  Past work in NLP has avoided 
some of the more complex problems by consider-
ing only certain types of coreference, or by simply 
ignoring the major problems.  The results have 
been partial, or inconsistent, annotations.   

In this paper we describe our approach to the 
problem of coreference among events.  In order to 
build a corpus containing event coreference links 
that is annotated with high enough inter-annotator 
agreement to be useful for machine learning, it has 
proven necessary to create a model of event identi-
ty that is more elaborate than is usually assumed in 
the NLP literature, and to formulate quite specific 
definitions for its central concepts.   

                                                             
2 In this work, we mean both events and states when we say 
“event”.  A state refers to a fixed, or regularly changing, con-
figuration of entities in the world, such as “it is hot” or “he is 
running”.  An event occurs when there is a change of state in 
the world, such as “he stops running” or “the plane took off”. 

21



 Event coreference is the problem of determin-
ing when two mentions in a text refer to the ‘same’ 
event. Whether or not the event actually occurred 
in reality is a separate issue; a text can describe 
people flying around on dragons or broomsticks.  
While the events might be actual occurrences, hy-
pothesized or desired ones, etc., they exist in the 
text as Discourse Elements (DEs), and this is what 
we consider in this work. 

Each DE is referred to (explicitly or implicitly) 
in the text by a mention, for example “destroy”, 
“the attack”, “that event”, or “it”. But it is often 
unclear whether two mentions refer to the same DE 
or to closely related ones, or to something alto-
gether different. The following example illustrates 
two principal problems of event coreference:  

While Turkish troops have been fighting_E.1 
a Kurdish faction in northern Iraq, two other 
Kurdish groups have been battling_E.2 each 
other. 
A radio station operated_E.3 by the Kurdistan 
Democratic Party said_E.4 the party's forces 
attacked_E.5 positions of the Patriotic Union 
of Kurdistan on Monday in the Kurdish re-
gion's capital Irbil. 
The Voice of Iraqi Kurdistan radio, moni-
tored_E.6 by the British Broadcasting Corp., 
said_E.7 more than 80 Patriotic Union fight-
ers were killed_E.8 and at least 150 wound-
ed_E.9. 
The fighting_E.10 was also reported_E.11 
by a senior Patriotic Union official, Kusret 
Rasul Ali, who said_E.12 PUK forces re-
pelled_E.13 a large KDP attack_E.14. 
… 
Ali claimed_E.16 that 300 KDP fighters were 
killed_E.17 or wounded_E.18 and only 11 
Patriotic Union members died_E.19. 
Problem 1: Partial event overlap.  Event E.2, 

“battling each other”, refers to an ongoing series of 
skirmishes between two Kurdish groups, the KDP 
and the PUK.  Since one of these battles, where the 
KDP attacked positions of the PUK, is E.5, it is 
natural to say that E.2 and E.5 corefer.  However, 
E.2 clearly denotes other battles as well, and there-
fore E.5 and E.2 cannot fully corefer.  In another 
example, event E.8 refers to the killing of a num-
ber of soldiers as part of this fight E.5, and event 
E.9 to the wounding of others.  Both events E.8 

and E.9 constitute an intrinsic part of the attack 
E.5, and hence corefer to it, but are each only part 
of E.5, and hence neither can fully corefer to it.   

Problem 2: Inconsistent reporting.  This news 
fragment contains two reports of the fight: E.5 and 
E.10.  Since E.10 describes E.5 from the perspec-
tive of a senior PUK official, it should corefer to 
E.5.  But where the KDP’s report claims more than 
80 PUK fighters killed (event E.8, part of E.5), the 
PUK official said that only 11 PUK members died 
(event E.19, part of E.10).  Without taking into 
account the fact that the two killing events are re-
ports made by different speakers, it would not be 
possible to recognize them as coreferent.   

Examples of partial event overlap and incon-
sistent reporting are common in text, and occur as 
various types.  In our work, we formally recognize 
partial event overlap, calling it partial event identi-
ty, which permits different degrees and types of 
event coreference.  This approach simplifies the 
coreference problem and highlights various inter-
event relationships that facilitates grouping events 
into ‘families’ that support further analysis and 
combination with other NLP system components.   

In this paper, we introduce the idea that there are 
three degrees of event identity: fully identical, qua-
si-identical, and fully independent (not identical).  
Full identity reflects in full coreference and quasi-
identity in partial coreference.  Fully independent 
events are singletons.  

Our claims in this paper are:  
• Events, being complex phenomena, can 

corefer fully (identity) or partially (quasi-identity).  
• Event coreference annotation is considera-

bly clarified when partial coreference is allowed.  
• A relatively small fixed set of types of 

quasi-identity suffices to describe most of them.  
• Different domains and genres highlight 

different subsets of these quasi-identity types.   
• Different auxiliary knowledge sources and 

texts are relevant for different types. 

2 Types of Full and Partial Identity 
Def: Two mentions fully corefer if their activi-

ty/event/state DE is identical in all respects, as far 
as one can tell from their occurrence in the text.  
(In particular, their agents, location, and time are 
identical or compatible.)  One can distinguish sev-
eral types of identity, as spelled out below.  

22



Def: Two mentions partially corefer if activi-
ty/event/state DE is quasi-identical: most aspects 
are the same, but some additional information is 
provided for one or the other that is not shared. 
There are two principal types of quasi-identity, as 
defined below.  

Otherwise, two mentions do not corefer.  

2.1 Full Identity  
Mention1 is identical to mention2 iff there is no 
semantic (meaning) difference between them. Just 
one DE, and exactly the same aspects of the DE, 
are understood from both mentions in their con-
texts. It is possible to replace the one mention with 
the other without any semantic change (though 
some small syntactic changes might be required to 
ensure grammaticality). Note that mention2 may 
contain less detail than mention1 and remain iden-
tical, if it carries over information from mention1 
that is understood / inherited from the context.  
However, when mention2 provides more or new 
information not contained in mention1 or naturally 
inferred for it, then the two are no longer identical. 
Usually, exact identity is rare within a single text, 
but may occur more often across texts.  We identi-
fy the following types:  

1. Lexical identity: The two mentions use 
exactly the same senses of the same word(s), in-
cluding derivational words (e.g., “destroy”, “de-
struction”). 

2. Synonym: One mention’s word is a syno-
nym of the other’s word.  

3. Wide-reading: One mention is a synonym 
of the wide reading of the other (defined below, 
under Quasi-identity:Scriptal).  For example, in 
“the attack(E1) took place yesterday.  The bomb-
ing(E2) killed four people”, E1 and E2 are fully 
coreferent only when “bombing” is read in its wide 
sense that denotes the whole attack, not the narrow 
sense that denotes just the actual exploding of the 
bomb.   

4. Paraphrase: One mention is a paraphrase 
of the other.  Here some syntactic differences may 
occur.  Some examples are active/passive trans-
formation (“she gave him the book” / “he was giv-
en the book by her”), shifts of perspective that do 
not add or lose information (“he went to Boston” / 
“he came to Boston”), etc.  No extra semantic in-
formation is provided in one mention or the other.    

5. Pronoun: One mention refers deictically 
to the DE, as in (“the party” / “that event”), (“the 
election [went well]” / “it [went well]”).   

2.2  Quasi-identity  
Mention1 is quasi- (partially) identical to mention2 
iff they refer to the ‘same’ DE but one mention 
includes information that is not contained in the 
other, not counting information understood/inhe-
rited from the context.  They are semantically not 
fully identical, though the core part of the two 
mentions is.  One mention can replace the other, 
but some information will be changed, added, or 
lost.  (This is the typical case between possible 
coreferent mentions within a document.)   

We distinguish between two core types of partial 
identity: Membership and Subevent.  The essential 
difference between the two is which aspects of the 
two events in question differ.  Member-of obtains 
when we have two instances of the same event that 
differ in some particulars, such as time and loca-
tion and [some] participants (agents, patients, etc).  
In contrast, Subevent obtains when we have differ-
ent events that occur at more or less the same place 
and time with the same cast of participants.   

Membership: Mention1 is a set of similar DEs 
(multiple instances of the same kind of event), like 
several birthday parties, and mention2 is one or 
more of them.  More precisely, we say that an 
event B is a member of A if: (i) A is a set of mul-
tiple instances of the same type of event (and 
hence its mention usually pluralized); (ii) B’s 
DE(s) is one or more (but not all) of them; (iii) ei-
ther or both the time and the place of B’s DE(s) 
and (some of) A’s DEs are different.  For example, 
in “I attended three parties(E1) last month.  The 
first one(E2) was the best”, E2 is a member of E1.  
The relation that links the single instance to the set 
is member-of.  

Subevent: The DE of mention1 is a script (a ste-
reotypical sequence of events, performed by an 
agent in pursuit of a given goal, such as eating at a 
restaurant, executing a bombing, running for elec-
tion), and mention2 is one of the actions/events 
executed as part of that script (say, paying the 
waiter, or detonating the bomb, or making a cam-
paign speech).  More precisely, we say that an 
event B is a subevent of an event A if: (i) A is a 
complex sequence of activities, mostly performed 
by the same (or compatible) agent; (ii) B is one of 

23



these activities; and (iii) B occurs at the same time 
and place as A.  Here A acts as a kind of collector 
event.  Often, the whole script is named by the key 
event of the script (for example, in “he planned the 
explosion”, the “explosion” signifies the whole 
script, including planning, planting the bomb, the 
detonation, etc.; but the actual detonation event 
itself can also be called “the explosion”).  We call 
the interpretation of the mention that refers to the 
whole script its wide reading, and the interpreta-
tion that refers to just the key subevent the narrow 
reading.  It is important not to confuse the two; a 
wide reading and a narrow reading of a word can-
not corefer3. The relation that links the narrow 
reading DE to the wide one is sub-to.   

Several aspects of the events in question provide 
key information to differentiate between members 
and subevents:   

1. Time: When the time of occurrence of 
mention1 is temporally ‘close enough’ to the time 
of occurrence of mention2, then it is likely that one 
is a Subevent of the other.  More precisely, we say 
that an event B is a subevent of event A if: (i) A 
and B are both events; (ii) the mentions of A and B 
both refer to the same overall DE; and (iii) the time 
of occurrence of B is contained in the time of oc-
currence of A. But if (i) and (ii) hold but not (iii), 
and A is a set of events (plural), then B is a mem-
ber of A.  (In (Humphreys et al., 1997), any varia-
tion in time automatically results in a decision of 
non-coreference.)   

2. Space/location: The location of mention1 
is spatially ‘close enough’ to the location of men-
tion2.  More precisely, we say that an event B is a 
subevent of event A if: (i) A and B are both 
events; (ii) the mentions of A and B both refer to 
the same overall DE; and (iii) the location of oc-
currence of B is contained in, or overlaps with, or 
abuts the location of occurrence of A.  But if (i) 
and (ii) hold but not (iii), and A is a set of events 
(plural), then B is a member of A. 

                                                             
3 For example, in “James perpetrated the shooting. He was 
arrested for the attack”, “shooting” is used in its wide sense 
and here is coreferent with “attack”, since it applies to a whole 
sequence of events.  In contrast, “James perpetrated the shoot-
ing.  He is the one who actually pulled the trigger”, “shooting” 
is used in its narrow sense to mean just the single act.  Typi-
cally, a word with two readings can corefer (i.e., be lexically 
or synonymically identical to) another in the same reading 
only. 

3.  Event participants: Mention1 and men-
tion2 refer to the same DE but differ in the overall 
cast of participants involved.  In these cases, the 
member relation obtains, and can be differentiated 
into subtypes, since participants of events can dif-
fer in several ways.  For example, if: (i) the men-
tions of events A and B refer to the same overall 
DE; and (ii) the participants (agents, patients, etc.) 
of mention2 are a subset of the participants of 
mention1, as in “the crowd demonstrated on the 
square. Susan and Mary were in it”, then event B is 
a participant-member of event A.  In another ex-
ample, event B is a participant-instance-member 
of event A if: (i) the mentions of events A and B 
refer to the same overall DE; and (ii) one or more 
of the participants (agents, patients, etc.) of men-
tion2 is/are an instance of the participants of men-
tion1, as in “a firebrand addressed the crowd on the 
square. Joe spoke for an hour”, where Joe is the 
firebrand.  

There are other ways in which two mentions 
may refer to the same DE but differ from one an-
other.  Usually these differences are not semantic 
but reflect an orientation or perspective difference.  
For example, one mention may include the speak-
er’s evaluation/opinion, while the other is neutral, 
as in “He sang the silly song.  He embarrassed 
himself”, or the spatial orientation of the speaker, 
as in “she went to New York” / “she came to New 
York”.  We treat these cases as fully coreferent.   

Sometimes it is very difficult to know whether 
two mentions are bidirectionally implied, meaning 
that the two must corefer, or whether they are only 
quasi-identical (i.e., one entails the other but not 
vice versa).  For example, in “he had a heart at-
tack” / “he died”, the two mentions are not identi-
cal because one can have a heart attack and not die 
from it. In contrast, “he had a fatal heart attack” / 
“he died from a heart attack” are identical.  In “she 
was elected President” / “she took office as Presi-
dent”, it is more difficult to decide. Does being 
elected automatically entail taking office?  In some 
political systems it may, and in others it may not.  
When in doubt, we treat the case as only quasi-
identical.  Thus, comparing to examples from Full-
Identity: Paraphrase, the following are only quasi-
identical because of additional information: “she 
sold the book” / “she sold Peter the book”; “she 
sold Peter the book” / “Peter got [not bought] the 
book from her”. 

24



Quasi-identity has been considered in corefer-
ence before in (Hasler et al., 2006) but not as ex-
tensively, and in (Recasens and Hovy, 2010a; 
2011) but applied only to entities.  When applied to 
events, the issue becomes more complex.  

3 Two Problems  
3.1 Domain and Reporting Events  

As described above, inconsistent reporting occurs 
when a DE stated in reported text contains signifi-
cant differences from the author’s description of 
the same DE.   

To handle such cases we have found it necessary 
to additionally identify communication events, 
which we call Reportings, during annotation be-
cause they provide a context in which a DE is stat-
ed.  We identify two principal types of Reporting 
verbs: locutionary verbs “say”, “report”, “an-
nounce”, etc.) and Speech Acts (“condemn”, 
“promise”, “support”, “blame”, etc.).  Where the 
former verbs signal merely a telling, the latter 
verbs both say and thereby do something.  For ex-
ample in the following paragraph, “admitted” and 
“say” are communication events:  

Memon admitted_R.7,in-sayR.3 his in-
volvement in activities_E.8,in-sayR.3 in-
volving an explosives-laden van near the 
president's motorcade, police said_R.3”.  
Sometimes the same event can participate in-
side two reporting events, as in   “The LA 
Times lauded_R.1 the decision_E.2,in-
sayR.1,in-sayR.3, which the NY Times 
lampooned_R.3. 

Though an added annotation burden, the link from 
a DE to a reporting event allows the analyst or 
learning system to discount apparent contradictory 
aspects of the DE and make more accurate identity 
decisions.     

3.2 Unclear Semantics of Events  

Sometimes it is difficult to determine the exact 
relationships between events since their semantics 
is unclear.  In the following, is E.45 coreferent to 
E.44, or only partially?  If so, how?  

Amnesty International has accused both sides 
of violating_E.44 international humanitarian 
law by targeting_E.45 civilian areas, and ... 

We decided that E.44 is not fully coreferent with 
E.45, since violating is not the same as targeting.  
Also, E.45 is not a subevent of E.44 since “violat-
ing” is not a script with a well-defined series of 
steps, does not trigger “targeting”, and does not 
occur before “targeting”.  Rather, targeting is a 
certain form or example of violation/violating. (It 
might be easier if the sentence were: “... of violat-
ing international humanitarian law by targeting 
civilian areas and the human rights group, by kill-
ing civilians, and by....”.  As such E.45 could be 
interpreted as a member of E.44, interpreting the 
latter as a series of violations.)   

4 Annotation  

To validate these ideas we have been annotating 
newspaper texts within the context of a large pro-
ject on automated deep reading of text. This pro-
ject combines Information Extraction, parsing, and 
various forms of inference to analyze a small num-
ber of texts and to then answer questions about 
them.  The inability of current text analysis engines 
to handle event coreference has been a stumbling 
block in the project.  By creating a corpus of texts 
annotated for coreference we are working to enable 
machine learning systems to learn which features 
are relevant for coreference and then ultimately to 
perform such coreference as well.  

We are annotating two corpora: 
1. The Intelligence Community (IC) Corpus 

contains texts in the Violent Events domain 
(bombings, killings, wars, etc.).  Given the relative 
scarcity of the partial coreference subtypes, we 
annotated only instances of full coreference, 
Subevent, and Member relations.  To handle 
Subevents one needs an unambiguous definition of 
the scripts in the domain.  Fortunately this domain 
offers a manageable set of events (our event ontol-
ogy comprises approximately 50 terms) with a 
subevent structure that is not overly complex but 
still realistic.  We did not find the need to exceed 
three layers of scriptal granularity, as in  campaign 
> {bombing, attack} > {blast, kill, wound}.  

2. The Biography (Bio) Corpus contains texts 
describing the lives of famous people. Typically, 
these texts are written when the person dies or has 
some notable achievement.  Given the complexi-
ties of description of artistic and other creative 
achievements, we restrict our corpus to achieve-

25



ments in politics, science, sports, and other more 
factual endeavors.  More important than scriptal 
granularity in this domain is temporal sequencing.  

We obtained and modified a version of the An-
CoraPipe entity coreference annotation interface 
(Bertran et al., 2010) that was kindly given us by 
the AnCora team at the University of Barcelona.  
We implemented criteria and an automated method 
for automatically identifying domain and reporting 
events.  We also created a tool to check and dis-
play the results of annotation, and technology to 
deliver various agreement scores.  

Using different sets of annotators (from 3 to 6 
people per text), we have completed a corpus of 
100 texts in the IC domain and are in process of 
annotating the Bio corpus. Our various types of 
full and partial coreference and the associated an-
notation guidelines were developed and refined 
over the first third of these documents.   

Table 1 shows statistics and inter-annotator 
agreement for the remaining 65 articles.  The aver-
age number of domain and reporting events per 
article is 41.2.  We use Fleiss’s kappa since we 
have more than two annotators per article.  The 
(rather low) score for member coreference is not 
really reliable given the small number of instances.  

  
 Avg no 

per 
article 

Agreement 
(Fleiss’s 
kappa) 

Full coreference relations 
Member coreference relations 
Subevent coreference relations 

19.5 0.620 
2.7 0.213 
7.2 0.467 

Table 1: Annotation statistics and agreement. 

5 Validation and Use 
To validate the conceptualization and definitions of 
full and partial identity relations, we report in 
(Araki et al., 2013) a study that determines correla-
tions between the Member and Subevent relation 
instances and a variety of syntactic and lexico-
semantic features.  The utility of these features to 
support automated event coreference is reported in 
the same paper.   

We are now developing a flexible recursive pro-
cedure that integrates coreference of events and of 
their pertinent participants (including locations and 
times).  This procedure employs inference in addi-
tion to feature-based classification to compensate 
for the shortcomings of each method alone.   

6 Relevant Past Work 
The problem of identity has been addressed by 
scholars since antiquity.  In the intensional ap-
proach (for example, De Saussure, 1896) a concept 
is defined as a set of attributes (differentiae), that 
serve to distinguish it from other concepts; two 
concepts are identical iff all their attributes and 
values are.  In the extensional approach (Frege, 
1982) a concept can be defined as the set of all in-
stances of that concept; two concepts are identical 
when their two extensional sets are.    

Given the impossibility of either approach to 
support practical work, AI scholars have devoted 
some attention to so-called Identity Criteria.  Gua-
rino (1999) outlines several ‘dimensions’ along 
which entities can remain identical or change un-
der transformations; for example, a glass before 
and after it is crushed is identical with respect to its 
matter but not its shape; the ACL now and one 
hundred years hence is (probably) identical as an 
organization but not in its membership.   

There has not been much theoretical work on 
semantic identity in the NLP community.  But 
there has been a considerable amount of work on 
the problem of coreference. Focusing on entity 
coreference are (McCarthy and Lehnert, 1995; Cu-
lotta et al., 2007; Ng, 2007; Ng, 2009; Finkel and 
Manning, 2008; Ng, 2009).  Focusing on event 
coreference are (Humphries et al., 1997; Chen and 
Zi, 2009; Bejan and Harabagiu, 2008; 2010).   

Anaphora and bridging reference are discussed 
in (Poesio and Artstein, 2005; 2007). Relevant to 
events is the TIME-ML corpus (Mani and 
Pustejovsky, 2004; Pustejovsky et al., 2003), 
which provides a specification notation for events 
and temporal expressions. 

Several corpora contain annotations for entity 
coreference, including the Prague Dependency 
Treebank (Kučová and Hajičová. 2004), the ACE 
corpus (Walker et al., 2006), and OntoNotes (Pra-
dhan et al., 2007).  

Most similar to our work is that of (Hasler et al., 
2006). In that study, coreferential events and their 
arguments (also coreference between the argu-
ments) were annotated for the terrorism/security 
domain, considering five event categories (attack, 
defend, injure, die, contact), and five event clusters 
(Bukavu bombing, Peru hostages, Tajikistan hos-
tages, Israel suicide bombing and China-Taiwan 

26



hijacking). They also annotated information about 
the kind of coreferential link, such as identity / 
synonymy / generalization / specialization / other.   

Our work takes further the ideas of (Hasler et 
al., 2006) and (Recasens et al., 2011) in elaborating 
the types of full and partial identity, as they are 
manifest in event coreference.   

7 Conclusion 

The problem of entity and event identity, and 
hence coreference, is challenging.  We provide a 
definition of identity and two principal types of 
quasi-identity, with differentiation based on differ-
ences in location, time, and participants.  We hope 
that these ideas help to clarify the problem and im-
prove inter-annotator agreement. 

Acknowledgments 
Our grateful thanks goes to Prof. Antonia Martí 

and her team for their extensive work on the modi-
fications of the AnCoraPipe annotation interface. 

References  
Araki, J., T, Mitamura, and E.H. Hovy. 2013. Identity 

and Quasi-Identity Relations for Event Coreference. 
Unpublished manuscript. 

Bejan, C.A. and S. Harabagiu. 2008. A Linguistic Re-
source for Discovering Event Structures and Resolv-
ing Event Coreference. Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation (LREC 08). 

Bejan, C.A. and S. Harabagiu. 2010. Unsupervised 
Event Coreference Resolution with Rich Linguistic 
Features. Proceedings of the 48th conference of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 10). 

Bertran, M., O. Borrega, M.A. Martí, and M. Taulé, 
2010. AnCoraPipe: A New Tool for Corpora Annota-
tion. Working paper 1: TEXT-MESS 2.0 (Text-
Knowledge 2.0). Available at 
http://clic.ub.edu/files/AnCoraPipe_0.pdf  

Chen, Z. and H. Ji. 2009. Graph-based Event Corefer-
ence Resolution. Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 09 
workshop on TextGraphs-4: Graph-based Methods 
for Natural Language Processing. 

Culotta, A., M. Wick, and A. McCallum. 2007. First-
order probabilistic models for coreference resolution. 
Proceedings of the HLT/NAACL conference.  

De Saussure, F. 1896. Course in General Linguistics. 
Open Court Classics. 

Finkel, J.R. and C.D. Manning. 2008. Enforcing transi-
tivity in coreference resolution. Proceedings of the 
ACL-HLT conference, pp. 45–48.  

Florian, R., J F Pitrelli, S Roukos, I Zitouni. 2010. Im-
proving Mention Detection Robustness to Noisy In-
put.  Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). 

Frege, G. 1892. On Sense and Reference. Reprinted in 
P. Geach and M. Black (eds.) Translations from the 
Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege. Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1960. 

Guarino, N. 1999. The Role of Identity Conditions in 
Ontology Design. In C. Freksa and D.M. Mark (eds.), 
Spatial Information Theory: Cognitive and Computa-
tional Foundations of Geographic Information Sci-
ence. Proceedings of International Conference 
COSIT '99.  Springer Verlag. 

Hasler, L., C. Orasan, and K. Naumann. 2006. NPs for 
Events: Experiments in Coreference Annotation. 
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-06), pp. 
1167–1172.  

Hasler, L. and C. Orasan. 2009. Do Coreferential Ar-
guments make Event Mentions Coreferential? Pro-
ceedings of the 7th Discourse Anaphora and 
Anaphor Resolution Colloquium (DAARC 09), pp 
151–163. 

Humphreys, K., R. Gaizauskas and S. Azzam. 1997.  
Event Coreference for Information Extraction. Pro-
ceedings of the ACL conference Workshop on Opera-
tional Factors in Practical, Robust Anaphora 
Resolution for Unrestricted Texts (ANARESOLU-
TION 97).  

Kučová, L. and E. Hajičová. 2004. Coreferential rela-
tions in the Prague Dependency Treebank. Proceed-
ings of the DAARC workshop, pp. 97–102. 

Mani, I. and J. Pustejovsky. 2004. Temporal Discourse 
Models for Narrative Structure. Proceedings of the 
ACL 2004 Workshop on Discourse Annotation.  

McCarthy, J.F. and W. Lehnert. 1995. Using Decision 
trees for Coreference Resolution. Proceedings of the 
IJCAI conference.  

Mill, J.S. 1872. A System of Logic, definitive 8th edi-
tion. 1949 reprint, London: Longmans, Green and 
Company. 

Ng, V. 2007. Shallow Semantics for Coreference Reso-
lution. Proceedings of the IJCAI conference. 

27



Ng, V. 2009. Graph-cut-based Anaphoricity Determina- 
tion for Coreference Resolution. Proceedings of the 
NAACL-HLT conference, pp. 575–583. 

Poesio, M. and R. Artstein. 2005. The reliability of ana-
phoric annotation, reconsidered: Taking ambiguity 
into account. Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on 
Frontiers in Corpus Annotation II. 

Poesio, M. and R. Artstein. 2008. Anaphoric annotation 
in the ARRAU corpus. Proceedings of the LREC 
conference. 

Pradhan, S., E.H. Hovy, M. Marcus, M. Palmer, L. 
Ramshaw, and R. Weischedel 2007. OntoNotes: A 
Unified Relational Semantic Representation. Interna-
tional Journal of Semantic Computing 1(4), pp. 405–
420.  

Pustejovsky, J., J. Castaño, R. Ingria, R. Saurí, R. Gai-
zauskas, A. Setzer and G. Katz. 2003. TimeML: Ro-
bust Specification of Event and Temporal 
Expressions in Text. Proceedings of IWCS-5, Fifth 
International Workshop on Computational Seman-
tics. 

Recasens, M. and E.H. Hovy. 2010a. Coreference Reso-
lution across Corpora: Languages, Coding Schemes, 
and Preprocessing Information. Proceedings of the 
Association of Computational Linguistics conference 
(ACL 10).  

Recasens, M. and E.H. Hovy. 2010b. BLANC: Imple-
menting the Rand Index for Coreference Evaluation.  
Journal of Natural Language Engineering 16(5).  

Recasens, M., E.H. Hovy, and M.A. Martí. 2011. Identi-
ty, Non-identity, and Near-identity: Addressing the 
Complexity of Coreference.  Lingua.   

Taulé, M., M.A. Martí. and M. Recasens. 2008. An-
Cora: Multilevel Annotated Corpora for Catalan and 
Spanish. Proceedings of the LREC 08 conference, pp. 
96–101.  

Walker, C., S. Strassel, J. Medero 2006. The ACE 2005 
multilingual training corpus.  Linguistic Data Con-
sortium, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. 

28


