










































Tools for non-native readers: the case for translation and simplification


Proceedings of the 2th Workshop of Natural Language Processing for Improving Textual Accessibility (NLP4ITA), pages 20–28,
Atlanta, Georgia, 14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Tools for non-native readers: the case for translation and simplification 
 
 

 Maxine Eskenazi Yibin Lin  
 Language Technologies Institute  Language Technologies Institute 

 Carnegie Mellon University  Carnegie Mellon University 
 Pittsburgh PA 15213  Pittsburgh PA 15213 
max@cmu.edu   yibinl@cs.cmu.edu 

 
Oscar Saz  

 Language Technologies Institute 
 Carnegie Mellon University 

 Pittsburgh PA 15213 
 osaz@cs.cmu.edu  

 

 
 

Abstract 

One of the populations that often needs some 
form of help to read everyday documents is 
non-native speakers. This paper discusses aid 
at the word and word string levels and focuses 
on the possibility of using translation and 
simplification. Seen from the perspective of 
the non-native as an ever-learning reader, we 
show how translation may be of more harm 
than help in understanding and retaining the 
meaning of a word while simplification holds 
promise. We conclude that if reading every-
day documents can be considered as a learn-
ing activity as well as a practical necessity, 
then our study reinforces the arguments that 
defend the use of simplification to make docu-
ments that non-natives need to read more ac-
cessible. 

1 Introduction 

 There are many tools that natural language 
processing (NLP) can offer disadvantaged readers 
to aid them in understanding a document. Readers 
may be at a disadvantage due to poor sight, to cog-
nitive disabilities, or simply to reading in a lan-
guage other than their native one (L1). This paper 
addresses that last case. For non-native readers, 
there are a number of aids that could be made 
available to them. Some aids help on the word 
level, assuming that the understanding of a specific 

word is what is impeding comprehension. Others 
address a more global level, presuming that the 
understanding blockage is due lack of comprehen-
sion of the meaning of a group of words. Our work 
addresses learning English vocabulary, for which 
we have conducted studies on both word-level and 
higher-level aids. We argue that our findings can 
inform what can be done to make documents more 
understandable in general for non-natives. 
 In the past, we have studied the effect of 
aids such as ordered definitions (Dela Rosa and 
Eskenazi, 2011) and synthesized speech (Dela 
Rosa et al., 2010) on learning vocabulary from web 
documents. These aids have been aimed at the 
word level and have been shown to help learning. 
We explored the wider context around an unknown 
word in an effort to give the non-native reader an 
understanding of the several-word context around 
an unknown word in order to help understanding of 
the meaning of the text.  
 Reading documents to learn a language is a 
very different activity from reading an everyday 
document (like a rental agreement) out of neces-
sity. Yet we find that there are similarities between 
the two activities. We believe that, unlike for some 
other categories of disadvantaged readers, each 
document that a non-native reads is a learning 
moment and that they learn the target language 
more with each encounter. These incremental addi-
tions to the readers’ knowledge enable them to be 
increasingly capable of tackling future unknown 
documents. It also reflects on the manner with 

20



which readers tackle a document since some un-
derstanding of the words has to take place in order 
for the document to be understood. We believe that 
these similarities warrant using learning findings to 
guide the choice of NLP tools used in document 
processing for non-native readers. The learning 
environment is used in this paper to measure 
document understanding.  

2 Background  

 Using learning as a means of estimating 
the usefulness of NLP techniques in making texts 
more accessible, we can examine the positions that 
the learning community has taken on the educa-
tional value of several of these techniques. 
 Translation (the use of L1 in second lan-
guage (L2) vocabulary acquisition) is the area in 
which we find the greatest controversy. Models of 
L2 lexical acquisition represent acquisition of new 
L2 words as an assimilation through an L1 lemma 
that is generalized and applied to concepts in L2 
(Jiang, 2000; Kroll and Sunderman, 2003). Exces-
sive use of L1 is believed to reduce L2 fluency and 
to fossilize errors. Context, dictionary definitions 
and examples of other sentences in which a word 
could be used are commonly considered to be the 
most effective tools since students can interiorize 
the concept of the new word without reliance on 
L1. This implies that the use of such techniques 
can lead to better learning and improved fluency 
than direct use of L1 translation. This claim has 
been challenged by Grace (1998), showing that 
that when translation is provided, there are higher 
scores on vocabulary tests both in the short-term 
and long-term use of the new words. Prince (1996) 
also claimed that the more proficient students 
benefit more from translation on short-term lexical 
recall tasks, since it is easier for them to get rid of 
the L1 scaffolding. These studies and others have 
been hampered by the ability to accurately measure 
the extent of the subjects’ use of translation. The 
REAP software described below has afforded a 
more precise estimate of use and of retention of 
vocabulary items. 
 Simplification has had more widespread 
acceptance. Simplified texts have often been pro-
vided to language learners either along with the 
original text or alone (Burstein et al, 2007, Peter-
sen and Ostendorf, 2007). These texts have been 
used as reading comprehension exercises or text-

book reading materials (Crossley, et al. 2007). Ac-
cording to Oh (2008), simplification typically uses 
shorter sentences, simpler grammar and controlled 
vocabulary. The use of simplified texts has been 
shown to significantly help students’ reading com-
prehension (Yano, et al. 1994, Oh 2008). However, 
there has not been any research specifically about 
whether reading the simplified texts, rather than 
the original ones, will affect the students’ vocabu-
lary acquisition. There are a few disadvantages 
related to simplifying texts for ESL students. Yano 
et al. (1994) note that simplified texts may appear 
unnatural, giving them a lack of flow, thus making 
them difficult to read. They may also lack the 
complex grammar structures that commonly exist 
in the real world (that students should be exposed 
to). The simplified texts used in these studies were 
created by hand and are usually written with the 
express intention of featuring certain vocabulary 
and/or syntactic elements for the purpose of being 
used by a non-native learner. 
 To address the link between vocabulary 
and comprehension of a text, the literature often 
reveals mastery of vocabulary as the key. Perfetti 
(2010) emphasized the vocabulary-comprehension 
link. Increased vocabulary has been shown to in-
crease comprehension. Thus text comprehension 
for non-natives could depend on either presenting 
only words that they can understand or offering an 
aid for understanding any challenging words that 
they may encounter.  

2.1 NLP techniques 

 Assuming that we can aid a non-native in 
understanding a document by using natural lan-
guage processing techniques, numerous possibili-
ties present themselves. We can help the student 
both on the word level and on a more global (con-
textual) level. On the word level, the one aid that 
does not appear to need any processing is diction-
ary definitions. Access to an online dictionary 
would give the student definitions to any word in 
question. However, many words are polysemous, 
often having several meanings for the same part of 
speech (like “bank”). In that case, the reader has to 
choose which one of the meanings is the right one 
for the context of the text at hand. This dilemma 
(and possible incorrect choice) can be avoided by 
using word sense disambiguation (Dela Rosa and 
Eskenazi 2011). We showed that when definitions 

21



are presented in an ordered list, according to the 
best fit in the context, students learned words bet-
ter. Another word-level aid is the use of speech 
synthesis to speak the word to the reader (Dela 
Rosa 2010). Non-natives know some words au-
rally, but have never seen them in written form. 
This aid is especially helpful when the orthography 
of an unknown word makes it difficult to deduce 
the pronunciation (as in “thought”). Another aid 
presents a word in other contexts. Giving the stu-
dent the ability to compare several contexts with 
their contrasting meanings is helpful for learning. 
These contexts can be found by searching for sen-
tences with a target word and a set of commonly 
co-occurring context words. 
 While research in vocabulary acquisition 
over the years has shown positive results for many 
word-centric learning aids, it is interesting to ex-
pand the offerings to context-level aids. We were 
also curious to see if the use of the REAP platform 
(Brown and Eskenazi, 2005) could help add to the 
knowledge of the role of translation in L2 vocabu-
lary learning. This is what brought us to examine 
the effect of translation and simplification on 
learning. These two techniques, thanks to the use 
of NLP, could be totally automated in the future. 
Research in machine translation (MT) goes back 
several decades and many types of statistical mod-
els have been employed (Koehn, 2010). If all of 
the documents to be translated are in one given 
domain, then sufficiently good automatically trans-
lations can be obtained.  
 Automated simplification is a newer do-
main. There has been significant progress in sim-
plifying documents for use by specific 
disadvantaged populations (Alusio et al 2010, 
Bach et al, 2011, Chandrasekar and Srinivas, 1997, 
Inui et al, 2003, Medero and Ostendorf, 2011, 
Yaskar et al 2010). Like Alusio and colleagues, 
who work with low-literacy populations, and a few 
other authors, we are concerned not only about the 
quality of the simplification, but also about 
whether the simplified documents actually help 
disadvantaged readers. 
 We could have also looked at summariza-
tion, which uses some of the same techniques that 
are used for simplification. In some early unpub-
lished studies, we found that students experienced 
difficulty when asked to summarize a passage. 
They usually responded by simply cutting and 
pasting the first sentence of that passage. This 

could have meant that students just could not pro-
duce a well-structured sentence and thus avoided 
doing so. But non-natives, who are asked to iden-
tify the appropriate summary out of four possibili-
ties in a multiple choice question, also had much 
difficulty. Thus, rather than giving a very high-
level overview of a passage through summariza-
tion, we chose to look at the intermediate level aids 
that would also contribute to vocabulary under-
standing: translation and simplification of local 
contexts.  
 Translation and simplification can both be 
characterized as relating to overall context, operat-
ing effectively on a string of several words rather 
than on only one word. They both aid in under-
standing the meaning of the whole string as op-
posed to just one target word, and their help for 
unknown words is through making the context of 
the word clear enough to surmise the meaning of 
the word. Besides its controversial status, transla-
tion had also attracted our interest when we ob-
served the students’ efforts to get translations for 
tasks in class. We wanted to find out if translation 
had different properties from all other aids. Trans-
lation is different from the aids that we had used in 
the past in two ways:  

 it uses L1  
 it covers several-word contexts, rather 

than just one word.  
To tease apart these two characteristics, we became 
interested in simplification, which shares the sec-
ond characteristic, but not the first. 

3 The REAP tutor 

 The studies in this paper used the CMU 
REAP intelligent tutor. That tutor provides curricu-
lum for vocabulary acquisition for non-native stu-
dents while serving as a platform for research 
studies (Brown and Eskenazi, 2005). REAP gives 
students texts retrieved from the Internet that are 
matched to their reading level and their preferences 
(Heilman et al., 2008) and helps them acquire new 
words from context (Juffs et al., 2006). REAP in-
corporates several features like pop-up word defi-
nitions, examples of the word in other contexts, 
text-to-speech synthesis of words and translation of 
words to the student’s native language. 
 REAP presents the reading in any web 
browser (see Figure 1). Upon registration, students 
enter their native language. To get a definition, 

22



clicking on a word brings up a pop-up window 
showing the definition and examples of use of that 
word and a button for hearing the pronunciation of 
the word. Focus words, the words that the teacher 
has chosen for the students to learn, are highlighted 
in the text.  
 From the beginning, REAP has shown that 
it can improve students’ acquisition of new vo-
cabulary in English (Heilman et al., 2006). Fea-
tures embedded in REAP have been validated in 
several experimental studies which showed the 
learning outcomes achieved by the students. REAP 
has been used to study motivation as well as learn-
ing gains. 

 

 
 
Figure 1. REAP interface and features for a 

student whose native language is Mandarin. 
 

4 The translation study 

 REAP was used to study whether transla-
tion helped students to learn vocabulary (Lin, Saz 
and Eskenazi, in review). These studies explored 
whether the students both learned more and be-
came more fluent when they use translation. It is 
challenging to measure fluency. While it is impos-
sible to record everything that the student says in 
her everyday conversations and then measure the 
average rapidity of response, one can measure the 
increase in the rapidity of response from the mo-
ment an item (post-test question) appears on the 
screen to when the student clicks on the answer 
and can compare results for that student as well as 
across groups of students. The documents used in 
this study were gathered from a crawl of the inter-
net for documents containing certain focus words 
that students were to learn. The documents were 

filtered to be at the level of the students and the 
topics were varied, from sports to current events, 
for example. The translation (bilingual dictionary) 
of the words in this study was provided by 
WordReference.com and the Bing Translator 
(http://www.microsofttranslator.com/) for the 
documents (contexts) in the study. The translations 
of all of the focus words in all of the students’ L1s 
were manually checked by native speakers to make 
sure that the translated word corresponded with the 
specific context in which it appeared. If necessary, 
a change in the translation was made to make it 
context-appropriate. 
 All studies described in this paper were 
included as regular curricula at the English Lan-
guage Institute of the University of Pittsburgh. The 
first study involved 27 students taking the Level 5 
Reading course (high-intermediate learners); 25 
were native speakers of Arabic, 1 spoke Spanish 
and 1 spoke Turkish. The second study involved 
26 students in Level 5: 22 of them were native 
Arabic speakers, 2 were Mandarin Chinese speak-
ers and 2 were Korean speakers. There were two 
studies to determine whether the way that the stu-
dents requested translations had an effect on the 
amount of translations they asked for. 
 For both studies, the first session consisted 
of a pre-test which measured knowledge of a set of 
focus words in multiple-choice cloze questions 
(Taylor 1953), where the target word was removed 
from a full, meaningful sentence. There were 2 
questions per focus word. Post-reading (immedi-
ately after reading a document) and post-test (after 
all the training sessions were over) questions had 
the same form as the pre-test and involved com-
pletely different sentences. 
 In each training session, students had one 
400-500 word reading. After each reading, they 
took the post-reading test where they answered 2 
previously unseen cloze questions per focus word. 
The students were shown their results along with 
the correct answers to the cloze questions at the 
end of each post reading test. In the last session, 
the students took a post-test with content similar to 
the pre-test, 2 new unseen questions per focus 
word. 
 The first study took place for 8 weeks in 
the fall of 2011. Each reading session had one 
reading prepared for the students with 4 focus 
words, for a total of 24 focus words. The second 

23



study took place for 6 weeks in the spring of 2012. 
There were also 24 focus words in this study. 
 The main difference in the setup of both 
studies was how the students accessed a transla-
tion. For the fall 2011 study students had to type or 
copy and paste one or more words into a box at the 
bottom of the screen to get the translation. In the 
spring 2012 study they used a left mouseclick to 
get the translation. In both studies, the students 
could click (left mouseclick in fall 2011 and right 
mouseclick in spring 2012) to obtain the definition 
from the Cambridge Advanced Learners’ Diction-
ary (CALD, Walter, 2005) and to listen to text-to-
speech synthesis of the word (Cepstral, 2012). 

The accuracy of each student at the pre-
test, post-reading and post-test was calculated as 
the percentage of correct answers over the total 
number of questions in the test. The fluency was 
calculated as the median response time of a given 
student to answer each question. To measure flu-
ency, we used the median and not the mean of the 
response times since the mean was distorted by a 
few instances of very long response duration for a 
few questions (possibly due to distractions). We 
also used comparative measures, such as gain and 
normalized gain in accuracy between two different 
assessment tasks (for instance, from pre-test to 
post-test) (Hake, 1998). A positive value of the 
gain and the normalized gain means that the stu-
dent achieved higher scores in the post-test. 
 We note that only 14 (17%) of the transla-
tions are for focus words.  
 The results show that students used transla-
tion when it was easier (clicking instead of typing), 
in detriment to using dictionary definitions. Stu-
dents did not request definitions or translations for 
all of the focus words. This may indicate that they 
are not indiscriminately clicking on words, as has 
sometimes been seen in the past. Rather they may 
be making an effort to click on words they felt they 
did not know well. 

 Dictionary Translation 
 All 

words 
Focus 
words 

All 
words 

Focus 
words 

Fall’11 5.29 2.35 2.31 0.64 
Spring’12 1.78 0.84 8.15 2.35 

 
Table 1. Use of dictionary and translation (4 focus 
words/reading in Fall’11, 3 focus words/reading in 
Spring’12). Average is per student and per reading. 
 

 We then examined the accuracy of the stu-
dents for just the words that they chose to translate. 
Table 2 shows that accuracy increases in post-
reading tests and post-tests with respect to the pre-
test for both studies. But there is a drop in the post-
test scores with respect to the post-reading tests in 
spring 2012. Furthermore, there is an increase in 
response time in the post-test, which is more pro-
nounced for spring 2012. These are the first indica-
tions of possible differences in student 
performance related to their patterns in the use of 
translations. 

 
 Accuracy Fluency 
 Scores (mean and standard deviation) Response 

time (median 
value) 

 Pre-test Post-
reading  

Post-test Pre-
test 

Post
-test 

Fall    
’11 

0.35±0.15 0.67±0.11 0.65±0.08 20 
sec. 

22 
sec. 

Spring’
12 

0.48±0.25 0.74±0.16 0.62±0.17 18 
sec. 

23.5 
sec. 

 
Table 2. Accuracy and fluency results for translated 
words. 
 
 To find whether the amount of translation 
actually affected this result, spring 2012 students 
were separated into 2 groups: the 13 students who 
used the least number of translations overall and 
the 13 students who used the most translations. 
Figure 2 shows the normalized gains in post-
reading tests and post-tests over the pre-test for 
these 2 groups. Both groups present a similar gain 
in post-reading (approximately 0.35) and, while 
this gain was lower for groups on the post-test, the 
students who used translation the most had a larger 
loss. Although not significant (p = 0.48), this dif-
ference, which is approximately 0.07 in normalized 
gain, indicates that these students are having more 
difficulty transferring the knowledge they may 
have acquired in the longer term. The low signifi-
cance is mainly due to the relatively small number 
of participants in the study. 

5 The simplification study 

 In this study the setup, using REAP as the 
platform, was similar to the translation study. The 
students could click right for translations or left for 
simplifications and could type a word in a box at 
the bottom of the screen for definitions. Transla-
tions and simplifications could be for one or sev-

24



eral words at a time. The number of questions on 
focus words (24 words this time), over the pretest, 
post-reading test and the post-test remained the 
same. There were 20 students in this study. There 
were 11 speakers of Arabic, 3 of Japanese, 2 each 
of Korean and Chinese and one each of Spanish 
and Serbo-Croatian. 

 

 
FIGURE 2. Gains in post-reading and post-test de-
pending on the amount of translation used 
 
 Again, the translations were carried out 
automatically as described above, with a human 
verification pass. The simplifications were created 
by one of the authors by replacing less frequent 
words with appropriate more frequent ones (Leroy 
and Endicott, 2011) and splitting complex sen-
tences into shorter ones. An example of a simplifi-
cation:  

for: “ They began immigrating in large numbers in the 
1960s for economic reasons and now make up a third of 
the population—but there are also Africans, West Indi-
ans, Pakistanis, Indians, Turks, Chinese, and Eastern 
Europeans.”  
the simplified form was: “They began immigrating in 
large numbers in the 1960s for economic reasons. These 
people now make up a third of the population. There are 
also Africans, West Indians, Pakistanis, Indians, Turks, 
Chinese, and Eastern Europeans.” 

Overall, they requested 218 simplifications, 82 
translations and 79 dictionary lookups. This was 
surprising to us. Given the large number of transla-
tion requests in the past two studies, we were pre-
pared to see overwhelmingly more clicks for 
translations than for simplifications. This result is 
important in deciding what aids can be given to 
non-native readers. While we thought that a reader 
would prefer an aid that involved translation, this 
result shows an acceptance of the L2 aid. Non-

natives probably realize the educational value of 
the L2 tool and voluntarily choose to use it. 
 Only 14 (17%) of the translations con-
tained focus words while 102 (47%) of the simpli-
fications did. Given the small number of focus 
word translations, results cannot be significant. 
REAP significantly helps students to learn focus 
words in general ( p<0 .05 ). Post-reading tests 
show lower accuracy than the post-test. The t-test 
shows that the difference here is not statistically 
significant ( p= 0 . 2 6 ).  
 To control for the quality of the study, we 
compared overall learning gains from this study 
with that of the two translation studies above on 
Table 3 and found them to be similar 

 
 Normalized Gain 
 Pre-test to Post-

reading 
Pre-test to post-test 

Fall’12 0.10 ± 0.24 0.17 ± 0.28 
Fall’11 0.31 ± 0.33 0.31 ± 0.28 
Spring’12 0.35 ± 0.28 0.22 ± 0.21 

Table 3. Learning Outcome: Gains (gain + deviation)  
  
 Figure 3 shows the number of requests for 
simplification and translation for each of the six 
documents in the study compared to their readabil-
ity level (Heilman 2008). We note that the hardest 
document (#6) was not the one for which the most 
aid was requested. This could simply be due to the 
decreasing number of requests for aid over time. 
 

 
Figure 3: Readability vs number of translations and 
simplifications  

25



 To control for any outlier document, we 
also looked at whether any one of the six docu-
ments required more translation than simplifica-
tion. Figure 3 also shows that the trend to request 
more simplification held true for all of the docu-
ments. We note that this can only be called a trend 
due to the significant standard deviation which, in 
turn, is due to the low number of participants. The 
first document was where the requests for the two 
were almost equal. This could be due to the stu-
dents trying out both possibilities to see what they 
liked or to the fact that over a short time they real-
ized the greater value of the L2 aid. 
 Table 4 shows the normalized gains for 
focus words that were translated or simplified. The 
low number of translation requests lead to results 
that are not significant. We note that for simplifica-
tion there is a trend implying learning gains at both 
the post-reading test and, in long term retention, 
for the post-test. 

 
Normalized gain 
Aid pre-test to post-

reading 
pre-test to post-
test 

No. 
items 

Translation -0.07 ± 0.15 0.22 ± 0.13 14 
Simplification 0.27 ± 0.17 0.28 ± 0.18 98 

 
Table 4: Normalized Gain (average and standard 
deviation) for focus words that were translated or 
simplified and number of clicks on focus words 

 
Normalized Gain 

 Pre-test to post-
reading 

Pre-test to post-
test 

no. of 
questions 

Focus words 
not translated 

0.06±0.26 0.17±0.30 946 

Focus words 
not simplified 

0.06±0.26 0.18±0.31 862 

 
Table 5: Normalized Gain (average and standard 
deviation) for focus words that were not translated 
or simplified and number of questions 

 
In the case of non-translated and non-simplified 
focus words, although there was also some room 
for improvement (and at first, it would seem that 
the learning gains are larger), there are some vari-
ables that have not been taken into account here. 
One is that a subject could have often requested 
definitions. Some subjects may benefit more from 
the use of the definitions than from other types of 
help. We will test this hypothesis in the future, 
when we have more data, to see if the benefits 

from each type of help are greater for some sub-
jects than for others. While we are not convinced 
that this is the cause for the differences we see 
here, we do believe that hearing the words when 
working through the documents may be a factor. 
Since the students only have the written form of 
the word at pre-test time, they may know the word 
to hear it, but not by sight. In past years in our use 
of REAP in the classroom, we have noticed many 
students suddenly recognizing a word after hearing 
it (from clicking on the synthesis option). Again 
due to lack of sufficient data, we cannot explore 
this further for this dataset, but plan to look at this 
and any other possible variables in the near future. 

6 Conclusions and further directions 

 We have argued that exploring the learning 
results of non-natives when using various aids for 
learning vocabulary through context may guide our 
choices of reading aids for this population.  
 We have specifically explored the use of 
translation and of simplification. Both simplifica-
tion and translation are voluntarily used by stu-
dents and when both are available, students tend to 
prefer simplification. This should make the use of 
simplified documents in real life reading situations 
very acceptable to non-natives.  
 The overuse of translation contributes to a 
decline in long term retention of new vocabulary 
while the use of simplification appears to aid in 
retention. This could mean that reading any simpli-
fied document may benefit the ever-learning non-
native when encountering future documents.  
 In REAP, we collect documents from the 
Internet and characterize them by reading level. 
We also characterize them by topic (sports, health, 
etc). While we choose these documents to keep up 
the students’ interest, they in no way represent the 
real challenges of dealing with a rental agreement, 
a bank loan document, etc. While REAP does in-
still fundamentals of vocabulary understanding, it 
does not have the student apply this knowledge to 
the situations that are encountered in the real 
world. This is an essential need that can be fulfilled 
by members of the NLP community working to-
gether to create a database of real life challenging 
documents that can be annotated and used as a ba-
sis of comparison of research results. These docu-
ments should also be annotated for readability, etc. 
Such a realistic database can then serve the com-

26



munity as a whole as it develops novel and robust 
simplification tools. 

 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 This work is supported through the Re-
finement and Fluency Thrust of the Pittsburgh Sci-
ence of Learning Center which is funded by the US 
National Science Foundation under grant number 
SBE-0836012. Any opinions, findings, and conclu-
sions or recommendations expressed in this mate-
rial are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the NSF. Oscar Saz was sup-
ported with a Fulbright/MEX fellowship. 

References  
Alusio, S., Specia, L., Gasperin, C., Scarton, C., 2010, 

Readability Assessment for Text Simplification, Proc 
NAACL HLT Fifth Workshop on Innovative Use of 
NLP for  Building Educational Applications, p. 1-9. 

Bach, N., Gao, Q.,Vogel, S., Waibel A., 2011, TriS: A 
Statistical Sentence Simplifier with Log-linear Mod-
els and Margin-based Discriminative Training  In 
Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference 
on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP 2011), 
Chiang Mai, Thailand. 

Brown, J., Eskenazi, M., 2005, Student, text and cur-
riculum modeling for reader-specific document re-
trieval, In Hamza, M.-H. (Ed.) Proceedings of the 
IASTED International Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction (pp. 44-47). Anaheim, CA: 
Acta Press. 

Burstein, J., Shore, J., Sabatini, J., Lee, Y., Ventura, M., 
2007, The automated text adaptation tool, in Demo 
proceedings of NAACL-HLT, Rochester. 

Cepstral Text-to-Speech, 2000, Retrieved Sep. 8, 2012, 
from http://www.cepstral.com/. 

Chandrasekar, R. and Srinivas, B., 1997, Automatic 
induction of rules for text simplification. Knowledge-
Based Systems, 10(3):183--190. 

Coxhead, A., 2000, A New Academic Word List. 
TESOL Quarterly, 34(2), pp. 213-238. 
doi:10.2307/3587951 

Crossley, S. A., Louwerse, M. M., McCarthy, P. M., & 
McNamara, D. S., 2007, A linguistic analysis of sim-
plified and authentic texts. The Modern Language 
Journal, 91(1), 15-30.  

Dela Rosa, K., Eskenazi, M., 2011, Impact of Word 
Sense Disambiguation on Ordering Dictionary Defi-
nitions in Vocabulary Learning Tutors, Proceedings 
of the 24th International FLAIRS Conference. 

Dela Rosa, K., Parent, G.,Eskenazi, M., 2010, Multimo-
dal learning of words: A study on the use of speech 
synthesis to reinforce written text in L2 language 
learning, Proceedings of the ISCA Workshop on 
Speech and Language Technology in Education 
(SLaTE 2010). 

Geer, P., 2011, GRE Verbal Workbook. Hauppauge, 
NY: Barron’s Educational Series. 

Grace, C. A., 1998, Retention of Word Meanings In-
ferred from Context and Sentence-Level Transla-
tions: Implications for the Design of Beginning-
Level CALL Software. The Modern Language Jour-
nal, 82, 533–544. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-
4781.1998.tb05541.x 

Hake, R., 1998, Interactive-engagement versus tradi-
tional methods: a six-thousand- student survey of 
mechanics test data for introductory physics courses. 
American Journal of Physics, 66, 64 – 74.  

Heilman, M., Collins-Thompson, K., Callan, J. and Es-
kenazi, M., 2006, Classroom success of an Intelligent 
Tutoring System for lexical practice and reading 
comprehension. Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-
tional Conference on Spoken Language Processing 
(pp. 829-832). Pittsburgh, PA. 

Heilman, M., Zhao, L., Pino, J., and Eskenazi, M., 2008, 
In Tetreault, T., Burstein, J.  and  De Felice, R. (Ed.) 
Retrieval of Reading Materials for Vocabulary and 
Reading Practice. Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop 
on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational 
Applications (pp.80-88), Columbus, OH: Association 
for Computational Linguistics. 
doi:10.3115/1631836.1631846 

Inui, K., A. Fujita, T. Takahashi, R. Iida and T. Iwakura, 
2003, Text simplification for reading assistance: a 
project note, Proceedings of the second international 
workshop on paraphrasing-volume 16, pages 9--16. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Jiang, N., 2000, Lexical representation and development 
in a second language. Applied Linguistics, 21(1), 47-
77. doi: 10.1093/applin/21.1.47 

Juffs, A., Wilson, L., Eskenazi, M., Callan, J., Brown, 
J., Collins-Thompson, K., Heilman, M., Pelletreau, 
T. and Sanders, J., 2006, Robust learning of vocabu-
lary: investigating the relationship between learner 
behaviour and the acquisition of vocabulary. Paper 
presented at the 40th Annual TESOL Convention and 
Exhibit (TESOL 2006), Tampa Bay, FL. 

Koehn, P., 2010, Statistical machine translation. Cam-
bridge University Press. 

Kroll, J. F. and Sunderman, G., 2003, Cognitive Proc-
esses in Second Language Learners and Bilinguals: 

27



The Development of Lexical and Conceptual Repre-
sentations. In C.J. Doughty and M. H. Long (Ed.), 
The Handbook of Second Language Acquisition. Ox-
ford, UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd,. doi: 
10.1002/9780470756492.ch5 

Leroy, G., Endicott, J.E., 2011, Term familiarity to indi-
cate perceived and actual difficulty of text in medical 
digital libraries (ICADL 2011), Beijing. 

Lin, Y., Saz, O., Eskenazi, M. (in review) Measuring 
the impact of translation on the accuracy and fluency 
of vocabulary acquisition of English  

Medero, J., Ostendorf, M.,  2011, Identifying Targets 
for Syntactic Simplification," Proc. ISCA SLaTE 
ITRW Workshop.  

Oh, S-Y, 2008, Two types of input modification and 
EFL reading comprehension: simplification versus 
elaboration, TQD 2008, vol.35-1. 

Perfetti, C.C., 2010, Decoding, vocabulary and compre-
hension: the golden triangle of reading skill, in M.G. 
McKeown and L. Kucan (Eds), Bringing reading re-
searchers to life: essays in honor of Isabel Beck, pp. 
291-303, New York: Guilford. 

Petersen, S., Ostendorf, 2007, Text simplification for 
language learners: a corpus analysis, Proc ISCA 
SLaTE2007, Farmington PA 

Prince, P., 1996, Second Language Vocabulary Learn-
ing: The Role of Context versus Translations as a 
Function of Proficiency. Modern Language Journal, 
80(4), 478-493. doi:10.2307/329727 

Taylor, W.L., 1953, Cloze procedure: a new tool for 
measuring readability, Journalism Quarterly, vol.30, 
pp. 415-433. 

Walter, E., 2005, Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dic-
tionary, 2nd Edition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University 

Yano, Y., Long, M. H., & Ross, S., 1994, The effects of 
simplified and elaborated texts on foreign language 
reading comprehension, Language Learning, 44(2), 
189-219. 

Yatskar, M., Pang, B., Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., 
Lee, L., 2010, For the sake of simplicity : unsuper-
vised extraction of lexical simplifications from 
Wikipedia, Proc. NAACL 2010, p. 365-368. 

 

28


