



















































Patterns of Importance Variation in Spoken Dialog


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, pages 107–111,
Metz, France, 22-24 August 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Patterns of Importance Variation in Spoken Dialog

Nigel G. Ward
University of Texas at El Paso
El Paso, Texas, 79968 USA
nigelward@acm.org

Karen A. Richart-Ruiz
University of Texas at El Paso
El Paso, Texas, 79968 USA

karichart@miners.utep.edu

Abstract

Some things people say are more impor-
tant, and some less so. Importance varies
from moment to moment in spoken dialog,
and contextual prosodic features and pat-
terns signal this. A simple linear regres-
sion model over such features gave esti-
mates that correlated well, 0.83, with hu-
man importance judgments.

1 Importance in Language and Dialog

Not everything people say to each other is equally
important, for example many ums and uhs have al-
most no significance, in comparison to those con-
tent words or nuances that are critical in one way
or another.

Many language processing applications need to
detect what is important in the input stream, in-
cluding dialog systems and systems for summa-
rization, information retrieval, information extrac-
tion, and so on. Today this is primarily done
using task-specific heuristics, such as discarding
stopwords, giving more weight to low frequency
words, or favoring utterances with high average
pitch. In this paper, however, we explore a gen-
eral, task-independent notion of importance, tak-
ing a dialog perspective.

Section 2 explains our empirical approach. Sec-
tions 3 and 4 explore the individual prosodic fea-
tures and longer prosodic patterns that dialog par-
ticipants use to signal to each other what is impor-
tant and unimportant. Section 5 describes predic-
tive models that use this information to automat-
ically estimate importance and Section 6 summa-
rizes the significance and future work needed.

2 Annotating Importance

No standard definition of importance is useful for
describing what happens, moment-by-moment, in
spoken dialog. The closest contender would be
entropy, as defined in information theory. For
text we can measure the difficulty of guessing let-
ters or words, as a measure of their unpredictabil-
ity and thus informativeness (Shannon, 1951), but
this is indirect, time-consuming, and impossible
to apply to non-symbolic aspects of language. We
can also measure the value of certain information,
such as prosody, for improving the accuracy of
predictions, but again this is indirect and time-
consuming (Ward and Walker, 2009).

We therefore chose to do an empirical study. We
hired a student to annotate importance. Wanting
to capture her naive judgments, atheoretically, we
did not precisely define importance for her. In-
stead we discussed the concept briefly, noting that
importance may be judged: not just by content
but also by value for directing the future course
of the dialog, not just from the speaker’s perspec-
tive but also from the listener’s, and not just from
the words said but also from how they were said.

The labeling tool used enabled the annotator to
navigate back and forth in the dialogs, listen to the
speakers together in stereo or independently, de-
limit regions of any desired size including words
and word fragments, and ascribe to each region an
importance value. While importance is continu-
ous, for convenience we used the whole numbers
from 0 to 5, with 5 indicating highest importance,
4 typical importance, 3 somewhat less importance,
2 and 1 even less, and 0 silence. To have a variety
of speakers, topics, and speaking styles, the mate-
rial was from the Switchboard corpus (Godfrey et
al., 1992).

107



Figure 1: Importance versus Time, in milliseconds. Rectangular line: Annotator judgments; Jagged line:
Predictions (discussed below). The words are all by one speaker, horizontally positioned by approximate
occurrence.

In total, she labeled both tracks of just over 100
minutes of dialog. There was diversity in labels,
supporting our belief that importance is not mono-
tone: the largest fraction of non-zero-labeled re-
gions, covering 38% of the total time, was at level
4, but there were also 20% at level 3 and 37% at
level 5. In general importance was variable, on
average staying at the same level for only 1.5 sec-
onds. Figure 1 illustrates.

In parallel, the second author labeled 17 min-
utes of the same dialogs1. The agreement in terms
of Kappa was .80 (“very good”) across all cate-
gories, and .67 (“good”) excluding the zero-level
labels, which were mostly for silent regions and
thus easy to agree on. In terms of Weighted Kappa,
appropriate here since the labels are ordered (and
thus, for example, a 1-point difference matters
much less than a 5-point difference), the agree-
ment levels were .92 and .71, for all and for the
zero-excluding sets, respectively. The differences
were mainly due to minor variations in boundary
placement, missing labels for small quiet sounds
such as inbreaths and quiet overlapping backchan-
nels, and different ratings of repeated words, and
of backchannels (Ward and Richart-Ruiz, 2013).

3 Correlating Prosodic Factors

First we briefly examined lexical correlates of im-
portance, by examining the average importance
of words in this corpus (Ward and Richart-Ruiz,
2013). To summarize some key findings: Less fre-
quent words tend to have higher average per-word
importance, however ratings vary widely, depend-
ing on context. Some words have effects at a dis-
tance, for example, because tends to indicate that

1All labels are freely available at
http://www.cs.utep.edu/nigel/importance/

whatever is said one second later will be impor-
tant. The interlocutor’s words can also be infor-
mative, for example oh and uh-huh tend to indi-
cate that whatever the interlocutor said one second
ago was important. The “words” with the most
extreme average importance — notably uh-huh,
um-hum, um and laughter — are fillers, backchan-
nels and other vocalizations of types which can
be detected well from the prosodic and inter-
actional contexts (Neiberg and Gustafson, 2011;
Truong and van Leeuwen, 2007). Thus a word-
based model of importance would be challenging
to build and might not have much value. We there-
fore turned our attention to prosody.

While prosody-importance connections have
not been considered directly, several studies have
found correlations between prosodic features and
various importance-related constructs, such as
predictability, involvement, engagement, activa-
tion, newness, and interest (Bell et al., 2009; Yu
et al., 2004; Batliner et al., 2011; Roehr and Bau-
mann, 2010; Oertel et al., 2011; Hsiao et al., 2012;
Kahn and Arnold, 2012; Kawahara et al., 2010).
However these studies have all been limited to spe-
cific features, functions, or hypotheses. Our aims
being instead exploratory, we looked for features,
from among a broad inventory, which correlate
with importance, as it occurs in a broad variety of
contexts.

Our feature inventory included features of 8
classes: four basic types — volume, pitch height,
pitch range, and speaking-rate — each computed
for both participants: the speaker and the inter-
locutor. Within each class, features were com-
puted over windows of various widths and at var-
ious offsets, for a total of 78 features (Ward and
Richart-Ruiz, 2013).

108



The speaker features correlating most strongly
with importance were volume and speaking rate.
Although the very strongest correlations were with
volume slightly in the past, volume both before
and after the current moment was strongly cor-
related over all windows, with one exception.
Speaker pitch height, in contrast, correlated neg-
atively with importance across all windows, con-
trary to what is often seen in monolog data.

The interlocutor features correlating most
strongly with importance were again volume and
speaking rate, but only over windows close to the
point of interest, perhaps due to co-construction
or supportive back-channeling; over more distant
windows, both past and future, these correlate neg-
atively. Interlocutor pitch range correlated nega-
tively over all windows.

4 Correlating Dialog-Activity Patterns

Thus we find that some prosodic features have dif-
ferent effects depending on their offset from the
frame of interest. Perhaps prosody is not just
marking importance vaguely somewhere in the
area, but more precisely indicating important and
unimportant moments.

To explore this we used Principal Components
Analysis (PCA), as described in detail in (Ward
and Vega, 2012). In short, this method finds
patterns of prosodic features which co-occur fre-
quently in the data, and so provides an unsuper-
vised way to discover the latent structure underly-
ing the observed regularities. We correlated the di-
mensions resulting with PCA with the importance
values. Many dimensions had significant correla-
tions, indicating that importance relates to many
prosodic structures and contexts. Each dimension
had two characteristic patterns, one corresponding
to high values on that dimension and one to low
values. We were able to interpret most of these in
terms of dialog activities (Ward and Vega, 2012).

Tending to be more important was: speech in
the middle of other speech (dimension 1), rather
than words snuck in while the other has the floor;
simultaneous speech (dimension 2), understand-
ably as such times tended to be high in involve-
ment and/or backchannels; times of encountering
and resolving turn conflicts (dimension 7), more
than places where the participants were support-
ively interleaving turns, which in this corpus were
generally more phatic than contentful; crisp turn
ends (dimension 8), rather than slow repetitious

model correlation m.a.e.

m5pTree decision tree .38 1.21
neural network .66 1.20
simple linear regression .79 .89
linear regression .83 .75

ditto, past-only features .83 .79

Table 1: Prediction Quality in terms of correlation
and mean absolute error, for various learning algo-
rithms.

wind-downs; “upgraded assessments,” in which a
speaker agrees emphatically with an assessment
made by the other (dimension 6); and times when
speakers were solicitous, rather than controlling
(dimension 19). Dimension 6 is interesting in
that it matches an interaction pattern described as
an exemplar of prosodic co-construction (Ogden,
2012). Dimension 19 was one of those underlying
the exception noted above: the negative correla-
tion between importance and speaker volume over
the window from 0–50 milliseconds after the point
of prediction. Upon examination, low volume at
this offset often occurred when seeking agreement
and during quiet filled pauses in the vicinity of
high-content words.

5 Predictive Models

We next set out to build predictive models, for two
reasons: to judge whether the features discussed
above are adequate for building useful models, and
to determine what additional factors would be re-
quired in a more complete model.

The task is, given a timepoint in a track in a dia-
log, to predict the importance of what the speaker
is saying at that moment. Our performance met-
rics were the mean absolute error and the correla-
tion coefficient, computed over all frames; thus a
predictor is better to the extent that its predictions
are close to and correlate highly with the annota-
tor’s labels, including the implicit zero labels in
regions of silence or noise.

We built models using four algorithms in Weka.
All models performed poorly on dialogs for which
there was cross-track bleeding or other noise. As
these are artifacts of this corpus and would not be
relevant for most applications, our main evaluation
used only the five tracks with good audio quality.
These all had different speakers. We did five-fold
cross-validation on this; Table 1 gives the results.
Linear regression was best, by both measures and

109



past future all
−400 −200 0

speaker .55 .64 .66 .59 .70
interloc. .37 .43 .43 .37 .47
both .62 .70 .71 .65 .74

Table 2: Model Quality, in terms of R2, as a func-
tion of the features used.

across every fold, and this was consistent for all
the other training and test sets tried.

To compare the performance of this predictor to
human performance, we also trained a model us-
ing 5 tracks to predict performance over two test
tracks, a total of 224495 test datapoints, which
the second judge also had annotated. Over these
the predictor did almost as well as second judge
in correlation (.88 versus .92), but not so well in
terms of mean absolute error (.75 versus .31).

Analyzing the errors, we noted several types of
cause (Ward and Richart-Ruiz, 2013). First, per-
formance varied widely across tracks, with mean
absolute errors from .55 to .97, even though all the
features were speaker-normalized. The high value
was for a speaker who was an outlier in two re-
spects: the only female among four males, and the
only East-Coast speaker among four Texans. Thus
results might be improved by separately model-
ing different genders and dialects. Second, predic-
tions were often off in situations like those where
the two human judges disagreed. Third, most of
the errors were due to feature-set issues: robust-
ness, poor loudness features, and not enough fine-
grained features. Fourth, our prosodic-feature-
only model did very poorly at distinguishing be-
tween the highest importance levels, 4 and 5, but
was otherwise generally good.

Table 2 shows how performance varies with the
features used; here quality is measured using sim-
ply the R2 of a linear regression over all the data.
Performance is lower with only the left-context
features, as would be required for real-time appli-
cations, but not drastically so; as seen also in the
last line of Table 1. Performance is only slightly
lower when predicting slightly in advance, without
using any features closere than 200 ms prior to the
prediction point, but notably worse 400 ms before.
Features of the interlocutor’s behavior are helpful,
partially why explaining dialog can be easier to
understand than monolog (Branigan et al., 2011).

6 Broader Significance and Future Work

Sperber and Wilson argue that “attention and
thought processes . . . automatically turn toward in-
formation that seems relevant: that is, capable of
yielding cognitive effects” (Sperber and Wilson,
1987). This paper has identified some of the cues
that systems can use to “automatically turn to-
ward” the most important parts of the input stream.
Overall, these findings show that task-independent
importance can be identified fairly reliably, and
that it can be predicted fairly well using simple
prosodic features and a simple model. Signifi-
cantly, we find that importance is frequently not
signaled or determined by one participant alone,
but is often truly a dialog phenomenon. We see
three main directions for future work:

First, there is ample scope to build better models
of importance, not only by pursuing the prosodic-
feature improvements noted above, but in exam-
ining lexical, semantic, rhetorical-structure and
dialog-structure correlates of importance.

Second, one could work to put our pretheoreti-
cal notion of importance on a firmer footing, per-
haps by relating it to entropy, or to the time course
of the psychological processes involved in retriev-
ing, creating, managing, and packaging informa-
tion into speech; or to the design and timing of
dialog contributions so as not to overload the lis-
tener’s processing capacity.

Third, there are applications. For example, a
dialog system needing to definitely convey some
information to the user could use an appropriate
prosodic lead-in to signal it properly, doing an in-
teractional dance (Gratch et al., 2007; Brennan et
al., 2010) to prepare the recipient to be maximally
receptive at the moment when the critical word
is said. Another potential application is in voice
codecs, as used in telecommunications. Today’s
codecs treat all speech as equally valuable. In-
stead we would like to transmit more important
words and sounds at higher quality, and less im-
portant ones at lower quality, thereby increasing
perceived call quality without increasing the aver-
age datarate, of course while properly considering
all perceptual factors (Voran and Catellier, 2013).

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the NSF un-
der projects IIS-0914868 and CNS-0837556. We
thank Timo Baumann, Alejandro Vega, Shreyas
Karkhedkar, Gabriela Almeida and David Novick.

110



References
Anton Batliner, Stefan Steidl, Bjorn Schuller, et al.

2011. Whodunnit: Searching for the most important
feature types signalling emotion-related user states
in speech. Computer Speech and Language, 25:4–
28.

Alan Bell, Jason M. Brenier, Michelle Gregory, Cyn-
thia Girand, and Dan Jurafsky. 2009. Predictability
effects on durations of content and function words
in conversational English. Journal of Memory and
Language, 60:92–111.

Holly P. Branigan, C.M. Catchpole, and M.J. Pickering.
2011. What makes dialogues easy to understand?
Language and Cognitive Processes, 26:1667–1686.

Susan E. Brennan, Alexia Galati, and Anna K. Kuhlen.
2010. Two minds, one dialog: Coordinating speak-
ing and understanding. In Brian H. Ross, editor, The
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, volume 53,
pages 301–344. Elsevier.

John J. Godfrey, Edward C. Holliman, and Jane Mc-
Daniel. 1992. Switchboard: Telephone speech cor-
pus for research and development. In Proceedings
of ICASSP, pages 517–520.

Jonathan Gratch, Ning Wang, Jillian Gerten, Edward
Fast, and Robin Duffy. 2007. Creating rapport with
virtual agents. In Intelligent Virtual Agents, pages
125–138. Springer.

Joey Chiao-yin Hsiao, Wan-rong Jih, and Jane Yung-
jen Hsu. 2012. Recognizing continuous social en-
gagement level in dyadic conversation by using turn-
taking and speech emotion patterns. In Activity Con-
text Representation Workshop at AAAI.

Jason M. Kahn and Jennifer E. Arnold. 2012.
A processing-centered look at the contribution of
givenness to durational reduction. Journal of Mem-
ory and Language, 67:311–325.

Tatsuya Kawahara, K.Sumi, Z.Q. Chang, and
K.Takanashi. 2010. Detection of hot spots in poster
conversations based on reactive tokens of audience.
In Interspeech, pages 3042–3045.

Daniel Neiberg and Joakim Gustafson. 2011. A dual
channel coupled decoder for fillers and feedback. In
Interspeech 2011, pages 3097–3100.

Catharine Oertel, Stefan Scherer, and Nick Campbell.
2011. On the use of multimodal cues for the predic-
tion of degrees of involvment in spontaneous con-
versation. In Interspeech.

Richard Ogden. 2012. Prosodies in conversation. In
Oliver Niebuhr, editor, Understanding Prosody: The
role of context, function, and communication, pages
201–217. De Gruyter.

Christine Tanja Roehr and Stefan Baumann. 2010.
Prosodic marking of information status in German.
In Speech Prosody Conference.

Claude E. Shannon. 1951. Prediction and entropy
of printed English. Bell System Technical Journal,
30:50–64.

Dan Sperber and Deirdre Wilson. 1987. Précis of Rel-
evance: Communication and cognition. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 10(04):697–710.

Khiet P. Truong and David A. van Leeuwen. 2007. Au-
tomatic discrimination between laughter and speech.
Speech Communication, 49:144–158.

Stephen D. Voran and Andrew A. Catellier. 2013.
When should a speech coding quality increase be al-
lowed within a talk-spurt? In IEEE ICASSP.

Nigel G. Ward and Karen A. Richart-Ruiz. 2013. Lex-
ical and prosodic indicators of importance in spoken
dialog. Technical Report UTEP-CS-13-41, Univer-
sity of Texas at El Paso, Department of Computer
Science.

Nigel G. Ward and Alejandro Vega. 2012. A bottom-
up exploration of the dimensions of dialog state in
spoken interaction. In 13th Annual SIGdial Meeting
on Discourse and Dialogue.

Nigel G. Ward and Benjamin H. Walker. 2009. Esti-
mating the potential of signal and interlocutor-track
information for language modeling. In Interspeech,
pages 160–163.

Chen Yu, Paul M. Aoki, and Alison Woodruff. 2004.
Detecting user engagement in everyday conversa-
tions. In Interspeech, pages 1329–1332.

111


