



















































Subordinators with Elaborative Meanings in Czech and English


Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing 2013), pages 128–136,
Prague, August 27–30, 2013. c© 2013 Charles University in Prague, Matfyzpress, Prague, Czech Republic

Subordinators with Elaborative Meanings in Czech and English

Pavlína Jínová, Lucie Poláková, Jiří Mírovský
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Czech Republic

{jinova|polakova|mirovsky}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

This  paper  is  focused  on  description  of  hy­
potactic constructions (constructions with sub­
ordinating  conjunctions)  with “elaborative” 
meanings. In  dependency­based linguistic lit­
erature, they are referred to as  hypotactic co­
ordinations or also (a subset of)  false depen­
dent clauses. The analysis makes use of syn­
tax­ and discourse­annotated corpora of Czech 
and  English  and  thus  offers  an  empirically 
grounded contrastive study of the phenomena.

1 Motivation and Background

One of the basic means of expressing syntactic 
dependency  are  subordinating  conjunctions 
(henceforth subordinators). They also signal the 
semantic type of the dependency relation, i.e. the 
semantic relation holding between the dependent 
and  the  governing  clause.  Some  of  them have 
several semantic interpretations. In this paper, we 
describe those uses of subordinators that operate 
between two syntactically dependent but seman­
tically independent contents. In other words, the 
clause they introduce is formally dependent, but 
semantically it expresses an elaborative (coordi­
nating, restating, etc.) meaning. For the purposes 
of this paper, we call them hypotactic coordina­
tions (see Panevová 2012).1 

The  analysis  is  anchored  in  the  theoretical 
framework of Prague School of structuralism and 
its extension – functional generative description 
(FGD, Sgall et al. 1986). It was carried out on 50 
thousand Czech sentences from the Prague Dis­
course  Treebank,  and  on  a  similar  amount  of 
English data from the Wall Street Journal – Penn 
Discourse Treebank.

In linguistic theories of dependency, there are 
several  ways  of  understanding  the  relation  be­
1 Primarily, the term hypotactic coordination was 

used on the level of a simple clause description, 
for constructions such as “mum with dad”.

tween formal and semantic principles of a sen­
tence  composition.  Czech  linguistic  tradition 
usually distinguishes hypotaxis and parataxis as 
two basic formal principles of combining clauses 
to create a compound sentence. In majority, the 
linguistic community agrees that  hypotaxis cor­
responds mostly to the semantic relation of  de­
termination (one  clause  semantically  comple­
ments  or  enriches  the  other,  building  together 
one content),  and  parataxis corresponds to the 
semantic  principle of  coordination (connecting 
two semantically autonomous contents – the sec­
ond  clause  adds  some  new information  to  the 
first clause) (Hrbáček 2000). There are, however, 
discrepancies  between  these  forms  and  their 
functions. 

Such a phenomenon (correspondence between 
hypotaxis–determination,  parataxis–coordination 
and also their discrepancies) was described ear­
lier in structuralist works (Karcevskij 1929) and 
later in FGD for morphological and also syntacti­
cal level of linguistic analysis as asymmetric du­
alism of  forms  and functions  (Panevová  1980, 
2012). The phenomenon is depicted in Figure 1. 
The  solid  arrows  symbolize  the  most  common 
relations between the form and the meaning, the 
dashed arrows stand for other relations, i.e. coor­
dination realized in the hypotactic form and de­
termination realized in the paratactic form. 

meaning: coordination determination
          

      form:    parataxis    hypotaxis
Figure 1: A schema of the asymmetric dualism be­
tween formal and semantic relations (Panevová 2012)

In the annotation of discourse structure, the ac­
count  of  semantic  types2 of  relations  between 
discourse units deliberately disregards the notion 

2 e.g. temporality, causality, contrast

128



of syntactic parataxis/hypotaxis, in order to liber­
ate the perception of discourse structure from the 
sentential syntax.

In this paper, we look back from the discourse 
structure to the sentential syntax. From this point 
of  view,  for  one  discourse­semantic  (or  cogni­
tive)  type  (e.g. causality),  there are several lan­
guage means (forms) of expression (e.g. hypotac­
tic  and  paratactic  constructions  on  the  in­
ter­clausal level).

On the general level, we are interested in the 
question how discourse semantics is realized for­
mally in the sentence, our specific question is to 
what degree the correspondence hypotaxis–deter­
mination and parataxis–coordination on the sen­
tence level analysis holds also for the discourse 
level analysis. In other words, we want to see if 
e.g. causality,  a basic semantic concept of con­
necting propositions in discourse, is a matter of 
hypotactic constructions or if it is rather a matter 
of parataxis. Jínová et al. (2011) offered an over­
view of intra­ and inter­sentential distributions of 
discourse relations in the Prague Discourse Tree­
bank. Here, we are interested in hypotactic/parat­

actic distributions of discourse relations3 in order 
to  either  confirm  or  disprove  that  tendencies 
holding for the principles of sentence composi­
tion hold also for discourse composition.

In the study presented in this paper we focus 
on one part of the problem stated above – subor­
dinators with elaborative meaning.  The annota­
tion of explicit4 discourse connectives (with sub­
ordinators being a subset of them) and their dis­
course functions revealed some discrepancies in 
the  perception  of  the  sentence  and  discourse 
meanings.  Subordinating  connectives  in  con­
structions  which  we  call  hypotactic  coordina­
tions became one of the most visible differences 
between the sentence and discourse analysis  in 
the Prague approach.

Only thanks to the more cognitive­based5 dis­
course  annotation against the background of the 
dependency­based  syntactical  tagging  of  the 
same data,  we were first  able to identify these 
constructions  and  study  them  empirically.  As 
constructions  with  subordinating  conjunctions, 
3 those realized within a compound sentence
4 present on the surface
5  or content­based, according to Panevová (2010)

129



they are tagged – accordingly to their  form on 
the level of language meaning – as constructions 
with  dependent  clauses6.  As  discourse  connec­
tives,  these  subordinators  are  tagged  in  accor­
dance with the elaborative meaning they express 
(the level of cognitive content), see Example (1) 
and Figure 2. The tree diagram shows the syntac­
tic dependency of the clause introduced by když  
(when), and at the same time, the discourse tag 
“spec” for specification, which is a typical elabo­
rative category (the prototypical  temporal  read­
ing  is  considered  inappropriate  or  marginal  in 
this case).

(1) Další zajímavý výzkum provedla 
agentura NEOBLBA, když zkoumala sou­
vislost mezi barvou obrouček u brýlí 
a politickým přesvědčením.
Another interesting research was 
conducted by the NEOBLBA agency when 
it examined a connection between the 
color of glasses rims and political 
beliefs.

Apart from the analysis of Czech subordinators, 
we were also interested in another theoretical is­
sue, where the empirical data of the kind we had 
at our disposal could lead to other  findings: Do 
other languages demonstrate the same or similar 
examples of the described asymmetric dualism? 
We  were  able  to  look  into  this  issue on  dis­
course­ and syntax­annotated English data of the 
Penn Discourse Treebank.

The  paper  is  structured  as  follows:  in  Sec­
tion 2,  the  two  corpora  used  for  the  analysis 
(Prague  Discourse  Treebank 1.0 and Penn Dis­
course Treebank 2.0) are briefly introduced. Sec­
tion 3  presents  the  distribution  of  types  of  in­
tra­sentential discourse relations  (in total and in 
hypotactic  constructions)  in  the  Prague  Dis­
course Treebank. Sections 4 and 5 are devoted to 
the analyses of Czech and English subordinators 
in hypotactic coordinations, respectively, and we 
summarize  our findings in the concluding Sec­
tion 6.

2 Resources used (PDiT and PDTB)

Prague Discourse Treebank 1.07 (PDiT, Poláková 
et  al.  2012)  is  an  annotation  extension  of  the 
Prague Dependency Treebank 2.58 (PDT, Bejček 

6 For details on the annotation principles of the 
Prague Dependency Treebank, see Mikulová et al. 
(2005).

7 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/discourse/
8 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.5/

et al. 2012).  PDiT consists of approx. 50 thou­
sand sentences of Czech newspaper texts manu­
ally annotated with discourse relations anchored 
by explicit (i.e. surface present) connectives. The 
annotation was carried out directly on the depen­
dency trees (of the tectogrammatical (or syntac­
tico­semantic)  layer  of  PDT,  see  Sgall  et  al. 
1986).

Penn Discourse Treebank 2.09 (PDTB, Prasad 
et al. 2008) is a manually annotated treebank of 
English  texts  from the  Wall  Street  Journal,  its 
size is comparable to the PDiT (again, approx. 50 
thousand  sentences).  The  annotation  comprises 
both explicit and implicit discourse relations. In 
comparison with the Prague approach, the anno­
tation was carried out on raw texts and only then 
mapped onto the syntactic trees.

Let us emphasize that all numbers and exam­
ples  from  PDiT  that  we  present  in  this  paper 
have been measured on and taken from the train­
ing and  development test parts of the data (9/10 
of the treebank, approx. 44 thousand sentences). 
The evaluation test part of the data thus remains 
unobserved.

3 Discourse  relations  and  hypotactic 
structures in PDiT

In order to examine how discourse level analysis 
is related to the principles of sentence composi­
tion, all realizations of discourse relations within 
one  (compound)  sentence  were  measured  over 
the data of PDiT. Then, as our interest here lies 
in  subordinators,  the  percentage of  subordinate 
structures among all intra­sentential realizations 
was measured.

Distribution  of  individual  types  of  discourse 
relations10 for subordinate structures is given in 
Table 1. It displays the total number of intra­sen­
tential realizations for each semantic type of dis­
course relation and the percentage of subordinate 
structures for each type of relation.  The remain­
ing fraction consists of predominantly paratactic 
forms and a small  number of parenthetical  and 
other marginal structures.  On the basis of these 
data, the following observations can be made. 

First,  all  discourse  intra­sentential  relations 
whose syntactic parallels are treated by in Czech 
linguistic tradition as cases of determination (or 
content­dependency)  –  i.e.  purpose,  condi­
tion – result of the condition, synchrony, conces­

9 http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~pdtb/
10 Because of their nature, we exclude pragmatic re­

lations from the analysis. They represent other 
types of discourse meanings. 

130



sion,  precedence – succession and  reason – re­
sult (Hrbáček 2000, Daneš et al. 1987) are real­
ized in PDiT as subordinate structures in 50% of 
cases or more. The least distinctive is this result 
for the relation of  reason – result, the most dis­
tinctive for the relation of purpose (purpose was 
only realized in the hypotactic structure).

type of discourse re­
lation

number of
occurrences

within one sen­
tence in PDiT11

hypotactic 
structures 

(in %)

purpose 372 100

condition – result of  
the condition

1,171 99

synchrony 140 84

concession 561 82

precedence – suc­
cession

495 68

confrontation 312 55

reason – result 1,428 51

explication 89 26

restrictive opposi­
tion

87 15

specification 453 13

exemplification 22 5

correction 300 4

opposition 1,235 4

conjunction 5,389 1

gradation 196 0.5

conjunctive alterna­
tive

62 0

disjunctive alterna­
tive

234 0

equivalence 38 0

generalization 8 0

Table 1: Intra­sentential discourse relations in PDiT

Second, with the exception of confrontation (see 
below in this section), all relations whose syntac­
tic parallels are treated as cases of coordination 
(or content parallelism) are realized as hypotactic 
structures much less often than the first  group. 
For four types of relations (disjunctive and con­
junctive alternative, equivalence and generaliza­
11 Please note again that all numbers related to PDiT 

refer to the training and development test parts of 
the data (9/10 of the treebank, 43,955 sentences).

tion),  no  hypotactic  realization  was  found  in 
PDiT.

These  findings  corroborate  the  hypothesis 
about a symmetrical relation between hypotaxis 
and determination on one side, and parataxis and 
coordination on the other. Of course, with the ex­
ception  of  purpose,  all  discourse  types  whose 
syntactic parallel is treated as determination have 
also paratactic realizations documented in PDiT 
(for reason – result, they represent almost a half 
of the occurrences) and the majority of discourse 
types whose syntactic parallel is treated as con­
tent  parallelism (coordination) was documented 
also  as  a  hypotactic  form.  These  hypotactic 
forms are, however, in sum much less frequent 
than  paratactic  forms  of  relations  in  the  first 
group, and thus they represent a linguistically in­
teresting  phenomenon  that  has  not  been  de­
scribed yet on the basis of a larger corpus mate­
rial. Therefore, in Section 4, we introduce a de­
tailed  analysis  of  types  of  these  structures  ac­
cording to  their  formal  characteristics.  We call 
them hypotactic coordinations further on.

Before we proceed  further,  two types  of  the 
PDiT discourse  relations,  namely  confrontation 
and explication,  require a special comment. The 
syntactic parallel of confrontation is treated as a 
type of semantic coordination (Daneš et al. 1987, 
p. 462) – two  pieces of  content are put side by 
side  and  compared  (see  Example  (8)).  On  the 
other hand, comprehensive description of Czech 
syntax  distinguishes  paratactic  and  hypotactic 
means of its realization (ibid.) and thus reflect its 
special  status  among  coordinations.  Our  data 
confirms this status – the relation of  confronta­
tion is  in  55 % of  cases  realized  in  hypotactic 
structures. 

The second PDiT relation that deserves a spe­
cial comment is explication – it is not a basic re­
lation in grammatical descriptions of the Czech 
syntax, it was newly introduced for the discourse 
level analysis of PDiT. From the semantic point 
of view, it has a mixed nature between determi­
nation (an explanation of the content of one text 
unit is given in the second text unit) and content 
parallelism  (these  contents  are  somehow 
similar).12 Because of this mixed nature, we ex­
12 Cf. for example the context (A), where the depen­

dent clause expresses an explanation of the fact of 
a late interest by saying what “late” means. 

(A) O studium svého syna jste se 
začal zajímat pozdě, protože ofi­
ciální termín přihlášek na střední 
školy a učňovská zařízení vypršel 
s koncem února.

131



clude  explication from further analysis.  Typical 
connectives for this relation in Czech are parat­
actic. Hypotactic realizations of this relation em­
ploy  the  same  connectives  as  reason – result 
(26 % of intra­sentential realizations in PDiT). 

4 Subordinators with elaborative mean­
ings in PDiT

According to their formal structure, we can dis­
tinguish  four  main  types  of  dependent  clauses 
expressing elaborative meanings.

4.1 Clauses  with  a  specific  unambiguous 
structure

First, there are certain hypotactic formal means 
in Czech that only express one particular coordi­
nation relation and no others. We call them spe­
cific  structures.  These hypotactic  structures  are 
not very frequent in our data and they were only 
documented for correction (11 occurrences, con­
nective místo (toho,) aby (instead of, lit.  instead 
of  that,  that))  and  conjunction (2  occurrences, 
connective  kromě toho, že (besides,  lit.  besides 
that,  that)).  These structures are exemplified in 
(2) and (3).

(2) Kromě toho, že je kompatibilní 
s MS­DOS, podporuje řadu programů 
pro postižené osoby. 
Besides being compatible with MS­
DOS, it supports a variety of pro­
grams for disabled people.
(Lit: Besides that, that it is com­
patible with MS­DOS...)

(3) Místo aby clo od poslanců 
vymáhali, říkali jim "jen jeďte, jen 
jeďte".
Instead of exacting the customs from 
the members of parliament, they told 
them “just go, just go”.
(Lit: Instead that the customs from 
the­members­of­parliament they­ex­
acted, they­told them “just go, just 
go”.)

These examples suggest  that  the specific status 
of  these  hypotactic  coordinations is  connected 

You became interested in the 
studies of your son too late, 
because the official deadline for 
applications for high schools and 
secondary vocational schools has 
expired at the end of February. 

with the form of the subordinators – they are not 
regular conjunctions, they are composed of sev­
eral elements: a preposition, (optionally of) a rel­
ative pronoun, and a conjunction.

4.2 Relative clauses

Second, some relative clauses are known to have 
other functions than only to determine the noun 
phrase. Rather, they provide additional informa­
tion which can be expressed easily in a separate 
sentence (often they also express temporal suc­
cession of events).  There is a possibility to con­
sider these cases relevant for discourse analysis 
in our sense. In the Czech description of syntax, 
they  are  mostly  called  false  relative  clauses 
(Daneš et al. 1987, p. 533)13, in English they are 
viewed as non­restrictive relative clauses (Quirk 
et al. 1992). As far as we know, however, there 
are no clear criteria for distinguishing semanti­
cally autonomous contents from determined con­
tents  in  relative  clauses,  or,  in  our  view,  dis­
course­relevant cases from the other ones. Often 
it is impossible to say whether the relative clause 
only determines the noun phrase or continues the 
discourse.  For  the  PDiT annotation,  it  was de­
cided  that  only  those  cases  are  marked  where 
there is (apart from the relative pronoun/adverb) 
an  explicit  connective  present  in  the  relative 
clause. 

In PDiT data,  we were able to document  45 
cases of  opposition,  24 cases of  conjunction,  6 
cases of  restrictive  opposition,  2 cases of  con­
frontation and 1 case of correction expressed be­
tween a relative clause and its governing clause. 
Examples of such a realization of opposition and 
conjunction are given in (4) and (5).

(4) Chtěli jsme hrát nátlakový fot­
bal, který však ztroskotal na kval­
itní obraně Benešova. 
Lit: We wanted to play an aggressive 
football, which however failed on a 
high­quality defence of Benešov. 

(5) Kuvajťan byl rychlou záchrannou 
službou převezen do pražské 
Thomayerovy nemocnice, kde byl také 
operován.
The Kuwaiti was transported by the 
ambulance to the Prague Thomayer 
hospital, where he also underwent a 
surgery.

13 or improper relative clauses, in Czech nepravé 
věty vedlejší

132



4.3 Clauses  formally  equal  to regular  hy­
potactic structures

The third  group of  hypotactic  coordinations is 
represented by structures formally indistinguish­
able  from  regular  dependency  structures.  In 
Czech  linguistic  tradition, these types of depen­
dent clauses are also often called “false” (or “im­
proper”), as they formally signal dependency but 
semantically express an elaborative relation be­
tween  two  independent  propositions.  Table 2 
lists all types and number of occurrences of these 
structures that we were able to document in the 
PDiT data. 

Example (1)  from  the  introductory  section 
shows such a case of specification, which is for­
mally expressed as a construction with a depen­
dent temporal clause  and the subordinator  když 
(when), Example (6) below shows the same situ­
ation  for  confrontation,  which  is  formally  ex­
pressed as a construction with  a dependent con­
ditional clause and the subordinator jestliže (if).

(6) Jestliže v roce 1993 jich bylo 
8650, což je vytížení kapacity lázní 
asi na 65 až 70 procent, tak v 
letošním roce by jich mělo být již 
9745. 
If there were 8,650 of them in 1993, 
which represents the capacity 
utilization of the spa to about 65 
to 70 percent, then this year there 
should be already 9,745 of them.

relation

number of 
occur­

rences in 
PDiT

connectives

confrontation 9 2 ­li (if), 2 jestliže (if), 
3 když (when), 1 i když 
(although), 1 přestože 
(although)

conjunction 14 2 aby ((as) to), 11 když 
(when), 1 jestliže (if), 1 
zatímco (while)

correction 1 1 kdyby (if)

exemplification 1 1 například když (for 
example when)

opposition 3 1 zatímco (while), 2 i 
když (although)

restrictive op­
position

5 4 i když (although), 1 
když (when)

specification 57 57 když (when)

Table 2: “False” dependent clauses in PDiT

The findings in  Table 2 show that  these  struc­
tures are rather sparse. To illustrate how frequent 
the  hypotactic coordinations  are for each subor­
dinator from Table 2, we measured types of rela­
tions which were expressed by each of them in 
PDiT. The results are summarized in Table 3.

connective occur­rences
dominant type of re­

lation (in %)

hy­
potactic 
coordi­
nations 
(in %)

aby 390 purpose (94) 0.5

­li 272 condition (97) 1

když 499 condition (42), 
precedence – suc­
cession (21), syn­
chrony (16)

15

i když 166 concession (90) 4

jestliže 85 condition (92) 4

přestože 87 concession (98) 2

kdyby 155 condition (89), con­
cession (10)

1

zatímco
(regular  
use)

176 confrontation (90), 
synchrony (8)

92

Table 3: Subordinators in hypotactic coordinations in 
PDiT

Despite this rare use of subordinators in hypotac­
tic  coordinations,  there  is  one  subordinator  in 
Czech, namely zatímco (while), which is used in 
hypotactic  coordinations regularly  and  fre­
quently.  Zatímco in Czech either expresses tem­
poral synchronicity (7) or confrontation (8) and 
both these uses are perceived as regular, in the 
sense not “false” or “improper”. The confronta­
tional use, however, is treated as a semantic co­
ordination,  not  determination,  see  Section 3. 
Therefore we claim that the connective  zatímco 
in  the  confrontational  use  is  the  only  regular 
form of  expressing  the  asymmetric  dualism in 
Czech on the syntax­discourse  level of analysis. 
For comparison, it is added to Table 3 (the last 
row).

There  are  160  occurrences  of  confrontation 
with the connective zatímco (while) documented 
in the PDiT data. 

(7) [...] zatímco Sára ještě spí, 
zapřáhne osla.

133



[…] while Sarah is still sleeping, 
he hithes up the donkey.

(8) Prezident Václav Havel se těší 
důvěře 75 procent občanů, zatímco 
důvěra v premiéra Václava Klause 
klesla na 54 procent. 
President Václav Havel enjoys the 
confidence of 75 percent of citi­
zens, while the confidence in the 
Prime Minister Václav Klaus declined 
to 54 percent. 

4.4 Connective s tím, že (along with)

One subordinator in Czech –  s tím, že (roughly 
along with or saying also that, lit. with that, that) 
– is semantically vague and can serve as a con­
nective for many relations (in PDiT data, there 
are eight different types of relation expressed by 
this connective). The type of the relation is infer­
able  only from the  context.  From the  point  of 
view  of  hypotactic  coordination in  PDiT,  it 
serves as a connective of conjunction in 14 cases 
and as a connective of  specification in 3  cases. 
Examples of these contexts are given in (9) and 
(10), respectively.

(9) Doplněný návrh by měl obsahovat 
dvě varianty řešení s tím, že se k 
němu správní rada Českých drah znovu 
sejde 3. března. 
The completed proposal should 
contain two variants of the solution 
and (lit. with that that) the Board 
of Czech Railways will reconvene to 
adress it again on the third of 
March. 

(10) K oběma vraždám se přiznal s 
tím, že chtěl získat skromný majetek 
důchodců a drobné peněžní částky.
He confessed to both murders saying 
that he wanted to get the modest 
possessions of the retirees and 
small amounts of money.

5 Subordinators with elaborative mean­
ings in PDTB

Thanks to Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0, we have 
at our disposal  English subordinators annotated 
for their discourse semantics (Prasad et al. 2008). 
Having left their prevalent uses out of this analy­
sis, we were able to draw (at least partial) paral­
lels between their “non­standard” uses in Czech 
and in English.

We translated into English the Czech subordi­
nators that took part in hypotactic coordinations 
(e.g. když = when; jestliže = if) and searched the 
PDTB  for  similar  patterns.  Even  though  such 
constructions may be language­specific, and, for 
English, they are scarcely documented in linguis­
tic  handbooks14,  some  correspondence  between 
Czech and English in our data  is evident, com­
pare Examples (11)–(13). 

Subordinator:  if,  PDTB  tag:  Comparison:Con­
trast
(11) If Mr. Wilbur's translation 
is a finely ground lens through 
which we see the pettiness and 
corruption of 17th­century Paris, 
Mr. Falls's production is a mirror 
in which we see ourselves.

Subordinator:  if,  PDTB  tag:  Comparison:Con­
trast:Juxtaposition
(12) If the political establish­
ment is reluctant to forgive sex­
ual misadventures, the private 
sector sometimes will.

Subordinator:  when, PDTB tag:  Temporal:Syn­
chrony/Expansion:Restatement:Specification
(13) In the same sentence he con­
tradicts himself when he reports 
that the government still retains 
40% of the total equity of the 
airline.

In these examples, the predominantly conditional 
if (11),  (12)  and  the  predominantly  temporal 
when (13)  express  elaborative  meanings  –  the 
same  ones  that  we  were  able  to  document  for 
Czech in  Section  3.3,  i.e.  in  Example (6)  con­
frontation, in Example (1) specification. 

A similar correspondence was documented for 
“false” relative clauses in English. Example (14) 
from PDTB shows a relative clause introduced 
by which that also contains a contrastive connec­
tive nonetheless. This co­occurrence in our view 
clearly signals the presence of a semantically au­
tonomous content in the dependent clause (e.g. a 
coordination of the two contents rather than a de­
termination) and so it corresponds to the Czech 
sentence in (4).

14 with the exception of some non­restrictive relative 
clauses with a coordinative meaning (Quirk et al. 
1992, p. 648), or “false” infinitives of purpose, 
such as: I awoke to find the room flooded by sun­
shine. (Dušková 1992, p. 562)

134



(14) Gemina, which owns 13.26% of 
Nuovo Banco, abstained in the fi­
nal vote on Credit Agricole, which 
was nonetheless approved by a ma­
jority of shareholders. 

Similarly as in Czech, the only subordinators that 
regularly  signal  a  coordinative  meaning  are 
while  and whereas:  in terms of PDiT relations, 
they express confrontation. Of course, Czech za­
tímco and English  while cannot be mapped 1:1 
(e.g. the English  while regularly expresses also 
causality)  but for both languages they represent 
the most frequent subordinator with a coordina­
tive meaning.

Having found evidence for parallels in use of 
subordinators  in  hypotactic  coordinations in 
English and Czech, we are aware of the fact that 
the direction of analysis from Czech to English 
may have not  revealed  all  such relevant  struc­
tures in English. The existence of other types of 
hypotactic coordinations cannot be excluded and 
it  is  a  possible  topic  for  further  linguistic  re­
search. 

However,  in  spite  of  the  assumed  lan­
guage­specificity in  the  repertoire of connective 
means and their use, our findings on a relatively 
small  amount  of data and a restricted language 
domain  (financial  journal)  suggest that  when 
subordinators deviate from their usual functions, 
they tend to do it in the similar way in Czech and 
English.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we surveyed structures where sub­
ordinators  convey  coordinative  meaning  (hy­
potactic  coordinations).  These structures  repre­
sent an irregular relation between formal and se­
mantic principles of sentence composition, since 
coordinative meanings are prototypically realized 
in paratactic structures. On the basis of PDiT and 
PDTB, we described this phenomenon for Czech 
and we have drawn some comparisons of their 
use in English. 

As the first step, the distribution of discourse 
relations  as  hypotactic  versus  paratactic  struc­
tures in PDiT was measured to see to what extent 
the hypothesis of correspondence determination 
– hypotaxis, coordination – parataxis is also ap­
plicable for discourse semantics. We found that 
with the exception of  confrontation, whose syn­
tactic (and sentence­level  semantic)  counterpart 
is treated as coordination and which appears in 
our  data  quite  regularly both  as  paratactic  and 
hypotactic  structures,  relations  whose  syntactic 

counterpart is treated as coordination are realized 
as hypotactic structures rather rarely.

Further, we analyzed four types of hypotactic  
coordinations in Czech according to the charac­
teristics of their respective subordinators. Some 
subordinators  (e.g.  kromě toho,  že (lit.  besides  
that  that))  are specific only for coordination,  a 
majority of them is used regularly for other rela­
tions than coordination (e.g. jestliže (if) is a regu­
lar  subordinator  for  condition,  some  uses  of  it 
however express confrontation) etc.

Finally,  subordinators  whose  “non­standard” 
meaning was documented for Czech (e.g. jestliže 
(if))  were translated and looked for also in the 
English  data.  Despite  of  the  assumed  lan­
guage­specificity  in  connective  functions,  we 
were able to document English examples corre­
sponding to the Czech structures. 

Our findings are of course limited by the size 
and type of the language resources available for 
such a comparative study. Nevertheless, it should 
be  highlighted  that  only  the  existence  of  such 
manually and specifically annotated corpora that 
gather linguistic information from different lev­
els of language description makes it possible for 
the first time to carry out such a linguistic analy­
sis.

Acknowledgments

We  gratefully  acknowledge  support  from  the 
Grant  Agency  of  the  Czech  Republic  (grants 
P406/12/0658  and  P406/2010/0875)  and  from 
the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports in 
the Czech Republic (the LINDAT­Clarin project 
LM2010013).  This research was also supported 
by SVV project number 267 314.

References 
Eduard Bejček, Jarmila Panevová, Jan Popelka, Pavel 

Straňák, Magda Ševčíková, Jan Štěpánek, Zdeněk 
Žabokrtský.  2012.  Prague  Dependency  Treebank 
2.5 – a revisited version of PDT 2.0. In:  Proceed­
ings of the 24th International Conference on Com­
putational Linguistics (Coling 2012), Mumbai, In­
dia, pp. 231­246.

Libuše Dušková. 1992. Mluvnice současné angličtiny  
na pozadí češtiny. Praha: Academia.

Josef Hrbáček. 2000. Věta a výpověď. In:  Čechová, 
M. et al. Čeština – řeč a jazyk.

Pavlína Jínová, Lucie Mladová, Jiří Mírovský. 2011. 
Sentence Structure and Discourse Structure: Possi­
ble Parallels. In:  Proceedings of the International  
Conference  on  Dependency  Linguistics  (Depling  

135



2011),  Universitat  Pompeu  Fabra,  Barcelona, 
Spain, ISBN 978­84­615­1834­0, pp. 233­240.

S.  Karcevskij.  1929.  Du  dualisme  asymétrique  du 
signe linguistique. In:  Travaux du Cercle Linguis­
tique de Prague, 1, pp. 88–93. Czech translation by 
A.  Bémová  in:  Principy  strukturní  syntaxe  1 
(1974).  Praha:  Státní  pedagogické  nakladatelství, 
pp. 26–30.

Marie Mikulová et al. 2005. Anotace na tektogramat­
ické rovině Pražského závislostního korpusu.  An­
otátorská příručka. Praha: UFAL MFF. Available 
at:  http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/cz/t­
layer/html/index.html.

Lucie Poláková, Pavlína Jínová, Šárka Zikánová, Eva 
Hajičová, Jiří Mírovský, Anna Nedoluzhko, Mag­
daléna  Rysová,  Veronika  Pavlíková,  Jana 
Zdeňková,  Jiří  Pergler,  Radek  Ocelák.  2012. 
Prague  Discourse  Treebank  1.0.  Data/software, 
ÚFAL  MFF  UK,  Prague,  Czech  Republic, 
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/discourse/, Nov 2012.

R.  Prasad,  N.  Dinesh,  A.  Lee,  E.  Miltsakaki,  L. 
Robaldo, A. Joshi and B. Webber. 2008. The Penn 
Discourse Treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of the 6th  
International Conference on Language Resources  
and  Evaluation  (LREC  2008),  Marrakech,  Mo­
rocco, pp. 2961­2968.

Jarmila Panevová. 2010. Ke vztahu kognitivního ob­
sahu  a  jazykového  významu.  In:  Korpus  –  gra­
matika  –  axiologie,  Vol.  1,  No.  1,  Gaudeamus, 
Hradec  Králové,  Czech  Republic,  ISSN 1804­
137X, pp. 30­40. 

Jarmila  Panevová.  1980.  Formy a funkce  ve  stavbě  
české věty. Praha: Academia.

Jarmila Panevová. 2012.Koordinace vs. determinace  
(Forma nebo význam?). Contributed talk, Zasedání 
Komise  pro  gramatickou  stavbu  slovanských 
jazyků při MKS, Univerzita Konštantína Filozofa 
Nitra, Nitra, Slovensko, Oct 2012. 

František Daneš, Zdeněk Hlavsa, and Miroslav Grepl. 
1987.  Mluvnice  češtiny  3,  Skladba.  Praha, 
Academia.

Lucie  Poláková,  Pavlína  Jínová,  Šárka  Zikánová, 
Zuzana  Bedřichová,  Jiří  Mírovský,  Magdaléna 
Rysová,  Jana  Zdeňková,  Veronika  Pavlíková and 
Eva  Hajičová.  2012.  Manual  for  Annotation  of  
Discourse  Relations  in  the  Prague  Dependency  
Treebank. Technical  report,  UFAL  MFF  UK, 
Prague,  Czech  Republic.  Available  at: 
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/techrep/tr47.pdf.

Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech, 
Jan Svartvik. 1992.  A Grammar of Contemporary  
English. England: Longman Group.

Petr  Sgall,  Eva  Hajičová,  Jarmila  Panevová.  1986. 
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and  

Pragmatic Aspects. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publish­
ing Company.

136


