








































Distant annotation of Chinese tense and modality

Nianwen Xue, Yuchen Zhang and Yaqin Yang
Computer Science Department

Brandeis University, Waltham, USA
{xuen,yuchenz,yaqin}@brandeis.edu

Abstract

In this paper we describe a “distant annota-
tion” method by which we mark up tense and
modality of Chinese eventualities via a word-
aligned parallel corpus. We first map Chi-
nese verbs to their English counterpart via
word alignment, and then annotate the re-
sulting English text spans with coarse-grained
tense and modality categories that we be-
lieve apply to both English and Chinese. Be-
cause English has richer morpho-syntactic in-
dicators for tense and modality than Chinese,
we hope this distant annotation approach will
yield more consistent annotation than if we an-
notate the Chinese side directly. We report ex-
perimental results that show this expectation is
largely borne out.

1 Introduction

It is often the case that linguistic information that
is hidden in one language is directly observable in
another. This is particularly true for typologically
distant language pairs. For example, tense and num-
ber are “invisible”in languages like Chinese but
they are explicitly marked in languages like English
where there is a more developed morphological sys-
tem. In English, for example, tense is grammati-
calized as an inflectional morpheme attached to a
verb. In Chinese, on the other hand, such morpho-
logical cues are rare or non-existent, and the under-
lying semantic tense has to be inferred from the con-
text. (1) is an example Chinese sentence and its verb
举行 (“hold”) has no morphological inflections of
tense. However, a notional semantic tense that in-
dicates the temporal location of the event denoted

by举行 can be inferred by the time expression明
年 (“next year”).

(1) 大会
conference

明年
next year

在
in
新加坡
Singapore

举行
hold

。
.

“The conference will be held in Singapore next
year.”

In this paper, we describe a method of annotat-
ing the tense of a Chinese sentence by annotating
the tense of its English translation and then project-
ing this annotation back onto the Chinese sentence.
Specifically, we identify all English text spans that
are aligned to a Chinese verb in a word-aligned par-
allel Chinese-English corpus. Then all the English
text spans will be annotated with tense and modality.
Note that the resulting English text spans after such
mapping may not necessarily be English verbs be-
cause a Chinese verb may be translated into an En-
glish noun, or words of other parts-of-speech. In (2),
for example, “appointment” is translated into a Chi-
nese verb “赴约”. Nevertheless, such English text
spans can still be treated as “anchors” of tense and
modality. Our hypothesis is that we are more likely
to obtain consistent annotation by annotating the En-
glish translation rather than the Chinese source di-
rectly because the morpho-syntactic cues in English
are good indicators of tense and they constrain the
choices that an annotator has to make during the an-
notation process.

(2) a. One day in August 2005 , Abather was driv-
ing Balqes , six months pregnant with their
second child , to a doctor ’s appointment .



b. ２００５年８月的一天，阿巴舍正开车
送怀着他们第二个孩子已有六个月的巴
尔科斯赴约去医生处。

It is important to note that the target of our annota-
tion is the underlying semantic tense, not the gram-
matical tense. The semantic tense can be interpreted
as a relation between the time that an event occurs
and a reference time in the sense of (Reichenbach,
1947). In a written text, this reference time is usu-
ally the time when the document is created or the
time when another event occurs. This relation does
not change regardless of whether it has a morpho-
syntactic manifestation when a sentence is translated
into a different language.

The grammatical tense, indicated by the morpho-
syntactic cues, do not always have a one-to-one cor-
respondence with the semantic tense. In English, it
has long been noted that the same surface morpho-
syntactic form may indicate very different under-
lying semantic notions of tense (Dinsmore, 1991;
Cutrer, 1994; Fauconnier, 2007). For example, the
morpho-syntactic form “are playing” in both (3a)
and (3b) indicates present progressive tense, but un-
derlyingly, while in (3a), the present tense indeed
indicates a present time, in (3b), the present tense
indicates a future time. Typically, however, these
morpho-syntactic cues have a relatively straightfor-
ward correspondence with their underlying seman-
tics in the source language, making the manual an-
notation of the underlying semantics very straight-
forward.

(3) a. They are playing soccer in the park.

b. They are playing soccer next Tuesday.

In addition to the “polysemous” finite tense
forms, there are also a large proportion of English
verbs that appear in non-finite forms, which can also
be construed as having multiple semantic tense val-
ues. The examples in (4) show that infinitives and
gerunds can indicate past (4a, 4b), present (4c,4d)
or future (4e,4f) times. When projected onto a tar-
get language, these non-finite forms need to be dis-
ambiguated so that the correct semantic tense can
be accurately inferred from the context in the target
language.

(4) a. I enjoyed reading the book.

b. The prisoner managed to escape.

c. I enjoy reading.

d. To err is human, to forgive is divine.

e. The prisoner is considering escaping.

f. The prisoner hopes to escape tomorrow.

Tense is intricately related to modality. Although
both (3b) and (4f) indicate future times, they differ
in that (3b) indicates an event that has been pre-
viously scheduled to happen while (4f) describes
an intended event that may or may not materialize.
There is a higher level of certainty that the soccer
playing event is going to happen than that escaping
event will. In other words, although the tense is the
same, the modality, which accounts for the degree of
certainty of an event, is different.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we describe our annotation framework.
We present the results of a preliminary annotation
experiment in Section 3. Section 4 describes related
work and Section 5 concludes the paper.

2 Specifications

As described in Section 1, each Chinese verb in-
stance is mapped to a text span in English and then
annotation is performed on English text by label-
ing these text spans with tense and modality cate-
gories. Each text span is annotated along three di-
mensions to support the planned automatic infer-
ence of tense and modality on the Chinese side.
The first dimension is the semantic tense, and the
annotator must indicate whether the text span de-
scribes a past, present, or future event state. The sec-
ond dimension is event type that indicates whether
the text span represents a habitual event, an on-
going event, a completed event, an episodic event,
or a state. The event type is annotated because it
has been shown (Smith, 2001; Smith and Erbaugh,
2005; Xue, 2008) that in a language without explicit
tense markers, event types are good indicators of
tense. The third dimension is modality. The modal-
ity dimension is broadly construed and it classifies
events or states as actual, intended (which encom-
passes expected, planned events), hypothetical (as
in conditional clauses) or modalized. An event or
state is modalized if it occurs with a modal verb that



indicates possibility, necessity, or ability. These cat-
egories are very coarse-grained and we did not get
into the finer distinctions of different types of modal-
ity. Each of these categories are described in greater
detail below and illustrated with examples.

When annotating the semantic tense, some of
events or states cannot be interpreted in relation to
the document creation time and we have to annotate
its relative tense. In such cases, we also link this
text span to another that it depends on for its tempo-
ral interpretation. These links are all in the direction
from the dependent text span to its head span. Such
dependent text spans are typically tagged with one
of the relative tense categories that include Relative
Present, Relative Past or Relative Future when an-
notating tense.

As a practical matter, we also need to determine
whether a text span needs to be annotated for all
three dimensions in the first place. In (5a), for exam-
ple, text spans that consist entirely of auxiliary verbs
do not need to be annotated if they are followed by
a main predicate and the tense and modality annota-
tion will be associated with the main predicate. In
(5b), the text span is a modal verb, and modal verbs
only need to be annotated for tense, but not for event
type and modality. In some cases, a verb as part of
a Chinese verb compound is mapped to an adverbial
particle or a preposition in English and such parti-
cles or prepositions need not to be annotated as the
tense and modality is attached to the main verb in
the compound. An example is given in (5c), and the
main verb is italicized and the preposition is under-
lined.

(5) a. Six months after the kidnapping , he still
had n’t gotten the surgery he needed to heal
his burned flesh.

b. You can make a contribution at : Inter-
national Catholic Migration Commission
Citibank USA 153 East 53rd Street , 16th
floor New York, NY 10043 .

c. Very few organizations are working on get-
ting aid to Iraqi refugees.

2.1 Tense
We set up six categories for semantic tense, and
these are past, present, future, relative past, rela-
tive present, and relative future. The relative tense

categories are inspired by the discussions of tense in
(Comrie, 1985), and they are triggered by verbs in
non-finite forms that have a clear dominating verb
(“head verb” in dependency structure terms) that it
depends on for its temporal interpretation. A link
will also be annotated between the dependent verb
and its head verb. The annotation of links will be
discussed in greater detail in Section 2.4. Each of
these six categories are defined and illustrated be-
low. The relevant text spans are underlined.

Past The text span describes an event or state that
happened in the past.

(6) He started an engineering firm and worked with
contractors such as ABB and Kellogg , Brown
and Root;

Present The text span describes a present event or
state. This includes a present state, an event that hap-
pens repeatedly in the present, a present on-going
event, a completed event that has present relevance.

(7) It is centered on the Hongshui River hydroelec-
tric plant .

Future The text span describes an event that will
happen in the future, or a future state.

(8) Some people will prefer that option because it
’s more convenient .

Relative Past The text span describes an event
that happened in the past, or a past state relative to
the event it depends on. In (9),“crossing” happened
before the time “repeated” happened, i.e. “crossing”
is relatively past to “repeated”.

(9) After crossing a 30 - foot no man’s land we re-
peated the process at the second wall .

Relative Present The text span describes an event
that happens in the present, or a present state rela-
tive to the event it depends on. In (10),“taking up”
happens at the same time with “’ve got”, i.e. “taking
up” happens at the present relative to “’ve got”.

(10) I ’ve got two dead monitors taking up space in
my office .



Relative Future The text span describes an event
that happens in the future or a future state relative
to the event it depends on. In (11a), “to strengthen”
depends on “has invested” for its temporal interpre-
tation, and “to create” depends on “to strengthen”.
In (11b), “to be listed” depends on “approved” and
the former logically occurs after the latter.

(11) a. It has invested more than 130 billion yuan
to strengthen the construction of infrastruc-
tures and basic industries so as to create a
sound environment for expanding the open-
ing up to the outside world . (link from “to
strengthen” to “has invested”, from “create”
to “has invested”, and from “for expanding”
to “create”)

b. Among them , 57 items were approved
to be listed in the national , provincial and
municipal Torch Plan and their quantity ra-
tio is tops among the new , high level tech-
nology industry zones of the entire country
.

Even in English, annotating tense can be chal-
lenging in at least two scenarios, and the first one
being when there is a mismatch between the gram-
matical tense and the semantic tense. In (12), for ex-
ample, “reaches” has a grammatical present tense,
but it should be interpreted an event that occurs in
the future. In this case, the grammatical tense can be
deceiving and can be an impediment that prevents
the annotator from making the correct decision. The
other scenario is when the text span is a verb that
takes on a non-finite form of a verb (13a) or other
grammatical categories such as nouns (13b) and ad-
jectives (13c). When this happens, tense is gram-
matically under-specified even in English, just like
in Chinese. In this case, the temporal interpretation
of the event depends on the larger context rather than
the event denoting verb itself. While event denoting
verbs in non-finite forms such as infinitives and par-
ticiples can be annotated with a relative tense with
a link to its dominating verb, event denoting nouns
and adjectives often do not have one single domi-
nating event that it can get its temporal interpreta-
tion from. Therefore, for nouns and adjectives as
well as participle forms modifying nouns, we do not
annotate relative tense. Instead, we assign an abso-

lute tense value that reflects the temporal interpreta-
tion of the event based on the context of the event.
In (13b), for example, “acquittal” gets a past tense
due to clues like “since”, and “conviction” gets a
past interpretation due to the fact that it has a tem-
poral modifier “1999”, which makes the temporal
location of “conviction” explicit. In (13c), “rich”
and “doting” are adjectives that modify nouns, and
their temporal interpretation comes from the verb
“appeared”. These adjectives are translated from
predicative adjectives in relative clauses in Chinese,
which can also be interpreted for tense based on the
larger context.

(12) To ensure that the money reaches the Iraqi pro-
gram , write Iraq - icmc on your check.

(13) a. This should be a motif familiar to anyone
acquainted with the literature of mind con-
trol and ritual abuse survivors : the father
and first controller , passing his child - vic-
tim up the social ladder of abuse in return
for status , protection and reward .

b. He ’s moved on since his aquittal , like
Gary Glitter did after his 1999 conviction
, having departed last June for a Bahrain “
vacation ” from which he’s yet to emerge
.

c. For the people working at Bahrain’s malls
, the person covered head to toe in a black
veil , gloves and glasses appeared to be a
rich , doting Saudi mother.

2.2 Eventuality Type

We define five eventuality types, and these are ha-
bitual event, state, on-going event, completed event,
and episodic event. The eventuality type is set up as
a way to help infer tense. Habitual events, on-going
events, and states, for example, tend to occur in the
present by default, while episodic events tend to oc-
cur in the past by default (Smith and Erbaugh, 2005).
Given that there is no grammatical tense in Chinese,
such a classification may prove to be an important
source of information that helps predict tense. Each
of the five types is described and illustrated below,
and the relevant text spans are underlined:



Habitual Event The text span describes an
event that happens repeatedly on a regular ba-
sis (14a, 14b). Habitual events are compatible
with adverbial modifiers such as “often”, “usu-
ally”, “rarely”,“generally”, “seldom”, etc. Habitual
events describe a pattern of actual events. General
truths and statements also belong to this category
(14c,14d).

(14) a. I used to drive to work but now I take the
bus.

b. At present , the Pu Kang Company , which
produces the vaccine in this zone , has al-
ready formed a production scale of 5 mil-
lion doses per year .

c. Time flies.

d. The moon travels around the earth.

State The text span describes an unchanging situ-
ation that will continue unless something happens to
change it.

(15) a. It is centered on the Hongshui River hydro-
electric plant .

b. but the demand far outstrips the money
available to us , says Magy Mahrous , who
oversees the project.

c. According to investigation , each enterprise
entering this zone has one or more new ,
high level technology projects or products
.

On-going Event The text span describes an event
that is on-going. The progressive aspect marker is
generally a good indicator of this type of event.

(16) a. At the school, where Bush was reading a
story to a group of second-graders, the news
came on TV that a second jet had hit the
World Trade Center .

b. God is testing us , he said .

Episodic Event The text span describes a situation
that involves some sort of change or occurrence.

(17) a. The National Weather Service reported that
two other tornadoes touched down in the re-
gion - one in east Lindale, another in south-
east Calhoun.

b. Gross domestic product, the broadest mea-
sure of the nation’s economic growth,
contracted at an annual rate of 0.1% from
October to December, the Commerce De-
partment said Wednesday.

Completed Event The text span describes a past
event that has present relevance.

(18) Within three to five years , Beihai
has constructed the framework of a mod-
ernized city.

2.3 Modality
This dimension is used to distinguish events that ac-
tually happens from events that are intended, ex-
pected, possible, required, hypothetical. We de-
fine four modality categories – actual event is for
events that actually happens, while non-actual event
types include intended event, hypothetical event, and
modalized event. These are described and illustrated
below:

Actual Event The text span describes an event or
state in the real world that actually happened, hap-
pens, is happening or will happen. This includes
habitual events that happen repeatedly, or negated
event that actually do not happen.

(19) Beihai has already become a bright star arising
from China ’s policy of opening up to the out-
side world .

Intended Event The text span describes an in-
tended or expected event or state that does not nec-
essarily happen or hold in the real world. This cov-
ers events that are intended, expected, planned, etc.
An intended event typically follows a main verb and
denotes the purpose or intention of the main verb.
Those text spans are typically verbs in non-finite
forms and are linked to a main verb that occurs be-
fore or after it. Text spans following modal verbs are
excluded from this category, and are put into Modal-
ized event category.

(20) a. It has also drafted three documents
for attracting foreign capital , strengthening
horizontal economic integration and
allowing more authority for foreign
operations .



b. Among them , 57 items were approved
to be listed in the national , provincial and
municipal Torch Plan and their quantity ra-
tio is tops among the new , high level tech-
nology industry zones of the entire country
.

Hypothetical Event The text span describes an
event or state that is in a conditional (e.g., if, when)
clause or takes place conditional on something else,
and does not necessarily happen in reality.

(21) Would the experiment have been as successful
if they had not spent the money ?

Modalized Event The text span follows a modal
verb, and describes a possible or necessary event or
state, or an ability.

(22) a. The recent confrontation could ignite re-
gional convulsions as Turkey is sucked into
Syria, leading to belated actions from the
international community.

b. That now will not happen, but it is possible
that he could be summoned by Congress to
testify later.

Our annotation scheme for modality as it cur-
rently stands is still very coarse-grained. For ex-
ample, we do not distinguish the different types of
modalities traditionally introduced by modal verbs,
such as epistemic and deontic modals. The classifi-
cation is also shallow in that our intent is to simply
identify syntactic constructions that have a modal in-
terpretation. For instance, the sentences in (23) defi-
nitely expresses uncertainty, but because they are not
associated with one of the above syntactic construc-
tions, they are still considered to be “actual”, which
is the default category for modality.

(23) a. It will probably rain tomorrow.

b. It will possibly rain tomorrow.

2.4 Links
The annotation of links is triggered by events ex-
pressed by verbs in non-finite forms that have a clear
dominating (head) verb. The annotation of links is
closely tied to the annotation of relative tense. When
an event is annotated with a relative tense category,

a link is annotated so that the relative tense of the
dependent event can be interpreted in relation to the
temporal location of the dominating verb. The link
is always in the direction from a dependent text span
to a head text span.

(24) a. To further expand the opening up to the
outside and promote outwardly economic
development , Guangxi has come up with a
series of policies to make use of foreign in-
vestments .

b. This development zone is located in the
downtown area of Hangzhou , a famous
Chinese scenic sightseeing city , and is
a national level new , high level technol-
ogy industry development zone approved
for construction by the State Council in
1991 .

In (24a), “expand” and “promote” are both linked
to “has come up with”, with relative future tense as-
signed to the first two spans. In (24b), “for construc-
tion” is annotated with a relative future tense and
linked to “approved”.

3 Annotation Experiments

As of this writing, we have completed the first round
of our annotation experiments. We selected 50 sen-
tences, which consist of 944 words, from the Parallel
Aligned TreeBank (Li et al., 2012) from the LDC.
There are 167 text spans that are marked up as event
anchors. The annotation experiment involves three
annotators. Each sentence is annotated three times
and we computed their pairwise agreement statistics.
The results of the average agreement scores are pre-
sented in Table 1:

Tense Event Type Modality
Agree-
ments

78.6%
(131/167)

73.5%
(123/167)

81.4%
(136/167)

Kappa
scores

0.71 0.65 0.70

Table 1: Inter-annotator agreement

It is premature to draw any firm conclusions about
the effectiveness of this distant annotation approach
with this first round of annotation, but it is worth
noting that the inter-annotator agreement statistics



are already comparable with and even better than
that reported in (Xue et al., 2008) where tense is
directly annotated on Chinese text using annotators
that have undergone significant training and there
were a smaller number of tense categories (four).
We believe this shows the initial promise of this ap-
proach. From the statistics in Table 1, we can also
see that our annotators show better agreement for
Modality and Tense than Eventuality Type. We an-
alyzed our annotation results through confusion ma-
trices which show that the most difficult distinction
for Tense is between Present and Future, and the
confusion happens mostly on modal verbs, modal-
ized events and hypothetical events, where it is diffi-
cult to distinguish these two tenses. The most chal-
lenging distinction for Eventuality is between Ha-
bituals and State, indicating that the distinction be-
tween those tags is still vague and not clearly de-
fined.

4 Related Work

In a series of TempEval evaluations (Verhagen et al.,
2007; Verhagen et al., 2010) that are aimed at detect-
ing time expressions, events and the relations among
them, (abstract) tense determination is formulated as
a task of determining the relation between an event
and the document creation time. TempEval uses a
fairly coarse-grained set of values (Before, Before or
overlap, Overlap, After, After or Overlap) to repre-
sent abstract “tense”. The “tense” annotation task in
the TempEval evaluations targets the main event of
a sentence, while we are attempting to annotate the
semantic tense for all eventualities, including events
and states in non-finite verb forms or even in nom-
inal forms. We also define an event type classifica-
tion that is intended to help infer tense, mindful of
the fact that there will not be morpho-syntactic cues
on the Chinese side that can help make such deter-
mination. We also attempt to set up a fairly coarse-
grained classification system for modality of events.
Tense, aspect, and modality are also annotated in the
TimeBank (Pustejovsky et al., 2005) as attributes of
events, but TimeBank generally annotates the gram-
matical tense of English verbs. For example, the
tense of an event that takes the form of a non-finite
verb or a noun will get the value of “None” even
though the semantic tense for some non-finite verbs

can be determined, as shown in (4). We target the
semantic tense instead of the grammatical tense be-
cause we think they are “transportable” across lan-
guages. Our ultimate goal is to infer the semantic
tense on the Chinese side, not just on the English
side.

A recent attempt to annotate and disambiguate
the semantic tense for English is by Reichart and
Rappoport (2010), who introduced a more general
Tense Sense Disambiguation (TSD) task that pro-
vides a fine-grained sense taxonomy for tense. They
view tense as having three different levels: Concrete
(surface) Syntactic Forms (CSF, e.g., am/is/are V-
ing), Abstract Syntactic Forms (ASF, e.g., present
progressive), and a taxonomy of 103 different un-
derlying senses. For example, Reichart and Rap-
poport define 11 underlying senses for the “simple
present” ASF which include “things that are always
true”, “general and repeated actions and habits”,
“plans, expectations and hopes”. These fall under
the scope of modality in theoretical linguistics re-
search (Kratzer, 1981; Carlson and Pelletier, 1995;
Guéron and Lecarme, 2008). Reichart and Rap-
poport essentially use modality as a semantic di-
mension to disambiguate the different “senses” of
abstract tense forms. Their goal is to predict the
underlying senses given the surface CSFs. We tar-
get similar distinctions in our annotation, but instead
of treating these distinctions as unstructured fine-
grained senses, we classify events along three differ-
ent dimensions that in conjunction can make similar
distinctions in a more structured manner.

On the Chinese side, there have been several
past attempts to infer “tense” for Chinese automati-
cally using statistical models and modest success has
been reported. There are two general approaches to
“tense” inference for Chinese. The first approach
has been to manually annotate tense on Chinese
verbs (Ye et al., 2006; Ye, 2007; Xue et al., 2008;
Xue, 2008) and use the annotated data to train sta-
tistical models to predict tense in previously un-
seen text. (Xue, 2008) has shown that even though
there are no morpho-syntactic clues for tense in Chi-
nese, contextual information can be exploited to in-
fer “tense”. Such contextual information includes
explicit clues such as time expressions and aspect
markers as well as implicit information such as verb
types: bounded events (e.g., “explode”) tend to oc-



cur in the past while unbounded events tend to occur
in the present (e.g., “believe, know, like”), a gen-
eralization first articulated in (Smith and Erbaugh,
2005). Maintaining consistency among annotators
when annotating a phenomenon with a total lack of
explicit surface cues, however, proved to be a very
challenging task. (Xue et al., 2008) reported an
inter-annotator agreement of 75% despite of using
a fairly coarse-grained tagset (Xue et al., 2008), a
result that is comparable to that of our first round
of annotation. The second approach is cross-lingual
projection and this is the tack that Liu et al (2011)
took. They mapped grammatical tense in English
onto Chinese via word-aligned parallel text. The is-
sue with mapping the surface grammatical tense is
that, as we discussed above, the syntactic forms of
tense are ambiguous with regard to their underlying
semantics. As a result, when they are projected onto
a different language, the same context will point to
different grammatical tense categories. This will
confuse the statistical machine learning models and
hamper their performance and hence limit the utility
of the resulting automatic systems.

We believe that our distant annotation approach
combines the best of both worlds. Unlike man-
ual annotation on just the target language (Chinese)
side, we benefit from the presence of the morpho-
syntactic cues in the source language (English). Ef-
fectively, our distant annotation approach allows us
to annotate the underlying semantics of tense in the
easier source language and map it to the more dif-
ficult target language. At the same time, unlike di-
rect projection of surface forms of tense, our dis-
tant annotation approach maps the surface forms to
an underlying semantic representation that is free
from language-specfic idiosyncracies at the morpho-
syntactic level.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

We describe a distant annotation approach for anno-
tating the tense, event type and modality of events in
Chinese text by annotating their English counterpart
via a word-aligned parallel corpus. Preliminary re-
sults indicate that this approach shows promise as an
effective alternative to annotating the Chinese text
directly, a challenging task since Chinese does not
have the morpho-syntatic cues that constrain anno-

tation choices. We are currently performing addi-
tional annotation experiments while refining our an-
notation guidelines. The ultimate goal is to generate
consistently annotated data on the Chinese side that
can be used to train statistical models to automati-
cally predict tense, event type and modality of Chi-
nese events. We believe such a tool would benefit a
wide variety of natural language applications that in-
clude Machine Translation and Information Extrac-
tion.

Acknowledgment

This work is supported by the IIS Division of Na-
tional Science Foundation via Grant No. 0910532
entitled “Richer Representations for Machine
Translation”. All views expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the view of the National Science Foundation.

References

Gregory N. Carlson and Francis Jeffry Pelletier. 1995.
The Generic Book. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Bernard Comrie. 1985. Tense. Cambridge University
Press.

Michelle Cutrer. 1994. Time and Tense in Narratives
and Everyday Language. Ph.D. thesis, University of
California in San Diego.

John Dinsmore. 1991. Partitioned Representations.
Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.

Gilles Fauconnier. 2007. Mental Spaces. In Dirk Geer-
aerts and Hubert Guyckens, editors, The Oxford Hand-
book of Cognitive Linguistics.

Jacqueline Guéron and Jacqueline Lecarme. 2008. Time
and Modality. Springer.

Angelika Kratzer. 1981. The notional category of
Modality. In H.J. Eikmeyer and H. Rieser, editors,
Words, Worlds and Contexts. Berlin: de Gruyter.

Xuansong Li, Stephanie Strassel, Stephen Grimes, Safa
Ismael, Mohamed Maamouri, Ann Bies, and Nian-
wen Xue. 2012. Parallel Aligned Treebanks at LDC:
New Challenges Interfacing Existing Infrastructures.
In Proceedings of LREC-2012, Istanbul, Turkey.

Feifan Liu, Fei Liu, and Yang Liu. 2011. Learning from
chinese-english parallel data for chinese tense predic-
tion. In Proceedings of the 5th International Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing, pages 1116–
1124, November.



James Pustejovsky, Bob Ingria, Roser Sauri, Jose Cas-
tano, Jessica Littman, Rob Gaizauskas, Andrea Set-
zer, G. Katz, and I. Mani. 2005. The specifica-
tion language TimeML. In I. Mani, J. Pustejovsky,
and R. Gaizauskas, editors, The Language of Time: a
Reader. Oxford University Press.

Roi Reichart and Ari Rappoport. 2010. Tense sense dis-
ambiguation: A new syntactic polysemy task. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 325–334,
Cambridge, MA, October. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Hans Reichenbach. 1947. Elements of Symbolic Logic.
The MacMillan Company, New York.

Carlota S. Smith and Mary Erbaugh. 2005. Tempo-
ral interpretation in Mandarin Chinese. Linguistics,
43(4):713–756.

Carlota Smith. 2001. Discourse modes: Aspectual
and tense interpretation. In J. Busquets, F. Lambert,
and A. Le Draoulec, editors, Cahiers de Grammaire
26: Sémantique et Discours. ERSS et Université de
Toulouse-le Mirail, Toulouse.

Marc Verhagen, Robert Gaizauskas, Frank Schilder,
Mark Hepple, Graham Katz, and James Pustejovsky.
2007. Semeval-2007 task 15: Tempeval tempo-
ral relation identification. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tions (SemEval-2007), pages 75–80, Prague, Czech
Republic, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Marc Verhagen, Roser Sauri, Tommaso Caselli, and
James Pustejovsky. 2010. Semeval-2010 task 13:
Tempeval-2. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages 57–62, Up-
psala, Sweden, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Nianwen Xue, Zhong Hua, and Kai-Yun Chen. 2008.
Annotating tense in a tenseless language. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, Marrakech, Mo-
rocco.

Nianwen Xue. 2008. Automatic Inference of the Tempo-
ral Location of Situations in Chinese Text. In EMNLP-
2008, Honolulu, Hawaii.

Yang Ye, Victoria Li Fossum, and Steven Abney. 2006.
Latent features in automatic tense translation between
Chinese and English. In The Proceedings of the 5th
SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing,
Sydney, Australia.

Yang Ye. 2007. Automatica Tense and Aspect Transla-
tion between Chinese and English. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of Michigan.


