










































Fast Bootstrapping of Grapheme to Phoneme System for Under-resourced Languages - Application to the Iban Language


The 4th Workshop on South and Southeast Asian NLP (WSSANLP), International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 1–8,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Fast Bootstrapping of Grapheme to Phoneme System for Under-resourced
Languages - Application to the Iban Language

Sarah Samson Juan, Laurent Besacier
Laboratoire d’Informatique de Grenoble / Grenoble University

Grenoble, France
sarah.samson-juan@imag.fr, laurent.besacier@imag.fr

Abstract

This paper deals with the fast bootstrap-
ping of Grapheme-to-Phoneme (G2P)
conversion system, which is a key
module for both automatic speech recog-
nition (ASR), and text-to-speech synthe-
sis (TTS). The idea is to exploit language
contact between a local dominant lan-
guage (Malay) and a very under-resourced
language (Iban - spoken in Sarawak and
in several parts of the Borneo Island) for
which no resource nor knowledge is really
available. More precisely, a pre-existing
Malay G2P is used to produce phoneme
sequences of Iban words. The phonemes
are then manually post-edited (corrected)
by an Iban native. This resource, which
has been produced in a semi-supervised
fashion, is later used to train the first G2P
system for Iban language. As a by-product
of this methodology, the analysis of the
“pronunciation distance” between Malay
and Iban enlighten the phonological and
orthographic relations between these two
languages. The experiments conducted
show that a rather efficient Iban G2P sys-
tem can be obtained after only two hours
of post-edition (correction) of the output
of Malay G2P applied to Iban words.

1 Introduction

Multilingualism is at the heart of current issues re-
lating to cultural, economic and social exchanges
in a globalized world. Thus, people are more
likely to evolve in multilingual environments, as
evidenced by recent trends of world and soci-
ety: increasing importance of international or-
ganizations (multilateral organizations like Euro-
pean Union, multinational corporations, etc.), in-
crease of cultural exchanges and travel, extensive

use of social networks to communicate with peo-
ple around the world, renewed interest in regional
languages and dialects which now coexist with
the national languages. Such “language diversity”
must be taken into account. Moreover, it is known
that among the most widely spoken languages in
the world, many are those for which the tech-
nologies for written and spoken natural language
processing are poorly developed (under-resourced
languages). There is a commercial interest in en-
abling the ∼300 most widely spoken languages in
the digital domain: if digital technologies work
for this group of languages that represents 95 %
of humanity. As mobile phones are nearly ubiqui-
tous (87 % penetration worldwide) and global in-
ternet access is approaching 1/3 of the human pop-
ulation, enabling “the long tail of languages” in
the digital domain increasingly matters. The other
∼6,500 languages are not of commercial interest,
but there are other reasons to enable them if pos-
sible: to provide access to information, to provide
a critical new domain of use for endangered lan-
guages, for better linguistic knowledge of them,
for response in a crisis (surge languages), etc.

In this paper, our work concentrates on
Grapheme-to-Phoneme (G2P) conversion system,
which is an important component for both au-
tomatic speech recognition (ASR) and text-to-
speech synthesis (TTS). We proposed a quick and
plausible solution in developing a G2P system for
an under-resourced language using existing G2P
system with a language of the same family. More
precisely, a pre-existing G2P of a local dominant
language, Malay, is utilized to generate phoneme
sequences for Iban, a language from the same fam-
ily. The outputs are further post-edited manu-
ally by an Iban native to get the right sequences.
The post-edited transcript is later used to train the
first Iban G2P system. An alternative approach is
also studied where we experiment on Phoneme-
to-Phoneme (P2P) system which translates from

1



Malay pronunciation (output of a Malay G2P) to
Iban pronunciation.

This paper is organized as follows: section 2
describes the languages involved in our work and
their relationship is detailed in section 3. Section
4 presents our methodology for fast bootstrapping
of Iban G2P system with the help of pre-existing
Malay G2P and details of the P2P as well as our
experimental results of this study. Last but not
least, section 5 concludes this work and provides
some perspectives.

2 Malay and Iban Languages

Malay and Iban languages are both spoken in
Malaysia. The latter is mostly spoken only by the
Iban community while Malay language has many
speakers as it is the country’s national language.
In the following section, we briefly describe about
the two languages and the resources that are cur-
rently available for our research.

2.1 Malay language and its G2P system

Globally, Malay is not only spoken in Malaysia
but also in several other neighboring countries
such as Brunei, Indonesia, Singapore and south-
ern Thailand. Although it is spoken across several
countries, each country has its own standard of
pronunciation and spelling. For our study, we only
focus on the Malay language spoken in Malaysia.
This language is written using Latin alphabet and
considered as an agglutinative language. An ag-
glunative language has words that are formed by
adding affixes onto a root word, word composition
or reduplication (Rainavo-Malançon, 2004). Fur-
thermore, it is not a tonal language like Mandarin
or Vietnamese languages and basically, language
users can distinguish general pronunciations di-
rectly from the grapheme sequences.

The Malay data that we applied in this study
was collected by Universiti Sains Malaysia in
Malaysia, which was used to design a Malay
speech recognition system. Tan et al. (2009) col-
lected Malay texts from 1998-2008 articles con-
cerning economy, entertainment, sports and gen-
eral news. The authors built a pronunciation dic-
tionary and language model for the Malay ASR
using these texts. From our observation, a total
of 76.05K pronunciations was available for 63.9K
distinct Malay words (36 different phonemes are
used to transcribe Malay words).

To build our Malay G2P system, we utilized a

data driven G2P toolkit called Phonetisaurus (No-
vak, 2012) using the Malay data as our training
set. The open source toolkit is able to perform Ex-
pectation Maximization (EM)-based alignments
between grapheme and phoneme sequences; it
also uses a ”target” N-gram language model (made
up of phone sequences). Models are converted
to weighted finite states tranducers (WFST) by
Phonetisaurus for decoding.

Our Malay G2P model was constructed from
68K Malay pronunciations taken from the 76K to-
tal set (8.05K remain for testing). In our case,
the target N-gram model uses N = 7 where the
model was generated using original Kneser-Ney
smoothing utilizing the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke,
2002). This model was chosen among several N-
gram models where N values ranged from 3 to 7
and the 7-gram model gave us the lowest phoneme
and word error rates compared to the rest.

We tested with the remaining 8.05K data to
measure the accuracy of the Malay G2P system
and the results are 6.20% phoneme error rate
(PER) and 24.98% word error rate (WER). From
this point, this system became the starting point
before the development of the second language
phonetizer, the Iban G2P system. First, we briefly
explain about the target language and the prelimi-
nary text data available in the next part of this pa-
per.

2.2 Iban language and its initial text resource

2.2.1 Brief background

The Iban language is mainly spoken among the
Iban community, one of Sarawak’s indigenous
group in Malaysia. Sarawak is the biggest state
in Malaysia and has more than 690,000 Ibans
living across the region (Statistics-Department,
2010). Like Malay, the Iban language belongs
to the Malayo-Polynesian branch of the Austrone-
sian language family and Iban falls in the Ibanic
language group (Lewis et al., 2013). Speakers
can also be found in several parts of the Borneo
Island such as in Kalimantan, Indonesia; how-
ever, we limit our focus to Iban system from
Sarawak. Since the early 90s, schools in the re-
gion teaches Iban in the primary and secondary
level as a nonobligatory subject. The teaching
effort has also recently spread to the university
level, where several universities open basic Iban
courses for undergraduate students. Despite the
fact there are many Iban speakers, resources for

2



human language technologies (HLTs) are still very
limited. Thus, we view this language as a very
under-resourced language for technology applica-
tions.

2.2.2 Text resources
We began an Iban text collection campaign in
November 2012: a total of 7000 articles was ex-
tracted from a local newspaper through its website.
Articles dated from 2009 (the year when Iban arti-
cles started to be published online) to 2012, were
mostly on general news, entertainment and sports.
These articles were compiled and normalized. The
steps in the text normalization process included re-
moving HTML tags, changing numbers to words,
converting commonly used abbreviations such as
Apr. for April, Dr. for Doktor , Kpt. for Kapten
and Prof. for Profesor, spliting paragraphs to sen-
tences and removing punctuation marks except for
‘-’. For the latter step, we treated words “tied”
with ‘-’ as a single item. In Iban as well as in
Malay, these words are categorized as reduplica-
tion or jaku pengawa betandu penuh in Iban. It is
common that words are duplicated to form plurals
and new words. Plurals are, for example, bup-bup
or rumah-rumah or new words, such as, bebai-
bai, diuji-uji, ngijap-ngijapka and beberap-berap
where these words are categorized as partial redu-
plication. The final normalization step was to con-
vert all capital words to lower case. After the text
normalization process completed, we obtained ap-
proximately 2.08 M words. Based on this newly
acquired corpus and the Malay corpus, we carried
out a study on the relationship between Iban and
Malay languages.

3 Malay-Iban relationship

3.1 Phonology

According to a reference manual written by the
Centre of Curriculum and Sarawak Education De-
partment (Education-Department, 2007), the Iban
system is said to be influenced by the Malay sys-
tem in terms of phonology, morphology and syn-
tax. Omar (1981) provided the first description of
the language in 1981 where among her work in-
cluded the classifications of phonemes for Iban.
There are 19 consonants (including semivowels),
6 vowels and 11 vowel clusters. Meanwhile for
Malay, Tan et al. (2009) referred to Maris (1979)’s
classification of Malay sounds. Based on Maris’
work, there are 27 consonants, 6 vowels and 3

diphthongs. From the descriptions made by Omar
and Maris, we carried out a comparative study
between Malay and Iban phonemes.

Iban vs. Phonemes
Malay

Common
Consonants: p, b, m, w,t,d,n,Ù,dZ,
s,l,r, ñ, j, k, g, ï,h,P
Vowels : a,e,@,i,o,u
V. Clusters: ai, au

Difference

(only appear in Malay)
Consonants: f,v,T, z, x, G, D, S
(only appear in Iban)
V. Clusters : ui,ia, ea,ua,oa,iu,i@,
u@,o@

Table 1: Iban and Malay common and different
phonemes

In Table 1, we present the common and differ-
ent Malay and Iban consonants, vowels and vowel
clusters. It is observed that Iban is a subset of
Malay consonants and vowels. However, the same
could not be said for Iban vowel clusters. These
vowel clusters appear as variations in Iban pronun-
ciations and we found that only two of the Iban
vowel clusters, /ai/ and /au/ matched with Malay
diphthongs, /aj/ and /aw/, respectively. Our next
example of Iban words (refer to Table 2) also show
that the missing vowel clusters are not expressed
in the spellings (grapheme sequences). Hence,
it is clear that a Malay G2P will produce incor-
rect phoneme sequences for Iban words due to the
missing phonemes.

Vowel clusters Phoneme and grapheme
sequences

/ai/ /kumbai/ ∼ kumbai
/ui/ /ukui/ ∼ ukui
/ia/ /kiaP/ ∼ kiak
/ea/ /rumeah/ ∼ rumah
/ua/ /kuap/ ∼ kuap
/oa/ /menoa/ ∼ menua
/iu/ /niup/ ∼ niup
/au/ /tawn/ ∼ taun
/i@/ /bili@P/ ∼ bilik
/u@/ /pu@n/ ∼ pun
/o@/ /bo@P/ ∼ buk

Table 2: Iban vowel clusters with the related
grapheme and phoneme sequences

3



3.2 Orthography

Orthography relates to the standard writing system
for a particular language. Both Malay and Iban are
written using latin alphabets and their orthogra-
phy system is closely related. Ng et al. (2009) in-
vestigated their orthographic similarity i.e; finding
cognates and non-cognates between Malay and
Iban. They applied several methods such as the
Levenshtein distance (Levenshtein, 1966) in or-
der to estimate the distances on 200 word pairs.
Chosen words were translations of a Swadesh list
(Swadesh, 1952), which is a common reference
created for linguists to study relationships between
languages. Ng et al. (2009) discovered that Iban
has the highest cognate percentage of 61% with
Malay compared to other Sarawak languages like
Kelabit, Melanau and Bidayuh. From this ob-
servation, we investigated, at a larger scale, the
pronunciation similarity between Iban and Malay
words that have the same surface form.

There are 36,358 distinctive words in our Iban
texts. From this lexicon, we identified words (sur-
face forms) that match in both Malay and Iban lex-
icons. Table 3 shows that more than thirteen thou-
sand words are shared between Malay, Iban and
also surprisingly English. After removing words
included in the CMU English pronunciation dic-
tionary, the number of Malay-Iban common sur-
face forms is 8,472 words.

Corpus Vocab.
Identical words

size with English w/o English
Malay 76,050

13,774 8,472
Iban 36,358

Table 3: Number of identical (same surface form)
words found in our Iban and Malay lexicons

Conclusively, 23% (8,472) of our Iban vocabu-
lary is shared with Malay, 19% (6,707) with En-
glish, while the remaining 58% (21,179) purely
belong to the Iban language. In other words,
42% of this lexicon is found shared not only with
one, but, with two languages, English and Malay.
This gave us an idea of language contact and code
switching issues related to Iban language.

3.3 Measuring Malay-Iban pronunciation
distance

To measure pronunciation distances, our concern
was on Malay-Iban common surface forms only.

The purpose was to study what was the minimum
cost to transform a Malay phoneme sequences
to an Iban one. We chose Levenshtein distance
as the estimation method following the study by
Heeringa and de Wet (2008). To carry out this in-
vestigation, we selected 100 most frequent com-
mon surface forms and prepared the pronunciation
transcripts. Malay G2P was employed to generate
an initial pronunciation transcript for Iban and the
transcript was later post-edited by a native speaker.

The Levenshtein distance was computed for all
100 pronunciation pairs. As a result, we ob-
tained 17% of errors (phoneme Insertions, Substi-
tutions, Deletions) between Malay and Iban pro-
nunciations but we found out that 47% of the
Malay pronunciations were kept unchanged for
Iban! This result confirms that the use of a Malay
G2P is probably a good starting point to boot-
strap an Iban G2P system. To put this result in
perspective, we quote the work of Heeringa and
de Wet (2008) who measured the average dis-
tance between Afrikaans and Dutch pronuncia-
tions and found that it was significantly smaller
than between Afrikaans and Frisian ; as well as
between Afrikaans and German.

No. Words Iban Malay
1 ke /k@/ /k@/
2 nya /ñaP/ /ñ@/ or / ña/
3 iya /ija/ /ija/
4 ba /baP/ /ba/
5 dua /duwa/ /duw@/ or /duwa/
6 sida /sidaP/ /sida/
7 puluh /pulu@h/ /puloh/
8 raban /raban/ /raban/
9 lalu /lalu/ /lalu/
10 orang /urang/ /orang/

Table 4: Example of ten words with phoneme se-
quences for Iban and Malay

Table 4 shows an example of words and their
corresponding Malay / Iban phoneme sequences.
We analyzed several phonemes that were fre-
quently substituted and inserted in the Malay-to-
Iban transformation process. The phoneme /o/ is
frequently substituted with /u@/ , for example, the
word puluh in Table 4 is transcribed as /puloh/ in
Malay while in Iban, it is /pulu@h/. This substi-
tution occurred due to the vowel cluster /u@/ in
Iban utterance. Also, we found out that phoneme
/e/ was frequently substituted by /i@/ in sequences

4



such as /p@siser/ in Malay to /p@sisi@r/ in Iban for
the word pesisir. The glottal stop /P/ was inserted
at almost all words ending with a vowel. As an
example, kepala transcribed as /k@pala/ in Malay
needs a glottal stop at the final vowel to transform
to /k@palaP/ and another example, nya, changes
from /ña/ to /ñaP/.

To summarize, this preliminary study on Malay-
Iban pronunciation distance suggested that the
Malay G2P system can be used as a basis for
transcribing Iban words. The suggestion was
also supported by the closeness of these two lan-
guages based on phonological and orthographi-
cal aspects particularly for Malay-Iban cognates.
However, we need to investigate the Malay G2P
performance on non-related / non-common words
specifically, the ”pure” Iban words in the lexicon.
The strategy is detailed and experimented in the
following section.

4 Obtaining Iban G2P training data via
post-editing the Malay G2P output

4.1 Methodology
Our proposed methodology involves the following
process:

• Choose two different development sets of
common Malay-Iban and pure Iban words,
from the Iban vocabulary.

• Apply Malay G2P model on each set to ob-
tain initial phoneme sequences.

• Post edit Malay G2P outputs to produce cor-
rect Iban pronunciations and measure time
taken to complete this phase.

• Train Iban pronunciations from previous
step as a first Iban G2P system (using
Phonetisaurus)

• Run and evaluate both Malay and Iban G2P
systems on new Iban test set

We chose two sets of 500 most frequent Iban
words (500 common Malay-Iban and 500 pure
Iban words) and then applied our Malay G2P sys-
tem to convert words into phoneme sequences.
Then, a native speaker manually edited the output
to obtain correct sequences for Iban. Moreover,
we identified phonemes that were frequently sub-
stituted or inserted during the process and mea-
sured the phoneme and word (sequence) error

rates using a scoring toolkit by the National Insti-
tute of Standards and Technology (NIST, 2010).
Thereafter, we combined the post-edited tran-
scripts into one list and trained our first Iban G2P
system.

Upon achieving this, we selected another two
sets of different words from the Iban vocabulary
to evaluate the Malay G2P again and the new Iban
G2P system. The two sets contain second 500
most frequent Iban words (500 common Malay-
Iban and 500 pure Iban words).

4.2 G2P output evaluation

Phonetizer Corpus PER WER Post-edit
(%) (%) (mins)

Malay G2P
500IM 6.52 27.2 30
500I 15.8 56.0 42

Iban G2P
500IM 13.6 44.2 45
500I 8.2 31.8 32

Iban P2P
500IM 16.6 53.5 -
500I 7.3 31.9 -

Note: IM for common Malay-Iban words and I for
pure Iban words

Table 5: Malay G2P and Iban G2P systems (+
Iban P2P) peformance for an Iban phonetisation
task

Our first 1000 sequences generated by the
Malay G2P scored at 11.88% PER and 48.9%
WER. The scoring was based on the post-edited
transcript that was completed by the native within
1 hour and 34 minutes. Now, Table 5 presents the
evaluation results of our Iban G2P output and of
Malay G2P, for comparison which was done on a
second 1000 words data set. The test sets, 500IM
and 500I , were taken from the second most fre-
quent items in the Iban lexicon. The values pre-
sented are phoneme error rate (PER), word er-
ror rate (WER) and post-editing effort in minutes.
Based on these results, we discovered that the
Malay G2P system performed best for Malay-Iban
matching words and the result is consistent with
Malay G2P performance on Malay test set. On
the other hand, the Iban G2P system gave better
results for pure Iban words. Despite of the small
amount of data used to train the Iban G2P (1000
sentences), it was able to perform less than 10%
PER. The time spent to correct Iban G2P output
was also less for pure Iban words compared to the
post-editing effort for Malay G2P output. How-
ever, the Iban G2P system seems to be not suitable

5



to phonetize common Malay-Iban words (PER in-
creases from 6.52 % to 13.6 %).

We examined in detail on each G2P outputs to
find wrongly substituted and deleted phonemes. In
the case of pure Iban words test results, Malay
G2P substituted phonemes /u@/, /i@/, /ea/, with /o/,
/e/ and /a/, respectively, while the glottal stop /P/
and phoneme /r/ were missed out. Meanwhile,
Iban G2P substituted phonemes /@/ for /e/, /i@/ for
/i/, /u@/ for /u/ and /u@/ for /o/. We also found
that the glottal stop was inaccurately inserted. As
for the Malay-Iban common words results, sim-
ilar phonemes were wrongly predicted by both
G2P systems. However, Malay G2P conversion
was more accurate compared to Iban G2P because
many original phoneme sequences were retained
for Iban due to Malay word adoption (e.g; words
such as parlimen (parliament), menteri (minister)
and muzik (music)). For pure Iban words, Iban
G2P gave better sequences because it included
vowel clusters (combined Malay phonemes) that
were missing in the initial Malay G2P.

4.3 Converting pure Iban words using P2P
system

Apart from the phonetization tasks by G2P mod-
els, we also developed P2P system and conducted
phonetization tasks using P2P phonetizer. Recall-
ing our Malay G2P outputs which was later post-
edited to get data for Iban G2P system, we took
these outputs and the corrected pronunciations as
the training corpus for an Iban P2P system.

For experimentation, the 1000 pairs of phoneme
sequences were randomized and then divided into
10 portions. Later, we built ten systems with dif-
ferent training data sizes (add one portion to train-
ing set after each model developed) and evaluated
the systems on pure Iban words.

All phone error rates acquired from applying
the G2P and P2P systems were plotted as shown
in Figure 1 (see non-dotted line). The results are
between 6.4% to 7.6% and found to be rather sta-
ble for the P2P model. Also on the same graph, we
plotted PERs that were obtained by applying 10
Iban G2P systems of different training data sizes
where each system had the same Iban phoneme
sequences as in each P2P system. Based on our
results, the G2P systems gave worse results com-
pared to the P2P systems’ results. Unlike the
slightly unstable P2P results, phone accuracy im-
proved gradually after adding more data in the

G2P. Finally, using 1000 words for training, Iban
P2P and G2P systems’ PER results are quite close
and both systems have equal WER (31.9% - see
also last line of table 5).

4.4 Phonetization of our whole Iban lexicon
and final evaluation

Given results obtained, we decided to build the
pronunciation lexicon for Iban using both G2P
modules (Malay and Iban). The strategy was as
follows: the Malay G2P phonetizes all Malay-Iban
common words while the Iban G2P phonetizes all
pure Iban words. In total, we phonetized 29,651
words (Iban-English not included) automatically.
This lexicon can be used for further ASR or TTS
system development. In addition to this phoneti-
zation task, we also developed a second lexicon
using one of the P2P modules from previous ex-
periments as explained in section 4.3. We chose
the P2P that contains 1000 phoneme pairs (Malay-
Iban phonemes) to phonetize only pure Iban words
and we kept Malay G2P to phonetize Malay-Iban
common words.

As a final evaluation, we post-edited 2000 ran-
dom outputs taken from both lexicon. In this ran-
dom set, there are 1426 pure Iban words and 574
Malay-Iban common words. The random outputs
scored at 8.1% PER and 29.4% WER based on
the G2P strategy, whereas the results from the P2P
strategy are 10.2% PER and 38.1% WER.

Compared to our previous experimental results
as shown in Table 5, our strategy to phonetize the
Iban lexicon using G2Ps actually gave favourable
outputs. Although the error rates are not the low-
est, they are also not the worst. The PER falls
in the range between 6.52% (Malay G2P score)
and 8.2% (Iban G2P score) and WER in between
27.2% and 31.8%. Unfortunately, the P2P strat-
egy returned lower accuracy values compared to
the G2P strategy results. Table 6 presents a sum-
mary of the Malay and Iban phonetizers and their
performances. In summary, the Iban G2P and P2P
performances on Iban lexicon are a little worse
than those of Malay G2P on Malay test set ( 6.2%
PER; see Section 2.1).

5 Conclusions and future work

In this paper, we described the language contact
between a local dominant language Malay and
an under-resourced language from the same fam-
ily, Iban. This study involved the comparison of

6



Figure 1: Phonetization results for 500 pure Iban words (I) obtained by employing different sizes of G2P
and P2P models. Malay G2P (round dots) result is also plotted on the graph as our baseline study.

Phonetizer #words PER WER
Malay G2P 8050 (Malay) 6.2 24.98
Iban G2P 2000 (Iban) 8.1 29.4
Iban P2P 10.2 38.1

Table 6: Performance of Malay and Iban phone-
tizers. Measurement based on percentage (%) .

Malay and Iban phonemes and pronunciation dis-
tance measurement on Malay-Iban common sur-
face forms using the Levenshtein distance method.
Due to our findings on the Malay-Iban connec-
tion, we built our first Iban G2P using post-edited
Malay G2P output which, was done in less than 2
hours of manual post-editing by a native speaker.

Our preliminary results on two testing sets re-
vealed that the two phonetizers, Malay and Iban
G2Ps, are necessary to handle different word
groups (Malay-Iban or pure Iban words). Thus,
both Malay and Iban G2Ps were used in our at-
tempt to produce the first Iban pronunciation lex-
icon. Besides that, we also employed Malay G2P
and Iban P2P as our second strategy to obtain the
lexicon.

To compare sample outputs with the post-edited
list, we selected 2000 random phoneme sequences
from the G2P and P2P outputs. We discovered that
the G2P (results : 8.1% PER and 29.4% WER) is
more accurate than the P2P. However, both Iban
G2P and P2P performed lower than the Malay
G2P.

As a continuation work on Iban phonetizers, our

next research focus will be on tying Malay G2P
and Iban P2P as a potential way to reduce the
”knowledge gap” between Malay and Iban pro-
nunciations. At the moment, the Malay G2P suits
better for phonetizing Malay-Iban common words.
While results on 2000 sample outputs from the
Iban lexicon are not in favour of Iban P2P, the
phonetizer did give higher accuracies compared
to G2P phonetizers in our initial testings on pure
Iban words. Hence, a suitable tying approach such
as weighted finite states transducers, for example,
could probably improve our phonetizer’s accuracy.
Besides that, our future goal is to build an Iban
ASR system using Malay acoustic models and our
new Iban pronunciation lexicon.

References

Sarawak Education-Department, 2007. Sistem Jaku
Iban di Sekula. Sarawak, Malaysia, 1st edition.

W. Heeringa and F. de Wet. 2008. The origin of
afrikaans pronunciation: a comparison to west ger-
manic languages and dutch dialects. In Proceedings
of Conference of the Pattern Recognition Associa-
tion of South Africa, pages 159–164.

V. I. Levenshtein. 1966. Binary codes capable of cor-
recting deletions, insertions and reversals. In Soviet
Physics-Doklady, volume 10, pages 707–710.

M. P. Lewis, Gary F. Simons, and Charles D.
Fennig. 2013. Ethnologue : Languages
of the world, sil international. available at :
http://www.ethnologue.com.

7



Y. M. Maris. 1979. The Malay Sound System. Siri
Teks Fajar Bakti, Kuala Lumpur.

Ee Lee Ng, Alvin Wee Yeo, and Bali Ranaivo-
Malançon. 2009. Identification of closely-related
indigenous languages:an orthographic approach. In
Proc. of International Conference on Asian Lan-
guage Processing., number 230-235. IEEE.

NIST. 2010. Speech recognition scoring toolkit (sctk).
available at : http://www.nist.gov/speech/tools/.

Josef R. Novak. 2012. Phonetisaurus: A
wfst-driven phoneticizer. available at :
https://code.google.com/p/phonetisaurus.

Asmah Haji Omar. 1981. Phonology. In The Iban
Language of Sarawak, pages 16–41, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka.

Bali Rainavo-Malançon. 2004. Computational analy-
sis of affixed words in malay language. In Internal
Publication, Universiti Sains Malaysia.

Malaysian Statistics-Department. 2010. Negeri
sarawak:total population by ethnic group, sub-
district and state. Technical report, Statistics De-
partment, Malaysia.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. Srilm - an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Proc. of the 7th International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP
2002), pages 901–904.

Morris Swadesh. 1952. Lexico-statistic dating of pre-
historic ethnic contacts. In Proc. of the American
Philosophical Society, volume 96, pages 452–463.

T. P. Tan, H. Li, E. K. Tang, X. Xiao, and E. S. Chng.
2009. Mass: a malay language lvsr corpus resource.
In Proc. of 2009 Oriental COCOSDA International
Conference, pages 26–30.

8


