




















The INESS Treebanking Infrastructure

Paul Meurer2, Helge Dyvik1,2, Victoria Rosén1,2, Koenraad De Smedt1,
Gunn Inger Lyse1, Gyri Smørdal Losnegaard1, Martha Thunes1

(1) University of Bergen, Norway
(2) Uni Computing, Bergen, Norway

paul.meurer@uni.no, helge.dyvik@uib.no, victoria@uib.no, desmedt@uib.no,
gunn.lyse@lle.uib.no, gyri.losnegaard@lle.uib.no, martha.thunes@lle.uib.no

ABSTRACT
This paper briefly describes the current state of the evolving INESS infrastructure in Norway
which is developing treebanks as well as making treebanks more accessible to the R&D com-
munity. Recent work includes the hosting of more treebanks, including parallel treebanks, and
increasing the number of parsed and disambiguated sentences in the Norwegian LFG treebank.
Other recent improvements include the presentation of metadata and license handling for re-
stricted treebanks. The infrastructure is fully operational and accessible, but will be further
improved during the lifetime of the INESS project.

KEYWORDS: treebanks, research infrastructure, parsed corpora, metadata, IPR, INESS, META-
NORD, CLARIN, CLARINO.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 453 of 474]



1 Introduction

This short paper sketches the current state of the Infrastructure for the Exploration of Syntax
and Semantics (INESS) (Rosén et al., 2012a). The implementation and operation of this infra-
structure is carried out by the University of Bergen (Norway) and Uni Computing (a division
of Uni Research, Bergen), and is funded by the Research Council of Norway and the University
of Bergen (2010–2016).

INESS is aimed at providing access to treebanks to the R&D community in the language sci-
ences. One of the project’s main activities is the development of a large, deep parsebank for
Norwegian with a wide coverage grammar and lexicon based on the Lexical-Functional Gram-
mar (LFG) formalism (Bresnan, 2001). The other is the implementation and operation of a
comprehensive open treebanking environment for building, hosting and exploring treebanks,
thereby overcoming problems of maintenance and fragmentation due to treebanks being scat-
tered and dependent on various platform-dependent software.

The project has recently cooperated with META-NORD (Vasiļjevs et al., 2012) (2011–2013), in
the Information and Communication Technologies Policy Support Programme (CIP ICT-PSP),
aimed at creating an open infrastructure to promote the accessibility and reuse of language
resources and technologies (LRT). The META-NORD consortium included organizations from
all the Nordic and Baltic countries. Among its recent results has been the documentation,
rights clearance, licensing and sharing of many language resources, including treebanks, via
the META-SHARE1 catalogue and repository, thereby making LRT more readily available to R&D.

While the details of this cooperation are presented elsewhere,2 the present paper will summa-
rize the present state of the INESS infrastructure with a focus on functionality and usability.

2 Hosting treebanks in the INESS infrastructure

INESS currently provides the most comprehensive web-based treebanking services available. A
normal web browser is sufficient as a client platform for accessing, searching and downloading
treebanks, and also for the annotation of LFG-based parsebanks, including computer-aided
manual disambiguation, text cleanup and handling of unknown words (Rosén et al., 2009,
2012b). The search functionality has recently been extended and simplified (Meurer, 2012).
Search, visualization, resource management and cataloguing have been streamlined and work
in similar ways for treebanks in several different paradigms (LFG, constituency and various
dependency formats), thus simplifying access to a variety of resources.

For these reasons, INESS has become an attractive service for research groups who have de-
veloped or want to develop treebanks, but who cannot or do not want to invest in their own
suite of web services for treebanking. Since the project start in 2010, INESS has been hosting
an increasing number of treebanks, small and large. Among the larger treebanks developed by
others and made available through INESS are the Icelandic Parsed Historical Corpus (IcePaHC,
73,014 sentences) (Wallenberg et al., 2011), the German Tiger treebank (50,472 sentences
with dependency annotation, 9,221 with LFG annotation) (Brants et al., 2002) and the de-
pendency part of the Bulgarian BulTreeBank (11,900 sentences) (Simov and Osenova, 2004).
There is also a collection of sizable treebanks for Northern Sami (in total more than 1.7 million
sentences, although not manually checked).

1http:/meta-share.tilde.lv
2A paper about the cooperation between INESS and META-NORD has been accepted for the Workshop on Nordic

Language Resources Infrastructure (NoLaReIn) at NoDaLiDa 2013.
Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 454 of 474]



Figure 1: Choosing treebanks in INESS with the parallel treebanks setting.

The INESS infrastructure also offers tools for the development and exploitation of parallel cor-
pora. Two parallel corpora aligned at sentence level were recently constructed and documented
in cooperation with META-NORD. One of these is based on excerpts of a number of translations
of the novel Sofies Verden (Sophie’s World) (Gaarder, 1991), annotated for different languages
and various formalisms, amounting to 26 aligned language pairs. Annotations of translations
of a document from the Acquis communautaire were also aligned, currently yielding 21 pairs.

The ParGram project (Butt et al., 2002) has recently started using INESS as a testbed for semi-
automatically aligning several LFG treebanks at phrase level. For treebanks constructed with
parallel LFG grammars, the technology developed in the XPAR project (Dyvik et al., 2009)
makes it possible to automatically align c-structure phrases based on manually indicated trans-
lational equivalences between f-structures. The resulting parallel treebanks are currently too
small for exploitation, but their construction and exploration is an important proof of concept
and a test of the parallel grammar construction endeavor in ParGram.

A screenshot with an overview of the treebank selection interface, with the option of choosing
parallel treebanks, is shown in Figure 1. This figure also shows the 30 languages for which
there are currently treebanks in the INESS infrastructure.

3 Accessing treebanks in the INESS interface

When accessing treebanks, users may want to identify treebanks and their provenance, for
instance to correctly cite the materials. Access to many resources also requires that users be au-
thenticated and authorized to use the materials under specified conditions. In recent joint work
with META-NORD more attention has therefore been paid to the documentation and licensing
of treebanks in INESS.

Relevant information is presented in the user interface after login. By way of example, Figure
2 shows how information on the Sofie Estonian treebank is presented the first time an authen-
ticated user accesses this resource in INESS. A text describing the terms of the license and other
metadata is presented to the user. The user can then choose to accept this license by clicking on
the “Accept” button. This procedure is only necessary for treebanks with restrictions; in many
cases the restrictions amount to no more than the requirement of attribution.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 455 of 474]



Figure 2: Presentation of documentation and user license, Sofie Estonian treebank.

4 The INESS Norwegian treebank

One of the main activities of the INESS project is the development of a large treebank for Nor-
wegian, obtained by parsing automatically with an LFG grammar on the XLE parsing platform.
The Norwegian treebank is growing and consists of a number of different genres in fiction
and non-fiction. Part of the treebank is being efficiently manually disambiguated with the LFG
PARSEBANKER (Rosén et al., 2009) Currently 4568 Norwegian sentences (46735 words) have
been manually (at least partially) disambiguated; of these, 3602 sentences (35450) have been
fully disambiguated. Based on the increasing number of manually disambiguated and qual-
ity controlled sentences, a stochastic disambiguator has been implemented which currently
operates on the fly for any new sentences that are added.

(1) Men
But

det
it

var
was

helt
completely

umulig.
impossible.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 456 of 474]



Figure 3: Screenshot of a disambiguated sentence in the INESS Norwegian treebank.

Figure 3 shows the manually disambiguated analysis of the sentence in example 1. Parsing re-
sulted in 46 analyses for this sentence, and 211 discriminants were calculated (see Rosén et al.
(2007) for the use of discriminants in LFG). Of these 211, only four were chosen in order to
select the intended analysis.

5 Conclusion and outlook
INESS is becoming established as an infrastructure hosting a variety of existing treebanks as
well as actively promoting the development of new treebanks. The infrastructure provides
added value to existing treebanks through an increasing number of services, now including
streamlined documentation and metadata, cataloguing information, access and licensing pro-
cedures, search, visualization and download. The INESS infrastructure is fully functional.

In the future, access will be further improved through user authentication by means of single
sign-on via federated identity servers (eduGain) and through the use of persistent identifiers
to identify resources (including also complex resources and possibly parts of resources). The
resources and services in INESS will also be catalogued and linked in CLARINO (the Norwegian
part of the CLARIN network) and in the Language Technology Resource Collection for Norwegian
– Språkbanken, hosted at the National Library of Norway.

Acknowledgments
The reported work has been funded by the Research Council of Norway, the University of
Bergen, and the European Commission under CIP-ICT-PSP grant agreement no. 270899.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 457 of 474]



References
Brants, S., Dipper, S., Hansen, S., Lezius, W., and Smith, G. (2002). The TIGER treebank. In
Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, pages 24–41.

Bresnan, J. (2001). Lexical-Functional Syntax. Blackwell, Malden, MA.

Butt, M., Dyvik, H., King, T. H., Masuichi, H., and Rohrer, C. (2002). The Parallel Grammar
project. In Proceedings of COLING-2002 Workshop on Grammar Engineering and Evaluation,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Dyvik, H., Meurer, P., Rosén, V., and De Smedt, K. (2009). Linguistically motivated parallel
parsebanks. In Passarotti, M., Przepiórkowski, A., Raynaud, S., and Van Eynde, F., editors,
Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, pages
71–82, Milan, Italy. EDUCatt.

Gaarder, J. (1991). Sofies verden: roman om filosofiens historie. Aschehoug, Oslo, Norway.

Meurer, P. (2012). INESS-Search: A search system for LFG (and other) treebanks. In Butt, M.
and King, T. H., editors, Proceedings of the LFG ’12 Conference, LFG Online Proceedings, pages
404–421, Stanford, CA. CSLI Publications.

Rosén, V., De Smedt, K., Meurer, P., and Dyvik, H. (2012a). An open infrastructure for ad-
vanced treebanking. In Hajič, J., De Smedt, K., Tadić, M., and Branco, A., editors, META-
RESEARCH Workshop on Advanced Treebanking at LREC2012, pages 22–29, Istanbul, Turkey.

Rosén, V., Meurer, P., and De Smedt, K. (2007). Designing and implementing discriminants for
LFG grammars. In King, T. H. and Butt, M., editors, The Proceedings of the LFG ’07 Conference,
pages 397–417. CSLI Publications, Stanford.

Rosén, V., Meurer, P., and De Smedt, K. (2009). LFG Parsebanker: A toolkit for building and
searching a treebank as a parsed corpus. In Van Eynde, F., Frank, A., van Noord, G., and
De Smedt, K., editors, Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Treebanks and
Linguistic Theories (TLT7), pages 127–133, Utrecht. LOT.

Rosén, V., Meurer, P., Losnegaard, G. S., Lyse, G. I., De Smedt, K., Thunes, M., and Dyvik, H.
(2012b). An integrated web-based treebank annotation system. In Hendrickx, I., Kübler, S.,
and Simov, K., editors, Proceedings of the Eleventh International Workshop on Treebanks and
Linguistic Theories (TLT11), pages 157–167, Lisbon, Portugal. Edições Colibri.

Simov, K. and Osenova, P. (2004). BulTreeBank Stylebook. BulTreeBank Project Technical
Report 5, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences.

Vasiļjevs, A., Forsberg, M., Gornostay, T., Haltrup Hansen, D., Jóhannsdóttir, K., Lyse, G.,
Lindén, K., Offersgaard, L., Olsen, S., Pedersen, B., Rögnvaldsson, E., Skadiņa, I., De Smedt,
K., Oksanen, V., and Rozis, R. (2012). Creation of an open shared language resource repos-
itory in the Nordic and Baltic countries. In Calzolari, N., Choukri, K., Declerck, T., Doğan,
M. U., Maegaard, B., Mariani, J., Odijk, J., and Piperidis, S., editors, Proceedings of the Eighth
Conference on International Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), pages 1076–1083,
Istanbul, Turkey. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Wallenberg, J., Ingason, A. K., Sigurðsson, E. F., and Rögnvaldsson, E. (2011). Icelandic
Parsed Historical Corpus (IcePaHC) version 0.9.

Proceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2013); Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings #85 [page 458 of 474]


