



















































Verbal indicators of psychological distress in interactive dialogue with a virtual human


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, pages 193–202,
Metz, France, 22-24 August 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Verbal indicators of psychological distress in interactive dialogue with a
virtual human

David DeVault, Kallirroi Georgila, Ron Artstein, Fabrizio Morbini, David Traum,
Stefan Scherer, Albert (Skip) Rizzo, Louis-Philippe Morency

University of Southern California, Institute for Creative Technologies
Playa Vista, CA

devault@ict.usc.edu

Abstract
We explore the presence of indicators of
psychological distress in the linguistic be-
havior of subjects in a corpus of semi-
structured virtual human interviews. At
the level of aggregate dialogue-level fea-
tures, we identify several significant dif-
ferences between subjects with depres-
sion and PTSD when compared to non-
distressed subjects. At a more fine-grained
level, we show that significant differences
can also be found among features that
represent subject behavior during specific
moments in the dialogues. Finally, we
present statistical classification results that
suggest the potential for automatic assess-
ment of psychological distress in individ-
ual interactions with a virtual human dia-
logue system.

1 Introduction

One of the first steps toward dealing with psy-
chological disorders such as depression and PTSD
is diagnosing the problem. However, there is of-
ten a shortage of trained health care professionals,
or of access to those professionals, especially for
certain segments of the population such as mili-
tary personnel and veterans (Johnson et al., 2007).
One possible partial remedy is to use virtual hu-
man characters to do a preliminary triage screen-
ing, so that mental healthcare providers can focus
their attention on those who are most likely to need
help. The virtual human would engage an indi-
vidual in an interview and analyze some of their
behavioral characteristics. In addition to serving
a triage function, this automated interview could
produce valuable information to help the health-
care provider make their expert diagnosis.

In this paper, we investigate whether features
in the linguistic behavior of participants in a con-
versation with a virtual human could be used

for recognizing psychological distress. We focus
specifically on indicators of depression and post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in the verbal be-
havior of participants in a Wizard-of-Oz corpus.

The results and analysis presented here are part
of a broader effort to create an automated, interac-
tive virtual human dialogue system that can detect
indicators of psychological distress in the multi-
modal communicative behavior of its users. Re-
alizing this vision requires a careful and strate-
gic design of the virtual human’s dialogue behav-
ior, and in concert with the system’s behavior, the
identification of robust “indicator” features in the
verbal and nonverbal responses of human intervie-
wees. These indicators should be specific behavior
patterns that are empirically correlated with spe-
cific psychological disorders, and that can inform
a triage screening process or facilitate the diagno-
sis or treatment performed by a clinician.

In this paper, we report on several kinds of such
indicators we have observed in a corpus of 43
Wizard-of-Oz interactions collected with our pro-
totype virtual human, Ellie, pictured in Figure 1.
We begin in Section 2 with a brief discussion of
background and related work on the communica-
tive behavior associated with psychological dis-
tress. In Section 3, we describe our Wizard-of-Oz
data set. Section 4 presents an analysis of indicator
features we have explored in this data set, identi-
fying several significant differences between sub-
jects with depression and PTSD when compared
to non-distressed subjects. In Section 5 we present
statistical classification results that suggest the po-
tential for automatic assessment of psychological
distress based on individual interactions with a vir-
tual human dialogue system. We conclude in Sec-
tion 6.

2 Background and Related Work

There has been a range of psychological and clin-
ical research that has identified differences in the

193



Figure 1: Ellie.

communicative behavior of patients with specific
psychological disorders such as depression. In this
section, we briefly summarize some closely re-
lated work.

Most work has observed the behavior of patients
in human-human interactions, such as clinical in-
terviews and doctor-patient interactions. PTSD is
generally less well studied than depression.

Examples of the kinds of differences that have
been observed in non-verbal behavior include dif-
ferences in rates of mutual gaze and other gaze
patterns, downward angling of the head, mouth
movements, frowns, amount of gesturing, fidget-
ing, emotional expressivity, and voice quality; see
Scherer et al. (2013) for a recent review.

In terms of verbal behavior, our exploration of
features here is guided by several previous obser-
vations in the literature. Cohn and colleagues have
identified increased speaker-switch durations and
decreased variability of vocal fundamental fre-
quency as indicators of depression, and have ex-
plored the use of these features for classification
(Cohn et al., 2009). That work studied these fea-
tures in human-human clinical interviews, rather
than in virtual human interactions as reported here.
In clinical studies, acute depression has been as-
sociated with decreased speech, slow speech, de-
lays in delivery, and long silent pauses (Hall et al.,
1995). Aggregate differences in lexical frequen-
cies have also been observed. For example, in
written essays, Rude et al. (2004) observed that
depressed participants used more negatively va-
lenced words and used the first-person pronoun “I”
more frequently than never-depressed individuals.

Heeman et al. (2010) observed differences in chil-
dren with autism in how long they pause before
speaking and in their use of fillers, acknowledg-
ments, and discourse markers. Some of these fea-
tures are similar to those studied here, but looked
at children communicating with clinicians rather
than a virtual human dialogue system.

Recent work on machine classification has
demonstrated the ability to discriminate between
schizophrenic patients and healthy controls based
on transcriptions of spoken narratives (Hong et al.,
2012), and to predict patient adherence to med-
ical treatment from word-level features of dia-
logue transcripts (Howes et al., 2012). Automatic
speech recognition and word alignment has also
been shown to give good results in scoring narra-
tive recall tests for identification of cognitive im-
pairment (Prud’hommeaux and Roark, 2011; Lehr
et al., 2012).

3 Data Set

In this section, we introduce the Wizard-of-Oz
data set that forms the basis for this paper. In
this virtual human dialogue system, the charac-
ter Ellie depicted in Figure 1 carries out a semi-
structured interview with a single user. The sys-
tem was designed after a careful analysis of a
set of face-to-face interviews in the same do-
main. The face-to-face interviews make up the
large human-human Distress Assessment Inter-
view Corpus (DAIC) that is described in Scherer
et al. (2013). Drawing on observations of inter-
viewer behavior in the face-to-face dialogues, El-
lie was designed to serve as an interviewer who
is also a good listener, providing empathetic re-
sponses, backchannels, and continuation prompts
to elicit more extended replies to specific ques-
tions. The data set used in this paper is the re-
sult of a set of 43 Wizard-of-Oz interactions where
the virtual human interacts verbally and nonver-
bally in a semi-structured manner with a partici-
pant. Excerpts from the transcripts of two interac-
tions in this Wizard-of-Oz data set are provided in
the appendix in Figure 5.1

3.1 Procedure

The participants were recruited via Craigslist and
were recorded at the USC Institute for Creative

1A sample demonstration video of an interaction be-
tween the virtual agent and a human actor can be seen here:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ejczMs6b1Q4

194



Technologies. In total 64 participants interacted
with the virtual human. All participants who met
requirements (i.e. age greater than 18, and ad-
equate eyesight) were accepted. In this paper,
we focus on a subset of 43 of these participants
who were told that they would be interacting with
an automated system. (The other participants,
which we exclude from our analysis, were aware
that they were interacting with a human-controlled
system.) The mean age of the 43 participants in
our data set was 36.6 years, with 23 males and 20
females.

We adhered to the following procedure for data
collection: After a short explanation of the study
and giving consent, participants completed a series
of questionnaires. These questionnaires included
the PTSD Checklist-Civilian version (PCL-C) and
the Patient Health Questionnaire, depression mod-
ule (PHQ-9) (Scherer et al., 2013) along with other
questions. Then participants engage in an inter-
view with the virtual human, Ellie. After the di-
alogue concludes, participants are then debriefed
(i.e. the wizard control is revealed), paid $25 to
$35, and escorted out.

The interaction between the participants and El-
lie was designed as follows: Ellie explains the pur-
pose of the interaction and that she will ask a series
of questions. She then tries to build rapport with
the participant in the beginning of the interaction
with a series of casual questions about Los Ange-
les. Then the main interview begins, including a
range of questions such as:

What would you say are some of your
best qualities?

What are some things that usually put
you in a good mood?

Do you have disturbing thoughts?

What are some things that make you re-
ally mad?

How old were you when you enlisted?

What did you study at school?

Ellie’s behavior was controlled by two human
“wizards” in a separate room, who used a graph-
ical user interface to select Ellie’s nonverbal be-
havior (e.g. head nods, smiles, back-channels)
and verbal utterances (including the interview
questions, verbal back-channels, and empathy re-
sponses). This Wizard-of-Oz setup allows us to
prove the utility of the protocol and collect training

data for the eventual fully automatic interaction.
The speech for each question was pre-recorded us-
ing an amateur voice actress (who was also one of
the wizards). The virtual human’s performance of
these utterances is animated using the SmartBody
animation system (Thiebaux et al., 2008).

3.2 Condition Assessment

The PHQ-9 and PCL-C scales provide researchers
with guidelines on how to assess the participants’
conditions based on the responses. Among the
43 participants, 13 scored above 10 on the PHQ-
9, which corresponds to moderate depression and
above (Kroenke et al., 2001). We consider these
13 participants as positive for depression in this
study. 20 participants scored positive for PTSD,
following the PCL-C classification. The two pos-
itive conditions overlap strongly, as the evalu-
ated measurements PHQ-9 and PCL-C correlate
strongly (Pearson’s r > 0.8, as reported in Scherer
et al. (2013)).

4 Feature Analysis

4.1 Transcription and timing of speech

We have a set D = {d1, ..., d43} of 43 dialogues.
The user utterances in each dialogue were tran-
scribed using ELAN (Wittenburg et al., 2006),
with start and end timestamps for each utterance.2

At each pause of 300ms or longer in the user’s
speech, a new transcription segment was started.
The resulting speech segments were subsequently
reviewed and corrected for accuracy.

For each dialogue di ∈ D, this process resulted
in a sequence of user speech segments. We repre-
sent each segment as a tuple 〈s, e, t〉, where s and e
are the starting and ending timestamps in seconds,
and t is the manual text transcription of the corre-
sponding audio segment. The system speech seg-
ments, including their starting and ending times-
tamps and verbatim transcripts of system utter-
ances, were recovered from the system log files.

To explore aggregate statistical features based
on user turn-taking behavior in the dialogues, we
employ a simple approach to identifying turns
within the dialogues. First, all user and system
speech segments are sorted in increasing order of

2ELAN is a tool that supports annotation of
video and audio, from the Max Planck Insti-
tute for Psycholinguistics, The Language Archive,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. It is available at
http://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/elan/.

195



Segment level features

(a) mean speaking rate of each user segment

(b) mean onset time of first segment in each user turn

(c) mean onset time of non-first segments in user turns

(d) mean length of user segments

(e) mean minimum valence in user segments

(f) mean mean valence in user segments

(g) mean maximum valence in user segments

(h) mean number of filled pauses in user segments

(i) mean filled pause rate in user segments

Dialogue level features
(j) total number of user segments

(k) total length of all user segments

Figure 2: List of context-independent features.

their starting timestamps. All consecutive seg-
ments with the same speaker are then designated
as constituting a single turn. While this simple
scheme does not provide a detailed treatment of
relevant phenomena such as overlapping speech,
backchannels, and the interactive process of ne-
gotiating the turn in dialogue (Yang and Heeman,
2010), it provides a conceptually simple model for
the definition of features for aggregate statistical
analysis.

4.2 Context-independent feature analysis

We begin by analyzing a set of shallow features
which we describe as context-independent, as they
apply to user speech segments independently of
what the system has recently said. Most of these
are features that apply to many or all user speech
segments. We describe our context-independent
features in Section 4.2.1, and present our results
for these features in Section 4.2.2.

4.2.1 Context-independent features
We summarize our context-independent features
in Figure 2.

Speaking rate and onset times Based on previ-
ous clinical observations related to slowed speech
and increased onset time for depressed individuals
(Section 2), we defined features for speaking rate
and onset time of user speech segments.

We quantify the speaking rate of a user speech
segment 〈s, e, t〉, where t = 〈w1, ..., wN 〉, as
N/(e − s). Feature (a) is the mean value of
this feature across all user speech segments within
each dialogue.

Onset time is calculated using the notion of user
turns. For each user turn, we extracted the first
user speech segment in the turn fu = 〈su, eu, tu〉,
and the most recent system speech segment ls =
〈ss, es, ts〉. We define the onset time of such a first
user segment as su − es, and for each dialogue,
feature (b) is the intra-dialogue mean of these on-
set times.

In order to also quantify pause length between
user speech segments within a turn, we define fea-
ture (c), a similar feature that measures the mean
onset time between non-first user speech segments
within a user turn in relation to the preceding user
speech segment.

Length of user segments As one way to quan-
tify the amount of speech, feature (d) reports the
mean length of all user speech segments within a
dialogue (measured in words).

Valence features for user speech Features (e)-
(g) are meant to explore the idea that distressed
users might use more negative or less positive vo-
cabulary than non-distressed subjects. As an ex-
ploratory approach to this topic, we used Senti-
WordNet 3.0 (Baccianella and Sebastiani, 2010),
a lexical sentiment dictionary, to assign valence
to individual words spoken by users in our study.
The dictionary contains approximately 117,000
entries. In general, each word w may appear in
multiple entries, corresponding to different parts
of speech and word senses. To assign a single va-
lence score v(w) to each word in the dictionary, in
our features we compute the average score across
all parts of speech and word senses:

v(w) =

∑
e∈E(w) PosScoree(w)−NegScoree(w)

|E(w)|

where E(w) is the set of entries for the word w,
PosScoree(w) is the positive score for w in entry
e, and NegScoree(w) is the negative score for w
in entry e. This is similar to the “averaging across
senses” method described in Taboada et al. (2011).

We use several different measures of the va-
lence of each speech segment with transcript t =
〈w1, ..., wn〉. We compute the min, mean, and max
valence of each transcript:

minimum valence of t = minwi∈t v(wi)
mean valence of t = 1n

∑
wi∈t v(wi)

maximum valence of t = maxwi∈t v(wi)

Features (e)-(f) then are intra-dialogue mean

196



values for these three segment-level valence mea-
sures.

Filled pauses Another feature that we explored
is the presence of filled pauses in user speech seg-
ments. To do so, we counted the number of times
any of the tokens uh, um, uhh, umm, mm, or mmm
appeared in each speech segment. For each dia-
logue, feature (h) is the mean number of these to-
kens per user speech segment. In order to account
for the varying length of speech segments, we also
normalize the raw token counts in each segment
by dividing them by the length of the segment, to
produce a filled pause rate for the segment. Fea-
ture (i) is the mean value of the filled pause rate
for all speech segments in the dialogue.

Dialogue level features We also included two
dialogue level measures of how “talkative” the
user is. Feature (j) is the total number of user
speech segments throughout the dialogue. Feature
(k) is the total length (in words) of all speech seg-
ments throughout the dialogue.

Standard deviation features For the classifica-
tion experiments reported in Section 5, we also in-
cluded a standard deviation variant of each of the
features (a)-(i) in Figure 2. These variants are de-
fined as the intra-dialogue standard deviation of
the underlying value, rather than the mean. We
discuss examples of standard deviation features
further in Section 5.

4.2.2 Results for context-independent
features

We summarize the observed significant effects in
our Wizard-of-Oz corpus in Table 1.

Onset time We report our findings for individu-
als with and without depression and PTSD for fea-
ture (b) in Table 1 and in Figure 3. The units are
seconds. While an increase in onset time for in-
dividuals with depression has previously been ob-
served in human-human interaction (Cohn et al.,
2009; Hall et al., 1995), here we show that this
effect transfers to interactions between individuals
with depression and virtual humans. We find that
mean onset time is significantly increased for indi-
viduals with depression in their interactions with
our virtual human Ellie (p = 0.018, Wilcoxon
rank sum test).

Additionally, while to our knowledge onset time
for individuals with PTSD has not been reported,
we also found a significant increase in onset time

M
ea

n
on

se
td

el
ay

of
fir

st
pa

rt
ic

ip
an

ts
eg

m
en

t(
se

co
nd

s)

0

1

2

3

4

No depr.

◦◦

Depr.

◦

M
ea

n
on

se
td

el
ay

of
fir

st
pa

rt
ic

ip
an

ts
eg

m
en

t(
se

co
nd

s)

0

1

2

3

4

¬PTSD

◦

PTSD

◦

Figure 3: Onset time.

for individuals with PTSD (p = 0.019, Wilcoxon
rank sum test).

Filled pauses We report our findings for individ-
uals with and without depression and PTSD under
feature (h) in Table 1 and in Figure 4. We observed
a significant reduction in this feature for both in-
dividuals with depression (p = 0.012, Wilcoxon
rank sum test) and PTSD (p = 0.014, Wilcoxon
rank sum test). We believe this may be related
to the trend we observed toward shorter speech
segments from distressed individuals (though this
trend did not reach significance). There is a pos-
itive correlation, ρ = 0.55 (p = 0.0001), be-
tween mean segment length (d) and mean number
of filled pauses in segments (h).

Other features We did not observe significant
differences in the values of the other context-
independent features in Figure 2.

4.3 Context-dependent features
Our data set allows us to zoom in and look at
specific contextual moments in the dialogues, and
observe how users respond to specific Ellie ques-
tions. As an example, one of Ellie’s utterances,
which has system ID happy lasttime, is:

happy lasttime = Tell me about the last
time you felt really happy.

In our data set of 43 dialogues, this question was
asked in 42 dialogues, including 12 users positive
for depression and 19 users positive for PTSD.

197



Feature Depression (13 yes, 30 no) PTSD (20 yes, 23 no)

(b) mean onset time of first
segment in each user turn

↑
Depr.: 1.72 (0.89)

No Depr.: 1.08 (0.56)
p = 0.018

↑
PTSD.: 1.56 (0.80)

No PTSD.: 1.03 (0.57)
p = 0.019

(h) mean number of filled pauses
in user segments

↓
Depr.: 0.32 (0.19)

No Depr.: 0.48 (0.23)
p = 0.012

↓
PTSD: 0.36 (0.24)

No PTSD: 0.49 (0.21)
p = 0.014

Table 1: Results for context-independent features. For each feature and condition, we provide the mean
(standard deviation) for individuals with and without the condition. P-values for individual Wilcoxon
rank sum tests are provided. An up arrow (↑) indicates a significant trend toward increased feature values
for positive individuals. A down arrow (↓) indicates a significant trend toward decreased feature values
for positive individuals.

M
ea

n
fil

le
d

pa
us

es
in

pa
rt

ic
ip

an
ts

eg
m

en
t(

to
ke

ns
)

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

No depr.

◦

Depr.

◦

M
ea

n
fil

le
d

pa
us

es
in

pa
rt

ic
ip

an
ts

eg
m

en
t(

to
ke

ns
)

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

¬PTSD PTSD

◦

Figure 4: Number of filled pauses per speech seg-
ment.

This question is one of 95 topic setting utter-
ances in Ellie’s repertoire. (Ellie has additional
utterances that serve as continuation prompts,
backchannels, and empathy responses, which can
be used as a topic is discussed.)

To define context-dependent features, we asso-
ciate with each user segment the most recent of
Ellie’s topic setting utterances that has occurred in
the dialogue. We then focus our analysis on those
user segments and turns that follow specific topic
setting utterances. In Table 2, we present some ex-
amples of our findings for context-dependent fea-
tures for happy lasttime.3

3While we provide significance test results here at the p <
0.05 level, it should be noted that because of the large number
of context-dependent features that may be defined in a small
corpus such as ours, we report these merely as observations in
our corpus. We do not claim that these results transfer beyond

The contextual feature labeled (g′) in Table 2 is
the mean of the maximum valence feature across
all segments for which happy lasttime is the most
recent topic setting system utterance. We provide
a full example of this feature calculation in Fig-
ure 5 in the appendix.

As the figure shows, we find that users with
both PTSD and depression show a sharp reduc-
tion in the mean maximum valence in their speech
segments that respond to this question. This sug-
gests that in these virtual human interactions, this
question plays a useful role in eliciting differen-
tial responses from subjects with these psycholog-
ical disorders. We observed three additional ques-
tions which showed a significant difference in the
mean maximum valence feature. One example is
the question, How would your best friend describe
you?.

With feature (b′) in Table 2, we find an in-
creased onset time in responses to this question for
subjects with depression.4 Feature (d′) shows that
subjects with PTSD exhibit shorter speech seg-
ments in their responses to this question.

We observed a range of findings of this sort for
various combinations of Ellie’s topic setting utter-
ances and specific context-dependent features. In
future work, we would like to study the optimal
combinations of context-dependent questions that
yield the most information about the user’s distress
status.

this data set.
4In comparing Table 2 with Table 1, this question seems

to induce a higher mean onset time for distressed users than
the average system utterance does. This does not seem to be
the case for non-distressed users.

198



Feature Depression (12 yes, 30 no) PTSD (19 yes, 23 no)

(g′) mean maximum valence
in user segments following
happy lasttime

↓
Depr.: 0.15 (0.07)

No Depr.: 0.26 (0.12)
p = 0.003

↓
PTSD: 0.16 (0.08)

No PTSD: 0.28 (0.11)
p = 0.0003

(b′) mean onset time of first
segments in user turns
following happy lasttime

↑
Depr.: 2.64 (2.70)

No Depr.: 0.94 (1.80)
p = 0.030

n.s.
PTSD: 2.18 (2.48)

No PTSD: 0.80 (1.76)
p = 0.077

(d′) mean length of user
segments following
happy lasttime

n.s.
Depr.: 5.95 (1.80)

No Depr.: 10.03 (6.99)
p = 0.077

↓
PTSD: 6.82 (5.12)

No PTSD: 10.55 (6.68)
p = 0.012

Table 2: Example results for context-dependent features. For each feature and condition, we provide
the mean (standard deviation) for individuals with and without the condition. P-values for individual
Wilcoxon rank sum tests are provided. An up arrow (↑) indicates a significant trend toward increased
feature values for positive individuals. A down arrow (↓) indicates a significant trend toward decreased
feature values for positive individuals.

5 Classification Results

In this section, we present some suggestive clas-
sification results for our data set. We construct
three binary classifiers that use the kinds of fea-
tures described in Section 4 to predict the pres-
ence of three conditions: PTSD, depression, and
distress. For the third condition, we define dis-
tress to be present if and only if PTSD, depres-
sion, or both are present. Such a notion of distress
that collapses distinctions between disorders may
be the most appropriate type of classification for a
potential application in which distressed users of
any type are prioritized for access to health care
professionals (who will make a more informed as-
sessment of specific conditions).

For each individual dialogue, each of the three
classifiers emits a single binary label. We train
and evaluate the classifiers in a 10-fold cross-
validation using Weka (Hall et al., 2009).

While our data set of 43 dialogues is perhaps
of a typical size for a study of a research proto-
type dialogue system, it remains very small from
a machine learning perspective. We report here
two kinds of results that help provide perspective
on the prospects for classification of these condi-
tions. The first kind looks at classification based
on all the context-independent features described
in Section 4.2.1. The second looks at classifica-
tion based on individual features from this set.

In the first set of experiments, we trained a
Naı̈ve Bayes classifier for each condition using

all the context-independent features. We present
our results in Table 3, comparing each classifier to
a baseline that always predicts the majority class
(i.e. no condition for PTSD, no condition for de-
pression, and with condition for distress).

We note first that the trained classifiers all out-
perform the baseline in terms of weighted F-score,
weighted precision, weighted recall, and accuracy.
The accuracy improvement over baseline is sub-
stantial for PTSD (20.9% absolute improvement)
and distress (23.2% absolute improvement). The
accuracy improvement over baseline is more mod-
est for depression (2.3% absolute). We believe
one factor in the relative difficulty of classifying
depression more accurately is the relatively small
number of depressed participants in our study
(13).

While it has been shown in prior work (Cohn et
al., 2009) that depression can be classified above
baseline performance using features observed in
clinical human-human interactions, here we have
shown that classification above baseline perfor-
mance is possible in interactions between human
participants and a virtual human dialogue system.
Further, we have shown classification results for
PTSD and distress as well as depression.

We tried incorporating context-dependent fea-
tures, and also unigram features, but found that
neither improved performance. We believe our
data set is too small for effective training with
these very large extended feature sets.

199



Disorder Model Weighted F-score Weighted Precision Weighted Recall Accuracy

PTSD Naı̈ve Bayes 0.738 0.754 0.744 74.4%

Majority Baseline 0.373 0.286 0.535 53.5%

Depression Naı̈ve Bayes 0.721 0.721 0.721 72.1%

Majority Baseline 0.574 0.487 0.698 69.8%

Distress Naı̈ve Bayes 0.743 0.750 0.744 74.4%

Majority Baseline 0.347 0.262 0.512 51.2%

Table 3: Classification results.

In our second set of experiments, we sought to
gain understanding of which features were pro-
viding the greatest value to classification perfor-
mance. We therefore retrained Naı̈ve Bayes classi-
fiers using only one feature at a time. We summa-
rize here some of the highest performing features.

For depression, we found that the feature stan-
dard deviation in onset time of first segment in
each user turn yielded very strong performance
by itself. In our corpus, we observed that de-
pressed individuals show a greater standard devia-
tion in the onset time of their responses to Ellie’s
questions (p = 0.024, Wilcoxon rank sum test).
The value of this feature in classification comple-
ments the clinical finding that depressed individu-
als show greater onset times in their responses to
interview questions (Cohn et al., 2009).

For distress, we found that the feature mean
maximum valence in user segments was the most
valuable. We discussed findings for a context-
dependent version of this feature in Section 4.3.
This finding for distress can be related to previ-
ous observations that individuals with depression
use more negatively valenced words (Rude et al.,
2004).

For PTSD, we found that the feature mean num-
ber of filled pauses in user segments was among
the most informative.

Based on our observation of classification per-
formance using individual features, we believe
there remains much room for improvement in fea-
ture selection and training. A larger data set would
enable feature selection approaches that use held
out data, and would likely result in both increased
performance and deeper insights into the most
valuable combination of features for classification.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we have explored the presence of in-
dicators of psychological distress in the linguistic
behavior of subjects in a corpus of semi-structured

virtual human interviews. In our data set, we
have identified several significant differences be-
tween subjects with depression and PTSD when
compared to non-distressed subjects. Drawing on
these features, we have presented statistical classi-
fication results that suggest the potential for auto-
matic assessment of psychological distress in indi-
vidual interactions with a virtual human dialogue
system.

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by DARPA under con-
tract (W911NF-04-D-0005) and the U.S. Army
Research, Development, and Engineering Com-
mand. The content does not necessarily reflect the
position or the policy of the Government, and no
official endorsement should be inferred.

References
Andrea Esuli Stefano Baccianella and Fabrizio Sebas-

tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexi-
cal resource for sentiment analysis and opinion min-
ing. In Proceedings of the Seventh conference on
International Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10), Valletta, Malta, May. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).

Jeffery F. Cohn, Tomas Simon Kruez, Iain Matthews,
Ying Yang, Minh Hoai Nguyen, Margara Tejera
Padilla, Feng Zhou, and Fernando De la Torre.
2009. Detecting depression from facial actions and
vocal prosody. In Affective Computing and Intelli-
gent Interaction (ACII), September.

Judith A. Hall, Jinni A. Harrigan, and Robert Rosen-
thal. 1995. Nonverbal behavior in clinician-patient
interaction. Applied and Preventive Psychology,
4(1):21 – 37.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: an update.
SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., 11(1):10–18, November.

Peter A Heeman, Rebecca Lunsford, Ethan Selfridge,
Lois Black, and Jan Van Santen. 2010. Autism and

200



interactional aspects of dialogue. In Proceedings
of the 11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest
Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 249–252.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kai Hong, Christian G. Kohler, Mary E. March, Am-
ber A. Parker, and Ani Nenkova. 2012. Lexi-
cal differences in autobiographical narratives from
schizophrenic patients and healthy controls. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 37–
47, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Christine Howes, Matthew Purver, Rose McCabe,
Patrick G. T. Healey, and Mary Lavelle. 2012.
Predicting adherence to treatment for schizophrenia
from dialogue transcripts. In Proceedings of the
13th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group
on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 79–83, Seoul,
South Korea, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Shannon J Johnson, Michelle D Sherman, Jeanne S
Hoffman, Larry C James, Patti L Johnson, John E
Lochman, Thomas N Magee, David Riggs, Jes-
sica Henderson Daniel, Ronald S Palomares, et al.
2007. The psychological needs of US military ser-
vice members and their families: A preliminary re-
port. American Psychological Association Presi-
dential Task Force on Military Deployment Services
for Youth, Families and Service Members.

Kurt Kroenke, Robert L. Spitzer, and Janet B. W.
Williams. 2001. The phq-9. Journal of General
Internal Medicine, 16(9):606–613.

Maider Lehr, Emily Prud’hommeaux, Izhak Shafran,
and Brian Roark. 2012. Fully automated neuropsy-
chological assessment for detecting mild cognitive
impairment. In Interspeech 2012: 13th Annual Con-
ference of the International Speech Communication
Association, Portland, Oregon, September.

Emily Prud’hommeaux and Brian Roark. 2011. Ex-
traction of narrative recall patterns for neuropsycho-
logical assessment. In Interspeech 2011: 12th An-
nual Conference of the International Speech Com-
munication Association, pages 3021–3024, Flo-
rence, Italy, August.

Stephanie Rude, Eva-Maria Gortner, and James Pen-
nebaker. 2004. Language use of depressed and
depression-vulnerable college students. Cognition
& Emotion, 18(8):1121–1133.

S. Scherer, G. Stratou, M. Mahmoud, J. Boberg,
J. Gratch, A. Rizzo, and L.-P. Morency. 2013. Au-
tomatic behavior descriptors for psychological dis-
order analysis. In IEEE Conference on Automatic
Face and Gesture Recognition.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kim-
berly Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-
based methods for sentiment analysis. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 37(2):267–307, June.

Marcus Thiebaux, Stacy Marsella, Andrew N. Mar-
shall, and Marcelo Kallmann. 2008. Smartbody:
behavior realization for embodied conversational
agents. In Proceedings of the 7th international
joint conference on Autonomous agents and multi-
agent systems - Volume 1, AAMAS ’08, pages 151–
158, Richland, SC. International Foundation for Au-
tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.

Peter Wittenburg, Hennie Brugman, Albert Russel,
Alex Klassmann, and Han Sloetjes. 2006. Elan: a
professional framework for multimodality research.
In Proceedings of LREC 2006, Fifth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation.

Fan Yang and Peter A. Heeman. 2010. Initiative con-
flicts in task-oriented dialogue. Computer Speech &
Language, 24(2):175 – 189.

201



Appendix A. Wizard-of-Oz Dialogue Excerpts

Example user with PTSD and depression Example non-distressed user

max
valence

transcript

Ellie (happy lasttime) tell me
about the last time you
felt really happy

User 0.014 when i play with my dog
Ellie when was the last time

that happened?
User 0.000 this morning
Ellie aw
Ellie tell me more about that
User 0.312 i don’t know i just
User 0.010 whenever i get
User 0.312 super bored or i just

need some time to
User 0.312 for myself i just play

with the dog
Ellie that’s good
User 0.000 yeah

0.1371 = mean
maximum valence in
user segments following
happy lasttime

Ellie (ideal weekendC) tell
me how you spend your
ideal weekend

max
valence

transcript

Ellie (happy lasttime) tell me
about the last time you
felt really happy

User 0.562 um the last time i felt
really happy was

User 0.000 hm
User 0.000 today
Ellie tell me more about that
User 0.688 uh just from the moment

i woke up it was a
beautiful sunny day

User -0.062 i
User 0.565 went to see some friends

we had a good time
went to school

User 0.565 had some good grades
on some papers um
wrote a good essay

User 0.292 feel pretty accomplished
and

User 0.312 i feel like my day is just
User 0.565 a good day
Ellie that’s so good to hear

0.3487 = mean
maximum valence in
user segments following
happy lasttime

Ellie (BF describe) how
would your best friend
describe you?

Figure 5: Examples of maximum valence feature.

202


