



















































Speech Reduction, Intensity, and F0 Shape are Cues to Turn-Taking


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, pages 261–269,
Metz, France, 22-24 August 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Speech Reduction, Intensity, and F0 Shape are Cues to Turn-Taking 

 
 

Oliver Niebuhr 
Dept. of General Linguistics 

University of Kiel 
Kiel, Germany 

niebuhr@isfas.uni-kiel.de 

Karin Görs 
Dept. of General Linguistics 

University of Kiel 
Kiel, Germany 
kgoers@arcor.de 

Evelin Graupe 
Dept. of General Linguistics 

University of Kiel 
Kiel, Germany 

evelin_graupe@yahoo.de 
 

  
 

Abstract 

Based on German production data from 
the ‘Kiel Corpus of Spontaneous 
Speech’, we conducted two perception 
experiments, using an innovative interac-
tive task in which participants gave real 
oral responses to resynthesized question 
stimuli. Differences in the time interval 
between stimulus question and response 
show that segmental reduction, intensity 
level, and the shape of the phrase-final 
rise all function as cues to turn-taking in 
conversation. Thus, the phonetics of turn-
taking goes beyond the traditional triad 
of duration, voice quality, and F0 level. 

1 Introduction 
1.1 Empirical background 
Signalling turn-taking intentions is essential for 
successful speech communication. Accordingly, 
it was shown for all well-described languages 
that turn holding and yielding cues are robustly 
encoded in complex redundant bundles of mor-
phosyntactic and/or phonetic patterns. The pho-
netic patterns primarily rely on prosody, taking a 
considerable part of its functional load. Com-
pared with turn holding, turn yielding is typically 
signalled phrase-finally by extensive terminal 
falling or high rising F0 movements, deviation 
from modal phonation – mostly in the direction 
of creak phonation – and increasing final length-
ening from penultimate to ultimate syllables. 
These differences seem to be used in the same 
way across many languages, and not least for this 
reason their validity is beyond doubt (e.g., Dun-
can, 1972; Beattie, 1981; Lehiste, 1982; Kohler, 
1983; Nakatani et al., 1995; Ogden, 2001; Fon, 
2002; Kohler, 2004; Peters, 2006; Vaissière & 
Michaud 2006; Gravano, 2009; Fon et al., 2011). 

However, leaving aside gaze and gesture pat-
terns (cf. Kendon, 1995; Taboada, 2006), a 
growing body of evidence from production stud-
ies suggests that the phonetics of turn-taking is 
still richer and goes beyond the traditional triad 
of voice quality, duration, and the level or direc-
tion of F0 patterns. Turn holding or yielding also 
seems to include the fourth prosodic dimension, 
i.e. intensity, as well as details in the shape of 
phrase-final rises and the degree of phrase-final 
segmental reduction. 

For example, phrase-final voiceless plosives in 
English are realized either fully pronounced and 
with strong post-aspiration, or in reduced forms 
that lack post-aspiration and are (partly) replaced 
by glottalization, cf. “got” [g WÅ tH] vs. [g WÅ 0/t4], 
and “cap” [k H +Qp H] vs. [k H + Q / p |]. The difference 
between the unreduced and reduced forms was 
for a long time claimed to be a matter of free 
variation, until it was revealed in corpus analyses 
of different varieties of English that reduced 
forms were produced turn-medially whereas un-
reduced forms occurred almost exceptionally at 
the end of a speaker’s turn (Local et al., 1986; 
Docherty et al., 1997; Local & Walker, 2012). 

More recently, it was additionally found for 
English and French in independent analyses of 
spontaneous speech corpora that the intensity 
levels of phrase-final syllables differ depending 
on whether the syllables occur turn-medially or 
turn-finally (Gravano & Hirschberg, 2009; Cle-
mens & Dieckhaus, 2009; Raux, 2008; Fried-
berg, 2011). The difference was the same in both 
languages: “speakers tend to lower their voices 
when approaching turn boundaries, whereas 
they reach turn-internal pauses with a higher 
intensity“ (Gravano & Hirschberg, 2009:256). 

Furthermore, Dombrowski & Niebuhr (2005) 
showed on the basis of one of the largest corpora 
of Standard Northern German – the Kiel Corpus 
of Spontaneous Speech – that it is not only the 
range of phrase-final intonation movements that 

261



distinguishes turn-internal from turn-final bound-
aries. At least in the case of rises, it also matters 
whether the shape of the rise is concave (slow 
rise followed by fast rise) or convex (fast rise 
followed by slow rise). Convex rises occurred 
predominantly turn-medially, whereas concave 
rises were used by speakers almost invariably at 
the end of a turn. A similar distribution of rise 
shapes was found by Asu (2006) for discourse 
markers in spontaneous dialogues of Estonian. 

1.2 Question and aim 
The three groups of cross-linguistic findings on 
reduction levels, intensity levels and rise shapes 
have in common that their perceptual relevance 
for turn-taking has never been tested as yet. That 
is, do listeners actually interpret phrase-final dif-
ferences in (i) the degree of segmental reduction, 
(ii) the intensity level, and (iii) the shape of F0 
rises as signals of turn-holding and/or turn-
yielding? Providing a first answer to this ques-
tion is the main aim of the present paper. 

Clayards et al. (2007) showed that the more 
systematically acoustic cues are used in speech 
production the more likely they are exploited by 
listeners. Given the distinct production findings 
for (i)-(iii) and their consistency across lan-
guages or language varieties, it was already ex-
pectable that the answer to our question would be 
‘yes’; and, indeed our results met our expecta-
tion. Yet, empirical testing was indispensable. 

1.3 Research subject  
Our study was based on a single language vari-
ety: Standard Northern German. However, in 
view of the strong cross-linguistic parallels in the 
phonetics of turn-taking (cf. 1.1), it is reasonable 
to assume that our results will also be applicable 
to many other languages. 

In order to test the effects of intensity differ-
ences and particularly of reduction differences on 
the perception of turn-internal and turn-final 
boundaries, we used the most frequent sonorous 
word-final syllable in German: <-en#>. It always 
occurs unstressed and is phonologically repre-
sented as a sequence of schwa and alveolar nasal 
/´n/. However, next to its corresponding canoni-
cal pronunciation as [´n] (or rather [I 4 n]), the 
word-final <-en#> syllable is known to undergo 
different reduction processes. The two most im-
portant processes are /´/ elision, which leaves a 
syllabic nasal, and assimilation of the syllabic 
nasal to the place of articulation of the preceding 
consonant. For example, “lieben” (to love) can 

be realized as [» li˘b´n], [» li˘bn `], or [» li˘bm̀]. Like-
wise, possible pronunciations of “sagen” (to say) 
are [»za˘ g ´n], [»za˘ g n `], and [»za˘ g N `]. 

However, prior to conducting any perception 
experiments, we first had to confirm that the dif-
ferences in the turn-internal vs. turn-final reduc-
tion and intensity levels found for English and 
French (cf. 1.1) do occur as well in Standard 
Northern German (the differences in rise shape 
are already known for Standard Northern Ger-
man and thus need not be replicated). Therefore, 
our perception experiments were preceded by an 
analysis of the Kiel Corpus of Spontaneous 
Speech. This analysis is detailed below. 

2 Corpus analysis 
2.1 Analysis method 
The Kiel Corpus of Spontaneous Speech includes 
117 dialogues which add up to more than four 
hours of Standard Northern German speech from 
52 male or female interlocutors (Kohler, 1996). 
The corpus is completely annotated, segmentally 
and prosodically. The segmental annotations are 
made such that they specify reduction processes 
like assimilation, elision, lenition, and “articula-
tory prosodies” in terms of deviations from the 
canonical forms of the spoken words (articula-
tory prosodies preserve the “phonetic essence” of 
segmentally elided words or syllables in the form 
of suprasegmental sound qualities and are thus 
an important cue to word identification in re-
duced speech, Kohler & Niebuhr 2011). Fur-
thermore, the structure of the corpus in combina-
tion with the prosodic annotation allows a differ-
ential search for phrase and turn boundaries.  

On this basis, we conducted an annotation-
based analysis of unstressed word-final <-en#> 
syllables in turn-final and turn-internal position. 
The turn-internal tokens were further subdivided 
into phrase-final and phrase-internal syllables. 
The latter phrase-internal syllables were not di-
rectly relevant for our research question but still 
included for the sake of completeness. Our cor-
pus query yielded a total of 17,023 word-final   
<-en#> syllables. The majority of the syllables, 
viz. 11,329 tokens, occurred in phrase- and turn-
internal position. For the phrase-final but turn-
internal position, we found 4,090 <-en#> sylla-
bles. The phrase- and turn-final position was rep-
resented by 1,604 tokens. The information about 
whether the <-en#> syllables were subject of re-
duction processes, and if so, whether degree of 
reduction differed across the three syntactic-
prosodic positions was derived from the segmen-

262



tal annotation. We focussed on the two main re-
duction processes exemplified in 1.3: /´/ elision 
and, if the /´/ is absent, additional progressive 
place assimilation of the syllabic nasal /n/ to-
wards [m] or [N]. 

In a subsequent step, we took random sub-
samples of 50 <-en#> syllables from each of the 
three syntactic-prosodic positions and analyzed 
their intensity levels manually in Adobe Audi-
tion. Measurements were taken in terms of mean 
acoustic energy (in dB). As mixing syllables with 
and without schwa could have biased our inten-
sity measurements, all three sub-samples only 
contained syllabic [n `] nasals. The results of our 
reduction and intensity analyses are presented in 
the following section. 

2.2 Results of the production data 
To put it in a nutshell, analyzing the segmental 
annotation of the Kiel Corpus clearly showed: 
The more finally a <-en#> syllable was produced 
the lower was its degree of segmental reduction. 
This fact is illustrated in Figures 1(a)-(b). While 
virtually no <-en#> syllable in turn-medial and 
phrase-medial position was realized with a [´] or 
a similar vocoid sound before the nasal, about 
7% of the <-en#> syllables in turn-medial but 
phrase-final position showed such a vocoid sec-
tion (Fig.1a). The amount of schwas or similar 
vocoids increased above 10% for those <-en#> 
syllables that occurred phrase-finally and turn-
finally. Among the <-en#> syllables that were 
realized without /´/, the frequency of place as-
similation of the syllabic /n/ decreased from al-
most 80% in phrase-medial and turn-medial posi-
tion, through about 66% in turn-medial but 
phrase-final position, to only about 20% in 
phrase-final and turn-final position (Fig.1b). 

Although these figures speak for themselves, 
we also assessed their statistical significance by 
means of a χ² test. The test was based on the ab-
solute number of // and /n/ occurrences in the 
3x2 conditions of Figures 1(a)-(b). The test sta-
tistics corroborate that reduction becomes sig-
nificantly stronger under increasing finality 
(χ²=373.554, df=2, p<0.001). 

A similar tripartite picture emerged for the in-
tensity measurements. The intensity level in the 
random sub-samples of 3x50 <-en#> syllables 
(realized as syllabic nasals) decreased succes-
sively by on average about 3.5-6.2 dB (for fe-
male speakers less than for male speakers) from 
phrase- and turn-medial tokens to tokens which 

are both phrase-final and turn-final. That is, the 
softest <-en#> syllables occurred immediately 
before a turn transition. A one-way ANOVA 
showed that the intensity decrease across the 
three finality conditions was highly significant 
(F[2,147]=45.941, p<0.001). 
 

 
 

Figure 1: Degree of reduction of <-en#> sylla-
bles in terms of (a) /´/ elision and (b) place as-
similation of /n/ by the preceding consonant 
(when /´/ is absent). The <-en#> syllables oc-
curred in phrase- and turn-internal position (left), 
in turn-internal but phrase-final position (mid-
dle), or in phrase- and turn-final position (right). 

2.3 Conclusion from the production data 
Three conclusions can be drawn from the results 
of our corpus analysis. First, the degree of reduc-
tion of sound segments in Standard Northern 
German – represented by <-en#> syllables – dif-
fers substantially depending on whether they co-
incide with phrase boundaries or turn boundaries. 
The degree of reduction is lower at turn-final 
than at turn-internal boundaries. Second, also the 
intensity levels before different types of syntac-
tic-prosodic boundaries show clear differences. 
However, while the degree of segmental reduc-
tion decreases from phrase-internal through 
phrase-final to turn-final boundaries, the degree 
of intensity reduction increases by on average up 
to 100%. Third, the findings for Standard North-
ern German, particularly the direction of changes 
from phrase-final but turn-internal to phrase- and 
turn-final boundaries, are qualitatively consistent 
with those that have been found before for spon-
taneous dialogues in English and French. 

After having confirmed that Standard North-
ern German resembles English and French with 

263



regard to the production of reduction and inten-
sity differences at turn-internal and turn-final 
boundaries, we continued with conducting two 
perception experiments. They were based on 
question stimuli, whose ends were varied in a 
binary fashion with respect to <-en#> reduction, 
intensity level and the shape of the final F0 rise. 

3 Perception experiment 1: reduction 
and rise shape 

3.1 Stimulus generation 
When it comes to testing the perceptual rele-
vance of phonetic details for turn yielding or 
holding, internal/ecological validity is a big is-
sue. We addressed this issue by developing an 
interactive experimental design in which the par-
ticipants gave real verbal responses to the stim-
uli. Our target stimuli were syntactically marked 
questions, whose last constituent was concluded 
by a target word. As there were 16 different 
questions, we had 16 different target words. All 
of them were similarly frequent verbal infinitives 
of two or three syllables, and with lexical stress 
and a rising nuclear pitch accent (L+H*) on the 
penultimate syllable. The pitch-accent rise was 
complemented by a high boundary tone (H-%), 
and hence the rise continued across the final syl-
lable until the end of the utterance. The final syl-
lable was <-en#>. Two target-word examples 
have already been given in 1.3; further examples 
are “fliegen” (to fly), “liegen” (to lie), “kramen” 
(to fish sth out), and “fragen” (to question). In 
half (i.e. eight) of the target words, <-en#> was 
preceded by a labial consonant (/m,b/). The other 
half had a velar consonant (/N,g/) before the      
<-en#> syllable. Moreover, the target words 
were balanced with respect to vowel quantity and 
height of the stressed vowel (/i(:)/ or /a(:)/). 

The target questions were embedded in con-
text frames, i.e. they were preceded by 1-2 intro-
ductory statements and followed by an alterna-
tive question starting with “oder” (or). For ex-
ample, “Ich hab Anjas Freund letztens Hand in 
Hand mit einer anderen durch die Stadt laufen 
sehen. Meinst Du, ich soll Ihr das sagen ? – oder 
soll ich mich da lieber raus halten?“ (I saw 
Anja‘s boyfriend yesterday wandering hand in 
hand through the streets with another girl. Do 
you think I should tell her? – or should I rather 
butt out?). The crucial point is that the alternative 
question is optional. It may or may not be there 
so that the target question could equally be turn-
internal or turn-final. In order to validate this po-
sitional ambiguity, we ran a pretest with 12 par-

ticipants and orthographic representations of our 
target questions. The pretest confirmed that none 
of the target questions had a semantic bias to-
wards occurring in turn-internal or turn-final po-
sition (i.e. with/without an alternative question). 

The 16 sequences of preparatory statement(s), 
target question and alternative question were 
produced by a phonetically trained female 
speaker (KG) with unreduced, canonically pro-
nounced <-en#> syllables ([´n]) at the end of the 
target words. The sequences were digitally re-
corded and constituted our first set of 16 base 
stimuli. Then, KG produced the same 16 se-
quences again, but this time the <-en#> syllables 
were highly reduced to either [m̀] or [N `]. The 
latter segments were used to create a second set 
of 16 base stimuli by taking the stimuli of the 
first set and replacing (with Adobe Audition) 
their fully pronounced [´ n] syllables with the 
corresponding highly reduced nasal. In this way, 
we ended up with two sets 16 base stimuli. The 
stimuli in each set were phonetically absolutely 
identical except for the <-en#> syllables, which 
were either fully pronounced or highly reduced.  

 
 

Figure 2: Shape manipulation of the nuclear F0 
rise L+H* H-% at the end of the target questions, 
yielding 32 questions with convex and 32 ques-
tions with concave rises. 

Before proceeding with the next step, we 
checked our base stimulus endings for confound-
ing turn-taking factors. First, there were no de-
viations from modal phonation in the target syl-
lables. Second, final lengthening was also con-
trolled insofar as the fully pronounced and highly 
reduced target syllables showed no systematic 
duration differences. Moreover, all duration dif-
ferences were below the just noticeable differ-
ence of 20% (cf. Klatt 1976), which corresponds 
to about 40 ms in the case of our target syllables. 

All 32 base stimuli were then subjected to a 
PSOLA manipulation in PRAAT, in which we 
firstly set the pause between target and alterna-
tive question to exactly 1.5 seconds. For reasons 
that will be explained in 3.2, this interval is at the 
upper limit of turn-internal pauses in dialogues 
and thus suitable to raise the reasonable suspi-
cion that no alternative question would follow 

264



(e.g., Edlund & Heldner, 2005). Finally, we re-
placed the naturally produced F0 patterns at the 
end of the 32 target questions (all of them were 
more or less linear rises) by clearly convex and 
concave rises of the same overall range, as is il-
lustrated in Figure 2. The rises were stylized at 
rise onset, pivot, and rise offset. They set in right 
before the stressed vowel; the pivot was located 
at the end of the stressed vowel. 

The PSOLA manipulations resulted in 64 re-
synthesized stimuli. Another 64 stimuli were 
created by cutting off the alternative questions 
from the 64 resynthesized stimuli. 

3.2 Subjects and procedure 
Twenty native speakers of Standard Northern 
German participated in the perception experi-
ment (14 females, 6 males, 20-30 years old). All 
participants were undergraduate students of Em-
pirical Linguistics at the University of Kiel.  

The participants sat in a sound-treated room 
and put on a headset. Then, they were instructed 
that they would be presented with 64 stimuli, 
each of which would end in a question. Their 
task would be to conceive themselves in a dia-
logue situation and to respond to the questions of 
their female dialogue partner with short, plain 
answers (‘yes/no’, ‘don’t know’, ‘we’ll see’ and 
the like) as soon as they would think that they 
were given the floor. However, if they answered 
too early, i.e. before their dialogue partner’s turn 
had ended, their answer would count as a failure. 
On the other hand, if they did not respond within 
1.5 seconds after their dialogue partner’s turn 
had ended (indicated by a bleep), then their an-
swer would count as a failure, too. At the end of 
the experiment, that participant who gave the 
most valid answers in the shortest average re-
sponse time would win a prize (a 50 € voucher). 

The crucial point in this procedure was that 
the participants did not know when the target 
question was turn-internal or turn-final, i.e. when 
it was followed by an additional alternative ques-
tion, as this variable was randomly distributed 
across the 64 stimuli. In this way, we avoided 
that the participants were able to learn artificial 
turn yielding or holding cues during the experi-
ment by correlating the phonetic variation at the 
end of the target questions with the occurrence of 
alternative questions. Furthermore, informal pre-
tests showed that the dichotomous forces of the 
competitive task – i.e. the risk of premature vs. 
overdue responses – were effective in making 
participants focus on the stimuli and exploiting 
given acoustic cues. 

Prior to the actual experimental session, which 
took about 20 min, the participants received a 
practice session with 12 stimuli that were ran-
domly selected for each participant. The 64 stim-
uli of the subsequent experimental session were 
also played in individually randomized orders. 

The entire experimental sessions of all partici-
pants were recorded via their headsets. Re-
cordings were made with Audacity in the form of 
digital stereo files with separate channels for 
stimuli and responses. On this basis, we meas-
ured the response times, i.e. the time intervals 
from the end of the target question to the first 
response signal of the participant (which in-
cluded smacks). This response-time measure (in 
ms) served as dependent variable. Response-time 
measurements were made manually in Audacity. 
Figure 3 displays an example. If the relevant first 
response came too late (e.g., after an alternative 
question had begun) or not at all, response time 
measurements were capped at 1.5 seconds. 

 
 

 
 

Figure 3: Audacity screenshot showing an exam-
ple of a response-time measurement; top: stimu-
lus channel, bottom: response channel. 

3.3 Hypotheses of Experiment 1 
Assuming that participants would respond more 
readily/reluctantly when they perceived turn-
yielding/-holding cues in the target questions of 
their virtual female dialogue partner, we hy-
pothesized that response times would be shorter 
(i) for target questions ending in concave than in 
convex rises and (ii) for target questions ending 
in unreduced [´n] syllables rather than in the re-
duced syllabic nasals [m̀] or [N `]. 

Although we used target questions with differ-
ent wordings (that included the target words), a 
pretest showed that none of these wordings cre-
ated a semantic bias towards a turn-internal or 
turn-final interpretation (cf. 3.1). Thus, we ex-
pected no effect of the variable Question Word-
ing on response times. The same was true for the 
target-word internal variable Segmental Context 
(<-en#> preceded by a labial or velar consonant).  

265



3.4 Results of Experiment 1 
The results of the first perception experiment 

are depicted in Figure 4 in terms of response 
times per stimulus condition, averaged across all 
20 participants. For the statistical analysis, we 
used a four-way repeated-measures ANOVA 
(n=20) based on the fixed factors Reduction (2 
levels), Rise Shape (2 levels), Segmental Context 
(2 levels), and Question Wording (8 levels). The 
ANOVA yielded three significant main effects 
on the dependent variable Response Time (in 
ms). The main effects concerned Reduction 
(F[1,19]= 57.716, p<0.001, ηp²= 0.752), Rise 
Shape (F[1,19]= 63.462, p<0.001, ηp²= 0.770), and 
Segmental Context (F[1,19]= 10.991, p<0.001, 
ηp²= 0.366). The factor Question Wording was 
not significant, neither was any of the interac-
tions. Insofar, our results allow a straightforward 
analysis. As is shown in Figure 4, response times 
were significantly shorter … 

• when the target questions ended in the 
unreduced [´ n] syllables rather than in the 
reduced syllables [m̀] or [N `]; 

• when the rising intonation at the end of 
the target questions had a concave rather 
than a convex shape, i.e. when the F0 rise 
started shallowly across the initial, ac-
cented syllable of the utterance-final verb 
and continued steeply until the end of the 
utterance (cf. Fig.2); 

• when the final <-en#> syllable was pre-
ceded by a labial rather than a velar plo-
sive or nasal. 

 

 
Figure 4: Results of Experiment 1 in terms of 
average response times (in ms) per stimulus con-
dition; each bar n=20. 

3.5 Conclusions from Experiment 1 
Our hypotheses concerning the effects of rise 
shape and the degree of (question-)final reduc-
tion on the participants’ response times were 
confirmed. Participants responded slowest after 

target questions that ended in a convex final rise 
across a widely reduced <-en#> syllable, and 
they responded fastest after target questions that 
ended in a concave final rise across an unreduced 
<-en#> syllable. The latter target questions 
caused response times of only 300-400 ms, 
which is exactly in the order of magnitude of 
successful – i.e. intended and correctly inter-
preted – turn transitions in German (Weilhammer 
& Rabold, 2003). This fact lends further support 
to our main conclusion: Rise shape and degree of 
reduction, which were both found to vary utter-
ance-finally on the part of speech production, 
also function as cues to turn-yielding and/or turn-
holding on the part of speech perception. 

Moreover, as expected on the basis of our se-
mantic pretest, Question Wording had no effect 
on response times. However, we found an unex-
pected response-time effect of Segmental Con-
text, i.e. the place of articulation of the consonant 
that preceded the <-en#> syllables. We have no 
clear explanation for this finding as yet. It could 
be an experimental artefact caused by different 
frequencies of occurrence of our ‘labial’ and ‘ve-
lar’ target words. Such frequency differences, 
even if they are small, could be associated with 
different reduction baselines. These baselines 
could have then interacted differently with the 
turn-taking interpretation of our Reduction vari-
able. Alternatively, the effect of Segmental Con-
text could be due to a difference in intrinsic in-
tensity, which is slightly higher for velar than for 
labial consonants. This difference also applied to 
the final nasal /n/ when it was assimilated to [m `] 
or [N `]. That a lower/higher intensity level to-
wards the end of utterances can basically be in-
terpreted as a turn-yielding and/or turn-holding 
cue will be shown in the following Experiment 2. 

4 Perception experiment 2: reduction 
and intensity level 

Although Experiment 2 primarily tested, if and 
how utterance-final intensity variation affected 
the listeners’ response times, it was additionally 
used to investigate the reduction effect of Ex-
periment 1 in more detail. In Experiment 1, we 
contrasted widely reduced <-en#> syllables ([m̀], 
[N `]) with their maximally unreduced counterpart 
[´n], being aware of the fact that [´n] is a rare 
realization of <-en#>, cf. Figure 1(a). Now, in 
Experiment 2, we turned to the much more fre-
quent, but also perceptually much more subtle 
reduction difference in <-en#> syllables: assimi-
lated and non-assimilated syllabic nasals. 

266



4.1 Hypotheses of Experiment 2 
Our hypotheses were that response times would 
be shorter (i) for target questions ending in low 
rather than in high intensity levels and (ii) for 
target questions ending in less reduced (non-
assimilated) [n `] rather than in reduced (assimi-
lated) [m̀] or [N `]. In addition, we expect to repli-
cate the secondary findings of Experiment 1: 
There should be no systematic effect of Question 
Wording; and, concerning the Segmental Con-
text, there should be faster response times for the 
group of target words with ‘labial’ consonants. 

4.2 Method of Experiment 2 
The method was the same as in Experiment 1, 
except for three points. 

First, we performed a second round of re-
cordings in which we attenuated the reduction 
difference at the end of the target questions from 
[´n] vs. [m `]/[N `] to [n `] vs. [m]̀/[N `]. That is, all   
<-en#> syllables were realized as syllabic nasals 
so that the reduction difference became only a 
matter of presence vs. absence of place assimila-
tion by the preceding labial or velar consonant. 
The pause between target and alternative ques-
tion in the stimuli was again set to 1.5 seconds 
by inserting or cutting out silence. 

 

 
Figure 5: Intensity contrast (loud: +40%, top vs. 
soft: -60%, bottom) created for Experiment 2, 
exemplified by “kramen” (to fish sth. out). 

 
Second, instead of the difference in rise shape 

(all target questions of Experiment 2 ended in a 
similarly concave rise), we created a difference 
in the intensity level of the <-en#> syllable. 
More specifically, the naturally produced inten-
sity pattern of each syllabic nasal [n `], [m `] or [N `] 
(which typically featured a small intensity in-
crease towards the center of the sound segment, 
followed by a steep intensity decrease until the 
end of the target question) was expanded by 40% 
for the “loud” condition and abated by 60% for 
the “soft” condition. So, the resulting pairs of 
stimuli showed a clearly perceivable intensity 

contrast – “loud” vs. “soft” – in the amount of 
100% or 6 dB at the end of the target questions. 
The intensity manipulation was conducted with 
Adobe Audition. An example of two waveforms 
of the question-final target word “kramen” (to 
fish sth. out, without place assimilation of /n/) is 
presented in Figure 5. 

Third, Experiment 2 was run with a different 
group of 20 native speakers of Standard Northern 
German (15 females, 5 males, 23-38 years old). 

4.3 Results of Experiment 2 
We used again a four-way repeated-measures 
ANOVA for analyzing our response-time meas-
urements. The fixed factors were the same as in 
Experiment 1, except that the former factor Rise 
Shape was substituted by the factor Intensity De-
crease. The results of the ANOVA are restricted 
to three significant main effects that concerned 
the fixed factors Reduction (F[1,19]= 324.653, 
p<0.001, ηp²= 0.945), Intensity Decrease (F[1,19]= 
460.355, p<0.001, ηp²= 0.96), and Segmental 
Context (F[1,19]= 72.091, p<0.001, ηp²= 0.791). 

As can be seen in Figure 6, the effect of Re-
duction is due to the fact that participants re-
sponded more quickly in the less reduced [n `] 
condition than in the reduced [m̀] or [N `] condi-
tions. Furthermore, responses came faster when 
the degree of intensity reduction at the end of the 
target question was stronger, i.e. when target 
questions ended softer rather than louder. Fi-
nally, response times were shorter when the syl-
labic nasal at the end of the target question was 
labial rather than velar and/or preceded by a la-
bial rather than a velar consonant. 

 
 

 
Figure 6: Results of Experiment 2 in terms of 
average response times (in ms) per stimulus con-
dition; each bar n=20. 

4.4 Conclusions from Experiment 2 
All hypotheses in 4.1 were supported by Experi-
ment 2 The effect of Reduction means that our 
participants detected the subtle phonetic differ-

267



ence between non-assimilated and assimilated 
question-final /n/, and their reaction to this subtle 
difference was consistent with that of Experi-
ment 1: Participants respond readily when the 
target question ended less reduced, and/or they 
hesitated to respond after those target questions 
whose final <-en#> syllables were more strongly 
reduced. So, Experiment 2 provided additional 
evidence for our conclusion that stronger seg-
mental reduction functions as a cue to turn-
holding and/or that weaker segmental reduction 
functions as a cue to turn-yielding. 

The intensity level of the final <-en#> sylla-
bles had a separate effect. That louder ending 
questions delayed the participants’ response 
times suggests that a high utterance-final inten-
sity level has a turn-holding function. Addition-
ally (or alternatively), the immediate responses 
after soft ending questions indicate that the lower 
utterance-final intensity level is a cue to turn-
yielding. Like for the segmental effects above, 
the intensity effects fit in well with the real use 
and distribution of intensity differences in spon-
taneous dialogues, cf. 1.1. 

If we view the loud vs. soft contrast in terms 
of a low vs. high degree of reduction, then we 
can see that intensity reduction and segmental 
reduction played opposite roles in turn-taking. 
Stronger reduction at the segmental level pointed 
in the direction of turn-holding, whereas stronger 
intensity reduction pointed in the direction of 
turn-yielding. This fact leads to the conclusion 
that turn-taking cues are no indexical cues inso-
far as they cannot be uniformly projected onto 
changes in the speaker’s effort. 

Furthermore, Experiment 2 also replicated the 
Segmental-Context effect of Experiment 1. As-
suming – in accord with previous studies and 
informal measurements in our stimuli – that the 
labial condition was associated with an overall 
lower intensity level in the target words than the 
velar condition (e.g., due to longer closure dura-
tions, less intense releases, and closed lips during 
nasal production), then the unexpected Segmen-
tal-Context effect becomes understandable as an 
additional reflection of the role of intensity in 
turn-taking. That is, as has been anticipated in 
3.5, the intrinsically higher intensity in our velar 
target words created a bias towards turn-holding, 
and/or the intrinsically less intense labial target 
words created a bias towards turn-yielding. 

Finally, a comparison of Figures 4 and 6 
shows that the response times yielded by Ex-
periment 2 were overall longer than those of Ex-
periment 1. This general bias should not be over 

interpreted as it is probably just due to the fact 
that Experiment 2 was performed in the evening, 
whereas Experiment 1 took place in the morning. 

5 General discussion 
It is known for a long time that turn yielding and 
holding rely on complex form-function systems. 
So far, these systems have been typically associ-
ated with the prosodic triplet of duration, voice 
quality, and F0 level. Together they create bun-
dles of perceptually salient phrase-final patterns 
that involve the direction and range of intonation 
movements, final lengthening, and non-modal 
voice qualities (typically glottalization). 

More recently, analyses of spontaneous dia-
logues suggested that the bundles of final turn 
yielding and holding cues are still richer and in-
clude also comparatively subtle differences in the 
degree of segmental reduction, the intensity 
level, and the shape of intonation movements, 
especially of rises. Our study enhanced this pro-
duction evidence and confirmed for Standard 
Northern German that listeners do in fact pick up 
on these additional phrase-final differences and 
interpret them – in parallel to their use in produc-
tion – as cues to turn yielding and/or holding.  

The question that we raised in 1.2 can thus be 
answered affirmatively; and this means that our 
study laid the ground for a broader scope in the 
phonetics of turn-taking. In particular, as is dem-
onstrated by the turn-taking effects of segmental 
elision and assimilation, this broader scope has to 
span the traditionally separated segmental and 
prosodic layers of the speech signal. That is, like 
for prominence, intonation, and many other 
form-function systems, the phonetics of turn-
taking is not merely a matter of prosody. 

Moreover, our findings stress that understand-
ing speech communication includes having a 
constant eye on phonetic detail. Every phonetic 
detail should initially be considered functional 
rather than prejudging it as epiphenomenal or 
random variation.  

Previous studies, some of which are cited in 
1.1, have shown that the production and percep-
tion of turn yielding and holding exhibit strong 
similarities across many – even unrelated – lan-
guages. For this reason, we assume that our find-
ings are of general cross-linguistic significance. 
Testing this assumption will be the obvious next 
step. The corresponding perception experiments 
should use the same innovative task as the pre-
sent study. Although this task is complex, its in-
teractive concept proved to yield clear results 
while ensuring a high level of ecological validity. 

268



References 
E.L. Asu. 2006. Rising intonation in Estonian: an 

analysis of map task dialogues and spontaneous 
conversations. Proc. Phonetic Symposium 2006, 
Helsinki, Finland: 1-9. 

W.G. Beattie. 1981. The regulation of speaker turns in 
face-to-face conversation: Some implications for 
conversation in sound-only communication chan-
nels. Semiotica, 34: 55-70. 

M. Clayards, R.N. Aslin, M.K. Tanenhaus, and R.A. 
Jacobs. 2007. Within category phonetic variability 
affects perceptual uncertainty. Proc. 16th Interna-
tional Congress of Phonetic Sciences, Saar-
brücken, Germany: 701-704. 

C. Clemens and C. Diekhaus. 2009. Prosodic turn-
yielding Cues with and without optical Feedback. 
Proc. SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of 
the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dia-
logue, London, UK: 107–110. 

G.J. Docherty, J. Milroy, L. Milroy, and D. Walshaw. 
1997. Descriptive adequacy in phonology: A varia-
tionist perspective. J. of Linguistics, 33: 275–310. 

E. Dombrowski and O. Niebuhr. 2005. Acoustic pat-
terns and communicative functions of phrase-final 
rises in German: activating and restricting con-
tours. Phonetica, 62: 176-195. 

S. Duncan, Jr.. 1972. Some signals and rules for tak-
ing speaking turns in conversations. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 23: 283-292. 

J. Edlund and M. Heldner. 2005. Exploring prosody 
in interaction control. Phonetica, 62: 215-226. 

J.-Y. Fon. 2002. A cross-linguistic study on syntactic 
and discourse boundary cues in spontaneous 
speech. PhD thesis, Ohio State University, USA. 

J.-Y. Fon, K. Johnson, and S. Chen. 2011. Durational 
Patterning at Syntactic and Discourse Boundaries 
in Mandarin Spontaneous Speech. Language and 
Speech, 54: 5-32. 

H. Friedberg. 2011. Turn-taking cues in a human tu-
toring cirpus. Proc. Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Portland, USA: 94-98. 

A. Gravano. 2009. Turn-taking and affirmative cue 
words in task-oriented dialogue. PhD thesis, Co-
lumbia University, USA. 

A. Gravano and J. Hirschberg. 2009. Turn yielding 
cues in task-oriented dialogue. Proc. SIGDIAL 
2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special In-
terest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, London, 
UK: 253-261. 

A. Kendon. 1995. Gestures as illocutionary and dis-
course structure markers in Southern Italian con-
versation. Journal of Pragmatics, 23: 247-279. 

K.J. Kohler. 1983. Prosodic boundary signals in Ger-
man. Phonetica, 40: 89–134. 

K.J. Kohler. 1996. Labelled data bank of spoken 
Standard German: The Kiel Corpus of Spontaneous 
Speech. Proc. 4th  International Conference on 
Spoken Language Processing, Philadelphia, USA: 
1938-1941. 

K.J. Kohler. 2004. Categorical speech perception re-
visited. Proc. of the Conference From Sound to 
Sense: 50+ years of discoveries in speech commu-
nication, MIT, Cambridge, USA: 1-6. 

K.J. Kohler and O. Niebuhr. 2011. On the role of ar-
ticulatory prosodies in German message decod-
ing. Phonetica, 68: 1-31. 

D. H. Klatt. 1976. Linguistic uses of segmental dura-
tion in English: Acoustic and perceptual evidence. 
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 59: 
1208-21. 

I. Lehiste. 1982. Some phonetic characteristics of 
discourse. Studia Linguistica, 36: 117-130 

J. Local, J. Kelly, and W.H. Wells. 1986. Towards a 
phonology of conversation: Turn-taking in Tyne-
side English. Journal of Linguistics, 22: 411–437. 

J. Local and. G. Walker. 2012. How phonetic features 
project more talk. Journal of the International 
Phonetic Association, 42: 255-281. 

C.H. Nakatani, J. Hirschberg, and B.J. Grosz. 1995. 
Discourse structure in spoken language: Studies on 
speech corpora. Proc. AAAI Spring Symposium on 
Empirical Methods in Discourse Interpretation and 
Generation, Palo Alto, USA: 1-7. 

R.A. Ogden. 2001. Turn transition, creak and glottal 
stop in Finnish talk-in-interaction. Journal of the 
International Phonetic Association, 31: 139–152. 

B. Peters. 2006. Form und Funktion prosodischer 
Grenzen im Gespräch. PhD thesis, Christian-
Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Germany. 

A. Raux. 2008. Flexible turn-taking for spoken dialog 
systems. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 
Pittsburgh, USA. 

M. Taboada. 2006. Spontaneous and non-spontaneous 
turn taking. Pragmatics, 16: 329-360. 

J. Vaissière, J. and A. Michaud. 2006. Prosodic con-
stituents in French: a data-driven approach. In I. 
Fónagy, Y. Kawaguchi, T. Moriguchi (eds), Pros-
ody and syntax (pp. 47-64). Amsterdam: John Ben-
jamins. 

K. Weilhammer and S. Rabold. 2003. Durational as-
pects in turn taking. Proc. 15th International 
Congress of Phonetic Sciences, Barcelona, Spain : 
931–934. 

269


