










































GAF: A Grounded Annotation Framework for Events


Proceedings of the The 1st Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation, pages 11–20,
Atlanta, Georgia, 14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

GAF: A Grounded Annotation Framework for Events

Antske Fokkens, Marieke van Erp, Piek Vossen
The Network Institute

VU University Amsterdam
antske.fokkens@vu.nl
marieke.van.erp@vu.nl

piek.vossen@vu.nl

Sara Tonelli
FBK

Trento, Italy
satonelli@fbk.eu

Willem Robert van Hage
SynerScope B.V.

Eindhoven, The Netherlands
willem.van.hage
@synerscope.com

Luciano Serafini, Rachele Sprugnoli
FBK

Trento, Italy
serafini@fbk.eu
sprugnoli@fbk.eu

Jesper Hoeksema
The Network Institute

VU University Amsterdam
j.e.hoeksema@vu.nl

Abstract

This paper introduces GAF, a grounded an-
notation framework to represent events in a
formal context that can represent information
from both textual and extra-textual sources.
GAF makes a clear distinction between men-
tions of events in text and their formal rep-
resentation as instances in a semantic layer.
Instances are represented by RDF compliant
URIs that are shared across different research
disciplines. This allows us to complete textual
information with external sources and facili-
tates reasoning. The semantic layer can inte-
grate any linguistic information and is com-
patible with previous event representations in
NLP. Through a use case on earthquakes in
Southeast Asia, we demonstrate GAF flexibil-
ity and ability to reason over events with the
aid of extra-linguistic resources.

1 Introduction

Events are not only described in textual documents,
they are also represented in many other non-textual
sources. These sources include videos, pictures,
sensors or evidence from data registration such as
mobile phone data, financial transactions and hos-
pital registrations. Nevertheless, many approaches
to textual event annotation consider events as text-
internal-affairs, possibly across multiple documents
but seldom across different modalities. It follows
from the above that event representation is not ex-
clusively a concern for the NLP community. It also

plays a major role in several other branches of in-
formation science such as knowledge representation
and the Semantic Web, which have created their own
models for representing events.

We propose a grounded annotation framework
(GAF) that allows us to interconnect different ways
of describing and registering events, including non-
linguistic sources. GAF representations can be used
to reason over the cumulated and linked sources of
knowledge and information to interpret the often in-
complete and fragmented information that is pro-
vided by each source. We make a clear distinction
between mentions of events in text or any other form
of registration and their formal representation as in-
stances in a semantic layer.

Mentions in text are annotated using the Terence
Annotation Format (Moens et al., 2011, TAF) on top
of which the semantic layer is realized using Seman-
tic Web technologies and standards. In this semantic
layer, instances are denoted with Uniform Resource
Identifiers (URIs). Attributes and relations are ex-
pressed according to the Simple Event Model (Van
Hage et al., 2011, SEM) and other established on-
tologies. Statements are grouped in named graphs
based on provenance and (temporal) validity, en-
abling the representation of conflicting information.
External knowledge can be related to instances from
a wide variety of sources such as those found in the
Linked Open Data Cloud (Bizer et al., 2009a).

Instances in the semantic layer can optionally be
linked to one or more mentions in text or to other
sources. Because linking instances is optional, our

11



representation offers a straightforward way to in-
clude information that can be inferred from text,
such as implied participants or whether an event is
part of a series that is not explicitly mentioned. Due
to the fact that each URI is unique, it is clear that
mentions connected to the same URI have a coref-
erential relation. Other relations between instances
(participants, subevents, temporal relations, etc.) are
represented explicitly in the semantic layer.

The remainder of this paper is structured as fol-
lows. In Section 2, we present related work and ex-
plain the motivation behind our approach. Section 3
describes the in-text annotation approach. Our se-
mantic annotation layer is presented in Section 4.
Sections 5-7 present GAF through a use case on
earthquakes in Indonesia. This is followed by our
conclusions and future work in section 8.

2 Motivation and Background

Annotation of events and of relations between them
has a long tradition in NLP. The MUC confer-
ences (Grishman and Sundheim, 1996) in the 90s
did not explicitly annotate events and coreference
relations, but the templates used for evaluating the
information extraction tasks indirectly can be seen
as annotation of events represented in newswires.
Such events are not ordered in time or further related
to each other. In response, Setzer and Gaizauskas
(2000) describe an annotation framework to create
coherent temporal orderings of events represented
in documents using closure rules. They suggest that
reasoning with text independent models, such as a
calendar, helps annotating textual representations.

More recently, generic corpora, such as Prop-
bank (Palmer et al., 2005) and the Framenet cor-
pus (Baker et al., 2003) have been built according to
linguistic principles. The annotations aim at prop-
erly representing verb structures within a sentence
context, focusing on verb arguments, semantic roles
and other elements. In ACE 2004 (Linguistic Data
Consortium, 2004b), event detection and linking is
included as a pilot task for the first time, inspired by
annotation schemes developed for named entities.
They distinguish between event mentions and the
trigger event, which is the mention that most clearly
expresses its occurrence (Linguistic Data Consor-
tium, 2004a). Typically, agreement on the trigger

event is low across annotators (around 55% (Moens
et al., 2011)). Timebank (Pustejovsky et al., 2006b)
is a more recent corpus for representing events and
time-expressions that includes temporal relations in
addition to plain coreference relations.

All these approaches have in common that they
consider the textual representation as a closed world
within which events need to be represented. This
means that mentions are linked to a trigger event
or to each other but not to an independent semantic
representation. More recently, researchers started to
annotate events across multiple documents, such as
the EventCorefBank (Bejan and Harabagiu, 2010).
Cross-document coreference is more challenging for
establishing the trigger event, but it is in essence not
different from annotating textual event coreference
within a single document. Descriptions of events
across documents may complement each other pro-
viding a more complete picture, but still textual de-
scriptions tend to be incomplete and sparse with re-
spect to time, place and participants. At the same
time, the comparison of events becomes more com-
plex. We thus expect even lower agreement in as-
signing trigger events across documents. Nothman
et al. (2012) define the trigger as the first new ar-
ticle that mentions an event, which is easier than
to find the clearest description and still report inter-
annotator agreement of .48 and .73, respectively.

Recent approaches to automatically resolve event
coreference (cf. Chambers and Jurafsky (2011a),
Bejan and Harabagiu (2010)) use some background
data to establish coreference and other relations be-
tween events in text. Background information, in-
cluding resources, and models learned from textual
data do not represent mentions of events directly but
are useful to fill gaps of knowledge in the textual
descriptions. They do not alter the model for anno-
tation as such.

We aim to take these recent efforts one step fur-
ther and propose a grounded annotation framework
(GAF). Our main goal is to integrate information
from text analysis in a formal context shared with
researchers across domains. Furthermore, GAF is
flexible enough to contain contradictory informa-
tion. This is both important to represent sources
that (partially) contradict each other and to com-
bine alternative annotations or output of different
NLP tools. Because conflicting information may be

12



present, provenance of information is provided in
our framework, so that we may decide which source
to trust more or use it as a feature to decide which in-
terpretation to follow. Different models of event rep-
resentation exist that can contribute valuable infor-
mation. Therefore our model is compliant with prior
approaches regardless of whether they are manual or
automatic. Finally, GAF makes a clear distinction
between instances and instance mentions avoiding
the problem of determining a trigger event. Addi-
tionally, it facilitates the integration of information
from extra-textual sources and information that can
be inferred from texts, but is not explicitly men-
tioned. Sections 5 to 7 will explain how we can
achieve this with GAF.

3 The TERENCE annotation format

The TERENCE Annotation Format (TAF) is de-
fined within the TERENCE Project1 with the goal
to include event mentions, temporal expressions and
participant mentions in a single annotation proto-
col (Moens et al., 2011). TAF is based on ISO-
TimeML (Pustejovsky et al., 2010), but introduces
several adaptations in order to fit the domain of chil-
dren’s stories for which it was originally developed.
The format has been used to annotate around 30 chil-
dren stories in Italian and 10 in English.

We selected TAF as the basis for our in-text anno-
tation for three reasons. First, it incorporates the (in
our opinion crucial) distinction between instances
and instance mentions. Second, it adapts some con-
solidated paradigms for linguistic annotation such as
TimeML for events and temporal expressions and
ACE for participants and participant mentions (Lin-
guistic Data Consortium, 2005). It is thus compat-
ible with other annotation schemes. Third, it inte-
grates the annotation of event mentions, participants
and temporal expressions into a unified framework.
We will elaborate briefly on these properties below.

As mentioned, TAF makes a clear distinction be-
tween instances and instance mentions. Originally,
this distinction only applied to nominal and named
entities, similar to ACE (Linguistic Data Consor-
tium, 2005), because children’s stories can gener-
ally be treated as a closed world, usually present-

1ICT FP7 Programme, ICT-2010-25410, http://www.
terenceproject.eu/

ing a simple sequence of events that do not corefer.
Event coreference and linking to other sources was
thus not relevant for this domain. In GAF, we ex-
tend the distinction between instances and instance
mentions to events to model event coreference, link
them to other sources and create a consistent model
for all instances.

Children’s stories usually include a small set of
characters, event sequences (mostly in chronologi-
cal order), and a few generic temporal expressions.
In the TERENCE project, modeling characters in
the stories is necessary. This requires an extension
of TimeML to deal with event participants. Puste-
jovsky et al. (2006a) address the need to include ar-
guments in TimeML annotations, but that proposal
did not include specific examples and details on how
to perform annotation (e.g., on the participants’ at-
tributes). Such guidelines were created for TAF.

The TAF annotation of event mentions largely
follows TimeML in annotating tense, aspect, class,
mood, modality and polarity and temporal expres-
sions. However, there are several differences be-
tween TAF and TimeML. First, temporal expres-
sions are not normalized into the ISO-8601 form,
because most children’s stories are not fixed to a spe-
cific date. In GAF, the normalization of expressions
takes place in the semantic layer as these go beyond
the scope of the text. As a result, temporal vague-
ness of linguistic expressions in text do not need to
be normalized in the textual representation to actual
time points and remain underspecified.2

In TAF, events and participant mentions are linked
through a has participant relation, which is defined
as a directional, one-to-one relation from the event
to the participant mentions. Only mentions corre-
sponding to mandatory arguments of the events in
the story are annotated. Annotators look up each
verb in a reference dictionary providing information
on the predicate-argument structure of each verb.
This makes annotation easier and generally not con-
troversial. However, this kind of information can be
provided only by annotators having a good knowl-
edge of linguistics.

All annotations are performed with the Celct An-

2Note that we can still use existing tools for normalization
at the linguistic level: early normalizations can be integrated
in the semantic layer alongside normalizations carried out at a
later point.

13



sem:sub
EventOf

sem:Event sem:Actor sem:Place sem:Time

sem:hasTime

sem:hasActor

sem:hasPlace

sem:PlaceType

sem:placeType

sem:EventType

sem:eventType

sem:ActorType

sem:actorType

sem:TimeType

sem:Type

sem:timeType

sem:Core

sem:subTypeOf

C
ore C

lasses
(Foreign)

Type System

Literal sem:hasTimeStamp

Literal sem:hasTimeStamp

Figure 1: The SEM ontology

notation Tool (Bartalesi Lenzi et al., 2012), an online
tool supporting TimeML that can easily be extended
to include participant information. The annotated
file can be exported to various XML formats and im-
ported into the semantic layer. The next section de-
scribes SEM, the event model used in our semantic
layer, and how it complements the TAF annotations.

4 The Simple Event Model

The Simple Event Model (SEM) is an RDF
schema (Carroll and Klyne, 2004; Guha and Brick-
ley, 2004) to express who did what, where, and
when. There are many RDF schemas and OWL on-
tologies (Motik et al., 2009) that describe events,
e.g., Shaw et al. (2009), Crofts et al. (2008) and
Scherp et al. (2009). SEM is among the most
flexible and easiest to adapt to different domains.
SEM describes events and related instances such as
the place, time and participants (called Actors in
SEM) by representing the interactions between the
instances with RDF triples. SEM models are se-
mantic networks that include events, places, times,
participants and all related concepts, such as their
types.

An overview of all the classes in the SEM ontol-
ogy and the relations connecting them is shown in
Figure 1. Nodes can be identified by URIs, which
universally identify them across all RDF models. If
for example one uses the URI used by DBpedia3

(Bizer et al., 2009b) for the 2004 catastrophe in In-
3http://dbpedia.org

donesia, then one really means the same event as ev-
erybody else who uses that URI. SEM does not put
any constraints on the RDF vocabulary, so vocabu-
laries can easily be reused. Places and place types
can for example be imported from GeoNames4 and
event types from the RDF version of WordNet.

SEM supports two types of abstraction: gener-
alization with hierarchical relations from other on-
tologies, such as the subclass relation from RDFS,
and aggregation of events into superevents with the
sem:subEventOf relation, as exemplified in Fig-
ure 2. Other types of abstractions can be represented
using additional schemas or ontologies in combina-
tion with SEM. For instance, temporal aggregation
can be done with constructs from the OWL Time
ontology (Hobbs and Pan, 2004).

Relations between events and other instances,
which could be other events, places, actors, times,
or external concepts, can be modeled using the
sem:eventProperty relation. This relation can
be refined to represent specific relations, such as
specific participation, causality or simultaneity rela-
tions. The provenance of information in the SEM
graph is captured through assigning contexts to
statements using the PROV Data Model (Moreau et
al., 2012). In this manner, all statements derived
from a specific newspaper article are stored in a
named graph that represents that origin. Conflicting
statements can be stored in different named graphs,
and can thus coexist. This gives us the possibility

4http://www.geonames.org/ontology/

14



sem:Event

sem:Place

sem:EventType

sem:Time

dbpedia:2004_Indian_Ocean_
earthquake_and_ tsunami

rdf:type

"December 2004 
Earthquake and 
Tsunami"@en rdfs:label

rdf:type
rdf:type

"3.316"^^xsd:decimal

"2004-12-26"^^xsd:date

"95.854"^^xsd:decimal

wgs84:long

wgs84:lat owltime:inXSD
DateTime

sem:hasPlace sem:hasTime

naacl:INSTANCE_186

rdf:type sem:subEventOf

wn30:synset-
earthquake-noun-1 sem:eventType

rdf:type

naacl:INSTANCE_188

rdf:type

sem:subEventOf

naacl:INSTANCE_198

sem:hasTime

naacl:TIMEX3_81 "2004"str:anchorOfnwr:denotedBy

naacl:INSTANCE_MENTION_118nwr:denotedBy "temblor"@enstr:anchorOf

nwr:denotedBy "tsunami"@ennaacl:INSTANCE_MENTION_120 str:anchorOf

naacl:INSTANCE_189

sem:subEventOf

naacl:INSTANCE_MENTION_121nwr:denotedBy

"swept"@en
str:anchorOf

sem:hasPlace

naacl:INSTANCE_67 naacl:INSTANCE_MENTION_19nwr:denotedBy

"Indian Ocean"@en
str:anchorOf

taf:LOCATION

taf:NSUBJ

geonames:1545739

skos:exactMatch

gaf:G1
gaf:G2gaf:G3

gaf:G4

gaf:G5

dbpedia:Bloomberg

sem:accordingTo

taf:annotation_
2013_03_24

sem:accordingTo

gaf:annotation_
2013_04_29

sem:accordingTo

gaf:annotation_
2013_04_29

sem:accordingTo
taf:annotation_
2013_03_24

sem:accordingTo

sem:
derived
From

gaf:causes

Figure 2: Partial SEM representation of December 26th 2004 Earthquake

of delaying or ignoring the resolution of the conflict,
which enables use cases that require the analysis of
the conflict itself.

5 The GAF Annotation Framework

This section explains the basic idea behind GAF by
using texts on earthquakes in Indonesia. GAF pro-
vides a general model for event representation (in-
cluding textual and extra-textual mentions) as well
as exact representation of linguistic annotation or
output of NLP tools. Simply put, GAF is the combi-
nation of textual analyses and formal semantic rep-
resentations in RDF.

5.1 A SEM for earthquakes

We selected newspaper texts on the January 2009
West Papua earthquakes from Bejan and Harabagiu
(2010) to illustrate GAF. This choice was made be-
cause the topic “earthquake” illustrates the advan-
tage of sharing URIs across domains. Gao and
Hunter (2011) propose a Linked Data model to cap-
ture major geological events such as earthquakes,
volcano activity and tsunamis. They combine infor-
mation from different seismological databases with
the intention to provide more complete information

to experts which may help to predict the occurrence
of such events. The information can also be used
in text interpretation. We can verify whether in-
terpretations by NLP tools correspond to the data
and relations defined by geologists or, through gen-
eralization, which interpretation is the most sensi-
ble given what we know about the events. General
information on events obtained from automatic text
processing, such as event templates (Chambers and
Jurafsky, 2011b) or typical event durations (Gusev
et al., 2010) can be integrated in SEM in a similar
manner. Provenance indications can be used to in-
dicate whether information is based on a model cre-
ated by an expert or an automatically derived model
obtained by a particular approach.

Figure 2 provides a fragment of a SEM represen-
tation for the earthquake and tsunami of December
26 2004.5 The model is partially inspired by Gao
and Hunter (2011)’s proposal. It combines infor-
mation extracted from texts with information from
DBpedia. The linking between the two can be es-
tablished either manually or automatically through

5The annotation and a larger representation including the
sentence it represents can be found on the GAF website http:
//wordpress.let.vu.nl/gaf.

15



an entity linking system.6 The combined event of
the earthquake and tsunami is represented by a DB-
pedia URI. The node labeled naacl:INSTANCE 186
represents the earthquake itself. The unambiguous
representation of the 2004 earthquake leads us to ad-
ditional information about it, for instance that the
earthquake is an event (sem:Event) and that the
sem:EventType is an earthquake, in this case
represented by a synset from WordNet, but also the
exact date it occurred and the exact location (cf
sem:hasTime, sem:hasPlace).

5.2 Integrating TAF representations into SEM

TAF annotations are converted to SEM relations.
For example, the TAF as participant relations
are translated to sem:hasActor relations, and
temporal relations are translated to sem:hasTime.
We use the relation nwr:denotedBy to link in-
stances to their mentions in the text which are repre-
sented by their unique identifiers in Figure 2.

Named graphs are used to model the source of
information as discussed in Section 4. The re-
lation sem:accordingTo indicates provenance
of information in the graph.7 For instance, the
mentions from the text in named graph gaf:G1
come from the source dbpedia:Bloomberg.
Relations between instances (e.g. between IN-
STANCE 189 and INSTANCE 188) are derived
from a specific grammatical relation in the text
(here, that tsunami is subject of swept) indicated
by the nwr:derivedFrom relation from gaf:G5
to gaf:G4. The grammatical relations included
in graph gaf:G5 come from a TAF annotation
(tag:annotation 2013 03 24).

6 GAF Earthquake Examples

This section takes a closer look at a few selected sen-
tences from the text that illustrate different aspects
of GAF. Figure 2 showed how a URI can provide a
formal context including important background in-

6Entity linking is the task of associating a mention to an
instance in a knowledge base. Several approaches and tools for
entity linking w.r.t. DBpedia and other data sets in the Linked
Open Data cloud are available and achieve good performances,
such as DBpedia Spotlight (Mendes et al., 2011); see (Rizzo
and Troncy, 2011) for a comparison of tools.

7The use of named graphs in this way to denote context is
compatible with the method used by Bozzato et al. (2012).

formation on the event. Several texts in the corpus
refer to the tsunami of December 26, 2004, a 9.1
temblor in 2004 caused a tsunami and The catastro-
phe four years ago, among others. Compared to time
expressions such as 2004 and four years ago, time
indications extracted from external sources like DB-
pedia are not only more precise, but also permit us to
correctly establish the fact that these expressions re-
fer to the same event and thus indicate the same time.
The articles were published in January 2009: a direct
normalization of time indications would have placed
the catastrophe in 2005. The flexibility to combine
these seemingly conflicting time indications and de-
lay normalization can be used to correctly interpret
that four years ago early January 2009 refers to an
event taking place at the end of December 2004.

A fragment relating to one of the earthquakes of
January 2009: The quake struck off the coast [...] 75
kilometers (50 miles) west of [....] Manokwari pro-
vides a similar example. The expressions 75 kilo-
meters and 50 miles are clearly meant to express
the same distance, but not identical. The location
is most likely neither exactly 75 km nor 50 miles.
SEM can represent an underspecified location that
is included in the correct region. The exact location
of the earthquake can be found in external resources.
We can include both distances as expressions of the
location and decide whether they denote the general
location or include the normalized locations as alter-
natives to those from external resources.

Different sources may report different details.
Details may only be known later, or sources may
report from a different perspective. As provenance
information can be incorporated into the semantic
layer, we can represent different perspectives, and
choose which one to use when reasoning over the
information. For example, the following phrases
indicate the magnitude of the earthquakes that
struck Manokwari on January 4, 2009:

the 7.7 magnitude quake (source: Xinhuanet)
two quakes, measuring 7.6 and 7.4 (source: Bloomberg)
One 7.3-magnitude tremor (source: Jakartapost)

The first two magnitude indicators (7.7, 7.6)
are likely to pertain to the same earthquake, just as
the second two (7.4, 7.3) are. Trust indicators can
be found through the provenance trace of each men-

16



tion. Trust indicators can include the date on which
it was published, properties of the creation process,
the author, or publisher (Ceolin et al., 2010).
Furthermore, because the URIs are shared across
domains, we can link the information from the text
to information from seismological databases, which
may contain the exact measurement for the quake.

Similarly, external information obtained through
shared links can help us establish coreference. Con-
sider the sentences in Figure 3. There are several
ways to establish that the same event is meant in all
three sentences by using shared URIs and reasoning.
All sentences give us approximate time indications,
location of the affected area and casualties. Rea-
soning over these sentences combined with external
knowledge allows us to infer facts such as that un-
dersea [...] off [...] Aceh will be in the Indian Ocean,
or that the affected countries listed in the first sen-
tence are countries around the Indian Ocean, which
constitutes the Indian Ocean Community. The num-
ber of casualties in combination of the approximate
time indication or approximate location suffices to
identify the earthquake and tsunami in Indonesia on
December 26, 2004. The DBpedia representation
contains additional information such as the magni-
tude, exact location of the quake and a list of affected
countries, which can be used for additional verifica-
tion. This example illustrates how a formal context
using URIs that are shared across disciplines of in-
formation science can help to determine exact refer-
ents from limited or imprecise information.

7 Creating GAF

GAF entails integrating linguistic information
(e.g. TAF annotations) into RDF models (e.g. SEM).
The information in the model includes provenance
that points back to specific annotations. There are
two approaches to annotate text according to GAF.
The first approach is bottom-up. Mentions are
marked in the text as well as relations between them
(participants, time, causal relations, basically any-
thing except coreference). Consequently, these an-
notations are converted to SEM representations as
explained above. Coreference is established by link-
ing mentions to the same instance in SEM. The sec-
ond approach is top-down. Here, annotators mark
relations between instances (events, their partici-

pants, time relations, etc.) directly into SEM and
then link these to mentions in the text.

As mention in Section 2, inter-annotator agree-
ment on event annotation is generally low showing
that it is challenging. The task is somewhat simpli-
fied in GAF, since it removes the problem of identi-
fying an event trigger in the text. The GAF equiva-
lent of the event trigger in other linguistic annotation
approaches is an instance in SEM. However, other
challenges such as which mentions to select are in
principle not addressed by GAF, though differences
in inter-annotator agreement may be found depend-
ing on whether the bottom-up approach or the top-
down approach is selected. The formal context of
SEM may help frame annotations, especially for do-
mains such as earthquakes, where expert knowledge
was used to create basic event models. This may
help annotators while defining the correct relations
between events. On the other hand, the top-down
approach may lead to additional challenges, because
annotators are forced to link events to unambiguous
instances leading to hesitations as to when new in-
stances should be introduced.

Currently, we only use the bottom-up approach.
The main reason is the lack of an appropriate anno-
tation tool to directly annotate information in SEM.
We plan to perform comparative studies between the
two annotation approaches in future work.

8 Conclusion and Future Work

We presented GAF, an event annotation framework
in which textual mentions of events are grounded in
a semantic model that facilitates linking these events
to mentions in external (possibly non-textual) re-
sources and thereby reasoning. We illustrated how
GAF combines TAF and SEM through a use case
on earthquakes. We explained that we aim for a
representation that can combine textual and extra-
linguistic information, provides a clear distinction
between instances and instance mentions, is flexi-
ble enough to include conflicting information and
clearly marks the provenance of information.

GAF ticks all these boxes. All instances are rep-
resented by URIs in a semantic layer following stan-
dard RDF representations that are shared across re-
search disciplines. They are thus represented com-
pletely independent of the source and clearly distin-

17



There have been hundreds of earthquakes in Indonesia since a 9.1 temblor in 2004 caused a
tsunami that swept across the Indian Ocean, devastating coastal communities and leaving more
than 220,000 people dead in Indonesia, Sri Lanka, India, Thailand and other countries.
(Bloomberg, 2009-01-07 01:55 EST)

The catastrophe four years ago devastated Indian Ocean community and killed more than 230,000
people, over 170,000 of them in Aceh at northern tip of Sumatra Island of Indonesia.
(Xinhuanet, 2009-01-05 13:25:46 GMT)

In December 2004, a massive undersea quake off the western Indonesian province of Aceh
triggered a giant tsunami that left at least 230,000 people dead and missing in a dozen
countries facing the Indian Ocean. (Aljazeera, 2009-01-05 08:49 GMT)

Figure 3: Sample sentences mentioning the December 2004 Indonesian earthquake from sample texts

guished from mentions in text or mentions in other
sources. The Terence Annotation Format (TAF) pro-
vides a unified framework to annotate events, par-
ticipants and temporal expressions (and the corre-
sponding relations) by leaning on past, consolidated
annotation experiences such TimeML and ACE. We
will harmonize TAF, the Kyoto Annotation Format
(Bosma et al., 2009, KAF) and the NLP Interchange
Format (Hellmann et al., 2012, NIF) with respect
to the textual representation in the near future. The
NAF format includes the lessons learned from these
predecessors: layered standoff representations using
URI as identifiers and where possible standardized
data categories. The formal semantic model (SEM)
provides the flexibility to include conflicting infor-
mation as well as indications of the provenance of
this information. This allows us to use inferencing
and reasoning over the cumulated and aggregated
information, possibly exploiting the provenance of
the type of information source. This flexibility also
makes our representation compatible with all ap-
proaches dealing with event representation and de-
tections mentioned in Section 2. It can include au-
tomatically learned templates as well as specific re-
lations between events and time expressed in text.
Moreover, it may simultaneously contain output of
different NLP tools.

The proposed semantic layer may be simple, its
flexibility in importing external knowledge may in-
crease complexity in usage as it can model events in
every thinkable domain. To resolve this issue, it is
important to scope the domain by importing the ap-
propriate vocabularies, but no more. When keeping
this in mind, reasoning with SEM is shown to be rich
but still versatile (Van Hage et al., 2012).

While GAF provides us with the desired granu-

larity and flexibility for the event annotation tasks
we envision, a thorough evaluation still needs to be
carried out. This includes an evaluation of the anno-
tations created with GAF compared to other anno-
tation formats, as well as testing it within a greater
application. A comparative study of top-down and
bottom-up annotation will also be carried out. As al-
ready mentioned in Section 7, there is no appropriate
modeling tool for SEM yet. We are currently using
the CAT tool to create TAF annotations and convert
those to SEM, but will develop a tool to annotate the
semantic layer directly for this comparative study.

The most interesting effect of the GAF annota-
tions is that it provides us with relatively simple ac-
cess to a vast wealth of extra-linguistic information,
which we can utilize in a variety of NLP tasks; some
of the reasoning options that are made available by
the pairing up with Semantic Web technology may
for example aid us in identifying coreference rela-
tions between events. Investigating the implications
of this combination of NLP and Semantic Web tech-
nologies lies at the heart of our future work.

Acknowledgements

We thank Francesco Corcoglioniti for his helpful
comments and suggestions. The research lead-
ing to this paper was supported by the European
Union’s 7th Framework Programme via the News-
Reader Project (ICT-316404) and by the Biogra-
phyNed project, funded by the Netherlands eScience
Center (http://esciencecenter.nl/). Partners in Biog-
raphyNed are Huygens/ING Institute of the Dutch
Academy of Sciences and VU University Amster-
dam.

18



References

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and Beau Cronin.
2003. The structure of the FrameNet database. Inter-
national Journal of Lexicography, 16(3):281–296.

Valentina Bartalesi Lenzi, Giovanni Moretti, and Rachele
Sprugnoli. 2012. CAT: the CELCT Annotation Tool.
In Proceedings of LREC 2012.

Cosmin Bejan and Sandra Harabagiu. 2010. Unsuper-
vised event coreference resolution with rich linguistic
features. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
1412–1422.

Christian Bizer, Tom Heath, and Tim Berners-Lee.
2009a. Linked data - the story so far. International
Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems,
5(3):1–22.

Christian Bizer, Jens Lehmann, Georgi Kobilarov, Sören
Auer, Christian Becker, Richard Cyganiak, and Sebas-
tian Hellmann. 2009b. DBpedia - A crystallization
point for the Web of Data. Web Semantics: Science,
Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, 7(3):154
– 165.

Wauter Bosma, Piek Vossen, Aitor Soroa, German Rigau,
Maurizio Tesconi, Andrea Marchetti, Monica Mona-
chini, and Carlo Aliprandi. 2009. KAF: a generic se-
mantic annotation format. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Generative Approaches
to the Lexicon GL 2009, Pisa, Italy.

Loris Bozzato, Francesco Corcoglioniti, Martin Homola,
Mathew Joseph, and Luciano Serafini. 2012. Manag-
ing contextualized knowledge with the ckr (poster). In
Proceedings of the 9th Extended Semantic Web Con-
ference (ESWC 2012), May 27-31.

Jeremy J. Carroll and Graham Klyne. 2004. Re-
source description framework (RDF): Concepts and
abstract syntax. W3C recommendation, W3C, Febru-
ary. http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-rdf-concepts-
20040210/.

Davide Ceolin, Paul Groth, and Willem Robert Van Hage.
2010. Calculating the trust of event descriptions using
provenance. Proceedings Of The SWPM.

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2011a.
Template-based information extraction without the
templates. In Proceedings of ACL-2011.

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2011b.
Template-based information extraction without the
templates. In Proceedings of ACL-2011, Portland, OR.

Nick Crofts, Martin Doerr, Tony Gill, Stephen Stead,
and Matthew Stiff. 2008. Definition of the CIDOC
Conceptual Reference Model. Technical report,
ICOM/CIDOC CRM Special Interest Group. version
4.2.5.

Lianli Gao and Jane Hunter. 2011. Publishing, link-
ing and annotating events via interactive timelines: an
earth sciences case study. In DeRiVE 2011 (Detec-
tion, Representation, and Exploitation of Events in the
Semantic Web) Workshop in conjunction with ISWC
2011, Bonn, Germany.

Ralph Grishman and Beth Sundheim. 1996. Message
understanding conference - 6: A brief history. In Pro-
ceedings of the 16th conference on Computational lin-
guistics (COLING’96), pages 466–471.

Ramanathan V. Guha and Dan Brickley. 2004.
RDF vocabulary description language 1.0: RDF
schema. W3C recommendation, W3C, Febru-
ary. http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-rdf-schema-
20040210/.

Andrey Gusev, Nathanael Chambers, Pranav Khaitan,
Divye Khilnani, Steven Bethard, and Dan Jurafsky.
2010. Using query patterns to learn the duration of
events. In Proceedings of ISWC 2010.

Sebastian Hellmann, Jens Lehmann, and Sören Auer.
2012. NIF: An ontology-based and linked-data-aware
NLP Interchange Format. Working Draft.

Jerry R Hobbs and Feng Pan. 2004. An ontology of time
for the semantic web. ACM Transactions on Asian
Language Information Processing (TALIP), 3(1):66–
85.

Linguistic Data Consortium. 2004a. Annotation
Guidelines for Event Detection and Characterization
(EDC). http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/
ace/docs/EnglishEDCV2.0.pdf.

Linguistic Data Consortium. 2004b. The ACE 2004
Evaluation Plan. Technical report, LDC.

Linguistic Data Consortium. 2005. ACE (Automatic
Content Extraction) English annotation guidelines for
entities. Version 6.6, July.

Pablo N. Mendes, Max Jakob, Andrés Garcı́a-Silva, and
Christian Bizer. 2011. Dbpedia spotlight: shedding
light on the web of documents. In Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on Semantic Systems, I-
Semantics ’11, pages 1–8.

Marie-Francine Moens, Oleksandr Kolomiyets,
Emanuele Pianta, Sara Tonelli, and Steven Bethard.
2011. D3.1: State-of-the-art and design of novel
annotation languages and technologies: Updated
version. Technical report, TERENCE project – ICT
FP7 Programme – ICT-2010-25410.

Luc Moreau, Paolo Missier, Khalid Belhajjame, Reza
B’Far, James Cheney, Sam Coppens, Stephen Cress-
well, Yolanda Gil, Paul Groth, Graham Klyne, Timo-
thy Lebo, Jim McCusker, Simon Miles, James Myers,
Satya Sahoo, and Curt Tilmes. 2012. PROV-DM: The
PROV Data Model. Technical report.

Boris Motik, Bijan Parsia, and Peter F. Patel-
Schneider. 2009. OWL 2 Web Ontology

19



Language structural specification and functional-
style syntax. W3C recommendation, W3C,
October. http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/
REC-owl2-syntax-20091027/.

Joel Nothman, Matthew Honnibal, Ben Hachey, and
James R. Curran. 2012. Event linking: Ground-
ing event reference in a news archive. In Proceed-
ings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers),
pages 228–232, Jeju Island, Korea, July. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: An annotated corpus of
semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–
106, 2013/03/12.

James Pustejovsky, Jessica Littman, and Roser Saurı̀.
2006a. Argument Structure in TimeML. In Dagstuhl
Seminar Proceedings. Internationales Begegnungs-
und Forschungszentrum.

James Pustejovsky, Jessica Littman, Roser Saurı́, and
Marc Verhagen. 2006b. Timebank 1.2 documentation.
Technical report, Brandeis University, April.

James Pustejovsky, Kiyong Lee, Harry Bunt, and Lau-
rent Romary. 2010. ISO-TimeML: An international
standard for semantic annotation. In Proceedings o
the Fifth International Workshop on Interoperable Se-
mantic Annotation.

Giuseppe Rizzo and Raphaël Troncy. 2011. NERD:
A framework for evaluating named entity recognition
tools in the Web of data. In Workshop on Web Scale
Knowledge Extraction, colocated with ISWC 2011.

Ansgar Scherp, Thomas Franz, Carsten Saathoff, and
Steffen Staab. 2009. F–a model of events based on
the foundational ontology dolce+ dns ultralight. In
Proceedings of the fifth international conference on
Knowledge capture, pages 137–144. ACM.

Andrea Setzer and Robert J. Gaizauskas. 2000. Annotat-
ing events and temporal information in newswire texts.
In LREC. European Language Resources Association.

Ryan Shaw, Raphaël Troncy, and Lynda Hardman. 2009.
LODE: Linking Open Descriptions of Events. In 4th
Annual Asian Semantic Web Conference (ASWC’09),
Shanghai, China.

Willem Robert Van Hage, Véronique Malaisé, Roxane
Segers, Laura Hollink, and Guus Schreiber. 2011. De-
sign and use of the simple event model (SEM). Jour-
nal of Web Semantics.

Willem Robert Van Hage, Marieke Van Erp, and
Véronique Malaisé. 2012. Linked open piracy: A
story about e-science, linked data, and statistics. Jour-
nal on Data Semantics, 1(3):187–201.

20


