



















































Yandex School of Data Analysis Machine Translation Systems for WMT13


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 99–103,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013 c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Yandex School of Data Analysis machine translation systems for WMT13

Alexey Borisov, Jacob Dlougach, Irina Galinskaya
Yandex School of Data Analysis

16, Leo Tolstoy street, Moscow, Russia
{alborisov,jacob,galinskaya}@yandex-team.ru

Abstract

This paper describes the English-Russian
and Russian-English statistical machine
translation (SMT) systems developed at
Yandex School of Data Analysis for the
shared translation task of the ACL 2013
Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation. We adopted phrase-based
SMT approach and evaluated a number
of different techniques, including data fil-
tering, spelling correction, alignment of
lemmatized word forms and translitera-
tion. Altogether they yielded +2.0 and
+1.5 BLEU improvement for ru-en and en-
ru language pairs. We also report on the
experiments that did not have any positive
effect and provide an analysis of the prob-
lems we encountered during the develop-
ment of our systems.

1 Introduction

We participated in the shared translation task of
the ACL 2013 Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation (WMT13) for ru-en and en-ru lan-
guage pairs. We provide a detailed description of
the experiments carried out for the development of
our systems.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 describes the tools and data we used.
Our Russian→English and English→Russian se-
tups are discussed in Section 3. In Section 4 we
report on the experiments that did not have any
positive effect despite our expectations. We pro-
vide a thorough analysis of erroneous outputs in
Section 5 and draw conclusions in Section 6.

2 Tools and data

2.1 Tools
We used an open source SMT system Moses
(Koehn et al., 2007) for all our experiments ex-

cluding the one described in Section 4.1 due to its
performance constraints. To overcome the limita-
tion we employed our in-house decoder.

Language models (LM) were created with an
open source IRSTLM toolkit (Federico et al.,
2008). We computed 4-gram LMs with modified
Kneser-Ney smoothing (Kneser and Ney, 1995).

We used an open source MGIZA++ tool (Gao
and Vogel, 2008) to compute word alignment.

To obtain part of speech (POS) tags we used
an open source Stanford POS tagger for English
(Toutanova et al., 2003) and an open source suite
of language analyzers, FreeLing 3.0 (Carreras et
al., 2004; Padró and Stanilovsky, 2012), for Rus-
sian.

We utilized a closed source free for non-
commercial use morphological analyzer, Mystem
(Segalovich, 2003), that used a limited dictionary
to obtain lemmas.

We also made use of the in-house language rec-
ognizer based on (Dunning, 1994) and a spelling
corrector designed on the basis of the work of
Cucerzan and Brill (2004).

We report all results in case-sensitive BLEU
(Papineni et al., 2002) using mt-eval13a script
from Moses distribution.

2.2 Data
Training data
We used News Commentary and News Crawl
monolingual corpora provided by the organizers
of the workshop.

Bilingual training data comprised English-
Russian parallel corpus release by Yandex1, News
Commentary and Common Crawl corpora pro-
vided by the organizers.

We also exploited Wiki Headlines collection of
three parallel corpora provided by CMU2 as a

1https://translate.yandex.ru/corpus
2http://www.statmt.org/wmt13/

wiki-titles.ru-en.tar.gz

99



source of reliable data.

Development set
The newstest2012 test set (Callison-Burch et al.,
2012) was divided in the ratio 2:1 into a tuning
set and a test set. The latter is referred to as
newstest2012-test in the rest of the paper.

3 Primary setups

3.1 Baseline
We built the baseline systems according to the in-
structions available at the Moses website3.

3.2 Preprocessing
The first thing we noticed was that some sentences
marked as Russian appeared to be sentences in
other languages (most commonly English). We
applied a language recognizer for both monolin-
gual and bilingual corpora. Results are given in
Table 1.

Corpus Filtered out (%)
Bilingual 3.39
Monolingual (English) 0.41
Monolingual (Russian) 0.58

Table 1: Results of the language recognizer: per-
centage of filtered out sentences.

The next thing we came across was the pres-
ence of a lot of spelling errors in our training data,
so we applied a spelling corrector. Statistics are
presented in Table 2.

Corpus Modified (%)
Bilingual (English) 0.79
Bilingual (Russian) 1.45
Monolingual (English) 0.61
Monolingual (Russian) 0.52

Table 2: Results of the spelling corrector: percent-
age of modified sentences.

3.3 Alignment of lemmatized word forms
Russian is a language with rich morphology. The
diversity of word forms results in data sparse-
ness that makes translation of rare words dif-
ficult. In some cases inflections do not con-
tain any additional information and are used

3http://www.statmt.org/moses/?n=moses.
baseline

only to make an agreement between two words.
E.g. ADJ + NOUN: красив ая арфа (beau-
tiful harp), красив ое пианино (beautiful pi-
ano), красив ый рояль (beautiful grand piano).
These inflections reflect the gender of the noun
words, that has no equivalent in English.

In this particular case we can drop the inflec-
tions, but for other categories they can still be use-
ful for translation, because the information they
contain appears in function words in English. On
the other hand, most of Russian morphology is
useless for word alignment.

We applied a morphological analyzer Mystem
(Segalovich, 2003) to the Russian text and con-
verted each word to its dictionary form. Next
we computed word alignment between the origi-
nal English text and the lemmatized Russian text.
All the other steps were executed according to the
standard procedure with the original texts.

3.4 Phrase score adjustment
Sometimes phrases occur one or two times in the
training corpus. In this case the corresponding
phrase translation probability would be overesti-
mated. We used Good-Turing technique described
in (Gale, 1994) to decrease it to some more realis-
tic value.

3.5 Decoding
Minimum Bayes-Risk (MBR)
MBR decoding (Kumar and Byrne, 2004) aims
to minimize the expected loss of translation er-
rors. As it is not possible to explore the space of
all possible translations, we approximated it with
the 1,000 most probable translations. A minus
smoothed BLEU score (Lin and Och, 2004) was
used for the loss function.

Reordering constrains
We forbade reordering over punctuation and trans-
lated quoted phrases independently.

3.6 Handling unknown words
The news texts contained a lot of proper names
that did not appear in the training data. E.g. al-
most 25% of our translations contained unknown
words. Dropping the unknown words would lead
to better BLEU scores, but it might had caused
bad effect on human judgement. To leave them
in Cyrillic was not an option, so we exploited two
approaches: incorporating reliable data from Wiki
Headlines and transliteration.

100



newstest2012-test newstest2013
Russian→English
Baseline 28.96 21.82

+ Preprocessing 29.59 22.28
+ Alignment of lemmatized word forms 29.97 22.61

+ Good-Turing 30.31 22.87
+ MBR 30.45 23.21

+ Reordering constraints 30.54 23.33
+ Wiki Headlines 30.68 23.46

+ Transliteration 30.93 23.73
English→Russian
Baseline 21.96 16.24

+ Preprocessing 22.48 16.76
+ Good-Turing 22.84 17.13

+ MBR and Reordering constraints 23.27 17.45
+ Wiki Headlines and Transliteration 23.54 17.80

Table 3: Experimental results in case-sensitive BLEU for Russian→English and English→Russian tasks.

Wiki Headlines
We replaced the names occurring in the text with
their translations, based on the information in
"guessed-names" corpus from Wiki Headlines.

As has been mentioned in Section 3.3, Russian
is a morphologically rich language. This often
makes it hard to find exactly the same phrases,
so we applied lemmatization of Russian language
both for the input text and the Russian side of the
reference corpus.

Russian→English transliteration
We gained considerable improvement from incor-
porating Wiki Headlines, but still 17% of transla-
tions contained Cyrillic symbols.

We applied a transliteration algorithm based on
(Knight and Graehl, 1998). This technique yielded
us a significant improvement, but introduced a lot
of errors. E.g. Джеймс Бонд (James Bond) was
converted to Dzhejms Bond.

English→Russian transliteration
In Russian, it is a common practice to leave some
foreign words in Latin. E.g. the names of compa-
nies: Apple, Google, Microsoft look inadmissible
when either translated directly or transliterated.

Taking this into account, we applied the
same transliteration algorithm (Knight and Graehl,
1998), but replaced an unknown word with its
transliteration only if we found a sufficient num-
ber of occurrences of its transliterated form in the
monolingual corpus. We used five for such num-

ber.

3.7 Experimental results

We summarized the gains from the de-
scribed techniques for Russian→English and
English→Russian tasks on Table 3.

4 What did not work

4.1 Translation in two stages

Frequently machine translations contain errors
that can be easily corrected by human post-editors.
Since human aided machine translation is cost-
efficient, we decided to address this problem to the
computer.

We propose to translate sentences in two stages.
At the first stage a SMT system is used to trans-
late the input text into a preliminary form (in target
language). At the next stage the preliminary form
is translated again with an auxiliary SMT system
trained on the translated and the target sides of the
parallel corpus.

We encountered a technical challenge, when we
had to build a SMT system for the second stage.
A training corpus with one side generated with
the first stage SMT system was not possible to be
acquired with Moses due to its performance con-
straints. Thereupon we utilized our in-house SMT
decoder and managed to translate 2M sentences in
time.

We applied this technique both for ru-en and en-
ru language pairs. Approximately 20% of the sen-

101



tences had changed, but the BLEU score remained
the same.

4.2 Factored model
We tried to build a factored model for ru-en lan-
guage pair with POS tags produced by Stanford
POS tagger (Toutanova et al., 2003).

Unfortunately, we did not gain any improve-
ments from it.

5 Analysis

We carefully examined the erroneous outputs of
our system and compared it with the outputs of
the other systems participating in ru-en and en-ru
tasks, and with the commercial systems available
online (Bing, Google, Yandex).

5.1 Transliteration
Russian→English
The standard transliteration procedure is not in-
vertible. This means that a Latin word being trans-
fered into Cyrillic and then transliterated back
to Latin produces an artificial word form. E.g.
Хавард Хальварсен / Havard Halvarsen was
correctly transliterated by only four out of 23
systems, including ours. Twelve systems either
dropped one of the words or left it in Cyrillic.
We provide a list of typical mistakes in order of
their frequency: Khavard Khalvarsen, Khavard
Khal’varsen, Xavard Xaljvarsen. Another exam-
ple: Мисс Уайэтт (Miss Wyatt) → Miss Uayett
(all the systems failed).

The next issue is the presence of non-null in-
flections that most certainly would result in wrong
translation by any straight-forward algorithm. E.g.
Хайдельберг а (Heidelberg)→ Heidelberga.
English→Russian
In Russian, most words of foreign origin are writ-
ten phonetically. Thereby, in order to obtain the
best quality we should transliterate the transcrip-
tion, not the word itself. E.g. the French derived
name Elsie Monereau [’elsi mon@’r@V] being trans-
lated by letters would result in Элси Монереау
while the transliteration of the transcription would
result in the correct form Элси Монро.

5.2 Grammars
English and Russian make use of different gram-
mars. When the difference in their sentence struc-
ture becomes fundamental the phrase-based ap-
proach might get inapplicable.

Word order

Both Russian and English are classified as subject-
verb-object (SOV) languages, but Russian has
rather flexible word order compared to English
and might frequently appear in other forms. This
often results in wrong structure of the translated
sentence. A common mistake made by our sys-
tem and reproduced by the major online services:
не изменились и правила (rules have not been
changed either) → have not changed and the
rules.

Constructions

• there is / there are is a non-local construc-
tion that has no equivalent in Russian. In
most cases it can not be produced from the
Russian text. E.g. на столе стоит матрёш-
ка (there is a matryoshka doll on the table)
→ on the table is a matryoshka.

• multiple negatives in Russian are grammati-
cally correct ways to express negation (a sin-
gle negative is sometimes incorrect) while
they are undesirable in standard English. E.g.
Там никто никогда не был (nobody has
ever been there) being translated word by
word would result in there nobody never not
was.

5.3 Idioms

Idiomatic expressions are hard to discover and
dangerous to translate literary. E.g. a Russian
idiom была не была (let come what may) be-
ing translated word by word would result in was
not was. Neither of the commercial systems we
checked managed to collect sufficient statistic to
translate this very popular expression.

6 Conclusion

We have described the primary systems developed
by the team of Yandex School of Data Analysis for
WMT13 shared translation task.

We have reported on the experiments and
demonstrated considerable improvements over the
respective baseline. Among the most notable tech-
niques are data filtering, spelling correction, align-
ment of lemmatized word forms and translitera-
tion. We have analyzed the drawbacks of our sys-
tems and shared the ideas for further research.

102



References

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
Matt Post, Radu Soricut, and Lucia Specia. 2012.
Findings of the 2012 workshop on statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the Sev-
enth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT12), pages 10–51, Montréal, Canada, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Xavier Carreras, Isaac Chao, Lluís Padró, and Muntsa
Padró. 2004. FreeLing: An open-source suite of
language analyzers. In Proceedings of the 4th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC).

Silviu Cucerzan and Eric Brill. 2004. Spelling cor-
rection as an iterative process that exploits the col-
lective knowledge of web users. In Proceedings of
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP), pages 293–300.

Ted Dunning. 1994. Statistical identification of lan-
guage. Technical report, Computing Research Lab
(CRL), New Mexico State University, Las Cruces,
NM, USA.

Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, and Mauro Cet-
tolo. 2008. IRSTLM: an open source toolkit
for handling large scale language models. In Pro-
ceedings of 9th Annual Conference of the Interna-
tional Speech Communication Association (INTER-
SPEECH), pages 1618–1621.

William Gale. 1994. Good-Turing smoothing with-
out tears. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics (JQL),
2:217–237.

Qin Gao and Stephan Vogel. 2008. Parallel imple-
mentations of word alignment tool. In Proceedings
of the 46th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 49–57.

Reinhard Kneser and Hermann Ney. 1995. Improved
backing-off for m-gram language modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), vol-
ume 1, pages 181–184.

Kevin Knight and Jonathan Graehl. 1998. Ma-
chine transliteration. Computational Linguistics,
24(4):599–612.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch,
Chris Callison-burch, Richard Zens, Rwth Aachen,
Alexandra Constantin, Marcello Federico, Nicola
Bertoldi, Chris Dyer, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen,
Christine Moran, and Ondřej Bojar. 2007. Moses:
Open source toolkit for statistical machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), pages 177–180.

Shankar Kumar and William Byrne. 2004. Minimum
bayes-risk decoding for statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the Human Language Tech-
nology Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(HLT-NAACL), pages 163–171.

Chin-Yew Lin and Franz Josef Och. 2004. OR-
ANGE: a method for evaluating automatic evalua-
tion metrics for machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 20th international conference on Com-
putational Linguistics (COLING), Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Lluís Padró and Evgeny Stanilovsky. 2012. FreeLing
3.0: Towards wider multilinguality. In Proceedings
of the Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence (LREC), Istanbul, Turkey, May.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei
jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Processings
of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 311–318.

Ilya Segalovich. 2003. A fast morphological algorithm
with unknown word guessing induced by a dictio-
nary for a web search engine. In Hamid R. Arab-
nia and Elena B. Kozerenko, editors, Proceedings of
the International Conference on Machine Learning;
Models, Technologies and Applications (MLMTA),
pages 273–280, Las Vegas, NV, USA, June. CSREA
Press.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-
speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network.
In Proceedings of the Human Language Technol-
ogy Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (HLT-
NAACL), pages 252–259.

103


