










































MIME - NLG in Pre-Hospital Care


Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 152–156,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

MIME - NLG in Pre-Hospital Care

Anne H. Schneider Alasdair Mort Chris Mellish Ehud Reiter Phil Wilson
University of Aberdeen

{a.schneider, a.mort, c.mellish, e.reiter, p.wilson}@abdn.ac.uk

Pierre-Luc Vaudry
Université de Montréal

vaudrypl@iro.umontreal.ca

Abstract
The cross-disciplinary MIME project aims
to develop a mobile medical monitoring
system that improves handover transac-
tions in rural pre-hospital scenarios be-
tween the first person on scene and am-
bulance clinicians. NLG is used to pro-
duce a textual handover report at any time,
summarising data from novel medical sen-
sors, as well as observations and actions
recorded by the carer. We describe the
MIME project with a focus on the NLG
algorithm and an initial evaluation of the
generated reports.

1 Introduction
Applications of Natural Language Generation
(NLG) in the medical domain have been manifold.
A new area where NLG could contribute to the im-
provement of services and to patient safety is pre-
hospital care: care delivered to a patient before ar-
rival at hospital. There are many challenges in de-
livering pre-hospital care, making it different from
care taking place in the controlled circumstances
of emergency departments or hospital wards.

Some Ambulance Services have developed in-
novative models to care for patients whilst an am-
bulance is en-route. Community First Responder
(CFR) schemes recruit volunteers from local com-
munities and give them the necessary training and
equipment to deal with a limited range of medical
emergencies. The premise is that even those with
basic first-aid skills can save a life. It is their task
to attend the casualty while waiting for the am-
bulance and to record their observations and ac-
tions on a paper patient report form (PRF). They
may also assess the patient’s physiological mea-
surements (e.g. heart rate). In practice, due to
time constraints, a verbal handover is performed
and the PRF is filled in later. Physiological mea-
surements may be written in ink on the back of a

protective glove, and are rarely passed on in any
systematic way.

The MIME (Managing Information in Medical
Emergencies)1 project is developing technology to
support CFRs in the UK when they respond to pa-
tients. The project aims to enable CFRs to capture
a greater volume of physiological patient data, giv-
ing them a better awareness of a patient’s medical
status so they can deliver more effective care.

There are two parts to our work: the use of novel
lightweight wireless medical sensors that are sim-
ple and quick to apply, and the use of novel soft-
ware that takes these inherently complex sensor
data, along with some other information inputted
by the user (e.g. patient demographics or actions
performed) on a tablet computer, and present it
very simply. We are working with two sensors that
provide measurements of the patient’s respiratory
rate, heart rate and blood oxygen saturation. Our
software can use NLG to produce a textual han-
dover report at any time. This can be passed to an
arriving paramedic to give a quick summary of the
situation and can accompany the patient to inform
later stages of care. We anticipate that our sys-
tem will also provide some basic decision support
based upon the patients clinical condition.

2 Related Work

Many situations arise in the medical domain where
vast amounts of data are produced and their correct
interpretation is crucial to the lives of patients. In-
terpreting these data is usually a demanding and
complex task. Medical data are therefore often
presented graphically or preferably in textual sum-
maries (Law et al., 2005) making NLG important
for various applications in the medical domain.

A number of systems address the problem of
presenting medical information to patients in a
form that they will understand. Examples are

1www.dotrural.ac.uk/mime

152



STOP (Reiter et al., 2003), PILLS (Bouayad-Agha
et al., 2002), MIGRANE (Buchanan et al., 1992),
and Healthdoc (Hirst et al., 1997). Other systems,
such as TOPAZ (Kahn et al., 1991) and Suregen
(Hüske-Kraus, 2003), aim to summarise informa-
tion in order to support medical decision-making.

In the case of MIME, the challenge is to sum-
marise large amounts of sensor data, in the context
of carer observations and actions, in a coherent
way that supports quick decision making by the
reader. The problem of describing the data relates
to previous work on summarising time series data
(e.g. (Yu et al., 2007)). In many ways, though, our
problem is most similar to that of Babytalk BT-
Nurse system (Hunter et al., 2012), which gener-
ates shift handover reports for nurses in a neona-
tal intensive care unit. The nature of the recipi-
ent is, however, different. Whereas BabyTalk ad-
dresses clinical staff in a controlled environment,
MIME is aimed at people with little training who
may have to deal with emergency situations very
quickly. Further, while BT-Nurse works with an
existing clinical record system, which does not al-
ways record all actions and observations which
ideally would be included in a report, in MIME
users enter exactly the information which MIME
needs. This simplifies the NLG task, at the cost of
adding a new task (interface construction).

3 The MIME project

In the first stage of MIME, we have developed
a desktop application to prototype the generation
of handover reports. We used simulated scenar-
ios, where a panel of medical experts determined
the sequence of events and predicted the stream of
data from the simulated sensors.

The generated reports must provide a quick
overview of the situation but at the same time be
sufficiently comprehensive, while the format must
enhance the readability. A general structure for
the handover reports was determined in a user-
centred development process together with ambu-
lance clinicians. After the demographic descrip-
tion of the casualty and incident details (entered by
the responder whenever they have an opportunity),
two sections of generated text follow: the initial
assessment section and the treatments and findings
section. The initial assessment contains informa-
tion on the patient gathered by the CFRs just after
the sensors are applied and also any observations
made during the first minute after the application

of the sensors. The treatment and findings section
is a report on the observations and actions of the
CFRs while they waited for the ambulance to ar-
rive. This includes a paragraph that sums up the
condition of the patient at the time of handover.

Using sensors to capture physiological data
continuously introduces the problem that irrele-
vant information needs to be suppressed in order
not to overload the ambulance clinicians and hin-
der interpretation. The NLG algorithm that gen-
erates short as well as comprehensive handover re-
ports accomplishes text planning in the two stages
of document planning and micro-planning (Re-
iter and Dale, 2000). Document planning is re-
sponsible for the selection of the information that
will be mentioned in the generated report. Events
that will be mentioned in the text are selected
and structured into a list of trees (similar to trees
in Rhetorical Structure Theory (Scott and Siecke-
nius de Souza, 1990)). In the micro-planning step
the structure of the document plan is linearised and
sentences are compiled using coordination and ag-
gregation.

Whereas some parts of the handover document
(e.g. patient demographics) are relatively stylised,
the main technically demanding part of the NLG
involves the description of the “treatment and find-
ings”, which describes the events that happen
whilst the patient is being cared for and relevant
parts of the sensor data (see Figure 1). For this
section of the report, the document planning al-
gorithm is based on that of (Portet et al., 2007),
which identifies a number of key events and cre-
ates a paragraph for each key event. Events that
are explicitly linked to the key event or events that
happen at the same time are added to the relevant
paragraph. This is based on the earlier work of
(Hallett et al., 2006).

4 Evaluation

In an initial evaluation we sought to assess how
our reports would be received in comparison with
the current situation – either short verbal reports
or paper report forms (PRFs)– and also in com-
parison with what might be regarded as a “gold
standard” report produced by an expert.

Materials: Two videos were produced indepen-
dently of the NLG team, based on two scenarios
of medical incidents typical of a CFRs caseload.
These scenarios, a farm injury and chest pain, in-
cluded a short description of the incident, similar

153



At 02:12, after RR remained fairly
constant around 30 bpm for 4 minutes,
high flow oxygen was applied, she took
her inhaler and RR decreased to 27
bpm. However, subsequently RR once
more remained fairly constant around
30 bpm for 8 minutes.

At 02:15 she was feeling faint.

At 02:15 the casualty was moved.

At 02:17 the casualty was once more
moved.

Figure 1: Part of the ”Treatment and Findings” for an
asthma scenario.

to the initial information a CFR would receive, a
time line of events that happened before the ambu-
lance arrived as well as simulated sensor data from
the patient. The videos showed an actor in the
role of CFR and another as patient, with the sce-
nario time displayed in one corner. When the CFR
performed readings of the physiological measures
they were shown as subtitles.

The videos were presented to two CFRs and a
paramedic, who were asked to imagine themselves
in the situation of the CFR in the video, and to
produce a handover report. Each video was only
played once in order to produce more realistic re-
sults. We asked one CFR to construct a written
“verbal” handover for the first scenario and to fill
out a PRF for the other scenario, and the other
CFR to do the “verbal” handover for the second
scenario and to fill out the PRF for the first. To
anonymise the PRF it was transcribed into a digi-
tal version. The paramedic received a blank sheet
of paper and was requested to produce a handover
report that he would like to receive from a CFR
when arriving at the scene. Based on the scenarios
we also generated two reports with the MIME sys-
tem. This process resulted in four reports for each
of the two scenarios, one transcribed verbal han-
dover and a PRF from a CFR, a written handover
report from a paramedic and the generated report.

Hypotheses: Our hypothesis was that the gen-
erated reports would improve on the current prac-
tice of verbal handovers and PRFs, and that
paramedics would perceive them to be more suit-
able, hence rank them higher than the CFRs’ ver-
bal or PRF reports. The paramedic handover re-
port might be regarded as a gold standard pro-
duced by an expert and we were interested in how
the generated reports fared in comparison. Fur-
ther, we hoped to gain information on how to im-

prove our generated reports.
Participants: We approached paramedics in

the Scottish Ambulance Service to participate in
our study. Nine paramedics responded (eight male
and one female; age range 32–56 years with 10–24
years’ service).

Procedure: Participants received an invitation
email with a link to a brief online survey and the
eight reports as attachments. After an introduction
and consent form they were forwarded to one of
the two scenario descriptions and asked to rank the
respective four reports. After that the participant
was asked to rate the accuracy, understandability
and usefulness of the generated report for this sce-
nario on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from very
good to very bad and to indicate what they liked
or disliked about it in a free text box. This process
was repeated for the second scenario.

4.1 Results

Ranking: An overview of the rankings can be
found in Table 1. Apart from the rankings of par-
ticipant 7 and 8, no large differences in how the
reports were ranked could be observed between
the two scenarios. We performed a Friedman
test (Friedman, 1937) (farm injury scenario: chi-
squared=4.3, df=3, p=0.23; chest pain scenario:
chi-squared=12.44, df=3, p=0.006): some reports
were ranked consistently higher or lower than oth-
ers. The verbal CFR report was ranked worst in all
but five cases. There is a high disparity in the rank-
ings for the PRF, which was ranked first on eight
occasions and in the other ten instances in third
or fourth place. The generated report was ranked
in first place only once, but eleven times in sec-
ond place and in third place the other six times. In
general the paramedic report, which was regarded
as the “gold standard”, was ranked better than the
generated report, but in five cases the generated
report was ranked better.

Rating: An overview of the ratings for the gen-
erated reports can be found in Table 2. The rat-
ings for both scenarios were good on average, with
a majority of ratings lying between very good to
moderate. Only one rating (the accuracy of the
generated report for the farm injury scenario) was
bad; none was very bad. The ratings for the gen-
erated report of the chest pain scenario were on
average better than those for the farm injury sce-
nario. Accuracy had better ratings than usefulness
and understandability in both scenarios.

154



Participant: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 med min max
farm injury scenario
Paramedic 2 2 3 1 1 3 3 2 1 2 1 3
Generated 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 2 3
CFR PRF 1 1 1 3 4 1 4 4 3 3 1 4
CFR verbal 4 4 4 4 3 4 1 1 4 4 1 4
chest pain scenario
Paramedic 2 2 3 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 1 3
Generated 3 3 2 2 2 3 1 2 2 2 1 3
CFR PRF 1 1 1 3 4 1 4 3 3 3 1 4
CFR verbal 4 4 4 4 3 4 3 4 4 4 3 4

Table 1: Overview of the ranking results (most preferred
(1) to least preferred (4)), median (med), maximum (max)
and minimum (min) values for the patient report form (CFR
PRF), paramedic report (Paramedic), generated report (gen-
erated) and verbal report (verbal CFR).

Participant: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 med min max
farm injury scenario
accuracy 1 2 1 4 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 4
useful. 3 3 2 2 1 2 2 1 1 2 1 3
unders. 2 3 2 2 1 3 3 1 1 2 1 3
chest pain scenario
accuracy 2 2 1 1 1 3 1 2 1 1 1 3
useful. 2 3 2 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 2 3
unders. 2 3 2 1 1 3 2 1 1 2 1 3

Table 2: Overview of the rating results, median (med), max-
imum (max) and minimum (min) values for accuracy, useful-
ness (useful.) and understandability (unders.) of the gener-
ated reports, on a Likert scale (very good (1) to very bad (5)).

4.2 Discussion
We hypothesised that the generated reports would
fare better than the verbal handovers and the PRFs.
Results confirm a preference for the generated re-
ports over the verbal handover. The paramedic
reports, which were regarded as our “gold stan-
dard” were ranked higher than the generated re-
ports. Interestingly, in almost half the cases there
was a clear preference for the PRF and in the other
cases the PRF ranked badly. This may have been
affected by the familiarity of this medium and per-
haps by the background assumption that this is
how handover reports “should” be presented.

We regard this as a tentative confirmation that
the generated texts compete favourably with the
status quo. In a real world scenario the paramedics
often get a verbal handover instead of the PRF and
it should be noted that the PRF was printed and not
handwritten. Furthermore, although the CFRs and
paramedics only saw the scenario video once they
were under no time pressure to submit the reports.
Hence the quality of all the human reports in our
experiment is likely to be better than normal.

Although each individual generally provided
consistent responses across the two scenarios,
there were variations between individuals. These

different preferences may be merely stylistic
choices or they may reflect in task performance.
Preferences are not necessarily an indication of
usefulness for a task (cf. (Law et al., 2005)).

In general the accuracy, understandability and
usefulness of the generated reports received good
ratings. Although participation was low, the qual-
itative data we gathered were valuable, every par-
ticipant offered comments in the free text box on
what they liked or disliked about the generated re-
port. In general there seemed to be an impres-
sion that some sections were longer than neces-
sary. One participant observed that reporting on
observations a long time later is only useful if
things have changed significantly. The structure
and organisation of the report received some posi-
tive comments. For example one participant stated
that he liked “the separate sections for informa-
tion” and another commented that the report was
“logically laid out”, that it was “easy to obtain
information” from the report and that it “clearly
states intervention and outcome of intervention”.

5 Conclusion and Future Work
Despite the fact that the experiment reported here
involved a small number of participants, which
implies that its results need to be interpreted with
some caution, the generated reports produced by
the MIME system appear to improve on the cur-
rent practice of verbal handover. We aim to col-
lect more responses and repeat the evaluation that
has been presented. Our next step in evaluating the
report generator will be to carry out a task based
evaluation to see whether the preference ratings
we have gathered can be reflected in performance
measures.

We are now moving into the second stage of
MIME and have started developing a new proto-
type, a mobile device that gets signals from two
lightweight sensors. Here we will collect data
from real emergency ambulance callouts by hav-
ing a researcher join ambulance crews for their
normal activity, which will be used to modify the
NLG system (e.g. in order to allow for more reli-
able handling of noise).

6 Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the RCUK dot.rural
Digital Economy Research Hub, University of Ab-
erdeen (Grant reference: EP/G066051/1)

155



References
N. Bouayad-Agha, R. Power, D. Scott, and A. Belz.

2002. PILLS: Multilingual generation of medical
information documents with overlapping content. In
Proceedings of LREC 2002, pages 2111–2114.

B. Buchanan, J. Moore, D. Forsythe, G. Banks, and
S. Ohlsson. 1992. Involving patients in health care:
explanation in the clinical setting. In Proceedings of
the Annual Symposium on Computer Application in
Medical Care, pages 510–514, January.

M. Friedman. 1937. The Use of Ranks to Avoid the
Assumption of Normality Implicit in the Analysis
of Variance. Journal of the American Statistical As-
sociation, 32(200):675–701.

C. Hallett, R. Power, and D. Scott. 2006. Summari-
sation and visualisation of e-Health data repositories
Conference Item Repositories. In UK E-Science All-
Hands Meeting, pages 18–21.

G. Hirst, C. DiMarco, E. Hovy, and K. Parsons. 1997.
Authoring and Generating Health-Education Docu-
ments That Are Tailored to the Needs of the Individ-
ual Patient. In Anthony Jameson, Cécile Paris, and
Carlo Tasso, editors, User Modeling: Proceedings
of the Sixth International Conference, UM97, pages
107–118. Springer Wien New York.

J. Hunter, Y. Freer, A. Gatt, E. Reiter, S. Sripada, and
C Sykes. 2012. Automatic generation of natural
language nursing shift summaries in neonatal in-
tensive care: BT-Nurse. Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine, 56:157–172.

D. Hüske-Kraus. 2003. Suregen-2: A Shell System for
the Generation of Clinical Documents. In Proceed-
ings of the 10th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL-2003), pages 215–218.

M. Kahn, L. Fagan, and L. Sheiner. 1991. Combining
physiologic models and symbolic methods to inter-
pret time-varying patient data. Methods of informa-
tion in medicine, 30(3):167–78, August.

A. Law, Y. Freer, J. Hunter, R. Logie, N. McIntosh,
and J. Quinn. 2005. A comparison of graphical and
textual presentations of time series data to support
medical decision making in the neonatal intensive
care unit. Journal of clinical monitoring and com-
puting, 19(3):183–94, June.

F. Portet, E. Reiter, J. Hunter, and S. Sripada. 2007.
Automatic generation of textual summaries from
neonatal intensive care data. In In Proccedings
of the 11th Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine (AIME 07). LNCS, pages 227–236.

E. Reiter and R. Dale. 2000. Building Natural Lan-
guage Generation Systems. Studies in Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Cambridge University Press.

E. Reiter, R. Robertson, and L. Osman. 2003. Lessons
from a failure: Generating tailored smoking cessa-
tion letters. Artificial Intelligence, 144(1-2):41–58,
March.

D. Scott and C. Sieckenius de Souza. 1990. Get-
ting the message across in rst-based text genera-
tion. In R. Dale, C. Mellish, and M. Zock, editors,
Current Research in Natural Language Generation.
Academic Press.

J. Yu, E. Reiter, J. Hunter, and C. Mellish. 2007.
Choosing the content of textual summaries of large
time-series data sets. Natural Language Engineer-
ing, 13(1):25–49.

156


