










































Tradition and Modernity in 20th Century Chinese Poetry


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 17–22,
Atlanta, Georgia, June 14, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Tradition and Modernity in 20th Century Chinese Poetry

Rob Voigt
Center for East Asian Studies

Stanford University
robvoigt@stanford.edu

Dan Jurafsky
Linguistics Department

Stanford University
jurafsky@stanford.edu

Abstract

Scholars of Chinese literature note that
China’s tumultuous literary history in the
20th century centered around the uncomfort-
able tensions between tradition and modernity.
In this corpus study, we develop and auto-
matically extract three features to show that
the classical character of Chinese poetry de-
creased across the century. We also find that
Taiwan poets constitute a surprising excep-
tion to the trend, demonstrating an unusually
strong connection to classical diction in their
work as late as the ’50s and ’60s.

1 Introduction

For virtually all of Chinese history through the fall
of the Qing Dynasty, poetry was largely written in
Classical Chinese and accessible to a small, edu-
cated fraction of the population. With the rise of the
May Fourth Movement in 1919, prominent intellec-
tuals such as Hu Shi and Lu Xun began to advocate
for and produce a fresh vernacular literature.

This upheaval of tradition has been much dis-
cussed in literary studies; Michelle Yeh calls ver-
nacular poetry “a self-proclaimed iconoclast strug-
gling against a formidable predecessor: the heritage
of three millennia of classical poetry” (Yeh, 1991).

While some propose that the May Fourth intel-
lectuals “abolished the classical language and all of
its literary genres” (Hockx and Smits, 2003), others
make more measured claims: Mao Chen, for exam-
ple, maintains that “a special relationship to tradi-
tion informs all phases of cultural activity during the
May Fourth period” (Chen, 1997).

Julia Lin notes that the period following the May
Fourth Movement through 1937 saw “the most ex-
citing and diverse experimentation in the history of
modern Chinese poetry” (Lin, 1973). Much of this
experimentation was concerned with the question
of modernity versus tradition, wherein some poets
“adapt[ed] the reality of the modern spoken lan-
guage to what they felt was the essence of the old
classical Chinese forms” (Haft, 1989).

The founding of the People’s Republic of China
in 1949 was a second major turning point in the
century, when “the Communists in one cataclysmic
sweep [...] ruthlessly altered the course of the arts”
and poetry “became totally subservient to the dic-
tates of the party” (Lin, 1973). With the “physi-
cal removal of the old cultural leadership,” many of
whom fled to Taiwan, this period saw a substantial
“vacuum in literature and the arts” (McDougall and
Louie, 1997).

Post-Mao, publication restrictions gradually loos-
ened and earlier cultural journals re-entered circu-
lation. Poetry began to reclaim its audience, and a
Chinese avant-garde associated with the “Misty Po-
ets” developed (McDougall and Louie, 1997).

However, we lack broad-scale empirical evidence
of the linguistic features that constituted the shift
from tradition to modernity. Therefore, we propose
a study that asks: To what extent were classical po-
etic forms and classical language immediately dis-
carded with the advent of vernacular poetry? What
is the status of classical language after 1949 and
amidst the Maoist era, when we might expect its to-
tal absence? Does more contemporary poetry still
draw connections to classical language?

17



2 Prior Work on Chinese Poetry in NLP

The majority of existing studies in NLP on Chinese
poetry deal exclusively with the classical language.

Jiang and Zhou (2008) explore the problem of
classical Chinese poetic couplets, and to develop a
system to generate them automatically using tech-
niques from machine translation.

Fang et al. (2009) use an ontology of imagery de-
veloped by Lo (2008) to identify imagery in classical
Chinese poems, and develop a parser that is able to
extract tree structures that identify complex imagis-
tic language in the same.

More recent work develops useful resources for
understanding classical poetry. Lee (2012) develops
a corpus of classical Chinese poems that are word-
segmented and annotated with nested part-of-speech
tags that allow for different interpretations of “word-
hood” - a non-trivial concept in considering Chinese
texts classical and modern. Lee and Kong (2012)
introduce a large-scale dependency treebank anno-
tated on a corpus of 8th-century poems.

To our knowledge, there is no existing computa-
tional work that attempts to understand the develop-
ment of modern Chinese poetry over time.

3 Data Collection

For this project, we use a corpus of modern po-
ems collected on the site “Chinese Poetry Treasury”
(中国诗歌库, www.shigeku.com) entitled the “Se-
lected Database of Chinese Modern Poetry” (中国
现代诗歌精品资料库). It is important to note that
the poems in this collection were hand-selected by
the group running the site for their canonicity, so our
data are biased towards those poems that have, in a
sense, “stood the test of time” in the eyes of a main-
land Chinese readership.

This corpus is distributed through their site as a
collection of html documents, one page per poet,
which include brief biographical information for the
poet and a collection of their works. We use unix
command-line tools (sed, tr, iconv, grep) and basic
python scripting to process these documents into a
usable corpus with each poem as a separate, clean
file, segmented character-by-character. 1

1Scripts and further information are available here:
http://nlp.stanford.edu/robvoigt/chpoetry/

The site categorizes poets by their “most active”
decade, from the 1920s through the 1990s, and we
extract this metadata to allow for comparisons over
time. In our analysis, however, a methodological im-
pediment arose: namely, the Cultural Revolution.

As discussed in the introduction, this tumultuous
period severely disrupted the developmental path of
modern Chinese literature. Indeed, we find in our
corpus that almost none of the poets tagged as active
in the ’50s and ’60s were mainland Chinese, but in-
stead Taiwanese poets who fled to the island at the
climax of the Chinese Civil War.

For this reason, combined with the potential nois-
iness induced by the fact that decade tags are per-
poet instead of per-poem, we manually identify Tai-
wan poets and divide our corpus into three subsets
for analysis: “early modern” poetry in the 1920s and
’30s; “late modern” poetry in the ’40s interrupted by
the Maoist era but resuming in the late ’70s, ’80s,
and ’90s; and “Taiwan” poetry by Taiwan natives
and transplanted mainlanders in Taiwan post-1949.

After pre-processing, our full corpus for analysis
(denoted Eval in Table 1) contains 3,611 poems by
305 poets, with a total of 1,128,428 Chinese charac-
ters. This size is large enough for meaningful com-
putational results, but small enough to allow for sig-
nificant qualitative analysis.

We will later define metrics for evaluating the
“classicality” of individual characters and radicals,
so we process auxiliary corpora (denoted Aux in Ta-
ble 1) of classical poetry and contemporary prose.
For classical Chinese, we use a large corpus, from
the same source (www.shigeku.com), of poems from
the Tang Dynasty (618-907 AD), often considered
the greatest classical era for Chinese poetry. For
modern Chinese, we use a subset of a machine trans-
lation bi-text, comprised primarily of contemporary
newswire, legal, and other prose texts.2

Since we aim to discover the overall “classicality”
of association for individual characters, our auxil-
iary corpora are cross-genre to exaggerate the ef-
fects — a high “classicality” score will indicate both
a period-specific classicality and a classical poetic
genre association.

2From the BOLT Phase 1 Evaluation training data; see
http://www.nist.gov/itl/iad/mig/bolt p1.cfm

18



Table 1: Corpus inventory.
Poems Chars Vocab

Eval Early 351 89,226 3,299
Taiwan 513 126,369 3,878
Late 2,747 912,833 4,852

Aux Classical 2,712,685 6,263
Modern 9,405,549 5,517

4 Methodology

Speak in the language of the time in which you live.
— Hu Shi, 1917

As suggested in the introduction, modern poetry
is distinguished linguistically from classical poetry
in its explicit shift to the use of vernacular language.
Classical poetry is formalized, concise, and imagis-
tic. We propose three features to operationalize this
classicality and computationally observe the shift to
a poetic vernacular across the 20th century.

Final Rhyme Classical Chinese poetry in general
has a highly regular structure, following strict metri-
cal and rhyming conventions, and most prominently
employs a highly consistent end-rhyme. We use the
CJKLIB python library3 to obtain the pronunciation
for the last character in each line of each poem. The
pronunciation of a given Chinese character may be
divided into precisely one consonant (known as an
“initial”) and one vowel (known as a “final”).

We therefore qualify a given line as “rhyming” if
the last character of any line within a 3-line window
shares its vowel final pronunciation, and for each
poem calculate the proportion of rhyming lines.

Character-based Probability Ratio Inspired by
the work of Underwood and Sellers (2012) in track-
ing shifts in literary diction in English poetry, we use
our auxiliary corpora of Tang Dynasty poems and
modern Chinese language text to create two simple
metrics for understanding the “classicality” of poetic
diction.

The extreme concision of classical poetry “fo-
cuses attention on the characters themselves” (Hin-
ton, 2010), with common classical forms containing
as few as ten or twenty characters. To analyze clas-
sical diction, for each character we aim to get a ratio
describing how classical it sounds.

3http://code.google.com/p/cjklib/

For this metric, we calculate the probability of
each character occurring in its respective corpus us-
ing add-one smoothing. We then define the score
for a given character as the difference of the char-
acter’s log likelihood of occurring in the classical
auxiliary corpus with its log likelihood of occur-
ring in the modern auxiliary corpus. Scores range
from -8 to +8, where a higher score indicates a more
“classically”-tinged character.

We find these scores match up well with intu-
ition. In the highly negative range, we find recently-
invented, conversational, and grammatical charac-
ters unique to the modern vernacular. In the highly
positive range, we find rareified literary, poetic
characters. In the range surrounding 0.0, we find
many common, persistent characters whose mean-
ings have changed little over time. Selected exam-
ples of these scores can be seen in Table 2.

Table 2: Example classicality scores for selected charac-
ters on the Character-based Probability Ratio metric.

Character Meaning Score
HIGHLY CLASSICAL

遇 yu To meet; to encounter 7.94
衾 qin A thin quilt used to cover 6.42

a corpse in a coffin
萧 xiao A type of bamboo flute 5.99
柳 liu Willow 4.68

SIMILAR ACROSS PERIODS
听 ting Listen; hear 0.64
去 qü To go; towards 0.61
直 zhi Directly -0.11
收 shou To receive; to harvest -0.53

HIGHLY MODERN
你 ni Second-person pronoun -4.49
够 gou Sufficient; enough -6.02
呢 ne Sentence-final particle -6.67
她 ta Third-person female pronoun -7.82

We calculate a score for a given poem on this met-
ric by simply taking the average of the character-
based probability ratio for each character in the
poem. These results are denoted Char in Table 4.

Radical-based Probability Ratio This metric is
fundamentally similar to the above character-based
method, but offers the potential to provide a different
kind of insight. The majority of Chinese characters
are compositional, with a semantic component and a
phonetic component.

19



We start from the intuition that contemporary
texts will be more likely to use characters that con-
tain the 口 (kou, “mouth”) radical as their seman-
tic component, because this radical is commonly
found in modern conversational particles that were
not used in ancient texts. We generalize this hypoth-
esis and consider that the use of characters with cer-
tain semantic radicals is correlated with the classi-
cality of a text.

We again use the CJKLIB python library to pro-
cess our auxiliary corpora, extracting the seman-
tic component radical from each character and cal-
culating the ratio of its probability of occurrence,
with add-one smoothing, in the auxiliary classical
and modern corpora. As above, we obtain the ratio
scores for each radical, and score each poem in our
corpus by averaging these scores for each character
in the poem.

While these scores are less immediately acces-
sible to intuition than those of the character-based
metric, the radical-based scores, with examples seen
in Table 3, demonstrate a consistency that parallels
the character-based scores.

The semantic radicals most prevalent in classical
poetry include those signifying bird, horse, valley,
mountain, ghost, dragon, and so on; classical po-
etry has a pastoral and mythological aesthetic that
is directly reflected in the distribution of its radi-
cals. Conversely, modern prose is more likely to use
semantic radicals related to work, family, money,
speech, and movement; they convey the practical re-
alism of contemporary conversational speech.

Table 3: Example classicality scores for selected seman-
tic radicals on the Radical-based Probability Ratio metric.

Radical Meaning Score
HIGHLY CLASSICAL

鬼 gui Ghost 2.18
山 shan Mountain 2.09
虫 chong Insect 1.43

SIMILAR ACROSS PERIODS
女 nü Female 0.01
文 wen Culture; language -0.02
生 sheng Life; birth -0.01

HIGHLY MODERN
手 shou Hand -0.48
言 yan Words; speech -0.61
力 li Force; work -0.94

4.1 Diachronic Statistical Analysis
We began from the hypothesis that each of the met-
rics described above will demonstrate, broadly, that
the classical nature of Chinese poetry decreased over
the course of the 20th century. The raw statistical
counts for our features can been seen in Table 4.

Table 4: Raw feature statistics across sub-corpora.
Higher values in the AVG rows indicate a greater “classi-
cality.” For all three features, classicality decreased over
the century, with the exception of Taiwan.

Early Taiwan Late
Rhyme AVG 0.281 0.244 0.226

STDDEV 0.193 0.169 0.152
Char AVG -0.695 -0.620 -0.882

STDDEV 0.494 0.446 0.404
Radical AVG -0.072 -0.081 -0.116

STDDEV 0.121 0.105 0.097

We calculate the presence of the “classical” fea-
tures defined above for each subset, and compute
a binary logistic regression with the scikit-learn
python library (Pedregosa et al., 2011)4 to find cor-
relation coefficients for those features between the
“early modern” and “late modern” subsets.

5 Results and Discussion

Several claims from the literary community are well-
supported by our results.

Logistic regression reveals a significant down-
ward trend for our features as we shift from “early
modern” to “late modern” poetry (R2 = 0.89), in-
dicating decreased use of end-rhyme, increased use
of modern characters, and increased prevalence of
modern semantic radicals over the course of the cen-
tury.

Though the early works use more classical char-
acters on the whole, we also observe a higher statisti-
cal variance for all metrics in the ’20s and ’30s, sup-
porting the literary hypothesis that the May Fourth
period was one of increased experimentation that
later settled into a somewhat more consistent moder-
nity.

We find, however, less support for the idea that
Chinese modern poets “abolished the classical lan-
guage” in their work (Hockx and Smits, 2003).

4http://scikit-learn.org

20



Throughout the century we find repeated instances
of highly classical language, with individual poems
reaching a maximum character-based probability ra-
tio of 0.70 in the “early” works, 0.76 in the “late”
works, and 0.87 in the “Taiwan” works; compare
these with an average score of 1.20 for the auxiliary
classical dataset overall. Considering that a score of
0.0 would indicate an equal distribution of weight
between “classical” and “modern” characters, it’s
clear that these 20th-century poems still contain a
substantial proportion of characters drawn from the
classical language.

Poems from Taiwan in the ’50s and ’60s offer
perhaps the most interesting results in this study.
It’s notable in the first place that poets in our cor-
pus selected as worth remembering by contempo-
rary mainland Chinese from the most authoritarian
period of Communist control are almost exclusively
from Taiwanese authors. Furthermore, the dip to-
wards modernity we see in ’40s mainland poetry was
rejected in the next decade by those mainland poets
who found themselves in Taiwan after 1949; the Tai-
wan poems bear far greater resemblance to the early
subset of our data than to the late.

This finding parallels work on this period from lit-
erary scholars. Yvonne Chang writes that in ’50s
and ’60s Taiwan, valorization of traditional Chi-
nese culture and romanticization of the early 20th-
century Nationalist period in mainland China was
heavily encouraged. In particular, the concept of “纯
文学” (chun wenxue, “pure literature”) gained pop-
ularity in Taiwan’s literary circles, and with it came
a resurgence of more traditional diction and forms
(Chang, 1993).

Fangming Chen further describes poetry in post-
war Taiwan as a political outlet for the Kuomintang,
the sole ruling party of Taiwan at the time, as they
“forcefully brought Chinese nationalism” to the is-
land. Poets who demonstrated a deep “nostalgia” for
the “motherland” of mainland China were far more
likely to be rewarded with cultural resources such as
grants and publication money, being that the govern-
ment had a vested interest in keeping the public on
board with plans to “reclaim the homeland” (Chen,
2007). It is fascinating, then, that we observe this
tendency computationally with a return to the levels
of classicality seen in ’20s and ’30s mainland China.

In spite of these encouraging results, this work has

several limitations. Our reliance on decade-based la-
bels applied to poets, rather than poems, introduces
significant noise. The outlier behavior observed in
Taiwan poets is indicative of the need for a better
understanding of regional differences, and a com-
parison with a similarly isolated Sinophone region
such as Hong Kong would be productive in this re-
gard. In both cases, information extraction tech-
niques might allow us to tag poems with their date of
publication and poets with their hometown, facilitat-
ing fine-grained analysis, as would a broader dataset
that goes beyond the modern canon.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we computationally operationalized
three features that successfully track the declining
influence of classical poetic style and language in
20th-century Chinese poetry. We identified Taiwan
poets as an outlier in the dataset, and found empiri-
cal evidence for the political externalities of the ’50s
and ’60s that called for a return to a nostalgic clas-
sicism. In this way, this work presents a promising
first step to a thorough empirical understanding of
the development of modern Chinese poetry.

Acknowledgments

Thanks to three anonymous reviewers for detailed
and insightful comments. This research was sup-
ported in part by the Foreign Language and Area
Studies Fellowships, United States Department of
Education.

References
Sung-sheng Yvonne Chang. 1993. Modernism and the

Nativist Resistance. Duke University Press: Durham
and London.

Fangming Chen. 2007. Postmodern or Postcolonial? An
Inquiry into Postwar Taiwanese Literary History. In
Writing Taiwan, David Der-wei Wang and Carlos Ro-
jas, eds. Duke University Press, Durham and London.

Mao Chen. 1997. Between Tradition and Change. Uni-
versity Press of America, Lanham, MA.

Alex Chengyu Fang, Fengju Lo, and Cheuk Kit Chinn.
2009. Adapting NLP and Corpus Analysis Techniques
to Structured Imagery Analysis in Classical Chinese
Poetry. In Workshop Adaptation of Language Re-
sources and Technology to New Domains, Borovets,
Bulgaria.

21



Lloyd Haft. 1989. A Selective Guide to Chinese Litera-
ture: 1900-1949. E.J. Brill, New York.

David Hinton, ed. 2010. Classical Chinese Poetry: An
Anthology. Farrar, Straus, and Giroux.

Michel Hockx and Ivo Smits, eds. 2003. Reading East
Asian Writing: The Limits of Literary Theory. Rout-
ledgeCurzon, London and New York.

Long Jiang and Ming Zhou. 2008. Generating Chinese
Couplets using a Statistical MT Approach. In COL-
ING.

John Lee. 2012. A Classical Chinese Corpus with
Nested Part-of-Speech Tags. In Proceedings of the 6th
EACL Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural
Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, Avignon,
France.

John Lee and Yin Hei Kong. 2012. A Dependency Tree-
bank of Classical Chinese Poems. In NAACL-HLT,
Montreal, Canada.

Julia Lin. 1973. Modern Chinese Poetry: An Introduc-
tion. University of Washington Press, Seattle, WA.

Fengju Lo. 2008. The Research of Building a Semantic
Cetegory System Based on the Language Characteris-
tic of Chinese Poetry. In Proceedings of the 9th Cross-
Strait Symposium on Library Information Science.

Lu Zhiwei. 1984. Five Lectures on Chinese Poetry. Joint
Publishing Co., Hong Kong.

Bonnie McDougall and Kam Louie, eds. 1997. The Lit-
erature of China in the Twentieth Century. Hurst and
Company, London.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gram-
fort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel,
Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vin-
cent Dubourg, Jake Vanderplas, Alexandre Passos,
David Cournapeau, Matthieu Brucher, Matthieu Per-
rot, and Édouard Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Ma-
chine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Research. 12:2825-2830

Ted Underwood and Jordan Sellers. 2012.
The Emergence of Literary Diction. The
Journal of Digital Humanities, 1(2).
http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-2/the-
emergence-of-literary-diction-by-ted-underwood-
and-jordan-sellers/

Michelle Yeh. 1991. Modern Chinese Poetry: Theory
and Practice since 1917. Yale University Press, New
Haven, CT.

22


