










































Argument extraction for supporting public policy formulation


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 49–54,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Argument extraction for supporting public policy formulation
Eirini Florou

Dept of Linguistics, Faculty of Philosophy
University of Athens, Greece

eirini.florou@gmail.coml

Stasinos Konstantopoulos
Institute of Informatics and

Telecommunications, NCSR ‘Demokritos’
konstant@iit.demokritos.gr

Antonis Kukurikos Pythagoras Karampiperis
Institute of Informatics and Telecommunications, NCSR ‘Demokritos’, Athens, Greece

{kukurik,pythk}@iit.demokritos.gr

Abstract
In this paper we describe an application
of language technology to policy formula-
tion, where it can support policy makers
assess the acceptance of a yet-unpublished
policy before the policy enters public con-
sultation. One of the key concepts is that
instead of relying on thematic similarity,
we extract arguments expressed in support
or opposition of positions that are general
statements that are, themselves, consistent
with the policy or not. The focus of this
paper in this overall pipeline, is identify-
ing arguments in text: we present and em-
pirically evaluate the hypothesis that ver-
bal tense and mood are good indicators of
arguments that have not been explored in
the relevant literature.

1 Introduction

The large-scale acquisition, thematic classifica-
tion, and sentiment analysis of Web content has
been extensively applied to brand monitoring, dig-
ital reputation management, product development,
and a variety of similar applications. More re-
cently, it has also seen application in public policy
validation, where the ‘brand’ to be monitored is
a publicized and widely commented government
policy.

All these methods typically rely on the seman-
tic similarity between a given text or set of terms
and Web content; often using domain-specific on-
tological and terminological resources in order to
measure this similarity. This approach, however
requires that all parties involved discourse on the
same topic; that is to say, that we are seeking the
collective opinion of the Web on a topic that has
been publicized enough to attract the attention of
the Web.

In this paper we present a slightly different ap-
proach, where we are looking for arguments ex-

pressed in support or opposition of opinions with
little semantic similarity to our topic of interest.
As a rough example, consider how drafting envi-
ronmental policy can benefit from access to statis-
tics about how people felt about industrial growth
at the expense of environmental concerns when
other policy in completely different domains was
on public consultation: many of the arguments
about the relative merits of industrial growth and
environmental concerns can retain their structure
and be thematically transferred to the new domain,
helping draft a policy that best addresses people’s
concerns.

Of paramount importance for implementing
such an approach is the linguistic tools for identi-
fying arguments. In this paper, we first motivate
the inclusion of argument extraction inside the
larger policy formulation and validation cycle and
present the position of an argument extraction tool
inside a computational system for supporting this
cycle (Section 2). We then proceed to a present the
argument extraction literature (Section 3) and our
hypothesis that verbal morpho-syntactic features
are good discriminators of arguments (Section 4).
We close the paper by presenting and discussing
empirical results (Section 5) and concluding (Sec-
tion 6).

2 Policy formulation and validation

Our work is carried out in the context of a project
that develops computational tools for the early
phases of policy making, before policy drafts have
been made available for public consultation.1

At that stage, the policy’s impact on public
opinion cannot be estimated by similarity-based
searching for relevant Web content, since the pol-
icy text has not been announced yet — or even
fully authored for that matter. One of the core

1Full details about the project have been suppressed to
preserve anonymity, but will be included in the camera-ready.

49



ideas of the project is that in order to assist the
policy formulation process, a tool needs to esti-
mate the acceptance of a yet unpublished docu-
ment based on Web content that is not themati-
cally similar, but is rather supporting or opposing a
more general position or maxim that also supports
or opposes the policy under formulation.

To make this more concrete, consider a new pol-
icy for increasing the penetration of wind power
production, setting specific conditions and prior-
ities. The project is developing an authoring en-
vironment where specific policy statements are
linked to more general statements, such as:

(1) Greenhouse gas emissions should not be a
concern at all.

(2) It is desired to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, but this should be balanced
against other concerns.

(3) It is desired to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions at all costs.

We have, thus, created a formulation of ‘relevant
content’ that includes Examples 1 and 2 below.
These are taken from different domains, are com-
menting policies and laws that are already formu-
lated and made public, and can be used to infer
the level of support for the new wind power policy
although no textual similarity exists.

(4) In case hard packaging is made compulsory
by law, producers will be forced to consume
more energy, leading to more greenhouse
gas emissions.

(5) Tidal power production does not emit
greenhouse gases, but other environmental
problems are associated with its widespread
deployment.

Leaving aside the ontological conceptualization
that achieves this matching, which is reported else-
where, we will now discuss the language process-
ing pipeline that retrieves and classifies relevant
Web content.

Content is acquired via focused crawling, us-
ing search engine APIs to retrieve public Web
pages and social network APIs to retrieve con-
tent from social content sharing platforms. Con-
tent is searched and filtered (in case of feed-like
APIs) based on fairly permissive semantic similar-
ity measures, emphasising a high retrieval rate at

the expense of precision. As a second step, clean
text is extracted from the raw Web content using
the Boilerpipe library (Kohlschütter et al., 2010)
in order to remove HTML tags, active compo-
nents (e.g. JavaScript snippets), and content that
is irrelevant to the main content (menus, ad sec-
tions, links to other web pages), and also to replace
HTML entities with their textual equivalent, e.g.,
replacing ‘&amp;’ with the character ‘&’.

The resulting text is tokenized and sentence-
splitted and each sentence classified as relevant or
not using standard information retrieval methods
to assess the semantic similarity of each sentence
to the general policy statements. This is based on
both general-purpose resources2 and the domain
ontology for the particular policy. Consecutive
sentences that are classified as positive are joined
into a segment.

The main objective of the work described here
is the classification of these segments as being
representative of a stance that would also support
or oppose the policy being formulated, given the
premise of the general statements (1)–(3). Our ap-
proach is to apply the following criteria:

• That they are semantically similar to the gen-
eral statements associated with the policy.

• That they are arguments, rather than state-
ments of fact or other types of prose.

• That their polarity towards the general state-
ments is expressed.

In order to be able to assess segments, we thus
need a linguistic pipeline that can calculate seman-
tic similarity, identify arguments, and extract their
structure (premises/consequences) and polarity (in
support or opposition).

The focus of the work described here is iden-
tifying arguments, although we also outline how
the features we are proposing can also be used in
order to classify chunks of text as premises or con-
sequences.

3 Related Work

The first approaches of argument extraction were
concentrated on building wide-coverage argument

2WordNets are publicly available for both English and
Greek, that is the language of the experiments reported here.
Simpler semantic taxonomies can also be used; the accuracy
of the semantic similarity measured here does not have a ma-
jor bearing on the argument extraction experiments that are
the main contribution of this paper.

50



structure lexicons, originally manually Fitzpatrick
and Sager (1980, 1981) and later from elec-
tronic versions of conventional dictionaries, since
such dictionaries contain morpho-syntactic fea-
tures Briscoe et al. (1987). More recently, the fo-
cus shifted to automatically extracting these lex-
ical resources from corpora Brent (1993) and to
hybrid approaches using dictionaries and corpora.

Works using syntactic features to extract top-
ics and holders of opinions are numerous (Bethard
et al., 2005). Semantic role analysis has also
proven useful: Kim and Hovy (2006) used a
FrameNet-based semantic role labeler to deter-
mine holder and topic of opinions. Similarly, Choi
and Cardie (2006) successfully used a PropBank-
based semantic role labeler for opinion holder ex-
traction.

Somasundaran et al. (2008; 2010) argued that
semantic role techniques are useful but not com-
pletely sufficient for holder and topic identifica-
tion, and that other linguistic phenomena must be
studied as well. In particular, they studied dis-
course structure and found specific cue phrases
that are strong features for use in argument extrac-
tion. Discourse markers that are strongly associ-
ated with pragmatic functions can be used to pre-
dict the class of content, therefore useful features
include the presence of a known marker such as
‘actually’, ‘because’, ‘but’.

Tseronis (2011) describes three main ap-
proaches to describing argument markers: Geneva
School, Argument within Language Theory and
the Pragma-dialectical Approach. According the
Geneva School, there are three main types of
markers/connective, organisation markers, illocu-
tionary function markers (the relations between
acts) and interactive function markers. Argument
within Language Theory is a study of individual
words and phrases. The words identified are argu-
ment connectors: these describe an argumentative
function of a text span and change the potential
of it either realising or de-realising the span. The
Pragma-dialectical Approach looks at the context
beyond words and expressions that directly refer to
the argument. It attempts to identify words and ex-
pressions that refer to any moves in the argument
process. Similarly to Marcu and Echihabi (2002),
the approach is to create a model of an ideal argu-
ment and annotate relevant units.

4 Approach and Experimental Setup

As seen above, shallow techniques are typically
based on connectives and other discourse mark-
ers in order to define shallow argument patterns.
What has not been investigated is whether shallow
morpho-syntactic features, such as the tense and
mood of the verbal constructs in a passage, can
also indicate argumentative discourse.

Our hypothesis is that future and conditional
tenses and moods often indicate conjectures and
hypotheses which are commonly used in argumen-
tation techniques such as illustration, justification,
rebuttal where the effects of a position counter to
the speaker’s argument are analysed. Naturally,
such features cannot be the sole basis of argument
identification, so we need to experiment regarding
their interaction with discourse markers.

To make this more concrete, consider the exam-
ples in Section 2: although both are perfectly valid
arguments that can help us infer the acceptance or
rejection of a policy, in the first one future tense
is used to speculate about the effects of a policy;
in the second example there is no explicit marker
that the effects of large-scale tidal power produc-
tion are also a conjecture.

Another difficulty is that conditional and fu-
ture verbal groups are constructed using auxil-
iary verbs and (in some languages) other auxil-
iary pointers. Consider, for example, the follow-
ing PoS-tagged and chunked Greek translation of
Example 4:

(6) [oi
[the-NomPl

paragogoi]np
producers-NounNomPl]

[tha
[Pointer-Fut

ipochreothoun]vp
force-Perf-3PP]

[na
[Pointer-Subj

katanalosoun]vp
consume-Inf]

‘producers will be forced to consume’

In order to be able to correctly assign simple fu-
ture, information from the future pointer ‘tha’
needs to be combined with the perfective feature
of finite verb form. Conditionals, future perfect,
past perfect, and similar tenses or moods like sub-
juncive also involve the tense of the auxiliary verb,
besides the future pointer and the main verb.

We have carried out our experiments in Greek
language texts, for which we have developed a
JAPE grammar3 that extract the tense and mood of

3JAPE is finite state transducer over GATE annota-

51



Table 1: Categories of morpho-syntactic features extracted from text segments.

Label Description Features
DM Absolute number of occurrences of discourse markers 5 numerical features

from a given category
Rel Relative frequency of each of the 6 tenses and each of the 6 moods 12 numerical features
RCm Relative frequency of each tense/mood 9 numerical features

combination (only for those that actually appear).
Bin Appearance of each of the 6 tenses and each of the 6 moods 12 binary features
Dom Most frequent tense, mood, and tense/mood combination 3 string features

TOTAL 41 features

each verb chunk. The grammar uses patterns that
combine the features of pointers and auxiliary and
main verbs, without enforcing any restrictions on
what words (e.g., adverbs) might be interjected in
the chunk. That is to say, the chunker is responsi-
ble for identifying verb groups and our grammar is
restricted to propagating and combining the right
features from each of the chunk’s constituents to
the chunk’s own feature structure.

PoS-tagging and chunking annotations have
been previously assigned by the ILSP suite of
Greek NLP tools (Papageorgiou et al., 2000;
Prokopidis et al., 2011), as provided by the rele-
vant ILSP Web Services4 to get PoS tagged and
chunked texts in the GATE XML format.

At a second layer of processing, we create one
data instance for each segment (as defined in Sec-
tion 2 above) and for each such segment we ex-
tract features relating to verbal tense/mood and to
the appearance of discourse markers. The former
are different ways to aggregate the various tenses
and moods found in the whole segment, by mea-
suring relative frequencies, recording the appear-
ance of a tense or mood even once, and naming
the predominant (most frequent) tense and mood;
tense and mood are seen both individually and as
tense/mood combinations.

Furthermore, we have defined five absolute fre-
quency features which record the matching against
the several patterns and keywords provided for the
following five categories of arguments:

• justification, matching patterns such as ‘be-
cause’, ‘the reason being’, ‘due to’, etc.

tions. Please see http://gate.ac.uk/sale/tao/
splitch8.html The JAPE grammar we have developed
will be made available on-line; location cannot be yet dis-
closed in order to preserve anonymity.

4Currently at http://ilp.ilsp.gr

• explanation, matching patterns such as ‘in
other words’, ‘for instance’, quotesfor this
reason(s), etc.

• deduction, ‘as a consequence’, ‘in accor-
dance with the above’, ‘proving that’, etc.

• rebuttal, ‘despite’, ‘however’, etc.

• conditionals, ‘supposing that’, ‘in case that’,
etc.

All features extracted by this process are given
on Table 1.

5 Results and Discussion

We have used the method described in Section 2
in order to obtain 677 text segments, with a size
ranging between 10 and 100 words, with an av-
erage of 60 words. Of these, 332 were manually
annotated to not be arguments; the remaining 345
positive examples were obtained by oversampling
the 69 segments in our corpus that we have manu-
ally annotated to be arguments.5

We have then applied the feature extraction de-
scribed in Section 4 in order to set up a classifi-
cation task for J48, the Weka6 implementation of
the C4.5 decision tree learning algorithm (Quin-
lan, 1992). We have applied a moderate confi-
dence factor of 0.25, noting that experimenting
with the confidence factor did not yield any sub-
stantially different results.

In order to better understand the feature space,
we have run a series of experiments, with quan-
titative results summarized in Table 2. The first

5The data and relevant scripts for carrying out these
experiments are available at http://users.iit.
demokritos.gr/˜konstant/dload/arguments.
tgz

6Please see http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/
ml/weka

52



Table 2: Precision and recall for retrieving arguments using different feature mixtures. Please cf. Table 1
for an explanation of the feature labels. The results shown are the 10-fold cross-validation mean.

Morpho-syntactic With Discourse Markers Without Discourse Markers
features used Prec. Rec. Fβ=1 Prec. Rec. Fβ=1

All 75.8% 71.9% 73.8% 75.5% 70.4% 72.9%
no Dom 79.8% 73.3% 76.4% 74.0% 71.9% 72.9%
no Rel 74.5% 72.8% 73.8% 73.1% 69.3% 71.1%
no RCm 76.3% 71.0% 73.6% 76.8% 70.1% 73.3%
no Bin 70.0% 70.4% 70.2% 66.7% 69.6% 68.1%
Rel 73.4% 75.9% 74.6% 70.3% 72.2% 71.2%
Dom 57.1% 98.8% 72.4% 54.9% 94.2% 69.4%
RCm 69.3% 66.7% 67.9% 71.9% 62.9% 67.1%
Bin 71.7% 49.9% 58.8% 70.1% 44.9% 54.8%
None 67.9% 20.9% 31.9% —

observation is that both morpho-syntactic features
and discourse markers are needed, because if ei-
ther category is omitted results deteriorate. How-
ever, not all morpho-syntactic features are needed:
note how omitting the Dom, Rel, or RCm cate-
gories yields identical or improved results. On the
other hand, the binary presence feature category
Bin is significant (cf. 5th row). We cannot, how-
ever, claim that only the Bin category is sufficient,
and, in fact, if one category has to be chosen that
would have to be that of relative frequency fea-
tures (cf. rows 6-9).

6 Conclusion

We describe here an application of language tech-
nology to policy formulation, and, in particular, to
using Web content to assess the acceptance of a
yet-unpublished policy before public consultation.
The core of the idea is that classifying Web con-
tent as similar to the policy or not does apply, be-
cause the policy document has not been made pub-
lic yet; but that we should rather extract arguments
from Web content and assess whether these argue
in favour or against general concepts that are (or
are not) consistent with the policy being formu-
lated.

As a first step to this end, our paper focuses
on the identification of arguments in Greek lan-
guage content using shallow features. Based on
our observation that verb tense appears to be a sig-
nificant feature that is not exploited by the rele-
vant literature, we have carried out an empirical
evaluation of this hypothesis. We have, in partic-
ular, demonstrated that the relative frequency of

each verb tense/mood and the binary appearance
of each verb tense/mood inside a text segment are
as discriminative of argumentative text as the (typ-
ically used) discourse markers; and that classifica-
tion is improved by combining discourse marker
features with our verbal tense/mood features. For
doing this, we developed a regular grammar that
combines the PoS tags of the members of a verb
chunk in order to assign tense and mood to the
chunk. In this manner, our approach depends on
PoS taggin and chunking only.

In subsequent steps of our investigation, we are
planning to refine our approach to extracting ar-
gument structure: it would be interesting to test
if argument premises tend to correlate with cer-
tain tenses or moods, distinguishing them from
from conclusions. Further experiments can also
examine if the simultaneous appearance of con-
crete tenses at the same sentence is an indicator
of an argument. Finally, we plan to examine the
predicates of an argument, and especially if the
head word of each sentence (be it verb or deverbal
noun) and its seat at the boundaries of the sentence
may contribute to extract an argument or not, espe-
cially for impersonal, modal, and auxiliary verbs.

Acknowledgements

The research leading to these results has re-
ceived funding from the European Union’s Sev-
enth Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) un-
der grant agreement no 288513. For more de-
tails, please see the NOMAD project’s website,
http://www.nomad-project.eu

53



References

Steven Bethard, Hong Yu, Ashley Thornton,
Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, and Dan Jurafsky.
2005. Extracting opinion propositions and opin-
ion holders using syntactic and lexical cues. In
James G. Shanahan, Yan Qu, and Janyce Wiebe,
editors, Computing Attitude and Affect in Text:
Theory and Applications. Springer.

Michael Brent. 1993. From grammar to lexi-
con: unsupervised learning of lexical syntax.
In Computational Linguistics - Special issue on
using large corpora: II, Volume 19 Issue 2,
pages 243–262.

Ted Briscoe, Claire Grover, Bran Boguraev, and
John. Carroll. 1987. The derivation of a
grammatically-indexed lexicon from the long-
man dictionary of contemporary english. In
Proceeding of ACL ’87.

Yejin Choi and Claire Cardie. 2006. Joint extrac-
tion of entities and relations for opinion recog-
nition. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2006.

Eileen Fitzpatrick and Naomi Sager. 1980. The
Lexical subclasses of the LSP English Gram-
mar. Linguistic String Project, New York Uni-
versity.

Eileen Fitzpatrick and Naomi Sager. 1981. The
lexical subclasses of the lsp english grammar.
In N. Sager (ed), Natural Language Information
Processing, Addison- Wesley, Reading, Ma.

Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2006. Extract-
ing opinions, opinion holders, and topics ex-
pressedin online news media text. In Proceed-
ings of ACL/COLING Workshop on Sentiment
and Subjectivity in Text.

Christian Kohlschütter, Peter Fankhauser, and
Wolfgang Nejdl. 2010. Boilerplate detection us-
ing shallow text features. In Proc. 3rd ACM
International Conference on Web Search and
Data Mining (WSDM 2010) New York, USA.

Daniel Marcu and Abdessamad Echihabi. 2002.
An unsupervised approach to recognizing dis-
course relations. In Proc. ACL ’02.

Haris Papageorgiou, Prokopis Prokopidis, Voula
Giouli, and Stelios Piperidis. 2000. A unified
POS tagging architecture and its application to
Greek. In Proceedings of the 2nd Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC
2000), Athens, Greece, pages 1455–1462.

Prokopis Prokopidis, Byron Georgantopoulos, and
Haris Papageorgiou. 2011. A suite of NLP tools
for Greek. In Proceedings of the 10th Interna-
tional Conference of Greek Linguistics (ICGL
2011), Komotini, Greece.

J. Ross Quinlan. 1992. C4.5: Programs for Ma-
chine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo,
CA, USA.

Swapna Somasundaran and Janyce Wiebe. 2010.
Recognizing stances in ideological on-line de-
bates. In Proc. NAACL HLT Workshop on Com-
putational Approaches to Analysis and Genera-
tion of Emotion in Text (CAAGET 2010)

Swapna Somasundaran, Janyce Wiebe, and Joseph
Ruppenhofer. 2008. Discourse level opinion in-
terpretation. In Proceedings of the 22nd Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics - Volume 1, COLING ’08, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Assimakis Tseronis. 2011. From connectives to
argumentative markers: A quest for markers
of argumentative moves and of related aspects
of argumentative discourse. Argumentation,
25(4):427–444.

54


