










































Generic noun phrases and annotation of coreference and bridging relations in the Prague Dependency Treebank


Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop & Interoperability with Discourse, pages 103–111,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generic noun phrases and annotation of coreference and bridging re-

lations in the Prague Dependency Treebank 

Anna Nedoluzhko 

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University in Prague 

nedoluzko@ufal.mff.cuni.cz 
 

 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper discusses the problem of annotating 

coreference relations with generic expressions 

in a large scale corpus. We present and ana-

lyze some existing theories of genericity, 

compare them to the approaches to generics 

that are used in the state-of-the-art coreference 

annotation guidelines and discuss how coref-

erence of generic expressions is processed in 

the manual annotation of the Prague Depend-

ency Treebank. After analyzing some typical 

problematic issues we propose some partial 

solutions that can be used to enhance the 

quality and consistency of the annotation. 

1 Introduction 

One of the most problematic issues of anno-

tating coreference in large scale corpora is 

processing coreference of generic expres-

sions. The decision to annotate generic noun 
phrases produces a significant decrease of inter-

annotator agreement. On the other hand, neglect-

ing coreference relations between generic ex-

pressions causes a significant loss of information 

on the text coherence that is primordially the rea-

son for annotating coreference relations at all. It 

also causes the inconsistency of annotation 

guidelines: due to relatively vague definition of 

genericity, it is almost impossible to exclude all 

coreference relations between generics from the 

annotation. 

In the Prague Dependency Treebank (hence-

forth PDT), we tried to distinguish coreference 

relations between nominal expressions with spe-

cific and generic reading. Comparing the inter-

annotator agreement for these groups shows that 

the agreement for noun coreference with specific 

reading is significantly higher than the agreement 

for the coreference of generic NPs (F1-measure 

0.705 for specific NPs and 0.492 for generics
1
). 

Moreover, the manual analysis of the cases of 

disagreement of specific NPs coreference 

demonstrates that most cases of disagreement are 

those where NPs in question may be interpreted 

generically. 

Having formulated a set of criteria which help 

identifying generic expressions, there still re-

mains a wide range of typical examples which 

can have generic interpretation, though not nec-

essarily. In this paper, we try to delimit the set of 

generic NPs presenting the overview of some 

existing theories of genericity (Sections 2 and 

3.1) and compare them to the stand-of-the-art 

coreference annotation guidelines (Section 3.2). 

Then we present our approach to annotating co-

reference with generic noun phrases in PDT 

where we apply the presented theories to coref-

erence and bridging relations annotation (Section 

4). We analyze typical problematic issues (Sec-

tion 5) and discuss some possible solutions (Sec-

tion 6). 

2 What are generics and can they co-
refer? 

Generic reference is a term commonly used in 

linguistic semantics to describe noun-phrase ref-

erence to kinds of things (Carlson 2005). In dif-

ferent languages, generic reference may be 

expressed by noun phrases with definite and 

indefinite articles and with determinerless 

expressions quite generally. In languages 

without articles, the determinerless form is 

typically used (Carlson 2005, Hlavsa 1975; 

Padučeva 1985, etc.).  

                                                 
1
 F1-measure for generics is closer to inter-annotator 

agreement for bridging relations (0.460 for all anno-

tated data). 

103



Compare some typical examples for generic 

noun reference (different uses of a/the dog(s)) in 

English, German and Czech: 

English:  Dogs bark – The dog has evolved 

from the Jackal  – A dog knows when it is time 

for his walk
2
.  

German: Hunde beißen. Der Hund stammt 

vom Schakal ab. Ein Hund weiß// Hunde wissen, 

wenn es Zeit für seinen Spaziergang ist. 

Czech (non-article language): Psi štěkají. – 

Pes je šelma. 

The examples above demonstrate that generic 

noun phrases cannot be recognized by their 

forms (this fact  was pointed out in Lyons 1999, 

Carlson 2005, etc.). While in English the plural 

form of the definite can only marginally have 

generic reference, in German, which is closely 

related to English, the plural definite may imply 

generic reference quite easily. In Romance lan-

guages, the form of bare plural with generics is 

prohibited (Delfitto 2006) and even in languages 

without articles, generics with determiners are 

not so rare (see e.g. common examples with 

Czech in Nedoluzhko 2003)
3
. This leads to a 

suggestion that genericity is not a primitive cate-

gory of semantic or syntactic description. 

Theoretical studies like Carlson (1980) appeal 

to typical examples with noun phrases referring 

to specific objects. A discussion on his approach 

(Paducheva 1985, Delfitto 2006, Lyons 1999) 

concerns theoretical issues that are analyzed in 

similar typical cases. 

When analyzing real corpus examples we en-

counter a lot of cases indicating that not all ge-

neric expressions are generic in the same way. 

Problems with processing generic expressions 

arise also from the lack of a universally accepted 

theory of genericity which would be applicable 

to the real texts analysis. 

Generic reading is possible not only with re-

ferring nouns, but also with mass nouns, group 

nouns, abstract nouns, quantifiers and 

deverbatives. Look at the example (1). Everyone 

should probably agree that the homeless is a ge-

neric expression, but is the same true about the 

homeless population? 

                                                 
2
  However, Carlson –  Pelletier (1995) do not consid-

er a dog in the last sentence to be generic, because it 

cannot be combined with kind-level predicates. 
3
 It may be possible to determine generics in sentenc-

es with so-called “kind-level predicates” (Carlson 

2005), they interact with aspectual distinctions in 

verbs (Lyons 1999) etc, but these approaches are not 

applicable to real-text data. 

(1) Your comments implied we had discov-

ered that the principal cause of homeless-

ness is to be found in the large numbers of 

mentally ill and substance-abusing people 

in the homeless population. [...] The study 

shows that nearly 40% of the homeless pop-

ulation is made up of women and children 

and that only 25% of the homeless exhibits 

some combination of drug, alcohol and 

mental problems
4
. 

Another relevant question is if generic ex-

pressions referring to the same kind can be 

considered coreferent in the same sense as 

noun phrases with a specific reading. Ac-

cording to Carlson’s (1980) and Lyons‘ (1999) 
claim, generics refer to classes in the similar way 

as proper names refer to unique entities. In this 

sense, coreference of generic expressions appears 

to be obvious. On the other hand, Carlson’s ob-

servations seem to be quite language-specific. 

Arguing against a quantificational analysis of 

bare plurals with generic meaning, he claims that 

the sentence Miles wants to meet policemen can-

not be assigned a reading according to which 

“there are certain policemen that Miles wants to 

meet,” whereas this interpretation is naturally 

available in the case of Miles wants to meet some 

policemen. This is not the case of languages 

without articles where plural forms can be as-

signed any reading regardless of the use of the 

quantifier
5
. Generally, we suppose that quantifi-

cational (or predicative) interpretation of generic 

expressions in different languages is not impos-

sible (see for example almost obligatory predica-

tive reading of Czech exporters in (7)). However, 

this fact does not necessarily exclude the coref-

erence relation between them. Eventually, the 

discourse deixis as reference to events is also 

often considered and annotated as coreference. 

3 Recent research on generics 

We believe that it would not be a strong exag-

geration to claim that theoretical and computa-

tional linguistics have different goals as concerns 

their approach to genericity. The challenge of 

linguistic research is to find out more about the 

essence of genericity. The aim of annotating is to 

                                                 
4
 The example comes from the Prague English De-

pendency Treebank (PEDT, Hajič et al. 2009) 
5
 Actually, even in English not all bare plurals should 

necessarily refer to kinds. In modern journalistic texts, 

the tendency to omit articles appears to be quite 

strong. 

104



make the group of generics as clear as possible, 

in order to  reach higher agreement and better 

results of automatic processing. 

It is also generally known that the features of 

an annotation must be adapted to the task it is 

designed for. However, the existing large-scale 

annotated corpora (especially those prepared on 

university basis) are often meant to be multi-

purpose. They serve both as train data for (dif-

ferent!) automatic tasks and as a rich manually 

annotated material for linguistic research.  

In what follows, we complete the theoretical 

overview (started in section 2), present the anno-

tation approach and look for the common points. 

3.1 Linguistic research 

There is a rich variety of linguistic approaches to 

genericity. Even as concerns the terminology 

with generics, it is quite inconsistent and cannot 

be relied on with much certainty. According to 

different researchers, generic NPs are considered 

to be either referring to classes (Carlson –  Pelle-

tier 1995, Mendoza 2004) or non-referring (ra-

ther predicating) classifications over kinds 

(Paducheva 1985), beeing able to have specific 

and non-specific interpretation (Mendoza 2004, 

Smelev 1996) and divided from non-specific NPs 

as a separate group (Carlson –  Pelletier 2005, 

Paducheva 1985). 

Carlson (1980) represents the most influential 

approach to genericity that has been elaborated 

in the framework of formal semantics and gener-

ative grammar. Calson’s hypothesis is that gener-

ics are kind-referring expressions, roughly names 

for kinds, as opposed to individual-referring ex-

pressions that refer to individuals or groups of 

individuals. In his approach, there is a difference 

between generic reference and individual non-

specific reference, i.e. reference to an open set of 

individual objects. For example, NP lions that 

have toothaches is not generic, its reference is 

individual (i.e. non-generic) and non-specific, 

which can be demonstrated by the fact that it 

cannot be substituted by the definite NP the lion 

that has toothache (such NP can have only indi-

vidual reading). However, the problem with this 

criterion is that it is clearly language-specific (it 

cannot be applied at all to Czech, for instance). 

3.2 Annotation coreference with generic 
expression 

Let’s now have a look on how generic NPs are 

processed in annotation projects with anaphoric 

and coreference annotation. 

In some projects, e.g. ARRAU and other corpora 

based on the MATE coreference annotation 

scheme (Poesio 2004), genericity is marked as a 

part of lexico-semantical information of the noun 

(an attribute generic-yes/no/undersp is 

applied to each noun). This information is con-

templated in the annotation of identical corefer-

ence.  Identical coreference for generics is also 

annotated in AnCora (Recasens 2010) and PDT 

(Nedoluzhko 2011).  

In other projects, annotation of coreference 

with generic NPs may be excluded from annota-

tion schemes that are geared towards a reliable 

annotation of large text quantities. For example, 

generics are not annotated for coreference in On-

tonotes (Pradhan et al. 2007), TüBA-DZ (Hin-

richs et al. 2004) and PoCoS (Krasavina-

Chiarchos 2007).  

However, even if an annotation scheme ex-

plicitly says that coreference of generic NPs is 

not annotated, there are some borderline cases 

where coreference can still be annotated quite 

systematically. So, TüBA annotates coreference 

with the nominal expression if it appears repeat-

edly in the text with the same interpretation. In 

Ontonotes, the explicit anaphora with it in the 

anaphoric position is commonly annotated for 

coreference: 

(2) Still, any change in East Germany has 

enormous implications, for both East and 

West. It raises the long-cherished hopes of 

many Germans for reunification
6
. 

Furthermore, systematic exclusion of generic 

expressions from the annotation will force the 

coders not to mark the cases like (3) and (4)
7
. 

From the point of view of applied tasks and au-

tomatic coreference resolvers it will lead to the 

loss of relevant information and to an essential 

complification of automatic tools. 

(3) The sterilizing gene is expressed just be-

fore the pollen is about to develop and it 

deactivates the anthers of every flower in 

the plant. Mr. Leemans said this genetic 

manipulation doesn't hurt the growth of that 

plant. 

(4) A workshop needs to be planned careful-

ly. Otherwise it may turn in a disaster. 

As far as we know, there are no significant 

projects for annotating coreference separately for 

                                                 
6
 This example is taken from PEDT, to which the On-

tonotes coreference was applied. 
7
 Examples come from PEDT. 

105



generic, unspecific non-generic and specific ex-

pressions.  

4 Coreference annotation in Prague 
Dependency Treebank 

In this section we describe how generic expres-

sions (or more precisely, what we decided to 

consider generic expressions) are annotated in 

the Prague Dependency Treebank.  

Annotation of coreference and discourse rela-

tions is a project related to the Prague Dependen-

cy Treebank 2.5 (PDT; Bejček et al. 2011). It 

represents a new manually annotated layer of 

language description, above the existing layers of 

the PDT (morphology, analytic syntax and tecto-

grammatics) and it captures linguistic phenome-

na from the perspective of discourse structure 

and coherence. This special layer of the treebank 

consists of annotation of nominal coreference 

and bridging relations (Nedoluzhko et al. 2009), 

discourse connectives, discourse units linked by 

them and semantic relations between these units 

(Mladová 2011).  

Considering the fact that Czech has no definite 

article (hence no formal possibility to exclude 

non-anaphoric coreference), our annotation is 

aimed at coreference relations regardless to their 

anaphoricity. 

Coreference relations are marked for noun 

phrases with specific and generic reference sepa-

rately – coreference of specific noun phrases – 

type SPEC, coreference of generic noun phrases 

– type GEN
8
.  Bridging relations, which mark 

some semantic relations between non-

coreferential entities, are also annotated in PDT. 

The following types of bridging relations are dis-

tinguished: PART-OF (e.g. room - ceiling), 

SUBSET (students - some students) and FUNCT 

(state - president) traditional relations, CON-

TRAST for coherence relevant discourse oppo-

sites (this year - last year), ANAF for explicitly 

anaphoric relations without coreference or one of 

the semantic relations mentioned above (rainbow 

- that word) and the further underspecified group 

REST
9
.  

As seen from the point of view of the annotat-

ed groups, generic NPs are explicitly marked 

                                                 
8
 The reason for this decision is the lack of semantic 

information assigned to nouns themselves, as it is 

done e.g. for Gnome in MATE sceme (Poesio 2004). 
9
 For detailed classification of identity coreference 

and bridging relations used in PDT, see e.g. Ne-

doluzhko et al. 2011. 

only with the second element of the coreference 

relation. However, this distinction remains un-

registered by bridging relations. Moreover, it 

appears to be possible (and even not so uncom-

mon) that a coreference relation was annotated 

between a generic and a non-generic noun 

phrase. These cases are interpreted as either (lin-

guistically) ambiguous or insufficiently classified 

by the guidelines. For example, in (5), the specif-

ic noun phrase tento národ (=this nation) is core-

ferent with generic plural Romy (=the Gipsies): 

(5) Nic z toho se však nevyrovná míře 

neštěstí, které Romy postihlo v letech druhé 

světové války. Spolu se Židy byli označeni 

za méněcennou rasu a stali se objektem pa-

tologických fašistických opatření, jejichž cí-

lem byla úplná genocida tohoto národa. (= 

Nothing of this, however, compares to the 

misfortune that befell the Gipsies during the 

Second World War. Together with the Jews, 

they were called an inferior race and be-

came the object of pathological fascist 

measures, their purpose being the complete 

genocide of the nation.) 

Annotation rules for generics in PDT are de-

scribed in detail in sections 4.1-4.3. 

4.1 Type coreference of generic NPs 

Coreference relations between the same types 

are annotated as coreference of generic NPs (at-

tribute coref_text, type GEN). Cf. (6) 

where antecedent generic drug is pronominalized 

in the anaphoric position: 

(6) Droga je tedy tak účinná, že ten, kdo ji  

užívá, se snadno dostane do „pohody“ kou-

řením nebo šňupáním. (= The drug is so ef-

fective that the person who takes it can easi-

ly achieve the state of “coolness” by smok-

ing or snorting.) 

The “generic coreference” is more frequent for 

plural forms (7): 

(7) Nová striktní omezení vlády SR proti 

českým exportérům. Již několik dnů je všeo-

becně známo, že ochranářská opatření slov-

enské vlády proti českým exportérům se 

dotýkají zejména oblasti obchodu s po-

travinami a zemědělskými produkty. (= The 

new Slovak government's strict restrictions 

on Czech exporters. It’s commonly known 

for several days that protective measures of 

Slovakia's government against Czech ex-

porters apply mostly to the trade of food 

and agricultural products.) 

106



Textual coreference of type GEN is also anno-

tated for the majority of abstract nouns (see more 

detail in Section 5.5), cf. (8): 

(8) Tímto faktorem je podnikatel-inovátor, 

který se snaží o zisk, a proto logicky nemůže 

existovat ve stavu statiky, která nezná ani 

zisk, ani ztrátu. (= This factor is the enter-

preneur-innovator, who is trying to gain 

profit, and hence, logically, cannot exist in 

a static state, where there is no profit or 

loss.) 

4.2. Classes and subclasses 

The relation “category – sub-category” is 

marked as a bridging relation of the SUBSET 

type. Cf. (9).  

(9) I když konzervativní Anglie jeho čin od-

soudila, … Británie se pro žvýkačku stala 

bránou do Evropy. Ještě jeden milník si 

zaslouží zmínku – zrod bublinové žvýkačky 

(= Although conservative England did not 

accept it, ... for the gum, Britain has become 

the gateway to Europe. Another milestone is 

worth mentioning, that is the birth of a bub-

ble gum.) 

Annotating the SUBSET relation with generic 

expressions appears to be quite a serious prob-

lem. This relation has a different meaning com-

pared to the SUBSET relation of noun phrases 

with specific reading. However, such relations 

may be quite relevant for cohesion.  

4.3 The relation “type – entity” 

If a specific mention is used in the text af-

ter a generic mention (or the contrary), the 

relation between them is annotated as a 
bridging relation of the SUBSET type. Cf. (10): 

(10) Nový VW Golf je vybaven motorem 

o síle... Dostali jsme možnost se novým 

golfem projet. (= The new VW Golf is 

equipped with an engine power ... We 

had an opportunity to ride a new golf.) 

Similar, but not the same is the relation be-

tween a set of specific objects and a non-specific 

element in (11): 

(11) [volontéři] Absolvovali školení v první 

pomoci pro člověka v nouzi . […]Když dítě 

zavolá, dostane buď radu hned, nebo si s 

ním volontér domluví další hovor. (=The 

volunteers have been trained in first aid for 

people in need. [...] When a child calls, it 

will get get an advice immediately, or a vol-

unteer will arrange a meeting with him.) 

5 Problem cases with generics in PDT 

Although the cases presented in sections 4.1-4.3 

do not look very reliable, they are still consid-

ered to be relatively clear as compared to what 

follows in 5.1 -5.6.  The decisions made in anno-

tation guidelines for these cases are often case-

sensitive, might be in some cases contra-

intuitive, and they result in high inter-annotator 

disagreement. 

5.1 Non-generic non-specific NPs 

In case of non-generic non-specific noun 

phrases, when antecedent and anaphoric noun 

phrases have the same t-lemmas and the same 

scope, but anaphoric NP does not have a deter-

miner, coreference of type GEN is annotated. 

Although this kind of relation does not contribute 

much to text coherence, we still tend to mark this 

relation, also for the reason that the border be-

tween what should be annotated and what should 

not is not always easy to determine.  

(12) Když si dítě bude přát, aby se o jeho 

problému nikdo z rodiny nebo školy ne-

dozvěděl, musíme to respektovat, vysvětluje 

Jana Drtilová . […] Většinou se stává, že 

dítě ani nechce, aby se rodina  dozvěděla, že 

se nám ozval. Linka by neměla rodinu 

nahrazovat, ale doplňovat. (= If a child de-

sires that no one from the family or school 

would find out about his problems, we have 

to respect that, says Jana Drtilova. […] It is 

usually the case that the child does not even 

want for the family to know that he contact-

ed us.  The hotline should not replace the 

family, but to supplement it.)  

There are also cases of non-specific non-

generic NPs the referential value of which is 

provided by syntactic factors. These are so-called 

contexts with removed assertiveness, e.g. sen-

tences with modal verbs (can, want, need), im-

perative sentences, future tense, questions, nega-

tions, disjunctions, irreality, uncertainty and so 

on. Non-specific NPs are often used with per-

formative verbs, propositional attitudes (want, 

think, consider) and some constructions as e.g. in 

English such as, in Czech jde o (=lit. It is about), 

takový X (=such X), etc. These contexts can give 

a non-specific reading to an expression, even if it 

actually has a specific meaning. Cf (13), where  

107



(13) Ale jedna věc je jistá - palác bude 

stavebně předáván letos na podzim. […] 

Provoz tak obrovské budovy přijde ročně 

na desítky milionů korun. (=lit. But one 

thing is certain – the reconstruction of 

the palace will be finished this fall. [...] It 

will cost tens of millions crowns, to run 

such a huge building.) 

5.2 Borderline cases between coreference of 
specific and generic NPs 

In some cases, it is hard to decide if a noun 

phrase has a specific or a generic reading. Most-

ly, both interpretations are possible. There are no 

firm rules for an unambiguous assignment of the 

types in those cases; the type is chosen on the 

basis of the available context and the annotator’s 

consideration. Uncertainty of the choice between 

generic and specific reference is common with 

some typical groups of noun phrases, first of all 

with those that have or may have modifications. 

Cf. pořad (=TV show) in (14) that may have a 

temporal modification. The obligatoriness of this 

modification influences the annotator’s decision 

if (s)he should read it as a generic or a specific 

NP. For this case, the specific reading was cho-

sen.  

(14) K tématu pořadu TV NOVA TABU 

“Zrak za bílou hůl” byl přizván ke kon-

zultaci Oldřich Čálek. Kateřina Hamrová, 

dramaturgyně pořadu, TV NOVA. (= To 

consult the topic of the TV NOVA show TA-

BU "Vision for a white cane", Ulrich Čálek 

was invited. Catherine Hamrová, the dram-

atist of the show, TV NOVA) 

Also, for example for (15), the detergent Toto 

can be understood as a specific (a name for a de-

tergent brand) or generic (the type of the deter-

gent of such brand). Also in this case, the specif-

ic reference is preferred in PDT: 

(15) U detergentu Toto jsme například řešili 

problém s udržením stálé kvality, protože 

jednotlivé partie byly nevyvážené. In-

vestovali jsme dva miliony korun do nákupu 

pásových vah, zpřesnili dávkování a jakost 

pracího prášku stabilizovali. (=For exam-

ple, with the Toto detergent we face prob-

lems with maintaining consistent quality... 

We invested two million crowns... and stabi-

lized the quality of the detergent. ) 

5.3 Borderline cases between coreference of 
generic NPs and zero relation 

There is also a borderline between the cases of 

coreference of the generic NPs and the cases 

where it makes no sense to mark a coreferential 

relation. We do not annotate “generic corefer-

ence” if noun phrases have different scope (i.e. 

they refer to different sets of objects), e.g. ženy 

(= women) – ženy v 19. století (= women in 19
th
 

century). In this case, the bridging relation of the 

type SUBSET is annotated instead. In other 

problematic cases, annotators usually apply to 

their intuition and the text coherence. If both say 

no, no coreference is annotated. 

5.4 Coreference with measure NPs and oth-
er NPs with a ‘container’ meaning 

In PDT, a special group of numerals and 

nouns with a ‘container’ meaning is singled out. 

They  have  the  modification  in  their  valency  

frames denoting  the  content  (people,  things,  

substance etc.) of a container expressed by the 

governing noun. These ‘container’ expressions 

are e.g. nouns and numerals denoting groups, 

number or amount, sets, collections, portions, 

etc. (skupina lidí (=group of people), počet akcií 

(=number of stocks), stádo krav (=herd of cows), 

dostatek financí (=abundance of finance), 

milióny židů (=millions of Jews), sklenice piva 

(=glass of beer), deset procent obyvatel (=ten 

percent of population)). 

The PDT convention on annotating corefer-

ence by NPs with a ‘container’ meaning follows 

the maximum-scope rule, i.e., if possible, the 

governing (‘container’) node is linked by a co-

reference link (16). The modifications of con-

tainers may be coreferential themselves inde-

pendently of the ‘containers’ (17) 

(16) Absolutní většina lidí závislých na her-

oinu je příliš mladá na to, aby si #PersPron 

pamatovala rozklad a zesláblost generace 

sedmdesátých let, takže odvrácenou stránku 

„fantastického“ života si #PersPron 

mnohdy vůbec neuvědomí. (=Absolute ma-

jority of people addicted to heroin is too 

young to remember the decomposition and 

enfeeblement of the generation of seventies, 

so they (lit. ‘she’ referring to ‘majority’) do 

not realize the downside of the "fantastic" 

life.) 

(17) V běžném vzorku sedmdesátých let byla 

pouze 3–4 procenta čisté suroviny. b. Nyní 

jsou k dostání balíčky obsahující až 80 pro-

cent čistého heroinu. (=In an average sam-

108



ple from the seventies, there were only 3-4 

percent of pure raw material. Currently, 

one can get packages containing up to 80 

percent of pure heroin.) 

Coreference of ‘containers’ can be problemat-

ic from the point of view of their generic or spe-

cific interpretation. Nouns referring to groups 

may refer generically to the elements belonging 

to that group or specifically to the group itself. In 

the following example, there has been a disa-

greement between annotators concerning the ge-

neric/specific reading of the NP skupina 

(=group). We believe that this kind of disagree-

ment could be solved by separating the group of 

non-specific non-generic references. 

(18) Podle výzkumů ve vyspělých zemích se 

ukazuje, že lidí, kteří potřebují speciální 

služby, je daleko víc. U nás by tuto skupinu 

tvořilo asi tak 70000 osob. Jsou to hlavně 

starší lidé se zbytky zraku a slabozrací. Tato 

skupina stojí úplně mimo a má tak život 

ještě více ztížený, protože mnozí o těchto 

službách ani nevědí. (=According to the re-

search in the developed countries, there are 

many more people who need special ser-

vices. In our country, the group of such 

people would count about 70,000 individu-

als. They are mainly older people sighted 

and visually impaired. This group is com-

pletely off, their life being even more diffi-

cult, because they don’t even know about 

many of these services.) 

More complicated are the cases where coref-

erence chains for ‘containers’ and their modifica-

tions intersect. In (19), a coreference link for the 

strikers in b. should lead to three and a half 

thousand workers but in c., the number of strik-

ers changes, so the container modification work-

ers should be marked as coreferent with the 

strikers in b. For such cases, coreference of type 

GEN is used in PDT. 

(19) a. Tří a půl tisíce dělníků vyhlásili 

stávku. b. Stávkující žádají zvýšení platů o 

šest procent. c. Do 8. března se počet 

stávkujících může zdvojnásobit. (a. Three 

and a half thousand workers went on strike. 

b. The strikers demand six percent of salary 

increase. c. By 8 March, the number of 

strikers may double.)  

However, in this case, the problem is rather 

specific. Here, počet stávkujících  (=the number 

of strikers) does not actually refer to the strikers 

(as it would e.g. in tisíc stávkujících (=thousand 

strikers) but to the number itself and that is the 

reason for coreference annotation to strikers. In 

such cases, the number does not serve as a ‘con-

tainer’ in proper sense. 

5.5 Coreference with abstract nouns 

Processing coreference of abstract nouns 

seems to be in some respects close to that of ge-

nerics. Abstract nouns do not refer to a type, but 

to a notion. However, this notion is unique in the 

same way as type is unique to the generic ex-

pression which refers to it. Moreover, abstract 

nouns are close to predicative and quantification-

al interpretation and there are no formal rules 

distinguishing them from concrete NPs and 

deverbatives. They also result in high ambiguity 

when annotated for coreference. 

There have been several changes in the guide-

lines for the annotation of coreference and bridg-

ing relations with abstract nouns. Finally, we 

decided to distinguish between “specific” and 

“generic” abstracts. If subjects to annotation 

have complements with specific reference, or 

they have unambiguously specific reference 

themselves, coreference between them is anno-

tated as textual coreference, type SPEC (20). In 

case of even a little doubt, we annotate textual 

coreference, type GEN (8).  

(20) Ve specifických podmínkách české 

ekonomiky růst nezaměstnanosti v letech 

1991–1993 značně zaostal za poklesem 

HDP. […] Nejméně dvouprocentní růst 

české ekonomiky  již letos. (=In the specific 

conditions of the Czech economy the growth 

of unemployment... This year at least a two 

percent growth of the Czech economy.) 

5.6 Coreference with verbal nouns 

With verbal nouns, both specifying and gener-

ic reference are possible as well. Textual corefer-

ence with verbal nouns is annotated according to 

the following strategy: 

- If both verbal nouns are specific, they re-
fer to a specific situation and their possi-

ble arguments are coreferential, the rela-

tion between them is annotated as textual 

coreference, type SPEC, cf. (21); 

- If both verbal nouns are generic, or rather 
if their arguments are generic, the relation 

between them is annotated as textual co-

reference, type GEN. Cf. (22); 

- If both verbal nouns are specific, but their 
arguments are not coreferential, coreferen-

109



tial relation between them is not annotat-

ed.; 

- If one verbal noun is specific and the other 
is generic, coreferential relation between 

them is not annotated. 

(21) Vedení Pojišťovny Investiční a Poštov-

ní banky nás upozornilo, že jejich pojišťov-

na nebyla zařazena mezi ty, které umožňují 

úrazové připojištění, ač tuto službu posky-

tují. Omlouváme se za toto nedopatření, 

dotyčná redaktorka byla pokutována. (=The 

Insurance Investment and the Post Bank 

management has notified us that their in-

surance company was not included among 

those that allow casualty insurance, alt-

hough it provides this service. We apologize 

for this oversight, the editor who made the 

mistake was fined.) 

(22) Rychlé, avšak i bezpečné vypořádání. 

Rychlost vypořádání burzovních obchodů v 

čase odpovídá podle Jiřího Béra potřebám. 

(= Fast, yet safe transaction. According to 

Jiřího Bér’s opinion, the speed of transac-

tion corresponds to the needs.) 

However, such instructions are quite ambigu-

ous themselves, because, firstly, it is not always 

clear, what a specific verbal noun means and, 

secondly and most importantly, verbal nouns 

may have more than one argument, one of them 

being generic and other – specific (Pergler 2010). 

Moreover, deverbatives themselves may refer to 

specific events that has already happened (thus 

tending to type SPEC if coreferent) or to hypo-

thetic or typical ones (then, in case of corefer-

ence, marked as GEN). 

6 Discussion 

Processing coreference of generic expressions, 

even in manual annotation, raises a number of 

problems, both theoretical and the applied, like 

complification of coreference resolving. As we 

have seen, the problem of generics is very lan-

guage-specific. Each resolving system trying to 

process coreference for generics will have to be 

oriented towards the specific linguistic descrip-

tion of the language in question. But even so, 

there are many possibilities of expressing generic 

expressions in every language, thus making the 

formal problem of extracting generics even in 

one separate language extremely difficult. 

 Generic expressions are analyzed relatively in 

more detail for English (Carlson 1980, Carlson -  

Pelletier 1995). However, this research relies 

heavily on language forms, it is not based on a 

large-scale corpus and it seems to be too theoret-

ical to be easily adapted to a large corpus (manu-

al or automatic) processing. On the other hand, 

Carlson’s classification of the reference reading 

of nouns could be used in practice for the distinc-

tion between generic and non-specific non-

generic NPs. Using our experience, we believe 

that it would make the annotation more con-

sistent: there would be less ambiguity between 

specific and generic readings. However, being 

helpful in resolving the cases from section 5.1, 

this decision would not resolve the majority of 

the remaining problematic cases. There still re-

main borderline cases with specific noun expres-

sions with possible valency frames (see 5.2), co-

reference with abstract and verbal nouns and so 

on. Separating the group of NPs with non-

specific reading, the coders should concentrate 

on quite specific semantic issues when annotat-

ing. Moreover, annotating more groups of nouns 

is always a costly and time-consuming task. 

From the theoretical point of view, one could 

imagine a scale: from noun expressions with 

concrete meaning and specific reading (say 

named entities) up to abstract nouns and 

deverbatives with generic reading. However, 

such an approach will not help to process generic 

NPs in large-scale corpora. 

7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we discussed the problem of anno-

tating coreference with generic expressions. 

Considering theoretical approaches has revealed 

that they tend to be very language specific. State-

of-the-art in annotating coreference relations for 

generic NPs needs unification but this is compli-

cated, as the formal representation of genericity 

differs dramatically from language to language 

and can be hardly unified. We have presented an 

approach to annotation of generic expressions in 

PDT and analyzed some typical problematic ex-

amples. We consider this issue to be far from 

being solved. Both, theoretical research and large 

data approaches should be further investigated.  

 

Acknowledgments 

We gratefully acknowledge support from the 

Grant Agency of the Czech Republic (grants 

P406/12/0658 and P406/2010/0875).  

 

110



References  

Eduard Bejček, Jan Hajič, Jarmila Panevová, Jan 

Popelka, Lenka Smejkalová, Pavel Straňák, Magda 

Ševčíková, Jan Štěpánek, Josef Toman and Zdeněk 

Žabokrtský. 2011. Prague Dependency Treebank 

2.5. Data/software, Charles University in Prague, 

MFF, ÚFAL, Praha, Czech Republic 

(http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.5/). 

Greg Carlson. 1980. Reference to kinds in English. 

New York: Garland. 

Greg Carlson. 2005. Generic Reference. In The Ency-

clopedia of Language and Linguistics, 2nd Ed. 

Elsevier. 

Greg Carlson and F.J. Pelletier (eds.). 1995. The Ge-

neric Book. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Denis Delfitto. 2006. Bare plurals. In Martin Everaert 

and Henk van Riemsdijk (eds.) The Blackwell 

Companion to Syntax. Blackwell Publishing, pp. 

214-259. 

Erhard Hinrichs, Sandra Kübler, Karin Naumann, 

Heike Telljohann, Julia Trushkina und Heike 

Zinsmeister. 2004. Recent Developments in Lin-

guistic Annotations of the TüBa–D/Z Treebank. In 

Proceedings of the third workshop on treebanks 

and linguistic theories (TLT 2004). Tübingen. 

Jan Hajič, Silvie Cinková, Kristýna Čermáková, Lucie 

Mladová, Anja Nedolužko, Petr Pajas, Jiří 

Semecký, Jana Šindlerová, Josef Toman, Kristýna 

Tomšů, Matěj Korvas, Magdaléna Rysová, 

Kateřina Veselovská, Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2009. 

Prague English Dependency Treebank 1.0. Insti-

tute of Formal and Applied Linguistics. Charles 

University in Prague. 

Zdeněk Hlavsa. 1975. Denotace objektu a její 

prostředky v současné češtině. (Object denotation 

and its means in current Czech). Prague, Czech 

Republic. 

Olga Krasavina and Christian Chiarcos. 2007. PoCoS 

– Potsdam Coreference Scheme. In Proceedings of 

ACL 2007, Prague, Czech Republic. 

Christopher Lyons. 1999.  Definiteness. Cambridge: 

Cambridge University Press. 

Lucie Mladová. 2011. Annotating Discourse in Pra-

gue Dependency Treebank. In Workshop of Anno-

tation of Discourse Relations in Large Corpora at 

the conference Corpus Linguistics 2011 (CL 2011). 

Birmingham, Great Britain, July 2011. 

Anna Nedoluzhko, Jiří Mírovský, Radek Ocelák, Jiří 

Pergler. 2009. Extended Coreferential Relations 

and Bridging Anaphora in the Prague Dependency 

Treebank. In Proceedings of the 7th Discourse 

Anaphora and Anaphor Resolution Colloquium 

(DAARC 2009). Goa, India, 2009, pp. 1–16. 

Anna Nedoluzhko. 2003. Ukazovací zájmeno “ten” a 

generické jmenné fráze v češtině. In IV. 

mezinárodní setkání mladých lingvistů Olomouc 

2003: Jazyky v kontaktu, jazyky v konfliktu. Olo-

mouc: Univerzita Palackého v Olomouci, pp. 85 – 

96. 

Anna Nedoluzhko. 2011. Rozšířená textová korefer-

ence a asociační anafora. Koncepce anotace 

českých dat v Pražském závislostním korpusu. Pra-

gue, ÚFAL. 

Еlena V. Paducheva. 1985. Vyskazyvanie i ego 

sootnesennost s dejstviteľnosťju. Moskva. 

Jiří Pergler. 2010. Koreferenční řetězce s nespecific-

kou a generickou referencí v češtině (Coreferential 

chains with non-specific and generic reference in 

Czech). Unpublished bachelor thesis. Prague.  

Massimo Poesio. 2004. The MATE/GNOME Propo-

sals for Anaphoric Annotation, Revisited. In Pro-

ceedings of SIGDIAL. 

Sameer S. Pradhan, Eduard Hovy, Mitch Marcus, 

Martha Palmer, Lance Ramshaw, and Ralph Weis-

chedel. 2007. Ontonotes: A unified relational se-

mantic representation. In Proceedings of the Inter-

national Conference on Se-mantic Computing 

(ICSC-07). Washington, DC, pp. 517–526. 

Marta Recasens and Antònia Martí. 2010. AnCora-

CO: Coreferentially annotated corpora for Spanish 

and Catalan. In Language Resources and Evaluati-

on.  

Uriel Weinreich. 1966. On the Semantic Structure of 

Language. In Universals of Language, 2nd ed. 

Cambridge, Mass.  

 

 

111


