


































Detecting Bipolar Semantic Relations among Natural Language
Arguments with Textual Entailment: a Study.

Elena Cabrio and Serena Villata
INRIA

2004 Route des Lucioles BP93
06902 Sophia-Antipolis cedex, France.

{elena.cabrio, serena.villata}@inria.fr

Abstract

In the knowledge representation and rea-
soning research area, argumentation the-
ory aims at representing and reasoning
over information items called arguments.
In everyday life, arguments are reasons
to believe and reasons to act, and they
are usually expressed in natural language.
Even if ad-hoc natural language examples
are often provided in argumentation theory
works, no automated processing of such
natural language arguments is carried out,
making it impossible to exploit the results
of this research area in real world scenar-
ios. In this paper, we propose to adopt tex-
tual entailment to address this issue. In
particular, we discuss and evaluate, on a
sample of natural language arguments ex-
tracted from Debatepedia, the support and
attack relations among arguments in bipo-
lar abstract argumentation with respect to
the more specific notions of textual entail-
ment and contradiction.

1 Introduction

Until recent years, the idea of “argumentation” as
the process of creating arguments for and against
competing claims was a subject of interest to
philosophers and lawyers. In recent years, how-
ever, there has been a growth of interest in the
subject from formal and technical perspectives in
Artificial Intelligence, and a wide use of argumen-
tation technologies in practical applications. How-
ever, such applications are always constrained by
the fact that natural language arguments cannot
be automatically processed by such argumentation
technologies. Arguments are usually presented ei-
ther as the abstract nodes of a directed graph where
the edges represent the relations of attack and sup-
port (e.g., in abstract argumentation theory (Dung,

1995) and in bipolar argumentation (Cayrol and
Lagasquie-Schiex, 2005)) or as a set of premises
which lead to a certain conclusion thanks to the
application of a number of inference rules (e.g.,
in structured approaches to argumentation as AS-
PIC (Prakken, 2010)). Natural language argu-
ments are usually used in such works to provide
ad-hoc examples to help the reader in the under-
standing of the rationale behind the formal ap-
proach which is then introduced, but the need to
find automatic ways to process natural language
arguments to detect the semantic relations among
them is becoming more and more important.

To fill this gap, we propose to investigate se-
mantic inference approaches in Natural Language
Processing (NLP) in search of a suitable compu-
tational framework to account for bipolar argu-
mentation models. In particular, in this paper, we
study how bipolar semantic relations among nat-
ural language arguments can be discovered in an
automated way using textual entailment. This is-
sue breaks down into the following research ques-
tions: (1) what is the relation between the no-
tion of support in bipolar argumentation and the
notion of Textual Entailment (TE) in NLP?, and
given that additional attacks have been proposed
in the literature to highlight possible inconsisten-
cies arising among sets of arguments connected by
supports and attacks (2) what is the distribution
and thus the inner semantics of such additional at-
tacks in real data?

First, we study the relation among the notion
of support in bipolar argumentation (Cayrol and
Lagasquie-Schiex, 2005), and the notion of TE
in NLP (Dagan et al., 2009). In a recent pro-
posal, (Cabrio and Villata, 2012) represent the TE
relation extracted from NL texts as a support re-
lation in bipolar argumentation. This is a strong
assumption, and we aim at verifying on a sample
of real data from Debatepedia whether it is always
the case that support is equivalent to TE. In partic-

24



ular, for addressing this issue, we focus both on the
relations between support and entailment, and on
the relations between attack and contradiction. We
show that TE and contradiction are more specific
concepts than support and attack, but still hold in
most of the argument pairs.

Second, starting from the comparative study ad-
dressed by (Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex, 2011),
we consider four additional attacks proposed in the
literature: supported (if argument a supports argu-
ment b and b attacks argument c, then a attacks c)
and secondary (if a supports b and c attacks a, then
c attacks b) attacks (Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex,
2010), mediated attacks (Boella et al., 2010) (if
a supports b and c attacks b, then c attacks a),
and extended attacks (Nouioua and Risch, 2010;
Nouioua and Risch, 2011) (if a supports b and a
attacks c, then b attacks c). We investigate the dis-
tribution of these attacks in NL debates basing on a
data set extracted from Debatepedia, and we show
that all these models are verified in human debates,
even if with a different frequency.

The benefit of the proposed analysis is twofold.
First, it is used to verify, through a data driven
evaluation, the “goodness” of the proposed mod-
els of bipolar argumentation to be used in real set-
tings, going beyond ad hoc NL examples. Sec-
ond, it can be used to guide the construction of
cognitive agents whose major need is to achieve
a behavior as close as possible to the human one.
Thanks to such a kind of analysis, we highlight
that the mutual influence of these two related re-
search areas can actually bring to textual entail-
ment more than just an application scenario, but
it opens further challenges to be addressed with a
joint effort by the two research communities.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2
summarizes the basic notions of bipolar argumen-
tation, and describes the four kinds of additional
attacks we consider in this paper. Section 3 de-
scribes the experimental setting, and addresses the
analysis of the meaning of support and attack in
natural language dialogues, as well as the compar-
ative study on the existing additional attacks.

2 Bipolar argumentation

We provide the basic concepts of Dung’s (1995)
abstract argumentation.

Definition 1 (Abstract argumentation framework)
An abstract argumentation framework (AF) is a
pair 〈A,→〉 where A is a set of elements called

arguments and →⊆ A × A is a binary relation
called attack. We say that an argument a attacks
an argument b if and only if (a, b) ∈→.

Dung presents several acceptability semantics
that produce zero, one, or several sets of accepted
arguments called extensions. For more details,
see (Dung, 1995).

Bipolar argumentation frameworks, firstly pro-
posed by (Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex, 2005),
extend Dung’s framework taking into account both
the attack relation and the support relation. In par-
ticular, an abstract bipolar argumentation frame-
work is a labeled directed graph, with two labels
indicating either attack or support. In this paper,
we represent the attack relation by a → b, and the
support relation by a !!" b.
Definition 2 (Bipolar argumentation framework)
A bipolar argumentation framework (BAF) is a
tuple 〈A,→, !!"〉 where A is the set of elements
called arguments, and two binary relations over
A are called attack and support, respectively.

(Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex, 2011) address a
formal analysis of the models of support in bipolar
argumentation to achieve a better understanding of
this notion and its uses. In the rest of the paper,
we will adopt their terminology to refer to addi-
tional attacks, i.e., complex attacks. (Cayrol and
Lagasquie-Schiex, 2005; Cayrol and Lagasquie-
Schiex, 2010) argue about the emergence of new
kinds of attacks from the interaction between the
attacks and supports in BAF. In particular, they
specify two kinds of complex attacks called sec-
ondary and supported attacks, respectively.

Definition 3 (Secondary and supported attacks)
Let BAF = 〈A,→, !!"〉 where a, b ∈ A. A
supported attack for b by a is a sequence
a1R1 . . . Rn−1an, n ≥ 3, with a1 = a, an = b,
such that ∀i = 1 . . . n − 2, Ri =!!" and
Rn−1 =→. A secondary attack for b by a
is a sequence a1R1 . . . Rn−1an, n ≥ 3, with
a1 = a, an = b, such that R1 =→ and
∀i = 2 . . . n-1,Ri =!!".

According to the above definition, these attacks
hold in the first two cases depicted in Figure 1,
where there is a supported attack from a to c, and
there is a secondary attack from c to b.

The support relation has been specialized in
other approaches where new complex attacks
emerging from the combination of existing attacks
and supports are proposed. (Boella et al., 2010)

25



b ca a bc b ca a cb

Supported attack Secondary attack
(Extended attack 1)

Extended attack 2Mediated attack

Figure 1: Additional attacks emerging from the interaction of supports and attacks.

propose a deductive view of support in abstract ar-
gumentation where, given the support a !!" b the
acceptance of a implies the acceptance of b, and
the rejection of b implies the rejection of a. They
introduce a new kind of complex attack called me-
diated attacks (Figure 1).

Definition 4 (Mediated attacks) Let
BAF = 〈A,→, !!"〉 where a, b ∈ A. A
mediated attack on b by a is a sequence
a1R1 . . . Rn−2an−1 and anRn−1an−1, n ≥ 3,
with a1 = a, an−1 = b, an = c, such that
Rn−1 =→ and ∀i = 1 . . . n-2, Ri =!!".

(Nouioua and Risch, 2010; Nouioua and Risch,
2011) propose, instead, an account of support
called necessary support. In this framework, given
a !!" b then the acceptance of a is necessary to get
the acceptance of b, i.e., the acceptance of b im-
plies the acceptance of a. They introduce two new
kinds of complex attacks called extended attacks
(Figure 1). Note that the first kind of extended
attacks is equivalent to the secondary attacks in-
troduced by (Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex, 2005;
Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex, 2010), and that the
second case is the dual of supported attacks.

Definition 5 (Extended attacks) Let
BAF = 〈A,→, !!"〉 where a, b ∈ A. An
extended attack on b by a is a sequence
a1R1a2R2 . . . Rnan, n ≥ 3, with a1 = a, an = b,
such that R1 =→ and ∀i = 2 . . . n, Ri =!!", or
a sequence a1R1 . . . Rnan and a1Rpap, n ≥ 2,
with an = a, ap = b, such that Rp =→ and
∀i = 1 . . . n, Ri =!!".

All these models of support in bipolar argumen-
tation address the problem of how computing the
set of extensions from the extended framework
providing different kinds of solutions, i.e., intro-
ducing the notion of safety in BAF (Cayrol and
Lagasquie-Schiex, 2005), or computing the exten-
sions in the meta-level (Boella et al., 2010; Cay-
rol and Lagasquie-Schiex, 2010). In this paper,
we are not interested in discussing and evaluating
these different solutions. Our aim is to evaluate
how much these different models of support occur
and are effectively “exploited” in NL dialogues,

to provide a better understanding of the notion of
support and attack in bipolar argumentation.

We are aware that the notion of support is a
controversial one in the field of argumentation
theory. In particular, another view of support
sees this relation as a relation holding among the
premises and the conclusion of a structured ar-
gument, and not as another relation among the
arguments (Prakken, 2010). However, given the
amount of attention bipolar argumentation is re-
ceiving in the literature (Rahwan and Simari,
2009), a better account of this kind of frameworks
is required.

Another approach to support has been proposed
by (Oren and Norman, 2008; Oren et al., 2010)
where they distinguish among prima-facie argu-
ments and standard ones. They show how a set of
arguments described using Dung’s argumentation
framework can be mapped from and to an argu-
mentation framework that includes both attack and
support relations. The idea is that an argument can
be accepted only if there is an evidence support-
ing it, i.e., evidence is represented by means of
prima-facie arguments. In this paper, we concen-
trate our analysis on the abstract models of bipolar
argumentation proposed in the literature (Cayrol
and Lagasquie-Schiex, 2010; Boella et al., 2010;
Nouioua and Risch, 2011), and we leave as future
work the account of support in structured argu-
mentation and the model proposed by (Oren and
Norman, 2008; Oren et al., 2010).

3 Empirical studies on NL debates

Starting from (Cabrio and Villata, 2012), as a case
study to carry out our analysis we select Debate-
pedia1, the Wikipedia of debates. Specifically, De-
batepedia is an encyclopedia of pro and con ar-
guments where users can freely contribute to on-
line discussions about critical issues. We collect
a sample of the discussions extracting a set of ar-
guments from Debatepedia topics, as described in
Section 3.1. Even if our data set cannot be exhaus-
tive, the methodology we apply for the arguments
extraction aims at preserving the original structure

1http://idebate.org

26



of the debate, to make it as representative as possi-
ble of human daily natural language interactions.

Two different empirical studies are then pre-
sented in this section. The first one (Section 3.2)
starts from (Cabrio and Villata, 2012), and ex-
plores the relation among the notion of support
and attack in bipolar argumentation, and the se-
mantic inferences as defined in the NLP research
field. The second analysis (Section 3.3) starts in-
stead from the comparative study of (Cayrol and
Lagasquie-Schiex, 2011) of the four complex at-
tacks proposed in the literature, and investigates
their distribution in NL debates.

3.1 Data set
To have a stable version of the data to perform our
studies, we build a reference data set extracting a
sample of debates from Debatepedia2. Here, the
users manually insert their arguments in the col-
umn PRO if they agree with the issue under dis-
cussion, or in the column CON if they disagree.
To make our sample of NL debates comparable
with current works in the literature, e.g. (Wyner
and van Engers, 2010; Carenini and Moore, 2006;
Cabrio and Villata, 2012), we select the same top-
ics as (Cabrio and Villata, 2012), since this is the
only freely available data set of natural language
arguments (Table 1, column Topics). To create the
Debatepedia data set, for each topic of our sample
we apply the following procedure:

1. the main issue (i.e., the title of the debate in
its affirmative form) is considered as the start-
ing argument;

2. each user opinion is extracted and considered
as an argument;

3. since attack and support are binary relations,
the arguments are coupled with:

(a) the starting argument, or
(b) other arguments in the same discussion

to which the most recent argument refers
(e.g., when a user opinion supports or at-
tacks an argument previously expressed
by another user), following the chrono-
logical order (we maintain the dialogue
structure);

4. the resulting pairs of arguments are then
tagged with the appropriate relation, i.e., at-
tack or support.

2http://bit.ly/VZIs6M

To show a step-by-step application of the pro-
cedure, let us consider the debated issue Can
coca be classified as a narcotic?. At step 1, we
transform its title into the affirmative form, and
we consider it as the starting argument (a):

(a) Coca can be classified as a narcotic.

At step 2, we extract all the users opinions on this
issue (PRO and CON), e.g., (b), (c) and (d):

(b) In 1992 the World Health Organization’s Expert
Committee on Drug Dependence (ECDD) undertook a
’prereview’ of coca leaf at its 28th meeting. The 28th
ECDD report concluded that, “the coca leaf is appropriately
scheduled as a narcotic under the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, 1961, since cocaine is readily extractable
from the leaf.” This ease of extraction makes coca and
cocaine inextricably linked. Therefore, because cocaine
is defined as a narcotic, coca must also be defined in this way.

(c) Coca in its natural state is not a narcotic. What is absurd
about the 1961 convention is that it considers the coca leaf in
its natural, unaltered state to be a narcotic. The paste or the
concentrate that is extracted from the coca leaf, commonly
known as cocaine, is indeed a narcotic, but the plant itself is
not.

(d) Coca is not cocaine. Coca is distinct from cocaine.
Coca is a natural leaf with very mild effects when chewed.
Cocaine is a highly processed and concentrated drug
using derivatives from coca, and therefore should not be
considered as a narcotic.

At step 3a we couple the arguments (b) and (d)
with the starting issue since they are directly
linked with it, and at step 3b we couple argument
(c) with argument (b), and arguments (d) with ar-
gument (c) since they follow one another in the
discussion. At step 4, the resulting pairs of argu-
ments are then tagged with the appropriate rela-
tion: (b) supports (a), (d) attacks (a), (c) attacks
(b) and (d) supports (c).

Table 1 reports the number of arguments and
pairs we extracted applying the extraction method-
ology described before to all the mentioned top-
ics. In total, our data set contains 310 different
arguments and 320 argument pairs (179 express-
ing the support relation among the involved ar-
guments, and 141 expressing the attack relation).
We consider the obtained data set as representative

27



of human debates in a non-controlled setting (De-
batepedia users position their arguments w.r.t. the
others as PRO or CON, the data are not biased),
and therefore we use it for our empirical studies.

DEBATEPEDIA data set
Topic #argum #pairs
VIOLENT GAMES BOOST AGGRESSIVENESS 17 23
CHINA ONE-CHILD POLICY 11 14
CONSIDER COCA AS A NARCOTIC 17 22
CHILD BEAUTY CONTESTS 13 17
ARMING LIBYAN REBELS 13 15
RANDOM ALCOHOL BREATH TESTS 11 14
OSAMA DEATH PHOTO 22 24
PRIVATIZING SOCIAL SECURITY 12 13
INTERNET ACCESS AS A RIGHT 15 17
GROUND ZERO MOSQUE 11 12
MANDATORY MILITARY SERVICE 15 17
NO FLY ZONE OVER LIBYA 18 19
AIRPORT SECURITY PROFILING 12 13
SOLAR ENERGY 18 19
NATURAL GAS VEHICLES 16 17
USE OF CELL PHONES WHILE DRIVING 16 16
MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION 23 25
GAY MARRIAGE AS A RIGHT 10 10
VEGETARIANISM 14 13
TOTAL 310 320

Table 1: Debatepedia data set.

3.2 First study: support and TE
Our first empirical study aims at a better un-
derstanding of the relation among the notion
of support in bipolar argumentation (Cayrol and
Lagasquie-Schiex, 2011), and the definition of se-
mantic inference in NLP (in particular, the more
specific notion of TE) (Dagan et al., 2009). In a
recent work, (Cabrio and Villata, 2012) propose to
combine NLP and Dung-like abstract argumenta-
tion to generate the arguments from NL text, and
compute the accepted ones. They represent the TE
relation as a support relation in BAF. Even if they
narrow their work by considering only favorable
arguments implying another argument, explicitly
stating that arguments supporting another argu-
ment but without inferring it are out of the scope
of that work, the assumption that there exists an
identity between support and TE is still a claim to
verify.

3.2.1 Textual Entailment
The notion of TE has been defined as a directional
relation between two textual fragments, termed
text (T) and hypothesis (H), respectively (Dagan
et al., 2009). The relation holds (i.e. T ⇒ H)
whenever the truth of one text fragment follows
from the other, as interpreted by a typical lan-
guage user. Let us consider for instance the two
textual fragments (a) and (b) from Debatepedia.
According to the TE framework we set (b) as T

and (a) as H:

(b) !→ T: In 1992 the World Health Organization’s Expert
Committee on Drug Dependence (ECDD) undertook a ’pre-
review’ of coca leaf at its 28th meeting. [. . . ] This ease of ex-
traction makes coca and cocaine inextricably linked. There-
fore, because cocaine is defined as a narcotic, coca must also
be defined in this way.
(a)!→ H: Coca can be classified as a narcotic.

A human reading T would infer that H is most
likely true (i.e. the meaning of H can be derived
from the meaning of T, so the entailment holds).
On the contrary, if we consider Debatepedia
examples (a) and (d), and we set (d) as T and (a)
as H, there is a contradiction between T and H:

(d) !→ T: Coca is not cocaine. Coca is distinct from cocaine.
Coca is a natural leaf with very mild effects when chewed.
Cocaine is a highly processed and concentrated drug using
derivatives from coca, and therefore should not be considered
as a narcotic.
(a)!→ H: Coca can be classified as a narcotic.

(de Marneffe et al., 2008) provide a definition of
contradiction for the TE task, claiming that it oc-
curs when two sentences i) are extremely unlikely
to be true simultaneously, and ii) involve the same
event. As an applied framework, TE has been pro-
posed to capture major semantic inference needs
across NLP applications (e.g., question answering,
information extraction).

3.2.2 Analysis on the Debatepedia data set
Based on the TE definition, an annotator with
skills in linguistics has carried out a first phase
of annotation of the Debatepedia data set (Sec-
tion 3.1). The goal of such annotation is to indi-
vidually consider each pair of support and attack
among arguments, and to additionally tag them as
entailment, contradiction or null. The null judg-
ment can be assigned in case an argument is sup-
porting another argument without inferring it, or
the argument is attacking another argument with-
out contradicting it. As exemplified above, a cor-
rect entailment pair is (b) entails (a), while a con-
tradiction is (d) contradicts (a). A null judgment
is assigned to (d) - (c), since the former argument
supports the latter without inferring it. Our data
set is an extended version of (Cabrio and Villata,
2012)’s one allowing for a deeper investigation.

To assess the validity of the annotation task, we

28



calculated the inter-annotator agreement. Another
annotator with skills in linguistics has therefore in-
dependently annotated a sample of 100 pairs of the
data set. To calculate the inter-rater agreement we
used Cohen’s kappa coefficient (Carletta, 1996).
For NLP tasks, the agreement is considered as sig-
nificant when κ >0.6. We calculated the inter-
annotator agreement on the argument pairs tagged
as support and attacks by both annotators. For
supports, we calculated the agreement between the
pairs tagged as entailment and as null (i.e. no
entailment); for the contradictions, the agreement
between the pairs tagged as contradiction and as
null (i.e. no contradiction). Applying κ to our
data, the agreement for our task is κ = 0.74, that
is a satisfactory agreement.

Table 2 reports the results of the annotation on
our Debatepedia data set, as resulting after a rec-
onciliation phase carried out by the annotators.

Relations %arguments (#arg)

support + entailment 61.6 (111)- entailment (null) 38.4 (69)

attack + contradiction 71.4 (100)- contradiction (null) 28.6 (40)

Table 2: Support and TE on Debatepedia data set.

On the 320 pairs of the data set, 180 repre-
sent a support relation, while 140 are attacks.
Considering only the supports, we can see that
111 argument pairs (i.e., 61.6%) are an actual
entailment, while in 38.4% of the cases the first
argument of the pair supports the second one
without inferring it (as for example (d) - (c)).
With respect to the attacks, we can notice that
100 argument pairs (i.e., 71.4%) are both attack
and contradiction, while only the 28.6% of the
argument pairs does not contradict the arguments
they are attacking, as in the following example:

(e) Coca chewing is bad for human health. The decision to
ban coca chewing fifty years ago was based on a 1950 report
elaborated by the UN Commission of Inquiry on the Coca
Leaf with a mandate from ECOSOC: “We believe that the
daily, inveterate use of coca leaves by chewing is thoroughly
noxious and therefore detrimental”.
(f) Chewing coca offers an energy boost. Coca provides an
energy boost for working or for combating fatigue and cold.

Differently from the relationship between
support-entailment, the difference between attack
and contradiction is more subtle, and it is not al-
ways straightforward to say when an argument at-

tacks another argument without contradicting it.
In the example, we consider that (e) does not ex-
plicitly contradict (f) even if it attacks (f), since
chewing coca can offer an energy boost, and still
be bad for human health. As we can notice from
the results in Table 2, this kind of attacks is less
frequent than the attacks-contradictions.

Considering the TE three way scenario (entail-
ment, contradiction, unknown) to map TE relation
with bipolar argumentation, argument pairs con-
nected by a relation of support (but where the first
argument does not entail the second one), and ar-
gument pairs connected by a relation of attack (but
where the first argument does not contradict the
second one) have to be mapped as unknown pairs
in the TE framework. The unknown relation in TE
refers to the T-H pairs where the entailment can-
not be determined because the truth of H cannot
be verified on the basis of the content of T. This is
a broad definition, that can apply also to pairs of
non related sentences (that are considered as unre-
lated arguments in bipolar argumentation).

From an application viewpoint, as highlighted
in (Reed and Grasso, 2007; Heras et al., 2010), ar-
gumentation theory should be used as a tool in on-
line discussions applications to identify the rela-
tions among the statements, and to provide a struc-
ture to the dialogue to easily evaluate the user’s
opinions. Starting from the methodology pro-
posed by (Cabrio and Villata, 2012) for passing
from NL arguments to a Dung’s system towards a
fully automated system to identify the accepted ar-
guments, our study demonstrates that applying the
TE approach would be productive in the 66% of
the Debatepedia data set. Other techniques should
be investigated to cover the other cases, for in-
stance measuring the semantic relatedness of the
two propositions, e.g., Latent Semantics Analysis
techniques (Landauer et al., 1997).

3.3 Second study: complex attacks
As a second step of our survey, we carry out a
comparative evaluation of the four proposals of at-
tacks suggested in the literature, and we investi-
gate their distribution and meaning on the sample
of NL arguments.

3.3.1 Analysis on the Debatepedia data set
Relying on the additional attacks (Section 2), and
the original AF of each topic in our data set (Ta-
ble 1), the following procedure is applied: the
supported (secondary, mediated, and extended, re-

29



spectively) attacks are added, and the argument
pairs resulting from coupling the arguments linked
by this relation are collected in the data set “sup-
ported (secondary, mediated, and extended, re-
spectively) attack”.

Collecting the arguments pairs generated from
the different types of complex attacks in separate
data sets allows us to independently analyze each
type, and to perform a more accurate evaluation.3

Figures 2a-d show the four AFs resulting from the
addition of the complex attacks in the example
Can coca be classified as a narcotic?. The reader
may observe that the AF in Figure 2a, where the
supported attack is introduced, is the same of Fig-
ure 2b where the mediated attack is introduced.
Notice that, even if the attack which is introduced
is the same, i.e., d attacks b, this is due to different
interactions among supports and attacks (as high-
lighted in the figure), i.e., in the case of supported
attacks this is due to the support from d to c and
the attack from c to b, while in the case of medi-
ated attacks this is due to the support from b to a
and the attack from d to a.

A second annotation phase is then carried
out on the data set, to verify if the generated
arguments pairs of the four data sets are actually
attacks (i.e., if the models of complex attacks
proposed in the literature are represented in real
data). More specifically, an arguments pair result-
ing from the application of a complex attack can
be annotated as: attack (if it is a correct attack)
or as unrelated (in case the meanings of the two
arguments are not in conflict). For instance,
the pair (g)-(h) resulting from the insertion of
a supported attack, cannot be considered as an
attack since the arguments are considering two
different aspects of the issue.

(g) Chewing coca offers an energy boost. Coca provides an
energy boost for working or for combating fatigue and cold.

(h) Coca can be classified as a narcotic.

In the annotation, attacks are then annotated
also as contradiction (if the first argument con-
tradicts the other) or null (in case the first argu-
ment does not contradict the argument it is at-
tacking, as in the example (e)-(f) showed in Sec-
tion 3.2.2). Due to the complexity of the anno-
tation, the same annotation task has been indepen-
dently carried out also by a second annotator, so as

3Freely available at http://bit.ly/VZIs6M

to compute inter-annotator agreement. It has been
calculated on a sample of 80 argument pairs (20
pairs randomly extracted from each of the “com-
plex attacks” data set), and it has the goal to as-
sess the validity of the annotation task (counting
when the judges agree on the same annotation).
We calculated the inter-annotator agreement for
our annotation task in two steps. We (i) verify the
agreement of the two judges on the argument pairs
classification attacks/unrelated, and (ii) consider
only the argument pairs tagged as attacks by both
annotators, and we verify the agreement between
the pairs tagged as contradiction and as null (i.e.
non contradiction). Applying κ to our data, the
agreement for the first step is κ = 0.77, while for
the second step κ = 0.71. Both agreements are
satisfactory, although they reflect the higher com-
plexity of the second annotation task (contradic-
tion/null), as pointed out in Section 3.2.2.

The distribution of complex attacks in the De-
batepedia data set, as resulting after a reconcilia-
tion phase carried out by the annotators, is shown
in Table 3. As can be noticed, the mediated attack
is the most frequent type of attack, generating 335
new arguments pairs in the NL sample we consid-
ered (i.e., the conditions that allow the application
of this kind of complex attacks appear more fre-
quently in real debates). Together with the sec-
ondary attacks, they appear in the AFs of all the
debated topics. On the contrary, extended attacks
are added in 11 out of 19 topics, and supported at-
tacks in 17 out of 19 topics. Considering all the
topics, on average only 6 pairs generated from the
additional attacks were already present in the orig-
inal data set, meaning that considering also these
attacks is a way to hugely enrich our data set.

Proposed models # occ. attacks unrel.
+contr(null) -contr(null)

Supported attacks 47 23 17 7
Secondary attacks 53 29 18 6
Mediated attacks 335 84 148 103
Extended attacks 28 15 10 3

Table 3: Complex attacks distribution in our data.

Figure 3 graphically represents the complex at-
tacks distribution. Considering the first step of
the annotation (i.e. attacks vs unrelated), the fig-
ure shows that the latter case is very infrequent,
and that (except for the mediated attack) on av-
erage only 10% of the argument pairs are tagged
as unrelated. This observation can be considered
as a proof of concept of the four theoretical mod-
els of complex attacks we analyzed. Due to the

30



c a

d

b

c bd

Supported attack

c a

d

b

a db

Mediated attack

c a

d

b

b ac

Secondary attack

c a

d

b

d ca

Extended attack

(a) (d)(c)(b)

Figure 2: Example of bipolar argumentation framework with the introduction of supported attacks.

fact that the conditions for the application of the
mediated attacks are verified more often in the
data, it has the drawback of generating more un-
related pairs. Still, the number of successful cases
is high enough to consider this kind of attack as
representative of human interactions. Considering
the second step of the annotation (i.e., attacks as
contradiction or null), we can see that results are
in line with those reported in our first study (Ta-
ble 2), meaning that also among complex attacks
the same distribution is maintained.

!"##$%

&'(#)%

!*++,-$#. !#/,0.'-1 2#.3'$#. 45$#0.#.

6

76

%66

%76

866

876

966

976

!"#$%&'$(

)*+,"'#&(-.'-,"

/*+,"'#&(-.'-,"

Figure 3: Complex attacks distribution in our data.

4 Concluding remarks

In this paper, we provide a further step towards
a better comprehension of the support and attack
notions in bipolar argumentation (invoked by the
community, e.g. (Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex,
2011)) by evaluating them against naturally oc-
curring data extracted from NL online debates.
The results show that the support relation includes
the TE relation, i.e. it is more general (in about
60% of the argument pairs in relation of support,
also TE holds). Similarly, the study on the attack-
contradiction relations shows that the attack rela-
tion is more general than the contradiction (as un-
derlined by (de Marneffe et al., 2008)): in about
70% of the attacks also contradiction holds.

The proposed study shows that the research car-
ried out on semantic inferences in NLP, and ar-
gumentation theory in knowledge representation
could fruitfully influence each other, raising new
open challenges with a significant potential im-
pact on the future interactions among humans and
machines. On the one side, NLP provides to the
argumentation theory community i) textual infer-
ence paradigms like TE that make inference algo-
rithms and tools available to automatically process
NL arguments, and to detect the semantic relations
linking them, and ii) annotated natural language
corpora that can be investigated in depth to prove
the proposed formal models on naturally occurring
data. On the other side, argumentation theory can
provide to TE, and in general to NLP approaches
to semantic inference, a new framework where the
semantic relations are not only identified between
pairs of textual fragments, but such pairs are also
part of an argumentation graph that provides an
overall view of the arguments’ interactions such
that the influences of the arguments on the others
emerge, even if they are not direct (see the addi-
tional attacks in Section 3.3, and (Berant et al.,
2012)’s work on the structural constraints of TE
in the context of entailment graphs). Formal mod-
els of argumentation are also proposed to check
the consistency of a set of information items rep-
resented as the nodes of an argumentation graph,
allowing for the detection of the precise portions
of the graph where the inconsistency arises (e.g.,
argument a supports and attacks the same argu-
ment). This would open new challenges for TE,
that in the original definition considers the T-H
pairs as “self-contained” (i.e., the meaning of H
has to be derived from the meaning of T). On the
contrary, in arguments extracted from human lin-
guistic interactions a lot is left implicit (follow-
ing Grice’s conversational Maxim of Quantity),
and anaphoric expressions should be solved to cor-
rectly assign semantic relations among arguments.

31



References
Jonathan Berant, Ido Dagan, Meni Adler, and Jacob

Goldberger. 2012. Efficient tree-based approxima-
tion for entailment graph learning. In ACL (1), pages
117–125.

Guido Boella, Dov M. Gabbay, Leendert van der Torre,
and Serena Villata. 2010. Support in abstract argu-
mentation. In Procs of COMMA, Frontiers in Arti-
ficial Intelligence and Applications 216, pages 111–
122.

Elena Cabrio and Serena Villata. 2012. Natural lan-
guage arguments: A combined approach. In Procs
of ECAI, Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Ap-
plications 242, pages 205–210.

Giuseppe Carenini and Johanna D. Moore. 2006. Gen-
erating and evaluating evaluative arguments. Artif.
Intell., 170(11):925–952.

Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifi-
cation tasks: the kappa statistic. Comput. Linguist.,
22(2):249–254.

Claudette Cayrol and Marie-Christine Lagasquie-
Schiex. 2005. On the acceptability of arguments
in bipolar argumentation frameworks. In Procs of
ECSQARU, LNCS 3571, pages 378–389.

Claudette Cayrol and Marie-Christine Lagasquie-
Schiex. 2010. Coalitions of arguments: A tool for
handling bipolar argumentation frameworks. Int. J.
Intell. Syst., 25(1):83–109.

Claudette Cayrol and Marie-Christine Lagasquie-
Schiex. 2011. Bipolarity in argumentation graphs:
Towards a better understanding. In Procs of SUM,
LNCS 6929, pages 137–148.

Ido Dagan, Bill Dolan, Bernardo Magnini, and Dan
Roth. 2009. Recognizing textual entailment: Ratio-
nal, evaluation and approaches. Natural Language
Engineering (JNLE), 15(04):i–xvii.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Anna N. Rafferty, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2008. Finding contradic-
tions in text. In Procs of ACL.

Phan M. Dung. 1995. On the acceptability of argu-
ments and its fundamental role in nonmonotonic rea-
soning, logic programming and n-person games. Ar-
tif. Intell., 77(2):321–358.

Stella Heras, Katie Atkinson, Vicente J. Botti, Floriana
Grasso, Vicente Julián, and Peter McBurney. 2010.
How argumentation can enhance dialogues in social
networks. In Procs of COMMA, Frontiers in Artifi-
cial Intelligence and Applications 216, pages 267–
274.

Thomas K. Landauer, Darrell Laham, Bob Rehder, and
M. E. Schreiner. 1997. How well can passage mean-
ing be derived without using word order? a com-
parison of latent semantic analysis and humans. In
Procs of CSS, pages 412–417.

Farid Nouioua and Vincent Risch. 2010. Bipolar ar-
gumentation frameworks with specialized supports.
In Procs of ICTAI, pages 215–218. IEEE Computer
Society.

Farid Nouioua and Vincent Risch. 2011. Argumenta-
tion frameworks with necessities. In Procs of SUM,
LNCS 6929, pages 163–176.

Nir Oren and Timothy J. Norman. 2008. Seman-
tics for evidence-based argumentation. In Procs of
COMMA, Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Ap-
plications 172, pages 276–284.

Nir Oren, Chris Reed, and Michael Luck. 2010. Mov-
ing between argumentation frameworks. In Procs
of COMMA, Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and
Applications 216, pages 379–390.

Henry Prakken. 2010. An abstract framework for ar-
gumentation with structured arguments. Argument
& Computation, 1:93–124.

Iyad Rahwan and Guillermo Simari, editors. 2009. Ar-
gumentation in Artificial Intelligence. Springer.

Chris Reed and Floriana Grasso. 2007. Recent ad-
vances in computational models of natural argu-
ment. Int. J. Intell. Syst., 22(1):1–15.

Adam Wyner and Tom van Engers. 2010. A frame-
work for enriched, controlled on-line discussion fo-
rums for e-government policy-making. In Procs of
eGov 2010.

32


