










































A Semantic Tool for Historical Events


Proceedings of the The 1st Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation, pages 38–46,
Atlanta, Georgia, 14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Semantic Tool for Historical Events

Ryan Shaw
School of Information and Library Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

ryanshaw@unc.edu

Abstract

I present a set of functional requirements for a
speculative tool informing users about events
in historical discourse, in order to demonstrate
what these requirements imply about how we
should define and represent historical events.
The functions include individuation, selection,
and contextualization of events. I conclude
that a tool providing these functions would
need events to be defined and represented as
features of discourses about the world rather
than objectively existing things in the world.

1 Introduction

Most work in NLP on detecting and representing
events tacitly adopts a theory of events that can be
traced to Donald Davidson. The advantage of this
theory is that it promises to provide a solid founda-
tion for consensus on how to define and individuate
events. But that consensus will be useful for spe-
cific domains of application only to the extent that
it aligns with the way events are conceptualized in
those domains. In domains where events serve con-
ceptual functions that differ significantly from the
ones assumed by that consensus, it may actually re-
tard the development of practical tools.

History is one such domain. Automatic detection
of events and their coreference relations would be
a powerful tool for working with and learning from
collections of historical texts. But events as concep-
tualized by historians differ in significant ways from
events as theorized by analytic philosophers. Rather
than attempting to formulate an alternative theory, I
instead present a set of high-level requirements for

a speculative tool that would benefit from automatic
detection of historical events and their coreference
relations. That is, rather than looking for a founda-
tional theory to guide the definition and representa-
tion of events, I start by envisioning a useful tool and
then try to determine how events would need to be
defined and represented in order to create that tool.

The speculative vision I present is a semantic
tool for informing users about events in historical
discourse. A semantic tool is any instrument that
can inform its users about concepts of interest in
some domain, various names or terms associated
with those concepts, and relationships among con-
cepts (Hjørland, 2007). Examples include dictionar-
ies, gazetteers, taxonomies, thesauri, and ontologies.

I have purposefully chosen to present a highly
speculative, “blue sky” vision for two reasons. First,
I want to ensure the relevance of my points to the
NLP community by describing a tool that would
only be feasible to build given successful automatic
detection and representation of historical events and
their coreference relations. Second, a less ambitious
vision would not as clearly demonstrate the gap sep-
arating historians’ conceptualizations of events from
those of analytic philosophers.

2 Individuating Events

The first requirement is individuation. To be able to
individuate entities is to be able to distinguish them
from others. Any system that consists of individual
records describing entities presumes some way of
individuating those entities. But in practice individ-
uation is far from simple. Bibliographic organiza-
tion, for example, is plagued by the problem of when

38



to consider two documents to be “the same”. The
problem is worse for conceptual resources such as
events. A semantic tool consisting of records iden-
tifying and describing events needs to employ some
principles of individuation. The principles need to
result in records with values sufficiently different
that a user can distinguish between them and select
the one he wants.

Philosophers have long debated how to individu-
ate events. The problem is a deep one, as it is related
to debates over the ontological status of events. To
crudely simplify these debates, I characterize two
basic positions, one which takes events to be con-
crete individual items in the world, and one which
takes events to be products of language (specifically
narrative language). My goal here is not to get into
the specifics of the ontological debate but only to
give a sense of the spectrum of different possible ap-
proaches to the individuation of events.

2.1 Events as Concrete Individual Things
The philosopher Donald Davidson believed that the
structure of our natural language reflects the struc-
ture of reality. He argued that successful com-
munication depends upon the communicators hav-
ing “a largely correct, shared, view of the world”
and that, since natural language is successfully used
for communication, we can reach conclusions about
the nature of the world by studying natural lan-
guage (Davidson, 1977, p. 244). Using this ap-
proach to metaphysics, Davidson wrote a famous se-
ries of essays on the nature of events as indicated
by our use of language (Davidson, 2001). The crux
of his argument was that our use of language seems
to indicate a difference between events and descrip-
tions of events. Consider the following sentences:

1. Barack Obama signed the health care reform
bill.

2. Barack Obama joyfully signed the health care
reform bill with 22 pens in the East Room of
the White House on March 23, 2010 (Stolberg
and Pear, 2010).

Davidson argued that, intuitively, we want to say
that these sentences all describe or refer to “the same
event.” If we trust our intuition we are led to be-
lieve that there is something in reality—the event—

to which all these sentences refer. Davidson sought
to bolster that intuition by demonstrating that, with-
out the notion of an event as a concrete entity with a
location in space and time, we cannot make sense of
certain logical relationships among statements, for
example the fact that each sentence in the list above
is understood to entail the previous sentences.

Davidson argued that natural language sentences
such as these can be translated into a “logical form”
that captures their meanings and the relationships
between their meanings. The logical form of a sen-
tence is expressed using first-order logic. First-order
logic is distinguished by its use of quantifiers to en-
able the expression of generalizations like Every-
thing that thinks is alive (universal quantification)
and assertions like There is something that thinks
(existential quantification). Davidson held that sen-
tences like the ones above existentially quantify over
events. For example, the logical form of the sec-
ond sentence above would be something like (para-
phrasing first-order logic) There exists something X
such that it is the event of Barack Obama signing the
health care reform bill, and X was done joyfully, and
X was done with 22 pens. What the logical forms
of the sentences above have in common, Davidson
believed, was this X, the event that is their shared
referent and the existence of which they commonly
assert, despite the different modifications that follow
this assertion (Davidson, 2001a).

2.2 Events as Abstractions from Narratives
Davidson’s argument, which I have not done justice
to here, is a strong one and has become the main-
stream position on events among analytic philoso-
phers. Ideas like Davidson’s lie behind efforts to
automatically “detect” and “extract” events by ana-
lyzing texts. Certainly given sentences like the ones
above, and the kinds of sentences Davidson typically
uses as examples, the intuition that the sentences all
“refer” to the same concrete event is strong. But
consider the following sentences:

3. On March 23, 2010, with the strokes of 22
pens, Barack Obama transformed the United
States into a socialist country.

4. On March 23, 2010, with the strokes of 22
pens, Barack Obama ensured a more equitable
future for the children of the United States.

39



Do these sentences “refer” to “the same event”
as the previous sentences? Let’s assume that the
context of these last two sentences is such that it
is clear that the writer intended to comment upon
the health care reform bill, and not something else
Barack Obama did with a pen that day. On the one
hand, it seems correct to say that these sentences
too refer to the same event as the earlier sentences.
But on the other hand, it doesn’t seem incorrect to
say that these sentences refer to two different events.
The first event is one in which a closet radical who
has managed to fool a capitalist country into elect-
ing him president finally realizes the first step in his
secret agenda. The second event is one in which a
liberal hero finally overcomes the forces of wealth
and power to strike a blow for the little guy.

Sentences 3 and 4 are notable for their strong
point of view. In that sense, they are more typ-
ical of the kind of sentences found in historical
narratives. As the philosopher of history Frank
Ankersmit (1983, p. 173) noted, “the differences be-
tween descriptions given by historians of what is still
felt to be the same event may be of a more dramatic
nature than in the case of scientific descriptions.”
As a result, the question of whether events can be
separated from sentences becomes a little less clear.
It becomes even less clear when one considers not
just individual sentences, but whole texts. The histo-
rian William Cronon (1992) compared two books on
the long drought that struck the Midwestern plains
of the U.S. in the 1930s, known as the Dust Bowl.
Cronon found that despite covering the same span of
time and region of space, the two books constructed
two very different Dust Bowls: one a triumph of hu-
man spirit over natural disaster, the other a human-
wrought ecological disaster.

It was these kinds of contrasts that led the philoso-
pher Louis Mink (1978) to claim that

we cannot without confusion regard
different narratives as differently emplot-
ting the “same” events. We need a dif-
ferent way of thinking about narrative.
“Events” (or more precisely, descriptions
of events) are not the raw material out of
which narratives are constructed; rather an
event is an abstraction from a narrative. (p.
147)

Mink argued, contrary to Davidson, that events
are not concrete things existing apart from and re-
ferred to by sentences, but are ways of summariz-
ing sets of sentence organized into narratives. Of
course, with his qualifying “more precisely, descrip-
tions of events” Mink left the door open to the claim
that he too was making a distinction between con-
crete events existing in the world and the sentences
or parts of sentences describing those events. Mink’s
point, however, was that in history events and de-
scriptions of events are interchangeable; we cannot
identify events except by narrating them and decid-
ing whether or not to conclude that two narratives
are, in the abstract, sufficiently similar to say that
they emplot the “same” events.

2.3 Criteria for Individuating Events
My view on the nature of events is closer to Mink’s
than it is to Davidson’s. Yet Davidson is clearly
right that there are times when we wish to say that
two sentences refer to the same event, or that two
texts have the same event as their subject. Without
conclusively settling questions about the ontological
status of events, we can nevertheless conclude that
the criteria for individuating events can vary. We
can see this by looking at how the two positions on
the nature of events lead to different criteria for in-
dividuating them.

Davidson claimed that events are concrete indi-
vidual things that we can count. He recognized that
this claim, to be credible, required some principle
for counting—some principle for deciding whether
there is one event or two. In practice, David-
son (2001c) noted, we do seem to successfully
count events, since “rings of the bell, major wars,
eclipses of the moon and performances of Lulu can
be counted as easily as pencils, pots and people” (p.
180). So, he asked, what are the criteria of individu-
ation? He argued that

Events are identical if and only if
they have exactly the same causes and ef-
fects. Events have a unique position in
the framework of causal relations between
events in somewhat the way objects have
a unique position in the spatial framework
of objects. (Davidson, 2001c, p. 179)

Davidson’s proposal is interesting because it

40



seems to suggest that Mink was correct when he
argued that two narratives cannot differently em-
plot the “same” event. If to emplot an event is to
place it in a nexus of causal and contingent rela-
tions, then two differently emplotted events are, un-
der Davidson’s criteria, two different events. But
Davidson did not consider narratives to establish
true causal relations. When Davidson wrote of the
“causal nexus,” he seemed to have in mind some-
thing like what Laplace’s demon might see: the one
true set of causal relations as determined by scien-
tific laws. Historical narratives, on the other hand,
he considered to be just “causal stories” or “rudi-
mentary causal explanations” and not true causal re-
lations, and thus presumably not suitable for indi-
viduating events (Davidson, 2001b, p. 161–162).

Later Davidson (1985), in response to a critique
by Quine (1985), abandoned his proposal that causal
relations individuate events. He accepted (with
some reservations) the alternative criteria suggested
by Quine that events are the same if they occupy the
same space at the same time. This raises the problem
of deciding deciding how, or whether, events occupy
space and time. But both Quine and Davidson re-
mained wedded to the idea that events are concrete
individual things, and thus that there are some true
set of individuation criteria for events, even though
those criteria may be complex, and even though in
many cases we may not be able to actually satisfy
those criteria well enough to ascertain identity. In
contrast, consider the historian Paul Veyne’s (1984)
declaration that

events are not things, consistent ob-
jects, substances; they are a découpage we
freely make in reality, an aggregate of the
processes in which substances, men, and
things interact. Events have no natural
unity; one cannot . . . cut them accord-
ing to their true joints, because they have
none. (p. 36–37)

Veyne argued that individuation criteria are not
given by nature or language but are what we make
of them. That is the position I take here. A seman-
tic tool would need to propose some criteria for in-
dividuation, but there is no “true” set of criteria it
must adhere to. Of course, the kinds of criteria sug-
gested by Davidson and Quine are useful ones and

the authors of a semantic tool might choose to use
them, particularly if they wished to advocate a more
“scientific” viewpoint. But these are not the only cri-
teria, and authors might choose others or even more
than one set of criteria. The main requirement is that
authors document the choices they make.

An example of best practice for documenting
individuation criteria was provided by Doerr et
al. (2010) in the design of their time period the-
saurus. Rather than assume that spatiotemporal lo-
cation alone suffices to individuate periods, they
made a distinction between the characteristics used
to individuate time periods and the spatiotemporal
regions associated with those periods. This made
the thesaurus robust to new archaeological discover-
ies. For example, if a period were defined as being
associated with the prevalence of a certain kind of
pottery, then the later discovery that said pottery was
in use earlier than was previously known would only
result in a change to the temporal bounds associated
with the period, not its individuation criteria.

3 Selecting Events and Documents

There are two main reasons why one might use a se-
mantic tool to select event records. First, one may
be interested in using the tool as a kind of reference
resource, to acquire some basic knowledge of the
event and its relations. Or one may wish to explicitly
link a document to a particular event. For instance,
a blogger who wishes to label a blog post as being
about the Soweto Uprising might use a semantic tool
to find a standard identifier for that event, which he
can then use to link his post to the event record. In
either case, the user would use some attribute or re-
lation to select the event of interest.

3.1 Selecting Events

Most obviously, one can look for events by name.
But most events do not have names, and in these
cases, the event would need to be looked up via some
entities or concepts to which it is related. There are
a number of possibilities here. One might be inter-
ested in events involving some character, for exam-
ple events in the life of Emma Goldman or events in-
volving the Confederate States of America. Or one
may be looking for events associated with or por-
trayed as occurring in a particular place or setting,

41



such as Ireland or the American Midwest. Finally,
one may look for events that are directly related to
another event in some way that doesn’t necessarily
involve shared characters or settings. For example,
one might seek events that have been portrayed as
causes or consequences of the Battle of the Boyne,
or all events that have been emplotted as leading up
to, part of, or following from the French Revolution.

In addition to selecting events through their rela-
tionships to other concepts and entities, a semantic
tool would support selecting events using the ab-
stract grid of space and time. For example, one
might be interested in events that took place within a
given geographical area or that encompassed a given
point on the globe. Similarly, one might look for
events that took place during the 19th century or that
were ongoing on June 4th, 2009. Finding events in
space and time requires that events be resolvable to
locations in a spatiotemporal reference system.

Finally, users might wish to select events of a
certain type, such as battles or social movements.
Given that one man’s riot is another man’s revolt,
this can be more complicated than it first appears.
To select events that have been typed a certain way,
one would need to specify both a taxonomy of event
types and possibly a party responsible for assign-
ing types to events. Given the lack of standard
event type taxonomies, it may be easier to rely on
event name queries to approximate queries by type.
Since named events often have types integrated into
their names (e.g. the Watts Riot or the Battle of the
Boyne), searches on event names may help select
events of a certain type, especially if alternate names
have been specified for events. For unnamed events,
however, keyword searches on textual descriptions
are unlikely to provide precise or complete results,
and querying using an explicit type from a taxon-
omy would be preferable.

3.2 Selecting Documents Related to Events

But selecting an event may not be a user’s goal but a
means of finding an event-related document of some
sort. A document can stand in two kinds of relation
to an event. First, it may have been transformed into
evidence for an event through the process of histori-
cal inquiry. In other words, some historian has stud-
ied the document, made a judgment about the status
of the document as a survival from the past, and on

the basis of that study and that judgment has inferred
an event.

The historian Henri-Irénée Marrou (1966, pp.
133–137) enumerated a number of forms this infer-
ence from document-as-evidence to event can take.
In some cases the inference may be very direct, as
when the event in question involves the document
itself, e.g. when it was produced, or when a certain
word or phrase was first used. A slightly less direct
form of inference moves from the document to some
mental event, e.g. an intention, of the document’s
creator. Yet further afield are inferences made about
the general milieu of the document’s creator, infer-
ences made on the basis of ideas expressed or the
way they are expressed, regardless of the creator’s
specific intention. Finally there are those inferences
made to events localized in time and space: things
that characters in the past did or had happened to
them. This last category of inferences is the least
certain, despite the seemingly “concrete” or “fac-
tual” nature of the events inferred.

The second kind of relation that a document can
bear to an event arises when the historian articulates
his inferred event by producing a historical narra-
tive. A historical monograph, historical documen-
tary film, or a historical museum exhibit is a docu-
ment that portrays an inferred event.

It is possible for a document to be both a portrayal
of an event and evidence for some event. An eyewit-
ness account is a portrait of an event, and if a his-
torian has judged it to be authentic and accurate, it
is also evidence for that event. Yet a document that
is both portrait and evidence need not bear both re-
lations to the same event. Marrou (1966, p. 135)
gave the example of the work of fourth-century Ro-
man historian Ammianus Marcellinus, which por-
trays events during the reigns of Constantius II and
Julian the Apostate, yet which may be used as evi-
dence for very different events, such as the appear-
ance of particular ways of thinking or acting among
a certain class of Roman men of that time, inferred
from the language of the document.

When looking for documents related to an event,
one may not be concerned with the kind of relation
at all. In this case, if the event of interest is named, it
may be sufficient to look for (variations of) the event
name using full-text search of textual documents or
of written descriptions of non-textual documents.

42



But this approach is unlikely to be either precise or
comprehensive. Besides the well-known vocabulary
problems that plague full-text search, there is the
problem that documents which portray or evince an
event may not use any names of that event. Expand-
ing queries to include the names of people, places or
other concepts related to the event may help, but to
be reliably findable such documents would need to
be explicitly linked to an identifier for the event.

Explicit linking to an event record would be in-
dispensable if the kind of relation between the doc-
ument and the event were important. One would
need to be able to narrow down the set of all related
documents to those that were related as evidence or
those that are related as portraits, or to those that
were related as both evidence and portrait. It might
be desirable to further narrow the set by specifying
who treated the documents as evidence or who cre-
ated the portraits. The latter is a basic function of
any bibliographic instrument. The former is rarely
found in current tools, but will be increasingly im-
portant as the publishing of historical data becomes
more widespread.

4 Contextualizing Events

While individuation and selection are necessary and
useful functions, the effort of constructing a seman-
tic tool for historical events would not be justified
by these functions alone. Another key function of
such a tool would be to provide context in an un-
familiar historical domain. As the historian Ann
Rigney (1990) observed,

There is a certain difficulty in-
volved for a twentieth-century reader—
particularly a reader who is not French—
in following these nineteenth-century his-
tories of the French Revolution (or indeed
more recent ones) since they depend so
largely on the reader’s foreknowledge of a
particular cultural code to which the prin-
cipal elements of the Revolution already
belong. (p. 40 n. 22)

A semantic tool could potentially help such a
reader understand this code by linking events to
time, place and related concepts, as well as putting
them in the context of the narratives for which they

act as mnemonics. To navigate this labyrinth of
nested contexts, one needs a map:

What information searchers need are
maps that inform them about the world
(and the literature about that world) in
which they live and act. They need such
maps in order to formulate questions in
the first instance . . . This is probably
especially so in the humanities, where
concepts are more clearly associated with
worldviews. (Hjørland, 2007, p. 393)

A semantic tool for historical events would be a
map informing users about the past and discourses
about the past. Like a map of space, it could be used
for both exploration and orientation.

4.1 Exploring the Past

A semantic tool for historical events would make it
possible to learn about the past by following connec-
tions among events, characters and other concepts.
The idea that the past is best understood through a
network of contextual relations was dubbed “con-
textualism” by Hayden White (1973):

The informing presupposition of Con-
textualism is that events can be explained
by being set within the “context” of their
occurrence. Why they occurred as they
did is to be explained by the revelation
of the specific relationships they bore to
other events occurring in their circumam-
bient historical space . . . (p. 17)

A semantic tool for contextualizing historical
events would thus be comparable to an outline of
subjects for a history course, or a higher-level frame-
work for organizing a series of syllabuses for history
education. A syllabus or framework provides a map
to help teachers and students find their way through
a web of events and explanations. As students get
older and become more capable, more detail can be
added to the map. Any history is such a map in a
certain sense. Ankersmit (1983) suggested that what
makes historical narratives useful is that, like maps,
they strip away the overwhelming detail of actual ex-
perience, leaving an intelligible form:

43



A map should not be a copy of reality;
if it were we could just as well look at re-
ality itself. Being an abstraction of reality
is just what makes maps so useful. The
same goes for historiographies: we expect
the historian to tell us only what was im-
portant in the past and not the “total past”.
(p. 51)

The intelligible form of a geographical map con-
sists of the spatial relations made evident in its lay-
out. One can look at a map to see where places are
relative to other places. The map provides spatial
context. A history provides historical context. One
can read or watch history to learn how events hap-
pened relative to other events. The relations thus ar-
ticulated in a history compose its intelligible form.
Just as a simple hand-drawn route map can be easier
to follow than a photorealistic one, a semantic tool
would make these relations clearer through further
abstraction.

The analogy with geographic maps raises the
question of aggregation. Geographic maps of differ-
ent regions can be transformed and projected onto
a common system of coordinates. Can we expect
to be able to merge semantic tools covering differ-
ent domains of history to obtain a master tool cover-
ing a superset of these domains? According to Paul
Ricœur (1984), we expect that

the facts dealt with in historical works,
when they are taken one at a time, inter-
lock with one another in the manner of ge-
ographical maps, if the same rules of pro-
jection and scale are respected . . . A se-
cret dream of emulating the cartographer
. . . animates the historical enterprise. (p.
176)

Indeed, isn’t the promise of being able to link
together fragments of history into a collaborative
whole one of the great motivations to develop stan-
dardized schematic representations of historical re-
lationships? But we should not expect a single co-
herent past to emerge from such interlinking. We
must remember that the relations in a semantic tool
for historical events would be abstractions from his-
torical narratives, which portray the past but are not
the past itself. Different narratives express different

points of view that do not necessarily combine into
intelligible wholes.

Aggregating events into a larger framework would
not yield a more complete view of the past, because
there is no “whole view” of the past to be completed.
However, a more complete view of discourse about
the past could be achieved by juxtaposing differ-
ent portraits made from different perspectives. To
do this a semantic tool would need to accommodate
conflicting views without trying to resolve them.

4.2 Orienting Oneself in Historical Discourse
A semantic tool that informed users about varying
and possibly conflicting interpretations of past could
be used for orientation. One may use a map to
orient oneself by determining one’s own position
relative to something else. The philosopher Jörn
Rüsen (2005, 1) has proposed that history is a “cul-
tural framework of orientation” in time. According
to Rüsen, we make the passage of time intelligible
through reflecting on our experiences, interpreting
and telling stories about them. Through such in-
terpretation, the otherwise unintelligible passage of
time acquires meaning and becomes history. History
orients us in time: it tells us who we are and how we
relate to what has come before.

According to Rüsen’s theory, one way that peo-
ple orient themselves using history is by tracing the
kinds of threads White described in his account of
contextualism. Genealogy, or seeking one’s origins
by tracing back through a web of births and mar-
riages, is a good example of this. Other examples
are stories told of the founding of an institution of
which one is a member: the story of how Yahoo!’s
founders started the company in a trailer at Stanford
University is regularly recounted to new employees.
These stories directly relate their audiences to his-
torical characters and events, in effect making the
audience members characters too.

But, as Rüsen showed, history does not perform
its function of orientation only at this level of di-
rect genealogical relations with the past. More of-
ten, history orients its audience at the level of in-
terpretation, where histories are treated as stories
rather than as transparently presenting inferred rela-
tions. For example, historians often allude to histor-
ical events as instructive examples for understand-
ing current events. Consider the historian of early

44



twenty-first century economic inequality in the U.S.,
who references the Gilded Age of the late nineteenth
century. He does so not necessarily because he in-
tends to trace causal relations between the earlier pe-
riod and the later one. Rather he does so because he
wishes to imply that the narrative that presents the
best perspective for understanding the current situ-
ation is one that has a form similar to a particular,
conventionally accepted narrative of the Gilded Age.
He is making an analogy.

While analogies like the one above draw upon
conventionally accepted narratives, other histories
seek to re-orient their audiences by criticizing con-
ventionally accepted narratives. To a certain extent,
nearly every history attempts to do this—if the con-
ventional story were perfectly adequate, why pro-
duce a new one? But certain histories specifically
aim to dislodge a dominant narrative and replace it
with a new one. Where analogies with the past ap-
peal to a kind of continuity of form, critical histories
try to break that continuity.

Finally, there are histories that try to orient their
audiences not by directly linking them into histor-
ical narratives, nor by analogizing with or criti-
cizing accepted historical narratives, but by giving
accounts of changes in the narratives themselves.
These histories re-establish continuity by portraying
a higher-level process of change. An exemplary case
is Thomas Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientific Revo-
lutions (1962), in which he posited that discontin-
uous change in scientific thought is itself a steady
factor, something his late twentieth-century read-
ers could use as a reference point for understanding
their present situation.

What is important about Rüsen’s typology of his-
tory is that it shows how history functions to ori-
ent us at the level of discourse and not simply at
the level of direct chains of causal relation to the
past. A semantic tool that was intended only to help
people understand the past through exploration of
the threads among events and characters and their
settings would not need to refer to the stories that
spun those threads. But if the tool were intended
to help people orient themselves by understanding
discourse about the past, it would need to represent
not only events and characters and places but also
the narratives that emplot them, and relations among
these narratives.

Drawing upon Rüsen’s ideas, Peter Lee (2004)
developed a set of requirements for a framework
for history education that would not only help stu-
dents contextualize historical events but also de-
velop their “metahistorical” understanding. Lee ar-
gued that students should understand not only what
happened, but how we explain what happened. Lee
argued that history education should simultaneously
develop both students’ conceptions of the past and
their understanding of history as a discipline and dis-
course. These are the two functions that I have la-
beled “exploration” (of conceptions of the past) and
“orientation” within historical discourse.

A semantic tool intended primarily to provide ac-
cess to a homogeneous collection of documents, or
to enable exploration of a narrowly defined slice of
history, might simply summarize a single consensus
story of the past. But a semantic tool for orienting
users to a wider historical discourse would need to
aid their understanding of the variety of stories told
about the past, and to do so it would need to repre-
sent not only the contents of those stories—events,
characters, settings—but the stories themselves.

5 Conclusion

The issues that I have raised here may seem far afield
from the practical concerns of present day NLP re-
search in medical informatics, topic detection and
tracking, or natural language understanding. Cer-
tainly the development of a semantic tool for histor-
ical events is likely to be a much lower research pri-
ority than many other more immediate applications
of automatic event detection and representation. But
I have focused here on historical discourse simply
because it puts the issues discussed into sharp focus,
not because these issues are unique to the histori-
cal domain. No matter what the domain, NLP re-
searchers working on systems for detecting and rep-
resenting events will be forced to resolve the ques-
tion of whether they are detecting and representing
objectively existing things in the world or features of
discourses about the world. And I believe that even
the most “objective” areas of application that appear
to need the former will eventually, like history, turn
out to need the latter.

45



References

Frank R. Ankersmit. 1983. Narrative Logic: A Semantic
Analysis of the Historian’s Language. M. Nijhoff, The
Hague.

William Cronon. 1992. A place for stories: Nature, his-
tory, and narrative. The Journal of American History,
78(4):1347–1376.

Donald Davidson. 1977. The method of truth in meta-
physics. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 2(1):244–
254.

Donald Davidson. 1985. Reply to Quine on events.
In E. LePore and B. P. McLaughlin (Eds.), Actions
and Events: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald
Davidson (pp. 172–176). Basil Blackwell, Oxford.

Donald Davidson. 2001. Essays on Actions and Events
(2nd ed.). Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Donald Davidson. 2001a. The logical form of action
sentences. In Essays on Actions and Events (2nd ed.,
pp. 105–122). Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Donald Davidson. 2001b. Causal relations. In Essays on
Actions and Events (2nd ed., pp. 149–162). Clarendon
Press, Oxford.

Donald Davidson. 2001c. The individuation of events.
In Essays on Actions and Events (2nd ed., pp. 163–
180). Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Martin Doerr, Athina Kritsotaki, and Steven Stead. 2010.
Which period is it? A methodology to create thesauri
of historical periods. In Beyond the Artefact: Digital
Interpretation of the Past. Archaeolingua, Budapest.

Birger Hjørland. 2007. Semantics and knowledge orga-
nization. Annual Review of Information Science and
Technology, 41:367–405.

Henri-Irénée Marrou. 1966. The Meaning of History.
Helicon, Baltimore.

Thomas Kuhn. 1962. The Structure of Scientific Revolu-
tions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Peter Lee. 2004. “Walking backwards into tomorrow”:
Historical consciousness and understanding history.
International Journal of Historical Learning, Teach-
ing and Research, 4(1).

Louis O. Mink. 1978. Narrative form as a cognitive in-
strument. In R. H. Canary and H. Kozicki (Eds.), The
Writing of History: Literary Form and Historical Un-
derstanding (pp. 129–149). University of Wisconsin
Press, Madison, Wisconsin.

Willard Van Orman Quine. 1985. Events and reification.
In E. LePore and B. P. McLaughlin (Eds.), Actions
and Events: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald
Davidson (pp. 162–171). Basil Blackwell, Oxford.

Paul Ricœur. 1984. Time and Narrative, volume 1. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Ann Rigney. 1990. The Rhetoric of Historical Represen-
tation: Three Narrative Histories of the French Revo-
lution. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Jörn Rüsen. 2005. History: Narration, Interpretation,
Orientation. Berghahn Books, New York.

Sheryl Gay Stolberg and Robert Pear. 2010, March 23.
Obama signs health care overhaul bill, with a flourish.
New York Times.

Paul Veyne. 1984. Writing History: Essay on Epistemol-
ogy. Wesleyan University Press, Middletown, Con-
necticut.

Hayden White. 1973. Metahistory: The Historical Imag-
ination in Nineteenth-Century Europe. Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore.

46


