



















































Dependency and Constituency in Translation Shift Analysis


Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (DepLing 2013), pages 282–291,
Prague, August 27–30, 2013. c© 2013 Charles University in Prague, Matfyzpress, Prague, Czech Republic

Dependency and constituency in translation shift analysis

Manuela Sanguinetti and Cristina Bosco and Leonardo Lesmo
Universitá di Torino

Dipartimento di Informatica
Italy

{manuela.sanguinetti;cristina.bosco;leonardo.lesmo}@unito.it

Abstract
Exploiting data from a parallel treebank
recently developed for Italian, English and
French, the paper discusses issues related
to the development of a dependency-based
alignment system. We focus on the align-
ment of linguistic expressions and con-
structions which are structurally different
in the languages that have to be aligned,
and on how to deal with them using de-
pendency rather than constituency. In or-
der to analyze in particular the shifts re-
lated to syntactic structure, we present a
selection of cases where a dependency-
based and a constituency-based represen-
tation has been applied and compared.

1 Introduction

In the last few years several resources have
been developed for improving Machine Trans-
lation tools, applying corpus-based approaches.
Among them, there are parallel multilingual tree-
banks, which are also valuable for the extraction
of linguistic knowledge and for translation studies.
Their usefulness can be strongly improved by data
alignment in particular on the syntactic level, but
this task is very time-consuming if manually per-
formed and especially challenging for automatic
systems.
The main challenge for such kind of systems is
the alignment of linguistic constructions which are
expressed by different structures in different lan-
guages. Based on past work on translational diver-
gences, or shifts – according to Catford’s terminol-
ogy (Catford, 1965) – we thus present in this paper
a corpus-based analysis and a comparison, with re-
spect to translation shifts and their possible align-
ment, of parse tree pairs represented both in a de-
pendency and constituency-based format. The aim
of our research is to create a syntax-driven align-
ment system for parallel parse trees. Our intuition

is that, as it has been shown for other tasks, the
use of syntactic information on dependency rela-
tions and on the predicative structure provided by
annotated corpora can be useful while tackling the
alignment task, and, as a result, for translation pur-
poses. We therefore developed an alignment sys-
tem based on dependency information. While our
alignment system is now at a prototyping stage,
what we intend to define in this paper is a feasi-
bility study on the information that could be ex-
ploited by such system. Moreover, in order to ex-
amine whether and to what extent the dependen-
cies are able to capture parallelisms, we compared
them to a constituency representation. The obser-
vations emerged from this study, as well as being
the main focus of this paper, constitute the theoret-
ical framework upon which our alignment system
can be based. For the preliminary nature of our
research, the approach is strongly rule-based, and
this allows us to have more control over what in-
formation is actually relevant, and which is not.

The paper is organized as follows: after a pre-
sentation of the main contributions presented in
the last decade concerning parse tree alignment,
we describe the linguistic resource we used for our
study, focusing on both size and annotation for-
mats applied to the treebank. In the last sections
we provide some detailed analyses of the data, and
we present a selection of shifts where dependency
and constituency-based representations have been
compared, with final remarks on the observations
emerged from the comparison.

2 Parse tree alignment and related work

When it comes to parse tree alignment, the struc-
tures involved are mostly represented in the form
of syntactic constituents. Alignment of con-
stituency trees typically includes a sub-sentential
level: first, a lexical mapping is performed to ter-
minal nodes (i.e. words), then the non-terminal
nodes (i.e. phrases) are aligned so that ances-

282



tor/descendant in the source tree are only aligned
to an ancestor/descendant of its counterpart in the
target tree (Tiedemann, 2011; Tinsley et al., 2007;
Wu, 1997). Constituency paradigm is still the
most common and widespread in the field of pars-
ing and treebank development, and phrase align-
ments are considered useful for Syntax-based Ma-
chine Translation (which is, in fact, the main
use of aligned parallel resources) (Chiang, 2007;
Tiedemann and Kotzé, 2009), or for annotating
correspondences of idiomatic expressions (Volk et
al., 2011). Furthermore, they were also used to
make explicit the syntactic divergences between
sentence pairs, as in Hearne et al. (2007). In this
work in particular the major benefit from align-
ing phrase structures is claimed to be the oppor-
tunity to infer translational correspondences be-
tween two substrings in the source and target side
by allowing links at higher levels in the tree pair.

Our hypothesis is based on the fact that certain
equivalence relations, despite divergences in trans-
lations, can be detected using dependency trees.
This hypothesis is supported in literature by some
previous work on the alignment of deep syntactic
structures. For example Ding et al. (2003) devel-
oped an algorithm that uses parallel dependency
structures to iteratively add constraints to possi-
ble alignments; an extension of such work is that
of Ding and Palmer (2004), who used a statisti-
cal approach to learn dependency structure map-
pings from parallel corpora, assuming at first a free
word mapping, then gradually adding constraints
to word level alignments by breaking down the
parallel dependency structures into smaller pieces.
Mareček et al. (2008) proposed an alignment sys-
tem of the tectogrammatical layer of texts from
the Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank1

with a greedy feature-based algorithm that ex-
ploits some measurable properties of Czech and
English nodes in the corresponding tectogrammat-
ical layers. Among these works, three in partic-
ular presented a common approach consisting in
the creation of an initial set of word alignment
which is then propagated to the other nodes in the
source and target dependency trees using syntac-
tic knowledge, formalized in a set of alignment
rules (Menezes and Richardson, 2001; Ozdowska,
2005) or extracted by means of unsupervised ma-
chine learning techniques (Ma et al., 2008).

Our approach to the alignment task has been

1http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pcedt2.0/

largely inspired by such works. What we seek to
verify is how such an approach can be a valid al-
ternative to classical phrase-based ones, especially
when encountering translational shifts and linguis-
tic differences of various nature.

3 Annotations and data

In this section we describe the data exploited in
our study, focusing on the dependency and con-
stituency formats applied to the parallel treebank,
together with a brief overview of its size and con-
tent.

3.1 Annotation formats

The resource exploited in this study, i.e. ParTUT2,
is a parallel dependency treebank annotated ac-
cording to the principles and using the same tags
for Part of Speech (PoS) and syntactic labels of the
Italian monolingual treebank TUT (Turin Univer-
sity Treebank3), whose format has been the refer-
ence for parsing evaluation campaigns4, on which
is currently defined the state-of-the-art for Italian.
TUT trees can be partially compared to surface-
syntactic structures (SSyntS) as proposed in the
Meaning-Text Theory (Melčuk, 1988) and to the
analytical layer in the Prague Dependency Tree-
bank style (Böhmová et al., 2003).
As far as the native TUT dependency format
is concerned, it uses projective structures whose
nodes are labeled with words, and whose arcs are
labeled with the names of syntactic relations. Fig-
ure 1 shows an example of a typical TUT tree.
The arc labels include two components: the sec-
ond one specifies if the dependent is an argument
(ARG) or a modifier (in this case there are only
restrictive modifiers: RMOD). The first compo-
nent is the category of the governing item, in case
the relation is ARG, or of the dependent, in case
of RMOD. In some cases, the subcategory (type)
is also included (after the plus sign). So PREP-
RMOD should be read as prepositional restrictive
modifier and DET+DEF-ARG as argument of a
definite determiner. Note that, in TUT, the root
of noun groups is the Determiner (if any), while
the root of a prepositional group is the Preposi-
tion, as prescribed in the Word Grammar (Hudson,
1984) theoretical framework. In the actual TUT

2http://www.di.unito.it/˜tutreeb/
partut.html

3http://www.di.unito.it/˜tutreeb
4http://www.evalita.it/

283



there is a third component (omitted here) concern-
ing the semantic role of the dependent with re-
spect to its governor. An important feature is that
the format is oriented to an explicit representation
of the predicate-argument structure, which is ap-
plied to Verb, but also to Nouns and Adjectives;
to this end, a distinction is drawn between mod-
ifiers and subcategorized arguments and between
surface and deep realization of any admitted ar-
gument. TUT format is also enhanced by a trace
filler mechanism to deal with discontinuous struc-
tures, pro-drops and elliptical constructions. Fur-
thermore, compound nouns and contracted forms
are split into their components, with an associated
node in the parse tree for each of them. The same
happens for multi-word espressions, where each
of their components is associated with a different
node, although in this case they share the same
lexical (i.e lemma) and morpho-syntactic informa-
tion. This means, for example, that the Italian
preposition in the example Figure ”dei”, resulting
from the contraction between the preposition ”di”
(of ) and the masculine plural article ”i” (the), is
split in two distinct nodes for each of their compo-
nents.

Figure 1: Example of the Italian sentence
”Dichiarazione Universale dei Diritti dell’Uomo”
(Universal Declaration of Human Rights) anno-
tated in the TUT format.

The resource has been made available by con-
version also in other formats, among them TUT-
Penn, a format compliant (except for a few aspects
described below) with the English Penn Treebank
(PTB) standard. TUT-Penn has a richer morpho-

syntactic tag set than Penn format, but it imple-
ments almost the same syntactic structure. With
respect to the syntactic annotation, it differs from
PTB only for some particular constructions and
phenomena. It features, for example, a special
representation for post-verbal subjects: though a
quite common phenomenon in Italian, this is typ-
ically challenging for phrase structures (since the
subject is considered as external argument of the
VP). The standard PTB inventory of null elements
is also adopted in TUT–Penn, but while for En-
glish null elements are mainly traces denoting con-
stituent movements, in TUT–Penn they can play
different roles: zero Pronouns, reduction of rela-
tive clauses, elliptical Verbs and also, as said be-
fore, the duplication of Subjects which are posi-
tioned after Verbs.

These two types of representation, i.e. TUT and
TUT-Penn, are those used in our study (in Figure
2 the two formats are shown in parallel)5; the ob-
servations emerged during their comparison with
respect to the alignment issue are described in Sec-
tion 5.1.

3.2 Data set size and content

ParTUT includes 3,184 sentences corresponding
to 85,821 tokens: 28,772 for Italian, 30,118 for
French and 26,931 for English, organized in dif-
ferent sub-corpora and text genres, as outlined in
Table 1. The content of each corpus varies from
legal texts, namely legislative texts of European
Community (JRCAquis)6, to texts extracted from
the proceedings of the European Parliament (Eu-
roparl)7 and the Creative Commons license (CC)8,
from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
(UDHR)9 to instructions on how to create a new
Facebook account (FB) and multilingual transcrip-
tions of TED talks10 (WIT3)11.

Although the limited size of the treebank, which
is still far from being a representative resource of
the languages involved, the variety of genres in-
cluded in the collection also allows to detect some

5While for the implementation of the alignment tool we
use data annotated with TUT labels but formatted in CoNNL
tabs.

6http://langtech.jrc.it/JRC-Acquis.html
7http://www.statmt.org/europarl/
8http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-

nc-sa/2.0
9http://www.ohchr.org/EN/UDHR/Pages

/SearchByLang.aspx
10http://www.ted.com/talks
11https://wit3.fbk.eu/

284



relevant linguistic phenomena and their regularity.

Corpus sentences tokens
JRCAcquis It 181 5,984
JRCAcquis En 179 4,705
JRCAcquis Fr 179 6,580
UDHR It 76 2,072
UDHR En 77 2,293
UDHR Fr 77 2,329
CC It 96 3,252
CC En 88 2,507
CC Fr 102 3,097
FB It 115 1,893
FB En 114 1,723
FB Fr 112 1,964
Europarl It 505 14,051
Europarl En 515 14,204
Europarl Fr 480 14,480
WIT3 It 97 1,520
WIT3 En 92 1,499
WIT3 Fr 99 1,668
total 3,184 85,821

Table 1: Corpora and size of ParTUT

4 Data analysis

We applied several different analyses to the data
using a set of tools which take, as input, data in the
native TUT format. The assumptions of our anal-
ysis are based on preliminary studies (Sanguinetti
and Bosco, 2012) on the presence, and their classi-
fication, of translation shifts in the dataset. The re-
sults of those studies had shown that, as expected,
the highest number of shifts occurred essentially
on the morpho-syntactic and, especially, structural
level (see Section 5 for their description). In or-
der to both support and integrate those prelimi-
nary studies, in the current analysis we focused
our attention basically on the degree of structural
complexity of the texts in the different languages,
described in terms of word order and dependency
distance (Hudson, 1995). We also selected these
two metrics as they are good indicators of potential
cross-linguistic differences and translational diver-
gences, as well as discrepancies in the structural
representation using different formalisms.
As a side effect of the application of these tools,
we also obtained a validation and an improved
quality of the data set.

4.1 Word order

As for the word order (whose statistics are sum-
marized in Table 2), although the high number of
contributions in literature on the matter, it is diffi-
cult to find quantitative and cross-language results
about the behavior of languages with respect to the
movement of major constituents within the sen-
tence structure. A reliable and wide study about
word order should be based on a carefully bal-
anced very large dataset, and this goal is beyond
the scope of this work. The limits of our analysis
are those imposed by the limited size and content
of the dataset currently available, the results ob-
tained, however are in line with common knowl-
edge on typical behaviours of English, Italian and
French with respect to this issue.
In our analysis, we focused mainly on four ele-
ments, i.e. Verb, Subject, Object and Comple-
ment12 and on their relative positions within the
sentence. We excluded in advance from the anal-
ysis data such as marked structures, interrogative
and relative clauses, or infinitival structures, in
order to concentrate our attention on unmarked
declarative clauses only. For the same motivations
we did not consider expletive, progressive and pas-
sive structures. The remaining verbal structures
consist of 782 clauses for English, 886 for French
and 597 for Italian distributed within the three
monolingual treebanks. The far smaller amount of
verbal structures taken into account for Italian is
motivated by the exclusion of structures affected
by pro-drop, i.e. the absence of subject in finite
clauses, which occurs 32.6% of unmarked declar-
ative verbal structures.
The most frequent word order for all the three lan-
guages is the classical SVO, as assumed in lit-
erature (Dryer, 1998); however, if we focus our
attention on the relative position of Subject and
Verb, a typical issue that can be problematic for
constituency-based formats, we can see that this
phenomenon is quite rare in French (4.7%) and
English (7.3%), but far more frequent in Italian
(17.1%) verbal structures. Such figures, as far as
Italian language is concerned, are in line with the
results obtained in previous studies on the influ-
ence of the constituent order on data-driven pars-
ing (Alicante et al., 2012), where the Subj/Verb
order is attested at 79.10% and its inverted order

12We encompassed on the label Compl the Indirect Object,
the Agent complement, predicatives and other indirect com-
plements that act as arguments of the verb encountered.

285



at 20.90%.

Language order frequency
Italian (597) Subj/Verb(/Obj) 74.5%

Subject after Verb 17.1%
Compl between 9.9%

French (886) Subj/Verb(/Obj) 82.4%
Subject after Verb 4.7%
Compl between 9.4%

English (782) Subj/Verb(/Obj) 88.5%
Subject after Verb 7.3%
Compl between 1.02%

Table 2: Word order in the ParTUT languages.

The well-known assumption that English is fea-
tured by a fixed word order, with respect to French
or Italian, is clearly attested by our results also
observing that in the former it is very rare that a
Complement or an Object is positioned between
Subject and Verb. In Italian and French vari-
ous kinds of Complements can be positioned be-
tween Subject and Verb13, thus making the struc-
ture more complex.

4.2 Dependency distance

Concerning the results obtained in the analysis
of dependency distance, which is measured here
as the distance between words and their parents
in terms of intervening words (Hudson, 1995),
we considered also its correlated measure, that
of dependency direction, i.e the contrast between
governor-initial (which means that the position
number of the governor is lower than that of the
dependent) and governor-final dependencies (see
Table 3). In view of a comparison with a con-
stituency representation, this measure is a good in-
dicator of how the relationship between a depen-
dent and its head, within a dependency framework,
is still preserved despite their distance, and the di-
rection of this distance. This seems even more im-
portant when we have to find correspondences be-
tween parallel parse trees in different languages.

The distance is reported in terms of per-
centage of dependencies, while the direction is
expressed by the labels POS (POSITIVE, i.e.
governor-initial cases) and NEG (NEGATIVE, i.e.
governor-final cases). With respect to this mat-

13Such complements are mainly in the form of clitics ex-
pressing a direct or indirect object (”me l’ont demandé” –
I was asked to), or predicative complements (”non lo sono
mai” – they are never like that)

ter, we observed that English has a higher number
of dependency relations with governor-final cases
(25.19%), although their distance is lower if com-
pared to Italian and French. This could be easily
explained by the higher frequency of English pre-
modifiers, with respect to Italian and French.

Despite the small amount of data available for
our experiments, from a comparison of the data for
the Italian in ParTUT and those extracted from the
TUT monolingual treebank14 (a more extended
dataset, with a different text composition from the
multilingual treebank) there is a substantial simi-
larity with respect to dependency distance and its
direction (see the rightmost column in Table 3). In
light of this, we expect similar results for English
and French as well, once we can rely on a larger
dataset.

Distance En. Fr. It. TUT
POS 74.81 81.91 81.01 76.65
POS <=10 98.12 97.89 97.72 97.88
10 > POS < 20 1.43 1.64 1.72 1.62
POS >= 20 0.45 0.47 0.56 0.49
NEG 25.19 18.09 18.99 18.59
NEG <=10 95.70 92.81 93.62 92.24
10 > NEG < 20 2.99 4.91 4.54 5.17
NEG >= 20 1.31 2.28 1.84 2.58

Table 3: The table shows statistics on dependency
distance and direction distributed per language,
with a comparison of Italian data of ParTUT with
the overall figures extracted from the monolingual
treebank TUT.

5 Translation shifts and their alignment

The search for matches between pairs of non-
isomorphic trees requires an extended knowledge
(whether formalized by a set of rules or learned
automatically) on the divergences, or shifts, that
may occur during the translation process. While
designing our alignment system, we attempted in
a first step to determine what types of shifts may
be encountered in ParTUT. The classification was
made on a sample of the treebank sentences ex-
tracted from each of the sub-corpora that compose
the collection.

This comparison led to a first basic classifi-
cation15 which includes essentially three levels:

14The treebank currently consists of 3,542 sentences and
102,150 tokens.

15It was difficult to establish a clear-cut disticntion for each

286



morpho-syntactic (Category Shifts) and syntactic
level (Strucutral Shifts) on one hand, and that of
meaning (Semantic Shifts) on the other16.
Category Shifts may involve a change in the Part
of Speech;
Structral Shifts are the most complex and include
a number of different situations that can be deter-
mined both by linguistic constraints imposed by
the respective languages, or, more simply, by in-
dividual translator’s choice. Structural shifts may
thus comprise cases of:
– different word order and discontinuous corre-
spondences;
– passivization/depassivization;
– function word introduction/elimination;
– conflation (i.e. tre translation of two words using
a single word equivalent in meaning);
– paraphrases; – idioms.
Semantic Shifts mainly concern the level of
meaning; they include cases of:
– addition/deletion (i.e. the introduction or elimi-
nation of pieces of information);
– mutation (whenever the correspondence is char-
acterised by a high degree of fuzziness, or the con-
tent substantially differs).

In order to handle properly with such diver-
gences, we therefore designed an alignment sys-
tem that starting from a lexical mapping of the
nodes in the tree pair, it moves outwards to the un-
aligned nodes using the information available on
syntactic structure, with a focus in particular on
the argument structure (which, in ParTUT is ap-
plied to Nouns and Adjectives as well).
The algorithm, which is currently in a prototype
implementation stage, includes two distinct steps,
respectively referring to the lexical level and to
syntactic dependencies.
Step 1: lexical correspondences are identified and
stored in lexical pairs; the mapping of source and
target nodes is carried out by means of a proba-
bilistic dictionary created using the IMB Model 1
implementation in the Bilingual Sentence Aligner
(Moore, 2002).

kind of shifts, especially when multiple divergences cooc-
curred. Their classification was made based on the predomi-
nant aspects that characterize each shift.

16This classification is similar in spirit to the work by
Cyrus (2006), Dorr (1994) and Melčuk and Wanner (2006),
and partially adopts their terminology and definitions. In par-
ticular, like in Cyrus (2006), we opted for maintaining the
notion of shift as, in our view, particularly conveying the idea
of the transfer that takes place during the process of transpo-
sition of meaning from one language to another.

Step 2: starting from the lexical pairs obtained in
the first step, correspondences between neighbour-
ing nodes are verified comparing in parallel the re-
spective relational structure, such that:

ds > dt if:
(ws;wt)
rel (ws;ds) = rel(wt;dt)

where ds and dt are a source and a target node
of a tree pair whose governors are the word ws
and its counterpart wt; ds and dt can be aligned
(ds > dt) whenever their governors are selected
as anchor pair (ws;wt) during the lexical map-
ping step, and the syntactic relation rel (ws;ds)
between the source anchor word ws and its de-
pendent ds is the same as rel(wt;dt), i.e. that be-
tween the target anchor word wt and its dependent
dt. This means that, for example, in the expres-
sions ”no one” – ”nessun individuo”, given the an-
chor pair (no; nessun), and the syntactic relations
ARG(no; one) and ARG(nessun; individuo), then
the alignment can be expanded to the dependents
(one;individuo).

Our hypothesis is that tree alignment of depen-
dency structures could work because, besides lex-
icon, it is based on predicative structure, which
(provided that this is shared by the two parse trees)
will remain stable in different languages despite
variations in the realization of the constituents; as
a result, whenever the algorithm attempts to search
for correspondences between a source and a target
dependency tree, it may be able to find, within a
reasonable distance from the head of a predicative
structure, the relations that make up that structure.
This reasonable distance can be approximated by
taking into account the elements we reported in the
analysis on word order and dependency distance.

5.1 Constituency and dependency:
cross-linguistic comparison

In the previous section, we described the overall
framework of our alignment system; in this
section, we attempt to describe its strengths and
weaknesses while comparing trees in ParTUT
as represented in the dependency-based TUT
format and in the constituency-based converted
format TUT-Penn. The comparison mainly deals
with the types of shift introduced in Section 5.
What emerged from this investigation is that the
choice to compare sentence pairs considering
their deep structure and relations, rather than
grouping them together into constituents, can help

287



to overcome some of the limitations imposed by
such non-isomorphism. This proved true in the
case of category shift. With respect to the classic
case of nominalization, for example, while a
hierarchical costituency representation gives rise
to two different phrases, dependents identification
of corresponding heads is facilitated by the fact
that, as mentioned in Section 3.1, even Nouns
are assigned a predicative structure. Dependents
are therefore labeled as arguments of a same
predicative structure, as in the example below17:

(1a) TUT:

1-improving[TOP] 2-the[1;OBJ] 3-efficiency[2;ARG]

1-l’[TOP] 1-amélioration[1;ARG] 3-de[2;OBJ] 4-l’[3;ARG]
5-efficacité[4;ARG]

(The improvement of the efficiency)18

(1b) TUT-Penn:

(VP (V Improving) (NP (ART the) (N efficiency)))

(NP (ART L’) (NP (N amélioration) (PP (PREP
de) (NP (ART l’) (N efficacité)))))

As they include linguistic aspects of various
nature, structural shifts require broader and more
articulated considerations. On the one hand
the dependency structure, and in particular the
predicative structure as encoded in TUT, once
again may be useful in overcoming translational
divergences and reducing them to a common
structure. This is the case, for example, for
long-distance dependencies - which are difficult
to represent as such in a phrase structure - but
also for word order. Below we report an English-
Italian bisentence that may exemplify this issue:

(2a) TUT:

1-the[18;SUBJ] 2-exchange[1;ARG] 3-of [2;RMOD]
4-information[3;ARG] 5-on[4;RMOD]
6-environmental[9;RMOD] 7-life[8;RMOD]

17The examples are here represented in a compact form
where only the major annotated information is shown:
for each dependency node we provide information on
position-word[governorposition;relation], while for con-
stituency only some phrase label is abbreviated. Each ex-
ample reports a sentence pair where the source language is
always English and the target language is Italian or French.
Bold characters are used to highlight the dependency distance
between a head and its dependent in the linear order of the
sentence (see example 2a and 2b).

18The glosses for non-English examples are intended as lit-
eral and do not necessarily correspond to the correct English
expression.

8-cycle[9;RMOD] 9-performance[5;ARG]
10-and[5;COORD] 11-on[10;COORD2ND] 12-the[11;ARG]
13-achievements[12;ARG] 14-of [13;RMOD]
15-design[16;RMOD] 16-solutions[14;ARG] 17-is[18;AUX]
18-facilitated[TOP]

1-è[2;AUX] 2-agevolato[TOP] 3-uno[2;SUBJ]
4-scambio[3;ARG] 5-di[4;RMOD] 6-informazioni[5;ARG]
7-su[6;RMOD] 8-l’[7;ARG] 9-analisi[8;ARG] 10-di[8;RMOD]
11-la[10;ARG] 12-prestazione[11;ARG]
13-ambientale[12;RMOD] 14-di[12;RMOD] 15-il[14;ARG]
16-ciclo[15;ARG] 17-di[16;RMOD] 18-vita[17;RMOD]
19-e[7;COORD] 20-su[19;COORD2ND] 21-le[20;ARG]
22-realizzazioni[21;ARG] 23-di[22;RMOD]
24-soluzioni[23;ARG] 25-di[24;RMOD]
26-progettazione[25;ARG]

(is facilitated an exchange of information on
the analysis of the environmental life cycle
perfomance and on the achievements of design
solutions.)

(2b) TUT-Penn:

( (S (NP (NP (ART The) (N exchange)) (PP
(PREP of )(NP (NP (N information))(PP (PP
(PREP on)(NP (NP (NP (N life)) (N cycle)) (NP
(ADJ environmental) (N performance))))(CONJ
and)(PP (PREP on)(NP (NP (ART the) (N
achievements))(PP (PREP of )(NP (NP (N
design)) (N solutions)))))))))(VP (V is)(VP (V
facilitated)))) )

( (S (VP (V é) (VP (V agevolato)(NP (ART
uno)(N scambio))(PP (PREP di)(NP (NP (N
informazioni))(PP (PREP su)(NP (NP (ART l’)(N
analisi))(PP (PREP di)(NP (ART la)(NP (N
prestazione))(ADJP (ADJ ambientale)(PP (PREP
di) (NP (NP (ART il) (N ciclo)) (PP (PREP
di)(NP (NP (N vita))(CONJ e)(PP (PREP su)(NP
(NP (ART le) (N realizzazioni))(PP (PREP
di)(NP(NP (N soluzioni))(PP (PREP di)(NP (N
progettazione))))))))))))))))))))))

The English sentence presents a standard Subj-
Verb order, although their dependency distance
(as measured with the tools used for analysis de-
scribed in Section 4) equals to 17; on the contrary,
its Italian counterpart shows a Verb-Subj order
with a positive dependency distance of 1. While
such figures affected the phrase structure repre-
sentation, mainly because of the post-positioned
Subject in the Italian version, this was not the case
in dependency analysis, where the respective ar-
guments of the corresponding verbs were appro-

288



priately assigned, despite the high distance of the
Subject from the main verb in English, thus pre-
serving the parallelism between the two structures,
and as a result, their alignment.

The same can be said for passivization, which
can be easily detected and aligned by means
of the explicit representation of deep relations.
Considering the bisentence below, for example,
a common predicative structure can be observed
for the main verbs in the respective languages,
although in the passive form surface syntactic
roles are also expressed, so as to specify that the
verb has undertaken a transformation: the surface
Subject is thus linked to its predicate with the
relation [OBJ/SUBJ], meaning that it corresponds
to a deep Object. While in the phrase structure
the arguments of the predicate are moved during
transformation, resulting in a different realization.

(3a) TUT:

1-we[2;SUBJ] 2-allow[TOP] 3-accounts[2;OBJ]

1-gli[4;OBJ/SUBJ] 2-account[1;ARG] 3-sono[4;AUX]
4-consentiti[TOP]

(accounts are allowed)

(3b) TUT-Penn:

((S (NP (PRO we)) (VP (V allow) (NP (N
accounts)))) )

((S (NP (ART gli) (N account)) (V sono) (VP (V
consentiti))) )

A more tricky cases are those of paraphrases,
idioms and the conflation of two lexical items into
a single item semantically equivalent. In Fig-
ure 2 we represented in a graphic form an exam-
ple of paraphrase, where a Verb in English is ex-
pressed with a Verb followed by the nominalized
form of the English Verb in Italian, and of an id-
iom in English and its translation in French. In
the sub-class of idioms we also included multi-
word expressions: although their overall pres-
ence in the treebank is not so relevant (1,15%
in Italian, 0,86% in French and 0,05% in En-
glish), it is a phenomenon that we should take
into account, as they share with idioms the fea-
tures of non-compositionality and an idiosyncatic
use, which make them a very complex linguguis-
tic phenomenon for several NLP tasks, not only
in the alignment issue. It should also be pointed
out that, despite the problematic identification of
a multi-word unit, in the TUT format a number

of these linguistic items are already recognized as
such. This means that the aligner also can take ad-
vantage of this information, as it is provided in the
annotation.

All the aspects mentioned here share some pe-
culiarities that require particular consideration:
the difficult identification of these cases, by virtue
of both the absence of a direct lexical mapping
and a different syntactic realization, may see the
need to introduce a more extensive hierarchical
notion, such as that of dependency substructure, or
treelet, introduced in Ding and Palmer (2004)19.
This could be useful in order to capture possible
translational matches at a higher level, abstract-
ing away from pure relations between individual
nodes (supporting, though from a dependency per-
spective, what suggested in Hearne et al. (2007),
also reported in Section 2).
Contrarily, for example, to Mel’čuk and Wanner
(2006), where the level considered (i.e. the deep-
syntactic structure, DSyntS) is abstract enough
to avoid all types of lexical and syntactic diver-
gences, the dependency format considered in this
study, despite the explicit annotation of argumen-
tal roles, is more oriented to the representation
of the surface dependency structure. The obser-
vations posed above, and the examples in Fig-
ure 2 suggested us the hypothesis that to over-
come these limitations while attempting to map di-
vergent (though translationally equivalent) struc-
tures, it is necessary to integrate the current align-
ment system with an additional layer of abstrac-
tion, such that:

d(s1, ... , sn) > d(t1, ... , tn) if:
(ws;wt)
rel (ws;d(s1, ... , sn)) = rel(wt;dt)

where n is the number of nodes comprised in the
substructure, and (ws; wt) is the lexical pair used
as the closest anchor point from which the align-
ment can be expanded. This means that more than
one node that goes down from ws could be aligned
to the subtree that goes down from ds; i.e., for ex-
ample, that in the expression given in Figure 2 ”to
bring that home” – ”pour vous faire comprendre”,
given the anchor pair (to; pour) and the syntac-
tic relations ARG(to; bring) and ARG(pour; faire)
the descending nodes could then be aligned.

19As pointed out by the authors, the choice of the term
treelet was made in order to avoid confusion with subtree, as
treelets do not necessarily go down to every leaf.

289



Figure 2: Graphic representations in TUT (on the left side) and TUT-Penn (on the right) of two tree
pairs. The first reports a paraphrase in English, ”to achieve the promotion”, of a single Italian verb,
”promuovere” (“to promote”); the second one represents an English idiom,”to bring that home”, and its
French translation, “pour vous faire comprendre” (”to let you understand”). While an alignment link can
be drawn between the correspondent phrases in the constituency format, we are not able to do the same
for the nodes in the dependency structures.

5.2 Discussion

Comparing the TUT dependency format to a con-
verted version in the standard Penn Treebank, we
came to the conclusion that a number of shifts
could be handled with a simple approach that di-
rectly uses dependency relations expressed in the
format at issue. Structural shifts when the same
argumental roles are shared by the parallel trees,
or wirh differences in the linear word order or
distance are easily linked. However, other cases
required a different treatment. Some classes of
shifts, in particular those where divergences are
due to differences in the idiosyncratic use between
the languages or to the low compositionality of the
expressions, may require the integration of a more
abstract notion of substrucutre, or treelet (which
can be partially assimilated to that of constituency
subtree) in order to link the entire substructure to
its equivalent node, that is to capture translational
equivalence between these complex expressions
and their counterpart in the other language. This
seems to us a viable solution that could balance
the limits imposed by the format with the useful
linguistic information it provides.

6 Conclusion and future work

In this paper we presented a comparative study
between dependency and costituency representa-
tion of parallel structures with the aim of verifiyng
how and to what extent dependencies are a valu-
able support in the alignment task. The aim of our
research, in fact, is laying the ground for the de-
velopment of a more linguistically motivated tree-
bank alignment system which could properly ex-
ploit linguistic information on dependency struc-
tures in order to handle properly translational di-
vergences, or shifts, that may occur on different
levels (morpho-syntactic, syntactic or semantic).
The linguistic resource we used is a parallel multi-
lingual treebank, ParTUT, where dependency rep-
resentation is more oriented to the surface order
of nodes in the input sentence, rather than a deep
semantic representation. Besides the extension of
the treebank, in order to make it a more balanced
and reliable linguistic resource, the next steps in
our research will consist in improving the imple-
mentation of the alignment system so that it could
consider the notion of treelet, and, in a further
stage, in testing more extensively this method also

290



to other shifts, such as semantic shifts, which con-
stitute an even greater challenge.

References
Anita Alicante, Cristina Bosco, Anna Corazza and Al-

berto Lavelli. 2012. A treebank-based study on the
influence of Italian word order on parsing perfor-
mance. In Proceedings of the Eight International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’12), pp. 1985–1982.

Alena Böhmová, Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová and Barbora
Hladká. 2003. The Prague Dependency Treebank.
In Treebanks, pp. 103-127, Springer Netherlands.

John C. Catford. 1965. A linguistic theory of trans-
lation: An essay on applied linguistics, University
Press, Oxford.

David Chiang. 2007. Hierarchical phrase-based trans-
lation. In Computational Linguistics, volume 33,
number 2, pp. 201–228, MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, USA.

Lea Cyrus. 2006. Building a resource for study-
ing translation shifts. In Proceedings of Language
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC ’06),
Genoa, Italy.

Yuan Ding, Daniel Gildea and Martha Palmer. 2003.
An algorithm for word-level alignment of parallel
dependency trees. In The 9th Machine Translation
Summit of the International Association for Machine
Translation, pp. 95–101.

Yuan Ding and Martha Palmer. 2004. Automatic learn-
ing of parallel dependency treelet pairs. In Proceed-
ings of The First International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP-04), Hainan
Island, China, pp. 233–243.

Bonnie J. Dorr. 1994. Machine translation diver-
gences: a formal description and proposed solution.
In Computational Linguistics, volume 20, number 4,
pp. 597–633.

Matthew S. Dryer. 1998. Aspects of Word Order in
the Languages of Europe. In Constituent Order in
the Languages of Europe, pp. 283 - 319.

Mary Hearne, John Tinsley, Ventsislav Zhechev and
Andy Way. 2007. Capturing translational diver-
gences with a statistical tree-to-tree aligner. In
Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Theoretical
and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation
(TMI-07).

Richard Hudson. 1984. Word Grammar. Basil Black-
well, Oxford and New York.

Richard Hudson. 1995. Measuring syn-
tactic difficulty. Unpublished paper.
http://www.phon.ucl.ac.uk/home/dick/difficulty.htm

Yanjun Ma, Sylwia Ozdowska, Yanli Sun, Andy Way.
2008. Improving word alignment using syntactic
dependencies. In Proceeding of the Second ACL
Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical
Translation (SSST-2), pp. 69–77.

David Mareček, Zdeněk Žabortský and Václav Novák.
2008. Automatic alignment of Czech and English
deep syntactic dependency tree. In Proceeding of
the 12th EAMT Conference, Hamburg, Germany.

Igor Mel’čuk. 1988 Dependency Syntax: Theory and
Practice.. The SUNY Press, Albany, N.Y.

Igor Melčuk and Leo Wanner. 2006. Syntactic mis-
matches in machine translation. In Machine Trans-
lation, volume 20, number 2, pp. 81–138 .

Arul Menezes and Stephen D. Richardson. 2001. A
best-first alignment algorithm for automatic extrac-
tion of transfer mappings from bilingual corpora. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Data-driven Meth-
ods in Machine Translation at ACL-2001, pp. 39–46.

Robert C. Moore. 2002. Fast and accurate sentence
alignment of bilingual corpora. In Proceedings of
the 5th Conference of the Association for Machine
Translation in the Americas: From Research to Real
Users, (AMTA ’02), pp. 135–144.

Silvia Ozdowska. 2005. Using bilingual dependencies
to align words in English/French parallel corpora. In
Proceedings of the ACL Student Research Workshop,
pp. 127–132.

Manuela Sanguinetti and Cristina Bosco. 2012. Trans-
lational divergences and their alignment in a paral-
lel treebank. In Proceedings of the 11th Workshop
on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT11), pp.
169–180.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2011. Bitext alignment. Morgan &
Claypool.

Jörg Tiedemann and Gideon Kotzé. 2009. Building
a large machine-aligned parallel treebank. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Tree-
banks and Linguistic Theories (TLT ’08), pp. 197-
208.

John Tinsley, Ventislav Zhechev, Mary Hearne and
Andy Way. 2007. Robust language pair-
independent sub-tree alignment. In Proceedings of
the MT Summit XI, pp. 467-474.

Martin Volk, Torsten Marek, Yvonne Samuelsson.
2011. Building and Querying Parallel Treebanks.
In Translation: Computation, Corpora, Cogni-
tion, vol. 1, num. 1, http://www.t-c3.org/index.php/t-
c3/article/view/8

Dekai Wu. 1997. Stochastic inversion transduction
grammars and bilingual parsing of parallel corpora.
In Computational Linguistics, volume 3, number 3,
pp. 377–403.

291


