










































Recognition of Classical Arabic Poems


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 9–16,
Atlanta, Georgia, June 14, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Recognition of Classical Arabic Poems 

 
Abdulrahman Almuhareb Ibrahim Alkharashi  Lama AL Saud  Haya Altuwaijri 

Computer Research Institute  

KACST  

Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
{muhareb, kharashi, lalsaud, htuwaijri}@kacst.edu.sa  

 

 

Abstract 

This work presents a novel method for recog-

nizing and extracting classical Arabic poems 

found in textual sources. The method utilizes 

the basic classical Arabic poem features such 

as structure, rhyme, writing style, and word 

usage. The proposed method achieves a preci-

sion of 96.94% while keeping a high recall 

value at 92.24%. The method was also used to 

build a prototype search engine for classical 

Arabic poems. 

1 Introduction 

Searching for poetry instances on the web, as well 

as identifying and extracting them, is a challenging 

problem. Contributing to the difficulty are the fol-

lowing: creators of web content do not usually fol-

low a fixed standard format when publishing 

poetry content; there is no special HTML tags that 

can be used to identify and format poetry content; 

and finally poetry content is usually intermixed 

with other content published on the web. 

In this paper, a classical Arabic poetry recog-

nition and extraction method has been proposed. 

The method utilizes poem features and writing 

styles to identify and isolate one or more poem text 

bodies in a given piece of text. As an implementa-

tion of the poetry recognition and extraction me-

thod, a prototype Arabic poetry search engine was 

developed.  

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, 

the related works are briefly discussed. Section 3 

gives a general overview of Arabic poems features. 

Section 4 discusses the methodology used to iden-

tify and extract poem content from a given text. It 

also presents the used evaluation method. In Sec-

tion 5, we discuss the experimentation including 

the used dataset and results. A prototype imple-

mentation of the method is presented in Section 6 

followed by conclusions and future work plans. 

2 Related Work 

To the best of our knowledge, this work
1
is the first 

attempt to explore the possibility for building an 

automated system for recognizing and extracting 

Arabic poems from a given piece of text. The most 

similar work related to this effort is the work that 

has been done independently by Tizhoosh and Da-

ra (2006) and Tizhoosh et al. (2008). The objective 

of Tizhoosh and his colleagues was to define a me-

thod that can distinguish between poem and non-

poem (prose) documents using text classification 

techniques such as naïve Bayes, decision trees, and 

neural networks. The classifiers were applied on 

poetic features such as rhyme, shape, rhythm, me-

ter, and meaning. 

Another related work is by Al-Zahrani and El-

shafei (2010) who filed a patent application for 

inventing a system for Arabic poetry meter identi-

fication. Their invention is based on Al-khalil bin 

Ahmed theory on Arabic poetry meters from the 8
th
 

century. The invented system accepts spoken or 

written Arabic poems to identify and verify their 

poetic meters. The system also can be used to as-

sist the user in interactively producing poems 

based on a chosen meter.  

Work on poem processing has been also con-

ducted on other topics such as poem style and me-

ter classification, rhyme matching, poem 

generation and quality evaluation. For example, Yi 

                                                           
1 Parts of this work are also presented in Patent Application 

No.: US 2012/0290602 A1. 

9



et al. (2004) used a technique based on term con-

nection for poetry stylistics analysis. He et al. 

(2007) used Support Vector Machines to differen-

tiate bold-and-unconstrained styles from graceful-

and-restrained styles of poetry. Hamidi et al. 

(2009) proposed a meter classification system for 

Persian poems based on features that are extracted 

from uttered poems. Reddy and Knight (2011) 

proposed a language-independent method for 

rhyme scheme identification. Manurung (2004) 

and Netzer et al. (2009) proposed two poem gener-

ation methods using hill-climbing search and word 

associations norms, respectively. In a recent work, 

Kao and Jurafsky (2012) proposed a method to 

evaluate poem quality for contemporary English 

poetry. Their proposed method computes 16 fea-

tures that describe poem style, imagery, and senti-

ment. Kao and Jurafsky's result showed that 

referencing concrete objects is the primary indica-

tor for professional poetry. 

3 Features of Classical Arabic Poems 

Traditionally, Arabic poems have been used as a 

medium for recording historical events, transfer-

ring messages among tribes, glorifying tribe or 

oneself, or satirizing enemies. Classical Arabic 

poems are characterized by many features. Some 

of these features are common to poems written in 

other languages, and some are specific to Arabic 

poems. Features of classical Arabic poems have 

been established in the pre-Islamic era and re-

mained almost unchanged until now. Variation for 

such features can be noticed in contemporary (Pao-

li, 2001) and Bedouin (Palva, 1993) poems. In this 

section, we describe the Arabic poetic features that 

have been utilized in this work. 

3.1 Presence 

Instances of classical Arabic poems, as well as 

other types of poems, can be found in all sorts of 

printed and electronic documents including books, 

newspapers, magazines, and websites. An instance 

of classical Arabic poems can represent a complete 

poem or a poem portion. A single document can 

contain several classical Arabic poem instances. 

Poems can occur in designated documents by 

themselves or intermixed with normal text. In addi-

tion, poems can be found in non-textual media in-

cluding audios, videos and images. 

In the web, Arabic poem instances can be found 

in designated websites
2
. Only-poem websites nor-

mally organize poems in categories and adapt a 

unified style format that is maintained for the en-

tire website. Hence, poem instances found in such 

websites are almost carefully written and should 

contain fewer errors.  However, instances found in 

other websites such as forums and blogs are writ-

ten in all sorts of styles and may contain mistakes 

in the content, spelling, and formatting. 

3.2 Structure 

Classical Arabic poems are written as a set of 

verses. There is no limit on the number of verses in 

a poem. However, a typical poem contains be-

tween twenty and a hundred verses (Maling, 1973). 

Arabic poem verses are short in length, compared 

to lines in normal text, and of equivalent length. 

Each verse is divided into two halves called hemis-

tiches which also are equivalent in length. 

3.3 Meter 

The meters of classical Arabic poetry were mod-

eled by Al-Khalil bin Ahmed in the 8
th
 century. Al-

Khalil's system consists of 15 meters (Al-Akhfash, 

a student of Al-Khalil, added the 16th meter later). 

Each meter is described by an ordered set of con-

sonants and vowels. Most classical Arabic poems 

can be encoded using these identified meters and 

those that can't be encoded are considered un-

metrical.   Meters' patterns are applied on the he-

mistich level and each hemistich in the same poem 

must follow the same meter. 

3.4 Rhyme 

Classical Arabic poems follow a very strict but 

simple rhyme model. In this model, the last letter 

of each verse in a given poem must be the same. If 

the last letter in the verse is a vowel, then the 

second last letter of each verse must be the same as 

well. There are three basic vowel sounds in Arabic. 

Each vowel sound has two versions: a long and a 

short version. Short vowels are written as diacriti-

cal marks below or above the letter that precedes 

them while long vowels are written as whole let-

ters. The two versions of each basic vowel are con-

sidered equivalent for rhyme purposes. Table 1 

                                                           
2 adab.com is an example for a dedicated website for Arabic 

poetry. 

10



shows these vowel sets and other equivalent letters. 

These simple matching rules make rhyme detection 

in Arabic a much simpler task compared to English 

where different sets of letter combinations can sig-

nal the same rhyme (Tizhoosh & Dara 2006). On 

the other hand, the fact that, in modern Arabic 

writing, short vowels are ignored adds more chal-

lenges for the rhyme identification process. How-

ever, in poetry typesetting, typists tend not to omit 

short vowels especially for poems written in stan-

dard Arabic. 

 
Table 1: Equivalent vowels and letters 

Equivalent Letters Equivalent Vowels

ta, ta marbutah/a/, /a:/

ha, ta marbutah/u/, /u:/

 /i/, /i:/

 

H1

V
e
r
se

 1

H2

H1

V
e
r
se

 2

H2

H1

V
e
r
se

 3

H2

H1

V
e
r
se

 4

 H2

Figure 1: An example of classical Arabic poems with 

four verses written in Style 1. H1 and H2 are the first 

and second hemistich. 

3.5 Writing Styles 

There are three predominant writing styles of clas-

sical Arabic poems: (1) the poem is written in a 

single column with each verse in two rows; (2) the 

poem is written in a single column with each verse 

in two rows where the first half of each verse is 

written aligned to the right and the second half of 

each verse is aligned to the left; and (3) the poem 

is written such that each verse is written as two 

halves on the same row and separated by one or 

more punctuation marks or spaces. In some cases, 

this style can also be written without any separa-

tors and the end of the first half and the start of the 

second half have to be guessed by the reader. Fig-

ures 1 to 3 show examples of the three writing 

styles of classical Arabic poems. 

 

H1

V
e
r
se

 1

H2

H1

V
e
r
se

 2

H2

H1

V
e
r
se

 3

H2

H1

V
e
r
se

 4

 H2

Figure 2: An example of classical Arabic poems with 

four verses written in Style 2. 

 

Hemistich 1Hemistich 2 

Verse 1

Verse 2

Verse 3

 Verse 4

Figure 3: An example of classical Arabic poems with 

four verses written in Style 3. 

3.6 Word Usage 

It is very noticeable that classical Arabic poets tend 

not to use words repetitively in a given poem. To 

evaluate this observation, we analyzed a random 

set of 134 poem instances. We found duplicate 

start words (excluding common stop words) in 

22% of the poems. Duplicate end words were 

found in 31% of the poems. However, the proba-

bility of encountering a verse with a duplicate start 

in the same poem is only 3% and 4% for a dupli-

cate end word. 

4 Method 

The proposed method for standard Arabic poem 

recognition utilizes the poetic features described 

previously including structure, rhyme, writing 

style, and word usage. The meter feature was not 

11



literally used in the proposed method and may be 

used in a future work. The system operation is 

summarized by the flowchart shown in Figure 5 

and described by the following steps: 

1. Read input text line by line accepting only 
lines with reasonable size (e.g., lines of 

size between 2 and 20 words).  

2. Collect consecutive lines that have equiva-
lent length: compute the length of the line 

by counting the characters in the line. 

Lines are considered equivalent in length if 

the length difference is below a certain 

threshold (e.g., 40%, as has been used in 

the experiment discussed below).  

3. Identify lines with separators to process 
Style 3 candidate verses. Separators are 

identified by searching for a set of white 

spaces or punctuations in the middle of the 

line between two halves. If identified, 

transform Style 3 to Style 1 shape for nor-

malization.  

4. Identify candidate rhymes at the end of 
each line.  

5. Identify poems: searching for candidate 
poems in a consecutive list of candidate 

half-verses can produce several solutions 

based on rhyme. Select solution that pro-

duces poems with the maximum possible 

lengths. Figure 4 shows an example for a 

multiple solution case. 

6. Repeat steps 1 to 5 until the end of the text 
body is reached. 

 

 
Figure 4: An example for multiple solutions based on 

rhyme. A list of 10 candidate half-verses indicated by 

their rhymes from A to F. Poem 1 starts at line 2 and 

ends at line 9 with 4 verses and rhyme C. Poem 2 starts 

at line 3 and ends at line 6 with 2 verses and rhyme D. 

The proposed method will select Poem 1 instead of 

Poem 2 since it has more verses. 

Following these steps, the proposed method can 

recognize instances of classical Arabic poems of 

size at least two verses in any plain text. Detecting 

instances of a single verse is not covered in this 

work because the recognition process is only trig-

gered by repetitive patterns that can't occur within 

single verse instances. 

 

 
Figure 5: A flowchart of the proposed system for Arabic 

poems recognition. 

4.1 Handling ill-formed cases 

The proposed method can be applied on plain text 

from any source regardless of formatting and typ-

ing quality. Common formatting and typing mis-

takes and ambiguity are resolved as follows:  

1. Mismatched and false separators: Mis-
matched separators occur when a set of 

candidate verses share the same rhyme but 

with different verse separators. Here, we 

treat the separators as if they were similar 

assuming that the separators were incor-

rectly typed. False separators, on the other 

hand, is identified when a set of candidate 

verses share the same rhyme and one or 

more verses were identified as having se-

parators and the remaining verses have 

not. In this case, we ignore the identified 

separators assuming that these misidenti-

fied separators are just normal punctuation 

12



marks. Figure 6 and 7 show real examples 

from the web for mismatched and false se-

parators, respectively. 

 

  

  

  

   

Figure 6: An example of mismatched separators for a 

poem instance with four verses that share the same 

rhyme. The first two verses share the same separator 

while the third and the forth verses have similar but not 

exact separators. 

 

 

Figure 7: An example of false separators for a poem 

instance with three verses that share the same rhyme. 

The first half of the first and third verses contain dots 

(..) at the middle of the line which can mistakenly be 

identified as separators. 

 

2. Absence of short vowels: To treat missing 
short vowels in rhyme, we, recursively, as-

sume the existence of the vowel if missing 

in a given verse and exists in a neighboring 

verse. Here, the last character in the former 

verse must match the second last character 

in the neighboring verse. Figure 8 shows 

an example of this case. 

 

  

  

  

   

Figure 8: An example of short vowels absence for a 

poem instance with four verses. The first three verses 

neglect the short vowel Kasrah that exists at the end of 

the fourth verse. 

 

3. Absence of separators: This case is trig-
gered when encountering a set of consecu-

tive lines sharing the same rhyme, and 

having line length in words that exceed 

half of the threshold for valid lines, and of 

course have no identifiable separators. The 

proposed remedy is to locate the closest 

whitespace to the center of each line and 

split the lines at those points and generate 

a verse of two hemistiches from each line. 

Figure 9 shows an example of this case. 
 

 

Figure 9: An example of absence of separators for a 

poem instance with five verses. 

4.2 Pruning 

Based on our observations during the development 

phase of the proposed method, it was noticeable 

that the robustness of the method correlates posi-

tively with the number of verses in the candidate 

poem. This is because with each additional verse 

the accumulated evidences are reconfirmed repeti-

tively. This is not the case with few verses candi-

dates. The probability of encountering a false 

matching rhyme for example with two or three 

verses is much higher. To resolve these cases and 

improve the precision of the proposed method, we 

introduce the following pruning tests to be applied 

only to short candidate poems: 

1. Reject short candidate instances with low 
average number of words per half-verses. 

For example, using a threshold of 3 words. 

2. Accept only short candidate instances that 
have at least two letters rhymes. 

3. Reject short candidate instances when 
number of words per half-verse is not 

equivalent. 

4. Reject short candidate instances with dup-
licate starting or ending words that exceed 

a threshold of 20%, for example. 

13



0 2 3 4 4* 

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

Precision Recall F-measure

Pruning Level

S
c

o
re

 (
%

)

4.3 Evaluation Measure 

To evaluate the proposed method, we applied the 

F-measure (Swets, 1969) based on the precision 

and recall measures. Precision, as shown in Equa-

tion 1, is calculated by dividing the total number of 

the correct lines produced by the method over the 

total number of lines in the output. Given that our 

method processes the input data and generates out-

put as half-verse per line. Recall, as shown in Equ-

ation 2, is computed similarly except that we 

divide over the model total number of correct lines. 

The model resembles the prefect solution for such 

input data. 

 
 

)2(

)1(

Lines Correct of Number Total Model

Lines Correct of Number Total System
=Recall

Lines of Number Total System

Lines Correct of Number Total System
=Precision



5 Experiment 

5.1 Dataset 

During the development phase of the method, we 

used several development datasets utilizing data 

drawn from the web. For evaluation purposes, we 

assembled a dataset using text from hundred ran-

domly selected HTML web-pages. The set con-

tains 50 HTML pages with classical Arabic poem 

instances (positive set) and 50 pages without poem 

instances (negative set). To select the positive set, 

we randomly chose 5 poets and searched Google 

and selected the first 10 pages that contain poem 

instances for each poet. The negative set was simi-

larly chosen by selecting the first 50 pages that 

contain no poem instances for an arbitrary query. 

Text from the selected web-pages was converted to 

plain text using the Apache Tika toolkit
3
 and saved 

in a single large text file. This resulted in a text file 

that contains about 23K non-empty lines including 

161 classical Arabic poem instances having 4,740 

half-verses. 

                                                           
3 The Apache Tika toolkit can be downloaded from 

http://tika.apache.org/ 

5.2 Result 

The poem dataset was used to evaluate the pro-

posed poem recognition method. Figure 10 shows 

the results using five different pruning levels. The 

levels indicate the minimum number of verses for 

the pruning tests to be applied. Level 0 shows the 

performance without applying any of the pruning 

tests. The remaining levels show the results when 

the pruning is applied on candidates with at most 

two, three, and four verses, respectively. Level 4* 

is similar to Level 4 but here the fourth pruning 

test (duplicate words test) is applied on every can-

didate instance instead of only candidates with at 

most four verses. 

 
Figure 10: Evaluation results using five different prun-

ing levels. 

6 A Prototype Poem Search Engine  

In order to assess the performance of the proposed 

poem recognition method in a real-life application, 

a prototype search engine for Arabic poems was 

implemented
4. The search engine was built using the 

Apache Nutch web crawler and the Solr search 

engine to provide regular search engine services 

including crawling, parsing, and indexing. The 

HTML parsing plug-in in Nutch was extended us-

ing the proposed method to be able to recognize 

Arabic poems. Using this scenario, the search en-

gine was successfully used to crawl a set of web-

sites, identify all poem and non-poem instances, 

and index poem instances only. Figure 11 shows a 

snapshot of the search engine website. 

 

                                                           
4 The Arabic poem prototype search engine can be accessed at 

http://naba.kacst.edu.sa  

14



 
Figure 11:  A snapshot of the prototype poem search 

engine 

7 Conclusions and Future Work 

In this paper, we proposed a method for classical 

Arabic poem recognition. The proposed method 

was able to identify Arabic poems in any unstruc-

tured text with a very high accuracy. The method 

utilizes the common features of classical Arabic 

poems such as structure, writing style, and rhyme; 

and employs them in the recognition process. A 

specialized search engine for classical Arabic 

poems was implemented as a prototype using the 

proposed method with promising results. For the 

future, we plan to enhance the method by introduc-

ing the well known meter model for classical Arab-

ic poems. We would also like to extend the 

coverage of the method to include other types of 

Arabic poetry, namely contemporary Arabic. For 

the specialized search engine, we plan to add more 

features such as providing different search bounda-

ries, for example, within a poem, a verse, or a he-

mistich. Moreover, we would like to find 

automatic ways to relate a poem to its poet. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to thank Waleed Almutairi 

and Abdulelah Almubarak from KACST for their 

assistance in implementing the prototype poem 

search engine. 
  

15



References 
Al-Zahrani, A.K., Elshafei, M., 2010. Arabic poetry 

meter identification system and method. Patent Ap-

plication US 2010/0185436. 

Hamidi, S., Razzazi, F., Ghaemmaghami, M.P., 2009. 

Automatic Meter Classification in Persian Poetries 

Using Support Vector Machines. Presented at the 

IEEE International Symposium on Signal Processing 

and Information Technology (ISSPIT). 

He, Z.-S., Liang, W.-T., Li, L.-Y., Tian, Y.-F., 2007. 

SVM-Based Classification Method for Poetry Style. 

Presented at the Sixth International Conference on 

Machine Learning and Cybernetics, Hong Kong. 

Kao, J., Jurafsky, D., 2012. A Computational Analysis 

of Style, Affect, and Imagery in Contemporary Poe-

try, in: In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2012 

Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Litera-

ture. Montreal, Canada, pp. 8–17. 

Maling, J., 1973. The theory of classical Arabic metrics 

(dissertation). 

Manurung, H.M., 2004. An Evolutionary Algorithm 

Approach to Poetry Generation (PhD thesis). 

Netzer, Y., Gabay, D., Goldberg, Y., Elhadad, M., 2009. 

Gaiku: Generating Haiku with Word Associations 

Norms. Presented at the Workshop on Computational 

Approaches to Linguistic Creativity  (CALC ’09). 

Palva, H., 1993. Metrical problems of the contemporary 

Bedouin Qasida: A linguistic approach. Asian Fol-

klore Studies 52, 75–92. 

Paoli, B., 2001. Meters and Formulas: The Case of An-

cient Arabic Poetry. Belgian Journal of Linguistics 

15, 113–136. 

Reddy, S., Knight, K., 2011. Unsupervised Discovery of 

Rhyme Schemes. Presented at the 49th Annual Meet-

ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 

Portland, Oregon, pp. 77–82. 

Swets, J.A., 1969. Effectiveness of information retrieval 

methods. American Documentation 20, 72–89. 

Tizhoosh, H.R., Dara, R.A., 2006. On Poem Recogni-

tion. Pattern Analysis and Applications, Springer 9, 

325–338. 

Tizhoosh, H.R., Sahba, F., Dara, R., 2008. Poetic Fea-

tures for Poem Recognition: A Comparative Study. 

Journal of Pattern Recognition Research 3. 

Yi, Y., He, Z.-S., Li, L.-Y., Yu, T., 2004. Studies on 

Traditional Chinese Poetry Style Identification. Pre-

sented at the Third International Conference on Ma-

chine Learning and Cybernetics, Shanghai. 

16


