



















































Multi-Rate HMMs for Word Alignment


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 494–502,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013 c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Multi-rate HMMs for Word Alignment

Elif Eyigöz
Computer Science

University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627

Daniel Gildea
Computer Science

University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627

Kemal Oflazer
Computer Science

Carnegie Mellon University
PO Box 24866, Doha, Qatar

Abstract

We apply multi-rate HMMs, a tree struc-
tured HMM model, to the word-alignment
problem. Multi-rate HMMs allow us to
model reordering at both the morpheme
level and the word level in a hierarchical
fashion. This approach leads to better ma-
chine translation results than a morpheme-
aware model that does not explicitly model
morpheme reordering.

1 Introduction

We present an HMM-based word-alignment
model that addresses transitions between mor-
pheme positions and word positions simultane-
ously. Our model is an instance of a multi-scale
HMM, a widely used method for modeling dif-
ferent levels of a hierarchical stochastic process.
In multi-scale modeling of language, the deepest
level of the hierarchy may consist of the phoneme
sequence, and going up in the hierarchy, the next
level may consist of the syllable sequence, and
then the word sequence, the phrase sequence, and
so on. By the same token, in the hierarchical word-
alignment model we present here, the lower level
consists of the morpheme sequence and the higher
level the word sequence.

Multi-scale HMMs have a natural application in
language processing due to the hierarchical nature
of linguistic structures. They have been used for
modeling text and handwriting (Fine et al., 1998),
in signal processing (Willsky, 2002), knowledge
extraction (Skounakis et al., 2003), as well as in
other fields of AI such as vision (Li et al., 2006;
Luettgen et al., 1993) and robotics (Theocharous
et al., 2001). The model we propose here is most
similar to multi-rate HMMs (Çetin et al., 2007),
which were applied to a classification problem in
industrial machine tool wear.

The vast majority of languages exhibit morphol-
ogy to some extent, leading to various efforts in
machine translation research to include morphol-
ogy in translation models (Al-Onaizan et al., 1999;
Niessen and Ney, 2000; Čmejrek et al., 2003;
Lee, 2004; Chung and Gildea, 2009; Yeniterzi and
Oflazer, 2010). For the word-alignment problem,
Goldwater and McClosky (2005) and Eyigöz et al.
(2013) suggested word alignment models that ad-
dress morphology directly.

Eyigöz et al. (2013) introduced two-level align-
ment models (TAM), which adopt a hierarchi-
cal representation of alignment: the first level in-
volves word alignment, the second level involves
morpheme alignment. TAMs jointly induce word
and morpheme alignments using an EM algorithm.
TAMs can align rarely occurring words through
their frequently occurring morphemes. In other
words, they use morpheme probabilities to smooth
rare word probabilities.

Eyigöz et al. (2013) introduced TAM 1, which is
analogous to IBM Model 1, in that the first level is
a bag of words in a pair of sentences, and the sec-
ond level is a bag of morphemes. By introducing
distortion probabilities at the word level, Eyigöz
et al. (2013) defined the HMM extension of TAM
1, the TAM-HMM. TAM-HMM was shown to
be superior to its single-level counterpart, i.e., the
HMM-based word alignment model of Vogel et al.
(1996).

The alignment example in Figure 1 shows a
Turkish word aligned to an English phrase. The
morphemes of the Turkish word are aligned to
the English words. As the example shows, mor-
phologically rich languages exhibit complex re-
ordering phenomena at the morpheme level, which
is left unutilized in TAM-HMMs. In this paper,
we add morpheme sequence modeling to TAMs
to capture morpheme level distortions. The ex-
ample also shows that the Turkish morpheme or-

494



from our people who sell eyeglasses

göz­lük­çü­ler­imiz­den

Figure 1: Turkish word aligned to an English
phrase.

der is the reverse of the English word order. Be-
cause this pattern spans several English words, it
can only be captured by modeling morpheme re-
ordering across word boundaries. We chose multi-
rate HMMs over other hierarchical HMM mod-
els because multi-rate HMMs allow morpheme se-
quence modeling across words over the entire sen-
tence.

It is possible to model the morpheme sequence
by treating morphemes as words: segmenting the
words into morphemes, and using word-based
word alignment models on the segmented data.
Eyigöz et al. (2013) showed that TAM-HMM per-
forms better than treating morphemes as words.

Since the multi-rate HMM allows both word
and morpheme sequence modeling, it is a gener-
alization of TAM-HMM, which allows only word
sequence modeling. TAM-HMM in turn is a gen-
eralization of the model suggested by Goldwater
and McClosky (2005) and TAM 1. Our results
show that multi-rate HMMs are superior to TAM-
HMMs. Therefore, multi-rate HMMs are the best
two-level alignment models proposed so far.

2 Two-level Alignment Model (TAM)

The two-level alignment model (TAM) takes the
approach of assigning probabilities to both word-
to-word translations and morpheme-to-morpheme
translations simultaneously, allowing morpheme-
level probabilities to guide alignment for rare word
pairs. TAM is based on a concept of alignment
defined at both the word and morpheme levels.

2.1 Morpheme Alignment

A word alignment aw is a function mapping a set
of word positions in a target language sentence e
to a set of word positions in a source language sen-
tence f , as exemplified in Figure 2. A morpheme
alignment am is a function mapping a set of mor-
pheme positions in a target language sentence to

a set of morpheme positions in a source language
sentence. A morpheme position is a pair of inte-
gers (j, k), which defines a word position j and a
relative morpheme position k in the word at posi-
tion j, as shown in Figure 3. The word and mor-
pheme alignments below are depicted in Figures 2
and 3.

aw(1) = 1 am(2, 1) = (1, 1) aw(2) = 1

A morpheme alignment am and a word alignment
aw are compatible if and only if they satisfy the
following conditions: If the morpheme alignment
am maps a morpheme of e to a morpheme of f ,
then the word alignment aw maps e to f . If the
word alignment aw maps e to f , then the mor-
pheme alignment am maps at least one morpheme
of e to a morpheme of f . If the word align-
ment aw maps e to null, then all of its morphemes
are mapped to null. Figure 3 shows a morpheme
alignment that is compatible with, i.e., restricted
by, the word alignment in Figure 2. The smaller
boxes embedded inside the main box in Figure 3
depict the embedding of the morpheme level in-
side the word level in two-level alignment models
(TAM).

2.2 TAM 1

We call TAM without sequence modeling TAM 1,
because it defines an embedding of IBM Model 1
(Brown et al., 1993) for morphemes inside IBM
Model 1 for words. In TAM 1, p(e|f), the prob-
ability of translating the sentence f into e is com-
puted by summing over all possible word align-
ments and all possible morpheme alignments that
are compatible with a given word alignment aw:

Word Morpheme

Rw

|e|∏

j=1

|f |∑

i=0


t(ej |fi) Rm

|ej |∏

k=1

|fi|∑

n=0

t(ekj |fni )




(1)

where fni is the n
th morpheme of the word at po-

sition i. The probability of translating the word fi
into the word ej is computed by summing over all
possible morpheme alignments between the mor-
phemes of ej and fi. Rw substitutes

P (le|lf )
(lf+1)

le
for

easy readability.1 Rm is equivalent to Rw except
1le = |e| is the number of words in sentence e and lf =

|f |.

495



Figure 2: Word alignment Figure 3: Morpheme alignment

for the fact that its domain is not the set of sen-
tences but the set of words. The length of a word is
the number of morphemes in the word. The length
of words ej and fi in R(ej , fi) are the number of
morphemes of ej and fi. We assume that all un-
aligned morphemes in a sentence map to a special
null morpheme.

TAM 1 with the contribution of both word and
morpheme translation probabilities, as in Eqn. 1, is
called ‘word-and-morpheme’ version of TAM 1.
The model is technically deficient probabilisti-
cally, as it models word and morpheme transla-
tion independently, and assigns mass to invalid
word/morpheme combinations. We can also de-
fine the ‘morpheme-only’ version of TAM 1 by
canceling out the contribution of word translation
probabilities and assigning 1 to t(ej |fi) in Eqn. 1.
Please note that, although this version of the two-
level alignment model does not use word transla-
tion probabilities, it is also a word-aware model, as
morpheme alignments are restricted to correspond
to a valid word alignment. As such, it also allows
for word level sequence modeling by HMMs. Fi-
nally, canceling out the contribution of morpheme
translation probabilities reduces TAM 1 to IBM
Model 1. Just as IBM Model 1 is used for initial-
ization before HMM-based word-alignment mod-
els (Vogel et al., 1996; Och and Ney, 2003), TAM
Model 1 is used to initialize its HMM extensions,
which are described in the next section.

3 Multi-rate HMM

Like other multi-scale HMM models such as hi-
erarchical HMM’s (Fine et al., 1998) and hidden
Markov trees (Crouse et al., 1998), the multi-rate
HMM characterizes the inter-scale dependencies
by a tree structure. As shown in Figure 5, scales
are organized in a hierarchical manner from coarse
to fine, which allows for efficient representation of
both short- and long-distance context simultane-
ously.

We found that 51% of the dependency relations
in the Turkish Treebank (Oflazer et al., 2003) are
between the last morpheme of a dependent word
and the first morpheme (the root) of the head word
that is immediately to its right, which is exempli-
fied below. The following examples show English
sentences in Turkish word/morpheme order. The
pseudo Turkish words are formed by concatena-
tion of English morphemes, which are indicated
by the ‘+’ between the morphemes.

• – I will come from X.
– X+ABL come+will+I

• – I will look at X.
– X+DAT look+will+I

In English, the verb ‘come’ subcategorizes for
a PP headed by ‘from’ in the example above.
In the pseudo Turkish version of this sentence,
‘come’ subcategorizes for a NP marked with abla-
tive case (ABL), which corresponds to the prepo-
sition ‘from’. Similarly, ‘look’ subcategorizes for
a PP headed by ‘at’ in English, and a NP marked
with dative case (DAT) in Turkish. Just as the verb
and the preposition that it subcategorizes for are
frequently found adjacent to each other in English,
the verb and the case that it subcategorizes for are
frequently found adjacent to each other in Turk-
ish. Thus, we have a pattern of three correspond-
ing morphemes appearing in reverse order in En-
glish and Turkish, spanning two words in Turkish
and three words in English. In order to capture
such regularities, we chose multi-rate HMMs over
other hierarchically structured HMM models be-
cause, unlike other models, multi-rate HMMs al-
low morpheme sequence modeling across words
over the entire sentence. This allows us to capture
morpheme-mediated syntactic relations between
words (Eryiğit et al., 2008), as exemplified above.

Morpheme sequence modeling across words is
shown in Figure 4 by the arrows after the nodes

496



Figure 4: Multi-rate HMM graph.

representing fam(0,2) and fam(1,2). The circles
represent the words and morphemes of the source
language, the squares represent the words and
morphemes of the target language. e0,2 is the last
morpheme of word e0, and e1,0 is the first mor-
pheme of the next word e1. fam(1,0) is conditioned
on fam(0,2), which is in the previous word.

In order to model the morpheme sequence
across words, we define the function prev(j, k),
which maps the morpheme position (j, k) to the
previous morpheme position:

prev(j, k) =

{
(j, k − 1) if k > 1
(j − 1, |ej−1|) if k = 1

If a morpheme is the first morpheme of a word,
then the previous morpheme is the last morpheme
of the previous word.

3.1 Transitions

3.1.1 Morpheme transitions
Before introducing the morpheme level transition
probabilities, we first restrict morpheme level tran-
sitions according to the assumptions of our model.
We consider only the morpheme alignment func-
tions that are compatible with a word alignment
function. If we allow unrestricted transitions be-
tween morphemes, then this would result in some
morpheme alignments that do not allow a valid
word alignment function.

To avoid this problem, we restrict the transi-
tion function as follows: at each time step, we
allow transitions between morphemes in sentence
f if the morphemes belong to the same word.
This restriction reduces the transition matrix to a

block diagonal matrix. The block diagonal matrix
Ab below is a square matrix which has blocks of
square matrices A1 · · ·An on the main diagonal,
and the off-diagonal values are zero.

Ab =




A0 0 · · · 0
0 A1 · · · 0
...

...
. . .

...
0 0 · · · An




The square blocks A0, . . . ,An have the dimen-
sions |f0|, . . . , |fn|, the length of the words in sen-
tence f . In each step of the forward-backward al-
gorithm, multiplying the forward (or backward)
probability vectors with the block diagonal ma-
trix restricts morpheme transitions to occur only
within the words of sentence f .

In order to model the morpheme sequence
across words, we also allow transitions between
morphemes across the words in sentence f . How-
ever, we allow cross-word transitions only at cer-
tain time steps: between the last morpheme of a
word in sentence e and the first morpheme of the
next word in sentence e. This does not result in
morpheme alignments that do not allow a valid
word alignment function. Instead of the block di-
agonal matrix Ab, we use a transition matrix A
which is not necessarily block diagonal, to model
morpheme transitions across words.

In sum, we multiply the forward (or backward)
probability vectors with either the transition ma-
trix Ab or the transition matrix A, depending on
whether the transition is occurring at the last mor-
pheme of a word in e. We introduce the function
δ(p, q, r, s) to indicate whether a transition is al-
lowed from source position (p, q) to source posi-

497



tion (r, s) when advancing one target position:

δ(p, q, r, s) =

{
1 if p = r or s = 1

0 otherwise

Morpheme transition probabilities have four
components. First, the δ function as described
above. Second, the jump width:

J (p, q, r, s) = abs(r, s)− abs(p, q)
where abs(j, k) maps a word-relative morpheme
position to an absolute morpheme position, i.e., to
the simple left-to-right ordering of a morpheme in
a sentence. Third, the morpheme class of the pre-
vious morpheme:2

M(p, q) = Class(f qp )
Fourth, as the arrow from faw(0) to fam(0,0) in Fig-
ure 4 shows, there is a conditional dependence on
the word class that the morpheme is in:

W(r) = Class(fr)
Putting together these components, the morpheme
transitions are formulated as follows:

p(am(j, k) = (r, s) | am(prev(j, k)) = (p, q)) ∝
p
(
J (p, q, r, s)|M(p, q),W(r)

)
δ(p, q, r, s)

(2)

The block diagonal matrix Ab consists of mor-
pheme transition probabilities.

3.1.2 Word transitions
In the multi-rate HMM, word transition probabili-
ties have two components. First, the jump width:

J (p, r) = r − p
Second, the word class of the previous word:

W(p) = Class(fp)
The jump width is conditioned on the word class
of the previous word:

p(aw(j) = r | aw(j − 1) = p) ∝
p(J (p, r) | W(p)) (3)

The transition matrix A, which is not necessarily
block diagonal, consists of values which are the
product of a morpheme transition probability, as
defined in Eqn. 2, and a word transition probabil-
ity, as defined in Eqn. 3.

2We used the mkcls tool in GIZA (Och and Ney, 2003)
to learn the word and the morpheme classes.

3.2 Probability of translating a sentence

Finally, putting together Eqn. 1, Eqn. 2 and Eqn. 3,
we formulate the probability of translating a sen-
tence p(e|f) as follows:

Rw
∑

aw

|e|∏

j=1

(
t(ej |faw(j))p(aw(j)|aw(j−1))

Rm
∑

am

|ej |∏

k=1

t(ej,k|fam(j,k))

p(am(j,k)|am(prev(j,k)))
)

Rw is the same as it is in Eqn. 1, whereas
Rm = P (le|lf ). If we cancel out morpheme tran-
sitions by setting p(am(j, k)|am(prev(j, k))) =
1/|fam(j,k)|, i.e., with a uniform distribution, then
we get TAM with only word-level sequence mod-
eling, which we call TAM-HMM.

The complexity of the multi-rate HMM is
O(m3n3), where n is the number of words, and
m is the number of morphemes per word. TAM-
HMM differs from multi-rate HMM only by the
lack of morpheme-level sequence modeling, and
has complexity O(m2n3).

For the HMM to work correctly, we must han-
dle jumping to and jumping from null positions.
We learn the probabilities of jumping to a null po-
sition from the data. To compute the transition
probability from a null position, we keep track of
the nearest previous source word (or morpheme)
that does not align to null, and use the position of
the previous non-null word to calculate the jump
width. In order to keep track of the previous non-
null word, we insert a null word between words
(Och and Ney, 2003). Similarly, we insert a null
morpheme after every non-null morpheme.

3.3 Counts

We use Expectation Maximization (EM) to learn
the word and morpheme translation probabili-
ties, as well as the transition probabilities of the
reordering model. This is done with forward-
backward training at the morpheme level, collect-
ing translation and transition counts for both the
word and the morphemes from the morpheme-
level trellis.

In Figure 5, the grid on the right depicts the
morpheme-level trellis. The grid on the left is
the abstraction of the word-level trellis over the

498



Figure 5: Multi-rate HMM trellis

morpheme-level trellis. For each target word e and
for each source word f , there is a small HMM trel-
lis with dimensions |e|×|f | inside the morpheme-
level trellis, as shown by the shaded area inside the
grid on the right. We collect counts for words by
summing over the values in the small HMM trellis
associated with the words.

3.3.1 Translation counts
Morpheme translation counts We compute ex-
pected counts over the morpheme-level trellis.
The morpheme translation count function below
collects expected counts for a morpheme pair
(h, g) in a sentence pair (e, f):

cm(h|g; e, f) =
∑

(j,k)
s.t.

h=ekj

∑

(p,q)
s.t.

g=fqp

γj,k(p, q)

where γj,k(p, q) stands for the posterior mor-
pheme translation probabilities for source position
(p, q) and target position (i, j) that are computed
with the forward-backward algorithm.

Word translation counts For each target word
e and source word f , we collect word transla-
tion counts by summing over posterior morpheme
translation probabilities that are in the small trellis
associated with e and f .

Since δ allows only within-word transitions to
occur inside the small trellis, the posterior proba-
bility of observing the word e given the word f
is preserved across time points within the small
trellis associated with e and f . In other words,
the sum of the posterior probabilities in each col-
umn of the small trellis is the same. Therefore, we
collect word translation counts only from the last
morphemes of the words in e.

The word translation count function below col-
lects expected counts from a sentence pair (e, f)
for a particular source word f and target word e:

cw(e|f ; e, f) =
∑

j
s.t.
e=ej

∑

p
s.t.

f=fp

∑

1≤q≤|f |
γj,|e|(p, q)

3.3.2 Transition counts
Morpheme transition counts For all target po-
sitions (j, k) and all pairs of source positions (p, q)
and (r, s), we compute morpheme transition pos-
teriors:

ξj,k((p, q), (r, s))

using the forward-backward algorithm. These
expected counts are accumulated to esti-
mate the morpheme jump width probabilities
p
(
J (p, q, r, s)|M(p, q),W(r)

)
used in Eqn. 2.

Word transition counts We compute posterior
probabilities for word transitions by summing over
morpheme transition posteriors between the mor-
phemes of the words fl and fn:

ξj(p, r) =
∑

1≤q≤|fp|

∑

1≤s≤|fr|
ξj,|ej |((p, q), (r, s))

Like the translation counts, the transition counts
are collected from the last morphemes of words
in e. These expected counts are accumulated
to estimate the word jump width probabilities
p(J (p, r) | W(p)) used in Eqn. 3.

Finally, Rm = P (le|lf ) does not cancel out in
the counts of the multi-rate HMM. To compute the
conditional probability P (le|lf ), we assume that
the length of word e varies according to a Poisson
distribution with a mean that is linear with length
of the word f (Brown et al., 1993).

3.4 Variational Bayes

In order to prevent overfitting, we use the Varia-
tional Bayes extension of the EM algorithm (Beal,
2003). This amounts to a small change to the
M step of the original EM algorithm. We in-
troduce Dirichlet priors α to perform an inexact
normalization by applying the function f(v) =
exp(ψ(v)) to the expected counts collected in the
E step, where ψ is the digamma function (John-
son, 2007). The M-step update for a multinomial
parameter θx|y becomes:

θx|y =
f(E[c(x|y)] + α)

f(
∑

j E[c(xj |y)] + α)

499



Multi-rate
HMM

TAM-HMM WORD
Word-
Morph 

Morph 
only IBM 4 Baseline

BLEU
TR to EN 30.82 29.48 29.98 29.13 27.91
EN to TR 23.09 22.55  22.54 21.95 21.82

AER 0.254 0.255 0.256 0.375 0.370

Table 1: AER and BLEU Scores

We set α to 10−20, a very low value, to have the
effect of anti-smoothing, as low values of α cause
the algorithm to favor words which co-occur fre-
quently and to penalize words that co-occur rarely.
We used Dirichlet priors on morpheme translation
probabilities.

4 Experiments and Results

4.1 Data

We trained our model on a Turkish-English paral-
lel corpus of approximately 50K sentences which
have a maximum of 80 morphemes. Our parallel
data consists mainly of documents in international
relations and legal documents from sources such
as the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, EU,
etc. The Turkish data was first morphologically
parsed (Oflazer, 1994), then disambiguated (Sak
et al., 2007) to select the contextually salient inter-
pretation of words. In addition, we removed mor-
phological features that are not explicitly marked
by an overt morpheme. For English, we use part-
of-speech tagged data. The number of English
words is 1,033,726 and the size of the English vo-
cabulary is 28,647. The number of Turkish words
is 812,374, the size of the Turkish vocabulary is
57,249. The number of Turkish morphemes is
1,484,673 and the size of the morpheme vocab-
ulary is 16,713.

4.2 Experiments

We initialized our implementation of the single
level ‘word-only’ model, which we call ‘baseline’
in Table 1, with 5 iterations of IBM Model 1, and
further trained the HMM extension (Vogel et al.,
1996) for 5 iterations. Similarly, we initialized
TAM-HMM and multi-rate HMM with 5 iterations

of TAM 1 as explained in Section 2.2. Then we
trained TAM-HMM and the multi-rate HMM for 5
iterations. We also ran GIZA++ (IBM Model 1–4)
on the data. We translated 1000 sentence test sets.

We used Dirichlet priors in both IBM Model 1
and TAM 1 training. We experimented with using
Dirichlet priors on the HMM extensions of both
IBM-HMM and TAM-HMM. We report the best
results obtained for each model and translation di-
rection.

We evaluated the performance of our model in
two different ways. First, we evaluated against
gold word alignments for 75 Turkish-English sen-
tences. Table 1 shows the AER (Och and Ney,
2003) of the word alignments; we report the grow-
diag-final (Koehn et al., 2003) of the Viterbi align-
ments. Second, we used the Moses toolkit (Koehn
et al., 2007) to train machine translation systems
from the Viterbi alignments of our various models,
and evaluated the results with BLEU (Papineni et
al., 2002).

In order to reduce the effect of nondetermin-
ism, we run Moses three times per experiment set-
ting, and report the highest BLEU scores obtained.
Since the BLEU scores we obtained are close,
we did a significance test on the scores (Koehn,
2004). In Table 1, the colors partition the table
into equivalence classes: If two scores within the
same row have different background colors, then
the difference between their scores is statistically
significant. The best scores in the leftmost column
were obtained from multi-rate HMMs with Dirich-
let priors only during the TAM 1 training. On the
contrary, the best scores for TAM-HMM and the
baseline-HMM were obtained with Dirichlet pri-
ors both during the TAM 1 and the TAM-HMM

500



training. In Table 1, as the scores improve grad-
ually towards the left, the background color gets
gradually lighter, depicting the statistical signifi-
cance of the improvements. The multi-rate HMM
performs better than the TAM-HMM, which in
turn performs better than the word-only models.

5 Conclusion

We presented a multi-rate HMM word alignment
model, which models the word and the morpheme
sequence simultaneously. We have tested our
model on the Turkish-English pair and showed
that our model is superior to the two-level word
alignment model which has sequence modeling
only at the word level.

Acknowledgments Partially funded by NSF
award IIS-0910611. Kemal Oflazer acknowledges
the generous support of the Qatar Foundation
through Carnegie Mellon University’s Seed Re-
search program. The statements made herein are
solely the responsibility of this author(s), and not
necessarily that of Qatar Foundation.

References
Yaser Al-Onaizan, Jan Curin, Michael Jahr, Kevin

Knight, John Lafferty, Dan Melamed, Franz-Josef
Och, David Purdy, Noah A. Smith, and David
Yarowsky. 1999. Statistical machine translation.
Technical report, Final Report, JHU Summer Work-
shop.

Matthew J. Beal. 2003. Variational Algorithms for Ap-
proximate Bayesian Inference. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sity College London.

Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J.
Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The
mathematics of statistical machine translation: Pa-
rameter estimation. Computational Linguistics,
19(2):263–311.

Özgür Çetin, Mari Ostendorf, and Gary D. Bernard.
2007. Multirate coupled Hidden Markov Models
and their application to machining tool-wear clas-
sification. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
55(6):2885–2896, June.

Tagyoung Chung and Daniel Gildea. 2009. Unsu-
pervised tokenization for machine translation. In
EMNLP, pages 718–726.

Martin Čmejrek, Jan Cuřı́n, and Jiřı́ Havelka. 2003.
Czech-English dependency-based machine transla-
tion. In EACL, pages 83–90.

Matthew Crouse, Robert Nowak, and Richard Bara-
niuk. 1998. Wavelet-based statistical signal pro-
cessing using Hidden Markov Models. IEEE Trans-
actions on Signal Processing, 46(4):886–902.

Gülşen Eryiğit, Joakim Nivre, and Kemal Oflazer.
2008. Dependency parsing of Turkish. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(3):357–389.

Elif Eyigöz, Daniel Gildea, and Kemal Oflazer. 2013.
Simultaneous word-morpheme alignment for statis-
tical machine translation. In NAACL.

Shai Fine, Yoram Singer, and Naftali Tishby. 1998.
The hierarchical Hidden Markov model: Analysis
and applications. Machine Learning, 32(1):41–62,
July.

Sharon Goldwater and David McClosky. 2005. Im-
proving statistical MT through morphological anal-
ysis. In HLT-EMNLP.

Mark Johnson. 2007. Why doesn’t EM find good
HMM POS-taggers? In EMNLP-CoNLL, pages
296–305, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In HLT-
NAACL.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
ACL, pages 177–180.

Philipp Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests for
machine translation evaluation. In EMNLP, pages
388–395.

Young-suk Lee. 2004. Morphological analysis for sta-
tistical machine translation. In HLT-NAACL, pages
57–60.

Jia Li, Robert Gray, and Richard Olshen. 2006.
Multiresolution image classification by hierarchi-
cal modeling with two-dimensional Hidden Markov
Models. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
46(5):1826–1841, September.

Mark R. Luettgen, William C. Karl, Alan S. Willsky,
and Robert R. Tenney. 1993. Multiscale representa-
tions of Markov Random Fields. IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing, 41(12):3377–3396.

Sonja Niessen and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improving
SMT quality with morpho-syntactic analysis. In
COLING, pages 1081–1085.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
Models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

501



Kemal Oflazer, Bilge Say, Dilek Z. Hakkani-Tür, and
Gökhan Tür. 2003. Building a Turkish treebank. In
A. Abeillé, editor, Treebanks: Building and Using
Parsed Corpora, pages 261–277. Kluwer, London.

Kemal Oflazer. 1994. Two-level description of Turk-
ish morphology. Literary and Linguistic Comput-
ing, 9(2).

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 40th Annual Conference of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL-02), pages 311–
318.

Haşim Sak, Tunga Güngör, and Murat Saraçlar. 2007.
Morphological disambiguation of Turkish text with
perceptron algorithm. In CICLing, pages 107–118.

Marios Skounakis, Mark Craven, and Soumya Ray.
2003. Hierarchical Hidden Markov Models for in-
formation extraction. In International Joint Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 18, pages
427–433.

Georgios Theocharous, Khashayar Rohanimanesh, and
Sridhar Maharlevan. 2001. Learning hierarchi-
cal observable Markov decision process Models for
robot navigation. In ICRA 2001, volume 1, pages
511–516.

Stephan Vogel, Hermann Ney, and Christoph Tillmann.
1996. HMM-based word alignment in statistical
translation. In COLING, pages 836–841.

Alan S. Willsky. 2002. Multiresolution Markov Mod-
els for signal and image processing. In Proceedings
of the IEEE, pages 1396–1458.

Reyyan Yeniterzi and Kemal Oflazer. 2010. Syntax-to-
morphology mapping in factored phrase-based sta-
tistical machine translation from English to Turkish.
In ACL 2010, pages 454–464.

502


