



















































Acquisition of Desires before Beliefs: A Computional Investigation


Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, pages 231–240,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Acquisition of Desires before Beliefs: A Computational Investigation

Libby Barak, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson
Department of Computer Science

University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada

{libbyb,afsaneh,suzanne}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

The acquisition of Belief verbs lags be-
hind the acquisition of Desire verbs in
children. Some psycholinguistic theo-
ries attribute this lag to conceptual differ-
ences between the two classes, while oth-
ers suggest that syntactic differences are
responsible. Through computational ex-
periments, we show that a probabilistic
verb learning model exhibits the pattern of
acquisition, even though there is no dif-
ference in the model in the difficulty of
the semantic or syntactic properties of Be-
lief vs. Desire verbs. Our results point
to the distributional properties of various
verb classes as a potentially important, and
heretofore unexplored, factor in the ob-
served developmental lag of Belief verbs.

1 Introduction

Psycholinguistic studies have shown great inter-
est in the learning of Mental State Verbs (MSVs),
such as think and want, given the various cogni-
tive and linguistic challenges in their acquisition.
MSVs refer to an entity’s inner states, such as
thoughts and wishes, which the language learner
must be able to perceive and conceptualize appro-
priately. Moreover, such verbs often appear in a
Sentential Complement (SC) construction, which
is complex for children because of the embedded
clause.

Despite some shared properties, MSVs are
a heterogeneous group, with different types of
verbs exhibiting different developmental patterns.
Specifically, a wealth of research shows that chil-
dren produce Desire verbs, such as want and
wish, earlier than Belief verbs, such as think and
know (Shatz et al., 1983; Bartsch and Wellman,
1995; Asplin, 2002; Perner et al., 2003; de Vil-
liers, 2005; Papafragou et al., 2007; Pascual et al.,

2008). Some explanations for this pattern posit
that differences in the syntactic usages of Desire
and Belief verbs underlie the observed develop-
mental lag of the latter (de Villiers, 2005; Pas-
cual et al., 2008). In particular, Desire verbs oc-
cur mostly with an infinitival SC (as in I want
(her) to leave), while Belief verbs occur mostly
with a finite SC (a full tensed embedded clause,
as in I think (that) she left). Notably, infiniti-
vals appear earlier than finite SCs in the speech
of young children (Bloom et al., 1984, 1989).
Others suggest that Desire verbs are conceptu-
ally simpler (Bartsch and Wellman, 1995) or prag-
matically/communicatively more salient (Perner,
1988; Fodor, 1992; Perner et al., 2003). Propo-
nents of the conceptual and pragmatic accounts ar-
gue that syntax alone cannot explain the delay in
the acquisition of Belief verbs, because children
use finite SCs with verbs of Communication (e.g.,
say) and Perception (e.g., see) long before they
use them with Belief verbs (Bartsch and Wellman,
1995).

We use a computational model of verb argu-
ment structure acquisition to shed light on the fac-
tors that might be responsible for the developmen-
tal gap between Desire and Belief verbs. Impor-
tantly, our model exhibits the observed pattern of
learning Desire before Belief verbs, without hav-
ing to encode any differences in difficulty between
the two classes in terms of their syntactic or con-
ceptual/pragmatic requirements. The behaviour of
the model can thus be attributed to its probabilistic
learning mechanisms in conjunction with the dis-
tributional properties of the input. In particular, we
investigate how the model’s learning mechanism
interacts with the distributions of several classes
of verbs — including Belief, Desire, Perception,
Communication, and Action — in the finite and
infinitival SC syntax to produce the observed pat-
tern of acquisition of Desire and Belief verbs. Us-
ing a computational model can reveal the poten-

231



tial effects of interactions of verb classes in hu-
man language acquisition which would be difficult
to investigate experimentally. Our results suggest
that the distributional properties of relevant verb
classes are a potentially important, and heretofore
unexplored, factor in experimental studies of the
developmental lag of Belief verbs.

2 The Computational Model

We require an incremental model in which we
can examine developmental patterns as it gradu-
ally learns relevant aspects of argument structures.
This task calls for an ability to represent the se-
mantic and syntactic properties of verb usages, in-
cluding those containing MSVs and other kinds of
verbs taking sentential complements (SCs). Most
computational models of verb argument structure
acquisition have largely focused on physical ac-
tion verbs (Alishahi and Stevenson, 2008; Chang,
2009; Perfors et al., 2010; Parisien and Steven-
son, 2011). Recently, Barak et al. (2012) ex-
tended the incremental Bayesian model of Al-
ishahi and Stevenson (2008) to include the syntac-
tic and semantic features required for the process-
ing of MSVs and other verbs that take SCs. While
Barak et al. (2012) modeled some developmental
patterns of MSVs overall, their work did not ac-
count for the difference between Desire and Be-
lief verbs. In this section, we present their model,
which we adopt for our experiments. In Section 3,
we describe how we modify the representation of
the input in Barak et al. (2012) to enable our inves-
tigation of the differences among the MSV classes.

2.1 Overview of the Model

The input to the Barak et al. (2012) model is a
sequence of frames, where each frame is a col-
lection of syntactic and semantic features repre-
senting what the learner might extract from an ut-
terance s/he has heard paired with a scene s/he
has perceived. In particular, we consider syntactic
properties, including syntactic pattern, argument
count, and complement type, as well as seman-
tic properties, including event primitives and event
participants. Table 1 presents a sample frame il-
lustrating possible values for these features.

The model incrementally groups the input
frames into clusters that reflect probabilistic as-
sociations of the syntactic and semantic features
across similar verb usages. Each learned cluster
is a probabilistic (and possibly noisy) representa-

head predicate think
other predicate make
Syntactic Features:
syntactic pattern arg1 verb arg2 verb arg3
argument count 3
complement type SC-fin
Semantic Features:
event primitives { state, consider , cogitate, action }
event participants { experiencer , perceiver , considerer}

{ agent , animate}
{ theme, changed}

Table 1: An example input frame. The Syntactic features
reflect an utterance such as He thinks Mom made pancakes:
i.e., syntactic pattern ‘arg1 verb arg2 verb arg3’, 3 arguments,
and finite SC. The Semantic features reflect a corresponding
conceptualized belief event with a physical action described
in the SC ({state, consider , cogitate, action}) whose
‘arg1’ participant ({experiencer , perceiver , considerer})
perceives the ‘arg2’ ({agent , animate}) acting on the ‘arg3’
({theme, changed}).

tion of an argument structure construction: e.g.,
a cluster containing frames corresponding to us-
ages such as I eat apples, She took the ball, and
He got a book, etc., represents a Transitive Action
construction.1 Note that a cluster operates as more
than simply a set of similar frames: The model
can use the probabilistic associations among the
various features of the frames in a cluster to gen-
eralize over the individual verb usages that it has
seen. For example, if the model is presented with a
frame corresponding to a transitive utterance using
a verb it has not observed before, such as She gor-
ped the ball, the example cluster above would lead
the model to predict that gorp has semantic event
primitives in common with other Action verbs like
eat, take, and get. Such probabilistic reasoning is
especially powerful because clusters involve com-
plex interactions of features, and the model rea-
sons across all such clusters to make suitable gen-
eralizations over its learned knowledge.

2.2 Algorithm for Learning Clusters

The model groups input frames into clusters on
the basis of the overall similarity in the values of
their syntactic and semantic features. Importantly,
the model learns these clusters incrementally; the
number and type of clusters is not predetermined.
The model considers the creation of a new cluster
for a given frame if the frame is not sufficiently
similar to any of the existing clusters. Formally,
the model finds the best cluster for a given input

1Note that, because the associations are probabilistic, a
construction may be represented by more than one cluster.

232



frame F as in:

BestCluster(F ) = argmax
k∈Clusters

P (k|F ) (1)

where k ranges over all existing clusters and a new
one. Using Bayes rule:

P (k|F ) = P (k)P (F |k)
P (F )

∝ P (k)P (F |k) (2)

The prior probability of a cluster P (k) is estimated
as the proportion of frames that are in k out of
all observed input frames, thus assigning a higher
prior to larger clusters, representing more frequent
constructions. The likelihood P (F |k) is estimated
based on the match of feature values in F and in
the frames of k (assuming independence of the
features):

P (F |k) =
∏

i∈Features
Pi(j|k) (3)

where i refers to the ith feature of F and j refers
to its value, and Pi(j|k) is calculated using a
smoothed version of:

Pi(j|k) =
counti(j, k)

nk
(4)

where counti(j, k) is the number of times feature
i has the value j in cluster k, and nk is the number
of frames in k.

2.3 Attention to Mental Content

One factor proposed to play an important role in
the acquisition of MSVs is the difficulty children
have in being aware of (or perceiving the salience
of) the mental content of a scene that an utterance
may be describing (Papafragou et al., 2007). This
difficulty arises because the aspects of a scene as-
sociated with an MSV — the “believing” or the
“wanting” — are not directly observable, as they
involve the inner states of an event participant. In-
stead, younger children tend to focus on the phys-
ical (observable) parts of the scene, which gener-
ally correspond to the event described in the em-
bedded clause of an MSV utterance. For instance,
young children may focus on the “making” action
in He thinks Mom made pancakes, rather than on
the “thinking”.

A key component of the model of Barak
et al. (2012) is a mechanism that simulates the
gradually-developing ability in children to attend

to the mental content rather than solely to the (em-
bedded) physical action. This mechanism basi-
cally entails that the model may “misinterpret” an
input frame containing an MSV as focusing on the
semantics of the action in the sentential comple-
ment. Specifically, when receiving an input frame
with an MSV, as in Table 1, there is a probability p
that the frame is perceived with attention to the se-
mantics corresponding to the physical action verb
(here, make). In this case, the model correctly in-
cludes the syntactic features as in Table 1, on the
assumption that the child can accurately note the
number and pattern of arguments. However, the
model replaces the semantic features with those
that correspond to the physical action event and its
participants. At very early stages, p is very high
(close to 1), simulating the much greater saliency
of physical actions compared to mental events for
younger children. As the model “ages” (i.e., re-
ceives more input), p decreases, giving more and
more attention to the mental content, gradually ap-
proaching adult-like abilities.

3 Experimental Setup

3.1 Generation of the Input Corpora

Because there are no readily available large cor-
pora of actual child-directed speech (CDS) associ-
ated with appropriate semantic representations, we
generate artificial corpora for our simulations that
mimic the relevant syntactic properties of CDS
along with automatically-produced semantic prop-
erties. Importantly, these artificial corpora have
the distributional properties of the argument struc-
tures for the verbs under investigation based on
an analysis of verb usages in CDS. To accomplish
this, we adopt and extend the input-generation lex-
icon of Barak et al. (2012), which is used to au-
tomatically generate the syntactic and semantic
features of the frames that serve as input to the
model. Using this lexicon, each simulation cor-
pus is created through a probabilistic generation of
argument structure frames according to their rela-
tive frequencies of occurrence in CDS. Since the
corpora are probabilistically generated, all exper-
imental results are averaged over simulations on
100 different input corpora, to ensure the results
are not dependent on idiosyncratic properties of a
single generated corpus.

Our input-generation lexicon contains 31 verbs
from various semantic classes and different fre-
quency ranges; these verbs appear in a variety

233



Semantic Verb Frequency % Relative
class frequency with

SC-fin SC-inf
Belief think 13829 100 -

bet 391 100 -
guess 278 76 -
know 7189 61 -
believe 78 21 -

Desire wish 132 94 -
hope 290 86 -
want 8425 - 76
like 6944 - 51
need 1690 - 60

Communication tell 2953 64 -
say 8622 60 -
ask 818 29 10
speak 62 - -
talk 1322 - -

Perception hear 1370 21 25
see 9717 14 -
look 5856 9 -
watch 1045 - 27
listen 413 33 2

Action go 20364 - 5
get 16493 - 14
make 4165 - 10
put 8794 - -
come 6083 - -
eat 3894 - -
take 3239 - -
play 2565 - -
sit 2462 - -
give 2341 - -
fall 1555 - -

Table 2: The list of our 31 verbs from the five semantic
classes, along with their overall frequency, and their rela-
tive frequency with the finite SC (SC-fin) or the infinitival
SC (SC-inf).

of syntactic patterns including the sentential com-
plement (SC) construction. Our focus here is on
learning the Belief and Desire classes; however,
we include verbs from other classes to have a re-
alistic context of MSV acquisition in the presence
of other types of verbs. In particular, we include
(physical) Action verbs because of their frequent
usage in CDS, and we include Communication
and Perception groups because of their suggested
role in the acquisition of MSVs (Bloom et al.,
1989; de Villiers, 2005). Table 2 lists the verbs of
each semantic class, along with their overall fre-
quency and their relative frequency with the finite
(SC-fin) and infinitival SC (SC-inf) in our data.

For each of these 31 verbs, the distributional in-
formation about its argument structure was manu-
ally extracted from a random sample of 100 CDS
usages (or all usages if fewer than 100) from eight

corpora from CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000).2

The input-generation lexicon then contains the
overall frequency of each verb, as well as the rela-
tive frequency with which it appears with each of
its argument structures. Each argument structure
entry for a verb also contains the values for all the
syntactic and semantic features in a frame (see Ta-
ble 1 for an example), which are determined from
the manual inspection of the usages.

The values for syntactic features are based on
simple observation of the order and number of
verbs and arguments in the usage, and, if an ar-
gument is an SC, whether it is finite or infiniti-
val. We add this latter feature (the type of the
SC) to the syntactic representation used by Barak
et al. (2012) to allow distinguishing the syntac-
tic properties associated with Desire and Belief
verbs. Note that this feature does not incorporate
any potential level of difficulty in processing an
infinitival vs. finite SC; the feature simply records
that there are three different types of embedded ar-
guments: SC-inf, SC-fin, or none. Thus, while
Desire and Belief verbs that typically occur with
an SC-inf or SC-fin have a distinguishing feature,
there is nothing in this representation that makes
Desire verbs inherently easier to process. This
syntactic representation reflects our assumptions
that a learner: (i) understands basic syntactic prop-
erties of an utterance, such as syntactic categories
(e.g., noun and verb) and word order; and (ii) dis-
tinguishes between a finite complement, as in He
thinks that Mom left, and an infinitival, as in He
wants Mom to leave.

The values for the semantic features of a verb
and its arguments are based on a simple taxonomy
of event and participant role properties adapted
from several resources, including Alishahi and
Stevenson (2008), Kipper et al. (2008), and Dowty
(1991). In particular, we assume that the learner is
able to perceive and conceptualize the general se-
mantic properties of different kinds of events (e.g.,
state and action), as well as those of the event par-
ticipants (e.g., agent, experiencer, and theme). In
an adaptation of the lexicon of Barak et al., we
make minimal assumptions about shared seman-
tics across verb classes. Specifically, to encode
suitable semantic distinctions among MSVs, and
between MSVs and other verbs, we aimed for a
representation that would capture reasonable as-

2Brown (1973); Suppes (1974); Kuczaj (1977); Bloom
et al. (1974); Sachs (1983); Lieven et al. (2009).

234



sumptions about high-level similarities and differ-
ences among the verb classes. As with the syn-
tactic features, we ensured that we did not simply
encode the result we are investigating (that chil-
dren have facility with Desire verbs before Be-
lief verbs) by making the representation for Desire
verbs easier to learn.

In the results presented in Section 4, “our
model” refers to the computational model of Barak
et al. (2012) together with our modifications to the
input representation.

3.2 Simulations and Verb Prediction

Psycholinguistic studies have used variations of
a novel verb prediction task to examine how
strongly children (or adults) have learned to asso-
ciate the various syntactic and semantic properties
of a typical MSV usage. In particular, the typical
Desire verb usage combines desire semantics with
an infinitival SC syntax, while the typical Belief
verb usage combines belief semantics with a finite
SC syntax. In investigating the salience of these
associations in human experiments, participants
are presented with an utterance containing a nonce
verb with an SC (e.g., He gorped that his grand-
mother was in the bed), sometimes paired with a
corresponding scene representing a mental event
(e.g., a picture or a silent video depicting a think-
ing event with heightened saliency). An experi-
menter then asks each participant what the nonce
verb (gorp) “means” — i.e., what existing English
verb does it correspond to (see, e.g., Asplin, 2002;
Papafragou et al., 2007). The expectation is that,
e.g., if a participant has a well-entrenched Belief
construction, then they should have a strong as-
sociation between the finite-SC syntax and belief
semantics, and hence should produce more Belief
verbs as the meaning of a novel verb in an finite-
SC utterance (and analogously for infinitival SCs
and Desire verbs).

We perform simulations that are based on such
psycholinguistic experiments. After training the
model on some number of input frames, we then
present it with a test frame in which the main verb
(head predicate) is replaced by a nonce verb like
gorp (a verb that doesn’t occur in our lexicon).
Analogously to the human experiments, in order
to study the differences in the strength of associ-
ation between the syntax and semantics of Desire
and Belief verbs, we present the model with two
types of test frames: (i) a typical desire test frame,

with syntactic features corresponding to the infini-
tival SC syntax, optionally paired (depending on
the experiment) with semantic features associated
with a Desire verb in our lexicon; and (ii) a typi-
cal belief test frame, with syntactic features corre-
sponding to the finite SC syntax, optionally paired
with semantic features from a Belief verb.3

Given a test frame Ftest, we use the clusters
learned by the model to calculate the likelihood of
each of the 31 verbs v as the response of the model
indicating the meaning of the novel verb, as in:

P (v|Ftest) (5)
=

∑

k∈Clusters
Phead(v|k)P (k|Ftest)

∝
∑

k∈Clusters
Phead(v|k)P (Ftest|k)P (k)

where Phead(v|k) is the probability of the head
feature having the value v in cluster k, calculated
as in Eqn. (4); P (Ftest|k) is the probability of the
test frame Ftest given cluster k, calculated as in
Eqn. (3); and P (k) is the prior probability of clus-
ter k, calculated as explained in Section 2.2.

What we really want to know is the likelihood
of the model producing a verb from each of the
semantic classes, rather than the likelihood of any
particular verb. For each test frame, we calculate
the likelihood of each semantic class by summing
the likelihoods of the verbs in that class:

P (Class|Ftest) =
∑

vc∈Class
P (vc|Ftest)

where vc is one of the verbs in Class, and Class
ranges over the 5 classes in Table 2. We average
the verb class likelihoods across the 100 simula-
tions.

4 Experimental Results

The novel verb prediction experiments described
above have found differences in the performance
of children across the two MSV classes (e.g., As-
plin, 2002; Papafragou et al., 2007). For exam-
ple, children performed better at predicting that a
novel verb is a Desire verb in a typical desire con-
text (infinitival-SC utterance paired with a desire
scene), compared to their performance at identify-
ing a novel verb as a Belief verb in a typical belief

3Table 2 shows that, in our data, Belief verbs occur ex-
clusively with finite clauses in an SC usage. Although Desire
verbs occur in both SC-inf and SC-fin usages, the former out-
number the latter by almost 30 to 1 over all Desire verbs.

235



context (finite-SC utterance accompanied by a be-
lief scene). In Section 4.1, we examine whether
the model exhibits this behaviour in our verb class
prediction task, thereby mimicking children’s lag
in facility with Belief verbs compared to Desire
verbs.

Recall that some researchers attribute the
above-mentioned developmental gap to the con-
ceptual and pragmatic differences between the two
MSV classes, whereas others suggest it is due to a
difference in the syntactic requirements of the two
classes. As noted in Section 3.1, we have tailored
our representation of Desire and Belief verbs to
not build in any differences in the ease or difficulty
of acquiring their syntactic or semantic properties.
Moreover, the possibility in the model for “misin-
terpretation” of mental content as action semantics
(see Section 2.3) also applies equally to both types
of verbs. Thus, any observed performance gap in
the model reflects an interaction between its pro-
cessing approach and the distributional properties
of CDS. To better understand the role of the in-
put, in Section 4.2 we examine how the distribu-
tional pattern of appearances of various semantic
classes of verbs (including Belief, Desire, Com-
munication, Perception and Action verbs) with the
finite and infinitival SC constructions affects the
learning of the two types of MSVs.

4.1 Verb Prediction Simulations

Here we compare the verb prediction responses of
the participants in the experiments of Papafragou
et al. (2007) (PCG), with those of the model when
presented with a novel verb in a typical desire or
belief test frame. (See Section 3.2 for how we con-
struct these frames.) PCG report verb responses
for the novel verb meaning as desire, belief, or ac-
tion, where the latter category contains all other
verb responses. Looking closely at the latter cat-
egory in PCG, we find that most verbs are what
we have termed (physical) Action verbs. We thus
report the verb class likelihoods of the model for
the Belief, Desire, and Action verbs in our lexi-
con. To compare the model’s responses with those
of the children and adults in PCG, we report the
responses of the model to the test frames at two
test points: after training the model with 500 in-
put frames, resembling the “Child stage”, and after
presenting the model with 10, 000 input frames,
representing the “Adult stage”.

Figure 1(a) gives the percent verb types from

(a) Human participants in Papafragou et al. (2007)

(b) The model

Figure 1: (a) Percent verb types produced by adult and
child participants given a desire or belief utterance and scene.
(b) The model’s verb class likelihoods given a desire or be-
lief test frame. Child stage is represented by 500 input frames
compared to the 10, 000 input frames for Adult stage.

PCG;4 Figure 1(b) presents the results of the
model. Similarly to the children in PCG, the
model at earlier stages of learning (“Child stage”)
is better at predicting Desire verbs for a desire test
frame (.56) than it is at predicting Belief verbs for
a belief test frame (.42) — cf. 59% Desire vs.
41% Belief prediction for PCG. In addition, as for
both the children and adult participants of PCG,
the model produces more Action verbs in a desire
context than in a belief context at both stages.

We note that although the adult participants of
PCG perform well at identifying both Desire and
Belief verbs, the model does not identify Belief
verbs with the same accuracy as it does Desire
verbs, even after processing 10, 000 input frames
(i.e., the “Adult stage”). In Section 4.2, we will see
that this is due to the model forming strong asso-
ciations between the Communication and Percep-
tion verbs and the SC-fin usage (the typical syn-
tax of Belief verbs). These associations might be

4Based on results presented in Table 4, Page 149 in Pa-
pafragou et al. (2007), for the utterance and scene condition.

236



overly strong in our model because of the limited
number of verbs and verb classes — an issue we
will need to address in the future. We also note
that, unlike the results of PCG, the model only
rarely produces Desire verbs in a Belief context.
This also may be due to our choice of Desire verbs,
which have extremely few SC-fin usages overall.

To summarize, similarly to children (Asplin,
2002; Papafragou et al., 2007), the model per-
forms better at identifying Desire verbs compared
to Belief verbs. Moreover, we replicate the ex-
perimental results of PCG without encoding any
conceptual or syntactic differences in difficulty be-
tween the two types of verbs. Specifically, because
the representation of Desire and Belief classes in
our experiments does not build in a bias due to the
ease of processing Desire verbs, the differential
results in the model must be due to the interac-
tion of the different distributional patterns in CDS
(see Table 2) and the processing approach of the
model. Although this finding does not rule out the
role of conceptual or syntactic differences between
Desire and Belief verbs in delayed acquisition of
the latter, it points to the importance of the dis-
tributional patterns as a potentially important and
relevant factor worth further study in human ex-
periments. We further investigate this hypothesis
in the following section.

4.2 A Closer Look at the Role of Syntax

The goal of the experiments presented here is to
understand how an interaction among the 5 dif-
ferent semantic classes of verbs, in terms of their
distribution of appearance with the two types of
SC constructions, coupled with the probabilistic
“misinterpretation” of MSVs in the model, might
play a role in the acquisition of Desire before Be-
lief verbs. Because our focus is on the syntactic
properties of the verbs, we present the model with
partial test frames containing a novel verb and syn-
tactic features that correspond to either a finite SC
usage (the typical use of a Belief verb) or an infini-
tival SC usage (the typical use of a Desire verb).5

We refer to the partial test frames as SC-fin or SC-
inf test frames. We test the model periodically,
over the course of 10, 000 input frames, in order
to examine the progression of the verb class like-

5Verb prediction given an isolated utterance has been per-
formed with adult participants (e.g., Gleitman et al., 2005;
Papafragou et al., 2007). Here we simulate the settings of
such experiments, but do not compare our results with the
experimental data, since they have not included children.

(a) Model’s likelihoods given SC-inf test frame

(b) Model’s likelihoods given SC-fin test frame

Figure 2: The model’s verb class likelihoods for the indi-
vidual semantic classes.

lihoods over time.

First, we examine the verb class prediction like-
lihoods, given an SC-inf test frame; see Fig-
ure 2(a). We can see that all through training,
the likelihoods are mainly divided between Desire
and Action verbs, with the Desire likelihood im-
proving over time. Looking at Table 2, we note
that the Desire and Action verbs have the highest
frequency of occurrence with SC-inf (taking into
account both the overall frequency of verbs, and
their relative frequency with SC-inf), contributing
to their strength of association with the infinitival-
SC syntax. Note that the very high likelihood of
Action verbs given an SC-inf test frame, especially
at the earlier stages of training, cannot be solely
due to their occurrence with SC-inf, since these
verbs mostly occur with other syntactic patterns.
Recall that the model incorporates a mechanism
that simulates a higher probability of erroneously
attending to the physical action (as opposed to the
mental event) at earlier stages, simulating what has
been observed in young children (see Section 2.3
for details). We believe that this mechanism is re-

237



sponsible for some of the Action verb responses of
the model for an SC-inf test frame.

Next, we look at the pattern of verb class likeli-
hoods given an SC-fin test frame; see Figure 2(b).
We can see that the likelihoods here are divided
across a larger number of classes — namely, Ac-
tion, Communication, and Perception — com-
pared with Figure 2(a) for the SC-inf test frame.
Since Action verbs do not occur in our data with
SC-fin (see Table 2), their likelihood here comes
from the misinterpretation of mental events (ac-
companied with SC-fin) as action. The initially
high likelihoods of Communication and Percep-
tion verbs results from their high frequency of oc-
currence with SC-fin. Because at this stage Belief
verbs are not always correctly associated with SC-
fin due to the high probability of misinterpreting
them as action, we see a lower likelihood of pre-
dicting Belief verbs. Eventually, the model pro-
duces more Belief responses than any other verb
class, since Beliefs have the highest frequency of
occurrence with the finite-SC syntax.

To summarize, our results here confirm our hy-
pothesis that the distributional properties of the
verb classes with the finite and infinitival SC pat-
terns, coupled with the learning mechanisms of
the model, account for the observed developmen-
tal pattern of MSV acquisition in our model.

5 Discussion

We use a computational model of verb argument
structure learning to shed light on the factors that
might underlie the earlier acquisition of Desire
verbs (e.g., wish and want) than Belief verbs (e.g.,
think and know). Although this developmental gap
has been noted by many researchers, there are at
least two competing theories as to what might be
the important factors: differences in the concep-
tual/pragmatic requirements (e.g., Fodor, 1992;
Bartsch and Wellman, 1995; Perner et al., 2003),
or differences in the syntactic properties (e.g., de
Villiers, 2005; Pascual et al., 2008). Using a com-
putational model, we suggest other factors that
may play a role in an explanation of the observed
gap, and should be taken into account in experi-
mental studies on human subjects.

First, we show that the model exhibits a simi-
lar pattern to children, in that it performs better at
predicting Desire verbs compared to Belief verbs,
given a novel verb paired with typical Desire or
Belief syntax and semantics, respectively. This

difference in performance suggests that the model
forms a strong association between the desire se-
mantics and the infinitival-SC syntax — one that
is formed earlier and is stronger than the associa-
tion it forms between the belief semantics and the
finite-SC syntax. Importantly, the replication of
this behaviour in the model does not require an
explicit encoding of conceptual/pragmatic differ-
ences between Desire and Belief verbs, nor of a
difference between the two types of SC syntax (fi-
nite and infinitival) with respect to their ease of
acquisition. Instead, we find that what is responsi-
ble for the model’s behaviour is the distribution of
the semantic verb classes (Desire, Belief, Percep-
tion, Communication, and Action) with the finite
and infinitival SC syntactic patterns in the input.

Children are also found to produce
semantically-concrete verbs, such as Com-
munication (e.g., say) and Perception verbs (e.g.,
see), with the finite SC before they produce
(more abstract) Belief verbs with the same syntax.
Psycholinguistic theories have different views
on what this observation tells us about the delay
in the acquisition of Belief verbs. For example,
Bartsch and Wellman (1995) suggest that the
earlier production of Communication verbs shows
that even when children have learned the finite-SC
syntax (and use it with more concrete verbs),
they lack the required conceptual development
to talk about the beliefs of others. Our results
suggest a different take on these same findings:
because Communication (and Perception) verbs
also frequently appear with the finite-SC syntax in
the input, the model learns a relatively strong as-
sociation between each of these semantic classes
and the finite SC. This in turn causes a delay in
the formation of a sufficiently-strong association
between the Belief verbs and that same syntax,
compared with the association between the Desire
verbs and the infinitival SC.

de Villiers (2005) suggests that associating
Communication verbs with the finite-SC syntax
has a facilitating effect on the acquisition of Be-
lief verbs. In our model, we observe a competi-
tion between Communication and Belief verbs, in
terms of their association with the finite-SC syn-
tax. To further explore the hypothesis of de Vil-
liers (2005) will require expanding our model with
enriched semantic representations that enable us to
investigate the bootstrapping role of Communica-
tion verbs in the acquisition of Beliefs.

238



References

Afra Alishahi and Suzanne Stevenson. 2008. A
computational model of early argument struc-
ture acquisition. Cognitive Science, 32(5):789–
834.

Kristen N. Asplin. 2002. Can complement frames
help children learn the meaning of abstract
verbs? Ph.D. thesis, UMass Amherst.

Libby Barak, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Steven-
son. 2012. Modeling the acquisition of mental
state verbs. NAACL-HLT 2012.

Karen Bartsch and Henry M. Wellman. 1995.
Children talk about the mind. New York: Ox-
ford Univ. Press.

Lois Bloom, Lois Hood, and Patsy Lightbown.
1974. Imitation in language development:
If, when, and why. Cognitive Psychology,
6(3):380–420.

Lois Bloom, Matthew Rispoli, Barbara Gartner,
and Jeremie Hafitz. 1989. Acquisition of com-
plementation. Journal of Child Language,
16(01):101–120.

Lois Bloom, Jo Tackeff, and Margaret Lahey.
1984. Learning to in complement constructions.
Journal of Child Language, 11(02):391–406.

Roger Brown. 1973. A first language: The early
stages. Harvard Univ. Press.

Nancy Chih-Lin Chang. 2009. Constructing
grammar: A computational model of the emer-
gence of early constructions. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley.

Jill G. de Villiers. 2005. Can language acquisi-
tion give children a point of view. In Why Lan-
guage Matters for Theory of Mind, pages 199–
232. Oxford Univ. Press.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic Proto-Roles and
Argument Selection. Language, 67(3):547–
619.

Jerry A Fodor. 1992. A theory of the child’s theory
of mind. Cognition, 44(3):283–296.

Lila R. Gleitman, Kimberly Cassidy, Rebecca
Nappa, Anna Papafragou, and John C.
Trueswell. 2005. Hard words. Language
Learning and Development, 1(1):23–64.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and
Martha Palmer. 2008. A large-scale classifica-
tion of English verbs. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 42(1):21–40.

A. Kuczaj, Stan. 1977. The acquisition of regular
and irregular past tense forms. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16(5):589–600.

Elena Lieven, Dorothé Salomo, and Michael
Tomasello. 2009. Two-year-old children’s pro-
duction of multiword utterances: A usage-based
analysis. Cognitive Linguistics, 20(3):481–507.

B. MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES project:
Tools for analyzing talk, volume 2. Psychology
Press.

Anna Papafragou, Kimberly Cassidy, and Lila
Gleitman. 2007. When we think about think-
ing: The acquisition of belief verbs. Cognition,
105(1):125–165.

Christopher Parisien and Suzanne Stevenson.
2011. Generalizing between form and meaning
using learned verb classes. In Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Sci-
ence Society.

Belén Pascual, Gerardo Aguado, Marı́a Sotillo,
and Jose C Masdeu. 2008. Acquisition of men-
tal state language in Spanish children: a longitu-
dinal study of the relationship between the pro-
duction of mental verbs and linguistic develop-
ment. Developmental Science, 11(4):454–466.

Amy Perfors, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Eliz-
abeth Wonnacott. 2010. Variability, negative
evidence, and the acquisition of verb argu-
ment constructions. Journal of Child Language,
37(03):607–642.

Josef Perner. 1988. Developing semantics for the-
ories of mind: From propositional attitudes to
mental representation. Developing theories of
mind, pages 141–172.

Josef Perner, Manuel Sprung, Petra Zauner, and
Hubert Haider. 2003. Want That is understood
well before Say That, Think That, and False Be-
lief: A test of de Villiers’s linguistic determin-
ism on German–speaking children. Child devel-
opment, 74(1):179–188.

Jacqueline Sachs. 1983. Talking about the There
and Then: The emergence of displaced refer-
ence in parent–child discourse. Children’s lan-
guage, 4.

Marilyn Shatz, Henry M. Wellman, and Sharon
Silber. 1983. The acquisition of mental verbs:
A systematic investigation of the first reference
to mental state. Cognition, 14(3):301–321.

239



Patrick Suppes. 1974. The semantics of children’s
language. American psychologist, 29(2):103.

240


