










































On the Information Conveyed by Discourse Markers


Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics, pages 84–93,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

On the Information Conveyed by Discourse Markers

Fatemeh Torabi Asr
MMCI Cluster of Excellence

Saarland University
Germany

fatemeh@coli.uni-saarland.de

Vera Demberg
MMCI Cluster of Excellence

Saarland University
Germany

vera@coli.uni-saarland.de

Abstract

Discourse connectives play an impor-
tant role in making a text coherent
and helping humans to infer relations
between spans of text. Using the
Penn Discourse Treebank, we investi-
gate what information relevant to in-
ferring discourse relations is conveyed
by discourse connectives, and whether
the specificity of discourse relations re-
flects general cognitive biases for estab-
lishing coherence. We also propose an
approach to measure the effect of a dis-
course marker on sense identification
according to the different levels of a re-
lation sense hierarchy. This will open a
way to the computational modeling of
discourse processing.

1 Introduction

A central question in psycholinguistic model-
ing is the development of models for human
sentence processing difficulty. An approach
that has received a lot of interest in recent
years is the information-theoretic measure of
surprisal (Hale, 2001). Recent studies have
shown that surprisal can successfully account
for a range of psycholinguistic effects (Levy,
2008), as well as account for effects in nat-
uralistic broad-coverage texts (Demberg and
Keller, 2008; Roark et al., 2009; Frank, 2009;
Mitchell et al., 2010). : what work of Roark
and Frank you mean here? Under the no-
tion of the Uniform Information Density hy-
pothesis (UID, Levy and Jaeger, 2007; Frank
and Jaeger, 2008), surprisal has also been
used to explain choices in language produc-
tion: When their language gives people the
option to choose between different linguistic
encodings, people tend to choose the encod-

ing that distributes the information more uni-
formly across the sentence (where the informa-
tion conveyed by a word is its surprisal).

When using surprisal as a cognitive model
of processing difficulty, we hypothesize that
the processing difficulty incurred by the hu-
man when processing the word is proportional
to the update of the interpretation, i.e. the in-
formation conveyed by the word (Hale, 2001;
Levy, 2008). We can try to estimate partic-
ular aspects of the information conveyed by a
word, e.g., the information conveyed about the
syntactic structure of the sentence, the seman-
tic interpretation, or about discourse relations
within the text.

This paper does not go all the way to
proposing a model of discourse relation sur-
prisal, but discusses first steps towards a
model for the information conveyed by dis-
course connectors about discourse relations,
based on available resources like the Penn Dis-
course Treebank (Prasad et al., 2008). First,
we quantify how unambiguously specific dis-
course relations are marked by their typical
connectors (Section 4.1) and test whether eas-
ily inferable relations are on average marked
more ambiguously than relations which are
less expected according to the default assump-
tion of a reader. This idea is shaped with
respect to the UID hypothesis: expected re-
lations can afford to be signaled by weaker
markers and less expected ones should be
marked by strong connectors in order to keep
the discourse-level information density smooth
throughout the text (Section 4.2). We then
investigate in more detail the types of ambi-
guity that a reader might face when process-
ing discourse relations. While some ambigui-
ties lie in discourse connectors, it also happens
that more than one relation exist at the same
time between two text spans. We show that

84



some discourse markers also signal the pres-
ence of several relations (Section 5). In com-
putational modeling as well as laboratory set-
ups, one should therefore have a strategy to
deal with the different types of ambiguities.
Finally, we ask what granularity of distinction
from other discourse relations (with respect to
the PDTB relation sense hierarchy) each En-
glish discourse connective conveys (Section 6).

2 Discourse Relations and their
Markers

A cognitive approach to discourse process-
ing emphasizes on the procedural role of the
connectives to constrain the way readers re-
late the propositions in a text (Blakemore,
1992; Blass, 1993). Experimental findings
suggest that these markers can facilitate the
inference of specific discourse relations (De-
gand and Sanders, 2002), and that discourse
connectors are processed incrementally Köhne
and Demberg (2013). People can however in-
fer discourse relations also in the absence of
discourse connecotrs, relying on the propo-
sitional content of the sentences and their
world-knowledge (Hobbs, 1979; Asher and
Lascarides, 1998). Asr and Demberg (2012b)
point out that similar inferences are also nec-
essary for discourse relations which are only
marked with a weak connector which can be
used for many relations, such as and. Further-
more, we know that the inference of discourse
relations is affected by a set of general cog-
nitive biases. To illuminate the role of these
factors let’s have a look at (1). While the type
of relation between the two events is clearly in-
ferable in (1-a) and (1-b) due to the discourse
connectives, in (1-c), the reader would have
to access their knowledge, e.g., about Harry
(from larger context) or the usual affairs be-
tween bosses and employees, in order to con-
struct a discourse relation.
(1) a. The boss was angry because Harry skipped

the meeting (reason).
b. The boss was angry, so Harry skipped the

meeting (result).
c. The boss was angry and Harry skipped the

meeting.

Here, not only both reason and result inter-
pretations but even an independent parallel re-
lation (simple Conjunction) between the two
events are possible to be inferred as a relatively

neutral connective, i.e., and is used. Levinson
(2000) notes in his discussion on presumptive
meanings that “when events are conjoined they
tend to be read as temporally successive and if
at all plausible, as causally linked”. If this is
true then the result reading is most probable
for (1-c). General preferences of this kind have
been investigated via experimental approaches
(Segal et al., 1991; Murray, 1997; Sanders,
2005; Kuperberg et al., 2011). Segal et al.
(1991) and Murray (1997) argue that readers
expect a sentence to be continuous with re-
spect to its preceding context (the continuity
hypothesis). Continuous discourse relations in
terms of congruency and/or temporality are
consequently easier to process than the dis-
continuous ones. Sanders (2005) proposes that
causal relatedness entails the maximum degree
of coherence in a text, therefore readers always
start by attempting to find cause-consequence
relations between neighboring sentences (the
causality-by-default hypothesis). In a similar
vein, Kuperberg et al. (2011) shows that read-
ers face comprehension difficulty when sen-
tences in short text spans cannot be put into
causal relation and no marker of other rela-
tions (e.g., Concession) is available.

Taken together, these findings suggest that
world knowledge, general cognitive biases, and
linguistic features of the sentences such as the
presence of a weak or strong marker contribute
to the relational inference. With a look back
to the information theoretic approach to the
linguistic patterns, one could hypothesize that
when one factor is strongly triggering expec-
tation for a specific type of relation the other
factors could remain silent in order to keep the
information distribution uniform. With this
perspective, Asr and Demberg (2012a) tested
whether the predictability of discourse rela-
tions due to general cognitive biases (towards
causality and continuity) can explain the pres-
ence vs. absence of the discourse connectors.
They found that connectors were more likely
to be dropped in the more predictable (causal
or continuous) relations than in others. Our
investigation of the explicit relations in this
paper (the first experiment) looks into this
question in a stricter manner considering how
much information a connective delivers about
discourse relations. Since this information is

85



Figure 1: Hierarchy of senses in PDTB
(Prasad et al., 2008)

closely related to the ambiguities a connec-
tive removes (or maybe adds to the context)
in the course of reading, we dedicate a sepa-
rate section in this paper to illuminate differ-
ent types of ambiguities. Also, a more detail
question would be what types of informa-
tion a connective can convey about one or sev-
eral discourse relations. To our best of knowl-
edge there has been no corpus-based study so
far about this last point which we will try to
model in our third experiment.

3 Penn Discourse Treebank

The Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB, Prasad
et al., 2008) is a large corpus annotated with
discourse relations, (covering the Wall Street
Journal part of the Penn Treebank). The an-
notation includes sentence connectives, spans
of their arguments and the sense of discourse
relations implied by the connectives. The rela-
tion labels are chosen according to a hierarchy
of senses (Figure 1). Annotators were asked
to find the Explicit discourse connectives and
respectively select a sense (as much specific as
possible) from the hierarchy. For neighboring
sentences where no explicit marker existed in
the original text they were asked to first insert
a suitable connective between the two argu-
ments and then annotate a relation sense, in
this case categorized as Implicit. If an expres-
sion — not belonging to the list of constituted
connectives — in one of the involved sentences

is already indicative of a specific relation, then
instead they marked that expression and put
the relation into the AltLex category. In all
of our experiments only the explicit relation
are considered. Some connectives were anno-
tated with two sense labels in the PDTB. In
our analyses below, we count these text spans
twice (i.e., once for each sense), resulting in a
total of 19,458 relation instances.

4 Are Unexpected Relations
Strongly Marked?

4.1 Markedness Measure
Point-wise mutual information (pmi) is an
information-theoretic measure of association
between two factors. For our purpose of mea-
suring the markedness degree of a relation r in
the corpus, we calculate the normalized pmi of
it with any of the connectives, written as c that
it co-occurs with:

npmi(r; c) = pmi(r; c)
− log p(r, c)

=
log p(r,c)p(r)p(c)
− log p(r, c)

= log p(r)p(c)log p(r, c) − 1

npmi is calculated in base 2 and ranges be-
tween −1 and 1. For our markedness measure,
we scale it to the interval of [0, 1] and weigh it
by the probability of the connector given the
relation.

0 < npmi(r; c) + 12 < 1

markedness(r) =
∑

c

p(c|r)npmi(r; c) + 12

Intuitively, the markedness measure tells us
whether a relation has very specific markers
(high markedness) or whether it is usually
marked by connectors that also mark many
other relations (low markedness).

4.2 Discourse Expectations and
Marker Strength

Given the markedness measure, we are now
able to test whether those relations which are
more expected given general cognitive biases

86



0.62	  

0.64	  

0.66	  

0.68	  

0.7	  

0.72	  

0.74	  

0.76	  

Temporal	  
(3696)	  

Con7ngency	  
(3741)	  

Expansion	  
(6431)	  

Comparison	  
(5590)	  

Markedness	  

Figure 2: Markedness of level-1 explicit rela-
tions in the PDTB (frequencies of the relations
given in brackets).

(expecting continuous and causal relations)
are marked less strongly than e.g. discontinu-
ous relations. Figure 2 compares the marked-
ness associated to the explicit relations of the
PDTB when the first level relation sense dis-
tinction is considered.

Figure 2 shows that COMPARISON rela-
tions exhibit higher markedness than other
relations, meaning that discontinuity is
marked with little ambiguity, i.e. markers
of COMPARISON relations are only very rarely
used in other types of discourse relations.
COMPARISON relations are exactly those rela-
tions which were classified in Asr and Demberg
(2012a) as a class of discontinuous relations.
Further experimental evidence also shows that
these relations are more likely to cause pro-
cessing difficulty than others when no connec-
tor is present (Murray, 1997), and that their
markers have a more strongly disruptive effect
than other markers when used incorrectly. Un-
der the information density view, these obser-
vations can be interpreted as markers for com-
parison relations causing a larger context up-
date. The high markedness of COMPARISON re-
lations is thus in line with the hypothesis that
unpredictable relations are marked strongly.

CONTINGENCY relations, on the other hand,
exhibit a lower score of markedness. This
indeed complies with the prediction of
the causality-by-default hypothesis (Sanders,
2005) in conjunction with the UID hypothe-
sis: causal relations can still be easily inferred

even in the presence of ambiguous connectives
because they are preferred by default.

As also discussed in Asr and Demberg
(2012a), some types of EXPANSION relations
are continuous while others are discontinuous;
finding that the level of markedness is near the
average of all relations therefore comes as no
surprise.

More interesting is the case of TEMPORAL
relations: these relations have low marked-
ness, even though this class includes contin-
uous (temporal succession) relations as well as
discontinuous (temporal precedence) relations,
and we would thus have expected a higher level
of markedness than we actually find. Even
when calculating markedness at the more fine-
grained relation distinction level, did not find
a significant difference between the marked-
ness of the temporally forward vs. backward
relations. A low level of markedness means
that the connectors used to mark temporal re-
lations are also used to mark other relations,
in particular, temporal connectives are often
used to mark CONTINGENCY relations. This
observation brings us to the question of gen-
eral patterns of ambiguity in discourse markers
and the ambiguity of discourse relations them-
selves, see Section 5.

5 Ambiguous Connective
vs. Ambiguous Relation

Some discourse connectives (e.g., since, which
can be temporal or causal, or while, which can
be temporal or contrastive) are ambiguous. In
this section, we would like to distinguish be-
tween three different types of ambiguity (all
with respect to the PDTB relation hierarchy):

1. A connector expressing different relations,
where it is possible to say that one but not
the other relation holds between the text
spans, for example since.

2. A connector expressing a class of relations
but being ambiguous with respect to the
subclasses of that relation, for example
but, which always expresses a COMPARISON
relationship but may express any subtype
of the comparison relation.

3. the ambiguity inherent in the relation be-
tween two text spans, where several rela-

87



Relation pair #R1 (total) #R2 (total) #Pair χ2

T.Synchrony–CON.Cause.reason 507 (1594) 353 (1488) 187 1.08E+00
T.Asynchronous.succession–CON.Cause.reason 189 (1101) 353 (1488) 159 2.43E+02 ***
E.Conjunction–CON.Cause.result 352 (5320) 162 (752) 140 2.22E+02 ***
T.Synchrony–EXP.Conjunction 507 (1594) 352 (5320) 123 5.43E+01 ***’
T.Synchrony–CON.Condition.reneral 507 (1594) 70 (362) 52 1.67E+01 ***
T.Synchrony–COM.Contrast.juxtaposition 507 (1594) 77 (1186) 45 1.97E+00
T.Asynchronous.precedence–E.Conjunction 66 (986) 352 (5320) 36 1.15E+01 ***
T.Synchrony–COM.Contrast 507 (1594) 37 (2380) 28 9.55E+00 ***
T.Synchrony–COM.Contrast.opposition 507 (1594) 28 (362) 21 6.78E+00 **

Table 1: Most frequent co-occurring relations in the PDTB, their frequency among multi-labels
(and in the entire corpus)

tions can be identified to hold at the same
time.

The first and second notion of ambiguity re-
fer to what we so far have been talking about:
we showed that some connectors mark can
mark differnt types of relations, and that some
connectives marking a general relation type
but not marking specific subrelations.

The third type of ambiguity is also anno-
tated in the PDTB. Relations which are am-
biguous by nature are either labeled with a
coarse-grained sense in the hierarchy (e.g.,
COMPARISON.Contrast the second most fre-
quent label in the corpus chosen by the anno-
tators when they could not agree on a more
specific relation sense), or are labelled with
two senses. Table 1 lists which two relation
senses were most often annotated to hold at
the same time in the PDTB, along with the
individual frequency (also frequency in the
entire corpus inside brackets). Sub-types of
Cause and TEMPORAL relations appear most
often together, while TEMPORAL.Synchrony is
a label that appears significantly more than
expected among the multi-label instances,
even with a higher frequency than that of
EXPANSION.Conjunction, the most frequent
label in the corpus. Such observations confirm
the existence of the third type of ambiguity in
discourse relations.

Interestingly, these inherently ambiguous
relations also have their own specific mark-
ers, such as meanwhile which occurs in about
70% of its instances with two relation senses1.

1This connective is mostly labeled with
TEMPORAL.Synchrony and EXPANSION.Conjunction.
Interestingly these two labels appear together signif-
icanly less frequently than expected (as marked in
the table with ***’) but when such a cooccurrance
happened in the corpus it has been for the connective
meanwhile.

On the other hand, other well-known ambigu-
ous connectors like since rarely mark inher-
ently ambiguous relations, and most often can
be identified as one specific relation sense by
looking at the content of the arguments. The
importance of the possibility to annotate a
second sense and hence explicitly mark the
inherently ambiguous relations has also been
pointed out by Versley (2011). In fact, a con-
nective like meanwhile can be thought of as
delivering information not only about the pos-
sible relation senses it can express, but also
about the fact that two discourse relations
hold simultaneously.

In conclusion, it is possible that more than
one discourse relation hold between two text
spans. We believe that taking into account
the different types of ambiguity in discourse
relations can also benefit automatic discourse
relation classification methods, that so far ig-
nore multiple relation senses. Relations with
two senses mostly include one temporal sense.
This also (at least partially) explains the low
level of markedness of temporal relations in
Figure 2. Of particular interest is also the find-
ing that there seem to be specific connectors
such as meanwhile which are used to mark in-
herently ambiguous relations.

6 Type of Information Conveyed
by a Discourse Connector

In this experiment, we focus on the differ-
ences among individual connectives in reflect-
ing information about discourse relations from
coarse to fine grained granularity.

6.1 Measure of Information Gain
The mutual information between two discrete
variables which is indicative of the amount of
uncertainty that one removes for inference of

88



the other, can be decomposed in the following
manner:

I(X; Y ) =
∑

c

p(c)
∑

r

p(r|c) log p(r|c)
p(r)

The inner sum is known as Kullback-Leibler di-
vergence or relative entropy of the distribution
of relations p(r) independent of the connector
c and the distribution of relations p(r|c) af-
ter observing c2. The relative entropy thus
quantifies in how far knowing the connector c
changes the distribution of relations.

gain(c) = DKL(p(r|c)||p(r))
This formulation also allows us to calculate

the change in distribution for different levels of
the PDTB relation sense hierarchy and thus to
analyse which connectors convey information
about which level of the hierarchy. We define
the measure of enhancement to formalize this
notion:

enhancementxy(c) = gainy(c)− gainx(c)

The enhancementxy(c) indicates the amount
of information delivered by cue c for the
classification of the instances into finer-
grained relation subtypes. For exam-
ple, enhancement01(because) describes how
much information gain because provides
for distinguishing the level-1 relations it
marks from other relations. Similarly,
high enhancement23(because) indicates that
this connective is important for distinguish-
ing among level 3 relations (here, distin-
guishing CONTINGENCY.Cause.reason from
CONTINGENCY.Cause.result relations), while
low enhancement23(if) indicates that if does
not contribute almost any information for
distinguishing among the subtypes of the
CONTINGENCY.Condition relation.

2Note that this formulation is closely related to sur-
prisal: Levy (2008) shows that surprisal(wk+1) =
− logP (wk+1|w1..wk) is equivalent to the KL diver-
gence D(P (T |w1..j+1)||P (T |w1..j)) for “any stochas-
tic generative process P , conditioned on some (pos-
sibly null) external context, that generates complete
structures T , each consisting at least partly of sur-
face strings to be identified with serial linguistic in-
put”. Note however that in our current formula-
tion of a discourse relation, the simplification to gen-
eral structure-independent surprisal does not hold
(DKL(p(r|c)||p(r)) 6= − log p(c)) because our relations
(as they are defined here) do not satisfy the above con-
dition for T , in particular, P (r, c) 6= P (r).

6.2 Connective Help in Hierarchical
Classification

Figure 3 shows the amount of enhancement
for 27 frequent (> 100 occurrences) connec-
tives in the corpus in three transitions, namely
from no information to the first level classifi-
cation, from first to the second level and from
second to the third. Most of the connectives
contribute most strongly at the coarsest level
of classification, i.e., their L1-Root enhance-
ment is the highest. In particular, we find that
some of the most frequent connectives such as
but, and, and also only help distinguishing dis-
course relation meaning at the coarsest level of
the PDTB relation hierarchy, but contribute
little to distinguish among e.g. different sub-
types of COMPARISON or EXPANSION. An inter-
esting observation is also that frequent mark-
ers of comparison relations but, though, still
and however provide almost no information
about the second or third level of the hierar-
chy.

Another group of connectors, for example,
instead, indeed and or contribute significantly
more information in transition from the first
to the second level. These are specific markers
of some level-2 relation senses. Among these,
instead and or even help more for the deepest
classification3.

Temporal and causal connectives such as be-
fore, after, so, then ,when and thus have more
contribution to the deepest classification level.
This reflects the distinctions employed in the
definition of the third level senses which has
a direct correlation with the temporal order-
ing, i.e., forward vs. backward transition be-
tween the involved sentences. In other words,
regardless of whatever high-level class of rela-
tion such markers fit in, the temporal infor-
mation they hold make them beneficial for the
3rd level classification.

There are also a few connectives (if, indeed,
for example) that convey a lot of information
about the distinctions made at the first and
second level of the hierarchy, but not about the
third level. The reason for this is either that
the third level distinction can only be made
based on the propositional information in the

3Markers of EXPANSION.Alternative.conjunction
and EXPANSION.Alternative.chosen alternative re-
spectively.

89



0	  
0.5	  
1	  

1.5	  
2	  

2.5	  
3	  

enhancement	  0-­‐>1	  
enhancement	  1-­‐>2	  
enhancement	  2-­‐>3	  

4.4	   4.0	   3.5	  

Figure 3: Enhancement through three levels of relation sense classification obtained by 27 most
frequent connectives in the PDTB — ordered left to right by frequency.

arguments (this is the case for the sub-types
of conditionals), or that the connector usually
marks a relation which does not have a third
level (e.g., for example is a good marker of
the EXPANSION.Instantiation relation which
does not have any subtypes).

It is worth noting that a sum over enhance-
ments obtained in the three levels results in the
total relative entropy the distribution of dis-
course relations before vs. after encountering
the connective. As expected, ambiguous con-
nectors of the first type of ambiguity (while,
since, when) convey a little bit of information
at each level of distinction, while overall in-
formation gain is relatively small. Ambigu-
ous connectors of the second type of ambigu-
ity (e.g., but, and, if ) convey almost no infor-
mation about specific sub-types of relations.
Finally, markers of inherently ambiguous rela-
tions (meanwhile) stand out for very low in-
formation gain at all levels.

6.3 Discussion
The notion of the information conveyed by a
discourse connector about a discourse relation
can also help to explain two previous find-
ings on the relative facilitative effect of causal
and adversative connectors, that at first glance
seem contradictory.

While Murray (1997) showed a generally
more salient effect for a group of adversative
cues such as however, yet, nevertheless and
but compared with causal connectives there-
fore, so, thus and consequently, others reported
different patterns when particular pairs of con-
nectives were compared: Caron et al. (1988)
found greater inference activity and recall ac-
curacy for because sentences than sentences
connected with but. Also, Millis and Just
(1994) found a faster reading time and bet-

ter response to the comprehension questions
in the case of because than that of although
sentences. Interestingly, by looking at Figure
3, we find that because is a more constrain-
ing connective than but and even although,
given that the information gain obtain by this
connective in all levels of relation classifica-
tion is greater than that of but and although.
While adversative connectives are reliable sig-
nals to distinguish comparison relations in a
high-level from the other three major types of
relations, most causal connectives deliver spe-
cific information down to the finer grains. In
particular, because is a distinguished marker of
the reason relation; hence, it should be associ-
ated with a more constraining discourse effect,
while a generally used connective such as but
can serve as the marker of a variety of adver-
sative relations, e.g., a simple Contrast vs. a
Concession relation.

The information-theoretic view can also ac-
count for the larger facilitating effect of highly
constraining causal and adversative connec-
tives on discourse comprehension compared
to additive connectives such as and, also and
moreover (Murray, 1995, 1997; Ben-Anath,
2006). We also can see from the Figure 3 that
the mentioned additive connectives show a rel-
atively lower sum of enhancement.

In summary, the broad classification of a dis-
course connector (Murray, 1997; Halliday and
Hasan, 1976) is not the only factor that deter-
mines how constraining it is, or how difficult it
will be to process. Instead, one should look at
its usage in different context (i.e., specificity
of the connective usage in the natural text).
For example, based on the measurements pre-
sented in the Figure 3 we would expect a rel-
atively high constraining effect of the connec-
tives such as for example and instead. Note

90



however that these predictions strongly de-
pend on the discourse relation sense inventory
and the discourse relation hierarchy. In partic-
ular, it is important to ask in how far compu-
tational linguistics resources, like the PDTB,
reflect the inference processes in humans – in
how far are the sense distinction and hierar-
chical classification cognitively adequate?

7 Discussion and Conclusion

Discourse Relation Hierarchy and Fea-
ture Space Dimensions Psycholingusitic
models that need to be trained on annotated
data from computational linguistics resources
also have to be concerned about the psycholin-
guistic adequacy of the annotation. In par-
ticular, for a model of discourse relation sur-
prisal, we need to ask which discourse relations
are relevant to humans, and which distinctions
between relations are relevant to them? For
example, it may be possible that the distinc-
tion between cause and consequence (3rd level
PDTB hierarchy) is more important in the in-
ference process than the distinction between
conjunction and list (2nd level PDTB hierar-
chy). Given the fact that more than one dis-
course relation (or none) can hold between two
text segments, one should also ask whether a
hierarchy is the right way to think about the
discourse relation senses at all – it might be
more adequate to think about discourse con-
nectives conveying information about tempo-
rality, causality, contrast etc, with each con-
nector possibly conveying information about
more than one of these aspects at the same
time.

These questions are also relevant for auto-
matic discourse relation identification: many
approaches to discourse relation identification
have simplified the task to only distinguish
between e.g. the level-1 sense distinctions, or
level-2 distinctions (Versley, 2011; Lin et al.,
2011; Hernault et al., 2011; Park and Cardie,
2012), but may be missing to differentiate as-
pects that are important also for many text
interpretation tasks, such as distinguishing be-
tween causes and consequences.

Towards discourse relation surprisal A
computational model of discourse relation sur-
prisal would have to take the actual local con-
text into account, i.e. factors other than just

the connective, and model the interplay of dif-
ferent factors in the arguments of the discourse
relation. We would then be in a position to
argue about the predictability of a specific in-
stance of a discourse relation, as opposed to
arguing based on general cognitive biases such
as the causality-by-default or continuity hy-
potheses.

From the three studies in this paper, we note
that our findings so far are compatible with
a surprisal account at the discourse relation
level: The first study showed that discourse
relations that seem to cause a larger context
update are marked by less ambiguous connec-
tives than relations for which less information
needs to be conveyed in order to be inferred.
This is in line with the UID and the conti-
nuity and causality-by-default hypotheses put
forth by Murray (1997) and Sanders (2005).
The second study then went on to show that
one can distinguish several types of ambiguity
among discourse relations, in particular, more
than one relation can hold between two propo-
sitions, and there are some connectives which
express this inherent ambiguity. In the third
study, we also showed that the effect of par-
ticular discourse markers varies with respect
to their contribution in different levels of re-
lation classification. Some connectives such as
the majority of the adversative ones, simply
help to distinguish contrastive relations from
other classes, while those with a temporal di-
rectionality contribute most in the deeper level
of the PDTB hierarchical classification. The
enhancement measure introduced in this pa-
per can be employed for measuring the effect
of any discriminative feature through the hi-
erarchical classification of the relations. This
work is a first step towards the computational
modeling of the discourse processing with re-
spect to the linguistic markers of the abstract
discourse relations. In future work, we would
like to look at the contribution of different
types of relational markers including sentence
connectives, sentiment words, implicit causal-
ity verbs, negation markers, event modals etc.,
which in the laboratory setup have proven to
affect the expectation of the readers about
an upcoming discourse relation (Kehler et al.,
2008; Webber, 2013).

91



References

Asher, N. and Lascarides, A. (1998). Bridging.
Journal of Semantics, 15(1):83–113.

Asr, F. T. and Demberg, V. (2012a). Implic-
itness of discourse relations. In Proceedings
of COLING, Mumbai, India.

Asr, F. T. and Demberg, V. (2012b). Mea-
suring the strength of the discourse cues.
In workshop on the Advances in Discourse
Analysis and its Computational Aspects,
Mumbai, India.

Ben-Anath, D. (2006). The role of connec-
tives in text comprehension. Teachers Col-
lege, Columbia University Working Papers
in TESOL & Applied Linguistics, 5(2).

Blakemore, D. (1992). Understanding ut-
terances: An introduction to pragmatics.
Blackwell Oxford.

Blass, R. (1993). Are there logical relations in
a text? Lingua, 90(1-2):91–110.

Caron, J., Micko, H. C., and Thuring, M.
(1988). Conjunctions and the recall of com-
posite sentences. Journal of Memory and
Language, 27(3):309–323.

Degand, L. and Sanders, T. (2002). The im-
pact of relational markers on expository text
comprehension in l1 and l2. Reading and
Writing, 15(7):739–757.

Demberg, V. and Keller, F. (2008). Data from
eye-tracking corpora as evidence for theories
of syntactic processing complexity. Cogni-
tion, 109(2):193–210.

Frank, A. and Jaeger, T. (2008). Speaking ra-
tionally: Uniform information density as an
optimal strategy for language production.
Proceedings of the 28th meeting of the Cog-
nitive Science Society.

Frank, S. (2009). Surprisal-based compari-
son between a symbolic and a connectionist
model of sentence processing. In Proceedings
of the 31st annual conference of the cogni-
tive science society, pages 1139–1144.

Hale, J. (2001). A probabilistic earley parser
as a psycholinguistic model. In Second meet-
ing of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics
on Language technologies 2001, pages 1–8.

Halliday, M. and Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion
in English. Longman (London).

Hernault, H., Bollegala, D., and Ishizuka, M.
(2011). Semi-supervised discourse relation
classification with structural learning. Com-
putational Linguistics and Intelligent Text
Processing, pages 340–352.

Hobbs, J. R. (1979). Coherence and corefer-
ence. Cognitive science, 3(1):67–90.

Kehler, A., Kertz, L., Rohde, H., and Elman,
J. L. (2008). Coherence and coreference re-
visited. Journal of Semantics, 25(1):1–44.

Köhne, J. and Demberg, V. (2013). The time-
course of processing discourse connectives.
In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society.

Kuperberg, G., Paczynski, M., and Ditman,
T. (2011). Establishing causal coherence
across sentences: An ERP study. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(5):1230–1246.

Levinson, S. (2000). Presumptive Meanings:
The Theory of Generalized Conversational
Implicature. The MIT Press.

Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntac-
tic comprehension. Cognition, 106(3):1126–
1177.

Levy, R. and Jaeger, T. F. (2007). Speakers
optimize information density through syn-
tactic reduction. In Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems.

Lin, Z., Ng, H., and Kan, M. (2011). Automat-
ically evaluating text coherence using dis-
course relations. In Proceedings of the 49th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies-Volume 1, pages 997–1006.

Millis, K. and Just, M. (1994). The influence
of connectives on sentence comprehension.
Journal of Memory and Language.

Mitchell, J., Lapata, M., Demberg, V., and
Keller, F. (2010). Syntactic and seman-
tic factors in processing difficulty: An inte-
grated measure. In Proceedings of the 48th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 196–206.

Murray, J. (1995). Logical connectives and
local coherence. Sources of Coherence in
Reading, pages 107–125.

92



Murray, J. (1997). Connectives and narrative
text: The role of continuity. Memory and
Cognition, 25(2):227–236.

Park, J. and Cardie, C. (2012). Improving im-
plicit discourse relation recognition through
feature set optimization. In Proceedings of
the 13th Annual Meeting of the Special In-
terest Group on Discourse and Dialogue,
pages 108–112. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Prasad, R., Dinesh, N., Lee, A., Miltsakaki,
E., Robaldo, L., Joshi, A., and Webber, B.
(2008). The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, pages 2961–2968.

Roark, B., Bachrach, A., Cardenas, C., and
Pallier, C. (2009). Deriving lexical and syn-
tactic expectation-based measures for psy-
cholinguistic modeling via incremental top-
down parsing. In Proceedings of the 2009
Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 324–333,
Singapore. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Sanders, T. (2005). Coherence, causality and
cognitive complexity in discourse. In Pro-
ceedings/Actes SEM-05, First International
Symposium on the Exploration and Mod-
elling of Meaning, pages 105–114.

Segal, E., Duchan, J., and Scott, P. (1991).
The role of interclausal connectives in nar-
rative structuring: Evidence from adults’ in-
terpretations of simple stories. Discourse
Processes, 14(1):27–54.

Versley, Y. (2011). Towards finer-grained
tagging of discourse connectives. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop Beyound Seman-
tics: Corpus-based Investigations of Prag-
matic and Discourse Phenomena.

Webber, B. (2013). What excludes an alterna-
tive in coherence relations? In Proceedings
of the IWCS.

93


