


































Renewing and Revising SemLink

Claire Bonial, Kevin Stowe & Martha Palmer
Department of Linguistics,

University of Colorado at Boulder
Hellems 290, 295 UCB

Boulder, CO 80309-0295
{Claire.Bonial, Kevin.Stowe, Martha.Palmer}@colorado.edu

Abstract

This research describes SemLink, a compre-
hensive resource for Natural Language Pro-
cessing that maps and unifies several high-
quality lexical resources: PropBank, VerbNet,
FrameNet, and the recently added OntoNotes
sense groupings. Each of these resources was
created for slightly different purposes, and
therefore each carries unique strengths and
limitations. SemLink allows users to lever-
age the strengths of each resource and provides
the groundwork for incorporating these lexi-
cal resources effectively into linked data re-
sources. SemLink and the resources included
therein are discussed with a focus on the value
of using lexical resources in a complemen-
tary fashion. Recent improvements to Sem-
Link, including the addition of a new resource,
the OntoNotes sense groupings, are described.
Work to address future goals, including further
expansion of SemLink, is also discussed.

1 Introduction

SemLink (Palmer, 2009) is an ongoing effort to
map complementary lexical resources: PropBank
(PB) (Palmer et al., 2005), VerbNet (VN) (Kip-
per et al., 2008), FrameNet (FN) (Fillmore et al.,
2002), and the recently added OntoNotes (ON)
sense groupings (Pradhan et al., 2007). Each of
these lexical resources varies in the level and na-
ture of semantic detail represented, since each
was created independently with somewhat differ-
ing goals. Nonetheless, all of these resources can
be used to associate semantic information with the
propositions of natural language. SemLink serves
as a platform to unify these resources and there-
fore combine the fine-granularity and rich seman-
tics of FN, the syntactically-based generalizations
of VN, and the relatively coarse-grained semantics
of PB, which has been shown to be effective train-

ing data for supervised Machine Learning tech-
niques. The recent addition of ON sense group-
ings, which can be thought of as a more semanti-
cally general view of WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998),
provides even broader coverage for the resource.

Although SemLink has been created indepen-
dently from Semantic Web technology, it is in
an important tool for integrating the resources
therein into linked data lexical resources, such as
lemonUby (Eckle-Kohler, McCrae and Chiarcos,
submitted). Semlink provides a single link to a
lexical unit, which can then access all of these
resources at once. For linked data in linguistics
to be leveraged effectively, it is necessary to have
systems that can automatically recognize that, for
example, ‘Stock prices decreased’ and ‘The stock
market is falling’ describe the same event. Such
an interpretation relies upon a recognition of the
similarity between decrease and fall, as well as be-
tween stock prices and stock market. This requires
rich lexical resources that make these connections
explicit. While WordNet and FN alone contribute
much towards this goal, much more needs to be
done to appropriately interpret polysemous verbs
in context. SemLink helps to address this need.

SemLink unifies the aforementioned lexical
resources by firstly providing a mapping between
the semantic roles of PB and VN, as well as
a mapping between the semantic roles of VN
and the Frame Elements of FN. Each of these
resources differ primarily in the granularity, or
level of semantic specificity, of the semantic roles
used. For example, PB uses very generic labels
such as Arg0, as in:

[Arg0 President Bush] has [REL approved] [Arg1
duty-free treatment for imports of certain types of
watches.]

In addition to providing several alternative syntac-
tic frames and a set of semantic predicates corre-

9



sponding to verbs within a class, VN marks the PB
Arg0 as an Agent, and the Arg1 as a Theme, using
traditional thematic role labels. In contrast, FN la-
bels them as Grantor and Action respectively, and
puts them in the Grant Permission class, thereby
situating the event within a certain semantic do-
main or frame. The additional semantic richness
provided by VN and FN does not contradict PB,
but can be seen as complementary. It should also
be noted that while the explicit numbered argu-
ment label itself within PB is quite generic, PB
also includes a lexical resource where these num-
bered arguments are further specified, and these
descriptions are verb-specific and therefore quite
fine-grained.

SemLink provides an additional level of unifi-
cation by providing a mapping between the verb
senses, or ‘rolesets’ of PB and VN classes, and
in turn between VN classes and FN frames. Like
the semantic roles, these senses also differ in their
levels of granularity. For example, the verb hear
has just one coarse-grained sense in PB, with the
following roleset:

Arg0: hearer
Arg1: utterance, sound
Arg2: speaker, source of sound

This sense maps to both the Discover and See
classes of VN, and the Perception Experience and
Hear frames of FN. Each resource provides a
unique lexicon, again varying in the extent to
which verb senses are either lumped together or
distinguished. SemLink helps to leverage the con-
tributions of each component, as well as take ad-
vantage of manual annotations created for each re-
source.

2 The Resources Included in SemLink

As discussed initially, the resources described here
are distinct but complementary to each other. The
question is, how can we best leverage the contribu-
tions of each one in a broad-coverage English lex-
ical resource? In the quest for more annotated data
and, in particular more diverse genres, it would
clearly be advantageous to be able to take the man-
ual data annotations that have been created with
respect to one resource and merge them with data
annotations for other resources. This could create
a much larger, more diverse and yet still coherent
training corpus; this is one of the goals of the Sem-

Link project. This section provides background on
each individual resource.

2.1 PropBank

Unlike FN and VN, the primary goal in develop-
ing the Proposition Bank, or PB, was not lexical
resource creation, but the development of an an-
notated corpus to be used as training data for su-
pervised machine learning systems. The first PB
release consists of 1M words of the Wall Street
Journal portion of the Penn Treebank II (Marcus
& Marcinkiewicz, 1993) with predicate-argument
structures for verbs, using semantic role labels for
each verb argument. Although the semantic role
labels are purposely chosen to be quite generic and
theory neutral, Arg0, Arg1, etc., they are still in-
tended to consistently annotate the same seman-
tic role across syntactic variations (Arg0 and Arg1
do consistently correspond to Dowty’s (1991) con-
cepts of Proto-Agent and Proto-Patient respec-
tively). For example, the Arg1 or Patient in ‘John
broke the window’ is the same window that is an-
notated as the Arg1 in ‘The window broke,’ even
though it is the syntactic subject in one sentence
and the syntactic object in the other. Thus, the
main goal of PB is to supply consistent, simple,
general purpose labeling of semantic roles for a
large quantity of coherent text to support the train-
ing of automatic semantic role labelers, in the
same way the Penn Treebank has supported the
training of statistical syntactic parsers.

As mentioned previously, PB also provides a
lexicon entry for each broad meaning of every
annotated verb, including the possible arguments
of the predicate and their labels (its ‘roleset’) and
all possible syntactic realizations. For example,
the verb leave includes the following two rolesets,
which correspond to syntactically and semanti-
cally distinct senses of the verb:

Roleset ID: leave.01 move away from
Roles:
Arg0: entity leaving
Arg1: place, person, or thing left
Arg2: attribute of arg1
Example: John left Mary alone.

Roleset ID: leave.02 give
Roles:
Arg0: giver/leaver
Arg1: thing given

10



Arg2: benefactive, given-to
Example: Mary left her daughter the diamond
pendant.

This lexical resource is used as a set of verb-
specific guidelines by the annotators, and can be
seen as quite similar in nature to FN and VN al-
though at a more coarse-grained level. In addi-
tion to numbered roles, PB defines several more
general (ArgM, Argument Modifier) roles that can
apply to any verb, and which are similar to ad-
juncts. These include LOCation, EXTent, ADVer-
bial, CAUse, TeMPoral, MaNneR, and DIRection,
among others. These are marked, for example, as
‘ArgM-LOC.’

In spite of its success in facilitating the training
of semantic role labeling (SRL), there are several
ways in which PB could be more effective. PB
lacks much of the information that is contained
in VN, including information about selectional re-
strictions, verb semantics, and inter-verb relation-
ships. We have therefore created the mapping be-
tween VN and PB included in SemLink, which
will allow us to use the machine learning tech-
niques that have been developed for PB annota-
tions to generate VN representations.

The mapping between VN and PB consists of
two parts: a lexical mapping and an annotated cor-
pus. The lexical mapping is responsible for speci-
fying the potential mappings between PB and VN
for a given word; but it does not specify which of
those mappings (typically one to many) should be
used for any given occurrence of the word. That
is the job of the annotated corpus, which for any
given instance gives the specific VN mapping and
semantic role labels. This can be thought of as a
form of sense tagging: where a PB frame maps to
several VN classes, they can be thought of as more
fine-grained senses, and labeling with the class la-
bel corresponds to providing a sense tag label.

The type-to-type lexical mapping was used to
automatically predict VN classes and role labels
for each instance. Where the resulting mapping
was one-to-many, the correct mapping was se-
lected manually (Loper et al., 2007). The useful-
ness of this mapping for improving SRL on new
genres has been demonstrated by Yi, Loper, and
Palmer (2007) who focused on Arg2 . By subdi-
viding the Arg2 instances into coherent subgroups
based on the VN labels and then using them for
training, and then mapping back to Arg2 for test-

ing, the performance on Arg2 increased 6 points
for WSJ test data, and 10 points for Brown Corpus
test data. These results encouraged extending the
mappings to other resources, starting with FN.

2.2 VerbNet
VN is midway between PB and FN in terms of lex-
ical specificity, and is closer to PB in its close ties
to syntactic structure. It consists of hierarchically
arranged verb classes, inspired by and extended
from Levin’s verb classes (Levin, 1993). The orig-
inal Levin classes constitute the first few levels
in the hierarchy, with each class subsequently re-
fined to account for further semantic and syntac-
tic differences within a class. In many cases, the
additional information that VN provides for each
class has caused it to subdivide, or use intersec-
tions of, Levin classes. Each class and subclass
is characterized extensionally by its set of verbs,
and intensionally by a list of the arguments of
those verbs and syntactic and semantic informa-
tion about them. Subclasses add information about
behaviors and characteristics shared by a subset of
verbs in the class.

In each class and subclass, an effort is made
to list all syntactic frames in which the verbs of
that class can be grammatically realized. Each
syntactic frame is detailed with the expected
syntactic phrase type of each argument, thematic
roles of arguments, and a semantic representation;
for example:

Frame NP V NP PP.destination
Example Jessica loaded boxes into the wagon.
Syntax Agent V Theme Destination
Semantics Motion(during(E), Theme)
Not(Prep-into(start(E), Theme, Destination))
Prep-into(end(E), Theme, Destination)
Cause(Agent, E)

Although this classification is primarily based on
shared syntactic behaviors, there is clear semantic
cohesion to each of the classes. As Levin hypoth-
esizes, this is a result of the fact that verb behavior
is a reflection of verb meaning.

2.3 FrameNet
Based on Fillmore’s Frame Semantics, each se-
mantic frame in FN is defined with respect to its
Frame Elements, which are fine-grained semantic
role labels. For instance, the Frame Elements for
the Apply-heat Frame include a Cook, Food and

11



a Heating Instrument. More traditional labels for
the same roles might be Agent, Theme and Instru-
ment. Members of the Apply-heat frame include
bake, barbecue, blanch, boil, braise, broil, brown,
etc. The Apply-heat lexical units all happen to be
verbs, but a frame can also have adjectives and
nouns as members.

The 1,033 lexical frames are associated with
over 10,000 Frame Elements, since there is a de-
liberate effort to keep the Frame Element names
distinct whenever there are semantic differences
(Fillmore et al., 2002). The Frame Elements for
an individual Frame are classified in terms of how
central they are, with three levels being distin-
guished: core (similar to syntactically obligatory),
peripheral (similar to syntactically optional), and
extrathematic (similar to adjuncts rather than argu-
ments). Lexical items are grouped together based
solely on having the same frame semantics, with-
out consideration of similarity of syntactic behav-
ior, unlike Levin’s verb classes. Sets of verbs with
similar syntactic behavior may appear in multiple
frames, and a single FN frame may contain sets of
verbs with related senses but different subcatego-
rization properties. FN places a primary emphasis
on providing rich, idiosyncratic descriptions of se-
mantic properties of lexical units in context, and
making explicit subtle differences in meaning.

The SemLink VN/FN mapping consists of three
parts. The first part is a many-to-many mapping of
VN Classes and FN frames for specific class mem-
bers. It is many-to-many in that a given FN lexical
unit can map to more than one VN member, and
more frequently, a given VN member can map to
more than one FN Frame. The second part is a
mapping of VN semantic roles and FN frame el-
ements. These two parts have been provided in
separate files in order to offer the cleanest possible
formatting. The third part is the PB corpus with
mappings from PB roleset ID’s to FN frames and
mappings from the PB arguments to FN frame el-
ements. This has recently been manually updated
and corrected due to changes in each resource; this
process is discussed in more detail in 3.1.

2.4 OntoNotes Sense Groupings

The ON Sense Groupings can be thought of as
a more coarse-grained view of WordNet senses.
This is because these sense groupings were based
on WordNet senses that were successively merged
into more coarse-grained senses based on the

results of inter-annotator agreement in tagging
of the senses (Duffield et al., 2007; Pradhan et
al., 2007). Essentially, where two annotators
were consistently able to distinguish between two
senses, the distinction was kept. Where annotators
were not able to consistently distinguish between
two senses, the senses were conflated into one
sense. For example, the sense groupings for the
verb leave include the following 6 senses, whereas
the WordNet entry includes 14 senses:

Sense 1 name=‘depart, go forth, exit’
Sense 2 name=‘leave something behind...’
Sense 3 name=‘cause an effect that remains’
Sense 4 name=‘stop, terminate, end’
Sense 5 name=‘exclude, neglect to include’
Sense 6 name=‘end a romantic relationship’

These groupings also include recently updated,
manually created links to WordNet senses, VN
classes and PB Framesets. Because the SemLink
portion of the Wall Street Journal has also been an-
notated with these sense groupings, the annotation
portion of SemLink has recently been augmented
with the appropriate sense grouping for each in-
stance, therefore providing an additional mapping
level to the SemLink corpus. The incorporation of
ON sense groupings into SemLink is discussed in
more detail in 3.2.

3 Current State of SemLink

The first version of SemLink (1.1) contained
mappings between the three lexical resources
discussed (PB, VN, and FN), as well as a
collection of predicates from the Wall Street
Journal data annotated with PB and VN
classes and arguments. In the recent release
(SemLink 1.2, available for download here:
http://verbs.colorado.edu/semlink/), these WSJ
propositions have been additionally annotated
with FN frames and FN frame elements (using
FN version 1.5), as well as ON sense groupings.
The mapping files between PB, VN (version 3.2),
and FN have also been checked for consistency
and updated to more accurately reflect the current
relations between these resources.

3.1 FN Addition to Corpus

The first major improvement made to SemLink is
the addition of FN frames and FN frame elements
to the corpus annotation. SemLink 1.1 contained

12



mappings from VN classes to FN frames (e.g.
Remove-10.1 to Change of leadership for class
member depose), as well as mappings from VN
thematic roles to FN frame elements (e.g. Agent
to Selector for Change of leadership frame), but
contained no FN information for specific Wall
Street Journal predicates within the corpus. The
current SemLink version contains manually anno-
tated FN frames for most of these WSJ proposi-
tions, as well as automatic mappings where this
was possible because the existing mapping was
one-to-one. Additionally, the VN thematic role to
FN frame element mapping file was used to popu-
late the arguments for each proposition. Thus, the
SemLink corpus now contains PB argument infor-
mation, VN thematic roles, and the appropriately
mapped FN frame elements.

The addition of FN information to the corpus
data allows for a detailed inspection of these var-
ious lexical resources in language practice. The
mapping files of SemLink 1.1 allowed for an
overview of the granularity differences between
these resources, but applying all three of them to
the corpus data gives a clear picture of how each
resource handles various argument structures, as
well as how the resources interact and overlap with
each other. With the corpus data thus annotated, a
verb can be examined to see how it behaves with
regard to each resource, as well as how these re-
sources interact across a corpus.

3.2 Addition of OntoNotes Senses to
SemLink

To improve and expand the variety of resources
mapped by SemLink, ON sense grouping annota-
tions were added to the corpus data in the latest
SemLink release. As mentioned previously, the
ON senses are derived from the WordNet sense
groupings, but are more coarse-grained and allow
for better inter-annotator agreement. Sense dis-
tinctions with this level of granularity can be de-
tected automatically at 87-89% accuracy, making
them effective for NLP applications (Dligach and
Palmer, 2011). The coverage of ON annotations
isn’t complete - only 37,389 of approximately
80,000 have this annotation (although surely some
of these are monosemous verbs). The current
annotation covers all verbs with more than three
senses and is therefore quite useful despite its in-
complete coverage, but further annotation is nec-
essary to complete the mapping of this resource.

3.3 Updates & Corrections

A pressing challenge for the SemLink project
is keeping the resources that it maps properly
aligned. The three major lexical resources undergo
frequent revisions to improve accuracy and cover-
age, and the mappings between them subsequently
require updates and improvements. SemLink 1.2
contains a large amount of manual updates be-
tween the mappings as well as improvements to
the processes used to keep these resources aligned
in the future.

The VN to FN mapping files are incredibly
useful but are also challenging. Maintaining the
accuracy and completeness of the files is par-
ticularly difficult, as neither resource maintains
an explicit connection to the other. The map-
ping files between these resources were originally
created and curated by hand, so that as these
resources have been updated, the mapping files
fall out of date. The development of SemLink
1.2 required an implementation of error checking
in these files, which would indicate which VN
classes, FN frames, VN thematic roles, and FN
frame elements were no longer present. This al-
lowed for these files to be checked for explicit er-
rors and brought up to date with the current re-
leases of both resources.

The mapping file between VN and PB contained
similar errors, as both PB and VN are frequently
revised, but a long-term solution for correcting
these discrepancies has been developed. PB con-
tains within its framesets explicit, hand-annotated
mappings between PB frames and VN classes.
The VN to PB mapping file was generated from
these annotations, giving a current, accurate ver-
sion of the mappings between these two resources.

With the updates to all three resources and their
mapping files, the Wall Street Journal predicates
were also found to contain errors resulting from
antiquated annotations. Approximately one third
of the instances from the original VN to PB WSJ
mappings in the original SemLink contained map-
pings that are no longer valid, or incorrect anno-
tations as VN and PB have been updated. The
current implementation of SemLink checks each
PB roleset and VN class against the current data
and mapping files, and marks it for reannotation if
there are any discrepancies. In this way, the WSJ
data is kept consistent with the mapping files and
the current versions of each resource.

13



4 Leveraging SemLink

Natural Language Processing applications vary
widely in their of use of resources, and different
applications require different levels of granularity.
Research in automatic semantic role labeling has
demonstrated the importance of the level of gran-
ularity of semantic roles: Yi, Loper and Palmer
(2007) and Loper et al. (2007) both demonstrate
that because VN labels are more generalizable
across verbs than PB labels, they are easier for
semantic role labeling systems to learn; however,
Merlo and Van Der Plas (2009) found that the dif-
fering levels of granularity of PB and VN were
both useful, and therefore suggest complementary
use of both resources.

SemLink attemps to bring together both coarse
and fine-grained resources and make them eas-
ily useable and interchangable. If an application
requires a fine-grained resource like FN, but the
available data is annotated only with a coarse-
grained resource like PB, SemLink provides a
bridge to make that data useable. As the cov-
erage of SemLink expands to more data, more
lexical units, and more resources, this functional-
ity becomes more and more useful in traversing
the gap between different annotations and differ-
ent resource-oriented goals. Efforts to expand and
improve SemLink and some of the individual re-
sources therein are discussed in the sections to fol-
low.

The utility of integrating resources generally,
and of SemLink in particular, is also reflected
in the work on UBY (Eckle-Kohler et al., 2012;
Gurevychy et al., 2012), a large scale lexical se-
mantic resource using lexical markup framework
(an ISO-standard for modeling lexical resources)
to uniformly represent and combine a wide range
of lexical-semantic resources, like WordNet, FN
and VN, but also Wiktionary and Wikipedia in
both English and German. This project made
use of SemLink’s mappings between VN classes
and FN frames to supplement its integration of
resources. The UBY project brings to light the
need to expand such mappings to resources be-
tween many languages, instead of being limited
to English. Ideally, SemLink could in the future
integrate with or expand into such a multilingual
resource, for instance by linking Arabic or Hindi
PropBank rolesets.

Most recently, UBY has been converted into
RDF using the lemon lexicon model (McCrae

et al., 2012; Eckle-Kohler, McCrae and Chiar-
cos, submitted), to create lemonUby. lemon is
a lexicon model that has been specifically de-
veloped for lexical resource integration on the
Semantic Web, as part of the Linguistic Linked
Open Data (LLOD) initiative, which aims to de-
velop a Linked Open Data Subcloud of Linguistics
(http://linguistics.okfn.org/resources/llod/). This
resource thereby provides greater interoperability
between existing lexical resources and the Seman-
tic Web, and perhaps most importantly, addresses
a gap in the LLOD cloud: although there are
currently many lexical resources included in the
LLOD cloud, previous efforts have not included
information on syntactic behaviors and semantic
roles, which are crucial for lexicalizing relational
knowledge. While lemonUby has already taken
advantage of the portions of past versions of Sem-
Link included in UBY, continued efforts to inte-
grate the current version of SemLink will allow for
other valuable lexical information from both Prop-
Bank and the ON sense groupings to become part
of the LLOD cloud.

5 Future Work: Expansion of SemLink

The primary goal for future work on SemLink is
to expand the resource’s coverage using the fol-
lowing methods. Firstly, additional annotations of
the existing resources can be used to provide more
comprehensive mappings. Secondly, the resources
themselves can be improved to have greater cover-
age by adding to the types of annotation included
in each. Finally, the addition of PB function tags
(essentially semantic role labels) to numbered ar-
guments allows for additional mappings. Each of
these improvements is discussed in more detail in
the sections to follow.

5.1 Expanding Coverage with Additional
Annotations

We can firstly expand SemLink’s coverage by fo-
cusing on cases where the corpus would have an
annotation for one or more resources, but the map-
pings amongst all resources are incomplete. One
of the most common cases of this type is where
there is more than one FN frame associated with
a particular VN class, requiring manual annota-
tion of the most appropriate frame for a particu-
lar usage in the SemLink corpus. Approximately
50,000 of these cases have recently undergone an-
notation and simply require adjudication before

14



being added to the next SemLink release. Simi-
larly, other current annotation efforts include sup-
plementing ON sense annotations where there are
many senses associated with a given VN class.

We can also expand coverage by simply adding
to the number of predicates included in an individ-
ual resource. We have started this process by ex-
amining which are the most frequent verbs in the
SemLink corpus that are not included in VN. From
this examination, we have discovered 20 verbs
with PB annotations that are good candidates for
addition to VN because they are relatively frequent
in the corpus and would therefore greatly increase
the full coverage of the resource: these instances
make up 14,878, or 78%, of the 19,070 SemLink
instances missing VN classes. These verbs in-
clude, for example, account, be, benefit, cite, do,
finance, let, market, tend, trigger, and violate. Un-
fortunately, many of these verbs are not included
in VN currently because their addition proved to
be very difficult in the existing class structure:
many do not readily fit into a VN class due to
unique syntactic behaviors or semantic features,
such as differing semantic roles. Nonetheless, 12
of these 20 verbs have already been situated in
VN. Sometimes this required augmenting the ex-
isting class and subclass structure. For example,
discuss is now found in the Chit Chat class of VN,
after some changes to the structure. In this case,
the addition forced a reconsideration of the class
structure, and in turn, a more rational organization
for the class overall, with verbs in each of the two
sibling classes fully functional in all the frames
listed. The Seem class was also reorganized to
more precisely capture the behavior of verbs in
that class, and accommodate the extremely com-
mon verb, be, previously not included in VN. In
other cases, entirely new classes have been added
to accommodate some of these verbs. For exam-
ple, the Benefit and Become classes have recently
been added to VN, in order to house members such
as benefit, profit and common copular senses of
verbs like become and get.

5.2 Expanding Coverage with New Predicate
Types

The second method for expanding the coverage of
SemLink is to increase the number of predicate
types included, which is extremely important for
NLP applications. Firstly, the same event can be
expressed with different parts of speech within a

language; for example, He feared the bear; His
fear of bears; He is afraid of bears. Secondly, the
same event can be expressed with different parts
of speech across languages, as demonstrated by
the differences in the English, Hindi, and Arabic
PBs. To move beyond syntactic idiosyncrasies to
a deeper level of semantic representation, all of
these predicate types should be included in NLP
resources.

Currently, SemLink includes only verb pred-
icates, because VN of course consists solely
of verbs and PB consists largely of verbs.
FN, in comparison, also includes nouns and
adjectives. To address this gap, PB an-
notations have increasingly focused on noun
and adjective predicate annotations. Guide-
lines for noun annotation have been devel-
oped over the past two years (guidelines avail-
able at http://verbs.colorado.edu/propbank/EPB-
Annotation-Guidelines.pdf), and there are now ap-
proximately 48,000 noun annotations (although
some of these simply note that the noun is not re-
lational in the instance), and framesets for 2,549
nouns. The framesets borrow heavily from many
of the frameset choices made by NomBank (Mey-
ers et al., 2004), although the guidelines have
some significant differences. Guidelines for ad-
jective annotation are also being developed based
on pilot annotations of about 5400 adjective pred-
icates. Framesets for these adjectives are also
currently being created, with 111 existing frame-
sets. These new rolesets include mappings to
FN frames and etymologically related VN classes,
which will allow for future versions of SemLink
to be efficiently updated.

Although separate framesets are created for
each part of speech, each roleset also contains
mappings to related rolesets of other parts of
speech. Thus, for example, the adjective roleset
absent.01 is linked to the noun roleset absence.01
and the verb roleset absent.01. Where possible,
every effort is also made to ensure that the role-
set itself is the same across these different parts
of speech. These links allow for the creation of a
unified set of framesets that represent all etymo-
logically related realizations of the same concept
across all parts of speech. This unification of PB
rolesets is underway, so future versions of Sem-
Link will be mapped to rolesets that are not tied
to a particular part of speech, but rather represent
a particular concept. This also facilitates the in-

15



tegration of PB and the Abstract Meaning Repre-
sentation annotation project, the goal of which is
to create a large-scale semantics bank (Banarescu
et al., 2013).

5.3 Improving SemLink with PB Function
Tags

Because of the differences in granularity repre-
sented by each lexical resource, there are often dif-
ferences in the number of roles represented with a
given predicate. PB lists roles that are found fre-
quently with a given predicate and FN lists both
‘Core’ and ‘Non-Core’ roles separately. VN gen-
erally limits roles to those that are more ‘core,’ al-
though of course this status is always debatable.
As a result, there are often more roles listed in both
PB and FN than in VN, and SemLink may miss
links that can be made between PB and FN roles
because of the gap in VN coverage. With num-
bered arguments alone, it can be difficult to make
generalizations about PB arguments when they do
not have a mapping to a VN theta role.

To address this difficulty and facilitate further
mapping between FN and PB, the PB rolesets
have been augmented with ‘function tags’ for all
numbered arguments. These tags include all of
PB’s ArgM labels, as well as three additional tags:
Proto-Agent, Proto-Patient, and Verb-Specific.
These three tags are used, respectively, for Arg0,
Arg1 and other arguments that simply don’t have
an appropriate function tag because they are
quite unique to the verb in question. Each of the
numbered arguments is currently being annotated
with one of these function tags, allowing for users
to replace the numbered args with these tags if
so desired, even where a mapping to VN doesn’t
exist. For example, the roleset for buy would
include the following function tags, indicated here
by ‘F’:

Buy.01
Arg0: Buyer, F=Proto-Agent
Arg1: Thing bought, F=Proto-Patient
Arg2: Seller, F=Direction (used for source args)
Arg3: Price paid, F=Verb Specific
Arg4: Benefactive, F=Goal

Many of these function tags were added determin-
istically by using SemLink’s mapping between PB
arguments and VN roles. Each of the VN roles
was mapped to a particular function tag; therefore,

wherever there was an existing VN role mapping,
this was used to supply the appropriate function
tag. Manual annotations are complete for cases
where there is no VN mapping.

These function tags will help to improve PB
as a stand-alone corpus by allowing for the var-
ious higher-numbered arguments to be converted
into more generalizable function tags. When us-
ing PB as training data, performance on Args 0
and 1 tends to be quite good because these argu-
ments are syntactically and semantically very co-
herent; however, as mentioned previously, there is
no consistent relationship between Args 2-5 and
specific semantic roles. The function tags will fa-
cilitate useful groupings of these higher-numbered
arguments. Within SemLink, the function tags
can provide another level of potentially informa-
tive comparison between the more coarse-grained
PB annotations and the more fine-grained roles of
VN and FN, as well as overcoming gaps where a
mapping to VN doesn’t exist.

6 Conclusion

SemLink is a valuable tool that unifies several of
the most important and comprehensive lexical re-
sources, thereby combining the benefits of each.
This unification and the mappings between re-
sources allow for users to select the level of gran-
ularity most appropriate to their application, and
to take advantage of annotations across resources.
Improvements and expansions of each of the indi-
vidual lexical resources included in SemLink will
assist in increasing the coverage of SemLink it-
self, and continual updates to SemLink will en-
sure its quality despite ongoing changes in each of
the individual lexicons and annotations included.
Such improvements and expansions will allow for
users to leverage the unique contributions of each
of these complementary resources as each is ex-
panded and refined. SemLink is a reminder and a
reflection of the merit found in using resources in
a complementary fashion: the whole, after all, can
be greater than the sum of its parts. This lesson
lies at the heart of linked data in linguistics, and
SemLink provides a structure for greater integra-
tion of lexical resources into the Semantic Web.

Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge the support of the
National Science Foundation Grant NSF-IIS-
1116782, A Bayesian Approach to Dynamic Lexi-

16



cal Resources for Flexible Language Processing,
and the support of DARPA FA8750-09-C-0179
(via BBN) Machine Reading: Ontology Induc-
tion and AMR and DARPA HR0011-11-C-0145
(via LDC) BOLT, as well as the generous assis-
tance of Silvana Hartmann of Technische Univer-
sitat Darmstadt, an UBY collaborator. Any opin-
ions, findings, and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Science Foundation.

References
L. Banarescu, C. Bonial, S. Cai, M. Georgescu, K.

Griffitt, U. Hermjakob, K. Knight, P. Koehn, M.
Palmer, and N. Schneider 2013. Abstract Mean-
ing Representation for Sembanking. Proceedings of
the Linguistic Annotation Workshop.

Dmitriy Dligach and Martha Palmer. 2011. Good Seed
Makes a Good Crop: Accelerating Active Learn-
ing Using Language Modeling. Proceedings of the
46th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies. Portland, OR.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic Proto-roles and Argu-
ment Selection. Language, 67:547–619.

C.J. Duffield, J.D. Hwang, S.W. Brown, S.E. Viewig, J.
Davis and M. Palmer. 2007. Criteria for the manual
grouping of verb senses. Proceedings of the Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop Prague.

Judith Eckle-Kohler, Iryna Gurevychy, Silvana Hart-
mann, Michael Matuschek and Christian M. Meyer
2012. UBY-LMF A Uniform Model for Standard-
izing Heterogeneous Lexical-Semantic Resources in
ISO-LMF. Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC) Istanbul, Turkey.

Judith Eckle-Kohler, John Philip McCrae and Chrstian
Chiarcos. submitted. lemonUby - a large, inter-
linked, syntactically-rich lexical resource for ontolo-
gies. submitted to Semantic Web Journal

Christiane Fellbaum (Ed.) 1998. Wordnet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. MIT press, Cambridge.

Charles J Fillmore, Christoper R Johnson, and Miriam
R L Petruck. 2002. Background to FrameNet.
International Journal of Lexicography, 16(3):235–
250.

Iryna Gurevychy, Judith Eckle-Kohler, Silvana Hart-
mann, Michael Matuschek, Christian M. Meyer, and
Christian Wirth. 2012. UBY A Large-Scale Unified
Lexical-Semantic Resource Based on LMF. Pro-
ceedings of the 13th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (EACL) Avignon, France t.

E. Joanis, Suzanne Stevenson, and D. James. 2008.
A general feature space for automatic verb classifi-
cation. Natural Language Engineering. 14(3):337-
367.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant and
Martha Palmer. 2008. A large-scale classification
of English verbs. Language Resources and Evalua-
tion Journal, 42:21–40.

Anna Korhonen and T. Briscoe. 2004. Extended
lexical-semantic classification of english verbs. Pro-
ceedings of HLT/NAACL Workshop on Computa-
tional Lexical Semanticsl Boston, Massachusetts.

Beth Levin. 1983. English Verb Classes and Alter-
nations: A Preliminary Investigation. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

Edward Loper, S. Yi, and Martha Palmer. 2007. Com-
bining lexical resources: Mapping between Prop-
Bank and VerbNet. Proceedings of the Seventh In-
ternational Workshop on Computational Semantics
(IWCS-7) Tilburg.

Marcus M. Santorini and M.A. Marcinkiewicz. 1993.
Building a Large Annotated Corpus of English:
The Penn Treebank Computational Linguistics,
19(2):257–285.

John Philip McCrae, G. Aguado-de Cea, P. Buitelaar,
P. Cimiano, T. Declerck, A. Gomez-Perez, J. Gracia,
L. Hollink, E. Montiel-Ponsoda, D. Spohr, T. Wun-
ner. 2012. Interchanging lexical resources on the
Semantic Web. Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, 46:701–719.

Merlo, P., and Van Der Plas, L. 2009. Abstraction
and Generalization in Semantic Role Labels: Prop-
Bank, VerbNet or both? Proceedings of the 47th
Annual Meeting of the ACL and 4th IJCNLP of the
AFrameNetLP, Suntec, pp. 288-296.

Adam Meyers, R. Reeves, C. Macleod, R. Szekeley, V.
Zielinska, B. Young and R. Grisham. 2004. The
NomBank Project: An Interim Report Proceedings
of the Frontiers in Annotation Workshop, held in
conjunction with HLT/NAACL 2004 Boston, Mass.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics
31(1):71–106.

Martha Palmer. 2009. Semlink: Linking PropBank,
VerbNet and FrameNet. Proceedings of the Genera-
tive Lexicon Conference Pisa, Italy.

S. Pradhan, E.H. Hovy, M. Marcus, M. Palmer, L.
Ramshaw and R. Weischedel. 2007. OntoNotes: A
unified relational semantic representation. Proceed-
ings of the First IEEE International Conference on
Semantic Computing(ICSC-07) Irvine, CA.

Yi, S., Loper, E., and Palmer, M. 2007. Can semantic
roles generalize across genres? Proceedings of the
HLT/NAACL-2007, Rochester, pp. 548-555.

17


