










































Porting Elements of the Austrian Baroque Corpus onto the Linguistic Linked Open Data Format


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on NLP&LOD and SWAIE, pages 12–15,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 12 September 2013.

Porting Elements of the Austrian Baroque Corpus onto the Linguistic 

Linked Open Data Format 

 

Ulrike Czeitschner 
Institute for Corpus Linguistics and Text 

Technology 

Austrian Academy of Sciences 

Ulrike.Czeitschner@oeaw.ac.at 

Thierry Declerck 
German Research Center for  

Artificial Intelligence, GmbH 

thierry.declerck@dfki.de 

Claudia Resch 
Institute for Corpus Linguistics 

and Text Technology 

Austrian Academy of Sciences 

Claudia.Resch@oeaw.ac.at 

 

  

 

Abstract 

We describe work on porting linguistic and 

semantic annotation applied to the Austrian 

Baroque Corpus (ABaC:us) to a format sup-

porting its publication in the Linked Open 

Data Framework. This work includes several 

aspects, like a derived lexicon of old forms 

used in the texts and their mapping to modern 

German lemmas, the description of morpho-

syntactic features and the building of domain-

specific controlled vocabularies for covering 

the semantic aspects of this historical corpus. 

As a central and recurrent topic in the texts is 

death and dying, a first step in our work was 

geared towards the establishment of a death-

related taxonomy. In order to provide for lin-

guistic information to their textual content, 

labels of the taxonomy are pointing to linked 

data in the field of language resources. 

1 Introduction 

ABaC:us
1
 is a project conducted at ICLTT

2
 fo-

cusing on the creation of a thematic research col-

lection of texts based on the prevalence of sacred 

literature during the Baroque era, in particular 

the years from 1650 to 1750. Books of religious 

instruction and works concerning death and dy-

ing were a focal point of Baroque culture. There-

fore, the ABaC:us collection holds several texts 

specific to this genre including sermons, devo-

                                                 
1 Partly supported by funds of the Österreichische National-

bank, Anniversary Fund (project number 14783), the 

ABaC:us project started in spring 2012. See 

http://www.oeaw.ac.at/icltt/abacus and 

http://www.oeaw.ac.at/icltt/abacus-project for more details. 
2 The Institute for Corpus Linguistics and Text Technology 

(http://www.oeaw.ac.at/icltt/) of the Austrian Academy of 

Sciences in Vienna pursues corpus-based linguistic and 

literary research, focusing on the creation and adaptation of 

corpora and dictionaries as well as technologies for build-

ing, accessing and exploiting such data. 

tional books and works related to the dance-of-

death theme. The corpus comprises complete 

versions, not just samples, of first editions
3
 yield-

ing some 165.000 running words. An interdisci-

plinary approach has been adopted for the crea-

tion of this digital corpus, which is designed to 

meet the needs of both literary/historical and lin-

guistic/lexicographic research. 

In order to guarantee easy data-interchange 

and reusability, the corpus was encoded in TEI 

(P5).
4
 In addition, applied PoS tags and lemma 

information
5
, taken from modern German lan-

guage, allow for complex search queries and 

more sophisticated research questions.
6

 While 

starting work on the semantic annotation of the 

corpus, we saw the need to develop a specific 

taxonomy, which would also ease the task of 

semi-automated semantic annotation of the mor-

pho-syntactically annotated corpus and other re-

lated texts (Declerck et al., 2011, Mörth et al., 

2012). Following a bottom-up strategy, we iden-

tified all death-related lexical units such as nom-

                                                 
3 The majority of the selected works can be ascribed to the 

Baroque Catholic writer Abraham a Sancta Clara (1644-

1709): e.g. Mercks Wienn (1680), Lösch Wienn (1680), 

Grosse Todten Bruderschafft (1681), Augustini Feuriges 

Hertz (1693), and Todten-Capelle (1710). For detailed in-

formation about the author see Eybl (1992) and Knittel 

(2012). 

The ABaC:us collection combines high quality digital texts 

with image scans of facsimiles of the earliest known prints 

housed in different libraries such as the Austrian National 

Library, the Vienna City Library, the Melk Abbey, and the 

Library of the University of Illinois. 
4 See http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/ for details. 
5 PoS tagging has been realized using Tree Tagger, an open 

standard developed at the University of Stuttgart. See 

http://www.ims.uni-

stuttgart.de/projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/ for more infor-

mation. 
6 All ABaC:us texts, which represent a non-canonical varie-

ty, were tagged using automated tools adapted to the needs 

of historic language and were afterwards verified by do-

main-experts. 

12



inal simplicia, compound nouns and multi-word 

expressions for the personification of death. In 

addition, all terms and phrases dealing with the 

“end of life”, “dying” and “killing” were identi-

fied. In total, more than 1.700 occurrences could 

be discovered in Mercks Wienn, Grosse Todten 

Bruderschafft and Todten-Capelle, the three most 

important works of our corpus. 

The next step consisted in organizing the iden-

tified vocabulary in a taxonomy, which is encod-

ed in the SKOS format (Simple Knowledge Or-

ganization System)
7
. Based on the Resource De-

scription Framework (RDF)
8
, SKOS “provides a 

model for expressing the basic structure and con-

tent of concept schemes such as thesauri, classi-

fication schemes, subject heading lists, taxono-

mies, folksonomies, and other similar types of 

controlled vocabulary.”
9

 We chose it because 

SKOS concepts can be (1) “semantically related 

to each other in informal hierarchies and associa-

tion networks”, (2) “the SKOS vocabulary itself 

can be extended to suit the needs of particular 

communities of practice” and finally, because it 

(3) “can also be seen as a bridging technology, 

providing the missing link between the rigorous 

logical formalism of ontology languages such as 

OWL and the chaotic, informal and weakly-

structured world of Web-based collaboration 

tools.”
10

 With the use of SKOS (and RDF), we 

are also in the position to make our resource 

compatible with the Linked Data Framework
11

.  

The following sections provide an overview of 

the ABaC:us taxonomy and describe the way the 

language data contained in its labels are linked to 

web resources in the Linguistic Linked Open 

Data (LLOD) cloud
12

. 

2 The ABaC:us Taxonomy 

Currently the scheme of the ABaC:us taxonomy 

consists of 7 concepts comprising 362 terms or 

phrases, which are encoded in SKOS labels. In 

addition, 137 compounds and associated terms 

have been integrated in 4 more temporary con-

cepts, which still await a further processing. The 

terms included in the labels (both preferred and 

alternative ones) have been manually excerpted 

from the original texts and partly normalized. 

The majority of texts are written in German, 

                                                 
7 http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/ 
8 http://www.w3.org/RDF/ 
9 http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/NOTE-skos-primer-

20090818/ 
10 Ibid. 
11 See http://linkeddata.org/ 
12 http://linguistics.okfn.org/resources/llod/ 

some parts in Latin, therefore all lexical labels 

belong to one of these languages. 

Table 1 lists concepts and definitions. Row 3 

and 4 show selected examples for preferred and 

alternative terms in German and Latin—for bet-

ter readability, a rudimentary English translation 

has been added. The reader can see how the 

death as “end of life” (concept/1) and the person-

alized death (concept/2) are distinguished. 

Labels are related to each other by means of 

the following properties: abacus:hasTranslation 

and inverse abacus:isTranslationOf, used for 

German and corresponding Latin terms, aba-

cus:hasVariant and inverse abacus:isvariantOf 

indicate spelling variants.  

In order to systemize concept 4 (dealing with 

“manners of death”) we use the annotation prop-

erty skos:comment: “death by accident or cir-

cumstances”, “death by disease”, “death by for-

eign hand”, and “death as a murderer” (i.e. per-

sonification of death)
13

. We refrained from creat-

ing concepts (labeled skos:broader) in this case, 

as this kind of terms does not represent corpus 

text. Next, we will link for this purpose to corre-

sponding concepts included in external 

knowledge sources, allowing thus to distinguish 

between concepts and terms directly related to 

our corpus and other knowledge sources that can 

be used for additional interpretation and classifi-

cation. This can be seen as the most important 

difference of the ABaC:us taxonomy to other 

vocabularies, which are often characterized by 

strict hierarchical formalisms making them little 

useful for literary sciences
14

.  

3 Lexicalization of the Taxonomy 

In order to be able to use the taxonomy in the 

context of NLP applications, there is the need to 

lexicalize the content of its labels, enriching 

them with linguistic information. This includes 

tokenization, lemmatization, PoS tagging, and 

possibly other levels of natural language (NL) 

processing. Labels enriched with this information 

can be better compared to text, which has also 

been submitted to NL processing tools. If a cer-

tain amount of linguistic similarity is found in a 

text passage with a lexicalized label, this text 

segment can then be semantically annotated with 

the concepts the label is associated with. 

                                                 
13 Those comments are not displayed in Table 1. 
14 Recently Bradley and Pasin (2012 and 2013) described 

how informal semantic annotations could become more 

compatible with computer ontologies and the Semantic 

Web. 

13



The model we adopt for the representation of the 

results of lexicalized labels is the one described 

by lemon
15

, developed in the context of the Mon-

net project
16

. lemon is also available as an ontol-

ogy
17

, which has been imported in our taxonomy, 

so that we can make direct use of all classes and 

properties of this model.  

3.1 Tokenization and Sense                    

 Disambiguation 

All tokens in ABaC:us have been semi-

automatically annotated with lemma and PoS 

information, following the STTS tag-set (Mörth 

et al., 2012)
18

, so that all parts of the texts select-

ed as relevant terms for inclusion in the labels 

come already with this information. Thus, our 

task consists mainly in applying lemon ontology 

elements for annotating the labels of the taxono-

my with this linguistic information.   

                                                 
15 lemon stands for “Lexicon Model for Ontologies”. See 

http://lemon-model.net/ and McCrae et al. (2012) 
16 See www.monnet-project.eu 
17 See http://www.monnet-project.eu/lemon 
18 The STTS tag-set is described, among others. here: 

http://www.ims.uni-

stuttgart.de/forschung/ressourcen/lexika/TagSets/stts-

table.html 

As can be seen in Example 1 below, for the term 

included in the alternative label “rasender 

Tod@de” (raging death), we make use of the 

lemon property decomposition for encoding the 

results of tokenization. And we use the lemon 

property altRef, which has as rdfs:range an entity 

that is encoded as an instance of the lemon class 

lexicalSense
19

, for linking to the concept the al-

ternative label is an expression of.  

3.2 Linking to external Lexical and 

 Linguistic Resources 

We still need to associate the tokens, which are 

now each encoded as value of the lemon property 

decomposition, with morpho-syntactic infor-

mation. As mentioned earlier, we already have 

all the information about the corresponding mod-

ern German lemmas and PoS (in the STTS for-

mat) for all tokens of the corpus.  

But, instead of using directly the lemon class 

lexical entry and the lemon properties canonical 

form and lexical property for including the lin-

guistic information we have for every token in 

the corpus, we are for now linking the values of 

                                                 
19

 See http://lemon-model.net/lemon.rdf for the whole 

list of properties and classes of lemon.  

skos:concept skos:definition skos:prefLabel skos:altLabel 
concept/1  

 
                 

"Das Ende des Lebens" 

"the end of life" 

"Tod" @de 

"mors" @la 
 

"death" 

"End" 

"Garauß" 
"Hintritt" 

"Todsfall" 

"Verlust deß Lebens" 

concept/2  
                 

"Der Tod als Subjekt" 
"death as a subject" 

"Tod" @de 
"mors" @la 

 

"death" 

"dürrer Rippen-Kramer" 
"General Haut und Bein" 

"ohngeschliffener Schnitter" 

"Reuter auf dem fahlen Pferd" 
"Verbeinter Gesell" 

concept/3  

                 

"aufhören zu leben" 

"the process of dying" 

"sterben" @de 

"mori" @la 
 

"dying" 

"ad Patres gehen" 

"das Valete von der Welt nehmen" 
"dem Tod vnter die Sensen gerathen" 

"den Todten-Tantz antretten" 

"in Gott entschlaffen" 

concept/4  

 

(Comment: This concept 
is about "Todesarten", 

      "manners of death") 

"einen bestimmten Tod erleiden" 

"specific ways of dying" 

 
 

"getötet werden" @de 

 

 
"to be killed" 

"aufgehängt werden" 

"erbärmlich hingerichtet werden" 

"ermort werden" 
"mit solchen vergifften Pfeil getroffen werden" 

"zu todt gebissen werden" 

concept/5  

                 

"Verstorbene, Leichen" 

"dead bodies" 

"Toter" @de 

"mortuus" @la 
 

"corpses" 

"christliche Leiche" 

"Leichnam" 
"seelig-verstorbener" 

"todter Cörper" 

"Todter" 

concept/6  

                 

"tot sein" 

"to be dead" 

"tot" @de 

"mortuus" @la 

 
"dead" 

"abgestorben" 

"der Geist ist hinaus" 

"leblos" 
"verblichen" 

"verstorben" 

concept/7  

                 

"töten, ermorden" 

"to kill someone" 

"töten" @de 

 
"killing" 

"erwürgen" 

"morden" 
"todt schlagen" 

"tödten" 

"Vergifften" 

Table 1: ABaC:us Taxonomy 

14



the lemon property decomposition to already ex-

isting lexical entries that are encoded in the LOD 

format. We choose for this the actual DBpedia 

instantiation of Wiktionary
20

. There we get also 

the information that “rasender” is an adjective 

with lemma “rasend” and that “Tod” is a noun 

with lemma “Tod” (see Example 1 below)
21

. The 

two meanings we have distinguished in the 

ABaC:us taxonomy for “Tod” (death), as the 

“end of life” and as “a subject”, are also present 

in this external resource
22

. Depending on the 

specific Wiktionary entries, we have a variable 

number of sense-specific translations at our dis-

posal. The word “Tod”, with the meaning “end 

of life”, is provided with 44 translations. We can 

automatically add those labels to our taxonomy 

and link them to the German labels via the aba-

cus:isTranslationOf property, and so support 

cross-lingual access to our semantically annotat-

ed corpus. It was more difficult to find an Eng-

lish equivalent for the second meaning of 

“death”, “death as a subject”
23

, since no direct 

translation for English is given in this instantia-

tion of Wiktionary. The same can be said of the 

ambiguous German lemma “rasend” (raging). 

As a result, the term “rasender Tod@de” (rag-

ing death) is now encoded in our taxonomy (with 

lemon being integrated) this way: 
 

<http://www.oeaw.ac.at/icltt/abacus/term/2.004-de>    

rdf:type owl:NamedIndividual , skosxl:Label ; 

skosxl:literalForm "rasender Tod"@de ; 

<http://www.monnet-

project.eu/lemon#decomposition> 

<http://wiktionary.dbpedia.org/page/rasend-German-

Adjective-1de> ; 

<http://www.monnet-

project.eu/lemon#decomposition>     

<http://wiktionary.dbpedia.org/page/Tod-German-

Noun-2de> ; 

<http://www.lemon-model.net/lemon#altRef>       

<http://www.oeaw.ac.at/icltt/abacus/concept/2> ; 

abacus:isVariantOf 

<http://www.oeaw.ac.at/icltt/abacus/term/2.003-de> . 

 

Example 1: The simplified entry for the label 

“rasender Tod” (raging death) 

                                                 
20 See http://dbpedia.org/Wiktionary. There, lemon is also 

used for the description of certain lexical properties. 
21 But in the longer term we will use the lemon constructs 

for linking to the URIs associated to those pieces of infor-

mation in the DBpedia coverage of Wiktionary. 
22  See wiktionary.dbpedia.org/page/Tod-German-Noun-1de 

and wiktionary.dbpedia.org/page/Tod-German-Noun-2de 

for abacus:concept/1 and abacus:concept/2 respectively. 
23 http://wiktionary.dbpedia.org/page/death-English-Noun-

2en. 

4 Conclusion 

The ABaC:us collection contains a wide range of 

death-related linguistic vocabulary deriving from 

the Baroque era. Its writers were extremely in-

ventive in paraphrasing experiences with death 

and dying. Thus, one integral approach was to 

make those different concepts more easily dis-

cernible. The numerous SKOS labels in the 

ABaC:us taxonomy give evidence of how the 

culture of death and dying was transmitted in 

lexical and linguistic patterns. By making those 

patterns accessible and reusable on the (L)LOD, 

we complement existing contemporary concepts 

of the topic and provide a basis for sharing and 

comparing the concepts, which can be used in 

NLP applications in the context of eHumanities. 

References 

John Bradley, Michele Pasin. 2012. Annotation and 

Ontology in most Humanities research: accommo-

dating a more informal interpretation context. 

DH2012 NeDiMaH Ontology Workshop. 

John Bradley, Michele Pasin. 2013. Fitting Personal 

Interpretations with the Semantic Web. In: Pro-

ceedings of Digital Humanities 2013. University of 

Nebraska-Lincoln:118-120. 

Thierry Declerck, Ulrike Czeitschner, Karlheinz 

Mörth, Claudia Resch, Gerhard Budin. 2011. A 

Text Technology Infrastructure for Annotating 

Corpora in the eHumanities. In: Proceedings of the 

International Conference on Theory and Practice 

of Digital Libraries (TPDL-2011):457-460. 

Franz M. Eybl. 1992. Abraham a Sancta Clara. Vom 

Prediger zum Schriftsteller. Max Niemeyer, Tübin-

gen, D. 

Anton Philipp Knittel (Ed.). 2012. Unterhaltender 

Prediger und gelehrter Stofflieferant. Abraham a 

Sancta Clara (1644-1709). Beiträge eines Sympo-

sions anlässlich seines 300. Todestages. Edition I-

sele, Eggingen, D. 

John McCrae, Guadalupe Aguado-de-Cea, Paul Bui-

telaar, Philipp Cimiano, Thierry Declerck, Asun-

ción Gómez-Pérez, Jorge Gracia, Laura Hollink, 

Elena Montiel-Ponsoda, Dennis Spohr, Tobias 

Wunner. 2012. Interchanging lexical resources on 

the Semantic Web. In: Language Resources and 

Evaluation. Vol. 46, Issue 4, Springer:701-719. 

Karlheinz Mörth, Claudia Resch, Thierry Declerck, 

Ulrike Czeitschner. 2012. Linguistic and Semantic 

Annotation in Religious Memento Mori Literature. 

In: Proceedings of the LREC'2012 Workshop: 

Language Resources and Evaluation for Religious 

Texts (LRE-Rel-12). ELRA: 49-52. 

15


