



















































WebWOZ: A Platform for Designing and Conducting Web-based Wizard of Oz Experiments


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, pages 160–162,
Metz, France, 22-24 August 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

WebWOZ: A Platform for Designing and Conducting Web-based Wizard
of Oz Experiments

Stephan Schlögl
Institut Mines-Télécom

Télécom ParisTech, CNRS LTCI
Paris, France

schlogl@enst.fr

Saturnino Luz, Gavin Doherty
Trinity College

University of Dublin
Dublin, Ireland

{firstname.lastname}@scss.tcd.ie

Abstract
The Wizard of Oz (WOZ) method has
been used for a variety of purposes in
early-stage development of dialogue sys-
tems and language technology applica-
tions, from data collection, to experimen-
tation, prototyping and evaluation. How-
ever, software to support WOZ experimen-
tation is often developed ad hoc for spe-
cific application scenarios. In this demo
we present WebWOZ, a web-based WOZ
prototyping platform that aims at support-
ing a variety of experimental settings and
combinations of different language tech-
nology components. We argue that a
generic and distributed platform such as
WebWOZ can increase the usefulness of
the WOZ method.

1 Introduction

The use of language technologies such as Auto-
matic Speech Recognition (ASR), Machine Trans-
lation (MT) and Text-to-Speech Synthesis (TTS)
has significantly increased in recent years. Drivers
of adoption have been enhanced quality and in-
creasingly ubiquitous access to products and ser-
vices. However, the technology is still far from
perfect and typically substantial engineering effort
is needed before prototypes can deliver a user ex-
perience robust enough to allow potential applica-
tions to be evaluated with real users. For graph-
ical interfaces, well-known prototyping methods
like sketching and wire-framing support the de-
signer in obtaining early impressions and initial
user feedback. These low-fidelity prototyping
techniques do, however, not map well onto sys-
tems based around speech and natural language.
Wizard of Oz (WOZ) tries to fill this gap by using
a human ‘wizard’ to mimic some of the function-
ality of a system, which allows for evaluating po-
tential user experiences and interaction strategies

without the need for building a fully functional
product first (Gould et al., 1983).

2 The WebWOZ Platform

WebWOZ is an entirely web-based, open-source
Wizard of Oz prototyping platform1. It allows for
testing interaction scenarios that employ one or
more Language Technology Components (LTC).
The integration of these LTCs is done via web ser-
vices. Currently we have integrated ASR from
Google using HTML-based Speech Input2, on-
the-fly MT from Microsoft3 and TTS provided
by the Muse Speech Technology Research Plat-
form4. In addition we support pre-recorded audio
and video files that are accessible through a web
server. Table 1 shows the different components
currently integrated into WebWOZ. Depending on
the application scenario those components can be
turned on and off as well as be used in combina-
tion (Schlögl et al., 2010; Schlögl et al., 2011).

2.1 Software Requirements

WebWOZ is written in Java and therefore can be
hosted on a typical application server (e.g. Apache
Tomcat). In addition a relational database (e.g.
MySQL) is needed. In order to run experiments
we further recommend the use of an up-to-date
web browser that is able to adequately interpret
recent HTML5 commands. For the moment, the
Chrome browser is probably the best choice, since
it supports speech input without the need for in-
stalling an additional plug-in. However, we are
convinced that soon most web browsers will sup-
port the majority of HTML5 features required by
WebWOZ.

1https://github.com/stephanschloegl/WebWOZ/
2http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xg-

htmlspeech/2011Feb/att-0020/api-draft.html
3http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ff512419.aspx
4http://muster.ucd.ie/content/muse-speech-technology-

research-platform

160



Table 1: WebWOZ Component List
ASR HTML Speech Input
MT Microsoft Translate
TTS Muse Speech Technology

Pre-recorded Audio Files

2.2 Supported Scenarios

One of the main features of WebWOZ is its in-
tegrated CMS-like editing functionality. This
permits researchers/designers to create their own
WOZ experiments without requiring from them
any programming skills. They can add, edit, and
delete utterances and organize them in different
tabs (dialogue stages) using the wizard interface
(cf. demo video5). Corresponding client (i.e. non-
wizard) user/password combinations can be added
and distinct interaction modes for the experiment
can be set (e.g. ASR on/off, TTS on/off, MT
on/off, etc.). The client interface itself runs in
a separate browser window, which allows for an
easy integration into already existing web applica-
tions.

Following this architecture WebWOZ supports
the design of a variety of experimental settings.
Different scenarios from classic monolingual text-
to-text to multi-lingual speech-to-speech interac-
tions are possible. From a wizard’s perspective,
tasks can reach from pure dialogue management
to augmenting LTC output. That is, in WebWOZ
a wizard can act as the substitute for a working di-
alogue manager, linking a test persons’ input with
an appropriate response by choosing from a set
of pre-defined answer possibilities. Alternatively,
however, one could be focusing on enhancing the
quality of a single LTC by augmenting its output.
Examples might include choosing from an n-best
list of recognition results or the post-editing of
output produced by an MT service.

3 Why a Web-based Solution?

The WOZ technique is usually used for four main
purposes related to the design and implementation
of dialogue systems: (1) it is used for dialogue
data collection, (2) for controlled experimentation
(including system evaluation), (3) for exploration
of design alternatives and (4) for teaching of sys-
tem design. Given this context, why should one
build a web-based WOZ platform? What are the

5http://youtu.be/VPqHfXHq4X0

benefits of such a solution? As it turns out, one can
identify benefits to each of the above mentioned
main uses of the WOZ method.

In terms of data collection, the gathering of mul-
timodal dialogue corpora is often a complex and
time consuming enterprise. It requires standard-
ization and uniformity with respect to data format,
timing and encoding, as well as collection settings
and procedures. WOZ techniques have been in-
creasingly used for this purpose, particularly in the
gathering of data for studying multimodal infor-
mation presentation and interaction e.g. (Rieser et
al., 2011). A Web-based platform such as Web-
WOZ can facilitate data collection by geographi-
cally distributed groups while guaranteeing adher-
ence to the requisite standards.

As regards experiments, a crucial requirement
from the perspective of scientific methodology is
reproducibility. Different research groups need to
be able to replicate experiments according to pre-
cisely prescribed procedures and settings. Wiz-
ard of OZ experiments, however, are usually con-
ducted using purpose built, ad hoc tools and soft-
ware. This makes replication difficult, if not im-
possible. WebWOZ provides a widely available,
standardized environment in which experimental
protocols can be precisely specified and shared
with interested research groups, thus supporting
reproducibility. These features are similarly im-
portant for extrinsic system components evalua-
tion e.g. (Schneider and Luz, 2011) where the
overall system functionality should be kept con-
stant while a specific component to be tested (say,
an MT module) is varied.

WOZ techniques are also employed for explo-
ration (through prototyping) of design ideas and
alternatives, particularly at the early design stages
of interactive systems that involve diverse lan-
guage technology components. In this case, repro-
ducibility and controlled conditions are less im-
portant. However, as distributed system develop-
ment becomes a common practice WebWOZ can
be used in such scenarios as a shared design arti-
fact to support the activities of geographically dis-
tributed design teams as well as the communica-
tion among them.

Finally, WebWOZ can be (and has been) used in
support of teaching the development of dialogue
systems. While students are usually introduced to
WOZ (i.e. written on a lecture slide) only a small
portion of them receives actual hands-on experi-

161



ence. One reason for this lack of practical usage
might be that in order to be applicable in a teaching
context, any approach would have to have a low
logistical and technical overhead to enable stu-
dents to quickly design and carry out evaluations.
Our experience with WebWOZ has shown that the
web-based approach significantly lowers this bar-
rier. To date more than 50 students were able to de-
sign experiments and hence improve their under-
standing of the complexity of dialogue systems.

4 Uses of WebWOZ in Research

WebWOZ has already been employed in two dif-
ferent research studies. The first study explored
the effects of MT when it is used in combination
with TTS (Schneider et al., 2010). The second
study aimed at building and evaluating a corpus of
feedback utterances sent to language learners who
try to improve their pronunciation (Cabral et al.,
2012).

The experimental set-up of these two stud-
ies differed greatly, highlighting the flexibility of
WebWOZ. The first study tested the scenario of
an intelligent computer system recommending ap-
propriate Internet connection bundles to German
speaking customers. To support this scenario a
set of pre-defined dialogue utterances as well as
the relevant domain utterances (i.e. examples of
Internet connection bundles) were collected, auto-
matically translated and then added to WebWOZ.
On-the-fly translation was not used as the experi-
menters wanted to control for any possible incon-
sistencies. The TTS part of the experiment did
not utilize a synthesis directly, but rather used the
possibility of WebWOZ handling pre-synthesized
audio files. ASR was simulated by the wizard.
Voice-over-IP was used to transmit the partici-
pant’s voice to the wizard, who then selected an
appropriate response.

The second study was less restrictive. Here the
researcher’s goal was to built up and evaluate a
corpus of feedback utterances, for which the wiz-
ard could be more open in terms of responses.
Similarly to the first study a set of pre-defined
responses was added to WebWOZ. However, in
cases were those utterances were not sufficient, the
wizard could use a free-text field to reply. Again
Voice-over-IP was used to transfer speech input
from a test user to the wizard and TTS was turned
off, as the experiment design used textual feed-
back only.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

We presented WebWOZ a Wizard of Oz proto-
typing platform that is developed in our research
group. WebWOZ differs from existing WOZ tools
by being entirely web-based and through its goal
of supporting various types of application scenar-
ios. The different features of WebWOZ were high-
lighted and it was described how two independent
studies already made use of them. Future work
aims to optimize WebWOZ, to generalise it to fur-
ther experimental settings and to extend it by inte-
grating additional modalities. To do so the system
has been installed in our partner institutions where
it has currently been adapted to support additional
settings in at least two other research projects. Al-
though we are aware of the fact that the great
difference between the interests of individual re-
searchers pose challenges to the design of a truly
generic WOZ tool, we believe that our platform
can be a helpful starting point for a variety of re-
searchers and designers who may wish to use the
WOZ method.

References
J. P. Cabral, M. Kane, Z. Ahmed, M. Abou-Zleikha,

É. Székely, A. Zahra, K. U. Ogbureke, P. Cahill,
J. Carson-Berndsen, and S. Schlögl. 2012. Rapidly
Testing the Interaction Model of a Pronunciation
Training System via Wizard-of-Oz. In Proceedings
of LREC.

J. D. Gould, J. Conti, and T. Hovanyecz. 1983. Com-
posing letters with a simulated listening typewriter.
Communications of the ACM, 26:295–308.

V. Rieser, S. Keizer, X. Liu, and O. Lemon. 2011.
Adaptive Information Presentation for Spoken Dia-
logue Systems: Evaluation with human subjects. In
Proceedings of ENLG, pages 102–109.

S. Schlögl, G. Doherty, N. Karamanis, A. H. Schneider,
and S. Luz. 2010. Observing the wizard: In search
of a generic interface for wizard of oz studies. In
Proceedings of Irish HCI, pages 43–50.

S. Schlögl, A. H. Schneider, S. Luz, and G. Doherty.
2011. Supporting the wizard: Interface improve-
ments in wizard of oz studies. In Proceedings of
BCS HCI.

A. H. Schneider and S. Luz. 2011. Speaker alignment
in synthesised, machine translated communication.
In Proceedings of IWSLT, pages 254–260.

A. H. Schneider, I. Van der Sluis, and S. Luz. 2010.
Comparing intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation of mt
output in a dialogue system. In Proceedings of the
IWSLT, pages 329–336.

162


