










































Lexical Selection for Hybrid MT with Sequence Labeling


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation, pages 102–108,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Lexical Selection for Hybrid MT with Sequence Labeling

Alex Rudnick and Michael Gasser
Indiana University, School of Informatics and Computing

{alexr,gasser}@indiana.edu

Abstract

We present initial work on an inex-
pensive approach for building large-
vocabulary lexical selection modules for
hybrid RBMT systems by framing lexi-
cal selection as a sequence labeling prob-
lem. We submit that Maximum Entropy
Markov Models (MEMMs) are a sensible
formalism for this problem, due to their
ability to take into account many features
of the source text, and show how we can
build a combination MEMM/HMM sys-
tem that allows MT system implemen-
tors flexibility regarding which words have
their lexical choices modeled with classi-
fiers. We present initial results showing
successful use of this system both in trans-
lating English to Spanish and Spanish to
Guarani.

1 Introduction

Lexical ambiguity presents a serious challenge for
rule-based machine translation (RBMT) systems,
since many words have several possible transla-
tions in a given target language, and more than
one of them may be syntactically valid in context.
A translation system must choose a translation for
each word or phrase in the input sentence, and
simply taking the most common translation will
often fail, as a word in the source language may
have translations in the target language with sig-
nificantly different meanings. Even when choos-
ing among near-synonyms, we would like to re-
spect selectional preferences and common collo-
cations to produce natural-sounding output text.

Writing lexical selection rules by hand is te-
dious and error-prone; even if informants familiar
with both languages are available, they may not be
able to enumerate the contexts under which they
would choose one translation alternative over an-

other. Thus we would like to learn from corpora
where possible.

Framing the resolution of lexical ambiguities
in machine translation as an explicit classification
task has a long history, dating back at least to early
SMT work at IBM (Brown et al., 1991). More re-
cently, Carpuat and Wu have shown how to use
word-sense disambiguation techniques to improve
modern phrase-based SMT systems (Carpuat and
Wu, 2007), even though the language model and
phrase tables of these systems can mitigate the
problem of lexical ambiguities somewhat. Treat-
ing lexical selection as a word-sense disambigua-
tion problem, in which the sense inventory for
each source-language word is its set of possible
translations, is often called cross-lingual WSD
(CL-WSD). This framing has received enough at-
tention to warrant shared tasks at recent SemEval
workshops; the most recent running of the task is
described in (Lefever and Hoste, 2013).

Intuitively, machine translation implies an “all-
words” WSD task: we need to choose a transla-
tion for every word or phrase in the source sen-
tence, and the sequence of translations should
make sense taken together. Here we begin to ex-
plore CL-WSD not just as a classification task, but
as one of sequence labeling. We describe our ap-
proach and implementation, and present two ex-
periments. In the first experiment, we apply the
system to the SemEval 2013 shared task on CL-
WSD (Lefever and Hoste, 2013), translating from
English to Spanish, and in the second, we perform
an all-words labeling task, translating text from
the Bible from Spanish to Guarani. This is work
in progress and our code is currently “research-
quality”, but we are developing the software in
the open1, with the intention of using it with free
RBMT systems and producing an easily reusable
package as the system matures.

1http://github.com/alexrudnick/clwsd

102



2 Related Work

To our knowledge, there has not been work specifi-
cally on sequence labeling applied to lexical selec-
tion for RBMT systems. However, there has been
work recently on using WSD techniques for trans-
lation into lower-resourced languages, such as the
English-Slovene language pair, as in (Vintar et al.,
2012).

The Apertium team has a particular practical
interest in improving lexical selection in RBMT;
they recently have been developing a new sys-
tem, described in (Tyers et al., 2012), that learns
finite-state transducers for lexical selection from
the available parallel corpora. It is intended to be
both very fast, for use in practical translation sys-
tems, and to produce lexical selection rules that
are understandable and modifiable by humans.

Outside of the CL-WSD setting, there has been
work on framing all-words WSD as a sequence la-
beling problem. Particularly, Molina et al. (2002)
have made use of HMMs for all-words WSD in a
monolingual setting.

3 Sequence Labeling with HMMs

In building a sequence-based CL-WSD system,
we first tried using the familiar HMM formalism.
An HMM is a generative model, giving us a for-
mula for P (S, T ) = P (T ) ∗ P (S|T ). Here by
S we mean a sequence of source-language words,
and by T we mean a sequence words or phrases in
the target language. In practice, the input sequence
S is a given, and we want to find the sequence T
that maximizes the joint probability, which means
predicting an appropriate label for each word in
the input sequence.

Using the (first-order) Markov assumption, we
approximate P (T ) as P (T ) =

∏
iP (ti |ti−1 ),

where i denotes each index in the input sentence.
Then we imagine that each source-language word
si is generated by the corresponding unobserved
label ti , through the emission probabilities P (s|t).
This generative model is admittedly less intu-
itive for CL-WSD than for POS-tagging (where it
is more traditionally applied), in that it requires
the target-language words to be generated in the
source order.

Training the transition model – roughly an n-
gram language model – for target-language words
or phrases in the source order is straightforward
with sentence-aligned bitext. We use one-to-
many alignments in which each source word cor-

responds with zero or more target-language words,
and we take the sequence of target-language words
aligned with a given source word to be its label.
NULL labels are common; if a source word is not
aligned to a target word, it gets a NULL label.
Similarly , we can learn the emission probabilities,
P (s|t), simply by counting which source words
are paired with which target words and smoothing.

For decoding with this model, we can use
the Viterbi algorithm, especially for a first-order
Markov model – although we must be careful
in the inner loops only to consider the possible
target-language words and not the entire target-
language vocabulary. The Viterbi algorithm may
still be used with second- or higher-order models,
although it slows down considerably. In the inter-
est of speed, in this work we performed decoding
for second-order HMMs with a beam search.

4 Sequence Labeling With MEMMs and
HMMs

Contrastingly, an MEMM is a discriminative se-
quence model, with which we can calculate the
conditional probability P (T |S) using individual
discriminative classifiers that model P (ti |F ) (for
some features F ). Like an HMM, an MEMM
models transitions over labels, although the in-
put sequence is considered given. This frees
us to include any features we like from the
source-language sentence. The “Markov” aspect
of the MEMM is that, unlike a standard maxi-
mum entropy classifier, we can include informa-
tion from the previous k labels as features, for
a k-th order MEMM. So at every step in the se-
quence labeling, we want a classifier that models
P (ti |S, ti−1 ...ti−k ), and the probability of a se-
quence T is just the product of each of the individ-
ual transition probabilities.

To avoid the intractable task of building a single
classifier that might return thousands of different
labels, we could in principle build a classifier for
each individual word in the source-language vo-
cabulary, each of which will produce perhaps tens
of possible target-language labels. However, there
will be tens or hundreds of thousands of words in
the source-language vocabulary, and most word-
types will only occur very rarely; it may be pro-
hibitively expensive to train and store classifiers
for each of them.

We would like a way to focus our efforts
on some words, but not all, and to back off

103



to a simpler model when a classifier is not
available for a given word. Here, in order
to approximate P (ti |S, ti−1 ...ti−k ), we use an
HMM, as described in the previous section, with
which we can estimate P (si , ti |ti−1 ...ti−k ) as
P (ti |ti−1 ...ti−k ) ∗ P (si |ti). This gives us the
joint probability, which we divide by P (si) – prior
probabilities of each source-language word must
be stored ahead of time – and thus we can approx-
imate the conditional probability that we need to
continue the sequence labeling.

In the implementation, we can specify criteria
under which a source-language word will have its
translations explicitly modeled with a maximum
entropy classifier. When training a system, one
might choose, for example, the 100 most com-
mon ambiguous words, all words that are observed
a certain number of times in the training corpus,
or words that are particularly of interest for some
other reason.

At training time, we find all of the instances
of the words that we want to model with clas-
sifiers, along with their contexts, so that we can
extract appropriate features for training the clas-
sifiers. Then we train classifiers for those words,
and store the classifiers in a database for retrieval
at inference time.

For inference with this model, we use a beam
search rather than the Viterbi algorithm, for con-
venience and speed while using a second-order
Markov model. A sketch of the beam search im-
plementation is presented in Figure 1.

5 Experiments

So far, we have evaluated our sequence-labeling
system in two different settings, the English-
Spanish subset of a recent SemEval shared task
(Lefever and Hoste, 2013), and an all-words pre-
diction task in which we want to translate, from
Spanish to Guarani, each word in a test set sam-
pled from the Bible.

5.1 SemEval CL-WSD task

In the SemEval CL-WSD task, systems must pro-
vide translations for twenty ambiguous English
nouns given a small amount of context, typically a
single sentence. The test set for this task consists
of fifty short passages for each ambiguous word,
for a thousand test instances in total. Each pas-
sage contains one or a few uses of the ambiguous
word. For each test passage, the system must pro-

duce a translation of the noun of interest into the
target language. These translations may be a sin-
gle word or a short phrase in the target language,
and they should be lemmatized. The task allows
systems to produce several output labels, although
the scoring metric encourages producing one best
guess, which is matched against several reference
translations provided by human annotators. The
details of the scoring are provided in the task de-
scription paper, and the scores reported were cal-
culated with a script provided by the task organiz-
ers.

As a concrete example, consider the following
sentences from the test set:

(1) But a quick look at today’s letters to the
editor in the Times suggest that here at
least is one department of the paper that
could use a little more fact-checking.

(2) All over the ice were little Cohens, little
Levys, their names sewed in block letters
on the backs of their jerseys.

A system should produce carta (a message or
document) for Sentence (1) and letra or carácter
(a symbol or handwriting) for (2). During se-
quence labeling, our system chooses a translation
for each word in the sentence, but the scoring only
takes into account the translations for the words
marked in italics.

For simplicity and comparability with previous
work, we trained our system on the Europarl In-
tersection corpus, which was provided for devel-
oping CL-WSD systems in the shared task. The
Europarl Intersection is a subset of the sentences
from Europarl (Koehn, 2005) that are available in
English and all five of the target languages for the
task, although for these initial experiments, we
only worked with Spanish. There were 884603
sentences in our training corpus.

We preprocess the Europarl training data by to-
kenizing with the default NLTK tokenizer (Bird
et al., 2009), getting part-of-speech tags for the
English text with the Stanford Tagger (Toutanova
et al., 2003), and lemmatizing both sides with
TreeTagger (Schmid, 1995). We aligned the un-
tagged English text with the Spanish text using the
Berkeley Aligner (DeNero and Klein, 2007) to get
one-to-many alignments from English to Spanish,
since the target-language labels in this setting may
be multi-word phrases. We used nearly the de-
fault settings for Berkeley Aligner, except that we

104



def beam search(sequence, HMM, source word priors, classifiers):
”””Search over possible label sequences, return the best one we find.”””
candidates = [Candidate([], 0)] # empty label sequence with 0 penalty
for t in range(len(sequence)):

sourceword = sequence[t]
for candidate in candidates:

context = candidate.get context(t) # labels at positions (t−2, t−1)
if sourceword in classifiers:

features = extract features(sequence, t, context)
label distribution = classifiers[sourceword].prob classify(features)

else:
label distribution = Distribution()
for label in get vocabulary(sourceword):

label distribution[label] = (HMM.transition(context, label) +
HMM.emission(sourceword, label) −
source word priors[sourceword])

# extend candidates for next time step to include labels for next word
add new candidates(candidate, label distribution, new candidates)

candidates = filter top k(new candidates, BEAMWIDTH)
return get best(candidates)

Figure 1: Python-style code sketch for MEMM/HMM beam search. Here we are using negative log-
probabilities, which we interpret as penalties to be minimized.

ran 20 iterations each of IBM Model 1 and HMM
alignment.

We trained classifiers for all of the test words,
and also for any words that appear more than 500
times in the corpus. The classifiers used the pre-
vious two labels and all of the tagged, lemmatized
words within three tokens on either side of the tar-
get word as features. Training was done with the
MEGA Model optimization package 2 and its cor-
responding NLTK interface.

At testing time, for each test instance, we
labeled the test sentences with four different
sequence labeling methods: first-order HMMs,
second-order HMMs, MaxEnt classifiers with no
sequence features, and the MEMMs with HMM
backoff. We then compared the system output
against the reference translations for the target
words using the script provided by the task orga-
nizers.

5.2 All-words Lexical Selection for
Spanish-Guarani

Since we are primarily interested in lexical selec-
tion for RBMT systems in lower-resource settings,
we also experimented with translating from Span-
ish to Guarani, using the Bible as bitext. In this
experiment, we labeled all of the text in the test
set using each of the different sequence labeling
models, and we report the classification accuracy
over the test set.

For example, for the following sentences –
2http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/˜hal/megam/

from Isaiah and Psalms, respectively – the system
should predict the corresponding Guarani roots for
each Spanish word. Here we show the inflected
Spanish and Guarani text with English translation
for the sake of readability, although the system
was given the roots of the Spanish words as pro-
duced by the morphological analyzer.

(3) a. Plantaréis viñas y comeréis su fruto.

b. Peñotỹ parral ha pe’u hi’a.

c. You will plant vineyards and eat their
fruit.

(4) a. Comieron y se saciaron.

b. Okaru hikuái hyguãtã meve.

c. They ate and were well filled.

In this example, the correct translation of comer
depends on transitivity: if transitive, it should be
an inflected form of ’u as in (3), if intransitive it
should be karu, as in (4).

In preparing the corpus, since different transla-
tions of the Bible do not necessarily have direct
correspondences between verse numbers (they are
not unique identifiers across language!), we se-
lected only the chapters that contain the same
number of verses in our Spanish and Guarani
translations. This only leaves 879 chapters out of
1189, for a total of 22828 bitext verses of roughly
one sentence each. We randomly sampled 100
verses from the corpus and set these aside as the
test set.

105



Here we trained the HMM and MEMM as be-
fore, but with lemmatized Spanish as the source
language, and the roots of Guarani words as the
target. As Guarani is a much more morphologi-
cally rich language than either English or Spanish,
this requires the use of a sophisticated morpholog-
ical analyzer, described in section 6. Due to the
much smaller data set, in this setting we stored
classifiers for any Spanish word that occurs more
than 20 times in the training data and backed off
to the HMM during decoding otherwise.

6 Morphological Analysis for Guarani

We analyze the Spanish and Guarani Bible us-
ing our in-house morphological analyzer, origi-
nally developed for Ethiopian Semitic languages
(Gasser, 2009). As in other, more familiar, mod-
ern morphological analyzers such as (Beesley and
Karttunen, 2003), analysis in our system is mod-
eled by cascades of finite-state transducers (FSTs).
To solve the problem of long-distance dependen-
cies, we extend the basic FST framework using an
idea introduced by Amtrup (2003). Amtrup starts
with the well-understood framework of weighted
FSTs, familiar from speech recognition. For
speech recognition, FST arcs are weighted with
probabilities, and a successful traversal of a path
through a transducer results in a probability that
is the product of the probabilities on the arcs that
are traversed, as well as an output string as in con-
ventional transducers. Amtrup showed that proba-
bilities could be replaced by feature structures and
multiplication by unification. In an FST weighted
with feature structures, the result of a success-
ful traversal is the unification of the feature struc-
ture “weights” on the traversed arcs, as well as
an output string. Because a feature structure is
accumulated during the process of transduction,
the transducer retains a sort of memory of where
it has been, permitting the incorporation of long-
distance constraints such as those relating the neg-
ative prefix and suffix of Guarani verbs.

In our system, the output of the morphological
analysis of a word is a root and a feature struc-
ture representing the grammatical features of the
word. We implemented separate FSTs for Span-
ish verbs, for Guarani nouns, and for the two main
categories of Guarani verbs and adjectives. Since
Spanish nouns and adjectives have very few forms,
we simply list the alternatives in the lexicon for
these categories. For this paper, we are only con-

cerned with the roots of words in our corpora, so
we ignore the grammatical features that are output
with each word.

7 Results

The scores for the first experiment are presented
in Figure 2. Here we use the precision metric cal-
culated by the scripts for the SemEval shared task
(Lefever and Hoste, 2013), which compare the an-
swers produced by the system against several ref-
erence answers given by human annotators. There
are two “most frequent sense” baselines reported.
The first one (“with tag”), is the baseline in which
we always take the most frequent label for a given
source word, conditioned on its POS tag. The
other MFS baseline is not conditioned on POS tag;
this was the baseline for the SemEval task. Per-
haps unsurprisingly, we see part-of-speech tagging
doing some of the lexical disambiguation work.

Neither of the HMM systems beat the most-
frequent-sense baselines, but both the non-
sequence MaxEnt classifier and the MEMM sys-
tem did, which suggests that the window fea-
tures are useful in selecting target-language words.
Furthermore, the MEMM system outperforms the
MaxEnt classifiers.

The scores for the second experiment are pre-
sented in Figure 3. Here we did not have human-
annotated reference translations for each word, so
we take the labels extracted from the alignments as
ground truth and can only report per-word classifi-
cation accuracy, rather than the more sophisticated
precision metric used in the shared task.

Here we see similar results. Neither of the
HMM systems beat the MFS baseline, and the tri-
gram model was noticeably worse. The training
set here is probably too sparse to train a good tri-
gram model. The MEMM system, however, did
beat the baseline, posting the highest results: just
over two-thirds of the time, we were able to predict
the correct label for each Spanish word, whereas
the most frequent label was correct about 60% of
the time.

8 Conclusions and Future Work

We have described a work-in-progress lexical se-
lection system that takes a sequence labeling ap-
proach, and shown some initial successes in us-
ing it for cross-language word sense disambigua-
tion tasks for English to Spanish and Spanish to
Guarani. We have demonstrated a hybrid se-

106



system features score (precision)
MFS (with tag) 24.97

MFS (without tag) 23.23
HMM1 current word, previous label 21.17
HMM2 current word, previous two labels 21.23
MaxEnt three-word window 25.64
MEMM three-word window, previous two labels 26.49

Figure 2: Results for the first experiment; SemEval 2013 CL-WSD task.

system features score (accuracy %)
MFS 60.39

HMM1 current word, previous label 57.40
HMM2 current word, previous two labels 43.04

MEMM three-word window, previous two labels 66.82

Figure 3: Results for the second experiment; all-words lexical selection on the Guarani Bible

quence labeling strategy that combines MEMMs
and HMMs, which will allow users to set parame-
ters sensibly for their computational resources and
available training data.

In future work, we will continue to refine the
approach, exploring different parameter settings,
such as beam widths, numbers of classifiers for
the MEMM component, and the effects of differ-
ent features as input to the classifiers. We are also
interested in making use of multilingual informa-
tion sources, as in the work of Lefever and Hoste
(2011). We may also consider more sophisticated
sequence tagging models, such as CRFs (Lafferty
et al., 2001), although we may not have enough
training data to make use of richer models.

Our goal for this work is practical; we are try-
ing to produce a hybrid Spanish-Guarani MT sys-
tem that can be used in Paraguay. We have a
small amount of Guarani training data available,
and plan to collect more. At the time of writing,
our lexical selection system is a prototype and not
yet integrated with our RBMT engine, but this in-
tegration is among our near-term goals.

A limitation of the current design is that we do
not yet have a good way to make use of monolin-
gual training data. In SMT, it is common practice
to train a language model for the target language
from a monolingual corpus that is much larger
than the available bitext. There is a substantial
amount of available Guarani text on the Web, but
our current model can only be trained on aligned
bitext. Given Guarani text that had been rear-
ranged into a Spanish-like word order, we could

build a better model for the transition probabilities
in the HMM component of the system. It might
be feasible to use a Guarani-language parser and
some linguistic knowledge for this purpose. We
will also investigate ways to translate multiword
expressions as a unit rather than word-by-word.

References
Jan Amtrup. 2003. Morphology in machine translation

systems: Efficient integration of finite state trans-
ducers and feature structure descriptions. Machine
Translation, 18.

Kenneth R. Beesley and Lauri Karttunen. 2003. Finite
State Morphology. CSLI Publications.

Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper.
2009. Natural Language Processing with Python.
O’Reilly Media.

Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent
J. Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1991. Word-
Sense Disambiguation Using Statistical Methods. In
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Marine Carpuat and Dekai Wu. 2007. How Phrase
Sense Disambiguation Outperforms Word Sense
Disambiguation for Statistical Machine Translation.
In 11th Conference on Theoretical and Methodolog-
ical Issues in Machine Translation.

John DeNero and Dan Klein. 2007. Tailoring Word
Alignments to Syntactic Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation of Computational Linguistics. Association
for Computational Linguistics, June.

Michael Gasser. 2009. Semitic morphological analy-
sis and generation using finite state transducers with

107



feature structures. In Proceedings of the 12th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the ACL.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
The Tenth Machine Translation Summit.

John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional Random Fields:
Probabilistic Models for Segmenting and Labeling
Sequence Data. In ICML.

Els Lefever and Véronique Hoste. 2013. SemEval-
2013 Task 10: Cross-Lingual Word Sense Disam-
biguation. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013).

Els Lefever, Véronique Hoste, and Martine De Cock.
2011. ParaSense or How to Use Parallel Corpora
for Word Sense Disambiguation. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies.

Antonio Molina, Ferran Pla, and Encarna Segarra.
2002. A Hidden Markov Model Approach to Word
Sense Disambiguation. In IBERAMIA.

Helmut Schmid. 1995. Improvements In Part-of-
Speech Tagging With an Application To German. In
Proceedings of the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher D. Man-
ning, and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-Rich Part-
of-Speech Tagging with a Cyclic Dependency Net-
work. In PROCEEDINGS OF HLT-NAACL.

F. M. Tyers, F. Sánchez-Martı́nez, and M. L. Forcada.
2012. Flexible finite-state lexical selection for rule-
based machine translation. In Proceedings of the
17th Annual Conference of the European Associa-
tion of Machine Translation, EAMT12.

Špela Vintar, Darja Fišer, and Aljoša Vrščaj. 2012.
Were the clocks striking or surprising? Using WSD
to improve MT performance. In Proceedings of
the Joint Workshop on Exploiting Synergies be-
tween Information Retrieval and Machine Transla-
tion (ESIRMT) and Hybrid Approaches to Machine
Translation (HyTra).

108


