










































Finding Every Medical Terms by Life Science Dictionary for MedNLP


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Medical and Healthcare Fields, pages 30–32,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Finding Every Medical Terms by Life Science Dictionary 
for MedNLP 

 
Shuji Kaneko 

Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Kyoto University 

Kyoto, Japan 
skaneko@pharm.kyoto-u.ac.jp 

Nobuyuki Fujita 
National Institute of Technology and 

Evaluation 
Tokyo, Japan 

fujitan@nifty.com 

Hiroshi Ohtake 
Center for Arts and Sciences 
Fukui Prefectural University 

Fukui, Japan 
ohtake@fpu.ac.jp 

 
 

ABSTRACT 
We have been developing an English-Japanese thesaurus of 
medical terms for 20 years. The thesaurus is compatible with 
MeSH (Medical Subject Headings developed by National Library 
of Medicine, USA) and contains approximately 30 thousand 
headings with 200 thousand synonyms (consisting of the names of 
anatomical concepts, biological organisms, chemical compounds, 
methods, disease and symptoms). In this study, we aimed to 
extract medical terms as many as possible from the test data by a 
simple longest-matching Perl script. After changing the given 
UTF-8 text to EUC format, the matching process required only 2 
minutes including loading of a 10 MB dictionary into memory 
space with a desktop computer (Apple Mac Pro). From the 0.1 
MB test document, 2,569 terms (including English spellings) were 
tagged and visualized in a color HTML format. Particularly 
focusing on the names of disease and symptoms, 893 terms were 
found with several mistakes and missings. However, this process 
has a limitation in assigning ambiguous abbreviations and 
misspelled words. The simple longest-matching strategy may be 
useful as a preprocessing of medical reports. 

Keywords 
Life Science Dictionary, Medical Thesaurus, MeSH 

Team Name 
LSDP (standing for Life Science Dictionary Project) 

Subtask 
Free Task (finding every medical terms) 

1. INTRODUCTION 
The Life Science Dictionary (LSD) project, founded in 1993, is a 
research project by us to develop a systematic database for life 
science (of course, including medical) terms and tools for the 
convenience of life scientists [1]. Our services are designed to 
provide and encourage access within the scientific community to 
the most up-to-date and comprehensive information on English-
Japanese translation dictionary of life science terms. In keeping 
with the users' expectations, we have been enriching and refining 
the database records to a medical thesaurus compatible with 
MeSH (Medical Subject Headings developed by National Library 
of Medicine, USA) thesaurus. Recent version of LSD contains 
approximately 30 thousand headings with 200 thousand English 
and Japanese synonyms, consisting of the names of anatomical 

concepts, biological organisms, chemical compounds, methods, 
disease and symptoms.  

One of the practical applications of thesaurus is text mining. For 
example, adverse drug events can be rapidly extracted by finding 
the causal relationship of drug treatment and related symptoms 
recorded in medical records. Favorably, our thesaurus contains a 
wide range of medical concepts as mentioned. In addition, we 
have previously developed a series of gloss-embedding Perl 
scripts for medical English texts [2]. In this study, therefore we 
aimed to tag every medical term (Japanese and English) as many 
as possible to evaluate the robustness of thesaurus and tagging 
program. 

2. METHODS 
2.1 Dictionary 
A tagger dictionary was made from LSD database as an EUC text 
file, which contains approximately 200,000 rows and 4 columns: 
(1) synonym strings, (2) subject heading strings, (3) category of 
term, (4) subject heading ID (from MeSH). For the category of 
terms, all terms were classified and marked by one of the 
following categories according to the MeSH tree: anatomy, 
biological, disease, molecule, method, and knowledge  (Fig. 1). 
 

 
Fig. 1. Contents of tagger dictionary 

2.2 Perl scripts 
To take full advantage of the LSD in which many phrases have 
been registered, "the longest matches first" principle was adopted 
in the matching process. For this purpose, the tagger dictionary 
was sorted in the descending order of byte lengths, and text 
matching was performed for each of the dictionary entries in this 
order. 

30



For the sake of the speed of text matching in Perl language, both 
the text and the dictionary were first converted to EUC encoding, 
and they were treated as byte strings in the matching process. Also, 
all two-byte roman characters were converted to corresponding 
ASCII characters, and multi-byte characters unique in Unicode 
were converted to appropriate ASCII character(s) as far as 
possible. 

For better readability of the resulting data as well as for the ease 
of any secondary use, a standard HTML format was used as the 
output in which unique "class" attribute was assigned to each of 
the category (Fig. 2A). This allows the users to customize text 
coloring even after the output of the data. We also added a 
‘mouse-over heading’ feature, in which the embedded subject 
heading of the term will be displayed when the cursor was placed 
over the tagged term (Fig. 2B). In addition, by clicking the tagged 
part, the user can confirm the thesaurus entry in our WebLSD 
online dictionary system.  

A 

 

B 

 
Fig. 2 HTML output (A) and mouse-over heading function (B) 

3. RESULTS 
3.1 Speed 
For the test set containing 1,121 sentences, tagging process 
including UTF8-to-EUC conversion, 120 seconds were required 
with our Perl script by an Apple Mac Pro machine (3.2GHz Quad-
Core Intel Xeon, 16GB memory). The speed of tagging seemed to 
be simply proportional to the length of the source text. 

3.2 Overall result 
From the 0.1 MB test document, 2,569 terms (including English 
spellings) were tagged and isolated. The most abundant category 
was the names of disease and symptoms, and 893 terms were 
found (Table 1). 

Table 1. Number of tagged terms 

Category Tagged 

Anatomy   439 

Biological    35 

Disease (or Symptom)  893 

Molecule (or Drug)  395 

Method (or Index)  622 

Other knowledge  185 

Total 2,569 

 

3.3 Missed or incorrect tags 
In addition to many correctly-tagged terms, several patterns of 
missed or incorrect tags were found. 

The mostly missed terms were English abbreviations (Table 2). 
Especially, in the description of clinical test data, a variety of 
abbreviations were used, which cannot be marked. Since the 
meanings of 2- or 3-word abbreviations are ambiguous, we had 
omitted most of the abbreviations from tagger dictionary. 
However, if we know the part of document is apparently 
indicating clinical data, we can make a specific tagger dictionary 
for clinical tests. Similarly, some of the drug names were written 
in acronyms or non-universal abbreviations.  
 

Table 2. List of missed abbreviations 

Subcategory Examples 

Clinical test T-Chol, Hb, Plt, eosino, BP, MPO, PaCO2, ALT, Cre, T-Bil, ZTT, APTT, etc. 

Drug name 

DIC（ダカルバジン） 

CLDM（クリンダマイシン） 

PIPC（ピペラシリン） 

PAPM/BP（パニペネム・ベタミプロン合剤） 
 
The most typical pattern of incorrect tag was ‘partly-tagged’ term 
(Table 3). In these cases, part of unit concepts were registered in 
the dictionary, however, the combination of two or more concepts 
is common particularly in the names of disease and symptom, 
which were not completely covered in our thesaurus. 
 

Table 3. Examples of partly-tagged words 

Partial Compounded More complex case 

温痛覚 Murphy徴候 眼球の黄染 

顔面紅斑 心音不整 前頚部の腫脹 

日光過敏 眼球結膜黄染 胆嚢軽度腫大 

剥離爪 肺MAC症 下肺には honey comb 

31



3.4 Misspelling and typographical issue 
To our surprise, there were many misspellings and typographical 
errors, even in Japanese terms, in the test document. Precise text 
matching did not tag incorrect spellings that medical doctor can 
recognize their meanings.  
 

Table 4. List of misspellings  

In the text Correct 

predonisolone prednisolone 

theophyline theophylline 

mycobacterium abcessus Mycobacterium abscessus 

Enterococcus fecalis Enterococcus faecalis 

Klebsiella pneumonoae Klebsiella pneumoniae 

コルトコフ音 コロトコフ音 

グルドパ グルトパ（Grtpa） 

クオンテェンフェロン クオンティフェロン 

 

4. DISCUSSION 
With our tagging dictionary and scripts, most of medical terms 
were easily marked and visualized as a HTML document. From 
the 0.1 MB test document, 2,569 terms (including English 

spellings) were tagged and visualized in a color HTML format. 
Particularly focusing on the names of disease and symptoms, as 
much as 893 terms were found. Additional ‘mouse-over heading’ 
and web reference enables easy reviewing of the tagged terms.  

Through this task, we have learnt the potential of our thesaurus 
and scripts in finding medical terms from given Japanese texts. 
However, this process has a limitation in assigning ambiguous 
abbreviations and misspelled words. Moreover, there is an 
insurmountable difficulty to accomplish a ‘perfect matching’ with 
a fixed text dictionary, since improvement of thesaurus is a 
laborious work. The simple tagging strategy may be useful as a 
preprocessing of medical reports. Combination of natural text 
processing with this tool will be convenient for the practical use.  

5. REFERENCES 
[1] Kaneko S, Fujita N, Ugawa Y, Kawamoto T, Takeuchi H, 

Takekoshi M, Ohtake H. 2003. Life Science Dictionary: a 
versatile electronic database of medical and biological terms.  
"Dictionaries and Language Learning: How can Dictionaries 
Help Human & Machine Learning", Asialex, pp.434-439.  

[2] Ohtake H, Kawamoto T, Takekoshi M, Kunimura M, Morren 
B, Takeuchi H, Ugawa Y, Fujita N, Kaneko S. 2003. 
Development of a genre-specific electronic dictionary and 
automatic gloss-embedding system.  "Dictionaries and 
Language Learning: How can Dictionaries Help Human & 
Machine Learning", Asialex, pp.445-449. 

 

32


