










































Literature-driven Curation for Taxonomic Name Databases


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on NLP&LOD and SWAIE, pages 25–32,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 12 September 2013.

Literature-driven Curation for Taxonomic Name Databases  

 

Hui Yang, Alistair Willis, David R. Morse, Anne de Roeck 

Department of Computing and Communications 

{Hui.Yang, Alistair.Willis, David.Morse, 

Anne.deRoeck}@open.ac.uk 

  

Abstract 

Digitized biodiversity literature provides a wealth 

of content for using biodiversity knowledge by 

machines. However, identifying taxonomic names 

and the associated semantic metadata is a difficult 

and labour intensive process. We present a system 

to support human assisted creation of semantic 

metadata. Information extraction techniques auto-

matically identify taxonomic names from scanned 

documents. They are then presented to users for 

manual correction or verification. The tools that 

support the curation process include taxonomic 

name identification and mapping, and community-

driven taxonomic name verification. Our research 

shows the potential for these information extrac-

tion techniques to support research and curation in 

disciplines dependent upon scanned documents. 

1 Introduction 

Our understanding of the natural world is rapidly 

increasing. At the same time, issues in biodiver-

sity are shown to be relevant to many important 

policy areas, such as climate change, food secu-

rity and habitat management. Biological taxon-

omy is a discipline that underlies all of these ar-

eas; understanding species, their behaviours and 

how they interact is of critical importance in be-

ing able to manage commercially important land 

and environment use (SCBD, 2008). 

A major difficulty facing the curation of com-

prehensive taxonomic databases is incorporating 

the knowledge that is currently contained only in 

the printed literature, which spans well over one 

hundred million pages. Much of the literature, 

especially old taxonomic monographs that are 

both rare documents and extremely valuable for 

taxonomic research, are almost entirely in paper-

print form and are not directly accessible elec-

tronically. Recent large-scale digitization pro-

jects like the Biodiversity Heritage Library
1
 

(BHL) have worked to digitize the (out of copy-

right) biodiversity literature held in natural his-

                                                 
1
 http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org 

tory museums and other libraries’ collections. 

However, due to the lack of semantic metadata, 

the tasks of finding, extracting, and managing the 

knowledge contained in these volumes is still a 

primarily manual process and remains extremely 

difficult and labour-intensive. The difficulty in 

accessing the existing taxonomic literature is a 

severe impediment to research and delivery of 

the subject’s benefits (Godfray, 2002). Semantic 

tagging of organism mentions in biodiversity 

literature has recently been regarded as a pivotal 

step to facilitate taxonomy-aware text mining 

applications, including species-specific docu-

ment retrieval (Sarka, 2007), linking biodiversity 

databases (White, 2007), and semantic enrich-

ment of biodiversity articles (Penev et al, 2010).  

Semantic web is a potential solution to the 

problems of data fragmentation and knowledge 

management if the appropriate metadata can be 

created (Page, 2006). However, manually creat-

ing this metadata is an enormous and unrealistic 

task. The verification process of checking the 

validity of a taxonomic name is a specialist task 

requiring expert skills. 

In this paper, we present a semi-automated 

system that aims to develop a literature-driven 

curation process among practicing taxonomists, 

by providing tools to help taxonomists identify 

and validate appropriate taxonomic names from 

the scanned historical literature. Potential taxo-

nomic names are automatically extracted from 

scanned biodiversity documents with their asso-

ciated contextual information. These are pre-

sented for validation to taxonomic curators via 

an online web service. The manually verified or 

corrected names can then be indexed, and the 

semantic data stored, using the Darwin Core bio-

diversity data standard. 

2 System Framework 

Figure 1 shows the process for obtaining meta-

data and curating taxonomic names. Publishers 

who specialise in biological taxonomy often add 

appropriate metadata (Penev et al. 2010), but for 

scanned literature, this is generally not available. 

25



 

Figure 1. System framework of literature-driven curation for taxonomic databases 
 

The image files from scanned literature are proc-

essed through the ABBY FineReader or Pri-

meReader Optical Character Recognition (OCR) 

software to generate a plain text file. 

Next, we identify those tokens in the plain text 

that may be taxonomic names (possibly contain-

ing errors through imperfect OCR, or other tran-

scription errors).  We use an information extrac-

tion tool for Named Entity Recognition (NER) 

based on Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) 

(Lafferty et al., 2001). The detected names are 

then mapped onto unique identifiers across a 

range of taxonomic databases such as uBio 

Name Bank
2
, Encyclopaedia of Life (EoL)

3
, and 

Catalogue of Life (CoL)
4
. 

Taxonomic names that cannot be found in 

online databases will be validated manu-

ally. Potential unknown taxonomic names are 

presented for validation or correction to the re-

search community via the Scratchpads social 

network
5
 (e.g., professional taxonomists, experi-

enced citizen scientists and other biodiversity 

specialists) in a community-driven verification 

process. The newly verified taxonomic name, 

along with additional metadata recording the user 

who verified the name, its context and biblio-

graphic details is published as a semantic web 

service layer (currently a Scratchpads portal). 

3 Taxonomic Name Recognition  

Automatic identification of taxonomic names 

from biodiversity text has attracted increasing 

research interest over the past few years, but is 

difficult because of the problems of erroneous 

transcription and synonymy. There may be or-

thographic and other term variation in names 

                                                 
2
 http://www.ubio.org/ 

3
 http://eol.org/ 

4
 http://www.catalogueoflife.org/ 

5
 http://scratchpads.eu 

assigned to the same species (Remsen, 2011). 

For example, Actinobacillus actionomy, Actino-

bacillus actionomyce, and Actinobacillus action-

omycetam could all be variants of the same 

name. In addition, scanned documents can cause 

many OCR errors due to outdated fonts, complex 

terms, and aspects such as blemishes and stains 

on the scanned pages. Wei et al (2010) have ob-

served that 35% of taxonomic names in scanned 

documents contain an error, and this creates dif-

ficulties for term recognition (Willis et al. 2009). 

For example, erroneous OCR might propose ‘o’ 

in place of ‘c’ for the taxon Pioa, not a known 

name, rather than Pica (European magpie).  

Approaches to taxonomic name recognition 

(TNR) span a broad range from traditional dic-

tionary lookup (Gerner et al., 2010; Koning et 

al., 2005; Leary et al., 2007) combined with lin-

guistic rule-based (Sautter et al., 2006) to pure 

machine learning (Akella et al., 2012).  

In our system (Figure 1), the first stage is 

identifying potential taxonomic names. We used 

a supervised learning algorithm implemented by 

the CRF++ Package
6
. Compared to other ma-

chine learning algorithms, CRFs are good at se-

quence segmentation labeling tasks such as 

Named Entity Recognition, which have been 

shown to be effective for biological entity identi-

fication in the biomedical literature (Yang et al. 

2008). They can be easily adapted to similar 

tasks like Taxonomic Name Recognition (TNR). 

3.1 Dataset Preparation and Annotation 

To assess the performance of the CRFs on taxo-

nomic texts, we generated training and test sets 

from scanned volumes between 1879 and 1911 

from the Biodiversity Heritage Library (BHL). 

Annotations were carried out using the BRAT 

Rapid Annotation Tool (BRAT)
7
 (Stenetorp et 

                                                 
6
 http://crfpp.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/index.html 

7
 http://brat.nlplab.org/ 

create 

digital 

print 

format 

format 

Taxonomic 

databases 

collect publish 

report 

check 
Plain text 

OCR text 

Biodiversity 

Literature 

OCR Error 

Correction 

Taxonomic Name 

Identification 

 

Taxonomic Name 

Mapping 

 

Taxonomists 

Judgement 

Collection 

 

Taxonomic Name 

Validation 

 

Citizen scientists 

Scratchpads 

neighbourhood 

Semantic Web 

Service Layer 

BHL 

26



al., 2012) to mark up taxonomic elements in bio-

diversity literature. All mentions of taxonomic 

names in the text were manually tagged and 

linked to identifiers in external taxonomic data-

bases (i.e. uBio Name Bank, Catalogue of Life, 

and Encyclopaedia of Life) where possible. An-

notated mentions were also assigned to several 

categories that indicate specific linguistic or se-

mantic features (e.g. taxonomic rank, genus ab-

breviation or omission) for evaluation analysis. 

The manually annotated dataset consists of: 

(a) Training data. We selected three BHL vol-
umes of different animal groups: Coleoptera 

(Beetles)
8
, Aves (Birds)

9
, and Pisces (Fish)

10
 

as the training data to build a CRF-based 

taxon recogniser. The volume text used for 

the annotation is clear text, i.e. text from 

which OCR errors are removed, which was 

obtained from the INOTAXA Project
11

. Ta-

ble 1 reports the statistical annotation infor-

mation about these three volumes. 
 

 #Pages #Taxonomic Names 

Coleoptera 324 7,264 

Aves 553 8,354 

Pisces 234 4,915 

Table 1. The statistics on the training data 
 

(b) Test data. The dataset used for the evalua-
tion of the taxon recogniser is another BHL 

volume about Coleoptera (Beetles)
12

. Taxo-

nomic names are annotated in two datasets of 

different quality text, one is clear text (high-

quality text) and the other is the original 

OCR text with scanning errors (poor-quality 

text). The reason for building this compara-

tive corpus is to estimate the impact of OCR 

errors on taxon name recognition. The statis-

tics about this corpus are given in Table 2. 

More taxonomic names are found in the 

OCR text than the clear text because the 

OCR text includes page headings that may 

contain the scientific name of an organism.  
 

 Clear Text OCR Text 

#Pages 373 373 

#Taxonomic Names 5,198 5,414 

#Taxonomic Names 

(with OCR error) 

  --  2,335 

(43.1%) 

Table 2. The statistics on the test data 

                                                 
8
 http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/ia/mobotbca_12_01_01 

9
 http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/ia/mobotbca_03_01_00 

10
 http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/ia/mobotbca_05_00_00 

11
 http://www.inotaxa.org/jsp/index.jsp 

12
 http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/ia/mobotbca_12_04_03 

3.2 Taxonomic Name Identification 

To train the CRF-based recogniser, we used a 

variety of linguistic and semantic features to 

characterise the semantics of taxonomic names. 

The features used for taxon recognition were 

grouped into the following five categories: 

• Word-token Feature. This type of feature 
includes word lemma, Part-of-Speech (POS) 

tag, and chunk tag of the word, which are ob-

tained from the Genia Tagger
13

. 

• Context Features. The features for the 
lemma and POS tag of the three neighbour-

ing words before and after the current word 

token are also considered. 

• Orthographic Features. Taxonomic names 
tend to be case sensitive, e.g. Agelaus phae-

nicio. Moreover, much taxonomic literature 

employs abbreviations as standard like A. 

phaenicio. Some special tokens, e.g. Greek 

symbols (α, β, γ) and Roman numbers (I., II., 

iv.) also frequently occur in the text. 

• Morphologic Features. Some taxonomic 
names contain typographic ligatures, e.g., æ 

(ae), œ (oe), Æ (AE). We observed that some 

mentions contain the same suffix strings 

such as -us, -um, -eus.  

• Domain-specific Features. Taxonomic rank 
markers and their abbreviations, e.g., spe-

cies, genus, sp., subg., fam., etc., frequently 

occur in the text preceding taxonomic names. 

This is a binary property. Y if the word is a 

rank marker or O otherwise.  
 

The training data file for the CRFs consists of a 

set of word token instances, each of which con-

tains a feature vector that is made up of five 

groups of features described above together with 

an entity class label – BIO tags. 

 

 Precision Recall F-measure 

Clear text 0.9285 0.8642 0.8952 

OCR text 0.4450 0.3716 0.4050 

Table 3. The overall performance of taxonomic 

name identification on a comparative dataset 
 

Performance Evaluation. The trained CRFs 

were evaluated on the test corpus. We compared 

the results of the clear text with those of the OCR 

text in order to test the OCR-error toleration ca-

pability of the trained CRFs. As shown in Table 

3, the trained CRFs performs well and achieves 

an F-measure as high as 0.8952 on the clear text 

                                                 
13

 http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/GENIA/tagger/ 

27



 
Figure 2. A web service for OCR error correction 

 

(good-quality text). On the “dirty” OCR text the 

performance is worse and the F-measure drops to 

0.405. This shows that OCR errors are a potential 

threat that greatly affects the effectiveness of 

taxonomic name identification. Therefore an 

OCR error correction tool is necessary for 

searching and processing the OCR-scanned text. 
 

OCR Error Correction. To reduce the im-

pact of OCR errors on the identification of taxo-

nomic names, we developed a mechanism for 

error checking and correction. Figure 2 shows a 

screen shot of the web service
14

 used to highlight 

a potential taxon to a user. The left-hand panel is 

the image of the original page, and the right-hand 

panel is the corresponding text, which is ex-

tracted from the DjVu XML file created by the 

OCR software. When a word is selected using 

the navigation content in the right-hand panel, a 

small error-correction window pops up, and the 

user is allowed to make possible modifications, 

based on the enlarged image of the target word 

appearing in the pop-up window. 

3.3 Taxonomic Name Mapping 

Taxonomic name mapping or normalization is to 

map the detected mentions in the text into stan-

dardised taxonomic identifiers (Gerner et al. 

(2010). It aims to generate correct lists of unique 

identifiers (typically from referent taxonomic 

databases) for each taxonomic name. There are 

two potential factors that affect mapping accu-

racy. First, taxonomic names are not completely 

stable, and may change due to taxonomic revi-

sion. There may be multiple names (synonyms) 

for the same organism, and the same name may 

                                                 
14

 http://mcs-notes2.open.ac.uk/CommunityCuration/Book1.nsf/Concept1.xsp 

refer to different taxa (homonyms). Moreover, 

there is lexical and terminological variation 

among taxonomic names. Second, currently there 

is not a complete taxonomic database that covers 

all the organisms in the world so multiple taxo-

nomic databases are needed to complement each 

other. 

To resolve the problem of orthographic and 

term variations between taxonomic names, we 

exploited a generic and effective cascaded 

matching method that consists of two stages: 

• Stage I - Exact Matching: string matching 
between original identified mentions and da-

tabase entries. If a name mention is a known 

synonym in the curated list of a taxonomic 

database, the unique identifier of a taxon en-

try associated with the synonym will be as-

signed to the mention. It is possible that the 

mention might be mapped to synonyms of 

different organisms. In these ambiguous cas-

es, additional information such as the sur-

rounding context of the mention and the at-

tributes of its neighboring mentions are 

needed to help determine the selection of the 

most appropriate organism. 

• Stage II - Rule-based approximate match-
ing: First, a set of transformation rules that 

capture morphologic features of name varia-

tions are generated to produce more potential 

extended mentions. Second, for each un-

matched mention filtered at the first stage, 

the possible extended candidate names cre-

ated by the transformation rules (described 

later) are sent to the taxonomic databases 

again to find the possible matched synonyms 

of a known taxon entry.  
   

PDF Image Page OCR Text 

Target word 
Correction window 

28



Construction of transformation rules. Ac-

cording to the observations on our manually-

annotated taxonomic dataset, we roughly group 

name variations into the four categories below: 

(a) Ligature replacement: typographic liga-
tures (e.g., æ, œ, Æ, Œ, etc.) that appear in 

taxonomic names of the old literature are 

generally replaced with the corresponding 

two or more consecutive letters. For exam-

ple,  Agelæus phœniceus  -> Agelaeus phoe-

niceus, Dendrœca -> Dendroica 

(b) Latin declension: the scientific name of an 
organism is always written in either Latin or 

Greek. A Latin noun can be described in dif-

ferent declension instances (e.g., First-

declension, Second-declension) by changing 

its suffix substring. For instance, puellae, 

puellarum, puellis, puellas, can be normal-

ized as the same root word Puella. 

(c) Parenthesized trinomial names: some tax-
onomic names consist of three parts. These 

are usually represented as a species names 

with a subgenus name contained within pa-

rentheses, e.g., Corvus (Pica) beecheii, Tan-

agra (Aglaia) diaconus. However, the paren-

thesized subgenus name is not used very 

much, and some taxonomic databases do not 

contain the information at this low rank lev-

el. Therefore, the subgenus name can be ig-

nored when mapping, e.g.,  Corvus (Pica) 

beecheii -> Corvus beecheii 

(d) Taxon variety names: taxon variety names 
are another special case, which can appear in 

various name forms like Peucæa æstivalis 

arizonæ; Peucæa æstivalis var. arizonæ; 

Peucæa æstivalis, var arizonæ; Peucæa æsti-

valis, β. Arizonæ; even Peucæa arizonæ due 

to taxonomic inflation in which known sub-

species are raised to species as a result in a 

change in species concept (Isaac et al. 2004). 
 

    A set of linguistic rules are expressed as regu-

lar expressions to record the syntactic and se-

mantic clues found in the name variations dis-

cussed above. These rules are used to transform 

the original mentions to possible extended candi-

dates for string matching in taxonomic databases. 

External taxonomic databases. To link more 

identified mentions to existing external taxo-

nomic databases, we chose three widely-used 

large-scale taxonomic databases: uBio Name 

Bank, Encyclopaedia of Life (EoL), and Cata-

logue of Life (CoL), which separately curate 4.8 

million, 1.3 million, and 1.6 million taxonomic 

names respectively. In each database, each spe-

cies has exactly one entry with a unique identi-

fier, a name classified as scientific name (i.e. the 

“correct” canonical name), as well as other pos-

sible variants (e.g., synonyms, common misspell-

ings, or retired names if the organism has been 

reclassified). Moreover, these three databases 

provide relevant web services to users for online 

search of taxonomic names. For each candidate 

name, we send a name query to different data-

bases, and automatically extract the relevant 

unique identifier from the returned result.  

Mapping Results. We collected a total of 

8,687 distinct candidate names from four anno-

tated BHL volumes and mapped them to the cho-

sen taxonomic databases. Table 4 shows the sta-

tistical information of name matches in the indi-

vidual databases. It is interesting to note that the 

matched names in EoL usually can be found in 

uBio, whereas CoL can find some names that do 

not appear in either uBio or EoL. Nearly a half of 

the names (4, 273 names) could not be found in 

any of the taxonomic databases. This suggests 

that machine-learning based TNR can find quite 

a lot of new names that a simple dictionary ap-

proach cannot identify. Moreover, biodiversity 

literature is a potentially useful resource to en-

rich the existing taxonomic databases.   
 

 uBio EoL CoL 
Mapped Names 
(total names: 8,687) 

3,565 

(41.1%) 

2,893 

(33.3%) 

3,354 

(38.6%) 

Table 4. Name mapping in taxonomic databases 

4 Community Metadata Collection 

Biodiversity communities have come to the con-

sensus that converting unstructured biodiversity 

literature into semantically-enabled, machine-

readable structured data is essential to use the 

currently highly fragmented data sources. The 

main semantic metadata system is the Darwin 

Core biodiversity data standard
15

, maintained by 

the Biodiversity Information Standards group 

(TDWG)
16

, and based on Dublin Core. The main 

objects in Darwin Core represent an organism’s 

scientific name, information pertaining to its 

classification, and the geographical and geologi-

cal contexts of the organism. 

For this research, key information can be 

stored in the dwc:Taxon class, which has terms 

defined for the taxonomic name itself 

(dwc:scientificName), as well as a unique iden-

tifier, the Life Sciences ID (LSID) to locate the 

                                                 
15

 http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/index.htm 
16

 http://www.tdwg.org/ 

29



 
Figure 3. A sample web page to show how extracted semantic features link to the BHL and external 

taxonomic databases 
 

taxon across remote databases (dwc:taxonID) 

and various terms giving taxonomic information 

and provenance. For example, the metadata iden-

tifying the LSID and publication data for the 

species Anthus correndera might be represented 

using the standard Darwin Core terms: 
 

<dwc:Taxon> 

<dwc:taxonID>urn:lsid:catalogueoflife.org: 

taxon:f000e838-29c1-102b-9a4a- 

00304854f820:col20120721</dwc:taxonID> 

<dwc:scientificName>Anthus 

    correndera</dwc:scientificName> 

<dwc:class>Aves</dwc:class> 

<dwc:genus>Anthus</dwc:genus> 

<dwc:specificEpithet>correndera 

</dwc:specificEpithet> 

<dwc:namePublishedIn> London Med. 

Repos., 15: 308.</dwc:namePublishedIn> 

</dwc:Taxon> 
 

The basic Darwin Core terms can be extended 

to represent the information obtained via the 

original document and the curation tools. Labels 

should be used to represent information about the 

verified form of the name and the identity of the 

verifier, with the verifier's Scratchpad login 

name being the obvious choice. Adding the name 

of the verified form and the verifier with appro-

priate labels to the metadata 

(dwc:nameVerifiedBy and dwc:dateVerified) 

would then give: 
 

<dwc:Taxon> 

<dwc:taxonID>urn:lsid:catalogueoflife.org: 

taxon:f000e838-29c1-102b-9a4a- 

00304854f820:col20120721</dwc:taxonID> 

<dwc:scientificName>Anthus 

    correndera</dwc:scientificName> 

<dwc:nameVerifiedBy>Scratchpad user: 

Michael Smith</dwc:nameVerifiedBy> 

<dwc:dateVerified>2013-06-15 

</dwc:dateVerified> 

<dwc:genus>Anthus</dwc:genus> 

<dwc:specificEpithet>correndera 

</dwc:specificEpithet> 

<dwc:namePublishedIn>London Med. 

Repos., 15: 308.</dwc:namePublishedIn> 

</dwc:Taxon> 

 

    Further contextual information can be stored, 

providing species description information includ-

ing morphological features, biogeographic distri-

bution, and ecology. Figure 3 shows a web 

page
17

 corresponding to a species in which the 

contexts surrounding the occurrence of the target 

mention are extracted from the text. Each piece 

of evidence is given a bibliographic citation that 

is linked to the respective copy of the referring 

page (here, the BHL). Unique database identifi-

ers and hyperlinks to external taxonomic data-

bases are provided on the web page if possible. 

Connections to external databases increase the 

understanding and analysis of the behaviour of 

the target species. These bibliographic linkages 

allow the system to identify and track back the 

raw data across the range of remote databases. 

The metadata can potentially encode many 

semantic aspects of the data.  Identified taxo-

nomic names and hyperlinks to repositories will 

improve species-specific document retrieval. En-

coding different names for organisms will im-

prove synonym detection so reconciliation tech-

niques are needed to connect multiple names. 

Also, linkages to the unique identifiers of organ-

isms facilitate the reconciliation process. Future 

work will consider citation information, which 

improves the traceability of naming authorities. 

                                                 
17

 http://www9.open.ac.uk/Web_NER/mobotbca_03_01_00/3982.html 

Page citation 

Link to CoL 

Link to BHL 

30



 
Figure 4. A sample web page for taxonomic name verification (4-1: Extracted context evidence from 

the text; 4-2: A multi-option form for judgment collection; 4-3: The distribution of human judgments) 
 

4.1 Taxonomic Name Validation  

Taxonomic name validation task is to present 

unknown names for human validation. Validat-

ing taxonomic names is a specialist process, re-

quiring extensive human involvement and exper-

tise. Non-professional taxonomists and citizen 

scientists are an essential part of this effort. We 

aim to demonstrate how small, lightweight plug-

ins integrated to existing web-based collabora-

tion tools can facilitate the semantic annotation 

of open biodiversity resources via crowdsourcing 

techniques. 

Scratchpads (Smith et al. 2009) are a content 

management system that is optimised for han-

dling biological taxonomy data. Scratchpads are 

widely used amongst professional and amateur 

taxonomists, and so are a useful portal for valida-

tion. 

Our curation web service is a Scratchpads 

plug-in. Text for validation is selected via a sim-

ple recommender system
18

 (Figure 4). Users are 

presented with one or more potential taxonomic 

names found by the CRFs, as text "snippets" 

containing the proposed name with the surround-

ing context of the original scan (Figure 4-1). To 

collect specialists’ judgments, a multiple-option 

form (Figure 4-2) is used to request a judgment 

of whether the text snippet represents a poten-

tially new taxon, a synonym or a name variant of 

an existing organism.  

                                                 
18

 http://www9.open.ac.uk/ComTax/mobotbca_03_01_00/4136.html 

The validation information is collected in a 

back-end MySQL database in a metadata format 

that contains the curator’s name, verification 

time stamp, the target name, the associated pub-

lication, along with appropriate page citations 

and associated URI page linkages to make the 

support evidence traceable. By ensuring that this 

data is available to the community via the seman-

tic web service layer, the judgment is exposed to 

the community for further validation or modifi-

cation (distribution illustrated in Figure 4-3). 

Our aim in the medium term is to link the val-

idation task to search results within the Scratch-

pad portal
19

. This will allow us to investigate 

whether the output of document searching can be 

used as a reward for carrying out the validation 

exercise, and so whether the task can be pre-

sented in a (relatively) unobtrusive manner to 

users. 

5 Conclusions and Future Work  

Increasing numbers of older documents are 

scanned and made available online, through digi-

tal heritage projects like BHL. It will become 

more important to annotate those documents with 

semantic data in order to curate and manage the 

information contained in the documents. 

We have described how information extraction 

techniques can be used as part of a curation sys-

tem to improve the mechanisms for collecting 

                                                 
19

 http://taxoncuration.myspecies.info/node/77 

Fig. 4-1 

Fig. 4-2 

Fig. 4-3 

Link to BHL Page 

31



this metadata. Although we have focused on 

identifying taxonomic names, the same tech-

niques could be used to recognise any data of 

interest, such as geographical data in historic 

land documents, or proper names in census data. 

The critical part of the system, of course, is to be 

able to find suitable user groups to provide the 

appropriate semantic markup, as the data can 

rapidly become very large. 

The semantic web can provide a portal to this 

data, if the metadata can be reliably collected. 

We believe that IE-supported curation techniques 

can be used to bring this collection about. 

Future work includes: (1) The datasets were 

annotated by one computer scientist. It would be 

interesting to compare the annotated data with 

the verification results from biodiversity experts. 

(2) We need more annotated OCR text for the 

development of an automated OCR-error correc-

tion tool and a TNR tool built for OCR text. (3) 

Our project is in its early stages and requires 

more time for the collection of validation judg-

ments; to conduct the evaluation of the validation 

tool and to analyse the validation results. 

 

Acknowledgments 
The work was funded by JISC through the Digi-

tal Infrastructure programme, Managing Re-

search Data call. We thank Mr Jef Lay for devel-

oping the OCR error correction tool shown in 

Figure 2.  

References  

L. M. Akella, C. N. Norton, and H. Miller. 2012. Net-

iNeti: discovery of scientific names from text using 

machine learning methods. BMC Bioinformatics, 

13 (211):1471-2105. 

M. Gerner, G. Nenadic, and C. M. Bergman. 2010. 

LINNAEUS: A Species Name Identification Sys-

tem for Biomedical Literature. BMC Bioinformat-

ics 11:85. 

H. C. Godfray. 2002. Challenges for taxonomy. Na-

ture, 417 (6884):17-19. 

N. J. Isaac, J. Mallet, and G. M. Mace. 2004. Taxo-

nomic inflation: its influence on macroecology and 

conservation. Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 19: 

464–469. 

D. Koning, N. Sarkar, and T. Moritz. 2005. Taxon-

grab: extracting taxonomic names from text. Biodi-

versity Informatics, 2:79–82.  

J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, and F. Pereira. 2001. Con-

ditional random fields: Probabilistic models for 

segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Pro-

ceedings of the International Conference on Ma-

chine Learning (ICML-2001), pages 282-289. 

P. R. Leary, D. P. Remsen, C. N. Norton, D. J. Patter-

son, and I. N. Sarkar. 2007. uBioRSS: tracking 

taxonomic literature using RSS. Bioinformatics, 

23(11):1434–1436. 

R. D. M. Page. 2006. Taxonomic Names, Metadata, 

and The Semantic Web. Biodiversity Informatics, 

3, pp. 1-15. 

L. Penev, D. Agosti, T. Georgiev, et al. 2010. Seman-

tic tagging of and semantic enhancements to sys-

tematics papers: ZooKeys working examples. 

ZooKeys, 50:1–16. 

D. Remsen. 2011. Biodiversity Informatics - GBIFs 

role in linking information through scientific 

names. In The Symposium of Anchoring Biodiver-

sity Information: From Sherborne to the 21st Cen-

tury and Beyond. 

I. N. Sarkar. 2007. Biodiversity informatics: organiz-

ing and linking information across the spectrum of 

life. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 8(5):347-357. 

G. Sautter, K. Böhm, and D. Agosti. 2006. A combin-

ing approach to find all taxon names (FAT) in leg-

acy biosisystematics literature. Biodiversity infor-

matics, 3:41-53. 

Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity 

(SCBD). 2008. Guide to the global taxonomy ini-

tiative. CBD, Technical Report. 

V. Smith, S. Rycroft, K. Harman, B. Scott, and D. 

Roberts. 2009. Scratchpads: A Data-Publishing 

Framework to Build, Share and Manage Informa-

tion on the Diversity of Life. BMC Bioinformatics 

10(14):S6. 

P. Stenetorp, S. Pyysalo, G. Topić, T. Ohta, S. Anani-

adou, and J. Tsujii. 2012. brat: a Web-based Tool 

for NLP-Assisted Text Annotation. In Proceedings 

of the Demonstrations Session at EACL 2012, pag-

es 102-107. 

Q. Wei, P. B. Heidorn, and C. Freeland. 2010. Name 

Matters: Taxonomic Name Recognition (TNR) in 

Biodiversity Heritage Library (BHL). In Proceed-

ins of 2010 iConference, pages 284-288. 

R. J. White. 2007. Linking Biodiversity Databases. 

Systematics Association Special Volume, 73:111–

128. 

A. Willis, D. Morse, A. Dil, D. King, D. Roberts, and 

C. Lyal. 2009. Improving search in scanned docu-

ments: Looking for OCR mismatches. In Proceed-

ings of the workshop on Advanced Technologies 

for Digital Libraries, 2009. 

H. Yang, G. Nenadic, and J. Keane. 2008. Identifica-

tion of Transcription Factor Contexts in Literature 

Using Machine Learning Approaches. BMC Bioin-

formatics 9:S11. 

32


