










































Automatic Detection and Correction for Chinese Misspelled Words Using Phonological and Orthographic Similarities


Proceedings of the Seventh SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing (SIGHAN-7), pages 97–101,
Nagoya, Japan, 14 October 2013.

Automatic Detection and Correction for Chinese Misspelled Words 

Using Phonological and Orthographic Similarities 

 

Tao-Hsing Chang 

Department of Computer Science  

and Information Engineering, National 

Kaohsiung University of Applied Sciences  

changth@kuas.edu.tw 

 

Yuen-Hsien Tseng 

Information Technology Center  

National Taiwan Normal University  

samtseng@ntnu.edu.tw 

Hsueh-Chih Chen 

Department of  Educational Psychology  

and Counseling  

National Taiwan Normal University 

chcjyh@ntnu.edu.tw 

 

Jian-Liang Zheng 

Department of Computer Science  

and Information Engineering, National 

Kaohsiung University of Applied Sciences  

chaosgodyi@gmail.com 

 

Abstract 

How to detect and correct misspelled words 

in documents is a very important issue for 

Mandarin and Japanese. This paper uses pho-

nological similarity and orthographic similar-

ity co-occurrence to train linear regression 

model. Using ACL-SIGHAN 2013 Bake-off 

Dataset, experimental results indicate that the 

detection F-score, error location F-score of 

our proposed method for Subtask 1 is 0.70 

and 0.43 respectively, and the correction ac-

curacy of the proposed method for Subtask 1 

is 0.39. 

1 Introduction 

How to automatically detect and correct 

misspelled words in documents is a very im-

portant issue. It is not an easy task for programs 

to spot misspelled words automatically. In Eng-

lish sentences, words are separated by space, 

thereby leading to the result that it is not difficult 

to distinguish if there are characters with non-

existing orthography and unknown words. How-

ever, Chinese sentences are constructed by suc-

cessive single-character, and a word could con-

sist of one character or more. As a result, it is 

difficult to identify whether a character is a part 

of a misspelled word or not.  

Based on our observation, misspelled words 

mainly occur as the following cases: phonologi-

cal similarity and orthographic similarity. For 

example, word ‘已經’ is mistakenly written as 

‘以經’ due to the fact that characters ‘已’ and 

‘以’ are pronounced as ‘yi’. In addition, word 

‘代表’ is mistakenly written as ‘伐表’ because 

the orthographic of characters ‘代’ and ‘伐’ are 
quite confusing. As a result, it may work to iden-

tify the possible misspelled words within sen-

tences by phonological similarity and ortho-

graphic similarity between two characters. 

The purpose of the study is to propose a 

method to detecting and correcting misspelled 

words in sentences. The proposed method does 

not rely on the collection of similar words, but 

based on the following assumption. Supposing 

there was no misspelled word in sentences, ideal 

word segmentation method could divide sentence 

into serial correct words. However, if there was a 

misspelled word, the segmentation could sepa-

rate words containing misspelled character by 

serial characters. For instance, sentence ‘我們都

喜歡學佼’ will be segmented into ‘我們 都 喜歡 

學  佼’ due to the fact that ‘學佼’ cannot be 

found in the dictionary, thus segmenting ‘學’ and 

‘佼’ respectively.  
By the observation mention above, a sen-

tence may include several character sequences 

consisting of two or more than two characters, 

denoted as sentential fragments. Each character 

in fragments may be the wrong part of a mis-

spelling word while other characters are the cor-

rect part of the word. Hence, for each character 

treated as correct part of a misspelled word, the 

proposed method picks up the words containing 

the character. The words will be denoted as 

“candidate words”. On the other hand, all charac-

ters in the fragment may be single-character 

words. The sentential fragment referring to can-

didate words is called “original string” in this 

97



paper. By calculating the probability of candidate 

words and original strings, the proposed method 

can determine whether the original strings con-

tain misspelled words or not and correct the 

words. Next section will address the details. 

2 Related Works 

Chang (1995) proposed detecting technique 

of Mandarin misspelled word. Although it was 

able to find out misspelled words, there were 

some defects needed to be improved. For exam-

ple, too much False Alert, long detection time, 

not able to refer to entire paragraph. Ren et al. 

(2001) utilized rule-based with linguistic model 

to detect mistakes. Although it was not very effi-

cient, it was a new concept at the time. Lin et al. 

(2002) focused on misspelled words occurred in 

Cangjie input method and put forward a detect-

ing system. Huang et al. (2008) designed a cor-

recting system for wrong phonological words 

which built up similar phonological word collec-

tion for every single word. The correcting system 

also used bi-gram linguistic model to position the 

misspelled word, and replaced it with the most 

likely fit word.  

Afterwards, there were many proposes un-

der different circumstances. For example, Chen 

(2010) following previous studies, he amended 

detecting templates in order to automatically 

generate positive and negative knowledge corpus 

by Using Template and Translate modules to 

correct sentences. And final correction was con-

ducted by part-of-speech Language Model to 

improve the accuracy probability of misspelled 

word correction. 

3 Methods 

Chang et al. (2012)’s approach is refined as 

the algorithm for automatically correcting mis-

spelled words in this paper. They observed that 

there is a specific phenomenon when misspelled 

words occur. They envisaged that there was no 

misspelled words in sentences, ideal tokenization 

system would divide sentence into correct vo-

cabulary combinations. However, if there is a 

misspelled word, the system would segment the 

majority of vocabulary contained misspelled 

words by means of single-character formation.  

According to this property, existing mis-

spelled words was assumed to appear in a string 

formed by successive single-character words in 

this paper. As a result, for a string including two 

or more than two single-characters, the words 

which contain some characters in a string from 

the dictionary can be listed. In this study, these 

words are called candidate word while the string 

is called original string.  

Linear regression prediction model was 

used to determine whether an original string 

should be replaced with a candidate word or not. 

Three parameters between candidate word and 

original string are used in linear regression mod-

el as an input. The values of three parameters are 

respectively called similarity, the probability of 

character co-occurrence, and the probability of 

POS co-occurrence. The values are utilized as 

the input in linear regression formula, and then 

the probability of misspelled words in original 

string can be obtained. If several candidate words 

are predicted as the correct words of original 

string by prediction model at the same time, the 

word with highest score is treated as correct 

word. 

The similarity between candidate word and 

original string is the average between phonologi-

cal similarity and orthographic similarity. The 

Mandarin phonetic code was employed to com-

pute phonological similarity. High similarity 

means that the two characters are easily repre-

sented as misspelled words for each other. On 

the other hand, radical structures are utilized to 

determine spatial structure of two fonts. Two 

characters with higher graphic resemblance easi-

ly represents as misspelled words. In the follow-

ing sections, the detail of similarity will be ad-

dressed. 

3.1 Candidate Words 

For each sentence, it is segmented into 

words and the part-of-speeches of words are 

tagged by WeCAn system (Chang et al., 2012). 

Based on the assumption mentioned earlier in 

this paper, words which contain misspelled 

words can result in consecutive single-character 

string. Hence, the model will identify all words 

contained in consecutive single-character string 

from dictionary. As seen from Figure 1, a sen-

tence ‘人生又何償不是如此’ is segmented into 

‘人生_又_何_償_不是_如此’. ‘償’ is a mis-

spelled words of ‘嘗’ in this sentence, ‘何’ and 

‘償’ are thus segmented respectively. Followed 

by, for the string with successive single-character 

‘又何償’, the system will select the candidate 

word from each character in the string. For the 

‘何’ in string, the proposed method identifies ‘何’ 

as the second word and its length less than or 

equal to 3 in the dictionary, such as ‘任何’, ‘如

何’ and so on. Additionally, the word ‘何’ identi-

98



fied as the first word and its length less than or 

equal to 2 is also the candidate word, such as ‘何

必’, ‘何嘗’and so on. 

All candidate words will be compared to cor-

respondent original string with their phonologi-

cal similarity and orthographic similarity. In Fig-

ure 1, the phonological similarity and ortho-

graphic similarity between the character ‘任’ in 

candidate word ‘任何’ and character ‘又’ in orig-

inal string will be computed. The similarities 

determine whether ‘任何’ is needed to be further 
analyzed. 

 
Figure 1. An Example of Candidate Words and  

an Original String. 

 

3.2 Phonological Similarity 

Mandarin phonetic symbols are used to 

evaluate phonological similarity. There are 37 

symbols in Mandarin phonetic symbols dividing 

into initial (ㄅ/b/,ㄆ/p/,ㄇ/m/), medial (ㄧ /yi/,ㄨ

/wu/,ㄩ /yu/), final (ㄚ /a/,ㄛ /o/,ㄜ /e/) and five 
tones. Chang et al.(2010) mentioned that some 

Chinese phonetic alphabets have identical articu-

lation method and speech position, whereas ar-

ticulation confusability is the causes of mis-

spelled words. For example, symbols ‘ㄅ’ and ’

ㄆ’ have similar speech position ; symbols ‘ㄕ’ 

and ‘ㄙ’ have identical articulation; symbols ‘ㄣ’ 

and ’ㄥ’ in final category belongs to a confusable 

articulation set. 
This paper compares two characters with 

their Mandarin phonetic symbols of its initial, 

medial, final and tone respectively to measure 

phonetic similarity. The rules for comparison are 

as follows: 

1. If there are identical initial, a similarity score 

will achieve one point. The score will achieve 

0.5 point for initials of two characters which are 

‘ㄅ’ and ‘ㄆ’, ‘ㄉ’ and ‘ㄊ’, ‘ㄋ’ and ‘ㄌ’, ‘ㄍ’ 

and ‘ㄎ’, ‘ㄓ’ and ‘ㄗ’, ‘ㄔ’ and ‘ㄘ’, or ‘ㄕ’ 

and ‘ㄙ’. 
2. If there are identical finals, the score will in-

crease one point. The score will increase 0.5 

point for finals of two characters which are ‘ㄣ’ 

and ‘ㄥ’.  

3. If there are identical medial in two characters, 

the score will increase one point. 

4. If the tones are consistent in two characters, 

the score will increase one point. 

5. Phonetic similarity between two characters 

can be obtained by dividing the similarity score 

by 4. 

Phonological similarity between candidate 

word and original string is the average of phono-

logical similarity of all characters in the candi-

date word. For instance, given candidate word 

‘應該’ corresponding to original string ‘因該’, 

phonetic symbol of characters ‘因’ and ‘應’ is 
‘ㄧㄣ’ and ‘ㄧㄥ’ respectively. Hence, the pho-
nological similarity is (1+1+0.5+1)/4 = 0.875. 

The similarity between the same two characters 

‘該’ is one. Therefore, phonological similarity 

between candidate word ‘應該 ’ and original 

string ‘因該’is (1+0.875)/2=0.9375. 

3.3 Orthographic Similarity 

Measurement of orthographic similarity in 

this paper is based on the method proposed by 

Chang et al. (2012). The measurement first dis-

assembles two characters into a set of basic com-

ponents and compare the differences between the 

two using Chinese Orthography Database pro-

posed by Chen et al. (2011). There are 446 basic 

constituents in the database, and each unit of a 

character is linked by their spatial relations. 

There are 11 types of spatial relations, such as 

vertical combination and horizontal combination. 

Through the database, a Chinese character 

can be converted into a series of branch-like 

structure consisting of parts and combination 

relations. The structure is called the constituent 

structure. Figure 2 shows the constituent struc-

ture of the Chinese character ‘查’ in which ‘-’ 

represents horizontal combination, and ‘木’, ‘曰’, 

‘一’ are constituents. 
In the constituent structure of a character, 

nodes represent combination relations while 

leaves represent constituents. Every relation and 

constituent in the whole structure has a level rep-

resenting the position as well as a weight repre-

senting the strokes for that constituent. The 

weight for each relation denotes the total number 

99



of strokes for all relevant constituents. Chang et 

al.(2012) used the level and weight of constituent 

structure of two characters to calculate the de-

gree of orthographic similarity. 

 
Figure. 2. Constituent Strucutre in the Chinese 

Character ‘查’. 

This paper modifies measuring formula for 

similarity in previous study Chang et al. (2012). 

In previous formula, only the similarity between 

two identical constituents is scored. It is suggest-

ed that two similar constituents should increase 

the score. Therefore, this paper uses the stroke 

information in the database for constituents to 

calculate the similarity between two constituents. 

For example, stroke information of constituents 

‘已’ and ‘己’ in the database is as follows: 
 

‘已’ :[{口 2},{一}~(1:9@9),{乚}~(2:0@2)] 

‘己’: [{口 2},{一}~(1:9@9),{乚}~(2:0@0)] 
 

It is noted that most constituents for Chinese 

characters ‘已’and ‘己’ are very similar which 
would receive a score close to 1 in similarity 

measure. 

3.4 Probability of Co-occurrence 

In large corpuses, some specific characters 

may have high frequency to be adjacent to an-

other character, and this is called co-occurrence. 

The probability of co-occurrence between two 

characters is called probability of character co-

occurrence (PCC). If a sentence has misspelled 

words, the PCC among characters in the sentence 

should be lower than the sentence which has no 

misspelled words. Hence, if the PCC of character 

in the candidate word is great higher than that in 

original string, misspelled words may occur in 

the sentence. In addition, there exists co-

occurrence in part-of-speeches. The probability 

of co-occurrence between two characters is 

called probability of character co-occurrence 

(PPC).  

Bi-gram method is utilized in both this pa-

per and the previous study to calculate the PCC 

of characters in candidate words as well as that 

in original string. Ratio of PCC (RPCC) can be 

obtained by dividing the PCC of characters in 

candidate word by that in original string. The 

ratio of the probability of part-of-speech co-

occurrence (RPPC) can be obtained by the same 

methods. The higher the two values, the possible 

the misspelled words occur in original string. As 

a result, both ratios will be two inputs for predic-

tion model. 

3.5 Prediction Model 

This paper adopts linear regression formula to 

be the prediction model. For a candidate word 

and correspondent original string, the values of 

three inputs can be obtained by using approaches 

in subsection 3.2 to 3.4. Candidate words and 

correspondent original string in training data are 

utilized in this paper to compute each regression 

coefficient in formula 1. 

 

                         (1) 
 

For any set of candidate words and corre-

spondent original string, three parameters are 

substituted into formula 1 to obtain y. The y val-

ue represents the probability of the original string 

within misspelled words. Based on the values of 

y obtained from training data, a threshold can be 

set. If y is higher above the threshold, there are 

misspelled words in original string. If y is lower 

than threshold value, there are no misspelled 

words in original string. 

4 Experiments 

This paper use the data provided by ACL-

SIGHAN 2013 Bake-off to conduct performance 

evaluation. The data is divided into two sets 

called ‘dry run’ and ‘final test’ while the evalua-

tion includes two tasks sub-task 1 and sub-task 2. 

Each set consist of two subsets which is em-

ployed to evaluate the performance of methods 

for two tasks respectively. In dry run, sub-task 1 

and sub-task 2 each use 50 example sentences for 

testing. In final test, sub-task 1 and sub-task 2 

each use 1000 example sentences for testing. The 

purposes of sub-task 1 and sub-task 2 are to re-

spectively evaluate the performance of error de-

tection and error correction of methods. 

Table 1 presents the evaluation result of Sub-

task 1 in our proposed method, denoted as 

KUAS-NTNU, and results of sub-task 2 are 

shown in Table 2. Since SIGHAN has not re-

ported the F-score for sub-task 1 in dry run, Ta-

ble 1 does not show the detection F-score and 

error location F-score of dry run. 

100



 Dry Run Final Test 

False-alarm Rate 0.23 0.23 

Detection Accuracy 0.80 0.79 

Detection Precision 0.50 0.61 

Detection Recall 0.90 0.82 

Detection F-score - 0.70 

Error Location Accuracy 0.76 0.69 

Error Location Precision 0.39 0.38 

Error Location Recall 0.70 0.51 

Error Location F-score - 0.43 

Table 1. The Performance of KUAS-NTNU Sys-

tem for Subtask 1. 

 

 Dry Run Final Test 

Location Accuracy 0.30 0.44 

Correction Accuracy 0.28 0.39 

Correction Precision 0.36 0.51 

Table 2. The Performance of KUAS-NTNU Sys-

tem for Subtask 2. 

5 Discussion 

Methods suggested by previous studies of-

ten rely on data collected from confusable char-

acter sets. Although corresponding characters in 

the set are high in similarity and can be easily 

confused, they could not be assessed correctly if 

they are not from the confusable sets. Our pro-

posed methods calculate phonological similarity 

and orthographical similarity between misspelled 

words and original string, which are not restrict-

ed by confusable sets. The proposed method can 

still obtain a reliable estimation by other parame-

ters with characters in low similarity. 

Some issues and works could be explored 

and developed in the further. First, this study 

only examines characters with misspelled words. 

The detection and correction of single-character 

misspelled words only rely on simple rule-based 

approaches. It results in many single-character 

misspelled words cannot be extracted. Second, 

collections of unknown words in sentences are 

often considered having misspelled words which 

might cause a decrease in system accurate rate 

but an increase in false-alarm rate. Differences 

analysis for unknown words and misspelled 

words are issues that must be dealt with in future 

research. 

Acknowledgments 

This research was partially supported by 

National Science Council (NSC), Taiwan, under 

the grant NSC 100-2511-S-003-053-MY2 and 

NSC 102-2511-S-151-002, and the “Aim for the 

Top University Project” of National Taiwan 

Normal University (NTNU), sponsored by the 

Ministry of Education, Taiwan. We are also 

grateful to the support of International Research-

Intensive Center of Excellence Program of 

NTNU and NSC, Taiwan, R.O.C., under the 

grant 101WFA0300229.  

References 

Chang C.-H. 1995. A New Approach for Automatic 

Chinese Spelling Correction. Proceedings of 
Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Sympo-

sium’95, 278-283. 

Chang C.-H., Lin S.-Y., Li S.-Y., Tsai M.-F., Liao H.-

M., Sun C.-W., and Huang N.-E. 2010. Annotat-

ing Phonetic Component of Chinese Charac-

ters Using Constrained Optimization and Pro-

nunciation Distribution. International Journal of 
Computational Linguistics and Chinese Language 

Processing, 15(2):145-160.  

Chang T.-H., Su S.-Y., and Chen H.-C. 2012. Auto-

matic Correction for Graphemic Chinese Mis-

spelled Words. Proceedings of ROCLING 2012, 
125-139. 

Chang T.-H., Sung Y.-T., & Lee Y.-T. 2012. A Chi-

nese word segmentation and POS tagging sys-

tem for readability research. Proceedings of 
42

nd
 SCiP. 

Chen H.-C., Chang L.-Y., Chiou Y.-S., Sung Y.-T., 

and Chang K.-E. 2011. Chinese Orthography 

Database and Its Application in Teaching 

Chinese Characters. Bulletin of Educational 
Psychology, 43:66-86. 

Chen, Y.-Z. 2010. Improve the Detection of Im-

properly Used Chinese Characters with Noisy 

Channel Model and Detection Template. 
Chaoyang University of Technology, Taiwan, 

R.O.C.  

Huang C.-M, Wu M.-C., and Chang C.-C. 2008. Er-

ror Detection and Correction Based on Chi-

nese Phonemic Alphabet in Chinese Text. 
World scientific publishing company, International 

Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-

Based Systems, 16(1):89-105. 

Lin Y.-J., Huang F.-L., and Yu M.-S. 2002. A Chi-

nese Spelling Error Correction System. Pro-
ceedings of the 7

th
 Conference on Artificial Intel-

ligence and Applications. 

Ren F., Shi H., and Zhou Q. 2001. A hybrid ap-

proach to automatic Chinese text checking 

and error correction. Proceedings of IEEE SMC, 
1693-1698. 

101


