










































Exploring MWEs for Knowledge Acquisition from Corporate Technical Documents


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages 82–86,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Exploring MWEs for Knowledge Acquisition  

from Corporate Technical Documents 

 

 
Bell Manrique Losada Carlos M. Zapata Jaramillo Diego A. Burgos 
Universidad de Medellín Universidad Nacional de Colombia Wake Forest University 

Cra. 87 30-65 Belén Cra. 80 65-223 Robledo Greene Hall, P.O. Box 7566 

Medellín, AQ, Colombia Medellín, AQ, Colombia Winston Salem, NC 27109, USA 
bmanrique@udem.edu.co cmzapata@unal.edu.co burgosda@wfu.edu 

 
 
 

 

Abstract 
High frequency can convert a word sequence 

into a multiword expression (MWE), i.e., a 

collocation. In this paper, we use collocations 

as well as syntactically-flexible, lexicalized 

phrases to analyze ‘job specification docu-

ments’ (a kind of corporate technical docu-

ment) for subsequent acquisition of automated 

knowledge elicitation. We propose the defini-

tion of structural and functional patterns of 

specific corporate documents by analyzing the 

contexts and sections in which the expression 

occurs. Such patterns and its automated pro-

cessing are the basis for identifying organiza-

tional domain knowledge and business 

information which is used later for the first in-

stances of requirement elicitation processes in 

software engineering. 

 

1 Introduction 
 

In software engineering, business knowledge and 

the needs of a system’s users are analyzed and 

specified by a process called requirement elicita-

tion (RE). Traditionally, RE has been carried out 

by human analysts through techniques such as 

interviews, observations, questionnaires, etc. The 

information obtained by the analyst is then con-

verted to a controlled language used further stages 

of software implementation. These techniques, 

however, necessarily increase costs and imply a 

certain degree of subjectivity. Sometimes, as an 

alternative approach for RE, human analysts elicit 

requirement from documents instead of from cli-

ents or users. The present work, proposes the use 

multiword expressions (MWEs) such as colloca-

tions and syntactically-flexible, lexicalized phrases 

to detect relevant patterns in ‘job specification 

documents’ (a kind of corporate technical docu-

ment). The approach contributes to the task of 

generating controlled language used in subsequent 

automated knowledge representation.  

MWEs are lexical items which can be decom-

posed into multiple lexemes with lexical, syntactic, 

semantic, pragmatic, and/or statistical idiomaticity 

(Baldwin et al., 2010). According to Bauer (1983), 

MWEs can be broadly classified into lexicalized 

phrases and institutionalized phrases. Institutional-

ized phrases, or collocations, basically require a 

high frequency of co-occurrence of their compo-

nents. Lexicalized phrases (LP), on the other hand, 

may present other kind of idiomaticity, but not 

only statistical. Along with collocations, out of the 

set of lexicalized phrase types, we find syntactical-

ly-flexible, lexicalized phrases and semi-fixed 

phrases of special interest for the present work. 

Based on an experimental corpus, we identify 

when and how a MWE is used in order to identify 

patterns, infer organizational relationships, and 

generate corporate information and/or conceptual 

models for further requirement elicitation.  

We propose context analysis—in which MWEs 

occur—would contribute by adding essential in-

formation to the pattern definition. Such patterns 

are conceived from the structural and functional 

components inherent to corporate documents. This 

means that we classify MWEs according to the 

section in the document where they prevail. We 

expect the automated processing of such patterns 

helps in the identification and understanding of 

domain knowledge and business information from 

an organization. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-

lows: in Section 2 we describe the conceptual 

82



framework and background. Section 3 presents 

examples and analysis of the MWEs used for this 

study. Last, Section 4 draws conclusions and out-

lines future work. 

 

2 Conceptual Framework and Back-
ground 

 

Two main lines converge on this study, namely 

requirements elicitation belonging to software 

engineering and linguistic description and parsing 

related to natural language processing. 

Requirements elicitation (RE) is the initial pro-

cess from requirement engineering in the software 

development process lifecycle. RE involves seek-

ing, uncovering, capturing, and elaborating re-

quirements, based on activities of the business 

analysis initially performed. This process compris-

es functional, behavioral, and quality properties of 

the software to be developed (Castro-Herrera et al., 

2008). In order to accomplish RE, an analyst 

should increasingly and iteratively develop several 

actions involving natural language analysis and 

modeling (Li et al., 2003). 

On the other hand, a user of a language has 

available a large number of pre-constructed 

phrases conforming single choices, even though 

they might appear to be analyzable into segments 

(Sinclair, 1991). Such phrases are known as lexical 

phrases (LPs) and may have a pragmatic function. 

According to Pérez (1999), the importance of LPs 

lies in their usage and domain, which constitute an 

integral part of the communicative competence. In 

the same line of thought, López-Mezquita (2007) 

categorizes LPs into polywords, institutionalized 

expressions, phrasal constraints, and sentence 

builders.  

For this study, we use the classification of 

MWEs proposed by Baldwin et al. (2010). This 

and other classifications have been used in natural 

language processing techniques for text-mining 

and information extraction. They also have been 

applied to the analysis of many kinds of docu-

ments, e.g., technical documents, patents, and 

software requirement documents. 

Cascini et al. (2004) present a functional analy-

sis of patents and their implementation in the PAT-

Analyzer tool. They use techniques based on the 

extraction of the interactions between the entities 

described in the document and expressed as sub-

ject-action-object triples, by using a suitable syn-

tactic parser. 

Rösner et al. (1997) use techniques to automat-

ically generate multilingual documents from 

knowledge bases. The resulting documents can be 

represented in an interchangeable, reusable way. 

The authors describe several techniques for 

knowledge acquisition from documents by using 

particular knowledge structures from particular 

contexts. Breaux et al. (2006) describe the extrac-

tion of rights and obligations from regulation texts 

restated into restricted natural language statements. 

In this approach, the authors identify normative 

phrases that define what stakeholders are permitted 

or required to do, and then extract rights and obli-

gations by using normative phrases. 

For knowledge acquisition, several authors 

have applied NLP techniques for handling MWEs. 

Jackendoff (1997) and Aussenac-Gilles et al. 

(2000) extract knowledge from existing documents 

and demonstrate its usage on the ontological engi-

neering research domain.  

Some other contributions are related to the ex-

traction of multiword expressions from corpora, 

empirical work on lexical semantics in compara-

tive fields, word sense disambiguation, and ontolo-

gy learning (Bannard, 2005). In the intersection of 

NLP and requirement elicitation, Lee and Bryant 

(2002) use contextual techniques to overcome the 

ambiguity and express domain knowledge in the 

DARPA agent markup language (DAML). The 

resulting expression from the linguistic processing 

is a formal representation of the informal natural 

language requirements. 

For processing technical and organizational 

documentation, Dinesh et al. (2007) propose the 

description of organizational procedures and the 

validation of their conformance to regulations, 

based on logical analysis. Lévy et al. (2010) pre-

sent an environment that enables semantic annota-

tions of document textual units (e.g., words, 

phrases, paragraphs, etc.) with ontological infor-

mation (concepts, instances, roles, etc.). This ap-

proach provides an ontology-driven interpretation 

of the document contents. 

Some work has been also developed to perform 

corpus-based analysis from several technical doc-

uments, as follows: for the use of frequency and 

concordance data from a corpus, Flowerdew 

(1993) work on English biology lectures; Lam 

(2007) propose the processing of English tourism 

83



documents looking for pedagogical implications of 

its usage; and Henry and Roseberry (2001) observe 

English application letters. 

In other lines of thought, we found language 

models accounting for documents oriented to audit 

linguistic expertise and analyze communicative 

and health texts (Fernández & García, 2009).  
 

3 Exploration of MWEs in Corporate 
Documents  

 

3.1 Corpus and Analysis Tools 
 

We collected and analyzed a set of documents 

from the corporate domain in different subject 

fields such as medicine, forestry, and laboratory. 

The corpus used as the basis for this preliminary 

study consists of 25 English-written documents 

with independence of its variety.  

The documents selected are a small sample be-

longing to the ‘Job Specification Document’ (JSD) 

category and were collected following representa-

tiveness and ecological criteria, i.e., looking for the 

collection of documents produced, created, or 

promoted in the corporate or business environ-

ment. All the documents were taken from different 

corporations and sum 31627 tokens and 3839 

types. 

The initial exploration of this experimental cor-

pus was supported by AntConc 3.3.5w® (Anthony, 

2009) and TermoStatWeb™ (Drouin, 2003). 

AntConc was used to manually and systematically 

find frequent expressions and select their contexts, 

and TermoStatWeb™ was used to list most fre-

quent verbs, nouns, and adjectives which could 

become part of MWEs. 

 

3.2 Identification of Relevant MWEs 
Relevant MWEs are identified in the experimental 

corpus according to the flow chart shown in Figure 

1. From each technical document belonging to the 

corpus, we carried out the task of LP extraction 

(institutionalized expressions or lexicalized expres-

sions) and classification (analysis by categories).  

We classify the extracted expressions based on 

the document section where they prevail (see Table 

1). Each section corresponds to a structural com-

ponent of the JSD which also reflects the commu-

nicative intention of the writer. 
 

 
Figure 1. Flow chart for identifying MWEs 

 
No.  Description section 

i Job purpose / objective 

ii Main responsibilites / functions 

iii Knowledge and skills 

iv Requirements 

Table 1. Sections of JSD 

Table 2 shows the relevant MWEs identified, as 

follows: i) the selected expressions with the corre-

sponding MWE category (C) according to the clas-

sification proposed by Baldwin et al. (2010); ii) the 

frequency (F) of occurrence for each expression; 

and, iii) the section number (S) where the expres-

sion prevails in the JSD (from the Table 1).  
 

C MWEs F S 

1. 

Statisti

cally-

idio-

matic 

phrases 

be Able to 13 iii 

be required to 13 ii 

are required to 7 iv 

be responsible for 5 ii 

- knowledge of 49 iii 

- experience in 15 iv 

- ability to 61 iii 

related duties as 11 Ii 

the duties of 6 ii 

skills and abilities 11 iii 

level experience - 12 iv 

job code - 4 i 

job description - 9 i 

job specification - 7 i 

office equipment - 5 ii,iii 

working relationships with 12 ii,iii 

at all times 10 ii 

as well as 11 ii 

2. 

Syntact

ically-

flexible  

phrases 

be [adquired] on 5 iv 

to [support] the 29 ii 

the [priority] and 

[schedule] 

of 
24 

ii,iii 

the [work] of [others] 12 iii,iv 

by [giv]ing [time] 11 iii,iv 

in [contacts] 

with the  

[public] 
13 

ii 

3. 

Semi-

fixed 

phrases 

- work in 7 ii,iii 

- work of 6 ii 

- work with 5 iii 

- may be 30 ii 

- may have 5 iv 

- follow up 4 i,ii 

- carry out 9 i, 

Table 2. Extracted MWEs 

 

LP extraction Classification 

Institut. 
phrases 

Lexicalized 
phrases 

Doc_1 

Doc_2 

Doc_n 

Analysis 
by 

categories  

Technical 
documents 

84



We use brackets for indicating semi-fixed 

phrases or variable uses of the expression (they can 

take values with the same conjugation). In this way, 

we identify and prioritize the most frequents 

MWEs and patterns in each category, as follows:  
1. ability to, knowledge of, experience in, be able to, 

be required to 

2. to-V-the, the-N-and-N-of, in-N-with-the-N 
3. may be, carry out, work in, work of 

 

Likewise, we also found useful identifying the 

most frequent lexical items that could become part 

of MWEs and alternate with the expressions and 

patterns presented above. For that purpose, Ter-

moStatWeb was used to generate a map with the 

most frequent verbs, nouns, and adjectives. Some 

examples are shown in Figure 2. 

 
Figure 2. Some frequent verbs, nouns, and adjectives. 

 

The high frequency of these items in the corpus 

suggests that they could probably be part of MWEs 

conveying corporate information. Also, when 

placed in the slots of the patterns observed in Table 

2, they increase their chance to become relevant 

MWEs useful to detect specific corporate 

knowledge. 

The following paragraph is an example of how 

this can happen. The source text belongs to a JSD 

from our corpus and shows how two frequent items 

(evaluate and work) co-occur in a collocation. 

Then, identified corporate information is expected 

to be generated by other means into specific organ-

izational information in a controlled language: 
 

Source paragraph 

…A City Manager plans, organizes, evaluates, and controls 
the work of all City departments to ensure that operations 

and services comply with the policies… 

Generated organizational information:  
[City_manager plans work. City_manager organizes work. 

City_manager evaluates work City_manager controls work] 

[City_department has work] [City_manager ensures opera-

tions] [City_department has operations] [City_department 
has services] [operations comply policies] 

 

In terms of organizational knowledge, an analyst 

can find information from JSDs about roles, re-

sponsibilities, actions, and constraints, as an ap-

proach for understanding an organizational 

domain. Such entities are expressed in a JSD as 

subject, actions, and object triples, as suggested by 

some instances in Table 2. This information can be 

represented either into models or controlled lan-

guage discourses, among other specifications.  
 

4 Conclusions  
 

This study aims at characterizing JSDs by reveal-

ing key MWEs used in an English corpus. We 

proposed a set of MWEs of a JSD, as a corporate 

technical document, which can be processed as 

input for further knowledge engineering processes. 

The appropriateness of JSDs in requirements elici-

tation was verified with this study. 

The analysis shows frequencies and patterns of 

relevant MWEs as well as their contexts and in-

flectional forms extracted via a concordance tool. 

The performed analysis is a preliminary study for 

knowledge acquisition and understanding of organ-

izational domains. Such knowledge is expected to 

be readily available to future applications in specif-

ic domains in order to validate the findings and 

then to automate the process. 

As future work, we expect to increase the num-

ber of documents in the corpus and refine the study 

of lexical and textual features. Statistical associa-

tion measures can be also considered as a way to 

reinforce MWEs and term identification and ex-

traction in the frame of knowledge acquisition 

from corporate documents. Likewise, given the 

importance of the syntactic structure given by the 

triple subject-verb-object, dependency parsing 

seems to be a promising approach for the identifi-

cation of roles and responsibilities in JSDs. 

 

Acknowledgments 
This work is funded by the Vicerrectoría de Investiga-

ción from both the Universidad de Medellín and the 

Universidad Nacional de Colombia, under the project: 

“Método de transformación de lenguaje natural a len-

guaje controlado para la obtención de requisitos, a 

partir de documentación técnica”. 

 

V
er

b
s 

•Record 

•Report 

•Maintain 

•Verify 

• perform 

• provide 

• involve 

• direct 

• develop 

• ensure 

•work 

• evaluate 

• require 

•prepare 

N
o

u
n

s 

• Order 

• Accounting 

• skill 

• Knowledge 

• Business 

• Invoice 

• Department 

• Operation 

• Employee 

• Information 

• ability 

• work 

• regulation 

• code 

• development 

• task 

A
d

je
ct

iv
es

 

• applicable 

• effective 

• essential 

• administrative 

• accurate 

 

85



References  
Anthony, L. 2009. Issues in the design and development 

of software tools for corpus studies: The case for col-

laboration. Contemporary corpus linguistics, Lon-

don: P. Baker Ed.: 87-104. 

Aussenac-Gilles, N. Biébow, B. and Szulman, S. 2000. 

Revisiting Ontology Design: A Method Based on 

Corpus Analysis. Knowledge Engineering and 

Knowledge Management. Methods, Models, and 

Tools, 1937:27–66. 

Baldwin, Timothy and Su Nam Kim (2010) Multiword 

Expressions, in Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau 

(eds.) Handbook of Natural Language Processing, 

Second Ed., CRC Press, USA, pp. 267-292. 

Bannard, C. 2005. Learning about the meaning of verb–

particle constructions from corpora. Computer 

Speech & Language, 19(4): 467-478. 

Bauer, L. 1983. English Word-Formation. London: 

Cambridge University Press, 311. 

Breaux, T.D., Vail, M.W. and Antón, A.I. 2006. To-

wards Regulatory Compliance: Extracting Rights and 

Obligations to Align Requirements with Regulations. 

North Carolina State University TR-2006-6. 

Cascini, G. Fantechi, A. and Spinicci, E. 2004. Natural 

Language Processing of Patents and Technical Doc-

umentation. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 

3163:508-520. 

Castro-Herrera, C., Duan, C., Cleland-Huang, J. and 

Mobasher, B. Using data mining and recommender 

systems to facilitate large-scale, open, and inclusive 

requirements elicitation processes. Proceedings of 

16th IEEE Inter. Requirements Eng. Conference, 

pp.165–168, 2008. 

Dinesh, N. Joshi, A. Lee, I. and Sokolski, O. 2007. 

Logic-based regulatory conformance checking. In 

14th Monterey Workshop, ScholarlyCommons Penn. 

Drouin, P. 2003. TermoStat Web 3.0. Désormais utilisa-

ble qu'après enregistremen. Available in: 

http://olst.ling.umontreal.ca/~drouinp/termostat_web/ 

Fernández, L. and García, F.J. 2009. Texto y empresa. 

Applied Linguistics Now: Understanding Language 

and Mind, pp.655-665. Universidad de Almería, Es-

paña.  

Flowerdew, J. 1993. Concordancing as a Tool in Course 

Design. System, 21(2): 231-244.  

Henry, A. and Roseberry, R.L. 2001. Using a Small 

Corpus to Obtain Data for Teaching a Genre. In 

Ghadessy/Henry/Roseberry: 93-133. 

Jackendoff, R. 1997. The architecture of the language 

faculty. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. 

Lam, P. Y.  2007. A Corpus-driven Léxico-grammatical 

Analysis of English Tourism Industry Texts and the 

Study of its Pedagogic Implications in ESP. In Hidal-

go/Quereda/Santana: 71-90. 

Lee, B. and Bryant, B. R. 2002. Contextual Natural 

Language Processing and DAML for Understanding 

Software Requirements Specifications. In 19th Inter-

national Conference on Computational Linguistics, 

Taipei, Taiwan.  

Levy, F. Guisse, A. Nazarenko, A. Omrane, N. and 

Szulman, S. 2010. An Environment for the Joint 

Management of Written Policies and Business Rules. 

22nd IEEE International Conference on Tools with 

Artificial Intelligence. IEEE Computer Society, 

2:142-149. 

Li, K., Dewar, R.G. and Pooley, R.J. Requirements 

capture in natural language problem statements. Her-

iot-Watt University, 2003. Available in 

http://www.macs.hw.ac.uk:8080/techreps/docs/files/

HW-MACS-TR-0023.pdf 

López-Mezquita, M.T. 2007. La evaluación de la com-

petencia léxica: tests de vocabulario. Su fiabilidad y 

validez. Centro de Investigación y Documentación 

Educativa, 177(1): 488.  

López  Rodríguez,  C.  I., Faber,  P., León- Araúz,  P., 

Prieto,  J. A. and  Tercedor, M. 2010. La  Terminolo-

gía  basada  en marcos y su aplicación a las ciencias 

medioambientales: los proyectos MarcoCosta y Eco-

sistema. Arena Romanistica, 7 (10): 52-74. 

Peleg, M. Gutnik, L.A. Snow, V. and Patel, V.L. 2005. 

Interpreting procedures from descriptive guidelines. 

Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 39(1):184–195. 

Perez, C. 1999. La enseñanza del vocabulario desde 

una perspectiva lingufstica y pedagogica. In S. Sala-

berri (Ed.), Lingutstica Aplicada a las Lenguas Ex-

tranjeras, Almería: Univ. de Almería: 262-307. 

Rösner, D., Grote, B., Hartmann, K. and Höfling. B. 

1997. From Natural Language Documents to Shara-

ble Product Knowledge: A Knowledge Engineering 

Approach. Journal of Universal Computer Science. 

3(8): 955-987. 

Sinclair, J. 1991. Corpus, concordance, colloca-

tion. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Soler, C. and Gil, I. 2010. Posibilidades y límites de los 

tesauros frente a otros sistemas de organización del 

conocimiento: folksonomías, taxonomías y ontolo-

gías. Revista Interamericana de Bibliotecología, 

33(2): 361-377. 

 

86


