










































Towards the Detection of Reliable Food-Health Relationships


Proceedings of the Workshop on Language in Social Media (LASM 2013), pages 69–79,
Atlanta, Georgia, June 13 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards the Detection of Reliable Food-Health Relationships

Michael Wiegand and Dietrich Klakow
Spoken Language Systems

Saarland University
D-66123 Saarbrücken, Germany

{Michael.Wiegand|Dietrich.Klakow}@lsv.uni-saarland.de

Abstract

We investigate the task of detecting reli-
able statements about food-health relation-
ships from natural language texts. For that
purpose, we created a specially annotated
web corpus from forum entries discussing the
healthiness of certain food items. We ex-
amine a set of task-specific features (mostly)
based on linguistic insights that are instrumen-
tal in finding utterances that are commonly
perceived as reliable. These features are in-
corporated in a supervised classifier and com-
pared against standard features that are widely
used for various tasks in natural language pro-
cessing, such as bag of words, part-of speech
and syntactic parse information.

1 Introduction

In this paper, we explore some linguistic high-level
features to detect food-health relationships in natural
language texts that are perceived reliable. By food-
health relationships we mean relations that claim
that a food item is suitable (1) or unsuitable (2) for
some particular health condition.

(1) Baking soda is an approved remedy against
heartburn.

(2) During pregnancy women should not consume
any alcohol.

The same health claim may be uttered in differ-
ent ways (3)-(5) and, as a consequence, may be per-
ceived and judged differently. For the automatic ex-
traction of health claims, we believe that statements
that are perceived as reliable (4)-(5) are the most im-
portant to retrieve.

(3) Eggs do not have a negative impact on people
suffering from heart diseases.

(4) According to a leading medical scientist, the
consumption of eggs does not have a negative
impact on people suffering from heart diseases.

(5) I’m suffering from a heart disease and all my
life I’ve been eating many eggs; it never had
any impact on my well-being.

In this work, we will mine a web corpus of fo-
rum entries for such relations. Social media are a
promising source of such knowledge as, firstly, the
language employed is not very technical and thus,
unlike medical texts, accessible to the general pub-
lic. Secondly, social media can be considered as an
exclusive repository of popular wisdom. With re-
gard to the health conditions, we can find, for ex-
ample, home remedies. Despite the fact that many
of them are not scientifically proven, there is still a
great interest in that type of knowledge. However,
even though such content is usually not subject to
any scientific review, users would appreciate an au-
tomatic assessment of the quality of each relation ex-
pressed. In this work, we attempt a first step towards
this endeavour by automatically classifying these ut-
terances with regard to reliability.

The features we examine will be (mostly) based
on linguistic insights that are instrumental in finding
utterances that are commonly perceived as reliable.
These features are incorporated in a supervised clas-
sifier and compared against standard features that
are widely used for various tasks in natural language
processing, such as bag of words, part-of speech and
syntactic parse information.

69



Our experiments are carried out on German data.
We believe, however, that our findings carry over
to other languages since the linguistic aspects that
we address are (mostly) language universal. For the
sake of general accessibility, all examples will be
given as English translations.

2 Related Work

As far as the extraction of health relations from
social media are concerned, the prediction of epi-
demics (Fisichella et al., 2011; Torii et al., 2011;
Diaz-Aviles et al., 2012; Munro et al., 2012) has re-
cently attracted the attention of the research commu-
nity.

Relation extraction involving food items has also
been explored in the context of ontology align-
ment (van Hage et al., 2005; van Hage et al., 2006;
van Hage et al., 2010) and also as a means of knowl-
edge acquisition for virtual customer advice in a su-
permarket (Wiegand et al., 2012a).

The works most closely related to this paper are
Yang et al. (2011) and Miao et al. (2012). Both
of these works address the extraction of food-health
relationships. Unlike this work, they extract rela-
tions from scientific biomedical texts rather than so-
cial media. Yang et al. (2011) also cover the task
of strength analysis which bears some resemblance
to the task of finding reliable utterances to some ex-
tent. However, the features applied to that classifica-
tion task are only standard features, such as bag of
words.

3 Data & Annotation

As a corpus for our experiments, we used a crawl
of chefkoch.de1 (Wiegand et al., 2012a) consisting
of 418, 558 webpages of food-related forum entries.
chefkoch.de is the largest web portal for food-related
issues in the German language. From this dataset,
sentences in which some food item co-occurred with
some health condition (e.g. pregnancy, diarrhoea
or flu) were extracted. (In the following, we will
also refer to these entities as target food item and
target health condition.) The food items were iden-
tified with the help of GermaNet (Hamp and Feld-
weg, 1997), the German version of WordNet (Miller
et al., 1990), and the health conditions were used

1www.chefkoch.de

from Wiegand et al. (2012b). In total, 2604 sen-
tences were thus obtained.

For the manual annotation, each target sentence
(i.e. a sentence with a co-occurrence of target food
item and health condition) was presented in combi-
nation with the two sentences immediately preced-
ing and following it. Each target sentence was man-
ually assigned two labels, one specifying the type
of suitability (§3.1) and another specifying whether
the relation expressed is considered reliable or not
(§3.2).

3.1 Types of Suitability

The suitability-label indicates whether a polar rela-
tionship holds between the target food item and the
target health condition, and if so, which. Rather than
just focusing on positive polarity, i.e. suitability,
and negative polarity, i.e. unsuitability, we consider
more fine-grained classes. As such, the suitability-
label does not provide any explicit information about
the reliability of the utterance. In principle, ev-
ery polar relationship between target food item and
health condition expressed in a text could also be
formulated in such a way that it is perceived reliable.
In this work, we will consider the suitability-label as
given. We use it as a feature in order to measure the
correlation between suitability and reliability. The
usage of fine-grained labels is to investigate whether
subclasses of suitability or unsuitability have a ten-
dency to co-occur with reliability. (In other words:
we may assume differences among labels with the
same polarity type.) We define the following set of
fine-grained suitability-labels:

3.1.1 Suitable (SUIT)

SUIT encompasses all those statements in which
the consumption of the target food item is claimed to
be suitable for people affected by a particular health
condition (6). By suitable, we mean that there will
not be a negative effect on the health of a person
once he or she consumes the target food item. How-
ever, this relation type does not state that the con-
sumption is likely to improve the condition of the
person either.

(6) I also got dermatitis which is why my mother
used spelt flour [instead of wheat flour]; you
don’t taste a difference.

70



positive labels BENEF, SUIT, PREVENT
negative labels UNSUIT, CAUSE

Table 1: Categorization of suitability-labels.

3.1.2 Beneficial (BENEF)

While SUIT only states that the consumption of
the target food item is suitable for people with a par-
ticular health condition, BENEF actually states that
the consumption alleviates the symptoms of the con-
dition or even cures it (7). While both SUIT and
BENEF have a positive polarity, SUIT is much more
neutral than BENEF.

(7) Usually, a glass of milk helps me when I got a
sore throat.

3.1.3 Prevention (PREVENT)

An even stronger positive effect than the relation
type BENEF presents PREVENT which claims that
the consumption of the target food item can prevent
the outbreak of a particular disease (8).

(8) Citric acid largely reduces the chances of
kidney stones to develop.

3.1.4 Unsuitable (UNSUIT)

UNSUIT describes cases in which the consump-
tion of the target food item is deemed unsuitable (9).
Unsuitability means that one expects a negative ef-
fect (but it need not be mentioned explicitly), that
is, a deterioration of the health situation on the part
of the person who is affected by a particular health
condition.

(9) Raw milk cheese should not be eaten during
pregnancy.

3.1.5 Causation (CAUSE)

CAUSE is the negative counterpart of PREVENT.
It states that the consumption of the target food item
can actually cause a particular health condition (10).

(10) It’s a common fact that the regular consumption
of coke causes caries.

The suitability-labels can also be further sepa-
rated into two polar classes (i.e. positive and neg-
ative labels) as displayed in Table 1.

3.2 Reliability

Each utterance was additionally labeled as to
whether it was considered reliable (4)-(5) or not (3).
It is this label that we try to predict in this work. By
reliable, we understand utterances in which the re-
lations expressed are convincing in the sense that a
reputable source is cited, some explanation or empir-
ical evidence for the relation is given, or the relation
itself is emphasized by the speaker. In this work,
we are exclusively interested in detecting utterances
which are perceived reliable by the reader. We leave
aside whether the statements from our text corpus
are actually correct. Our aim is to identify linguis-
tic cues that evoke the impression of reliability on
behalf of the reader.

3.3 Class Distributions and Annotation
Agreement

Table 2 depicts the distribution of the reliability-
labels on our corpus while Table 3 lists the class dis-
tribution of the suitability-labels including the pro-
portion of the reliable instances among each cate-
gory. The proportion of reliable instances varies
quite a lot among the different suitability-labels,
which indicates that the suitability may be some ef-
fective feature.

Note that the class OTHER in Table 3 comprises
all instances in which the co-occurrence of a health
condition and a food item was co-incidental (11) or
there was some embedding that discarded the valid-
ity of the respective suitability-relation, as it is the
case, for example, in questions (12).

(11) It’s not his diabetes I’m concerned about but
the enormous amounts of fat that he consumes.

(12) Does anyone know whether I can eat tofu dur-
ing my pregnancy?

In order to measure interannotation agreement,
we collected for three health conditions their co-
occurrences with any food item. For the suitability-
labels we computed Cohen’s κ = 0.76 and for the
reliability-labels κ = 0.61. The agreement for reli-
ability is lower than for suitability. We assume that
the reason for that lies in the highly subjective no-
tion of reliability. Still, both agreements can be in-
terpreted as substantial (Landis and Koch, 1977) and
should be sufficiently high for our experiments.

71



Type Frequency Percentage
Reliable 480 18.43
Not Reliable 2124 81.57

Table 2: Distribution of the reliability-labels.

Type Frequency Perc. Perc. Reliable
BENEF 502 19.28 33.39
CAUSE 482 18.51 22.57
SUIT 428 16.44 17.91
UNSUIT 277 10.64 34.05
PREVENT 74 2.84 14.04
OTHER 841 32.30 0.00

Table 3: Distribution of the suitability-labels.

4 Feature Design

4.1 Task-specific High-level Feature Types

We now describe the different task-specific high-
level feature types. We call them high-level feature
types since they model concepts that typically gen-
eralize over sets of individual words (i.e. low-level
features).

4.1.1 Explanatory Statements (EXPL)

The most obvious type of reliability is a
suitability-relation that is also accompanied by some
explanatory statement. That is, some reason for the
relation expressed is given (13). We detect reasons
by scanning a sentence for typical discourse cues
(more precisely: conjunctions) that anchor such re-
marks, e.g. which is why or because.

(13) Honey has an antiseptic effect which is why it
is an ideal additive to milk in order to cure a
sore throat.

4.1.2 Frequent Observation (FREQ)

If a speaker claims to have witnessed a certain
relation very frequently or even at all times, then
there is a high likelihood that this relation actually
holds (14). We use a set of adverbs (18 expressions)
that express high frequency (e.g. often, frequently
etc.) or constancy (e.g. always, at all times etc.).

(14) What always helps me when I have the flu is a
hot chicken broth.

4.1.3 Intensifiers (INTENS)

Some utterances may also be perceived reliable if
their speaker adds some emphasis to them. One way
of doing so is by adding intensifiers to a remark (15).

(15) You can treat nausea with ginger very effec-
tively.

The intensifiers we use are a translation of the lex-
icon introduced in Wilson et al. (2005). For the de-
tection, we divide that list into two groups:

The first group INTENSsimple are unambiguous
adverbs that always function as intensifiers no mat-
ter in which context they appear (e.g. very or ex-
tremely).

The second group includes more ambiguous ex-
pressions, such as adjectives that only function as
an intensifier if they modify a polar expression
(e.g. horrible pain or terribly nice) otherwise they
function as typical polar expressions (e.g. you
are horrible− or he sang terribly−). We employ
two methods to detect these ambiguous expressions.
INTENSpolar requires a polar expression of a polar-
ity lexicon to be modified by the intensifier, while
INTENSadj requires an adjective to be modified. In
order to identify polar expressions we use the polar-
ity lexicon underlying the PolArt system (Klenner
et al., 2009). We also consider adjectives since we
must assume that our polarity lexicon does not cover
all possible polar expressions. We chose adjectives
as a complement criterion as this part of speech is
known to contain most polar expressions (Hatzivas-
siloglou and McKeown, 1997; Hatzivassiloglou and
Wiebe, 2000).

4.1.4 Strong Polar Expressions (STROPO)

Instead of adding intensifiers in order to put more
emphasis to a remark (§4.1.3), one may also use
polar expressions that convey a high polar inten-
sity (16). For instance, nice and excellent refer to
the same scale and convey positive polarity but ex-
cellent has a much higher polar intensity than nice.
Taboada et al. (2011) introduced an English polar-
ity lexicon SO-CAL in which polar expressions were
also assigned an intensity label. As our German
polarity lexicon (§4.1.3) does not contain compara-
ble intensity labels, we used a German translation
of SO-CAL. We identified polar expressions with a
high intensity score (i.e. ±4 or ±5) as strong po-
lar expressions. It includes 221 highly positive and
344 highly negative polar expressions. We also dis-
tinguish the polarity type (i.e. STROPO+ refers to
positive and STROPO− refers to negative polarity).

72



(16) Baking soda is an excellent remedy against
heartburn.

4.1.5 Superlatives (SUPER)

Another way of expressing high polar intensity is
by applying superlatives (17). Superlatives can only
be formed from gradable adjectives. At the same
time, the greatest amount of such adjectives are also
subjective expressions (Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe,
2000). As a consequence, the detection of this
grammatical category does not depend on a subjec-
tivity/polarity lexicon but on simple morphological
suffixes (e.g. -est in strongest)2 or combinations
with certain modifiers (e.g. most in most terrific).

(17) Baking soda is the most effective remedy
against heartburn.

4.1.6 Statements Made by Authorities (AUTH)

If a statement is quoted from an authority, then it
is usually perceived more reliable than other state-
ments (4). Authorities in our domain are mostly sci-
entists and medical doctors. Not only does a men-
tion of those types of professions indicate an author-
ity but also the citation of their work. Therefore,
for this feature we also scan for expressions, such as
journal, report, survey etc. Our final look-up list of
cues comprises 53 expressions.

We also considered using the knowledge of user
profiles in order to identify speakers whose profes-
sion fall under our defined set of authorities. Unfor-
tunately, the overwhelming majority of users who
actually specified their profession cannot be consid-
ered as authorities (for the relations that we are inter-
ested in) by mere consideration of their profession.
Most users of chefkoch.de are either office employ-
ees, housewifes, students or chefs. Less than 1% are
authorities according to our definition. Due to the
severe sparsity of authorities, we refrained from us-
ing the professions as they are specified in the user
profiles.

2We could not use part-of-speech tagging for the detec-
tion of superlatives since, unlike the standard English part-of-
speech tag set (i.e. the Penn Treebank Tag Set (Marcus et al.,
1993)), information regarding gradation (i.e. comparative and
superlative) is not reflected in the standard German tag set (i.e.
Stuttgart Tübinger Tag Set (Schiller et al., 1995)).

4.1.7 Doctors’ Prescriptions (PRESC)

Some of our food-health relations are also men-
tioned in the context of doctors’ prescriptions (5).
That is, a doctor may prescribe a patient to con-
sume a particular food item since it is considered
suitable for their health condition, or he/she may
forbid a food item in case it is considered unsuit-
able. As already pointed out in §4.1.6, doctors usu-
ally present an authority with regard to food-health
relations. That is why, their remarks should be con-
sidered reliable.

In order to detect doctors’ prescriptions, we
mainly look for (modal) verbs in a sentence that ex-
press obligations or prohibitions. We found that, on
our dataset, people rarely mention their doctor ex-
plicitly if they refer to a particular prescription. In-
stead, they just mention that they must or must not
consume a particular food item. From the context,
however, it is obvious that they refer to their doc-
tor’s prescription (18).

(18) Due to my diabetes I must not eat any sweets.

4.1.8 Hedge Cues (HEDGE)

While all previous features were designed to iden-
tify cases of reliable statements, we also include fea-
tures that indicate the opposite. The most obvious
type of utterances that are commonly considered un-
reliable are so-called hedges (Lakoff, 1973) or spec-
ulations (19).

(19) Coke may cause cancer.

For this feature, we use a German translation of En-
glish cue words that have been found useful in pre-
vious work (Morante and Daelemans, 2009) which
results in 47 different expressions.

4.1.9 Types of Suitability-Relations (REL)

Finally, we also incorporate the information
about what type of suitability-relation a statement
was labeled with. The suitability-labels were al-
ready presented and motivated in §3.1. The con-
crete features are: RELSUIT (§3.1.1), RELBENEF
(§3.1.2), RELPREVENT (§3.1.3), RELUNSUIT
(§3.1.4), RELCAUSE (§3.1.5).

73



Suffix Description
-WNDfood context window around food item
-WNDcond context window around health condition
-TS target sentence only
-EC entire (instance) context

Table 4: Variants for the individual feature types.

4.2 Variants of Feature Types

For our feature types we examine several variants
that differ in the size of context/scope. We distin-
guish between the target sentence and the entire con-
text of an instance, i.e. the target sentence plus the
two preceding and following sentences (§3). If only
the target sentence is considered, we can also con-
fine the occurrence of a cue word to a fixed window
(comprising 5 words) either around the target food
item or the target health condition rather than con-
sidering the entire sentence.

Small contexts usually offer a good precision. For
example, if a feature type occurs nearby a mention
of the target food item or health condition, the fea-
ture type and the target expression are likely to be
related to each other. The downside of such narrow
contexts is that they may be too sparse. Wide con-
texts may be better suited to situations in which a
high recall is desirable. However, ambiguous fea-
ture types may perform poorly with these contexts
as their co-occurrence with a target expression at a
large distance is likely to be co-incidental.

Table 4 lists all the variants that we use. These
variants are applied to all feature types except the
types of suitability (§4.1.9) as this label has only
been assigned to an entire target sentence.

4.3 Other Features

Table 5 lists the entire set of features that we ex-
amine in this work. The simplest classifier that we
can construct for our task is a trivial classifier that
predicts all statements as reliable statements. The
remaining features comprise bag of words, part-of-
speech and syntactic parse information. For the
latter two features, we employ the output of the
Stanford Parser for German (Rafferty and Manning,
2008).

Features Description
all trivial classifier that always predicts a reliable state-

ment

bow bag-of-words features: all words between the target
food item and target health condition and the words
immediately preceding and following each of them

pos part-of-speech features: part-of-speech sequence be-
tween target food item and health condition and tags
of the words immediately preceding and following
each of the target expressions

synt path from syntactic parse tree from target food item
to target health condition

task all task-specific high-level feature types from §4.1
with their respective variants (§4.2)

Table 5: Description of all feature sets.

5 Experiments

Each instance to be classified is a sentence in which
there is a co-occurrence of a target food item and
a target health condition along its respective con-
text sentences (§3). We only consider sentences in
which the co-occurrence expresses an actual suit-
ability relationship between the target food item and
the target health condition, that is, we ignore in-
stances labeled with the suitability-label OTHER
(§3.3). We make this restriction as the instances
labeled as OTHER are not eligible for being reli-
able statements (Table 3). In this work, we take the
suitability-labels for granted (this allows us to easily
exclude the instances labeled as OTHER). The au-
tomatic detection of suitability-labels would require
a different classifier with a different set of features
whose appropriate discussion would be beyond the
scope of this paper.

5.1 Comparison of the Different Task-specific
High-level Features

In our first experiment, we want to find out how
the different task-specific high-level features that we
have proposed in this work compare to each other.
More specifically, we want to find out how the in-
dividual features correlate with the utterances that
have been manually marked as reliable. For that
purpose, Table 6 shows the top 20 features accord-
ing to Chi-square feature selection computed with
WEKA (Witten and Frank, 2005). More informa-
tion regarding the computation of Chi-square statis-
tics in the context of text classification can be found
in Yang and Pederson (1997). Note that we apply
feature selection only as a means of feature compar-

74



Rank Feature Score
1 FREQ-WNDfood 105.1
2 FREQ-TS 102.8
3 FREQ-WNDcond 75.9
4 FREQ-EC 29.2
5 AUTH-EC 23.7
6 STROPO+-WNDcond 20.5
7 RELBENEF 20.2
8 RELSUIT 16.8
9 INTENSsimple-WNDcond 16.4

10 AUTH-TS 15.4
11 STROPO+-TS 15.0
12 INTENSsimple-EC 14.1
13 STROPO+-WNDfood 13.7
14 INTENSadj-WNDfood 13.2
15 INTENSsimple-WNDfood 12.1
16 INTENSsimple-TS 11.6
17 PRESC-WNDfood 11.0
18 INTENSadj-WNDcond 9.7
19 INTENSpolar-EC 9.0
20 AUTH-WNDfood 7.9

Table 6: Top 20 features according to Chi-square fea-
ture ranking (for each feature type the most highly ranked
variant is highlighted).

ison. For classification (§5.2), we will use the entire
feature set.

5.1.1 What are the most effective features?

There are basically five feature types that dom-
inate the highest ranks. They are FREQ, AUTH,
STROPO, REL and INTENS. This already indicates
that several features presented in this work are ef-
fective. It is interesting to see that two types of
suitability-labels, i.e. RELBENEF and RELSUIT ,
are among the highest ranked features which sug-
gests that suitability and reliability are somehow
connected.

Table 7 shows both precision and recall for each
of the most highly ranked variant of the feature types
that appear on the top 20 ranks according to Chi-
square ranking (Table 6). Thus, we can have an idea
in how far the high performing feature types differ.
We only display one feature per feature type due to
the limited space. The table shows that for most of
these features precision largely outperforms recall.
RELBENEF is the only notable exception (its recall
actually outperforms precision).

5.1.2 Positive Orientation and Reliability

By closer inspection of the highly ranked features,
we found quite a few features with positive ori-

Feature Prec Rec
FREQ-WNDfood 71.13 14.38
AUTH-EC 41.81 15.42
STROPO+-WNDcond 63.38 3.54
RELBENEF 33.39 39.17
INTENSsimple-WNDcond 41.73 11.04
PRESC-WNDfood 45.00 5.63

Table 7: Precision and recall of different features (we list
the most highly ranked variants of the feature types from
Table 6).

entation, i.e. STROPO+-WNDcond, RELBENEF ,
RELSUIT , STROPO+-WNDcond, while their nega-
tive counterparts are absent. This raises the question
whether there is a bias for positive orientation for the
detection of reliability.

We assume that there are different reasons why
the positive suitability-labels (RELBENEF and
RELSUIT ) and strong positive polarity (STROPO+)
are highly ranked features:

As far as polarity features are concerned, it is
known from sentiment analysis that positive polar-
ity is usually easier to detect than negative polar-
ity (Wiegand et al., 2013). This can largely be as-
cribed to social conventions to be less blunt with
communicating negative sentiment. For that reason,
for example, one often applies negated positive polar
expressions (e.g. not okay) or irony to express a neg-
ative sentiment rather than using an explicit negative
polar expression. Of course, such implicit types of
negative polarity are much more difficult to detect
automatically.

The highly ranked suitability-labels may be labels
with the same orientation (i.e. they both describe
relationships that a food item is suitable rather than
unsuitable for a particular health condition), yet they
have quite different properties.3 While RELBENEF
is a feature positively correlating with reliable ut-
terances, the opposite is true of RELSUIT , that is,
there is a correlation but this correlation is nega-
tive. Table 8 compares their respective precision
and also includes the trivial (reference) classifier all
that always predicts a reliable statement. The ta-
ble clearly shows that RELBENEF is above the triv-

3It is not the case that the proportion of reliable utterances
is larger among the entire set of instances tagged with positive
suitability-labels than among the instances tagged with negative
suitability-labels (Table 1). In both cases, they are at approx.
26%.

75



ial feature while RELSUIT is clearly below. (One
may wonder why the gap in precision between those
different features is not larger. These features are
also high-recall features – we have shown this for
RELBENEF in Table 7 – so the smaller gaps may
already have a significant impact.) In plain, this
result means that a statement conveying that some
food item alleviates the symptoms of a particular
disease or even cures it (RELBENEF ) is more likely
to be an utterance that is perceived reliable rather
than statements in which the speaker merely states
that the food item is suitable given a particular health
condition (RELSUIT ). Presumably, the latter type
of suitability-relations are mostly uttered parenthet-
ically (not emphatically), or they are remarks in
which the relation is inferred, so that they are un-
likely to provide further background information. In
Sentence (20), for example, the suitability of whole-
meal products is inferred as the speaker’s father eats
these types of food due to his diabetes. The focus
of this remark, however, is the psychic well-being of
the speaker’s father. That entire utterance does not
present any especially reliable or otherwise helpful
information regarding the relationship between dia-
betes and wholemeal products.

(20) My father suffers from diabetes and is fed up
with eating all these wholemeal products. We
are worried that he is going to fall into a de-
pression.

Having explained that the two (frequently occur-
ring) positive suitability-labels are highly ranked
features because they separate reliable from less re-
liable statements, one may wonder why we do not
find a similar behaviour on the negative suitability-
labels. The answer to this lies in the fact that there
is no similar distinction between RELBENEF and
RELSUIT among utterances expressing unsuitabil-
ity. There is no neutral negative suitability-label
similar to RELSUIT . The relation RELUNSUIT
expresses unsuitability which is usually connected
with some deterioration in health.

5.1.3 How important are explanatory
statements for this task?

We were very surprised that the feature type to
indicate explanatory statements EXPL (§4.1.1) per-
formed very poorly (none of its variants is listed in

Feature RELSUIT all RELBENEF
Prec 17.81 26.46 33.39

Table 8: The precision of different REL-features com-
pared to the trivial classifier all that always predicts a re-
liable utterance.

Type EXPLall EXPLcue
Percentage 22.59 8.30

Table 9: Proportion of explanatory statements among re-
liable utterances (EXPLall: all reliable instances that are
explanatory statements; EXPLcue: subset of explanatory
statements that also contain a lexical cue).

Table 6) since we assumed explanatory statements
to be one of the most relevant types of utterances.
In order to find a reason for this, we manually an-
notated all reliable utterances as to whether they can
be regarded as an explanatory statement (EXPLall)
and, if so, whether (in principle) there are lexical
cues (such as our set of conjunctions) to identify
them (EXPLcue). Table 9 shows the proportion of
these two categories among the reliable utterances.
With more than 20% being labeled as this subtype,
explanatory statements are clearly not a fringe phe-
nomenon. However, lexical cues could only be ob-
served in approximately 1/3 of those instances. The
majority of cases, such as Sentence (21), do not con-
tain any lexical cues and are thus extremely difficult
to detect.

(21) Citrus fruits are bad for dermatitis. They in-
crease the itch. Such fruits are rich in acids that
irritate your skin.

In addition, all variants of our feature type EXPL
have a poor precision (between 20 − 25%). This
means that the underlying lexical cues are too am-
biguous.

5.1.4 How important are the different
contextual scopes?

Table 6 clearly shows that the contextual scope
of a feature type matters. For example, for the fea-
ture type FREQ, the most effective scope achieves
a Chi-square score of 105.1 while the worst vari-
ant only achieves a score of 29.2. However, there
is no unique contextual scope which always outper-
forms the other variants. This is mostly due to the

76



Feature Set Prec Rec F1
all 26.46 100.00 41.85
bow 37.14 62.44 46.45
bow+pos 36.85 57.64 44.88
bow+synt 39.05 58.01 46.58
task 35.16 72.89 47.21
bow+task 42.54 66.01 51.56∗

Table 10: Comparison of different feature sets (summary
of features is displayed in Table 5); ∗ significantly better
than bow at p < 0.05 (based on paired t-test).

fact the different feature types have different proper-
ties. On the one hand, there are unambiguous fea-
ture types, such as AUTH, which work fine with
a wide scope. But we also have ambiguous fea-
ture types that require a fairly narrow context. A
typical example are strong (positive) polar expres-
sions (STROPO+). (Polar expressions are known
to be very ambiguous (Wiebe and Mihalcea, 2006;
Akkaya et al., 2009).)

5.2 Classification

Table 10 compares the different feature sets with
regard to extraction performance. We carry out
a 5-fold cross-validation on our manually labeled
dataset. As a classifier, we chose Support Vector
Machines (Joachims, 1999). As a toolkit, we use
SVMLight4 with a linear kernel.

Table 10 clearly shows the strength of the high-
level features that we proposed. They do not only
represent a strong feature set on their own but they
can also usefully be combined with bag-of-words
features. Apparently, neither part-of-speech nor
parse information are predictive for this task.

5.3 Impact of Training Data

Figure 1 compares bag-of-words features and our
task-specific high-level features on a learning curve.
The curve shows that the inclusion of our task-
specific features improves performance. Interest-
ingly, with task alone we obtain a good performance
on smaller amounts of data. However, this classifier
is already saturated with 40% of the training data.
From then onwards, it is more effective to use the
combination bow+task. Our high-level features gen-
eralize well which is particularly important for situ-
ations in which only few training data are available.

4http://svmlight.joachims.org

 25

 30

 35

 40

 45

 50

 55

 10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100

F
-s

co
re

Percentage of training data

bag of words (bow)
task-specific high-level features (task)

combination (bow+task)

Figure 1: Learning curve of the different feature sets.

However, in situations in which large training sets
are available, we additionally need bag of words that
are able to harness more sparse but specific informa-
tion.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we examined a set of task-specific
high-level features in order to detect food-health re-
lations that are perceived reliable. We found that,
in principle, a subset of these features that include
adverbials expressing frequent observations, state-
ments made by authorities, strong polar expressions
and intensifiers are fairly predictive and complement
bag-of-words information. We also observed a cor-
relation between some suitability-labels and relia-
bility. Moreover, the effectiveness of the different
features depends very much on the context to which
they are applied.

Acknowledgements

This work was performed in the context of the Software-
Cluster project EMERGENT. Michael Wiegand was
funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF) under grant no. “01IC10S01”. The
authors would like to thank Stephanie Köser for annotat-
ing the dataset presented in the paper. The authors would
also like to thank Prof. Dr. Wolfgang Menzel for provid-
ing the German version of the SO-CAL polarity lexicon
that has been developed at his department.

77



References

Cem Akkaya, Janyce Wiebe, and Rada Mihalcea. 2009.
Subjectivity Word Sense Disambiguation. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 190–199,
Singapore.

Ernesto Diaz-Aviles, Avar Stewart, Edward Velasco, Ker-
stin Denecke, and Wolfgang Nejdl. 2012. Epidemic
Intelligence for the Crowd, by the Crowd. In Proceed-
ings of the International AAAI Conference on Weblogs
and Social Media (ICWSM), Dublin, Ireland.

Marco Fisichella, Avar Stewart, Alfredo Cuzzocrea, and
Kerstin Denecke. 2011. Detecting Health Events on
the Social Web to Enable Epidemic Intelligence. In
Proceedings of the International Symposium on String
Processing and Information Retrieval (SPIRE), pages
87–103, Pisa, Italy.

Birgit Hamp and Helmut Feldweg. 1997. GermaNet - a
Lexical-Semantic Net for German. In Proceedings of
ACL workshop Automatic Information Extraction and
Building of Lexical Semantic Resources for NLP Ap-
plications, pages 9–15, Madrid, Spain.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathleen R. McKeown.
1997. Predicting the Semantic Orientation of Adjec-
tives. In Proceedings of the Conference on European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (EACL), pages 174–181, Madrid, Spain.

Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Janyce Wiebe. 2000. Ef-
fects of Adjective Orientation and Gradability on Sen-
tence Subjectivity. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING),
pages 299–305, Saarbrücken, Germany.

Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making Large-Scale SVM
Learning Practical. In B. Schölkopf, C. Burges, and
A. Smola, editors, Advances in Kernel Methods - Sup-
port Vector Learning. MIT Press.

Manfred Klenner, Stefanos Petrakis, and Angela Fahrni.
2009. Robust Compositional Polarity Classification.
In Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (RANLP), pages 180–184, Borovets,
Bulgaria.

George Lakoff. 1973. Hedging: A Study in Media Crite-
ria and the Logic of Fuzzy Concepts. Journal of Philo-
sophical Logic, 2:458 – 508.

J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The Mea-
surement of Observer Agreement for Categorical Data.
Biometrics, 33(1):159–174.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a Large Annotated
Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2):313–330, June. Special Issue
on Using Large Corpora.

Qingliang Miao, Shu Zhang, Bo Zhang, Yao Meng, and
Hao Yu. 2012. Extracting and Visualizing Seman-
tic Relationships from Chinese Biomedical Text. In
Proceedings of the Pacific Asia Conference on Lan-
guage, Information and Compuation (PACLIC), pages
99–107, Bali, Indonesia.

George Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fellbaum,
Derek Gross, and Katherine Miller. 1990. Introduc-
tion to WordNet: An On-line Lexical Database. Inter-
national Journal of Lexicography, 3:235–244.

Roser Morante and Walter Daelemans. 2009. Learning
the Scope of Hedge Cues in Biomedical Texts. In Pro-
ceedings of the BioNLP Workshop, pages 28–36, Boul-
der, CO, USA.

Robert Munro, Lucky Gunasekara, Stephanie Nevins,
Lalith Polepeddi, and Evan Rosen. 2012. Track-
ing Epidemics with Natural Language Processing and
Crowdsourcing. In Proceedings of the Spring Sympo-
sium for Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI), pages 52–58, Toronto, Canada.

Anna Rafferty and Christopher D. Manning. 2008. Pars-
ing Three German Treebanks: Lexicalized and Un-
lexicalized Baselines. In Proceedings of the ACL
Workshop on Parsing German (PaGe), pages 40–46,
Columbus, OH, USA.

Anne Schiller, Simone Teufel, Christine Stöckert, and
Christine Thielen. 1995. Vorläufige Guidelines
für das Tagging deutscher Textcorpora mit STTS.
Technical report, Universität Stuttgart, Insitut für
maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, and Seminar für
Sprachwissenschaft, Universität Tübingen.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kimberly
Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-Based Meth-
ods for Sentiment Analysis. Computational Linguis-
tics, 37(2):267 – 307.

Manabu Torii, Lanlan Yin, Thang Nguyen, Chand T.
Mazumdar, Hongfang Liu, David M. Hartley, and
Noele P. Nelson. 2011. An exploratory study of a text
classification framework for internet-based surveil-
lance of emerging epidemics. Internal Journal of
Medical Informatics, 80(1):56–66.

Willem Robert van Hage, Sophia Katrenko, and Guus
Schreiber. 2005. A Method to Combine Linguistic
Ontology-Mapping Techniques. In Proceedings of In-
ternational Semantic Web Conference (ISWC), pages
732 – 744, Galway, Ireland. Springer.

Willem Robert van Hage, Hap Kolb, and Guus Schreiber.
2006. A Method for Learning Part-Whole Relations.
In Proceedings of International Semantic Web Con-
ference (ISWC), pages 723 – 735, Athens, GA, USA.
Springer.

Willem Robert van Hage, Margherita Sini, Lori Finch,
Hap Kolb, and Guus Schreiber. 2010. The OAEI food

78



task: an analysis of a thesaurus alignment task. Ap-
plied Ontology, 5(1):1 – 28.

Janyce Wiebe and Rada Mihalcea. 2006. Word Sense
and Subjectivity. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING/ACL), pages 1065–1072, Syndney, Aus-
tralia.

Michael Wiegand, Benjamin Roth, and Dietrich Klakow.
2012a. Web-based Relation Extraction for the Food
Domain. In Proceeding of the International Confer-
ence on Applications of Natural Language Process-
ing to Information Systems (NLDB), pages 222–227,
Groningen, the Netherlands. Springer.

Michael Wiegand, Benjamin Roth, Eva Lasarcyk,
Stephanie Köser, and Dietrich Klakow. 2012b. A
Gold Standard for Relation Extraction in the Food Do-
main. In Proceedings of the Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pages 507–514, Is-
tanbul, Turkey.

Michael Wiegand, Manfred Klenner, and Dietrich
Klakow. 2013. Bootstrapping polarity classifiers with
rule-based classification. Language Resources and
Evaluation, Online First:1–40.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing Contextual Polarity in Phrase-level
Sentiment Analysis. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Human Language Technology and Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP),
pages 347–354, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Ian Witten and Eibe Frank. 2005. Data Mining: Practi-
cal Machine Learning Tools and Techniques. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, US.

Yiming Yang and Jan Pederson. 1997. A Comparative
Study on Feature Selection in Text Categorization. In
Proceedings the International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), pages 412–420, Nashville, US.

Hui Yang, Rajesh Swaminathan, Abhishek Sharma, Vi-
las Ketkar, and Jason D’Silva, 2011. Learning Struc-
ture and Schemas from Documents, volume 375 of
Studies in Computational Intelligence, chapter Min-
ing Biomedical Text Towards Building a Quantitative
Food-disease-gene Network, pages 205–225. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg.

79


