










































A System for the Simplification of Numerical Expressions at Different Levels of Understandability


Proceedings of the 2th Workshop of Natural Language Processing for Improving Textual Accessibility (NLP4ITA), pages 39–48,
Atlanta, Georgia, 14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

A System for the Simplification of Numerical Expressions at Different Levels
of Understandability

Susana Bautista, Raquel Hervás,
Pablo Gervás

Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Prof. José Garcı́a Santesmases

Madrid, Spain
{subautis,raquelhb}@fdi.ucm.es

pgervas@sip.ucm.es

Richard Power, Sandra Williams
Department of Computing,

The Open University
Milton Keynes,
MK76AA, UK

r.power@open.ac.uk
s.h.williams@open.ac.uk

Abstract

The purpose of this paper is to motivate and
describe a system that simplifies numerical
expression in texts, along with an evaluation
study in which experts in numeracy and liter-
acy assessed the outputs of this system. We
have worked with a collection of newspaper
articles with a significant number of numerical
expressions. The results are discussed in com-
parison to conclusions obtained from a prior
empirical survey.

1 Introduction

A surprisingly large number of people have limited
access to information because of poor literacy. The
most recent surveys of literacy in the United King-
dom reveal that 7 million adults in England can-
not locate the reference page for plumbers if given
the Yellow Pages alphabetical index. This means
that one in five adults has less literacy than the ex-
pected literacy in an 11-year-old child (Jama and
Dugdale, 2010; Williams et al., 2003a; Christina and
Jonathan, 2010). Additionally, almost 24 million
adults in the U.K. have insufficient numeracy skills
to perform simple everyday tasks such as paying
household bills and understanding wage slips. They
would be unable to achieve grade C in the GCSE
maths examination for 16-year-old school children
(Williams et al., 2003a).

“The Standard Rules on the Equalization of Op-
portunities for Persons with Disabilities” by United
Nations (1994) state that all public information ser-
vices and documents should be accessible in such
a way that they could be easily understood. If we

focus on numerical information, nowadays, a large
percentage of information expressed in daily news
or reports comes in the form of numerical expres-
sions (economic statistics, demography data, etc)
but many people have problems understanding the
more complex expressions. In the text simplification
process, different tasks are carried out: replacing
difficult words, splitting sentences, etc., and the sim-
plification of numerical expressions is one of them.

A possible approach to solve this important social
problem of making numerical information accessi-
ble is to rewrite difficult numerical expressions using
alternative wordings that are easier to understand.
For example, the original sentence, “25.9% scored A
grades” could be rewritten by “Around 26% scored
A grades”. In our study we define a “numerical ex-
pression” as a phrase that presents a quantity, some-
times modified by a numerical hedge as in these ex-
amples: ‘less than a quarter’ or ‘about 98%’. Such
an approach would require a set of rewriting strate-
gies yielding expressions that are linguistically cor-
rect, easier to understand than the original, and as
close as possible to the original meaning. Some loss
of precision could have positive advantages for nu-
merate people as well as less numerate. In rewrit-
ing, hedges play also an important role. For exam-
ple, ‘50.9%’ could be rewritten as ‘about a half’ us-
ing the hedge ‘about’. In this kind of simplification,
hedges indicate that the original number has been
approximated and, in some cases, also the direction
of the approximation.

This paper presents a system developed for auto-
mated simplification of numerical expressions. Ex-
perts in simplification tasks are asked to validate the

39



simplifications done automatically. The system is
evaluated and the results are discussed against con-
clusions obtained from previous empirical survey.

2 Previous work

Text simplification, a relative new task in Natural
Language Processing, has been directed mainly at
syntactic constructions and lexical choices that some
readers find difficult, such as long sentences, pas-
sives, coordinate and subordinate clauses, abstract
words, low frequency words, and abbreviations.

The rule-based paradigm has been used in the
implementation of some systems for text simpli-
fication, each one focusing on a variety of read-
ers (with poor literacy, aphasia, etc) (Chandrasekar
et al., 1996; Siddharthan, 2003; Jr. et al., 2009;
Bautista et al., 2009).

The transformation of texts into easy-to-read ver-
sions can also be phrased as a translation problem
between two different subsets of language: the orig-
inal and the easy-to-read version. Corpus-based sys-
tems can learn from corpora the simplification oper-
ations and also the required degree of simplification
for a given task (Daelemans et al., 2004; Petersen
and Ostendorf, 2007; Gasperin et al., 2009).

A variety of simplification techniques have been
used, substituting common words for uncommon
words (Devlin and Tait, 1998), activating passive
sentences and resolving references (Canning, 2000),
reducing multiple-clause sentences to single-clause
sentences (Chandrasekar and Srinivas, 1997; Can-
ning, 2000; Siddharthan, 2002) and making appro-
priate choices at the discourse level (Williams et al.,
2003b). Khan et at. (2008) studied the tradeoff be-
tween brevity and clarity in the context of generat-
ing referring expressions. Other researchers have fo-
cused on the generation of readable texts for readers
with low basic skills (Williams and Reiter, 2005),
and for teaching foreign languages (Petersen and
Ostendorf, 2007).

Previous work on numerical expressions has stud-
ied the treatment of numerical information in differ-
ent areas like health (Peters et al., 2007), forecast
(Dieckmann et al., 2009), representation of proba-
bilistic information (Bisantz et al., 2005) or vague
information (Mishra et al., 2011). In the NUM-
GEN project (Williams and Power, 2009), a corpus

of numerical expressions was collected and a for-
mal model for planning specifications for propor-
tions (numbers between 0 and 1) was developed.
The underlying theory and the design of the work-
ing program are described in (Power and Williams,
2012).

3 Experimental identification of
simplification strategies for numerical
information

In order to analyze different simplification strategies
for numerical expressions, first we have to study the
mathematical complexity of the expressions. Ex-
pressions can be classified and a level of difficulty
can be assigned. A study about the simplification
strategies selected by experts to simplify numerical
expressions expressed as decimal percentages in a
corpus was carried out in Bautista et al. (2011b).
Other important aspect of the simplification task is
the use of hedges to simplify numerical expressions
in the text. A study was performed in Bautista et
al. (2011a) to analyze the use of hedges in the sim-
plification process. This study was done with ex-
perts in simplification tasks. A set of sentences with
numerical expressions were presented and they had
to rewrite the numerical expressions following some
rules. Several hypotheses were expressed and an-
alyzed to understand experts’ preferences on sim-
plification strategies and use of hedges to simplify
numerical expressions in the text. The main conclu-
sions from the study were:

Conclusion 1: When experts choose expressions
for readers with low numeracy, they tend to prefer
round or common values to precise values. For ex-
ample, halves, thirds and quarters are usually pre-
ferred to eighths or similar, and expressions like N
in 10 or N in 100 are chosen instead of N in 36.

Conclusion 2: The value of the original propor-
tion influences the choice of simplification strategies
(fractions, ratios, percentages). With values in the
central range (say 0.2 to 0.8 in a 0.0 to 1.0 scale)
and values at the extreme ranges (say 0.0-0.2 and
0.8-1.0) favoring different strategies.

Conclusion 3: When writers choose numerical
expressions for readers with low numeracy, they
only use hedges if they are losing precision.

40



4 A system for adapting numerical
expressions

In this first prototype, only numerical expressions
defined as percentages are adapted. From an in-
put text, the percentage numerical expressions are
detected, a target level of difficulty is chosen and
the simplified version of the text is generated by re-
placing the original numerical expression with the
adapted expression.

4.1 Numerical expression
A numerical expression consists of: (1) a numerical
value, a quantity which may be expressed with dig-
its or with words; (2) an optional unit accompanying
the quantity (euro, miles, . . . ); and (3) an optional
numerical hedge modifier (around, less than, . . . ).
Some examples of numerical expressions used in
our experiments are: ‘more than a quarter’, ‘around
98.2%’, ‘just over 25 per cent’ or ‘less than 100 kilo-
metres’.

4.2 Levels of difficulty
The Mathematics Curriculum of the Qualifications
and Curriculum Authority (1999) describes a num-
ber of teaching levels and we assume that concepts
to be taught at lower levels will be simpler than ones
taught at higher levels. Following this idea a Scale of
Mathematic Concepts is defined to identify the dif-
ferent levels of difficulty to understand mathematic
concepts. The scale defined from less to greater dif-
ficulty is: numerical expression in numbers (600),
words (six), fractions (1/4), ratios (1 in 4), percent-
ages (25%) and decimal percentages (33.8%).

From the Scale of Mathematic Concepts defined,
different levels of difficulty are considered in our
system. There are three different levels (from eas-
iest to hardest):

1. Fractions Level: each percentage in the text is
adapted using fractions as mathematical form
for the quantity, and sometimes a hedge is used.

2. Percentages without decimals Level (PWD):
the system rounds the original percentage with
decimals and uses hedges if they are needed.

3. Percentages with decimals Level: This is the
most difficult level where no adaptation is per-
formed.

The system operates only on numerical expres-
sions at the highest levels of the scale (the most dif-
ficult levels), that is, numerical expression given in
percentages or decimal percentages, adapting them
to other levels of less difficulty. So, the user can
select the level to which adapt the original numeri-
cal expression from the text. Using the interface of
the system, the level of difficulty is chosen by the fi-
nal user and the numerical expressions from the text
with higher level of difficulty than the level chosen
are adapted following the rules defined.

4.3 Set of strategies
A set of strategies is defined so they can be applied to
adapt the original numerical expression. The quan-
tity of the expression is replaced with another ex-
pression and sometimes numerical hedges are added
to create the simplified numerical expression.

The use of hedges to simplify numerical expres-
sion can be influenced by three parameters. The first
is the type of simplification depending on the math-
ematical knowledge of the final user. The second is
the simplification strategy for the choice of the final
mathematical form. And the last is the loss of preci-
sion that occurs when the expression is simplified.

Out of the European Guidelines for the Produc-
tion of Easy-to-Read Information for People with
Learning Disability (Freyhoff et al., 1998), only one
involves the treatment of numbers: “Be careful with
numbers. If you use small numbers, always use the
number and not the word”. For example, if the texts
says ‘four’, the system adapts it by ‘4’ following this
European Guideline. This strategy is applied by the
system at all levels.

There are other strategies to adapt numerical ex-
pressions in the form of percentage to other levels of
difficulty: (1) replace decimal percentages with per-
centages without decimals; (2) replace decimal per-
centages with ratios; (3) replace percentages with ra-
tios; (4) replace decimal percentages with fractions;
(5) replace percentages with fractions; (6) replace
ratios with fractions; (7) replace numerical expres-
sions in words with numerical expressions in digits.

At each level of difficulty, a subset of the strate-
gies is applied to simplify the numerical expression.
For the Fractions Level the strategies 4, 5 and 7
are used. For the Percentages with decimals Level
the strategies 1 and 7 are applied. And for the last

41



level, Percentages without decimals Level only the
last strategy, number 7, is used.

4.4 System operation

The system takes as input the original text. The user
of the system has to choose the level of difficulty. A
set of numerical expressions are selected and a set
of transformations is applied to adapt them, generat-
ing as output of the system a text with the numerical
expressions simplified at the chosen level.

The system works through several phases to adapt
the numerical expressions in the input text. Some of
them are internal working phases (2, 4 and 5). The
rest of them (1, 3 and 6) are phases where the user
of the system plays a role. The phases considered in
the system are:

1. Input text: an original text is selected to adapt
its numerical expressions.

2. Mark Numerical Expressions: the numerical
expressions that can be adapted are marked.

3. Choose the level of difficulty: the user chooses
the desired level of difficulty for the numerical
expressions in the text.

4. Adapt the numerical expression from the
text: each numerical expression is adapted if
the level of the numerical expression is higher
than the level of difficulty chosen.

5. Replace numerical expression in the text:
adapted numerical expressions replace the orig-
inals in the text.

6. Output text: the final adapted version of the
text is presented to the user.

The next subsections presents how the system acts
in each phase and what kind of tools are used to
achieve the final text.

4.4.1 Phase 1: Input text

In this first phase, a plain text is chosen as input to
the system to adapt its numerical expressions. Using
a Graphical User Interface (GUI) in Java, the user
can upload an original text.

4.4.2 Phase 2: Mark numerical expressions
For the text chosen, the system executes the Nu-

merical Expression Parser1. Using this parser the
numerical quantities are annotated with their type
(cardinal, fraction, percentage, decimal percentage,
etc.), their format (words, digits), their value (Vg),
their units, and hedging phrases, such as ‘more
than’. The input to the program is the plain text file
and the output is the text with sentences and numer-
ical expressions annotated in XML format. In the
following code we can see how a numerical quantity
is annotated in the parser.

Overall figures showed the national pass
rate soared
<numex hedge=“above” hedge-
sem=“greaterthan” type=“percentage”
format=“digits” Vg=“0.97”>
above 97% </numex>

The XML file is treated by the system and numer-
ical expressions are marked in the original text. So,
the user can see which numerical expressions are go-
ing to be adapted by the system (in the next phase)
depending on the level of difficulty chosen.

4.4.3 Phase 3: Choose the level of difficulty
The user of the system chooses the level of dif-

ficulty to adapt the original numerical expressions.
There are three levels: fractions, percentages with-
out decimals and percentages with decimals.

4.4.4 Phase 4: Adapt the Numerical
Expressions

After deciding the level of difficulty, the system
has to adapt each numerical expression to generate
the final version. The process of simplification has
two stages: obtaining the candidate and applying the
adaptation and hedge choice rules.

From the XML file produced by the parser the fol-
lowing information for a numerical expression is ob-
tained: (1) if there is or not hedge and the kind of
hedge; (2) the type (cardinal, fraction, percentage,
decimal percentage) and format (digits or words)
of the original numerical expression; (3) the given
value (Vg) translated from the original numerical ex-
pression value of the text; and (4) the units from the

1For more details see (Williams, 2010)

42



Original 
Expression Parser Vmg

Proportion
Approx.
Program

Vr

More than 28% 0.28 0.28 1/3 0.33

Vg Vc
[0...1] [0...1]

1/3
30%
28%

Figure 1: Obtaining the candidate for simplification. The original expression is annotated by the parser (Vg), and this
value is normalized (Vmg). A candidate substitute value (Vc) is chosen from the proportion approximation program
and normalized (Vr).

original expression (M, ins, grams). For example,
if in the text the original numerical expression is a
percentage like ‘25.9%’, there is no hedge, the type
is ‘decimal percentage’, the format is ‘digits’, Vg is
0.259 and there are no units. In the expression, ‘20
grams’, there is no hedge, the type is ‘cardinal’, the
format is ‘digits’, Vg is 20 and the parser annotates
the units with ‘g’.

The given value Vg annotated by the parser is
transformed into a value between 0 to 1, referred
to as mapping given value (Vmg), which represents
the proportion under consideration. This value is
given as input to the proportion approximation pro-
gram (Power and Williams, 2012), which returns a
list of candidates for substitution. From this list,
the first option is taken as candidate substitute value
(Vc), because the program returns them in decreas-
ing order of precision. This means that the most
precise candidate at the required level of difficulty
is chosen. The program also might return the val-
ues “none” and “all” if the input value is close to
0 or 1, respectively. From the Vc we calculate the
rounded value (Vr) corresponding to the normaliza-
tion of the candidate value between 0 to 1. For ex-
ample, if Fraction level is chosen, for the original
expression “more than 28%” with Vmg=0.28, the
system chooses Vc=1/3 with Vr=0.33. The whole
process can be seen in Figure 1.

An additional level of adaptation is required be-
yond simple replacement with the candidate substi-
tute value. If the original numerical expressions in
the text are difficult to understand, the system must
adapt them to the desired level of difficulty. For each
numerical expression, the system only applies the
adaptation rules if the difficulty level of the numer-
ical expression is higher than the level of difficulty
chosen by the user. This is captured by a set of three
adaptation rules:

• If the type of the numerical expression is ‘car-
dinal’ and the format is ‘words’ then the candi-
date to be used in the simplification is Vg. For
example, if the original numerical expression is
‘six’, it will be replaced by ‘6’.

• In a similar way, if the type is ‘fraction’ (the
lowest possible level of difficulty) and the for-
mat is also ‘words’ then the candidate is ob-
tained by applying the proportion approxima-
tion program. For example, if the original nu-
merical expression is ‘a quarter’, it would be
replaced by ‘1/4’.

• If the type is ‘percentages’ or ‘decimal percent-
ages’ and the format is ‘digits’ then the can-
didate is calculated by the proportion approxi-
mation program provided that the level of dif-
ficulty chosen in the GUI was lower than the
level of the calculated numerical expression.

In order to complete the simplification, the system
has to decide if a hedge should be used to achieve
the final version of the adapted numerical expres-
sion. This decision is taken based on the difference
in value between the value of the original expression
in the text (Vg) and the value of the candidate substi-
tute (Vc) (as given by the relative difference between
the normalized values Vr and Vmg calculated in the
first stage). The actual hedge used in the original
expression (if any) is also considered. The various
possible combinations of these values, and the corre-
sponding choice of final hedge, are described in Ta-
ble 1, which presents all possible options to decide
in each case, the hedge and the value corresponding
to the final numerical expression. For example, if
the original expression is “more than 28%”, we have
Vc=1/3, Vmg=0.28 and Vr=0.33. Then Vr>Vmg so
the corresponding choice of the final hedge is in the

43



OriginalNumExp if Vr>Vmg if Vr=Vmg if Vr<Vmg
more than OrigValue around Vc more than Vc more than Vc

exactly OrigValue less than Vc exactly Vc more than Vc
less than OrigValue less than Vc less than Vc around Vc

OrigValue around Vc Vc around Vc

Table 1: Hedge Choice Rules. For each original expression (OrigValue), the normalized values (Vmg, Vr) are used to
determinate the hedge chosen for the simplified expression. The final version is composed by the hedge chosen and
the candidate value (Vc)

first column of Table 1 (“around”) and the simplified
expression is “around 1/3”.

When the user chooses the Fraction Level in the
system, every numerical expression with difficulty
level greater than fraction level will be replaced by
a numerical expression expressed in fraction form.
Depending on the values Vr and Vmg, the appropri-
ate hedge will be chosen.

4.4.5 Phase 5: Replace numerical expressions
Once the system has applied its rules, an adapted

version is available for each original numerical ex-
pression which was more difficult than the target dif-
ficulty level. The output text is obtained by replac-
ing these difficult expressions with the correspond-
ing simplified version.

5 Evaluation of the system

This section presents the evaluation of the system,
describing the materials, experiment, participants
and results of the evaluation.

5.1 Materials
We selected for the experiment a set of eight can-
didate sentences from the NUMGEN corpus, but the
number of numerical expressions was larger as some
sentences contained more than one proportion ex-
pression. In total we had 13 numerical expressions.
We selected sentences with as many variations in
context, precision and different wordings as possi-
ble. The range of proportions values was from points
nearly 0.0 to almost 1.0, to give coverage to a wide
spread of proportion values. We considered values
in the central range (say 0.2 to 0.8) and values at the
extreme ranges (say 0.0-0.2 and 0.8-1.0). We also
classified as common values the well-known per-
centages and fractions like 25%, 50%, 1/4 and 1/2,
and as uncommon values the rest like 15% or 6/7.

5.2 Experiment

To evaluate the system a questionnaire was pre-
sented to a set of human evaluators. The experi-
ment was created and presented on SurveyMonkey2,
a commonly-used provider of web surveys. For each
original sentence, we presented two possible simpli-
fications generated by the system. Participants were
asked to use their judgement to decide whether they
agreed that the simplified sentences were acceptable
for the original sentence. A Likert scale of four val-
ues (Strongly Disagree, Disagree, Agree, Strongly
Agree) was used to collect the answers.

In the survey only two levels of adaptation from
the original sentence were presented. The first op-
tion generated by the system was for the Fractions
level. The second option generated by the system
was for the Percentages without decimals (PWD).

5.3 Participants

The task of simplifying numerical expressions is dif-
ficult, so we selected a group of 34 experts made up
of primary or secondary school mathematics teach-
ers or adult basic numeracy tutors, all native English
speakers. This group is well qualified to tackle the
task since they are highly numerate and accustomed
to talking to people who do not understand mathe-
matical concepts very well. We found participants
through personal contacts and posts to Internet fo-
rums for mathematics teachers and numeracy tutors.

5.4 Results

The answers from the participants were evaluated.
In total we collected 377 responses, 191 responses
for the Fraction level and 186 responses for the Per-
centage without decimals (PWD). Table 2 shows the
average from the collected responses, considering 1

2http://www.surveymonkey.com/s/WJ69L86

44



Level Total average Values Average Values Average

Fraction 2,44 Central 2,87 Common 2,59
Extreme 2,14 Uncommon 1,21

PWD 2,96 Central 3,00 Common 2,80
Extreme 2,96 Uncommon 3,22

Table 2: System Evaluation: Fraction Level and Percentages Without Decimals (PWD)

Opinion Fraction PWD
Level Level

Strongly Disagree 19% 6%
Disagree 27% 15%

Agree 43% 56%
Strongly Agree 11% 23%

Table 3: Opinion of the experts in percentages

to 4 for strongly disagree to strongly agree. In ad-
dition, Table 3 shows the distribution in percentages
of the opinion of the experts. At the Fraction level,
there is not too much difference between the average
of the answers of the experts that agree with the sys-
tem and those that disagree. Most experts are neu-
tral. But for the PWD level the average shows that
most experts agree with the simplification done.

We have also analyzed the answers considering
two different criteria from the original numerical ex-
pressions: when they are central (20% to 80%) or
extreme values (0% to 20% and 80% to 100%), and
when the original numerical expressions are com-
mon or uncommon values. In general terms, the ex-
perts think that the simplification done by the sys-
tem in the PWD level is better than the simplification
done in the Fraction level. They disagree specially
with the simplification using fractions in two cases.
One is the treatment of the extreme values where the
system obtains as possible candidates “none” and
“all”3. Another case is when uncommon fractions
are used to simplify the numerical expression, like
for example 9/10. In these two cases the average is
lower than the rest of the average achieved.

5.5 Discussion
The system combines syntactic transformations (via
the introduction of hedges) and lexical substitu-

3See (Power and Williams, 2012) for a discussion of appro-
priate hedges for values near the extreme points of 0 and 1.

tions (by replacing actual values with substitution
candidates and transforming quantities expressed as
words into digits) to simplify the original numerical
expression. These kinds of transformations are dif-
ferent from those used by other systems, which rely
only on syntactic transformations or only on lexi-
cal substitutions. Rules are purpose-specific and fo-
cused on numerical expressions. With this kind of
transformations the readability of the text improves
in spite of the fact that the resulting syntactic struc-
ture of the numerical expression is more compli-
cated, due to the possible presence of hedges. For
example, for a original numerical expression like
‘25.9%’ the system generates the simplified ‘more
than a quarter’ which is easier to understand even
though longer and syntactically more complex.

With respect to coverage of different types of nu-
merical expressions, this system does not consider
ratios as a possible simplification strategy because
the proportion approximation program does not use
them as candidates to simplify a proportion. This
possibility should be explored in the future.

Another observation is that the system does not
consider the context of the sentence in which the
numerical expression occurs. For example, if the
sentence makes a comparison between two numer-
ical expressions that the system rounded to the same
value, the original meaning is lost. One example
of this case is the following sentence from the cor-
pus: “One in four children were awarded A grades
(25.9%, up from 25.3% last year)”. Both percent-
ages ‘25.9%’ and ‘25.3%’ are simplified by the sys-
tem using ‘around 1/4’ and the meaning of the sen-
tence is lost. Thus we should consider the role of
context (the set of numerical expressions in a given
sentence as a whole and the meaning of the text) in
establishing what simplifications must be used.

45



6 Conforming with conclusions of prior
surveys

The results presented for the system are evaluated
in this section for conformance with the conclusions
resulting from the empirical studies described in
(Bautista et al., 2011b) and (Bautista et al., 2011a).

With respect to the preference for round or com-
mon values in simplification (Conclusion 1), the sys-
tem presented conforms to this preference by virtue
of the way in which the list of candidate substitu-
tions is produced by the program. The candidates re-
turned by the program are already restricted to com-
mon values of percentages (rounded up) and frac-
tions, so the decision to consider as preferred candi-
date the one listed first implicitly applies the criteria
that leads to this behavior.

With respect to the need to treat differently values
in the extreme or central ranges of proportion (Con-
clusion 2), the system addresses this need by virtue
of the actual set of candidates produced by the pro-
gram in each case. For example, if the original ex-
pression is a extreme value like ‘0.972’, the program
produces a different candidate substitution (‘almost
all’) that in the central ranges is not considered.

With respect to restricting the use of hedges to
situations where loss of precision is incurred (Con-
clusion 3), the hedge choice rules applied by the
system (see Table 1) satisfy this restriction. When
Vr=Vmg hedges are included in the simplified ex-
pression only if they were already present in the
original expression.

In addition, the system rounds up any quantities
with decimal positions to the nearest whole num-
ber whenever the decimal positions are lost during
simplification. This functionality is provided im-
plicitly by the program, which presents the rounded
up version as the next option immediately follow-
ing the alternative which includes the decimal posi-
tions. For example, if the input proportion is ‘0.198’,
some rounded candidate substitutions are calculated
as ‘almost 20%’ or ‘less than 20%’.

Finally, the system follows the European guide-
lines for the production of easy to read information
in that it automatically replaces numerical quantities
expressed in words with the corresponding quantity
expressed in digits.

7 Conclusions and future work

The system described in this paper constitutes a first
approximation to the task of simplifying numerical
expressions in a text to varying degrees of difficulty.
The definition of an scale of difficulty of numeri-
cal expressions, the identification of rules governing
the selection of candidate substitution and the appli-
cation of hedges constitute important contributions.
The empirical evaluation of the system with human
experts results in acceptable rates of agreement. The
behavior of the system conforms to the conclusions
on simplification strategies as applied by humans re-
sulting from previous empirical surveys.

There are different aspects to improve the actual
system from the data collected, with a special atten-
tion to cases in which the experts disagree. As future
work, the syntactic context should be considered to
simplify numerical expression, extending the kind
of proportion to simplify and treating special cases
analyzed in this first version. At the syntactic level,
some transformation rules can be implemented from
a syntactic analysis. It is important that the meaning
of the sentences be preserved regardless of whether
part of the sentence is deleted or rewritten by the
adaptation rules. In addition, the numerical expres-
sion parser and the proportion approximation pro-
gram could also be studied in order to evaluate the
impact of their errors in the final performance.

Our final aim is to develop an automatic simplifi-
cation system in a broader sense, possibly including
more complex operations like syntactic transforma-
tions of the structure of the input text, or lexical sub-
stitution to reduce the complexity of the vocabulary
employed in the text. Additionally we hope to de-
velop versions of the simplification system for other
languages, starting with Spanish. Probably the sim-
plification strategies for numbers would be the same
but the use of hedge modifiers may be different.

Acknowledgments

This research is funded by the Spanish Ministry
of Education and Science (TIN2009-14659-C03-01
Project), Universidad Complutense de Madrid and
Banco Santander Central Hispano (GR58/08 Re-
search Group Grant), and the FPI grant program.

46



References

Susana Bautista, Pablo Gervás, and Ignacio Madrid.
2009. Feasibility Analysis for SemiAutomatic Con-
version of Text to Improve Readability. In Proceed-
ings of The Second International Conference on Infor-
mation and Communication Technologies and Acces-
sibility, Hammamet, Tunusia, May.

Susana Bautista, Raquel Hervás, Pablo Gervás, Richard
Power, and Sandra Williams. 2011a. Experimental
identification of the use of hedges in the simplifica-
tion of numerical expressions. In Proceedings of the
Second Workshop on Speech and Language Process-
ing for Assistive Technologies, pages 128–136, Edin-
burgh, Scotland, UK, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Susana Bautista, Raquel Hervás, Pablo Gervás, Richard
Power, and Sandra Williams. 2011b. How to
Make Numerical Information Accessible: Experimen-
tal Identification of Simplification Strategies. In Cam-
pos, Pedro and Graham, Nicholas and Jorge, Joaquim
and Nunes, Nuno and Palanque, Philippe and Winck-
ler, Marco, editor, Human-Computer Interaction IN-
TERACT 2011, volume 6946 of Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 57–64. Springer Berlin / Heidel-
berg.

Ann M. Bisantz, Stephanie Schinzing, and Jessica
Munch. 2005. Displaying uncertainty: Investigating
the effects of display format and specificity. Human
Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Er-
gonomics Society, 47(4):777.

Yvonne Canning. 2000. Cohesive simplification of
newspaper text for aphasic readers. In 3rd annual
CLUK Doctoral Research Colloquium.

Raman Chandrasekar and Bangalore Srinivas. 1997.
Automatic induction of rules for text simplification.
Knowledge-Based Systems, 10.

Raman Chandrasekar, Christine Doran, and Bangalore
Srinivas. 1996. Motivations and methods for text
simplification. In In Proceedings of the Sixteenth In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING ’96), pages 1041–1044.

Clark Christina and Douglas Jonathan. 2010. Young
people reading and writing today: Whether, what and
why. Technical report, London: National Literacy
Trust.

Walter Daelemans, Anja Hothker, and Erik Tjong Kim
Sang. 2004. Automatic Sentence Simplification for
Subtitling in Dutch and English. In Proceedings of the
4th Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, pages 1045–1048, Lisbon, Portugal.

Siobhan Devlin and John Tait. 1998. The use of a
Psycholinguistic database in the Simplification of Text

for Aphasic Readers. Lecture Notes. Stanford, USA:
CSLI.

Nathan Dieckmann, Paul Slovic, and Ellen Peters. 2009.
The use of narrative evidence and explicit likelihood
by decision makers varying in numeracy. Risk Analy-
sis, 29(10).

Geert Freyhoff, Gerhard Hess, Linda Kerr, Elizabeth
Menzel, Bror Tronbacke, and Kathy Van Der Veken.
1998. European guidelines for the production of easy-
to-read information.

Caroline Gasperin, Lucia Specia, Tiago F. Pereira, and
Sandra M. Aluisio. 2009. Learning when to simplify
sentences for natural text simplification. In Proceed-
ings of the Encontro Nacional de Inteligencia Artificial
(ENIA), pages 809–818, Bento Gonalves, Brazil.

Deeqa Jama and George Dugdale. 2010. Literacy: State
of the nation. Technical report, National Literacy
Trust.

Arnaldo Candido Jr., Erick Maziero, Caroline Gasperin,
Thiago A. S. Pardo, Lucia Specia, and Sandra M.
Aluisio. 2009. Supporting the Adaptation of Texts
for Poor Literacy Readers: a Text Simplification Ed-
itor for Brazilian Portuguese. In Proceedings of the
NAACL/HLT Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP
for Building Educational Applications, pages 34–42,
Boulder, Colorado.

Imtiaz Hussain Khan, Kees Deemter, and Graeme
Ritchie. 2008. Generation of refering expressions:
managing structural ambiguities. In Proceedings of
the 22nd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics(COLING), pages 433–440, Manchester.

Himanshu Mishra, Arul Mishra, and Baba Shiv. 2011.
In praise of vagueness: malleability of vague informa-
tion as a performance booster. Psychological Science,
22(6):733–8, April.

Ellen Peters, Judith Hibbard, Paul Slovic, and Nathan
Dieckmann. 2007. Numeracy skill and the commu-
nication, comprehension, and use of risk-benefit infor-
mation. Health Affairs, 26(3):741–748.

Sarah E. Petersen and Mari Ostendorf. 2007. Text Sim-
plification for Language Learners: A Corpus Analysis.
In Proceedings of Workshop on Speech and Language
Technology for Education (SLaTE).

Richard Power and Sandra Williams. 2012. Generating
numerical approximations. Computational Linguis-
tics, 38(1).

Qualification and Curriculum Authority. 1999. Mathe-
matics: the National Curriculum for England. Depart-
ment for Education and Employment, London.

Advaith Siddharthan. 2002. Resolving attachment and
clause boundary amgiguities for simplifying relative
clause constructs. In Proceedings of the Student Re-
search Workshop, 40th Meeting of the Association for
Computacional Linguistics.

47



Advaith Siddharthan. 2003. Syntactic Simplification and
Text Cohesion. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge.

United Nations. 1994. Standard Rules on the Equal-
ization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities.
Technical report.

Sandra Williams and Richard Power. 2009. Precision
and mathematical form in first and subsequent men-
tions of numerical facts and their relation to document
structure. In Proc. of the 12th European Workshop on
Natural Language Generation, Athens.

Sandra Williams and Ehud Reiter. 2005. Generating
readable texts for readers with low basic skills. In
Proceeding of the 10th European Workshop on Natu-
ral Language Generation, pages 140–147, Aberdeen,
Scotland.

Joel Williams, Sam Clemens, Karin Oleinikova, and
Karen Tarvin. 2003a. The Skills for Life survey: A
national needs and impact survey of literacy, numer-
acy and ICT skills. Technical Report Research Report
490, Department for Education and Skills.

Sandra Williams, Ehud Reiter, and Liesl Osman. 2003b.
Experiments with discourse-level choices and read-
ability. In In Proceedings of the European Natu-
ral Language Generation Workshop (ENLG) and 11th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (EACL03), pages
127–134.

Sandra Williams. 2010. A Parser and Information
Extraction System for English Numerical Expres-
sions. Technical report, The Open University, Milton
Keynes, MK7 6AA, U.K.

48


