










































Evaluating Unsupervised Language Model Adaptation Methods for Speaking Assessment


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 288–292,
Atlanta, Georgia, June 13 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Evaluating Unsupervised Language Model Adaptation Methods for
Speaking Assessment

Shasha Xie
Microsoft

1020 Enterprise Way
Sunnyvale, CA 94089

shxie@microsoft.com

Lei Chen
Educational Testing Service

600 Rosedale Rd
Princeton, NJ

LChen@ets.org

Abstract

In automated speech assessment, adaptation of
language models (LMs) to test questions is im-
portant to achieve high recognition accuracy
However, for large-scale language tests, the
ordinary supervised training, which uses an
expensive and time-consuming manual tran-
scription process, is hard to utilize for LM
adaptation. In this paper, several LM adap-
tation methods that require either no manual
transcription process or just a small amount of
transcriptions have been evaluated. Our ex-
periments suggest that these LM adaptation
methods can allow us to obtain considerable
recognition accuracy gain with no or low hu-
man transcription cost.

Index Terms: language model adaptation, unsuper-
vised training, Web as a corpus

1 Introduction

Automated speech assessment, a fast-growing area
in the speech research field (Eskenazi, 2009), typ-
ically uses an automatic speech recognition (ASR)
system to recognize spontaneous speech responses
and use the recognition outputs to generate the fea-
tures for scoring. Since the recognition accuracy di-
rectly influences the quality of the speech features,
especially for the features related to word entities,
such as those measuring grammar accuracy and vo-
cabulary richness, it is important to use ASR sys-
tems with high recognition accuracy.

Adaptation of language models (LMs) to test re-
sponses is an effective method to improve recogni-
tion accuracy. However, it is difficult to only use

the ordinary supervised training to adapt LMs to test
questions. First, for high-stake tests administered
globally, a very large pool of test questions have to
be used to strengthen the tests’ security and validity.
Since a large number of test questions have many
possible answers for each question, a large set of au-
dio files needs to be transcribed to cover response
content. Second, due to time and cost constraints,
it may not be practical to have a pre-test to collect
enough speech responses for adaptation purposes.
Therefore, it is important to pursue other methods to
obtain LM adaptation data in a faster and lower-cost
way than the ordinary supervised training.

As we will review in Section 2, some promising
technologies, such as unsupervised training, active
learning, and LM adaptation based on Web data,
have been utilized in broadcast news recognition, di-
alog system, and so on. In this paper on the LM
adaptation task used in automated speech scoring
systems, we will report our experiments to obtain
LM adaptation data in a faster and more economical
way that requires little human involvement. To our
knowledge, this is the first such work reported in the
automated speech assessment area.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion 2 reviews the related previous research results;
Section 3 describes the English test, the data used
in our experiments, and the ASR system used; Sec-
tion 4 reports the experiments of different methods
we tried to obtain LM adaptation data; Section 5 dis-
cusses our findings and plans for future research.

288



2 Previous Work

Unsupervised training is the method of using untran-
scribed audio to adapt a language model (LM). An
initial ASR model (seed model) is used to recognize
the untranscribed audio, and the obtained ASR out-
puts are used in the follow-up LM adaptation. (Chen
et al., 2003) utilized unsupervised LM adaptation
on broadcast news (BN) recognition. The unsuper-
vised adaptation method reduces the word error rate
(WER) by 2% relative to using the baseline LM.
(Bacchiani and Roark, 2003) reported that unsuper-
vised LM adaptation provided an absolute error rate
reduction of 3.9% over the un-adapted baseline per-
formance by using 17 hours of untranscribed adap-
tation data. This was 51% of the 7.7% adaptation
error rate reduction obtained by using an ordinary
supervised adaptation method.

Active learning is used to reduce the number of
training examples to be annotated by automatically
processing the unlabeled examples and then select-
ing the most informative ones with respect to a given
cost function. (Riccardi and Hakkani-Tur, 2003;
Tur et al., 2005) proposed using a combination of
unsupervised and active learning for ASR training
to minimize the workload of human transcription.
Their experiments showed that the amount of la-
beled data needed for a given recognition accuracy
can be reduced by 75% when combining these two
training approaches.

A recent trend in Natural Language Processing
(NLP) and speech recognition research is utilizing
Web data to improve the LMs, especially when in-
domain training material is limited. (Ng et al.,
2005) investigated LM topic adaptation using Web
data. Experiments in recognizing Mandarin tele-
phone conversations showed that use of filtered Web
data leads to a 7% reduction in the character recog-
nition error rate. (Sarikaya et al., 2005) used Web
data to adapt LMs used in a spoken dialog system.
From a limited in-domain data set, they generated
a series of search queries and retrieved Web pages
from Google using these queries. In their recog-
nition experiment done on a dialog system, they
achieved a 5.2% word error reduction by using the
Web data, compared to a baseline LM trained on
1700 in-domain utterances.

3 Test, Data, and ASR

Our in-domain data was from The Test of English
for International Communication, TOEIC R©, which
tests non-native English speakers’ basic speaking
ability required in international business communi-
cations. In our experiments, we focused on opinion
testing questions. An example question is: “Do you
agree with the statement that a company should only
hire experienced employees? Use specific reasons to
support your answer”.

A state-of-the-art HMM LVCSR system, which
was provided by a leading ASR vendor, was used in
our experiments. It contains a cross-word tri-phone
acoustic model (AM) and a combination of bi-gram,
tri-gram, and up to four-gram LMs. The AM and
LM are trained by supervised training from about
800 hours of audio and manual transcriptions of
non-native English speaking data collected from the
Test Of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL R©).
TOEFL R© is targeted to assess test-takers’ ability
to use English to study in an institution using En-
glish as its primary teaching language. Speaking
content from TOEFL R© data is quite different from
the content shown in TOEIC R© data. When testing
this recognizer on a held-out evaluation set extracted
from the TOEFL R© test, a word error rate (WER) of
33.0% 1 is observed. This recognizer was used as
the seed recognizer in our experiments.

4 Experiments

We collected a set of audio responses from the
TOEIC R© test, focusing on opinion questions. This
data set was randomly selected from different first-
language (L1) and English speaking proficiency lev-
els. Then, these audio files were manually tran-
scribed. In our experiments, 1470 responses were
used for LM adaptation and the remaining 184 re-
sponses were used to evaluate speech recognition

1ASR on non-native speech is more difficult than on native
speech for various reasons (Livescu and Glass, 2000). How-
ever, a high WER does not rule out the possibility of using
ASR outputs for automated scoring, especially when relying
on delivery related features. For example, (Chen et al., 2009)
shows that several pronunciation features’ contributions for as-
sessment, measured as Pearson correlations between the feat-
uers and human scores, only drop about 10% to 20% when us-
ing ASR outputs with a WER as high as 50% compared to using
human transcriptions.

289



accuracy. When using the seed recognizer with-
out any adaptation, the WER on the evaluation set
is 42.8%, which is much higher than the accuracy
achieved on the TOEFL R© data (33.0%). Using the
ordinary supervised training, adapting LMs using
these 1470 manual transcriptions, the WER is re-
duced to 34.7%, close to the performance on the
in-domain TOEFL R© data. Note that a fixed dictio-
nary with a vocabulary size of about 20, 000 words,
which in general is much larger than the vocabulary
mastered by non-native test takers, was used in our
experiment.

4.1 Unsupervised LM adaptation

Using the seed recognizer trained on the TOEFL R©

data, we recognized 1470 adaptation responses and
selected varying amounts of ASR outputs for LM
adaptation. From ASR outputs of all responses, we
selected the responses with high confidence scores
estimated by the seed recognizer so that we could
use the ASR outputs with higher recognition accu-
racy on the LM adaptation task. We used two meth-
ods to measure the confidence score for each re-
sponse from word-level confidence scores. First, we
took the average of all word confidence scores a re-
sponse contains, as shown in Equation 1.

ConfperWord =
1

N

N∑
i=1

conf(wi) (1)

where conf(wi) is the confidence score of word, wi.
The other method we used considers each word’s du-
ration, as shown in Equation 2.

ConfperSec =

∑N
i=1 d(wi) ∗ conf(wi)∑N

i=1 d(wi)
(2)

where d(wi) is the duration of wi.
In Figure 1, we showed the WER after running

unsupervised LM adaptation, where the adaptation
responses were selected if they had high word-based
(ConfperWord) or duration-based (ConfperSec)
confidence scores. The data sizes used for adapta-
tion vary from 0% (without any adaptation) to 100%
(using all adaptation data). We observe continuous
reduction of WER when using more and more adap-
tation data. Selecting responses by the word-based

confidence scores performs a little better than the se-
lection method based on the confidence scores nor-
malized by corresponding word durations. However,
there is no significant difference between these two
selection criteria.

Figure 1: Unsupervised LM adaptation performance us-
ing different sizes of development set data.

ASR accuracy may vary within each response.
Therefore, instead of using entire responses, we also
explored using smaller units for LM adaptation. All
of the ASR outputs were split into word sequences
with fixed lengths (10-15 words), and the ones with
higher per-word confidence scores (ConfperWord)
were extracted for model adaptation. Our experi-
ment shows that using word-sequence pieces rather
than entire responses leads to a faster WER reduc-
tion. When only using 5% of the adaptation data, we
obtained 3.5% absolute WER reduction compared to
the baseline result without adaptation. Note that we
only obtained 2.5% absolute WER reduction when
using entire responses in adaptation.

4.2 Web data LM adaptation

Given around 40% WER when using our seed ASR,
unsupervised learning faces the issue that many
recognition errors were included in model adapta-
tion. Can we find another source to obtain LM
adaptation inputs with fewer errors? To address
this question, we explored building a training cor-
pus from Web data based on test questions. We
used BootCat (Baroni and Bernardini, 2004), a cor-
pus building tool designed to collect data from the
Web, to collect our LM adaptation data. Based on
test prompts in the TOEIC R© test, we manually gen-
erated search queries. After receiving the search
queries, the BootCat tool searched the Web using
the Microsoft Bing search engine. Then, top-ranked

290



Web pages were downloaded and texts on these Web
pages were extracted. We examined the Web search
results (including URLs and texts) returned by the
BootCat tool. The returned Web data has varied
matching rates among these prompts and are gen-
erally noisy.

By using only the default setup provided by the
BootCat tool, we collected 5312 sentences in total.
After a simple text normalization, we used the ob-
tained Web data for LM adaptation, and the WER
on the evaluation data was 38.5%. This WER result
is a little higher than the WER result achieved by
unsupervised LM adaptation (38.1%). Without tran-
scribing any response from test-takers, the language
model adaptation using Web data already helps to
improve recognition accuracy. Then, we tried us-
ing both the Web data and the ASR hypotheses for
adaptation, and we can further decreased the WER
to 37.6%. This is lower than using the two LM adap-
tation data sets separately.

4.3 Semi-supervised approaches for LM
adaptation

For semi-supervised LM adaptation, we replaced the
speech responses of lower confidence scores with
their corresponding human transcripts. We hoped
that by using the responses with high confidence
scores together with a small amount of human tran-
scripts, we could get better performance by intro-
ducing less noise during adaptation. We set differ-
ent thresholds for selecting the low confidence re-
sponses and replacing them with human transcripts.
We find that just manually transcribing a limited
amount of audio data gives us further WER reduc-
tion, compared to using unsupervised learning. Af-
ter transcribing just 100 responses, 6.8% of 1470 re-
sponses in the adaptation data set, semi-supervised
learning can achieve 61.73% of the WER reduction
(8.1%) obtained by using the ordinary supervised
training that requires transcription of all 1470 re-
sponses.

4.4 Discussion

In Table 1, we compared the performance of all the
adaptation methods mentioned in this paper, includ-
ing two unsupervised methods adapted using the
ASR hypotheses and “related” Web data, and one

semi-supervised method 2, replacing the ASR hy-
potheses of lower confidence scores with their corre-
sponding human transcripts. For a convenient com-
parison, we also include the baseline (without LM
adaptation) and the result of using the supervised
adaptation. All the proposed unsupervised/semi-
supervised methods can significantly improve the
ASR performance compared to the baseline result.
For projects with time limits, we can use these
unsupervised/semi-supervised methods to help us
get relatively good ASR outputs.

Table 1: The WER on the evaluation set using different
LM adaptation methods.

baseline unsupervised semi super.ASR Web ASR&Web
42.8 38.1 38.5 37.6 37.8 34.7

5 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper, we reported our experiments in ap-
plying several LM adaptation methods to automated
speech scoring systems that require few, if any, hu-
man transcripts, which are expensive and slow to
obtain for large-sized adaptation data sets. The un-
supervised training (using ASR transcriptions from
a seed ASR system) clearly shows higher accuracy
than a ASR system without any domain adaptation.
We also used test questions to collect related texts
from Web. Even though such Web data may be noisy
and its relatedness to real test responses is not al-
ways guaranteed, text data collected from the Web
is helpful to adapt LMs to better fit the responses to
test questions. To better cope with recognition er-
rors brought on by using the unsupervised training
method, we proposed using human transcriptions on
a small amount of poorly recognized responses. Us-
ing such little human involvement further helps to
obtain a lower WER. Therefore, based on the ex-
periments described in this paper, we conclude that
these novel LM adaptation methods provide promis-
ing solutions to let us skip the ordinary supervised
training for LM adaptation tasks frequently used in
automated speech scoring.

2The semi-supervised result was from replacing 100 low-
confidence responses with human transcripts.

291



The reported experiments in this paper were con-
ducted on a limited-size data set. We plan to increase
the testing data to a larger size and hope to cover
more types of test questions and spoken tests. In ad-
dition, we plan to investigate how to automatically
generate Web search queries based on test questions.

References
M. Bacchiani and B. Roark. 2003. Unsupervised lan-

guage model adaptation. In 2003 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Process-
ing, 2003. Proceedings.(ICASSP’03).

M. Baroni and S. Bernardini. 2004. BootCaT: bootstrap-
ping corpora and terms from the web. In Proceedings
of LREC, volume 2004, page 13131316.

L. Chen, J. L Gauvain, L. Lamel, and G. Adda. 2003.
Unsupervised language model adaptation for broad-
cast news. In 2003 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 2003. Pro-
ceedings.(ICASSP’03).

L. Chen, K. Zechner, and X Xi. 2009. Improved pro-
nunciation features for construct-driven assessment of
non-native spontaneous speech. In NAACL-HLT.

M. Eskenazi. 2009. An overview of spoken language
technology for education. Speech Communication,
51(10):832–844.

K. Livescu and J. Glass. 2000. Lexical modeling
of non-native speech for automatic speech recogni-
tion. In Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing,
2000. ICASSP’00. Proceedings. 2000 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on, volume 3, pages 1683–1686.

T. Ng, M. Ostendorf, M. Y Hwang, M. Siu, I. Bulyko, and
X. Lei. 2005. Web-data augmented language mod-
els for mandarin conversational speech recognition. In
Proc. ICASSP, volume 1.

G. Riccardi and D. Z Hakkani-Tur. 2003. Active and un-
supervised learning for automatic speech recognition.
In Proc. 8th European Conference on Speech Commu-
nication and Technology.

R. Sarikaya, A. Gravano, and Y. Gao. 2005. Rapid lan-
guage model development using external resources for
new spoken dialog domains. In Proc. ICASSP, vol-
ume 1, pages 573–576.

G. Tur, D. Hakkani-Tur, and R. E Schapire. 2005. Com-
bining active and semi-supervised learning for spo-
ken language understanding. Speech Communication,
45(2):171–186.

292


