










































Role of Morpho-Syntactic Features in Estonian Proficiency Classification


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 63–72,
Atlanta, Georgia, June 13 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Role of Morpho-Syntactic Features in Estonian Proficiency Classification

Sowmya Vajjala
Seminar für Sprachwissenschaft

Universität Tübingen
sowmya@sfs.uni-tuebingen.de

Kaidi Lõo
Seminar für Sprachwissenschaft

Universität Tübingen
kaidi.loo@student.uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract

We developed an approach to predict the pro-
ficiency level of Estonian language learners
based on the CEFR guidelines. We performed
learner classification by studying morpho-
syntactic variation and lexical richness in texts
produced by learners of Estonian as a sec-
ond language. We show that our features
which exploit the rich morphology of Esto-
nian by focusing on the nominal case and ver-
bal mood are useful predictors for this task.
We also show that re-formulating the classifi-
cation problem as a multi-stage cascaded clas-
sification improves the classification accuracy.
Finally, we also studied the effect of training
data size on classification accuracy and found
that more training data is beneficial in only
some of the cases.

1 Introduction and Motivation

Every year, language learners across the world learn
various languages and take tests that measure their
proficiency level. The Estonian language profi-
ciency examination1 in particular is usually taken
by the immigrant population for citizenship and/or
employment needs in Estonia. Assessing learner
texts to classify them into relevant proficiency lev-
els is usually done by human evaluators and is of-
ten a time consuming process. An approach to au-
tomate this process would complement the human
annotators and reduce the overall effort in evaluat-
ing learner texts for their proficiency. Investigat-
ing features that follow any sort of trend across the

1http://www.ekk.edu.ee/

various proficiency levels among learners is a first
step in building such automatic proficiency classifi-
cation systems. This is the main motivation for our
research.

Several factors might play a role in determining a
learner’s proficiency in a given language. Since we
study the learner corpus of Estonian, a morphologi-
cally complex language with an elaborate declension
and conjugation system, we hypothesized that study-
ing the role of morpho-syntactic features would be a
good starting point to perform proficiency classifi-
cation. We used the Estonian Interlanguage Corpus
(EIC)2, a publicly accessible corpus of written texts
produced by learners of Estonian as a second lan-
guage, for this purpose. All the texts were annotated
with a proficiency level that is based on the Com-
mon European Framework of Reference for Lan-
guages Council of Europe (CEFR). We constructed
various proficiency classification models based on
this corpus by using features motivated primarily by
the morphological complexity of Estonian and found
that true to our hypothesis, they turn out to be good
predictors of the proficiency level.

We also studied the effect of breaking up the
main classification task into sub-tasks and cascad-
ing them. We show that this approach increases the
overall accuracy of proficiency classification. In ad-
dition, we studied the effect of training data size and
found that it does not have a significant impact in
most of the classification tasks we performed. To
summarize, we studied the task of proficiency clas-
sification for Estonian by studying both the aspects
feature engineering and model construction.

2http://evkk.tlu.ee/wwwdata/what_is_evk

63



The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion 2 briefly surveys related work and explains the
context of our research. Section 3 describes our cor-
pus and the experimental setup. Section 4 describes
our feature set. Section 5 describes our experiments
and results. Section 6 concludes the paper with a
discussion on results and directions for future work.

2 Related Work

With the availability of computer based learner cor-
pora, research focusing on studying the criterial fea-
tures that correlate with proficiency levels began to
emerge. A wide body of research exists on studying
the syntactic complexity of texts produced by learn-
ers across different proficiency levels, their lexical
richness and the errors they make (e.g., Lu, 2012;
Vyatkina, 2012; Tono, 2000) . Learner data from
both longitudinal and cross sectional studies was an-
alyzed to understand the linguistic patterns among
learners of different proficiency levels, in Second
Language Acquisition (SLA) research.

Automatic proficiency assessment of learner texts
is another active area of related research, which
plays an important role in language testing. Auto-
mated systems are now being used both for evalua-
tion of language learners and for offering feedback
on their language proficiency (e.g., Williamson,
2009; Burstein et al., 2003 ). Forms of text used for
assessment include mathematical responses, short
answers, essays and spoken responses among oth-
ers (Williamson et al., 2010). Standardized tests like
GRE and GMAT too use such systems to comple-
ment human scorers while evaluating student essays
automatically (Burstein, 2003; Rudner et al., 2005).
Zhang (2008) discusses proficiency classification for
the Examination for the Certificate of Proficiency
in English (ECPE) in detail, by comparing proce-
dures based on four types of measurement models.
The problem of automatic student classification i.e.,
making inferences about a student’s skill level by us-
ing some form of data about them is an active area
of research in Educational data mining (e.g., Des-
marais and Baker, 2012; Baker 2010).

But, automatic approaches for classifying lan-
guage learners into standardized proficiency levels
(e.g., the European CEFR levels3, Common Core

3http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/linguistic/

Standards4) is a relatively new area of interest.
Supnithi et al. (2003) used a dataset consisting of

audio transcripts by Japanese learners of English to
build a proficiency classification model with a fea-
ture set that modeled vocabulary, grammatical accu-
racy and fluency. This dataset had 10 levels of pro-
ficiency. Hasan and Khaing (2008) performed profi-
ciency classification with the same dataset using er-
ror rate and fluency features. Dickinson et al. (2012)
developed a system for classifying Hebrew learners
into five proficiency levels, using features that focus
on the nature of errors in a corpus of scrambled sen-
tence exercise questions.

Proficiency Classification so far has been predom-
inantly focused on the correlation of error-rate with
proficiency. Although error-rate is a strong indicator
of a learner’s proficiency in a language, consider-
ing other factors like lexical indices or syntactic and
morphological complexity would help in providing
multiple views about the same data. Providing a
non-error driven model, Crossley et al. (2011) stud-
ied the impact of various lexical indices in predicting
the learner proficiency level. Using a corpus of 100
writing samples by L2 learners of English classified
in to three levels (beginner, intermediate, advanced),
they built a classification system that analyses lan-
guage proficiency using the Coh-metrix5 lexical in-
dices.

Most of the research about the distinguishing fac-
tors among learners of various proficiency levels has
focused on English. However, issues like morpho-
logical variation, which may not be strong predic-
tors of learner proficiency in English, could be use-
ful in proficiency classification of other languages.
Hence, in this paper, we study the texts produced by
the learners of a morphologically rich and complex
language, Estonian and show that morphology can
be a good predictor for learner proficiency classifi-
cation.

We build our classification models using the Es-
tonian Interlanguage Corpus (EIC), which contains
texts produced by learners of Estonian as a second
language. We modeled our approach based on the
features motivated by the morphological complex-
ity of Estonian. To our knowledge, this is the first

Cadre1_en.asp
4http://www.corestandards.org/
5http://cohmetrix.memphis.edu

64



work that studies the role of morphology based fea-
tures for proficiency classification in general and in
Estonian in particular.

3 Corpus and Experimental Setup

3.1 Corpus

The Estonian Interlanguage Corpus (EIC)6 was cre-
ated by the Talinn University. It is a collection of
written texts produced by learners of Estonian as a
second language. Most of the learners were native
speakers of Russian. The corpus consists mainly of
short essays, answers to questions, translations and
personal letters. The texts are annotated with error
types and incorrect forms. The corpus also provides
information about the learner’s age, gender, educa-
tion and about other languages known to the learner.
Descriptive statistics about the corpus are available
on their website7. The corpus contains around 8000
documents (two million words), most of which are
texts from the Estonian language proficiency exam-
ination. The length of the texts varies in general be-
tween 50 and 1000 words (Eslon, 2007).

Information about the learner’s level of compe-
tence is based on the CEFR guidelines8 and is de-
cided by human annotator judgement. Until late
2008, Estonian language proficiency was tested by
conducting proficiency exams at three levels - the
lowest level A, the medium level B and the highest
level C. Later, the CEFR standards were adapted, di-
viding the development of language proficiency into
six levels (A1, A2, B1, B2, C1, C2). A1 indicates a
basic proficiency and C2 indicates a mastery.

For our current work, we use a sub-corpus con-
sisting of 2000 texts that can be accessibly through
the EIC. These texts are spread across three broad
levels A, B, C instead of the more fine grained six
levels and contain all kinds of texts including short
answers. Although these texts also have an an-
notated version containing information about error-
types and corrections, since our aim in this paper is
to study the effect of morpho-syntactic features, we
considered the raw texts produced by the learners as

6http://evkk.tlu.ee/
7http://evkk.tlu.ee/statistics.html
8http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_

European_Framework_of_Reference_for_
Languages

they were, without looking at the error annotations.
Table 1 shows a summary of the entire corpus that
was made available.

We prepared a test set consisting of 50 documents
from each category, picked randomly. This test set
was not used to train any of the classifiers we used
in this paper. Further, to avoid a training bias to-
wards any class, we used equal number of instances
from all classes during all our binary and three-class
training processes.

Proficiency Level #Docs Avg. #tokens
A-level 807 182.9
B-level 876 260.3
C-level 307 431.8

Table 1: The EIC Corpus

3.2 Pre-processing

All the texts in our corpus were POS-tagged with the
TreeTagger9 and the tagged output was then used
to extract the required features. The TreeTagger
(Schmid, 1994) is a probabilistic part of speech tag-
ger, which contains parameter files to tag Estonian
data. The tag set was derived from the Tartu Mor-
phologically Disambiguated Corpus tag set10. As
mentioned earlier, we do not use the error annotation
information for these learner texts, in this paper.

4 Features

Our choice of features were primarily motivated by
the nature of the morphology of Estonian.

4.1 The Estonian Language

The Estonian language has about one million native
speakers. It belongs to the Finnic branch of Uralic
languages and is known for it’s complex morphol-
ogy. It is both an agglutinative and a flectional (fu-
sional) language. Some of the prominent features of
Estonian language include:

• 14 productive nominal cases
9http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/

projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/
10http://www.cl.ut.ee/korpused/

morfkorpus/

65



• no grammatical gender (either of nouns or per-
sonal pronouns) and no articles (either definite
or indefinite)

• the verbal system lacks a morphological future
tense (the present tense is used instead)

• relatively free word order (relations between
words are expressed by case endings)

• extensive compound word formation
• impersonal voice (specific to the Finnic lan-

guages and similar to passive voice. The verb
is conjugated in ”fourth person”, who is never
mentioned)

• Most of the inflected words in Estonian have
two distinctive parts: the stem and the forma-
tive. For example, raamatutele (book, plural,
allative) consists of the stem raamatu and the
formative tele, which in turn consists of plural
marker te and allative case marker le (Erelt et
al., 2007, p. 203).

• Unlike most of other Finnic languages, Esto-
nian also has flective features, i.e., the same
morpheme may have different shapes in differ-
ent word forms. For example, the stem jalg
(”foot”, singular, nominative) may appear as
jala (singular, genitive) or jalga (singular, par-
titive) and plural marker may appear as d, de,
te or i or merged with the stem as in jalad
(plural, nominative), jalgade (plural, genitive)
and jalgu (plural, partitive) (Erelt et al., 2007,
p. 203).

As many of these characteristics are morpholog-
ical in nature, we hypothesized that this morpho-
logical complexity of Estonian may play a role in
the process of language learning and hence may
be a useful predictor for proficiency classification.
Hence, we built our feature set primarily focusing
on the morphological properties of the learner texts.
Apart from these features, we also included other
features based on the Parts of Speech and lexical
variation.

4.2 Morphological Features

In Estonian, as in other Finnic languages, nomi-
nals (nouns, adjectives, numerals and pronouns) and
verbs are inflected for number and case. Estonian

nominals are inflected in 14 different cases. Three of
the nominal cases are grammatical cases, i.e., nom-
inative, genitive and partitive. They fulfill mainly
a syntactic purpose and have a very general gram-
matical meaning. All the other cases are semantic
cases, and they have a more concrete meaning than
grammatical cases, which often can be explained by
means of adverbs or adpositions (Erelt et al., 2007,
p. 241). We considered the proportion of nouns and
adjectives tagged with various cases per document
and included them as our declension features. The
cases we considered in this paper are: nominative,
genitive, partitive, illative, inessive, elative, allative,
adessive, ablative, translative, terminative, essive,
abessive, comitative and short singular illative, i.e.,
aditive case.

The verb in Estonian has finite forms that occur
as predicates and auxiliary components of complex
predicates and non-finite forms. Finite forms are in-
flected for mood, tense, voice, aspect, person and
number. The verb has altogether five moods: the in-
dicative, conditional, imperative, quotative and jus-
sive. It has two simple tenses: the present and the
past, two voices: personal and impersonal, affirma-
tion and negation. Non-finite forms behave differ-
ently. Participles are inflected for voice and tense,
present participles also for case and number, and
supines for voice and case. There is one infinitive
and one gerund, which can be explained as the ines-
sive case form of the infinitve (Erelt, 2003, p. 52). In
this paper, we considered the proportion of verbs be-
longing to various tense, mood, voice, number and
person categories as our features.11.

4.3 POS features

We included the various degrees of comparison of
adjectives and the proportion of words belonging to
various parts of speech among our features. This
group of features also included the proportion of ad-
positions (=prepositions+postpositions) along with
the proportion of prepositions and postpositions sep-
arately. We also included the proportion of co-
ordinating conjunctions and subordinating conjunc-
tions along with that of all conjunctions.

11Examples of various forms of declension and conjugation
can be found in the Estonian morphology guide at: http://
lpcs.math.msu.su/˜pentus/etmorf.htm

66



4.4 Lexical Variation features

Lexical variation, also called lexical range indicates
the range of vocabulary displayed in a learner’s lan-
guage use. We implemented the measures of lexical
variation that are used in the English SLA research
to measure the lexical richness of the learners of En-
glish as a second language (Lu, 2012). These in-
cluded the noun variation, verb variation, adjective
variation and verb variation which indicated the ra-
tio of the words with the respective parts of speech
to the total number of lexical words (instead of all
words).

4.5 Text Length Feature

Since text length is one of the most commonly used
measures of learner proficiency and also because of
the variation in average text length across the pro-
ficiency levels (Table1), we included the number of
word tokens per document as a feature.

4.6 Most Predictive Features

Apart from these individual feature groups, we also
performed a feature selection, to identify the most
predictive ones among all our features. We used the
Correlation based Feature Subset (CFS) selection
method in WEKA for this purpose. CFS chooses
a feature subset considering the correlation and the
degree of redundancy between the features. Table 2
consists of a list of the most predictive and non-
redundant features after ranking all the selected fea-
tures based on their Information Gain. This list con-
sisted of five verb morphology based features fol-
lowed by three nominal declension features.

Feature Group
Nominative case NounMorph
Impersonal VerbMorph
Personal VerbMorph
Num. words TextLength
Present tense VerbMorph
2nd person verbs VerbMorph
Prepositions POS
Allative case NounMorph
Imperatives VerbMorph
Translative case NounMorph

Table 2: 10 Most Predictive, Non-redundant Features

It is interesting to note that several characteris-
tics that are prominent in Estonian (cf. Section 4.1)
figured among this list of most predictive features.
Nominative being the top predictor can be explained
due to the difference in (the number of) cases be-
tween Estonian and other languages. For example
(Eslon, 2011) found in her corpus study based on the
same corpus that the learners frequently use nom-
inative case instead of genitive and partitive case.
So, it is to be expected that the usage of the nom-
inative case changes as the proficiency increases.
Impersonal and personal voice are distinctive fea-
tures in Estonian and other Finnic languages, as
they are different from the active and passive voice
that typically exist in other languages (Erelt, 2003).
This may make them difficult to master for language
learners, making them one of the top predictors for
proficiency. Further, Estonian has more postposi-
tions than prepositions. Hence, one could that the
use of prepositions will be replaced by postposi-
tions as the language acquisition progresses (Ehala,
1994).

5 Experiments and Results

We first studied the effect of the individual feature
groups as well as their combination for a three class
classification of Estonian learners into A, B and C
classes. We also studied the impact of a stacking
ensemble on the overall classification accuracy and
found out that it did not result in a significant im-
provement on the test set. Hence, we further investi-
gated the problem as a collection of multi-stage two-
class cascades instead of a single stage three class
classification. For all our classification experiments,
we used the WEKA (Hall et al., 2009) toolkit. We
report the overall classification accuracy as our eval-
uation metric.

5.1 Three Class-Classification

We first considered the learner classification as a sin-
gle step, three class classification problem. Since
50 documents from each category were separated as
a held-out test set (cf. Section 3.1), we built our
three-class models with 250 texts per category as our
training set to ensure that there is a balanced distri-
bution between classes. We trained multiple clas-
sification models considering the individual feature

67



groups and the most predictive feature group. Ta-
ble 3 shows the classification accuracy of various
feature groups, reported using the Sequential Mini-
mal Optimization (SMO) implementation in WEKA
(Platt, 1998).

Features 10-Fold CV Test set
Random baseline 33.33% 33.33%
Noun Morph. 56.64% 52%
Verb Morph 57.55% 58%
POS 52.99% 47.33%
Lex. Variation 43.36% 47.33%
Text Length 33.72% 34%
All Features 62.45% 59.33%
Noun+Verb Morph 61.45% 58%
Top10 features (Table 2) 57.34% 56.58%

Table 3: Estonian Learner Proficiency Classification with
various Feature groups

Although the classification accuracies overall are
not very high, it can be seen from the results that the
morphological variation does play a key role in pro-
ficiency classification of Estonian. While the verbal
morphology features performed best as an individ-
ual feature sub group, the addition of lexical varia-
tion and POS features to the morphological features
added very little to the overall classification accu-
racy.

Text length turned out to be the most predictive
single feature among the top features. It can be seen
from Table 3 that this feature alone resulted in a clas-
sification accuracy of 34%, which is just above the
random baseline (33.33%). But the fact that the C
level in general contained a higher number of es-
says and translations compared to other categories
of text like letters and short answers (than the A and
B levels), thereby resulting in longer texts in gen-
eral, may have resulted text length being the single
most predictive feature. The Top-10 features also
performed on par with the individual morphological
feature subgroups.

5.1.1 Ensemble Model
Since ensemble models are known to obtain a bet-

ter performance than their constituent models, we
compared the performance of a stacking ensemble
against its individual constituent models. We trained

three classification models on the entire feature set,
using the same train-test sets as explained before and
trained an ensemble model with three classifiers. We
used the StackingC implementation of WEKA (See-
wald, 2002) to combine the models, with a linear re-
gression model as our meta classifier. Table 4 shows
the classification accuracies for the individual clas-
sifiers as well as the ensemble on a 10-fold CV of
the training set and on the held out test set. The
ensemble did not result in any significant improve-
ment (<1%) compared to the best model amongst
the three of its individual components (SMO). The
ensemble’s performance on the test set was poor
compared to the best classification model.

Classifier 10-Fold CV Test set
SMO 62.45% 59.33%
Logistic Regression 59.37% 52%
Decision Tree 57.29% 52.33%
Stacked Ensemble 63.28% 57.33%

Table 4: Proficiency Classification With an Ensemble

5.2 Classification Through Two-Class Cascades

Since combining the classifiers as a stacking ensem-
ble did not work, we turned to reformulating our
problem as a cascade of two-class classifiers. Cas-
cade generalization is the process of sequentially
using a set of small classifiers to perform an over-
all classification task. Gama and Brazdil (2000)
showed that a cascade can outperform other ensem-
ble methods like stacking or boosting. Kaynak and
Alpaydin (2000) proposed a method to sequentially
cascade classifiers and showed that this improves the
accuracy without increasing the computational com-
plexity and cost. Although the creation of our clas-
sifier cascades in this paper is not the same as any
of the above mentioned research, their conclusion
that cascading subsets of classifiers to build an over-
all classifier can possibly result in a better accuracy
was the main motivation for this experiment.

The SMO implementation in WEKA also con-
siders multi-class classification as a combination of
pairwise binary classifications. But, in our subse-
quent experiments, we combine our two-class clas-
sifiers as a multi-stage cascade rather than a multi-
expert stacking ensemble. For these experiments,

68



we first built the various binary classifiers that were
later used to construct the cascades. We chose our
combinations both by using a One vs All (OvA) as
well as a One vs One (OvO) strategy. Thus, six bi-
nary classifiers were created, namely:

• (A, B) classifier

• (B, C) classifier

• (C, A) classifier

• (A and Not A) classifier

• (B and Not B) classifier

• (C and Not C) classifier

In all the cases, our training data consisted of
equal number of instances per class. In the cases of
the last three classifiers, the training data for NotA,
NotB and NotC categories consisted of instances
from both the classes that were included in the re-
spective ”Not-” classes. The data from the held-
out test set was not included in any of these binary
classification experiments. The training data size for
each classifier has a different size depending on the
classes involved. In all cases, the number of train-
ing samples per category is equal to the number of
documents belonging to the category with the least
number of documents. Hence, in cases involving
the C-class (ABC, AC, BC, CnotC), we trained the
classifiers with 250 documents per category. In all
the other cases (AB, AnotA, BnotB), we trained the
classifiers with 750 documents per category. Table 5
summarizes the training data size and the classifica-
tion accuracies using 10-fold cross validation. All
the models were trained using the SMO algorithm.

Classifer Training data size Accuracy
A,B 750 per cat 70.8%
B,C 250 per cat 74.59%
A,C 250 per cat 85.93%
A,NotA 750 per cat 74.20%
B,NotB 750 per cat 60.04%
C,NotC 250 per cat 79.69%

Table 5: Binary Classifications of Estonian Learners

This binary classification shows that there is a
clear trend among the features across the proficiency

levels. In the case of a pair-wise classification be-
tween classes, the highest classification accuracy
was achieved for the binary classifier that considered
the A and C classes. Although the classification ac-
curacies of the binary classifiers (A,B) and (B,C) are
considerably higher than the overall three class clas-
sification accuracy (Table 3), they are very low com-
pared to that of the binary classifier (A,C). The con-
fusion between the three classes is the highest when
it involves the middle class, B. This confirmed the
ordinal nature of proficiency classification. In the
second set of binary classifiers, again, the classifier
with a poor performance turned out to be (B,NotB).

To take advantage of the fact that the two-class
classification is much more accurate than the three-
class classification, we studied three class classifica-
tion by building multi-stage classifier cascades us-
ing the above binary classifiers. Based on the output
of the first stage (which is the most accurate classi-
fier), we feed the test instance to one of the remain-
ing classifiers to get the final prediction.

5.2.1 Cascade-1
For the first cascade, we considered the pairwise

binary classifiers that used a One vs One (OvO)
strategy from Table 5. We constructed a classifier
cascade as follows: For each test instance,

• Classify the instance using the classifier (A,C).

• If A, re-classify the instance using the classifier
(A,B).

• if C, re-classify the instance using the classifier
(B,C).

5.2.2 Cascade-2
For the second cascade, we considered the sec-

ond set of binary classifiers from Table 5, which use
a One vs All (OvA) strategy. The cascade is con-
structed as follows: For each test instance,

• Classify the instance using the classifier
(C,NotC).

• If C, classify the instance as C.

• Else, re-classify the instance using the classifier
(A,notA).

69



The choice of these particular combinations of
cascades was motivated by two factors:

• To understand the performance of OvO and
OvA binary classifier cascades independently

• To start with the classifier that has the highest
accuracy as the first stage.

Table 6 compares the performance on the test set
of the cascaded classifiers against the normal 3-class
classifier and a classifier ensemble. Compared to a
normal three-class classifier, the cascaded approach
showed more than 5% improvement in the classifica-
tion accuracy using both the cascades. Compared to
Cascade-1, Cascade-2 performed even better with a
66.66% classification accuracy on the test set. Since
binary classification for certain pairs seemed to be
possible with higher accuracy than the three-class
classification, reformulating three class classifica-
tion as a cascade of binary classifications may result
in a better classification accuracy. This was the ini-
tial motivation for the choice of cascade classifica-
tion. Our results clearly showed that it was a fruitful
experiment.

Classifer Accuracy
Cascade-1 64.66%
Cascade-2 66.66%
3-class,without cascade 59.33%
3-class ensemble 57.33%

Table 6: Comparison of Cascade classification

The cascades need more exploration though.
Also, although the morphological features turned
out to be useful predictors of proficiency classifica-
tion, the classification accuracies are still not very
high. Two possible explanations could be that our
features are good but not sufficient or that the train-
ing data was insufficient.

It is clear from our various classification experi-
ments that the morphological features are good pre-
dictors of proficiency levels. But, surely, there is
much more to language proficiency than morpholog-
ical complexity. So, exploring more features will be
the natural next step to improve the overall classi-
fication accuracy. However, to gain some more in-
sights at this level, we studied the effect of training

data sizes on the various classification tasks we per-
formed.

5.3 Effect of Training Sample Size

We took all the seven different classification mod-
els we used in the earlier experiments and studied
the impact of gradually increasing the training data
size on classification accuracy. For this purpose,we
trained all the classifiers with the complete feature
set using the SMO algorithm. The classifiers studied
include the three class ABC classifier and the binary
classifiers AB, BC, AC, AnotA, BnotB and CnotC.
Table 7 summarizes the effect of splitting the respec-
tive training sets into various train-test splits, on the
classification accuracies.

classifier 50-50 60-40 70-30 80-20
ABC 56.73% 60.05% 61.76% 62.76%
AB 71.07% 71.3% 71.2% 72.04%
BC 71.33% 72.35% 71.73% 74.86%
AC 86.31% 84.95% 84.15% 85.55%
AnotA 75.39% 75.20% 76.65% 75.82%
BnotB 59.05% 57.95% 56.91% 58.08%
CnotC 77.34% 77.56% 77.27% 76.52%

Table 7: Effect of training size on classification accuracy

As the table shows, training data size had an im-
pact only on some of the classification tasks. For
the three class classification, training set size had a
clear effect. Although our corpus had a large num-
ber of texts from A and B compared to C (Table
1), since we used balanced training sets to train all
models, the three-class model had relatively fewer
number of documents per category (250) compared
to, say, the AB classifier (750 per category). Re-
duction of this small training set further by 50% de-
creased the three class classification accuracy from
62.76% (when 80% of the data was used for train-
ing) to 56.73%. So, in this case, training data size
had an effect.

However, an interesting observation is that this
small training sample size (250 documents per cat-
egory) did not have any impact on the classification
performance of the classifier (A,C). This classifier
consistently performed at a higher level compared to
all the other classifiers even when the training data
was only 50% (125 documents per category). Al-

70



though it is possible that the length of the document
played a role here, there was little difference in the
performance (< 1%) even after removing the text
length feature. This indicates a strong differentiation
between the texts of the language learners of levels
A and C, in terms of the features we used.

In case of the other classification tasks, only the
(B,C) classifier showed some effect of the training
data on its overall classification accuracy. While
there might be other reasons that we did not no-
tice yet, it is possible that the inter class overlap
between (A,B) is more compared to the overlap be-
tween (B,C) at least in terms of the features we con-
sidered. Also, the fact that the B-level lies in be-
tween A and C could also have contributed to the
fact that more training data has little effect on clas-
sifiers involving data from all the three classes (An-
otA, BnotB, CnotC).

6 Conclusion and Discussion

In this paper, we discussed the task of classify-
ing learner texts into standardized proficiency lev-
els based on the texts produced by learners of Es-
tonian as a second language. We used the publicly
accessible Estonian Interlanguage Corpus (EIC) and
modeled our classifiers by considering the morpho-
syntactic variation as our primary feature group. We
hypothesized that the morphology may play an im-
portant role in detecting the proficiency levels as Es-
tonian is a morphologically rich and complex lan-
guage.

For building our classifiers, we experimented with
various methods such as three class classifiers, an
ensemble model and multi-stage cascades. Our ex-
periments showed that the multi-stage cascades im-
proved the classification accuracy compared to the
other approaches. Our experiments also showed a
clear trend across the proficiency levels. There was
little classification overlap between the beginner (A)
and the advanced (C) level texts but a strong overlap
of both these levels with the intermediate (B) level.

We can conclude from our experiments that the
morphological features can indeed play an impor-
tant role in the proficiency classification of Estonian.
Although the classification accuracies we achieved
(60-65%) have a long way to go in terms of a real-
world grading application, we believe that this is a

good starting point to explore the role of morphol-
ogy in proficiency classification of Estonian in par-
ticular and other morphologically rich languages in
general.

As a part of our future work, we intend to investi-
gate the role of morphology in Estonian proficiency
classification further. We also want to compare the
proficiency levels across various genres of texts in
the corpus (e.g, essays, personal and official letters,
translations etc.). Another interesting dimension we
want to explore further is the distribution of specific
kinds of morphological phenomena (e.g., case mark-
ers) that exist in Estonian but not in the learner’s na-
tive language, across the different proficiency levels.
It would also be interesting to apply insights from
the theories of second language acquisition research
and study their utility for proficiency classification.
Apart from morphology, we also intend to study the
impact of other features such as lexical sophistica-
tion, error rate, syntactic complexity and discourse
coherence. Finally, on the model construction side,
we plan to investigate and understand the working
of cascaded classifiers better in this context.

Acknowledgments

We thank Dr Pille Eslon from the Talinn University
for sharing the corpus with us. We also thank Serhiy
Bykh, Dr Detmar Meurers and the three anonymous
reviewers for their feedback on the paper. This re-
search is partially funded by the European Commis-
sion’s 7th Framework Program under grant agree-
ment number 238405 (CLARA)12

References
R.S.J.d. Baker. 2010. Mining data for student models. In

Advances in Intelligent Tutoring Systems, pages 323–
338. Springer.

Jill Burstein, Martin Chodorow, and Claudia Leacock.
2003. Criterion: Online essay evaluation: An appli-
cation for automated evaluation of student essays. In
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual Conference on In-
novative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-
03), pages 3–10, Acapulco, Mexico, August.

Jill Burstein, 2003. The e-rater Scoring Engine: Auto-
mated Essay Scoring with Natural Language Process-
ing, chapter 7, pages 107–115. Lawrence Erlbaum As-
sociates, Inc.
12http://clara.uib.no

71



Scott A. Crossley, Tom Salsbury, and Danielle S. Mc-
Namara. 2011. Predicting the proficiency level of
language learners using lexical indices. In Language
Testing.

M.C. Desmarais and R.S.J.d. Baker. 2012. A review of
recent advances in learner and skill modeling in intel-
ligent learning environments. In User Modeling and
User-Adapted Interaction, 22(1-2).

Markus Dickinson, Sandra Kübler, and Anthony Meyer.
2012. Predicting learner levels for online exercises
of Hebrew. In Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop
on Building Educational Applications Using NLP,
pages 95–104, Montréal, Canada, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Martin Ehala. 1994. Russian influence and the change in
progress in the Estonian adpositional system. In Lin-
guistica Uralica, 3, pages 177–193.

M. Erelt, T. Erelt, and K. Ross. 2007. Eesti keele
käsiraamat. Eesti Keele Sihtasutus.

M. Erelt. 2003. Estonian language. Linguistica Uralica.
Estonian Academy Publishers.

Pille Eslon. 2007. Õppijakeelekorpused ja keeleõp.
In Tallinna Ülikooli keelekorpuste optimaalsus,
töötlemine ja kasutamine, pages 87–120.

Pille Eslon. 2011. Millest räägivad eesti keele
käändeadendused? lähivõrdlusi. In Lähivertailuja, 21,
pages 45–64.

Joao Gama and Pavel Brazdil. 2000. Cascade general-
ization.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The WEKA data mining software: An update.
In The SIGKDD Explorations, volume 11, pages 10–
18.

Md Maruf Hasan and Hnin Oo Khaing. 2008. Learner
corpus and its application to automatic level checking
using machine learning algorithms. In Proceedings of
ECTI-CON.

C. Kaynak and E. Alpaydin. 2000. Multistage cascad-
ing of multiple classifiers: One mans noise is another
man’s data. In Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).

Xiaofei Lu. 2012. The relationship of lexical richness to
the quality of esl learners’ oral narratives. The Modern
Languages Journal.

John C. Platt. 1998. Sequential minimal optimiza-
tion: A fast algorithm for training support vector ma-
chines. Technical Report MSR-TR-98-14, Microsoft
Research.

Lawrence Rudner, Veronica Garcia, and Catherine
Welch. 2005. An evaluation of intellimetricTM essay
scoring system using responses to gmat awa prompts.
Technical report, Graduate Management Admission
Council (GMAC).

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tag-
ging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on New Methods in Language
Processing, pages 44–49, Manchester, UK.

A.K. Seewald. 2002. How to make stacking better and
faster while also taking care of an unknown weakness.
In In the proceedings of the Nineteenth International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 554–561.

Thepchai Supnithi, Kiyotaka Uchimoto, Toyomi Saiga,
Emi Izumi, Sornlertlamvanich Virach, and Hitoshi Isa-
hara. 2003. Automatic proficiency level checking
based on sst corpus. In In Proceedings of RANLP.

Yukio Tono. 2000. A corpus-based analysis of interlan-
guage development: analysing pos tag sequences of
EFL learner corpora. In PALC’99: Practical Applica-
tions in Language Corpora, pages 323–340.

Nina Vyatkina. 2012. The development of second lan-
guage writing complexity in groups and individuals:
A longitudinal learner corpus study. The Modern Lan-
guage Journal. to appear.

David M. Williamson, Randy Elliot Bennett, Stephen
Lazer, Jared Bernstein, Peter W. Foltz, Thomas K.
Landauer, David P. Rubin, Walter D. Way, and Kevin
Sweeney. 2010. Automated scoring for the assess-
ment of common core standards. White Paper.

David M. Williamson. 2009. A framework for im-
plementing automated scoring. In The annual meet-
ing of the American Educational Research Association
(AERA) and the National Council on Measurement in
Education (NCME).

Bo Zhang. 2008. Investigating proficiency classification
for the examination for the certificate of proficiency
in english (ecpe). In Spaan Fellow Working Papers in
Second or Foreign Language Assessment.

72


