



















































An MT Error-Driven Discriminative Word Lexicon using Sentence Structure Features


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 512–520,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013 c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

An MT Error-driven Discriminative Word Lexicon
using Sentence Structure Features

Jan Niehues and Alex Waibel
Institute for Anthropomatics

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
firstname.secondname@kit.edu

Abstract

The Discriminative Word Lexicon (DWL)
is a maximum-entropy model that pre-
dicts the target word probability given the
source sentence words. We present two
ways to extend a DWL to improve its abil-
ity to model the word translation probabil-
ity in a phrase-based machine translation
(PBMT) system. While DWLs are able to
model the global source information, they
ignore the structure of the source and tar-
get sentence. We propose to include this
structure by modeling the source sentence
as a bag-of-n-grams and features depend-
ing on the surrounding target words. Fur-
thermore, as the standard DWL does not
get any feedback from the MT system, we
change the DWL training process to ex-
plicitly focus on addressing MT errors.

By using these methods we are able to im-
prove the translation performance by up
to 0.8 BLEU points compared to a system
that uses a standard DWL.

1 Introduction

In many state-of-the-art SMT systems, the phrase-
based (Koehn et al., 2003) approach is used. In
this approach, instead of building the translation
by translating word by word, sequences of source
and target words, so-called phrase pairs, are used
as the basic translation unit. A table of correspon-
dences between source and target phrases forms
the translation model. Target language fluency is
modeled by a language model storing monolingual
n-gram occurrences. A log-linear combination of
these main models as well as additional features is
used to score the different translation hypotheses.
Then the decoder searches for the translation with
the highest score.

One problem of this approach is that bilingual
context is only modeled within the phrase pairs.
Therefore, different approaches to increase the
context available during decoding have been pre-
sented (Haque et al., 2011; Niehues et al., 2011;
Mauser et al., 2009). One promising approach is
the Discriminative Word Lexicon (DWL). In this
approach, a discriminative model is used to predict
the probability of a target word given the words in
the source sentence.

In contrast to other models in the phrase-based
system, this approach is capable of modeling the
translation probability using information from the
whole sentence. Thus it is possible to model
long-distance dependencies. But the model is not
able to use the structure of the sentence, since
the source sentence is modeled only as a bag-
of-words. Furthermore, the DWL is trained to
discriminate between all translation options with-
out knowledge about the other models used in a
phrase-based machine translation system such as
the translation model, language model etc. In
contrast, we try to feedback information about
possible errors of the MT system into the DWL.
Thereby, the DWLs are able to focus on improving
the errors of the other models of an MT system.

We will introduce features that encode infor-
mation about the source sentence structure. Fur-
thermore, the surrounding target words will also
be used in the model to encode information about
the target sentence structure. Finally, we incor-
porate information from the other models into the
creation of the training examples. We create the
negative training examples using possible errors of
the other models.

2 Related Work

Bangalore et al. (2007) presented an approach to
machine translation using discriminative lexical
selection. Motivated by their results, Mauser et
al. (2009) integrated the DWL into the PBMT ap-

512



proach. Thereby, they are able to use global source
information.

This was extended by Huck et al. (2010) by a
feature selection strategy in order to reduce the
number of weights. In Mediani et al. (2011) a first
approach to use information about MT errors in
the training of DWLs was presented. They select
the training examples by using phrase table infor-
mation also.

The DWLs are related to work that was done
in the area of word sense disambiguation (WSD).
Carpuat and Wu (2007) presented an approach to
disambiguate between different phrases instead of
performing the disambiguation at word level.

A different lexical model that uses target side
information was presented in Jeong et al. (2010).
The focus of this work was to model complex mor-
phology on the target language.

3 Discriminative Word Lexicon

The DWL is a maximum entropy model used to
determine the probability of using a target word
in the translation. Therefore, we train individ-
ual models for every target word. Each model is
trained to return the probability of this word given
the input sentence.

The input of the model is the source sentence.
Therefore, we need to represent the input sentence
by features. In this approach this is done by using
binary features. We use an indicator feature for
every input word. Therefore, the sentence is mod-
eled as a bag-of-words and the order of the words
is ignored. More formally, a given source sen-
tence F = f1 . . . fI is represented by the features
I(F ) = {if (F ) : f ∈ SourceV ocabulary}:

if (F ) =

{
1 : f ∈ F
0 : f /∈ F (1)

The models are trained on examples generated
by the parallel training data. The labels for train-
ing the classifier of target word e are defined as
follows:

labele(F,E) =

{
1 : e ∈ E
0 : e /∈ E (2)

We used the MegaM Toolkit1 to train the maxi-
mum entropy models. This model approximates
the probability p(ej |F ) of a target word ej given
the source sentence F .

1http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/ hal/megam/index.html

When we have the probability for every word ej
given the source sentence F , we need to combine
these probabilities into a probability of the whole
target sentence E = e1 . . . eJ given F . Making an
assumption of independence on the target side as
well, the models can be combined to the probabil-
ity of E given F :

p(E|F ) =
∏

ej∈e
p(ej |F ) (3)

In this equation we multiply the probability of
one word only once even if the word occurs sev-
eral times in the sentence. Since we build the tar-
get sentence from left to right during decoding,
we would need to change the score for this fea-
ture only if a new word is added to the hypothesis.
If a word is added second time we do not want
to change the feature value. In order to keep track
of this, additional bookkeeping would be required.
But the other models in our translation system will
prevent us from using a word too often in any case.
Therefore, we approximate the probability of the
sentence differently as defined in Equation 4.

p(E|F ) =
J∏

j=1

p(ej |F ) (4)

In this case we multiply the probabilities of all
word occurrences in the target sentence. There-
fore, we can calculate the score for every phrase
pair before starting with the translation.

4 Modeling Sentence Structure

As mentioned before one main drawback of DWLs
is that they do not encode any structural informa-
tion about the source or target sentence. We in-
corporated this information with two types of fea-
tures. First, we tried to encode the information
from the source sentence better by using a bag-of-
n-grams approach. Secondly, we introduced new
features to be able to encode information about the
neighboring target words also.

4.1 Source Sentence Structure
In the default approach the sentence is represented
as a bag-of-words. This has the advantage that
the model can use a quite large context of the
whole sentence. In contrast to the IBM models,
where the translation probability only depends on
the aligned source word, here the translation prob-
ability can be influenced by all words in the sen-
tence.

513



On the other hand, the local context is ignored
by the bag-of-words approach. Information about
the word order get lost. No information about the
previous and next word is available. The problem
is illustrated in the example in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Example for source structural informa-
tion

Source: Die Lehrer wussten nicht, ...
Reference: The teachers didn’t know ...

The German word Lehrer (engl. teacher) is the
same word for singular or plural. It is only pos-
sible to distinguish whether singular or plural is
meant through the context. This can be determined
by the plural article die. If only one teacher would
be meant, the corresponding article would be der.

In order be able to use the DWL to distinguish
between these two translations, we need to im-
prove the representation of the input sentence. As
shown in the example, it would be helpful to know
the order of the words. If we know that the word
die precedes Lehrer, it would be more probable
that the word is translated into teachers rather than
teacher.

Therefore, we propose to use a bag-of-n-grams
instead of a bag-of-words to represent the input
sentence. In this case we will use an indicator fea-
ture for every n-gram occurring in the input sen-
tence and not only for every word. This way we
are also able to encode the sequence of the words.
For the example, we would have the input feature
die Lehrer, which would increase the probability
of using teachers in the translation compared to
teacher.

By increasing the order of the n-grams, we will
also increase the number of features and run into
data sparseness problems. Therefore, we used
count filtering on the features for higher order n-
grams. Furthermore, we combine n-grams of dif-
ferent orders to better handle the data sparseness
problem.

4.2 Target Sentence Structure

In the standard DWL approach, the probability of
the target word depends only on the source words
in the input sentence. But this is a quite rough ap-
proximation. In reality, the probability of a target
word occurring in the sentence also depends on the
other target words in the sentence.

If we look at the word langsam (engl. slow or

slowly) in the example sentence in Figure 2, we
can only determine the correct translation by using
the target context. The word can be translated as
slow or slowly depending on how it is used in the
English sentence.

In order to model the translation probability bet-
ter we need structural information of the target
side. For example, if the preceding word on the
target side is be, the translation will be more prob-
ably slow than slowly.

We encoded the target context of the word by
features indicating the preceding or next word.
Furthermore, we extend the context to up to three
words before and after the word. Therefore the
following target features are added to the set of
features for the classifier of word e:

iTC e′ k(E) =

{
1 : ∃j : ej = e ∧ ej+k = e′
0 : else

(5)
where k ∈ {−1, 1} for a context of one word

before and after.

5 Training

Apart from the missing sentence structure the
DWL is not able to make use of feedback from
the other models in the MT system. We try to in-
corporate information about possible errors intro-
duced by the other models into the training of the
DWL.

The DWL is trained on the paral-
lel data that is available for the task
T = (F1, E1), . . . , (FM , EM ). In order to
train it, we need to create positive and negative
examples from this data. We will present different
approaches to generate the training examples,
which differ in the information used for creating
the negative examples.

In the original approach, one training example
is created for every sentence of the parallel data
and for every DWL classifier. If the target word
occurs in the sentence, we create a positive ex-
ample and if not the source sentence is used as a
negative example as described in Equation 2. For
most words, this results in a very unbalanced set of
training examples. Most words will only occur in
quite few sentences and therefore, we have mostly
negative examples.

Mediani et al. (2011) presented an approach
to create the training examples that is driven by
looking at possible errors due to the different

514



Figure 2: Example for target structural information

Source: Die Anerkennung wird langsam sein in den Vereinigten Staaten ...
Reference: The recognition is going to be slow in the United States, ...

translations in the phrase table (Phrase pair ap-
proach). Since a translation is generated always
using phrase pairs (f̃ , ẽ) with matching source
side, wrong words can only be generated in the
translation if the word occurs in the target side
words of those matching phrase pairs. There-
fore, we can define the possible target vocabulary
TV (F ) of a source sentence:

TV (F ) = {e|∃(f̃ , ẽ) : f̃ ⊆ F ∧ e ∈ ẽ} (6)

As a consequence, we generate a negative train-
ing example for one target word only from those
training sentences where the word is in the target
vocabulary but not in the reference.

labele(F,E) =

{
1 : e ∈ E
0 : e /∈ E ∧ e ∈ TV (F )

(7)
All training sentences for which the label is not
defined are not used in the training of the model
for word e. Thereby, not only can we focus the
classifiers on improving possible errors made by
the phrase table, but also reduce the amount of
training examples and therefore the time needed
for training dramatically.

In the phrase pair approach we only use in-
formation about possible errors of the translation
model for generating the negative training exam-
ples. But it would be preferable to consider possi-
ble errors of the whole MT system instead of only
using the phrase table. Some of the errors of the
phrase table might already be corrected by the lan-
guage model. The possible errors of the whole
system can be approximated by using the N -Best
list.

We first need to translate the whole cor-
pus and save the N -Best list for all sentences
NBEST (F ) = {E′1 . . . E′N}. Then we can
approximate the possible errors of the MT sys-
tem with the errors that occur in the N -Best list.
Therefore, we create a negative example for a tar-
get word only if it occurs in the N -Best list and
not in the reference. Compared to the phrase pair
approach, the only difference is the definition of
the target vocabulary:

TV (F ) = {e|e ∈ NBEST (F )} (8)

The disadvantage of the N-Best approach is, of
course, that we need to translate the whole cor-
pus. This is quite time consuming, but it can be
parallelized.

5.1 Training Examples for Target Features
If we use target features, the creation of the train-
ing examples gets more difficult. When using only
source features, we can create one example from
every training sentence. Even if the word occurs
in several phrase pairs or in several entries of the
N -Best list, all of them will create the same train-
ing example, since the features only depend on the
source sentence.

When we use target features, the features of the
training example depend also on the target words
that occur around the word. Therefore, we can
only use the N -Best list approach to create the tar-
get features since previous approaches mentioned
in the last part do not have the target context in-
formation. Furthermore, we can create different
examples from the same sentence. If we have, for
example, the N -Best list entries I think ... and I be-
lieve .., we can use the context think or the context
believe for the model of I.

In the approach using all target features (All
TF), we created one training example for every
sentence where the word occurs. If we see the
word in different target contexts, we create all the
features for these contexts and use them in the
training example.

I(F,E) = max( I(F ); I(E); (9)

I(E′)|E′ ∈ NBEST (F ))

The maximum is defined component-wise. So
all features, which have in I(F ),I(E) or I(E′) the
value one, also have the value one in I(F,E). If
we use the context that was given by the reference,
this might not exist in the phrase-based MT sys-
tem. Therefore, in the next approach (N-Best TF),
we only used target features from the N -Best list.

I(F,E) = max(I(F ); I(E′)|E′ ∈ NBEST (F ))
(10)

In both examples, we still have the problem that
we can use different contexts in one training ex-

515



ample. This condition can not happen when ap-
plying the DWL model. Therefore, we changed
the set of training examples in the separate target
features approach (Separate TF). We no longer
create one training example for every training sen-
tence (F,E), but one for every training sentence
N -Best list translation (F,E,E′). We only con-
sidered the examples for the classifier of target
word e, where e occurs in the N -Best list entry E′.
If the word does not occur in any N -Best list en-
try of a training sentence, but in the reference, we
created an additional example (F,E, ””). The fea-
tures of this examples can then be created straight
forward as:

I((F,E,E′)) = max(I(F ); I(E′)) (11)

If we have seen the word only in the reference,
we create an training example without target fea-
tures. Therefore, we have again a training exam-
ple which can not happen when using the DWL
model. Therefore, we removed these examples in
the last method (Restricted TF).

6 Experiments

After presenting the different approaches to per-
form feature and example selection, we will now
evaluate them. First, we will give a short overview
of the MT system. Then we will give a detailed
evaluation on the task of translating German lec-
tures into English and analyze the influence of the
presented approaches. Afterwards, we will present
overview experiments on the German-to-English
and English-to-German translation task of WMT
13 Shared Translation Task.

6.1 System Description
The translation system was trained on the EPPS
corpus, NC corpus, the BTEC corpus and TED
talks.2 The data was preprocessed and compound
splitting (Koehn and Knight, 2003) was applied
for German. Afterwards the discriminative word
alignment approach as described in Niehues and
Vogel (2008) was applied to generate the align-
ments between source and target words. The
phrase table was built using the scripts from the
Moses package (Koehn et al., 2007). A 4-gram
language model was trained on the target side of
the parallel data using the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke,
2002). In addition we used a bilingual language
model as described in Niehues et al. (2011).

2http://www.ted.com

Reordering was performed as a preprocessing
step using part-of-speech information generated
by the TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994). We used
the reordering approach described in Rottmann
and Vogel (2007) and the extensions presented in
Niehues and Kolss (2009) to cover long-range re-
orderings, which are typical when translating be-
tween German and English.

An in-house phrase-based decoder was used to
generate the translation hypotheses and the opti-
mization was performed using MERT (Venugopal
et al., 2005).

We optimized the weights of the log-linear
model on a separate set of TED talks and also
used TED talks for testing. The development set
consists of 1.7k segments containing 16k words.
As test set we used 3.5k segments containing 31k
words. We will refer to this system as System 1.

In order to show the influence of the approaches
better, we evaluated them also in a second system.
In addition to the models used in the first system
we performed a log-linear language model and
phrase table adaptation as described in Niehues
and Waibel (2012). To this system we refer as Sys-
tem 2 in the following experiments.

6.2 German - English TED Experiments

6.2.1 Source Features
In a first set of experiments, we analyzed the dif-
ferent types of source structure features described
in Section 4.1. In all the experiments, we generate
the negative training examples using the candidate
translations generated by the phrase pairs. The re-
sults can be found in Table 1.

First, we added the unigram DWL to the base-
line system. The higher improvements for the Sys-
tem 1 is due to the fact that the DWL is only
trained on the TED corpus and therefore also per-
forms some level of domain adaptation. This is
more important for the System 1, since System 2
is already adapted to the TED domain.

If we use features based on bigrams instead of
unigrams, the number of features increases by a
factor of eight. Furthermore, in both cases the
translation quality drops. Especially for System
1, we have a significant drop in the BLEU score
of the test set by 0.6 BLEU points. One prob-
lem might be that most of the bigrams occur quite
rarely and therefore, we have a problem of data
sparseness and generalization.

If we combine the features of unigram and bi-

516



Table 1: Experiments using different source features

System FeatureSize System 1 System 2
Dev Test Dev Test

Baseline 0 26.32 24.24 28.40 25.89
Unigram 40k 27.46 25.56 28.58 26.15
Bigram 319k 27.34 24.92 28.53 25.82
Uni+bigram 359k 27.69 25.55 28.66 26.51
+ Count filter 2 122k 27.75 25.71 28.75 26.74
+ Count filter 5 63k 27.81 25.67 28.72 26.81
+ Trigram 77k 27.76 25.76 28.82 26.94

gram features, for System 1, we get an improve-
ment of 0.2 BLEU points on the development data
and the same translation quality on the test data
as the baseline DWL system using only unigrams.
For System 2, we can improve by 0.1 on the devel-
opment data and 0.4 on the test data. So we can get
a first improvement using these additional source
features, but the number of features increased by a
factor of nine.

In order to decrease the number of features
again, we applied count filtering to the bigram
features. In a first experiment we only used the
bigram features that occur at least twice. This
reduced the number of features dramatically by
a factor of three. Furthermore, this even im-
proved the translation quality. In both systems we
could improve the translation quality by 0.2 BLEU
points. So it seems to be quite important to add
only the relevant bigram features.

If we use a minimum occurrence of five for the
bigram features, we can even decrease the num-
ber of features further by a factor of two without
losing any translation performance.

Finally, we added the trigram features. For
these features we applied count filtering of five.
For System 1, the translation quality stays the
same, but for System 2 we can improve the trans-
lation quality by additional 0.2 BLEU points.

In summary, we could improve the translation
quality by 0.2 for the System 1 and 0.8 BLEU
points for the System 2 on the test set. Due to the
count filtering, this is achieved by only using less
than twice as many features.

6.3 Training Examples

In a next step we analyzed the different exam-
ple selection approaches. The results are summa-
rized in Table 2. In these experiments we used the
source features using unigrams, bigrams and tri-

grams with count filtering in all experiments.
In the first experiment, we used the original ap-

proach to create the training examples. In this
case, all sentences where the word does not occur
in the reference generate negative examples. In
our setup, we needed 8,461 DWL models to trans-
late the development and test data. These are all
target words that occur in phrase pairs that can be
used to translate the development or test set.

In each of approaches we have 0.75M posi-
tive examples for these models. In the origi-
nal approach, we have 428M negative examples.
So in this case the number of positive and nega-
tive examples is very unbalanced. This training
data leads to models with a total of 659M feature
weights.

If we use the target side of the phrase pairs to
generate our training examples, we dramatically
reduce the number of negative training examples.
In this case only 5M negative training examples
are generated. The size of the models is reduced
dramatically to 38M weights. Furthermore, we
could improve the translation quality by 0.3 BLEU
points on both System 1 and System 2.

If we use the 300-Best lists produced by Sys-
tem 1 to generate the training examples, we can
reduce the model size further. This approach leads
to models only half the size of the phrase pairs ap-
proach using only 1.59M negative examples. Fur-
thermore, for System 1 the translation quality can
be improved further to 25.87 BLEU points. For
System 2 the BLEU score on the development data
increases, but the score on the test sets drops by 0.4
BLEU points.

In the next experiment we used the N -Best lists
generated by System 2. The results are shown in
the line N -Best list 2. In this case, the model size
is slightly reduced further. And on the adapted
system a similar performance is achieved. But for

517



Table 2: Experiments using different methods to create training examples

System #weight #neg. Examples System 1 System 2
Dev Test Dev Test

Original Approach 659 M 428 M 27.39 25.44 28.64 26.63
Phrase pairs 38 M 5.26 M 27.76 25.76 28.82 26.94
N -Best list 1 16 M 1.59 M 27.93 25.87 29.07 26.57
N -Best list 2 11 M 1.22 M 27.46 25.37 28.79 26.59
N -Best list 1 nonUnique 16 M 1.41M 27.99 25.97 29.07 26.65

System 1 the performance of this approach drops.
Consequently, it seems to be fine to use an N -

Best list of a more general system to generate the
negative examples. But the N -Best list should not
stem from an adapted system.

Finally, the phrase table was trained on the same
corpus as the one that was used to generate the N -
Best lists for DWL training. Since we have seen
the data before, longer phrases can be used than
in a real test scenario. To compensate partly for
that, we removed all phrase pairs that occur only
once in the phrase table. The results are shown in
the last line. This approach could slightly improve
the translation quality leading to a BLEU score of
25.97 for System 1 and 26.65 for the System 2.

6.4 Target Features

After evaluating the different approaches to gen-
erate the negative examples, we also evaluated the
different approaches for the target features. The
results are summarized in Table 3. In all these ex-
periments we use the training examples generated
by the N -Best list of System 1 using the phrase
table without unique phrase pairs.

First, we tested the four different methods using
a context of one word before and one word after
the word.

In the experiments the first two methods, All
TF and N-Best TF , perform worse than the last
two approaches, Separate TF and Restricted TF.
So it seems to be important to have realistic exam-
ples and not to mix different target contexts in one
example. The Separate and Restricted approach
perform similarly well. In both cases the perfor-
mance can be improved slightly by using a context
of three words before and after instead of using
only one word.

If we look at the model size, the number of
weights increases from 16M to 17M, when using
a context of one word and to 21M using a context
of three words.

If we compare the results to the systems using
no target features in the first row, no or only slight
improvements can be achieved. One reason might
be that the morphology of English is not very com-
plex and therefore, the target context is not as im-
portant to determine the correct translation.

6.4.1 Overview
In Table 4, we give an overview of the results us-
ing the different extensions to DWLs given in this
paper. The baseline system does not use any DWL
at all. If we use a DWL using only bag-of-words
features and the training examples from the phrase
pairs, we can improve by 1.3 BLEU points on Sys-
tem 1 and 0.3 BLEU points on System 2.

By adding the source-context features, the first
system can be improved by 0.2 BLEU points and
the second one by 0.8 BLEU points. If we use the
training examples from the N -Best list instead of
using the ones from the phrase table, we improve
by 0.2 on System 1, but perform 0.3 worse on Sys-
tem 2. Adding the target context features does not
improve System 1, but System 2 can be improved
by 0.3 BLEU points. This system results in the
best average performance. Compared to the base-
line system with DWLs, we can improve by 0.4
and 0.8 BLEU points, respectively.

Table 4: Overview of results for TED lectures

System System 1 System 2
Dev Test Dev Test

Baseline 26.32 24.24 28.40 25.89
DWL 27.46 25.56 28.58 26.15
sourceContext 27.76 25.76 28.82 26.94
N -Best 27.99 25.97 29.07 26.65
TargetContext 28.15 25.91 29.12 26.90

6.5 German - English WMT 13 Experiments
In addition to the experiments on the TED data,
we also tested the models in the systems for the

518



Table 3: Experiments using different target features

System Context System 1 System 2
Dev Test Dev Test

No Target Features 0-0 27.99 25.97 29.07 26.65
All TF 1-1 27.80 25.48 28.80 26.38
N-Best TF 1-1 27.99 25.74 28.86 26.37
Separate TF 1-1 28.06 25.81 28.98 26.80
Restricted TF 1-1 28.13 25.84 28.94 26.68
Separate TF 3-3 27.87 25.90 28.99 26.75
Restricted TF 3-3 28.15 25.91 29.12 26.90

WMT 2013. The systems are similar to the one
used before, but were trained on all available train-
ing data and use additional models. The systems
were tested on newstest2012. The results for Ger-
man to English are summarized in Table 5. In this
case the DWLs were trained on the EPPS and the
NC corpus. Since the corpora are bigger, we per-
form an additional weight filtering on the models.

The baseline system uses already a DWL
trained with the bag-of-words features and the
training examples were created using the phrase
table. If we add the bag-of-n-grams features up
to a n-gram length of 3, we cannot improve the
translation quality on this task. But by addition-
ally generating the negative training examples us-
ing the 300-Best list, we can improve this system
by 0.2 BLEU points.

Table 5: Experiments on German to English WMT
2013

System Dev Test
Unigram DWL 25.79 24.36
+ Bag-of-n-gram 25.85 24.33
+ N -Best 25.84 24.52

6.6 English - German WMT 13 Experiments

We also tested the approach also on the reverse
direction. Since the German morphology is much
more complex than the English one, we hope that
in this case the target features can help more. The
results for this task are shown in Table 6. Here, the
baseline system again already uses DWLs. If we
add the bag-of-n-grams features and generate the
training examples from the 300-Best list, we can
again slightly improve the translation quality. In
this case we can improve the translation quality by
additional 0.1 BLEU points by adding the target

features. This leads to an overall improvement by
nearly 0.2 BLEU points.

Table 6: Experiments on English to German WMT
2013

System Dev Test
unigram DWL 16.97 17.41
+ Bag-of-n-gram 16.89 17.45
+ N -Best 17.10 17.47
+ Target Features 17.08 17.58

7 Conclusion

Discriminative Word Lexica have been recently
used in several translation systems and have shown
to improve the translation quality. In this work, we
extended the approach to improve its modeling of
the translation process.

First, we added features which represent the
structure of the sentence better. By using bag-of-
n-grams features instead of bag-of-words features,
we are able to encode the order of the source sen-
tence. Furthermore, we use features for the sur-
rounding target words to also model the target con-
text of the word. In addition, we tried to train the
DWLs in a way that they help to address possi-
ble errors of the MT system by feeding informa-
tion from the MT system back into the generation
of the negative training examples. Thereby, we
could reduce the size of the models and improve
the translation quality. Overall, we were able to
improve the translation quality on three different
tasks in two different translation directions. Im-
provements of up to 0.8 BLEU points could be
achieved.

519



8 Acknowledgements

This work was partly achieved as part of the
Quaero Programme, funded by OSEO, French
State agency for innovation. The research lead-
ing to these results has received funding from
the European Union Seventh Framework Pro-
gramme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement
n◦ 287658.

References
S. Bangalore, P. Haffner, and S. Kanthak. 2007. Sta-

tistical Machine Translation through Global Lexical
Selection and Sentence Reconstruction. In Annual
Meeting-Association for Computational Linguistics,
volume 45, page 152.

M. Carpuat and D. Wu. 2007. Improving Statis-
tical Machine Translation using Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation. In In The 2007 Joint Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and Computational Natural Language Learning.

R. Haque, S.K. Naskar, A. Bosch, and A. Way.
2011. Integrating source-language context into
phrase-based statistical machine translation. Ma-
chine Translation, 25(3):239–285.

M. Huck, M. Ratajczak, P. Lehnen, and H. Ney. 2010.
A Comparison of Various Types of Extended Lexi-
con Models for Statistical Machine Translation. In
Proc. of the Conf. of the Assoc. for Machine Trans-
lation in the Americas (AMTA).

M. Jeong, K. Toutanova, H. Suzuki, and C. Quirk.
2010. A Discriminative Lexicon Model for Com-
plex Morphology. In Proceedings of the Ninth Con-
ference of the Association for Machine Translation
in the Americas (AMTA 2010).

P. Koehn and K. Knight. 2003. Empirical Methods for
Compound Splitting. In EACL, Budapest, Hungary.

P. Koehn, F.J. Och, and D. Marcu. 2003. Statis-
tical Phrase-Based Translation. In Proceedings of
the 2003 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
on Human Language Technology, pages 48–54, Ed-
monton, Canada.

P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch,
M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen,
C. Moran, R. Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin,
and E. Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source Toolkit
for Statistical Machine Translation. In ACL 2007,
Demonstration Session, Prague, Czech Republic.

A. Mauser, S. Hasan, and H. Ney. 2009. Extending
Statistical Machine Translation with Discriminative
and Trigger-based Lexicon Models. In Proceedings
of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing: Volume 1 – Volume
1, Emnlp’09, Singapore.

M. Mediani, E. Cho, J. Niehues, T. Herrmann, and
A. Waibel. 2011. The KIT English-French Trans-
lation Systems for IWSLT 2011. Proceedings of the
eight International Workshop on Spoken Language
Translation (IWSLT).

Jan Niehues and Mutsin Kolss. 2009. A POS-Based
Model for Long-Range Reorderings in SMT. Fourth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT
2009), Athens, Greece.

J. Niehues and S. Vogel. 2008. Discriminative Word
Alignment via Alignment Matrix Modeling. Pro-
ceedings of the Third Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 18–25.

J. Niehues and A. Waibel. 2012. Detailed Analysis of
different Strategies for Phrase Table Adaptation in
SMT. In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference of the
Association for Machine Translation in the Ameri-
cas (AMTA).

J. Niehues, T. Herrmann, S. Vogel, and A. Waibel.
2011. Wider Context by Using Bilingual Language
Models in Machine Translation. Sixth Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation (WMT 2011), Edin-
burgh, UK.

K. Rottmann and S. Vogel. 2007. Word Reordering in
Statistical Machine Translation with a POS-Based
Distortion Model. In TMI, Skövde, Sweden.

H. Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tag-
ging Using Decision Trees. In International Con-
ference on New Methods in Language Processing,
Manchester, UK.

A. Stolcke. 2002. SRILM – An Extensible Language
Modeling Toolkit. In Icslp, Denver, Colorado, USA.

A. Venugopal, A. Zollman, and A. Waibel. 2005.
Training and Evaluation Error Minimization Rules
for Statistical Machine Translation. In Workshop on
Data-drive Machine Translation and Beyond (WPT-
05), Ann Arbor, MI.

520


