










































Influence of preprocessing on dependency syntax annotation: speed and agreement


Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop & Interoperability with Discourse, pages 28–32,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Influence of preprocessing on dependency syntax annotation: speed and
agreement

Arne Skjærholt
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo

arnskj@ifi.uio.no

Abstract

When creating a new resource, prepro-
cessing the source texts before annotation
is both ubiquitous and obvious. How the
preprocessing affects the annotation effort
for various tasks is for the most part an
open question, however. In this paper,
we study the effects of preprocessing on
the annotation of dependency corpora and
how annotation speed varies as a function
of the quality of three different parsers and
compare with the speed obtained when
starting from a least-processed baseline.

We also present preliminary results con-
cerning the effects on agreement based on
a small subset of sentences that have been
doubly-annotated.1

1 Introduction

It is commonly accepted wisdom in treebanking
that it is preferable to preprocess data before PoS
and syntax annotation, rather than having annota-
tors work from raw text. However, the impact of
preprocessing is not well studied and factors such
as the lower bound on performance for preprocess-
ing to be useful and the return on investment of
increased performance are largely unknown.

Corpora and applications based on dependency
syntax have become increasingly popular in recent
years, and many new corpora are being created. In
this work we investigate the task of syntactic anno-
tation based on dependency grammar, and how an-
notation speed and inter-annotator agreement are
influenced by parser performance. Our study is
performed in the context of the annotation effort
currently under way at the national library of Nor-
way, tasked with creating a freely available syn-
tactically annotated corpus of Norwegian. It is the
first widely available such corpus.

1Code and data used to obtain these results is available at
https://github.com/arnsholt/law7-annotation

1.1 Related work
The Penn Treebank project (Marcus et al., 1993)
had annotators correct automatically parsed and
PoS-tagged data, and they report that correcting
rather than annotating from scratch is massively
helpful in the PoS annotation task (from scratch
took twice as long and increased error rate and dis-
agreement by 50%), but unfortunately there is no
such comparison for the syntactic bracketing task.
The task of PoS annotation has been studied fur-
ther by Fort and Sagot (2010), who establish the
lower bound on tagger accuracy to be in the range
of 60–80% for the preprocessing to be useful.

For the task of syntactic bracketing, Chiou et
al. (2001) investigated some facets of the prob-
lem while developing the Penn Chinese treebank
and found that when using a parser with a labelled
F1 = 76.04, the time spent correcting is 58% of the
time spent on unassisted annotation, and a further
improved parser (F1 = 82.14) reduces the time to
50% of that used by unassisted annotation.

2 Experimental protocol

In this section we outline the key methodological
choices made for our experiments. First we dis-
cuss what timing data we collect and the texts an-
notated, before describing the preprocessors used.

Environment For our experiments, four differ-
ent texts were chosen for annotation: two from
the Aftenposten (AP 06 & AP 08), and two from
Dagbladet (DB 12 & DB 13), both daily news-
papers. Key statistics for the four texts are given
in Table 1. The annotation effort uses the TRED
tool2, originally created for the Prague Depen-
dency Treebank project. It is easily extended, and
thus we used these facilities to collect the timing
data. To minimise interference with the annota-
tors, we simply recorded the time a sentence was
shown on screen and accounted for outliers caused
by breaks and interruptions in the analysis.

The annotation work is done by two annotators,
Odin and Thor. Both are trained linguists, and

2http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/tred/

28



Text n µ s

AP 06 373 17.0 10.8
AP 08 525 16.5 9.11
DB 12 808 12.1 8.47
DB 13 648 14.6 9.15

Total 2354 34223 tokens

Table 1: Statistics of the annotated texts. n num-
ber of sentences, µ mean length, s length standard
deviation.

are full-time employees of the National Library
tasked with annotating the corpus. The only ad-
ditional instruction given to the annotators in con-
junction with the experiment was that they try to
close the TRED program when they know that they
were going away for a long time, in order to min-
imise the number of outliers. The actual annota-
tion proceeded as normal according to the anno-
tation guidelines3. Thor annotated AP 08 and DB
13, while Odin annotated AP 06 and DB 12 as well
as the first 400 sentences of DB 13 for the purposes
of measuring annotator agreement.

Preprocessing In our experiments, we consider
three different statistical parsers as preprocessors
and compare these to a minimally preprocessed
baseline. Unfortunately, it was impossible to get
timing data for completely unannotated data, as
TRED requires its input to be a dependency tree.
For this reason our minimal preprocessing, we call
it the caterpillar strategy, is attaching each word to
the previous word, labelled with the most frequent
dependency relation.

Of the three statistical parsers, one is trained
directly on already annotated Norwegian data re-
leased by the treebank project (version 0.2) and
the other two are cross-lingual parsers trained on
converted Swedish and Danish data using the tech-
niques described in Skjærholt and Øvrelid (2012).
In brief, this technique involves mapping the PoS
and dependency relation tagsets of the source cor-
pora into the corresponding tagsets of the target
representation, and applying structural transfor-
mations to bring the syntactic analyses into as
close a correspondence as possible with the tar-
get analyses. It was also shown that for lan-
guages as closely related as Norwegian, Danish
and Swedish, not delexicalising, contrary to the

3Distributed with the corpus at:
http://www.nb.no/Tilbud/Forske/Spraakbanken/
Tilgjengelege-ressursar/Tekstressursar

Parser UAS LAS

Baseline 30.8% 3.86%
Danish 69.9% 46.7%
Swedish 77.7% 68.1%
Norwegian 86.6% 83.5%

Table 2: Parser performance. Labelled (LAS) and
unlabelled (UAS) attachment scores.

standard procedure in cross-lingual parsing (Sø-
gaard, 2011; Zeman and Resnik, 2008), yields a
non-negligible boost in performance.

All three parsers are trained using MaltParser
(Nivre et al., 2007) using the liblinear learner and
the nivreeager parsing algorithm with default set-
tings. The Norwegian parser is trained on the first
90% of the version 0.2 release of the Norwegian
dependency treebank with the remaining 10% held
out for evaluation, while the cross-lingual parsers
are trained on the training sets of Talbanken05
(Nivre et al., 2006) and the Danish Dependency
Treebank (Kromann, 2003) as distributed for the
CoNLL-X shared task. The parser trained on
Swedish data is lexicalised, while the one trained
on Danish used a delexicalised corpus.

The performance of the four different prepro-
cessing strategies is summarised in Table 2. The
numbers are mostly in line with those reported
in Skjærholt and Øvrelid (2012), with a drop of
a few percentage points in both LAS and UAS
for all parsers, except for a gain of more than 5
points LAS for the Danish parser, due to the fixed
relation labels. There are three reasons for the
differences: First of all, the test corpus is differ-
ent; Skjærholt and Øvrelid (2012) used the ver-
sion 0.1 release of the Norwegian corpus, while
we use version 0.2. Secondly, TRED requires that
its input trees only have a single child of the root
node, while MaltParser will attach unconnected
subgraphs to the root node if the graph produced
after consuming the whole input isn’t connected.
Finally, TRED validates dependency relation la-
bels strictly, which revealed a few bugs in the
conversion script for the Danish data. A post-
processing script corrects the invalid relations and
attaches multiple children of the root node to the
most appropriate child of the root.

The texts given to the annotators were an amal-
gam of the outputs of the four parsers, such
that each block of ten sentences comes from the
same parser. Each chunk was randomly assigned

29



0

50

100

150

200

250

2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20

M
ed

ia
n

tim
e

(s
)

Sentence length

Caterpillar
Danish

Norwegian
Swedish

Figure 1: Median annotation time, Odin.

to a parser, in such a way that 5 chunks were
parsed with the baseline strategy and the remain-
ing chunks were evenly distributed between the
remaining three parsers. This strategy ensures
as even a distribution between parsers as possi-
ble, while keeping the annotators blind to parser
assignments. We avoid the annotators knowing
which parser was used, as this could subcon-
ciously bias their behaviour.

3 Results

Speed To compare the different parsers as pre-
processors for annotation, we need to apply a sum-
mary statistic across the times for each annotator,
binned by sentence length. We use the median,
which is highly resistant to outliers and concep-
tually simpler than strategies for outlier elimina-
tion4. Furthermore, to ensure large enough bins,
we only consider sentences of length 20 or less.

Figure 1 shows the evolution of annotation time
as a function of sentence length for Odin for
all four parsers, and Figure 2 the corresponding
graphs for Thor. It is clear that, although Odin
consistently uses less time to annotate sentences
than Thor, the different parsers are ranked identi-
cally, and the relative speed-up of the higher qual-
ity parsers is similar for both annotators.

Agreement To measure agreement we study the
LAS and UAS we get from comparing Odin and
Thor’s annotations. Artstein and Poesio (2008) ar-
gue strongly in favour of using a chance-corrected

4Nor does it assume normality, which would be inappro-
priate for timing data, unlike most outlier detection methods.

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20

M
ed

ia
n

tim
e

(s
)

Sentence length

Caterpillar
Danish

Norwegian
Swedish

Figure 2: Median annotation time, Thor.

Parser n UAS LAS

Baseline 10 99.1% 99.1%
Danish 130 96.3% 94.0%
Swedish 110 96.1% 94.4%
Norwegian 150 96.8% 95.3%

Table 3: Annotator agreement. n sentences, unla-
belled (UAS) and labelled (LAS) attachment.

measure of agreement, but the measures they
present are applicable to categorical data, not
structured data such as syntactic data. Thus, sim-
ple agreement measures are the standard measures
in syntax (Hajič, 2004; Miltsakaki et al., 2004;
Maamouri et al., 2008). As mentioned in Sec-
tion 2, only 400 sentences were doubly annotated.
Ideally, we would have liked to have all the texts
doubly annotated, but external constraints on the
annotation effort limited us to the set at hand.

Table 3 shows the unlabelled and unlabelled ac-
curacies on the doubly annotated dataset, along
with the number of sentences in each dataset. Due
to the random distribution of sentences, only a sin-
gle baseline chunk was in the first 400 sentences,
making it hard to draw conclusions on the quality
obtained with that strategy. The imbalance is less
severe for the other parsers, but the Norwegian set
is still almost 50% larger than the Swedish one.
The agreement on the baseline set is quite surpris-
ing, with only a single token out of 115 receiving
different heads and all tokens having the same de-
pendency relation. Unlabelled agreement is lower
by about three percentage points on the three re-
maining datasets, with no real variation in terms

30



of parser performance, and labelled agreement is
somewhat lower again, indicating some level of
disagreement over dependency relations.

4 Analysis

Our results are clearest for the question of how
time used to annotate is affected by preprocess-
ing quality. The Danish parser halves the time re-
quired to annotate sentences compared to the base-
line; already an important gain. The Norwegian
parser cuts the time in half again, with the Swedish
parser between the two. Based on the learning
curves in Skjærholt and Øvrelid (2012), a parser
with performance equivalent to the Danish parser
(70% UAS) can be obtained with about 50 anno-
tated sentences, and the 80% UAS of the Swedish
parser is reachable with about 200 sentences.

Given the limited amount of data available for
our study of agreement, it is hard to make solid
conclusions, but it does appear that head selec-
tion is virtually unchanged by parser performance,
while there may be some increase in agreement
on dependency relation labels, from 96.0% with
the Danish parser, to 96.5% and 97.1% with the
Swedish and Norwegian parsers. Agreement is ex-
tremely high for both heads and labels on the data
preprocessed with the baseline parser, but based
on 10 sentences, it is impossible to say whether
this is a fluke or a reasonable approximation of the
value we would get with a larger sample.

The unchanged agreement score suggests that
the annotators are not unduly influenced by a bet-
ter parser. An increase in agreement would not be
an unambiguously positive result though; a pos-
itive interpretation would be that the annotators’
work is closer to the Platonic ideal of a correct
analysis of the corpus, but a less charitable inter-
pretation is that the annotators are more biased by
the parser. Furthermore, the very high agreement
for the baseline parser is potentially worrying if
the result remains unchanged by a larger sample.
This would indicate that in order to get the best
quality annotation, it is necessary to start from
a virtually unprocessed corpus, which would re-
quire four times as much time as using a 90% UAS
parser for preprocessing, based on our data.

5 Conclusions

Given the time-consuming nature of linguistic an-
notation, higher annotation speed is an obvious
good for any annotation project as long as the

annotation quality doesn’t degrade unacceptably.
Based on the results obtained in our study, it is
clear that the speed-up to be had from a good de-
pendency parser is important, to the extent that
when annotating it is a very bad idea to not use
one. Further, based on the learning curves pre-
sented in Skjærholt and Øvrelid (2012), it seems
that parser adaptation with a view to preprocess-
ing for annotation is primarily useful in the ear-
liest stages of an annotation effort as the learn-
ing curves show that once 100 sentences are anno-
tated, a parser trained on that data will already be
competitive with a cross-lingual parser for Norwe-
gian. Other languages may require more data, but
the amount required is most likely on the same or-
der of magnitude. If same-language data are avail-
able, a parser trained on that may last longer.

As regards annotator agreement, our results
show that head selection as measured by unla-
belled accuracy is unchanged by parser accuracy.
Agreement as measured by labelled accuracy in-
creases somewhat with increased parser perfor-
mance, which indicates that agreement on labels
increases with parser performance. The agreement
results for our baseline parser are extremely high,
but given that we only have ten sentences to com-
pare, it is impossible to say if this is a real differ-
ence between the baseline and the other parsers.

5.1 Future work

There are a number of things, particularly relat-
ing to annotator agreement we would like to in-
vestigate further. Chief of these is the lack of a
chance corrected agreement measure for depen-
dency syntax. As mentioned previously, no such
measure has been formulated as most agreement
measures are most naturally expressed in terms of
categorical assignments, which is a bad fit for syn-
tax. However, it should be possible to create an
agreement measure suitable for syntax.

We would also like to perform a deeper study of
the effects of preprocessing on agreement using a
proper measure of agreement. The results for our
baseline strategy are based on extremely little data,
and thus it is hard to draw any solid conclusions.
We would also like to see if different groups of an-
notators are influenced differently by the parsers.
Our annotators were both trained linguists, and it
would be interesting to see if using lay annotators
or undergraduate linguistics students changes the
agreement scores.

31



References
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-Coder

Agreement for Computational Linguistics. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 34(4):555–596.

Fu-Dong Chiou, David Chiang, and Martha Palmer.
2001. Facilitating Treebank Annotation Using a Sta-
tistical Parser. In Proceedings of the first interna-
tional conference on Human language technology
research, pages 1–4.

Karën Fort and Benoît Sagot. 2010. Influence of Pre-
annotation on POS-tagged Corpus Development. In
Nianwen Xue and Massimo Poesio, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the fourth linguistic annotation work-
shop, pages 56–63, Stroudsburg. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Jan Hajič. 2004. Complex Corpus Annotation: The
Prague Dependency Treebank. Jazykovedný ústav
L’. Štúra, SAV.

Matthias Trautner Kromann. 2003. The Danish De-
pendency Treebank and the DTAG Treebank Tool.
In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories, pages 217–220. Växjö Uni-
versity Press.

Mohamed Maamouri, Ann Bies, and Seth Kulick.
2008. Enhancing the Arabic Treebank : A Collabo-
rative Effort toward New Annotation Guidelines. In
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 3192–
3196. European Language Resources Association.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, and
Bonnie Webber. 2004. The Penn Discourse Tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the 4th International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
pages 2237–2240. European Language Resources
Association.

Joakim Nivre, Jens Nilsson, and Johan Hall. 2006. Tal-
banken05 : A Swedish Treebank with Phrase Struc-
ture and Dependency Annotation. In Proceedings of
the fifth international conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation.

Joakim Nivre, Jens Nilsson, Johan Hall, Atanas
Chanev, Gülşen Eryiğit, Sandra Kübler, Svetoslav
Marinov, and Erwin Marsi. 2007. MaltParser:
A language-independent system for data-driven de-
pendency parsing. Natural Language Engineering,
13(2):95–135.

Arne Skjærholt and Lilja Øvrelid. 2012. Impact
of treebank characteristics on cross-lingual parser
adaptation. In Iris Hendrickx, Sandra Kübler, and
Kiril Simov, editors, Proceedings of the 11th inter-
national workshop on treebanks and linguistic theo-
ries, pages 187–198, Lisbon. Edições Colibri.

Anders Søgaard. 2011. Data point selection for cross-
language adaptation of dependency parsers. In Pro-
ceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 682–686.

Daniel Zeman and Philip Resnik. 2008. Cross-
Language Parser Adaptation between Related Lan-
guages. In Anil Kumar Singh, editor, Proceedings
of the IJCNLP-08 Workshop on NLP for Less Priv-
ileged Languages, pages 35–42, Hyderabad, India.
Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing.

32


