










































Complex Predicates are Multi-Word Expressions


Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), page 31,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13-14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Complex Predicates are Multi-word Expressions

Martha Palmer
Department of Linguistics

University of Colorado at Boulder
295 UCB

Boulder, Colorado 80309-029, USA
Martha.Palmer@colorado.edu

Abstract

Practitioners of English Natural Language Process-
ing often feel fortunate because their tokens are
clearly marked by spaces on either side. However,
the spaces can be quite deceptive, since they ignore
the boundaries of multi-word expressions, such as
noun-noun compounds, verb particle constructions,
light verb constructions and constructions from Con-
struction Grammar, e.g., caused-motion construc-
tions and resultatives. Correctly identifying and han-
dling these types of expressions can be quite chal-
lenging, even from the viewpoint of manual anno-
tation. This talk will review the pervasive nature of
these constructions, touching on Arabic and Hindi as
well as English. Using several illustrative examples
from newswire and medical informatics, current best
practices for annotation and automatic identification
will be described, with an emphasis on contributions
from predicate argument structures.

About the Speaker

Martha Palmer is a Professor of Linguistics and
Computer Science, and a Fellow of the Institute of
Cognitive Science at the University of Colorado.
Her current research is aimed at building domain-
independent and language independent techniques
for semantic interpretation based on linguistically
annotated data, such as Proposition Banks. She has
been the PI on NSF, NIH and DARPA projects for
linguistic annotation (syntax, semantics and prag-
matics) of English, Chinese, Korean, Arabic and
Hindi. She has been a member of the Advisory
Committee for the DARPA TIDES program, Chair

of SIGLEX, Chair of SIGHAN, a past President of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, and
is a Co-Editor of JNLE and of LiLT and is on the
CL Editorial Board. She received her Ph.D. in Arti-
ficial Intelligence from the University of Edinburgh
in 1985.

31


