



















































The Karlsruhe Institute of Technology Translation Systems for the WMT 2013


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 104–108,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013 c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Karlsruhe Institute of Technology Translation Systems
for the WMT 2013

Eunah Cho, Thanh-Le Ha, Mohammed Mediani, Jan Niehues,
Teresa Herrmann, Isabel Slawik and Alex Waibel

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany

firstname.lastname@kit.edu

Abstract

This paper describes the phrase-based
SMT systems developed for our partici-
pation in the WMT13 Shared Translation
Task. Translations for English↔German
and English↔French were generated us-
ing a phrase-based translation system
which is extended by additional models
such as bilingual, fine-grained part-of-
speech (POS) and automatic cluster lan-
guage models and discriminative word
lexica (DWL). In addition, we combined
reordering models on different sentence
abstraction levels.

1 Introduction

In this paper, we describe our systems for the
ACL 2013 Eighth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. We participated in the Shared
Translation Task and submitted translations for
English↔German and English↔French using a
phrase-based decoder with lattice input.

The paper is organized as follows: the next sec-
tion gives a detailed description of our systems
including all the models. The translation results
for all directions are presented afterwards and we
close with a conclusion.

2 System Description

The phrase table is based on a GIZA++ word
alignment for the French↔English systems. For
the German↔English systems we use a Discrim-
inative Word Alignment (DWA) as described in
Niehues and Vogel (2008). For every source
phrase only the top 10 translation options are con-
sidered during decoding. The SRILM Toolkit
(Stolcke, 2002) is used for training SRI language
models using Kneser-Ney smoothing.

For the word reordering between languages, we
used POS-based reordering models as described in

Section 4. In addition to it, tree-based reordering
model and lexicalized reordering were added for
German↔English systems.

An in-house phrase-based decoder (Vogel,
2003) is used to perform translation. The trans-
lation was optimized using Minimum Error Rate
Training (MERT) as described in Venugopal et
al. (2005) towards better BLEU (Papineni et al.,
2002) scores.

2.1 Data
The Europarl corpus (EPPS) and News Commen-
tary (NC) corpus were used for training our trans-
lation models. We trained language models for
each language on the monolingual part of the
training corpora as well as the News Shuffle and
the Gigaword corpora. The additional data such as
web-crawled corpus, UN and Giga corpora were
used after filtering. The filtering work for this data
is discussed in Section 3.

For the German↔English systems we use the
news-test2010 set for tuning, while the news-
test2011 set is used for the French↔English sys-
tems. For testing, news-test2012 set was used for
all systems.

2.2 Preprocessing
The training data is preprocessed prior to train-
ing the system. This includes normalizing special
symbols, smart-casing the first word of each sen-
tence and removing long sentences and sentence
pairs with length mismatch.

Compound splitting is applied to the German
part of the corpus of the German→English system
as described in Koehn and Knight (2003).

3 Filtering of Noisy Pairs

The filtering was applied on the corpora which
are found to be noisy. Namely, the Giga English-
French parallel corpus and the all the new web-
crawled data . The operation was performed using

104



an SVM classifier as in our past systems (Medi-
ani et al., 2011). For each pair, the required lexica
were extracted from Giza alignment of the corre-
sponding EPPS and NC corpora. Furthermore, for
the web-crawled data, higher precision classifiers
were trained by providing a larger number of neg-
ative examples to the classifier.

After filtering, we could still find English sen-
tences in the other part of the corpus. Therefore,
we performed a language identification (LID)-
based filtering afterwards (performed only on the
French-English corpora, in this participation).

4 Word Reordering

Word reordering was modeled based on POS se-
quences. For the German↔English system, re-
ordering rules learned from syntactic parse trees
were used in addition.

4.1 POS-based Reordering Model

In order to train the POS-based reordering model,
probabilistic rules were learned based on the POS
tags from the TreeTagger (Schmid and Laws,
2008) of the training corpus and the alignment. As
described in Rottmann and Vogel (2007), continu-
ous reordering rules are extracted. This modeling
of short-range reorderings was extended so that it
can cover also long-range reorderings with non-
continuous rules (Niehues and Kolss, 2009), for
German↔English systems.

4.2 Tree-based Reordering Model

In addition to the POS-based reordering, we
apply a tree-based reordering model for the
German↔English translation to better address the
differences in word order between German and
English. We use the Stanford Parser (Rafferty and
Manning, 2008) to generate syntactic parse trees
for the source side of the training corpus. Then
we use the word alignment between source and
target language to learn rules on how to reorder
the constituents in a German source sentence to
make it match the English target sentence word or-
der better (Herrmann et al., 2013). The POS-based
and tree-based reordering rules are applied to each
input sentence. The resulting reordered sentence
variants as well as the original sentence order are
encoded in a word lattice. The lattice is then used
as input to the decoder.

4.3 Lexicalized Reordering

The lexicalized reordering model stores the re-
ordering probabilities for each phrase pair. Pos-
sible reordering orientations at the incoming and
outgoing phrase boundaries are monotone, swap
or discontinuous. With the POS- and tree-based
reordering word lattices encode different reorder-
ing variants. In order to apply the lexicalized re-
ordering model, we store the original position of
each word in the lattice. At each phrase boundary
at the end, the reordering orientation with respect
to the original position of the words is checked.
The probability for the respective orientation is in-
cluded as an additional score.

5 Translation Models

In addition to the models used in the baseline sys-
tem described above, we conducted experiments
including additional models that enhance trans-
lation quality by introducing alternative or addi-
tional information into the translation modeling
process.

5.1 Bilingual Language Model

During the decoding the source sentence is seg-
mented so that the best combination of phrases
which maximizes the scores is available. How-
ever, this causes some loss of context information
at the phrase boundaries. In order to make bilin-
gual context available, we use a bilingual language
model (Niehues et al., 2011). In the bilingual lan-
guage model, each token consists of a target word
and all source words it is aligned to.

5.2 Discriminative Word Lexicon

Mauser et al. (2009) introduced the Discriminative
Word Lexicon (DWL) into phrase-based machine
translation. In this approach, a maximum entropy
model is used to determine the probability of using
a target word in the translation.

In this evaluation, we used two extensions to
this work as shown in (Niehues and Waibel, 2013).
First, we added additional features to model the
order of the source words better. Instead of rep-
resenting the source sentence as a bag-of-words,
we used a bag-of-n-grams. We used n-grams up to
the order of three and applied count filtering to the
features for higher order n-grams.

Furthermore, we created the training examples
differently in order to focus on addressing errors
of the other models of the phrase-based translation

105



system. We first translated the whole corpus with a
baseline system. Then we only used the words that
occur in the N-Best List and not in the reference as
negative examples instead of using all words that
do not occur in the reference.

5.3 Quasi-Morphological Operations

Because of the inflected characteristic of the
German language, we try to learn quasi-
morphological operations that change the lexi-
cal entry of a known word form to the out-of-
vocabulary (OOV) word form as described in
Niehues and Waibel (2012).

5.4 Phrase Table Adaptation

For the French↔English systems, we built two
phrase tables; one trained with all data and the
other trained only with the EPPS and NC cor-
pora. This is due to the fact that Giga corpus is big
but noisy and EPPS and NC corpus are more reli-
able. The two models are combined log-linearly to
achieve the adaptation towards the cleaner corpora
as described in Niehues et al. (2010).

6 Language Models

The 4-gram language models generated by the
SRILM toolkit are used as the main language
models for all of our systems. For the
English↔French systems, we use a good quality
corpus as in-domain data to train in-domain lan-
guage models. Additionally, we apply the POS
and cluster language models in different systems.
For the German→English system, we build sepa-
rate language models using each corpus and com-
bine them linearly before the decoding by mini-
mizing the perplexity. Language models are inte-
grated into the translation system by a log-linear
combination and receive optimal weights during
tuning by the MERT.

6.1 POS Language Models

For the English→German system, we use the POS
language model, which is trained on the POS se-
quence of the target language. The POS tags are
generated using the RFTagger (Schmid and Laws,
2008) for German. The RFTagger generates fine-
grained tags which include person, gender, and
case information. The language model is trained
with up to 9-gram information, using the German
side of the parallel EPPS and NC corpus, as well
as the News Shuffle corpus.

6.2 Cluster Language Models

In order to use larger context information, we use
a cluster language model for all our systems. The
cluster language model is based on the idea shown
in Och (1999). Using the MKCLS algorithm, we
cluster the words in the corpus, given a number
of classes. Then words in the corpus are replaced
with their cluster IDs. Using these cluster IDs,
we train n-gram language models as well as a
phrase table with this additional factor of cluster
ID. Our submitted systems have diversed range of
the number of clusters as well as n-gram.

7 Results

Using the models described above we performed
several experiments leading finally to the systems
used for generating the translations submitted to
the workshop. The results are reported as case-
sensitive BLEU scores on one reference transla-
tion.

7.1 German→English
The experiments for the German to English trans-
lation system are summarized in Table 1. The
baseline system uses POS-based reordering, DWA
with lattice phrase extraction and language models
trained on the News Shuffle corpus and Giga cor-
pus separately. Then we added a 5-gram cluster
LM trained with 1,000 word classes. By adding a
language model using the filtered crawled data we
gained 0.3 BLEU on the test set. For this we com-
bined all language models linearly. The filtered
crawled data was also used to generate a phrase
table, which brought another improvement of 0.85
BLEU. Applying tree-based reordering improved
the BLEU score, and the performance had more
gain by adding the extended DWL, namely us-
ing both bag-of-ngrams and n-best lists. While
lexicalized reordering gave us a slight gain, we
added morphological operation and gained more
improvements.

7.2 English→German
The English to German baseline system uses POS-
based reordering and language models using par-
allel data (EPPS and NC) as shown in Table 2.
Gradual gains were achieved by changing align-
ment from GIZA++ to DWA, adding a bilingual
language model as well as a language model based
on the POS tokens. A 9-gram cluster-based lan-
guage model with 100 word classes gave us a

106



System Dev Test
Baseline 24.15 22.79
+ Cluster LM 24.18 22.84
+ Crawled Data LM (Comb.) 24.53 23.14
+ Crawled Data PT 25.38 23.99
+ Tree Rules 25.80 24.16
+ Extended DWL 25.59 24.54
+ Lexicalized Reordering 26.04 24.55
+ Morphological Operation - 24.62

Table 1: Translation results for German→English

small gain. Improving the reordering using lexi-
alized reordering gave us gain on the optimization
set. Using DWL let us have more improvements
on our test set. By using the filtered crawled data,
we gained a big improvement of 0.46 BLEU on
the test set. Then we extended the DWL with bag
of n-grams and n-best lists to achieve additional
improvements. Finally, the best system includes
lattices generated using tree rules.

System Dev Test
Baseline 17.00 16.24
+ DWA 17.27 16.53
+ Bilingual LM 17.27 16.59
+ POS LM 17.46 16.66
+ Cluster LM 17.49 16.68
+ Lexicalized Reordering 17.57 16.68
+ DWL 17.58 16.77
+ Crawled Data 18.43 17.23
+ Extended DWL 18.66 17.57
+ Tree Rules 18.63 17.70

Table 2: Translation results for English→German

7.3 French→English
Table 3 reports some remarkable improvements
as we combined several techniques on the
French→English direction. The baseline system
was trained on parallel corpora such as EPPS, NC
and Giga, while the language model was trained
on the English part of those corpora plus News
Shuffle. The newly presented web-crawled data
helps to achieve almost 0.6 BLEU points more
on test set. Adding bilingual language model and
cluster language model does not show a significant
impact. Further gains were achieved by the adap-
tation of in-domain data into general-theme phrase
table, bringing 0.15 BLEU better on the test set.
When we added the DWL feature, it notably im-
proves the system by 0.25 BLEU points, resulting

in our best system.

System Dev Test
Baseline 30.33 29.35
+ Crawled Data 30.59 29.93
+ Bilingual and Cluster LMs 30.67 30.01
+ In-Domain PT Adaptation 31.17 30.16
+ DWL 31.07 30.40

Table 3: Translation results for French→English

7.4 English→French
In the baseline system, EPPS, NC, Giga and News
Shuffle corpora are used for language modeling.
The big phrase tables tailored EPPC, NC and Giga
data. The system also uses short-range reordering
trained on EPPS and NC. Adding parallel and fil-
tered crawl data improves the system. It was fur-
ther enhanced by the integration of a 4-gram bilin-
gual language model. Moreover, the best config-
uration of 9-gram language model trained on 500
clusters of French texts gains 0.25 BLEU points
improvement. We also conducted phrase-table
adaptation from the general one into the domain
covered by EPPS and NC data and it helps as well.
The initial try-out with lexicalized reordering fea-
ture showed an improvement of 0.23 points on the
development set, but a surprising reduction on the
test set, thus we decided to take the system after
adaptation as our best English→French system.

System Dev Test
Baseline 30.50 27.77
+ Crawled Data 31.05 27.87
+ Bilingual LM 31.23 28.50
+ Cluster LM 31.58 28.75
+ In-Domain PT Adaptation 31.88 29.12
+ Lexicalized Reordering 32.11 28.98

Table 4: Translation results for English→French

8 Conclusions

We have presented the systems for our par-
ticipation in the WMT 2013 Evaluation for
English↔German and English↔French. All sys-
tems use a class-based language model as well
as a bilingual language model. Using a DWL
with source context improved the translation qual-
ity of English↔German systems. Also for these
systems, we could improve even more with a
tree-based reordering model. Special handling

107



of OOV words improved German→English sys-
tem, while for the inverse direction the language
model with fine-grained POS tags was helpful. For
English↔French, phrase table adaptation helps to
avoid using wrong parts of the noisy Giga corpus.

9 Acknowledgements

This work was partly achieved as part of the
Quaero Programme, funded by OSEO, French
State agency for innovation. The research lead-
ing to these results has received funding from
the European Union Seventh Framework Pro-
gramme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement
n◦ 287658.

References
Teresa Herrmann, Jan Niehues, and Alex Waibel.

2013. Combining Word Reordering Methods on
different Linguistic Abstraction Levels for Statisti-
cal Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Sev-
enth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure
in Statistical Translation, Altanta, Georgia, USA,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn and Kevin Knight. 2003. Empirical
Methods for Compound Splitting. In EACL, Bu-
dapest, Hungary.

Arne Mauser, Saša Hasan, and Hermann Ney. 2009.
Extending Statistical Machine Translation with Dis-
criminative and Trigger-based Lexicon Models. In
Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: Volume
1 - Volume 1, EMNLP ’09, Singapore.

Mohammed Mediani, Eunah Cho, Jan Niehues, Teresa
Herrmann, and Alex Waibel. 2011. The kit english-
french translation systems for iwslt 2011. In Pro-
ceedings of the eight International Workshop on
Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT).

Jan Niehues and Muntsin Kolss. 2009. A POS-Based
Model for Long-Range Reorderings in SMT. In
Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT 2009), Athens, Greece.

Jan Niehues and Stephan Vogel. 2008. Discriminative
Word Alignment via Alignment Matrix Modeling.
In Proc. of Third ACL Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, Columbus, USA.

Jan Niehues and Alex Waibel. 2012. Detailed Analysis
of different Strategies for Phrase Table Adaptation
in SMT. In Proceedings of the American Machine
Translation Association (AMTA), San Diego, Cali-
fornia, October.

Jan Niehues and Alex Waibel. 2013. An MT Error-
driven Discriminative Word Lexicon using Sentence

Structure Features. In Eighth Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation (WMT 2013), Sofia, Bul-
garia.

Jan Niehues, Mohammed Mediani, Teresa Herrmann,
Michael Heck, Christian Herff, and Alex Waibel.
2010. The KIT Translation system for IWSLT 2010.
In Marcello Federico, Ian Lane, Michael Paul, and
François Yvon, editors, Proceedings of the seventh
International Workshop on Spoken Language Trans-
lation (IWSLT), pages 93–98.

Jan Niehues, Teresa Herrmann, Stephan Vogel, and
Alex Waibel. 2011. Wider Context by Using Bilin-
gual Language Models in Machine Translation. In
Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT 2011), Edinburgh, UK.

Franz Josef Och. 1999. An efficient method for de-
termining bilingual word classes. In Proceedings of
the ninth conference on European chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, EACL ’99,
pages 71–76, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a Method for Automatic
Evaluation of Machine Translation. Technical Re-
port RC22176 (W0109-022), IBM Research Divi-
sion, T. J. Watson Research Center.

Anna N. Rafferty and Christopher D. Manning. 2008.
Parsing three German treebanks: lexicalized and un-
lexicalized baselines. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Parsing German, Columbus, Ohio.

Kay Rottmann and Stephan Vogel. 2007. Word Re-
ordering in Statistical Machine Translation with a
POS-Based Distortion Model. In TMI, Skövde,
Sweden.

Helmut Schmid and Florian Laws. 2008. Estimation
of Conditional Probabilities with Decision Trees and
an Application to Fine-Grained POS Tagging. In
COLING 2008, Manchester, Great Britain.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM – An Extensible Lan-
guage Modeling Toolkit. In Proc. of ICSLP, Denver,
Colorado, USA.

Ashish Venugopal, Andreas Zollman, and Alex Waibel.
2005. Training and Evaluation Error Minimization
Rules for Statistical Machine Translation. In Work-
shop on Data-drive Machine Translation and Be-
yond (WPT-05), Ann Arbor, MI.

Stephan Vogel. 2003. SMT Decoder Dissected: Word
Reordering. In Int. Conf. on Natural Language
Processing and Knowledge Engineering, Beijing,
China.

108


