










































POS-Tag Based Poetry Generation with WordNet


Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 162–166,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

POS-tag based poetry generation with WordNet

Manex Agirrezabal, Bertol Arrieta, Aitzol Astigarraga
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU)

IXA NLP Group
Dept. of Computer Science

20018 Donostia
sgpagzam@ehu.es
bertol@ehu.es

aitzol.astigarraga@ehu.es

Mans Hulden
University of Helsinki

Department of Modern Languages
Helsinki, Finland

mhulden@email.arizona.edu

Abstract

In this paper we present the preliminary work of
a Basque poetry generation system. Basically,
we have extracted the POS-tag sequences from
some verse corpora and calculated the probabil-
ity of each sequence. For the generation process
we have defined 3 different experiments: Based
on a strophe from the corpora, we (a) replace
each word with other according to its POS-tag
and suffixes, (b) replace each noun and adjective
with another equally inflected word and (c) re-
place only nouns with semantically related ones
(inflected). Finally we evaluate those strategies
using a Turing Test-like evaluation.

1 Introduction

Poetry generation is one of the dream tasks of Natural
Language Processing (NLP). In this text we point out
an approach to generate Basque strophes automatically
using some corpora, morphological information and
a lexical database. The presented method is not tied
to a specific language, but it is especially suitable for
inflected languages, as the POS information used in
some tasks with success in non inflected languages is
not enough for inflected ones. We have used the POS-
tags with their inflectional information to learn usual
structures in Basque poetry.

This work is part of a more general and complete
project, called BertsoBOT (Astigarraga et al., 2013).
BertsoBOT is a robot capable of creating and singing
Basque verses automatically. The robot joins together
in a single system techniques from robotics, NLP and
speech synthesis and recognition. The work presented

in this paper comes to improve the generation module
of the mentioned system.

Although our intention is to create whole verses, in
this paper we present the first steps towards it: the cre-
ation of strophes. Additionally, Basque verses have
to rhyme, but in these first experiments we have not
considered it.

Basque language

Basque language is spoken along the Basque Country1

by approximately 700.000 people. Although there is a
standardized form of the language, it is common the use
of non-standard dialects in certain regions, mainly in
spoken language.

Basque is a morphologically rich language, which is
an obvious feature if we analyze the multiple declension
cases2 that can be used with only one word. For example,
the phrase “with the friends” can be expressed with only
one word, “lagunekin”.

lagunekin = lagun (friend) + ak (plural determiner) +
kin (with)

Art of bertsolaritza

The art of impromptu verse-making, bertsolaritza, is
very ingrained in the Basque Country. The performances
of verse-makers are quite usual and a big championship
is held every four years which congregates 15.000 peo-
ple, approximately. One tipical work to do for the verse-
makers is to sing verses extempore, given a topic. The
particularity of these verses is that they have to follow
strict constraints of meter and rhyme. In the case of
a metric structure of verses known as “zortziko txikia”

1http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basque Country (greater region)
2en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basque grammar#Declension

162



(small of eight), the poem must have eight lines. The
union of each odd line with the next even line, form a
strophe. Each strophe, has a small structure3 and must
rhyme with the others. Below, you can see an example
of a verse, with lauko txikia4 stanza:

Neurriz eta errimaz With meter and rhyme
kantatzea hitza, to sing the word

horra hor ze kirol mota bertsolaritza is
den bertsolaritza. that kind of sport

2 State of the art

A good review of computer guided poetry can be found
in (Gervás, 2010). Most relevant ones include:

WASP
The WASP system (Gervás, 2000) can be considered

one of first serious attempts to build an automatic poetry
generator system. It is based on the generate-and-test
paradigm of problem solving. Simple solutions are
generated and then coupled with an evaluation function
for metric constraints, producing acceptable results.

ASPERA
ASPERA (Gervás, 2001) is a case-based reasoning

(CBR) system for poetry generation. It generates poetry
based on the information provided by the user: a prose
description of the intended message, a specific stanza
for the final poem, a set of verse examples on that stanza,
and a group of words that the final poem must contain.

The system was implemented using CLIPS rule-
based system, and follows the four typical CBR steps:
Retrieval, Reuse, Revise and Retain.

POEVOLVE
Levy (Levy, 2001) went on to develop an evolution-

ary model of poetry generation. POEVOLVE creates
limericks taking as a reference the human way of poetry
writing. The POEVOLVE system works as follows:
an initial population is created from a group of words
that include phonetic and stress information. Rhymes
that meet the requirements are selected and then more
words are selected to fill the rest of the verse-line
based on their stress information. A genetic algorithm
is employed to modify the words that compose the

313 syllables with a caesura after the 7th syllable
4Lauko txikia: The same as zortziko txikia but with four lines,

instead of eight.

limerick. Evaluation is performed by a neural network
trained on human judgements. It must be said that this
system does not take syntax and semantics into account.

McGonnagall
Manurung presented also an evolutionary approach

to generate poetry (Manurung, 2003). The poem gen-
eration process is formulated as a state space search
problem using stochastic hill-climbing. The overall pro-
cess is divided in two steps: evaluation and evolution.
During the evaluation phase, a group of individuals is
formed based on initial information, target semantics
and target phonetics. This group of initial individuals
is then evaluated taking into account different aspects
such as phonetics, semantics and surface form. Each
individual receives a score, and in the evolution step, the
subset with higher scores is selected for reproduction.
The resulting mutated individuals derive, hopefully, in
better versions of the poem.

3 Creating strophes

Our goal is to create Basque strophes automatically. But
strophes written by combining words randomly usually
do not have any sense. For words have any meaning
when combined together, they must be organized fol-
lowing particular patterns. Towards this end we have
applied and tested different methodologies. We use a
morphological analyzer to extract POS and inflection
patterns in strophes, and to create new ones following
those schemes. The idea is to find the most commonly
used patterns so that we can use them in new strophes.
We also improve the results taking semantics into ac-
count. In the next lines we are going to describe some
resources we have used.

3.1 Corpora

For the learning process of the usual POS-tag patterns
we have employed some Basque verse corpora yielded
by the Association of the Friends of Bertsolaritza5 (AFB).
Those are impromptu verses sung by Basque verse-
makers and the transcriptions of this collection have
been done by members of the information center6 of the
AFB.

For this work, we are going to exploit three corpora,

5http://www.bertsozale.com/en
6http://bdb.bertsozale.com/en/orriak/get/7-xenpelar-

dokumentazio-zentroa

163



each one following a classic stanza in Basque verses: (a)
small stanza, (b) big stanza and (c) habanera.

a) Small stanza
This corpus has approximately 10.000 lines. Each

line of this corpus is composed by a strophe containing
13 syllables with a caesura between the 7th and the 8th
syllable. This stanza is used to sing sprightly verses
composed by compact ideas.

b) Big stanza
In this case, this corpus has about 8.000 lines and

each line has 18 syllables with a caesura after the 10th
syllable. Depending on the chosen melody, this stanza
can also have a complementary pause in the 5th syllable.
The topics of this type of verses tend to be more epic or
dramatic.

c) Habanera
This corpus has just about 1000 lines and they are

composed by 16-syllable lines with a caesura after the
8th syllable. It is commonly used when the verse-maker
has to compose a verse alone about a topic.

3.2 POS sequence extraction

To extract the POS-tags, we use a Basque analyzer de-
veloped by members of IXA NLP group (Aduriz et al.,
2004), which involve phrasal morphologic analysis and
disambiguation, among other matters.

Once calculated the POS-tags, we estimated the most
probable POS sequences using POS-tag ngrams. We did
this in order to know which POS-tag sequence would
better fit for each stanza. For example, an acceptable
POS-tag sequence in the small stanza corpus would be
“NN-NN-JJ-VB”. This pattern could be extracted from
this strophe, which is correct.

Mirenekin+NN zakurra+NN zoriontsua+JJ da+VB.
(With Miren)+NN (the dog)+NN is+VB happy+JJ.

But to have the POS-tag pattern is not enough for a
good generation.

Special issues in the categorization of words in
Basque

The gist is that Basque is an agglutinative language,
so there is plenty information included in the suffixes
of the words. Because of that, if we don’t retain any
information about suffixes, we would lose some impor-
tant data. In Basque, we can apply declension to nouns,
pronouns, adjectives and determiners. Therefore, we
need to save the declension case information to do a

correct generation. When a set of words compound a
noun phrase, only one of the words will be inflected.

Some verbs, when they are part of a subourdinate
clause, can also be inflected. In these cases, we have to
extract the suffixes of the verb of that clause, because it
expresses the type of clause.

All this information is essential if we do not want to
lose the meaning of the clause. Below, you can see an
example of generation of strophes in Basque using only
POS-tags:

Mirenekin+NN lagunekin+NN zoriontsua+JJ da+VB.
(With Miren)+NN (with the friends)+NN is+VB happy+JJ.

As you can see, the phrase “with Miren with the
friends is happy” is not grammatically correct. Storing
the declension information, that creation would not be
allowed and one of the clauses created by the system
could be:

Mirenekin+NN COM mahaia+NN ABS zoriontsua+JJ ABS da+VB.
(With Miren)+NN COM (the desk)+NN ABS is+VB happy+JJ ABS.

The addition of the declension information will avoid
some grammatical errors in the generation process. But
when the changed element is a verb, the system can
insert one that does not follow the same subcategoriza-
tion7, which will lead us to a grammatical error too.
So, changing the verb without more information can be
uncertain.

3.3 Semantic information
On the other hand, if we take a look at the last example,
it is not correct to say that the desk is happy. To avoid
these cases, we posed the use of the Basque WordNet
(Fellbaum, 2010) (Pociello et al., 2011). We used it to
change words with related ones.

3.4 Morphological generation
Finally, it is important the fact that Basque is an inflected
language. So, we need to have a morphological gener-
ator (Alegria et al., 2010) to create the corresponding
inflected forms of the words. This generator is based
on the Basque morphology description (Alegria et al.,
1996).

4 Experiments

In this work, we have performed a set of experiments
to analyze different strategies for the generation of stro-

7The subcategorization indicates the syntactic arguments re-
quired or allowed in some lexical items (usually verbs).

164



phes in Basque. In the following lines, we explain the
ameliorations we get in each experiment.

The first experiment creates strophes by inserting
words that are consistent with each POS-tag and its
inflection information. We first get some of the most
common POS-tag sequences and for each POS-tag se-
quence the application returns two strophes. The first
strophe uses words from the same verse corpus to make
substitutions. The second one uses words from the
EPEC corpus (Aduriz et al., 2006).

The second experiment creates clauses, but chang-
ing only the nouns and adjectives from original strophes
from the corpus. We mantain the inflection information.
In this experiment we also get two strophes for each pat-
tern sequence, as in the previous attempt (verse corpus
and EPEC corpus). With this constraint we avoid the
creation of incorrect strophes because of the problem of
subcategorization (explained in section 3.2).

The third experiment makes small changes in the
original strophes (from the corpus), as it only replaces
each noun for a semantically related noun. The related
noun can be: (a) Antonym of the original word or (b)
hyponym of the hypernyms of the original word. In
order of preference, first we try to change each name
with one of its antonyms. If there is no antonym, then
we try to get the hypernyms of the word to return their
hyponims. Once the new word has been found, we
add the needed suffixes (the same ones that had the
words from the corpus) in order to fit correctly in the
strophe, using the morphological generator. The change
of words with related ones gives us the chance to express
semantically similar sentences using different words.

5 Evaluation

Once the experiments were finished, we made an evalu-
ation in order to analyze the quality of the automatically
generated strophes. The evaluation of computer gener-
ated poetry is nowadays fuzzy, so we defined a Turing
Test-like evaluation. We contacted two linguists that had
not done any work on this project, so that the evaluation
be as objective as possible. We prepared 135 strophes
interleaving some created by the machine with others
from the corpus. We asked the evaluators to guess if the
strophe was done by the machine or by a human. We
only draw conclusions using machine-generated stro-
phes, as we want to know how many of them percolate
as human-generated ones. In the next table you can

see the rate of sentences created by the machine and
suposed to be done by humans:

EXPERIMENT
Evaluator 1 1 2 3
Percolated as human 0.033 0.259 0.75
Evaluator 2
Percolated as human 0.333 0.481 0.75

As you can see, according to Evaluator 1, the first
experiment was not very worthy, as the only 3.3% of
the machine generated strophes percolated as human
generated ones. The second experiment got better re-
sults, and the 26% of the strophes were thought to be
human generated ones. As expected, the strophes of
the third experiment are the most trustworthy ones. The
results given by the second evaluator are higher, but the
important fact is the increase of the progression over the
experiments.

6 Discussion & Future Work

In this paper we have presented a set of experiments
for the automatic generation of poetry using POS and
inflectional tag patterns and some semantics. In the
last section we show the Turing Test-like evaluation to
measure the reliability of each experiment. This will be
part of a whole poetry analysis and generation system.

In the future, we intend to change verbs from stro-
phes controlling the subcategorization of them in order
to enable the creation of well-formed strophes about a
constrained topic. Also, we plan to use a frame seman-
tics resource, such as FrameNet, and after creating a
strophe, make some modifications to get an acceptable
semantic meaning.

165



References

Aduriz, I., Aranzabe, M., Arriola, J., de Ilarraza, A.,
Gojenola, K., Oronoz, M., and Uria, L. (2004). A cas-
caded syntactic analyser for Basque. Computational
Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, pages 124–
134.

Aduriz, I., Aranzabe, M. J., Arriola, J. M., Atutxa, A.,
de Ilarraza, D. A., Ezeiza, N., Gojenola, K., Oronoz,
M., Soroa, A., and Urizar, R. (2006). Methodology
and steps towards the construction of EPEC, a corpus
of written Basque tagged at morphological and syn-
tactic levels for automatic processing. Language and
Computers, 56(1):1–15.

Alegria, I., Artola, X., Sarasola, K., and Urkia, M.
(1996). Automatic morphological analysis of Basque.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 11(4):193–203.

Alegria, I., Etxeberria, I., Hulden, M., and Maritxalar,
M. (2010). Porting Basque morphological grammars
to foma, an open-source tool. Finite-State Methods
and Natural Language Processing, pages 105–113.

Astigarraga, A., Agirrezabal, M., Lazkano, E., Jauregi,
E., and Sierra, B. (2013). Bertsobot: the first min-
strel robot. 6th International Conference on Human
System Interaction, Gdansk.

Fellbaum, C. (2010). WordNet. Springer.

Gervás, P. (2000). Wasp: Evaluation of different strate-
gies for the automatic generation of Spanish verse. In
Proceedings of the AISB-00 Symposium on Creative
& Cultural Aspects of AI, pages 93–100.

Gervás, P. (2001). An expert system for the composition
of formal spanish poetry. Knowledge-Based Systems,
14(3):181–188.

Gervás, P. (2010). Engineering linguistic creativity: Bird
flight and jet planes. In Proceedings of the NAACL
HLT 2010 Second Workshop on Computational Ap-
proaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 23–30. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Levy, R. P. (2001). A computational model of poetic
creativity with neural network as measure of adaptive
fitness. In Proccedings of the ICCBR-01 Workshop
on Creative Systems. Citeseer.

Manurung, R. (2003). An evolutionary algorithm ap-
proach to poetry generation. PhD thesis, School of
informatics, University of Edinburgh.

Pociello, E., Agirre, E., and Aldezabal, I. (2011).
Methodology and construction of the Basque Word-
net. Language resources and evaluation, 45(2):121–
142.

166


