










































Correspondence Seminar: Bringing Linguistics to High Schools


Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Teaching Natural Language Processing, pages 46–50,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Correspondence Seminar: Bringing Linguistics to High Schools

Matěj Korvas
Charles University in Prague

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Institute of Applied and Formal Linguistics

korvas@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Vojtěch Diatka
Charles University in Prague

Faculty of Arts
Department of Linguistics

Vojta.Diatka@gmail.com

Abstract

We present the concept of a correspon-
dence seminar as a way to complement
and support one-time contests, especially
olympiads. We evaluate specific payoffs
of this way of teaching linguistics, and
compare its nature to that of a linguistics
olympiad. We believe that the correspon-
dence seminar is a great way to introduce
talented high school students to linguis-
tics.

1 Introduction

At high schools in the Czech Republic, linguistics
is taught only marginally or not at all. Students
talented in linguistics thus tend to focus their tal-
ent on other areas, not even knowing what linguis-
tics is like. We have struggled to change the state
of affairs, and provide an alternative to the state
system in delivering linguistic education to high
school students.

Up until recently, we exposed the high school
students to linguistics only through a correspon-
dence seminar. By the term correspondence semi-
nar, we mean a form of voluntary education where
students and teachers exchange assignments and
their solutions by postal correspondence (or more
recently, via electronic communication in a similar
way). This concept is described in more detail in
Section 2. However, as IOL1 (International Lin-
guistics Olympiad; Radev et al. (2008)) came to
our attention, we learned that despite the strong
Czech linguistic tradition (Vachek and Dušková,
1983), there was no contest organised to select
the Czech team for IOL. Hence we started the
Czech Linguistic Olympiad (ČLO)2 last year, and
we have since observed some notable differences

1http://www.ioling.org
2http://lingol.cz

in the nature of the two formats, which we shall
summarise in this paper.

We will start by giving a brief overview of
the history of correspondence seminars, including
Pralinka, the seminar in linguistics. In fact, corre-
spondence seminar is not a new concept. The old-
est contest based on postal correspondence, to our
knowledge, is the Hungarian High School Math-
ematics and Physics Journal.3 It dates back to as
early as 1894, and with two interruptions, it sur-
vived up to the present. Thanks to the fact that it is
translated into English, it is open to international
audiences.

To the best of our knowledge, most correspon-
dence seminars are organised in the area of for-
mer Czechoslovakia. The Slovak seminars in-
clude KMS4 (mathematics), FKS5 (physics), and
STROM6 (mathematics). The last mentioned one
claims to have the longest tradition in the area of
former Czechoslovakia, having been established
in 1976. Correspondence seminars organised in
the Czech Republic include MKS7 (mathemat-
ics; founded 1981), FYKOS8 (physics; 1986),
and KSICHT9 (chemistry; 2002; cf. Řezanka et
al. (2012)). The seminars mentioned above have
grown very popular – they commonly have several
hundred participants each year.

Our correspondence seminar in linguistics is
called Pralinka.10 It was founded in 2008 and
has about 14 participants each year, this low num-
ber being one significant difference to olympiads.
During the five years, over 100 linguistic problems

3http://www.komal.hu/info/
bemutatkozas.e.shtml

4http://www.kms.sk
5http://fks.sk/english/english.php
6http://seminar.strom.sk/
7http://mks.mff.cuni.cz
8http://fykos.org/
9http://ksicht.natur.cuni.cz/o-ksichtu

10http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pralinka/
english.php

46



have been created and published in Pralinka.
The contents and workings of the correspon-

dence seminar are explained in detail in the fol-
lowing section. In Section 3, we point out differ-
ences between the correspondence seminar and an
olympiad. In Section 4, we show sample problems
created for Pralinka, and conclude with plans for
the future in Section 5.

2 The Concept of a Correspondence
Seminar

We will present the concept of a correspondence
seminar on the concrete example of Pralinka. In
Pralinka, we publish four issues featuring various
linguistics problems each year. Students are sup-
posed to solve as many problems as they can, and
they have about six weeks to send us their solu-
tions. We mark and comment on the solutions
before sending them back to the participants. In
a few weeks’ time, a new issue is put together
from new problem specifications and authors’ so-
lutions to previous problems. The specifications
of the individual problems are linked together with
a story, partly to provide motivation for the prob-
lems, partly to make the booklet more attractive
for the reader.

The first issue is sent with other faculty prop-
agation materials, including other correspondence
seminars, in the printed form to high school teach-
ers countrywide. This is the only occassion when
Pralinka uses traditional post. Every issue is pub-
lished on our web page as a PDF, and participants’
solutions and their corrections are submitted to an
integrated system again as document files. An ap-
propriately formatted PDF of each issue is pro-
vided so that whoever is interested, can easily print
out the booklet at their site. Apart from the sys-
tem for collecting problem submissions and their
corrections, another online interface of Pralinka is
its Facebook page where every new issue is an-
nounced and participants can discuss with the or-
ganisers.

An essential motivation for the participants are
points we give them for their solutions. Seminars
with a higher number of participants use the rank-
ing of participants to select the ones eligible for the
seminar summer school. Pralinka also has a short
summer school each year, but we have no need to
cut the number of its participants. Still, we reward
the best ranking ones for their efforts with a prize.

Problems we publish in Pralinka can be divided

into three classes: single problems, thematic prob-
lems and running tasks. Single problems are one-
off tasks that typically include little or no theory.
They usually require the students to discover a pat-
tern in the provided linguistic data, or expand on a
given topic.

Thematic problems form a completely different
genre. Their constitutive feature is that they go
deep into the topic. Every year, a different topic
is chosen to be investigated by the students under
the supervision of the organisers. Theory for the
topic is extended in each issue of the seminar, and
a very open formulation of a problem to solve is
given. The problem specification in the next is-
sue is largely determined by the students’ contri-
butions. Students are thus introduced to the se-
lected branch of linguistics step by step, both the-
oretically and practically. Thematic problems in
the history of Pralinka examined topics like mean-
ing of words in context or verbal aspects and their
use.

Lastly, running tasks or series are similar to the-
matic problems in many respects. They are on a
selected topic each year, and gradually build up
the theory. In contrast to thematic problems, as-
signments in each instance of the running task are
precisely specified and solvers’ answers do not in-
fluence the future direction of the series. Some
running tasks explore phenomena from different
layers of linguistic description using an artificial
language as the subject, others have the form of
a textbook text split into chapters, providing ex-
ercises for each chapter. The latter kind covered
topics such as language universals, Arabic (an in-
troduction to the language) or semantics.

An important feature of the correspondence
seminar is the individual attitude to students and
their solutions. Correcting solutions does not con-
sist only of assigning the appropriate number of
points. More important is the feedback in the form
of advice and questions related to the contestant’s
own text.

3 Comparison to Olympiads

We now turn to the comparison of a correspon-
dence seminar and an olympiad as two alternative
ways of promoting linguistics among gifted high
school students. We will discuss the following as-
pects: time required for solving the problems, na-
ture of the problems, attitude to linguistic knowl-
edge, use of external information sources, and at-

47



type Plka 10/11 Plka 12/13 ČLO 12/13

total 22 (100%) 18 (100%) 14 (100%)
seg+al 5 (23%) 7 (39%) 11 (79%)
theory 15 (68%) 7 (39%) 0 (0%)
open 16 (73%) 10 (56%) 4 (29%)

Table 1: Types of tasks in a sample from ČLO and
Pralinka

type Plka 10/11 Plka 12/13 ČLO 12/13

total 114 (100%) 119 (100%) 2393 (100%)
seg+al 23 (20%) 55 (46%) 2268 (95%)
theory 58 (51%) 43 (36%) 0 (0%)
open 86 (75%) 79 (66%) 665 (28%)

Table 2: Number of students that attempted solv-
ing different types of problems in a sample from
ČLO and Pralinka

tractiveness to students.
Linguistic olympiads are generally one-time

events whose participants are given just a few
hours to solve a number of problems. They are
thus motivated to quickly discover just as many
features of the problem as needed to find answers
for the questions posed. It is likely that solving
such a problem involves just the short term mem-
ory, and the related ideas are much easier to for-
get. In contrast, participants of a correspondence
seminar have lots of time to think each problem
over, therefore, firstly, the problems need to pro-
vide enough food for thought, and secondly, this
leads the solvers to internalise the ideas behind the
problem much better.

For typically large numbers of participants of
olympiads, especially in school rounds, olympiads
need to have a clear grading scheme, hence closed-
ended questions are the best suited. In contrast,
problems in a correspondence seminar can be
(and, in Pralinka, they often are) open-ended. This
again supports deeper thinking about the problem.

The different composition of Pralinka versus
ČLO in terms of problem types is quantified in Ta-
ble 1. We counted problems from the 2010/2011
(the last school year before we launched ČLO) and
2012/2013 (this year; one issue could not yet be in-
cluded) editions of Pralinka and this year’s ČLO.
We assessed for each problem whether:

1. it is solved by applying the common pattern
of establishing a segmentation of the linguis-
tic data (e.g. words into morphemes, Chinese
characters into two parts) and then aligning

the corresponding segments (row “seg+al” in
the table);

2. theory is explained as part of the problem
(“theory”);

3. an open-ended question is posed (“open”).

Table 2 follows the same layout but lists counts of
students that attempted to solve each problem.11

The numbers justify our claim that problems in
Pralinka are more often open-ended than those
in the olympiad. They also show that there is
much more space for presenting theory as part of
the problems in Pralinka, which we expand on
in the following paragraph. Another fact illus-
trated by the numbers is that we adjusted Pralinka
problems to be more similar to olympiad prob-
lems when ČLO was founded, in order to prepare
Pralinka solvers for the olympiad. Lastly, the dif-
ference in the number of attempted solutions be-
tween Pralinka and ČLO is huge, as evident from
Table 2. We try to explain this fact in the para-
graphs below.

Another important difference regards the
amount of linguistic knowledge presented to-
gether with the problems and required to solve
them. The olympiad is primarily concerned with
testing the contestant’s skills in analysing an
unknown language, often their analytical thinking
in general. On the other hand, the correspondence
seminar puts stress on teaching not only skills, but
also knowledge, in order to widen contestants’
horizons. To this end, problems published in
Pralinka often comprise two parts: a theoretical
one and a practical one, the latter part helping the
solver practise immediately what was expounded
in the former part.

The two formats differ also with respect to the
approach to various external sources of knowl-
edge. Olympiads strictly forbid using them,
whereas in the correspondence seminar, their use
is welcome. O. Šteffl, a prominent Czech educa-
tion specialist, claims that “. . . the accessibility of
information has dramatically changed. If I type
‘coelenterate’ into Google, what appears in a few
seconds are BBC documentaries, pictures, expla-
nations, curiosities, and I can search for context
and links in this topic.”12 Situation is the same for
linguistic knowledge. There is a vast amount of

11Entries in Table 2 are measured in student-problems.
12source (original in Czech): respekt.ihned.cz/

c1-55775590-jsme-posedli-selekci-deti

48



linguistic information accessible on the Internet.
In Pralinka, even though we usually aim to cre-
ate problems that cannot be simply solved by con-
sulting Wikipedia or other sources, we are pleased
to hear when our participants bother to use on-
line resources, or even borrow a grammar book of
a language in order to understand the topic more
deeply, as provoking students to study on their
own is one of our goals.

Finally, it is remarkable how few students get
involved in the correspondence seminar, compared
to the olympiad. The olympiad started only last
year and it already has an order of magnitude more
participants. This can be attributed to a simple fact
that general awareness of linguistics as an interest-
ing discipline among Czech high school students
is very poor compared to mathematics or physics.
Students thus do not show active interest in lin-
guistics, although they get involved once their
teachers give them linguistic problems at school
during the olympiad school round.

We believe that participants of Pralinka are gen-
erally more interested in linguistics than partici-
pants of ČLO, and hence are more likely to en-
roll in a linguistics study programme at the uni-
versity and be successful in it. Unfortunately, data
we could use to test this hypothesis is not collected
yet, although currently there is an effort of the Fac-
ulty of Mathematics and Physics to quantify the
effectivity of its propagation activities including
Pralinka.

4 Sample Problems

In this section, we present two examples of prob-
lems that appeared in Pralinka, which we think are
particularly suitable for a correspondence seminar.

4.1 Labovian cups

In this problem, we motivate the participants to
replicate Labov’s famous experiment with table-
ware (Labov, 1973). General introduction to the
topic of categories which do not have clear-cut
boundaries is given through a simple dialogue led
by two characters, rather than a technical expo-
sition. Participants are then presented with tasks
connected to two pictures of tableware (see Fig-
ure 1).

Tasks were as follows:

1. Do you think that the content of a container
would influence whether it is called cup,

(a) (b)

Figure 1: Labov’s tableware experiment in
Pralinka

bowl, or vase? We could fill it with flowers,
tea or mashed potatoes.

2. Do your own experiment. Print out the pic-
tures (those shown in Figure 1) and ask at
least three people to name the objects. Show
them first the container without contents, and
then the same container with contents. Make
sure that you show only one container at a
time. Instruction could be that simple: “Tell
me what you see.” Write down the answers
and expand on them.

4.2 Word alignment
In this problem, we present the concept of word
alignment as used in machine translation (Koehn,
2007, pp. 113–124), and ask the students to elabo-
rate on possible configurations in word alignment
tables.

The task is motivated by the main character of
Pralinka constructing a dictionary, trying to cap-
ture all translation options for every phrase.

This problem is clearly not suitable for
olympiads, whereas it fits nicely the format of a
correspondence seminar. Let us now comment on
how well some students can cope with such prob-
lems, using two quite different kinds of analysis.

One participant performed a principled anal-
ysis of the possible configurations of alignment
points, distinguishing cases with a single align-
ment point in the row and column, multiple points
in a row or column, and multiple points in the
same row and column. He illustrates his clas-
sification using examples including those shown
in Figure 2. The first two examples in Figure 2
(the first one meaning “my country”) are based on

49



én ország-om
má

země

šel jsem
I

have
gone

láska na první pohled
coup
de

foudre

Figure 2: Examples of alignments from Solver 1

different ways grammatical categories are marked
in different languages, including the first person
and possessive markers in the first example, and
first person and the tense in the second example.
The third example (“love at first sight”) shows two
phrases that are translation of each other but can-
not be analysed into smaller units that would also
translate one to the other.

Another participant focuses in her solution on
the most interesting cases, showing typical prop-
erties of different languages, such as the tendency
towards analytic or synthetic forms, and different
word order. Even though she does not come up
with a classification system, she gives a compre-
hensive overview of particular interesting exam-
ples. A few of her alignment examples are shown
in Figure 3. The first example again demonstrates

I do not want to
nechci

Entlassungsproduktivität
produktivita

v
důsledku

propouštění

äåëàòü èç ìóõè ñëîíà

dělat
z

komára
velblouda

Figure 3: Examples of alignments from Solver 2

(a more extreme) difference in expressing gram-
matical categories in a flective (Czech) and an iso-
lating (English) language. The second example
(“productivity resulting from layoffs”) illustrates
the same meaning being expressed using multiple
words in Czech, as compared to the synthetic Ger-
man. The last example (“make a mountain out of
a molehill”) is parallel to the example with coup
de foudre, but the phrases decompose in this case,

even though they result in the mosquito–mouse
and camel–elephant translation pairs.

5 Future Work

It is our ambition to make Pralinka international,
either by organising the summer school jointly for
Czech and foreign students, or by translating our
problems into English and inviting foreign stu-
dents to solve them. However, the latter could
meet with a larger response than the existing or-
ganising team can handle, thus we greatly wel-
come any helpers before that transition is made,
both to participate in the organisation, and help in
promoting the seminar.

Acknowledgments

We thank Lěra Ivanova and Adam Pospíšil for
the consent to cite their problem solutions, and
Ondřej Dušek, Lukáš Žilka and the anonymous
reviewers for their corrections and helpful com-
ments. Pralinka has been supported by the Faculty
of Mathematics and Physics of the Charles Univer-
sity, ČLO has been supported jointly by the Fac-
ulty of Mathematics and Physics and the Faculty
of Arts of the Charles University.

References
Philipp Koehn. 2007. Statistical Machine Translation.

Univ. Pr., Cambridge.

William Labov. 1973. The boundaries of words and
their meanings. In Bailey and R. W. Shuy, editors,
New Ways of analyzing variation in English, pages
340–373. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown Univer-
sity Press.

Dragomir R. Radev, Lori S. Levin, and Thomas E.
Payne. 2008. The North American Computational
Linguistics Olympiad (NACLO). In Proceedings
of the Third Workshop on Issues in Teaching Com-
putational Linguistics, TeachCL ’08, pages 87–96,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Michal Řezanka, Pavel Řezanka, Luděk Míka, Pavla
Perlíková, and Karel Berka. 2012. Korespon-
denční seminář inspirovaný chemickou tematikou
(KSICHT) [Correspondence seminar inspired by
chemistry topics (KSICHT)]. In Chemické listy, vol-
ume 106, page 319–322, Prague, Czech Republic,
April.

Josef Vachek and Libuše Dušková. 1983. Praguiana:
some basic and less known aspects of the Prague
Linguistic School. Number v. 12 in Linguis-
tic & literary studies in Eastern Europe (LLSEE).
J.Benjamins, Amsterdam ; Philadelphia.

50


