

















































Metaphor and Qualia_gl2013


Metaphor and Qualia: Embodiment or Eventuality? 
 

Chu-Ren Huang 
Hong Kong Polytechnic University 

churenhuang@gmail.com 

 

Kathleen Ahrens 
Hong Kong Baptist University 

ahrens@hkbu.edu.hk 

 

Francesca Quattri 
Hong Kong Polytechnic University 

francesca.quattri@connect.polyu.hk

The Contemporary Theory of Metaphor heralded a whole generation of research by positing 
that metaphor is used because we refer to concrete and familiar object to explain abstract and 
potentially novel ideas.  Ensuing research, picking up the two strands, can be largely classified as 
those focusing on embodiment (i.e. referring to familiar objects) or experiential mapping. Among 
those proposing mapping theories is the Conceptual Mapping Model proposed by Ahrens (2002, 
2010) in which she proposes a mapping rule template that requires the description of an event. 
And Huang et al. (2007) adopts this approach and show that it can be mapped to ontology.   

The underlining question we may ask, is whether metaphor is object-embodiment based or 
event-experiential driven? And if it is event-experiential driven, how can it be captured 
theoretically? We point out in this talk that many metaphors, especially those captured by Ahrens' 
mapping theory, cannot be fully explained without referring to the different event types in the 
qualia structure. Most shape metaphors, for instance, requires the understanding of the shaping 
and/or shape perception process, and can be easily captured as the agentive qualia complementing 
a small number of object-based metaphors which can be described by the formal qualia. For 
instance, a love triangle refers to the complex relations between three lovers because we know that 
a triangle is made by linking lines (as relations) among three apexes (as the three lovers). Hence, 
we seem to look into the formal qualae of a triangle. A vicious/virtuous circle can either spiral or 
be broken because we make the circle by tracing the point of the circumference. This seems to 
require information of the agentive qualae. And in Chinese, 规 矩  gui1ju3 
compass+try-square/set-square refers to rules because they are the tools to ensure that perfect 
circles and squares are drawn. This seems to require the telic qualae of the tools.  

We propose that conceptual mapping of metaphor is experiential-eventual and makes uses of 
qualia structure by showing that the conceptual mapping theory of Ahrens (2002, 2010) can be 
better formalized and constrained with GL theory. 
 
Selected Bibliography 
Ahrens, Kathleen. 2002. When Love is not Digested: Underlying Reasons for Source to Target 

Domain Pairing in the Contemporary Theory of Metaphor. In Yu Chau E. Hsiao 
(ed.) Proceeding of the First Cognitive Linguistics Conference, pp 273-302. Taipei: 
Cheng-Chi University.  



Ahrens, Kathleen. 2010. Mapping Principles for Conceptual Metaphors. In Cameron Lynne, Alice 
Deignan, Graham Low, Zazie Todd (Eds.), Researching and Applying Metaphor in the Real 
World. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. pp. 185-207. 

Clausner, Timothy, and William Croft. Productivity and Schematicity in Metaphors. Cognitive 
Science. 21. 247-282. 

Gibbs, Raymond. 2006. Metaphor Interpretation as Embodied Stimulation. Mind and Language. 
21434-458. 

Gong, Shu-Ping, Kathleen Ahrens and Chu-Ren Huang. 2008. Chinese Word Sketch and Mapping 
Principles: A Corpus-Based Study of Conceptual Metaphors Using the BUILDING Source 
Domain. International Journal of Computer Processing of Oriental Languages. 21(2): 3-17. 

Huang, Chu-Ren, Siaw-Fong Chung and Kathleen Ahrens. 2007. An Ontology-based Exploration 
of Knowledge Systems for Metaphor. In Kishore, Rajiv, Ram Ramesh, and Raj Sharman 
(Eds.), Ontologies: A Handbook of Principles, Concepts and Applications in Information 
Systems. Volume 14. Berlin: Springer. pp. 489-517. 

Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: Chicago University 
Press. 

Pustejovsky, James. 1998. The Generative Lexicon. Boston: MIT University Press. 
 
 

 


