










































Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) - Building the cloud


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on NLP&LOD and SWAIE, pages 1–2,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 12 September 2013.

Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) – Building the cloud

Christian Chiarcos
Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main, Germany

chiarcos@informatik.uni-frankfurt.de

The last decades have seen an immense maturation
of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and an in-
creased interest to apply NLP techniques and re-
sources to real-world applications in business and
academia. This process has certainly been facili-
tated by the increased availability of language data
in the internet age, and the subsequent paradigm
shift to statistical approaches, but also it coin-
cided with an increasing acceptance of empiri-
cal approaches in linguistics and related academic
fields, including empirical approaches to typol-
ogy (Greenberg, 1963), corpus linguistics (Francis
and Kucera, 1979, Brown Corpus), and (computa-
tional) lexicography (Kucera, 1969), as well as the
dawn of Digital Humanities (Busa, 1974).

Given the complexity of language and the anal-
ysis of linguistic data on different levels, its in-
vestigation involves a broad band-width of for-
malisms and resources used to analyze, process
and generate natural language. With the transi-
tion to empirical, data-driven research, the pri-
mary challenge in the field is thus to store, con-
nect and exploit the wealth of language data avail-
able in all its heterogeneity. Interoperability of
language resources has hence been an important
issue addressed by the community since the late
1980s (Text Encoding Initiative, 1990), but still
remains a problem that is solved only partially,
i.e., on the level of specific sub-types of linguistic
resources, such as lexical resources (Francopoulo
et al., 2006) or annotated corpora (Ide and Suder-
man, 2007), respectively. A closely related chal-
lenge is information integration, i.e., how infor-
mation from different sources can be retrieved and
combined in an efficient way.

Recently, both challenges have been addressed
by means of Linked Data principles (Chiarcos
et al., 2013a,b), eventually leading to the forma-
tion of a Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD)
cloud (Chiarcos et al., 2012b). The talk describes
its current state of development, it presents se-

lected examples for main types of linguistic re-
sources in the LLOD cloud, and objectives leading
to the adaptation of Linked Data principles for any
of these.

Further, the talk elaborates on history and goals
behind this effort, its relation to established stan-
dardization initiatives in the field, and on-going
community activities conducted under the um-
brella of the Open Linguistics Working Group
(OWLG) of the Open Knowledge Foundation
(Chiarcos et al., 2012a), an initiative of experts
from various fields concerned with linguistic data,
which works towards

1. promoting the idea of open linguistic re-
sources,

2. developing means for their representation,
and

3. encouraging the exchange of ideas and re-
sources across different disciplines.

As the Linked Data paradigm can be used to fa-
cilitate any of these aspects, the OWLG identified
potential application scenarios for linked and/or
open resources in linguistics since its formation
in 2010. The Working Group also has intensified
its community-building efforts by means of a se-
ries of workshops, accompanying publications and
data set releases. As a result of this process, nu-
merous resources have been provided in a Linked-
Data-compliant way, and linked with each other,
as sketched here for selected examples.

References

Roberto Busa. Index Thomisticus. Frommann-
Holzboog, Stuttgart, 1974.

Christian Chiarcos, Sebastian Hellmann, Sebas-
tian Nordhoff, Steven Moran, Richard Littauer,
Judith Eckle-Kohler, Iryna Gurevych, Silvana
Hartmann, Michael Matuschek, and Christian

1



M. Meyer. The Open Linguistics Working
Group. In Proc. 8th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2012), pages 3603–3610, Istanbul, Turkey, May
2012a.

Christian Chiarcos, Sebastian Nordhoff, and Se-
bastian Hellmann. Linked Data in Linguistics.
Representing and Connecting Language Data
and Language Metadata. Springer, Heidelberg,
2012b.

Christian Chiarcos, John McCrae, Philipp Cimi-
ano, and Christiane Fellbaum. Towards open
data for linguistics: Lexical Linked Data. In
Alessandro Oltramari, Piek Vossen, Lu Qin, and
Eduard Hovy, editors, New Trends of Research
in Ontologies and Lexical Resources. Springer,
Heidelberg, 2013a.

Christian Chiarcos, Steven Moran, Pablo N.
Mendes, Sebastian Nordhoff, and Richard Lit-
tauer. Building a Linked Open Data cloud
of linguistic resources: Motivations and devel-
opments. In Iryna Gurevych and Jungi Kim,
editors, The People’s Web Meets NLP. Col-
laboratively Constructed Language Resources.
Springer, Heidelberg, 2013b.

W. Nelson Francis and Henry Kucera. Brown
Corpus Manual. Manual of Information to ac-
company A Standard Corpus of Present-Day
Edited American English, for use with Dig-
ital Computers. Providence, Rhode Island,
1979. URL \url{http://icame.uib.
no/brown/bcm.html}. original edition
1964.

Gil Francopoulo, Monte George, Nicoletta Calzo-
lari, Monica Monachini, Nuria Bel, Mandy Pet,
and Claudia Soria. Lexical Markup Framework
(LMF). In Proc. 5th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2006), Genoa, May 2006.

Joseph Greenberg. Some universals of grammar
with particular reference to the order of mean-
ingful elements. In Joseph Greenberg, edi-
tor, Universals of Language, pages 58–90. MIT
Press, Cambridge, 1963.

Nancy Ide and Keith Suderman. GrAF: A graph-
based format for linguistic annotations. In
Proc. 1st Linguistic Annotation Workshop (LAW
2007), pages 1–8, Prague, Czech Republic, Jun
2007.

Henry Kucera. Computers in language analysis
and lexicography. In American Heritage Dictio-
nary of the English Language, pages XXXVII–
XL. Houghton Mifflin, New York, 1969.

Text Encoding Initiative. TEI P1 guidelines for the
encoding and interchange of machine readable
texts. http://www.tei-c.org/Vault/
Vault-GL.html, Nov 1990. draft version
1.1 1.

2


