



















































Exploring Features For Localized Detection of Speech Recognition Errors


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, pages 132–136,
Metz, France, 22-24 August 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Exploring Features For Localized Detection of Speech Recognition Errors

Eli Pincus and Svetlana Stoyanchev and Julia Hirschberg
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, USA

elipincus@gmail.com & sstoyanchev@cs.columbia.edu
& julia@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of localized error
detection in Automatic Speech Recognition
(ASR) output to support the generation of tar-
geted clarifications in spoken dialogue sys-
tems. Localized error detection finds specific
mis-recognized words in a user utterance. Tar-
geted clarifications, in contrast with generic
‘please repeat/rephrase’ clarifications, target
a specific mis-recognized word in an utter-
ance (Stoyanchev et al., 2012a) and require
accurate detection of such words. We extend
and modify work presented in (Stoyanchev et
al., 2012b) by experimenting with a new set
of features for predicting the likelihood of a
local error in an ASR hypothesis on an un-
sifted version of the original dataset. We im-
prove over baseline results, where only ASR-
generated features are used, by constructing
optimal feature sets for utterance and word
mis-recognition prediction. The f-measure for
identifying incorrect utterances improves by
2.2% and by 3.9% for identifiying incorrect
words.

1 Introduction
Spoken Dialogue Systems typically indicate their lack
of understanding of user input by simple requests for
repetition or rephrasing – “I’m sorry, I didn’t under-
stand you.”, or “Can you please repeat?”. However
human conversational partners generally provide more
targeted clarification requests. Corpus analysis of hu-
man conversations have shown that people are more
likely to indicate what they have understood and what
they have not understood by producing reprise clar-
ification questions (Purver, 2004; Stoyanchev et al.,
2012a), as illustrated in the following exchange where
XXX indicates a word misunderstood by speaker B:

A: Do you have any XXX in your bag?
B: Do I have any what in my bag?

A reprise clarification question targets a specific mis-
recognized word and incorporates recognized context

into a clarification question.
We investigate replacing generic please repeat clari-

fications with more natural targeted clarifications in au-
tomatic spoken systems. Targeted clarifications allow
users to provide a concise response to a clarification
question which is beneficial for spoken systems accept-
ing broad vocabulary and flexible syntax. Examples of
such systems include tutoring systems, intelligent as-
sistants, and spoken translation systems (Litman and
Silliman, 2004; Dzikovska et al., 2009; Akbacak et al.,
2009).

To enable Spoken Dialogue Systems (SDS) to gen-
erate targeted clarification questions, we must first be
able to identify mis-recognized words with high accu-
racy. We term such mis-recognition detection localized
error detection. Accurate distinction between correctly
and incorrectly recognized words is essential to the cre-
ation of appropriate targeted clarification questions.

In previous research on recognition error detection in
dialogue systems, researchers have addressed error de-
tection at the utterance level (Hirschberg et al., 2004;
Komatani and Okuno, 2010). In this paper we present
results of classification experiments designed to de-
tect localized errors within the utterance. Our base-
line results are obtained from a classifier trained only
on word posterior probabilities generated by an Auto-
matic Speech Recognition (ASR) engine. ASR confi-
dence score computation is an active research area, re-
lying upon acoustic and lexical collocation information
to compute confidence scores. We determine whether
improvement over baseline can be achieved by training
a classifier for utterance and word mis-recognition pre-
diction on an expanded feature set that includes lexical,
positional, prosodic, semantic, syntactic as well as ad-
ditional ASR score features. All of the features we ex-
periment with can be computed from an ASR hypothe-
sis without affecting the performance of a SDS materi-
ally. After determining optimal feature sets we experi-
ment with one- and two-stage approaches for localized
error detection. The first simply identifies whether a
word is correctly recognized or not. The second first
classifies an utterance as incorrect or correct and then
classifies errors only on utterances labeled incorrect.

132



This work extends earlier work in which we eval-
uated a smaller set of syntactic and prosodic fea-
tures (Stoyanchev et al., 2012b). In addition to im-
provements implemented in the ASR engine that we
use to produce ASR hypotheses, our current work re-
ports results on a larger dataset which includes com-
mands to the system and utterances containing disflu-
encies. Here, we propose a framework for localized
error detection that does not rely upon pre-filtering of
the dataset.

In Section 2 we describe our corpus. In Section 3
we discuss our classification experiments. In Section
4 we discuss our results. In Section 5 we present our
conclusions and discuss future research.

2 Data
We conduct our machine learning experiments on the
DARPA TRANSTAC corpus (Weiss et al., 2008). The
TRANSTAC corpus is comprised of staged conversa-
tions between American military personnel and Ara-
bic interviewees utilizing IraqComm speech-to-speech
translation system (Akbacak et al., 2009). This data
was collected by NIST between 2005 and 2008 in eval-
uation exercises. The dataset contains audio record-
ings and manual transcript of English and Arabic utter-
ances. We used SRI’s DynaSpeak (Franco et al., 2002)
speech recognition system to recognize the English ut-
terances and use posterior probabilities from DynaS-
peak as our baseline feature. We create a corpus from
this dataset that contains over 99% of the English ut-
terances. 38 utterances were removed from the dataset
either for lack of actual speech data or errors in refer-
ence transcription. 26.2% of our cleaned corpus con-
sist of mis-recognized instances and 6.4% of the total
words in it are incorrectly recognized by DynaSpeak
(see Table 1). We are using an unsifted version of the
corpus used in our previous work (Stoyanchev et al.,
2012b) whose hypotheses were produced with a new
version of the DynaSpeak ASR system. In our previous
work utterances containing disfluencies and commands
to the system were excluded. We seek to avoid the cas-
cading errors that would follow from implementing a
2-step framework for localized error detection where
the first step is command and disfluency detection and
the second step is localized error detection. The 1-step
framework also has the advantage of working for all ut-
terances including ones that contain commands or dis-
fluencies. Due to these differences, our current results
are not directly comparable with our previous results.

Table 1: Corpus statistics

Overall Correct ASR Incorr ASR
All utts. 3,952 2,914 (73.7%) 1,038 (26.2%)
All wrds. 25,333 23,705 (93.6%) 1,628 (6.4%)

wrds in err utts 7,888 6,260 (79.4%) 1,628 (20.6%)

3 Method
We analyze how the performance of predicting mis-
recognized utterances and words is affected by the
use of lexical, positional, prosodic, semantic, and syn-
tactic features in addition to ASR confidence scores.
We perform machine learning experiments using the
Weka Machine Learning Library to construct a J48
decision tree classifier boosted with MultiBoostAB
method (Witten and Eibe, 2005).

Baseline confidence features We use ASR posterior
scores extracted from the log files output by Dynaspeak
as a baseline feature set in our experiments. In the utter-
ance mis-recognition prediction experiment, we calcu-
late the average of the logarithm of the ASR posterior
scores over all words in the hypothesis. In the word
mis-recognition prediction experiment we use the log-
arithm of the posterior score of a given word.

Feature selection We run a heuristic feature ex-
ploration experiment to identify optimal feature sets
for predicting mis-recognized utterances and mis-
recognized words. We first use a greedy approach
adding one feature at a time to the baseline ASR feature
set and only keep a feature in the set if it improves F-
measure predicting mis-recognition. We then use an al-
ternate greedy approach in which we begin with a fea-
ture set composed of all extracted features and proceed
to remove one feature at a time and only leave it out
of the set if incorrect F-measure improved or remained
the same with its absence. The second approach yields
the optimal feature sets for both utterance and word
mis-recognition prediction. Table 2 lists the features
that make up these optimal sets. For incorrect utter-
ance prediction, we run a 10-fold cross validation on
all utterances. For incorrect word prediction, we run a
10-fold cross validation on all words in mis-recognized
utterances.1 We next describe the features we found to
be useful in prediction and those that did not improve
performance.

3.1 Useful Features

ASR context features We use the logarithm of the pos-
terior score of a given word and the average of the log-
arithm of the posterior scores for both a given word and
its surrounding context. We use one word context be-
fore and after the given word. We also use the average
of the logarithm of the posterior scores for all words in
the utterance.

Lexical features We hypothesize that properties of
words such as length and frequency are predictive of
whether a word is correctly recognized. In particular,
noting that words of greater length are often better rec-
ognized by an ASR engine, we examine the length, fre-
quency, and posterior score of the maximum and min-

1Because of the size limitations of our dataset feature se-
lection and evaluation are performed on the same dataset.

133



imum words in an utterance. For mis-recognized ut-
terance prediction, we find that the average length of a
word in the utterance are useful features for predicting
both mis-recognized utterances and words. For mis-
recognized word prediction, we find the word length of
the surrounding words, the current word, and the fre-
quency of the longest word in an utterance are useful.
We also find that utterance length calculated in words is
a useful feature for predicting both utterance and word
mis-recognition.

Positional features Motivated by the use of dialogue
history features in Lopes et al (2011), we find that the
location of the hypothesis relative to the speaker’s first
utterance in the dialogue (utterance location) is a use-
ful feature. Similarly, we obtain improvement from the
word index feature, the distance of the word from the
first word in the utterance.

Syntactic POS tags were shown to be helpful in our
previous work and we find that these tags improve the
current results as well. We obtain these from the Stan-
ford POS tagger (et al., 2003). In mis-recognized ut-
terance prediction, we use unigram and bigram counts
of POS tags as a feature. For mis-recognized word pre-
diction, we use the word’s POS tag as well as the POS
tag for the surrounding one or two words.

We obtain a binary Func/Content feature using a
function word list to distinguish function from content
words. The list includes certain adverbs, conjunctions,
determiners, modal verbs, primary verbs such as be,
prepositions, pronouns, and WP-pronouns. These tags
also boost our ability to identify mis-recognized words.
The feature Func/Tot ratio is the fraction of function
words to total words in an ASR hypothesis. We hy-
pothesize that an extreme value of the Func/Tot ratio
may indicate a potential mis-recognition, and it does
improve both utterance and word mis-recognition pre-
diction.

3.2 Less Useful Features

Features we do not find helpful include information as-
sociated with the minimum length word in the utter-
ance, the fraction of words in an utterance that pos-
sess greater length than the average length word in the
corpus, as well as syntactic features such as a depen-
dency tag assigned to the word. Additional unhelp-
ful features include prosodic features, such as shimmer
and jitter identified by PRAAT (Boersma and Weenink,
2013) and pitch and phrase information extracted from
AuToBI(Rosenberg, 2010) software. Performing a se-
mantic role label of our hypotheses with the software
SENNA (Collobert et al., 2011) also did not provide
helpful semantic features.

System Performance To evaluate performance of
our mis-recognized word classifier, we use the selected
features in 1-stage and 2-stage approaches. First, we
train models for utterance and word classification sep-

Table 2: Features

Cat Specific In Optimal Utt
Feature Set

In Optimal
Wrd Feature
Set

ASR Log Post Score Yes (avg of all
wrds in utt)

Yes (curr wrd)

ASR-
CTX

Log Post Score No Yes (avg of curr
wrd, curr wrd
context, avg of
all wrds in utt)

Lex Wrd length Yes (avg wrd
length in utt)

Yes
(curr,prev,next)

Max Wrd freq No Yes

Utt length Yes Yes

POS Utt location Yes Yes

Word Index No Yes (curr)

Syn POS Tag Yes (unigram
and bigram
count)

Yes
(curr,prev,next)

Func/Cont tag No Yes (curr, prev,
next)

Func/Tot ratio Yes Yes

arately on 80% of the dataset with up-sampling (35%)2
of the incorrect instances as well as with the actual dis-
tribution of incorrect instances in the corpus (20.6% ut-
terances, 6.4% words). We then test these models on
the remaining 20% of the dataset using the 1-stage and
2-stage approach. In the 1-stage approach we test on
20% of the total words in the corpus. In the 2-stage ap-
proach we first test on 20% of the total utterances in the
corpus and then only test on the words in the utterances
labeled as mis-recognized.

4 Results
New Feature Experiments Using our newly con-
structed utterance feature set we are able to boost incor-
rect utterance classification F-measure by 2.2% from
.597 to .610 (see Table 3). The increase in F-measure
for incorrect utterance mis-recognition is due to an in-
crease in incorrect utterance recall from .531 to .555.
There is a slight decrease in incorrect utterance pre-
cision from .682 to .678. Overall classification accu-
racy improves by 2.1% points (absolute) from 81.2%
to 83.3%. Using our newly constructed word feature
set we are able to improve incorrect word classification
F-measure by 3.9% from .620 to .644 (see Table 4). For
incorrect word classification there is an increase in both
mis-recognized word precision and recall; the former
increasing from .678 to .719 and the latter increasing
from .571 to .584. The results for incorrect word clas-
sification represent a statistically significant improve-

2This percentage was derived empirically.

134



Table 3: Utterance new feature experiment results
Feature Correct Incorrect % F-Measure Incorr Imp Accuracy

P — R — F P — R — F over ASR Only
ASR .845 — .912 — .877 .682 — .531 — .597 - 81.2%

ASR+LEX+POS+SYN .851 — .906 — .878 .678 — .555 — .610 2.2% 83.3%
Table 4: Word new feature experiment results

Feature Correct Incorrect % F-Measure Incorr Imp Accuracy
P — R — F P — R — F over ASR only

ASR .893 — .930 — .911 .678 — .571 — .620 - 85.5%
ASR+LEX+POS+SYN .897 — .941 — .918 .719 — .584 — .644 3.9% 86.7%

Table 5: 1-stage and 2-stage approach results
Experiment Correct Incorrect Accuracy

P — R — F P — R — F
Maj. Baseline .94 — 1.00 — .97 - — 0 — - 94%

1-stage original .97 — .94 — .96 .39 — .57 — .46 92%
1-stage (35% upsample) .98 — .90 — .94 .31 — .72 — .44 89%

2-stage original .96 — .98 — .97 .51 — .34 — .41 94%
2-stage (35% upsample) .96 — .96 — .96 .41 — .46 — .43 93%

ment3. Overall classification accuracy improves by
1.2% points (absolute) from 85.5% to 86.7%.

1-stage and 2-stage experiments To estimate how
well a dialogue system could perform incorrect word
classification we run our 1-stage and 2-stage ap-
proaches. The 1-stage approaches (with and without
up-sampling) are able to achieve higher recall; while
the 2-stage approaches (with and without up-sampling)
are able to achieve higher precision. The 2-stage re-
sult’s higher precision is not surprising given that this
approach has two chances to filter out correct words
— first with utterance classification and then with
word classification. In our 1-stage approach with up-
sampling we are able to identify almost 3/4 (72%) of
the incorrect words in the corpus (see Table 5). In
our 2-stage approach without up-sampling we are able
to accurately label just over 1/2 (51%) of the total in-
stances we identify as incorrect. In future work we will
experiment with additional features in order to boost
precision for incorrect word classification to a level
suitable for use in the construction of reprise clarifi-
cation questions.

5 Conclusions
We have presented results of machine learning exper-
iments that utilize new features to improve localized
detection of ASR errors to assist spoken dialogue sys-
tem’s production of reprise clarification questions. We
conducted feature selection experiments to find optimal
feature sets to train classifiers for utterance and word
mis-recognition prediction. We find that certain lexi-
cal, positional, and syntactic features improve classi-
fication results over a baseline feature set containing
only ASR posterior score features. We improve incor-
rect F-measure for utterance mis-recognition prediction
by 2.2% by adding utterance length, location, fraction

3χ2test(p < .01)

of function words to total words, average word length,
and unigram and bigram count to the baseline feature
set. By removing average word length as well as uni-
gram and bigram count from this optimal set for utter-
ances and adding the current word’s ASR-context fea-
tures, length, distance from first word, POS tag, Con-
tent/Function tag as well as the length of the current’s
words surrounding 1 or 2 word contexts, we improve
incorrect F-measure for word mis-recognition predic-
tion by 3.9% . We then employ these feature sets in
1-stage and 2-stage approached to obtain our final re-
sults. The 2-stage (no up-sampling) approach yields the
highest precision for detection of word mis-recognition
at 51% while the 1-stage (with 35% up-sampling) ap-
proach yields the highest recall for detection of word
mis-recognition at 72%.

In order to implement this approach in a working
dialog system we would need to increase our word
mis-recognition precision. The presence of false pos-
itives in mis-recognition prediction (correctly recog-
nized words classified as mis-recognized) could lead
to unnecessary clarification requests — potentially de-
railing the dialogue.

In future work we will experiment with additional
corpora as well as with an even more fine-grained ap-
proach to local error detection, looking for deletions,
insertions, and substitutions. Potentially, optimal clas-
sifiers could be found for each of these types of mis-
recognition. If we are able to identify the type of ASR
error as well as its location, we should be able to im-
prove our construction of clarifications questions.

We will also continue our investigation of how to use
reprise clarification questions in SDS. Once we have
detected localized ASR errors we must still refine our
strategies for constructing clarification questions using
this information. We are also studying how appropri-
ate and inappropriate reprise clarification questions are
handled by SDS users.

135



References
M. Akbacak, H. Franco, M. Frandsen, S. Hasan,

H. Jameel, A. Kathol, S. Khadivi, X. Lei, A. Man-
dal, S. Mansour, K. Precoda, C. Richey, D. Ver-
gyri, W. Wang, M. Yang, and J. Zheng. 2009. Re-
cent advances in sri’s iraqcomm; iraqi arabic-english
speech-to-speech translation system. In Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing, 2009. ICASSP 2009.
IEEE International Conference on, pages 4809–
4812.

P. Boersma and D. Weenink. 2013. Praat: do-
ing phonetics by computer [computer program].
http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/.

R. Collobert, J. Weston, L. Bottou, M. Karlen,
K. Kavukcuoglu, and P. Kuksa. 2011. Natural lan-
guage processing (almost) from scratch.

M. O. Dzikovska, C. B. Callaway, E. Farrow, J. D.
Moore, N. Steinhauser, and G. Campbell. 2009.
Dealing with interpretation errors in tutorial dia-
logue. In Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2009 Con-
ference: The 10th Annual Meeting of the Special In-
terest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, SIGDIAL
’09, pages 38–45, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

K. Toutanova et al. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-speech
tagging with a cyclic dependency network. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics on Human Language Technology - Vol-
ume 1.

H. Franco, J. Zheng, J. Butzberger, F. Cesari, M. Fr,
J. Arnold, V. Ramana, A. Stolcke R. Gadde, and
V. Abrash. 2002. Dynaspeak: Sri’s scalable speech
recognizer for embedded and mobile systems. In
Proceedings of the second international conference
on Human Language Technology Research, HLT
’02, pages 25–30, San Francisco, CA, USA. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.

J. Hirschberg, D. J. Litman, and M. Swerts. 2004.
Prosodic and other cues to speech recognition fail-
ures. Speech Communication, 43(1-2):155–175.

K. Komatani and H. G. Okuno. 2010. Online error
detection of barge-in utterances by using individual
users utterance histories in spoken dialogue system.

D. J. Litman and S. Silliman. 2004. Itspoke: an
intelligent tutoring spoken dialogue system. In
Demonstration Papers at HLT-NAACL 2004, HLT-
NAACL–Demonstrations ’04, pages 5–8, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA.

J. Lopes, M. Eskenazi, and I. Trancoso. 2011. To-
wards choosing better primes for spoken dialog sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on

Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding
(ASRU), Keystone, CO.

M. Purver. 2004. The Theory and Use of Clarification
Requests in Dialogue. Ph.D. thesis, King’s College,
University of London.

A. Rosenberg. 2010. Autobi - a tool for auto-
matic tobi annotation. In Takao Kobayashi, Kei-
kichi Hirose, and Satoshi Nakamura, editors, IN-
TERSPEECH, pages 146–149. ISCA.

S. Stoyanchev, A. Liu, and J. Hirschberg. 2012a. Clar-
ification questions with feedback 2012. In Interdis-
ciplinary Workshop on Feedback Behaviors in Dia-
log.

S. Stoyanchev, P. Salletmayr, J. Yang, and
J. Hirschberg. 2012b. Localized detection of
speech recognition errors. In Spoken Language
Technology Workshop (SLT), 2012 IEEE, pages
25–30.

B. Weiss, C. Schlenoff, G. Sanders, M. Steves, S. Con-
don, J. Phillips, and D. Parvaz. 2008. Perfor-
mance evaluation of speech translation systems. In
Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair) et al., editor,
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08),
Marrakech, Morocco, may. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA). http://www.lrec-
conf.org/proceedings/lrec2008/.

I. Witten and F. Eibe. 2005. Data Mining: Practi-
cal machine learning tools and techniques. Morgan
Kaufmann, San Francisco, 2nd edition.

136


