










































Relational words have high metaphoric potential


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Metaphor in NLP, pages 21–26,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Relational words have high metaphoric potential 
 

Anja Jamrozik Eyal Sagi 
Northwestern University Northwestern University 

Department of Psychology - 2029 Sheridan Road Kellogg School - 2001 Sheridan Road 
Evanston, IL 60208-2710, USA Evanston, IL 60208-2710, USA 

a.jamrozik@u.northwestern.edu eyal@u.northwestern.edu 
 

Micah Goldwater Dedre Gentner 
Northwestern University Northwestern University 

Department of Psychology - 2029 Sheridan Road Department of Psychology - 2029 Sheridan Road 
Evanston, IL 60208-2710, USA Evanston, IL 60208-2710, USA 

micahbg@gmail.com gentner@northwestern.edu 
  

Abstract 

What influences the likelihood that a word 
will be used metaphorically? We tested 
whether the likelihood of metaphorical use is 
related to the relationality of a word’s mean-
ing. Relational words name relations between 
entities. We predicted that relational words, 
such as verbs (e.g., speak) and relational 
nouns (e.g., marriage) would be more likely 
to be used metaphorically than words that 
name entities (e.g., item). In two experiments, 
we collected expert ratings of metaphoricity 
for uses of verbs, relational nouns, and entity 
nouns collected from a corpus search. As pre-
dicted, uses of relational words were rated as 
more metaphorical than uses of entity words. 
We discuss how these findings could inform 
NLP models of metaphor.  

1 Introduction 

Our goal is to assess the metaphoric potential of 
words and word classes—by which we mean the 
likelihood that the word (or word class) will be 
used metaphorically. By metaphorical use, we 
mean the use of a word to convey ideas that are not 
part of its basic or standard meaning. We note that 
metaphoric potential does not equate to metaphoric 
salience. Many common metaphorical uses are not 
particularly salient. These include non-spatial, ab-
stract uses of prepositions (e.g., in love, between 
assignments) and metaphorical uses of verbs (e.g., 
run for office, fall behind).  

One could question whether it is useful to iden-
tify the kind of metaphorical uses just mentioned. 
Shutova, Tuefel, & Korhonen (2012) point out that 

it may not be relevant to NLP applications to iden-
tify highly conventionalized or “dead” metaphori-
cal uses, ones for which a metaphorical sense has 
become dominant and earlier literal senses have 
become obsolete. An example is the verb impress, 
which was originally used in printing contexts and 
meant ‘to make a mark with pressure’ but now is 
typically used to mean ‘to produce admiration in 
someone’. While we agree that identifying such 
‘dead’ metaphors may not be useful, we note that 
there are many conventional metaphors that also 
retain a healthy literal sense; and in these cases, 
identifying their metaphorical uses can be chal-
lenging. An example is the word glow, which can 
be used literally (The lamp glows dimly) as well as 
metaphorically (Her face glows with joy). In our 
research, we will consider both conventional and 
novel extensions of a word’s meaning but will fo-
cus more on conventional metaphorical uses. 

Many factors influence a word’s metaphoric po-
tential—including its conventionality as a prior 
metaphoric source, its familiarity, and whether it 
belongs to a conceptual system whose other mem-
bers are often used metaphorically1. We focus here 
on a relatively unexplored factor: namely, the rela-
tionality of the word’s meaning. 

Relational words are words that take more than 
one argument. These include verbs (KNOW(Sue, 
Ida)), prepositions (ON(fence, hill)), and relational 

                                                 
1 For example, one might be able to say “Let me slide this to 
him” meaning “Let me communicate this to him in a smooth 
manner),” because the “conduit” metaphoric system (Reddy, 
1979; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980) includes other instances of 
caused-physical-motion verbs used to convey communication 
of ideas (e.g., “Is this message getting across to you?”). 

21



nouns2 (FRIEND OF(John, George). Relational 
nouns (e.g., guest, host, party). which name rela-
tions or systems of relations, can be contrasted 
with entity nouns (e.g., zebra, thing), which name 
entities defined by their intrinsic properties (see 
Gentner & Kurtz, 2005; Goldwater Markman & 
Stilwell, 2011, and Markman & Stilwell, 2001). 

Goldwater and Willits (2010) explored ways to 
distinguish relational from entity nouns based on 
their distributional patterns. All of the nouns from 
the Goldwater et al. (2011), Gentner & Kurtz 
(2005) and Gentner & Asmuth (2008) studies were 
normed for their relationality by naïve participants, 
who rated to what degree each word expressed re-
lational or entity meanings. Goldwater and Willits 
analyzed the distributions of the top 50 highest 
rated relational nouns and top 25 entity nouns on a 
10,000 word corpus from Wikipedia.com. The two 
kinds of nouns were found to have distinct dis-
tributional patterns. For relational nouns, the most 
frequent immediate following word is a preposition 
connecting the noun to another term (as in ‘propor-
tion of X’ or ‘barrier to X’)3. In contrast, the most 
frequent immediate follower for entity nouns is 
and4. These distributional patterns can be used to 
predict noun type. Given two words, their distribu-
tional similarity can predict whether they are of the 
same noun type or different noun type with close 
to 90% accuracy. Although further study is needed 
of how well these results extend to a larger sample 
of nouns, we believe this is a promising direction.  

Our hypothesis that metaphorical potential is re-
lated to relationality is supported by evidence that 
relational words are more mutable than entity 
words—that is, the meanings of relational words 
adjust more to fit their contexts than do the mean-
ings of entity nouns (Gentner, 1981). Psycholin-
guistic studies of sentence interpretation have 
found this pattern both across word classes (nouns 
vs. verbs) and within the noun class (entity nouns 
vs. relational nouns). For example, when partici-

                                                 
2 A common test for relational nouns involves the use of geni-
tive of (Barker and Dowty, 1993).  For example, friend is a 
relational noun, and "friend of John" and "John's friend" are 
both grammatical and interchangeable.  The of form is not 
grammatical for non-relational nouns (e.g., John’s truck, 
*truck of John) (Barker, 1995). 
3 Goldwater and Willits found that relational nouns were most 
frequently followed by of, but distributional approaches could 
be extended to other common role-bearing terms. 
 

pants were asked to paraphrase semantically 
strained sentences in which the noun did not meet 
the argument specification of the verb (e.g., The 
car laughed), their paraphrases were far more 
likely to preserve the meanings of the nouns than 
of the verbs (Gentner & France, 1988) (e.g., ‘The 
automobile sputtered and refused to start’). Further 
evidence comes from studies testing recognition 
memory of nouns and verbs (Kersten & Earles, 
2004). Verbs were recognized better if found in the 
same context as at encoding, but nouns were rec-
ognized equally well whether in the same context 
or in a new context. Kersten and Earles suggested 
that this difference stemmed from the greater mu-
tability of verbs (Gentner, 1981). Because the 
meanings of verbs adjust more to their contexts 
than do the meanings of nouns, a verb may be in-
terpreted as having very different meanings at en-
coding and at test. This made it difficult for 
participants to recognize that the same word was 
used in both cases.  

There is also evidence that relational nouns have 
greater mutability than entity nouns. Using a simi-
lar paradigm to the one used by Kersten and Earles 
(2004), Asmuth and Gentner (2005) gave partici-
pants conceptual combinations consisting of one 
relational noun and one entity noun (e.g., a truck 
limitation, a barrier peanut) and later tested their 
recognition memory for the individual nouns, 
which were either presented in the old context (the 
same context as at encoding) or in a new context. 
Overall, recognition of entity nouns was better than 
recognition of relational nouns. Additionally, rec-
ognition for relational nouns was more impaired by 
a shift to a new context than was recognition of 
entity nouns. This is consistent with the mutability 
claim that relational nouns are encoded in a con-
text-dependent manner. 

 To summarize, the evidence that relational 
words are more mutable than entity words suggest 
that they should have greater metaphoric potential. 
If a word’s meaning readily adjusts to its context, 
this can result in metaphoric extensions that go 
beyond the word’s basic or standard meaning. 
Since relational words are more mutable than en-
tity words, they should be more likely to be ex-
tended in this way.  

We test this prediction both across and within 
word classes. Comparing across word classes, we 
predict that verbs will have greater metaphoric po-
tential than nouns. Comparing within word class, 

22



we predict that relational nouns will have greater 
metaphoric potential than entity nouns. 

There is already evidence for the predicted dif-
ference between word classes: metaphorical uses 
of verbs have been found to be more common than 
metaphorical uses of nouns in poetry (Brooke-
Rose, 1958), in classroom discourse (e.g., Cam-
eron, 2003), and across various spoken and written 
genres (e.g., Shutova & Teufel, 2010; Steen, Dorst, 
Herrmann, Kaal, Krennmayr, & Pasma, 2010).  

In the studies that follow, we tested our predic-
tions using data collected from a corpus search. 
We randomly sampled uses of verbs, relational 
nouns, and entity nouns and collected novelty and 
metaphoricity ratings for each of these uses. We 
were particularly interested in the pattern among 
conventional metaphorical uses, which are the 
most challenging to identify with NLP methods. 

2 Experiment 1 

2.1 Materials 

The materials consisted of 20 uses each of nine 
entity nouns, eighteen relational nouns5, and nine 
verbs.  The entity and relational nouns were se-
lected based on data from a previous rating task 
(the same as provided Goldwater and Willits with 
their sample). The entity nouns we selected were 
rated as conveying an entity meaning to a higher 
degree than the relational nouns, and vice versa, all 
ps < .001. The nine verbs were selected to match 
the frequencies of the nouns, using data from the 
Corpus of Contemporary American English 
(COCA) (Davies, 2008-). There were no differ-
ences in the frequencies of the word types, F(3, 32) 
= .857, p = .474. 

We collected a random sample of 20 uses of 
each of the 36 words from COCA, with an equal 
number from the spoken, fiction, magazine, news, 
and academic registers. We used the following cri-
teria to determine whether a word use would be 
included in the sample. First, the word had to be 
used as a noun or verb, depending on its prese-
lected word type6 (e.g., for the verb talk, we only 

                                                 
5 There were two different kinds of relational nouns (schema 
nouns, which refer to relational systems, e.g., party, and role 
nouns, which refer to roles within such systems, e.g., guest), 
but we do not distinguish them in the analyses that follow. 
6 We reserve the use of the term word class for accepted syn-
tactic distinctions (e.g., nouns vs. verbs) and use the term 

collected uses in which talk was used as a verb). 
Second, the word had to be used in a full sentence 
or phrase, so as to give sufficient context to deter-
mine how metaphorical the use was. Third, the 
sentence had to be a statement, not a question. Fi-
nally, the word could only appear once in the sen-
tence. 

2.2 Rating Task 

The three raters were Ph.D. students of English 
or Comparative Literature. They were chosen be-
cause they had extensive experience identifying 
figurative language and would be able to identify 
metaphors that may not have been particularly sa-
lient to average readers.  

The raters were given sets of sentences with the 
key terms bolded and underlined: e.g.,  

The human mind, the only device capable of traveling 
through time, tends to want to stay in its own time.  
A smartphone or other technological device used dur-
ing worship also can be a distraction. 
 They were instructed to rate the metaphoricity 

and the novelty of the indicated words, on two 
separate scales from 1 (not at all novel 
/metaphorical) to 6 (very novel/metaphorical). The 
separate ratings were used to ensure that raters 
were not conflating novelty and metaphoricity. For 
each item, we calculated the average of the indi-
vidual novelty and metaphoricity scores assigned 
by the raters. 

2.3 Results 

As predicted, we found that the metaphor ratings 
differed across word types. We conducted an 
ANOVA with the average metaphor ratings for 
each use as the dependent variable. The type of 
word rated (Entity Noun, Relational Noun, or 
Verb) was the independent variable and the spe-
cific word was a random effect. This resulted in a 
marginally significant effect of word type, F(2, 
684) = 3.22, p = .053. Post-hoc Tukey HSD tests 
revealed that uses of verbs (M = 1.77, SD = 0.76) 
and relational nouns (M = 1.75, SD = 0.91) were 
rated as more metaphorical than uses of entity 
nouns (M = 1.27, SD = 0.61), ps < .001.  

The difference between word types was also 

                                                                             
word type to differentiate the kinds of words compared in 
these experiments. 

23



marginal when analyzing only conventional uses 
(i.e., those rated “1” for novelty), F(2, 437) = 2.80, 
p = .075. Uses of verbs (M = 1.36, SD = 0.33) and 
relational nouns (M = 1.27, SD = 0.41) were rated 
as more metaphorical than uses of entity nouns (M 
= 1.16, SD = 0.29), ps < .01. No differences in 
metaphoricity were observed between word types 
for novel uses (i.e., those rated higher than “1” for 
novelty), F(2, 213) = 1.49, p = 0.24.  

While these results are only marginally signifi-
cant, they provide encouragement that relationality 
might influence the metaphoric potential of a word.  

2.4 Concreteness, imageability and meta-
phoric potential 

One concern regarding Experiment 1 is that we did 
not control for concreteness or imeageability of the 
words. Previous research is conflicted about what 
effects concreteness and imageability should have 
on a word’s metaphorical potential. On the one 
hand, it has been argued that greater concreteness 
(e.g., Katz, 1989) and imageability (e.g., Goatly, 
2011) should result in greater metaphoricity. How-
ever, previous work by Gentner and Asmuth 
(2008) has shown that relational words, which we 
found to have greater metaphorical potential, tend 
to be less concrete and imageable than entity 
words. In accordance with these findings, we 
found that concreteness and imageability of the 
words (using data from MRC Psycholinguistic Da-
tabase - Coltheart, 1981) varied across word types 
(concreteness: F(2, 26) = 27.36, p < .001; image-
ability: F(2, 26) = 15.71, p < .001). Entity nouns 
were more concrete and imageable than relational 
nouns and verbs, all ps < .001.  

The entity nouns were more concrete and im-
ageable than the relational words, but their uses 
were less metaphorical. Thus in our sample, the 
relationship between concreteness, imageability, 
and metaphoricity was the opposite of that pre-
dicted by Katz (1989) and Goatly (2011)7: more 
concrete words were rated as less metaphorical, 
r(27) = -.43, p = .021. (The relationship between 
imageability and metaphoricity was not significant 
(r(27) = -.30, p = .117)). Because of these findings, 
in the next experiment we controlled for concrete-
ness and imageability across word classes. 

                                                 
7 It is possible that Katz’s and Goatly’s predictions drew on 
different contexts of use from those in our corpus.  

3 Experiment 2 

3.1 Materials 

The materials consisted of 20 uses each of eight 
entity nouns, sixteen relational nouns, and eight 
verbs. The words were selected in the same man-
ner as those in Experiment 1, except that in addi-
tion to controlling for frequency across word types, 
we also controlled for concreteness and imageabil-
ity. In the resulting sets, there were no differences 
in the concreteness of the word types (Coltheart, 
1981), F(2, 29) = .745, p = .484, in the imageabil-
ity of the word types (Coltheart, 1981), F(2, 29) = 
.043, p = .958, nor in the frequencies of the word 
types (using frequency data from COCA), F(2, 29) 
= .144, p = .867.  

3.2 Rating task  

The raters were three Ph.D. students of English or 
Comparative Literature who had not participated in 
the first experiment. The raters received the same 
instructions and followed the same procedure as in 
the first experiment. 

3.3 Results  

Overall, as predicted, we found that uses of rela-
tional words were rated as more metaphorical than 
uses of entity words. An ANOVA like that used in 
Experiment 1 showed that the average metaphor 
ratings differed across word types, F(2, 608) = 
3.77, p < .05. Uses of verbs (M = 2.35, SD = 1.69) 
were rated as more metaphorical than uses of entity 
nouns (M = 1.47, SD = 1.08) and relational nouns 
(M = 1.67, SD = 1.21), ps < .001.  However (in 
contrast to the first study) relational nouns were 
not significantly more metaphorical overall than 
entity nouns (p = .17).  

The pattern was stronger when we looked only 
within conventional uses8 (i.e., those rated “1” for 
novelty), F(2, 513) = 4.22, p < .05. Conventional 
uses of verbs were rated as more metaphorical (M 
= 2.19, SD = 1.59) than uses of entity nouns (M = 
1.16, SD = 0.56) and relational nouns (M = 1.42, 
SD = 0.96), all ps < .001. Uses of relational nouns 
were also rated as more metaphorical than uses of 
entity nouns, p < .05. 

As in the first study, there were no differences 

                                                 
8 Conventional uses made up 85% (545/640) of the sample. 

24



between word types for the novel uses (i.e., those 
rated higher than “1” for novelty), F(2, 70) = 1.22, 
p = 0.31. 

4 Discussion 

The results of two experiments provide support for 
the hypothesis that relational words have greater 
metaphoric potential than entity words. In the first 
experiment, verbs and relational nouns were rated 
as marginally more metaphorical than entity nouns. 
In the second experiment, in which concreteness 
and imageability were equated across the word 
types, verbs were rated more metaphorical than 
nouns.  Within conventional uses, verbs were rated 
as more metaphorical than nouns, and relational 
nouns were rated more metaphorical than entity 
nouns.  

4.1 Relationality and language change 

These findings accord with our prediction that rela-
tional words have greater metaphorical potential 
than entity words, and that this pattern is stronger 
for conventional uses. Why is this the case? We 
conjecture that there may be two paths at work 
here. First, metaphor conventionalization may re-
sult in words acquiring relational senses. Accord-
ing to the Career of Metaphor hypothesis (Bowdle 
& Gentner, 1999, 2005; Gentner, Bowdle, Wolff, 
& Boronat, 2001; Gentner & Wolff, 1997) when a 
word is used in a novel metaphoric way, the use is 
processed by aligning the literal target and base of 
the metaphor in order to abstract their common 
structure. If the base term is repeatedly paired with 
other similar target terms, the structure abstracted 
through alignment may become another conven-
tional meaning of the base term. Providing some 
initial support for this idea, Zharikov and Gentner 
(2002) traced the meanings of current relational 
words (e.g., bridge), and found that their relational 
meanings had evolved from earlier concrete, entity 
meanings.  This idea also fits with accounts that 
argue that metaphoric use is one of the mecha-
nisms precipitating semantic shifts in meaning 
(e.g., Traugott, 2004). 

A second conjecture is that because relational 
words often identify deep relations among their 
arguments, uses of relational words across domains 
should result in more apt and relevant metaphors, 
which may therefore be more readily accepted.  

This means that metaphorical uses of relational 
words may be more likely to become conventional-
ized than metaphorical uses of entity words. 

4.2 Applications to NLP 

The metaphoric uses we found in our experiments 
were in general not high-salient, striking figures of 
speech. Moreover, these metaphoric uses co-
existed with literal uses of the same word (conven-
tional non-metaphoric language was still the most 
common form). It is these unstriking, conventional 
metaphorical uses that pose a challenge for NLP 
(Shutova, Tuefel, & Korhonen, 2012). 

How can NLP models of metaphor utilize our 
results? One possibility is to use differences in 
metaphoric potential among word types to inform 
searches for metaphoric language in corpora. Such 
an application would naturally also require a 
method for identifying relational words. Of course, 
since verbs appear to have a higher metaphoric 
potential than nouns, just using grammatical cate-
gory information that is already available can make 
a substantial gain. Moreover, the distributional 
findings discussed earlier offer a potential way to 
distinguish relational from entity nouns (Goldwater 
& Willits, 2010). Assuming their results general-
ize, it might be feasible to distinguish relational 
nouns from entity nouns using distributional in-
formation. 

In sum, we believe that taking into account the 
relationality of words has the potential to improve 
NLP models of metaphor. We look forward to the 
research that would come from uniting this psy-
chological research with current research in NLP. 

Acknowledgments 
The research described here was conducted in the 
Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC), a 
center funded by NSF grant SBE-0541957. We 
thank the six raters who participated in our rating 
tasks and the Cognition and Language Lab. 

25



References  
 
Asmuth, J. & Gentner, D. (2005). Context sensitivity of 

relational nouns. Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh 
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 
163-168. 

Barker, C. (1995). Possessive Descriptions. Stanford, 
CA: CSLI Publications. 

Barker, C., & Dowty, D. (1993). Non-verbal thematic 
proto-roles. Proceedings of the North East Linguistic 
Society 23, 49-62.  

Brooke-Rose, C. (1958). A grammar of metaphor. Lon-
don: Seeker & Warburg.  

Bowdle, B., & Gentner, D. (1999). Metaphor compre-
hension: From comparison to categorization. Pro-
ceedings of the Twenty-First Annual Conference of 
the Cognitive Science Society, 90-95. 

Bowdle, B., & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of meta-
phor. Psychological Review, 112(1), 193-216. 

Cameron, L. (2003). Metaphor in educational dis-
course. New York: Continuum. 

Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC Psycholinguistic Data-
base. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 
33A, 497-505. 

Davies, M. (2008-) The Corpus of Contemporary 
American English (COCA): 425 million words, 
1990-present. Available online at 
http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/. 

Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences be-
tween nouns and verbs. Cognition and Brain Theory, 
4, 161-178. 

Gentner, D., & Asmuth, J. (2008). Can relationality be 
distinguished from abstractness in noun mutability? 
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the 
Cognitive Science Society, 863-868. 

Gentner, D., Bowdle, B., Wolff, P., & Boronat, C. 
(2001). Metaphor is like analogy. In D. Gentner, K. J. 
Holyoak, & B. N. Kokinov (Eds.), The analogical 
mind: Perspectives from cognitive science (pp. 199-
253). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Gentner, D., & France, I. M. (1988). The verb mutabil-
ity effect: Studies of the combinatorial semantics of 
nouns and verbs. In S. L. Small, G. W. Cottrell, & M. 
K. Tanenhaus (Eds.), Lexical ambiguity resolution: 
Perspectives from psycholinguistics, neuropsychol-
ogy, and artificial intelligence (pp. 343-382). San 
Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. 

Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. (2005). Relational categories. 
In W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B. 
Markman & P. W. Wolff (Eds.), Categorization in-
side and outside the lab. (pp. 151-175). Washington, 
DC: APA. 

Gentner, D., & Wolff, P. (1997). Alignment in the proc-
essing of metaphor. Journal of Memory and Lan-
guage, 37, 331-355. 

Goatly, A. (2011). The language of metaphors (2nd ed.). 
London: Routledge. 

Goldwater, M. B., Markman, A. B, Stilwell, C. H. 
(2011). The empirical case for role-governed catego-
ries. Cognition, 118, 359-376. 

Goldwater, M. B., & Willits, J. (2010). The Linguistic 
Distribution of Relational Categories. Poster pre-
sented at the 32nd annual conference of the Cognitive 
Science Society, Portland, Oregon. 

Kersten, A.W., & Earles, J.L. (2004). Semantic context 
influences memory for verbs more than memory for 
nouns. Memory & Cognition, 32, 198-211. 

Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live 
by. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press. 

Markman, A. B., & Stilwell, C. H. (2001). Role-
governed categories. Journal of Experimental & 
Theoretical Intelligence, 13, 329-358. 

Reddy, M. J. (1979). The conduit metaphor: A case of 
frame conflict in our language about language. In A. 
Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and thought, 1st ed. (pp. 
284-324). Cambridge, England: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. 

Shutova, E., & Teufel, S. (2010). Metaphor corpus an-
notated for source-target domain mappings. Proceed-
ings of LREC 2010, 3255-3261. 

Shutova, E., Teufel, S. & Korhonen, A. (2012). Statisti-
cal metaphor processing. Computational Linguistics, 
39(2), 1-53. 

 Steen, G.J., Dorst, A.G., Herrmann, J.B., Kaal, A.A., 
Krennmayr, T., & Pasma, T. (2010). A method for 
linguistic metaphor identification: From MIP to 
MIPVU. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 

Traugott, E. C. (2004). Semantic Change. In K. Brown 
(Ed.) Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics (2nd 
ed.). Oxford: Elsevier.  

Zharikov, S., & Gentner, D. (2002). Why do metaphors 
seem deeper than similes? Proceedings of the 
Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive 
Science Society, 976-981. 

 

26


