










































Applicative Structures and Immediate Discourse in the Turkish Discourse Bank


Proceedings of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop & Interoperability with Discourse, pages 122–130,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

 

 

Applicative Structures and Immediate Discourse in the Turkish 
Discourse Bank 

 
 

Işın Demirşahin, Adnan Öztürel, Cem Bozşahin, and Deniz Zeyrek 
Department of Cognitive Science, Informatics Institute 

Middle East Technical University 
{disin,ozturel,bozsahin,zeyrek}@metu.edu.tr 

 
  

 

Abstract 

Various discourse theories have argued for da-
ta structures ranging from the simplest trees to 
the most complex chain graphs. This paper in-
vestigates the structure represented by the ex-
plicit connectives annotated in the multiple-
genre Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB). The de-
pendencies that violate tree-constraints are an-
alyzed. The effects of information structure in 
the surface form, which result in seemingly 
complex configurations with underlying sim-
ple dependencies, are introduced; and the 
structural implications are discussed. The re-
sults indicate that our current approach to local 
discourse structure needs to accommodate 
properly contained arguments and relations, 
and partially overlapping as well as shared ar-
guments; deviating further from simple trees, 
but not as drastically as a chain graph structure 
would imply, since no genuine cases of struc-
tural crossing dependencies are attested in 
TDB. 

1 Introduction 
A variety of structures for discourse representa-
tion has been proposed, including successive 
trees of varying sizes connected and occasionally 
intertwined at the peripheries (Hobbs, 1985), a 
single tree structure (Rhetorical Structure Theo-
ry, RST, Mann & Thompson, 1988), entity 
chains (Knott et al. 2001), tree-adjoining gram-
mars (Discourse-Lexicalized Tree Adjoining 
Grammar, D-LTAG, Webber, 2004), directed 
acyclic graphs (Lee et al., 2006, 2008) and chain 
graphs (Wolf & Gibson, 2005).  

The simplest of these structures is a tree, 
which treats discourse structure simpler than 
sentence-level syntax. The most complex repre-
sentation, chain graphs that allow for crossing 
dependencies and other tree-violations, treats 

discourse as more complex than sentence level. 
We know since the work of Shieber (1985) and 
Joshi (1985) that sentence-level structures re-
quire more than context-free power, but not to 
the extent of dealing with general graphs, or with 
strings that grow out of constant control.  It is of 
general interest to discover whether such com-
plexity occurs in natural discourses, because we 
would like to know how far discourse structures 
deviate from applicative semantics. (Applicative 
structures are binary operations on data; for ex-
ample a connective’s meaning depending only on 
two arguments. A system is applicative if it only 
makes use of function application, but not e.g. 
graph reduction or general function composition. 
The concepts are distinct but related: function 
application can be linked to applicative structures 
by currying.) If more complex structures are 
found, we must go above applicative semantics, 
and we must worry about function compositions 
and graph reductions, which are known to re-
quire more computational power.  

2 Turkish Discourse Bank 
Turkish Discourse Bank (TDB) is the first large-
scale publicly available language resource with 
discourse level annotations for Turkish built on a 
~ 400,000-word sub-corpus of METU Turkish 
Corpus (MTC) (Say et al., 2002), annotated in 
the style of Penn Discourse Tree Bank (PDTB) 
(Prasad et al., 2008). The TDB Relations are 
annotated for explicit discourse connectives, 
which link two spans of text that can be inter-
preted as Abstract Objects (Asher, 1993). Con-
nectives are annotated together with their modi-
fiers and arguments,and with supplementary 
materials for the arguments (Zeyrek & Webber, 
2008; Zeyrek et al., 2010). The first release of 
TDB is available at http://medid.ii.metu.edu.tr/.  

122



 

 

As in PDTB, the connectives in TDB come 
from a variety of syntactic classes (Zeyrek & 
Webber, ibid). The coordinating and subordinat-
ing conjunctions such as ve ‘and’ and için ‘for’ 
and ‘in order to’, respectively, are considered 
structural connectives, meaning that they take 
both arguments structurally. Discourse adverbials 
and phrasal expressions that are built by combin-
ing a discourse-anaphoric element with a subor-
dinating conjunction are considered to be ana-
phoric connectives, meaning that they only take 
the argument that is syntactically related, and the 
other argument is interpreted anaphorically. In 
PDTB and TDB style, the syntactically related 
argument is called the second argument (Arg2), 
and the other argument is called the first argu-
ment (Arg1), for both structural and anaphoric 
connectives. The syntactic class of the discourse 
connective will be included in the further releas-
es of TDB along with the sense of the discourse 
relations, and some morphological features for 
the arguments of subordinating conjunctions 
(Demirşahin et al., 2012). 

3 Discourse Relation Configurations in 
Turkish 

Lee et al. (2006) identified independent relations 
and fully embedded relations as conforming to 
the tree structure, and shared arguments, proper-
ly contained arguments, pure crossing, and par-
tially overlapping arguments as departures from 
the tree structure in PDTB. Although most depar-
tures from the tree structure can be accounted for 
by non-structural explanations, such as anaphora 
and attribution, Lee et al. (2006, 2008) state that 
shared arguments may have to be accepted in 
discourse structure. 

Aktaş et al. (2010) identified similar structures 
in TDB, adding nested relations that do not vio-
late tree structure constraints, as well as properly 
contained relations that introduce further devia-
tions from trees. Following their terminology, we 
will reserve the word relation to discourse rela-
tions (or coherence relations), and use the term 
configuration to refer to relations between dis-
course relations.  

1.1 Independent, Fully Embedded and 
Nested Relations 

The first release of TDB consists of 8,484 explic-
it relations. The argument spans of some dis-
course connectives do not overlap with those of 
any other connectives in the corpus. We call 
them independent relations. All others are called 

non-independent relations. We have identified 
2,548 non-independent configurations consisting 
of 3,474 unique relations, meaning that 5,010 
relations (59.05%) are independent. Table 1 
shows the distribution of 2,548 non-independent 
configurations.  

 
Configuration # %
Full Embedding 695 27.28
Nested Relations 138 5.42
Total Non-violating  
Configurations 833 32.69
Shared Argument 489 19.19
Prop. Cont. Argument 194 7.61
Prop. Cont. Relation 1018 39.95
Pure Crossing 2 0.08
Partial Overlap 12 0.47
Total Violating  
Configurations 1715 67.31
Total 2548 100.00

 
Table 1: Distribution of non-independent config-

urations 
 
Since full embedding and nested relations con-

form to tree structure, these configurations will 
not be discussed further. The following subsec-
tions discuss the suitability of explanations in-
volving anaphora and attribution to tree-violating 
configurations. Those that cannot be completely 
explained away must be accommodated by the 
discourse structure. 

1.2 Shared Arguments 
Lee et al. (2006, 2008) state that shared argu-
ment is one of the configurations that cannot be 
explained away, and should be accommodated by 
discourse structure. Similarly, Egg & Redeker 
(2008) admit that even in a corpus annotated 
within RST Framework, which enforces tree 
structure by annotation guidelines, there is a 
genre-specific structure that is similar to the 
shared arguments in Lee et al. (2006). 

 

 
 

Figure 1 - Shared Argument  
 

123



 

 

Of the 489 shared arguments in TDB, 331 be-
long to anaphoric discourse relations (i.e. rela-
tions in which at least one of the connectives 
involved is either a discourse adverbial or a 
phrasal expression) (67.69%). In the remaining 
158 relations (32.31%), arguments are shared by 
structural connectives. (1) is an example of a 
shared argument.  
 
(1) 00001131-2&3  
(a) Vazgeçmek kolaydı, ertelemek de. Ama 
tırmanmaya başlandı mı bitirilmeli! Çünkü her 
seferinde acımasız bir geriye dönüş vardı. 
“It was easy to give up, so was to postpone. But 
once you start climbing you have to go all the 
way! Because there was a cruel comeback 
everytime.”  
(b) Vazgeçmek kolaydı, ertelemek de. Ama 
tırmanmaya başlandı mı bitirilmeli! Çünkü her 
seferinde acımasız bir geriye dönüş vardı. 
“It was easy to give up, so was to postpone. But 
once you start climbing you have to go all the 
way! Because there was a cruel comeback 
everytime.” 
 
All examples are from TDB; the first line indi-
cates the file name (00077211 in (1)), and the 
browser index of the connectives involved in the 
configuration (2 & 3 in (1)). The first arguments 
(Arg1) of the connectives are in italic, the second 
arguments (Arg2) are in bold. The connectives 
themselves are underlined. For the sake of sim-
plicity, the modifiers of the connectives are dis-
played as part of the connective, and the shared 
tags are omitted when they are immaterial to the 
configuration being discussed. 

In (1), the first argument of but (relation 2) 
annotated in (a) completely overlaps with the 
first argument of because (relation 3), annotated 
in (b) on the same text for comparison. The result 
is a shared argument configuration. 

1.3 Properly Contained Relations and Ar-
guments 

In TDB there are 1,018 properly contained rela-
tions, almost half of which (471 relations; 
46.27%) are caused by anaphoric relations. 

Properly contained relations where anaphoric 
connectives are not involved can be caused by 
attribution, complement clauses, and relative 
clauses. (2) is a relation within a relative clause 
(a), which is part of another relation in the matrix 
clause (b). The result is a properly contained 
relation. 
  

(2) 00001131-27&28 
(a) Sabah çok erken saatte bir önceki akşam 
gün batmadan hemen önce astığı çamaşırları 
toplamaya çıkıyordu ve doğal olarak da gün 
batmadan o günkü çamaşırları asmak için 
geliyordu. 
“She used to go out to gather the clean laundry 
she had hung to dry right before the sun went 
down the previous evening, and naturally she 
came before sunset to hang the laundry of the 
day.” 
(b) Sabah çok erken saatte bir önceki akşam gün 
batmadan hemen önce astığı çamaşırları 
toplamaya çıkıyordu ve doğal olarak da gün 
batmadan o günkü çamaşırları asmak için 
geliyordu. 
“She used to go out to gather the clean laundry 
she had hung to dry the previous evening right 
before the sun went down, and naturally she 
came before sunset to hang the laundry of the 
day.” 
 

 
a. Full Embedding 

 

 
b. Properly Contained Relation 

 
Figure 2 - Properly Contained Relation vs. Full 

Embedding 
 

Sometimes a verb of attribution is the only el-
ement that causes proper containment. Lee et al. 
(2006) argue that since the relation between the 
verb of attribution and the owner of the attribu-
tion is between an abstract object and an entity, 
and not between two abstract objects, it is not a 

124



 

 

relation on the discourse level. Therefore, those 
stranded verbs of attribution should not be re-
garded as tree-structure violations. In (3) the 
properly contained relations occur in a quote, but 
the intervening materials are more than just verbs 
of attribution. Because the intervening materials 
in (3) are whole sentences that participate in 
complex discourse structures, we believe that (3) 
is different than the case proposed by Lee et al. 
(2006) and should be considered a genuine case 
of properly contained relation. 

 
(3) 00003121-10, 11&13  
(a) "Evet, küçük amcamdı o, nur içinde yatsın, 
yetmişlik bir rakıyı devirip ipi sek sek geçmeye 
kalkmış; kaptan olan amcam ise kocaman bir 
gemiyi sulara gömdü. Aylardan kasımdı, ben 
çocuktum, çok iyi anımsıyorum, fırtınalı bir 
gecede, Karadeniz’in batısında batmışlardı. 
Kaptandı, ama yüzme bilmezdi amcam. Bir 
namaz tahtasına sarılmış olarak kıyıya 
vurduğunda kollarını zor açmışlar, yarı yarıya 
donmuş. Belki de o anda Tanrı’ya yakarıp 
yardım istiyordu, çünkü çok dindar bir adamdı. 
Ama artık değil; küp gibi içip meyhanelerde 
keman çalıyor." Sonra da Nesli’nin ilgiyle 
çatılmış alnına bakıp gülüyor: "Çok istavritsin!" 
“Yes, he was my younger uncle, may he rest in 
peace, he tried to hop on the tightrope after 
quaffing down a bottle of raki; my other uncle 
who was a captain, on the other hand, sank a 
whole ship. It was October, I was a child, I re-
member it vividly, in a stormy night, they sank 
by the west of the Black Sea. He was a captain, 
but he couldn’t swim, my uncle. When he 
washed ashore holding onto a piece of driftwood, 
they pried open his arms with great difficulty, he 
was half frozen. Maybe at that moment he was 
begging God for help, because he was a very 
religious man. But not anymore, now he hits the 
bottle and plays the violin in taverns.” Then he 
sees Nesli’s interested frown and laughs: 
“You’re so gullible!”   
(b) "Evet, [...] Ama artık değil; küp gibi içip 
meyhanelerde keman çalıyor." Sonra da 
Nesli’nin ilgiyle çatılmış alnına bakıp gülüyor: 
"Çok istavritsin!" 
“Yes, [...]But not anymore, now he hits the bottle 
and plays the violin in taverns.” Then he sees 
Nesli’s interested frown and laughs: “You’re 
so gullible!” 
 

Whereas attribution can be discarded as a non-
discourse relation, a discourse model based on 
discourse connectives should be able to accom-

modate partially contained relations resulting 
from relations within complements of verbs and 
relative clauses. 

 

 
 

Figure 3 - Properly Contained Argument 
As in properly contained relations, properly 

contained arguments may arise when an abstract 
object that is external to a quote is in a relation 
with an abstract object in a quote. Likewise, a 
discourse relation within the complement of a 
verb or a relative clause can cause properly con-
tained arguments. Anaphoric connectives ac-
count for the 129 (66.49%) of the 194 properly 
contained arguments in TDB.  

1.4 Partial Overlap 
There are only 12 partial overlaps in TDB, and 

3 of them involve anaphoric relations. 
 

 
 

Figure 4 - Partial Overlap 
 
In (4), the argument span of in order to par-

tially overlaps with the argument span of to. This 
is a partial overlap of the arguments of two struc-
tural connectives. 

  
(4) 20630000-44&45 
(a) Hükümetin, 1998’de kapatılan 
kumarhaneleri, kaynak sorununa çözüm 
bulmak amacıyla yeniden açmak için harekete 
geçmesi, tartışma yarattı. 
“The fact that the governtment took action in 
order to reopen the casinos that were closed 
down in 1998 in order to come up with a solu-
tion to the resource problem caused argu-
ments.” 
(b) Hükümetin, 1998’de kapatılan 
kumarhaneleri, kaynak sorununa çözüm 
bulmak amacıyla yeniden açmak için harekete 
geçmesi, tartışma yarattı. 

125



 

 

“The fact that the governtment took action in 
order to reopen the casinos that were closed 
down in 1998 in order to come up with a solu-
tion to the resource problem caused argu-
ments.” 

 
The first argument of relation 44 (a) properly 

contains the first argument of 45 (b), whereas the 
second argument of (b) properly contains the 
second argument of (a). This double containment 
results in a complicated structure that will be 
analyzed in detail in §3.5. 

In (5) the second argument of but (relation 42 
(a)) contains only one of the two conjoined 
clauses, whereas the first argument of after (rela-
tion 43 (b)) contains both of them. The most 
probable cause for this difference in annotations 
is the combination of “blind annotation” with the 
“minimality principle.” This principle guides the 
participants to annotate the minimum text span 
required to interpret the relation. Since the anno-
tators cannot see previous annotations, they have 
to assess the minimum span of an argument 
again when they annotate the second relation. 
Sometimes the minimal span for one relation is 
annotated differently than the minimal span re-
quired for the other, resulting in partial overlaps.  
 
(5) 00001131-42&43 
(a) Yine istediği kişiyi bir türlü görememişti, ama 
aylarca sabrettikten sonra gözetlediği bir 
kadın soluğunu daralttı, tüyleri diken diken 
oldu. 
“Once again he couldn’t see the person he want-
ed to see, but after waiting patiently for 
months, a woman he peeped at took his breath 
away, gave him goose bumps”.  
(b) Yine istediği kişiyi bir türlü görememişti, 
ama aylarca sabrettikten sonra gözetlediği bir 
kadın soluğunu daralttı, tüyleri diken diken oldu.
“Once again he couldn’t see the person he want-
ed to see, but after waiting patiently for 
months, a woman he peeped at took his breath 
away, gave him goose bumps.” 

1.5 Pure Crossing 
There are only 2 pure crossing examples in the 
current release of TDB, a number so small that it 
is tempting to treat them as negligible. However, 
the inclusion of pure crossing would result in the 
most dramatic change in discourse structure, 
raising the complexity level to chain graph and 
making discourse structure markedly more com-
plex than sentence level grammar. Therefore, we 
would like to discuss both examples in detail. 

(6) 00010111-54&55 
(a) Sonra ansızın sesler gelir. Ayak sesleri. Biri-
lerinin ya işi vardır, aceleyle yürürler, ya 
koşarlar. O zaman kız katılaşır ansızın. Oğlan 
da katılaşır ve her koşunun gizli bir isteği var. 
“And then suddenly there is a sound. Footsteps. 
Someone has an errand to run, they walk hurried-
ly or run. Then the girl stiffens suddenly. The 
boy stiffens, too; and every run has a hidden 
wish.”  
(b) Sonra ansızın sesler gelir. Ayak sesleri. Biri-
lerinin ya işi vardır, aceleyle yürürler, ya 
koşarlar. O zaman kız katılaşır ansızın. Oğlan da 
katılaşır ve her koşunun gizli bir isteği var. 
“And then suddenly there is a sound. Footsteps. 
Someone has an errand to run, they walk hur-
riedly or run. Then the girl stiffens suddenly. 
The boy stiffens, too; and every run has a hid-
den wish.”

 
In (6), the discourse relation encoded by then 

is not only anaphoric -and therefore not determi-
nant in terms of discourse structure- but also the 
crossing annotation does not necessarily arise 
from the coherence relation of the connective’s 
arguments. It is more likely imposed by lexical 
cohesive elements (Halliday & Hasan, 1976), as 
the annotators apparently made use of the repeti-
tions of ansızın ‘suddenly’ and koş ‘run’ in the 
text when they could not interpret the intended 
meaning. 

 

 
 

Figure 5 - Pure Crossing 
 

The other example, given in (7), is not ana-
phoric. It is more interesting as it points to a pe-
culiar structure similar to (4) in §3.4, a surface 
crossing which is frequent in the subordinating 
conjunctions of Turkish.  
 
(7) 20510000-31,32&34 
(a) Ceza, Telekom’un iki farklı internet alt 
yapısı pazarında tekel konumunu kötüye 
kullandığı için ve uydu istasyonu işletmeciliği 
pazarında artık tekel hakkı kalmadığı halde 
rakiplerinin faaliyetlerini zorlaştırdığı için 
verildi. 

126



 

 

“The penalty was given because Telekom 
abused its monopoly status in the two differ-
ent internet infrastructure markets and be-
cause it caused difficulties with its rivals’ activi-
ties although it did not have a monopoly status in 
the satellite management market anymore.” 
(b) Ceza, Telekom’un iki farklı internet alt yapısı 
pazarında tekel konumunu kötüye kullandığı için 
ve uydu istasyonu işletmeciliği pazarında 
artık tekel hakkı kalmadığı halde rakiplerinin 
faaliyetlerini zorlaştırdığı için verildi. 
“The penalty was given because Telekom abused 
its monopoly status in the two different internet 
infrastructure markets and because it caused 
difficulties with its rivals’ activities although it 
did not have a monopoly status in the satellite 
management market anymore.” 
(c) Ceza, Telekom’un iki farklı internet alt yapısı 
pazarında tekel konumunu kötüye kullandığı için 
ve uydu istasyonu işletmeciliği pazarında 
artık tekel hakkı kalmadığı halde rakiplerinin 
faaliyetlerini zorlaştırdığı için verildi. 
“The penalty was given because Telekom abused 
its monopoly status in the two different internet 
infrastructure markets and because it caused 
difficulties with its rivals’ activities although it 
did not have a monopoly status in the satellite 
management market anymore.” 

 
A closer inspection reveals that the pure cross-

ings in (7) are caused by two distinct reasons.  

The first reason is the repetition of the subor-
dinator için ‘because’. Had there been only the 
rightmost subordinator, the relation would be a 
simple case of Full Embedding, where ve ‘and’ 
in (b) connects the two reasons for the penalty, 
while the rightmost subordinator connects the 
combined reasons to the matrix clause (see Fig-
ure 6). However, since both subordinators were 
present, they were annotated separately. They 
share their first arguments, and take different 
spans as their second arguments, which are also 
connected by ve ‘and’, resulting in an apparent 
pure crossing.  

Our alternative analysis is that ve ‘and’ actual-
ly takes the subordinators için ‘because’ in its 
scope, and it should be analyzed similar to an 
assumed single-subordinator case. This kind of 
annotation was not available in TDB because the 
annotation guidelines state that the discourse 
connectives at the peripheries of the arguments 
should be left out. Machine Learning can help us 
spot these instances. 

The second reason for crossing is the wrap-
ping of the first arguments of (a) and (c) around 
the subordinate clause. This crossing is in fact 
not a configuration-level dependency, but a rela-
tion-level surface phenomenon confined within 
the relation anchored by için ‘because’, without 
underlying complex discourse semantics. Exam-
ple (8) is a simpler case where the surface cross-
ing within the relation can be observed.  

 

 
a. Double-subordinator (as-is) 

 
 

b. Single-subordinator (hypothetical) 
 

Figure 6 - Configuration for (7) as is, and the hypothetical single-subordinator version

127



 

 

 (8) 10380000-3 
1882’de İstanbul Ticaret Odası, bir zahire ve 
ticaret borsası kurulması için girişimde 
bulunuyor ama sonuç alamıyor. 
“In 1882, İstanbul Chamber of Commerce makes 
an attempt for founding a Provisions and 
Commodity Exchange Market but cannot ob-
tain a result.” 
 

Subordinators in Turkish form adverbial 
clauses (Kornfilt, 1997), so they can occupy any 
position that is legitimate for a sentential adverb. 

Wrapping in discourse seems to be motivated 
information-structurally. In the unmarked posi-
tion, the subordinate clause comes before the 
matrix clause and introduces a theme. However, 
the discourse constituents can occupy different 
positions or carry non-neutral prosodic features 
to express different information structures 
(Demirşahin, 2008). In (7), wrapping takes ceza 
‘penalty’ away from the rheme and makes it part 
of the theme, at the same time bringing the caus-
al discourse relation into the rheme. 

As is clear from the gloss in (7) and its 
stringset, this is function application, where ceza 
verildi ‘penalty was given’ wraps in the first 
argument as a whole. Double occurrence of the 
“connective” within the wrapped-in argument is 
causing the apparent crossing, but there is in fact 
one discourse relation. 

 
 

Figure 7 - Wrapping 
 
Wrapping in discourse is almost exclusive to 

subordinating conjunctions, possibly due to their 
adverbial freedom in sentence-level syntax. The 
subordinators make up 468 of the total of 479 
wrapping cases identified in TDB. However, 
there are also four cases of coordinating conjunc-
tions with wrapping. Two of them result in sur-
face crossing as in (9), and the other two build a 
nested-like structure, as in (10) and (11). The 
latter two are both parentheticals. 

 
(9) 10690000-32 
Bezirci’nin sonradan elimize geçen ve 
1985’lerde yaptığı antoloji hazırlığında, […] 
“In the preparation for an anthology which 
Bezirci made during 1985’s and which came 
into our possession later[…]” 

In (9) ve ‘and’ links two relative clauses, one 
of which seems to be embedded in the other. It 
should be noted that the first part of Arg1 
(Bezirci-nin) has an ambiguous suffix. The suffix 
could be the agreement marker of the relative 
clause, as reflected in the annotation, or it could 
be the genitive marked complement of the geni-
tive-possessive construction Bezirci’nin antoloji 
hazırlığı ‘Bezirci’s anthology preparation’. The 
latter analysis does not cause wrapping. 

 
(10) 00003121-26 
Biz yasalar karşısında evli sayılacak, ama 
gerçekte evli iki insan gibi değil de (evlilikler 
sıradanlaşıyordu çünkü, tekdüze ve sıkıcıydı; 
biz farklı olacaktık), aynı evi paylaşan iki 
öğrenci gibi yaşayacaktık. 
“We would be married under the law, but in real-
ity we would live like two students sharing the 
same house rather than two married people (be-
cause marriages were getting ordinary, (they 
were) monotonous and boring; we would be 
different).” 
 
(11) 00008113-10 
Masa ya da duvar saatleri bulunmayan, ezan 
seslerini her zaman duyamayıp zamanı öğrenmek 
için erkeklerin (evde oldukları zaman, tabii) cep 
saatiyle doğanın ışık saatine ve kendi 
içgüdüleriyle tahminlerine bel bağlayan birçok 
aile, yaşamlarını bu top sesine göre ayarlarlardı. 
“Lots of families who didn’t have a table clock 
or a wall clock and couldn’t always hear the 
prayer calls, who relied upon the men’s pocket 
watch (when they were home, of course) and 
their instincts and guesses to learn the time ad-
justed their lives according to this cannon shot.” 

 
Both (10) and (11) are parentheticals, resulting 

in a double-wrapping-like construction (Figure 
8). However, parentheticals move freely in the 
clause and occupy various positions, so we be-
lieve that this construction should be taken as a 
peculiarity of the parenthetical, rather than the 
structural connectives involved in the relation.  

 

 
 

Figure 8 - Double-wrap-like Parenthetical Con-
struction for (10) 

 

128



 

 

4 Conclusion 
In this paper we presented possible deviations 
from the tree structure in the first release of 
TDB. Following Lee et al. (2006, 2008) and 
Aktaş et al. (2010). We have scanned the corpus 
for shared arguments, properly contained rela-
tions and arguments, partial overlaps, and pure 
crossings. Overall, about half of these configura-
tions can be accounted for by anaphoric rela-
tions, i.e. they are not applicative structures (see 
Table 2). Note that if one of the relations in a 
configuration is anaphoric, we treat the configu-
ration as anaphoric.  

 

Configuration Struc-tural 
Ana-

phoric Total 

Shared Argument 158 331 489
 32.31% 67.69% 100.00%

Prop. Cont. Arg. 65 129 194
 33.51% 66.49% 100.00%

Prop. Cont. Rel. 547 471 1018
 53.73% 46.27% 100.00%

Pure Crossing 1 1 2
 50.00% 50.00% 100.00%

Partial Overlap 9 3 12
 75.00% 25.00% 100.00%

Total 780 935 1715
 45.48% 54.52% 100.00%

 
Table 2: Distribution of anaphoric relations 

among tree-violating configurations 
 

In addition to the shared arguments that were 
accepted in discourse structure by Lee et al., we 
have also come up with partially contained rela-
tions arising from verbal complements and rela-
tive clauses. These structures can be treated dif-
ferently in other frameworks; for instance in 
RST, they are treated as discourse constituents 
taking part in coherence relations. However, for 
the connective-based approach adopted in this 
study, they need to be accommodated as devia-
tions from tree structure.  

The few partial overlaps we have encountered 
could mostly be explained away by wrapping and 
by different interpretations of annotation guide-
lines by the annotators, especially the minimality 
principle. Recall that wrap has applicative se-
mantics. Of the two pure crossing examples we 
have found, one was also anaphoric, whereas the 
other could be explained in terms of information-
structurally motivated relation-level surface 
crossing, rather than configuration-level crossing 

dependency. In other words, if we leave the pro-
cessing of information structure to other process-
es, the need for more elaborate annotation disap-
pears. In Joshi’s (2011) terminology, immediate 
discourse in the TDB appears to be an applica-
tive structure, which, unlike syntax, seems to be 
in no need of currying.  

As a result, we can state that pure crossing (i.e. 
crossing of the arguments of structural connec-
tives) is not genuinely attested in the current 
release of TDB. The annotation scheme need not 
be enriched to allow more complex algorithms to 
deal with unlimited use of crossing. There seems 
to be a reason in every contested case to go back 
to the annotation, and revise it in ways to keep 
the applicative semantics, without losing much of 
the connective’s meaning.  
  In summary, our preliminary analysis shows 
that discourse structure may have to accommo-
date partial containment and wrap in addition to 
shared arguments. TDB has an applicative struc-
ture.   
  Taking into account that independent relations, 
fully embedded relations and nested relations are 
frequent in discourse structure, and that the dis-
course structure should accommodate shared 
arguments and partial containments; we are cur-
rently inclined to think of discourse structure as 
Hobbs (1985) does: local trees of various sizes 
connected and occasionally intertwined at the 
edges. Further complications within trees are an 
open field for further studies. 

References  
Berfin Aktaş, Cem Bozşahin, Deniz Zeyrek. 2010. 

Discourse  Relation  Configurations  in  Turkish  
and  an Annotation  Environment.  Proc.  LAW  IV  
-  The Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop. 

Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects 
in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

Işın Demirşahin. 2008. Connective Position, Argu-
ment Order and Information Structure of Discourse 
Connectives in Written Turkish Texts. Un-
published MS Thesis, Cognitive Science Program, 
Middle East Technical University. 

Işın Demirşahin, Ayışığı Sevdik-Çallı, Hale Ögel 
Balaban, Ruket Çakıcı and Deniz Zeyrek. 2012. 
Turkish Discourse Bank: Ongoing Developments. 
Proc. LREC 2012. The First Turkic Languages 
Workshop. 

Markus Egg, Gisela Redeker. 2010. How Complex is 
Discourse Structure? Proc. 7th International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC 2010) pp. 1619–23. 

129



 

 

Michael A. K. Halliday, Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976.  Cohe-
sion in English. London: Longman 

Jerry R. Hobbs. 1985. On the Coherence and Struc-
ture of Discourse. Report CSLI-85-37, Center for 
Study of Language and Information. 

Aravind K. Joshi. 1985. How Much Context-
sensitivity is Necessary for Characterizing Struc-
tural Descriptions: Tree Adjoining Grammars. In 
David Dowty, Lauri Karttunen and Arnold Zwicky 
(eds.) Natural Language Parsing. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 

Aravind K. Joshi. 2011. Some Aspects of Transition 
from Sentence to Discourse. Keynote address, In-
formatics Science Festival, Middle East Technical 
University, Ankara, June 9.  

Alistair  Knott,  Jon  Oberlander,  Michael  O’Donnel, 
Chris Mellish. 2001. Beyond elaboration: The in-
teraction of relations and focus in coherent text. In 
Ted Sanders, Joost Schilperoord and Wilbert 
Spooren (Eds.), Text Representation: Linguistic  
and  psycholinguistic  aspects (181-196): John 
Benjamins Publishing. 

Jacqueline Kornfilt. 1997. Turkish. New York: 
Routledge. 

Alan Lee, Rashmi Prasad, Aravind K. Joshi, Nikhil 
Dinesh, Bonnie Webber. 2006. Complexity of de-
pendencies in discourse: are dependencies in dis-
course more complex than in syntax?  Proc. 5th 
Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theory 
(TLT’06 ). 

Alan  Lee,  Rashmi  Prasad,  Aravind  K.  Joshi,  
Bonnie Webber. 2008. Departures from tree struc-
tures in discourse. Proc. Workshop on Constraints 
in Discourse III. 

William C. Mann, Sandra A. Thompson. 1988. Rhe-
torical structure theory: Toward a functional theory 
of text organization. Text, 8(3), 243-281. 

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni 
Miltsakaki,  Livio  Robaldo,  Aravind  K.  Joshi,  
Bonnie Webber.  2008.  The  Penn Discourse  
Treebank  2.0. Proc. LREC’08 - The sixth interna-
tional conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation. 

Bilge Say, Deniz Zeyrek, Kemal Oflazer, and Umut 
Özge.  2002. Development of a Corpus and a Tree-
bank for Present-day Written Turkish. Proc. Elev-
enth International Conference on Turkish Linguis-
tics (ICTL 2002). 

Stuart Shieber. 1985. Evidence against the Context-
Freeness of Natural Language.  Linguistics and 
Philosophy: 8:333-343. 

Bonnie Webber. 2004. D-LTAG: Extending Lexical-
ized TAG to Discourse. Cognitive Science, 28(5), 
751-779. 

Florian Wolf, Edward Gibson. 2005. Representing 
discourse  coherence:  a corpus-based  study.  
Computational Linguistics 31: 249–87. 

Deniz Zeyrek, Bonnie Webber. 2008. A Discourse 
Resource for Turkish: Annotating Discourse Con-
nectives in the METU Turkish Corpus. Proc. 6 th 
Workshop on Asian Language Resources, The 
Third International Joint Conference on Natural 
Language Processing (IJNLP). 

Deniz  Zeyrek,  Işın  Demirşahin,  Ayışığı  Sevdik-
Çallı, Hale Ögel Balaban, İhsan Yalçınkaya, Ümit 
Deniz Turan. 2010. The annotation scheme of 
Turkish discourse bank and an evaluation of incon-
sistent annotations.  Proc. 4th  Linguistic  Annota-
tion  Workshop (LAW IV). 

 

130


