










































Overview of BioNLP Shared Task 2013


Proceedings of the BioNLP Shared Task 2013 Workshop, pages 1–7,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Overview of BioNLP Shared Task 2013 

 
Claire Nédellec 

MIG INRA UR1077  
F-78352 Jouy-en-Josas cedex 

claire.nedellec@jouy.inra.fr  

Robert Bossy 
MIG INRA UR1077  

F-78352 Jouy-en-Josas cedex 
robert.bossy@jouy.inra.fr  

 
Jin-Dong Kim 

Database Center for Life Science  
2-11-16 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo  
jdkim@dbcls.rois.ac.jp  

Jung-jae Kim 
Nanyang Technological University 

Singapore 
 jungjae.kim@ntu.edu.sg 

 
Tomoko Ohta 

National Centre for Text Mining and 
School of Computer Science 

University of Manchester 
tomoko.ohta@manchester.ac.uk  

Sampo Pyysalo 
National Centre for Text Mining and 

School of Computer Science 
University of Manchester 

sampo.pyysalo@gmail.com  

 
 Pierre Zweigenbaum 

LIMSI-CNRS 
F-91403 Orsay 
 pz@limsi.fr 

 

 
 

 
 

Abstract 

The BioNLP Shared Task 2013 is the 
third edition of the BioNLP Shared Task 
series that is a community-wide effort to 
address fine-grained, structural 
information extraction from biomedical 
literature. The BioNLP Shared Task 2013 
was held from January to April 2013. Six 
main tasks were proposed. 38 final 
submissions were received, from 22 
teams. The results show advances in the 
state of the art and demonstrate that 
extraction methods can be successfully 
generalized in various aspects. 

1 Introduction 

The BioNLP Shared Task (BioNLP-ST 
hereafter) series is a community-wide effort 
toward fine-grained biomolecular event 
extraction, from scientific documents. BioNLP-
ST 2013 follows the general outline and goals of 
the previous tasks, namely BioNLP-ST’09 (Kim  
et al., 2009) and BioNLP-ST’11 (Kim et al., 

2011). BioNLP-ST aims to provide a common 
framework for the comparative evaluation of 
information extraction (IE) methods in the 
biomedical domain. It shares this common goal 
with other tasks, namely BioCreative (Critical 
Assessment of Information Extraction in 
Biology) (Arighi  et al., 2011), DDIExtraction 
(Extraction of Drug-Drug Interactions from 
biomedical texts) (Segura-Bedmar et al., 2011) 
and i2b2 (Informatics for Integrating Biology 
and the Bedside) Shared-Tasks (Sun et al., 
2013).  

The biological questions addressed by the 
BioNLP-ST series belong to the molecular 
biology domain and its related fields. With the 
three editions, the series gathers several groups 
that prepared various tasks and resources, which 
represent diverse themes in biology. As the two 
previous editions, this one measures the progress 
accomplished by the community on complex 
text-bound event extraction. Compared to the 
other initiatives, the BioNLP-ST series proposes 
a linguistically motivated approach to event 
representation that enables the evaluation of the 
participating methods in a unifying computer 
science framework. Each edition has attracted an 

1



increasing number of teams with 22 teams 
submitting 38 final results this year. The task 
setup and the data serve as a basis for numerous 
further studies, released event extraction 
systems, and published datasets.  

The first event in 2009 triggered active 
research in the community on a specific fine-
grained IE task called Genia event extraction  
task. Expanding on this, the second BioNLP-ST 
was organized under the theme Generalization, 
where the participants introduced numerous 
systems that could be straightforwardly applied 
to different tasks. This time, the BioNLP-ST 
goes a step further and pursues the grand theme 
of Knowledge base construction. There were five 
tasks in 2011, and this year there are 6.  
- [GE] Genia Event Extraction for NFkB 

knowledge base  
- [CG] Cancer Genetics  
- [PC] Pathway Curation  
- [GRO] Corpus Annotation with Gene 

Regulation Ontology  
- [GRN] Gene Regulation Network in Bacteria  
- [BB] Bacteria Biotopes  

The grand theme of Knowledge base 
construction is addressed in various ways: 
semantic web (GE, GRO), pathway (PC), 
molecular mechanism of cancer (CG), regulation 
network (GRN) and ontology population (GRO, 
BB).  

In the biology domain, BioNLP-ST 2013 
covers many new hot topics that reflect the 
evolving needs of biologists. BioNLP-ST 2013 
broadens the scope of the text-mining application 
domains in biology by introducing new issues on 
cancer genetics and pathway curation. It also 
builds on the well-known previous datasets 
GENIA, LLL/BI and BB to propose tasks closer 
to the actual needs of biological data integration.  

As in previous events, manually annotated 
data are provided to the participants for training, 
development and evaluation of the information 
extraction methods. According to their relevance 
for biological studies, the annotations are either 
bound to specific expressions in the text or 
represented as structured knowledge. Linguistic 
processing support was provided to the 
participants in the form of analyses of the dataset 
texts produced by state-of-the art tools. 

This paper summarizes the BioNLP-ST 2013 
organization, the task characteristics and their 
relationships. It gives synthetic figures on the 
participants and discusses the participating 
system advances. 

2 Tasks 
The BioNLP-ST’13 includes six tasks from 

four groups: DBCLS, NaCTeM, NTU and 
INRA. As opposed to the last edition, all tasks 
were main extraction tasks. There were no 
supporting tasks designed to assist the extraction 
tasks. 

All tasks share the same event-based 
representation and file format, which is similar to 
the previous editions. This makes it easier to 
reuse the systems across tasks. Five kinds of 
annotation types are defined: 

• T: text-bound annotation (entity/event 
trigger) 

• Equiv: entity aliases 
• E: event 
• M: event modification 
• R: relation 
• N: normalization (external reference) 

The normalization type has been introduced this 
year to represent the references to external 
resources such as dictionaries for GRN or 
ontologies for GRO and BB. The annotations are 
stand-off: the texts of the documents are kept 
separate from the annotations that refer to 
specific spans of texts through character offsets. 
More detail and examples can be found on the 
BioNLP-ST’13 web site. 

2.1     Genia Event Extraction (GE) 
Originally the design and implementation of 

the GE task was based on the Genia event corpus 
(Kim et al., 2008) that represents domain 
knowledge of NFκB proteins. It was first 
organized as the sole task of the initial 2009 
edition of BioNLP-ST (Kim et al., 2009). While 
in 2009 the data sets consisted only of Medline 
abstracts, in its second edition in 2011 (Kim et 
al., 2011b), it was extended to include full text 
articles to measure the generalization of the 
technology to full text papers. For its third 
edition this year, the GE task is organized with 
the goal of making it a more “real” task useful 
for knowledge base construction. The first design 
choice is to construct the data sets with recent 
full papers only, so that the extracted pieces of 
information could represent up-to-date 
knowledge of the domain. Second, the co-
reference annotations are integrated into the 
event annotations, to encourage the use of these 
co-reference features in the solution of the event 
extraction. 

2



2.2     Cancer Genetics (CG) 

The CG task concerns the extraction of events 
relevant to cancer, covering molecular 
foundations, cellular, tissue, and organ-level 
effects, and organism-level outcomes. In addition 
to the domain, the task is novel in particular in 
extending event extraction to upper levels of 
biological organization. The CG task involves 
the extraction of 40 event types involving 18 
types of entities, defined with respect to 
community-standard ontologies (Pyysalo et al., 
2011a; Ohta et al., 2012). The newly introduced 
CG task corpus, prepared as an extension of a 
previously introduced corpus of 250 abstracts 
(Pyysalo et al., 2012), consists of 600 PubMed 
abstracts annotated for over 17,000 events. 

2.3     Pathway Curation (PC) 

The PC task focuses on the automatic 
extraction of biomolecular reactions from text 
with the aim of supporting the development, 
evaluation and maintenance of biomolecular 
pathway models. The PC task setting and its 
document selection protocol account for both 
signaling and metabolic pathways. The 23 event 
types, including chemical modifications (Pyysalo 
et al., 2011b), are defined primarily with respect 
to the Systems Biology Ontology (SBO) (Ohta et 
al., 2011b; Ohta et al., 2011c), involving 4 SBO 
entity types. 

The PC task corpus was newly annotated for 
the task and consists of 525 PubMed abstracts, 
chosen for the relevance to specific pathway 
reactions selected from SBML models registered 
in BioModels and PANTHER DB repositories 
(Mi and Thomas, 2009). The corpus was 
manually annotated for over 12,000 events on 
top of close to 16,000 entities. 

 2.4     Gene Regulation Ontology (GRO) 

The GRO task aims to populate the Gene 
Regulation Ontology (GRO) (Beisswanger et al., 
2008) with events and relations identified from 
text. The large size and the complex semantic 
representation of the underlying ontology are the 
main challenges of the task. Those issues, to a 
greater extent, should be addressed to support 
full-fledged semantic search over the biomedical 
literature, which is the ultimate goal of this work.   

The corpus consists of 300 MEDLINE 
abstracts, prepared as an extension of (Kim et al., 
2011c). The analysis of the inter-annotator 
agreement between the two annotators shows 

Kappa values of 43%-56%, which might indicate 
the difficulty of the task.  

2.5     Gene Regulation Network in Bacteria 
          (GRN) 

The Gene Regulation Network task consists of 
the extraction of the regulatory network of a set 
of genes involved in the sporulation phenomenon 
of the model organism Bacillus subtilis. 
Participant system predictions are evaluated with 
respect to the target regulation network, rather 
than the text-bound relations. The aim is to 
assess the IE methods with regards to the needs 
of systems biology and predictive biology 
studies. 

The GRN corpus is a set of sentences from 
PubMed abstracts that extends the BioNLP-ST 
2011 BI (Jourde et al., 2011) and LLL (Nedellec, 
2005) corpora. The additional sentences cover a 
wider range of publication dates and complement 
the regulation network of the sporulation 
phenomenon. It has been thoroughly annotated 
with different levels of biological abstraction: 
entities, biochemical events, genic interactions 
and the corresponding regulation network. 

The network prediction submissions have been 
evaluated against the reference network using an 
original metric, the Slot Error Rate (Makhoul et 
al., 1999) that is more adapted to graph 
comparison than the usual Recall, Precision and 
F-score measures.  

2.6     Bacteria Biotopes (BB) 

The Bacteria Biotope (BB) task concerns the 
extraction of locations in which bacteria live and 
the categorization of these habitats with concepts 
from OntoBiotope,1 a large ontology of 1,700 
concepts and 2,000 synonyms. The association 
between bacteria and their habitats is essential 
information for environmental biology studies, 
metagenomics and phylogeny. 

In the previous edition of the BB task, 
participants had to recognize bacteria and habitat 
entities, to categorize habitat entities among 
eight broad types and to extract localization 
relations between bacteria and their habitats 
(Bossy et al., 2011). The BioNLP-ST 2013 
edition has been split into 3 sub-tasks in order to 
better assess the performance of the predictive 
systems for each step. The novelty of this task is 
mainly the more comprehensive and fine-grained 
categorization. It addresses the critical problem 
of habitat normalization necessary for the 
                                                             
1 http://bibliome.jouy.inra.fr/MEM-OntoBiotope 

3



automatic exploitation of bacteria-habitat 
databases.  

2.7     Task characteristics 

Task features are given in Table 1. Three 
different types of text were considered: the 
abstracts of scientific papers taken from PubMed 
(CG, PC, GRO and GRN), full-text scientific 
papers (GE) and scientific web pages (BB).   

Task Documents # types # events 
GE 34 Full papers  2 13 
CG 600 Abstracts 18 40 
PC 525 Abstracts 4 23 
GRO 300 Abstracts 174  126 
GRN 201 Abstracts 6 12 
BB 124 Web pages 563 2 

Table 1. Characteristics of the BioNLP-ST 2013 
tasks. 

The number of relations or events targeted 
greatly varies with the tasks as shown in column 
3. The high number of types and events reflect 
the increasing complexity of the biological 
knowledge to be extracted. The grand theme of 
Knowledge base construction in this edition has 
been translated into rich knowledge 
representations with the goal of integrating 
textual data with data from sources other than 
text. These figures illustrate the shared ambition 
of the organizers to promote fine-grained 
information extraction together with an 
increasing biological plausibility. Beyond gene 
and protein interactions, they include many 
complex biological phenomena and 
environmental factors. 

3 BioNLP-ST’13 organization  
BioNLP-ST’13 was split in three main 

periods. During thirteen weeks from mid-January 
to the first week of April, the participants 
prepared their systems with the training data. 
Supporting resources were delivered to 
participants during this period. Supporting 
resources were provided by the organizers and 
by three external providers after a public call for 
contribution. They range from tokenizers to 
entity detection tools, mostly focusing on 
syntactic parsing (Enju (Miyao and Tsujii, 2008), 
Stanford (Klein and Manning, 2002), McCCJ 
(Charniak and Johnson, 2005)). The test data 
were made available for 10 days before the 
participants had to submit their final results using 
on-line services. The evaluation results were 

communicated shortly after and published on the 
ST site. The descriptions of the tasks and 
representative sample data have been available 
since October 2012 so that the participants could 
become acquainted with the task goals and data 
formats in advance. Table 2 shows the task 
schedule.  

Date Event 
23 Oct. 2012 Release of sample data sets 
17 Jan 2013 Release of the training data sets 
06 Apr. 2013 Release of the test data sets 
16 Apr. 2013 Result submission 

17 Apr. 2013 Notification of the evaluation results 

Table 2: Schedule of BioNLP-ST 2013. 

The BioNLP-ST’13 web site and a dedicated 
mailing-list have kept the participant informed 
about the whole process.  

4 Participation 
 GE 1-2-3 CG PC GRO GRN BB 1 - 2-3 

EVEX • • •    •    
TEES-2.1 • • • • • • •  • • 

BioSEM •          

NCBI •          
DlutNLP •          
HDS 4NLP •          
NICTA  •  •        
USheff •          
UZH  •          
HCMUS •          
NaCTeM     • •      
NCBI     •       
RelAgent     •       
UET-NII     •       
ISI    •       
OSEE      •     
U. of 
Ljubljana       

•    

K.U. 
Leuven       

•    

IRISA-
TexMex       

• • •  

Boun        • •  
LIPN        •   
LIMSI        • • • 

Table 3: Participating teams per task. 

BioNLP-ST 2013 received 38 submissions from 
22 teams (Table 3). One third, or seven teams, 
participated in multiple tasks. Only one team, 
UTurku, submitted final results with TEES-2.1 to 

4



all the tasks except one – entity categorization. 
This broad participation resulted from the 
growing capability of the systems to be applied 
to various tasks without manual tuning. The 
remaining 15 teams participated in one single 
task. 

5 Results  
Table 4 summarizes the best results and the 
participating systems for each task and sub-task. 
They are all measured using F-scores, except 
when it is not relevant, in which case SER is 
used instead. It is noticeable that the TEES-2.1 
system that participated in 9 of the 10 tasks and 
sub-tasks achieved the best result in 6 cases. 
Most of the participating systems applied a 
combination of machine learning algorithms and 
linguistic features, mainly syntactic parses, with 
some noticeable exceptions.  
 

Tasks Evaluation results  

GE 
Core event extraction 

TEES-2.1, EVEX, 
BioSEM:  0.51 

GE 2 
Event enrichment TEES2.1:  0.32 

GE 3 
Negation/Speculation 

TEES-2.1, EVEX: 

  0.25 

CG TEES-2.1:  0.55 

PC NaCTeM:  0.53 

GRO TEES-2.1: 0.22 (events),   0.63 (relations) 

GRN 
U. of Ljubljana:  

 0.73 (SER) 
BB 1 Entity detection 

and categorization IRISA: 0.46 (SER) 

BB 2 
Relation extraction IRISA:  0.40 

BB 3 
Full event extraction TEES-2.1:  0.14 

Table 4. Best results and team per task  
(F-score, except when SER). 

Twelve teams submitted final results to the GE 
task. The performance of highly ranked systems 
shows that the event extraction technology is 
applicable to the most recent full papers without 
drop of performance. 

Six teams submitted final results to the CG 
task. The highest-performing systems achieved 

results comparable to those for established 
molecular level extraction tasks (Kim et al., 
2011). The results indicate that event extraction 
methods generalize well to higher levels of 
biological organization and are applicable to the 
construction of knowledge bases on cancer. 

Two teams successfully completed the PC 
task, and the highest F-score reached 52.8%, 
indicating that event extraction is a promising 
approach to support pathway curation efforts. 

The GRN task attracted five participants. The 
best SER score was 0,73 (the higher, the worse), 
which shows their capability of designing 
regulatory network, but handling modalities 
remains an issue. 

Five teams participated to the 3 BB subtasks 
with 10 final submissions. Not surprisingly, the 
systems achieved better results in relation 
extraction than habitat categorization, which 
remains a major challenge in IE. 

One team participated in the GRO task, and 
their results were compared with those of a 
preliminary system prepared by the task 
organizers. An analysis of the evaluation results 
leads us to study issues such as the need to 
consider the ontology structure and the need for 
semantic analysis, which are not seriously dealt 
with by current approaches to event extraction. 

6 Organization of the workshop 

The BioNLP Shared Task 2013 (BioNLP-ST) 
workshop was organized as part of the ACL 
BioNLP 2013 workshop. After submission of 
their system results, participants were invited to 
submit a paper on their systems to the workshop.  
Task organizers were also invited to present 
overviews of each task, with analyses of the 
participant system features and results. The 
workshop was held in August 2013 in Sofia 
(Bulgaria). It included overview presentations on 
tasks, as well as oral and poster presentations by 
Shared Task participants.  

7 Discussion and Conclusion 

This year, the tasks has significantly gained in 
complexity to face the increasing need for 
Systems Biology knowledge from various textual 
sources. The high level of participation and the 
quality of the results show that the maturity of 
the field is such that it can meet this challenge. 
The innovative and various solutions applied this 
year will without doubt be extended in the future. 
As for previous editions of BioNLP-ST, all tasks 
maintain an online evaluation service that is 

5



publicly available. This on-going challenge will 
contribute to the assessment of the evolving 
information extraction field in the biomedical 
domain. 

References  
Auhors. 2013. Title. In Proceedings of the BioNLP 

2013 Workshop Companion Volume for Shared 
Task, Sofia, Bulgaria. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 

Arighi, C., Lu, Z., Krallinger, M., Cohen, K., Wilbur, 
W., Valencia, A., Hirschman, L. and Wu, C. 2011. 
Overview of the BioCreative III Workshop. BMC 
Bioinformatics, 12, S1. 

E Beisswanger, V Lee, JJ Kim, D Rebholz-
Schuhmann, A Splendiani, O Dameron, S Schulz, 
U Hahn. Gene Regulation Ontology (GRO): 
Design principles and use cases. Studies in Health 
Technology and Informatics, 136:9-14, 2008. 

BioNLP-ST’13 web site: https://2013.bionlp-st.org 

Robert Bossy, Julien Jourde, Philippe Bessières, 
Maarten van de Guchte, Claire Nédellec. 2011. 
BioNLP shared Tasks 2011 - Bacteria Biotope. In 
Proceedings of BioNLP 2011 Workshop, pages 65-
73. Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Portland, USA, 2011. 

Eugene Charniak and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-to-
fine n-best parsing and maxent discriminative 
reranking. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual 
Meeting on Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages 173–180. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 

Julien Jourde, Alain-Pierre Manine, Philippe Veber, 
Karen Fort, Robert Bossy, Erick Alphonse, 
Philippe Bessières. 2011. BioNLP Shared Task 
2011 - Bacteria Gene Interactions and Renaming. 
In Proceedings of BioNLP 2011 Workshop, pages 
65-73. Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Portland. 

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta and Jun'ichi Tsujii, 
2008, Corpus annotation for mining biomedical 
events from literature, BMC Bioinformatics, 9(1): 
10. 

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, 
Yoshinobu Kano and Jun'ichi Tsujii. 2009. 
Overview of BioNLP'09 Shared Task on Event 
Extraction. In Proceedings of the BioNLP 2009 
Workshop Companion Volume for Shared Task, 
pages 1-9. 

Jin-Dong Kim, Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, Robert 
Bossy, Ngan Nguyen and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2011. 
Overview of BioNLP Shared Task 2011. In 
Proceedings of BioNLP 2011 Workshop, pages 1-6. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Jin-Dong Kim, Yue Wang, Toshihisa Takagi, and 
Akinori Yonezawa. 2011b. Overview of the Genia 
Event task in BioNLP Shared Task 2011. In 
Proceedings of the BioNLP 2011 Workshop 
Companion Volume for Shared Task, Portland, 
Oregon, June. Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 

Jung-Jae Kim, Xu Han and Watson Wei Khong Chua. 
2011c. Annotation of biomedical text with Gene 
Regulation Ontology: Towards Semantic Web for 
biomedical literature. Proceedings of LBM 2011, 
pp. 63-70. 

Dan Klein and Christopher D Manning. 2002. Fast ex 
act inference with a factored model for natural 
language parsing. Advances in neural information 
processing systems, 15(2003):3–10. 

John Makhoul, Francis Kubala, Richard Schwartz and 
Ralph Weischedel. 1999.  Performance measures 
for information extraction. In Proceedings of 
DARPA Broadcast News Workshop, Herndon, VA, 
February. 

Yusuke Miyao and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2008. Feature 
forest models for probabilistic HPSG parsing. 
Computational Linguistics, 34(1):35–80. 

Huaiyu Mi and Paul Thomas. 2009. PANTHER path- 
way: an ontology-based pathway database coupled 
with data analysis tools. In Protein Networks and 
Pathway Analysis, pages 123–140. Springer. 

Claire Nédellec. 2005. Learning Language in Logic - 
Genic Interaction Extraction Challenge. In 
Proceedings of the Learning Language in Logic 
(LLL05) workshop joint to ICML'05. Cussens J. 
and Nedellec C. (eds). Bonn, August. 

Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Sophia Ananiadou, 
and Jun'ichi Tsujii. 2011b. Pathway curation 
support as an information extraction task. 
Proceedings of LBM 2011. 

Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 
2011c. From pathways to biomolecular events: 
opportunities and challenges. In Proceedings of 
BioNLP 2011 Workshop, pages 105–113. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Tomoko Ohta, Sampo Pyysalo, Jun’ichi Tsujii, and 
Sophia Ananiadou. 2012. Open-domain anatomical 
entity mention detection. In Proceedings of DSSD 
2012, pages 27–36. 

Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, Makoto Miwa, Han-
Cheol Cho, Jun’ichi Tsujii, and Sophia Ananiadou. 
2012. Event extraction across multiple levels of 
biological organization. Bioinformatics, 
28(18):i575-i581. 

Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, Makoto Miwa, and 
Jun'ichi Tsujii. 2011b. Towards exhaustive event 
extraction for protein modifications. In 
Proceedings of the BioNLP 2011 Workshop, 

6



pp.114-123, Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 

Sampo Pyysalo, Tomoko Ohta, Jun'ichi Tsujii and 
Sophia Ananiadou. 2011a. Anatomical Entity 
Recognition with Open Biomedical Ontologies. In 
proceedings of LBM 2011. 

Isabel Segura-Bedmar, Paloma Martinez, and Daniel 
Sanchez-Cisneros. 2011. The 1st DDIExtraction-
2011 challenge task: Extraction of Drug-Drug 
Interactions from biomedical texts. In Proceedings 
of the 1st Challenge Task on Drug-Drug 
Interaction Extraction 2011, SEPLN 2011 satellite 
workshop. Huelva, Spain, September 7. 

Weiyi Sun, Anna Rumshisky, Ozlem Uzuner. 2013. 
Evaluating temporal relations in clinical text: 2012 
i2b2 Challenge. J Am Med Inform Assoc.

7


