










































Argumentation-Relevant Metaphors in Test-Taker Essays


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Metaphor in NLP, pages 11–20,
Atlanta, Georgia, 13 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Argumentation-Relevant Metaphors in Test-Taker Essays

Beata Beigman Klebanov and Michael Flor
Educational Testing Service

{bbeigmanklebanov,mflor}@ets.org

Abstract

This article discusses metaphor annotation in
a corpus of argumentative essays written by
test-takers during a standardized examination
for graduate school admission. The quality of
argumentation being the focus of the project,
we developed a metaphor annotation proto-
col that targets metaphors that are relevant
for the writer’s arguments. The reliability of
the protocol is κ=0.58, on a set of 116 es-
says (the total of about 30K content-word to-
kens). We found a moderate-to-strong correla-
tion (r=0.51-0.57) between the percentage of
metaphorically used words in an essay and the
writing quality score. We also describe en-
couraging findings regarding the potential of
metaphor identification to contribute to auto-
mated scoring of essays.

1 Introduction

The goal of our project is to automatically score
the quality of argumentation in essays written for
a standardized graduate school admission exam.
Metaphors being important argumentative devices,
we report on annotating data for potential training
and testing of metaphor detection software that
would eventually be used for automated scoring of
essays.

Metaphors of various kinds can be relevant to ar-
gumentation. Some metaphors create vivid images
and function as examples or as organizing ideas be-
hind a series of examples. These are akin to pictures
that are worth a thousand words, and are highly po-
tent rhetorical devices. Metaphors of a less artistic

crafting – more conventionalized ones, metaphors
that we “live by” according to Lakoff and John-
son’s (1980) famous tenet – subtly organize our
thinking and language production in culturally co-
herent ways.

For an example of a vivid metaphor that helps or-
ganize the essay, consider an essay on the relation-
ship between arts and government funding thereof
(see example 1). The author’s image of a piece of
art as a slippery object that escapes its captor’s grip
as a parallel to the relationship between an artist and
his or her patron/financier is a powerful image that
provides a framework for the author’s examples (in
the preceding paragraph, Chaucer is discussed as
a clever and subversive writer for his patron) and
elaborations (means of “slippage”, like veiled ima-
gery, multiple meanings, etc).

(1) Great artistic productions, thus, tend to
rise above the money that bought them, to
bite, as it were, the hand that fed them.
This is not always so, of course. But
the point is that great art is too slippery
to be held in the grip of a governing
power. Through veiled imagery, multiple
meanings, and carefully guarded language,
a poem can both powerfully criticize a ruler
and not blow its cover.

For an example of a conventional metaphor, con-
sider the metaphor of construction/building. The
connotation of foundations is something essential,
old, solid, and lying deep, something that, once laid,
remains available for new construction for a long pe-
riod of time. It is often used to explain emergence

11



of things – the existence of foundations (or support,
or basis) is contrasted with the (presumed) idea of
appearance out of nothing. Certain topics of discus-
sion are particularly amenable for arguments from
construction-upon-foundation. For example, con-
sider an essay question “Originality does not mean
thinking something that was never thought before;
it means putting old ideas together in new ways,”
where an explanation of the emergence of something
is required. Examples 2-6 show excerpts from es-
says answering this prompt that employ the founda-
tion metaphor.

(2) The foundation of the United States was
also based on a series of older ideas into
which the fathers of our nation breathed
new life.

(3) History is a progressive passing on of ideas,
a process of building on the foundations laid
by the previous generations. New ideas can-
not stand if they are without support from
the past.

(4) New discoveries and ideas are also original
for some time, but eventually they become
the older, accepted pieces that are the build-
ing blocks for originality.

(5) Original thinking can include old ideas
which almost always are a basis for
continued thought leading to new ideas.

(6) Humans are born of their ancestors, thrive
from their intelligence, and are free to build
on the intellectual foundations laid.

The two types of metaphors exemplified above
have different argumentative roles. The first orga-
nizes a segment of an essay around it, firstly by
imposing itself on the reader’s mind (a property
rhetoricians call presence (Perelman and Olbrechts-
Tyteca, 1969; Gross and Dearin, 2003; Atkinson
et al., 2008)), secondly by helping select support-
ing ideas or examples that are congruent with the
parts of the target domain that are highlighted by the
metaphor (this property is termed framing (Lakoff,
1991; Entman, 2003)), such as the idea of evasive-
ness purported by the ART AS A SLIPPERY OB-
JECT metaphor that is taken up both in the preceding
Chaucer example and in an elaboration.

By contrast, metaphors “we live by” without even
noticing, such as TIME IS MONEY or IDEAS ARE
BUILDINGS, are not usually accorded much reader
attention; they are processed by using the conven-
tional connotation of the word as if it were an
additional sense of that word, without invoking a
comparison between two domains (for processing
by categorization see (Bowdle and Gentner, 2005;
Glucksbeg and Haught, 2006)). Thus, the word
foundation is unlikely to elicit an image of a con-
struction site, but rather will directly invoke the con-
cept of something essential and primary. It is un-
clear to what extent such highly conventionalized
metaphors that are not deliberately construed as
metaphors have the framing property beyond fram-
ing induced by any lexical choice – that of stress-
ing the chosen over the un-chosen alternative (Bil-
lig, 1996). Therefore, the fact that an essay writer
used a conventional metaphor is not in itself a mark
of rhetorical sophistication; it is possible, however,
that, if certain metaphorical source domains are par-
ticularly apt for the given target domain (as the do-
main of construction to discuss emergence), using
the metaphor is akin to choosing a solid though not
particularly original argument.

Our interest being in metaphors that play a role
in argumentation, we attempted to devise an annota-
tion protocol that would be specifically geared to-
wards identification of such metaphors. In what
follows, we review the literature on approaches to
annotating metaphors in a given discourse (sec-
tion 2), we describe the protocol and the annotation
procedure (section 3), report inter-annotator agree-
ment (section 4), quantify the relationship between
metaphorical density (percentage of metaphorically
used words in an essay) and essay quality as mea-
sured by essay score, as well as estimate the poten-
tial usefulness of metaphor detection for automated
scoring of essays (section 5.2).

2 Related Work

Much of the contemporary work on metaphor in psy-
chological and computational veins is inspired by
Lakoff and Johnson’s (1980) research on concep-
tual metaphor. Early work in this tradition concen-
trated on mapping the various conceptual metaphors
in use in a particular culture (Lakoff and Johnson,

12



1980; Lakoff and Kövecses, 1987; Kövecses, 2002).
Examples for various conceptual mappings are col-
lected, resulting in the Master Metaphor List (Lakoff
et al., 1991), showing common metaphorical map-
pings and their instances of use. For example, the
LIFE IS A JOURNEY conceptual metaphor that maps
the source domain of JOURNEY to the target domain
of LIFE is used in expressions such as:

• He just sails through life.

• He is headed for great things.

• If this doesn’t work, I’ll just try a different
route.

• She’ll cross that bridge when she comes to it.

• We’ve come a long way.

While exemplifying the extent of metaphoricity of
everyday English, such a list is not directly appli-
cable to annotating metaphors in discourse, due to
the limited coverage of the expressions pertaining to
each conceptual metaphor, as well as of the concep-
tual metaphors themselves.

Studies of discourse metaphor conducted in
the Critical Discourse Analysis tradition (Musolff,
2000; Charteris-Black, 2005) analyze a particular
discourse for its employment of metaphors. For
example, an extensive database of metaphors in
British and German newspaper discourse on Euro-
pean integration in the 1990s was compiled by Mu-
solff (2000); the author did not make it clear how
materials for annotation were selected.

A systematic but not comprehensive approach to
creating a metaphor-rich dataset is to pre-select ma-
terials using linguistic clues (Goatly, 1997) for the
presence of metaphor, such as utterly or so to speak.
Shutova and Teufel (2010) report precision statis-
tics for using different clues to detect metaphoric
sentences; expressions such as literally, utterly, and
completely indicate a metaphorical context in more
than 25% of cases of their use in the British National
Corpus. Such cues can aid in pre-selecting data for
annotation so as to increase the proportion of mate-
rials with metaphors beyond a random sample.

Another approach is to decide on the source do-
mains of interest in advance, use a dictionary or
thesaurus to detect words belonging to the domain,

and annotate them for metaphoricity (Stefanowitsch,
2006; Martin, 2006; Gedigan et al., 2006). Gedi-
gan et al. (2006) found that more than 90% of
verbs belonging to MOTION and CURE domains in
a Wall Street Journal corpus were used metaphori-
cally. Fixing the source domain is potentially appro-
priate if common metaphorically used domains in a
given discourse have already been identified, as in
(Koller et al., 2008; Beigman Klebanov et al., 2008).

A complementary approach is to fix the target
domain, and do metaphor “harvesting” in a win-
dow around words belonging to the target domain.
For example, Reining and Löneker-Rodman (2007)
chose the lemma Europe to represent the target do-
main in the discourse on European integration. They
extracted small windows around each occurrence of
Europe in the corpus, and manually annotated them
for metaphoricity. This is potentially applicable to
analyzing essays, because the main target domain of
the discourse is usually given in the prompt, such
as art, originality. The strength of this method is
its ability to focus on metaphors with argumentative
potential, because the target domain, which is the
topic of the essay, is directly involved. The weak-
ness is the possibility of missing metaphors because
they are not immediately adjacent to a string from
the target domain.

The Metaphor Identification Procedure (MIP) is
a protocol for exhaustive metaphoricity annota-
tion proposed by the Pragglejaz group (Pragglejaz,
2007). The annotator classifies every word in a
document (including prepositions) as metaphorical
if it has “a more basic contemporary meaning” in
other contexts than the one it has in the current con-
text. Basic meanings are explained to be “more con-
crete, related to bodily action, more precise, and his-
torically older.” The authors – all highly qualified
linguists who have a long history of research collab-
oration on the subject of metaphor – attained a kappa
of 0.72 for 6 annotators for one text of 668 words
and 0.62 for another text of 676 words. Shutova and
Teufel (2010) used the protocol to annotate content
verbs only, yielding kappa of 0.64 for 3 volunteer
annotators with some linguistic background, on a set
of sentences containing 142 verbs sampled from the
British National Corpus. It is an open question how
well educated lay people can agree on an exhaustive
metaphor annotation of a text.

13



We note that the procedure is geared towards con-
ceptual metaphors at large, not necessarily argumen-
tative ones, in that the protocol does not consider the
writer’s purpose in using the metaphor. For example,
the noun forms in “All one needs to use high-speed
forms of communication is a computer or television
and an internet cable” is a metaphor according to
the MIP procedure, because the basic meaning “a
shape of something” is more concrete/physical than
the contextual meaning “a type of something,” so a
physical categorization by shape stands for a more
abstract categorization into types. This metaphor
could have an argumentative purport; for instance,
if the types in question were actually very blurred
and difficult to tell apart, by calling them forms (and,
by implications, shapes), they are framed as being
more clearly and easily separable than they actually
are. However, since the ease of categorization of
high-speed electronic communication into types is
not part of the author’s argument, the argumentative
relevance of this metaphor is doubtful.

3 Annotation Protocol

In the present study, annotators were given the fol-
lowing guidelines:

Generally speaking, a metaphor is a lin-
guistic expression whereby something is
compared to something else that it is
clearly literally not, in order to make a
point. Thus, in Tony Blair’s famous “I
haven’t got a reverse gear,” Tony Blair is
compared to a car in order to stress his
unwillingness/inability to retract his state-
ments or actions. We would say in this
case that a metaphor from a vehicle do-
main is used.
. . . [more examples] . . .
The first task in our study of metaphor
in essays is to read essays and underline
words you think are used metaphorically.
Think about the point that is being made
by the metaphor, and write it down. Note
that a metaphor might be expressed by the
author or attributed to someone else. Note
also that the same metaphor can be taken
up in multiple places in a text.

During training, two annotators were instructed
to apply the guidelines to 6 top-scoring essays an-
swering a prompt about the role of art in society.
After they finished, sessions were held where the
annotators and one of the authors of this paper dis-
cussed the annotations, including explication of the
role played by the metaphor in the essay. A sum-
mary document that presents a detailed consensus
annotation of 3 of the essays was circulated to the
annotators. An example of an annotation is shown
below (metaphors are boldfaced in the text and ex-
plained underneath):

F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote, “There is a dark
night in every man’s soul where it is
always 2 o’clock in the morning.” His
words are a profound statement of human
nature. Within society, we operate under a
variety of social disguises. Some of these
masks become so second nature that we
find ourselves unable to take them off.
(1) Dark night, 2 o’clock in the morning:
True emotions are not accessible (at 2
o’clock a person is usually asleep and un-
aware of what is going on) and frighten-
ing to handle on one’s own (scary to walk
at night alone); people need mediation to
help accessibility, and also company to al-
leviate the fear. Art provides both. This
metaphor puts forward the two main argu-
ments: accessibility and sharing.
(2) Masks, take off, disguises: could
be referring to the domain of the-
ater/performance. Makes the point that
what people do in real life to themselves
is superficially similar to what art (the-
ater) does to performers – hiding their true
identity. In the theater, the hiding is tem-
porary and completely reversible at will,
there is really no such thing as inability to
take off the mask. The socially-inflicted
hiding is not necessarily under the per-
son’s control, differently from a theatrical
mask. Supports and extends the accessi-
bility argument: not just lack of courage
or will, but lack of control to access the
true selves.

14



The actual annotation then commenced, on a sam-
ple of essays answering a different question (the
data will be described in section 3.1). Annotators
were instructed to mark metaphors in the text using a
graphical interface that was specially developed for
the project. The guidelines for the actual annotation
are shown below:

During training, you practiced careful
reading while paying attention to non-
literal language and saw how metaphors
work in their context. At the annota-
tion stage, you are not asked to expli-
citly interpret the metaphor and identify
its argumentative contribution (or rather,
its attempted argumentative contribution),
only to mark metaphors, trusting your in-
tuition that you could try to interpret the
metaphor in context if needed.

Note that we have not provided formal defini-
tions of what a literal sense is in order to not inter-
fere with intuitive judgments of metaphoricity (dif-
ferently from Pragglejaz (2007), for example, who
provide definition of a basic sense). Neither have
we set up an explicit classification task, whereby an-
notators are required to classify every single word in
the text as a metaphor or a non-metaphor (again, dif-
ferently from Pragglejaz (2007)); in our task, anno-
tators were instructed to mark metaphors while they
read. This is in the spirit of Steen’s (2008) notion of
deliberate metaphors – words and phrases that the
writer actually meant to produce as a metaphor, as
opposed to cases where the writer did not have a
choice, such as using in for an expression like in
time, due to the pervasiveness of the time-as-space
metaphor. Note, however, that Steen’s notion is
writer-based; since we have no access to the writers
of the essays, we side with an educated lay reader
and his or her perception of a metaphorical use.

The annotators were instructed to give the author
the benefit of the doubt and *not* to assume that a
common metaphor is necessarily unintenional:

When deciding whether to attribute to the
author the intention of making a point
using a metaphor, please be as liberal as
you can and give the author the benefit
of the doubt. Specifically, if something is

a rather common metaphor that still hap-
pens to fit nicely into the argument the au-
thor is making, we assume that the author
intended it that way.

To clarify what kinds of metaphors are excluded
by our guidelines, we explained as follows:

In contrast, consider cases where an ex-
pression might be perhaps formally clas-
sified as a metaphor, but the literal sense
cannot be seen as relevant to the author’s
argument. For example, consider the fol-
lowing sentence from Essay 2 from our
training material: “Seeing the beauty of
nature or hearing a moving piece of music
may drive one to perhaps try to replicate
that beauty in a style of one’s own.” Look
at the italicized word – the preposition in.
According to some theories of metaphor,
that would constitute a metaphorical use:
Literally, in means inside some container;
since style is not literally a container, the
use of in here is non-literal. Suppose now
that the non-literal interpretation invites
the reader to see style as a container. A
container might have more or less room,
can be full or empty, can be rigid or flex-
ible, can contain items of the same or dif-
ferent sorts – these are some potential im-
ages that go with viewing something as a
container, yet none of them seems to be
relevant to whatever the author is saying
about style, that is, that it is unique (one’s
own) and yet the result is not quite original
(replication).

The two annotators who participated in the task
hold BA degrees in Linguistics, but have no back-
ground in metaphor theory. They were surprised and
bemused by an example like in style, commenting
that it would never have occurred to them to mark it
as a metaphor. In general, the thrust of this proto-
col is to identify metaphorical expressions that are
noticeable and support the author’s argumentative
moves; yet, we targeted a reasonable timeline for
completing the task, with about 30 minutes per text,
therefore we did not require a detailed analysis of
the marked metaphors as done during training.

15



3.1 Data

Annotation was performed on 116 essays written on
the following topic: “High-speed electronic commu-
nications media, such as electronic mail and tele-
vision, tend to prevent meaningful and thought-
ful communication.” Test-takers are instructed to
present their perspective on the issue, using rele-
vant reasons and/or examples to support their views.
Test-takers are given 45 minutes to compose an es-
say. The essays were sampled from the dataset an-
alyzed in Attali et al. (2013), with oversampling
of longer essays. In the Attali et al. (2013) study,
each essay was scored for the overall quality of En-
glish argumentative composition; thus, to receive the
maximum score, an essay should present a cogent,
well-articulated analysis of the complexities of the
issue and convey meaning skillfully. Each essay was
scored by 16 professional raters on a scale of 1 to 6,
allowing plus and minus scores as well, quantified
as 0.33 – thus, a score of 4- is rendered as 3.67. This
fine-grained scale resulted in a high mean pairwise
inter-rater correlation (r=0.79). We use the average
of 16 raters as the final score for each essay. This
dataset provides a fine-grained ranking of the essays,
with almost no two essays getting exactly the same
score.

For the 116 essays, the mean length was 478
words (min: 159, max: 793, std: 142); mean score:
3.82 (min: 1.81, max: 5.77, std: 0.73). Table 1
shows the distribution of essay scores.

Score Number Proportion
of Essays of Essays

2 4 0.034
3 33 0.284
4 59 0.509
5 19 0.164
6 1 0.009

Table 1: Score distribution in the essay data. The first
column shows the rounded score. For the sake of pre-
sentation in this table, all scores were rounded to integer
scores, so a score of 3.33 was counted as 3, and a score
of 3.5 was counted as 4.

4 Inter-Annotator Agreement and Parts of
Speech

The inter-annotator agreement on the total of 55,473
word tokens was κ=0.575. In this section, we inves-
tigate the relationship between part of speech and
metaphor use, as well as part of speech and inter-
annotator agreement.

For this discussion, words that appear in the
prompt (essay topic) are excluded from all sets. Fur-
thermore, we concentrate on content words only (as
identified by the OpenNLP tagger1). Table 2 shows
the split of the content-word annotations by part
of speech, as well as the reliability figures. We
report information for each of the two annotators
separately, as well as for the union of their anno-
tations. We report the union as we hypothesize that
a substantial proportion of apparent disagreements
between annotators are attention slips rather than
substantive disagreements; this phenomenon was at-
tested in a previous study (Beigman Klebanov et al.,
2008).

POS Count A1 A2 A1
⋃

A2 κ
All 55,473 2,802 2,591 3,788 0.575
Cont. 29,207 2,380 2,251 3,211 0.580
Noun 12,119 1,033 869 1,305 0.596
Adj 4,181 253 239 356 0.525
Verb 9,561 1,007 1,039 1,422 0.563
Adv 3,346 87 104 128 0.650

Table 2: Reliability by part of speech. The column Count
shows the total number of words in the given part of
speech across the 116 essays. Columns A1 and A2 show
the number of items marked as metaphors by annotators
1 and 2, respectively, while Column A1

⋃
A2 shows num-

bers of items in the union of the two annotations. The
second row presents the overall figure for content words.

Nouns constitute 41.5% of all content words; they
are 43.4% of all content-word metaphors for anno-
tator 1, 38.6% for annotator 2, and 40.6% for the
union of the two annotations. Nouns are therefore
represented in the metaphor annotated data in their
general distribution proportions. Of all nouns, 7%-
8.5% are identified as metaphors by a single annota-
tor, while 10.8% of the nouns are metaphors in the
union annotation.

1http://opennlp.apache.org/index.html

16



Verbs are 32.7% of all content words; they are
42.3% of all content-word metaphors for annotator
1, 46.2% for annotator 2, and 44.3% in the union.
Verbs are therefore over-represented in the metaphor
annotated data relative to their general distribution
proportions. Of all verbs, 10.5%-10.9% are identi-
fied as metaphors by a single annotator, while 14.9%
are metaphors in the union annotation.

Adjectives are 14.3% of all content words; they
are 10.6% of all content-word metaphors for anno-
tator 1, 10.6% for annotator 2, and 11.1% in the
union. Adjectives are therefore somewhat under-
represented in the metaphor annotated data with re-
spect to their general distribution. About 6% of ad-
jectives are identified as metaphors in individual an-
notations, and 8.5% in the union annotation.

Adverbs are 11.5% of all content words; they are
3.7% of all content-word metaphors for annotator 1
and 4.6% for annotator 2, and 4% in the union. Ad-
verbs are heavily under-represented in the metaphor
annotated data with respect to their general distri-
bution. Of all non-prompt adverbs, about 3-4% are
identified as metaphors.

The data clearly points towards the propensity of
verbs towards metaphoricity, relative to words from
other parts of speech. This is in line with reports in
the literature that identify verbs as central carriers of
metaphorical vehicles: Cameron (2003) found that
about 50% of metaphors in educational discourse are
realized by verbs, beyond their distributional propor-
tion; this finding prompted Shutova et al. (2013) to
concentrate exclusively on verbs.

According to Goatly (1997), parts of speech dif-
fer in the kinds of metaphors they realize in terms of
the recognizability of the metaphorical use as such.
Nouns are more recognizable as metaphors than
other word classes for the following two reasons:
(1) Since nouns are referring expressions, they re-
veal very strongly the clashes between conventional
and unconventional reference; (2) Since nouns of-
ten refer to vivid, imaginable entities, they are more
easliy recognized than metaphors of other parts of
speech. Moreover, morphological derivation away
from nouns – for example, by affixation – leads to
more lexicalized and less noticeable metaphors than
the original nouns.

Goatly’s predictions seem to be reflected in inter-
annotator agreement figures for nouns versus adjec-

tives and verbs, with nouns yielding higher reliabi-
lity of identification than verbs and adjectives, with
the latter two categories having more cases where
only one but not both of the annotators noticed a
metaphorical use. Since adverbs are the most distant
from nouns in terms of processes of morphological
derivation, one would expect them to be less eas-
ily noticeable, yet in our annotation adverbs are the
most reliably classified category.

Inspecting the metaphorically used adverbs, we
find that a small number of adverbs cover the bulk
of the volume: together (11), closer (11), away (10),
back (8) account for 46% of the adverbs marked by
annotator 1 in our dataset. Almost all cases of to-
gether come from a use in the phrasal verb bring
together (8 cases), in expressions like “bringing the
world together into one cyberspace without borders”
or “electronic mail could bring people closer to-
gether” or “bringing society together.” In fact, 6 of
the 11 cases of closer are part of the construction
bring closer together, and the other cases have simi-
lar uses like “our conversations are more meaningful
because we are closer through the internet.”

Interestingly, the metaphorical uses of away also
come from phrasal constructions that are used for
arguing precisely the opposite point – that cyber-
communications drive people away from each other:
“email, instant messaging, and television support a
shift away from throughful communication,” “mass
media and communications drive people away from
one another,” “by typing a message ... you can easily
get away from the conversation.”

It seems that the adverbs marked for meta-
phoricity in our data tend to be (a) part of phrasal
constructions, and (b) part of a commonly made ar-
gument for or against electronic communication –
that it (metaphorically) brings people together, or
(metaphorically) drives them apart by making the
actual togetherness (co-location) unnecessary for
communication. The adverbs are therefore not of the
derivationally complex kind Goatly has in mind, and
their noticeability might be enhanced by being part
of a common argumentative move in the examined
materials, especially since the annotators were in-
structed to look out for metaphors that support the
writer’s argument.

17



5 Metaphor and Content Scoring

In order to assess the potential of metaphor detec-
tion to contribute to essay scoring, we performed
two tests: correlation with essay scores and a regres-
sion analysis in order to check whether metaphor use
contributes information that is beyond what is cap-
tured by a state-of-art essay scoring system.

As a metaphor-derived feature, we calculated
metaphorical density, that is, the percentage of
metaphorically used words in an essay: All words
marked as metaphors in an essay were counted (con-
tent or other), and the total was divided by essay
length.

5.1 E-rater
As a reference system, we use e-rater (Attali and
Burstein, 2006), a state-of-art essay scoring system
developed at Educational Testing Service.2 E-rater
computes more than 100 micro-features, which are
aggregated into macro-features aligned with specific
aspects of the writing construct. The system in-
corporates macro-features measuring grammar, us-
age, mechanics, style, organization and develop-
ment, lexical complexity, and vocabulary usage. Ta-
ble 3 gives examples of micro-features covered by
the different macro-features.

Macro-Feature Example Micro-Features
Grammar, agreement errors
Usage, and verb formation errors
Mechanics missing punctuation
Style passive, very long or very short

sentences, excessive repetition
Organization use of discourse elements:
and thesis, support, conclusion
Development
Lexical average word frequency
Complexity average word length
Vocabulary similarity to vocabulary in

high- vs low-scoring essays

Table 3: Features used in e-rater (Attali and Burstein,
2006).

E-rater models are built using linear regression on
large samples of test-taker essays. We use an e-rater
model built at Educational Testing Service using

2http://www.ets.org/erater/about/

a large number of essays across different prompts,
with no connection to the current project and its
authors. This model obtains Pearson correlations
of r=0.935 with the human scores. The excellent
performance of the system leaves little room for
improvement; yet, none of the features in e-rater
specifically targets the use of figurative language, so
it is interesting to see the extent to which metaphor
use could help explain additional variance.

5.2 Results

We found that metaphorical density attains correla-
tion of r=0.507 with essay score using annotations
of annotator 1, r=0.556 for annotator 2, and r=0.570
using the union of the two annotators. It is clearly
the case that better essays tend to have higher pro-
portions of metaphors.

We ran a regression analysis with essay score as
the dependent variable and e-rater raw score and
metaphor density in the union annotation as two
independent variables. The correlation with essay
score improved from 0.935 using e-rater alone to
0.937 using the regression equation (the adjusted R2

of the model improved from 0.874 to 0.876). While
the contribution of metaphor feature is not statisti-
cally significant for the size of our dataset (n=116,
p=0.07), we are cautiously optimistic that metaphor
detection can make a contribution to essay scoring
when the process is automated and a larger-scale
evaluation can be performed.

6 Conclusion

This article discusses annotation of metaphors in
a corpus of argumentative essays written by test-
takers during a standardized examination for grad-
uate school admission. The quality of argumenta-
tion being the focus of the project, we developed a
metaphor annotation protocol that targets metaphors
that are relevant for the writer’s arguments. The
reliability of the protocol is κ=0.58, on a set of 116
essays (a total of about 30K content word tokens).

We found a moderate-to-strong correlation
(r=0.51-0.57) between the density of metaphors
in an essay (percentage of metaphorically used
words) and the writing quality score as provided by
professional essay raters.

As the annotation protocol is operationally effi-

18



cient (30 minutes per essay of about 500 words),
moderately reliable (κ=0.58), and uses annotators
that do not possess specialized knowledge and
training in metaphor theory, we believe it is fea-
sible to annotate a large set of essays for the pur-
pose of building a supervised machine learning sys-
tem for detection of metaphors in test-taker essays.
The observed correlations of metaphor use with es-
say score, as well as the fact that metaphor use is
not captured by state-of-art essay scoring systems,
point towards the potential usefulness of a metaphor
detection system for essay scoring.

References
Nathan Atkinson, David Kaufer, and Suguru Ishizaki.

2008. Presence and Global Presence in Genres of Self-
Presentation: A Framework for Comparative Analysis.
Rhetoric Society Quarterly, 38(3):1–27.

Yigal Attali and Jill Burstein. 2006. Automated Es-
say Scoring With e-rater R©V.2. Journal of Technology,
Learning, and Assessment, 4(3).

Yigal Attali, Will Lewis, and Michael Steier. 2013. Scor-
ing with the computer: Alternative procedures for im-
proving reliability of holistic essay scoring. Language
Testing, 30(1):125–141.

Beata Beigman Klebanov, Eyal Beigman, and Daniel
Diermeier. 2008. Analyzing disagreements. In COL-
ING 2008 workshop on Human Judgments in Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 2–7, Manchester, UK.

Michael Billig. 1996. Arguing and Thinking: A Rhetor-
ical Approach to Social Psychology. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge.

Brian Bowdle and Dedre Gentner. 2005. The career of
metaphor. Psychological Review, 112(1):193–216.

Lynne Cameron. 2003. Metaphor in Educational Dis-
course. Continuum, London.

Jonathan Charteris-Black. 2005. Politicians and
rhetoric: The persuasive power of metaphors. Pal-
grave MacMillan, Houndmills, UK and New York.

Robert Entman. 2003. Cascading activation: Contesting
the white houses frame after 9/11. Political Communi-
cation, 20:415–432.

Matt Gedigan, John Bryant, Srini Narayanan, and Bran-
imir Ciric. 2006. Catching metaphors. In PProceed-
ings of the 3rd Workshop on Scalable Natural Lan-
guage Understanding, pages 41–48, New York.

Sam Glucksbeg and Catrinel Haught. 2006. On the rela-
tion between metaphor and simile: When comparison
fails. Mind and Language, 21(3):360–378.

Andrew Goatly. 1997. The Language of Metaphors.
Routledge, London.

Alan Gross and Ray Dearin. 2003. Chaim Perelman.
Albany: SUNY Press.

Zoltan Kövecses. 2002. Metaphor: A Practical Intro-
duction. Oxford University Press.

Veronika Koller, Andrew Hardie, Paul Rayson, and Elena
Semino. 2008. Using a semantic annotation tool for
the analysis of metaphor in discourse. Metaphorik.de,
15:141–160.

George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we
live by. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

George Lakoff and Zoltan Kövecses. 1987. Metaphors
of anger in japanese. In D. Holland and N. Quinn, edi-
tors, Cultural Models in Language and Thought. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.

George Lakoff, Jane Espenson, Adele Goldberg,
and Alan Schwartz. 1991. Master Metaphor
List, Second Draft Copy. Cognitive Linguisics
Group, Univeristy of California, Berkeley:
http://araw.mede.uic.edu/˜alansz/metaphor/
METAPHORLIST.pdf.

George Lakoff. 1991. Metaphor and war: The metaphor
system used to justify war in the gulf. Peace Research,
23:25–32.

James Martin. 2006. A corpus-based analysis of context
effects on metaphor comprehension. In Anatol Ste-
fanowitsch and Stefan Gries, editors, Corpus-Based
Approaches to Metaphor and Metonymy. Berlin: Mou-
ton de Gruyter.

Andreas Musolff. 2000. Mirror images of Eu-
rope: Metaphors in the public debate about
Europe in Britain and Germany. München:
Iudicium. Annotated data is available at
http://www.dur.ac.uk/andreas.musolff/Arcindex.htm.

Chaı̈m Perelman and Lucie Olbrechts-Tyteca. 1969. The
New Rhetoric: A Treatise on Argumentation. Notre
Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press.
Translated by John Wilkinson and Purcell Weaver
from French original published in 1958.

Group Pragglejaz. 2007. MIP: A Method for Identifying
Metaphorically Used Words in Discourse. Metaphor
and Symbol, 22(1):1–39.

Astrid Reining and Birte Löneker-Rodman. 2007.
Corpus-driven metaphor harvesting. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Computational Approaches to Figu-
rative Language, pages 5–12, Rochester, New York.

Ekaterina Shutova and Simone Teufel. 2010. Metaphor
Corpus Annotated for Source-Target Domain Map-
pings. In Proceedings of LREC, Valetta, Malta.

Ekaterina Shutova, Simone Teufel, and Anna Korhonen.
2013. Statistical metaphor processing. Computational
Linguistics, 39(1).

Gerard Steen. 2008. The Paradox of Metaphor: Why
We Need a Three-Dimensional Model of Metaphor.
Metaphor and Symbol, 23(4):213–241.

19



Anatol Stefanowitsch. 2006. Corpus-based approaches
to metaphor and metonymy. In Anatol Stefanow-
itsch and Stefan Gries, editors, Corpus-Based Ap-
proaches to Metaphor and Metonymy. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.

20


