










































Event representation across genre


Proceedings of the The 1st Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation, pages 29–37,
Atlanta, Georgia, 14 June 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Event representation across genre

Lidia Pivovarova, Silja Huttunen and Roman Yangarber

University of Helsinki
Finland

Abstract

This paper describes an approach for investi-
gating the representation of events and their
distribution in a corpus. We collect and
analyze statistics about subject-verb-object
triplets and their content, which helps us com-
pare corpora belonging to the same domain
but to different genre/text type. We argue that
event structure is strongly related to the genre
of the corpus, and propose statistical proper-
ties that are able to capture these genre differ-
ences. The results obtained can be used for the
improvement of Information Extraction.

1 Introduction

The focus of this paper is collecting data about
certain characteristics of events found in text, in
order to improve the performance of an Infor-
mation Extraction (IE) system. IE is a tech-
nology used for locating and extracting specific
pieces of information—or “facts”—from unstruc-
tured natural-language text, by transforming the
facts into abstract, structured objects, called events.

In IE we assume that events represent real-world
facts and the main objective is to extract them from
plain text; the nature of the events themselves rarely
receives in-depth attention in current research.

Events may have various relationships to real-
world facts, and different sources may have contra-
dictory views on the facts, (Saurı́ and Pustejovsky,
2012). Similarly to many other linguistic units, an
event is a combination of meaning and form; the
structure and content of an event is influenced by

both the structure of the corresponding real-world
fact and by the properties of the surrounding text.

We use the notion of scenario to denote a set
of structured events of interest in a real-world do-
main: e.g., the MUC Management Succession sce-
nario, (Grishman and Sundheim, 1996), within the
broader Business domain.

The representation and the structure of events in
text depends on the scenario. For example, Huttunen
et al. (2002a; Huttunen et al. (2002b) points out that
“classic” MUC scenarios, such as Management Suc-
cession or Terrorist Attacks, describe events that oc-
cur in a specific point in time, whereas other sce-
narios like Natural Disaster or Disease Outbreak
describe processes that are spread out across time
and space. As a consequence, events in the latter,
“nature”-related scenarios are more complex, may
have a hierarchical structure, and may overlap with
each other in text. Linguistic cues that have been
proposed in Huttunen et al. (2002a) to identify the
overlapping or partial events include specific lexical
items, locative and temporal expressions, and usage
of ellipsis and anaphora.

Grishman (2012) has emphasized that for fully
unsupervised event extraction, extensive linguistic
analysis is essential; such analysis should be able
to capture “modifiers on entities, including quan-
tity and measure phrases and locatives; modifiers on
predicates, including negation, aspect, quantity, and
temporal information; and higher-order predicates,
including sequence and causal relations and verbs of
belief and reporting.” It is clear that such sophisti-
cated linguistic analysis increases the importance of
text style and genre for Information Extraction.

29



The idea of statistical comparison between text
types goes back at least as far as (Biber, 1991). It
was subsequently used in a number of papers on au-
tomatic text categorization (Kessler et al., 1997; Sta-
matatos et al., 2000; Petrenz and Webber, 2011).

Szarvas et al. (2012) studied the linguistic cues
indicating uncertainty of events in three genres:
news, scientific papers and Wikipedia articles. They
demonstrate significant differences in lexical usage
across the genres; for example, such words as fear
or worry may appear relatively often in news and
Wikipedia, but almost never in scientific text. They
also investigate differences in syntactic cues: for
example, the relation between a proposition and a
real-word fact is more likely to be expressed in the
passive voice in scientific papers (it is expected),
whereas in news the same words are more likely ap-
pear in the active.

Because events are not only representations of
facts but also linguistic units, an investigation of
events should take into account the particular lan-
guage, genre, scenario and medium of the text—i.e.,
events should be studied in the context of a particu-
lar corpus. Hence, the next question is how corpus-
driven study of events should be organized in prac-
tice, or, more concretely, what particular statistics
are needed to capture the scenario-specific charac-
teristics of event representation in a particular cor-
pus, and what kind of markup is necessary to solve
this task. We believe that answers to these questions
will likely depend on the ultimate goals of event de-
tection. We investigate IE in the business domain—
thus, we believe that preliminary study of the corpus
should use exactly the same depth of linguistic anal-
ysis as would be later utilized by the IE system.

2 Problem Statement

2.1 Events in the Business domain
We investigate event structure in the context of
PULS,1 an IE System, that discovers, aggregates,
verifies and visualizes events in various scenarios.
This paper focuses on the Business domain, in which
scenarios include investments, contracts, layoffs and
other business-related events, which are collected in
a database to be used for decision support. In the
Business domain, PULS currently handles two types

1More information is available at: http://puls.cs.helsinki.fi

Figure 1: Distributions of document length in the news
and business analysts’ reports corpora

of documents: news reports and short summaries
written by professional business analysts. Thus,
events extracted from both corpora relate to approx-
imately the same real-world facts.

Both corpora are in English (though some of the
analysts’ reports are based on news articles written
in other languages). We collected a corpus of re-
ports containing 740 thousand documents over three
years 2010-2012, and a news corpus containing 240
thousand documents over the same period.

The two corpora demonstrate significant linguis-
tic differences. First, the documents have different
length: the average length of an analyst reports is 5.5
sentences including the title, and 80% of the docu-
ments have length between 4 and 7 sentences, (see
Figure 1). News articles are on average 19 sentences
long—and much more varied in length.

The topical structure is also quite different for the
two corpora. Each analyst report is most typically
dedicated to a particular single real-world event.
Also, the reports tend to have a standardized, formu-
laic structure. The analysts who generate these re-
ports tend to follow a specific, strict style and struc-
ture over time.

By contrast, documents in the news corpus are
much more heterogeneous. These texts can follow
a wide variety of different styles—short messages,
surveys, interviews, etc. News documents can focus
not only strictly on business events but on related
topics as well. For example, political events have
complex interaction with and impact on business ac-

30



tivity, and therefore political news frequently appear
in business news feeds.

PULS aims to use the same processing chain for
various types of input documents. One key goal of
the current work is to investigate whether different
IE processing approaches are needed for documents
belonging to different text types, as exemplified by
analyst reports vs. articles from news feeds.

To summarize, the goals of the present work are:

• investigate how text genre influences event rep-
resentation;

• find formal markers able to capture and mea-
sure the differences in corpus style/genre;

• propose a methodology for adaptating an IE
system to a different text genre.

2.2 System Description
In this section we describe how the IE system is used
in a “pattern-mining mode,” to address the afore-
mentioned problems.

PULS is a pipeline of components, including:
a shallow parser/chunker; domain ontologies and
lexicons; low-level patterns for capturing domain-
specific entities and other semantic units, such as
dates and currency expressions; higher-level pat-
terns for capturing domain-specific relations and
events; inference rules, which combine fragments of
an event that may be scattered in text—that a pattern
may not have picked up in the immediate context
(e.g., the date of the event); reference resolution for
merging co-referring entities and events.

The ontology and the lexicon for the Business do-
main encode the taxonomic relations and support
merging of synonyms: e.g., the ontology stores the
information that cellphone and mobile phone are
synonymous, and that a super-concept for both is
PRODUCT.

Low-level patterns are used to extract entities
from text, such as company names, dates, and lo-
cations. On a slightly higher level, there are pat-
terns that match contexts such as range (collection,
line, etc.) of X and assign them the type of X. For
instance, the phrase a collection of watches would
be assigned semantic type watch, etc. The top-level
patterns in all IE scenarios are responsible for find-
ing the target events in text.

In the pattern-mining mode we use the gen-
eral pattern SUBJECT–VERB–OBJECT, where the
components may have any semantic type and are
constrained only by their deep syntactic function—
the system attempts to normalize many syntactic
variants of the basic, active form: including passive
clauses, relative clauses, etc.2

The idea of using very simple, local patterns
for obtaining information from large corpora in
the context of event extraction is similar to work
reported previously, e.g., the bootstrapping ap-
proaches in (Thelen and Riloff, 2002; Yangarber et
al., 2000; Riloff and Shepherd, 1997). Here, we
do not use iterative learning, and focus instead on
collecting and analyzing interesting statistics from
a large number of S-V-O patterns. We collected
all such “generalized” S-V-O triplets from the cor-
pus and stored them in a database. In addition to
the noun groups, we save the head nouns and their
semantic classes. This makes it easy to use sim-
ple SQL queries to count instances of a particular
pattern, e.g., all objects of a particular verb, or all
actions that can be applied to an object of seman-
tic class “PRODUCT.” For each triplet the database
stores a pointer the original sentence, making it pos-
sible to analyze specific examples in their context.

In the next two sections we present the statis-
tics that we collected using the pattern-mining
mode. This information reflects significant differ-
ences among the corpora genres and can be used to
measure variety of genre. We believe that in the fu-
ture such data analysis will support the adaptation of
PULS to new text genres.

3 Statistical Properties of the Corpora

3.1 Personal pronouns

Pronouns play a key role in anaphoric relations; the
more pronouns are present in the corpus, the more
crucial anaphora resolution becomes. Analysis of
relationships between frequencies of personal pro-
nouns in text and the genre of the text is not new;
it has been observed and studied extensively, going

2By normalization of syntactic variants we mean, for in-
stance, that clauses like “Nokia releases a new cellphone” (ac-
tive), “a new cellphone is released by Nokia” (passive), “a new
cellphone, released by Nokia,...” (relative), etc., are all reduced
to the same S-V-O form.

31



Reports News
Pronoun Object Subject Object Subject
I/me 0.003 0.007 0.2 1.0
we/us 0.001 0.001 0.4 1.7
you 0.002 0.003 0.3 0.8
he/him 0.05 0.4 0.6 2.2
she/her 0.007 0.05 0.1 0.5
they/them 0.3 0.6 0.8 1.3
it 1.1 2.6 1.5 2.3
Total 1.5 3.6 4.0 9.8

Table 1: Personal pronouns appearing in the subject or
object position in the corpora. The numerical values are
proportions of the total number of verbs.

back as far as, e.g., (Karlgren and Cutting, 1994).
The analysis of pronoun distribution in our corpora
is presented in Table 1, which shows the proportions
of personal pronouns, as they appear in subject or
object position with verbs in the collected triples.
The numbers are relative to the count of all verb to-
kens in the corpus, i.e., the total number of the S–V–
O triplets extracted from the corpus. The total num-
ber of triplets is approximately 5.7M in the report
corpus and 11M in the news corpus.

It can be seen from Table 1 that personal pro-
nouns are much more rare in the report corpus than
in the news corpus. Only 1.5% of verbs in the re-
ports corpus have a pronoun as an object, and 3.6%
as a subject. By contrast, in the news corpus 4%
of verbs have a personal pronoun as an object, and
9.8% as a subject. This corresponds to the observa-
tion in (Szarvas et al., 2012), that “impersonal con-
structions are hardly used in news media.”

It is interesting to note the distribution of the par-
ticular pronouns in the two corpora. Table 1 shows
that it is the most frequent pronoun, they and he are
less frequent; the remaining pronouns are much less
frequent in the report corpus, whereas in the news
the remaining personal pronouns have a much more
even distribution. This clearly reflects a more re-
laxed style of the news that may use rhetorical de-
vices more freely, including citing direct speech and
use a direct addressing the reader (you). It is also
interesting to note that in the third-person singular,
the feminine pronoun is starkly more rare in both
corpora than the masculine, but roughly twice more
rare among the analyst reports.

Reports News
Subject Object Subject Object

All 21.8 6.6 14.6 6.5
Business 27.1 8.1 20.1 9.5

Table 2: Distribution of proper names as subjects and ob-
jects, as a proportion the total number of all verbs (top
row) vs. business-related verbs (bottom row).

3.2 Proper Names

Proper names play a crucial role in co-reference res-
olution, by designating anaphoric relations in text,
similarly to pronouns. In the Business domain, e.g.,
a common noun phrase (NP) may co-refer with a
proper name, as “the company” may refer to the
name of a particular firm. A correctly extracted
event can be much less useful for the end-user if it
does not contain the specific name of the company
involved in the event.

A verbs is often the key element of a pattern that
indicates to the IE system the presence of an event
of interest in the text. When the subject or ob-
ject of the verb is a common NP, the corresponding
proper name must be found in the surrounding con-
text, using reference resolution or domain-specific
inference rules. Since reference resolution is itself
a phase that contributes some amount of error to
the overall IE process, it is natural to expect that if
proper-name subjects and objects are more frequent
in the corpus, then the analysis can be more precise,
since all necessary information can be extracted by
pattern without the need for additional extra infer-
ence. Huttunen et al. (2012) suggests that the com-
pactness of the event representation may be used as
one of the discourse cues that determine the event
relevance.

Table 2 shows the percentage of proper name ob-
jects and subjects for the two corpora. Proper-name
objects have comparable frequency in both corpora,
though proper-name subjects appear much more fre-
quently in analyst reports than in news. Further-
more, for the business verbs, introduced below in
section 4.1—i.e., the specific set of verbs that are
used in event patterns in the Business scenarios—as
seen in the second row of the table—proper-name
objects and subjects are more frequent still. This
suggests that business events tend to mention proper
names.

32



Percentage of business verbs
Corpus Total Title 1st sentence
Reports 49.5 7.6 13.8
News 31.8 0.6 1.1

Table 3: Business verbs in analyst reports and news cor-
pora, as a proportion of the total number of verbs.

4 Business Verbs

4.1 Distribution of Business verbs

The set of business-related verbs is an important part
of the system’s domain-specific lexicon for the Busi-
ness domain. These verbs are quite diverse: some
are strongly associated with the Business domain,
e.g., invest; some are more general, e.g., pay, make;
many are ambiguous, e.g., launch, fire. Inside ana-
lyst reports these verbs always function as markers
of certain business events or relations. The verbs
are the key elements of the top-level patterns and it
is especially crucial to investigate their usage in the
corpora to understand how the pattern base should
be fine-tune for the task.

Since the majority of these verbs fall in the am-
biguous category, none of these verbs can by them-
selves serve a sufficient indicator of the document’s
topic. Even the more clear-cut business verbs, such
as invest, can be used metaphorically in the non-
business context. However, their distribution in the
particular document and in the corpus as a whole can
reflect the genre specificity of the corpus.

Table 3 shows the overall proportion of the busi-
ness verbs, and their proportion in titles and in the
first sentence of a documents. It suggests that almost
50% of the verbs in the report corpus are “business”
verbs, and almost half of them are concentrated in
the beginning of a document. By contrast, the frac-
tion of business verbs in the news corpus is less than
one third and they are more scattered through the
text. This fact is illustrated by the plot in Figure 2.

The first sentence is often the most informa-
tive part of text, since it introduces the topic of
the document to the reader and the writer must do
his/her best to attract the reader’s attention. It was
shown in (Huttunen et al., 2012) that 65% of highly-
relevant events in the domain of medical epidemics
appear in the title or in the first two sentences of a
news article; Lin and Hovy (1997) demonstrated that

Figure 2: Percentage of business verbs in the text; sen-
tence 0 refers to the title of the document. The fraction of
verbs is presented as a percent of all verb instances in the
corpus. Logarithmic scale is used for the x axis.

about 50% of topical keywords are concentrated in
the titles. We have noticed that some documents in
the news corpus have relevance to the business sce-
nario, although relevant events still can be extracted
from the second or third paragraphs of the text, men-
tioned incidentally. By contrast, each analyst report
is devoted to a specific business event, and these
events are frequently mentioned as early as in the
title.

4.2 Case study: is “launch” a business verb?
A set of verbs such as launch, introduce, release,
present,3 etc., are used in the Business scenarios to
extract events about bringing new products to mar-
ket. In the domain ontology they are grouped under
a concept called LAUNCH-PRODUCT. An example
of a pattern that uses this concept is following:

np(COMPANY) vg(LAUNCH-PRODUCT)
np(ANYTHING)

This pattern matches when a NP designating a com-
pany is followed by a verb from the ontology, fol-
lowed by any other NP. This pattern matches, for
example, such sentence as: The Real Juice Company
has launched Pomegranate Blueberry flavour to its line
of 100% juices. However, this pattern also over-
generates by matching sentences such as, e.g.: Cen-

3Note, the S-V-O triplet extraction also handles phrasal
verbs, such as roll out, correctly, i.e., identifies them as a single
linguistic unit, and treats them the same as single-word verbs.

33



tral bank unveils effort to manage household debt. Even
among analyst reports, approximately 14% of the
NEW-PRODUCT events found by the system are
false positives. It is not feasible to collect a list of
all possible products to restrict the semantic type
of the object of the verb, since new, unpredictable
types of products can appear on the market every
day. It seemed more feasible to try to discover all
non-products that can appear in the object slot, due
to the ambiguity of the verbs in patterns—a kind of a
black-list. We introduce an ontology concept NON-
PRODUCT that groups nouns that can be matched
by the LAUNCH verbs but are in fact not products,
e.g., budget, effort, plan, report, study. The ontology
supports multiple inheritance, so any of these words
can be attached to other parents as well, if necessary.

If the <PRODUCT> slot in of event is filled by
one of the black-listed concepts, the event is also
black-listed, and not visible to the end-user. They
are used as discourse features by learning algorithms
that predict the relevance of other events from the
same documents (Huttunen et al., 2012).

The NON-PRODUCT class is populated in an ad-
hoc manner over time. The content of such a list
depends on the particular corpus; the more diverse
the topical and stylistic structure of the corpus, the
more time-consuming and the less tractable such de-
velopment becomes. Thus, an important task is to
adjust the patterns and the class of NON-PRODUCT
nouns to work for the news corpus, and to develop
a feasible methodology to address the false-positive
problem. We next show how we can use the pattern-
mining mode to address these problems.

We extract all instances of the LAUNCH-
PRODUCT verbs appearing in the corpora from the
S–V–O database. In total 27.5% of all verb instances
in reports corpus are verbs from this semantic class,
in comparison to 0.7% in the news corpus. The num-
ber of distinct objects are approximately the same in
both corpora: 3520 for reports and 3062 for news,
see Table 4. In total 247 different objects from the
report corpus attached to the semantic class PROD-
UCT in PULS ontology, and 158 objects have this
semantic class in the news corpus.

For 21% of launch verbs in the report corpus, and
34% in the news corpus, the system is not able to ex-
tract the objects, which may be a consequence of the
more diverse and varied language of news. Recall,

LAUNCH- distinct PRODUCT
Corpus PRODUCT objects objects
Reports 204193 3520 247
News 77463 3062 158

Table 4: Distributions of LAUNCH-PRODUCT verbs in
the corpora

that the system extracts a deep-structure verbal argu-
ments, i.e., for a sentence like “A new cell-phone has
been launched by company XYZ” it identifies cell-
phone as the (deep) object, and the agent company
XYZ as the (deep) subject.

It is interesting to examine the particular sets of
words that can appear in the object position. We col-
lected the 50 most frequent objects of the LAUNCH-
PRODUCT verbs for each corpus; they are shown in
Table 5 ranked by frequency (we show the top 30
objects to save space). The table shows the semantic
class according to our ontology.

Of the 50 most frequent objects, 24 belong to
the semantic class PRODUCT in the report corpus,
while only 8 objects do in the general news cor-
pus. By contrast, 20 objects belong to the NON-
PRODUCT class in the news corpus and only 9 ob-
jects in reports. Moreover, 8 objects in the news cor-
pus are not found in the ontology at all, in compari-
son to only one such case from the report corpus.

Some object classes may mean that the event is
still relevant for the business domain, though it does
not belong to the NEW-PRODUCT scenario. For
example, when object is an advertising campaign the
event is likely to belong to the MARKETING sce-
nario, when the object is a facility (factory, outlet,
etc.) it is likely INVESTMENT. Inference rules may
detect such dependencies and adjust the scenario of
these events in the Business domain.

The inference rules are supported by the same do-
main ontology, but can test domain- and scenario-
specific conditions explicitly, and thus can be more
accurate than the generic reference resolution mech-
anism. However, this also means that inference rules
are more sensitive to the corpus genre and may not
easily transfer from one corpus to another.

In some cases an object type cannot be interpreted
as belonging to any reasonable event type, e.g., if
it is an ORGANIZATION or PERSON. Such cases
may arise due to unusual syntax in the sentence that

34



Rank Reports News
Object Freq Class Object Freq Class

1 Proper Name unspecified 19987 Proper Name unspecified 5971
2 product 7331 PROD report 1078 NON
3 service 6510 PROD result 851 NON
4 campaign 3537 CAMP plan 805 NON
5 project 2870 PROD product 792 PROD
6 range 2536 COLL service 648 PROD
7 plan 2524 NON it 618 PRON
8 organization 2450 ORG data 552
9 system 2166 FAC campaign 510 CAMP

10 line 1938 COLL organization 495 ORG
11 model 1920 PROD statement 467 NON
12 application 1345 PROD Proper Name person 449 PER
13 website 1321 PROD program 439
14 flight 1315 PROD Proper Name company 432 ORG
15 Proper Name company 1232 ORG information 411 NON
16 brand 1200 COLL detail 398 NON
17 offer 1187 NON investigation 380 NON
18 production 1112 NON website 373 PROD
19 programme 998 NON measure 368 NON
20 store 993 PROD they 363 PRON
21 currency 958 CUR he 358 PRON
22 route 954 PROD device 352 PROD
23 drink 891 PROD system 340 FAC
24 solution 883 NON smartphone 337 PROD
25 smartphone 852 PROD attack 335
26 fragrance 824 PROD figure 318 NON
27 card 802 PROD opportunity 295 INV
28 fund 801 PROD fund 290 NON
29 scheme 773 NON currency 287 CUR
30 facility 756 FAC model 286 COLL

Table 5: The most frequent objects of LAUNCH verbs. Class labels: PROD: product, NON: non-product (black-
listed), CAMP: advertising campaign, INV: investment. Domain independent labels: COLL: collective; PRON: pro-
noun, FAC: facility, ORG: organization, PER: person, CUR: currency,

confuses the shallow parser.

In summary, the results obtained from the S-V-O
pattern-mining can be used to improve the perfor-
mance of IE. First, the most frequent subjects and
objects for the business verbs can be added to the
ontology; second, inference rules and patterns are
adjusted to handle the new concepts and words.

It is very interesting to investigate—and we plan
to pursue this in the future—how this can be done
fully automatically; the problem is challenging since
the semantic classes for these news concepts de-
pend on the domain and task; for example, some
objects are of type PRODUCT (e.g., “video”), and
others are of type NON-PRODUCT (e.g., “attack”,

“report”, etc.). Certain words can be ambiguous
even within a limited domain: e.g., player may des-
ignate a COMPANY (“a major player on the mar-
ket”), a PRODUCT (DVD-player, CD-player, etc.),
or a person (tennis player, football player, etc.); the
last meaning is relevant for the Business domain
since sports personalities participate in promotion
campaigns, and can launch their own brands. Au-
tomating the construction of the knowledge bases is
a challenging task.

In practice, we found that the semi-automated ap-
proach and the pattern-mining tool can be helpful for
analyzing genre-specific event patterns; it provides
the advantages of a corpus-based study.

35



5 Conclusion

We have described an approach for collecting use-
ful statistics about event representation and distribu-
tion of event arguments in corpora. The approach
was easily implemented using pattern-based extrac-
tion of S-V-O triplets with PULS; it can be equally
efficiently implemented on top of a syntactic parser,
or a shallow parser of reasonable quality. An ontol-
ogy and lexicons are necessary to perform domain-
specific analysis. We have discussed how the results
of such analysis can be exploited for fine-tuning of
a practical IE scenario.

The pattern-mining process collects deep-
structure S–V–O triplets from the corpus—which
are “potential” events. The triplets are stored in
a database, to facilitate searching and grouping
by words or by semantic class appearing as the
arguments of the triplets. This helps us quickly
find all realizations of a particular pattern—for
example, all semantic classes that appear in the
corpus as objects of verbs that have semantic class
LAUNCH-PRODUCT. The subsequent analysis of
the frequency lists can help improve the perfor-
mance of the IE system by suggesting refinements
to the ontology and the lexicon, as well as patterns
and inference rules appropriate for the particular
genre of the corpus.

Our current work includes the adaptation of the
IE system developed for the analyst reports to the
general news corpus devoted to the same topics. We
also plan to develop a hybrid methodology, to com-
bine the presented corpus-driven analysis with open-
domain techniques for pattern acquisition, (Cham-
bers and Jurafsky, 2011; Huang and Riloff, 2012).

The approach outlined here for analyzing the dis-
tributions of features in documents is useful for
studying events within the context of a corpus. It
demonstrates that event structure depends on the text
genre, and that genre differences can be easily cap-
tured and measured. By analyzing document statis-
tics and the output of the pattern-mining, we can
demonstrate significant differences between the gen-
res of analyst reports and general news, such as: sen-
tence length, distribution of the domain vocabulary
in the text, selectional preference in domain-specific
verbs, word co-occurrences, usage of pronouns and
proper names.

The pattern mining collects other statistical fea-
tures, beyond those that have been discussed in de-
tail above. For example, it showed that active voice
is used in 95% of the cases in the news corpus in
comparison to 88% in the analyst report corpus. It
is also possible to count and compare the usage of
other grammatical cues, such as verb tense, modal-
ity, etc. Thus, we should investigate not only lexical
and semantic cues, but also broader syntactic prefer-
ences and selectional constrains in the corpora.

In further research we plan to study how the for-
mal representation of the genre differences can be
used in practice, that is, for obtaining directly mea-
surable improvements in the quality of event extrac-
tion. Taking into account the particular genre of the
corpora from which documents are drawn will also
have implications for the work on performance im-
provements via cross-document merging and infer-
ence, (Ji and Grishman, 2008; Yangarber, 2006).

The frequency-based analysis described in Sec-
tion 4.2 seems to be effective. Sharpening the results
of the analysis as well as putting it to use in practical
IE applications will be the subject of further study.

Acknowledgements

We wish to thank Matthew Pierce and Peter von Et-
ter for their help in implementation of the pattern
mining more described in this paper. The work was
supported in part by the ALGODAN: Algorithmic
Data Analysis Centre of Excellence of the Academy
of Finland.

References
Douglas Biber. 1991. Variation across speech and writ-

ing. Cambridge University Press.
Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2011. Template-

based information extraction without the templates. In
Proceedings of ACL-HLT, pages 976–986.

Ralph Grishman and Beth Sundheim. 1996. Message
understanding conference-6: A brief history. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING, volume 96, pages 466–471.

Ralph Grishman. 2012. Structural linguistics and un-
supervised information extraction. Automatic Knowl-
edge Base Construction and Web-scale Knowledge Ex-
traction (AKBC-WEKEX 2012), pages 57–61.

Ruihong Huang and Ellen Riloff. 2012. Bootstrapped
training of event extraction classifiers. EACL 2012,
pages 286–295.

36



Silja Huttunen, Roman Yangarber, and Ralph Grishman.
2002a. Complexity of event structure in IE scenarios.
In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2002), Taipei,
August.

Silja Huttunen, Roman Yangarber, and Ralph Grishman.
2002b. Diversity of scenarios in information extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the Third International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2002), Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, May.

Silja Huttunen, Arto Vihavainen, Mian Du, and Roman
Yangarber. 2012. Predicting relevance of event ex-
traction for the end user. In T. Poibeau et al., edi-
tor, Multi-source, Multilingual Information Extraction
and Summarization, pages 163–177. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.

Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2008. Refining event ex-
traction through cross-document inference. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL-2008: HLT, pages 254–262, June.

Jussi Karlgren and Douglas Cutting. 1994. Recogniz-
ing text genres with simple metrics using discriminant
analysis. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 1071–1075, Kyoto,
Japan, August.

Brett Kessler, Geoffrey Numberg, and Hinrich Schütze.
1997. Automatic detection of text genre. In Proceed-
ings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and Eighth Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 32–38. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. 1997. Identifying top-
ics by position. In Proceedings of the fifth conference
on Applied natural language processing, pages 283–
290. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Philipp Petrenz and Bonnie Webber. 2011. Stable clas-
sification of text genres. Computational Linguistics,
37(2):385–393.

Ellen Riloff and Jessica Shepherd. 1997. A corpus-based
approach for building semantic lexicons. In Proceed-
ings of the Second Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 117–124.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Somerset,
New Jersey.

Roser Saurı́ and James Pustejovsky. 2012. Are you sure
that this happened? Assessing the factuality degree of
events in text. Computational Linguistics, 38(2):261–
299.

Efstathios Stamatatos, Nikos Fakotakis, and George
Kokkinakis. 2000. Text genre detection using com-
mon word frequencies. In Proceedings of the 18th
conference on Computational linguistics - Volume 2,
COLING ’00, pages 808–814, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

György Szarvas, Veronika Vincze, Richárd Farkas,
György Mófra, and Iryna Gurevych. 2012. Cross-
genre and cross-domain detection of semantic uncer-
tainty. Computational Linguistics, 38(2):335–367.

Mark Thelen and Ellen Riloff. 2002. A bootstrapping
method for learning semantic lexicons using extraction
pattern contexts. In Proceedings of the 2002 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP 2002).

Roman Yangarber, Ralph Grishman, Pasi Tapanainen,
and Silja Huttunen. 2000. Automatic acquisi-
tion of domain knowledge for information extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the 18th International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2000),
Saarbrücken, Germany, August.

Roman Yangarber. 2006. Verification of facts across
document boundaries. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Workshop on Intelligent Information Access
(IIIA-2006), Helsinki, Finland, August.

37


