










































Machine Translation with Many Manually Labeled Discourse Connectives


Proceedings of the Workshop on Discourse in Machine Translation (DiscoMT), pages 43–50,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 9, 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Machine Translation with Many Manually Labeled Discourse Connectives

Thomas Meyer
Idiap Research Institute and EPFL

Martigny and Lausanne, Switzerland
thomas.meyer@idiap.ch

Lucie Poláková
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Charles University in Prague

Prague, Czech Republic
polakova@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

The paper presents machine translation ex-
periments from English to Czech with a
large amount of manually annotated dis-
course connectives. The gold-standard
discourse relation annotation leads to bet-
ter translation performance in ranges of
4–60% for some ambiguous English con-
nectives and helps to find correct syntacti-
cal constructs in Czech for less ambiguous
connectives. Automatic scoring confirms
the stability of the newly built discourse-
aware translation systems. Error analysis
and human translation evaluation point to
the cases where the annotation was most
and where less helpful.

1 Introduction

Recently, research in statistical machine transla-
tion (SMT) has renewed interest in the fact that
for a variety of linguistic phenomena one needs
information from a longer-range context. Cur-
rent statistical translation models and decoding
algorithms operate at the sentence and/or phrase
level only, not considering already translated con-
text from previous sentences. This local dis-
tance is in many cases too restrictive to correctly
model lexical cohesion, referential expressions
(noun phrases, pronouns), and discourse markers,
all of which relate to the sentence(s) before the one
to be translated.

Discourse relations between sentences are often
conveyed by explicit discourse connectives (DC),
such as although, because, but, since, while. DCs
play a significant role in coherence and readabil-
ity of a text. Likewise, if a wrong connective is
used in translation, the target text can be fully in-
comprehensible or not conveying the same mean-
ing as was established by the discourse relations
in the source text. In English, about 100 types

of such explicit connectives have been annotated
in the Penn Discourse TreeBank (PDTB, see Sec-
tion 4), signaling discourse relations such as tem-
porality or contrast between two spans of text. De-
pending on the set of relations used, there can be
up to 130 such relations and combinations thereof.
Discourse relations can also be present implicitly
(inferred from the context), without any explicit
marker being present. Although annotation for im-
plicit DCs exists as well, we only deal with explicit
DCs in this paper. DCs are difficult to translate
mainly because a same English connective can sig-
nal different discourse relations in different con-
texts and when the target language has either dif-
ferent connectives according to the source rela-
tions signaled or uses different lexical or syntac-
tical constructs in place of the English connective.

In this paper, we present MT experiments from
English (EN) to Czech (CZ) with a large amount
of manually annotated DCs. The corpus, the par-
allel Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank
(PCEDT) (Section 4), is directly usable for MT
experiments: the entire discourse annotation in
EN is paralleled with a human CZ translation.
This means that we can build and evaluate, against
the CZ reference, a translation system, that learns
from the EN gold standard discourse relations.
These then have no distortion from wrongly la-
beled connectives as it is given in related work
(Section 3) where automatic classifiers have been
used to label the connectives with a certain er-
ror rate. Furthermore, we can use the sense la-
bels for 100 types of EN connectives, whereas re-
lated work only focused on a few highly ambigu-
ous connectives that are especially problematic for
translation.

The paper starts by illustrating difficult trans-
lations involving connectives (Section 2) and dis-
cusses related work in Section 3. The resources
and data used are introduced in Section 4. The
MT experiments are explained in Section 5 and

43



automatic evaluation is given in Section 6. We fur-
ther provide a detailed manual evaluation and error
analysis for the CZ translations generated by our
SMT systems (Section 7). Future work described
in Section 8 concludes the paper.

2 Motivation

The following example shows a CZ translation
of the English DC meanwhile. The previous
sentences to the example were about other com-
puter producers expected to report disappointing
financial results. The interpretation of meanwhile
and the discourse relation (or sense) signaled is
therefore CONTRASTIVE and not TEMPORAL:

SOURCE: Apple Computer Inc., mean-
while<COMPARISONCONTRAST>, is expected to
show improved earnings for the period ended September.
BASELINE: Společnost Apple Computer Inc., mezitı́m by
měla ukázat lepšı́ přı́jmy za obdobı́ končı́cı́ v zářı́.
SYSTEM2: Společnost Apple Computer Inc., naopak by
měla ukázat lepšı́ přı́jmy za obdobı́ končı́cı́ v zářı́.

A baseline SMT system for EN/CZ generated the
incorrect CZ connective mezitı́m which signals a
temporal relation only. The translation marked
SYSTEM2 in the example was output by one of
the systems we trained on manual DC annotations
(cf. Section 5). The system correctly generated
the CZ connective naopak signaling a contrastive
sense. The example sentence is taken from the
Wall Street Journal corpus, section 2365. The
sense tag for meanwhile was manually annotated
in the Penn Discourse TreeBank, see Section 4.

3 Related Work

The disambiguation of DCs can be seen as a spe-
cial form of Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD),
that has been applied to SMT for content words
with slight improvements to translation qual-
ity (Chan et al., 2007; Carpuat and Wu, 2007).
DCs however form a class of procedural function
words that relate text spans from an arbitrarily
long context and their disambiguation needs fea-
tures from that longer-range context. Only few
studies address function word disambiguation for
SMT: Chang et al. (2009) disambiguate a mul-
tifunctional Chinese particle for Chinese/English
translation and Ma et al. (2011) use tagging of
English collocational particles for translation into
Chinese. Lexical cohesion at the document level
has recently also come into play, with studies
on lexical consistency in SMT (Carpuat, 2009;
Carpuat and Simard, 2012), topic modeling ap-

plied to SMT (Eidelman et al., 2012) or decod-
ing with document-wide features (Hardmeier et
al., 2012). A recently published article summa-
rizes most of the work on SMT with the broader
perspective of discourse, lexical cohesion and co-
reference (Hardmeier, 2013).

For discourse relations and DCs especially,
more and more annotated resources have be-
come available in several languages, such as En-
glish (Prasad et al., 2008), French (Péry-Woodley
et al., 2009; Danlos et al., 2012), German (Stede,
2004), Arabic (AlSaif, 2012), Chinese (Zhou and
Xue, 2012) and Czech (Mladová et al., 2009).
These resources however remain mostly monolin-
gual, i.e. translations or parallel texts in other lan-
guages do normally not exist. This makes these
resources not directly usable for MT experiments.

Recent work has shown that more adequate
and coherent translations can be generated for
English/French when ambiguous connectives in
the source language are annotated with the dis-
course relation they signal (Popescu-Belis et al.,
2012). SMT systems for European language
pairs are most often trained on Europarl corpus
data (Koehn, 2005), where only a small amount of
discourse-annotated instances is available (8 con-
nectives with about 300-500 manual annotations
each). Meyer and Popescu-Belis (2012) there-
fore used these few examples to train automatic
classifiers that introduce the sense labels for the
connectives in the entire English text of the Eu-
roparl corpus. Although these classifiers are state-
of-the-art, they can have an error rate of up to
30% when labeling unseen instances of connec-
tives. The discourse-aware SMT systems never-
theless improved about 8-10% of the connective
translations. When integrating into SMT directly
the small manually-labeled data, without train-
ing classifiers, hardly any translation improvement
was measurable, cf. (Meyer and Popescu-Belis,
2012).

4 The Parallel Prague Czech-English
Dependency Treebank

With the English-Czech parallel text provided in
the Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank
2.0 (PCEDT) (Hajič et al., 2011)1, comes a hu-
man CZ translation of the entire Wall Street Jour-
nal Corpus in EN (WSJ, sections 00-24, approxi-

1http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/
catalogEntry.jsp?catalogId=LDC2012T08

44



mately 50k sentences).
The syntactical annotation of WSJ, the Penn

TreeBank (Marcus et al., 1993), has been followed
by a discourse annotation project, the Penn Dis-
course TreeBank (PDTB) (Prasad et al., 2008),
over the same sections of the corpus. In the
PDTB version 2.0, 18,459 instances of explicit
DCs, among other discourse-related phenomena
(implicit relations, alternative lexicalizations), are
labeled along with the text spans they connect (dis-
course arguments) and the discourse relation they
signal (sense tags).

The sense tags are organized in a three-level
sense hierarchy with four top semantic classes,
16 sub-senses on the second and further 23 sub-
senses on the third hierarchy level. The annotators
were not forced to make the finest distinction (on
the sub-sense level). A token can also be annotated
with two senses, forming a composite sense with
a label combination from wherever in the hierar-
chy, resulting in 129 theoretically possible distinct
sense tags (see Section 5 for the sense levels we
use). For the latter reason, some of the sense labels
are very scarcely used and although they make for
important and fine-grained distinctions in English,
this granularity level might not be useful for trans-
lation, where only certain ambiguities have to be
resolved to obtain a correct target language con-
nective, see Section 7.

The PCEDT is a 1:1 sentence-aligned paral-
lel resource with a manual multilayer dependency
analysis of both original Penn TreeBank-WSJ
texts and their translations to Czech. Despite
the manually annotated parallel dependency trees
which are very valuable in other linguistic stud-
ies, for translation we only used the plain CZ texts
provided with the treebank.

5 Experimental Setup

In the following, we describe a series of SMT ex-
periments that made direct use of the EN/CZ text
as provided with the PCEDT. The SMT models
were all phrase-based and trained with the Moses
decoder (Koehn et al., 2007), either on plain text
for the BASELINE or on text where the EN con-
nective word-forms have been concatenated with
the PDTB sense labels. All texts have been tok-
enized and lowercased with the Moses tools before
training SMT. In future work, we will build fac-
tored translation models (Koehn and Hoang, 2007)
as well, as this would reduce the label scarcity

that was likely a problem when just concatenating
word-forms and labels (see Sections 7 and 8).

For SYSTEM1 in the following, we inserted, into
the English side of the PCEDT data, the full sense
labels from the PDTB, which can be, as already
mentioned, as detailed as containing 3 sense levels
and allowing for composite tags (where annotators
chose that two senses hold at the same time). SYS-
TEM1 therefore operates on a total of 63 distinct
and observed sense tags for all DCs.

For SYSTEM2, we reduced the sense labels to
contain only senses from PDTB sense hierarchy
level 2 and 1, not allowing for composite senses,
i.e. for those instances that were annotated with
two senses we discarded the secondary (but not
less important) sense. This reduced the set of
senses for SYSTEM2 to 22.

The procedure is exemplified in the example
below with an EN sentence 1 (WSJ section
2300) containing a complex PDTB sense tag
that has been kept for SYSTEM1. For SYS-
TEM2 we have reduced the sense of when to:
<CONTINGENCYCONDITIONGENERAL>. Sen-
tence 2 (WSJ section 2341) contains two already
simplified sense tags. The original PDTB sense
tags for meanwhile and as were respectively
<COMPARISONCONTRASTJUXTAPOSITION>
and <CONTINGENCYPRAGMATICCAUSE-
JUSTIFICATION>, where JUXTAPOSITION and
JUSTIFICATION were dropped because they stem
from the third level of the PDTB sense hierarchy:

1. Selling snowballed because of waves of au-
tomatic “stop-loss” orders, which are triggered by
computer when<CONTINGENCYCONDITIONGENERAL-
TEMPORALASYNCHRONOUSSUCCESSION> prices fall to
certain levels.
2. Meanwhile<COMPARISONCONTRAST>, analysts said
Pfizer’s recent string of lackluster quarterly performances
continued, as<CONTINGENCYPRAGMATICCAUSE> earn-
ings in the quarter were expected to decline by about 5%.

In order to build SMT systems of reasonable
quality, we still need to combine the PCEDT texts
(50k sentences) with other resources such as the
EN/CZ parts of the Europarl corpus. This results
in a mixture of labeled and unlabeled DCs in the
data and estimates might be noisy. We however
also checked system performance on the PDTB
test set (section 23) with labeled DCs only (see
Section 6) for which the unlabeled ones in the
model do not pose a problem, as they are not con-
sidered as valid target phrases by the SMT de-
coder. The following list gives an overview of the
data used to build three SMT systems. No modi-

45



fications have been done to the texts of the BASE-
LINE system, that uses exactly the same amount of
sentences, but no sense labels.
• BASELINE: no tags for connectives
• SYSTEM1: complex PDTB sense tags
• SYSTEM2: simplified PDTB sense tags
• training: Europarlv7 (645,155 sentences)

+ PDTB sections 02-21 (41,532 sentences;
15,402 connectives)

• tuning: newstest2011 (3,003 sentences) +
PDTB sections 00,01,22,24 (5,260 sentences;
2,134 connectives)

• testing: newstest2012 (3,001 sentences) +
PDTB section 23 (2,416 sentences; 923 con-
nectives)2

The language model, the same for BASE-
LINE, SYSTEM1 and SYSTEM2, was built using
SRILM (Stolcke et al., 2011) with 5-grams over
Europarl and the news data sets 2007-2011 in CZ,
as distributed by the Workshop on Machine Trans-
lation3. All systems were tuned by MERT (Och,
2003) as implemented in Moses.

6 Automatic Evaluation

Most automatic MT scoring relies on n-gram
matching of a system’s candidate translation
against (usually) only one human reference trans-
lation. For DCs therefore, automatic scores do not
reveal much of a system’s performance, as often
only one or two words, i.e. the DC is changed.
When a candidate translation however contains a
more accurate and correct connective, the trans-
lation output is often more coherent and readable
than the baseline’s output, see Section 7.

Automatic evaluation has been done using the
MultEval tool, version 0.5.1 (Clark et al., 2011).
The BLEU scores are computed by jBLEU V0.1.1
(an exact reimplementation of NIST’s mteval-
v13.pl without tokenization). Table 1 provides an
overview of the BLEU scores for the BASELINE
and systems 1 and 2 on the full test set (new-
stest2012 + PDTB section 23), and on PDTB sec-
tion 23 only, the latter containing 2,416 sentences
and 923 labeled DCs.

In order to gain reliable automatic evaluation
scores, we executed 5 runs of MERT for each

2Note that this PDTB section division for training, devel-
opment and testing is the same as is used for automatic clas-
sification experiments, as recommended in the PDTB anno-
tation manual.

3http://www.statmt.org/wmt12/

translation model configuration. MERT is imple-
mented as a randomized, non-deterministic opti-
mization process, so that each run leads to differ-
ent feature weights and as a consequence, to dif-
ferent BLEU scores when translating unseen text.
The scores from the 5 runs were then averaged and
with a t-test we calculated the confidence p-values
for the score differences. When these are below
0.05, they confirm that it is statistically likely,
that such scores would occur again in other tun-
ing runs. In terms of BLEU, neither SYSTEM1 nor
SYSTEM2 therefore performs significantly better
or worse than the BASELINE.

In order to show how little the DC labeling ac-
tually affects the BLEU score, we randomized all
connective sense tags in PDTB test section 23 and
translated again 5 times (with the weights from
each tuning run) with both, SYSTEM1 and SYS-
TEM2. With randomized labels, both systems per-
form statistically significantly worse (p = 0.01,
marked with a star in Table 1) than the BASELINE,
but only with an average performance loss of−0.6
BLEU points. Note that some sense tags might
still have been correct due to randomization.

Test set System BLEU

nt2012 + PDTB 23
BASELINE 17.6
SYSTEM1 17.6
SYSTEM2 17.6

PDTB 23
BASELINE 21.4
SYSTEM1 21.4
SYSTEM2 21.4

PDTB 23 random
SYSTEM1 20.8*
SYSTEM2 20.8*

Table 1: BLEU scores when testing on the com-
bined test set (newstest2012 + PDTB 23); on
PDTB section 23 only (2416 sentences, 923 con-
nectives); and when randomizing the sense tags
(PDTB 23 random), for the BASELINE system and
the two systems using PDTB connective labels:
SYSTEM1: complex labels, SYSTEM2: simplified
labels. When testing on randomized sense labels
(PDTB 23 random), the BLEU scores are statisti-
cally significantly lower than the ones on the cor-
rectly labeled test set (PDTB 23), which is indi-
cated by starred values.

Automatic MT scoring does therefore not reveal
actual changes in translation quality due to DC
usage. In the next section, we manually analyze

46



samples of the translation output by SYSTEM2 that
reached the highest scores observed in some of the
single tuning runs before averaging.

7 Manual Evaluation and Error Analysis

Two human judges went both through two random
samples of SYSTEM2 translations from WSJ sec-
tion 23, namely sentences 1-300 and 1000-2416.
In these sentences, there were 630 observed con-
nectives. The judges counted the translations that
were better, equal and worse in terms of the DCs as
output by SYSTEM2 versus the BASELINE system.
We then summarized the counts over the two sam-
ples and give the scores as ∆(%) in Table 2. To
further test if we just had bad samples, the judges
went through another set of translations (1024–
1138), containing 50 DCs, for which the counts
are summarized in Table 2 as well. A translation
was counted as being correct when it generated a
valid CZ connective for the corresponding context,
without grading the rest of the sentences.

Overall, it was found that the number of better
translations is only slightly higher for SYSTEM2
than the ones from the BASELINE system. The
vast majority of DCs was translated correctly by
both the BASELINE and SYSTEM2, and in very few
cases, both systems translated the DCs incorrectly.

SYSTEM2 appeared to systematically repeat one
mistake, namely translating the very frequent con-
nective but preferably with jenže, which is correct
but rare in CZ (the primary and default equivalent
for but in CZ is ale). This ‘mis-learning’ likely
happened to a frequent correspondence of but–
jenže in the SMT training data, which then does
not necessarily scale to and be of appropriate style
in the testing data. If one disregards these occur-
rences, SYSTEM2 translates between about 8 and
20% of all connectives better than the BASELINE
(discounted percentages for jenže in Table 2). The
results seem therefore to be dependent on the parts
of the test set evaluated and the DCs occurring in
them.

The only slight quantitative improvements and
cases were SYSTEM2 performed worse are most
likely due to the overall scarcity of the PDTB
sense tags (cf. Section 4). Especially for SYS-
TEM1 but to some extent also for SYSTEM2, rare
sense tags such as CONTINGENCYPRAGMATIC-
CAUSE might not be seen often or even not at all in
the SMT training data and therefore not be learned
appropriately to provide good translations for the

test data. In relation to that, simply concatenat-
ing the sense tags onto the connective word-forms
leads to scarcity of the latter, whereas other ways
to include linguistic labels in SMT, such as fac-
tored translation models, would account for the la-
bels as additional translation features, which will
be investigated in future work (Section 8).

In the following, we analyze cases where SYS-
TEM2 translates the connectives better and more
appropriately than the BASELINE. These cases
include highly ambiguous connectives, temporal
DCs with verbal ing-forms and conditionals.

In general, for the very ambiguous EN connec-
tives (e.g. as, when, while), disambiguated for
SYSTEM2 with the PDTB sense tags, we indeed
obtained more accurate translations than those
generated by the BASELINE. One of the human
judges had a close look at 25 randomly sampled
instances of as, taken from the manually evalu-
ated sets mentioned above. In these test cases,
68% of all occurrences of as were better translated
by SYSTEM2 and only 4% of the translations were
degraded when compared to the BASELINE. For
details, see Table 34.

In the following translation example (WSJ
section 2365), and often elsewhere, the BASELINE
system treats the connective as as a preposition
jako with the meaning She worked as a teacher.
This frequent interpretation seems to be learned
quite reasonably from the SMT training data, it is
however incorrect where as actually functions as
a DC. SYSTEM2, in agreement with the tagging,
then correctly generates the causal connective
protože:

SOURCE: In the occupied lands, underground leaders of
the Arab uprising rejected a U.S. plan to arrange Israeli-
Palestinian talks as<CONTINGENCYCAUSE> Shamir op-
posed holding such discussions in Cairo.
BASELINE: *Na okupovaných územı́ch, podzemnı́ vůdců
arabských povstánı́ odmı́tl americký plán uspořádat
izraelsko-palestinské rozhovory jako Šamira proti pořádánı́
takových diskusı́ v Káhiře.
SYSTEM2: Na okupovaných územı́ch, podzemnı́ vůdců
arabského povstánı́ odmı́tl americký plán uspořádat
izraelsko-palestinské rozhovory, protože Šamira proti
pořádánı́ takových diskusı́ v Káhiře.

DCs can also be translated to other syntactical
constructs available in the target language that
convey the same discourse relation without any

4We included simple occurrences only, i.e. not compound
connectives like as if, as soon as or translations were the con-
nective was dropped. In the PDTB, as can have up to 17
distinct senses, ranging from temporal, causal to concessive
relations.

47



Configuration ∆(%) vs. BASELINE Total (%)
Improved Equal Degraded

sentences 1–300 / 1000–2416
630 labeled DCs

SYSTEM2 7.9 75.2 9.4 92.5
not counting 25 x but–jenže 8.2 80.3 4.0 92.5
both systems wrong 7.5

100

sentences 1024–1138
50 labeled DCs

SYSTEM2 16 76 6 98
not counting 2 x but–jenže 19 77 2 98
both systems wrong 2

100

Table 2: Performance of SYSTEM2 (simplified PDTB tags) when manually counting for improved, equal
and degraded translations compared to the BASELINE, in samples from the PDTB section 23 test set.

explicit DC. For EN/CZ this occurs for DCs such
as before/after/since + Verb in Present Continu-
ous. In CZ, these either should be rendered as a
verbal clause or a nominalization. We accounted
for translations as being well-formed, if the
SMT systems generated one of these possibilities
correctly, i.e. not only the connective/preposition
but also the verb/noun. In CZ, it must be decided
between using a preposition (e.g. před) or a
connective (e.g. než). A good translation would
for example be: before climbing = PREP+NP or
DC+V, and a bad translation: before climbing
= PREP+V/ADJ or DC+NP. The following
example (WSJ section 2381) is a SYSTEM2 output
where the sense tag in English helped to translate
the connective before more correctly by DC+V,
whereas the BASELINE renders this wrongly by
using PREP+ADJ:

SOURCE: Mr. Weisman predicts stocks will
appear to stabilize in the next few days be-
fore<TEMPORALASYNCHRONOUS> declining again,
trapping more investors.
BASELINE: *Pan Weisman předpovı́dá, že akcie budou
stabilizovat v přı́štı́ch několika dnech před/PREP kle-
sajı́cı́m/ADJ opět odchytu vı́ce investorů.
SYSTEM2: Pan Weisman předpovı́dá, že akcie bude
stabilizovat, jak se zdá, v přı́štı́ch několika dnı́, než/DC
opět klesat/V, zablokovánı́ vı́ce investorů.

A further difficult case in CZ is the binding of
conditionals with personal pronouns, e.g. if I =
kdybych, if you = kdybys, if he/she = kdyby etc.
In the following example (WSJ section 2386), the

BASELINE system completely missed to render
the personal pronoun (but still generated the
correct conditional connective if–pokud), whereas
SYSTEM2 outputs the much better if I–kdybych.
However, apart from the better connective, SYS-
TEM2’s translation is worse than the BASELINE’s,
because the first verb form is misconjugated and
the second verb (will take) is missing:

SOURCE: If<CONTINGENCYCONDITION> I sell now, I’ll
take a big loss.
BASELINE: *Pokud chtěl prodat, teď budu brát s velkou
ztrátou.
LIT.: If he-wanted to-sell, now I-will take with big-
Instrumental loss-Instrumental.
SYSTEM2: Kdybych se nynı́ prodávajı́, se z tohohle velkou
ztrátu.
LIT.: If-I themselves-ReflexPron now they-are selling, Re-
flexPron out-of this big-Accusative loss-Accusative.

From the automatic and manual translation
evaluation, we conclude that using the sense tags
for all 100 connectives in EN is not the most ap-
propriate method, and that only certain connec-
tives such as as, when, while, yet and a few oth-
ers are very problematic in translation due to the
many discourse relations they can signal. In fu-
ture work, we will therefore analyze in more detail
which connectives and which sense labels from the
PDTB should actually be included in the data to
train SMT.

48



BASELINE SYSTEM2 occ. PDTB
jak když 1 SY
jak když 1 SY
jelikož jelikož 1 CA
neboť neboť 1 CA
protože protože 2 SY/CO; CA
a protože 1 SY/CO
aby když 1 SY
jak když 1 SY
jak protože 1 CA
jako protože 4 SY/CO; CA
jako když 5 SY; ASY; CA
jako kdy 2 SY
protože když 1 SY
že když 1 SY
jako jak 1 SY
jako poté, co 1 SY
Total 25
SYS2 + 68%
SYS2 = 20%
SYS2 – 4%
both – 8%

Table 3: Translation outputs for the EN con-
nective as, which was translated more correctly
by SYSTEM2 thanks to the disambiguating sense
tags compared to the BASELINE that often just
produces the prepositional as – jako. The erro-
neous translations are marked in bold. The PDTB
sense tags indicate the meaning of the CZ trans-
lations and are encoded as follows: Synchrony
(Sy), Asynchrony (Asy), Contingency (Co), Cause
(Ca).

8 Conclusion

We presented experiments for EN/CZ SMT with
a large amount of hand-labeled discourse connec-
tives that are disambiguated in the source language
and training material for MT systems by their
sense tags or discourse relations they signal. This
leads to improved translations in cases where the
source DC is highly ambiguous or where the tar-
get language uses other syntactical constructs than
a connective to convey the discourse relation.

Using all 100 types of EN DCs in the corpus
and/or all the detailed sense tags from the man-
ual annotation most probably lead to the only very
slight improvements for the discourse-aware sys-
tems when measured quantitatively over the whole

test sets. In future work we plan to more thor-
oughly analyze which connectives need to be dis-
ambiguated at which sense granularity level before
implementing them into an SMT system.

For label implementation there also are other
ways worth examining, such as factored transla-
tion models that handle the supplementary linguis-
tic information as separate features and alternative
decoding paths.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful for the funding of this work to the
Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) under
the COMTIS Sinergia project, n. CRSI22 127510
(see www.idiap.ch/comtis/), to the Grant
Agency of the Czech Republic (project n.
P406/12/0658) and to the SVV of the Charles
University (project n. 267 314). We would like
to thank Lenka Sándor for her help with manual
translation evaluation.

References
Amal AlSaif. 2012. Human and Automatic Annota-

tion of Discourse Relations for Arabic. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Leeds.

Marine Carpuat and Michel Simard. 2012. The Trou-
ble with SMT Consistency. In Proceedings of the
7th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(WMT), pages 442–449, Montreal, Canada.

Marine Carpuat and Dekai Wu. 2007. Improving Sta-
tistical Machine Translation using Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation. In Proceedings of Joint Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP) and Computational Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL), pages 61–72, Prague, Czech Re-
public.

Marine Carpuat. 2009. One Translation per Discourse.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Semantic Evalu-
ations: Recent Achievements and Future Directions
(SEW), pages 19–27, Singapore.

Yee Seng Chan, Hwee Tou Ng, and David Chiang.
2007. Word Sense Disambiguation Improves Sta-
tistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the
45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL), pages 33–40, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Pi-Chuan Chang, Dan Jurafsky, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2009. Disambiguating ‘DE’ for Chinese-
English Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the
Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
at the 12th Meeting of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL),
Athens, Greece.

49



Jonathan Clark, Chris Dyer, Alon Lavie, and Noah
Smith. 2011. Better Hypothesis Testing for Statisti-
cal Machine Translation: Controlling for Optimizer
Instability. In Proceedings of ACL-HLT 2011 (46th
Annual Meeting of the ACL: Human Language Tech-
nologies), Portland, OR.

Laurence Danlos, Diégo Antolinos-Basso, Chloé
Braud, and Charlotte Roze. 2012. Vers le
FDTB : French Discourse Tree Bank. In Actes de
la conférence conjointe JEP-TALN-RECITAL 2012,
volume 2: TALN, pages 471–478, Grenoble, France.

Vladimir Eidelman, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Philip
Resnik. 2012. Topic Models for Dynamic Transla-
tion Model Adaptation. In Proceedings of ACL 2012
(50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 115–119, Jeju, Republic
of Korea.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová, Petr Sgall,
Silvie Cinková, Eva Fučı́ková, Marie Mikulová, Petr
Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiřı́ Semecký, Jana Šindlerová,
Jan Štěpánek, Josef Toman, Zdeňka Urešová, and
Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2011. Prague Czech-English
Dependency Treebank 2.0. Institute of Formal
and Applied Linguistics, Charles University, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Christian Hardmeier, Joakim Nivre, and Jörg Tiede-
mann. 2012. Document-Wide Decoding for Phrase-
Based Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and Natural Language
Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), Jeju, Korea.

Christian Hardmeier. 2013. Discourse in Statistical
Machine Translation. DISCOURS, 11:1–29.

Philipp Koehn and Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored
Translation Models. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP) and Computational
Natural Language Learning (CONLL), pages 868–
876, Prague, Czech Republic.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexan-
dra Constantin, and Evan Herbs. 2007. Moses:
Open Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Trans-
lation. In Proceedings of 45th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
Demonstration Session, pages 177–180, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
MT Summit X, pages 79–86, Phuket, Thailand.

Jianjun Ma, Degen Huang, Haixia Liu, and Wenfeng
Sheng. 2011. POS Tagging of English Particles for
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the Thir-
teenth Machine Translation Summit, pages 57–63,
Xiamen, China.

Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a Large Annotated
Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2):313–330.

Thomas Meyer and Andrei Popescu-Belis. 2012. Us-
ing Sense-labeled Discourse Connectives for Statis-
tical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the
EACL 2012 Joint Workshop on Exploiting Synergies
between IR and MT, and Hybrid Approaches to MT
(ESIRMT-HyTra), pages 129–138, Avignon, FR.

Lucie Mladová, Šárka Zikánová, Zuzanna Bedřichová,
and Eva Hajičová. 2009. Towards a discourse cor-
pus of Czech. In Proceedings of the Corpus Linguis-
tics Conference, Liverpool, UK.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum Error Rate Training
in Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings
of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 160–167,
Sapporo, Japan.

Marie-Paule Péry-Woodley, Nicholas Asher, Patrice
Enjalbert, Farah Benamara, Myriam Bras, Cécile
Fabre, Stéphane Ferrari, Lydia-Mai Ho-Dac, Anne
Le Draoulec, Yann Mathet, Philippe Muller, Lau-
rent Prévot, Josette Rebeyrolle, Ludovic Tanguy,
Marianne Vergez-Couret, Laure Vieu, and Antoine
Widlöcher. 2009. ANNODIS: une approche out-
illée de l’annotation de structures discursives. In
Actes de la 16ème Conférence sur le Traitement
Automatique des Langues Naturelles (TALN), Paris,
France.

Andrei Popescu-Belis, Thomas Meyer, Jeevanthi
Liyanapathirana, Bruno Cartoni, and Sandrine Zuf-
ferey. 2012. Discourse-level Annotation over Eu-
roparl for Machine Translation: Connectives and
Pronouns. In Proceedings of the eighth interna-
tional conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC), Istanbul, Turkey.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0.
In Proceedings of 6th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pages
2961–2968, Marrakech, Morocco.

Manfred Stede. 2004. The Potsdam Commentary Cor-
pus. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Dis-
course Annotation, pages 96–102, Barcelona, Spain.

Andreas Stolcke, Jing Zheng, Wen Wang, and Victor
Abrash. 2011. SRILM at Sixteen: Update and
Outlook. In Proceedings of the IEEE Automatic
Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop,
Waikoloa, Hawaii.

Yuping Zhou and Nianwen Xue. 2012. PDTB-style
Discourse Annotation of Chinese Text. In Proceed-
ings of the 50th Annual Meeting on Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), Jeju Island, Ko-
rea.

50


