










































Sentiment Analysis of Hindi Reviews based on Negation and Discourse Relation


International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 45–50,
Nagoya, Japan, 14-18 October 2013.

Sentiment Analysis of Hindi Review based on Negation and Discourse 

Relation 

Namita Mittal 

Department of Computer 

Engineering 

Malaviya National Institute of 

Technology, Jaipur 

mittalnamita@gmail.com 

Basant Agarwal 

Department of Computer 

Engineering 

Malaviya National Institute of 

Technology, Jaipur 

thebasant@gmail.com 

Garvit Chouhan 

Department of Computer 

Engineering 

Malaviya National Institute 

of Technology, Jaipur 

jkgarvit@gmail.com 

Nitin Bania 

Department of Computer 

Engineering 

Malaviya National Institute 

of Technology, Jaipur 

nittinuts@gmail.com 

Prateek Pareek 

Department of Computer 

Engineering 

Malaviya National Institute 

of Technology, Jaipur 

prtkpareek@gmail.com 
 

Abstract: With recent developments in web 

technologies, percentage of web content in Hindi 

language is growing up at a lightning speed. 

Opinion classification research has gained 

tremendous momentum in recent times mostly for 

English language. However, there has been little 

work in this area for Indian languages. There is a 

need to analyse the Hindi language content and get 

insight of opinions expressed by people and various 

communities. In this paper, a method is proposed to 

increase the coverage of the Hindi SentiWordNet 

for better classification results. In addition to this, 

impact of the negation and discourse rules are 

investigated for Hindi sentiment analysis. Proposed 

algorithm produces 82.89% for positive reviews 

and 76.59 % for negative reviews, and an overall 

accuracy of 80.21%. 

Keywords: Sentiment Analysis, HSWN, Discourse 

and negation for Hindi Reviews.  

1. Introduction 

Sentiment Analysis is a natural language 

processing task that deals with the extraction 

of opinion from a piece of text with respect to 

a topic (Pang et al., 2008). A large number of 

advertising industries and recommendation 

systems work on understanding liking and 

disliking of the people from their reviews. 

Hindi is the fourth highest speaking language 

in the world. The increasing user-generated 

content on the Internet is the motivation 

behind the sentiment analysis research.  

Majority of the existing work in this field is 

for English language. Very little attention has 

been paid in direction of sentiment analysis 

for Hindi Language. Information content in 

Hindi is important to be analysed for the use 

of industries and government(s). 

Sentiment analysis is very difficult for Hindi 

language due to numerous reasons as follows. 

(1) Unavailability of well annotated standard 

corpora, therefore supervised machine 

learning algorithms cannot be applied. (2) 

Hindi is a resource scarce language; there are 

no efficient parser and tagger for this 

language. (3) Limited resources available for 

this language like HindiSentiWordNet 

(HSWN). It consists of limited numbers of 

adjectives and adverbs.  All the words are 

available in inflected forms. Even all the 

inflected forms of the word are not present. 

HSWN is created using the Hindi WordNet 

and English SentiWordNet (SWN). During 

the creation of this resource for Hindi 

language, it is assumed that all synonyms 

have the same polarity while all antonyms 

have the reverse polarity of a word.  This 

assumption neglected word sense intensity in 

terms of polarity, however polarity intensity 

of their word is important in opinion mining. 

(4) Even, Translation dictionaries may not 

account for all the words because of the 

45



language variations. Same words may be used 

in multiple contexts and context dependent 

word mapping is a difficult task, error prone 

and requires manual efforts. Using Translation 

method for generating subjective lexicon, 

there is a high possibility of losing the 

contextual information and sometimes may 

have translation errors. 

In this paper, an efficient approach is 

proposed for identifying sentiments and 

opinions from user generated content in 

Hindi.  

Main contributions of this paper are as 

follows. (1) Developed an annotated corpus 

for Hindi Movie Reviews. (2) Improve the 

existing HindiSentiWordNet (HSWN) by 

incorporating more opinion words into it. (3) 

Proposed new rules for negation handling and 

discourse relation for Hindi language reviews.  

This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 

presents related work. Proposed approach is 

described in detail in Section 3. Section 4 

discusses the experimental setup and results. 

Finally, Section 5 concludes and presents 

the future work. 

 

2. Related Work 

Identifying the sentiment polarity is a 

complex task. To address the problem of 

sentiment classification various methods have 

been proposed (Agarwal et al. 2012, Agarwal 

et al. 2013, Pang et al. 2008). Joshi et al. 

(2010)
 
proposed a fallback strategy in their 

paper. This strategy follows three approaches: 

In-language Sentiment Analysis, Machine 

Translation and Resource Based Sentiment 

Analysis. The final accuracy achieved by 

them is 78.14 %. They developed a lexical 

resource, HindiSentiWordNet (HSWN) based 

on its English format. Bakliwal et al. (2012) 

created lexicon using a graph based method. 

They explored how the synonym and antonym 

relations can be exploited using simple graph 

traversal to generate the subjectivity lexicon. 

Their proposed algorithm achieved 

approximately 79% accuracy on classification 

of reviews and 70.4% agreement with human 

annotated. Mukherjee et al. (2012) showed 

that the incorporation of discourse markers in 

a bag-of-words model improves the sentiment 

classification accuracy by 2 - 4%. Bakliwal et 

al. (2011) proposed a method to classify Hindi 

reviews as positive or negative. They devised 

a new scoring function and test on two 

different approaches. They also used a 

combination of simple N-gram and POS-

Tagged N-gram approaches. Ambati et al. 

(2011)
 
proposed a novel approach to detect 

errors in the treebanks. This approach can 

significantly reduce the validation time. They 

tested it on Hindi dependency treebank data 

and were able to detect 76.63% of errors at 

dependency level. 

 

3. Proposed Approach 

Proposed approach for Sentiment Analysis of 

Hindi review documents works as follows. 

Initially, annotated dataset is created for 

testing of the proposed algorithm. Then, rules 

are devised for handling negation and 

discourse relation which highly influence the 

sentiments expressed in the review. Further, 

HindiSentiWordNet (HSWN) is used for 

polarity values of words. Method for 

improving the HSWN is also proposed. 

Finally, overall semantic orientation of the 

review document is determined by 

aggregating the polarity values of all the 

words in the document  

3.1. Preparation of Annotated Dataset 

Initially, 900 reviews are crawled from Hindi 

review websites, out of these 900 reviews, 

130 reviews were rejected due to their 

objective nature manually. Next, for 

remaining 770 reviews, agreement was 

established on 662 reviews using Cohen‟s 

kappa. Out of these 662 total reviews, 380 

were agreed as positive and 282 as negative. 

After that, Fleiss kappa was used for the 

agreement and achieved 0.8092 as kappa 

coefficient. This falls under the substantial 

agreement according to Fleiss kappa. Average 

size of the reviews in our dataset is 104 

words. 

46



3.2  Negation Handling 

The negation operator (Example:    ,  , 
      etc.) inverts the sentiment of the word 
following it. The usual way of handling 

negation in sentiment analysis is to consider a 

window of size n (typically 3 to 5) and reverse 

the polarity of all the words in the window.  

We reverse all the words in the window by 

adding (!) to every word, till either the 

sentence is completed or a violating 

expectation (or a contrast) conjunction or a 

delimiter is encountered. Negation on the 

basis of sentence structure may be applied 

either in forward or in backward direction. 

Some rules are proposed to handle negation, 

are discussed in following cases.  

CASE 1: If a sentence has only one single 

negate word (“   ”, “     ”)  i.e. negation is 
present in a simple sentence. For example. 

 (1) य                   । (2)      प       
 ई                        प           
  य   य     | 
In the above sentence, due to negation, all the 

words before the negation word “   ” would 
be negated and the reverse polarity of the 

negated words would be considered further. 

The above examples will be negated as 

(1) !य  !     !            । 
(2) !     !प  !     ! ई !      !   !    
!   !      ! प             य   य     
But this negation rule may be invalid for 

sarcastic and special form of sentences. 

e.g.   ई                 य              । 
CASE 2: If a sentence has a negate word and 

conjunction, and index of conjunction is more 

than the index of negated word, forward 

negation is applied. For example: 

(1) प                           प ई    आ  
आ        प       य                | 
(2)                                         
                            ।   
In the above sentences, negate word and the 

conjunction words are present and the index 

of conjunction is greater than the index of 

negate word; therefore, forward negation is 

applied. In above example, all the words after 

the conjunction will be negated .The above 

examples will be negated as 

a) प                           प ई    !आ  
!आ    !    !प     !  य  !     !    !     | 
b)                                         
       !   !      !   !     !    ।   
CASE 3:  If a sentence has “ ” multiple 
times in sub-sentences separated by commas. 

For example: (1)                   ,   प     
औ             | 
“ ” usually occurs multiple times in this 
example sentence, with sub sentences 

separated by commas. Here for each “ ” the 
negation is applied in forward direction until a 

delimiter is encountered. The above example 

will be negated as follows.    !      !    !   
!  ,   !प     औ    !   !      | 
3.3 Discourse Relations 

An essential phenomenon in natural language 

processing is the use of discourse relations to 

establish a coherent relation, linking phrases 

and clauses in a text. The presence of 

linguistic constructs like connectives, modals, 

and conditional can alter sentiment at the 

sentence level as well as the clausal or phrasal 

level (Wolf et al., 2005). A coherent relation 

reflects how different discourse segments 

interact. Discourse segments are non-

overlapping spans of text. In this paper, 

Violated Expectations like       ,       ,  
     etc. are handled. 
Violating expectation conjunctions oppose or 

refute the neighboring discourse segment. 

These conjunctions are categorized into the 

following two sub-categories: Conj_After and 

Conj_Infer. 

3.3.1 Conj_After: 

It is the set of conjunctions that give more 

importance to the discourse segment that 

follows them. It means that actual segment is 

mostly reflected by the statement following 

the conjunction. So, in all the below 

examples, the discourse segments after the 

Conj_After (in bold) are given preferences 

and the previous sentences are dropped. 

47



For example:       ,     ,        ,        
     :                              ,       
य                                | 
मगर:       ई                      
                       प    | 
      :                                 
                               | 
  र   :                                 
               आ         प   ,       
          य                        
       य       ओ               | 
3.3.2 Conclusive or Inferential 

Conjunctions  

These are the set of conjunctions, Conj_infer, 

that tend to draw a conclusion or inference. 

Hence, the discourse segment following them 

should be given more weight. 

For example:        ,             
     म   र :             „          ‟     
   प                | 
3.4 Improvement of HSWN 

Existing version of HindiSentiWordNet 

consists of limited numbers of adjectives and 

adverbs.  All those words are available in 

inflected forms. Even all the inflected forms 

of the word are not present. HSWN is created 

using the Hindi WordNet and English 

SentiWordNet (SWN). During the creation of 

this resource for Hindi language, it is assumed 

that all synonyms have the same polarity 

while all antonyms have the reverse polarity 

of a word. HSWN is improved in the same 

way as it was developed initially. The main 

focus during the improvement was on missing 

and inflected adjectives and adverbs. 

Therefore, all the inflected words of the 

existing root words are also included in the 

improved HSWN. Proposed approach is 

describes in Algorithm 1. In Step 4, Google 

translator is used in our experiment. In Step 6, 

in case of sense disambiguation, the suitable 

sense of the word refers to the sense which is 

suitable according to the domain. 

Algorithm 1.  Improvement of HSWN 

Step 1: Find out the adjectives and adverbs in 

the corpus that are not in HSWN. 

Step 2: Extract adjectives and adverb from 

document corpus.  

Step3: Now for each of the extracted word in 

Step 2. 

Step 4: Translate the given word into its 

English meaning using a bilingual resource. 

Step 5: Find the polarity of the translated word 

using English SentiWordNet. If single entry is 

found then go to step7. 

Step 6: Select the entry with the suitable and 

most common sense of the word. 

Step 7: Translate the word back to Hindi 

Step 8: Add it to the HSWN  

Step 9: return 

In our case the domain is the movie review 

dataset. If multiple senses are possible in the 

same domain, then select the most common 

sense among these words, which implies that 

multiple resources may need to be created for 

different domains. 

3.5 Proposed Algorithm for Sentiment 

Analysis of Hindi Reviews 
The first step of the proposed algorithm is the 

pre-processing.  

Algorithm 2. Proposed Algorithm 

Step 1:  For each document in the corpus 

Step 2:  Apply Pre-Processing 

(a) Remove the Stop Words. 

(b) Apply Rules (Negation and Discourse). 

 End of For Loop of Step 1; 
Step 3:  For each token in the document. 

Step 4: Retrieve polarity (POL) from modified 

HSWN. 

Step 5: If (word is present in HSWN) 

            Then go to Step 6 

            Else   Add it to Missing Word List 

Step 6: If (word is negated) 

            Then word.POL=-POL; 

            Else   Word.POL=POL; 

          End of For Loop of Step 3; 
Step 7: Compute the aggregate polarity of the 

document (doc.POL) by adding the polarities 

values of all the token. 

Step 8: If (doc.POL  >  zero) 

          Then label the document as positive   

          Else If (doc.POL<zero) 

           Then label the document as negative 

          Else   Classify the document as neutral.  
Step 9: Return the set of Labelled Documents. 

48



Review documents are pre-processed by 

applying stemming, negation and discourse 

relations as discussed in previous sections. 

After, the pre-processing, polarity value is 

retrieved from the improved 

HindiSentiWordNet (HSWN). Finally, by 

aggregating the polarity values of all the words 

semantic orientation of the review document is 

determined. Proposed approach is describes in 

Algorithm 2. 

4. Results and Discussions 
Proposed algorithm is tested on 662 movie 

review dataset created as described in previous 

sections. For various experimental settings, 

results are reported in Table 1. Initially, 

semantic orientation of a document is 

determined by aggregating the total polarity 

value of all the words in the document using 

existing HSWN. Experimental results show an 

accuracy of 50.45%, which is very less. The 

main reason for this observation was that most 

of the words in our dataset were not present in 

the HSWN and some words are inflected forms 

of the available words in HSWN. Further, 

proposed algorithm without any negation and 

discourse handling is applied using improved 

HSWN, and experimental results show that 

accuracy increased up to 69.79%. The 

proposed algorithm performs well for positive 

reviews, for the negatives performance needs 

to be improved.  

 

Table 1. Accuracy of various experiments 

  ACCURACY (In %) 

S. 

No. 

Experimental 

Setup 

Positi

ve    

Negat

ive 

Over

all 

1 Only Existing 

HSWN 

50  51.06  50.45  

2 With Improved 

HSWN  

85.26  48.93 69.78 

3 With Improved 

HSWN +  

Negation 

82.89  72.34  78.39  

4 Improved HSWN 

+Negation+  

Discourse 

82.89 76.59  80.21 

 

In our further versions of the experiments, we 

analysed the impact of our negation rules and 

applied proposed algorithm with negation on 

the movie review dataset. Experimental results 

show an improvement in performance for 

overall sentiment analysis especially for the 

negative reviews. Overall accuracy with 

negation handling increased to 78.39 %. 

Further, to we applied discourse relation with 

negation rules on reviews, and experimental 

results show that significant improvement for 

sentiment classification. Results obtained for 

positive, negative and total reviews are 

82.89%, 76.59% and 80.21% respectively. 

5. Conclusion and Future Work 
Opinion Mining for Hindi is an important task. 

In the paper, a method is proposed to increase 

the coverage of HindiSentiWordNet (HSWN) 

for better classification results, as HSWN faces 

the problem of very less coverage. In addition 

to this, impact of negation and discourse are 

investigated on Hindi Review sentiment 

analysis. This approach just uses only one 

resource HSWN for the word polarity. The 

movie review corpus is developed in Hindi 

using the Hindi websites as our source. It has 

been standardized using Cohen‟s Kappa and 

Fleiss Kappa for agreement. Improvement of 

HSWN is proposed for improved results. The 

inflected forms of the existing root words in 

this HSWN are also included. Experimental 

results show that proposed algorithm with 

negation and discourse relations achieves 

82.89% for positive reviews and 76.59 % for 

negative reviews with an overall accuracy of 

80.21%. In future, the dataset can further be 

extended for the better and generalized results.  

This work can be extended to incorporate 

Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) and 

morphological variants which could result in 

better accuracy for words which have dual 

nature. HSWN may be developed further.  

 
References 
Aditya Joshi, Balamurali A R, Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 

“A Fall-Back Strategy For Sentiment Analysis In Hindi: 

A Case Study”, In International Conference On Natural 

Language Processing (ICON), 2010. 

Akshat Bakliwal, Piyush Arora, Vasudeva Varma. 

“Hindi Subjective Lexicon : A Lexical Resource For 

Hindi Polarity Classification”.In Proceedings of the 

Eight International Conference on Language Resources 

and Evaluation (LREC) 2012. 

Akshat Bakliwal, Piyush Arora, Ankit Patil, Vasudeva 

49



Varma, “Towards Enhanced Opinion Classification 

using NLP Techniques” In Proceedings of the Workshop 

on Sentiment Analysis where AI meets Psychology 

(SAAIP), IJCNLP 2011, pages 101–107, 2011 

Basant Agarwal, Namita Mittal, “Optimal Feature 

Selection Methods for Sentiment Analysis”, In 14th 

International Conference on Intelligent Text Processing 

and Computational Linguistics (CICLing 2013),Vol-

7817, pages-13-24, 2013  
Basant Agarwal, Namita Mittal, “Categorical Probability 

Proportion Difference (CPPD): A Feature Selection 

Method for Sentiment Classification”, In Proceedings of 

the 2nd Workshop on Sentiment Analysis where AI 

meets Psychology (SAAIP 2012), COLING 2012, pages 

17–26, 2012.  

Bharat R. Ambati, Samar Husain, Sambhav Jain, Dipti 

M. Sharma, Rajeev Sangal, “Two Methods to 

Incorporate Local Morph Syntactic Features in Hindi 

Dependency Parsing” In Proceedings of the NAACL 

HLT 1st Workshop on Statistical Parsing of 

Morphologically-Rich Languages, pages 22–30, 2010.  

Florian Wolf and Edward Gibson. “Representing 

Discourse Coherence: A Corpus-based Study”. 

Computational Linguistics, 31(2), pp. 249-287. 2005 

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, “Opinion mining and sentiment 

analysis”. Foundations and Trends in Information 

Retrieval, Vol. 2(1-2):pp. 1–135. (2008). 

Subhabrata Mukherjee, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, 

“Sentiment Analysis in Twitter with Lightweight 

Discourse Analysis”, In Proceedings of the 24th 

International Conference on Computational 

Linguistics (COLING 2012), 2012 

 

 

50


