










































Feature Space Selection and Combination for Native Language Identification


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 96–100,
Atlanta, Georgia, June 13 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Feature Space Selection and Combination for Native Language
Identification

Cyril Goutte
National Research Council

1200 Montreal Rd,
Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6

Cyril.Goutte@nrc.ca

Serge Léger
National Research Council

100, des Aboiteaux St.,
Moncton, NB E1A 7R1

Serge.Leger@nrc.ca

Marine Carpuat
National Research Council

1200 Montreal Rd,
Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6

Marine.Carpuat@nrc.ca

Abstract

We decribe the submissions made by the Na-
tional Research Council Canada to the Native
Language Identification (NLI) shared task.
Our submissions rely on a Support Vector Ma-
chine classifier, various feature spaces using
a variety of lexical, spelling, and syntactic
features, and on a simple model combination
strategy relying on a majority vote between
classifiers. Somewhat surprisingly, a clas-
sifier relying on purely lexical features per-
formed very well and proved difficult to out-
perform significantly using various combina-
tions of feature spaces. However, the com-
bination of multiple predictors allowed to ex-
ploit their different strengths and provided a
significant boost in performance.

1 Introduction

We describe the National Research Council
Canada’s submissions to the Native Language Iden-
tification 2013 shared task (Tetreault et al., 2013).
Our submissions rely on fairly straightforward
statistical modelling techniques, applied to various
feature spaces representing lexical and syntactic
information. Our most successful submission was
actually a combination of models trained on differ-
ent sets of feature spaces using a simple majority
vote.

Much of the work on Natural Language Process-
ing is motivated by the desire to have machines
that can help or replace humans on language-related
tasks. Many tasks such as topic or genre classifi-
cation, entity extraction, disambiguation, are fairly

straightforward for humans to complete. Machines
typically trade-off some performance for ease of ap-
plication and reduced cost. Equally fascinating are
tasks that seem non-trivial to humans, but on which
machines, through appropriate statistical analysis,
discover regularities and dependencies that are far
from obvious to humans. Examples may include cat-
egorizing text by author gender (Koppel et al., 2003)
or detecting whether a text is an original or a trans-
lation (Baroni and Bernardini, 2006). This is one
motivation for addressing the problem of identify-
ing the native language of an author in this shared
task.

In the following section, we describe various as-
pects of the models and features we used on this
task. In section 3, we describe our experimental set-
tings and summarize the results we obtained. We
discuss and conclude in section 4.

2 Modelling

Our submissions rely on straightforward statistical
classifiers trained on various combinations of fea-
tures and feature spaces. We first describe the clas-
sifier we used, then give the list of features that we
have been combining. Our best performing submis-
sion used a combination of the three systems we sub-
mitted in a majority vote, which we also describe at
the end of this section.

2.1 Classification Model

We decided to use a straightforward and state-of-
the-art statistical classifier, in order to focus our at-
tention on the combination of features and models
rather than on the design of the classifier.

96



We used freely available implementations of Sup-
port Vector Machines (SVM) provided in SVM-light
(Joachims, 1999) and SVM-perf (Joachims, 2006).
SVM performance may be influenced by at least two
important factors: the choice of the kernel and the
trade-off parameter “C”. In our experiments, we did
not observe any gain from using either polynomial
or RBF kernels. All results below are therefore ob-
tained with linear models. Similarly, we investigated
the optimization of parameter “C” on a held-out val-
idation set, but found out that the resulting perfor-
mance was not consistently significantly better than
that provided by the default value. As a consequence
our results were obtained using the SVM-light de-
fault.

One important issue in this shared task was to
handle multiple classes (the 11 languages). There
are essentially two easy approaches to handle sin-
gle label, multiclass classification with binary SVM:
one-versus-all and one-versus-one. We adopted the
one-versus-all setting, combined with a calibration
step. We first trained 11 classifiers using the docu-
ments for each language in turn as “positive” exam-
ples, and the documents for the remaining 10 lan-
guages as negative examples. The output score for
each class-specific SVM model was then mapped
into a probability using isotonic regression with the
pair-adjacent violators (PAV) algorithm (Zadrozny
and Elkan, 2002). A test document is then assigned
to the class with the highest probability.

2.2 Feature Space Extraction
We extracted the following features from the docu-
ments provided for the shared task.

Character ngrams: We index trigrams of charac-
ters within each word (Koppel et al., 2005). The
beginning and end of a word are treated as special
character. For example, the word “at” will produce
two trigrams: “ at” and “at “. These features allow us
to capture for example typical spelling variants. In
a language with weak morphology such as English,
they may also be able to capture patterns of usage
of, e.g. suffixes, which provides a low-cost proxy
for syntactic information.

Word ngrams: We index unigrams and bigrams
of words within each sentence. For bigrams, the be-
ginning and end of a sentence are treated as special

tokens. Note that we do not apply any stoplist fil-
tering. As a consequence, function words, an often-
used feature (Koppel et al., 2005; Brooke and Hirst,
2012), are naturally included in the unigram feature
space.

Spelling features: Misspelled words are identified
using GNU Aspell V0.60.41 and indexed with their
counts. Some parser artifacts such as “n’t” are re-
moved from the final mispelled word index. Al-
though misspellings may seem to provide clues as
to the author’s native language, we did not find these
features to be useful in any of our experiments. Note
however, that misspelled words will also appear in
the unigram feature space.

Part-of-speech ngrams: The texts were tagged
with the Stanford tagger v. 3.02 using the largest
and best (bidirectional) model. Note that the lan-
guage in a couple of documents was so poor that the
tagger was unable to complete, and we reverted to a
slightly weaker (left three words) model for those.
After tagging, we indexed all ngrams of part-of-
speech tags, with n = 2, 3, 4, 5. We experimented
with the choice of n and found out that n > 2 did
not bring any significant difference in performance.

Syntactic dependencies: We ran the Stanford
Parser v2.0.0 on all essays, and use the typed
dependency output to generate features. Our
goal is to capture phenomena such as preposi-
tion selection which might be influenced by the
native language of the writer. In order to reduce
sparsity, each observed dependency is used to
generate three features: one feature for the full
lexicalized dependency relation; one feature for
the head (which generalizes over all observed
modifiers); one feature for the modifier (which
generalizes over all possible heads). For instance,
in the sentence ”they participate to one ’s appear-
ance”, the parser extracts the following depen-
dency: ”prepto(participate,appearance)”. It yields
three features ”prepto(participate,appearance)”,
”prepto(participate,X)” and
”prepto(X,appearance)”. We experimented with all
three feature types, but the systems used for the

1http://aspell.net
2http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/

tagger.shtml

97



official evaluation results only used the last two
(head and modifier features.) Note that while these
features can capture long distance dependencies in
theory, they significantly overlap with word ngram
features in practice.

For each feature space, we used a choice of two
weighting schemes inspired by SMART (Manning
et al., 2008):

ltc: log of the feature count, combined with the log
inverse document frequency (idf), with a cosine
normalization;

nnc: straight feature count, no idf, with cosine nor-
malization.

Normalization is important with SVM classifiers as
they are not scale invariant and tend to be sensitive
to large variations in the scale of features.

2.3 Voting Combination
Investigating the differences in predictions made
by different models, it became apparent that there
were significant differences between systems that
displayed similar performance. For example, our
first two submissions, which perform within 0.2% of
each other on the test data, disagree on almost 20%
of the examples.

This suggests that there is potentially a lot of in-
formation to gain by combining systems trained on
different feature spaces. An attempt to directly com-
bine the predictions of different systems into a new
predictive score proved unsuccessful and failed to
provide a significant gain over the systems used in
the combination.

A more successful combination was obtained us-
ing a simple majority vote. Our method relies on
simply looking at the classes predicted by an en-
semble of classifier for a given document. The pre-
diction for the ensemble will be the most predicted
class, breaking possible ties according to the overall
scores of the component models: for example, for an
ensemble of only 2 models, the decision in the case
of a tie will be that of the best model.

3 Experiments

We describe the experimental setting that we used
to prepare our submissions, and the final perfor-

mance we obtained on the shared task (Tetreault et
al., 2013).

3.1 Experimental Setting

In order to test the performance of various choices
of feature spaces and their combination, we set up a
cross-validation experimental setting. We originally
sampled 9 equal sized disjoint folds of 1100 docu-
ments each from the training data. We used strati-
fied sampling across the languages and the prompts.
This made sure that the folds respected the uniform
distribution across languages, as well as the distri-
bution across prompts, which was slightly uneven
for some languages. These 9 folds were later aug-
mented with a 10th fold containing the development
data released during the evaluation.

All systems were evaluated by computing the ac-
curacy (or equivalently the micro-averaged F-score)
on the cross-validated predictions.

3.2 Experimental Results

We submitted four systems to the shared task evalu-
ation:

1. BOW2ltc+CHAR3ltc: Uses counts of word bi-
grams and character trigrams, both weighted
independently with the ltc weighting scheme
(tf-idf with cosine normalization);

2. BOW2ltc+DEPltc: Uses counts of word
bigrams and syntactic dependencies, both
weighted independently with the ltc weighting
scheme;

3. BOW2ltc+CHAR3ltc+POS2nnc: Same as sys-
tem #1, adding counts of bigrams of part-of-
speech tags, independently cosine-normalized;

4. 3-system vote: Combination of the three sub-
missions using majority vote.

The purpose of submission #1 was to check the
performance that we could get using only surface
form information (words and spelling). As shown
on Table 1, it reached an average test accuracy of
79.5%, which places it in the middle of the pack over
all submissions. For us, it establishes a baseline of
what is achievable without any additional syntactic
information provided by either taggers or parsers.

98



Model # Acc(%)
BOW2ltc+CHAR3ltc 1 79.27
BOW2ltc+DEPltc 2 79.55
BOW2ltc+CHAR3ltc+POS2nnc 3 78.82
3-system vote 4 81.82
10-system vote - 84.00

Table 1: The four systems submitted by NRC, plus a
more extensive voting combination. System 1 uses only
surface information. Systems 2 and 3 use two types of
syntactic information and system #4 uses a majority vote
among the three previous submissions. The last (unsub-
mitted) uses a majority vote among ten systems.

Our submissions #2 and #3 were meant to check
the effect of adding syntactic features to basic lexi-
cal information. We evaluated various combinations
of feature spaces using cross-validation performance
and found out that these two combinations seemed to
bring a small boost in performance. Unfortunately,
as shown on Table 1, this did not reflect on the actual
test results. The test performance of submission #2
was a mere 0.2% higher than our baseline, when we
expected +0.6% from the cross-validation estimate.
The test performance for submission #3 was 0.5%
below that of the baseline, whereas we expected a
small increase.

Submission #4 was our majority voting submis-
sion. Due to lack of time, we could not generate
test predictions for all the systems that we wanted to
include in the combination. As a consequence, we
performed a majority voting over just the 3 previ-
ous submissions. Despite this, the majority voting
proved remarkaby effective, yielding a 2.5% perfor-
mance boost over our baseline, and a 2.3% increase
over our best single system.

In order to further test the potential of the major-
ity vote, we later applied it to the 10 best systems in
a pool generated from various combinations of fea-
ture spaces (10-system vote in Table 1). That (unsub-
mitted) combination outperformed our official sub-
missions by another 2.2% accuracy, and in fact out-
performed the best system in the official evaluation
results by a small (and very likely not significant)
margin.

In comparison with submissions from other
groups, our top submission was 1.8% below the top
performing system (Table 2). According to the re-

Model Accuracy(%) p-value
Jarvis 83.6 0.082
Oslo NLI 83.4 0.1
Unibuc 82.7 0.361
MITRE-Carnie 82.6 0.448
Tuebingen 82.2 0.715
NRC 81.8
CMU-Haifa 81.5 0.807
Cologne-Nijmegen 81.4 0.665
NAIST 81.1 0.472
UTD 80.9 0.401
UAlberta 80.3 0.194
Toronto 80.2 0.167
MQ 80.1 0.097

Table 2: Resulting accuracy scores and significance vs.
NRC top submission (3-system vote).

sults of significance tests released by the organizers,
the difference is slightly below the traditional thresh-
old of statistical significance (0.05).

4 Discussion and Conclusion

Our results suggest that on the shared task, a combi-
nation of features relying only on word and character
ngrams provided a strong baseline. Our best system
ended up being a combination of models trained on
various sets of lexical and syntactic features, using a
simple majority vote. Our submission #4 combined
only our three other submissions, but we later exper-
imented with a larger pool of models. Table 3 shows
that the best performance is obtained using the top
10 models, and many of the combinations are com-
petitive with the best performance achieved during
the evaluation. Our cross-validation estimate was
also maximized for 10 models, with as estimated ac-
curacy of 83.23%. It is interesting that adding some
of the weaker models does not seem to hurt the vot-
ing combination very much.

One obvious limitation of this study is that it was
applied to a well defined and circumscribed setting.
There is definitely no guarantee on the performance
that may be obtained on a different corpus of docu-
ments.

Another limitation is that although the resulting
performance of our models seems encouraging, it
is not obvious that we have learned particularly

99



Model Vote
Rank score score Feature set

1 79.55 79.55 BOW2+DEP
2 79.36 79.55 BOW1+DEP
3 79.27 82.18 BOW2+CHAR3
4 79.00 82.27 BOW1+DEPL
5 78.91 82.91 BOW2+CHAR3+POS3
6 78.82 83.18 BOW2+CHAR3+POS2
7 78.73 83.45 BOW2+DEPL
8 78.36 83.55 BOW2
9 77.09 83.82 BOW1+POS3
10 76.82 84.00 BOW2+POS2
11 76.55 83.64 BOW2+POS3
12 76.55 83.82 BOW1+POS2
13 75.27 83.55 BOW1
14 74.36 83.73 BOW1+CHAR3
15 74.27 83.73 DEP
16 66.91 83.91 DEPL
17 64.18 83.82 CHAR3
18 51.64 83.82 POS3
19 49.64 83.36 POS2

Table 3: Majority vote among the top-N mod-
els. BOWn=word ngrams; CHAR3=char trigrams;
POSn=POS ngrams; DEP/DEPL=syntactic dependecies.

useful clues about what differentiates the English
written by authors with different native languages.
This is of course a side effect of a format where
systems compete on a specific performance met-
ric, which encourages using large, well-regularized
models which optimize the relevant metric, at the ex-
pense of sparser models focusing on a few markers
that may be more easily understandable.

During the workshop, we plan to show more com-
plete results using the majority vote strategy, involv-
ing a wider array of base models.

References
M. Baroni and S. Bernardini. 2006. A new approach to

the study of translationese: Machine-learning the dif-
ference between original and translated text. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 21(3):259–274.

Julian Brooke and Graeme Hirst. 2012. Robust, lexical-
ized native language identification. In Proceedings of
COLING 2012.

T. Joachims. 1999. Making large-scale SVM learning
practical. In Advances in Kernel Methods - Support
Vector Learning.

T. Joachims. 2006. Training linear SVMs in linear time.
In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD).

M. Koppel, S. Argamon, and A. R. Shimoni. 2003. Auto-
matically categorizing written texts by author gender.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17:401–412.

M. Koppel, J. Schler, and K. Zigdon. 2005. Determin-
ing an authors native language by mining a text for er-
rors. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM SIGKDD Inter-
national Conference on Knowledge Discovery in Data
Mining (KDD 05), pages 624–628, Chicago, Ilinois,
USA.

Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hin-
rich Schtze. 2008. Document and query weighting
schemes. In Introduction to Information Retrieval.
Cambridge University Press.

Joel Tetreault, Daniel Blanchard, and Aoife Cahill. 2013.
A report on the first native language identification
shared task. In Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop
on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational
Applications, Atlanta, GA, USA, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

B. Zadrozny and C. Elkan. 2002. Transforming classifier
scores into accurate multiclass probability estimates.
In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD’02).

100


