










































Natural Language Generation and Summarization at RALI


Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 92–93,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Natural Language Generation and Summarization at RALI

Guy Lapalme
RALI - DIRO

Université de Montréal
C.P. 6128, Succ. Centre-Ville

Montréal, Québec, Canada, H3C 3J7
lapalme@iro.umontreal.ca

Processing language in written or spoken form,
in a mother tongue or in another language is a very
complex and important problem. Hence the idea
of building automatic or semi-automatic tools to
support people during their attempt to understand
what they read or to translate a given message into
an adequate linguistic form. Since the eighties,
I have worked with my students on many NLP
projects, this talk focusses on some of them, past
and present, dealing with generation and summa-
rization.

We have always thrived to produce working sys-
tems that deal with real texts or use data to pro-
duce texts that can be easily understood by hu-
mans. This fundamental motivation imposes some
challenging constraints but also produces interest-
ing payoffs. Given the fact that our lab is in French
speaking university in a mostly English speaking
country, we have often worked in either of these
languages and often in both.

1 Generation

PRÉTEXTE (Gagnon and Lapalme, 1996) was a
system for generating French texts conveying tem-
poral information. Temporal information and lo-
calization expressed by temporal adverbial and
verbal phrases was represented with DRT. Sys-
temic Grammar Theory was used to translate the
DRT representation into a syntactic form to pro-
duce the final text.

SPIN (Kosseim and Lapalme, 2000) deals with
a fundamental problem in natural language gener-
ation: how to organize the content of a text in a
coherent and natural way. From a corpus analy-
sis of French instructional texts, we determined 9
senses typically communicated in these texts and
7 rhetorical relations used to present them. We
then developed presentation heuristics to deter-
mine how the senses should be organized rhetor-
ically to create a coherent and natural text.

POSTGRAPHE (Fasciano and Lapalme, 2000)
generated a report integrating graphics and text
from a set of writer’s intentions. The system was
given data in tabular form and a declaration of the
types of values in the columns of the table. Also
indicated were intentions to be conveyed in the
graphics (e.g., compare two variables or show the
evolution of a set of variables) and the system gen-
erated a report in LATEX. PostGraphe also gener-
ated the accompanying text to help the reader fo-
cus on the important points of the graphics.

SIMPLENLG-EN-FR (Vaudry and Lapalme,
2013) is a bilingual adaptation of the English real-
izer SimpleNLG. Its French grammatical coverage
is equivalent to the English one and covers the es-
sential notions that are taught to learners of French
as a second language as defined by Le français
fondamental (1er Degré). The French lexicon con-
tains a commonly used French vocabulary, includ-
ing function words. JSREAL is a work in progress
describing a French text realizer in Javascript that
can be easily embedded in a web browser. Its main
originality is the fact that it produces DOM ele-
ments and not text strings so that they can easily
produce parts of web pages from JSON inputs sent
by the server for example.

In a project of interactive generation, we de-
velop a cognitively inspired methodology to as-
sist people during the production process, as
the route between input and output can be full
of hurdles and quite long. For each step, we
want to develop web based applications that ad-
dress a specific problem and help induce some
pattern reaction in the production of language.
For the moment we have produced two proto-
types: DRILLTUTOR (Zock and Lapalme, 2010)
which is goal-oriented multilingual phrasebook
and WEBREG (Zock et al., 2012) to practice the
generation of appropriate referring expressions.

92



2 Summarization

Summarization is in principle strongly related to
NLG because it implies reading and understand-
ing one or many documents in order to produce a
short text describing the main ideas of the original.
Summarization approaches are often classified as
either abstractive or extractive, the former being
the selection of the most important sentences from
the original documents.

In much the same way as NLG has suffered
from the fact that it is often possible to trick the
readers with canned text or formatted templates,
abstractive summarization had to compete with ac-
ceptable results produced by scorers of sentences,
the ones with the best scores being then concate-
nated to produce a summary. In our group, we
tried to stay away from such approaches that in our
view did not give any new insights even though it
did not always allow us to win the summarization
competitions at DUC or TAC.

SUMUM (Saggion and Lapalme, 2002) ex-
plored the idea of dynamic summarization by tak-
ing a raw technical text as input and produced an
indicative-informative summary. The indicative
part of the summary identifies the topics of the
document, and the informative part elaborates on
some of these topics according to the reader’s in-
terest. SumUM motivates the topics, describes en-
tities, and defines concepts. This is accomplished
through a process of shallow syntactic and seman-
tic analysis, concept identification, and text regen-
eration.

LETSUM (Farzindar and Lapalme, 2004) de-
veloped an approach for the summarization of le-
gal documents by helping a legal expert determine
the key ideas of a judgment. It is based on the
exploration of the document’s architecture and its
thematic structures in order to build a table style
summary for improving coherency and readability
of the text. Although LetSUM extracted full sen-
tences from the original document, it reorganized,
merged and displayed different parts in order to
better give an idea of the document and focus the
reader, a legal expert, to the important parts.

ABSUM (Genest and Lapalme, 2013) intro-
duces a flexible and scalable methodology for ab-
stractive summarization that analyzes the source
documents using a knowledge base to identify pat-
terns in the the source documents and generate
summary text from them. This knowledge-based
approach allows for implicit understanding and

transformation of the source documents’ content
because it is carefully crafted for the summariza-
tion task and domain of interest.

3 Conclusion

These examples illustrate some links that we have
established between generation and summariza-
tion over the last few years and that are promising
for the future of these two research areas.

References
Atefeh Farzindar and Guy Lapalme. 2004. Legal texts

summarization by exploration of the thematic struc-
tures and argumentative roles. In Stan Szpakowicz
Marie-Francine Moens, editor, Text Summarization
Branches Out: Proceedings of the ACL-04 Work-
shop, pages 27–34, Barcelona, Spain, July. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

M. Fasciano and G. Lapalme. 2000. Intentions in
the coordinated generation of graphics and text from
tabular data. Knowledge and Information Systems,
2(3):310–339, Aug.

M. Gagnon and G. Lapalme. 1996. From conceptual
time to linguistic time. Computational Linguistics,
22(1):91–127, March.

Pierre-Etienne Genest and Guy Lapalme. 2013. Ab-
sum: a knowledge-based abstractive summarizer.
Computational Linguistics, page 30 pages, July. In
preparation.

L. Kosseim and G. Lapalme. 2000. Choosing rhetor-
ical structures to plan instructional texts. Computa-
tional Intelligence, 16(3):408–445, Aug.

Horacio Saggion and Guy Lapalme. 2002. Generating
informative and indicative summaries with SumUM.
Computational Linguistics, 28(4):497–526, Dec.

Pierre-Luc Vaudry and Guy Lapalme. 2013. Adapt-
ing SimpleNLG for bilingual English-French real-
isation. In 14th European Conference on Natural
Language Generation, Sofia, Bulgaria, Aug. This
volume.

Michael Zock and Guy Lapalme. 2010. A generic tool
for creating and using multilingual phrasebooks. In
Bernadette Sharp and Michael Zock eds., editors,
Proceedings of NLPCS 2010 (Natural Language
Processing and Cognitive Science), pages 79–89,
Funchal, Madeira - Portugal, Jun.

Michael Zock, Guy Lapalme, and Mehdi Yousfi-
Monod. 2012. Learn to speak like normal people
do: the case of object descriptions. In 9th Interna-
tional Workshop on Natural Language Processing
and Cognitive Science (NLPCS 2012), pages 120–
129, Wraclow, jun.

93


