










































Multilingual access to cultural heritage content on the Semantic Web


Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 107–115,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Multilingual access to cultural heritage content
on the Semantic Web

Dana Dannélls and Aarne Ranta and Ramona Enache
University of Gothenburg and Chalmers University of Technology

SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden
{dana.dannells, aarne.ranta, ramona.enache}@chalmers.se

Mariana Damova and Maria Mateva
Ontotext

Sofia 1784, Bulgaria
{mariana.damova,maria.mateva}@ontotext.com

Abstract

As the amount of cultural data avail-
able on the Semantic Web is expand-
ing, the demand of accessing this
data in multiple languages is increas-
ing. Previous work on multilingual
access to cultural heritage informa-
tion has shown that at least two dif-
ferent problems must be dealt with
when mapping from ontologies to nat-
ural language: (1) mapping multilin-
gual metadata to interoperable knowl-
edge sources; (2) assigning multilin-
gual knowledge to cultural data. This
paper presents our effort to deal with
these problems. We describe our expe-
riences with processing museum data
extracted from two distinct sources,
harmonizing this data and making its
content accessible in natural language.
We extend prior work in two ways.
First, we present a grammar-based sys-
tem that is designed to generate co-
herent texts from Semantic Web on-
tologies in 15 languages. Second, we
describe how this multilingual system
is exploited to form queries using the
standard query language SPARQL. The
generation and retrieval system builds
on W3C standards and is available for
further research.

1 Introduction

As the amount of cultural data available on
the Semantic Web is expanding (Dekkers et
al., 2009; Brugman et al., 2008), the demand
of accessing this data in multiple languages
is increasing (Stiller and Olensky, 2012).

There have been several applications that
applied Natural Language Generation (NLG)

technologies to allow multilingual access to
Semantic Web ontologies (Androutsopoulos
et al., 2001; O’Donnell et al., 2001; Androut-
sopoulos and Karkaletsis, 2005; Androut-
sopoulos and Karkaletsis, 2007; Davies, 2009;
Bouayad-Agha et al., 2012). The above au-
thors have shown it is necessary to have
an extensive lexical and syntactic knowl-
edge when generating multilingual natu-
ral language from Semantic Web ontologies.
However, because previous applications are
mainly concerned with two or three lan-
guages, it is still not clear how to minimize
the efforts in assigning lexical and syntactic
knowledge for the purpose of enhancing au-
tomatic generation of adequate descriptions
in multiple languages.

This paper presents our work on mak-
ing Cultural Heritage (CH) content avail-
able on the Semantic Web and accessible in
15 languages using the Grammatical Frame-
work, GF (Ranta, 2011). The objective of
our work is both to form queries and to
retrieve semantic content in multiple lan-
guages. We describe our experiences with
processing museum data extracted from two
different sources, harmonizing this data and
making its content accessible in natural lan-
guage (NL). The generation and retrieval sys-
tem builds on the World Wide Web Consor-
tium (W3C) standards and is available for
further research.1

The remainder of this paper is structured
as followed. We present the related work in
Section 2. We describe the underlying tech-

1The generation and retrieval system is available
online: http://museum.ontotext.com/

107



nology in Section 3. We provide a detailed
description of the data and present the ap-
proach taken to make this data accessible in
the Linked Open Data (LOD) in Section 4. We
outline the multilingual approach and dis-
cuss the challenges we faced in Section 5.
We discuss the results in Section 6. We end
with some conclusions and pointers to future
work in Section 7.

2 Related work

Lately there has been a lot of interest in en-
abling multilingual access to cultural her-
itage content that is available on the Se-
mantic Web. Androutsopoulos et al. (2001)
and O’Donnell et al. (2001) have shown that
accessing ontology content in multiple lan-
guages requires extensive linguistic data as-
sociated with the ontology classes and prop-
erties. However, they did not attempt to gen-
erate descriptions in real time from a large set
of ontologies.

Similar to Bouayad-Agha et al. (2012), our
system relies on a multi-layered ontology ap-
proach for generating multilingual descrip-
tions. In contrast to Dekkers et al. (2009) and
Brugman et al. (2008) whose systems make
use of Google translation services, which are
data driven, our system is grammar driven.

Moreover, we present a multilingual
grammar-based approach to SPARQL
(SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query Lan-
guage) (Garlik and Andy, 2013). The method
differs from the verbalization methods pre-
sented by Ngonga Ngomo et al. (2013) and
Ell et al. (2012) in that it realizes the ontology
content rather than the ontology axioms.
Thus providing a more natural realization of
the query language.

3 The technological infrastructure

Although the architecture of the Semantic
Web and Linked Open Data provides access
to distributed data sets,2 many of the re-
sources available in these sets are not accessi-
ble because of cross-language meta-data. To
overcome this limitation, the knowledge rep-
resentation infrastructure adopted in our ap-
proach is designed as a Reason-able View of

2http://linkeddata.org

the Web of Data. The Reason-able View is a
compound dataset composed of several Re-
source Description Frameworks (RDFs). To
query such a compound dataset, the user has
to be intimately familiar with the schemata
of each single composing dataset. That is
why the Reason-able View approach is ex-
tended with the so called ontological refer-
ence layer, which introduces a unification on-
tology, mapped to the schemata of all single
datasets from a given Reason-able View and
thus provides a mechanism for efficient ac-
cess and navigation of the data.

3.1 Museum Reason-able View (MRV)

The Museum Reason-able View is an as-
sembly of cultural heritage dominated RDF
datasets (Dannélls et al., 2011). It is loaded
into OWLIM-SE (Bishop et al., 2011) with in-
ference preformed on the data with respect to
OWL Horst (ter Horst, 2005).

3.2 The ontological reference layer

The Museum Reason-able View gathers:
(a) datasets from LOD, including DBpe-
dia;3 (b) the unification ontology PROTON,4

an upper-level ontology, consisting of 542
classes and 183 properties; (c) two cultural
heritage specific ontologies: (i) CIDOC-CRM
(Crofts et al., 2008),5 consisting of 90 classes
and 148 properties; (ii) Museum Artifacts
Ontology (MAO),6 developed for mapping
between museum data and the K-samsök
schema.7 It has 10 classes and 20 properties;
(d) the Painting ontology,8 an application on-
tology developed to cover detailed informa-
tion about painting objects in the framework

3DBPedia, structured information from Wikipedia:
http://dbpedia.org.

4http://www.ontotext.com/
proton-ontology

5http://www.cidoc-crm.org/
6It is just a coincidence that this ontology has the

same name as the Finnish MAO (Hyvyonen et al.,
2008), which also describes museum artifacts for the
Finnish museums.

7K-samsök http://www.ksamsok.se/
in-english/), the Swedish Open Cultural Her-
itage (SOCH), provides a Web service for applications
to retrieve data from cultural heritage institutions or
associations with cultural heritage information.

8http://spraakdata.gu.se/svedd/
painting-ontology/painting.owl

108



of the Semantic Web. It contains 197 classes
and 107 properties of which 24 classes are
equivalent to classes from the CIDOC-CRM
and 17 properties are sub-properties of the
CIDOC-CRM properties.

3.3 Grammatical Framework (GF)

The Grammatical Framework (GF) (Ranta,
2004) is a grammar formalism targeted to-
wards parsing and generation. The key fea-
ture of GF is the distinction between an ab-
stract syntax, representing the domain, and
concrete syntaxes, representing lineariza-
tions in various target languages, natural or
formal.

GF comes with a resource grammar li-
brary (RGL) (Ranta, 2009) which aids the
development of new grammars for specific
domains by providing syntactic operations
for basic grammatical constructions (Ranta,
2011). More than 30 languages are available
in the RGL. Our application targets 15 of
those, including: Bulgarian, Catalan, Dan-
ish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, Hebrew,
Italian, German, Norwegian, Romanian, Rus-
sian, Spanish, and Swedish.

4 Cultural heritage data

The data we have been experimenting with
to enable multilingual descriptions of mu-
seum objects and answering to queries over
them is a subset of the Gothenburg City Mu-
seum (GCM) database,9 and a subset of the
DBpedia dataset. Because these two datasets
are very different in size and nature, the pre-
processing of each set differs substantially. In
the following we describe each of the sets and
the pre-processing steps in more details.

4.1 Gothenburg City Museum (GCM)

The set from the GCM contains 48 painting
records. Its content, both the metadata and
data that were originally in Swedish, were
translated to English. An example of a record
from GCM is shown in Table 1.

4.2 DBpedia

The set from DBpedia contains 662 painting
records, the data covers at least 5 languages,

9http://stadsmuseum.goteborg.se/wps/
portal/stadsm/english

Record field Value
Field nr. 4063
Prefix GIM
Object nr. 8364
Search word painting
Class nr 353532
Classification Gothenburg portrait
Amount 1
Producer E.Glud
Produced year 1984
Length cm 106
Width cm 78
Description oil painting

represents a studio indoors
History Up to 1986 belonged to Datema

AB, Flöjelbergsg 8, Gbg
Material oil paint
Current keeper 2
Location Polstjärnegatan 4
Package nr. 299
Registration 19930831
Signature BI
Search field Bilder:TAVLOR PICT:GIM

Table 1: A painting object representation from the
GCM database.

the metadata is in English. An example of a
record from DBpedia is shown in Table 2.

4.3 Transition of data to the MRV

Making the museum data available through
the knowledge infrastructure required trans-
lations of the record fields and values, and
mapping to a unified ontology. This process
also required pre-processing of the free text
fields such as Description and History (see Ta-
ble 1) to enrich the data content.

To make the DBpedia data accessible
through the knowledge infrastructure, it re-
quired some preprocessing, cleaning, and
mapping to the Painting ontology for data
consistency. This unification was needed to
use a consistent SPARQL queries from where
NL descriptions could be generated.

Firstly, we attempted to clean data noise
and results that would make a single paint-
ing reappear in the query results. Then, we
transformed year and size strings into only
numbers. For each painter, museum and
painting literal we had a single representa-
tion in the data. All names were normalized,
for example, Salvador Dalı́ was converted

109



<result>
<binding name=’painting’>
<uri>http://dbpedia.org/resource/
Virgin of the Rocks</uri> </binding>
<binding name=’museum’>
<literal xml:lang=’en’>Musée du Louvre
</literal> </binding>
<binding name=’author’>
<literal xml:lang=’en’>da Vinci, Leonardo
</literal> </binding>
<binding name=’height’>
<literal datatype=
’http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#int’>
190</literal> </binding>
<binding name=’width’>
<literal datatype=
’http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#int’>
120</literal>mateva </binding>
<binding name=’title’>
<literal xml:lang=’en’>London version
</literal> </binding>
<binding name=’type’>
<literal xml:lang=’fr’>Huile sur panneau
</literal> </binding>
<binding name=’year’>
<literal datatype=
’http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#int’>
1495</literal> </binding> </result>

Table 2: A painting object representation from
DBpedia

to Salvador Dal . For different Uniform Re-
source Identifiers (URIs) pointing to the same
painting, we used the OWL (W3C, 2012)
construct owl:sameAs. With this construct we
were able to keep the data linked in the other
graphs in the LOD cloud.

5 Multilingual linked data

Our application is targeted towards lay users
who wish to formulate queries and retrieve
information in any language. Such users do
not have any knowledge about ontologies or
semantic data processing. For us it was there-
fore necessary to enable interactions in a sim-
ple use.

The work towards making Semantic Web
data accessible to different users required
lexicalizations of ontology classes, proper-
ties and individuals (literal strings associated
with a certain class).

Following the GF mechanism, lexicaliza-

tions is accomplished through linearizations
of functions. Linearization of functions varies
depending on the language.

5.1 Lexicalizations of classes and
properties

Most of the ontology classes defined in our
grammar are linearized with noun phrases
in the concrete syntaxes. These were trans-
lated manually by a native speaker of the
language. Examples from four languages are
shown below. In the examples we find the
following RGL constructions: mkCN (Com-
mon noun) and mkN (Noun).

Class: Painting
Swe. mkCN (mkN "målning");
Fre. mkCN (mkN "tableau");
Fin. mkCN (mkN "maalaus");
Ger. mkCN mkN "Bild"

"Bilder" neuter;

Class: Portrait
Swe. mkCN (regGenN "porträtt"

neutrum);
Fre. mkCN (mkN "portrait");
Fin. mkCN (mkN "muoto"

(mkN "kuva"));
Ger. mkCN (mkN "Porträt"

"Porträts" neuter);

Two of the ontology classes that are not
linearized with a noun phrase are: Year and
Size. These are linearized with prepositional
phrases in which the preposition is language
dependent. Below are some examples which
show how the Year string, i.e. YInt function, is
realized in six languages. In the examples we
find the following RGL constructions: mkAdv
(Verb Phrase modifying adverb), Prep (Prepo-
sition) and symb (Symbolic).
Bul. YInt i = mkAdv prez_Prep

(symb (i.s ++ year_Str));
Fin. YInt i = mkAdv (prePrep
nominative "vuonna") (symb i);

Fre. YInt i = mkAdv en_Prep (symb i);
Ger. YInt i = mkAdv in_Prep (symb i);
Swe. YInt i = mkAdv noPrep

(symb ("år" ++ i.s));
Rus. YInt i = mkAdv in_Prep

(symb (i.s ++ godu_Str));

The ontology properties are defined with
operations in the concrete syntaxes. Because

110



Table 3: The amount of lexicalized literals in a
subset of the MRV

Class literals
Title 662
Painter 116
Museum 104
Place 22

an ontology property is linearized differently
depending on how it is realized in the target
language, these operations are of type: verbs
(e.g. paint V2), adverbs (e.g. painted A) and
prepositions (e.g. Prep). Examples from three
languages are shown below.

Swe. paint_V2 : V2 = mkV2 "måla";
painted_A : A = mkA "målad";
at_Prep = mkPrep "på" ;

Fin. paint_V2 = mkV2 "maalata";
painted_A = mkA "maalattu";

Ger. paint_V2 : V2 = mkV2
(mkV "malen");

painted_A : A = mkA "gemalt";
at_Prep = in_Prep ;

The above functions correspond to three
ontological properties, namely painted by,
painted and created in. This approach to ontol-
ogy lexicalization permits variations regard-
ing the lexical units the ontology properties
should be mapped to. It allows to make prin-
cipled choices about the different realizations
of an ontology property.

5.2 Lexicalizations of literals

The part of the MRV to which we provide
translations for consists of 906 individuals,
their distribution across four classes is pro-
vided in Table 3. The lexical units assigned to
paining titles, painters and museum literals
are by default the original strings as they ap-
pear in the data. The majority of strings are
given in English. However, because without
translations of the name entities the results
can become artificial and for some languages
ungrammatical, we run a script that trans-
lates museum literals from Wikipedia auto-
matically.

Automatic translation was done by:
(1) curling for Web pages for a museum
string; (2) extracting the retrieved trans-

Table 4: The number of automatically translated
museum names from Wikipedia

Language Translated names
Bulgarian 26
Catalan 63
Danish 33
Dutch 81
Finnish 40
French 94
Hebrew 46
Italian 94
German 99
Norwegian 50
Romanian 27
Russian 87
Spanish 89
Swedish 58

lated entry for each string; (3) reducing
the retrieved list by removing duplicated
and ambiguous entries. This process was
repeated for each language.

As a result of the translation process, a
list of lexical pairs was created for each lan-
guage. Museum literals were then linearized
automatically by consulting the created list
for each language. In the cases where no
translation was found, the original string, as
it appears in the dataset was used.

Unfortunately, the amount of the trans-
lated museum names was not equal for all
languages. The distribution of the translated
names is given in Table 4. Below follow some
examples of how museum names are repre-
sented in the grammar:
Swe. MGothenburg_City_Museum =
mkMuseum "Göteborgs stadsmuseum";
MMus_e_du_Louvre =

mkMuseum "Louvren";
Ita. MGothenburg_City_Museum =
mkMuseum
"museo municipale di Goteburgo";

MMus_e_du_Louvre =
mkMuseum "Museo del Louvre";

Fre. MGothenburg_City_Museum =
mkMuseum

"musée municipal de Göteborg";
MMus_e_du_Louvre =

mkMuseum "Musée du Louvre";
Cat. MGothenburg_City_Museum =
mkMuseum "Gothenburg_City_Museum";
MMus_e_du_Louvre =

111



mkMuseum "Museu del Louvre";
Ger. MGothenburg_City_Museum =
mkMuseum "Gothenburg_City_Museum";
MMus_e_du_Louvre =

mkMuseum "Der Louvre ";

Where the construct mkMuseum has been
defined to build a noun phrase from a given
string. A special case of mkMuseum appears
in four languages: Italian, Catalan, Spanish
and French, where a masculine gender is as-
signed to the museum string to get the cor-
rect inflection form of the noun.

5.3 Realization of sentences

To generate sentences from a set of classes
we had to make different judgements about
how to order the different classes. Below we
provide an example of a sentence lineariza-
tion from four languages. The sentence com-
prises four semantic classes: Painting, Mate-
rial, Painter and Year. In the examples we find
following RGL constructors: mkText (Text),
mkS (Sentence), mkCl (Clause), mkNP (Noun
Phrase), and mkVP (Verb Phrase).

Ita. s1 : Text = mkText (mkS
(mkCl painting (mkVP (mkVP (mkVP
(mkVP dipinto_A) material.s)
(SyntaxIta.mkAdv by8agent_Prep
(title painter.long))) year.s))) ;

Fre. s1 : Text = mkText
(mkS anteriorAnt
(mkCl painting (mkVP (mkVP (mkVP
(passiveVP paint_V2) material.s)
(SyntaxFre.mkAdv by8agent_Prep
(title painter.long))) year.s))) ;

Ger. s1 : Text = mkText
(mkS pastTense
(mkCl painting (mkVP (mkVP
(mkVP (passiveVP paint_V2) year.s)
(SyntaxGer.mkAdv von_Prep
(title painter.long))) material.s)));

Rus. s1 : Text = mkText
(mkS pastTense
(mkCl painting (mkVP (mkVP (mkVP
(passiveVP paint_V2)
(SyntaxRus.mkAdv part_Prep
(title painter.long
masculine animate)))
material.s) year.s))) ;

Some of the distinguishing differences be-
tween the languages are: in Finnish the use
of an active voice, in Italian, present tense,
in French, past participle, in Spanish, present

simple. The order of the categories is also dif-
ferent. In German the material string appears
at the end of the sentence as opposed to the
other languages where year is often the last
string.

5.4 Realizations of texts

The text grammar has been designed to gen-
erate a coherent natural language descrip-
tions from a selected set of the returned
triples. More specifically, our grammar cov-
ers eight concepts that are most commonly
used to describe a painting, including: Title,
Painter, Painting type, Material, Colour, Year,
Museum and Size. In the grammar mod-
ule called TextPainting they are defined as
categories and are captured in one function
DPainting which has the following represen-
tation in the abstract syntax.
DPainting :
Painting -> Painter ->
PaintingType -> OptColours ->
OptSize -> OptMaterial ->
OptYear -> OptMuseum -> Description;

In the function DPainting five arguments
have been implemented as optional, i.e.
OptColour, OptSize, OptMaterial, OptYear and
OptMuseum. Each of these categories can be
left out in a text.

In the current implementation we limited
the length of a description to three sentences.
A minimal description consists of only one
sentences. Below follow some examples of
texts generated in English to exemplify the
different descriptions we are able to generate
from one single function call with a varying
number of instantiated parameters.

• Interior was painted on canvas by Edgar
Degas in 1868. It measures 81 by 114 cm
and it is painted in red and white. This
painting is displayed at the Philadelphia
Museum of Art.

• Interior was painted by Edgar Degas in
1868. It measures 81 by 114 cm. This
painting is displayed at the Philadelphia
Museum of Art.

• Interior was painted on canvas by Edgar
Degas in 1868. It is painted in red and
white. This painting is displayed at the
Philadelphia Museum of Art.

112



Figure 1: A semantic tree realization of nine ontology classes

• Interior was painted by Edgar Degas. It
measures 81 by 114 cm and it is painted
in red and white. This painting is dis-
played at the Philadelphia Museum of
Art.

• Interior was painted on canvas by Edgar
Degas. It measures 81 by 114 cm and it is
painted in red and white.

• Interior was painted by Edgar Degas in
1868. This painting is displayed at the
Philadelphia Museum of Art.

• Interior was painted by Edgar Degas.

5.5 Multilingual querying

Semantic Web technologies offer the tech-
nological backbone to meet the requirement
of integrating heterogeneous data easily, but
they are still more adapted to be consumed
by computers than by humans. As a con-
sequence, to retrieve semantic content from
the knowledge base the user must: 1. mas-
ter SPARQL, the query language for RDF;
2. have knowledge about each integrated
dataset in the knowledge base.

Ngonga Ngomo et al. (2013) have shown
that realizations of SPARQL queries in natu-
ral language enhance the user understanding
of the formulated queries and the retrieved
results.

We have implemented an extra SPARQL
module that allow us to map from any
of the 15 supported languages to SPARQL
and from SPARQL to any of the 15 sup-
ported languages. The grammar reuses a
more generic query module that allows to

form both domain specific and domain in-
dependent queries. Some examples of the
queries that can be formulated with the
multilingual grammar and transformed to
SPARQL are:

1. Some X
2. All About X
3. Show everything about X
4. All X painted by Y
5. Some X painted on Y
6. What is the material of X
7. Show everything about all X that are painted

on Y

In GF, realization of SPARQL queries is
done by introducing new parameters, for ex-
ample:

QPainter p = {
wh1 = "?author";
prop = p ;
wh2 ="painting:createdBy ?painter.
?painter rdfs:label ?author ."} ;

The function QPainter defined to formulate
a query such as who painted Mona Lisa? has
been added two additional parameters, i.e.
wh1 and wh2. With these parameters it is pos-
sible to formulate SPARQL queries such as
the one below.

SELECT ?author
WHERE {
?painting rdf:type

painting:Painting ;
painting:createdBy ?painter ;
rdfs:label ?title
FILTER (str(?title)="Mona_Lisa").
?painter rdfs:label ?author.
}

113



Figure 2: Multilingual generation results

5.6 Multilingual text generation

Our approach allows different texts to be
generated depending on the information that
is available in the ontology. A minimal de-
scription consists of three classes: a title, a
painter and a painting type. A complete de-
scription consists of nine classes, as illus-
trated in Figure 1. With only one function
DPainting our system is able to generate 16
different text variants. Figure 2 illustrates a
generation results in 15 languages.

6 Discussion

The majority of the challenges in the produc-
tion of the CH data pool stemmed from the
very nature of the Linked Open Data. The
data in the LOD cloud are notoriously noisy
and inconsistent.

The multilingual labels from the FactForge
datasets and more precisely from DBpedia,
are not always available in all the supported
languages. Although DBpedia in its large
pool of data provides access to multilingual
content, it is inconsistent. Many of the entries
it contains are missing translations. There is a
mixture of numeric and string literals. There
are many duplications, most of them occur
because the same ID appears in different lan-
guages. The content of the data is verbose, for
example place-names and museum-names
are represented with one string, for example:
“Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam”, instead of two
different strings linked by two separate con-
cepts, i.e. Museum and Place. This kind of in-
consistent data representation had an impact
on the translation of museum names.

Another problem was that not all art ob-
jects are uniformly described with the same
set of characteristics. For instance, some
paintings were missing a title or a painter
name. Because we constructed the grammar
in such a way that disallows absence of this
information, we had to replace titles with
id numbers and empty painter names with
the string unknown. Moreover, the data con-
tained many duplications. This occurred be-
cause some of the property assertions were
presented with different strings and trig-
gered many RDF triples.

We also faced many linguistic challenges
on different levels. Lexicalizations of ontol-
ogy classes and properties regarding use
of compounds, variations of verbs, adverbs
and prepositions. On sentence level, order of
classes, variations of tense and voice. On both
sentence and discourse levels, aggregation
variations and use of coreference elements.

7 Conclusions

We presented an ontology-based multilin-
gual application developed in the Gram-
matical Framework and a cross-language re-
trieval system that uses this application for
generating museum object descriptions in
the Semantic Web.

The generation and retrieval system builds
on W3C standards. It covers semantic data
from the Gothenburg City Museum database
and DBpedia. The grammar enables descrip-
tions of paintings and answering to queries
over them, covering 15 languages for base-
line functionality.

114



Acknowledgment

This research has been supported by
MOLTO, the European Union’s Seventh
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013)
under grant agreement FP7-ICT-247914.

References

S. Kallonis Androutsopoulos and V. Karkaletsis.
2005. Exploiting OWL ontologies in the mul-
tilingual generation of object descriptions. In
The 10th European Workshop on NLG, pages 150–
155, Aberdeen, UK.

J. Oberlander Androutsopoulos and V. Karkalet-
sis. 2007. Source authoring for multilingual
generation of personalised object descriptions.
Natural Language Engineering, 13(3):191–233.

Ion Androutsopoulos, Vassiliki Kokkinaki, Agge-
liki Dimitromanolaki, Jo Calder, Jon Oberl, and
Elena Not. 2001. Generating multilingual per-
sonalized descriptions of museum exhibits: the
M-PIRO project. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Applications and
Quantitative Methods in Archaeology.

B. Bishop, A. Kiryakov, D. Ognyanoff, I. Peikov,
Z. Tashev, and R. Velkov. 2011. OWLIM: A
family of scalable semantic repositories. Se-
mantic Web Journal, Special Issue: Real-World Ap-
plications of OWL.

Nadjet Bouayad-Agha, Gerard Casamayor, Si-
mon Mille, Marco Rospocher, Horacio Saggion,
Luciano Serafini, and Leo Wanner. 2012. From
Ontology to NL: Generation of multilingual
user-oriented environmental reports. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 7337.

Hennie Brugman, Véronique Malaisé, and Laura
Hollink. 2008. A common multimedia annota-
tion framework for cross linking cultural her-
itage digital collections. In International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation.

Nick Crofts, Martin Doerr, Tony Gill, Stephen
Stead, and Matthew Stiff, 2008. Definition of the
CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model.

Dana Dannélls, Mariana Damova, Ramona
Enache, and Milen Chechev. 2011. A Frame-
work for Improved Access to Museum
Databases in the Semantic Web. In Recent Ad-
vances in Natural Language Processing (RANLP).
Language Technologies for Digital Humanities and
Cultural Heritage (LaTeCH).

Rob Davies. 2009. EuropeanaLocal – its role
in improving access to Europe’s cultural her-
itage through the European digital library. In
Proceedings of IACH workshop at ECDL2009 (Eu-
ropean Conference on Digital Libraries), Aarhus,
September.

Makx Dekkers, Stefan Gradmann, and Carlo
Meghini. 2009. Europeana outline func-
tional specification for development of an op-
erational european digital library. Technical
report. Europeana Thematic Network Deliv-
erables 2.5. Contributors and peer reviewers:
Europeana.net WP2 Working Group members,
Europeana office.

Basil Ell, Denny Vrandec̆ić, and Elena Sim-
perl. 2012. SPARTIQULATION – Verbalizing
SPARQL queries. In Proceedings of ILD Work-
shop, ESWC 2012.

Steve Harris Garlik and Seaborne Andy, 2013.
SPARQL 1.1 Query Language, March. http:
//www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/.

E Hyvyonen, E. Maekelae, M. Salminen, A. Valo,
K. Viljanen, S. Saarela, M. Junnila, and S. Ket-
tula. 2008. Museum finland. In Finnihs Mu-
seum on the Semantic Web.

Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Lorenz Bühmann,
Christina Unger, Jens Lehmann, and Daniel
Gerber. 2013. Sorry, i don’t speak sparql: trans-
lating sparql queries into natural language. In
Proceedings of the 22nd international conference
on World Wide Web, WWW ’13, pages 977–
988, Republic and Canton of Geneva, Switzer-
land. International World Wide Web Confer-
ences Steering Committee.

Michael J. O’Donnell, Chris Mellish, Jon Oberlan-
der, and Alistair Knott. 2001. ILEX: An archi-
tecture for a dynamic hypertext generation sys-
tem. Natural Language Engineering, 7(3):225–
250.

Aarne Ranta. 2004. Grammatical Framework, a
type-theoretical grammar formalism. Journal of
Functional Programming, 14(2):145–189.

Aarne Ranta. 2009. The GF resource gram-
mar library. The on-line journal Linguistics
in Language Technology (LiLT), 2(2). http:
//elanguage.net/journals/index.
php/lilt/article/viewFile/214/158.

Aarne Ranta. 2011. Grammatical Framework: Pro-
gramming with Multilingual Grammars. CSLI
Publications, Stanford. ISBN-10: 1-57586-626-9
(Paper), 1-57586-627-7 (Cloth).

J. Stiller and M. Olensky. 2012. Europeana: A
multilingual trailblazer. In The W3C Workshop:
The Multilingual Web - Linked Open Data and
Multilingual Web-LT Requirements, Dublin.

H. J. ter Horst. 2005. Combining RDF and Part
of OWL with Rules: Semantics, Decidability,
Complexity. In Proceedings of The Semantic Web
ISWC, volume 3729 of LNCS, pages 668–684,
Heidelberg. Springer Berlin.

W3C, 2012. OWL Web Ontology Language
Overview, December. http://www.w3.org/
TR/owl2-overview/.

115


