



















































Ranking Translations using Error Analysis and Quality Estimation


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 405–407,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9, 2013 c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Ranking Translations using Error Analysis and Quality Estimation

Mark Fishel
Institute of Computational Linguistics

University of Zurich, Switzerland
fishel@cl.uzh.ch

Abstract

We describe TerrorCat, a submission to
this year’s metrics shared task. It is a ma-
chine learning-based metric that is trained
on manual ranking data from WMT shared
tasks 2008–2012. Input features are
generated by applying automatic transla-
tion error analysis to the translation hy-
potheses and calculating the error cate-
gory frequency differences. We addition-
ally experiment with adding quality es-
timation features in addition to the er-
ror analysis-based ones. When evaluated
against WMT’2012 rankings, the system-
level agreement is rather high for several
language pairs.

1 Introduction

Recently a couple of methods of automatic analy-
sis of translation errors have been described (Ze-
man et al., 2011; Popović and Ney, 2011). Both of
these compare a hypothesis translation to a refer-
ence and draw detailed conclusions from the dif-
ferences between the two.

TerrorCat, a metric submitted to the metrics
shared task of WMT’2012 (Callison-Burch et al.,
2012) used the output of those two error analysis
methods as input features, which yielded mildly
promising results (Fishel et al., 2012). How-
ever the submitted version of TerrorCat was lan-
guage pair-specific, which means that the classifier
model used by the metric has to be retrained on
new manual pairwise ranking data for every new
language pair. This in turn complicates its usage.

Our main aim in this work is to make Terror-
Cat usable out-of-the-box. We compare models
specific to the language pair (baseline), target lan-
guage and a universal model for all languages. The
updated metric is applied to the WMT’13 metrics
shared task.

An additional modification to the metric uses
input features from quality estimation. Using the
resources of the quality estimation shared task of
WMT’13 the modified model is applied to the
English–Spanish language pair.

We start by briefly re-introducing the TerrorCat
metric.

2 Baseline

The baseline TerrorCat metric is a machine
learning-based metric: it uses manually ranked
translation hypothesis pairs to train a classifier
model. The trained model is then used to predict a
ranking for new sentence pairs that have not been
ranked yet.

To convert the binary comparisons between
translation hypothesis pairs into a numeric score
per translation hypothesis the wins per hypothe-
sis are summed together. Previous year’s work
has shown (Fishel et al., 2012) that weighting
the wins with the classifier’s confidence for the
summed score improves agreement with human
judgements.

The input features for learning and classifica-
tion are obtained by

1. applying translation error analysis software
to the compared hypotheses,

2. getting the frequencies of every error type,
i.e. the ratio of words marked with that er-
ror type to the hypothesis sentence length,

3. and using each error type’s frequency differ-
ences between the two hypotheses as input
features.

Relative frequencies are used on both system and
segment level: i.e. the ratios of words marked with
a particular error type to the hypothesis translation
length. This guarantees that feature values lie in
the [−1, 1] range.

405



Translation error analysis is done with two
tools: Addicter (Zeman et al., 2011) and Hjer-
son (Popović and Ney, 2011). Both perform error
analysis by comparing the hypothesis and refer-
ence translations on word level and treating each
difference as an error of one or the other kind.
Translation error taxonomies as well as the way
word differences and their contexts are interpreted
differ between the two tools. In order to enable
independent input from both tools the feature vec-
tors obtained from them both tools are concate-
nated.

To increase the level of detail the frequencies of
each error category are counted separately for each
part-of-speech separately. As a result, e.g. instead
of having the information of order errors having a
particular frequency, the classifier will separately
see the frequencies of misplaced nouns, adjectives,
particles, etc.

3 Experiments

The usage of part-of-speech tags improves agree-
ment with human judgements (Fishel et al., 2012);
however, it also introduces language dependency
for the metric. In the first set of experiments we try
to remove this imposed dependency without losing
the achieved benefit.

3.1 Common Settings

We focused on six language pairs: between En-
glish and German, French and Spanish. Manual
ranking data for training was taken from WMT
shared task evaluations 2008–2011; data from
WMT’2012 was used as a development set to as-
sess the performance of metric variations.

Final models for the WMT’2013 shared task
were re-trained on the whole set of manual rank-
ings, from WMT 2008–2012.

The classifier used by TerrorCat is an SVM with
a linear kernel; more powerful kernels, such as ra-
dial basis function-based ones scaled poorly to the
high number of features and thus were not tested.

PoS-tagging was done using TreeTagger
(Schmid, 1995) with the pre-trained models for
English, German, French and Spanish.

3.2 Language Independence

It is natural to expect error categories to have
varying importance on the quality comparison be-
tween two translation candidates. For instance,
one might expect order differences between trans-

lations into functional languages (e.g. English,
Chinese) to have a greater importance than in case
of languages with a more flexible word order (e.g.
German, Russian); on the other hand inflection er-
rors are likely to do more damage to the meaning
in morphologically complex languages (e.g. Rus-
sian, Finnish) than in languages with simpler mor-
phology (e.g. English, French). However, we want
to see whether we can train a classifier that would
generalize over all language pairs.

The main obstacle for training a general model
on all language pairs are the different taxonomies
of part-of-speech tags for different target lan-
guages: the arity of the input feature vectors is dif-
ferent for different target languages, which makes
the data incompatible between them.

To overcome the difference we define a map-
ping from every used taxonomy to a common gen-
eral set of PoS-tags, which is supposed to cover
any language. It consists of general part-of-speech
categories (such as noun, verb, particle, etc., a to-
tal of 15), without any morphological information
(tense, case, person, etc.).

By using the same set of generalized PoS-tags
for every language we ensure that the used Terror-
Cat classifier model is language-independent; the
PoS-tagging step is naturally language-dependent
still.

Tables 1 and 2 present system-level and
segment-level correlations of TerrorCat based on
this common PoS-tag set and three models, spe-
cific to the language pair, target language only
and a general model for any language. Both sets
of results show that using a language-independent
model neither improves nor worsens the perfor-
mance.

3.3 Quality Estimation for Ranking

To further improve the agreement between Terror-
Cat and human assessment we experimented with
adding input features from quality estimation.

The input features were adopted from this year’s
shared task on quality estimation. We selected the
smaller set of black-box features, which included
the sentence lenghts, their language model proba-
bilities, average numbers of translations per word,
percentages of uni-, bi- and tri-grams in the dif-
ferent frequency quartiles, etc. All resources were
taken from the shared task, which also meant that
this modified model was applied only to English–
Spanish.

406



de-en en-de es-en en-es fr-en en-fr
Language pair-specific 0.94 0.56 0.94 0.59 0.85 0.82
Target language-specific 0.92 0.56 0.97 0.59 0.84 0.82
Language-independent 0.93 0.71 0.94 0.66 0.84 0.88
BLEU 0.67 0.22 0.87 0.40 0.81 0.71
METEOR 0.89 0.18 0.95 0.45 0.84 0.82
TER 0.62 0.41 0.92 0.45 0.82 0.66

Table 1: System-level correlation between TerrorCat and human ranking. Correlations of BLEU, ME-
TEOR and TER scores are given for comparison.

de-en en-de es-en en-es fr-en en-fr
Language pair-specific 0.31 0.18 0.24 0.21 0.23 0.20
Target language-specific 0.31 0.18 0.28 0.21 0.23 0.20
Language-independent 0.28 0.20 0.27 0.22 0.24 0.21

Table 2: Segment-level correlation between TerrorCat and human ranking.

Training the model on quality estimation fea-
tures alone yields a system-level score of 0.56. Al-
though this is lower than the TerrorCat baseline,
it beats the correlations of BLEU, TER and ME-
TEOR (see Table 1). The segment-level correla-
tion is -0.01.

Next we combined features from error analysis
and quality estimation by concatenating them into
a single input feature vector. As a result system-
level correlation improved to 0.72, which is higher
than all TerrorCat variants so far (best correlation:
0.66). Segment-level correlation remained practi-
cally the same (0.22).

4 Conclusion

We have applied TerrorCat to the shared metrics
task of WMT’2013. Just like last year, the results
are mildly promising.

We were successful at achieving language inde-
pendence, provided that PoS-tagging is done be-
fore applying the metric.

The trained model as well as the metric imple-
mentation with all the necessary scripts is avail-
able online1.

It remains to be tested, whether quality es-
timation features fit well with the language-
independent models. As the extracted feature val-
ues are based on completely different, language-
specific resources, this does not seem to be a likely
outcome.

1https://github.com/fishel/TerrorCat

References
Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,

Matt Post, Radu Soricut, and Lucia Specia. 2012.
Findings of the 2012 workshop on statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the Seventh
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
10–51, Montréal, Canada.

Mark Fishel, Rico Sennrich, Maja Popović, and Ondřej
Bojar. 2012. Terrorcat: a translation error
categorization-based mt quality metric. In Proceed-
ings of the Seventh Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 64–70, Montréal, Canada.

Maja Popović and Hermann Ney. 2011. Towards au-
tomatic error analysis of machine translation output.
Computational Linguistics, 37(4):657–688.

Helmut Schmid. 1995. Improvements in part-of-
speech tagging with an application to german. In
Proceedings of the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop, Dublin,
Ireland.

Daniel Zeman, Mark Fishel, Jan Berka, and Ondřej Bo-
jar. 2011. Addicter: What is wrong with my trans-
lations? The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Lin-
guistics, 96:79–88.

407


