










































LOR-KBGEN, A Hybrid Approach To Generating from the KBGen Knowledge-Base


Proceedings of the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 204–205,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 8-9 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

LOR-KBGEN, A Hybrid Approach To Generating from the KBGen
Knowledge-Base

Bikash Gyawali
Université de Lorraine, LORIA, UMR 7503
Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, F-54500, France
bikash.gyawali@loria.fr

Claire Gardent
CNRS, LORIA, UMR 7503

Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, F-54500, France
claire.gardent@loria.fr

Abstract

This abstract describes a contribution
to the 2013 KBGen Challenge from
CNRS/LORIA and the University of Lor-
raine. Our contribution focuses on an
attempt to automate the extraction of a
Feature Based Tree Adjoining Grammar
equipped with a unification based compo-
sitional semantics which can be used to
generate from KBGen data.

Introduction Semantic grammars, i.e., gram-
mars which link syntax and semantics, have been
shown to be useful for generation and for seman-
tic parsing. This abstract outlines an attempt to
automatically extract from the KBGen data, a Fea-
ture Based Tree Adjoining Grammar which can be
used for generation from the KBGen data.

Data The KBGen data consists of sets of triples
extracted from the AURA knowledge base which
encodes knowledge contained in a college-level
biology textbook. Each set of triple was selected
to be verbalisable as a simple, possibly complex
sentence. For instance, the input shown in Fig-
ure 1 can be verbalised as1:
(1) The function of a gated channel is to release

particles from the endoplasmic reticulum

Sketch of the Overall Grammar Extraction and
Generation Procedure To generate from the
KBGen data, we parsed each input sentence us-
ing the Stanford parser; we aligned the semantic
input with a substring in the input sentence; we ex-
tracted a grammar from the parsed sentences pro-
vided with the input triples; and we generated us-
ing an existing surface realiser. In addition some
of the input were preprocessed to produce a se-
mantics more compatible with the assumption un-
derlying the syntax/semantic interace of SemTAG;

1For space reasons, we slightly simplified the KBGen in-
put and removed type information.

:TRIPLES (
(|Release-Of-Calcium646|
|object| |Particle-In-Motion64582|)
(|Release-Of-Calcium646|
|base| |Endoplasmic-Reticulum64603|)
(|Gated-Channel64605|
|has-function||Release-Of-Calcium646|)
(|Release-Of-Calcium646|
|agent| |Gated-Channel64605|))
:INSTANCE-TYPES
(|Particle-In-Motion64582|
|instance-of| |Particle-In-Motion|)
(|Endoplasmic-Reticulum64603|
|instance-of| |Endoplasmic-Reticulum|)
(|Gated-Channel64605|
|instance-of| |Gated-Channel|)
(|Release-Of-Calcium646|
|instance-of| |Release-Of-Calcium|))

and a procedure was used to guess missing lexical
entries.

Alignment and Index Projection Given a Sen-
tence/Input pair (S, I) provided by the KBGen
Challenge, we match each entity and event vari-
able in I to a substring in S. Matching uses the
variable name, the name of the unary predicate
true of that variable and the word form assigned
to that predicte in the KBGen lexicon. Digits oc-
curring in the input are removed and the string in
the input sentence which is closest to either of the
used units is decorated with that variable. Index
variables are then projected up the syntactic trees
to reflect headedness. For instance, the variable
indexed with a noun is projected to the NP level;
and the index projected to the NP of a preposi-
tional phrase is project to the PP level.

Grammar Extraction Grammar extraction pro-
ceeds in two steps as follows. First, the subtrees
whose root node are indexed with an entity vari-
able are extracted. This results in a set of NP and
PP trees anchored with entity names and associ-
ated with the predication true of the indexing vari-
able.
Second, the subtrees capturing relations be-

tween variables are extracted. To perform this ex-

204



traction, each input variableX is associated with a
set of dependent variables i.e., the set of variables
Y such that X is related to Y (R(X,Y )). The
minimal tree containing all and only the dependent
variables D(X) of a variable X is then extracted
and associated with the set of literals Φ such that
Φ = {R(Y,Z) | (Y = X∧Z ∈ D(X))∨(Y,Z ∈
D(X))}. This procedure extracts the subtrees re-
lating the argument variables of a semantics func-
tors such as an event or a role.
The extracted grammar is a Feature-Based

Tree Adjoining Grammar with a Unification-based
compositional semantics as described in (Gardent,
2008). Each entry in the grammar associates a nat-
ural language expression with a syntactic tree and
a semantic representation thereby allowing both
for semantic parsing and for generation. Figure 1
shows the tree extracted for the release predicate
in Example 1.

Pre-Processing The parse trees produced by the
Stanford parser are pre-processed to better match
TAG recursive modeling of modification. In
particular, the flat structure assigned to relative
clauses is modified into a recursive structure.
The input semantics provided by the KBGen

task is also preprocessed to allow for aggregation
and to better match the assumptions underlying the
syntax/semantics interface of SemTAG.
For aggregation, we use a rewrite rule of the

form shown below to support the production

of e.g., A cellulose-synthase which contains a
polypeptide and two glucose synthesizes cellu-
lose..

R(X,Y1), . . . , R(X,Yn), P (Y 1), . . . , P (Yn)
⇒ R(X,Y ), P (Y ), quantity(Y, n)

For relative clauses, we rewrite input of the
form plays(X Y),in-event(Y E), P(E), R(E X) to
plays(X Y),in-event(Y E), P(E), R(E Y). This cap-
tures the fact that in sentences such as A biomem-
brane is a barrier which blocks the hydrogen ion
of a chemical., the entity variable bound by the rel-
ative clause is that associated with barrier, not that
of the main clause subject biomembrane.

Guessing Missing Lexical Entries To handle
unseen input, we start by partitioning the in-
put semantics into sub-semantics corresponding to
events, entities and role. We then search the lexi-
con for an entry with a matching or similar seman-
tics. An entry with a similar semantics is an entry
with the same number and same type of literals
(literals with same arity and with identical rela-
tions). Similar entries are then adapted to create
lexical entries for unseen data.

References
Claire Gardent. 2008. Integrating a unification-based
semantics in a large scale lexicalised tree adjoining
grammar for french. In COLING’08, Manchester,
UK.

205


