




































Disambiguation of Basic Action Types through Nouns’ Telic Qualia

Irene Russo, Francesca Frontini, Irene De Felice, 
Fahad Khan, Monica Monachini

ILC CNR / Via G. Moruzzi 1, 56124 Pisa
{irene.russo,francesca.frontini,irene.defelice,

fahad.khan,monica.monachini}@ilc.cnr.it

Abstract

Knowledge about semantic associations be-
tween words is effective to disambiguate word 
senses. The aim of this paper is to investigate 
the role and the relevance of telic information 
from SIMPLE in the disambiguation of basic
action types of Italian HOLD verbs (prendere,
‘to take’, raccogliere, ‘to pick up’, pigliare ‘to 
grab’ etc.). We propose an experiment to com-
pare the results obtained with telic information 
from SIMPLE with basic co-occurrence in-
formation extracted from corpora (most salient 
verbs modifying nouns) classified in terms of 
general semantic classes to avoid data sparse-
ness.

1 Introduction

Word senses emerge in lexicographic practice 
as the result of splitting strategies depending on 
context of use, syntagmatic patterns and per-
ceived semantic similarity. Lexicographers share 
working assumptions (e.g. the concrete sense is 
encoded before the abstract sense of a lemma) on 
the way to structure glosses. The induction of 
word senses from corpus co-occurrences, as in 
the Corpus Pattern Analysis effort (Hanks 2008), 
has an impact on the definition of how many dif-
ferent senses are available and, with the focus on 
general semantic classes of nouns involved for 
example as objects in verbal contexts, the path 
toward sense induction is made fully empirical. 

Since word senses are not metaphysical ob-
jects but depend on dedicated tasks that require 
them (Kilgarriff 1997), other operative principles 
are possible. In this paper we present a manually 
annotated dataset relative to basic Italian action 
verbs that have been partitioned in basic action 
types when the action described in the sentence 
was analysed in terms of body movements in-
volved. This split among senses can’t be unequi-
vocally aligned with lexical resources such as 

WordNet (Moneglia et al. 2012) and, even if the 
induction from corpora examples implies that the 
syntagmatic structure is important, the guiding 
motivation in segmenting the meaning concerns 
salient differences in the action performed by the 
agent for the sake of basic action modelling in 
robotics. 

In this dataset a central role is assigned to 
nouns denoting concrete objects and as a conse-
quence the task of basic action type classification 
focuses on nouns and the information attached to 
them that could help in disambiguation. 

In word sense disambiguation tasks different 
sets of features have been tested in order to un-
derstand which are the most relevant for classify-
ing senses. Among these features, there are PoS 
and syntactic information, collocations (or selec-
tional preferences), thematic roles, semantic as-
sociations between words in terms of taxonomic 
relations (e.g. chair, furniture), events (e.g. 
chair, sitting), topic (e.g. bat, baseball), head 
argument relations (e.g. dog, bite). (Agirre and 
Martinez 2001) reviewed these features, disco-
vering that collocations and semantic associa-
tions are the most useful (and manually anno-
tated corpora are the best source to acquire 
them).

The aim of this paper is to investigate the role 
and the relevance of telic information from SIM-
PLE (Ruimy et al. 2003) in the disambiguation
of basic action types of Italian HOLD verbs 
(prendere, ‘to take’, raccogliere, ‘to pick up’, 
pigliare ‘to grab’ etc.). We propose an experi-
ment (see 5) to compare the results obtained with 
telic information from SIMPLE with basic co-
occurrence information extracted from corpora 
(most salient verbs modifying nouns) classified 
in terms of general semantic classes to avoid data 
sparseness.



2 ImagAct Basic Action Types: Bottom-
up Derivation of Verbs Senses

Action verbs are among the most informative 
elements in a sentence: the concepts they codify 
have a great relevance in human life and they are 
the most frequent elements in speech (Moneglia 
and Panunzi, 2007). In our everyday experience, 
the kind of actions we can carry out is almost 
endless but, given that every human language 
tends towards economy of expression, the num-
ber of action verbs we use is always somehow 
restricted. So we adopt the same verbs to denote 
different types of events: for example, the verb 
“to take” in (1) John takes a present from a 
stranger means “to receive, to accept”; but in (2) 
John takes Mary the book it means “to bring”; in 
(3) John takes the pot by the handle it simply 
means “to grasp”; finally, in (4) John takes Mary 
to the station it means “to conduct, to accompa-
ny”. Furthermore, every language manifests a 
different behaviour in segmenting human expe-
rience into its proper action verbal lexicon. For 
this reason, the examples just cited can’t be 
translated with a single Italian verb: (1a) John 
prende un regalo da uno straniero; (2a) John 
porta il libro a Maria; (3a) John prende la tazza 
dal manico; (4a) John porta Maria alla stazione. 
But we expect that, in a given language, similar 
events will be referred to by using the same verb: 
so “to take” will apply also to John takes the 
children to school/his wife to the cinema, similar-
ly to (4); we also expect this tendency to be 
found in other languages, as is the case for “por-
tare” in John porta i bambini a scuola/sua mog-
lie al cinema, similar to (4a). In the ImagAct 
framework these coherent sets of similar events 
are referred to as action types. Verbs which ex-
tensionally denote more than one action types (as 
“to take”) are named general verbs.
Since written corpora tend to abound in abstract 
verbs or verbs used in their abstract senses, the 
best way to study action verbs’ actual variation is 
in spontaneous speech, i.e. in transcribed spoken 
corpora. The ImagAct project focuses on high 
frequency action verbs (approximately 600 lexi-
cal entry) of Italian and English, which represent 
the basic verbal lexicon of the two languages. All 
occurrences of these verb were retrieved, respec-
tively from a collection of Italian spoken corpora 
(C-ORAL-ROM; LABLITA; LIP; CLIPS), and 
from the BNC-Spoken; linguistic contexts of 
each occurrence were then standardized and re-
duced to simple sentences as those reported 
above (1-4).

Once the ImagAct corpus was created, as a first 
step, annotators made a distinction between the 
metaphorical and phraseological usages (e.g. 
John takes Mary to be honest) from proper oc-
currences of action verbs (e.g. John takes the 
glass); then, they grouped the occurrences into 
action types, keeping granularity to its minimal 
level, so that each type contained a number of 
instances referring to similar events (John takes 
the glass/the umbrella/the pen etc.). This proce-
dure was accomplished through a web based an-
notation interface and was standardized in the 
specifications of the ImagAct project. Finally, 
one best example was chosen (or more than one, 
if the verb had more than one possible syntactic 
structure) from all standardized sentences of each 
type, and it was then associated to a video to ex-
emplify the action type.
To obtain a parallel corpus, all English standar-
dized instances assigned to a type have been 
translated into Italian, and vice versa; the possi-
bility of translating all instances of a type into 
another language, using only one verb, assures 
the coherence of that type. In the very last phase, 
a mapping between English and Italian action 
types has been conducted onto the same set of 
scenes. The validation of basic action types is 
going on also for Chinese and in the future other 
languages will be involved in this procedure. 
Crosslinguistic comparison between languages 
highlights coarse-grained distinctions between 
word senses (Resnik and Yarowsky 1998); as a 
consequence we expect that the extension to 
more languages will make the basic action types 
more general and less dependent on a specific 
language. 
The result of the procedure described above is a 
set of short videos, each one corresponding to an 
action type and showing simple actions (e.g. a 
man taking a glass on a table), by which a user 
can access the English/Italian best examples cho-
sen for that type (John takes the glass/John 
prende il bicchiere) and all the standardized sen-
tences extracted from corpora that have been as-
signed to that type; these videos show the actual 
use of the verb when referring to a specific type 
of action. Also, a user can access this data by 
lemma: for example, searching for the verb “to 
take”, he will be presented with a number of 
scenes, showing the different action types asso-
ciated to that verb, with their related information. 
Scenes, and their associated best examples, 
represent the variation of all action verbs consi-
dered and constitute the ImagAct ontology of 
action. This ontology is not only inherently inter-



linguistic, having been derived through an induc-
tive process from corpora of different languages, 
but also takes into account the intra-linguistic 
and inter-linguistic variation that characterizes 
action verbs in human languages.

3 GL Co-Composition and ImagAct 
General Verbs

Pustejovsky (1995) defines co-composition as 
a semantic property of a structure in which both 
a predicate and its argument(s) contribute func-
tionally to the meaning of an expression, so that 
the semantic contribution of the argument(s) of 
the predicate is greater than can be accounted for 
on a strictly compositional analysis of meaning. 
We can then view certain verbs as being lexically 
underspecified in the sense that the arguments of 
these verbs play a significant role in ascertaining 
the full meaning of the verb in context. The clas-
sic example of co-compositionality as given in 
Pustejovsky (1995) involves the verb “bake” 
which can be understood in at least two distinct 
senses, a “change of state” sense as in sentence 
(5)  and a “creation” sense as in sentence (6):

(5) John baked the potato.
(6) John baked the cake. 

This can be understood as an example of logi-
cal polysemy since, although “bake” has a 
slightly different meaning in each of the two sen-
tences (5) and (6), these meanings are somehow 
closely related.  It’s not hard to find other exam-
ples in which co-compositionality is clearly evi-
dent and where the meaning of a verbal predicate 
in context, including the type of action to which 
it might refer, is heavily dependent on the type 
and meaning of its arguments. So that for exam-
ple the following two sentences refer to two dif-
ferent action types for the Italian verb prendere
in ImagAct: 

(7) Marco prende la mela. (‘Marco takes the 
apple’)
(8) Marco prende la mela dall’albero. (‘Mar-
co picks the apple from the tree’).

One could argue that those action verbs which 
best fit the definition of lexical underspecifica-
tion as given above should also be regarded as 
“general” verbs in the ImagAct sense. Each gen-
eral verb is associated with a finite set of action 
types, which are themselves determined by the 
different kinds of objects to which the actions 

referred to by the verb might apply. If an action 
verb is underspecified, it can be said to lack one 
determinate meaning which might provide a 
clear prototypical example of the kinds of actions 
to which it refers, so that a verb like “to open” or 
“to take” is “vague” enough to be associated with 
a number of distinctive action types in its prima-
ry non-metaphorical usages, whereas a verb like 
“to knife” or even “to eat” can plausibly be asso-
ciated with only one type of action: this is at least 
the viewpoint taken up the ImagAct project 
(www.imagact.it). Thus, ImagAct could be 
viewed as an important lexical resource for the 
analysis of the phenomena of co-composition at 
least to the extent that it pertains to the class of 
action verbs.

4 Enriching HOLD Verbs’ Sentences 
with Semantic Information from 
SIMPLE

A disambiguation task performed on manually 
annotated data involving action types has a prac-
tical application, considering that these data will 
be analysed in the on-going ModelAct project for 
human-robot interaction and modeling of actions. 
However, the results have also theoretical impli-
cations because the way the senses have been 
individuated is peculiar and the kind of meanings 
classified (verbs’ senses referring to concrete 
actions) can change the expectations about the 
most relevant/useful knowledge source for dis-
ambiguation. In this paper we mainly use seman-
tic associations knowledge from SIMPLE to dis-
ambiguate between basic action types.

The Italian component of the ImagAct dataset 
contains at the moment 744 verbs and 1358 basic 
action types, for a total of 26233 standardized 
sentences. The intra-linguistic mapping between 
basic action types to discover local equivalence 
between verbs is in progress. In this paper we 
focus on a semantically coherent verbs’ class, 
that of Levin’s HOLD verbs (Levin 1993) (to 
clasp, to clutch, to grasp, to grip, to handle, to 
hold, to wield), corresponding to Italian verbs 
acchiappare, afferrare agguantare, pigliare, 
prendere, raccattare, raccogliere, stringere, te-
nere. Looking at basic action types of these 
verbs, we find several equivalence (Marco piglia 
lo yogurt dal frigorifero/ Marco prende il pro-
dotto dalla busta) that will be grouped in the dis-
ambiguation experiment (see 5).

We extract from SIMPLE the telic information 
about the objects of the HOLD verbs. 



We decided to use SIMPLE because of great 
amount of structured encyclopedic knowledge it 
contains. SIMPLE is largely based on Puste-
jovsky’s Generative Lexicon (GL) theory. GL 
theory posits that the meaning of each word in a 
lexicon can be structured into components, one 
of which, the qualia structure, consists of a bun-
dle of four orthogonal dimensions. 

These dimensions allow for the encoding of 
four separate representative aspects of the mean-
ing of a word or phrase: the formal, namely that 
which allows the identification of an entity, i.e., 
what it is; the constitutive, what an entity is made 
of; the telic, that which specifies the function of 
an entity; and finally the agentive, that which 
specifies the origin of an entity. These qualia 
structures play an important role within GL in 
explaining for example, the phenomena of poly-
semy in natural languages. SIMPLE itself is ac-
tually based on the notion of an extended qualia 
structure, which as the name suggests is an ex-
tension of the qualia structure notion found in 
GL. Thus, there is a hierarchy of constitutive, 
telic, and agentive relations that can hold be-
tween semantic units. SIMPLE contains a lan-
guage independent ontology of 153 semantic 
types as well as  60k so called “semantic units” 
or USems, representing the meanings of lexical 
entries in the lexicon. SIMPLE also contains 66 
relations organized in a hierarchy of types and 
subtypes all subsumed by one of the four main 
qualia roles:

 FORMAL (is-a) 
 CONSTITUTIVE, such as ACTIVITY 

produced-by
 TELIC, such as INSTRUMENTAL

used-for 
 AGENTIVE, such as ARTIFACTUAL

caused-by 

4.1 Manual annotation of affording proper-
ties

Since HOLD verbs selected are the most ge-
neric verbs involving actions done with hands, a 
manual annotation has been done on each sen-
tence in terms of affording properties of the ob-
jects (Gibson 1979).

As additional information we annotated the 
properties of the objects denoted by lemmas that 
afford grasping. These properties are defined by 
the type of grasping the object afford. We 
created these categories adopting a bottom-up 
approach, by looking at all the possible objects 

of primary verbs and identifying a minimum set 
of common features among them. 

One-Hand_Grasp: this is a property of ob-
jects that can be grasped using only one hand. 
The size of two of the object’s dimensions 
(length, width or thickness) must not exceed the 
maximum span of a hand with at least two fin-
gers bent in order to grasp and hold something. 
E.g.: “Johs takes the lighter”. The agent’s control 
over the grasped object is maximum.

Two-Hands_Grasp: this property is still re-
lated to the object size and qualifies objects that 
cannot be grasped without necessarily using two 
hands. Note this kind of grasp is not specifically 
directed to any of the object's parts. E.g.: “John 
takes the board”. Also in this case, the agent’s 
control over the grasped entity is very high, also 
with animates (when they can be taken and hold 
with two hands, as in “The nurse takes the baby 
from the incubator”).

Grasp_by_part: this property is proper of big 
objects (i.e., whose size exceed the maximum 
span of a hand) that, even so, can be perfectly 
controlled by agents using only one hand thanks 
to a handle. Handle refers here to any part of an 
object specifically designed to afford grasping 
(like a handle of a handbag). This property is 
also shown by objects with dimensions bigger 
than a hand size, especially all animate entities, 
that have no designed handles, but that still can 
be grasped and hold simply using one hand: the 
grasp will be directed to one of their parts, the 
one  (usually hand, arm) that better allows grasp-
ing for its suitability in size with hands (but note 
that in these cases agent’s control over the 
grasped entity is much less strong). These parts 
are often explicitly mentioned for their relevance 
for action (especially if there are many possible 
graspable parts in the same entity, as in “John 
takes Mary by her hand/her leg/her arm”), for 
they are not predetermined, as designed handles 
are.

Grasp_with_instrument_container: this is 
the main property of entities (mainly substance 
and mass entities) which humans cannot directly 
control without using some other object, because 
of their fluid consistency and because of the ab-
sence of a solid, tangible, definite shape contour. 
For example, water and other liquids cannot be 
grasped without a container, as a bottle or a 
glass. Because it is impossible for humans to 
grasp these entities without a recipient, explicit 
reference to the container is often omitted (as in 
“John takes the water for the dog from the fau-
cet”: it is implicitly understood that he uses a 



bowl), and in some cases is even lexicalized, as 
demonstrated by the fact that some objects can 
accept a quantified form, as in “John takes two 
beers out of/from the fridge” (= bottles of beer). 
In this example, the grasping event properly in-
volves the solid container, but is semantically 
referred to the content. This kind of polysemy 
(container/content), which originates from meto-
nymic processes, is quite regular and widespread 
in languages: this can be easily understood con-
sidering that, for humans, contents are usually 
much more salient than containers.

Additional information: sometimes, objects 
shape, dimensions and constituency do not suf-
fice to predict how humans actually grasp them. 
For this reason, we annotated some objects with 
two affording properties. This mainly concerns 
objects that can be grasped with one hand, but 
that usually are grasped with an instrument (that 
in turn can be grasped with one or two hands). 
For example, zucchini, potatoes, meat and other 
foods (as in “John takes the zucchini/the meat-
ball from the tray”), can be grasped directly by 
hands, but usually we prefer to use a fork 
(grasped with one hand). So, for zucchini, when 
intended as [food], we annotated both 
one_hand_grasp and 
one_hand_instrumental_grasp. Another case in 
which we annotated two affording properties is 
when an object is one_hand_graspable, but it has 
a part specifically designed for grasping (as for 
scissors or pacifiers). In this case, we annotated 
both one_hand_graspabable and grasp_by_part.

5 Disambiguation of HOLD Verbs Ba-
sic Action Types: a First Experiment

Our starting dataset comprises 1419 sentences 
and 29 basic action types. Some sentences were 
doubled because the telic qualia in SIMPLE for 
several nouns has more than one entry. At the 
end we have 1573 instances to classify. We per-
formed a ten-fold cross validation experiment 
with the implementation provided in WEKA 
(Hall el al. 2009) of Support Vector Machine 
algorithm (called SMO) since results from the 
literature WSD on benchmark data show that 
support vector machines (SVMs) yield models 
with one of the highest accuracies.

The features for this experiment are:

 manually annotated information about 
the semantic class of nouns in WordNet
3.0 (SCN in Table 1):

o libro (‘book’)  artifact
o caramelle (‘candies’)  cibo

 annotation on the affording properties of 
objects as described in 4.1 (AffP in Ta-
ble 1).

 values encoded for Telic qualia in SIM-
PLE, manually disambiguated for each 
noun and reported as Boolean values for 
each of the 23 verbs’ abstract semantic 
classes in SIMPLE (as
Cause_Constitutive_Change in the fol-
lowing example) (SIMPLE in Table 1):

Matteo prende il coltello. ‘Matteo takes 
the knife’ 
knife UsedFor tagliare (‘to cut’) 

tagliare is Cause_Constitutive_Change

 SIMPLE semantic classes of most salient 
verbs that precede the target noun in it-
TenTen, a web corpus of 3.1 billion to-
kens, accessible through APIs provided 
by sketchengine.co.uk . These data have 
been extracted as word sketches (Kilgar-
riff et al. 2004) and as a consequence re-
port on selectional preferences that are 
among the most useful features in WSD 
(see Introduction) (itTenTen in Table 1). 
We found out that this pattern extracts 
content similar to telic qualia and for this 
reason we compare telic information and 
word sketches in this experiment. 

We also perform disambiguation experiment 
on a version of the dataset with grouped action 
types (i.e. 14) composed by 1577 sentences be-
cause we found equivalence between several 
types. Baseline assigns each sentence to the most 
common action type (75.3% for AllBT, the data-
set with all the basic action types, and 84% for 
GroupedBT, the dataset with grouped action 
types).

The results are reported in Table 1.

AllF SCN AffP SIMPLE itTenTen
AllBT 81.6% 77% 76% 77.4% 80.5%
GroupedBT 89.7% 86.9% 85.7% 87.6% 90.2%

Table 1: Accuracy for basic action types disambig-
uation with different set of features

The best result is obtained on the grouped 
basic action types dataset, with 0.88 as preci-



sion and 0.90 as recall. For this dataset in-
formation extracted from SIMPLE have a 
small negative impact on the accuracy while 
for the dataset with all the action types it 
contributes to improve the result. Affording 
properties are not very relevant for disam-
biguation: even if the affordances of objects 
are known from psychological studies as a 
relevant feature in action learning, the anno-
tation proposed is probably not the best way 
to represent this knowledge.  

6 Conclusions and Future Work

Knowledge about semantic associations be-
tween words is effective to disambiguate word 
senses. Distributional models of word meanings 
represent this information providing a vector-
based representation of most frequent words in 
context. We extracted this information from 
SIMPLE, a rich lexical resource that provide es-
sential information about objects' typical uses in 
the telic qualia. The three most salient verbs that 
have as object the target nouns in ImagAct sen-
tences have been extracted from a large web cor-
pus. To avoid data sparseness SIMPLE complex 
ontology that label verbs with coarse-grained 
semantic classes have been used. The results 
show that qualia information is useful for disam-
biguation but enriching it with salient data from 
corpus improves the accuracy. 

As future work we want to enrich the ImagAct 
dataset with information from other qualia in 
SIMPLE (i.e. formal, constitutive and agentive) 
and from other resources, such as dictionary's 
glosses, ontologies for actions, distributional data 
from different corpora with the aim to find the 
best set of features for the disambiguation of ba-
sic action types. As a collateral project, we plan 
to find additional salient values for nouns’ qualia 
structure through patterns in corpora.

References 

Agirre, E. Martinez, D. (2001), Knowledge sources 
for word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of 
International Conference on Text, Speech and Di-
alogue (TSD'2001) Selezna Ruda, Czech Republic.

Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Vis-
ual Perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Hall, M. Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard Pfa-
hringer, Peter Reutemann, Ian H. Witten (2009); 
The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update; 
SIGKDD Explorations, Volume 11, Issue 1.

Hanks, Patrick. (2008). "Mapping meaning onto use: 
a Pattern Dictionary of English Verbs". AACL 
2008, Utah.

Levin, B. (1993), "English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions: A Preliminary Investigation." In: The Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.

Kilgarriff, A.; Rychly, P.; Smrz, P.; Tugwell, D. 
(2004). ‘The Sketch Engine’. Proceedings Euralex. 
Lorient.

Kilgarriff, A. (1997), “I don’t believe in word senses” 
Computers and the Humanities 31: 91-113.

Moneglia, M., Alessandro Panunzi, Gloria Gagliardi, 
Monica Monachini, Irene Russo (2012), Mapping a 
corpus-induced ontology of action verbs on 
ItalWordNet. Global Wordnet Conference 2012.

Pustejovsky, J. (1995), The Generative Lexicon. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Resnik, P., Yarowsky, D. (1998) Distinguishing Sys-
tems and Distinguishing sense: new evaluation me-
thods fot WSD. Natural Language Engineering.

Ruimy, N,  M. Monachini, E. Gola, N. Calzolari, 
M.C. Del Fiorentino, M. Ulivieri, and S. Rossi 
(2003), A computational semantic lexicon of 
italian: SIMPLE. Linguistica Computazionale 
XVIII-XIX, Pisa, pages 821–64.


