


































Linguistic Resources Enhanced with Geospatial Information

Richard Littauer
Computational Linguistics

University of Saarland
Saarbrücken, Germany

richard.littauer@gmail.com

Boris Villazon-Terrazas∗
Intelligent Software Components

iSOCO, S.A.
Av. del Partenon 16-18

Madrid, Spain
bvillazon@isoco.com

Steven Moran
Department of Linguistics

University of Zürich
Plattenstrasse 54, CH-8032

Zürich, Switzerland
steven.moran@uzh.ch

Abstract

In this short report on language data and
RDF tools, we describe the transforma-
tion process that we undertook to convert
spreadsheet data about a group of endan-
gered languages and where they are spo-
ken in West Africa into an RDF triple
store. We use RDF tools to organize and
visualize these data on a world map, ac-
cessible through a web browser. The func-
tionality we develop allows researchers to
see where these languages are spoken and
to query the language data. This type
of development not only showcases the
power of RDF, but it provides a power-
ful tool for linguists trying the solve the
mysteries of the genealogical relatedness
of the Dogon languages.

1 Introduction

Linked Data presents many opportunities to access
and share data in different formats and for differ-
ent purposes. In linguistics and related fields like
cultural archaeology and population genetics, vi-
sualization of data points on maps is particularly
beneficial in formulating hypotheses about data
sets, particularly sparse ones, which is often the
case in these fields. In this short report, we de-
scribe how we converted a spreadsheet that con-
tains information about endangered Dogon lan-
guages and where they are spoken in small ru-
ral villages in Mali, West Africa, into an Re-
source Description Framework (RDF) triple store
so that we could leverage other RDF tools to vi-
sualize these data. The result gives researchers a
clearer picture of the dispersal of Dogon speak-
ers and neighboring languages and we show that
the spreadsheet-to-RDF conversion pipeline that

∗Ontology Engineering Group, Universidad Politécnica
de Madrid, http://www.oeg-upm.net/

we develop is applicable to any data set that can
be combined with GPS coordinates.

2 Background

In the visualization of language data, there has
been work on displaying language differences on
a broad scale, including presenting hierarchical
and cross-linguistic data (7; 8), displaying related
languages gathered from the World Atlas of Lan-
guage Structures (WALS) by geographical prox-
imity and relatedness (6), displaying word mean-
ings on a map (9), and displaying the location of
languages that contain some type of typological
feature language locations on a world map (5).
There has also recently been visualizations that
display language relatedness and dialectology us-
ing lexical items and location together (11).

In this work we derive RDF from simple table
data stored in a spreadsheet, leverage the ability of
RDF graphs to be easily merged, and harness dif-
ferent RDF tools to display geospatial data in the
map4rdf software, which is freely available and
runs in the browser. In doing so, we provide de-
tailed information about the location of villages in
Mali in which Dogon languages are spoken. Do-
gon is an interesting language family because until
recently there was very little that was known about
these languages. In fact, until as late as 1989, Do-
gon appeared in reference books on African lan-
guages as if it were a single language (cf. (1; 2)).
Current estimates from experts working in Mali is
that there are now over 20 mutually unintelligble
Dogon languages, with new varieties being “dis-
covered” every year. However, the current ge-
nealogical relatedness of these languages is still
unclear, as is the internal structure of the Dogon
language family. Additionally, due to the typo-
logical characteristics of Dogon languages, such
as these languages’ lack of noun classes that are
typical of sub-saharan West African languages in
general or Dogon’s SOV basic word order (in-

53



stead of SVO like many of its neighbors), the po-
sition of the Dogon language family relative to
other African language families remains unclear.
Thus in disentangling the mysteries of how Do-
gon languages are related within their family, an
interactive visual reference of where the languages
are spoken is a useful tool for exploring avenues
of possible genealogical decent due to geographic
proximity and other effects like borrowing due to
areal contact.

3 LLD Life Cycle

In this section we present the specification of the
Linked Data Life Cycle presented in (10) as ap-
plied to linguistic resources to visualize them with
geospatial information.

3.1 Linguistics Resources

Our data source consists of a spreadsheet contain-
ing GPS coordinates of villages where the dif-
ferent Dogon languages are spoken in Mali. It
also contains information about each of these lan-
guages, such as the language name, ISO 639-3
language name identifier, the language family and
family code, village name, etc. and it can be
easily combined via ISO 639-3 codes with dic-
tionary data from each language. These datasets
come from the Dogon Languages Project and are
freely available online.1 They were collected by
the Dogon Language Project team, mainly Jeffrey
Heath, by on-ground reconnaissance or by using
language maps; the provenance of each data point
is noted in the spreadsheet.2 Each set of data
points per village is associated with a GPS coor-
dinate and can thus be plotted on a world map.
Because the set of Dogon languages that belong
to the Dogon language family have been until re-
cently poorly documented and described, informa-
tion about where these languages are spoken in
relation to each other can assist linguists in iden-
tifying the genealogical relatedness of these lan-
guages. The visualization of linguistic informa-
tion on maps has been a successful method for
generating and testing hypotheses (cf. (5)).

1http://dogonlanguages.org
2Steven Moran is affiliated with the Dogon Languages

Project and he has worked with the geo spreadsheet data and
with the LL-MAP project to bring these data online. See:
http://llmap.org/viewer.html?maps=472946.

3.2 Specification

The process of publishing Linked Data has an it-
erative incremental life cycle model. Data sources
must be identified and analyzed and entities in the
data must be assigned a URI. A key element of
Linked Data is also the ability to reuse and lever-
age data that has already been published as Linked
Data. By identifying the schema of resources that
are to be transformed into Linked Data, conceptual
components and their relationships can be prop-
erly modeled into the RDF triple format. In the
Dogon GPS spreadsheet, we were able to iden-
tify fields such as language name, ISO 639-3 code,
language family and subfamily, alternative lan-
guages spoken in each village, village names, mu-
nicipality, notes about the speaker’s society, and
geospatial information and assign them a URI.
The spreadsheet also contains information about
non-Dogon languages, which allows us to plot the
current language contact situation between Dogon
and surrounding languages. See Fig. 1.

All resources in the dataset are given deref-
erenceable URIs and we’ve attempted to use
meaningful names instead of opaque ones. We
also reuse URIs where we can, including us-
ing the General Ontology of Linguistic Descrip-
tion (GOLD) for morphosyntactic data descrip-
tions (4).3 The base URI structure uses the http:
//linguistic.linkeddata.es/ namespace. Vo-
cabulary elements are appended with /ontology/
{property|class} and instances with /dataset/
resource/{r.type|r.name}. We also reused
URIs from the WGS84 Geo Basic Vocabulary for
the representation of geospatial data.4

3.3 RDF Generation

Next, the spreadsheet data was transformed into
RDF. First we imported the spreadsheet into
MySQL. Then we defined a set of R2RML map-
pings. R2RML is a RDF-to-RDF mapping lan-
guage and we used it to create mappings between
elements in the MySQL database table from the
spreadsheet and the RDF vocabulary that we de-
fined.5 Lastly, using the R2RML engine and
morph,6 we generated the RDF instances using the
R2RML defined mappings. It is worth mentioning
we are in the process of generating links with other

3http://linguistics-ontology.org/.
4http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/
5http://www.w3.org/TR/r2rml/
6https://github.com/boricles/morph

54



Figure 1: Data that contains villages in Mali with language information

datasets, such as WALS and DBpedia.

3.4 Publication

The RDF data that we generated is stored in a
triple store with the Virtuoso software, which we
use to publish the data online.7 Integrated with
Pubby,8 Virtuoso allows us to leverage content
management to serve up machine-readable and hu-
man consumable webpages that contain informa-
tion about each village, such as which languages
are spoken there, where the village is located, ad-
ditional information about the society, etc.9 Vir-
tuoso also provides a SPARQL endpoint10 with
which we can query and share the data.

3.5 Exploitation

Following the previous steps of specification,
RDF generation and publication, we expose the
RDF data, enhanced with GPS coordinates, us-
ing map4rdf.11 map4rdf is a maps viewer of RDF
resources with geometrical information built on
OpenStreetMap12 and it can be used to visualize
information in RDF datasets. Additionally, it is
extensible with Google app plugins. The parame-
ters of map4rdf must be set so that the application
knows where to locate the endpoint of Dogon data

7http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/
8http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/

pubby/
9See for example the page on the village Boni:

hhttp://linguistic.linkeddata.es/mlode/
resource/Village/Boni

10http://linguistic.linkeddata.es/
sparql

11https://github.com/boricles/
linked-data-visualization-tools

12http://www.openstreetmap.org/

in RDF (that we set up with Virutoso) and which
geometry model that we are using (since there dif-
ferent standards for geo-mapping). With the pa-
rameters set, a user can open the map4rdf applica-
tion in his or her web browser and explore the lo-
cation of villages where Dogon are spoken.13 Fig.
2 provides an illustration.

Each point on the map comes from GPS co-
ordinates in the original spreadsheet, which have
been transformed into RDF triples and stored in a
triple store with Virtuoso. This triple store can be
queried with SPARQL or its endpoint can be given
as an endpoint for programs like map4rdf to access
its data contents. Each pin in Fig. 2 can be clicked
on, showing the village name, its latitude and lon-
gitude, and a link for more information about the
language. This is shown in Fig. 3.

When clicking on the link for more informa-
tion, a request is sent to the SPARQL endpoint
for all information in the RDF triple store about
that particular village. When accessing the data
through map4rdf, the endpoint knows through
content management to return an HTML page that
displays the query results, as shown in Fig. 4.

4 Summary

We have briefly shown here a workflow to trans-
form data from a simple spreadsheet into an RDF
triple store that can queried using a SPARQL end-
point, and an application called map4rdf that uses
this endpoint with GPS coordinates to visualize
RDF data on a world map. Moreover, the tools

13The map4rdf instantiation for the Dogon vil-
lages resides at: http://geo.linkeddata.es/
map4rdf-dogon/.

55



Figure 2: Visualization of the Dogon villages

Figure 3: Clicking on a pin

56



Figure 4: More information about a village

that we have used here are open source and freely
available. Converting linguistic data into RDF can
be a straightforward process and we have shown
the steps and some tools to assist in that transfor-
mation. There is much data available about lan-
guages and their typological features on the Web,
which are often available in simple .csv formats.
For example, the contents of World Atlas of Lan-
guage Structures (WALS)14 (5) have been con-
verted from .csv to RDF and are available through
the MLODE SPARQL endpoint.15 It was a triv-
ial task for us to set up map4rdf to point at the
WALS RDF data, so that we could also visualize
its contents, which contain over 2000 languages’
data points. Whereas the online version of WALS
already contains maps of typological features of
languages, their use is limited and by leveraging
RDF as we have with WALS and the Dogon data,
we can easily combine these disparate datasets, so
that, for example, we can merge data about lan-
guages and their typological features from both
datasets. This allows us to visualize not only the
villages where Dogon languages are spoken, but
linguistic features of languages spoken in this area
of Mali encoded in WALS. This mashup provides
even more detailed information about the features
of these different languages, which provides an-
other important data source in untangling the mys-
tery of why Dogon languages are so different than
other language families in West Africa. It also

14http://wals.info
15http://mlode-sparql.nlp2rdf.org/

sparql

shows the power of encoding data in RDF and
leveraging RDF tools.

References

[1] J. Bendor-Samuel, E. J. Olsen, and A. R.
White. Dogon. In J. Bendor-Samuel, edi-
tor, The Niger-Congo Languages–A Classi-
fication and Description of Africa’s Largest
Language Family, pages 169–177. Univer-
sity Press of America, Lanham, Maryland,
1989.

[2] R. Blench. A survey of Dogon languages in
Mali: overview. OGMIOS, 26:14–15, 2005.

[3] A. de León, F. Wisniewki, B. Villazón-
Terrazas, and O. Corcho. Map4rdf - Faceted
Browser for Geospatial Datasets. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Workshop on USING
OPEN DATA. W3C, June 2012.

[4] S. Farrar and D. T. Langendoen. A Linguis-
tic Ontology for the Semantic Web. GLOT
International, 7:97–100, 2003.

[5] M. Haspelmath, M. Dryer, D. Gil, and
B. Comrie, editors. The World Atlas of Lan-
guage Structures Online. Max Planck Digital
Library, Munich, 2008.

[6] R. Littauer, R. Turnbull, and A. Palmer. Vi-
sualising typological relationships: Plotting
wals with heat maps. In Proceedings of the
EACL 2012 Workshop on the Visualization of
Linguistic Patterns, page 4, Avignon, France,

57



April 2012. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

[7] C. Rohrdantz, M. Hund, T. Mayer,
B. Wälchli, and D. A. Keim. The world’s
languages explorer: Visual analysis of
language features in genealogical and
areal contexts. Comp. Graph. Forum,
31(3pt1):935–944, June 2012.

[8] C. Rohrdantz, T. Mayer, M. Butt, F. Plank,
and D. A. Keim. Comparative visual anal-
ysis of cross-linguistic featuretures. In
J. Kohlhammer and D. A. Keim, editors,
Proceedings of the International Symposium
on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
(EuroVAST 2010). The DEFINITIVE VER-
SION is available at diglib.eg.org., pages 27–
32, 2010.

[9] R. Therón, L. Fontanillo, A. Esteban, and
C. Segun. Visual analytics: A novel ap-
proach in corpus linguistics and the nuevo
diccionario histórico del español. In III Con-
greso Internacional de Lingstica de Corpusi,
2011.

[10] B. Villazón-Terrazas, L. Vilches-Blázquez,
O. Corcho, and A. Gómez-Pérez. Method-
ological Guidelines for Publishing Gov-
ernment Linked Data Linking Government
Data. In D. Wood, editor, Linking Govern-
ment Data, chapter 2, pages 27–49. Springer
New York, New York, NY, 2011.

[11] M. Wieling, J. Nerbonne, and R. H. Baayen.
Quantitative social dialectology: Explaining
linguistic variation geographically and so-
cially. PLoS ONE, 6(9):e23613, 09 2011.

58


