










































Detecting Missing Hyphens in Learner Text


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 300–305,
Atlanta, Georgia, June 13 2013. c©2013 Association for Computational Linguistics

Detecting Missing Hyphens in Learner Text

Aoife Cahill∗, Martin Chodorow†, Susanne Wolff∗ and Nitin Madnani∗

∗ Educational Testing Service, 660 Rosedale Road, Princeton, NJ 08541, USA
{acahill, swolff, nmadnani}@ets.org

† Hunter College and the Graduate Center, City University of New York, NY 10065, USA
martin.chodorow@hunter.cuny.edu

Abstract

We present a method for automatically de-
tecting missing hyphens in English text. Our
method goes beyond a purely dictionary-based
approach and also takes context into account.
We evaluate our model on artificially gener-
ated data as well as naturally occurring learner
text. Our best-performing model achieves
high precision and reasonable recall, making
it suitable for inclusion in a system that gives
feedback to language learners.

1 Introduction

While errors of punctuation are not as frequent, nor
often as serious, as some of the other typical mis-
takes that learners make, they are nevertheless an
important consideration for students aiming to im-
prove the overall quality of their writing. In this pa-
per we focus on the error of missing hyphens. The
following example is a typical mistake made by a
student writer:

(1) Schools may have more after school sports.

In this case the tokens after and school should be hy-
phenated as they modify the noun sports. However,
in Example (2) a hyphen between after and school
would be incorrect, since in this instance after func-
tions as as the head of a prepositional phrase modi-
fying went.

(2) I went to the dentist after school today.

These examples illustrate that purely dictionary-
based approaches to detecting missing hyphens are
not likely to be sophisticated enough to differentiate

the contexts in which a hyphen is required. In addi-
tion, learner text frequently contains other grammat-
ical and spelling errors, further complicating auto-
matic error detection. Example (3) contains an error
father like instead of father likes to. This causes dif-
ficulty for automated hyphenation systems because
like is a frequent suffix of hyphenated words and
play can function as a noun.

(3) My father like play basketball with me.

In this paper, we propose a classifier-based approach
to automatically detecting missing hyphen errors.
The goal of our system is to detect missing hyphen
errors and provide feedback to language learners.
Therefore, we place more importance on the preci-
sion of the system than recall. We train our model on
features that take the context of a pair of words into
account, as well as other discriminative features. We
present a number of evaluations on both artificially
generated errors and naturally occurring learner er-
rors and show that our classifiers achieve high preci-
sion and reasonable recall.

2 Related Work

The task of detecting missing hyphens is related to
previous work on detecting punctuation errors. One
of the classes of errors in the Helping Our Own
(HOO) 2011 shared task (Dale and Kilgarriff, 2011)
was punctuation. Comma errors are the most fre-
quent kind of punctuation error made by learners. Is-
rael et al. (2012) present a model for detecting these
kinds of errors in learner texts. They train CRF mod-
els on sentences from unedited essays written by
high-level college students and show that they per-
forms well on detecting errors in learner text. As

300



far as we are aware, the HOO 2011 system descrip-
tion of Rozovskaya et al. (2011) is the only work to
specifically reference hyphen errors. They use rules
derived from frequencies in the training corpus to
determine whether a hyphen was required between
two words separated by white space.

The task of detecting missing hyphens is related
to the task of inserting punctuation into the output of
unpunctuated text (for example, the output of speech
recognition, automatic generation, machine transla-
tion, etc.). Systems that are built on the output of
speech recognition can obviously take features like
prosody into account. In our case, we are deal-
ing only with written text. Gravano et al. (2009)
present an n-gram-based model for automatically
adding punctuation and capitalization to the output
of an ASR system, without taking any of the speech
signal information into account. They conclude that
more training data, rather than wider n-gram con-
texts leads to a greater improvement in accuracy.

3 Baselines

We implement three baseline systems which we will
later compare to our classification approach. The
first baseline is a naı̈ve heuristic that predicts a miss-
ing hyphen between bigrams that appear hyphenated
in the Collins Dictionary.1 As a somewhat less-
naı̈ve baseline, we implement a heuristic that pre-
dicts a missing hyphen between bigrams that occur
hyphenated more than 1,000 times in Wikipedia. A
third baseline is a heuristic that predicts a missing
hyphen between bigrams where the probability of
the hyphenated form as estimated from Wikipedia
is greater than 0.66, meaning that the hyphenated
bigram is twice as likely as the non-hyphenated bi-
gram. This baseline is similar to the approach taken
by Rozovskaya et al. (2011), except that the proba-
bilities are estimated from a much larger corpus.

4 System Description

Using the features in Table 1, we build a logis-
tic regression model which assigns a probability to
the likelihood of a hyphen occurring between two
words, wi and wi+1. As we are primarily interested
in using this system for giving feedback to language
learners, we require very high precision. Therefore,

1LDC catalog number LDC93T1

Tokens wi−1, wi, wi+1, wi+2
Stems si−1, si, si+1, si+2
Tags ti−1, ti, ti+1, ti+2
Bigrams wi–wi+1, si–si+1, ti–ti+1
Dict Does the hyphenated form appear in

the Collins dictionary?
Prob What is the probability of the word

bigram appearing hyphenated in
Wikipedia?

Distance Distance to following and preced-
ing verb, noun

Verb/Noun Is there a verb/noun preced-
ing/following this bigram

Table 1: Features used in all models. Positive in-
stances are those where there was a hyphen between
wi and wi+1 in the data. Stems are generated using
NLTK’s implementation of the Lancaster Stemmer,
and tags are obtained from the Stanford Parser.

we only predict a missing hyphen error when the
probability of the prediction is >0.99.

We experiment with two different sources of
training data, in addition to their combination. We
first train on well-edited text, using almost 1.8 mil-
lion sentences from the San Jose Mercury News cor-
pus.2 For training, hyphenated words are automati-
cally split (i.e. well-known becomes well known).
The positive examples for the classifier are all bi-
grams where a hyphen was removed. Negative ex-
amples consist of bigrams where there was no hy-
phen in the training data. Since this is over 99% of
the data, we randomly sample 3% of the negative
examples for training. We also restrict the negative
examples to only the most likely contexts, where a
context is defined as a part-of-speech bigram. A list
of possible contexts in which hyphens occur is ex-
tracted from the entire training set. Only contexts
that occur more than 20 times are selected during
training. All contexts are evaluated during testing.
Table 2 lists some of the most frequent contexts with
examples of when they should be hyphenated and
when they should remain unhyphenated.

The second data source for training the model
comes from pairs of revisions from Wikipedia ar-
ticles. Following Cahill et al. (2013), we automati-
cally extract a corpus of error annotations for miss-

2LDC catalog number LDC93T3A.

301



Context Hyphenated Unhyphenated
NN NN terrific truck-stop

waitress
a quake insurance
surcharge

CD CD Twenty-two thou-
sand

the 126 million
Americans

JJ NN an early-morning
blaze

an entire practice
session

CD NN a two-year contract about 600 tank cars
NN VBN a court-ordered

program
a letter delivered to-
day

Table 2: Some frequent likely POS contexts for hy-
phenation, with examples from the Brown corpus.

ing hyphens. This is done by extracting the plain
text from every revision to every article and com-
paring adjacent pairs of revisions. For each article,
chains of errors are detected, using the surrounding
text to identify them. When a chain begins and ends
with the same form, it is ignored. Only the first and
last points in an error chain are retained for train-
ing. An example chain is the following: It has been
an ancient {focal point → location → focal point
→ focal-point} of trade and migration., where we
would extract the correction focal point → focal-
point. In total, we extract a corpus of 390,298 sen-
tences containing missing hyphen error annotations.

Finally, we combine both data sources.

5 Evaluating on Artificial Data

Since there are large corpora of well-edited text
readily available, it is easy to evaluate on artifi-
cial data. For testing, we take 24,243 sentences
from the Brown corpus and automatically remove
hyphens from the 2,072 hyphenated words (but not
free-standing dashes). Each system makes a predic-
tion for all bigrams about whether a hyphen should
appear between the pair of words. We measure the
performance of each system in terms of precision, P,
(how many of the missing hyphen errors predicted
by the system were true errors), recall, R, (how many
of the artificially removed hyphens the system de-
tected as errors) and f-score, F, (the harmonic mean
of precision and recall). The results are given in
Table 3, and also include the raw number of true
positives, TP, detected by each system. The results
show that the baseline using Wikipedia probabilities
obtains the highest precision, however with low re-
call. The classifiers trained on newswire text and the

TP P R F
Baseline

Collins dict 397 40.5 19.2 26.0
Wiki Counts-1000 359 39.1 17.3 24.0
Wiki Probs-0.66 811 85.5 39.1 53.7

Classifier
SJM-trained 1097 82.0 52.9 64.3
Wiki-revision-trained 1061 72.8 51.2 60.1
Combined 1106 80.9 53.4 64.3

Table 3: Results of evaluating on the Brown Corpus
with hyphens removed

combined news and Wikipedia revision text achieve
the highest overall f-score. Figure (1a) shows the
Precision Recall curves for the Wikipedia baselines
and the three classifiers. The curves mirror the re-
sults in the table, showing that the classifier trained
on the newswire text, and the classifier trained on the
combined data perform best. The Wikipedia counts
baseline performs worst.

6 Evaluating on Learner Text

We carry out two evaluations of our system on
learner text. We first evaluate on the missing hyphen
errors contained in the CLC-FCE (Yannakoudakis et
al., 2011). This corpus contains 1,244 exam scripts
written by learners of English as part of the Cam-
bridge ESOL First Certificate in English. In total,
there are 173 instances of missing hyphen errors.
The results are given in Table 4, and the precision
recall curves are displayed in Figure (1b).

The results show that the classifiers consistently
achieve high precision on this data set. This is as
expected, given the high threshold set. Looking at
the curves, it seems that a slightly lower threshold in
this case may lead to better results. The curves show
that the combined classifier is performing slightly
better than the other two classifiers. The baselines
are clearly not performing as well on this dataset.

While the overall size of the CLC-FCE data set
is quite large, the low frequency of this kind of er-
ror means that the evaluation was carried out on a
relatively small number of examples. For this rea-
son, the reliability of the results may be called into
question. There is, for instance, a striking difference
between the f-scores for the Collins Dictionary base-

302



0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

0.
0

0.
2

0.
4

0.
6

0.
8

1.
0

Recall

P
re

ci
si

on

combined
sjm
wiki
baseline−wiki−counts
baseline−wiki−probs

(a) Brown Corpus

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

0.
0

0.
2

0.
4

0.
6

0.
8

1.
0

Recall

P
re

ci
si

on

combined
sjm
wiki
baseline−wiki−counts
baseline−wiki−probs

(b) CLC-FCE Corpus

Figure 1: Precision Recall curves for the Wikipedia baselines and the three classifiers.

TP P R F
Baseline

Collins dict 131 64.5 75.7 69.7
Wiki Counts-1000 141 73.1 81.5 77.0
Wiki Probs-0.66 36 92.3 20.8 34.0

Classifier
SJM-trained 60 84.5 34.7 49.2
Wiki-revision-trained 71 98.6 41.0 58.0
Combined 66 98.5 38.2 55.0

Table 4: Results of evaluating on the CLC-FCE
dataset

line on the Brown corpus (26.0) and on the learner
data (69.7). Inspection of the 131 true positives for
the learner data reveal that 87 of these are cases of a
single type, the word “make-up”, which students of-
ten wrote without a hyphen in response to a prompt
about a fashion and leisure show. Since the hyphen-
ated form was in the Collins Dictionary, the base-
line system was credited with detection of this error.
However, when the 87 occurrences of “make up” are
removed from the data set, the values of precision,
recall and f-score for the Collins Dictionary baseline
fall to 37.9, 51.2, and 42.9, respectively. This points
to a problem for system evaluation that is more gen-

303



eral than the low frequency of an error type, such
as missing hyphens. The more general problem is
that of non-independence among errors, which oc-
curs when an individual writer contributes multiple
times to an error count or when a particular prompt
gives rise to many occurrences of the same error, as
in the current case of “make-up”.

Despite the problem of non-independent errors, a
more accurate picture of system performance may
nonetheless emerge with more evidence. Therefore,
we evaluate system precision on a data set of 1,000
student GRE and TOEFL essays written by both na-
tive and nonnative speakers, across a wide range of
proficiency levels and prompts. The essays, drawn
from 295 prompts, ranged in length from 1 to 50
sentences, with an average of 378 words per essay.

We manually inspect a random sample of 100 in-
stances where each system detected a missing hy-
phen. Two native-English speakers judged the cor-
rectness of the predictions using the Chicago Man-
ual of Style as a guide.3 Inter-annotator agreement
on the binary classification task for 600 items was
0.79κ, showing high agreement. The results are
given in Table 5.

Total Judge-1 Judge 2
Predictions Precision Precision

Baseline
Collins dict 416 11 8
Wiki Counts 2185 20 21
Wiki Probs 224 54 52

Classifier
SJM-trained 421 62 69
Wiki-revision 577 43 41
Combined 450 60 62

Table 5: Precision results on 1000 student responses,
estimated by randomly sampling 100 hyphen predic-
tions of each system and manually evaluating them.

The results show that the first two baseline sys-
tems do not perform well on this essay data. This
is mainly because they do not take context into ac-
count. Many of the errors made by these systems in-
volved verb + preposition bigrams, as in Examples
(4) and (5). Restricting the detection by probability
clearly improves precision, but at the cost of recall

3http://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org

(only 224 total instances of missing hyphen errors
detected, the lowest of all 6 systems). In the man-
ual evaluation, the system trained on the SJM corpus
achieves the highest precision, though all precision
figures are lower than the previous evaluations. Ex-
ample (6) is a typical example of the kinds of false
positives made by the classifier models.

(4) If these men were required to step-down after a
limited number of years, the damage would be
contained.

(5) These families may even choose to eat at-home
than outside.

(6) The wellness program will save money in the
long-term.

Future work will explore additional features that
may help improve performance. A more thorough
study will also be carried out to fully understand the
differences in performance of the classifiers across
corpora. Another direction to explore in future work
is the related task of identifying extraneous hyphens
in learner text. These are even less frequent than
missing hyphens (87 annotated cases in the CLC-
FCE corpus), but we believe a similar classification
approach could be successful.

7 Conclusion

In this paper we presented a model for automatically
detecting missing hyphen errors in learner text. We
experimented with two kinds of training data, one
well-edited text, and the other an automatically ex-
tracted corpus of error annotations. When evaluat-
ing on artificially generated errors in otherwise well-
edited text, the classifiers generally performed bet-
ter than the baseline systems. When evaluating on
the small number of missing hyphen errors in the
CLC-FCE corpus, the word-based models did well,
though the classifiers also achieved consistently high
precision. A precision-only evaluation on a sample
of learner essays resulted in overall lower scores, but
the classifier trained on well-edited text performed
best. In general, the classifiers outperform the base-
line, especially in terms of precision, showing that
taking context into account when detecting these
kinds of errors is important.

304



References
Aoife Cahill, Nitin Madnani, Joel Tetreault, and Diane

Napolitano. 2013. Robust Systems for Preposition
Error Correction Using Wikipedia Revisions. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies, Atlanta, GA.

Robert Dale and Adam Kilgarriff. 2011. Helping Our
Own: The HOO 2011 Pilot Shared Task. In Pro-
ceedings of the Generation Challenges Session at the
13th European Workshop on Natural Language Gener-
ation, pages 242–249, Nancy, France, September. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Agustin Gravano, Martin Jansche, and Michiel Bacchi-
ani. 2009. Restoring punctuation and capitalization in
transcribed speech. In Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, 2009. ICASSP 2009. IEEE International
Conference on, pages 4741–4744. IEEE.

Ross Israel, Joel Tetreault, and Martin Chodorow. 2012.
Correcting Comma Errors in Learner Essays, and
Restoring Commas in Newswire Text. In Proceed-
ings of the 2012 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 284–
294, Montréal, Canada, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Alla Rozovskaya, Mark Sammons, Joshua Gioja, and
Dan Roth. 2011. University of Illinois System in
HOO Text Correction Shared Task. In Proceedings
of the Generation Challenges Session at the 13th Eu-
ropean Workshop on Natural Language Generation,
pages 263–266, Nancy, France, September. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Helen Yannakoudakis, Ted Briscoe, and Ben Medlock.
2011. A New Dataset and Method for Automati-
cally Grading ESOL Texts. In Proceedings of the
49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 180–189, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

305


