










































Applications of Semantic Publishing


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on NLP&LOD and SWAIE, pages 23–24,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 12 September 2013.

Applications of Semantic Publishing

Borislav Popov
Ontotext AD

borislav.popov@ontotext.com

1 Abstract

In recent years Semantic publishing applications 
get more and more domain-spread and user-ori-
ented  in  several  aspects,  among  which:  cus-
tomization and re-purpose of data and content re-
flecting the user needs in various domains;  fo-
cused summaries with respect to user interests; 
high relevance of the retrieved information and 
minimal effort in receiving it.

There are various works, exploring the relation 
between publishing and Linked Open Data, since 
the  latter  enriches  the  semantics  successfully 
across various domains. In (Villazon-Terrazas et. 
al 2012), for example, authors present their idea 
on a  life  cycle  model  (specification,  modeling, 
generation,  linking,  publication,  exploitation) 
and  demonstrate  its  application  within  various 
domains.  At  the  same  time,  in  (Mendes  et.  al 
2011)  a  DBpedia  service  has  been  presented 
(called DBpedia Spotlight), which automatically 
annotates  text  documents  with  DBpedia  URI’s 
using the DBpedia in-house ontology. Similarly, 
Zemanta1 provides a plug-in to content creators, 
which recommends links to relevant content (ar-
ticles, keywords, tags). Our approach is generally 
in-line  with these  ideas  and services  –  domain 
specific applications, automatic semantic annota-
tion,  and  addition  of  relevant  linked  content. 
However, our focus is preferably on: the trade-
off between the semantic knowledge holders (on-
tologies, linked data) and their language reflec-
tion  (domain  texts),  mediated  by  the  linguistic 
processing pipelines;  the  adaptive  flexibility  of 
the  constructed  applications  and  the  efficient 
storage and publishing of large data. 

Within Ontotext, examples of mass media, se-
mantic publishing web sites, such as the BBC’s 
sport web2 and the official web of the London’s 
Olympics 2013, have proven to attract a multi-

1  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zemanta
2  www.bbc.com/sport

million user bases. Behind such applications, as 
revealed by lead engineers at the BBC3, there lies 
the  complex  architecture  of  the  state-of-the-art 
Semantic and Text Analytics technologies, such 
as in-house: fast RDF database management sys-
tem OWLIM4 and knowledge management plat-
forms  KIM5; for robust semantic annotation and 
search, as well as for text analytics applications.

Both platforms are incorporated into numerous 
successful  Semantic  Publishing  Solutions  (in-
cluding  the  BBC  Sport6,  Press  Association7, 
Newz8, EuroMoney9, Publicis10 etc.). For the core 
methodology  see  (Kiryakov  et.  al  2003)  and 
(Popov et. al 2003). Starting with the FIFA 2010 
BBC web  site,  through  the  London  Olympics, 
feeding the official news site with enriched con-
tent  together  with  Press  Association,  we  have 
built  domain  expertise,  sound  solution  imple-
mentation  methodologies,  and  a  semantic  pub-
lishing  platform  to  serve  our  clients.  Beyond 
mass media, specialized publishers licensed our 
products  and  commissioned  us  for  customiza-
tions  -  like  Euromoney for  macroeconomic re-
port  analytics and Oxford University Press and 
IET for high value scientific content.

This talk  aims to describe the parameters of 
our  domain adaptation approach,  used success-
fully in many projects for more than 5 years, to 
build rigorous semantic publishing solutions.

Our strategy relies on the calibration between 
the  RDF  semantic  repository  OWLIM,  the  se-
mantic resources in KIM and the optimized Text 
Analytics  techniques  including  methodologies 
for fast creation of gold data in the selected do-

3 www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/bbcinternet/2012/04/sports_dy-
namic_semantic.html

4  www.ontotext.com/owlim  
5  http://www.ontotext.com/kim  
6  http://www.ontotext.com/publishing
7  http://www.pressassociation.com/
8  newz.nl
9  http://www.euromoney.com/
10  http://www.publicis.de/

23



main; focused curation of the automatically ana-
lyzed data and the application of advanced ma-
chine  learning  algorithms  in  data  clustering. 
Thus, the success of our solutions lays in the cus-
tomization  of  the  advanced  semantic  technolo-
gies  in  combination  with  text  analytics  tech-
niques,  tuned  to  the  needs  of  publishers  and 
adapted to the requested domains.  

2 Short Bio

Borislav Popov is the Head of the Semantic An-
notation and Search division at Ontotext. He has 
specialized in AI, spent some time on landmark 
projects in the financial and ERP industry across 
the  Balkans  with  clients  like  BASF  and  AC 
Nielsen. He is a part of Ontotext since its found-
ing and leads the company’s involvement in sev-
eral EC funded projects with multi–million bud-
gets. He took part in the birth of the KIM Plat-
form and since then is leading both its develop-
ment,  the  semantic  annotation and search divi-
sion and is primarily responsible for all the solu-
tion the group provides. Under his guidance the 
group delivered multiple solutions in Publishing 
and Media for the BBC, Press Association and 
several other major customers.

References 
Atanas Kiryakov, Borislav Popov, Damyan Ognyanoff, 

Dimitar Manov, Angel Kirilov, Miroslav Goranov. 
2003.  Semantic  Annotation,  Indexing,  and  Re-
trieval.  In: 2nd International Semantic Web Confer-
ence  (ISWC2003),  20-23  October  2003,  Florida, 
USA. LNAI Vol. 2870, pp. 484-499, Springer-Ver-
lag Berlin Heidelberg 2003.

Pablo N. Mendes, Max Jakob, Andres Garcia-Silva and 
Christian Bizer. 2011. DBpedia spotlight: shed-
ding light on the web of documents. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 7th International Conference on Se-
mantic Systems, pp. 1-8, ACM, New York, NY, 
USA.

Borislav Popov, Atanas Kiryakov, Angel Kirilov, Dim-
itar Manov, Damyan Ognyanoff and Miroslav Gora-
nov.  2003.  KIM – Semantic  Annotation Plat-
form. In:  2nd International Semantic Web Confer-
ence  (ISWC2003),  20-23  October  2003,  Florida, 
USA. LNAI Vol. 2870, pp. 834-849, Springer-Ver-
lag Berlin Heidelberg 2003.

Boris  Villazon-Terrazas,  Daniel  Vila-Suero,  Daniel 
Garijo,  Luis M. Vilches-Blazquez,  Maria Poveda-
Villalon, Jose Mora,  Oscar Corcho, and Asuncion 
Gomez-Perez.  2012.  Publishing  Linked  Data  - 
There  is  no  One-Size-Fits-All  Formula.  In: 

Proceedings  of  the  European  Data  Forum 2012,  
Copenague, Dinamarca.

24


