

















































Towards Building KurdNet, the Kurdish WordNet

Purya Aliabadi
SRBIAU

Sanandaj, Iran
purya.it@gmail.com

Mohammad Sina Ahmadi
University of Kurdistan

Sanandaj, Iran
reboir.ahmadi@gmail.com

Shahin Salavati
University of Kurdistan

Sanandaj, Iran
shahin.salavati@ieee.org

Kyumars Sheykh Esmaili
Nanyang Technological University

Singapore
kyumarss@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

In this paper we highlight the main chal-
lenges in building a lexical database for
Kurdish, a resource-scarce and diverse
language. We also report on our effort in
building the first prototype of KurdNet –
the Kurdish WordNet– along with a pre-
liminary evaluation of its impact on Kur-
dish information retrieval.

1 Introduction

WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) has been used in nu-
merous natural language processing tasks such as
word sense disambiguation and information ex-
traction with considerable success. Motivated by
this success, many projects have been undertaken
to build similar lexical databases for other lan-
guages. Among the large-scale projects are Eu-
roWordNet (Vossen, 1998) and BalkaNet (Tufis et
al., 2004) for European languages and IndoWord-
Net (Bhattacharyya, 2010) for Indian languages.

Kurdish belongs to the Indo-European family
of languages and is spoken in Kurdistan, a large
geographical region spanning the intersections of
Iran, Iraq, Turkey, and Syria. Kurdish is a less-
resourced language for which, among other re-
sources, no wordnet has been built yet.

We have recently launched the Kurdish lan-
guage processing project (KLPP1), aiming at pro-
viding basic tools and techniques for Kurdish text
processing. This paper reports on KLPP’s first
outcomes on building KurdNet, the Kurdish Word-
Net.

At a high level, our approach is semi-automatic
and centered around building a Kurdish alignment

1http://eng.uok.ac.ir/esmaili/
research/klpp/en/main.htm

for Base Concepts (Vossen et al., 1998), which is a
core subset of major meanings in WordNet. More
specifically, we use a bilingual dictionary and sim-
ple set theory operations to translate and align
synsets and use a corpus to extract usage exam-
ples. The effectiveness of our prototype database
is evaluated via measuring its impact on a Kurdish
information retrieval task. Throughout, we have
made the following contributions:

1. highlight the main challenges in building
a wordnet for the Kurdish language (Sec-
tion 2),

2. identify a list of available resources that can
facilitate the process of constructing such a
lexical database for Kurdish (Section 3),

3. build the first prototype of KurdNet, the Kur-
dish WordNet (Section 4), and

4. conduct a preliminary set of experiments to
evaluate the impact of KurdNet on Kurdish
information retrieval (Section 5).

Moreover, a manual effort to translate the glosses
and refine the automatically-generated outputs is
currently underway.

The latest snapshot of KurdNet’s prototype is
freely accessible and can be obtained from (KLPP,
2013). We hope that making this database pub-
licly available, will bolster research on Kurdish
text processing in general, and on KurdNet in par-
ticular.

2 Challenges

In the following, we highlight the main challenges
in Kurdish text processing, with a greater focus on

http://eng.uok.ac.ir/esmaili/research /klpp/en/main.htm
http://eng.uok.ac.ir/esmaili/research /klpp/en/main.htm


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Arabic‐based  ز  خ  ڤ  وو  ت  ش  س  ر  ق  پ  ۆ  ن  م  ل  ک  ژ  گ  ف  ێ  د  چ  ج  ب  ا  
Latin‐based A B C Ç D Ê F G J K L M N O P Q R S Ş T Û V X Z

(a) One-to-One Mappings
25 26 27 28

Arabic‐based ه ی و  ئ /  
Latin‐based I  U / W  Y / Î  E / H 

(b) One-to-Two Mappings

29 30 31 32 33

Arabic‐based  ح  غ  ع  ڵ  ڕ 
Latin‐based (RR) - (E) (X) (H)

(c) One-to-Zero Mappings

Figure 1: The Two Standard Kurdish Alphabets (Esmaili and Salavati, 2013)

the aspects that are relevant to building a Kurdish
wordnet.

2.1 Diversity

Diversity –in both dialects and writing systems–
is the primary challenge in Kurdish language
processing (Gautier, 1998; Gautier, 1996; Es-
maili, 2012). In fact, Kurdish is considered a bi-
standard2 language (Gautier, 1998; Hassanpour et
al., 2012): the Sorani dialect written in an Arabic-
based alphabet and the Kurmanji dialect written
in a Latin-based alphabet. Figure 1 shows both of
the standard Kurdish alphabets and the mappings
between them.

The linguistics features distinguishing these
two dialects are phonological, lexical, and mor-
phological. The important morphological differ-
ences that concern the construction of KurdNet
are (MacKenzie, 1961; Haig and Matras, 2002):
(i) in contrast to Sorani, Kurmanji has retained
both gender (feminine v. masculine) and case op-
position (absolute v. oblique) for nouns and pro-
nouns, and (ii) while is Kurmanji passive voice is
constructed using the helper verb “hatin”, in So-
rani it is created via verb morphology.

In summary, as the examples in (Gautier, 1998)
show, the “same” word, when going from Sorani
to Kurmanji, may at the same time go through sev-
eral levels of change: writing systems, phonology,
morphology, and sometimes semantics.

2.2 Complex Morphology

Kurdish has a complex morphology (Samvelian,
2007; Walther, 2011) and one of the main driv-
ing factors behind this complexity is the wide use
of inflectional and derivational suffixes (Esmaili et

2Within KLPP, our focus has been on Sorani and Kur-
manji which are the two most widely-spoken and closely-
related dialects (Haig and Matras, 2002; Walther and Sagot,
2010).

al., 2013a). Moreover, as demonstrated by the ex-
ample in Table 1, in the Sorani’s writing system
definiteness markers, possessive pronouns, encl-
itics, and many of the widely-used postpositions
are used as suffixes (Salavati et al., 2013).

One important implication of this morpho-
logical complexity is that any corpus-based
assistance or analysis (e.g., frequencies, co-
occurrences, sample passages) would require a
lemmatizer/morphological analyzer.

2.3 Resource-Scarceness

Although there exist a few resources which can
be leveraged in building a wordnet for Kurdish –
these are listed in Section 3– but some of the most
crucial resources are yet to be built for this lan-
guage. One of such resources is a collection of
comprehensive monolingual and bilingual dictio-
naries. The main problem with the existing elec-
tronic dictionaries is that they are relatively small
and have no notion of sense, gender, or part-of-
speech labels.

Another necessary resource that is yet to be
built, is a mapping system (i.e., a translitera-
tion/translation engine) between the Sorani and
Kurmanji dialects.

3 Available Resources

In this section we give a brief description of the
linguistics resources that our team has built as well
as other useful resources that are available on the
Web.

3.1 KLPP Resources

The main Kurdish text processing resources that
we have previously built are as follows:
− the Pewan corpus (Esmaili and Salavati,
2013): for both Sorani and Kurmanji dialects. Its
basic statistics are shown in Table 2.



+ + + + =
daa + taan + ish + akaan + ktew = ktewakaanishtaandaa

postpos. + poss. pron. + conj. + pl. def. mark. + lemma = word

Table 1: An Exemplary Demonstration of Kurdish’s Morphological Complexity (Salavati et al., 2013)

Sorani Kurmanji
Articles No. 115,340 25,572
Words No. (dist.) 501,054 127,272
Words No. (all) 18,110,723 4,120,027

Table 2: The Pewan Corpus’ Basic Statistics (Es-
maili and Salavati, 2013)

− the Pewan test collection (Esmaili et al., 2013a;
Esmaili et al., 2013b): built upon the Pewan cor-
pus, this collection has a set of 22 queries (in So-
rani and Kurmanji) and their corresponding rele-
vance judgments.
− the Payv lemmatizer: it is the result of a ma-
jor revision of Jedar (Salavati et al., 2013), our
Kurdish stemmer whose outputs are stems and not
lemmas. In order to return lemmas, Payv not only
maintains a list of exceptions (e.g., named enti-
ties), but also takes into consideration Kurdish’s
inflectional rules.

3.2 Web Resources

To the best of our knowledge, here are the other
existing readily-usable resources that can be ob-
tain from the Web:
− Dictio3: an English-to-Sorani dictionary with
more than 13,000 headwords. It employs a collab-
orative mechanism for enrichment.
− Ferheng4: a collection of dictionaries for the
Kurmanji dialect with sizes ranging from medium
(around 25,000 entries, for German and Turkish)
to small (around 4,500, for English).
− Wikipedia: it currently has more than 12,000
Sorani5 and 20,000 Kurmanji6 articles. One use-
ful application of these entries is to build a parallel
collection of named entities across both dialects.

4 KurdNet’s First Prototype

In the following, we first define the scope of our
first prototype, then after justifying our choice of
construction model, we describe KurdNet’s indi-
vidual elements.

3http://dictio.kurditgroup.org/
4http://ferheng.org/?Daxistin
5http://ckb.wikipedia.org/
6http://ku.wikipedia.org/

4.1 Scope
In the first prototype of KurdNet we focus only on
the Sorani dialect. This is mainly due to lack of an
available and reliable Kurmanji-to-English dictio-
nary. Moreover, processing Sorani is in general
more challenging than Kurmanji (Esmaili et al.,
2013a). The Kurmanji version will be built later
and will be closely aligned with its Sorani coun-
terpart. To that end, we have already started build-
ing a high-quality transliterator/translator engine
between the two dialects.

4.2 Methodology
There are two well-known models for building
wordnets for a language (Vossen, 1998):

• Expand: in this model, the synsets are built
in correspondence with the WordNet synsets
and the semantic relations are directly im-
ported. It has been used for Italian in Mul-
tiWordNet and for Spanish in EuroWordNet.

• Merge: in this model, the synsets and rela-
tions are first built independently and then
they are aligned with WordNet’s. It has been
the dominant model in building BalkaNet and
EuroWordNet.

The expand model seems less complex and
guarantees the highest degree of compatibility
across different wordnets. But it also has potential
drawbacks. The most serious risk is that of forcing
an excessive dependency on the lexical and con-
ceptual structure of one of the languages involved,
as pointed out in (Vossen, 1996).

In our project, we follow the Expand model,
since it can be partly automated and therefore
would be faster. More precisely, we aim at cre-
ating a Kurdish translation/alignment for the Base
Concepts (Vossen et al., 1998) which is a set of
5,000 essential concepts (i.e. synsets) that play
a major role in the wordnets. Base Concepts
(BC) is available on the Global WordNet Associa-
tion (GWA)’s Web page7. The Entity-Relationship
(ER) model for the data represented in Base Con-
cept is shown in Figure 2.

7http://globalwordnet.org/

http://dictio.kurditgroup.org/
http://ferheng.org/?Daxistin
http://ckb.wikipedia.org/
http://ku.wikipedia.org/
http://globalwordnet.org/


Synset 

Domain 

Definition Usage 

SUMO 

BCS 

Literal 

ID POS 

Type 

Lexical 
Relation 

Has / Is in 
N 

N N 

N 

Sense_no 

Figure 2: Base Concepts’ ER Model

4.3 Elements

Since KurdNet follows the Expand model, it inher-
its most of Base Concepts’ structural properties,
including: synsets and the lexical relations among
them, POS, Domain, BCS, and SUMO. KurdNet’s
language-specific aspects, on the other hand, have
been built using a semi-automatic approach. Be-
low, we elaborate on the details of construction the
remaining three elements.
Synset Alignments: for each synset in BC,
its counterpart in KurdNet is defined semi-
automatically. We first use Dictio to translate its
literals (words). Having compiled the translation
lists, we combine them in two different ways: (i) a
maximal alignment (abbr. max) which is a super-
set of all lists, and (ii) a minimal alignment (abbr.
min) which is a subset of non-empty lists. Fig-
ure 3 shows an illustration of these two combina-
tion variants. In future, we plan to apply more ad-
vanced techniques, similar to the graph algorithms
described in (Flati and Navigli, 2012).
Usage Examples: we have taken a corpus-assisted
approach to speed-up the process of providing us-
age examples for each aligned synset. To this end,
we: (i) extract all Pewan’s sentences (820,203),
(ii) lemmatize the corpus to extract all the lemmas
(278,873), and (iii) construct a lemma-to-sentence
inverted index. In the current version of KurdNet,
for each synset we build a pool of sentences by
fetching the first 5 sentences of each of its liter-
als from the inverted list. These pools will later
be assessed by lexicographers to filter out non-
relevant instances. In future, more sophisticated
approaches can be applied (e.g., exploiting con-
textual information).
Definitions: due to lack of proper translation
tools, this element must be aligned manually. The
manual enrichment and assessment process is cur-
rently underway. We have built a graphical user

k3 

e2 
k2 

k1 
e1 

Kmax 
E 

Kmin 

Figure 3: An Illustration of a Synset in Base Con-
cepts and its Maximal and Minimal Alignment
Variants in KurdNet

Base
Concepts

KurdNet
(max)

KurdNet
(min)

Synset No. 4,689 3,801 2,145
Literal No. 11,171 17,990 6,248
Usage No. 2,645 89,950 31,240

Table 3: The Main Statistical Properties of Base
Concepts and its Alignment in KurdNet

interface to facilitate the lexicographers’ task.
Table 3 shows a summary of KurdNet’s statistical
properties along with those of Base Concepts.

5 Preliminary Experiments

The most reliable way to evaluate the quality of
a wordnet is to manually examine its content and
structure. This is clearly very costly. In this pa-
per we have adopted an indirect evaluation alter-
native in which we look at the effectiveness of us-
ing KurdNet for rewriting IR queries (i.e. query
expansion).

We measure the impact of query expansion us-
ing two separate configurations: (i) Terms, which
uses the raw version of the evaluation components
(queries, corpus, and KurdNet), and (ii) Lemmas,
which uses the lemmatized version of them. Fur-
thermore, as depicted in Figure 4, we have con-
sidered two alternatives for expanding each query
term: (i) add all of its Synonyms, and (ii) add
all of the synonyms of its direct Hypernym(s).
Hence –given the min and max variants of Kurd-
Net’s synsets– there can be at least 10 different ex-
perimental scenarios.

In our experiments we have used the Pewan
test collection (see Section 3.1), the MG4J IR en-
gine (MG4J, 2013), and the Mean Average Preci-
sion (MAP) evaluation metric.

The results are summarized in Table 4. The no-
table patterns are as follows:

• since lemmatization yields additional



w0 
w2 w1 

w5 
w4 w3 

w6 

(a) By its Synonyms

w0 
w2 w1 

w5 
w4 w3 

w6 

(b) By its Hypernyms

Figure 4: Expansion Alternatives for the Term W0

matches between query terms and their
inflectional variants in the documents, it
improves the performance (row 2 v. row 3).
Expansion of the same lemmatized queries,
however, degrades the performance (7-10 v.
1,4-6). This degradation can be attributed to
the fact that the projection of KurdNet from
terms to lemmas introduces imprecise entry
merges.

• the min approach to align synsets outper-
forms its max counterpart overwhelmingly
(1,4,7,8 v. 5,6,9,10), confirming the intuition
that the max approach entails high-ambiguity,

• expanding query terms by their own syn-
onyms is less effective than by their hyper-
nyms’ synonyms. This phenomena might be
explained by the fact that currently for each
query term, we use all of its synonyms and
no sense disambiguation is applied.

Needless to say, a more detailed analysis of the
outputs can provide further insights about the
above results and claims.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we briefly highlighted the main
challenges in building a lexical database for the
Kurdish language and presented the first prototype
of KurdNet –the Kurdish WordNet– along with a
preliminary evaluation of its impact on Kurdish
IR.

We would like to note once more that the Kurd-
Net project is a work in progress. Apart from
the manual enrichment and assessment of the de-
scribed prototype which is currently underway,
there are many avenues to continue this work.
First, we would like to extend our prototype to
include the Kurmanji dialect. This would require
not only using similar resources to those reported

# Scenario MAP
1 Terms & Hypernyms (min) 0.4265
2 Lemmas 0.4263
3 Terms 0.4075
4 Terms & Synonyms (min) 0.3978
5 Terms & Hypernyms (max) 0.3960
6 Terms & Synonyms (max) 0.3841
7 Lemmas & Hypernyms (min) 0.3840
8 Lemmas & Synonyms (min) 0.3587
9 Lemmas & Hypernyms (max) 0.2530
10 Lemmas & Synonyms (max) 0.2215

Table 4: Different KurdNet-based Query Expan-
sion Scenarios and Their Impact on Kurdish IR

in this paper, but also building a mapping system
between the Sorani and Kurmanji dialects.

Another direction for future work is to prune the
current structure i.e. handling the lexical idiosyn-
crasies between Kurdish and English.

References
Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2010. IndoWordNet. In

Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10).

Kyumars Sheykh Esmaili and Shahin Salavati. 2013.
Sorani Kurdish versus Kurmanji Kurdish: An Em-
pirical Comparison. In Proceedings of the 51st An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL’13), pages 300–305.

Kyumars Sheykh Esmaili, Shahin Salavati, and An-
witaman Datta. 2013a. Towards Kurdish Informa-
tion Retrieval. ACM Transactions on Asian Lan-
guage Information Processing (TALIP), To Appear.

Kyumars Sheykh Esmaili, Shahin Salavati, Somayeh
Yosefi, Donya Eliassi, Purya Aliabadi, Shownem
Hakimi, and Asrin Mohammadi. 2013b. Building a
Test Collection for Sorani Kurdish. In Proceedings
of the 10th IEEE/ACS International Conference on
Computer Systems and Applications (AICCSA ’13).

Kyumars Sheykh Esmaili. 2012. Challenges in Kur-
dish Text Processing. CoRR, abs/1212.0074.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press.

Tiziano Flati and Roberto Navigli. 2012. The CQC
Algorithm: Cycling in Graphs to Semantically En-
rich and Enhance a Bilingual Dictionary. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 43(1):135–171.

Gérard Gautier. 1996. A Lexicographic Environment
for Kurdish Language using 4th Dimension. In Pro-
ceedings of ICEMCO.

Gérard Gautier. 1998. Building a Kurdish Language
Corpus: An Overview of the Technical Problems.
In Proceedings of ICEMCO.



Goeffrey Haig and Yaron Matras. 2002. Kurdish Lin-
guistics: A Brief Overview. Language Typology and
Universals, 55(1).

Amir Hassanpour, Jaffer Sheyholislami, and Tove
Skutnabb-Kangas. 2012. Introduction. Kurdish:
Linguicide, Resistance and Hope. International
Journal of the Sociology of Language, 217:1–8.

KLPP. 2013. KurdNet’s Download Page. Available
at: https://github.com/klpp/kurdnet.

David N. MacKenzie. 1961. Kurdish Dialect Studies.
Oxford University Press.

MG4J. 2013. Managing Gigabytes for Java. Available
at: http://mg4j.dsi.unimi.it/.

Shahin Salavati, Kyumars Sheykh Esmaili, and Fardin
Akhlaghian. 2013. Stemming for Kurdish Infor-
mation Retrieval. In The Proceeding (to appear) of
the 9th Asian Information Retrieval Societies Con-
ference (AIRS 2013).

Pollet Samvelian. 2007. A Lexical Account of So-
rani Kurdish Prepositions. In Proceedings of Inter-
national Conference on Head-Driven Phrase Struc-
ture Grammar, pages 235–249.

Dan Tufis, Dan Cristea, and Sofia Stamou. 2004.
BalkaNet: Aims, Methods, Results and Perspec-
tives. A General Overview. Romanian Journal of
Information science and technology, 7(1-2):9–43.

Piek Vossen, Laura Bloksma, Horacio Rodriguez, Sal-
vador Climent, Nicoletta Calzolari, Adriana Roven-
tini, Francesca Bertagna, Antonietta Alonge, and
Wim Peters. 1998. The EuroWordNet Base Con-
cepts and Top Ontology. Deliverable D017 D,
34:D036.

Piek Vossen. 1996. Right or Wrong: Combining Lex-
ical Resources in the EuroWordNet Project. In EU-
RALEX, volume 96, pages 715–728.

Piek Vossen. 1998. Introduction to EuroWordNet.
Computers and the Humanities, 32(2-3):73–89.

Géraldine Walther and Benoı̂t Sagot. 2010. Devel-
oping a Large-scale Lexicon for a Less-Resourced
Language. In SaLTMiL’s Workshop on Less-
resourced Languages (LREC).

Géraldine Walther. 2011. Fitting into Morphological
Structure: Accounting for Sorani Kurdish Endocl-
itics. In The Proceedings of the Eighth Mediter-
ranean Morphology Meeting.

https://github.com/klpp/kurdnet
http://mg4j.dsi.unimi.it/

	Introduction
	Challenges
	Diversity
	Complex Morphology
	Resource-Scarceness

	Available Resources
	KLPP Resources
	Web Resources

	KurdNet's First Prototype
	Scope
	Methodology
	Elements

	Preliminary Experiments
	Conclusions and Future Work

