



















































The PARLANCE mobile application for interactive search in English and Mandarin


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2014 Conference, pages 260–262,
Philadelphia, U.S.A., 18-20 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Parlance Mobile Application for Interactive Search in
English and Mandarin

Helen Hastie, Marie-Aude Aufaure∗, Panos Alexopoulos,
Hugues Bouchard, Catherine Breslin, Heriberto Cuayáhuitl, Nina Dethlefs,

Milica Gašić, James Henderson, Oliver Lemon, Xingkun Liu, Peter Mika, Nesrine Ben Mustapha,
Tim Potter, Verena Rieser, Blaise Thomson, Pirros Tsiakoulis, Yves Vanrompay,

Boris Villazon-Terrazas, Majid Yazdani, Steve Young and Yanchao Yu

email: h.hastie@hw.ac.uk. See http://parlance-project.eu for full list of affiliations

Abstract

We demonstrate a mobile application in
English and Mandarin to test and eval-
uate components of the Parlance di-
alogue system for interactive search un-
der real-world conditions.

1 Introduction

With the advent of evaluations “in the wild”,
emphasis is being put on converting re-
search prototypes into mobile applications that
can be used for evaluation and data col-
lection by real users downloading the ap-
plication from the market place. This is
the motivation behind the work demonstrated
here where we present a modular framework
whereby research components from the Par-
lance project (Hastie et al., 2013) can be
plugged in, tested and evaluated in a mobile
environment.
The goal of Parlance is to perform inter-

active search through speech in multiple lan-
guages. The domain for the demonstration
system is interactive search for restaurants in
Cambridge, UK for Mandarin and San Fran-
cisco, USA for English. The scenario is that
Mandarin speaking tourists would be able to
download the application and use it to learn
about restaurants in English speaking towns
and cities.

2 System Architecture

Here, we adopt a client-server approach as il-
lustrated in Figure 1 for Mandarin and Figure
2 for English. The front end of the demon-
stration system is an Android application that
calls the Google Automatic Speech Recogni-
tion (ASR) API and sends the recognized user
utterance to a server running the Interaction

∗Authors are in alphabetical order

Manager (IM), Spoken Language Understand-
ing (SLU) and Natural Language Generation
(NLG) components.

Figure 1: Overview of the Parlance Man-
darin mobile application system architecture

Figure 2: Overview of the Parlance En-
glish mobile application system architecture
extended to use the Yahoo API to populate
the application with additional restaurant in-
formation

When the user clicks the Start button, a di-
alogue session starts. The phone application
first connects to the Parlance server (via
the Java Socket Server) to get the initial sys-
tem greeting which it speaks via the Google

260



Text-To-Speech (TTS) API. After the system
utterance finishes the recognizer starts to lis-
ten for user input to send to the SLU compo-
nent. The SLU converts text into a semantic
interpretation consisting of a set of triples of
communicative function, attribute, and (op-
tionally) value1. Probabilities can be associ-
ated with candidate interpretations to reflect
uncertainty in either the ASR or SLU. The
SLU then passes the semantic interpretation
to the IM within the same server.
Chinese sentences are composed of strings of

characters without any space to mark words as
other languages do, for example:

In order to correctly parse and understand
Chinese sentences, Chinese word segmenta-
tions must be performed. To do this segmen-
tation, we use the Stanford Chinese word seg-
mentor2, which relies on a linear-chain condi-
tional random field (CRF) model and treats
word segmentation as a binary decision task.
The Java Socket Server then sends the seg-
mented Chinese sentence to the SLU on the
server.
The IM then selects a dialogue act, accesses

the database and in the case of English passes
back the list of restaurant identification num-
bers (ids) associated with the relevant restau-
rants. For the English demonstration system,
these restaurants are displayed on the smart
phone as seen in Figures 4 and 5. Finally,
the NLG component decides how best to re-
alise the restaurant descriptions and sends the
string back to the phone application for the
TTS to realise. The example output is illus-
trated in Figure 3 for Mandarin and Figure 4
for English.
As discussed above, the Parlance mobile

application can be used as a test-bed for com-
paring alternative techniques for various com-
ponents. Here we discuss two such compo-
nents: IM and NLG.

1This has been implemented for English; Mandarin
uses the rule-based Phoenix parser.

2http://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/chinese-
nlp.shtml

Figure 3: Screenshot and translation of the
Mandarin system

Figure 4: Screenshot of dialogue and the list
of recommended restaurants shown on a map
and in a list for English

2.1 Interaction Management

The Parlance Interaction Manager is based
on the partially observable Markov decision
process (POMDP) framework, where the sys-
tem’s decisions can be optimised via reinforce-
ment learning. The model adopted for Par-
lance is the Bayesian Update of Dialogue
State (BUDS) manager (Thomson and Young,
2010). This POMDP-based IM factors the di-
alogue state into conditionally dependent ele-
ments. Dependencies between these elements
can be derived directly from the dialogue on-
tology. These elements are arranged into a dy-
namic Bayesian network which allows for their
marginal probabilities to be updated during
the dialogue, comprising the belief state. The
belief state is then mapped into a smaller-scale
summary space and the decisions are optimised
using the natural actor critic algorithm. In the
Parlance application, hand-crafted policies

261



Figure 5: Screenshot of the recommended
restaurant for the English application

can be compared to learned ones.

2.2 Natural Language Generation

As mentioned above, the server returns the
string to be synthesised by the Google TTS
API. This mobile framework allows for testing
of alternative approaches to NLG. In particu-
lar, we are interested in comparing a surface re-
aliser that uses CRFs against a template-based
baseline. The CRFs take semantically anno-
tated phrase structure trees as input, which it
uses to keep track of rich linguistic contexts.
Our approach has been compared with a num-
ber of competitive state-of-the art surface real-
izers (Dethlefs et al., 2013), and can be trained
from example sentences with annotations of se-
mantic slots.

2.3 Local Search and Knowledge Base

For the English system, the domain database is
populated by the search Yahoo API (Bouchard
and Mika, 2013) with restaurants in San Fran-
sisco. These restaurant search results are
returned based on their longitude and lati-
tude within San Francisco for 5 main areas, 3
price categories and 52 cuisine types contain-
ing around 1,600 individual restaurants.
The Chinese database has been partially

translated from an English database for restau-
rants in Cambridge, UK and search is based
on 3 price categories, 5 areas and 35 cuisine
types having a total of 157 restaurants. Due
to the language-agnostic nature of the Par-
lance system, only the name and address

fields needed to be translated.

3 Future Work

Investigating application side audio compres-
sion and audio streaming over a mobile in-
ternet connection would enable further assess-
ment of the ASR and TTS components used
in the original Parlance system (Hastie et
al., 2013). This would allow for entire research
systems to be plugged directly into the mobile
interface without the use of third party ASR
and TTS.
Future work also involves developing a feed-

back mechanism for evaluation purposes that
does not put undue effort on the user and put
them off using the application. In addition,
this framework can be extended to leverage
hyperlocal and social information of the user
when displaying items of interest.

Acknowledgements

The research leading to this work was funded
by the EC FP7 programme FP7/2011-14
under grant agreement no. 287615 (PAR-
LANCE).

References
H. Bouchard and P. Mika. 2013. Interactive hy-

perlocal search API. Technical report, Yahoo
Iberia, August.

N. Dethlefs, H. Hastie, H. Cuayáhuitl, and
O. Lemon. 2013. Conditional Random Fields
for Responsive Surface Realisation Using Global
Features. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), Sofia, Bulgaria.

H. Hastie, M.A. Aufaure, P. Alexopoulos,
H. Cuayáhuitl, N. Dethlefs, M. Gasic,
J. Henderson, O. Lemon, X. Liu, P. Mika,
N. Ben Mustapha, V. Rieser, B. Thomson,
P. Tsiakoulis, Y. Vanrompay, B. Villazon-
Terrazas, and S. Young. 2013. Demonstration
of the PARLANCE system: a data-driven
incremental, spoken dialogue system for in-
teractive search. In Proceedings of the 14th
Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group
on Discourse and Dialogue (SIGDIAL), Metz,
France, August.

B. Thomson and S. Young. 2010. Bayesian up-
date of dialogue state: A POMDP framework
for spoken dialogue systems. Computer Speech
and Language, 24(4):562–588.

262


