









































Registers in the System of Semantic Relations in plWordNet

Marek Maziarz
Maciej Piasecki
Ewa Rudnicka

Institute of Informatics
Wrocław University of Technology

Wrocław, Poland
mawroc@gmail.com

maciej.piasecki@pwr.wroc.pl
ewa.rudnicka78@gmail.com

Stan Szpakowicz
Institute of Computer Science
Polish Academy of Sciences

Warsaw, Poland
&

School of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
University of Ottawa

Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
szpak@eecs.uottawa.ca

Abstract

Lexicalised concepts are represented in wordnets

by word-sense pairs. The strength of markedness

is one of the factors which influence word use.

Stylistically unmarked words are largely context-

neutral. Technical terms, obsolete words, “of-

ficialese”, slangs, obscenities and so on are all

marked, often strongly, and that limits their use con-

siderably. We discuss the position of register and

markedness in wordnets with respect to semantic

relations, and we list typical values of register. We

illustrate the discussion with the system of regis-

ters in plWordNet, the largest Polish wordnet. We

present a decision tree for the assignment of mark-

ing labels, and examine the consistency of the edit-

ing decisions based on that tree.

1 Introduction

A dense network of lexico-semantic relations is
the feature that best differentiates a wordnet from
other types of dictionaries and thesauri. Word-
nets are organised into synsets and lexical units
(LUs), whose meaning is crucially determined just
by such relations. The inventories of relations,
usually based on the findings in lexical semantics,
seem largely comparable across wordnets, but spe-
cific definitions and strategies of applications vary.
Wordnets also vary in the amount of typical dictio-
nary information encoded. An apt example of such
variation is the treatment of stylistic registers, as
well as broad semantic domains, to which a given
synset or LU belongs.

Lexico-semantic relations are the principal de-
terminant of lexical meaning in plWordNet. Mark-
ing often constrains those relations; some of them
cannot hold between LUs of incompatible regis-
ters. Semantics can constrain derivationally based
relations, e.g., femininity is limited to the nouns
denoting animals and humans. Among verbs
there are also relations limited to the particular as-
pect or verb class, like hyponymy or inchoativity
(Maziarz et al., 2013, section 4).

Registers, semantic domains and verb classes
are attributes. It is far from obvious how to put at-
tributive information into an inherently relational
structure of a wordnet. Princeton WordNet (PWN)
represents semantic domains by synsets in two
roles: elements of the lexical system and meta-
information which characterises those elements.
To associate a synset with a domain, a domain re-
lation links it with another synset which represents
that domain. Attributes of LUs can also be rep-
resented by sub-dividing those LUs into classes.
This mechanism has been present in PWN from
the beginning. There are, e.g., separate bases for
parts of speech or semantic domains, represented
by the so-called lexicographers’ files.

Registers have a major role to play in shap-
ing the structure of plWordNet. We will con-
tinue the practice of making registers figure in
the definitions of lexico-semantic relations, but we
will analyse them, and introduce register values
into plWordNet, very systematically. To begin
with, we need an appropriate set of marking la-
bels. It should streamline the description of lexico-
semantic relations, facilitate future plWordNet ap-



plications, and ensure the consistency of the lin-
guists’ decisions.

Section 2 of the paper recaps the model of the
semantic relation system in plWordNet. Section 3
serves as an overview of related work insofar as
it contributes to our intended use of the marking
labels for the enrichment of the wordnet-based de-
scription of lexical meaning. Section 4 presents
the details of the markedness labelling in plWord-
Net. Section 5 reports on a small, carefully ar-
ranged experiment meant to determine how con-
sistent marking can be expected given a precise
procedure in the form of a decision tree. Section 6
offers a few conclusions based on our experience,
and briefly discusses our expectations for the on-
going development of plWordNet.

2 Constitutive relations and registers

A wordnet is founded on synonymy. Its basic unit,
the synset, is a group of lexical units (LUs).1 Al-
though synonymy is undoubtedly key, wordnets
vary as to how it is defined and applied. The cre-
ators of PWN (Miller et al., 1993; Fellbaum, 1998)
adopt a very strict definition of synonymy usu-
ally attributed to Leibniz,2 but realistically make
it context-dependent. The effect is a take on syn-
onymy which is linguistically satisfying but insuf-
ficiently accurate: the wordnet authors’ intuition
largely dictates what LUs go into a synset. More-
over, a synset is often understood as a set of syn-
onymous LUs, while synonymous LUs are under-
stood as elements of the same synset. Such circu-
larity is hard to make operational.

The interdependence of the notions of syn-
onymy and synset, and the subjectivity of autho-
rial judgement, can be avoided. Maziarz et al.
(2013) propose a different perspective. The LU,
rather than the synset, becomes the basic structure
in plWordNet. As Vossen (2002) notes, the cen-
tral relations – synonymy, hyponymy, hypernymy,
meronymy and holonymy – are lexical: they hold
between words, not between concepts. A PWN
synset denotes a lexicalized concept, and con-
ceptual relations link synsets, but those relations
have a lexico-semantic origin. Our model derives
synset content and synonymy from a carefully
constructed set of constitutive relations between

1We understand the lexical unit informally as a lemma-
sense pair.

2“Two words are said to be synonyms if one can be used in
a statement in place of the other without changing the mean-
ing of the statement.”

LUs. The construction is discussed in (Maziarz et
al., 2013); the focus of this paper is on the prop-
erties which help constitutive lexico-semantic re-
lations determine synsets.

The constitutive relations in plWordNet are hy-
ponymy, hypernymy, meronymy and holonymy,
plus verb-specific relations of presupposition, pre-
ceding, cause, processuality, state, iterativity and
inchoativity (Maziarz et al. (2011) discuss the de-
tails), and adjective-specific relations of value (of
an attribute), gradation and modifier (Maziarz et
al., 2012b). They are supplemented by constitu-
tive features: verb aspect and semantic class, and
register.

A wordnet describes lexical meaning primarily
via semantic relations, so it is important for a con-
stitutive relation to be fairly widespread in the net-
work. A high degree of sharing among groups
of LUs is necessary because a constitutive rela-
tion underlies grouping LUs into synsets. It also
helps if a constitutive relation is well established in
linguistics: linguists who are wordnet editors will
encounter fewer misunderstanding. Finally, a con-
stitutive relations which accords with the wordnet
practice will make for better compatibility among
wordnets (Maziarz et al., 2013).

Verbs of different aspect participate in different
lexico-semantic relations, e.g., a hypernym cannot
be replaced by the other element of its aspectual
pair. The value of aspect thus constrains selected
verb relations (Maziarz et al., 2012a). Semantic
verb classes also restrict links for some verb rela-
tions. The verb classification is based on a Vend-
lerian typology. A hierarchy of verb classes has
been implemented in plWordNet as a hypernymy
hierarchy of artificial lexical units, each naming
a different class. Verbs in a given class are hy-
ponyms of the corresponding artificial LU.

Stylistic registers have been introduced into
plWordNet relation definitions; they appear in
guidelines and in some substitution tests. With ev-
ery editing decision a linguist must recognise the
registers of the LUs and synsets to be linked. The
marking labels represent pragmatic features of LU
usage, so it seems natural to have register values
encoded explicitly.

A synset in plWordNet is a set of lexical units
which are connected to the rest of the network by
the same set of instances of constitutive relations,
and have compatible values of the constitutive fea-
tures. Note how this definition does not refer to



synonymy. Once synset membership has been de-
cided, its elements are understood to be in the re-
lation of synonymy.

It now becomes crucial to recognise accurately
the connectivity afforded by the constitutive re-
lations. Linguists who build the wordnet are as-
sisted by conditions in the definitions of relations
(such conditions often refer to registers and se-
mantic classes) and by substitution tests. Vossen
(2002) discusses tests for semantic correspon-
dence, which did not take into account the differ-
ences in register or usage, often essential for the
possibility of contextual interchangeability.

Lexical units which have nearly the same sense
but significantly differ in register are put into sep-
arate synsets, but the proximity is not lost: those
synsets become linked by inter-register synonymy.
That relation is weaker than synonymy with re-
spect to sharing. Synsets linked by inter-register
synonymy share a hypernym, but not hyponym
sets, and clearly have different register values.

Consider an example: komputer ‘computer’
has an obsolete inter-register synonym mózg elek-
tronowy ‘electronic brain’. Figure 1 shows hy-
ponymy to urządzenie elektroniczne ‘electronic
device’, which is shared.3 There is, however, a
hyponym komputer cyfrowy ‘digital computer’, a
specialist term which should not be linked to the
obsolete term for a computer.4 The terms kom-
puter and mózg elektronowy have the same deno-
tation but different linguistic contexts of use.

The model and the development of plWord-
Net comply with a form of minimal commitment
principle: make as few assumptions as possible
about the construction process. First of all, the
model avoids references to theories of cognition
and specific theories of lexical semantics. By min-
imising the theoretical underpinning and ground-
ing all editing decisions on the language data ob-
servable in a corpus, we try to focus on the lexical
system regardless of the reasons why it is organ-
ised as it is. We thus hope to make the wordnet
theory-neutral and ready for use in a wide range
of applications.

Minimal commitment does not preclude a map-
ping to an ontology. Such a mapping supplements
the linguistic dependencies recorded in the word-
net with a theoretical interpretation: the cogni-

3In plWordNet, a hyponymy link from X to Y means “X
is a hyponym of Y” rather than “X has a hyponym Y”.

4The substitution test “If it is a digital computer, then it
must be an electronic brain.” sounds distinctly funny.

komputer 
`computer’ 

mózg elektronowy 
`electronic brain’ 

urządzenie elektroniczne 
`electronic device’ 

komputer cyfrowy 
`digital computer’ 

    hyponymy 
    inter-register synonymy 

Figure 1: Inter-register synonymy between LUs
from different registers.

tive principles of the ontology. The wordnet de-
scribes lexico-semantic relation of varying, possi-
bly complex, background and origin, while the on-
tology mapping shows a possible relation between
the lexical system and the internal cognitive struc-
ture of concepts. A potential plus is the possibility
of considering different ontologies as the mapping
target, and so different interpretations of the lexi-
cal dependencies.

3 Markedness in lexicography
and in Princeton WordNet

Svensén (2009) notes that lexicographers refer as
marked to the part of the vocabulary with addi-
tional pragmatic features which narrow the usage
to a specific context or group of speakers. Such
distinction includes, but is not limited to, differ-
ent stylistic registers. Svensén adopts the classi-
fication of “diasystematic marking in a contem-
porary general purpose dictionary” (Hausmann,
1989), organised along 11 criteria: time, place, na-
tionality, medium, socio-cultural, formality, text
type, technicality, frequency, attitude and norma-
tivity. An unmarked centre and a marked periph-
ery5 are established for each criterion. The main
peripheries include “archaism-neologism; region-
alism, dialect word; foreign word; spoken-written
sociolects; formal-informal; poetic, literary, jour-
nalese; technical language; rare; connoted; and
incorrect”. In a dictionary, the location of a lex-
ical item in a periphery is signalled by a label,
e.g., arch ‘archaic’, AmE ‘American English’ or

5or peripheries, because for some criteria there can be
more than one periphery



poet ‘poetic’.
Wordnets vary with respect to the ways and de-

gree of coding markedness. PWN signals marked-
ness with a special DOMAIN - MEMBER OF A DO-
MAIN relation with three sub-types: TOPIC, RE-
GION and USAGE. It can be established between
synsets in the same grammatical category or be-
tween cateories. The subtype names correspond
to the criteria of marking (Hausmann, 1989). Sur-
prisingly, noun synsets play the role of specific la-
bels within particular subtypes. PWN 3.0 has 438
labels pertaining to DOMAIN TERM TOPIC, 166 la-
bels to DOMAIN TERM REGION, and 29 labels to
DOMAIN TERM USAGE.

A closer look at the specific label instances
within the selected domains shows that some of
them belong to different peripheries of Sven-
sén (2009) / Hausmann (1989). The TOPIC do-
main includes such labels as, e.g., ‘archeology’,
‘Arthurian legend’ or ‘auto racing’. The USAGE
domain includes, e.g., ‘archaism’, ‘African Amer-
ican Vernacular English’ and ‘colloquialism’. RE-
GION seems to be built most consistently: in prin-
ciple it concerns dialectal names. It could thus be
treated as an equivalent of the ‘regionalism-dialect
word’ periphery. Yet, some of those links sig-
nal only geographical membership, but not dialec-
tal variation. Consider, for example, the relation
DOMAIN TERM REGION between {Polynesia} and
{Austronesia}. It is clearly not the case that Poly-
nesia is a dialect word used mainly in, or coming
from, Austronesia.

Polish lexicography distinguishes groups of
marking (register) labels not unlike those we
showed above: diachronic, stylistic, emotional,
terminological (professional, scientific), diastratic,
diatopic (geographical), diafrequential (Dubisz,
2006; Engelking et al., 1989). The consistency
of marking is low. Lexicographers point out mis-
takes and dubious decisions in the dictionary-
making process (Kurkiewicz, 2007).6 Not only

6Consider metal ‘one listening to heavy metal music’ and
wywiad ‘interview’. Dubisz (2006) labels the former youth
language, the latter – journalism. Żmigrodzki (2012)
assigns music to the former and no label to the latter.

This is not only the malady of Polish lexicography. In En-
glish and German dictionaries, words also carry assorted reg-
ister labels. Svensén (2009, p. 316) notes: “Different dictio-
naries may use different labels, and the categories represented
by the labels may have different ranges in different dictionar-
ies. Moreover, there may be differences in labelling practice,
so that, in one dictionary, fewer or more lexical items are re-
garded as formal or informal, correct or incorrect, etc., than
in another one (Haussman 1989: 650).”

do dictionaries label the same lexical units differ-
ently (Engelking et al., 1989), but the label lists
vary significantly (exemplum (Dubisz, 2006) and
(Kurkiewicz, 2007)). There also are too many la-
bels (ca. 20-30 main and more than 100 secondary
categories), so it is virtually impossible to mark
the semantico-pragmatic constraints with any de-
gree of consensus.

Several sets of criteria have emerged during the
lexicographic debates in Poland. We find the set
proposed by Buttler and Markowski (1998) to be
the most interesting. Three semantico-pragmatic
features are posited: official, specialist,
emotional (or emotionally marked, or
expressive). Their +/- (present/absent values)
define a space in which all language variants
or styles can be placed. Thus, general lan-
guage could be characterised by {-official,
-specialist, -emotional}, and liter-
ary style by {+official, -specialist,
-emotional}.

4 Registers in plWordNet

Although in plWordNet 2.0 registers did influence
relations, they were not introduced explicitly. In
order to gain high consistency, we have decided to
mark labels explicitly, and to create detailed guide-
lines for the lexicographers.

The set of plWordNet marking labels is in-
spired by Buttler and Markowski (1998) and by
Kurkiewicz (2007). As does the Great Dictionary
of Polish (Kurkiewicz, 2007; Żmigrodzki, 2012),
we aim to lower the overall number of labels by
about an order of magnitude. In the end, we have
distinguished nine marking labels, with general
(unmarked) language as the tenth register:7

• obsolete – this label marks LUs which are
outdated, typically used only by elderly or
(rarely) middle-aged people;

• regional – LUs from a dialect, well known to
(but not used by) almost all Poles;

• terminological {+off, +spec, -emo} –
LUs used by specialists, scientists, engineers,

For example, Oxford English Dictionary (Simpson, 2013)
equips the word malady with the label literary, while
Cambridge Dictionaries Online (Heacock, 1995 2011) con-
sider it formal. The word freak is informal in (Simpson,
2013), but has no label (!) in (Heacock, 1995 2011).

7We abbreviate the three features from (Buttler and
Markowski, 1998) as off = official, spec = specialist, emo
= emotional.



and generally professionals;

• argot/slang {-off, +spec, +emo} – LUs
used by a particular social group or a
small/local community;

• literary {+off, -spec, ±emo} – this label
marks high style vocabulary, especially LUs
used only in literature or in speeches;

• official {+off, -spec, -emo} – LUs used
on official and formal occasions, mainly in
communication between citizens and repre-
sentatives of state institutions;8

• vulgar {-off, -spec, +emo} – crude vo-
cabulary, LUs with very restricted acceptable
usage;

• popular {-off, -spec, +emo} – LUs
which might be used in a familiar context, but
normally not acceptable in other situations;

• colloquial {-off, -spec, +emo} – vocab-
ulary used informally, in a free style, but with
low acceptability in official situations;

• general {±off, -spec, -emo} – LUs
which could be used virtually in every situ-
ation.

To help plWordNet editors maintain consis-
tency, we have designed a series of substitution
tests in the form of a decision tree. The editor
systematically inspects the semantic features
±spec, ±off and ±emo for a given LU, as
well as more specific pragmatic features. The tree
appears in Figure 2. Consider Example 1 (the
prerequisite is italicised, the actual test is set in
roman):

Example 1 (regional)

Test. The LU pyra ‘potato’ may have
equivalents in other regions of Poland or
in general language. The Poles know
the LU pyra and recognise it as re-
gional.9

The test is applied right after the diachronic cri-
terion (Figure 2, obs). If the prerequisite and the
test proper both hold, the LU pyra is marked as

8Such language develops around any bureaucracy.
9It is used in Greater Poland.

LU 

obsolete 

regional 

+ 

– 

terminological 

argot 

literary 

– 

+ 

+ 
official 

– 

general 

vulgar 

popular 

colloquial 

obs? 

reg? 

spec? 

ic? 

+ 

+ 

– 

– 

+ 

– 

+ 

off? 

+++emo? 

– 

+ 

– 

+ 

+ 

+ 

– 

lit? 

inst? 

unc? 

– 

– 

++emo? 

+emo? 

Figure 2: Substitution tests for markedness in
plWordNet. Legend: +++emo = emotionally
marked LU unacceptable in most situations (that
includes vulgarity), ++emo = emotionally marked
LU acceptable only in familiar situations, +emo =
emotionally marked LU acceptable in some famil-
iar situations and when talking to strangers, ic =
LU from a slang or argot, inst = LU used only
in communication with state institutions, lit =
LU used only in literature, obs = used by the el-
derly, off = language suitable for official situa-
tions, reg = regional LU, spec = LU used only
by specialists, unc = LU unsuitable for common
communication.

regional. The test fails if either part disagrees with
the plWordNet editor’s intuition.



Example 2 shows a two-step test: consider
a (possibly) vulgar noun first in an unofficial
situation of talking to a stranger, and then in a
very official situation.

Example 2 (vulgar)

Test 1. Imagine that you meet a stranger
in the street and talk a while. You have
just used the LU skurwiel ‘son of
a bitch’. Your interlocutor will most
likely think that you are crude.

Test 2. Imagine yourself in the mid-
dle of a very official or public situa-
tion (you are in the presence of an el-
der, your superior, president of the Pol-
ish Republic, a professor, a bishop, or
you are being interviewed on TV news).
You have just used the LU skurwiel
‘son of a bitch’. Your interlocutor – or
TV viewer – will most likely think that
you are crude.

The substitution tests are applied in a cascade
of filters. An LU which passes through all filters
must land in the final bin – the general register.

5 The stability of the substitution tests

To ensure that the marking labels introduced in
Section 4 can be applied with sufficient consis-
tency, we examined the inter-rater agreement be-
tween two plWordNet editors who independently
marked a sample of LUs. They were given a docu-
ment with detailed guidelines and complete tests,
and a spreadsheet with 385 noun LUs randomly
drawn from plWordNet (a simple random sample,
proper names and gerunds excluded).

Figure 3 presents the histograms of the counts
of marking labels in the 385-LU sample. The most
frequently assigned registers are terminology, gen-
eral language, and literary and colloquial styles.
These four account for more than 90% of the sam-
ple. Both editors found terminology to be the most
frequent register, and neither found the vulgar la-
bel necessary. If we were to extrapolate, we could
venture a broad guess on the approximate distribu-
tion of register values of LUs in plWordNet:

• 25 in the terminology register,

• 13 in the general register,

• 16 in the literary style,

 

162 

108 

58 

24 

12 

5 

4 

9 

3 

0 

146 

113 

63 

44 

9 

5 

1 

3 

1 

0 

0 50 100 150

terminology

general

literary

colloquial

obsolete

argot

official

popular

regional

vulgar

Frequency 

#1 #2

Figure 3: Counts of stylistic register values in a
385-LU sample from plWordNet, with two raters.

• 112 in the colloquial style,

• 112 in the remaining registers.

The annotators are in reasonable agreement, as
measured by Cohen’s kappa: κ = 0.645 with the
confidence interval 0.586-0.722 (Table 1).10 Ac-
cording to Landis and Koch (1977, p. 165), the
confidence interval covers two values of agree-
ment strength: moderate and substantial.

It is commonly assumed that only κ≥ 0.8 guar-
antees reliable results in computational linguistics,
and κ in 0.67-0.8 is tolerable. Reidsma and Car-
letta (2007) show that this rule of thumb does not
always work. Sometimes lower κ makes the re-
sults reliable, sometimes even κ ≥ 0.8 does not
suffice. The authors recommend checking whether
differences between annotators are systematic or
random,11 so we have decided also to put our data

10The confidence interval was calculated by simple per-
centile bootstrap (DiCiccio and Efron, 1996; DiCiccio and
Romano, 1988) suitable for Cohen’s κ (Artstein and Poesio,
2008).

11The former is a real problem for computational methods,



label Cohen’s confidence p-value
system κ interval of κ of χ2 test

10 labels 0.645 0.586-0.722 0.03962
5 labels 0.722 0.657-0.785 0.02686

Table 1: Inter-rater agreement of two annotators
assigning marking labels to nouns from plWord-
Net. Confidence intervals are calculated by the
percentile bootstrap method, n = 10000 resam-
plings, α = 0.05. P-values are calculated for the
χ2 tests of independence. The 10-label system was
described in Section 4. The 5-label system equates
compatible labels, as described in this section.

through a non-parametric χ2 test of independence.
The p-value is 0.03962, so we do not reject the null
hypothesis that the plWordNet editors’ choices are
distributed similarly at 1% significance level.

The Cohen’s κ value will increase if there are
fewer marking labels. One fairly obvious way of
doing that is to consider as compatible those mark-
ing label bins whose definitions are close; see the
decision tree in Figure 2:

• general ≈ literary ≈ colloquial,

• official ≈ terminology ≈ argot,

• vulgar ≈ popular.

This boosts Cohen’s kappa to 0.722 with a very
good confidence interval of 0.657-0.785. Now the
κ is in the area of substantial agreement of Landis
and Koch. The χ2 test for the new labelling sys-
tem again leads us to the fortunate assumption that
distributions of editor choices are similar at 1%
significance level (so none of the editors has any
bias). Fewer labels, narrow and high inter-rater
agreement, but somewhat less information. . .

6 Conclusions

The model proposed for plWordNet bases the
grouping of lexical units (LUs) into synsets on
constitutive relations. In order to match the lan-
guage data even more accurately, we enriched the
definitions of some of the semantic relations. We
added constraints which refer to verb aspect, verb
semantic classes and registers. Those features play
a central role in shaping the wordnet relation struc-
ture, so we named them constitutive features.12

the latter it not a threat.
12It is attributive information in an inherently relational

system, but there is no contradiction. This information only

Registers appear to be particularly important, be-
cause they characterise all parts of speech covered
by plWordNet, and they link the pragmatics of us-
age in a simple manner with the lexico-semantic
description in the relational paradigm. That is why
registers in plWordNet will now explicitly charac-
terise LUs.

A review of the linguistic study of registers has
suggested a set of ten registers, including the de-
fault unmarked register. We have also designed
rules for register identification in the form of a
decision tree, and made them a mandatory ele-
ment of the guidelines for wordnet editors. We
ran an annotation experiment in which two lin-
guists independently assigned register values to
a representative sample. We conclude that LUs
can be given register labels with acceptable inter-
annotator agreement.

Our wordnet model follows the minimal com-
mitment principle. We only consider a small set
of homogeneous and quite carefully specified ba-
sic notions. The whole system of semantic rela-
tions and synsets in a wordnet is directly derived
from the linguistic lexico-semantic relations and
from language data. The structure of the wordnet
is closer to language facts, because it is derived
from the lexico-semantic relations between LUs
which can largely be observed directly in corpus
data. That is why the adopted wordnet model fa-
cilitates semi-automated wordnet expansion using
knowledge extracted from corpora. The system-
atic introduction of registers allows us to take into
account elements of pragmatics without giving up
the conceptual simplicity of the model.

Acknowledgment

Co-financed by the Polish Ministry of Education
and Science, Project CLARIN-PL, and the Eu-
ropean Innovative Economy Programme project
POIG.01.01.02-14-013/09.

References
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-Coder

Agreement for Computational Linguistics. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 34(4):555–596.

Danuta Buttler and Andrzej Markowski. 1998. Słown-
ictwo wspólnoodmianowe, książkowe i potoczne
współczesnej polszczyzny [The general, bookish
and colloquial vocabulary of contemporary Polish].

helps constrain semantic relations, which remain the princi-
pal vehicle for the description of lexical meaning.



Język a Kultura [Language and Culture], 1:179–
203.

Thomas J. DiCiccio and Bradley Efron. 1996. Boot-
strap Confidence Intervals. Statistical Science,
11(3):189–212.

Thomas J. DiCiccio and Joseph P. Romano. 1988. A
Review of Bootstrap Confidence Intervals. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Method-
ological), 50(3):338–354.

Stanisław Dubisz. 2006. Wstęp [introduction].
In Stanisław Dubisz, editor, Uniwersalny słownik
języka polskiego PWN. Wersja 3.0 (elektroniczna
na CD) [A universal dictionary of Polish. Version
3.0 (electronic on CD)]. Polish Scientific Publishers
PWN.

Anna Engelking, Andrzej Markowski, and Elżbieta
Weiss. 1989. Kwalifikatory w słownikach – próba
systematyzacji [Qualifiers in dictionaries – an at-
tempt to systematise]. Poradnik Językowy [Lan-
guage Guide], pages 300–309.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet – An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press.

Franz Josef Hausmann. 1989. Die Markierung im
allgemeinen einsprachigen Wörterbuch: eine Über-
sicht. In Franz Josef Hausmann, Oskar Reichmann,
Herbert Ernst Wiegand, and Ladislav Zgusta, edi-
tors, Wörterbücher. Ein internationales Handbuch
zur Lexikographie, volume 5.1, pages 649–657. De
Gruyter.

Paul Heacock, editor. 1995-2011. Cambridge Dictio-
naries Online. Cambridge University Press.

Juliusz Kurkiewicz. 2007. Kwalifikatory w
wielkim słowniku języka polskiego [Qualifiers in
the great dictionary of Polish]. In Piotr Żmi-
grodzki and Renata Przybylska, editors, Nowe stu-
dia leksykograficzne [New lexicographic studies].
Wydawnictwo Lexis.

J. Richard Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The
Measurement of Observer Agreement for Categor-
ical Data. Biometrics, 33(1):159–174.

Marek Maziarz, Maciej Piasecki, Stanisław Szpakow-
icz, Joanna Rabiega-Wiśniewska, and Bożena Ho-
jka. 2011. Semantic Relations between Verbs in
Polish Wordnet 2.0. Cognitive Studies, 11.

Marek Maziarz, Maciej Piasecki, and Stan Sz-
pakowicz. 2012a. An Implementation of a
System of Verb Relations in plWordNet 2.0.
In Christiane Fellbaum and Piek Vossen, ed-
itors, Proc. 6th International Global Wordnet
Conference, pages 181–188, Matsue, Japan,
January. The Global WordNet Association.
〈www.globalwordnet.org/gwa/proceedings/gwc2012.pdf〉.

Marek Maziarz, Stanisław Szpakowicz, and Maciej Pi-
asecki. 2012b. Semantic Relations among Adjec-
tives in Polish WordNet 2.0: A New Relation Set,
Discussion and Evaluation. Cognitive Studies, 12.

Marek Maziarz, Maciej Piasecki, and Stanisław Sz-
pakowicz. 2013. The chicken-and-egg problem in
wordnet design: synonymy, synsets and constitu-
tive relations. Language Resources and Evaluation,
47(3):769–796.

George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fell-
baum, Derek Gross, and Katherine J. Miller.
1993. Introduction to WordNet: an on-line lexi-
cal database. Unpublished, one of “Five Papers”
〈ftp://ftp.cogsci.princeton.edu/pub/wordnet/5papers.ps〉.

Dennis Reidsma and Jean Carletta. 2007. Reliabil-
ity measurement without limits. Computational Lin-
guistics, 1(1):1–8.

John Simpson. 2013. Oxford English Dictionary. Ox-
ford University Press. 〈www.oed.com/〉.

Bo Svensén. 2009. A handbook of lexicography: the
theory and practice of dictionary-making. Cam-
bridge University Press.

Piek Vossen. 2002. EuroWordNet General Document
Version 3. Technical report, University of Amster-
dam.

Piotr Żmigrodzki, editor. 2012. Wielki słownik języka
polskiego: Zasady opracowania [A great dictionary
of Polish: The principles of compilation]. Institute
of Polish Language, Polish Academy of Sciences.


