



















































Exploring cross-language statistical machine translation for closely related South Slavic languages


Language Technology for Closely Related Languages and Language Variants (LT4CloseLang), pages 76–84,
October 29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Exploring cross-language statistical machine translation
for closely related South Slavic languages

Maja Popović
DFKI Berlin, Germany

maja.popovic@dfki.de

Nikola Ljubešić
University of Zagreb, Croatia

nikola.ljubesic@ffzg.hr

Abstract

This work investigates the use of cross-
language resources for statistical machine
translation (SMT) between English and
two closely related South Slavic lan-
guages, namely Croatian and Serbian. The
goal is to explore the effects of translating
from and into one language using an SMT
system trained on another. For translation
into English, a loss due to cross-translation
is about 13% of BLEU and for the other
translation direction about 15%. The per-
formance decrease for both languages in
both translation directions is mainly due
to lexical divergences. Several language
adaptation methods are explored, and it is
shown that very simple lexical transforma-
tions already can yield a small improve-
ment, and that the most promising adap-
tation method is using a Croatian-Serbian
SMT system trained on a very small cor-
pus.

1 Introduction

Statistical machine translation has become widely
used over the last decade – open source tools such
as Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) make it possible
to build translation systems for any language pair
within days, or even hours. However, the prereq-
uisite is that appropriate bilingual training data is
available, which is actually one of the most se-
vere limitations of the statistical approach – large
resources are only available for a few language
pairs and domains. Therefore exploiting language
closeness can be very convenient if there are no
appropriate corpora containing the desired lan-
guage, but it is possible to acquire corpora con-
taining a closely related one. Croatian and Ser-
bian are very close languages, and both1 are under-

1as well as other South Slavic languages

resourced in terms of free/open-source language
resources and tools, especially in terms of paral-
lel bilingual corpora. On the other hand, Croatian
has recently become the third official South Slavic
language in the EU2, and Serbian3 is the official
language of a candidate member state. Therefore
investigating cross-language translation for these
two languages can be considered very useful.

Both languages belong to the South-Western
Slavic branch. As Slavic languages, they have
a free word order and are highly inflected. Al-
though they exhibit a large overlap in vocabulary
and a strong morphosyntactic similarity so that the
speakers can understand each other without diffi-
culties, there is a number of small, but notable and
frequently occurring differences between them.

In this paper, we investigate the impact of these
differences on cross-language translation. The
main questions are:

• How much will the translation performance
decrease if a Serbian-English SMT system is
used for translation from and into Croatian?
(and the other way round)

• What are the possibilities for diminishing this
performance decrease?

1.1 Related work

First publications dealing with statistical machine
translation systems for Serbian-English (Popović
et al., 2005) and for Croatian-English (Ljubešić
et al., 2010) are reporting results of first steps
on small bilingual corpora. Recent work on
Croatian-English pair describes building a paral-
lel corpus in the tourism domain by automatic
web harvesting (Esplà-Gomis et al., 2014) and re-
sults of a SMT system built on this parallel cor-
pus which yielded significant improvement (10%

2together with Slovenian and Bulgarian
3together with Bosnian and Montenegrin

76



BLEU) over the Google baseline in the tourism do-
main (Toral et al., 2014). A rule-based Apertium
system (Peradin et al., 2014) has been recently de-
veloped for translation from and into Slovenian
(also closely related language, but more distant).

Techniques simpler than general SMT such
as character-level translation have been investi-
gated for translation between various close lan-
guage pairs, where for the South Slavic group
the Bulgarian-Macedonian pair has been ex-
plored (Nakov and Tiedemann, 2012). Character-
based translation has also been used for translat-
ing between Bosnian and Macedonian in order to
build pivot translation systems from and into En-
glish (Tiedemann, 2012).

Developing POS taggers and lemmatizers for
Croatian and Serbian and using Croatian models
on Serbian data has been explored in (Agić et al.,
2013).

To the best of our knowledge, a systematic in-
vestigation of cross-language translation systems
involving Croatian and Serbian, thereby exploit-
ing benefits from the language closeness and ana-
lyzing problems induced by language differences
has not been carried out yet.

2 Language characteristics

2.1 General characteristics

Croatian and Serbian, as Slavic languages, have
a very rich inflectional morphology for all word
classes. There are six distinct cases affecting
not only common nouns but also proper nouns
as well as pronouns, adjectives and some num-
bers. Some nouns and adjectives have two dis-
tinct plural forms depending on the number (less
than five or not). There are also three genders for
the nouns, pronouns, adjectives and some numbers
leading to differences between the cases and also
between the verb participles for past tense and pas-
sive voice.

As for verbs, person and many tenses are ex-
pressed by the suffix, and the subject pronoun (e.g.
I, we, it) is often omitted (similarly as in Spanish
and Italian). In addition, negation of three quite
important verbs, “biti” (to be, auxiliary verb for
past tense, conditional and passive voice), “imati”
(to have) and “ht(j)eti” (to want, auxiliary verb for
the future tense), is formed by adding the negative
particle to the verb as a prefix.

As for syntax, both languages have a quite free
word order, and there are no articles.

2.2 Differences

The main differences between the languages are
illustrated by examples in Table 1.

The largest differences between the two lan-
guages are in the vocabulary. Months have Slavic-
derived names in Croatian whereas Serbian uses
standard set of international Latin-derived names.
A number of other words are also completely dif-
ferent (1), and a lot of words differ only by one
or two letters (2). In addition, Croatian language
does not transcribe foreign names and words,
whereas phonetical transcriptions are usual in Ser-
bian although original writing is allowed too (3).

Apart from lexical differences, there are also
structural differences mainly concerning verbs.
After modal verbs such as “morati” (to have to)
or “moći” (can) (4), the infinitive is prescribed in
Croatian (“moram raditi”), whereas the construc-
tion with particle “da” (that/to) and present tense
(“moram da radim”) is preferred in Serbian. An
inspection of the Croatian and Serbian web cor-
pora4 (Ljubešić and Klubička., 2014) shows the
prescription being followed by identifying 1286
vs. 29 occurrences of the two phrases in the Croat-
ian and 40 vs. 322 occurrences in the Serbian cor-
pus. It is important to note that the queried cor-
pora consist of texts from the Croatian and Ser-
bian top-level web domain and that the results in
discriminating between Croatian and Serbian lan-
guage applied to these corpora are not used at this
point.

The mentioned difference partly extends to the
future tense (5), which is formed in a similar
manner to English, using present of the verb
"ht(j)eti" as auxiliary verb. The infinitive is for-
mally required in both variants, however, when
“da”+present is used instead, it can additionally
express the subject’s will or intention to perform
the action. This form is frequent in Serbian (“ja
ću da radim”), whereas in Croatian only the infini-
tive form is used (“ja ću raditi”). This is, again,
followed by corpus evidence with 0 vs. 71 occur-
rences of the phrases in the Croatian corpus and 13
vs. 22 occurrences in the Serbian corpus. Another
difference regarding future tense exists when the
the auxiliary and main verb are reversed (5b): in
Croatian the final "i" of the infinitive is removed
(“radit ću”), whereas in Serbian the main and the
auxiliary verb merge into a single word (“radiću”).

4the corpora can be queried via http://nl.ijs.si/
noske/

77



Croatian Serbian English
vocabulary
1) word level gospodarstvo ekonomija economy

tjedan nedelja week
tisuća hiljada one thousand

months siječanj januar January

2) character level točno tačno accurate
Europa Evropa Europe
vjerojatno verovatno probably
vijesti vesti news
terorist terorista terrorist

3) transcription Washington Vašington Washington

structure (verbs)
4) modal verbs moram raditi moram da radim I have to work

mogu raditi mogu da radim I can work

5) future tense a) ja ću raditi ja ću da radim I will work
b) radit ću radiću I will work

6) “trebati” = should a) trebam raditi treba da radim I should work
trebaš raditi treba da radiš you should work

= need b) trebam posao treba mi posao I need a job
Petar treba knjige Petru trebaju knjige Petar needs books

Table 1: Examples of main differences between Croatian and Serbian.

Corpus evidence follows this as well with 611 vs.
9 occurrences in the Croatian corpus and 4 vs.
103 occurrences in the Serbian one. A very im-
portant difference concerns the verb “trebati” (to
need, should) (6). In Croatian, the verb takes the
tense according to the subject and it is transitive as
in English. In Serbian, when it means “should”
(6a) it is impersonal followed by “da” and the
present of the main verb (“treba da radim”). When
it means “to need” (6b), the verb is conjugated ac-
cording to the needed object (“treba” (job), “tre-
baju” (books)), and the subject which needs some-
thing (I, Petar) is an indirect grammatical object in
dative case (“meni”, “Petru”).

Apart from the described differences, there is
also a difference in scripts: Croatian uses only the
Latin alphabet whereas Serbian uses both Latin
and Cyrillic scripts5. However, this poses no prob-
lem regarding corpora because a Cyrillic Serbian

5During the compilation process of the Serbian web cor-
pus (Ljubešić and Klubička., 2014), 16.7% of retrieved text
was written in the Cyrillic script.

text can be easily transliterated into Latin.

 0

 20

 40

 60

 80

 100

 1  2  3  4  5  6

n-gram length

n-gram overlap [F-score, %]

sr-hr, char

sr-hr, word 

hr-en, char

sr-en, char

hr-en, word 

sr-en, word 

Figure 1: n-gram overlap on word level and
on character level between Croatian-Serbian,
Croatian-English and Serbian-English.

The idea of Figure 1 is to illustrate the close-
ness and the differences between the two close
languages of interest by numbers: overlapping of

78



word level and character level n-grams for n =
1, ...6 in training, development and test corpora to-
gether is presented via the F-score. In order to give
a better insight, overlaps with English are calcu-
lated as well. It can be seen that the Croatian-
Serbian overlap on character level is very high,
and still rather high on the word level. Charac-
ter overlaps with English are below the Croatian-
Serbian overlap on the word level, whereas the
word level overlaps with English are very low.

3 Translation experiments

In order to explore effects of the described
language differences on cross-language
SMT, four translation systems have been
built: Croatian→English, Serbian→English,
English→Croatian and English→Serbian. For
the sake of brevity and clarity, we will use the
terms “corresponding source/output” when the
test language is same as the language used for
training, and “other source/output” when the
cross-language translation is performed. For
translation into English, the translation outputs
of the other source text and its adapted variants
are compared to the translation output of the
corresponding source test with respect to the
English reference. For translation from English,
the other translation output and its adapted ver-
sions are compared to the corresponding output
with respect to the corresponding reference. The
investigated adaptation methods are described in
the next section.

3.1 Language adaptation methods

The following methods were investigated for
adaptation of the test set in the other language:

• lexical conversion of the most frequent words
(conv);

The most frequent6 different words together
with simple morphological variations are re-
placed by the words in the corresponding lan-
guage. This method is simple and fast, how-
ever it is very basic and also requires knowl-
edge of the involved languages to be set up.
It can be seen as a very first step towards the
use of a rule-based Croatian-Serbian system.

• Croatian-Serbian translation system trained
on three thousand parallel sentences (3k);

6occurring ≥ 1000 times in the training corpus

This method does not require any language
knowledge, and a small bilingual corpus is
often not very difficult to acquire. It is even
not very difficult to create it manually from
a monolingual corpus by translating it, al-
though in that case the language knowledge
is needed.

• Croatian-Serbian translation system trained
on the large parallel corpus (200k);

This method is interesting in order to see the
upper limits of the adaptation, however it is
not realistic – if a large in-domain corpus is
available in both languages, there is no need
for cross-language translation, but pivoting or
synthetic corpora can be used.

The language adaptation is performed in the fol-
lowing way: for translation into English, the other
language test set is first preprocesssed, i.e. con-
verted or translated into the corresponding lan-
guage, and then translated. For the other transla-
tion direction, the English test is translated into the
other language and then converted/translated into
the corresponding one.

In addition, training a system using the con-
verted corpus has also been investigated for all
translation directions.

4 Experimental set-up

The enhanced version7 of the SEtimes corpus (Ty-
ers and Alperen, 2010) is used for translation
experiments. The corpus is based on the con-
tent published on the SETimes.com news portal
which publishes “news and views from Southeast
Europe” in ten languages: Bulgarian, Bosnian,
Greek, English, Croatian, Macedonian, Roma-
nian, Albanian and Serbian. We used the paral-
lel trilingual Croatian-English-Serbian part of the
corpus. The detailed corpus statistic is shown in
Table 2. The Croatian language is further referred
to as hr, Serbian as sr and English as en.

The translation system used is the phrase-based
Moses system (Koehn et al., 2007). The evalu-
ation metrics used for assessment of the transla-
tions are the BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002)
and the F-score, which also takes recall into ac-
count and generally better correlates with human
rankings which has been shown in (Melamed et
al., 2003) and confirmed in (Popović, 2011). For

7http://nlp.ffzg.hr/resources/corpora/setimes/

79



Croatian (hr) Serbian (sr) English (en)
Train sentences 197575

avg sent length 22.3 22.5 23.9
running words 4410721 4453579 4731746
vocabulary 149416 144544 76242

Dev sentences 995
avg sent length 22.2 22.5 24.0
running words 22125 22343 23896
running OOVs 1.7% 1.6% 0.8%

Test sentences 1000
avg sent length 22.3 22.4 23.8
running words 22346 22428 23825
running OOVs 1.5% 1.4% 0.7%

Table 2: Corpus statistics

translation into Croatian and Serbian, F-scores on
character level are also calculated.

5 Results

5.1 Croatian↔Serbian language adaptation
This section presents the results of conversion and
translation between Croatian and Serbian in order
to better understand advantages and disadvantages
of each of the adaptation methods. The effects of
each method on translation into and from English
will be reported in the next section.

Table 3 shows the BLEU and F-scores as well
as the percentage of running OOVs for each adap-
tation method. If no adaptation is performed (first
row), the word level scores are about 40%, CHARF
score is close to 75% , and a large number of OOVs
is present – 13% of running words are unseen. A
large portion of these words differ only by one
or two characters, and for a standard SMT sys-
tem there is no difference between such words and
completely distinct ones.

The conv method, i.e. simple replacement of a
set of words, already makes the text more close:
it reduces the number of OOVs by 3-5% and im-
proves the scores by 3%. The best results are ob-
tained, as it can be expected, by 200k adaptation,
i.e. translation using the large Croatian-Serbian
training corpus; the amount of OOVs in the adapted
text is comparable with the text in the correspond-
ing language (presented in Table 2). The 3k trans-
lation system, being the most suitable for “real-
word” tasks and improving significantly the text in
the other language (almost 10% reduction of OOVs
and 13% increase of scores) seems to be the most

promising adaptation method.

5.2 Croatian/Serbian↔English translation
The translation results into and from English
are presented in Table 4. It can be seen that
the BLEU/WORDF loss induced by cross-language
translation is about 12-13% for translation into
English and about 13-15% for the other direc-
tion. The effects of language adaptation meth-
ods are similar for all translation directions: the
simple lexical conversion conv slightly improves
the translation outputs, and the best option is to
use the 200k translation system. The small train-
ing corpus achieves, of course, less improvement
than the large corpus. On the other hand, taking
into account the significant improvement over the
original of the text of the other language (about
9%) and the advantages of the method discussed
in Sections 3.1 and 5.1, this performance differ-
ence is actually not too large. Future work should
explore techniques for improvement of such sys-
tems.

Last two rows in each table represent the re-
sults of the additional experiment, namely us-
ing the converted other language corpus for train-
ing. However, the results do not outperform
those obtained by (much faster) conversion of the
source/output, meaning that there is no need for
retraining the translation system – it is sufficient
to adapt only the test source/output.

Translation examples
Table 5 presents two translation examples: the
source/reference sentence in all three languages,
the cross-language translation output, the trans-

80



direction method BLEU WORDF CHARF OOV
none 40.1 43.1 74.7 13.3

hr→sr conv 43.7 46.3 76.4 10.7
3k 54.8 55.9 80.8 4.6
200k 64.3 65.4 85.2 1.4

sr→hr conv 43.5 46.1 76.3 8.5
3k 54.0 55.9 80.9 4.3
200k 64.1 65.3 85.1 1.4

Table 3: BLEU and F-scores for Croatian-Serbian conversion and translation used for adaptation.

lation outputs of adapted sources, as well as the
translation output of the corresponding source.
The examples are given only for translation into
English, and the effects for the other translation di-
rection can be observed implicitly. Generally, the
main source of errors are OOV words, but struc-
tural differences also cause problems.

For the first sentence (1), the conv method is
sufficient for obtaining a perfect cross-translation
output: the obstacles are three OOV words, all of
them being frequent and thus converted. The out-
puts obtained by 3k and 200k methods as well as
the output for the corresponding language are ex-
actly the same and therefore not presented.

The second sentence (2) is more complex: it
contains three OOV words, two of which are not
frequent and thus not adapted by conv, and one
future tense i.e. a structural difference. The OOV
words do not only generate lexical errors (untrans-
lated words) but also incorrect word order (“from
17 dječjih kazališta”). The conv method is able to
repair only the month name, whereas other errors
induced by language differences8 are still present.
The 3k translation system resolves one more OOV
word (“theater”) together with its position, as well
as the future tense problem, but the third OOV
word “children’s” is still untranslated and in the
wrong position. This error is fixed only when 200k
translation system is used, since the word occurs in
the large corpus but not in the small one. It should
be noted that the word is, though, an OOV only
due to the one single letter and probably could be
dealt with by character-based techniques (Nakov
and Tiedemann, 2012) which should be investi-
gated in future work.

8It should be noted that errors not related to the language
differences are out of the scope of this work.

6 Conclusions

In this work, we have examined the possibilities
for using a statistical machine translation system
built on one language and English for translation
from and into another closely related language.
Our experiments on Croatian and Serbian showed
that the loss by cross-translation is about 13% of
BLEU for translation into English and 15% for
translation from English.

We have systematically investigated several
methods for language adaptation. It is shown that
even a simple lexical conversion of limited num-
ber of words yields improvements of about 2%
BLEU, and the Croatian-Serbian translation system
trained on three thousand sentences yields a large
improvement of about 6-9%. The best results are
obtained when the translation system built on the
large corpus is used; however, it should be taken
into account that such scenario is not realistic.

We believe that the use of a small parallel cor-
pus is a very promising method for language adap-
tation and that the future work should concen-
trate in improving such systems, for example by
character-based techniques. We also believe that a
rule-based Croatian-Serbian system could be use-
ful for adaptation, since the translation perfor-
mance has been improved already by applying a
very simple lexical transfer rule. Both approaches
will be investigated in the framework of the ABU-
MATRAN project9.

Depending on the availability of resources and
tools, we plan to examine texts in other related lan-
guages such as Slovenian, Macedonian and Bul-
garian (the last already being part of ongoing work
in the framework of the QTLEAP project10), and
also to do further investigations on the Croatian-
Serbian language pair.

9http://abumatran.eu/
10http://qtleap.eu/

81



(a) translation into English

training source BLEU WORDF
sr→en hr 29.8 34.1

hr-sr.conv 32.3 36.4
hr-sr.3k 37.6 41.1
hr-sr.200k 42.3 45.6
sr 42.9 46.0

hr→en sr 31.4 35.5
sr-hr.conv 32.8 36.8
sr-hr.3k 37.2 40.8
sr-hr.200k 41.7 44.9
hr 43.2 46.3

sr-hr.conv→en hr 32.2 36.2
hr-sr.conv→en sr 33.5 37.4

(b) translation from English

reference output BLEU WORDF CHARF
hr sr 20.6 25.4 62.7

sr-hr.conv 22.8 27.4 64.2
sr-hr.3k 29.3 33.4 68.5
sr-hr.200k 33.5 37.2 71.2
hr 35.5 38.9 72.1

sr hr 20.3 25.3 62.7
hr-sr.conv 22.6 27.4 64.2
hr-sr.3k 29.8 33.7 68.4
hr-sr.200k 34.0 37.5 71.3
sr 35.3 38.5 72.1

sr en→hr-sr.conv 22.6 27.4 64.2
hr en→sr-hr.conv 23.2 27.7 64.2

Table 4: BLEU, WORDF and CHARF scores for translation (a) into English; (b) from English.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the QTLEAP
project – EC’s FP7 (FP7/2007-2013) under grant
agreement number 610516: “QTLEAP: Qual-
ity Translation by Deep Language Engineering
Approaches” and the ABU-MATRAN project –
EC’s FP7 (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agree-
ment number PIAP-GA-2012-324414: “ABU-
MATRAN: Automatic building of Machine Trans-
lation”.

References
Željko Agić, Nikola Ljubešić and Danijela Merkler.

2013. Lemmatization and Morphosyntactic Tag-
ging of Croatian and Serbian, In Proceedings of
the 4th Biennial International Workshop on Balto-

Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 48–57,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August.

Miquel Esplà-Gomis and Filip Klubička and Nikola
Ljubešić and Sergio Ortiz-Rojas and Vassilis Pa-
pavassiliou and Prokopis Prokopidis 2014. Com-
paring Two Acquisition Systems for Automatically
Building an English-Croatian Parallel Corpus from
Multilingual Websites, In Proceedings of the 9th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC), Reykjavik, Iceland, May.

Nikola Ljubešić and Filip Klubička 2014.
{bs,hr,sr}WaC – Web corpora of Bosnian, Croatian
and Serbian, In Proceedings of the 9th Web as
Corpus Workshop (WaC-9), Gothenburg, Sweden,
April.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,

82



sr Pregled poslovnih i ekonomskih vesti sa Balkana od 15. avgusta.
1) hr Pregled poslovnih i gospodarskih vijesti s Balkana od 15. kolovoza.

en A review of business and economic news from the Balkans since 15 August.
training: sr→en
source: hr A review of business and gospodarskih vijesti from the Balkans since 15 kolovoza .

hr-sr.conv A review of business and economic news from the Balkans since 15 August .

sr Srpski grad Subotica biće domaćin 16. izdanja Med̄unarodnog festivala
dečjih pozorišta od 17. do 23. maja.

2) hr Subotica u Srbiji bit će domaćin 16 . Med̄unarodnog festivala
dječjih kazališta od 17. do 23. svibnja.

en Subotica, Serbia, will host the 16th edition of the International Festival of
Children’s Theatres from May 17th to May 23rd .

training: sr→en
source: hr Subotica in Serbia will be will host the 16th International Festival

from 17 dječjih kazališta to 23 svibnja.
hr-sr.conv Subotica in Serbia will be will host the 16th International Festival

from 17 dječjih kazališta to 23 May.
hr-sr.3k Subotica in Serbia will host the 16th International Theatre Festival

from 17 dječjih to 23 May.
hr-sr.200k Subotica in Serbia will host the 16th International Children’s

Theatre Festival from 17 to 23 May.
sr The Serbian town of Subotica will host the 16th edition of the

International Children’s Theatre Festival from 17 to 23 May.

Table 5: Two examples of cross-translation of Croatian source sentence into English using
Serbian→English translation system.

Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation, In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL
on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
pages 177–180, Prague, Czech Republic, June.

Nikola Ljubešić, Petra Bago and Damir Boras. 2010.
Statistical machine translation of Croatian weather
forecast: How much data do we need?, In Proceed-
ings of the ITI 2010 32nd International Conference
on Information Technology Interfaces, pages 91–96,
Cavtat, Croatia, June.

I.Dan Melamed, Ryan Green and Joseph P. Turian.
2003. Precision and Recall of Machine Transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the Human Language Tech-
nology Conference (HLT-NAACL), pages 61–63, Ed-
monton, Canada, May/June.

Preslav Nakov and Jörg Tiedemann. 2012. Combin-
ing word-level and character-level models for ma-
chine translation between closely-related languages,
In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the As-

sociation of Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages
301–305, Jeju, Republic of Korea, July.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward and Wie-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation, In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 311–318,
Philadelphia, PA, July.

Hrvoje Peradin, Filip Petkovski and Francis Tyers.
2014. Shallow-transfer rule-based machine trans-
lation for the Western group of South Slavic lan-
guages, In Proceedings of the 9th SaLTMiL Work-
shop on Free/open-Source Language Resources for
the Machine Translation of Less-Resourced Lan-
guages, pages 25–30, Reykjavik, Iceland, May.

Maja Popović, David Vilar, Hermann Ney, Slobo-
dan Jovičić and Zoran Šarić. 2005. Augment-
ing a Small Parallel Text with Morpho-syntactic
Language Resources for Serbian–English Statisti-
cal Machine Translation In Proceedings of the
ACL-05 Workshop on Building and Using Parallel

83



Texts: Data-Driven Machine Translation and Be-
yond, pages 119–124, Ann Arbor, MI, June.

Maja Popović. 2011. Morphemes and POS tags for
n-gram based evaluation metrics, In Proceedings of
the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion (WMT 2011), pages 104–107, Edinburgh, Scot-
land, July.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2012. Character-based pivot transla-
tion for under-resourced languages and domains, In
Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (EACL), pages 141–151, Avignon, France,
April.

Antonio Toral, Raphael Rubino, Miquel Esplà-Gomis,

Tommi Pirinen, Andy Way and Gema Ramirez-
Sanchez 2014. Extrinsic Evaluation of Web-
Crawlers in Machine Translation: a Case Study on
Croatian–English for the Tourism Domain, In Pro-
ceedings of the 17th Conference of the European As-
sociation for Machine Translation (EAMT), pages
221–224, Dubrovnik, Croatia, June.

Francis M. Tyers and Murat Alperen. 2010. South-
East European Times: A parallel corpus of the
Balkan languages, In Proceedings of the LREC
Workshop on Exploitation of Multilingual Resources
and Tools for Central and (South-) Eastern Euro-
pean Languages, pages 49–53, Valetta, Malta, May.

84


