

















































elephant beer revised 17Dec


Elephant Beer and Shinto Gates: Managing Similar Concepts in a 
Multilingual Database 

 
 

Martin Benjamin 
EPFL Swiss Federal Institute of Tech-

nology 
Lausanne, Switzerland 

martin.benjamin@epfl.ch 
 

  
 

Abstract 

 

This paper addresses problems in equiva-
lence among concepts, within and be-
tween languages. The Kamusi Project has 
begun building a massively multilingual 
dictionary that relates as many languages 
as possible for which data can be gath-
ered. In the process, we have encountered 
numerous complexities that we attempt to 
address through the design of our data 
structure. This paper presents the issues 
we have encountered, and discusses the 
solutions that we have developed. 

1 Introduction 
True synonyms are rare within a language, if 
synonyms are taken to be words that can stand in 
each other’s place in all contexts. Even if you 
cannot propose a whisper’s difference between 
the ideas of “snuggling” and “cuddling”, you can 
“snuggle against” someone, but you cannot 
“cuddle against” them. In Swahili,  “ndovu” and 
“tembo” are completely interchangeable when 
talking about elephants, but bring you different 
brands of beer when you ask for them in a bar. 
Each word must thus be treated differently in a 
dictionary, so that its particular nuances can be 
elaborated. 

Between languages, it is quite common that 
terms exist for exactly the same concept. When 
speaking of colors, English “red” evokes essen-
tially the same bloody hue as “rouge” in French 
or “nyekundu” in Swahili. An “elephant” is an 
elephant, whether it is “éléphant” or “ndovu”. 
“Beer” and “bière” and “bia” are all beer. How-

ever, we do not expect other senses of a word to 
map identically in translation; we anticipate that 
a “red” grape in English might be “noir” in 
French. 

These issues are not new to lexicographers, 
and this paper will not claim to advance our un-
derstanding of synonymy; a trio of recent articles 
in the International Journal of Lexicography 
(2013) by Adamska-Sałaciak, Gouws, and Mur-
phy provide the context from which this paper is 
launched. What is new is the system that Kamusi 
is developing to produce a global dictionary that 
can catalogue synonyms within and across lan-
guages, and account for their subtle differences. 

2 Monolingual Pillars and Multilingual 
Beams 

The basic architecture of Kamusi was developed 
to handle cases like the examples above, which 
we now think of as the easy ones. The initial 
structure is two dimensional, with vertical pillars 
and horizontal beams. 

The vertical axis is the monolingual entry for 
a term. Within a language, each term is entitled 
to as many entries as that particular sequence of 
letters has senses; “light” (not dark) is a different 
entry from “light” (not heavy) or “light” (not se-
rious) or “light” (low calorie). Those entries can 
then be segregated into groups, so that a “light” 
(flame for a cigarette) is grouped with the verb 
“light” (ignite a fire) while “light” (a lamp) is 
grouped with “light” (a traffic signal). Within 
groups, entries can be ranked, so that “light” (a 
lamp) is listed above “light” (a traffic signal). 
The groups themselves can be ranked on a scien-
tific or whimsical basis – a corpus count would 
place the groups for light (energy) and light 
(lamps) high on the list, but the decision about 
where to rank light comedy versus light soda can 



only be arbitrary. This vertical structure provides 
all the space needed to engage in the lexico-
graphical challenge of giving a definition to each 
of a term’s different senses. In order to support 
the horizontal beams, no entry is deemed com-
plete in Kamusi unless it includes a definition 
written in its own language. 

The horizontal axis is the same concept as ex-
pressed in different languages. “Light” (not dark) 
can be expressed with some term in German, 
another term in Japanese, and another one in 
Songhay. Once a concept from one language has 
been determined to be equivalent to a particular 
entry for a different language that is already in 
the system, we take the relationship to be transi-
tive across all the other equivalents in all the oth-
er languages in the system. Because “red” for 
colors and “red” for grapes are two different en-
tries on the vertical pillar in English, they con-
nect to different horizontal beams, and we can 
weld on terms in different languages that match 
those varying concepts: 
 
Red (color of blood) ↔ rouge ↔ nyekundu 
↓ 
Red (color of wine) ↔ rouge ↔ nyekundu 
↓ 
Red (color of grapes) ↔ noir ↔ zambarau 
 

 

In this schema, “rouge” in French has its 
own monolingual pillar (color of blood, color of 
wine, type of cosmetic), as does “noir”. It is clear 
what terms gloss each other between languages – 
one would not look up “red” and mistakenly use 
the color of blood to talk about grapes in either 
French or Swahili. Horizontal beams work per-
fectly when concepts are essentially the same 
across languages. 

3 Mapping Inexact Concepts 
Unfortunately for our architecture, however, lan-
guages do not map on a simple one-to-one basis. 
We have had to address five major problems 
with the internal wiring of our edifice. 
 

1) Partial equivalence 
2) No equivalent term 
3) Different forms 
4) Different parts of speech 
5) Synonyms within a language 

 
 
1. Partial equivalence. In English, we have ten 
fingers and ten toes, and the Dutch have ten 

“vingers” and ten “tenen”. Romanians, however, 
have twenty “degete”, and Swahili speakers have 
twenty “vidole”. Nowhere is this a problem for 
glove makers, but it wreaks havoc for a multilin-
gual dictionary. English and Dutch are full 
equivalents, as are Romanian and Swahili, but 
those two sets only partially match each other. 
Thus, the flow of transitivity is broken, and the 
nature of the partial relationships is ambiguous. 
 When establishing a relationship between 
terms in Kamusi, a contributor specifies whether 
they are “parallel”, “similar”, or “explanatory” 
(see the next section). Terms that are designated 
as “similar” disrupt the welding of the horizontal 
beam. We know that items that are added as par-
allel to “finger” will be transitive to the first set, 
and items that are parallel to “vidole” are parallel 
to the second set, and we can also infer the same 
similarity between new terms on either side of 
the divide. However, we cannot infer any inher-
ent relationship between similarities that have 
not been documented; a language that had terms 
for each individual finger but no overriding cate-
gory term, for example, would be similar to fin-
ger and vinger in a different way than it is similar 
to kidole and deget, and differently than the simi-
larity between finger/vinger ↔ deget/kidole. The 
programming to chart similarities between transi-
tive groups is not complete as of this writing. 
 Forthcoming programming will include two 
new features for similarities. First, each relation-
ship pair will have a descriptive field in which 
differences can be explained in writing, in multi-
ple languages. Second, users will be able to vote 
on the level of similarity (close, distant, barely 
comparable), and the votes can be aggregated 
into a graphic such as a Venn diagram to alert 
dictionary users about potential dangers in 
equivalence. 
 Partial equivalence is also addressed within 
Kamusi’s vertical pillars. As discussed, each 
sense should have a definition of a term written 
in its own language. Each of these definitions 
can be further translated into any other language. 
Thus, an English definition of “finger” would 
refer to the ten digits of the hand, and the Roma-
nian and Swahili translations of that definition, 
stored within the English concept of “finger”, 
would also discuss the ten digits of the hand. 
Conversely, the Romanian definition of “deget” 
would refer to both hands and feet, and the Eng-
lish translation of that definition within the Ro-
manian entry would contain that clarifying in-
formation for English readers. 



2. No equivalent term. Numerous concepts that 
exist in one language do not exist in another. For 
example, Japanese has a term “torii” (鳥居) for 
the ceremonial gate to a Shinto shrine seen in the 
images above. “Torii” is not an English word, 
but we need a way to describe it in a Japanese-
English dictionary. Our solution is to create an 
entry on the English side that is labeled “ex-
planatory” of the Japanese term: “Shinto gate”. 
This term does not become part of the larger 
English lexicon, but will be visible when a user 
looks up “torii” in Japanese or conducts a direct 
English-Japanese search. 
 Explanatory phrases come with their own 
complications. “Shinto gate” is an endpoint on 
the horizontal beam; one can add a French ex-
planatory phrase for “torii”, but that will not link 
to the English explanation. However, Okinawan 
does have the concept, and uses the termトリイ
(torii). In this case, the relationship between Jap-
anese and Okinawan is transitive, so we assume 
that English “Shinto gate” is explanatory of the 
Okinawan and any other languages that enter the 
parallel set.  
 Parallel relationships cannot be automatically 
inferred from explanations in the current Kamusi 
system. For example, “-simulia” in Swahili and 
“a povesti” in Romanian are both explained in 
English with the phrase “tell a story”, but that 
relationship is not easily discoverable. Future 
programming will address this gap. 
3. Different forms. Two languages might have 
the same concept, represented by the same part 
of speech, but approached from different direc-
tions. For example, placing a passive suffix on 
the Swahili verb “-abiri” (travel as a passenger) 
produces the verb “-abiriwa”, which can translate 
to English as “be crossed” in the sense that a riv-
er is crossed by a ferry. Such misalignments oc-
cur ad infinitum between Bantu languages and 
English, and similar form differences occur 
throughout the data. 
 Kamusi has a tidy system for handling differ-
ent forms of a word (although we do not have a 
tidy term, since neither “morphemes” nor “in-
flections” cover the concept; our current candi-
date is the coinage “morphlections”). When a 
language has a manageable number N of 
morphlections, such as the four possible forms of 
a Portuguese adjective, we create N minus one 
additional input boxes for that part of speech, 
which we label during the setup process (e.g., 
feminine singular, masculine plural, and femi-

nine plural). A more automated system for large 
conjugation sets such as Romance verbs is on the 
agenda, and a fully automated system for ma-
chine-predictable agglutination parsing has al-
ready been developed for Swahili and should be 
transferable (not without tears) to languages from 
German to Xhosa. 
 This morphlection system makes it possible to 
list forms that do not normally appear in diction-
aries, such as the passive verb form in English. “-
Abiriwa” can then be linked to “be crossed” 
within the correct sense entry of “cross” (not be-
tray, nor intersect, etc.). Everything that one 
needs to know in order to make sense of “be 
crossed” is contained within the English entry (it 
is the passive form of a verb meaning “to pass 
from one side to the other”), without having to 
create a full separate English entry to accommo-
date the Swahili formation. It also becomes pos-
sible to link morphlections from one language to 
morphlections in another, such as mapping the 
English past participle “crossed” to the French 
past participle “traversé”. A search for a 
morphlection will pull up the full result for the 
canonical form, but show any relevant inter-
language links for the morphlection as well. 
4. Different parts of speech. Although you may 
think your watch is on your left wrist, with “left” 
as an adjective, in Kirundi it is on your wrist left-
ly, with “bubamfu” as an adverb. Similarly, the 
verb “achtgeben” in German is expressed in Eng-
lish as an auxiliary verb plus an adjective, “be 
careful”, and in French as an auxiliary verb plus 
a noun, “faire attention”. A green cigar may be 
just a cigar with an adjective, but it greens as a 
verb (“guun”) in the Aukan language of Suri-
name. 
 A monolingual dictionary should contain only 
the terms that exist in that language; “careful” is 
an English term, whereas “be careful” is a non-
problematic construction of two terms that has 
no home in any English dictionary consulted for 
this paper, nor in the Princeton WordNet. Bilin-
gual dictionaries, however, need ways to show 
how terms in one language are expressed in the 
other. As shown in the example below from 
WordReference.com, showing equivalence be-
tween languages in such cases is a struggle; 
“achtgeben” is glossed as “be careful”, but “be 
careful” is shown on the English side as a usage 
example that does not track back to “achtgeben”.  
 



 
Figure 1: “careful” in English-German transla-
tion, http://www.wordreference.com/ende/careful 

 
Figure 2: “achtgeben” in German-English translation, 
http://www.wordreference.com/deen/achtgeben 

 
The Kamusi solution is to provide fields for 
“bridges”. Though not implemented as of this 
writing, the monolingual entry for a term will 
also include the option for a contributor to “add a 
bridge” for a part of speech. The English adjec-
tive “careful” can be augmented with the verb 
bridge “be careful”, and the French noun “atten-
tion” can have the verb bridge “faire attention”. 
The English and French items can then be linked 
to German and become connected transitively 
along the horizontal beam, or they can be linked 
directly without the German intermediary. In 
either case, we do not crowd the monolingual 
side of a dictionary with unnecessary entries for 
differently-structured concepts from other lan-
guages, but we include the necessary information 
and make it discoverable. 
5. Synonyms within a language. The Kamusi 
structure makes it easy to attach a synonym to a 
single sense of a word, such as matching “trav-
erse” only to the sense of “cross” as passing from 
one side to the other. However, we face three 
additional challenges: a) whether the terms are 
exact equivalents, b) whether one term is pre-
ferred to another, and c) how they act in transi-
tive translation sets. 
a. When presenting glosses between lan-
guages, one has some latitude to stretch the 
notion of exact equivalence between terms; 
English “stool” can be linked as equivalent to 
Swahili “kigoda” even though a typical stool 
is much higher above the ground than a typical 
kigoda. Within a language, though, the subtle 
differences between terms arguably take on 
more significance. “Think” and “ponder” are 
synonyms in the WordNet sense of “reflect 
deeply on a subject”, but there is a nuanced 
difference of degree. 

 
 

 As with bilingual glosses, forthcoming pro-
gramming will provide the opportunity to catego-
rize a synonym relationship as parallel or similar. 
Users will have the opportunity to rate the close-
ness of similar terms, and a comment field will 
provide the opportunity to stipulate the ways that 
synonyms differ. In the above example, “think” 

and “ponder” would likely be shown as parallel 
for the specific sense, but a comment that ad-
heres to the relationship might explain that pon-
dering is a somewhat more intense activity.  
b. Within a group of terms that are listed as syn-
onyms, a system is needed to rank those that are 
more prevalent. This is especially important 
when showing the set within a translation result, 
because language learners will have little inde-
pendent basis to judge which term to use. A stu-
dent of English would be hard pressed to select a 
best choice from among the options in the 
WordNet synset: “chew over, think over, medi-
tate, ponder, excogitate, contemplate, muse, re-
flect, mull, mull over, ruminate, speculate”. A 
chief complaint that Swahili teachers have about 
the Kamusi Project is that students tend to use 
the first entry of a search result, even if the dis-
play is alphabetical because the result has not yet 
been ranked, so essays are often submitted with 
some rather strange choices of vocabulary. 
Without a ranking system, English students 
worldwide will chew over problems more often 
than they ponder them, and they will excogitate 
more than they contemplate. 
 We have developed a simple tool (currently 
not online due to a change in our programming 
platform) that allows contributors to slide entries 
in a set up or down in relation to each other. A 
set can ultimately be locked down by a modera-
tor, but we see the ranking tool as lightweight 
work that is a good use of crowd-source energy. 
Synonyms cannot easily be ranked based on cor-
pus frequency results, because the work of de-
termining the specific senses of homonyms is 
prohibitive. Future programming will simplify 
crowdsourcing even more, posing questions to 
users such as, “’Ponder’ and ‘think’ are both de-
fined as ‘to reflect deeply on a subject.’ Which 
do you use more often?” Without digressing into 
our plans for building Kamusi data through tight-
ly-controlled input from the crowd, we can still 
propose that aggregated voting results will pro-
vide a somewhat scientific method to rank terms 
within a set of synonyms. 



c. Monolingual synonyms within multilingual 
translation sets. “Ndovu” and “tembo” are both 
translations of “elephant” and “éléphant”, but 
they are not translations of each other. In future, 
were we to link “ndovu” to “elephant” as a paral-
lel translation, and then link “tembo” and “ele-
phant”, Kamusi will be savvy enough to recog-
nize that “ndovu” and “tembo” are the same lan-
guage, and therefore synonyms rather than trans-
lations. Conversely, if we have a set of synonyms 
in one language, and we link one of those terms 
to a term in another language, then we can create 
a transitive translation relationship for each of 
those synonyms. The coding for this feature will 
follow significant refinements to the behavior of 
translation sets that have just been completed as 
of this writing, with ramifications described in 
the conclusion. 

4. Concluding thoughts: Integration with the 
Global WordNet 

The questions of synonymy raised above are, of 
course, not new to WordNet. What is new is the 
potential that the Kamusi system offers for fine-
tuning relationships identified as synonymous 
within a language, and for charting those identi-
fied semantic links across language WordNets. 

As an example, the Princeton WordNet con-
tains the synset: car/ auto/ automobile/ machine/ 
motorcar. UWN/MENTA maps the sense of that 
synset to the following French equivalents: au-
tomobile/ auto/ bagnole/ voiture/ wagon, and 
similar clusters or single terms in many other 
languages. 

Tying five terms identified as synonyms in 
English with five terms identified as synonyms 
in French creates 25 pairs, each of which needs 
to be differentiated from homonyms on both 
sides. When the programming resources are 
available, Kamusi proposes to address this chal-
lenge through a process that engages the crowd 
to validate synsets within a language, and their 
glosses across languages. In the above example, 
crowd consensus might push “machine” out of 
the English synset, or bring “wheels” into the 
group. A similar process would be in effect on 
the French side. When a link is established be-
tween any item within a set of synonyms in one 
language, and another item within a set of syno-
nyms in another language, then the computer 
establishes the existence of a relationship among 
all the entities. 

What is significant about these links from one 
synonym to the next, and from one translation to 
the next, however, is that they are not absolute. 

With programming completed just in time for 
this paper to go to press, Kamusi charts degrees 
of separation between links that have been vali-
dated by humans and those that have been in-
ferred by transitivity algorithms. Those degrees 
of separation will track through intra-language 
synonyms. Thus, if “wheels” is human-linked to 
“car”, “car” is linked by hand to “voiture”, and 
“voiture” is manually linked to “bagnole”, then 
“wheels” and “bagnole” will be shown to be sep-
arated by three degrees. This will enable readers 
to make an educated judgment about the tight-
ness of the association between any two terms. In 
addition, knowledgeable users will be able to 
help confirm, reject, or add nuance to computer-
predicted linkages.  

The programming to implement a smooth in-
tegration of WordNet data within the Kamusi 
framework has not yet advanced out of the con-
ceptual stage, for two reasons. First, a variety of 
other tasks must be completed in order for work-
ing with WordNet data to be practical, particular-
ly reestablishment of the grouping tool in a mul-
tilingual context, certain behaviors of morphlec-
tions, and the big upcoming task of developing 
an effective system of working with the crowd. 
Second, finances. Once those elements are in 
order, and we have had further conversations 
with members of the WordNet community to 
refine our approach, we look forward to seeing 
what can happen when we connect the extensive 
multilingual WordNet data sets with the lexico-
graphical potential that the Kamusi framework 
makes possible. 

5. References 
Arleta Adamska-Sałaciak. 2013. Equivalence, Synon-
ymy, and Sameness of Meaning in a Bilingual Dic-
tionary, Int J Lexicography 26 (3): 329-345 
 
Rufus H. Gouws. 2013. Contextual and Co-Textual 
Guidance Regarding Synonyms in General Bilingual 
Dictionaries, Int J Lexicography 26 (3): 346-361 
 
M. Lynne Murphy. 2013. What We Talk About When 
We Talk About Synonyms: (and What it Can Tell Us 
About Thesauruses), Int J Lexicography 26 (3): 279-
304 
 


