













































Microsoft Word - GWC-2014_final.docx


Aligning Word Senses in GermaNet and 
the DWDS Dictionary of the German Language 

 
Verena Henrich, Erhard Hinrichs, Reinhild Barkey 

Department of Linguistics 
University of Tübingen, Germany 

{vhenrich,eh,rbarkey}@sfs.uni-tuebingen.de 

  
 

Abstract 

A comparison and alignment of lexical re-
sources brings about considerable mutual ben-
efits for all resources involved. For all sense 
distinctions that are completely parallel in two 
resources, such an alignment provides support-
ing external evidence for the validity of sense 
distinction and allows enriching word senses 
by information contained in the other resource. 
By contrast, for all non-matching sense dis-
tinctions, reason for revisiting and possibly re-
vising the lexical entries in question is provid-
ed. The purpose of this paper is to compare the 
German wordnet GermaNet with the Digital 
Dictionary of the German Language (DWDS) 
and to align word senses in the two resources. 
The paper presents issues that arise in practice 
when such an alignment is performed and in-
dicates the benefits that both resources will 
gain. 

1 Introduction 
It has long been recognized that the identification 
and differentiation of word senses is one of the 
harder tasks that lexicographers face. As a result, 
lexical resources display considerable variation 
in the number of word senses that lexicographers 
assign to a given lexical entry in a dictionary. 
Against this background, lexicographic practice 
has undertaken considerable efforts to find exter-
nal knowledge sources that can aid in distin-
guishing and identifying word senses. The exter-
nal knowledge sources that are most widely used 
for this purpose are very large electronic corpora 
that can be harvested for a given word under lex-
icographic consideration. Another type of re-
source that has also been explored as an external 
reference point is the comparison with another 
semantic dictionary that has been constructed 
independently for the same language. 

The present paper reports on an ongoing pro-
ject in which the German wordnet GermaNet 

(Hamp and Feldweg, 1997; Henrich and Hin-
richs, 2010) is compared to the word senses con-
tained in the Digital Dictionary of the German 
Language (Digitales Wörterbuch der Deutschen 
Sprache 1 , DWDS; Klein and Geyken, 2010). 
Both resources are long-term lexicographic pro-
jects aiming at a comprehensive coverage of con-
temporary standard German in electronic form. 
What makes a comparison between these re-
sources particularly interesting and useful is the 
fact that they utilize two different methods for 
constructing word meanings. 

The DWDS is based on the digital versions of 
three pre-existing dictionaries: the Dictionary of 
Contemporary German (Wörterbuch der deut-
schen Gegenwartssprache, WDG), the Grimm 
Dictionaries Deutsches Wörterbuch von Jacob 
Grimm und Wilhelm Grimm (1DWB) and its re-
vised version (2DWB), as well as the Etymologi-
cal German Dictionary by Wolfgang Pfeifer (Et-
ymWb). The lexical entries inherited from these 
dictionaries have been revised and amended by 
information harvested from large electronic cor-
pora of contemporary German (Didakowski et 
al., 2012). DWDS lexical entries are structured 
by the number of senses which may be further 
differentiated by an enumeration of subsenses. 
Senses are accompanied by examples harvested 
from German text corpora or by so-called com-
petence examples that are manually constructed. 

The conception of word meaning underlying 
GermaNet adheres to the idea of a network of 
meaningfully related words and concepts that are 
interlinked by a set of lexical and conceptual re-
lations and that was first realized in the Princeton 
WordNet for English (Fellbaum, 1998). The set 
of lexical and conceptual relations include syn-
onymy, hypernymy/hyponymy, meronymy/holo-
nymy, causation, antonymy, and pertainymy. 

The comparison of GermaNet and the DWDS 
dictionary will focus on the alignment of Germa-
                                                
1 http://www.dwds.de/ 



Net senses (synsets and lexical units) with the 
senses and subsenses of DWDS lexical entries. 
The benefits of this GermaNet-DWDS compari-
son include the following: 
• If the set of sense distinctions match for a 

given word lemma in both resources, then 
this provides supporting external evidence 
for the validity of these sense distinctions. 

• If the set of sense distinctions differ between 
the two resources, then this provides reason 
for revisiting and possibly revising the lexi-
cal entries in question. 

Apart from the comparison of word senses, 
each resource stands to gain from the GermaNet-
DWDS mapping in the following ways: 
• It becomes possible to implement an intelli-

gent semantic search for the DWDS that 
provides users not just with the word senses 
of a given lexical entry but also with lexical 
information about related words. 

• GermaNet synsets and lexical units can be 
enriched by suitable definitions as well as 
examples contained in the DWDS. 

The purpose of this paper is to present the re-
sults of a pilot study that concentrates on a set of 
issues that arise in practice when such a mapping 
is performed. 

2 Survey of the Overlapping Coverage 
The total number of lemmas that have lexical 
entries in both resources is 48,0362 (6,211 adjec-
tives, 34,366 nouns, and 7,735 verbs), which co-
vers about 53.5% of all lemmas encoded in Ger-
maNet. At first glance, this overlap might seem 
low. However, on a closer look, there is an ex-
planation for this which mainly concerns the fol-
lowing three points: 
• The history of the two resources causes dif-

ferences in coverage. The DWDS is based on 
the digital versions of three pre-existing dic-
tionaries that do not include most recent con-
temporary language. By contrast, the terms 
to be included in GermaNet follow frequen-
cy lists extracted from large corpora such as 
newspaper texts and Wikipedia, which also 
contain recent contemporary language. 

• Both resources have different basic decisions 
on what terms and senses should be includ-
ed. The perspectives and guidelines that the 

                                                
2 All numbers are calculated on GermaNet’s current release 
8.0 as of April 2013 and on the DWDS subset taken from 
version 0.4.17 and filtered for all lexical entries for lemmas 
covered by both resources. This filtered subset has been 
made available to us on August 9, 2013. 

lexicographers of both resources pursue dif-
fer. For example, the resources deviate in the 
inclusion of regional, obsolete, technical, and 
colloquial terms as well as most recent con-
temporary language. This further explains 
why the coverage of GermaNet and the 
DWDS differs. 

• Since compounding is a highly productive 
phenomenon of the German language, the 
question of which compounds to include in a 
lexical resource is not trivial to answer. 
There are many newly created compounds 
that eventually – after some undefined time 
and depending on the frequency of general 
usage – might become part of the fundamen-
tal vocabulary of the German language. 
Thus, especially for the coverage of com-
pounds, there is a huge deviation between 
the two resources. 

Since senses in the DWDS might be further 
differentiated by an enumeration of subsenses, a 
survey on word senses involves more than one 
comparison. GermaNet distinguishes 59,495 
senses for the 48,036 lemmas that the two re-
sources share. The overall number of 61,053 
main sense distinctions in the DWDS is very 
similar. On the contrary, the number of main 
senses plus subsenses on the highest level encod-
ed in the DWDS is 74,346, which is more than in 
GermaNet. This suggests a mapping on the main 
sense level of the DWDS. 

The outcome of this survey proves that there is 
a considerable overlap of word lemmas with a 
comparable amount of senses in both resources, 
which supports the usefulness of conducting a 
sense alignment. 

3 Evaluation of the Sense Alignment 
In order to be able to evaluate the alignment 

on the level of senses and subsenses, the lexical 
entries for an initial set of 470 randomly selected 
word lemmas (see Section 4 for the selection 
process) have been manually analyzed with re-
gard to the appropriateness of matching senses 
from one resource onto the senses in the other 
resource. The variability of how good the senses 
can be matched leads to a division into four clas-
ses that are illustrated and described in the fol-
lowing four subsections – in descending order 
according to their alignment appropriateness. 

 



 
Figure 1: Sense mapping using the example of Pferd (class 1). 

 

3.1 Class 1: Exact match of main senses 
Class 1 represents the ideal case, i.e., senses in 
GermaNet correspond to main senses in the 
DWDS. The German noun Pferd is a case in 
point. As illustrated in Figure 1, this lemma has 
the three distinct senses in both resources repre-
senting an animal horse, a gymnastic horse, and a 
chess knight. All word senses that fall into this 
class show an identical overlapping lexical cov-
erage and an identical granularity level of sense 
distinctions. For both GermaNet and the DWDS, 
this provides mutual supporting evidence for the 
validity of these sense distinctions. 

For GermaNet, the obvious gain for all these 
senses is an enrichment by suitable definitions 
and examples contained in the corresponding 
DWDS senses. For the DWDS, it becomes pos-
sible for all these senses that an intelligent se-
mantic search provides users not just with the 
word senses of a given lexical entry but also with 
lexical information about related words. 

3.2 Class 2: Exact match of subsenses 
There are several senses in GermaNet that do not 
correspond to main senses in the DWDS but 
which correspond to subsenses in the DWDS. 
These latter ones are included in class 2. Figure 2 
gives an example using the word Bogen. In Ger-
maNet, there are two distinct senses representing 
a violin bow and a bow as a weapon (see the left 
side of Figure 2). In the DWDS, there is a main 
sense described as gebogenes Gerät ‘curved de-
vice’ which is further differentiated into the two 
subsenses of a violin bow (sub 1) and a bow as a 
weapon (sub 2) – see the two entries denoted by 
sub 1 and sub 2 on the right side of Figure 2. 

The overall coverage for these senses is the 
same. It is only the granularity level of the sense 

distinctions that differs. The reason for this dif-
ference results from different perspectives and 
guidelines of how to model word senses that the 
lexicographers of both resources pursue. There is 
an agreement between lexicographers of both 
resources that the two senses under consideration 
should be modeled separately. The question of 
whether to constitute two separate word senses 
or two subsenses of a common main sense is 
bound to the nature of the resources, i.e., Germa-
Net does not further distinguish word senses into 
subsenses. 

The senses that fall into this class again pro-
vide support for the validity of the sense distinc-
tions for both resources. Furthermore, the en-
richment of GermaNet senses with definitions 
and examples as well as the enrichment of 
DWDS senses with information on related words 
is equally possible than it is described for class 1. 

3.3 Class 3: Partly overlapping coverage 
and different sense distinctions 

Class 3 contains senses for which a straightfor-
ward one-to-one mapping is not possible. This 
includes the following two cases: (i) two separate 
senses from one resource are jointly represented 
by only one sense in the other resource and (ii) 
the core meaning of two senses is the same, but 
the two senses are still not completely identical 
in their coverage. 

The German noun Pranke is a case in point for 
case (i). The DWDS encodes a sense defined as 
Vordertatze, besonders von großen Raubtieren; 
umgangssprachlich, scherzhaft, übertragen: 
große, starke Hand ’forepaw of an animal, espe-
cially a predator; colloquial, jokingly, figurative: 
big, strong hand’ (see the right side in Figure 3). 
In GermaNet, Pranke has the two fine-grained 
senses denoting the paw of an animal and the



 
Figure 2: Sense mapping using the example of Bogen (class 2). 

 
figurative term for the human hand (see the left 
side in Figure 3). In this example, both these 
more specific GermaNet senses are subsumed 
under one single DWDS sense. 

In the second case (ii) that is subsumed by 
class 3, there is no complete coverage of the 
meaning of one sense in one resource with the 
corresponding sense in the other resource. The 
core sense is mostly identical, but there are 
meaning aspects that led the lexicographers to 
decide differently on whether to explicitly en-
code a separate sense in the dictionary or not. 

An example of this type is the German noun 
Sturm ‘storm’. Both GermaNet and the DWDS 
encode a sense referring to the weather phenom-
enon. Accompanying example sentences of this 
word sense in the DWDS include instances ex-
emplifying a figurative usage, such as, for exam-
ple, ein Sturm der Entrüstung ‘a storm of indig-
nation’. That means, the figurative meaning of 
Sturm is explicitly mentioned in the DWDS 
weather phenomenon sense – without encoding a 
separate sense or subsense. By contrast, the fig-
urative meaning of Sturm is not present in Ger-
maNet – neither as part of the corresponding 
weather phenomenon sense nor explicitly as a 
separate sense. 

The phenomena of both cases (i) and (ii) can-
not solely be explained by the lexicographic 
background of the two resources. They rather 
illustrate different lexicographic perspectives of 
how to distinguish senses of a word. The ques-
tion at what point a meaning should be regarded 
as a distinct sense or subsense to be included in a 
dictionary is a difficult issue in lexicographic 
work. Aspects that affect this decision include 
figurative meaning, technical, colloquial, or re-
gional usage of a term. Both in the paw and in 

the storm examples, the lexicographers of the 
two resources have made different decisions with 
respect to the status of the figurative meaning of 
a word sense. 

As for the benefit from a mapping of senses in 
this class, it would mean that each example sen-
tence for the DWDS senses in question has to be 
analyzed individually in order to decide whether 
it can be assigned to a GermaNet sense. None-
theless, it is interesting to further analyze these 
cases since they concern the identification and 
differentiation of word senses which is one of the 
harder tasks that lexicographers face. 

3.4 Class 4: Distinct coverage 
This class comprises lemmas where there is at 
least one sense or subsense in one resource that 
does not have a corresponding entry in the other 
resource. An example of this kind is illustrated in 
Figure 4 using the example of Maus. For this 
word, GermaNet encodes the two senses of the 
mouse as an animal and the computer mouse (see 
the left side of Figure 4). The DWDS also en-
codes the animal sense of a mouse, but it does 
not include the computer mouse sense. Instead, 
the DWDS lists Mäuse (plural for Maus) in the 
sense of an informal synonym for money (see the 
right side of Figure 4). 

As illustrated in the mouse example, both re-
sources gain benefit from a sense alignment by 
mutually providing suggestions of possibly miss-
ing senses. In general, with the help of simple 
word comparisons, it is easy to automatically 
compile lists of lemmas that serve as candidates 
to be inserted into a dictionary. By contrast, it is 
much more difficult to provide (automatic) sug-
gestions of possibly missing senses. In all cases 
where the sense alignment discovers different



 
Figure 3: Sense mapping using the example of Pranke (class 3). 

 
sets of sense distinctions between GermaNet and 
the DWDS, this provides reason for revisiting 
and possibly revising the lexical entries in ques-
tion. 

4 Evaluation Statistics 
The selection of the initial set of manually 
aligned word lemmas is guided by the following 
criteria: 
• The selected words include all three word 

classes of adjectives, nouns, and verbs. 
• In order to ensure a detailed evaluation of 

lexical items with different degrees of poly-
semy, the evaluation reports results for five 
different polysemy classes: words having (i) 
one sense in GermaNet, (ii) two senses in 
GermaNet, (iii) three or four senses, (iv) five 
to ten senses, and (v) more than ten senses in 
GermaNet. 

• The sample as a whole represents a good 
balance of word classes and number of dis-
tinct word senses. 

That is, for adjectives and verbs, 35 lemmas 
were randomly selected for each of the polysemy 
classes (i) to (v). Since the coverage for nouns is 
higher compared to the coverage of the other two 
word classes, 50 nominal lemmas were randomly 
chosen for each polysemy class. Table 1 shows 
the total number of word lemmas and corre-
sponding word senses (in parentheses) in each 
polysemy class for the three word classes3 that 
were manually aligned by two experienced lexi-
cographers. Column All POS contains the 
summed numbers for all word classes (i.e., part-
of-speech, POS) separately for the polysemy 
classes. 

 
 
 

                                                
3 The information both about the number of distinct word 
senses as well as about the word category of the lemmas is 
taken from GermaNet. 

Senses Adjectives Nouns Verbs All POS 
1 35 (35) 50 (50) 35 (35) 120 (120) 
2 35 (70) 50 (100) 35 (70) 120 (240) 

3 – 4 35 (114) 50 (161) 35 (112) 120 (387) 
5 – 10 8 (51) 50 (282) 35 (209) 93 (542) 
> 10 – 3 (36) 14 (192) 17 (228) 
Total 113 (270) 203 (629) 154 (618) 470 (1,517) 

Table 1: Aligned word lemmas 
(corresponding word senses in parentheses) 

and their sense distributions 
 

Note that the number of lemmas for adjectives 
with three or four senses and for nouns and verbs 
with more than ten senses is lower than men-
tioned above. The reason is simply because there 
are only few lemmas encoded both in GermaNet 
and the DWDS that fall into these classes, i.e., 8, 
3, and 14, respectively. Adjectives with more 
than ten senses do not exist at all. 

Altogether, 470 distinct word lemmas were 
manually checked by the lexicographers. These 
lemmas correspond to 1,517 senses (in Germa-
Net) of which 113 adjectives, 203 nouns, and 
154 verbs. That is, the 470 words have an aver-
age of 3.2 senses (2.4 for adjectives, 3.1 for 
nouns, and 4.0 for verbs). With the help of the 
manual sense alignment, it is possible to classify 
senses according to their alignment appropriate-
ness, i.e., into classes 1 to 4 described in Sec-
tions 3.1-3.4. 

Table 2 lists the counts of these 1,517 Germa-
Net senses classified into the four alignment 
classes separately for the previously defined pol-
ysemy classes (columns). The rightmost column 
depicts the overall results without classifying 
words with respect to their number of different 
senses. The rows show the different alignment 
classes 1 – 4 separately for each of the three 
word categories of adjectives, nouns, and verbs. 
The last row (All cl.) sums all aligned senses for 
each word class per polysemy class. Rows 
marked with Σ denote results for all word catego-
ries. 



 
Figure 4: Sense mapping using the example of Maus (class 4). 

 
 

  Senses in GermaNet 
  1 2 3–4 5–10 > 10 Total 

C
la

ss
 1

 adj. 
nouns 
verbs 
Σ 

35 
49 
34 

118 

29 
64 
36 

129 

46 
77 
51 

174 

16 
136 
73 

225 

– 
9 

56 
9 

126 (47%) 
335 (53%) 
250 (40%) 
711 (47%) 

C
la

ss
 2

 adj. 
nouns 
verbs 
Σ 

0 
0 
0 
0 

5 
2 
0 
7 

19 
11 
7 

37 

12 
43 
48 

103 

– 
4 

55 
4 

36 (13%) 
60 (10%) 

110 (18%) 
206 (14%) 

C
la

ss
 3

 adj. 
nouns 
verbs 
Σ 

0 
1 
0 
1 

35 
18 
32 
85 

38 
54 
46 

138 

19 
58 
71 

148 

– 
22 
71 
22 

92 (34%) 
153 (24%) 
220 (36%) 
465 (31%) 

C
la

ss
 4

 adj. 
nouns 
verbs 
Σ 

0 
0 
1 
1 

1 
16 
2 

19 

11 
19 
8 

38 

4 
45 
17 
66 

– 
1 

10 
1 

16 (7%) 
81 (13%) 
38 (6%) 

135 (9%) 

Al
l C

l. 

adj. 
nouns 
verbs 
Σ 

35 
50 
35 

120 

70 
100 
70 

240 

114 
161 
112 
387 

51 
282 
209 
542 

– 
36 

192 
228 

270 (100%) 
629 (100%) 
618 (100%) 

1,517 (100%) 
Table 2: Sense distribution 

of the different alignment classes 
 

The numbers in Table 2 count senses rather 
than lemmas. Note that this implies that senses of 
a single lemma do not necessarily all have to be 
classified to the same alignment class but can 
belong to different classes – what arises quite 
frequently in practice. An example of this kind is 
the lemma Maus which has already been dis-
cussed in Section 3.4 (see Figure 4). The first 
GermaNet sense depicting the mouse as an ani-
mal has a corresponding main sense on the 
DWDS side; meaning that this sense is counted 
for alignment class 1. On the contrary, the se-
cond GermaNet sense for this lemma, which rep-
resents the computer mouse sense, does not have 
a corresponding match on the DWDS side. Thus, 
the second sense has to be counted for class 4. 

5 Discussion of the Results 
To begin with the most prominent and important 
result, classes 1 (exact match of main senses) and 
2 (exact match of subsenses) together arise in 
61% of all cases, i.e., 47% and 14%, respectively 
– see Table 2. This suggests that for three out of 
five word senses from GermaNet there is a 
matching sense in the DWDS with which a Ger-
maNet sense can be aligned. This underscores 
the overall feasibility of a sense alignment be-
tween the two lexical resources. The obvious 
gain for all these senses is the mutual enrichment 
by sense-specific information – such as suitable 
definitions, examples, and lexical relations – tak-
en from the matching sense. 

Class 1 arises in 47% of all cases and thus 
much more frequently than all other classes. The 
fact that matches between GermaNet senses and 
main senses in the DWDS (class 1) outnumber 
matches between GermaNet senses and subsens-
es in the DWDS (class 2) was to be expected. 
This confirms the conception of word senses on 
the same granularity level in both resources. 

Both classes 3 (partly overlapping coverage 
and different sense distinctions) and 4 (distinct 
coverage) reveal differences between GermaNet 
and the DWDS that prevent a straight forward 
sense alignment. The explanation why class 3 
arises in 31% of all cases, i.e., why there are dif-
ferences in the distinction of senses, is due to the 
lexicographic background of the two resources. 
The lexicographers of GermaNet and the DWDS 
pursue different perspectives and guidelines of 
how to model word senses, e.g. with respect to 
the sense granularity. Thus, from a lexicogra-
pher’s perspective, it is interesting to analyze 
these cases since they concern the identification 
and differentiation of word senses which is one 
of the harder tasks that lexicographers face. To 
gain benefit from a mapping of senses in this 
class, it would mean that all information for a 



sense has to be analyzed in order to be individu-
ally assigned to a corresponding sense. 

Class 4, which indicates a distinct coverage of 
GermaNet and the DWDS, shows fewest occur-
rences. In only 9% of all GermaNet senses, there 
is no corresponding entry in the DWDS. It 
should be kept in mind that this number only ap-
plies to those 48,036 lemmas that are encoded in 
both resources. For all remaining lemmas, there 
are no lexical entries in the DWDS at all and thus 
these word senses would fall into class 4 as well. 
The evaluation for class 4 is biased towards one 
direction, i.e., it regards GermaNet senses with 
missing entries in the DWDS. Since it is also 
interesting to analyze and compare the other way 
around where there are DWDS senses lacking 
matches in GermaNet, these cases have also been 
recorded during the manual alignment. Altogeth-
er, there are 384 word senses (122 adjectival, 104 
nominal, and 158 verbal senses) in the DWDS 
that do not have a corresponding entry in Germa-
Net. In all cases where the sets of sense distinc-
tions differ between the two resources, this pro-
vides reason for revisiting and possibly revising 
the lexical entries in question. Of course, this 
also applies to all those word lemmas for which 
there is a lexical entry in only one of the two re-
sources. 

A comparison of the results for the three dif-
ferent word classes and polysemy classes yields 
the following tendencies: 
• Words with only one GermaNet sense almost 

exclusively fall into class 1 – for all three 
word classes. This is not surprising since 
those words usually have one or few senses 
in the DWDS and thus the probability that 
the “same” most prominent sense of a word 
is encoded in both resources is significant. 

• More than half of all nouns (53%) fall into 
class 1 – much fewer nouns (10%) fall into 
class 2. By contrast, there are only 40% of all 
verbs in class 1, but proportionally almost 
twice as many verbs (18%) classified to 
class 2 compared to nouns. This is especially 
remarkable for verbs with more than four 
senses. One reason for this difference is the 
variety in the granularity level of the sense 
distinctions in GermaNet and the DWDS 
which arises more often for verbs than for 
nouns. 

• The deviation between the three word classes 
for polysemous words, i.e., words with more 
than one sense in GermaNet, is interesting to 
observe. Adjectives and verbs show a pro-
portionally larger number of occurrences in 

class 3 (34% and 36%, respectively) com-
pared to nouns (24%). This means that there 
are more words with a partly overlapping 
coverage and different sense distinctions for 
adjectives and verbs than for nouns, e.g., 
where two senses from one resource jointly 
describe one sense of the other resource. 

• By contrast, this ratio is reversed for class 4, 
where there are proportionally nearly twice 
as many occurrences for nouns (13%) than 
for adjectives and verbs (7% and 6%, respec-
tively). The explanation for this is that there 
are more nominal senses that are not encoded 
in one resource, but more adjectival and ver-
bal senses that encode an overlapping cover-
age with a different distinction of senses. 

All in all, it is worthwhile to perform a com-
plete sense alignment between GermaNet and the 
DWDS. This will open up a wide range of bene-
fits for both resources, including the harvesting 
of sense-specific information and the external 
support of sense distinctions for matching senses 
as well as indicators for revisiting and possibly 
revising the lexical entries in question for non-
matching senses. 

6 Related Work 
There has been a considerable body of research 
for English that investigates the alignment of the 
Princeton WordNet with Wikipedia (including 
Ruiz-Casado et al., 2005; Ponzetto and Navigli, 
2010; Niemann and Gurevych, 2011), with Wik-
tionary (including Meyer and Gurevych, 2011), 
with the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary 
English and with Roget's thesaurus (Kwong, 
1998), with the Hector lexicon (Litkowski, 
1999), or with the Oxford Dictionary of English 
(Navigli, 2006). 

Previous work for German has been on the 
alignment of GermaNet with the German version 
of Wiktionary (Henrich et al., 2011) and with the 
German Wikipedia (Henrich et al., 2012). 

However, there is no other previous research 
that tries to align GermaNet to the DWDS. 

7 Conclusion and Future Work 
This initial pilot study has proven the feasibility 
of a sense alignment between GermaNet and the 
DWDS both in term of quantity and appropriate-
ness. We have learned about the differences in 
the distinction of senses that are due to different 
perspectives and guidelines of how to model 
word senses that the lexicographers of both re-
sources pursue. The classification of senses ac-



cording to their appropriateness to be aligned 
with senses from the other resource allows an 
individual treatment of different issues and phe-
nomena that arise in practice when an alignment 
of two resources is performed. 

The alignment of GermaNet with the DWDS 
brings about considerable mutual benefits for 
both resources. For all sense distinctions that are 
completely parallel in the two resources, the 
alignment provides supporting external evidence 
for the validity of sense distinction and allows 
enriching word senses by information contained 
in the other resource. By contrast, for all non-
matching sense distinctions, reason for revisiting 
and possibly revising the lexical entries in ques-
tion is provided. 

The natural next step, which we have already 
started to work on, is to implement an algorithm 
that automatically aligns senses from the two 
resources. This provides a good basis for the lex-
icographer’s work of post-correcting the auto-
matic alignment and revising the senses in both 
resources, which still remains a complex and 
substantial task to be performed. 

Acknowledgments 
We are very grateful to our student assistants 
Sabrina Galasso and Amit Vrubel, who helped us 
with the evaluation reported in Sections 4 and 5. 
Special thanks go to our colleagues in Berlin for 
making available the DWDS to us. 

Financial support was provided by the German 
Research Foundation (DFG) as part of the Col-
laborative Research Center ‘Emergence of 
Meaning’ (SFB 833), by the German Ministry of 
Education and Technology (BMBF) as part of 
the research grant CLARIN-D, and by a research 
grant from the University of Tübingen. 

References  
Jörg Didakowski, Lothar Lemnitzer, and Alexander 

Geyken. 2012. Automatic example sentence extrac-
tion for a contemporary German dictionary. Pro-
ceedings of EURALEX 2012, Oslo, pp. 343-349. 

Christiane Fellbaum. (eds.). 1998. WordNet – An 
Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press. 

Birgit Hamp and Helmut Feldweg. 1997. GermaNet – 
a Lexical-Semantic Net for German. Proceedings 
of ACL workshop Automatic Information Extrac-
tion and Building of Lexical Semantic Resources 
for NLP Applications, Madrid. 

Verena Henrich and Erhard Hinrichs. 2010. GernEdiT 
– The GermaNet Editing Tool. Proceedings of the 

Seventh Conference on International Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, pp. 2228-2235. 

Verena Henrich, Erhard Hinrichs, and Klaus Suttner: 
Automatically Linking GermaNet to Wikipedia for 
Harvesting Corpus Examples for GermaNet Sens-
es. Journal for Language Technology and Compu-
tational Linguistics (JLCL), Vol. 27, No. 1, 2012, 
pp. 1-19. 

Verena Henrich, Erhard Hinrichs, and Tatiana 
Vodolazova. 2011. Semi-Automatic Extension of 
GermaNet with Sense Definitions from Wiktionary. 
Proceedings of 5th Language & Technology Con-
ference (LTC 2011), Poznań, Poland, 2011, pp. 
126-130. 

Wolfgang Klein and Alexander Geyken. 2010. Das 
Digitale Wörterbuch der Deutschen Sprache 
(DWDS). Heid, Ulrich/Schierholz, Stef-
an/Schweickard, Wolfgang/Wiegand, Herbert 
Ernst/Gouws, Rufus H./Wolski, Werner (Hg.): 
Lexikographica. Berlin/New York, pp. 79-93. 

Oi Yee Kwong. 1998. Aligning wordnet with addi-
tional lexical resources. Proceedings of the COL-
ING-ACL’98 Workshop on ‘Usage of WordNet in 
Natural Language Processing Systems’, Montreal, 
QC, Canada, pp. 73-79. 

Kenneth C. Litkowski. 1999. Towards a meaning-full 
comparison of lexical resources. Proceedings of 
the ACL Special Interest Group on the Lexicon 
Workshop on Standardizing Lexical Resources, 
College Park, MD, USA, pp. 30-37. 

Christian M. Meyer and Irina Gurevych. 2011. What 
psycholinguists know about chemistry: Aligning 
Wiktionary and WordNet for increased domain 
coverage. Proceedings of the 5th International Joint 
Conference on Natural Language Processing 
(IJCNLP 2011), pages 883–892, 

Elisabeth Niemann and Iryna Gurevych. 2011. The 
People’s Web meets Linguistic Knowledge: Auto-
matic Sense Alignment of Wikipedia and WordNet. 
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference 
on Computational Semantics, pp. 205-214. 

Roberto Navigli. 2006. Meaningful clustering of sens-
es helps boost word sense disambiguation perfor-
mance. Proceedings of COLING 2006 and ACL 
2006. Association for Computational Linguistics, 
pp. 105-112. 

Simone P. Ponzetto and Roberto Navigli. 2010. 
Knowledge-rich Word Sense Disambiguation rival-
ing supervised system. Proceedings of the 48th An-
nual Meeting of the ACL, pp. 1522-1531. 

Maria Ruiz-Casado, Enrique Alfonseca, and Pablo 
Castells. 2005. Automatic Assignment of Wikipedia 
Encyclopedic Entries to WordNet Synsets. Advanc-
es in Web Intelligence, Volume 3528 of LNCS, 
Springer Verlag, pp. 380-386. 


