








































Information density, Heaps’ Law, and perception of factiness in news
(REVISED 06-23-2014)

Miriam Boon
Technology and Social Behavior, Northwestern University

Evanston, IL 60208, USA
MiriamBoon2012@u.northwestern.edu

Abstract

Seeking information online can be an exer-
cise in time wasted wading through repeti-
tive, verbose text with little actual content.
Some documents are more densely popu-
lated with factoids (fact-like claims) than
others. The densest documents are poten-
tially the most efficient use of time, likely
to include the most information. Thus
some measure of “factiness” might be use-
ful to readers. Based on crowdsourced rat-
ings of the factual content of 806 online
news articles, we find that after controlling
for widely varying document length using
Heaps’ Law, a significant positive correla-
tion exists between perceived factual con-
tent and relative information entropy.

1 Introduction

In today’s information-based society, finding ac-
curate information is of concern to everyone.
There are many obstacles to this goal. Not all peo-
ple are equally skilled at judging the veracity of
a factoid (a term used here to indicate something
that is stated as a fact, but that may or may not ac-
tually be true.). Nor is it always easy to find the
single drop of content you need amidst the oceans
of the Internet. Even for those equipped with both
skill and access, time is always a limiting factor.

It is this last problem with which this paper is
concerned. How can we identify content that most
efficiently conveys the most information, given
that any information seeker’s time is limited?

1.1 The difficulty with factoids
Imagine that we must select from a set of
documents those that efficiently convey the
most information in the fewest words possi-
ble; that is, those with the highest factoid rate,
count(factoids)/count(words). A human do-
ing this by hand would count the factoids and

words in each document. Automating this exact
approach would require ‘teaching’ the computer
to identify unique factoids in a document, which
requires being able to recognize and discard re-
dundant factoids, which requires at least a rudi-
mentary understanding of each factoid’s meaning.
These are all difficult tasks for a computer.

Luckily, to achieve our goal, we don’t need to
know which sentences are factoids. What we need
is a good heuristic estimate of information density
that computers can easily calculate.

1.2 Linking vocabulary to factoids
To insert new information into a text, an author
must add words, making the document longer.
While the new information can sometimes be con-
veyed using the same vocabulary as the rest of
the text, if the information is sufficiently different
from what is already present, it will also likely in-
troduce new vocabulary words.

The result is that the introduction of a new fac-
toid into a text is likely to also introduce new vo-
cabulary, unless it is redundant. Thus, the more
non-redundant factoids a text contains, the more
varied the vocabulary of the text is likely to be.

1.3 From vocabulary to relative entropy
Vocabulary is commonly used in connection with
Shannon’s information entropy to measure such
things as surprisal, redundancy, perplexity, and, of
course, information density (Shannon, 1949; Mc-
Farlane et al., 2009).

Entropy models text as being created via a
Markov process. In its most basic form, it can be
written as:

H = −K
L∑
i=0

pilog2pi (1)

where K is a constant chosen based on the units,
L is the length of the document, and pi is the
probability of the ith word. This equation works



equally well whether it is used for unigrams, bi-
grams, or trigrams.

Consider for a moment the relationship between
entropy and length, vocabulary, and the probabil-
ity of each vocabulary word. Entropy increases
as both document length and vocabulary increase.
Words with lower probability increase entropy less
than those with higher probabilities, and entropy
for a document of given length is maximized when
all words have equal probability summing to one.
For this study, probabilities were calculated based
on corpus-wide frequencies, and then normalized
such that the sum of these probabilities would
equal one for each document.

Given two documents of equal length on the
same topic, only one of which is rich in infor-
mation, we might wonder why the information-
poor document is, relatively speaking, so long or
the information-rich document is so short. This
can be explained by noting that: 1. “translation”
into simpler versions of a language often leads to
a longer text, 2. simple versions of languages gen-
erally consist of the most common words in that
language, and 3. words that are less common of-
ten have more specific, information-dense, com-
plex meanings. Similarly, inefficient word choices
typically make excessive use of highly probable
function words, which increase the entropy more
than less common words. Thus, we can expect the
entropy to be lower for the denser document.

1.4 Controlling for document length with
Heaps‘ Law

While entropy may not rise as fast with the repe-
tition or addition of low probability words, every
word added does still increase the entropy. We can
try to compensate by dividing by document length.
But dividing by document length doesn’t remove
this dependency. I propose that this is because, as
Heap’s Law tells us, the vocabulary used in a doc-
ument has a positive relationship with document
size (Heaps, 1978). To control for this effect, I
fit a curve for unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams to
create a model for these relationships; an example
can be seen in Figure 1.

I then used that model to calculate the expected
document length, expected entropy, and residual
entropy, as follows:

Lexp = 10
(log10v−b)/m (2)

Hexp = H
Lexp
L

(3)

Hres = H −Hexp (4)

Here the subscript ‘exp’ stands for ‘expected’
and the subscript ‘res’ for ‘residual.’ This cal-
culation eliminates the dependency on document
length for bigram and trigram-based entropy, and
decreases it from an R2 of 0.99 to only 0.011 for
unigram-based entropy.

Figure 1: Top: As you can see there is a strong re-
lationship between document length and entropy.
R2=0.957, p > F: < 0.0001. Bottom: Resid-
ual entropy, which controls for that relationship,
no longer has a significant nor strong relationship
with document length. R2=5.32 * 10-9, p > F:
0.998

2 Data and Analysis

To further pursue the hypothesis that residual en-
tropy could be used to identify news articles with
lots of factoids, and thus, a sense of ‘factiness,’ a
labeled data set is necessary. Lots of websites al-
low users to rate articles, but those ratings don’t
have anything to do with the presence of factoids.
Labeling a data set of adequate size by hand would
be tedious, time-consuming, and costly.



Figure 2: Mousing over the question makes the
text “Is it based on facts or opinions?” appear in
pale grey text. Clicking on the question mark icon
next to the question, “Is this story factual?” reveals
an explanation of what the user should be rating.

2.1 Crowdsourcing with NewsTrust

Fortunately, a project called NewsTrust provided a
feasible alternative. NewsTrust, founded in 2005
by Fabrice Florin, created four sets of specific re-
view questions designed to inspire reviewers to
think critically about the quality of articles they re-
view. NewsTrust partnered with independent aca-
demic researchers Cliff Lampe and Kelly Garrett
to validate the review questions. They jointly ad-
ministered a survey in which respondents were
asked to complete one of the review instruments
regarding either the original version of an article
or blog post, or a degraded version.

The independent study found that even the
less experienced, less knowledgeable readers were
able to distinguish between the two versions of
the story. The shortest review instrument, with
only one question, had the most discriminating
power, while the slightly longer normative re-
view instrument (which added five more ques-
tions) yielded responses from non-experts that
most closely matched those of NewsTrust’s expert
journalists (Lampe and Garrett, 2007; Florin et
al., 2006; Florin, 2009).

Using their validated survey instrument, New-
sTrust created a system that allowed users to read
articles elsewhere, rate them using one of the four
review instruments, and even rate other NewsTrust
users’ reviews of articles. Each user has a trust-
worthiness rating (which can be bolstered by be-
coming validated as a journalist expert), and each
article has a composite rating, a certainty level for
that rating, reviews, and ratings of reviews.

One of the dimensions of journalistic quality
for which NewsTrust users rate articles is called

‘facts’. This can be taken as an aspect of “facti-
ness”: the extent to which people perceived the
article as truthful and factual. It follows that, to
the extent that the users are making a good-faith
attempt to rate articles based on facts regardless of
the soundness of their judgment about what is or
is not true, articles with a high rating for ‘facts’
should have more factoids, and therefore a higher
density of information.

2.2 Data acquisition
When this research project was launched, New-
sTrust had recently been acquired by the Poynter
Institute. Although they were open to making their
data available for research purposes, they were not
yet able to access the data in order to do so. In-
stead, the review data for over 11000 stories from
NewsTrust’s political section were retrieved using
Python, Requests, and Beautiful Soup. A combi-
nation of Alchemy API, digital library archives,
and custom scrapers for 19 different publication
websites were used to harvest the corresponding
article texts.

It quickly became clear, however, that it would
not be possible to completely capture all 11,000
articles. Some of the independent blogs and web-
sites no longer existed. Others had changed their
link structure, making it difficult to find the cor-
rect article. A great deal of content was behind
paywalls, or simply did not have a webpage struc-
ture that lent itself to clean extraction. As the text
would be used for automated analysis, it was es-
sential that the extracted text be as clean of de-
tritus as possible. As a result, the dataset shrank
from a potential 11,000 rated articles to only 3300
for which I could be confident of having clean
text. Approximately 2600 of those articles have
been rated by at least one NewsTrust user based
on factiness, and after removing any with fewer
than four facts ratings, the data set shrank fur-
ther to only 806 articles. Unigrams, bigrams, and
trigrams were extracted from these articles using
the Natural Language Toolkit, NLTK; all text was
lowercased, and only alphanumeric words were
included.

2.3 Analysis
The relationship between length and vocabulary
was modeled using the optimize toolkit from
SciPy, and visualized with MatPlotLib. The result-
ing relationship was used to calculate the residual,
normalized entropy for each document.



Figure 3: Top: Bivariate fit for bigrams (corr = -
0.06, p = 0.096) and trigrams (corr = -0.0975, p
= 0.0056). Colors are quantile density contours.
Bottom: Oneway ANOVA for bigrams (diff = -
0.60, p = 0.033) and trigrams (diff = -4.3, p =
0.0024).

In order to conduct oneway analysis, documents
needed to be separated into two distinct clusters. I
used Weka’s K-Means clustering algorithm to find
the mean of three clusters; the lowest and high-
est means served as the estimates for the means of
my “low fact” and “high fact” categories. Mem-
bership was determined by using a T-test with an
85% confidence interval; points that could come
from both or neither category were discarded (43
remaining cases). This process was repeated for
80 and 70% confidence levels; they yielded more
data points (51 and 97), a higher level of signifi-
cance, and similar effect sizes. A 90% confidence
level did not yield enough articles to analyze prop-
erly (n = 28).

3 Results and Discussion

As you can see in Figure 3, the ANOVA found
that the residual normalized entropy was signifi-
cantly lower for the high versus low factiness clas-
sification for bigrams, and the effect strengthened
for trigrams. The bivariate analysis shows some-
thing more interesting happening. With bigrams,
there is a cluster of documents that are almost sep-
arated from the main body of documents, having
lower entropy and higher factiness. This transition
is completed for the trigrams, resulting in a com-
pletely distinct cluster.

This cluster has a higher factiness rating (diff =
0.088, p = 0.0079), and shows no significant re-
lationship with any of the other dimensions mea-

sured by NewsTrust review instruments. Further-
more, none of the cluster members are in the low-
factiness category (this is true when constructing
the categories with p-values ranging from 0.05 to
0.3).

The migrating cluster pictured above is not
quite in keeping with expectations given the hy-
pothesis of less probable words being more dense
in meaning. If the original hypothesis were cor-
rect, this relationship would hold for unigrams as
well. Yet it does not. Future work must exam-
ine this cluster to better understand the mechanism
that is leading reviewers to rate these stories as
high in factiness.

If we accept the assumption that the articles
rated by NewsTrust users as highly factual will
contain a higher density of factoids, then this result
supports the hypothesis that residual entropy is
positively correlated with that characteristic. Con-
versely, if we accept the assumption that entropy
should be correlated with factoid density, then this
result supports the claim that NewsTrust users ef-
fectively identify articles that are more informa-
tion dense.

Other work on the fact-rated sub-corpus has two
obvious directions. First, and most closely related
to the work described in this paper, is the goal
of proving either assumption in a more controlled
experiment. If one of these assumptions can be
supported, then it strengthens the claim about the
other, which will be interesting from both a lin-
guistic perspective, and a human-computer inter-
action perspective. The other avenue of inquiry
that follows naturally from this work is to look
for other textual features that might, in combina-
tion, enable the automatic prediction of fact rat-
ings based on article text.

Acknowledgments

This work was partly supported by the Tech-
nology and Social Behavior program at North-
western University, the National Science Foun-
dation (grant numbers IIS-0856058 and IIS-
0917261/001), the Knight Foundation, and
Google. Many thanks to Dr. Darren Gergle for
his insight on the larger NewsTrust data set, to Dr.
Janet Pierrehumbert for her guidance on entropy
and factiness, and to Dr. Larry Birnbaum for his
intellectual guidance as well as his assistance on
this paper.



References
Fabrice Florin, Cliff Lampe, and Kelly Garrett. 2006.

Survey report summary - NewsTrust.

Fabrice Florin. 2009. NewsTrust communications
2009 report. Technical report.

Harold Stanley Heaps. 1978. Information retrieval:
Computational and theoretical aspects. Academic
Press, Inc.

Cliff Lampe and R. Kelly Garrett. 2007. It’s all news
to me: The effect of instruments on ratings provi-
sion. In System Sciences, 2007. HICSS 2007. 40th
Annual Hawaii International Conference on, page
180b180b.

Delano J. McFarlane, Noemie Elhadad, and Rita
Kukafka. 2009. Perplexity analysis of obesity news
coverage. AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings,
2009:426–430. 00001.

Claude E. Shannon. 1949. The mathematical theory
of communication. Urbana, University of Illinois
Press.


