



















































Symptom extraction issue


Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2014), pages 107–111,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26-27 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Symptom recognition issue

Laure Martin
MoDyCo

Paris Ouest University
laure.martin.1988

@gmail.com

Delphine Battistelli
MoDyCo

Paris Ouest University
del.battistelli

@gmail.com

Thierry Charnois
LIPN

Paris 13 University
thierry.charnois

@lipn.univ-paris13.fr

Abstract

This work focuses on signs and symptoms
recognition in biomedical texts abstracts.
First, this specific task is described from a
linguistic point of view. Then a method-
ology combining pattern mining and lan-
guage processing is proposed. In the ab-
sence of an authoritative annotated cor-
pus, our approach has the advantage of
being weakly-supervised. Preliminary ex-
perimental results are discussed and reveal
promising avenues.

1 Introduction

Our work is part of the Hybride1 Project, which
aims to expand the Orphanet encyclopedia. Or-
phanet is the reference portal for information on
rare diseases (RD) and orphan drugs, for all audi-
ences. A disease is considered rare if it affects less
than 1 person in 2,000. There are between 6,000
and 8,000 RD. 30 million people are concerned in
Europe. Among its activities, Orphanet maintains
an RD encyclopedia by manually monitoring sci-
entific publications. Hybride Project attempts to
automatically acquire new RD-related knowledge
from large amounts of scientific publications. The
elements of knowledge about a disease are varied:
onset, prevalence, signs and symptoms, transmis-
sion mode, disease causes (etiology).

In this article, we investigate the automatic
recognition of signs and symptoms in abstracts
from scientific articles. Although named entity
recognition in the biomedical domain has been
extensively studied, signs and symptoms seem to
have been left aside, for there is very little work on
the subject. First, the linguistic issue of our study
is presented in section 2, then the state of the art
and the description of our lexical resources in sec-
tion 3. Then our corpus and general method are

1http://hybride.loria.fr/

presented in section 4. First experiments are intro-
duced in section 5. Finally, the work to come is
presented in section 6.

2 Signs and symptoms

Signs and symptoms both refer to the features of a
disease, except that a symptom (or functional sign)
is noticed and described by a patient, whilst a clin-
ical sign is observed by a healthcare professional.
In thesauri and medical ontologies, these two no-
tions are generally put together in the same cate-
gory. Moreover, in texts –particularly in our cor-
pus of abstracts from scientific articles– there is
no morphological or syntactic difference between
sign and symptom. The difference is only seman-
tic, so it is impossible for non-specialists in the
medical field to tell the difference from the linguis-
tic context alone. In example (1), clinical signs are
in bold and symptoms are italicized.

(1) Cluster headache (CH) is a primary
headache disease characterized by re-
current short-lasting attacks of excruci-
ating unilateral periorbital pain accom-
panied by ipsilateral autonomic signs
(lacrimation, nasal congestion, ptosis,
miosis, lid edema, and eye redness).

Furthermore, the diagnosis is established by the
symptoms and the clinical signs together. We did
not, therefore, try to distinguish them.

Signs and symptoms take on the most varied lin-
guistic forms, as is noticeable in the corpus (which
will be described in more detail below). In its sim-
plest form, a sign or symptom is a noun, which
may be extended by complements, such as adjec-
tives or other nouns (example 2). They also appear
in other, more complex, forms, ranging from a sin-
gle phrase to a whole sentence (example 3).

(2) With disease progression patients
additionally develop weakness and

107



wasting of the limb and bulbar mus-
cles.

(3) Diagnosis is based on clini-
cal presentation, and glycemia
and lactacidemia levels, after a
meal (hyperglycemia and hypo-
lactacidemia), and after three to
four hour fasting (hypoglycemia and
hyperlactacidemia).

In addition to their variety, the linguistic units
representing signs and symptoms present some
syntactic ambiguities, particularly ambiguities
concerning prepositional attachment and coordi-
nation scope. In example (2), the first occur-
rence of “and” is ambiguous, for we don’t know
if “weakness” and “wasting” should be grouped
together as a single manifestation of the disease,
or if “weakness” on the one hand and “wasting of
the limbs and bulbar muscles” on the other hand
are two separate entities, as annotated here.

In addition to these syntactic ambiguities, two
annotation difficulties also arise. The first one con-
sists in correctly delimiting the linguistic units of
the signs and symptoms (example 4a). We agreed
with experts in the field that, generally, pieces
of information such as adjectives of intensity or
anatomical localizations were not part of the units;
nevertheless, this information is interesting in that
it provides the linguistic context for the signs and
symptoms. The second difficulty concerns ellip-
tical constructions: where two signs can be dis-
tinguished, only one can be annotated because the
two nouns have an adjective in common (exam-
ple 4b).

(4) In the severe forms, paralysis (4a)
concerns the neck, shoulder, and proxi-
mal muscles, followed by involvement
of the muscles of the distal upper ex-
tremities, the diaphragm and respiratory
muscles, which may result in respira-
tory compromise or arrest (4b).

Eventually, the last difficulty that was met dur-
ing the corpus observation is the semantic ambi-
guity existing between sign or symptom and dis-
ease denominations. A disease can be the clinical
sign of another disease. A clinical sign may be
included in a disease name or conversely. In ex-
ample (5), the clinical sign is in bold and the name
of the disease is underlined.

(5) The adult form results in progressive
limb-girdle myopathy beginning with
the lower limbs, and affects the respira-
tory system.

3 State of the art

Signs and symptoms have seldom been studied
for themselves in the field of biomedical informa-
tion extraction. They are often included in more
general categories such as “clinical concepts”
(Wagholikar et al., 2013), “medical problems”
(Uzuner et al., 2011) or “phenotypic information”
(South et al., 2009). Moreover, most of the studies
are based on clinical reports or narrative corpora
–the Mayo Clinic corpus (Savova et al., 2010) or
the 2010i2b2/VA Challenge corpus (Uzuner et al.,
2011)–, except for the Swedish MEDLEX Cor-
pus (Kokkinakis, 2006), which comprises teaching
material, guidelines, official documents, scientific
articles from medical journals, etc. Our work aims
at scientific monitoring and is therefore based on a
corpus of abstracts from scientific articles.

Most of the information extraction systems de-
veloped in the works previously cited use lexi-
cal resources, such as the Unified Medical Lan-
guage System (UMLS) or Medical Subject Head-
ings (MeSH) thesauri for the named entity extrac-
tion task. The UMLS comprises over 160 con-
trolled vocabularies such as MeSH, which is a
generic medical thesaurus containing over 25,000
descriptors. However, as Albright et al. (2013)
pointed out, UMLS was not originally designed
for annotation, so some of the semantic types over-
lap. They add that “the sheer size of the UMLS
schema increases the complexity of the annotation
task and slows annotation, while only a small pro-
portion of the annotation types present are used.”
That is why they decided to work with UMLS se-
mantic groups instead of types, except for signs
and symptoms –originally a semantic type in the
Disorders semantic group–, that they used inde-
pendently.

In a genetic disease context, a sign or symp-
tom may be phenotype-related. A phenotype is
all the observable characteristics of a person, such
as their morphology, biochemical or physiological
properties. It results from the interactions between
a genotype (expression of an organism’s genes)
and its environment. As many rare diseases are
genetic, many signs and symptoms may be found
in lists of phenotype anomalies. For that reason,

108



we chose to use the Human Phenotype Ontology
– HPO (Khler et al., 2014) as a lexical resource.
To our knowledge, HPO has not yet been used
in any study on signs and symptoms extraction.
Nevertheless, it should be recalled that phenotype
anomalies are not always clinical signs, and signs
or symptoms are not all phenotype-related. Even
so, we decided to use HPO as a lexical resource
because it lists 10,088 terms describing human
phenotype anomalies and can be easily collected.

Just a very few studies take advantage of consid-
ering the linguistic contexts of sign and symptom
entities. Kokkinakis (2006), after a first annotation
step of his corpus with MeSH, states that 75% of
the signs and symptoms co-occur with up to five
other signs and symptoms in a sentence. This al-
lowed him to develop new annotation rules. We
can also mention the MedLEE system (Friedman,
1997), which provides, for each concept, its type
(e.g. “problem”), value (e.g. “pain”) and modi-
fiers such as the degree (e.g. “severe”) or the body
location (e.g. “chest”).

As far as we are concerned, our approach is
based on the combination of NLP and pattern min-
ing techniques. We will see that the linguistic con-
texts mentioned above are part of the patterns au-
tomatically discovered with our text mining tool.

4 Corpus and general method

As mentioned above, HPO was selected as the
lexical resource for this project. With the list of
phenotype anomalies as queries, we compiled a
corpus of 306,606 abstracts from the MEDLINE
database with the PubMed search engine. These
abstracts are from articles published within the last
365 days. They consist of an ID, a title and a para-
graph. Then, we applied HPO and kept only the
sentences containing a unit annotated as a sign or
symptom. As already pointed out, signs and symp-
toms are not all phenotype-related, so our pre-
annotation is incomplete. Nonetheless, this first
annotation is quick and cheap, and it initiates the
process.

Figure 1 illustrates the successive steps in the
approach. In step 1, HPO (f) is used to annotate a
first corpus (a) by a single projection of HPO terms
onto the texts. This annotated corpus provides a
first learning corpus (b) to discover patterns (c) by
a text mining method (step 2; this method is de-
tailed below). These patterns are then validated by
an expert (step 3), as linguistic patterns (d). Step

Figure 1: Iterative process of our sign and symp-
tom extraction method

4 consists in using these patterns to annotate new
corpora (e) and extract new terms (here with the
semantic type of sign or symptom), which will
be added to the resources (f). The process is fi-
nally repeated (back to step 1, with enriched lexi-
cal resources). This incremental process has the
advantage of being weakly-supervised and non-
dependent on the corpus type.

Sequential pattern mining was first introduced
by Agrawal et al. (1995) in the data mining field.
It was adapted to information extraction in texts by
Béchet et al. (2012). It is a matter of locating, in a
set of sequences, sequences of items having a fre-
quency above a given threshold (called “support”).
Pattern mining is done in an ordered sequence of
items base, where each sequence corresponds to a
text unit (the sentence here). An item represents a
word in this sequence, generally the inflected form
or the lemma or even the part of speech if the aim
is to identify generic patterns. A number of param-
eters can be adapted along with the application.

Contrary to classical Machine Learning ap-
proaches which produce numerical models that are
unintelligible for humans, data mining allows the
discovery of symbolic patterns which can be inter-
preted by an expert. In the absence of authoritative
annotated corpora for the recognition of signs and
symptoms, manual validation of the patterns step
is necessary, and often a large number of patterns
still remains. To overcome this difficulty, Béchet
et al. (2012) suggested adding constraints in or-
der to reduce the results. In continuation of this
work, we make use of the sequential patterns ex-
traction tool SDMC2, which makes it possible to

2https://sdmc.greyc.fr/

109



apply various constraints and condensed represen-
tations extraction (patterns without redundancy).

We adapted pattern mining to our field of ap-
plication. Thus we first propose to use TreeTag-
ger (Schmidt, 1994) as a pretreatment, in order
to mark up different types of item (inflected form,
lemma, part of speech). To narrow down the num-
ber of patterns returned by the tool, we introduce
several constraints specific to our application: lin-
guistic membership constraints (for example, we
can choose to return only patterns containing at
least one sign or symptom name), or the “gap”
constraint (Dong and Pei, 2007), corresponding to
possible gaps between items in the pattern. Thus a
gap of maximal value n means that at most n items
(words) are between each item of the pattern in the
corresponding sequences (sentences).

5 First experiment

Annotating the first MEDLINE corpus of Ab-
stracts with HPO provided us with a corpus of
10,000 annotated sentences. The 13,477 annotated
units were replaced by a keyword –SYMPTOM–
in order to facilitate the discovery of patterns.
Then we used SDMC to mine the corpus for max-
imal patterns, with a minimal support of 10, a
length between 3 and 50 words and a gap con-
straint of g(0,0), i.e. the words are consecutive
(no gap allowed). We were mining for lemma se-
quences only.

Results produced 988 patterns, among which
326 contained the keyword symptom. Based on
these patterns, several remarks can already be
made:

• Several annotated signs or symptoms are
regularly associated with a third term,
which can be another sign or symptom:
{symptom}{symptom}{and}{stress};
• HPO annotation limitations (see sec-

tion 3) are made visible by some contexts:
{disease}{such}{as}{symptom};
• Some contexts are particularly recurrent,

such as {be}{associate}{with}{symptom}
or {characterize}{by}{symptom};
• Some temporal and chronologi-

cal ordering contexts are present:
{@card@}{%}{follow}{by}{symptom};
• The term “patient” is quite regular

({patient}{have}{severe}{symptom}),

but after the evaluation, these occurrences
turned out to be disease-related more than
sign or symptom-related;

• The body location proved to
be another regular context:
{frontotemporal}{symptom}{ftd}.

Firstly, a linguistics expert selected the pat-
terns that he considered the most relevant. These
patterns were then classified in three categories:
strong if they seem to strongly imply the pres-
ence of signs and symptoms (43 patterns), mod-
erate (309 patterns) and weak (45 patterns). Sec-
ondly, these patterns were applied on a new cor-
pus of MEDLINE abstracts in order to annotate
the sign and symptom contexts. For the moment,
only strong patterns have been applied.

25 abstracts were randomly selected among all
the scientific articles published within the last
month and dealing with Pompe disease. These
25 articles were manually annotated for signs and
symptoms by an expert and thus constituted a gold
standard. Then, we compared the manual annota-
tion to our automatically annotated contexts. If
the annotated sentence includes signs or symp-
toms, we consider that the annotation is relevant.
Among the 25 abstracts (225 sentences), 27 con-
texts were extracted with our method. 23 were
correct, 4 were irrelevant; 70 sentences were not
annotated by the system. Thus the results were
23.7 in recall, reaching 82.2 in precision (36.8 in
F-score).

6 Conclusions

Sign/disease ambiguity is the cause of 3 of the 4
irrelevant annotations, i.e. diseases were in the
same linguistic context than signs. Thus the sen-
tences were annotated but they contained diseases,
not signs. The forth irrelevant annotation indi-
cates a diagnosis test; it highlights that causes and
consequences of a disease can be easily confused
by non-specialists. Most of the left out sentences
contain signs or symptoms expressed by complex
units, such as Levels of creatinkinase in serum
were high. (36%). 27% of these sentences are
about gene mutations, which can be considered as
causes of diseases or as clinical signs. Others con-
tain patterns which have not been selected by the
expert but can be easily added to improve the re-
call.

110



The context annotation is only a first step to-
wards sign and symptom extraction. So far, we
have not solved the problem of unit delimitation.
In order to achieve this, we have two working hy-
potheses. We intend to compare chunking and
syntactic analysis results in defining the scope of
sign and symptom lexical units. Chunking will
be conducted with an NLP tool such as TreeTag-
ger, and syntactic analysis will use a dependency
parser such as the Stanford Parser (ref.). The latter
should allow us to delimit some recurring syntac-
tic structures (e.g. agents, enumerations, etc.).

We also intend to compare our results with re-
sults provided by CRFs. First the features will be
classical (bag of words, among others), and sec-
ond, we will add the contexts obtained with the
text mining to the features. This should enable
us to compare our method to others. Finally, we
are going to develop an evaluation interface to fa-
cilitate the work of the expert. In the absence of
comparable corpora, the evaluation can only be
manual. Our current sample of 50 abstracts is
just a start, and needs to be expanded in order to
strengthen the evaluation.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the Hybride
Project ANR-11-BS02-002.

References
Rakesh Agrawal and Ramakrishnan Srikant. 1995.

Mining Sequential Patterns. Proceedings of
ICDE’95.

Daniel Albright, Arrick Lanfranchi, Anwen Fredrik-
sen, William F. Styler IV, Colin Warner, Jena D.
Hwang, Jinho D. Choi, Dmitriy Dligach, Rodney D.
Nielsen, James Martin, Wayne Ward, Martha Palmer
ans Guergana K. Savova. 2013. Towards compre-
hensive syntactic and semantic annotations of the
clinical narrative. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 20:922–930.

Nicolas Béchet, Peggy Cellier, Thierry Charnois and
Bruno Crémilleux. 2012. Discovering linguistic
patterns using sequence mining. Proceedings of
Springer LNCS, 13th International Conference on
Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Lin-
guistics - CICLing’2012, 1:154–165.

Guozhu Dong and Jian Pei. 2007. Sequence Data Min-
ing. Springer.

Carol Friedman. 1997. Towards a Comprehensive
Medical Language Processing System: Methods and

Issues. Proceedings of the AMIA Annual Fall Sym-
posium, 1997:595–599.

Sebastian Köhler, Sandra C. Doelken, Christopher J.
Mungall, Sebastian Bauer, Helen V. Firth, Is-
abelle Bailleul-Forestier, Graeme C. M. Black,
Danielle L. Brown, Michael Brudno, Jennifer
Campbell, David R. FitzPatrick, Janan T. Eppig, An-
drew P. Jackson, Kathleen Freson, Marta Girdea,
Ingo Helbig, Jane A. Hurst, Johanna Jähn, Laird G.
Jackson, Anne M. Kelly, David H. Ledbetter, Sa-
har Mansour, Christa L. Martin, Celia Moss, An-
drew Mumford, Willem H. Ouwehand, Soo-Mi
Park, Erin Rooney Riggs, Richard H. Scott, Sanjay
Sisodiya, Steven Van Vooren, Ronald J. Wapner, An-
drew O. M. Wilkie, Caroline F. Wright, Anneke T.
Vulto-van Silfhout, Nicole de Leeuw, Bert B. A.
de Vries, Nicole L. Washingthon, Cynthia L. Smith,
Monte Westerfield, Paul Schofield, Barbara J. Ruef,
Georgios V. Gkoutos, Melissa Haendel, Damian
Smedley, Suzanna E. Lewis and Peter N. Robinson.
2014. The Human Phenotype Ontology project:
linking molecular biology and disease through phe-
notype data. Nucleic Acids Research, 42:966–974.

Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2006. Developing Resources
for Swedish Bio-Medical Text-Mining. Proceed-
ings of the 2nd International Symposium on Seman-
tic Mining in Biomedicine (SMBM)

Guergana K. Savova, James J. Masanz, Philip V.
Ogren, Jiaping Zheng, Sunghwan Sohn, Karin C.
Kipper-Schuler, Christopher G. Chute. 2010. Mayo
clinical Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction
System (cTAKES): architecture, component evalua-
tion and applications. Journal of the American Med-
ical Informatics Association, 17:507–513.

Helmut Schmidt. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-Speech
Tagging Using Decision Trees. Proceedings of In-
ternational Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing.

Brett R. South, Shuying Shen, Makoto Jones, Jennifer
Garvin, Matthew H. Samore, Wendy W. Chapman
and Adi V. Gundlapalli. 2009. Developing a man-
ually annotated clinical document corpus to identify
phenotypic information for inflammatory bowel dis-
ease. Summit on Translational Bioinformatics 2009

Özlem Uzuner, Brett R. South, Shuying Shen, Scott L.
DuVall. 2011. 2010 i2b2/VA challenge on con-
cepts, assertions, and relations in clinical text. Jour-
nal of the American Medical Informatics Associa-
tion, 18:552–556.

Kavishwar B. Wagholikar, Manabu Torii, Siddartha R.
Jonnalagadda and Hongfang Liu. 2013. Pooling
annotated corpora for clinical concept extraction.
Journal of Biomedical Semantics, 4:3.

Alfred V. Aho and Jeffrey D. Ullman. 1972. The
Theory of Parsing, Translation and Compiling, vol-
ume 1. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

111


