



















































A Study on Personal Attributes Extraction Based on the Combination of Sentences Classifications and Rules


Proceedings of the Third CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language Processing, pages 192–201,
Wuhan, China, 20-21 October 2014

A Study on Personal Attributes Extraction Based on the Combination 
of Sentences Classifications and Rules 

 
Nan-chang Cheng Cheng-qing Zong 

    Institute of Automation Chinese 
Academy of Sciences 

Beijing, china 

    Institute of Automation Chinese 
Academy of Sciences 

Beijing, china 
nanchang.cheng@nlpr.ia.ac.cn cqzong@nlpr.ia.ac.cn 

Min Hou Yong-lin Teng 
Communication University of China 

Beijing, china 
Communication University of China 

Beijing, china 
houmin@cuc.edu.cn tengyonglin@cuc.edu.cn 

 
Abstract 

Personal attributes extraction plays a significant role 
in information mining, event tracing and personal 
name disambiguation. It mainly involves two 
problems, attribute recognition and decision making 
on whether this attribute belongs to the extracted 
person. Personal attributes generally involve named 
entities, which are recognized mainly by adjusting 
word segmentation software. As for those which 
cannot be recognized by word segmentation, the 
combination of feature words and rules can be used 
for their recognition. The combination of sentences 
classifications and rules is employed for attribute 
ownership decision. At first, all the sentences in the 
document are classified into those with attribute 
words and those without, with the latter omitted. 
The former are then classified into description 
sentences with one person and description sentences 
with more persons, according to the criterion that 
whether there are more than one person described in 
the sentence. According to statistics of description 
sentences with one person, anaphora resolution is 
not necessary, which reduces recognition errors 
from anaphora resolution failures. Minimum slicing 
is used for description sentences with more persons, 
and attribute ownership decision is made within the 
minimum language segment with the co-occurrence 
of both the person and the attribute. This method 
achieves 0.507388780 and 0.489505010 
respectively in the lenient evaluation results and the 
strict evaluation results of SF_Value in 
CIPS-SIGHAN20141 Bakeoff, which turns out to 
be the best. The fact has shown that the method is 
effective. 

1  Introduction 

Attribute, characterized by its objectivity, is 
                                                             
1 http://www.cipsc.org.cn/clp2014/webpage/en/home_en.htm 

inherent in things(Zhuang, 2000). Personal 
attribute extraction aims 
at automatically extracting in unstructured texts 
specific attributes associated with the personal 
name, such as the character entity's date of birth, 
work units, spouses, children, education, title, etc. 
This plays a significant role in information 
mining, event tracing and personal name 
disambiguation. International TAC KBP has been 
conducted since 2009 (Bikel et al., 2009; 
McNamee et al., 2009), and CIPS-SIGHAN2014 
has referred to and revised its Slot Filling tasks to 
design personal attribute extraction tasks in 
Chinese. There are six groups participating this 
bakeoff. 
Personal attribute extraction mainly involves two 
problems, attribute recognition and decision 
making on whether this attribute belongs to the 
extracted person, and the latter can be called 
attribute ownership decision. Personal attributes 
are generally named entities, such as personal 
names, place names, organization names, 
temporal nouns, so named entity recognition 
technology is needed in attribute recognition. 
Although named entity recognition is one 
difficulty in natural language processing, there 
are plenty of experiences and methods we can 
draw upon as 30 years has witnessed its research 
since the introduction of Chinese word 
segmentation, as in (Sun et al., 1995; Zhao et al., 
1999; Liao et al., 2004; Yu et al., 2006; Ye et al., 
2007). Therefore, this paper focuses upon 
attribute ownership decision after a brief 
introduction to personal attribute extraction, since 
the former is more complicated with anaphora 
resolution and attribute ownership decision 
among more persons. Some of bakeoff papers 

192



regarding filling slot have noticed these problems, 
as in (Bikel et al., 2009; Burman et al., 2012). In 
this paper, we propose attribute ownership 
decision through the combination of sentences 
classifications and rules in accordance with 
natural language features and the task 
requirements of our bakeoff. This method has 
achieved good results in the evaluation. The rest 
of the paper is organized as: Section 2 introduces 
main ideas, Section 3 presents the methods of 
personal attribute recognition, Section 4 
emphasizes on and discusses the methods of 
personal attribute ownership decision, Section 5 
is experimental results and Section 6 is 
conclusion. 

2  Main ideas 

Attribute recognition is mainly named entity 
recognition, which is attempted to be settled in 
word segmentation in our study. According to 
attribute recognition task requirements, the word 
segmentation software used in this study has been 
adjusted so that it can recognize most named 
entities. As for those which cannot be recognized 
by the software, the method of feature words 
together with rules has been employed. After 
attribute recognition, all the sentences in the 
document are classified into those with attribute 
words and those without, with the latter omitted. 
Therefore, attribute ownership decision is merely 
conducted to the sentences marked with attribute 
words. 
Now that the anaphora of personal pronouns are 
widely used in most sentences, attribute 
ownership decision involves anaphora resolution, 
which means the determination of the antecedent 
of the anaphor(Wang, 2005). Anaphora resolution 
appears to be difficult in Chinese, far from being 
settled completely satisfactorily(Wang, 2002; 
Wang 2005). In order to decrease the reliance on 
anaphora resolution, we have studied the tested 
documents and found that the described person in 
most of them is the extracted character. When 
most sentences in a document describe the 
extracted person, it is not necessary to employ 
anaphora resolution. Anaphora resolution or some 
other methods are needed to find the attribute of 
the extracted person only for those sentences with 
more persons. In a small number of documents, 

there is only one extracted person within the 
whole text, such as “马伟明_T1.xml” and “白志
东 _T1.xml”. As such, in attribute ownership 
decision, it should be determined whether there 
are more than two persons described in the 
sentence. In this way, the sentences marked with 
attribute words in the document will be classified 
as description sentences with one person and 
description sentences with more persons through 
some methods, which would decrease the 
reliance on anaphora resolution and so greatly 
improve decision precision by decreasing the 
recognition errors from anaphora resolution 
failures. The challenge here is how to determine 
those sentences with more persons, which will be 
expounded later. 

3  Personal attribute recognition 

Personal attribute recognition involves two jobs. 
One is to adjust word segmentation software in 
order to achieve full recognition of various types 
of named entities, and the other is to annotate 
feature words to ensure exact decision of attribute 
identity of some named entities. 
3.1 Adjusting word segmentation software 
Named entity recognition is mainly completed in 
word segmentation. The word segmentation 
software used is CUCBst, a dictionary and rule 
based software developed by Broadcasting Media 
Center, Communications University of China. 
The adjustment includes: adjustmenting tagging, 
adding words, and adjusting rules. 
3.1.1  Adjustmenting Tagging  
First, some tags are adjusted in the dictionary. 
Take some words associated with titles as an 
example. In the dictionary, there are items such as 
“程序员(programmer) n”, “雕刻师(sculptor) n”, 
“董事长(president) n”, “发明家(inventor) n” and 
“检察长(chief-prosecutor) n”. The tag of “n” 
within is adjusted to be “tt”. For instance: 
Example Sentence 1: 可见魏冉．．这位封建社会地
主阶级的政治家，在完成秦王朝统一中国的事

业中所起的作用。 
Translation: As a feudal politician of landlord 
class, in the cause of uniting China by Qin 
dynasty, Wei Ran's role is clearly demonstrated. 
Its tagged version is: 
可见/c 魏冉/nr 这位/r 封建社会/ln 地主/n 阶

193



级/n 的/u 政治家/tt，/w 在/d 完成/v 秦王朝/t 
统一/a 中国/gj 的/u 事业/n 中/f 所/u 起/v 的
/u 作用/n 。/w 
Through the tagging adjustment, it is easy to 
recognize the title of the extracted person “魏冉
(Wei Ran)” is “政治家(statesman)”. We also 
adjust the tagging of death reasons(sw), 
nations(gj), provincial cities(sh), cities and 
towns(sx). In addition, some feature words are 
annotated. For example, the feature words 
associated with character birth such as “生于(be 
born)”, “出生(be born)” and “诞生(be born)” are 
annotated as “bir”. 
3.1.2  Adding words 
There are two stages in adding words: 
Stage One is to collect and sort dictionaries in 
system development, adding names such as titles, 
nations and places to the segmentation dictionary. 
Stage Two is to add OOV words to the 
segmentation dictionary in evaluation period by 
implementing new words automatic recognized 
in evaluation corpus with manual intervention. It 
should be pointed out that some certain noun 
phrase is regarded as one word and then kept in 
the dictionary. These noun phrases are mainly 
organization titles, nicknames and titles such as 
“北平研究院物理研究所(Institute of Physics of 
Peking Academy of Sciences)”, “罗彻斯特储蓄
银行(Rochester Bank)”, “橙县小姐(Miss Orange 
County)” and “ 名 誉 理 事 长 (Honorary 
chairman)”. 
3.1.3  Adjusting rules 
CUCBst segmentation system is characterized by 
coarse-grained segmentation and fine-grained 
segmentation, which is implemented by rules. We 
adjust some merging rules so that they can 
achieve better attribution recognition. For 
example: 
Example Sentence 2: 斯托曼 1953 年出生于美
国纽约曼哈顿地区的犹太人家庭。 
Translation: Stallman was born of a Jewish 
family in Manhattan, New York, in 1953. 
Its segmented version before the rule adjustment 
is: 
coarse-grained segmentation：斯托曼/nr 1953 年
/t 出生/v 于/p 美国纽约曼哈顿地区/ns 的/u 
犹太人/n 家庭/n  
fine-grained segmentation：斯托曼/nr 1953 年/t 
出生/v 于/p 美国/ns 纽约/ns 曼哈顿/ns 地区

/n 的/u 犹太人/n 家庭/n 
In the coarse-grained segmentation version, “美
国纽约曼哈顿地区 ”, which includes two 
personal attributes in accordance with evaluation 
outline, country of birth and city of birth, is 
merged together. Further analyses and processes 
are needed for correct recognition. In the 
fine-grained segmentation version, “美国纽约曼
哈顿地区” is divided into 4 words as “美国/ns 
纽约/ns 曼哈顿/ns 地区/n”, in which country 
of birth is correctly segmented. However, city of 
birth needs further processes by merging the 
following three words. Example Sentence 2’s 
segmented version after the rule adjustment is: 
斯托曼/nr 1953 年/t 出生/v 于/p 美国/gj 

纽约曼哈顿地区/ns 的/u 犹太人/n 家庭/n 
In this version, “美国纽约曼哈顿地区 ” is 
segmented into 2 words as “美国/gj 纽约曼哈
顿地区/ns”, which are country of birth and city 
of birth respectively. This makes the recognition 
and extraction of related attributes convenient. 
3.2  Finding nearest named entity through 
the feature word 
Although some specific tagging aimed for named 
entities and some personal attributes is conducted 
in word segmentation, it should be noted that not 
all tagged named entities are personal attributes. 
For example, 1998 is not always a person’s date 
of birth, since it could be the date for an event or 
something else. Therefore, it is necessary to 
decide personal attribute through the feature word, 
and find nearest named entity through the feature 
word within the sentence. Take the example of 
time of birth: 
Example Sentence 3: 张幼仪/nr 生于/bir 1900
年/t ，/w 比/p 徐志摩/nr 小/a 4/m 岁/q 。/w 
Translation: Zhang Youyi was born in 1900, and 
she was four years younger than Xu Zhimo. 
Example Sentence 4: 鲁桂珍/nr 1904 年/t 生于
/bir 南京/ns 
Translation: In 1904, Lu Guizhen was born in 
Nanjing. 
When segmented, “生于(be born)” is tagged as 
“bir”, which means the word is a feature word 
associated with a person’s birth. When there is 
“bir” in a sentence, the system will iterate before 
and after this feature word to find the nearest 
time noun, as in Example Sentence 3, 1900 is 
after the feature word and in Sentence 4, 1904 is 

194



before the feature word. 

4  Deciding whether the attribute 
belongs to the extracted person 

In this section, we first classify the sentences in 
two levels in order to decide the attribute 
ownership in the classified sentence. As for the 
description sentence with one person, decide 
whether the character is the extracted object. If 
not, just omit the sentence. As for the description 
sentence with more persons, decide personal 
attribute ownership by extracting the personal 
attribute within the minimum language segment 
with the co-occurrence of both the person and the 
attribute. 
4.1  Sentence classification 
Sentence classification involves two levels. First, 
the sentences are classified into sentences with or 
without attribute marks. Then, classify the 
sentences with attribute marks into those with 
one person and those with more persons. 
4.1.1 Classifying all the sentences into two 
types 
All the attributes and feature words are marked in 
word segmentation. In terms of these marks, all 
the sentences are classified into two types. Those 
without attribute marks will be directly omitted, 
whereas those with attribute marks will be kept 
for further processing.  
4.1.2 Classifying the sentences with attribute 
marks into two types 
The sentences with attribute marks are classified 
into those with one described person and those 
with 2 or more than 2 described persons. 
Character recognition is significant in this step. 
The forms to recognize characters include 
personal names, only surnames or first names, 
personal pronouns, zero form and kinship titles, 
in which personal names and kinship titles can be 
either antecedent or anaphora, the rest three can 
only be anaphora. 
(1) personal names 
Personal names are the most important feature to 
detect characters. For example: 
Example Sentence 5. 1973 年 7 月 19 日，冯白驹
在北京逝世。 
Translation: On July 19, 1973, Feng Baiju passed 

away in Beijing. 
Example Sentence 6. 次年 1 月，王文明病逝，
冯白驹继任中共琼崖特委书记。 
Translation: In January of the next year, Wang 
Wenming passed away, and Feng Baiju take 
Wang' place to be the Special Secretary of CPC 
in Qiongya. 
Here, the number of personal names in the 
sentence will decide whether the sentence is the 
one with one described person. Example 
Sentence 5 is the sentence with one described 
person, for there is one personal name “冯白驹” 
within, whereas Example Sentence 6 is the 
sentence with more described persons, for there 
are two personal names within, “王文明” and “冯
白驹”. 
(2) only surnames or first names 
As for non-Chinese names, the whole name is 
used first and then generally the surname is used 
for anaphora. For example: 
Example Sentence 7. 莫奈．．1840 年 11 月 14 日出
生于法国巴黎 45 街拉菲特第九郡，是阿道夫和
路易斯的第二个儿子。（克劳德·莫奈） 
Translation: Monet was born on November 14, 
1840, in 45 Street, the 9th canton of Lafayette, 
Paris, France; and he was the second son of Adolf 
and Louis. (Claude Monet) 
When using the surname would be confusing, 
first names will be used, as in the introduction to 
the twin brothers, “Mike Bryan” and “Bob 
Bryan”, in Example Sentence 8. 
例句 8. 等到鲍勃．．和迈克．．开始真正对网球产生
了浓厚兴趣，也拿起球拍开始了网球生涯后，

布莱恩夫妇又给他们订了个规矩：在 17 岁之
前，这对双胞胎都不可以在比赛中对抗。 
Translation: Until Bob and Mike really grew 
strong interests in tennis and began their tennis 
career, Bryans set up a catch for them. Before 17 
years old, the twins were not permitted to 
compete in game. 
Generally speaking, the whole name is used for 
the Chinese name. However, only surnames or 
first names could be used. For example: 
Example Sentence 9. 七七事变后，日本人邀请
他组建“中日友好协会”，梁意识到，要想不当

汉奸，必须立即离开北平。（梁思成） 
Translation: After Marco Polo Bridge Incident of 
7th July 1937, the Japanese invited him to 
organize the "China-Japan Friendship 

195



Association", Liang realized that he had to leave 
Peking immediately; otherwise he would be 
forced to become a traitor. (Liang Sichneg) 
Example Sentence 10. 我与泽涵兄交往多了，与
他的家人都处得很熟。（江泽涵） 
Translation: After frequent contacts with Bro 
Zehan, I got well acquainted with his families. 
(Jiang Zehan) 
When only surnames or first names are used, it is 
a little difficult to recognize them. Once 
recognized, it is as easy to decide whether there is 
one person or there are more persons in the 
sentence, as in the case of personal names. 
(3) personal pronouns 
Anaphora means that another component is used 
to refer to the prior component in order to avoid 
its repeat in the text(Xu 2003). There are three 
forms of anaphora, zero anaphora, pronominal 
anaphora and NP anaphora(Chen, 1987). In the 
personal attribute extraction, personal pronouns 
are anaphora with obvious forms and are used as 
one of the features to detect characters. For 
example: 
Example Sentence 11. 江泽涵是中国数学会的
创始人之一，从 1935 年该会成立时起，他就是
副理事长。（江泽涵） 
Translation: Jiang Zehan, one of the founders of 
the Chinese Mathematics Society, has been the 
vice chairman since the association was founded 
in 1935. (Jiang Zehan) 
When the character is detected, a single personal 
pronoun (such as he, she, you and I) used in one 
sentence, even with several occurrences, will be 
regarded as only one person, for in one sentence, 
it is rare to use the same single personal pronoun 
to refer to different persons. 
Generally the sentence with plural personal 
pronouns includes more persons. For example: 
Example Sentence 12. 李约瑟一如既往忠于他
的爱妻：“执子之手、与子偕老，”直到 1987
年德萝西 91 岁时去世，他们夫妇共同生活了整
整 64 年。 
Translation: Joseph Needham was always loyal to 
his beloved wife, just as the famous Chinese 
saying goes, "Holding your hand, lead our merry 
life till old". Until De Luoxi left at the age of 91 
in 1987, the couple had lived together for a full 
64 years. 
(4) kinship titles 

When the extracted person is introduced, some 
other related persons will be mentioned. 
Relatives, such as parents, the wife and brothers, 
are often mentioned. Besides, some other 
connections may also be mentioned, such as 
teachers, friends and leaders. The kinship titles 
have obvious form features and can be used for 
detecting characters in the sentence. For example: 
Example Sentence 13. 布兰切特的降生充满了
浪漫色彩，爸爸是美国前海军军官，军舰在澳

洲墨尔本停靠时，与布兰切特的母亲相识。（凯

特·布兰切特） 
Translation: Blanchett birth is full of romance. 
His father, a former US Navy officer, met 
Blanchett mother when the warship docked in 
Melbourne, Australia. (Cate Blanchett) 
In Example Sentence 13, there are three persons, 
“Blanchett”, “father” and “mother”. 
In addition, we also find that when some 
attributes of the extracted person’s teacher, 
student, friend or leader are described, this 
person’s name will appear. However, when a 
teacher, a student or a professor is used in a 
general sense, he or she has little thing to do with 
attribute extraction, so he or she will not be 
regarded as a character. For example: 
Example Sentence 14. 但法伊弗却透露，自己上
高中的时候很不受欢迎，“我那时很高，很笨拙，

老师曾经在我的成绩单上写过‘米歇尔是班里
个子最大的女孩’”。 
Translation: But Pfeiffer has revealed that she 
was very unpopular in high school, "At that time, 
I am very tall but somehow clumsy, and my 
teacher once wrote on my report card 'Michelle is 
the tallest Girl in class'". 
Example Sentence 15. 梅耶的死让很多人震惊，
他的同事和学生认为他是一个非常有才华的科

学家和教师。 
Translation: Meyer's death shocked a lot of 
people, both his colleagues and students believed 
that he was a very talented scientist and teacher. 
Example Sentence 16. 需要提出的是，卡罗瑟斯
的学生 Paul J. Flory (1910-1985)，在总结研究
卡罗瑟斯的基础上，出版了影响整个世界的《高

分子化学原理》一书，该书依然是今天高分子

领域主要的理论基础。 
Translation: I must point out that Carothers’ 
student Paul Flory (1910-1985), on the basis of 
summarizing research on Carothers, published 
"Principles of Polymer Chemistry", which shook 

196



the whole globe. The book is still the bible-like 
theoretical basis of today's realm of polymer. 
“老师(the teacher)” in Example Sentence 14, “同
事、学生 (colleagues, students)” in Example 
Sentence 15 are used in a general sense, so both 
sentences are ones with one person. Instead, 
Example Sentence 16 makes clear the date of 
birth, date of death, and some other information, 
concerning Carothers’ student, Paul J. Flory(with 
a specific name for the student), so the sentence 
is one with more persons. 
4.2 Attribute ownership decision 
By employing the above mentioned character 
recognition features to classify the sentences, we 
get two sentence sets, the description sentences 
with one person (including zero anaphora) and 
the description sentences with more persons. 
4.2.1 The description sentences with one 
person 
(1) affirming the extracted person 
As for the sentences with personal names, 
including with only first names or surnames, the 
extracted persons’ names, including first names 
or surnames, are used for the match. The 
difficulty lies in the sentences with personal 
pronouns and zero form. As mentioned above, 
most documents in the testing texts mainly 
describe extracted persons, thus when the 
description sentences with one person involve 
personal pronouns and zero form, it can be 
hypothesized that extracted persons are directly 
used as described persons. In order to test this 
hypothesis, we study the use of the third singular 
personal pronoun “他(he)” in all the sentences. 
Through automated recognition, we obtain 369 
sentences with one person which have “他(he)”. 
Then we identify all the sentences to see whether 
“他(he)” is the anaphora of the extracted person. 
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 show the results. 

As illustrated in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, 356 sentences, 
in 112 documents, with “他(he)” as the anaphora 
of the extracted person, account for 96 percent of 
all the sentences, whereas 14 sentences, in 5 
documents, with “他(he)” not as the anaphora of 
the extracted person, account for only 4 percent 
of all the sentences. We study these 5 documents 
and find that the chiefly described person is not 
the extracted person in 3 documents, which are 
“鲁桂珍_T2.xml”, “鲁桂珍_T3.xml” and “陈济
棠_T3.xml”. In “鲁桂珍_T2.xml” and “鲁桂珍
_T3.xml”, the chiefly described person is 鲁桂
珍’s husband, 李约瑟, not the extracted person, 
鲁桂珍 . In “ 陈济棠 _T3.xml”, he chiefly 
described person is 陈济棠’s son, 陈树柏, not 
the extracted person, 陈济棠. In this document, 
there are 5 sentences with one person which have 
“他(he)”. There are 4 sentences with “他(he)” not 
as the anaphora of the extracted person, while 
there is only one sentences with “他(he)” as the 
anaphora of the extracted person. Thus we call 
this document as one with overlaps. The other 
two documents are “马伟明_T3.xml” and “白志
东_T3.xml” respectively. Although the chiefly 
described person is the extracted person in both 
documents, the narrative perspective is 
first-person perspective. 
In addition, we also perform statistical analysis of 
the use of zero form. As there are a number of 
zero anaphora, 193 sentences with zero anaphora 
are randomly chosen from 126 documents. Then 
we identify all these sentences to see whether 
there is the anaphora of the extracted person. The 
results are shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. 

As illustrated in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, zero anaphora 
shares similar use with the anaphora of the third 
singular pronoun “他 (he)”. By analyzing the 
documents with zero anaphora not referred to the 
extracted person, we find that the chiefly 
described person is not the extracted person. 

197



However, there is no first-person perspective, 
which is quite different from the case of the third 
singular pronoun “他(he)”. 
The data above demonstrate that our hypotheses 
are in line with reality. If we have had classified 
the documents in terms of some features such as 
the chiefly described person and narrative 
perspectives and then classified the sentences in 
documents, we would have achieved better 
results. 
(2) attribute extraction 
The extracted character in the description 
sentence with one person is affirmed at first. If 
the character is not the extracted object, omit the 
sentence. If the character is the extracted object, 
attributes are extracted and put into different 
attribute lists in terms of marks. For example: 
Example Sentence 17.  1943 年 11 月/t ，/w 白
志东/nr 出生/bir 于/p 河北省/sh 乐亭县/sx。/w 
Translation: In November, 1943, Bai Zhidong 
was born in Leting County, Hebei Province. 
According to the feature word “出生(birth)” and 
attribute marks, the attributes of “1943 年 11 月
(Nov. 1943)”, “河北省(Hebei province)” and “乐
亭县(Laoting county)” are put into such attribute 
lists as date of birth, province of birth and city of 
birth(including towns and villages) of the 
extracted person “白志东”. 
4.2.2 The description sentences with more 
persons 
Attribute ownership decision in the description 
sentences with more persons turns out be the 
challenge of this evaluation task. For example: 
Example Sentence 18. 李济深升为军长，陈济棠
升任第十一师师长。（陈济棠） 
Translation: Li Jishen was promoted to an army 
corps commander, and Chen Jitang was promoted 
to be the commander of eleventh division. (Chen 
Jitang) 
In this sentence, “军长(army commander)” is the 
title of “ 李济深 ”, while “ 师长 (divisional 
commander)” is the title of “陈济棠”, a person to 
be extracted. Attribute ownership decision 
requires us to correctly recognize “陈济棠” and 
then extract it. We mainly employ minimum 
slicing with the co-occurrence of the extracted 
person and the attribute and the nearest distance 
principle to decide attribute ownership, which 
will be expounded below. 

(1) minimum co-occurrence slicing 
When the person and the attribute co-occur in the 
same grammatical unit as minimum as possible, 
and there is only one person, the attribute belongs 
to the person. For example: 
Example Sentence 19. 1947 年 4 月冀察热辽军
区部队改编为东北民主联军第八纵队，黄永胜

任司令，丁盛任二十四师师长，之后参加了辽

沈战役。 
Translation: In April, 1947, the troops of 
Ji-Cha-Re-Liao military region were reorganized 
as the 8th Army of the Northeast Democratic 
Coalition Force. Huang Yongsheng became the 
commander, and Ding Sheng took the post of 
commander of 24th division, then they took part 
in the Liaoning-Shenyang Campaign. 
Example Sentence 20. 1935 年，蒋中正调张学良
东北军剿共，西安出现以西北剿匪总司令部副

总司令张学良、西安绥靖公署主任杨虎城和陕

西省政府主席邵力子为首三种势力并存局面。

（杨虎城） 
Translation: In 1935, Chiang Kai-shek dispatched 
Zhang Xueliang's Northeast Army to conquer the 
communist power. There coexisted three powers 
in Xi'an, ie the power of Zhan Xueliang, who was 
the Vice Commander in chief of Northeast 
Anti-communist Army; the power of Yang 
Hucheng, who was the director of Xi'an 
Appeasement Administrative Office; and the 
power of Shao Lizi, who as the governor of 
Shaanxi provincial government. (Yang Hucheng) 
In the two clauses of Example Sentence 19, “黄
永胜任司令” and “丁盛任二十四师师长” 
means the title of “司令(commander)” belongs to 
“黄永胜”, while the title of “师长(divisional 
commander)” belongs to “丁盛”. In Example 
Sentence 20, “副总司令张学良”, “主任杨虎城” 
and “主席邵力子” show that the person and the 
attribute co-occur in the same subject-predicate 
phrase. 
(2) the nearest distance principle 
When there is a long distance between the person 
and the attribute, and at the same time, there are 
more persons in the sentence, the attribute 
belongs to the person with the nearest distance. 
Example Sentence 21. 钱三强的父亲钱玄同是
中国近代著名的语言文字学家。（钱三强） 
Translation: Qian Sanqiang's father, Qian 
Xuantong is a famous modern Chinese linguist. 

198



(Sanqiang Qian) 
Example Sentence 22.  我从小就知道江泽涵是
北京大学一位鼎鼎大名的数学教授，却无缘见

面，但他们的堂姐江冬秀我却在孩童时就见过。

（江泽涵．．．） 
Translation: When I was young, I got to know 
that Jiang Zehan is a famous math professor of 
Peking University, but I had no luck to meet him; 
but I'd seen their cousin Jiang Dongxiu during 
my childhood. (Zehan Jiang) 
Example Sentence 23. 薛万彻的二哥薛万淑，也
战功显赫，历任右领军将军、梁郡公、畅武道

行军总管。（薛万彻） 
Translation: Xue Wanche's second brother, Xue 
Wanshu also made daring military exploits, who 
used to be a general of the right wing, Duke of 
Liang Jun, and Commander in Chief of 
Changwudao.( Wanren Xue) 
In Example Sentence 21, the title “语言文字学家
(linguist)” belongs to “钱玄同” instead of “钱三
强”, for the distance between the title “语言文字
学家 (linguist)” and the person “钱玄同 ” is 
smaller. The situations in Example Sentence 22 
and Example Sentence 23 are also like this. It 
should be noted that the nearest distance principle 
is not always effective, as in the following 
example sentence.  
Example Sentence 24. 中共四大后，彭述之以中
央委员身份接替多病的蔡和森担任中央宣传部

长，为了工作方便，蔡和森夫妇、彭述之夫妇

等人一起住在宣传部的寓所。 
Translation: After the 4th National Congress of 
CPC, as a member of the Central Committee of 
CPC, Peng Shuzhi take the place of Cai Hesen, 
who was sick, to be the minister of the State of 
Central Propaganda Ministry. In order to 
facilitate the work, both Hesens and Shuzhis 
lived in the apartments of Propaganda Ministry. 
In Example Sentence 24, the title “ 部 长
(minister)” belongs to “彭述之”, the person 
which has a longer distance. This sentence needs 
deeper syntax or semantic analysis, which is a 
little difficult to process at present. 
4.2.3 anaphora resolution of person pronouns2 
As for anaphora resolution in the description 
sentences with more persons, we mainly refer to 
the methods in (Wang, 2001; Wang, 2005). The 
                                                             
2Since there are few cases of reverse anaphora, it has not 
been considered in this text. 

extracted person is known, so its designation and 
sex can be annotated in advance, which facilitates 
anaphora resolution. For example: 
Example Sentence 25 & 26：1940 年，钱三强取
得了法国国家博士学位，又继续跟随第二代居

里夫妇当助手。1946 年，他与同一学科的才女
何泽慧结婚。 
Translation: In 1940, Qian Sanqiang obtained his 
French national doctorate, and then he continued 
to follow Curies, the junior, as an assistant. In 
1946, he married the talented girl He Zehui, who 
was learning the same subject. 
As in Example Sentence 25, “居里夫妇” is plural, 
“他(He)” in Example Sentence 26 refers to “钱三
强” in the preceding sentence, which is a male 
name in singular form. 
4.3  Attribution extraction flowchart 

Fig. 5  the Flowchart of Personal Attribution 
Extraction 

5  Experimental results 

In this bakeoff, the performance of 6 groups 
attending the competition are shown in Table 1. 

Begin 

Input one 
sentence 

  omit 
no 

yes 

The combination 
of word 
segmentation 
and rules 

  

No 

Included in the one 
person sentence 

Included in the more 
persons sentence 

Yes 

affirming the 
extracted person 

Attribute ownership 
decision 

End 

Personal names, 
surnames or first 
names, personal  
pronouns, 
kinship titles 

Feature 
words and 
attributes 

minimum 
co-occurrence slicing 
and the nearest 
distance principle 

Whether there is 
personal attribute 

Whether there are 
more persons 

Extract personal attributes 

199



Our system is named as CASIA_CUC_PAES. 
Table 1. The lenient and strict evaluation results 

Team Id lenient SF_Value strict SF_Value 
CIST-BUPT 0.363235496 0.352206490 

ICTNET_002 0.277775207 0.273884523 
WZ_v4 0.004311033 0.002491385 

BLCU-yudong 0.308706661 0.292608955 
Result-BUPT 0.071467108 0.035979785 

CASIA_CUC_PAES 0.507388780 0.489505010 
According to the evaluation results, our system 
achieves 0.507388780 and 0.489505010 
respectively in the lenient evaluation results and 
the strict evaluation results of SF_Value in 
CIPS-SIGHAN2014 Bakeoff, which turns out to 
be the best. The fact has shown that our system is 
effective. However, 50 percent of SF_Value 
implies that there is still room to increase the 
system’s efficiencies. The system performance 
could be improved in 3 aspects: 
1. to establish the word segmentation system 
specific for personal attribute extraction. 
2. to establish grammatical knowledge system 
regarding personal attribute extraction, For 
example, “我父亲住在北京(My father lived in 
Beijing)” is different from “我和父亲住在北京
(My father and I live in Beijing)”, with “我父亲” 
as a modifier-head construction in the former and 
“我和父亲” as a parallel construction in the 
latter. 
3. to establish semantic knowledge system 
regarding personal attribute extraction, For 
example, in the sentence of “凯利与女演员劳
里·莫顿 结婚后居 住于 Goatstown.(After 
wedding, Kerry and actress, Laurie Morton 
settled in Goatstown.)”, certain semantic 
knowledge is needed to correctly extract the 
information that Laurie Morton is Kelly’s wife.  

6  Conclusion 

This bakeoff is full of challenges with a number 
of personal attributes to be extracted. CUCBst, 
the word segmentation software, plays a 
significant role in named entity recognition, 
which provides a solid foundation for attribute 
extraction. The strategy of sentence 
classifications is employed in attribute ownership 
decision, which, though cannot solve all the 
problems, simplifies analyses. This strategy plays 
a role in improving precision in attribute 

ownership decision. 

References 

Bikel, D., Castelli, V., Florian, R., & Han, D. J. 
2009, November. Entity linking and slot filling 
through statistical processing and inference rules. 
In Proc. TAC 2009 Workshop. 

Burman, A., Jayapal, A., Kannan, S., Kavilikatta, 
M., Alhelbawy, A., Derczynski, L., & Gaizauskas, 
R. 2012. USFD at KBP 2011: Entity linking, slot 
filling and temporal bounding. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1203.5073. 

Chen Ping. 1987. Discourse Analysis of Chinese 
Zero Anaphora. Studies of The Chinese Language, 
5: 363-378. 

Kong Fang, Zhou Guodong, & Zhu Qiaoming. 2010. 
Survey on Coreference Resolution. Computer 
Engineering, 36(8): 33-36. 

Liao Xiantao, Yu Haibin, & Qin Bing, Liu Ting. 
2004. HMM combined with automatic 
rules-extracting for Chinese Named Entity 
recognition. The second national student 
Workshop on Computational Linguistics. 
Beijing:[s. n.], 2004: 232-237. 

McNamee, P., & Dang, H. T. 2009, November. 
Overview of the TAC 2009 knowledge base 
population track. In Text Analysis Conference 
(TAC) (Vol. 17, pp. 111-113). 

McNamee, P., Dang, H. T., Simpson, H., Schone, P., 
& Strassel, S. 2010, May. An Evaluation of 
Technologies for Knowledge Base Population. In 
LREC. 

Sun Maosong, & Gao Haiyan. 1995. Identifying 
Chinese Names in Unrestricted Texts. Journal of 
Chinese Information Processing, 9(2), 16-27. 

Sun, A., Grishman, R., Xu, W., & Min, B. 2011. 
New York University 2011 system for KBP slot 
filling. In Proceedings of the Text Analytics 
Conference. 

Wang Houfeng, & Tingting He. 2001. Research on 
Chinese Personal Pronoun Anaphora Resolution. 
Chinese Journal of Computers, 24(2), 136-143. 

Wang Houfeng, & Zheng Mei. 2005. Robust 
Pronominal Resolution within Chinese Text. 
Journal of Software, 16(5), 700-707. 

Wang Houfeng. 2002. Computational Models and 
Technologies in Anaphora Resolution. Journal of 
Chinese Information Processing, 16(6), 9-17. 

Wang Houfeng. 2005. On Anaphora Resolution 

200



within Chinese Text. Applied Linguistics, (4), 
113-119. 

Xu Jiujiu. 2003. Anaphora in Chinese Texts. China 
Social Sciences Publishing House. 

Ye Zheng, Lin Hongfei, & Shu Sui. 2007. Person 
Attribute Extracting Based on SVM. Journal of 
Computer Research and Development, (z2): 
271-275. 

Yu Hongkui, Zhang Huaping, & Liu Qun. 2006. 
Chinese named entity identification using 
cascaded hidden Markov model. Journal on 
Communications, 27(2). 

Zhao Jun, Huang Changning. 1999. A 
Transformation-Based Model for Chinese 
BaseNP Recognition. Journal of Chinese 
Information Processing, 13(2): 1-7. 

Zhuang Shouqiang. 1997. Difference and Relation 
Between Features and Attribute and its 
Significance in Scientific Research. Studies In 
Dialectics of Nature, 13(11): 44-48. 

201


