



















































A Comparison of the Events and Relations Across ACE, ERE, TAC-KBP, and FrameNet Annotation Standards


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation, pages 45–53,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 22-27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Comparison of the Events and Relations Across ACE, ERE, TAC-KBP,
and FrameNet Annotation Standards

Jacqueline Aguilar and Charley Beller and Paul McNamee and Benjamin Van Durme
Human Language Technology Center of Excellence

Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, USA

Stephanie Strassel and Zhiyi Song and Joe Ellis
University of Pennsylvania

Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC)
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Abstract

The resurgence of effort within computa-
tional semantics has led to increased in-
terest in various types of relation extrac-
tion and semantic parsing. While var-
ious manually annotated resources exist
for enabling this work, these materials
have been developed with different stan-
dards and goals in mind. In an effort
to develop better general understanding
across these resources, we provide a sum-
mary overview of the standards underly-
ing ACE, ERE, TAC-KBP Slot-filling, and
FrameNet.

1 Overview

ACE and ERE are comprehensive annotation stan-
dards that aim to consistently annotate Entities,
Events, and Relations within a variety of doc-
uments. The ACE (Automatic Content Extrac-
tion) standard was developed by NIST in 1999 and
has evolved over time to support different evalua-
tion cycles, the last evaluation having occurred in
2008. The ERE (Entities, Relations, Events) stan-
dard was created under the DARPA DEFT pro-
gram as a lighter-weight version of ACE with the
goal of making annotation easier, and more con-
sistent across annotators. ERE attempts to achieve
this goal by consolidating some of the annotation
type distinctions that were found to be the most
problematic in ACE, as well as removing some
more complex annotation features.

This paper provides an overview of the relation-
ship between these two standards and compares
them to the more restricted standard of the TAC-
KBP slot-filling task and the more expansive stan-

dard of FrameNet. Sections 3 and 4 examine Rela-
tions and Events in the ACE/ERE standards, sec-
tion 5 looks at TAC-KBP slot-filling, and section
6 compares FrameNet to the other standards.

2 ACE and ERE Entity Tagging

Many of the differences in Relations and Events
annotation across the ACE and ERE standards
stem from differences in entity mention tagging.
This is simply because Relation and Event tagging
relies on the distinctions established in the entity
tagging portion of the annotation process. For ex-
ample, since ERE collapses the ACE Facility and
Location Types, any ACE Relation or Event that
relied on that distinction is revised in ERE. These
top-level differences are worth keeping in mind
when considering how Events and Relations tag-
ging is approached in ACE and ERE:

• Type Inventory: ACE and ERE share the Per-
son, Organization, Geo-Political Entity, and
Location Types. ACE has two additional
Types: Vehicle and Weapon. ERE does not
account for these Types and collapses the Fa-
cility and Location Types into Location. ERE
also includes a Title Type to address titles,
honorifics, roles, and professions (Linguis-
tic Data Consortium, 2006; Linguistic Data
Consortium, 2013a).

• Subtype Annotation: ACE further classifies
entity mentions by including Subtypes for
each determined Type; if the entity does not
fit into any Subtype, it is not annotated. ERE
annotation does not include any Subtypes.

• Entity Classes: In addition to Subtype, ACE
also classifies each entity mention according

45



1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012

Fr
am

eN
et

pro
jec

t c
rea

ted

AC
E

de
ve

lop
ed

mo
st

co
mp

reh
en

siv
e A

CE
co

rpu
s

las
t A

CE
ev

al

fir
st

TA
C-

KB
P

ER
E

cre
ate

d

Figure 1: Important Dates for the ACE, ERE, TAC-KBP, and FrameNet Standards

to entity class (Specific, Generic, Attributive,
and Underspecified).

• Taggability: ACE tags Attributive, Generic,
Specific, and Underspecified entity mentions.
ERE only tags Specific entity mentions.

• Extents and Heads: ACE marks the full noun
phrase of an entity mention and tags a head
word. ERE handles tagging based on the
mention level of an entity; in Name mentions
(NAM) the name is the extent, in Nominal
mentions (NOM) the full noun phrase is the
extent, in Pronoun mentions (PRO) the pro-
noun is the extent.

• Tags: ERE only specifies Type and Men-
tion level (NAM, NOM, PRO). ACE speci-
fies Type, Subtype, Entity Class (Attributive,
Generic, Specific, Underspecified), and Men-
tion Level (NAM, NOM, PRO, Headless).

3 Relations in ACE and ERE

In the ACE and ERE annotation models, the goal
of the Relations task is to detect and character-
ize relations of the targeted types between enti-
ties (Linguistic Data Consortium, 2008; Linguistic
Data Consortium, 2013c). The purpose of this task
is to extract a representation of the meaning of the
text, not necessarily tied to underlying syntactic
or lexical semantic representations. Both models
share similar overarching guidelines for determin-
ing what is taggable. For relations the differences
lie in the absence or presence of additional fea-
tures, syntactic classes, as well as differences in
assertion, trigger words, and minor subtype varia-
tions.

3.1 Similarities in Relations Annotation
In addition to comprising similar Types (both
models include Physical and Part.Whole Types as
well as slightly different Types to address Affilia-
tion and Social relations) used to characterize each

relation, ACE and ERE share important similar-
ities concerning their relation-tagging guidelines.
These include:

• Limiting relations to only those expressed in
a single sentence

• Tagging only for explicit mention
• No ‘promoting’ or ‘nesting’ of taggable en-

tities. In the sentence, Smith went to a hotel
in Brazil, (Smith, hotel) is a taggable Phys-
ical.Located relation, but (Smith, Brazil) is
not. This is because in order to tag this as
such, one would have to promote ‘Brazil’.

• Tagging for past and former relations
• Two different Argument slots (Arg1 and

Arg2) are provided for each relation to cap-
ture the importance of Argument ordering.

• Arguments can be more than one token (al-
though ACE marks the head as well)

• Using ‘templates’ for each relation
Type/Subtype (e.g., in a Physical.Located
relation, the Person that is located some-
where will always be assigned to Arg1 and
the place in which the person is located will
always be assigned to Arg2).

• Neither model tags for negative relations
• Both methods contain argument span bound-

aries. That is, the relations should only in-
clude tagged entities within the extent of a
sentence.

3.2 Differences in Assertion, Modality, and
Tense

A primary difference between these two annota-
tion models is a result of ERE only annotating as-
serted events while ACE also includes hypothet-
icals. ACE accounts for these cases by including
two Modality attributes: ASSERTED and OTHER

46



(Linguistic Data Consortium, 2008). For exam-
ple, in the sentence, We are afraid that Al-Qaeda
terrorists will be in Baghdad, ACE would tag this
as an OTHER attribute, where OTHER pertains to
situations in “some other world defined by coun-
terfactual constraints elsewhere in the context”,
whereas ERE would simply not tag a relation in
this sentence. Additionally, while both ACE and
ERE tag past and former relations, ACE goes fur-
ther to mark the Tense of each relation by means
of four attributes: Past, Future, Present and Un-
specified.

3.3 Syntactic Classes

ACE further justifies the tagging of each Relation
through Syntactic Classes. The primary function
of these classes is to serve as a sanity check on
taggability and as an additional constraint for tag-
ging. These classes include: Possessive, Prepo-
sition, PreMod, Coordination, Formulaic, Partic-
ipal, Verbal, Relations Expressed by Verbs, and
Other. Syntactic classes are not present in ERE
relations annotation.

3.4 Triggers

Explicit trigger words do not exist in ACE relation
annotation; instead, the model annotates the full
syntactic clause that serves as the ‘trigger’ for the
relation. ERE attempts to minimize the annotated
span by allowing for the tagging of an optional
trigger word, defined as “the smallest extent of text
that indicates a relation Type and Subtype” (Lin-
guistic Data Consortium, 2013c). These triggers
are not limited to a single word, but can also be
composed of a phrase or any extent of the text that
indicates a Type/Subtype relation, left to the dis-
cretion of the annotator. It is common for preposi-
tions to be triggers, as in John is in Chicago. How-
ever, sometimes no trigger is needed because the
syntax of the sentence is such that it indicates a
particular relation Type/Subtype without a word to
explicitly signal the relation.

3.5 Types and Subtypes of Relations

There are three types of relations that contain var-
ied Subtypes between ERE and ACE. These are
the Physical, Part-Whole, Social and Affiliation
Types. The differences are a result of ERE collaps-
ing ACE Types and Subtypes into more concise, if
less specific, Type groups.

Physical Relation Type Differences The main
differences in the handling of the physical rela-
tions between ACE and ERE are shown in Table
1. ACE only marks Location for PERSON enti-
ties (for Arg1). ERE uses Location for PERSON
entities being located somewhere as well as for
a geographical location being part of another ge-
ographical location. Additionally, ACE includes
‘Near’ as a Subtype. This is used for when an en-
tity is explicitly near another entity, but neither en-
tity is a part of the other or located in/at the other.
ERE does not have an equivalent Subtype to ac-
count for this physical relation. Instead, ERE in-
cludes ‘Origin’ as a Subtype. This is used to de-
scribe the relation between a PER and an ORG.
ACE does not have a Physical Type equivalent,
but it does account for this type of relation within
a separate General Affiliation Type and ‘Citizen-
Resident-Religion-Ethnicity’ Subtype.

Part-Whole Relation Differences In Table 2,
note that ACE has a ‘Geographical’ Subtype
which captures the location of a FAC, LOC, or
GPE in or at, or as part of another FAC, LOC,
or GPE. Examples of this would be India con-
trolled the region or a phrase such as the Atlanta
area. ERE does not include this type of annota-
tion option. Instead, ERE tags these regional re-
lations as Physical.Located. ACE and ERE do
share a ‘Subsidiary’ Subtype which is defined in
both models as a “category to capture the own-
ership, administrative and other hierarchical rela-
tionships between ORGs and/or GPEs” (Linguis-
tic Data Consortium, 2008; Linguistic Data Con-
sortium, 2013c).

Social and Affiliation Relation Differences
The most evident discrepancy in relation anno-
tation between the two models lies in the So-
cial and Affiliation Relation Types and Subtypes.
For social relations, ACE and ERE have three
Subtypes with similar goals (Business, Family,
Unspecified/Lasting-Personal) but ERE has an ad-
ditional ‘Membership’ Subtype, as shown in Ta-
ble 3. ACE addresses all ‘Membership’ relations
in its Affiliation Type. ERE also includes the ‘So-
cial.Role’ Subtype in order to address the TITLE
entity type, which only applies to ERE. How-
ever, both models agree that the arguments for
each relation must be PERSON entities and that
they should not include relationships implied from
interaction between two entities (e.g., President

47



Relation Type Relation Subtype ARG1 Type ARG2 Type
ERE

Physical Located PER, GPE, LOC GPE, LOC
Physical Origin PER, ORG GPE, LOC

ACE
Physical Located PER FAC, LOC, GPE
Physical Near PER, FAC, GPE, LOC FAC, GPE, LOC

Table 1: Comparison of Permitted Relation Arguments for the Physical Type Distinction in the ERE and
ACE Guidelines

Relation Type Relation Subtype ARG1 Type ARG2 Type
ERE

Part-Whole Subsidiary ORG ORG, GPE
ACE

Part-Whole Geographical FAC, LOC, GPE FAC, LOC, GPE
Part-Whole Subsidiary ORG ORG, GPE

Table 2: Comparison of Permitted Relation Arguments for the Part-Whole Type and Subtype Distinctions
in the ERE and ACE Guidelines

Relation Type Relation Subtype ARG1 Type ARG2 Type
ERE

Social Business PER PER
Social Family PER PER
Social Membership PER PER
Social Role TTL PER
Social Unspecified PER PER

ACE
Personal-Social Business PER PER
Personal-Social Family PER PER
Personal-Social Lasting-Personal PER PER

Table 3: Comparison of Permitted Relation Arguments for the Social Type and Subtype Distinctions in
the ERE and ACE Guidelines

Relation Type Relation Subtype ARG1 Type ARG2 Type
ERE

Affiliation Employment/Membership PER, ORG,
GPE

ORG, GPE

Affiliation Leadership PER ORG, GPE
ACE

ORG-Affiliation Employment PER ORG, GPE
ORG-Affiliation Ownership PER ORG
ORG-Affiliation Founder PER, ORG ORG, GPE
ORG-Affiliation Student-Alum PER ORG.Educational
ORG-Affiliation Sports-Affiliation PER ORG
ORG-Affiliation Investor-Shareholder PER, ORG,

GPE
ORG, GPE

ORG-Affiliation Membership PER, ORG,
GPE

ORG

Agent-Artifact User-Owner-Inventor-
Manufacturer

PER, ORG,
GPE

FAC

Gen-Affiliation Citizen-Resident-Religion-
Ethnicity

PER PER.Group,
LOC, GPE,
ORG

Gen-Affiliation Org-Location-Origin ORG LOC, GPE

Table 4: Comparison of Permitted Relation Arguments for the Affiliation Type and Subtype Distinctions
in the ERE and ACE Guidelines

48



Clinton met with Yasser Arafat last week would
not be considered a social relation).

As for the differences in affiliation relations,
ACE includes many Subtype possibilities which
can more accurately represent affiliation, whereas
ERE only observes two Affiliation Subtype op-
tions (Table 4).

4 Events in ACE and ERE

Events in both annotation methods are defined as
‘specific occurrences’, involving ‘specific partic-
ipants’ (Linguistic Data Consortium, 2005; Lin-
guistic Data Consortium, 2013b). The primary
goal of Event tagging is to detect and character-
ize events that include tagged entities. The central
Event tagging difference between ACE and ERE
is the level of specificity present in ACE, whereas
ERE tends to collapse tags for a more simplified
approach.

4.1 Event Tagging Similarities
Both annotation schemas annotate the same ex-
act Event Types: LIFE, MOVEMENT, TRANS-
ACTION, BUSINESS, CONFLICT, CONTACT,
PERSONNEL, and JUSTICE events. Both anno-
tation ontologies also include 33 Subtypes for each
Type. Furthermore, both rely on the expression
of an occurrence through the use of a ‘Trigger’.
ACE, however, restricts the trigger to be a single
word that most clearly expresses the event occur-
rence (usually a main verb), while ERE allows for
the trigger to be a word or a phrase that instanti-
ates the event (Linguistic Data Consortium, 2005;
Linguistic Data Consortium, 2013b). Both meth-
ods annotate modifiers when they trigger events
as well as anaphors, when they refer to previously
mentioned events. Furthermore, when there is
any ambiguity about which trigger to select, both
methods have similar rules established, such as
the Stand-Alone Noun Rule (In cases where more
than one trigger is possible, the noun that can be
used by itself to refer to the event will be selected)
and the Stand-Alone Adjective Rule (Whenever a
verb and an adjective are used together to express
the occurrence of an Event, the adjective will be
chosen as the trigger whenever it can stand-alone
to express the resulting state brought about by the
Event). Additionally, both annotation guidelines
agree on the following:

• Tagging of Resultative Events (states that re-
sult from taggable Events)

• Nominalized Events are tagged as regular
events

• Reported Events are not tagged
• Implicit events are not tagged
• Light verbs are not tagged
• Coreferential Events are tagged
• Tagging of multi-part triggers (both parts are

tagged only if they are contiguous)

4.2 Event Tagging Differences
One of the more general differences between ERE
and ACE Event tagging is the way in which each
model addresses Event Extent. ACE defines the
extent as always being the ‘entire sentence within
which the Event is described’ (Linguistic Data
Consortium, 2005). In ERE, the extent is the
entire document unless an event is coreferenced
(in which case, the extent is defined as the ‘span
of a document from the first trigger for a par-
ticular event to the next trigger for a particular
event.’ This signifies that the span can cross
sentence boundaries). Unlike ACE, ERE does
not delve into indicating Polarity, Tense, Gener-
icity, and Modality. ERE simplifies any anno-
tator confusion engendered by these features by
simply not tagging negative, future, hypotheti-
cal, conditional, uncertain or generic events (al-
though it does tag for past events). While ERE
only tags attested Events, ACE allows for irrealis
events, and includes attributes for marking them
as such: Believed Events; Hypothetical Events;
Commanded and Requested Events; Threatened,
Proposed and Discussed Events; Desired Events;
Promised Events; and Otherwise Unclear Con-
structions. Additionally both ERE and ACE tag
Event arguments as long as the arguments occur
within the event mention extent (another way of
saying that a taggable Event argument will occur
in the same sentence as the trigger word for its
Event). However, ERE and ACE have a diverging
approach to argument tagging:

• ERE is limited to pre-specified arguments for
each event and relation subtype. The pos-
sible arguments for ACE are: Event partici-
pants (limited to pre-specified roles for each
event type); Event-specific attributes that are
associated with a particular event type (e.g.,
the victim of an attack); and General event
attributes that can apply to most or all event
types (e.g., time, place).

49



• ACE tags arguments regardless of modal cer-
tainty of their involvement in the event. ERE
only tags asserted participants in the event.

• The full noun phrase is marked in both ERE
and ACE arguments, but the head is only
specified in ACE. This is because ACE han-
dles entity annotation slightly differently than
ERE does; ACE marks the full noun phrase
with a head word for entity mention, and ERE
treats mentions differently based on their syn-
tactic features (for named or pronominal en-
tity mentions the name or pronominal itself
is marked, whereas for nominal mentions the
full noun phrase is marked).

Event Type and Subtype Differences Both an-
notation methods have almost identical Event
Type and Subtype categories. The only differences
between both are present in the Contact and Move-
ment Event Types.

A minor distinction in Subtype exists as a re-
sult of the types of entities that can be trans-
ported within the Movement Type category. In
ACE, ARTIFACT entities (WEAPON or VEHI-
CLE) as well as PERSON entities can be trans-
ported, whereas in ERE, only PERSON entities
can be transported. The difference between the
Phone-Write and Communicate Subtypes merely
lies in the definition. Both Subtypes are the de-
fault Subtype to cover all Contact events where
a ‘face-to-face’ meeting between sender and re-
ceiver is not explicitly stated. In ACE, this contact
is limited to written or telephone communication
where at least two parties are specified to make
this event subtype less open-ended. In ERE, this
requirement is simply widened to comprise elec-
tronic communication as well, explicitly including
those via internet channels (e.g., Skype).

5 TAC-KBP

After the final ACE evaluation in 2008 there was
interest in the community to form an evaluation
explicitly focused on knowledge bases (KBs) cre-
ated from the output of extraction systems. NIST
had recently started the Text Analysis Conference
series for related NLP tasks such as Recognizing
Textual Entailment, Summarization, and Question
Answering. In 2009 the first Knowledge Base
Population track (TAC-KBP) was held featuring
two initial tasks: (a) Entity Linking — linking en-
tities to KB entities, and (b) Slot Filling — adding

information to entity profiles that is missing from
the KB (McNamee et al., 2010). Due to its gener-
ous license and large scale, a snapshot of English
Wikipedia from late 2008 has been used as the ref-
erence KB in the TAC-KBP evaluations.

5.1 Slot Filling Overview
Unlike ACE and ERE, Slot Filling does not have
as its primary goal the annotation of text. Rather,
the aim is to identify knowledge nuggets about a
focal named entity using a fixed inventory of re-
lations and attributes. For example, given a fo-
cal entity such as former Ukrainian prime minister
Yulia Tymoshenko, the task is to identify attributes
such as schools she attended, occupations, and im-
mediate family members. This is the same sort
of information commonly listed about prominent
people in Wikipedia Infoboxes and in derivative
databases such as FreeBase and DBpedia.

Consequently, Slot Filling is somewhat of a hy-
brid between relation extraction and question an-
swering — slot fills can be considered as the cor-
rect responses to a fixed set of questions. The rela-
tions and attributes used in the 2013 task are pre-
sented in Table 5.

5.2 Differences with ACE-style relation
extraction

Slot Filling in TAC-KBP differs from extraction in
ACE and ERE in several significant ways:

• information is sought for named entities,
chiefly PERs and ORGs;

• the focus is on values not mentions;
• assessment is more like QA; and,
• events are handled as uncorrelated slots
In traditional IE evaluation, there was an

implicit skew towards highly attested in-
formation such as leader(Bush, US), or
capital(Paris, France). In contrast, TAC-KBP
gives full credit for finding a single instance of a
correct fill instead of every attestation of that fact.

Slot Filling assessment is somewhat simpler
than IE annotation. The assessor must decide
if provenance text is supportive of a posited fact
about the focal entity instead of annotating a doc-
ument with all evidenced relations and events for
any entity. For clarity and to increase assessor
agreement, guidelines have been developed to jus-
tify when a posited relation is deemed adequately
supported from text. Additionally, the problem of

50



Relations Attributes
per:children org:shareholders per:alternate names org:alternate names
per:other family org:founded by per:date of birth org:political religious affiliation
per:parents org:top members employees per:age org:number of employees members
per:siblings org:member of per:origin org:date founded
per:spouse org:members per:date of death org:date dissolved
per:employee or member of org:parents per:cause of death org:website
per:schools attended org:subsidiaries per:title
per:city of birth org:city of headquarters per:religion
per:stateorprovince of birth org:stateorprovince of headquarters per:charges
per:country of birth org:country of headquarters
per:cities of residence
per:statesorprovinces of residence
per:countries of residence
per:city of death
per:stateorprovince of death
per:country of death

Table 5: Relation and attributes for PERs and ORGs.

slot value equivalence becomes an issue - a sys-
tem should be penalized for redundantly asserting
that a person has four children named Tim, Beth,
Timothy, and Elizabeth, or that a person is both a
cardiologist and a doctor.

Rather than explicitly modeling events, TAC-
KBP created relations that capture events, more
in line with the notion of Infobox filling or ques-
tion answering (McNamee et al., 2010). For exam-
ple, instead of a criminal event, there is a slot fill
for charges brought against an entity. Instead of a
founding event, there are slots like org:founded by
(who) and org:date founded (when). Thus a state-
ment that “Jobs is the founder and CEO of Apple”
is every bit as useful for the org:founded by rela-
tion as “Jobs founded Apple in 1976.” even though
the date is not included in the former sentence.

5.3 Additional tasks

Starting in 2012 TAC-KBP introduced the “Cold
Start” task, which is to literally produce a KB
based on the Slot Filling schema. To date, Cold
Start KBs have been built from collections of
O(50,000) documents, and due to their large size,
they are assessed by sampling. There is also
an event argument detection evaluation in KBP
planned for 2014.

Other TAC-KBP tasks have been introduced in-
cluding determining the timeline when dynamic
slot fills are valid (e.g., CEO of Microsoft), and
targeted sentiment.

6 FrameNet

The FrameNet project has rather different moti-
vations than either ACE/ERE or TAC-KBP, but
shares with them a goal of capturing informa-
tion about events and relations in text. FrameNet
stems from Charles Fillmore’s linguistic and lex-

icographic theory of Frame Semantics (Fillmore,
1976; Fillmore, 1982). Frames are descriptions
of event (or state) types and contain information
about event participants (frame elements), infor-
mation as to how event types relate to each other
(frame relations), and information about which
words or multi-word expressions can trigger a
given frame (lexical units).

FrameNet is designed with text annotation in
mind, but unlike ACE/ERE it prioritizes lexico-
graphic and linguistic completeness over ease of
annotation. As a result Frames tend to be much
finer grained than ACE/ERE events, and are more
numerous by an order of magnitude. The Berkeley
FrameNet Project (Baker et al., 1998) was devel-
oped as a machine readable database of distinct
frames and lexical units (words and multi-word
constructions) that were known to trigger specific
frames.1 FrameNet 1.5 includes 1020 identified
frames and 11830 lexical units.

One of the most widespread uses of FrameNet
has been as a resource for Semantic Role Label-
ing (SRL) (Gildea and Jurafsky, 2002). FrameNet
related SRL was promoted as a task by the
SENSEVAL-3 workshop (Litkowski, 2004), and
the SemEval-2007 workshop (Baker et al., 2007).
(Das et al., 2010) is a current system for automatic
FrameNet annotation.

The relation and attribute types of TAC-KBP
and the relation and event types in the ACE/ERE
standards can be mapped to FrameNet frames.
The mapping is complicated by two factors.
The first is that FrameNet frames are gener-
ally more fine-grained than the ACE/ERE cate-
gories. As a result the mapping is sometimes
one-to-many. For example, the ERE relation Af-

1This database is accessible via webpage (https:
//framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/fndrupal/)
and as a collection of XML files by request.

51



Relations
FrameNet ACE ERE TAC-KBP
Kinship Personal-Social.Family Social.Family per:children

per:other family
per:parents
per:siblings
per:spouse

Being Employed ORG-Affiliation.Employment Affiliation.Employment/Membership per:employee or member of
Membership org:member of
Being Located Physical.Located Physical.Located org:city of headquarters

org:stateorprovince of headquarters
org:country of headquarters

Events
FrameNet ACE ERE
Contacting Phone-Write Communicate
Extradition Justice-Extradition Justice-Extradition
Attack Conflict-Attack Conflict-Attack
Being Born Life-Be Born Life-Be Born

Attributes
FrameNet TAC-KBP
Being Named per:alternate names
Age per:age

Table 6: Rough mappings between subsets of FrameNet, ACE, ERE, and TAC-KBP

filiation.Employment/Membership covers both
the Being Employed frame and the Member-
ship frame. At the same time, while TAC-
KBP has only a handful of relations relative to
FrameNet, some of these relations are more fine-
grained than the analogous frames or ACE/ERE
relations. For example, the frame Kinship, which
maps to the single ERE relation Social.Family,
maps to five TAC-KBP relations, and the Be-
ing Located, which maps to the ACE/ERE rela-
tion Being.Located, maps to three TAC-KBP re-
lations. Rough mappings from a selection of rela-
tions, events, and attributes are given in Table 6.

The second complication arises from the fact
that FrameNet frames are more complex objects
than ERE/ACE events, and considerably more
complex than TAC-KBP relations. Rather than the
two entities related via a TAC-KBP or ACE/ERE
relation, some frames have upwards of 20 frame
elements. Table 7 shows in detail the mapping be-
tween frame elements in the Extradition frame and
ACE’s and ERE’s Justice-Extradition events. The
“core” frame elements map exactly to the ERE
event, the remaining two arguments in the ACE
event map to two non-core frame elements, and
the frame includes several more non-core elements
with no analogue in either ACE or ERE standards.

7 Conclusion

The ACE and ERE annotation schemas have
closely related goals of identifying similar in-
formation across various possible types of docu-
ments, though their approaches differ due to sepa-
rate goals regarding scope and replicability. ERE
differs from ACE in collapsing different Type dis-
tinctions and in removing annotation features in
order to eliminate annotator confusion and to im-

FrameNet ACE ERE
Authorities Agent-Arg Agent-Arg
Crime jursidiction Destination-Arg Destination-Arg
Current jursidiction Origin-Arg Origin-Arg
Suspect Person-Arg Person-Arg
Reason Crime-Arg
Time Time-Arg
Legal Basis
Manner
Means
Place
Purpose
Depictive

Table 7: Mapping between frame elements of Ex-
tradition (FrameNet), and arguments of Justice-
Extradition (ACE/ERE): A line divides core frame
elements (above) from non-core (below).

prove consistency, efficiency, and higher inter-
annotator agreement. TAC-KPB slot-filling shares
some goals with ACE/ERE, but is wholly fo-
cused on a set collection of questions (slots to
be filled) concerning entities to the extent that
there is no explicit modeling of events. At the
other extreme, FrameNet seeks to capture the
full range of linguistic and lexicographic varia-
tion in event representations in text. In general, all
events, relations, and attributes that can be repre-
sented by ACE/ERE and TAC-KBP standards can
be mapped to FrameNet representations, though
adjustments need to be made for granularity of
event/relation types and granularity of arguments.

Acknowledgements

This material is partially based on research spon-
sored by the NSF under grant IIS-1249516 and
DARPA under agreement number FA8750-13-2-
0017 (the DEFT program).

52



References
Collin F Baker, Charles J Fillmore, and John B Lowe.

1998. The berkeley framenet project. In Proceed-
ings of the 17th international conference on Compu-
tational linguistics-Volume 1, pages 86–90. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Collin Baker, Michael Ellsworth, and Katrin Erk.
2007. Semeval-2007 task 19: Frame semantic
structure extraction. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations
(SemEval-2007), pages 99–104, Prague, Czech Re-
public, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Dipanjan Das, Nathan Schneider, Desai Chen, and
Noah A Smith. 2010. Probabilistic frame-semantic
parsing. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 948–
956. Association for Computational Linguistics.

George Doddington, Alexis Mitchell, Mark Przybocki,
Lancec Ramshaw, Stephanie Strassel, and Ralph
Weischedel. 2004. The automatic content extrac-
tion (ace) program- tasks, data, and evaluation. In
Proceedings of LREC 2004: Fourth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
Lisbon, May 24-30.

Charles J Fillmore. 1976. Frame semantics and the na-
ture of language. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 280(1):20–32.

Charles Fillmore. 1982. Frame semantics. In Linguis-
tics in the morning calm, pages 111–137. Hanshin
Publishing Co.

Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. Computational linguis-
tics, 28(3):245–288.

Linguistic Data Consortium. 2005. ACE (automatic
content extraction) English annotation guidelines
for events. https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/
collaborations/past-projects/ace.
Version 5.4.3 2005.07.01.

Linguistic Data Consortium. 2006. ACE (automatic
content extraction) English annotation guidelines
for entities. https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/
collaborations/past-projects/ace,
Version 5.6.6 2006.08.01.

Linguistic Data Consortium. 2008. ACE (automatic
content extraction) English annotation guidelines for
relations. https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/
collaborations/past-projects/ace.
Version 6.0 2008.01.07.

Linguistic Data Consortium. 2013a. DEFT ERE anno-
tation guidelines: Entities v1.1, 05.17.2013.

Linguistic Data Consortium. 2013b. DEFT ERE anno-
tation guidelines: Events v1.1. 05.17.2013.

Linguistic Data Consortium. 2013c. DEFT ERE anno-
tation guidelines: Relations v1.1. 05.17.2013.

Ken Litkowski. 2004. Senseval-3 task: Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. In Rada Mihalcea and
Phil Edmonds, editors, Senseval-3: Third Interna-
tional Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems for the
Semantic Analysis of Text, pages 9–12, Barcelona,
Spain, July. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Paul McNamee, Hoa Trang Dang, Heather Simpson,
Patrick Schone, and Stephanie Strassel. 2010. An
evaluation of technologies for knowledge base pop-
ulation. In Proceedings of LREC.

53


