



















































GLANCE Visualizes Lexical Phenomena for Language Learning


Proceedings of the Workshop on Interactive Language Learning, Visualization, and Interfaces, pages 34–37,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

GLANCE Visualizes Lexical Phenomena for Language Learning  

 

Mei-Hua Chen*, Shih-Ting Huang+, Ting-Hui Kao+, Sun-Wen Chiu+, Tzu-His Yen+ 
* Department of Foreign Languages and Literature, Hua Fan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 

R.O.C. 22301 
+ Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, HsinChu, Taiwan, 

R.O.C. 30013 

{chen.meihua,koromiko1104,maxis1718,chiuhsunwen, joseph.yen}@gmail.com 

 

 

Abstract 

Facilitating vocabulary knowledge is a 

challenging aspect for language learners. 

Although current corpus-based reference 

tools provide authentic contextual clues, the 

plain text format is not conducive to fully 

illustrating some lexical phenomena. Thus, 

this paper proposes GLANCE
1

, a text 

visualization tool, to present a large amount 

of lexical phenomena using charts and graphs, 

aimed at helping language learners 

understand a word quickly and intuitively. To 

evaluate the effectiveness of the system, we 

designed interfaces to allow comparison 

between text and graphics presentation, and 

conducted a preliminary user study with ESL 

students. The results show that the visualized 

display is of greater benefit to the 

understanding of word characteristics than 

textual display. 

1 Introduction 

Vocabulary is a challenging aspect for language 

learners to master. Extended word knowledge, 

such as word polarity and position, is not widely 

available in traditional dictionaries. Thus, for 

most language learners, it is very difficult to 

have a good command of such lexical phenome-

na.  

Current linguistics software programs use 

large corpus data to advance language learning. 

The use of corpora exposes learners to authentic 

contextual clues and lets them discover patterns 

or collocations of words from contextual clues 

(Partington, 1998). However, a huge amount of 

data can be overwhelming and time-consuming 

(Yeh et al., 2007) for language learners to induce 

rules or patterns. On the other hand, some lexical 

phenomena seem unable to be comprehended 

                                                 
1
 http://glance-it.herokuapp.com/ 

fast and directly in plain text format (Koo, 2006). 

For example, in the British National Corpus 

(2007), “however” seems more negative than 

“but”. Also, compared with “but”, “however” 

appears more frequently at the beginning of a 

sentence. 

With this in mind, we proposed GLANCE
1
, a 

text visualization tool, which presents corpus 

data using charts and graphs to help language 

learners understand the lexical phenomena of a 

word quickly and intuitively. In this paper, we 

focused on five types of lexical phenomena: po-

larity, position, POS, form and discipline, which 

will be detailed in the Section 3. Given a single 

query word, the GLANCE system shows graph-

ical representations of its lexical phenomena se-

quentially within a single web page.  

Additionally we believe that the use of 

graphics also facilitates the understanding of the 

differences between two words. Taking this into 

consideration, we introduce a comparison mode 

to help learners differentiate two words at a 

glance. Allowing two word input, GLANCE 

draws the individual representative graphs for 

both words and presents these graphs in a two-

column view. The display of parallel graphs de-

picts the distinctions between the two words 

clearly. 

 

2 Related Work 

Corpus-based language learning has widened the 

perspectives in second and foreign language edu-

cation, such as vocabulary learning (Wood, 

2001). In past decades, various corpus-based ref-

erence tools have been developed. For example, 

WordSmith (Scott, 2000), Compleat Lexical Tu-

tor (Cobb, 2007), GRASP (Huang et al., 2011), 

PREFER (Chen et al, 2012). 

Recently, some interactive visualization tools 

have been developed for the purpose of illustrat-

ing various linguistic phenomena. Three exam-

34



ples are Word Tree, a visual concordance (Wat-

tenberg and  i gas, 2008), WORDGRAPH, a 

visual tool for context-sensitive word choice 

(Riehmann et al., 2012) and Visual Thesaurus, a 

3D interactive reference tool (ThinkMap Inc., 

2005). 

 

3 Design of the GLANCE System 

The GLANCE system consists of several com-

ponents of corpus data visualization. We design 

and implement these visualization modules sepa-

rately to ensure all graphs are simple and clear 

enough for users to capture and understand the 

lexical phenomena quickly. 

In this paper, we use the d3.js (Data-Driven 

Documents) (Bostock et al., 2011) to visualize 

the data. The d3.js enables direct inspection and 

manipulation of a standard document object 

model (DOM) so that we are able to transform 

numeric data into various types of graphs when 

fitting these data to other visualization tools. In 

this section, we describe the ways we extract the 

data from the corpus and how we translate these 

data into informative graphs. 

 

3.1 Data Preprocessing 

We use the well-formed corpus, the BNC, to ex-

tract the data. In order to obtain the Part-of-

speech tags for each text, we use the GENIA 

tagger (Tsuruoka et al., 2005) to analyze the sen-

tences of the BNC and build a list of <POS-tag, 

frequency> pairs for each word in the BNC. Also 

the BNC contains the classification code as-

signed to the text in a genre-based analysis car-

ried out at Lancaster University by Lee (2001). 

For each word, the classification codes are ag-

gregated to a list of <code, frequency> pairs.  

  

3.2 Visualization of Lexical Phenomena  

Polarity 

A word may carry different sentiment polarities 

(i.e., positive, negative and objective). To help 

users quickly determine the proper sentiment 

polarity of a word, we introduce the sentiment 

polarity information of SentiWordNet 

(Baccianella et al., 2010) into our system. For 

each synset of a word, GLANCE displays the 

polarity in a bar with three different colors. The 

individual length of the three parts in the bar cor-

responds to the polarity scores of a synset (Fig-

ure 1). 

 

 

Figure 1. Representation of sentiment polarity  

 

Position 

The word position in a sentence is also an im-

portant lexical phenomenon. By calculating the 

word position in each sentence, we then obtain 

the location distribution. GLANCE visualizes the 

distribution information of a word using a bar 

chart. Figure 2 shows a plot of distribution of 

word position on the x-axis against the word fre-

quency on the y-axis. 

 

 

Figure 2. Distribution of word position 

 

Part Of Speech (POS) 

A lexical item may have more than one part of 

speech. Knowing the distribution of POS helps 

users quickly understand the general usage of a 

word.  

GLANCE displays a pie chart for each word 

to differentiate between its parts of speech. We 

use the maximum likelihood probability of a 

POS tag for a word as the arc length of the pie 

chart (Figure 3). 

 

 

35



Figure 3. POS representation 

 

Form 

The levels of formality of written and spoken 

language are different, which also confuse lan-

guage learners. Pie charts are used to illustrate 

the proportion of written and spoken English of 

individual words as shown in Figure 4. 

We derive the frequencies of both forms from 

the BNC classification code for each word. The 

arc length of each sector is proportional to the 

maximum likelihood probability of forms. 

 

 

Figure 4. Form representation 

 

Discipline 

Similar to language form, the discipline infor-

mation (e.g., newspaper or fiction) was gathered 

from the BNC classification code. The relations 

of the disciplines of a word are presented using a 

sunburst graph, a radial space-filling tree layout 

implemented with prefuse (Heer et al., 2005). In 

the sunburst graph (Figure 5.), each level corre-

sponds to the relation of the disciplines of a cer-

tain word. The farther the level is away from the 

center, the more specific the discipline is. Each 

level is given equal width, but the circular angle 

swept out by a discipline corresponds to the fre-

quency of the disciplines. 

 

  

Figure 5. Discipline relations 

 

4 Results 

4.1 Experimental Setting 

We performed a preliminary user study to assess 

the efficiency of our system in assisting language 

learners in grasping lexical phenomena. To ex-

amine the effectiveness of visualization, we built 

a textual interface for comparison with the 

graphical interface. 

Ten pre-intermediate ESL college students 

participated in the study. A total of six pairs of 

similar words were listed on the worksheet. After 

being introduced to GLANCE, all students were 

randomly divided into two groups. One group 

was required to consult the first three pairs using 

the graphical interface and the second three pairs 

the textual interface, and vice versa. The partici-

pants were allowed a maximum of one minute 

per pair, which meets the goal of this study of 

quickly glancing at the graphics and grasping the 

concepts of words. Then a test sheet containing 

the same six similar word pairs was used to ex-

amine the extent of students’ word understanding. 

Note that during the test, no tool supports were 

provided. The student scored one point if he gave 

the correct answers to each question. In other 

words he would be awarded 6 points (the highest 

number of points) if he provided all the correct 

answers. They also completed a questionnaire, 

described below, evaluating the system. 

 

4.2 Experimental Results 

To determine the effectiveness of visualization of 

lexical phenomena, the students’ average scores 

were used as performance indicators. Students 

achieved the average score 61.9 and 45.0 out of 

100.00 after consulting the graphic interface and 

textual interface respectively. Overall, the visual-

ized display of word characteristics outper-

formed the textual version. 

The questionnaire revealed that all the partici-

pants showed a positive attitude to visualized 

word information. Further analyses showed that 

all ten participants appreciated the position dis-

play and nine of them the polarity and form dis-

plays. In short, the graphical display of lexical 

phenomena in GLANCE results in faster assimi-

lation and understanding of word information. 

Moreover, the participants suggested several in-

teresting aspects for improving the GLANCE 

system. For example, they preferred bilingual 

environment, further information concerning an-

tonyms, more example sentences, and increased 

36



detail in the sunburst representation of disci-

plines. 

 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 

In this paper, we proposed GLANCE, a text vis-

ualization tool, which provides graphical display 

of corpus data. Our goal is to assist language 

learners in glancing at the graphics and grasping 

the lexical knowledge quickly and intuitively. To 

evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of 

GLANCE, we conducted a preliminary user 

study with ten non-native ESL learners. The re-

sults revealed that visualization format outper-

formed plain text format. 

Many avenues exist for future research and 

improvement. We attempt to expand the single 

word to phrase level. For example, the colloca-

tion behaviors are expected to be deduced and 

displayed. Moreover, we are interested in sup-

porting more lexical phenomena, such as hypo-

nyms, to provide learners with more lexical rela-

tions of the word with other words. 

 

Reference 

Baccianella, S., Esuli, A., & Sebastiani, F. (2010, 

May). SentiWordNet 3.0: An Enhanced Lexical 

Resource for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Min-

ing. In LREC (Vol. 10, pp. 2200-2204). 

Bostock, M., Ogievetsky, V., & Heer, J. (2011). D³ 

data-driven documents. Visualization and Comput-

er Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 17(12), 2301-

2309. 

Chen, M. H., Huang, S. T., Huang, C. C., Liou, H. C., 

& Chang, J. S. (2012, June). PREFER: using a 

graph-based approach to generate paraphrases for 

language learning. In Proceedings of the Seventh 

Workshop on Building Educational Applications 

Using NLP (pp. 80-85). Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics. 

Cobb, T. (2007). The compleat lexical tutor. Retrieved 

September, 22, 2009. 

Heer, J., Card, S. K., & Landay, J. A. (2005, April). 

Prefuse: a toolkit for interactive information visual-

ization. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference 

on Human factors in computing systems (pp. 421-

430). ACM. 

Huang, C. C., Chen, M. H., Huang, S. T., Liou, H. C., 

& Chang, J. S. (2011, June). GRASP: grammar-

and syntax-based pattern-finder in CALL. 

In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Innovative 

Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications 

(pp. 96-104). Association for Computational Lin-

guistics. 

Kyosung Koo (2006). Effects of using corpora and 

online reference tools on foreign language writing: 

a study of Korean learners of English as a second 

language. PhD. dissertation, University of Iowa. 

Lee, D. Y. (2001). Genres, registers, text types, do-

mains and styles: Clarifying the concepts and 

nevigating a path through the BNC jungle. 

Partington, A. (1998). Patterns and meanings: Using 

corpora for English language research and teach-

ing (Vol. 2). John Benjamins Publishing. 

Riehmann, P., Gruendl, H., Froehlich, B., Potthast, M., 

Trenkmann, M., & Stein, B. (2011, March). The 

NETSPEAK WORDGRAPH: Visualizing key-

words in context. In Pacific Visualization Sympo-

sium (PacificVis), 2011 IEEE (pp. 123-130). IEEE. 

Scott, M. (2004). WordSmith tools version 4. 

The British National Corpus, version 3 (BNC XML 

Edition). 2007. Distributed by Oxford University 

Computing Services on behalf of the BNC Consor-

tium. URL: http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/ 

ThinkMap Inc. (2005). Thinkmap Visual Thesaurus. 

Available from http:// www.visualthesaurus.com 

Tsuruoka, Y., Tateishi, Y., Kim, J. D., Ohta, T., 

McNaught, J., Ananiadou, S., & Tsujii, J. I. (2005). 

Developing a robust part-of-speech tagger for bio-

medical text. In Advances in informatics (pp. 382-

392). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

Wattenberg, M., & Viégas, F. B. (2008). The word 

tree, an interactive visual concord-

ance. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE 

Transactions on, 14(6), 1221-1228. 

Wood, J. (2001). Can software support children’s 

vocabulary development.Language Learning & 

Technology, 5(1), 166-201. 

Yeh, Y., Liou, H. C., & Li, Y. H. (2007). Online syn-

onym materials and concordancing for EFL college 

writing. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 

20(2), 131-152. 

 

37


