



















































Temporal Expressions in Swedish Medical Text - A Pilot Study


Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2014), pages 88–92,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26-27 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Temporal Expressions in Swedish Medical Text – A Pilot Study

Sumithra Velupillai
Department of Computer and Systems Sciences

Stockholm University
Sweden

sumithra@dsv.su.se

Abstract

One of the most important features of
health care is to be able to follow a pa-
tient’s progress over time and identify
events in a temporal order. We describe
initial steps in creating resources for au-
tomatic temporal reasoning of Swedish
medical text. As a first step, we focus
on the identification of temporal expres-
sions by exploiting existing resources and
systems available for English. We adapt
the HeidelTime system and manually eval-
uate its performance on a small subset
of Swedish intensive care unit documents.
On this subset, the adapted version of Hei-
delTime achieves a precision of 92% and
a recall of 66%. We also extract the most
frequent temporal expressions from a sep-
arate, larger subset, and note that most ex-
pressions concern parts of days or specific
times. We intend to further develop re-
sources for temporal reasoning of Swedish
medical text by creating a gold standard
corpus also annotated with events and tem-
poral links, in addition to temporal expres-
sions and their normalised values.

1 Introduction

One of the most important features of health care
is to be able to follow patient progress over time
and identify clinically relevant events in a tempo-
ral order. In medical records, temporal informa-
tion is stored with explicit timestamps, but it is
also documented in free text in the clinical nar-
ratives. To meet our overall goal of building ac-
curate and useful information extraction systems
in the health care domain, our aim is to build re-
sources for temporal reasoning in Swedish clini-
cal text. For instance, in the example sentence
MR-undersökningen av skallen igår visade att

den vä-sidiga förändringen i thalamus minskat i
volym. (“The MRI-scan of the scull yesterday
showed that the left (abbreviated) side change in
thalamus has decreased in volume”), a temporal
reasoning system should extract the event (MRI-
scan of the scull) and the temporal expression
(yesterday), and be able to normalise the time ex-
pression to a specific date and classify the tempo-
ral relation.

In this pilot study we focus on the identifi-
cation of temporal expressions, utilising existing
resources and systems available for English. A
temporal expression is defined as any mention
of dates, times, durations, and frequencies, e.g.
“April 2nd”, “10:50am”, “five hours ago”, and
“every 2 hours”. When successfully identifying
such expressions, subsequent anchoring in time is
made possible.

Although English and Swedish are both Ger-
manic languages, there are some differences that
are important to take into account when adapt-
ing existing solutions developed for English to
Swedish, e.g. Swedish is more inflective and is
more compounding than English.

The purpose of this study is to initiate our work
on temporal reasoning for Swedish, and to evalu-
ate existing solutions adapted to Swedish. These
are our first steps towards the creation of a refer-
ence standard that can be used for evaluation of
future systems.

2 Background

Temporal reasoning has been the focus of several
international natural language processing (NLP)
challenges in the general domain such as ACE1,
TempEval-2 and 3 (Verhagen et al., 2010; Uz-
Zaman et al., 2013), and in the clinical domain
through the 2012 i2b2 challenge (Sun et al., 2013).
Most previous work has been performed on En-

1http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/mig/tests/ace/

88



glish documents, but the TempEval series have
also included other languages, e.g. Spanish. For
temporal modelling, the TimeML (Pustejovsky
et al., 2010) guidelines are widely used. The
TimeML standard denotes events (EVENT), tem-
poral expressions (TIMEX3) and temporal rela-
tions (TLINK).

For English, several systems have been devel-
oped for all or some of these subtasks, such as
the TARSQI Toolkit (Verhagen et al., 2005) and
SUTime (Chang and Manning, 2012). Both these
tools are rule-based, and rely on regular expres-
sions and gazetteers. The TARSQI Toolkit has
also been developed for the clinical domain: Med-
TTK (Reeves et al., 2013).

In other domains, and for other languages, Hei-
delTime (Strötgen and Gertz, 2012) and TIMEN
(Llorens et al., 2012) are examples of other rule-
based systems. These are also developed to be
easily extendable to new domains and languages.
HeidelTime ranked first in the TempEval-3 chal-
lenge on TIMEX3:s, resulting in an F1 of 77.61
for the task of correctly identifying and normalis-
ing temporal expressions.

HeidelTime was also used in several participat-
ing systems in the i2b2 challenge (Lin et al., 2013;
Tang et al., 2013; Grouin et al., 2013) with suc-
cess. Top results for correctly identifying and nor-
malising temporal expressions in the clinical do-
main are around 66 F1 (Sun et al., 2013). The
system has also been adapted for French clinical
text (Hamon and Grabar, 2014).

3 Methods

The HeidelTime system was chosen for the ini-
tial development of a Swedish temporal expres-
sion identifier. Given that its architecture is de-
signed to be easily extendible for other languages
as well as domains, and after reviewing alternative
existing systems, we concluded that it was suitable
for this pilot study.

3.1 Data

We used medical records from an intensive care
unit (ICU) from the Stockholm EPR Corpus, a
clinical database from the Stockholm region in
Sweden2 (Dalianis et al., 2012). Each medi-
cal record (document) contains all entries (notes)

2Study approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board
in Stockholm (Etikprövningsnämnden i Stockholm), permis-
sion number 2012/834-31/5

about one patient a given day. The document con-
tains notes written by both physicians and nurses.
They also contain headings (e.g. Daganteckn-
ing (“Daily note”), Andning (“Breathing”)) and
timestamps for when a specific note/heading was
recorded in the medical record system. These are
excluded in this analysis.

Three subsets from this ICU dataset were used:
1) two randomly selected documents were used for
analysing and identifying domain specific time ex-
pressions and regular expressions to be added in
the adaptation of HeidelTime (development set),
2) a random sample of ten documents was used for
manual analysis and evaluation (test set), and 3) a
set of 100 documents was also extracted for the
purpose of empirically studying the types of tem-
poral expressions found in the data by the adapted
system (validation set).

3.2 Adaptation of HeidelTime and
Evaluation

The available resources (keywords and regular ex-
pression rules) in the HeidelTime system were ini-
tially translated automatically (Google translate3)
and manually corrected. Regular expressions were
modified to handle Swedish inflections and other
specific traits. An initial analysis on two separate,
randomly selected ICU notes (development set)
was performed, as a first step in adapting for both
the Swedish language and the clinical domain.

Results on the system performance were manu-
ally evaluated on the test set by one computational
linguistics researcher by analysing system outputs:
adding annotations when the system failed to iden-
tify a temporal expression, and correcting system
output errors. A contingency table was created
for calculating precision, recall and F1, the main
outcome measures. Moreover, the top most fre-
quent temporal expressions found by the system
on a separate set were extracted (validation set),
for illustration and analysis purposes.

4 Results

We report general statistics for the ICU corpus, re-
sults from the adaptation and evaluation of Hei-
delTime for Swedish (HTSwe) on the test set, and
the most frequent temporal expressions found by
HTSwe in a separate set of 100 ICU documents
(validation set).

3http://translate.google.se

89



4.1 Data: ICU corpus
General statistics for the test set used in this study
is shown in Table 1. On average, each document
consists of 54.6 sentences, and each sentence con-
tains on average 8.7 tokens (including punctua-
tion). We observe that some sentences are very
short (min = 1), and there is great variability in
length, as can be seen through the standard devia-
tion.

# min - max avg ± std
Sentences 540 35 - 80 54.6±14.1
/document
Tokens 4749 1 - 52 8.7±5.7
/sentence

Table 1: General statistics for the test set (ten
ICU documents) used in this study. Minimum,
maximum, average and standard deviation for sen-
tences per document and tokens (including punc-
tuation) per sentence.

4.2 Adaptation and evaluation of
HeidelTime: HTSwe

The main modifications required in the adapta-
tion of HeidelTime to Swedish (HTSwe) involved
handling definite articles and plurals, e.g. adding
eftermiddag(en)?(ar)?(na)? (“afternoon”, “the af-
ternoon”/“afternoons”/“the afternoons”). From
the analysis of the small development set, some
abbreviations were also added, e.g. em (“after-
noon”). Regular expressions for handling typical
ways dates are written in Swedish were added, e.g.
“020812” and “31/12 -99” (day, month, year). In
order to avoid false positives, a rule for handling
measurements that could be interpreted as years
(e.g. 1900 ml) was also added (a negative rule).

Results from running HTSwe on the test set are
shown in Table 2. HTSwe correctly identified 105
temporal expressions, but missed 55 expressions
that should have been marked, and classified 9
expressions erroneously. In total, there are 160
TIMEX3s. Overall performance was 92% preci-
sion, 65% recall and F1 = 77%.

The main errors were due to faulty regular ex-
pressions for times, e.g. 13-tiden (“around 13 PM)
and missing keywords such as dygn (“day” - a
word to indicate a full day, i.e. 24 hours) and
lunchtid (“around lunch”). Some missing key-
words were specific for the clinical domain, e.g.
efternatten (“the after/late night”, typical for shift

indication). There were also some partial errors.
For instance, i dag (“today”) was only included
with the spelling idag in the system, thus generat-
ing a TIMEX3 output only for dag.

TIMEX3 Other
∑

Annotator Annotator
TIMEX3 105 9 114
HTSwe
Other 55 4580 4635
HTSwe∑

160 4589 4749

Table 2: Contingency table, TIMEX3 annotations
by the annotator and the adapted HeidelTime sys-
tem for Swedish (HTSwe) on the test set. “Other”
means all other tokens in the corpus. These results
yield a precision of 92%, a recall of 66%, and F1
= 77% for HTSwe.

On the validation set, 168 unique time expres-
sions were found by the system, and 1,178 in total.
The most frequent expressions all denote parts of
days, e.g. idag (“today”), nu (“now”), and natten
(“the night”), see Table 3. Specific times (mostly
specific hours) were also very common. Thus,
there were many translated expressions in the Hei-
delTime system that never occurred in the data.

TIMEX3 N %
idag (“today”) 164 14%
nu (“now”) 132 11%
natten (“the night”) 117 10%
morgonen (“the morning”) 96 8%
em (“afternoon”, abbreviated) 82 7%
kvällen (“the evening”) 74 6%
igår (“yesterday”) 49 4%
fm (“morning”, abbreviated) 34 3%
morgon (“morning”) 30 3%
natt (‘night”) 26 2%
Total 1178 100%

Table 3: Most frequent (top ten, descending or-
der) TIMEX3s found by HTSwe on the validation
set (100 ICU documents). Total = all TIMEX3:s
found by HTSwe in the entire validation set. There
were 168 unique TIMEX3s in the validation set.

5 Discussion and Conclusion

We perform an initial study on automatic identifi-
cation of temporal expressions in Swedish clinical

90



text by translating and adapting the HeidelTime
system, and evaluating performance on Swedish
ICU records. Results show that precision is high
(92%), which is promising for our future develop-
ment of a temporal reasoning system for Swedish.
The main errors involve regular expressions for
time and some missing keywords; these expres-
sions will be added in our next iteration in this
work. Our results, F1 = 77%, are lower than state-
of-the-art systems for English clinical text, where
the top-performing system in the 2010 i2b2 Chal-
lenge achieved 90% F1 for TIMEX3 spans (Sun
et al., 2013). However, given the small size of this
study, results are encouraging, and we have cre-
ated a baseline system which can be used for fur-
ther improvements.

The adaptation and translation of HeidelTime
involved extending regular expressions and rules
to handle Swedish inflections and specific ways of
writing dates and times. Through a small, initial
analysis on a development set, some further ad-
ditions and modifications were made, which led
to the correct identification of common TIMEX3s
present in this type of document. A majority of
the expressions translated from the original system
was not found in the data. Hence, it is worthwhile
analysing a small subset to inform the adaptation
of HeidelTime.

The ICU notes are an interesting and suit-
able type of documentation for temporal reason-
ing studies, as they contain notes on the progress
of patients in constant care. However, from the re-
sults it is evident that the types of TIMEX3 expres-
sions are rather limited and mostly refer to parts
of days or specific times. Moreover, as recall was
lower (66%), there is clearly room for improve-
ment. We plan to extend our study to also include
other report types.

5.1 Limitations

There are several limitations in this study. The cor-
pus is very small, and evaluated only by one an-
notator, which limits the conclusions that can be
drawn from the analysis. For the creation of a ref-
erence standard, we plan to involve at least one
clinician, in order to get validation from a domain
expert, and to be able to calculate inter-annotator
agreement. The size of the corpus will also be in-
creased. We have not evaluated performance on
TIMEX3 normalisation, which, of course, is cru-
cial for an accurate temporal reasoning system.

For instance, we have not considered the category
Frequency, which is essential in the clinical do-
main to capture e.g. medication instructions and
dosages. Moreover, we have not annotated and
evaluated events. This is perhaps the most im-
portant part of a temporal reasoning system. We
plan to utilise existing named entity taggers de-
veloped in our group as a pre-annotation step in
the creation of our reference standard. The last
step involves annotating temporal links (TLINK)
between events and TIMEX3:s. We believe that
part-of-speech (PoS) and/or syntactic information
will be a very important component in an end-to-
end system for this task. We plan to tailor an exist-
ing Swedish PoS tagger, to better handle Swedish
clinical text.

5.2 Conclusion

Our main finding is that it is feasible to adapt Hei-
delTime to the Swedish clinical domain. More-
over, we have shown that the parts of days and
specific times are the most frequent temporal ex-
pressions in Swedish ICU documents.

This is the first step towards building resources
for temporal reasoning in Swedish. We believe
these results are useful for our continued endeav-
our in this area. Our next step is to add further
keywords and regular expressions to improve re-
call, and to evaluate TIMEX3 normalisation. Fol-
lowing that, we will annotate events and temporal
links.

To our knowledge, this is the first study on tem-
poral expression identification in Swedish clinical
text. All resulting gazetteers and guidelines in our
future work on temporal reasoning in Swedish will
be made publicly available.

Acknowledgments

The author wishes to thank the anonymous review-
ers for invaluable comments on this manuscript.
Thanks also to Danielle Mowery and Dr. Wendy
Chapman for all their support. This work was par-
tially funded by Swedish Research Council (350-
2012-6658) and Swedish Fulbright Commission.

References

Angel X. Chang and Christopher Manning. 2012.
SUTime: A library for recognizing and normaliz-
ing time expressions. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Con-
ference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,

91



Mehmet Uur Doan, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mar-
iani, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the Eight International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), Is-
tanbul, Turkey, may. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Hercules Dalianis, Martin Hassel, Aron Henriksson,
and Maria Skeppstedt. 2012. Stockholm EPR Cor-
pus: A Clinical Database Used to Improve Health
Care. In Pierre Nugues, editor, Proc. 4th SLTC,
2012, pages 17–18, Lund, October 25-26.

Cyril Grouin, Natalia Grabar, Thierry Hamon, Sophie
Rosset, Xavier Tannier, and Pierre Zweigenbaum.
2013. Eventual situations for timeline extraction
from clinical reports. JAMIA, 20:820–827.

Thierry Hamon and Natalia Grabar. 2014. Tuning Hei-
delTime for identifying time expressions in clinical
texts in English and French. In Proceedings of the
5th International Workshop on Health Text Mining
and Information Analysis (Louhi), pages 101–105,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Yu-Kai Lin, Hsinchun Chen, and Randall A. Brown.
2013. MedTime: A temporal information extraction
system for clinical narratives. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, 46:20–28.

Hector Llorens, Leon Derczynski, Robert Gaizauskas,
and Estela Saquete. 2012. TIMEN: An Open Tem-
poral Expression Normalisation Resource. In Nico-
letta Calzolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri,
Thierry Declerck, Mehmet Uur Doan, Bente Mae-
gaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Eight Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’12), Istanbul, Turkey, may. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

James Pustejovsky, Kiyong Lee, Harry Bunt, and Lau-
rent Romary. 2010. ISO-TimeML: An Interna-
tional Standard for Semantic Annotation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Seventh International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’10),
Valletta, Malta, may. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Ruth M. Reeves, Ferdo R. Ong, Michael E. Math-
eny, Joshua C. Denny, Dominik Aronsky, Glenn T.
Gobbel, Diane Montella, Theodore Speroff, and
Steven H. Brown. 2013. Detecting temporal expres-
sions in medical narratives. International Journal of
Medical Informatics, 82:118–127.

Jannik Strötgen and Michael Gertz. 2012. Temporal
Tagging on Different Domains: Challenges, Strate-
gies, and Gold Standards. In Proceedings of the
Eigth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’12), pages 3746–
3753. ELRA.

Weiyi Sun, Anna Rumshisky, and Özlem Uzuner.
2013. Evaluating temporal relations in clinical text:
2012 i2b2 Challenge. JAMIA, 20(5):806–813.

Buzhou Tang, Yonghui Wu, Min Jiang, Yukun Chen,
Joshua C Denny, and Hua Xu. 2013. A hybrid sys-
tem for temporal information extraction from clini-
cal text. JAMIA, 20:828–835.

Naushad UzZaman, Hector Llorens, Leon Derczyn-
ski, James Allen, Marc Verhagen, and James Puste-
jovsky. 2013. SemEval-2013 Task 1: TempEval-3:
Evaluating Time Expressions, Events, and Temporal
Relations. In Second Joint Conference on Lexical
and Computational Semantics (*SEM), Volume 2:
Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013), pages 1–9,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Marc Verhagen, Inderjeet Mani, Roser Sauri, Robert
Knippen, Seok Bae Jang, Jessica Littman, Anna
Rumshisky, John Phillips, and James Pustejovsky.
2005. Automating Temporal Annotation with
TARSQI. In Proceedings of the ACL 2005 on
Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
ACLdemo ’05, pages 81–84, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Marc Verhagen, Roser Saurı́, Tommaso Caselli, and
James Pustejovsky. 2010. SemEval-2010 Task 13:
TempEval-2. In Proceedings of the 5th Interna-
tional Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval
’10, pages 57–62, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

92


