















































Original file was acl2014_revisado.tex


1 

Emotion Detection from text: A Survey 

Lea Canales, Patricio Martínez-Barco  
Department of Software and Computing Systems  

University of Alicante  
{lcanales,patricio}@dlsi.ua.es  

 

Abstract 

 

 This survey describes recent works in 

the field of Emotion Detection from text, 

being a part of the broader area of Affective 

Computing. This survey has been inspired 

on the well-known fact that, despite there is 

a lot of work on emotional detection 

systems, a lot of work is expected to be 

done yet. The increment of these systems is 

due to the large amount of emotional data 

available in Social Web. Detecting 

emotions from text have attracted the 

attention of many researchers in 

computational linguistics because it has a 

wide range of applications, such as suicide 

prevention or measuring well-being of a 

community. This paper mainly collects 

works based on lexical and machine 

learning approaches and these works are 

classificated in accordance with the 

emotional model and the approach used.  

 

1  Introduction 

 

This survey describes recent works in the 

field of emotion or affect detection from 

text. Emotion detection is part of the 

broader area of Affective Computing with 

aims to enable computers recognize and 

express emotions [Picard 1997]. Current 

affect detection systems are with respect to 

individual modalities or channels, such as 

face, voice and text [Calvo 2010]. In this 

survey, we have focused on reviewing 

works about emotion detection from text. 

Emotion detection and analysis has 

been widely researched in neuroscience, 

psychology and behavior science, as they 

are an important element of human nature. 

In computer science, this task has also 

attracted the attention of many researchers, 

especially in the field of human computer 

interactions [Strapparava 2008]. 

In computational linguistics, the 

detection of emotion states of a person by 

analyzing a text document written by 

him/her can have many applications in 

different fields, such as in e-learning 

environment [Rodriguez 2012] or suicide 

prevention [Desmet 2013, Vaassen 2014]. 

For this reason, we decided to develop a 

survey about emotion detection systems 

from text and make it available to 

researcher community. 

In this survey, we classify the most 

relevant emotion detection works in 

accordance with the emotional model and 

the approach used. A numerical comparison 

is not possible since each work used 

different data sets to evaluate their systems. 

Regarding the search strategy used in 

the survey, we have looked for all of papers 

related to emotion detection from text in 

different research databases like Scopus1 or 

IEEE Xplore2. Later on, we have reviewed 

the papers obtained of these databases and 

have selected the best papers that use 

lexical approach or machine learning 

approach in their emotion detection 

systems. The selection criterion used is 

based on the relevance of each work in the 

field of Affective Computing. 

This paper is organized as follows. In 

section 2, describes the emotional models. 

Section 3, the different computational 

                                                      
1 http://www.scopus.com/ 
2 http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ 



2 

approaches for emotion detection is 

described. Finally, in section 4, we express 

our conclusions about this survey. 

 

2  Emotion models 

 

When emotional detection systems are 

analyzed, it is important to focus our 

interest on describing and explaining how 

the emotion models are established, as they 

are, the basis of these systems. 

According to research in psychology, 

there is a number of theories about how to 

represent emotions [Cowie 2003] but two 

are the most important and the most often 

used in existing approaches in Sentiment 

Analysis [Francisco 2013]: emotional 

categories and emotional dimensions. 

Emotional categories approaches are 

focused on model emotions based on 

distinct emotion classes or labels. The 

categorical model assumes that there are 

discrete emotion categories. The Ekman’s 

basic emotion model is within this 

approach. [Ekman 1999] concluded that the 

six basic emotions are ANGER, 

DISGUST, FEAR, HAPPINESS, 

SADNESS and SURPRISE. [Plutchik 

1980] define a set of eight basic bipolar 

emotions, consisting of a superset of 

Ekman’s and with two additions: TRUST 

and ANTICIPATION. These eight 

emotions are organized into four bipolar 

sets: joy vs. sadness, anger vs. fear, trust vs. 

disgust, and surprise vs. anticipation. 

Emotional dimensions approaches 

represent affects in a dimensional form. 

Each emotion occupies a location in this 

space [Kim 2011]. One of the more 

representative model of these approaches is 

[Russell 1980]. Rusell’s Circumplex Model 

of Affect suggests that emotions are 

distributed in a two-dimensional circular 

space: valence dimension and arousal 

dimension, as show Figure 1. The valence 

dimension indicates how much PLEASANT 

and UNPLEASANT is an emotion. The 

arousal dimension differentiates 

ACTIVATION and DEACTIVATION 

states. In this approach, we also find the 

Mehrabian’s model, a model based on a 

three-dimensional PAD (Pleasure – Arousal 

- Dominance) representation [Mehrabian 

1996]. The dominance dimension indicates 

whether the subject feels in control of the 

situation or not. 

Although existing emotional categories 

and emotional dimensions for representing 

affective states, categorical approaches are 

the most commonly used [Calvo 2013], as 

we can check out in next section. Most of 

computational approaches are based on 

emotional categories, due to its simplicity 

and familiarity. Nevertheless, emotional 

categories may not cover all emotions 

adequately because emotion categories are 

limited. This is a major benefit of emotional 

dimensional models. They are not 

correlated to a certain emotional state and 

are able to capture subtle emotion concepts 

that differ only slightly. In addition, a 

dimensional emotion model provides a 

means for measuring similarity between 

affective states [Kim 2011]. 

As we can observe, there are not an 

emotion model better than other. Both 

models have advantages and disadvantages. 

The election of an emotion model depends 

on the set of emotions that we want detect. 

 

3  Computational approaches for 

emotion detection 

 

Emotion detection techniques can be 

divided into lexicon based approaches and 

machine learning approaches. On the one 

hand, lexicon based approaches rely on 

lexical resources such as lexicons, bags of 

words or ontologies. On the other hand, 

Machine Learning (ML) approaches apply 



3 

ML algorithms based on linguistic features. 

 

Figure 1: Graphical representation of 

the Circumplex Model of Affect. 

 

3.1  Lexicon-based approaches 

 

Lexicon based approaches are approaches 

that only use one or several lexical 

resources to detect emotions detection. 

Among these approaches, we can find 

keyword-based approaches that are based 

on predetermining a set of terms to classify 

the text into emotion categories. In 

[Strapparava 2008], as a baseline, they 

implemented a simple algorithm that 

checked the presence of affective words in 

the headlines, and computed a score that 

reflected the frequency of the words in this 

affective lexicon in the text. They used 

WordNet-Affect [Strapparava 2004]. 

Also among Lexicon based approaches, 

we find the ontology-based ones. [Balahur 

2011] use EmotiNet - a resource for the 

detection of emotion from text based on 

commonsense knowledge on concepts, their 

interaction and their affective consequence 

– to detect emotion. EmotiNet models 

situations as chains of actions and their 

corresponding emotional effect using an 

ontological representation. Their evaluation 

consists in testing if by employing the 

model they build and the knowledge 

contained in the core of EmotiNet, they are 

able to detect the emotion expressed in new 

examples pertaining to the categories in 

International Survey of Emotional 

Antecedents and Reactions (ISEAR), 

through computing the similarity between 

the emotion chain of the new situation and 

the EmotiNet emotion chains. Their 

evaluation shows that the structure and 

content of EmotiNet are appropriate to 

address the automatic treatment of 

implicitly expressed affect. [Sykora 2013] 

also use an ontology approach to solve the 

problem of fine-grained emotion detection 

in text. Their approach detects a range of 

eight high-level emotions; anger, confusion, 

disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, shame and 

surprise. 

Statistical approach is also considered 

as a Lexical approach. Most 

knowledge-based works use Latent 

Semantic Analysis (LSA), a statistical 

approach for analyzing the relationships 

between a set of documents and the terms 

mentioned in these documents in order to 

produce a set of meaningful patterns related 

to the documents and terms [Deerwester 

1999]. [Gill 2008] used LSA and the 

Hyperspace Analogue to Language (HAL) 

to automatically compute the semantic 

similarity between the texts and emotions 

keywords. Recently, [Wang 2013] propose 

a method that uses an improved LSA 

algorithm for text emotion classification on 

ISEAR dataset. 

 

3.2  Machine Learning-based 

approaches 

 

Machine learning is a scientific discipline 

that deals with the construction and study of 

algorithms that can learn from data [Kovahi 

1998]. Such algorithms operate by building 

a model based on inputs and using these 

inputs to make predictions or decisions, 

rather than following only explicitly 

programmed instructions [Bishop 2006]. 

Specifically in emotion detection, 

Machine learning algorithms are used to 

learn how detect emotions. These 



4 

approaches can be divided into supervised 

and unsupervised learning. 

Supervised learning approaches rely on 

a labelled training data, a set of training 

examples. The supervised learning 

algorithm analyses the training data and 

infers a function, which we use for mapping 

new examples [Mohri 2012]. 

A labelled corpus is a large and 

structured set of text that it is necessary 

annotated with emotional tags. In this case, 

the annotation process is considered as one 

of their most important disadvantages as it 

becomes a tedious and time-consuming 

task. However, there are recent works 

related with emotion detection in Twitter 

messages, where the training examples are 

automatically labelled through hashtags and 

emoticons contained. [Hasan 2014, Wang 

2012, Roberts 2012, Suttles 2013] among 

others, are proposals that use this method 

for labeling training data automatically. 

Moreover, [Hasan 2014a] confirms that 

hashtags are indeed good emotion labels. 

Concerning works that apply supervised 

learning algorithms, we can find both the 

categorical and the dimensional approaches 

to base their emotional models. Categorical 

approaches are the most commonly used in 

emotion detection [Calvo 2013]. One of the 

first works based in this model is [Alm 

2005]. This proposal presented an empirical 

study of applying supervised machine 

learning with the SNoW learning 

architecture [Roth 1999]. They used an 

annotated corpus with an extended set of 

Ekman basic emotions. [Strapparava 2008], 

in one of the experiment presented in their 

work, applied Naïve Bayes classifier 

trained on the blog entries from 

LiveJournal.com 3. They used a collection 

of blogposts annotated with Ekman’s 

emotions. More recently, [Balabantaray 

2012] presents an Emotion classifier that is 

able to determinate the emotion class of the 

person writing. Their emotion classifier is 

                                                      
3 http://www.livejournal.com/ 

based on multi-class SVM kernels and 

takes decisions according to the basic 

emotions identified by Ekman [Ekman 

1999]. [Roberts 2012] also use the Ekman’s 

six basic emotions and include LOVE 

emotion. Their system uses a series of 

binary SVM classifiers to detect each of the 

seven emotions. Other related work with 

categorical emotion models, [Suttles 2013] 

classify emotions according to a set of eight 

basic bipolar emotions defined by 

Plutchick. This allows them to treat the 

multi-class problem of emotion 

classification as a binary problem for 

opposing emotion pairs. Their approach 

applies Distant Supervision [Mintz 2009]. 

About works that apply supervised 

learning approach and use dimensional 

emotion model, we can find the work of 

[Hasan 2014], where they propose an 

approach for automatically classifying text 

messages of individual to infer their 

emotional states. They use the Rusell’s 

Circumplex Model of Affect as emotion 

model and train supervised classifiers to 

detect multiple emotion. Specifically, they 

have compared the accuracy of SVM, 

KNN, Decision Tree and Naïve Bayes for 

classifying Twitter messages. 

Regarding unsupervised learning 

approaches, these algorithms try to find 

hidden structure in unlabeled data in order 

to build models for emotion classification 

[Mohri 2012].  

As occurs in supervised learning, 

among unsupervised learning proposals 

also it can be found systems based on 

categorical and dimensional emotion 

models. 

With respect to works based in 

categorical emotion model, [Strapparava 

2008] apply unsupervised techniques 

combining LSA with WordNet Affect 

[Strapparava 2004]. This proposal used the 

Ekman’s basic emotions. [Agrawal 2012] 

proposes a novel unsupervised 

context-based approach based on a 

methodology that does not depend on any 



5 

existing affect lexicon, thereby their model 

is flexible enough to classify sentences 

beyond Ekman’s model of six basic 

emotions. [Calvo 2013] presents different 

categorical approaches based on Vector 

Space Model (VSM) with three 

dimensionality reduction techniques: Latent 

Semantic Analysis (LSA), Probabilistic 

Latent Semantic Analysis (PLSA) and 

Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF). 

This work conclude that NMF-based 

categorical classification performs the best 

among categorical approaches to 

classification. 

About unsupervised approach with 

dimensional emotion model, we find [Calvo 

2013]. This work used a normative database 

ANEW [Bradley 1999] to produce 

tree-dimensional vectors (valence, arousal, 

dominance) for each pseudo-document. 

The articles presented in this survey are 

summarized in Table 1. 

 

4  Conclusion 

 

In this survey, we have started discussing 

the emotion models defined by 

psychologies because it is the base of 

emotion detection. As concluding by 

[Calvo 2013] and we have check out, 

categorical approach is the model more 

used in emotion detection systems. 

Regarding Lexical approaches, 

keyword-based approaches are easily 

implementable and we can obtain good 

accuracy values, even though this approach 

has drawbacks: determining the content of 

the emotion lexicon is subjective, obtaining 

wrong recall values and the select words 

may be ambiguous [Suttles 2013]. 

Moreover, it is not suitable for wide range 

of domains. 

With respect to approaches based on 

ontologies let us use commonsense 

knowledge and improve recall values but 

the creation of an emotional ontology is a 

tedious and time-consuming task. 

Consequently, lexical resources usually 

are used as features in Machine Learning 

algorithms. 

As for Machine Learning approaches, 

the supervised learning approach is more 

used in emotion detection because it usually 

leads to better results than unsupervised 

learning [Kim 2011]. Although, these 

approaches need labelling training 

examples and annotating of examples, 

which is a time-consuming task. For this 

reason, several researches have analyzed as  



6 

Table 1:  Emotion Detection approaches 

 

realize this task automatically and when our 

system process Twitter messages, the 

messages can be annotated through 

hashtags or emotions that it contains. 

Although unsupervised learning 

approach leads worse results than 

supervised learning, it can be a good 

election for the emotion detection task 

because the emotional interpretations of a 

text can be highly subjective and the 

annotation task is an error prone task [Kim 

2011]. 

In conclusion, Machine Learning 

approaches are better option for detection 

emotion task since we obtain a model is 

also able to detect emotions in texts that 

have only an indirect reference to an 

emotions. Although, it is important use a 

good lexical resource as features in 

Machine Learning algorithms to obtain 

good results. 

Concerning pending tasks in emotion 

detection field, we consider really 

important that researcher community 

establish an annotated corpus and a set of 

metrics that it may be used to evaluate the 

different existing systems and the future 

systems. Moreover, in emotional detection 

systems based on machine learning 

approach, we have detected that most of 

these systems use features based on a 

shallow analysis on the text as: n-grams, 

punctuation, emoticons or Part-Of-Speech. 

Hence, we propose a new direction focuses 

on deep analysis, since we consider that if 

we use features based on a deep analysis on 

the text we could improve the emotional 

detection systems. 



7 

Acknowledgments 

 

This research has been supported by the FPI 

grant (BES-2013-065950) from the Spanish 

Ministry of Science and Innovation, under 

the project LEGOLANGUAGE 

(TIN2012-31224) funded by the Spanish 

Government. It has been also funded by the 

Valencian Government (grant no. 

PROMETEOII/2014/001). 

 

References 

 
Ameeta Agrawal and Aijun An. 2012. 

Unsupervised Emotion Detection from Text 

Using Semantic and Syntactic Relations. In 

2012 IEEE/WIC/ACM International 

Conferences on Web Intelligence and 

Intelligent Agent Technology, pages 

346–353. IEEE Computer Society, 

December. 

Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, Dan Roth, and 

RichardSproat. 2005. Emotions from text: 

machine learning for text-based emotion 

prediction. Proc. Conf. Human Language 

Technology and Empirical Methods in 

Natural Language Processing, pages 

579–586. 

R C Balabantaray, Mudasir Mohammad, and 

Nibha Sharma. 2012. Multi-Class Twitter 

Emotion Classification: A New Approach. 

International Journal of Applied Information 

Systems (IJAIS), 4(1):48–53. 

Alexandra Balahur, Jesús M. Hermida, and 

Andrés Montoyo. 2011. Detecting Implicit 

Expressions of Sentiment in Text Based on 

Commonsense Knowledge. In 2nd Workshop 

on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity 

and Sentiment Analysis, ACL-HLT 2011, 

pages 53–60. 

C. M. Bishop. 2006. Pattern Recognition and 

Machine Learning. Springer. Margaret M 

Bradley and Peter J Lang. 1999. Affective 

Norms for English Words (ANEW): 

Instruction Manual and Affective Ratings. 

Technical report, The Center for Research in 

Psychophysiology, University of Florida. 

 

Rafael A Calvo and Sunghwan Mac Kim. 2013. 

Emotions in text: dimensional and categorical 

models. Computational Intelligence, 29(3). 

Rafael A Calvo and Senior Member. 2010.  

Affect Detection: An Interdisciplinary 

Review of Models, Methods, and Their 

Applications. IEEE Transactions on 

Affective Computing, 1(1):18–37. 

Roddy Cowie and Randolph R. Cornelius. 2003. 

Describing the emotional states that are 

expressed in speech. Speech Communication, 

40(1-2):5–32, April. 

Scott Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, George W. 

Furnas, Thomas K. Landauer, and Richard 

Harshman.1999. Indexing by latent semantic 

analysis. Journal of the American Society for 

Information Science, 41(6):391–407, 

September. 

Bart Desmet and Véronique Hoste. 2013.  

Emotion detection in suicide notes. Expert 

Systems with Applications, 

40(16):6351–6358, November. 

Paul Ekman. 1999. Basic emotions. In 

Handbook of cognition and emotion, pages 

45–60. Virginia Francisco and Pablo Gerv´as. 

2013. EmoTag: An Approach to Automated 

Mark-Up of Emotions in Texts. 

Computational Intelligence, 29(4):680–721. 

Alastair J. Gill, Robert M. French, Darren 

Gergle, and Jon Oberlander. 2008. 

Identifying Emotional  Characteristics from 

Short Blog Texts. In 30th Annual Meeting of 

the Cognitive Science Society, pages 

2237–2242. 

Maryam Hasan, Emmanuel Agu, and Elke 

Rundensteiner. 2014a. Using Hashtags as 

Labels for Supervised Learning of Emotions 

in Twitter Messages. 

Maryam Hasan, Elke Rundensteiner, and 

Emmanuel Agu. 2014b. EMOTEX: 

Detecting Emotions in Twitter Messages. In 

ASE 

BIGDATA/SOCIALCOM/CYBERSECURI

TY Conference, pages 27–31. 

Sunghwan Mac Kim. 2011. Recognising 

Emotions and Sentiments in Text. Ph.D. 

thesis, University of Sydney. 

 



8 

Ron Kovahi and Foster Provost. 1998. Glossary 

of terms. Machine Learning, pages 271–274. 

A. Mehrabian. 1996. 

Pleasure-arousal-dominance: A general 

framework for describing and measuring 

individual. 

Current Psychology, 15(4):505–525. M. Mintz, 

S. Bills, R. Snow, and D. Jurafsky. 2009. 

Distant supervision for relation extraction 

without labeled data. In Proceedings of the 

Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting 

of the ACL and the 4th International Joint 

Conference on Natural Language Processing 

of the AFNLP, pages 1003–1011. 

Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and 

Ameet Talwalkar. 2012. Foundations of 

Machine Learning. MIT Press. 

Rosalind W. Picard. 1997. Affective computing. 

MIT Press Cambridge, MA, USAc 1997. R. 

Plutchik. 1980. Emotion: Theory, Research 

and Experience. In Theories of emotion, 

volume 11, page 399. Academic Press. 

Kirk Roberts, Michael A Roach, Joseph 

Johnson, Josh Guthrie, and Sanda M 

Harabagiu. 2012. EmpaTweet: Annotating 

and Detecting Emotions on Twitter. In 

Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference  Chair) 

Piperidis, Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, 

Mehmet U˘gur Do˘gan, Bente Maegaard, 

Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan 

Odijk, and Stelios, editors, Proceedings of the 

Eight International Conference on Language 

Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12). 

European Language Resources Association 

(ELRA). 

Pilar Rodriguez, Alvaro Ortigosa, and Rosa M. 

Carro. 2012. Extracting Emotions from Texts 

in ELearning Environments. In 2012 Sixth 

International Conference on Complex, 

Intelligent, and Software Intensive Systems, 

pages 887–892. Ieee, July. 

Dan Roth, Chad Cumby, Andy Carlson, and Jeff 

Rosen. 1999. The SNoW Learning 

Architecture. Technical report, UIUC 

Computer Science  Department. J.A. 

Russell. 1980. A circumplex model of affect. 

Journal of Personality and Social 

Psychology, 39(6):1161–1178. 

Carlo Strapparava and Rada Mihalcea. 2008. 

Learning to identify emotions in text. In 

Proceedings of the 2008 ACM symposium on 

Applied computing – SAC ’08, pages 

1556–1560, New York, New York, USA. 

ACM Press. 

Carlo Strapparava and Alessandro Valitutti. 

2004. WordNet-Affect: an Affective 

Extension of Word-Net. In 4th International 

Conference on Language Resources and 

Evaluation, pages 1083–1086. 

Jared Suttles and Nancy Ide. 2013. Distant 

Supervision for Emotion Classification with 

Discrete Binary Values. In Alexander 

Gelbukh, editor, Computational Linguistics 

and Intelligent Text Processing, volume 7817 

of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 

121–136. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, 

Heidelberg. 

Martin D Sykora, Thomas W Jackson, and 

Suzanne Elayan. 2013. Emotive ontology: 

extracting finegrained emotions from terse, 

informal messages. IADIS International 

Journal on Computer Science and 

Information Systems, 8(2):106–118. Frederik 

Vaassen. 2014. Measuring emotion. Ph.D. 

thesis, Universiteit Antwerpen. 

Xuren Wang and Qiuhui Zheng. 2013. Text 

Emotion  Classification Research Based on 

Improved Latent  Semantic Analysis 

Algorithm. In Proceedings of the 2nd 

International Conference on Computer 

Science nd Electronics Engineering (ICCSEE 

2013),  number Iccsee, pages 210–213, 

Paris, France. Atlantis Press. 

Wenbo Wang, Lu Chen, Krishnaprasad 

Thirunarayan, and Amit P. Sheth. 2012. 

Harnessing Twitter ”Big Data” for Automatic 

Emotion Identification. In 2012 International 

Conference on Privacy, Security,Risk and 

Trust and 2012 International Conference on 

Social Computing, pages 587–592. IEEE 

Computer Society, September. 

 


