



















































Building a Japanese Corpus of Temporal-Causal-Discourse Structures Based on SDRT for Extracting Causal Relations


Proceedings of the EACL 2014 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Causality in Language, pages 33–39,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Building a Japanese Corpus of Temporal-Causal-Discourse Structures
Based on SDRT for Extracting Causal Relations

Kimi Kaneko 1 Daisuke Bekki 1,2,3
1 Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan

2 National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
3 CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama, Japan

{kaneko.kimi | bekki}@is.ocha.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper proposes a methodology for
generating specialized Japanese data sets
for the extraction of causal relations, in
which temporal, causal and discourse re-
lations at both the fact level and the epis-
temic level, are annotated. We applied
our methodology to a number of text frag-
ments taken from the Balanced Corpus of
Contemporary Written Japanese. We eval-
uated the feasibility of our methodology in
terms of agreement and frequencies, and
discussed the results of the analysis.

1 Introduction

In recent years, considerable attention has been
paid to deep semantic processing. Many studies
(Betherd et al., 2008), (Inui et al., 2007), (Inui
et al., 2003), (Riaz and Girju, 2013) have been
recently conducted on deep semantic processing,
and causal relation extraction (CRE) is one of the
specific tasks in deep semantic processing. Re-
search on CRE is still developing and there are
many obstacles that must be overcome.

Inui et al. (2003) acquired cause and effect
pairs from text, where the antecedent events were
taken as causes and consequent events were taken
as effects based on Japanese keywords such as
kara and node. In (1), for example, the an-
tecedent ame-ga hutta (‘it rained’) and the conse-
quent mizutamari-ga dekita (‘puddles emerged’)
are acquired as a pair of cause and effect.

(1) Ame-ga
rain-NOM

hutta-node
fall-past-because

mizutamari-ga
puddles-NOM

dekita.
emerge-past

‘Because it rained, puddles emerged.’

However, antecedents are not always causes or
reasons for consequents in Japanese, as illustrated
by the following example.

(2) Zinsinziko-ga
injury.accident-NOM
okita-kara
happen-past-because

densya-ga
trains-NOM

tiensita
delay-past

to-iu-wake-dewanai.
it.is.not.the.case.that

‘It is not the case that the trains were
delayed because an injury accident hap-
pened.’

In example (2), the antecedent zinsinziko-ga okita
(‘an injury accident happened’) is not the cause
of the consequent densya-ga tiensita (‘the trains
were delayed’). Though in such sentences that
contain causal expressions there are no causal re-
lations between antecedents and consequents, in
existing studies each sentence containing a causal
expression was extracted as knowledge represent-
ing cause and effect, such as in (Inui et al., 2003).
It is difficult for computers to auto-recognize and
exclude such cases.

In this paper, we report on the analysis of nec-
essary information for acquiring more accurate
cause-effect knowledge and propose a methodol-
ogy for creating a Japanese corpus for CRE. First,
we introduce previous studies and describe infor-
mation that should be used to annotate data sets.
Next, we describe our methodology based on Seg-
mented Discourse Representation Theory (SDRT)
(Asher et al., 2003). Finally, we evaluate the va-
lidity of our methodology in terms of agreement
and frequency, and analyze the results.

2 Previous Studies

In this section, we introduce previous studies on
annotation of temporal, causal and other types of
relations and present a linguistic analysis of tem-
poral and causal relations.

Betherd et al. (2008) generated English data
sets annotated with temporal and causal relations
and analyzed interactions between the two types of

33



relations. In addition, these specialized data sets
were evaluated in terms of agreement and accu-
racy. Relations were classified into two causal cat-
egories (CAUSAL, NO-REL) and three temporal
categories (BEFORE, AFTER, NO-REL). In re-
gard to the evaluation, Betherd et al. pointed out
that the classification was coarse-grained, and that
reanalysis would have to be performed with more
fine-grained relations.

Inui et al. (2005) characterized causal expres-
sions in Japanese text and built Japanese corpus
with tagged causal relations. However, usages
such as that illustrated in (2) and interactions be-
tween temporal relations and causal relations were
not analyzed.

Tamura (2012) linguistically analyzed temporal
and causal relations and pointed out that in rea-
son/purpose constructions in Japanese, the event
time indicated by the tense sometimes contradicts
the actual event time, and that the information nec-
essary to recognize the order between events lies
in the choice of the fact and the epistemic levels
(we will come back to these notions in the sec-
tion 3.4), and the explicit or implicit meaning of
a sentence in the causal expressions in Japanese.
Furthermore, some causal expressions in Japanese
are free from the absolute and relative tense sys-
tems, and both the past and non-past forms can be
freely used in main and subordinate clauses (Chin,
1984) (an example is given in the next section). In
other words, temporal relations are not always re-
solved earlier than causal relations, and therefore
we should resolve temporal relations and causal
relations simultaneously.

Asher et al. (2003) proposed SDRT in order to
account for cases where discourse relations affect
the truth condition of sentences. Because tempo-
ral relations constrain causal relations, the explicit
or implicit meaning of a sentences and the epis-
temic level information affects preceding and fol-
lowing temporal relations in causal expressions in
Japanese, recognition also affects causal relations.
Therefore, the annotation of both causal relations
and discourse relations in corpora is expected to be
useful for CRE. Moreover, which characteristics
(such as tense, actual event time, time when the
event is recognized, meaning and structure of the
sentence and causal relations) will serve as input
and which of them will serve as output depends on
the time and place. Therefore, we should also take
into account discourse relations together with tem-

poral and causal relations. We can create special-
ized data sets for evaluating these types of infor-
mation together by annotating text with discourse,
temporal and causal relations.

However, discourse relations of SDRT are not
distributed into discourse relations and temporal
relations, and as a result the classification of labels
becomes unnecessarily complex. Therefore, it is
necessary to rearrange discourse relations as in the
following example.

(3) Inu-wa
dog-NOM

niwa-o
garden-ACC

kakemawatta.
run-past

Neko-wa
cat-NOM

kotatu-de
kotatsu.heater-LOC

marukunatte-ita.
be.curled.up-past
‘The dog ran in the garden. The cat was
curled up in the kotatsu heater.’

This pair of sentences is an antithesis, so we an-
notate it with the “Contrast” label in SDRT. On the
other hand, the situation described in the first sen-
tence overlaps with that of the second sentence, so
we annotate this pair of sentences with the “Back-
ground” label as well. Though there are many
cases in which we can annotate a sentence with
discourse relations in this way, dividing temporal
relations from discourse relations as in this study
allows us to avoid overlapping discourse relations.

This study was performed with the aim to rear-
range SDRT according to discourse relations, tem-
poral relations and causal relations separately, and
we generated specialized data sets according to
our methodology. In addition, occasionally it is
necessary to handle the actual event time and the
time when the event was recognized individually.
An example is given below.

(4) Asu
tomorrow

tesuto-ga
exam-NOM

aru-node,
take.place-nonpast-because,

kyoo-wa
today-TOP

benkyoo-suru-koto-ni
to.study-DAT

sita.
decide-past

‘Because there will be an exam tomorrow,
I decided to study today.

Before we evaluate the consequent kyoo-wa
benkyoo-suru-koto-ni sita (‘I decided to study to-
day’), we should recognize the fact of the an-
tecedent Asu tesuto-ga aru (‘there will be an exam
tomorrow’). Whether we deal with the actual

34



Label Description
Precedence(A,B) End time (A) < start time (B)

In other words, event A temporally precedes event B.
Overlap(A,B) Start time (A) < end time (B) ≤ end time (B) < end time (A)，

In other words, event A temporally overlaps with event B.
Subsumption(A,B) Start time (A) ≤ end time (B) & End time (A) ≤ end time (B)，

In other words, event A temporally subsumes event B.

Table 1: Temporal relations list

Level Description
Cause(A,B) The event in A and the event in B are in a causal relation.

Table 2: Causal relation

event time or the time when the event was recog-
nized depends on the circumstances. Therefore,
we decided to annotate text at the fact and epis-
temic levels in parallel to account for such a dis-
tinction.

3 Methodology

We extended and refined SDRT and developed our
own methodology for annotating main and subor-
dinate clauses, phrases located between main and
subordinate clauses (e.g., continuative conjuncts
in Japanese), two consecutive sentences and two
adjoining nodes with a discourse relation. We also
defined our own method for annotating proposi-
tions with causal and temporal relations. The re-
sult of tagging example (5a) is shown in (5b).

(5) a. Kaze-ga
wind-NOM

huita.
blow-past

Harigami-ga
poster-NOM

hagare,
come.off-past

tonda.
flow-past

‘The wind blew. A poster came off and
flew away.’

b. [Precedence(π1,π3),Explanation(π1,π3),
Cause(π1,π3)],
[Precedence(π2,π4), Explanation(π2,π4),
Cause(π2,π4)]
π2π1Kaze-ga huita.
π4π3Harigami-ga hagare, tonda.

The remainder of this section is structured as fol-
lows. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 deal with temporal and
causal relations, respectively. Section 3.3 covers
discourse relations, and Section 3.4 describes the
fact level and the epistemic level.

3.1 Temporal Relations

We consider the following three temporal relations
(Table 1). We assume that they represent the rela-
tions between two events in propositions and indi-
cate a start time and an end time. In addition, we
also assume that (start time of e) ≤ (end time of e)
for all events. Based on this, the temporal place-
ment of each two events is limited to the three re-
lations in Table 1.

In this regard, Japanese non-past predicates
occasionally express habitually repeating events,
which have to be distinguished from events occur-
ring later than the reference point. In this paper, in
annotating the scope of the repetition, habitually
repeating events are described as in the following
example.

(6) a. Taiin-go,
After.retirement

{kouen-o
park-ACC

hasiru}repeat
to.run

yoo-ni-site-iru.
have.a.custom

‘After retiring, I have a custom to {run
in the park}repeat.’

b. {supootu-inryo-o
Sports.drink-ACC

nonda-ato,
drink-past-after

kouen-o
park-ACC

hasiru}repeat
run

yoo-ni-site-iru.
have.a.custom

‘I have a custom that {I run in the park
after having a sports drink}repeat.’

3.2 Causal Relations

We tag pairs of clauses with the following relation
(Table 2) only if there is a causal relation between
events in the proposition. By annotating text with
discourse relations, a fact and epistemic level and
temporal relations, we can describe the presence

35



Label Description
Alternation(A,B) “A or B”, where the pair of A and B corresponds to logical disjunction (∨).
Consequence(A,B) “If A then B”, where the pair of A and B corresponds to logical implication (→).
Elaboration(A,B) B explains A in detail in the discourse relation.

B of the event is part of A of the event.
Narration(A,B) A and B are in the same situation, and

the pair of A and B corresponds to logical conjunction (∧).
Explanation(A,B) The discourse relation indicates A as a cause and B as an effect.
Contrast(A,B) “A but B”, where A and B are paradoxical.
Commentary(A,B) The content of A is summarized or complemented in B.

Table 3: Discourse relations list

SDRT Our methodology Rules
Alternation(A,B) Alternation(A,B) NA
Consequence(A,B) Consequence(A,B) NA
Elaboration(A,B) Elaboration(A,B) ∀ A,B (Elaboration(A,B)→ Subsumption (A,B))
Narration(A,B) Precedence(A,B) ∧ Narration(A,B) NA
Background(A,B) Subsumption(A,B) ∧ Narration(A,B) NA
Result(A,B) Explanation(A,B)
Explanation(A,B) Cause(A,B) ∀ A,B (Cause(A,B)→ Temp rel(A,B)) 1
Contrast(A,B) Contrast(A,B) NA
Commentary(A,B) Commentary(A,B) NA

Table 4: Correspondence between SDRT and our methodology

of causation in finer detail than (Betherd et al.,
2008).

3.3 Discourse Relations
We consider the following discourse relations
based on SDRT (Table 3). There are also relations
that impose limitations on temporal and causal re-
lations (Table 4). The way temporal, causal and
discourse relations affect each other is described
below together with their correspondence to the
relations in SDRT. Bold-faced entries represent
relations integrated in SDRT in our study.
Such limitations on temporal relations provides in-
formation for making a decision in terms of tem-
poral order and cause/effect in the “de-tensed”
sentence structure 2 (Chin, 1984) in Japanese. An
example is given below.

(7) Kinoo
yesterday

anna-ni
that.much

taberu-kara,
eat-past-because

kyoo
today

onaka-ga
stomach-NOM

itaku
ache-cont

natta-nda.
become-noda

2Temp rel(A,B) ≡
Precedence(A,B)∨ Overlap(A,B)∨ Subsumption(A,B)

3According to (Chin, 1984), “de-tensed” is a relation
whereby the phrase has lost the meaning contributed by tense,
namely, the logical aspect of the semantic relation between an
antecedent and a consequent has eliminated the aspect tem-
poral relation between them.

‘Because you ate that much yesterday, you
have a stomachache today.’

(7) [Precedence(π1,π3),Explanation(π1,π3),
Cause(π1,π3)],
[Precedence(π2,π4),Explanation(π2,π4),
Cause(π2,π4)]
π2π1Kinoo anna-ni taberu-kara,
π4π3kyoo onaka-ga itaku natta-nda.

This is a sentence where the subordinate clause is
in non-past tense and the main clause is in past
tense. Then, we may mistakenly interpret the
event in the subordinate clause as occurring after
the event of the main clause. However, we can de-
termine that in fact it occurred before the event in
the main clause based on the rule imposed by the
“Cause” relation.

3.4 Fact Level and Epistemic Level
A fact level proposition refers to an event and
its states, while an epistemic level proposition
refers to speaker’s recognizing event of a described
event. In Japanese, the latter form is often marked
by the suffix noda that attaches to all kinds of
predicates (which may also be omitted). Both
overt and covert noda introduce embedded struc-
tures, and we annotate them in such a way that a
fact level proposition is embedded in an epistemic
level proposition.

Semantically, the most notable difference be-
tween the two levels is that the tense in the former

36



represents the time that an event takes place, while
the tense in the latter represents the time that the
speaker recognizes the event.

This distinction between the two types of propo-
sitions is carried over to the distinction between
the fact level and the epistemic level causal rela-
tions. We annotate the former by the tag “Cause”
and the latter by the tag “Explanation”.

In Japanese, a causal marker such as node (a
continuation form of noda) and kara are both used
in the fact level and the epistemic level. The fact
level causality is a causal relation between the
two events, while the epistemic level causality is a
causal relation between the two recognizing events
of the two events mentioned. Therefore, in the
causal construction, it happens that the precedence
relations between the subordinate and the matrix
clauses in the fact level and the epistemic level do
not coincide, as in the following example.

(8) Kesa
this.morning

nani-mo
nothing-NOM

hoodoo-sare-nakatta-node,
report-passive-NEG.past-because,
kinoo-wa
yesterday-TOP

mebosii
notable

ziken-wa
events-NOM

nakatta-noda.
be-NEG-noda
‘Because nothing was reported this morn-
ing, there were no notable event yester-
day.’

[Precedence(π3,π1),Explanation(π3,π1),
Cause(π3,π1)],
[Precedence(π2,π4), Explanation(π2,π4),
Cause(π2,π4)]
π2π1Kesa nani-mo hoodoo-sare-nakatta-
node, π4π3kinoo-wa mebosii
ziken-wa nakatta-noda.

The temporal relation at the fact level is that π3
precedes π1. By contrast, that at the epistemic
level is that π2 precedes π4. By describing the
relation between π1 and π3 and that between π2
and π4 separately, we can reproduce the relation-
ship at both levels.

3.5 Merits

We defined our methodology for annotating text
fragments at both the fact and epistemic levels in
parallel with temporal, causal and discourse re-
lations. Therefore, we can generate specialized

data sets that enable estimating the causality in the
fact and epistemic levels by various cues (such as
known causal relations, truth condition, conjunc-
tions and temporal relations between sentences or
clauses).

In addition, we can say that causal expressions
without causation are not in a causal relation (and
vice versa) by annotating text with both discourse
and causal relations.

4 Results

We applied our methodology to 66 sentences from
the Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written
Japanese (BCCWJ) (Maekawa, 2008). The sen-
tences were decomposed by one annotator, and la-
bels were assigned to the decomposed segments
by two annotators. During labeling, we used the
labels presented in Section 3. Our methodology
was developed based on 96 segments (38 sen-
tences), and by using the other 100 segments (28
sentences), we evaluated the inter-annotator agree-
ment as well as the frequencies of decomposition
and times of annotation. The agreement for 196
segments generated from 28 sentences amounted
to 0.68 and was computed as follows (the kappa
coefficient for them amounted to 0.79).

Agreement = Agreed labels/Total labels

Analyzing more segments in actual text and im-
proving our methodology can lead to further im-
provement in terms of agreement.

Table 5 shows the distribution of labels into seg-
ments in our study.

label segments
Total fact epistemic

Precedence 25 14 11
Overlap 7 4 3
Subsumption 61 29 32
total 94 47 47
Cause 14 8 6
total 14 8 6
Alternation – – –
Consequence 6 3 3
Elaboration 4 2 2
Narration 66 33 33
Explanation 14 7 7
Contrast 2 1 1
Commentary 94 47 47

Table 5: Distribution of labels in segments in our
study

37



We can see from Table 5 that “Narration” was
the most frequent one, while “Alternation” never
appeared. As s result, we can assume that frequent
relations will be separated from non-frequent rela-
tions. So far, all the relations are either frequent or
non-frequent. We should re-analyze the data with
more samples again.

When the methodology was applied to 28 sen-
tences, a total of 100 and an average of 3.57 seg-
ments were derived. This is the number of seg-
ments at both the fact and epistemic levels. With-
out dividing the fact and epistemic levels, an aver-
age of 1.79 segments were derived.

On average, 11 segments per hour were tagged
in our study. Although we should evaluate the va-
lidity after having computed the average decom-
position times, it is assumed that our methodology
is valid when focusing only on labeling.

5 Discussion

We analyzed errors in this annotation exercise.
The annotators often found difficulties in judging
temporal relations in the following two cases: (1)
the case where it was difficult to determine the
scope of the segments pairing and (2) the case
where formalization of lexical meaning is difficult.

In regard to the first case, how to divide seg-
ments sometimes affects temporal relations. In the
following example, consider the temporal relation
between the first and the second sentences.

(9) Marason-ni
marathon-DAT

syutuzyoo-sita.
participate-past.

sonohi-wa
that.day-TOP

6zi-ni
6:00-at

kisyoo-si,
get.up-past,

10zi-ni
10:00-at

totyoo-kara
Metropolitan.Government-from

syuppatu-site,
leave-past,

12zi-ni
12:00-at

kansoo-sita.
finish.running-past.
‘I participated in marathon. I got up at
6:00 on that day and left the Metropolitan
Government at 10:00 and finished running
at 12:00.’

When we focus on the first segment of the sec-
ond sentnce (‘I got up at 6:00’), its relation to the
first sentence appears to be “Precedence”. How-
ever, if we consider the second and the third seg-
ments as the same segment, their relation to the
first sentence appears to be “Subsumption”.

Therefore, we should establish clear criteria for
the segmentation. Although we currently adopts a
criterion that we chose smaller segment in unclear
cases, there still remain 9 unclear cases (tempo-
ral:5, discourse:4).

One of the reason why Kappa coefficient marks
relatively high score is that we only compare the
labels and ignore the difference in the segmenta-
tions. Criteria for deciding the segment scope in
paring segments will improve our methodology.

The second case is exemplified by the tempo-
ral relation between the subordinate clause and the
main clause in the following sentence.

(10) Migawari-no
scapegoat-GEN

tomo-o
friend-ACC

sukuu-tame-ni
to.save

hasiru-noda.
run-noda.

‘I run to save my friend who is my scape-
goat.’

If we consider that the saving event only spans
over the very moment of saving, the relation be-
tween the clauses appears to be “Precedence”.
However, if we consider that running event is a
part of the saving event, the relation between the
clauses is “Subsumption”.

Thus, judging lexical meaning with respect to
when events start and end involves some difficul-
ties and they yield delicate cases in judging tem-
poral relations.

These problems are mutually related, and the
first problem arises when the components of a lex-
ical meaning are displayed explicitly in the sen-
tence, and the second problem arises when they
are implicit.

6 Conclusions

We analyzed and proposed our methodology based
on SDRT for building a more precise Japanese
corpus for CRE. In addition, we annotated 196
segments (66 sentences) in BCCWJ with tempo-
ral relations, discourse relations, causal relations
and fact level and epistemic level propositions and
evaluated the annotations of 100 segments (28 sen-
tences) in terms of agreement, frequencies and
times for decompositions. We reported and an-
alyzed the result and discussed problems of our
methodology.

The discrepancies of decomposition patterns
were not yet empirically compared in the present
study and will be investigated in future work.

38



References
Asher N. and Lascaridas A. 2003. Logics of Con-

versation: Studies in Natural Language Processing.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Bethard S., Corvey W. and Kilingenstein S. 2008.
Building a Corpus of Temporal Causal Structure.
LREC 2008, Marrakech, Morocco.

Chin M. 1984. Tense of the predicates for clauses
of compound statement binded by conjunctive parti-
cle -”Suru-Ga” and ”Shita-Ga”, ”Suru-Node” and
”Shita-Node” etc.-. Language Teaching Research
Article.

Inui T., Inui K. and Matsumoto Y. 2005. Acquir-
ing Causal Knowledge from Text Using the Con-
nective Marker Tame. ACM Transactions on Asian
Language Information Processing (ACM-TALIP),
Vol.4, Issue 4, Special Issue on Recent Advances
in Information Processing and Access for Japanese,
435–474.

Inui T., Inui K. and Matsumoto Y. 2003. What Kinds
and Amounts of Causal Knowledge Can Be Aquired
from Text by Using Connective Markers as Clues.
The 6th International Conference on Discovery Sci-
ence (DS-2003), 180–193.

Inui T., Takamura H. and Okumura M. 2007. Latent
Variable Models for Causal Knowledge Acquisition.
Alexander Gelbukh(Ed.), Computational Linguistics
and Intelligent Text Processing, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 4393:85–96.

Maekawa K. 2008. Balanced Corpus of Contemporary
Written Japanese. In Proceedings of the 6th Work-
shop on Asian Language Resources (ALR), 101―
102.

Riaz M. and Girju R. 2013. Toward a Bet-
ter Understanding of Causality between Verbal
Events:Extraction and Analysis of the Causal Power
of Verb-Verb Associations. In Proceedings of the
SIGDIAL 2013 Conference, Metz, France 21–30.

Tamura S. 2012. Causal relations and epistemic per-
spectives: Studies on Japanese causal and purposive
constructions. Doctoral thesis, Kyoto University.

39


