



















































Detecting linguistic idiosyncratic interests in autism using distributional semantic models


Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality, pages 46–50,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Detecting linguistic idiosyncratic interests in autism
using distributional semantic models

Masoud Rouhizadeh†, Emily Prud’hommeaux◦, Jan van Santen†, Richard Sproat§
†Center for Spoken Language Understanding, Oregon Health & Science University

◦Center for Language Sciences, University of Rochester
§ Google, Inc.

{rouhizad,vansantj}@ohsu.edu, emilypx@gmail.com, rws@xoba.com

Abstract

Children with autism spectrum disorder
often exhibit idiosyncratic patterns of be-
haviors and interests. In this paper, we fo-
cus on measuring the presence of idiosyn-
cratic interests at the linguistic level in
children with autism using distributional
semantic models. We model the semantic
space of children’s narratives by calculat-
ing pairwise word overlap, and we com-
pare the overlap found within and across
diagnostic groups. We find that the words
used by children with typical development
tend to be used by other children with typ-
ical development, while the words used
by children with autism overlap less with
those used by children with typical devel-
opment and even less with those used by
other children with autism. These findings
suggest that children with autism are veer-
ing not only away from the topic of the
target narrative but also in idiosyncratic
semantic directions potentially defined by
their individual topics of interest.

1 Introduction

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurode-
velopmental disorder characterized by impaired
communication and social behavior. One of the
core deficits associated with ASD is an intense
preoccupation with a restricted set of interests
(American Psychiatric Association, 2000; Amer-
ican Psychiatric Association, 2013), which can of-
ten be observed in an individual’s tendency to per-
severate on specific, idiosyncratic topics of con-
versation. Because this symptom is explicitly
mentioned among the diagnostic criteria for ASD

used in the DSM-IV and DSM-5, many diagnos-
tic instruments (Lord et al., 2002; Rutter et al.,
2003) require a qualitative assessment of this phe-
nomenon. Instances of perseveration on a partic-
ular topic in the spontaneous spoken language of
children with ASD, however, are not typically ex-
plicitly counted in a clinical setting, making com-
parisons with typically developing children diffi-
cult to quantify.

Expert manual analysis of conversations and
narratives of individuals with ASD has shown that
children and teenagers with autism include signif-
icantly more bizarre and irrelevant content in their
narratives (Loveland et al., 1990; Losh and Capps,
2003) and introduce more abrupt topic changes in
their conversations (Lam et al., 2012) than their
typically developing peers. Automatic detection
of poor topic maintenance has also been explored
using techniques originally developed for infor-
mation extraction (Rouhizadeh et al., 2013). There
has been little work, however, in annotating the
precise direction of the departure from a target
topic. Thus, it is not clear whether children with
ASD are instigating similar topic changes or pur-
suing idiosyncratic directions in their narratives
and conversations consistent with their restricted
interests.

In this paper, we attempt to automatically iden-
tify topic changes and idiosyncratic interests ex-
pressed in the language of children with ASD
by measuring the semantic similarity of narrative
retellings produced by children with and without
ASD. We first use word overlap measures to cal-
culate the semantic similarity between every pos-
sible pair of narratives. We then build three pair-
wise comparison matrices: one comparing pairs of
typically developing (TD) children; one compar-
ing pairs of children with ASD; and a third com-

46



paring pairs consisting of one child with ASD and
one child with TD. We calculate the significance
of the differences between the pairs in the three
matrices using the Monte Carlo method to shuffle
the diagnosis label of each child.

We find that TD children share the greatest
word overlap with one another, while children
with ASD have significantly less word overlap
with TD children and even less word overlap with
other ASD children. These results indicate that
TD children tend to adhere to the target topic in
the narrative retellings, while children with ASD
often stray from the target topic. Furthermore,
the fact that the word choices of an individual
child with ASD seem not to resemble the word
choices of other children with ASD suggests that
when a child with ASD chooses to abandon the
target topic, he or she does so in an idiosyncratic
way. Although these results are only indirect in-
dications of the presence of restricted interests,
the work presented here highlights the potential of
computational language analysis methods for im-
proving our understanding of the social and lin-
guistic deficits associated with the disorder.

2 Data

Participants in this study included 39 children with
typical development (TD) and 21 children with
autism spectrum disorder (ASD). ASD was di-
agnosed via clinical consensus according to the
DSM-IV-TR criteria (American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation, 2000) and the established threshold scores
on two diagnostic instruments: the Autism Di-
agnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) (Lord et
al., 2002), a semi-structured series of activities de-
signed to allow an examiner to observe behaviors
associated with autism; and the Social Communi-
cation Questionnaire (SCQ) (Rutter et al., 2003),
a parental questionnaire. None of the children
in this study met the criteria for a language im-
pairment, and there were no significant between-
group differences in age (mean=6.3) or full-scale
IQ (mean=115.5).

The narrative retelling task analyzed here is the
Narrative Memory subtest of the NEPSY (Kork-
man et al., 1998), a large and comprehensive bat-
tery of tasks that test neurocognitive functioning in
children. The NEPSY Narrative Memory (NNM)
subtest is a narrative retelling test in which the sub-
ject listens to a brief narrative about a boy and his
dog and then must retell the narrative to the ex-

aminer. Under standard administration, the NNM
free recall score is calculated by counting how
many from a set of 17 story elements were used
in a retelling. Following the free recall portion of
the test is the cued recall task, in which the ex-
aminer then asks the subject to provide answers to
questions about all of the story elements that were
omitted in the retelling.

The NNM was administered to each participant
in the study, and each participant’s retelling was
recorded and transcribed. The responses for the
cued recall portion of the subtest were not in-
cluded in this work presented here. There was no
significant difference between the two diagnostic
groups in the standard NNM free recall score.

3 Methods

We expect that two different retellings of the same
source will lie in the same lexico-semantic space.
As a result, they should include high percentage
of overlapping words. When a pair of retellings
has a low word overlap measure, it could be that
one or both retellings include intrusions from un-
related topics. An alternative explanation is that
the subjects recalled a non-overlapping set of story
elements or simply a small set of story elements.
However, since we did not find any significant dif-
ference between the TD and ASD groups in the
standard narrative recall score, we infer that a low
percentage of word overlap indicates a difference
in topic between the two retellings.

3.1 Word overlap measures

In order to calculate the similarity between a pair
of narratives i and j, we use type and token over-
lap measures based on the Jaccard similarity coef-
ficient. Token similarity is defined as the size of
intersection of the words (i.e., the actual number
of tokens in common) in narratives i and j relative
to the size of the union of the words in the two
narratives (i.e., summing over all tokens in both
narratives, the maximum number of instances of
that token in either narrative). Type similarity is
defined as the size of intersection of the types (i.e.,
unique words) in narratives i and j relative to the
size of the union of the types in the two narratives.
For instance, for the following set of words i and
j:

i = {a, b, c, d, c}
j = {a, c, e, c, a, a},

the token intersection is equal to {a, c, c} and

47



Group Means

TD.TD TD.ASD ASD.ASD

Type Overlap .23 .17 .13
Token Overlap .19 .14 .11

Table 3: Word overlap pairwise group means

the token union is {a, a, a, c, c, b, e, d}. The token
overlap similarity between the two sets i and j is
therefore 3/8. The type intersection of i and j is
equal to {a, c} and the type union is {a, c, b, e, d},
yielding a type overlap similarity of 2/5.

3.2 Pairwise similarity matrix

We next build a similarity matrix for the type and
token overlap measures, comparing every possi-
ble pair of children. Every child in the TD and
ASD groups is compared to the children in his own
group (TD.TD and ASD.ASD), as well as the chil-
dren in the other group (TD.ASD). The pairwise
similarity matrix is diagonally symmetrical, and
we thus consider only the top right section of the
matrix above the diagonal in our analysis.

3.3 Monte Carlo permutation

Since we may not have enough information to
make an assumption that the pairwise similarity
measures of all children are from a particular dis-
tribution, we utilize a non-parametric procedure,
the Monte Carlo permutation approach, which is
widely used in non-standard significance testing
situations.

Given the three sub-matrices in the similarity
matrix described above (TD.TD, TD.ASD, and
ASD.ASD), we first calculate for each pair of sub-
matrices (e.g., TD.TD vs ASD.ASD) three statis-
tics that compare all cells in one submatrix with

the cells in other submatrices: the difference be-
tween the means, t-statistics (using the Welch
Two Sample t-test), and w-statistics (using the
Wilcoxon rank sum test). We label these observed
values observed-mean, observed-t, and observed-
w. We next take a large random sample with re-
placement from all possible permutations of the
data by shuffling the diagnosis labels of the chil-
dren 1000 times, and then calculate each of the
three above statistics for each shuffle. Finally, we
determine the number of times the observed values
exceed the values generated by the 1000 shuffles.

4 Results

The comparison of the group means of each of
the three sub-matrices described in Section 3.2
show that TD children have the greatest overlap
with each other; children with ASD have less
word overlap with TD children than TD children
have with one another and even less word over-
lap with other ASD children. The group means
of both type and token overlap are summarized
in Table 3. In addition, examples of overlapping
and non-overlapping terms between the groups are
provided in Tables 1 and 2 respectively.

The level plot of the pairwise token overlap
is shown in figure 1. We see that the TD.TD
sub-matrix has the lightest color, indicating higher
overlap, followed by TD.ASD. The ASD.ASD
submatrix has the darkest color, indicating low
word overlap.

In the next step, we determine the significance
of the group mean differences. As described in
Section 3.3, using the Monte Carlo permutation to
test the significance of the following comparisons:
TD.TD vs ASD.ASD, TD.TD vs TD.ASD, and
TD.ASD vs ASD.ASD. The results of these signif-

Group Top 10 overlapping words

TD.TD shoe, tree, climb, ladder, fall, Pepper, Jim, dog, sister, branch
TD.ASD shoe, tree, Jim, climb, dog, ladder, Pepper, fall, branch, sister

ASD.ASD shoe, tree, Jim, dog, climb, Pepper, ladder, branch, boy, run

Table 1: Top 10 overlapping words between the groups

Group Examples of non-overlapping words

TD.TD coconut, couch, jew, lie, picture, spike, stuff, t-rex, tight, watch
TD.ASD arm, bottom, cousin, doctor, eat, fruit, giant, meat, push, sense

ASD.ASD bite, bridge, crunch, donut, gadget, lizard, microphone, sell, table, vision

Table 2: Examples of non-overlapping words between the groups

48



!"

!"

#$"

#$"

Figure 1: Level plot of the pairwise token overlap
(lighter colors indicate higher overlap)

icance tests are summarized in table 4, and in all
cases the differences are significant at p < 0.05.

5 Conclusions and future work

The methods presented for comparing the lexical
choices made by children with and without ASD
while generating a narrative retelling demonstrate
the utility of language analysis for revealing diag-
nostically interesting information. The low rates
of word overlap between retellings produced by
children with ASD and those produced by typi-
cally developing children suggest that the children
with ASD are having difficulty maintaining the
target topic. Furthermore, the low overlap between
pairs of children with ASD suggests that children
with ASD are not straying from the topic in sim-
ilar ways but are instead exploring topics that are
of idiosyncratic interest.

These findings can be potentially used for
diagnostic purposes in combinations of other

applications of speech and language process-
ing for automated narrative retelling assessment
(Lehr et al., 2013), detection of off-topic words
(Rouhizadeh et al., 2013), and pragmatic deficits
(Prud’hommeaux and Rouhizadeh, 2012). From a
clinical standpoint, diagnostic measures utilizing
these methods for automated evaluation of disor-
dered language could be very useful in diagnosis
and planning interventions.

One major focus of our future work will be to
manually annotate the narrative retellings used in
this study to determine the frequency of topic de-
partures and the nature of these departures. Given
the vocabulary differences seen here, we expect
to find not only that children with ASD are aban-
doning the topic of the source narrative more fre-
quently than children with typical development
but also that the topics they choose to pursue are
related to their own individual specific interests.

A second area we hope to explore is the use
of external resources, such as WordNet, to ex-
pand the set of terms used to calculate word over-
lap. It is perfectly reasonable to expect that people
will use synonyms and paraphrases in their narra-
tive retellings. It is therefore possible that chil-
dren with autism are discussing the appropriate
topic but choosing unusual words within that topic
space in their retellings, which could be consis-
tent with the type of atypical language often ob-
served in children with ASD. By considering se-
mantic overlap rather than simple word overlap,
we may be able to distinguish instances of atypical
language from true examples of poor topic main-
tenance.

Third, we are also interested in applying the
analysis described above to a set of retellings from
seniors with and without mild cognitive impair-
ment, a frequent precursor to dementia. Like chil-
dren with ASD, seniors with dementia are also
more likely to include irrelevant information in

overlap statistic p-values

TD.TD vs ASD.ASD TD.TD vs TD.ASD TD.ASD vs ASD.ASD

Type Overlap
Means .004 .042 .008
t.test .009 .012 .008

Wilcoxon test .004 .002 .002

Token Overlap
Means .012 .034 .028
t.test .014 .022 .022

Wilcoxon test .012 .002 .002

Table 4: Monte Carlo significance test results

49



their narrative retellings. These intrusions, how-
ever, are often informed by real-world knowledge,
and thus may not result in a decrease in measures
of word overlap with narratives produced by unim-
paired individuals.

Finally, we plan to apply our methods to the out-
put of an automatic speech recognition (ASR) sys-
tem rather than manual transcripts. Although the
ASR output is likely to contain many errors, the
fact that our methods focus on content words may
make them robust to the sorts of function word
recognition errors typically produced by ASR sys-
tems.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by NSF grant
#BCS-0826654, and NIH NIDCD grants #R01-
DC007129 and #1R01DC012033-01. Any opin-
ions, findings, conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this publication are those of the au-
thors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the NSF or the NIH.

References
American Psychiatric Association. 2000. DSM-IV-TR:

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor-
ders. American Psychiatric Publishing, Washing-
ton, DC.

American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic
and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).
American Psychiatric Publishing, Washington, DC.

Marit Korkman, Ursula Kirk, and Sally Kemp. 1998.
NEPSY: A developmental neuropsychological as-
sessment. The Psychological Corporation, San An-
tonio.

Yan Grace Lam, Siu Sze, and Susanna Yeung. 2012.
Towards a convergent account of pragmatic lan-

guage deficits in children with high-functioning
autism: Depicting the phenotype using the prag-
matic rating scale. Research in Autism Spectrum
Disorders, 6(2):792–797.

Maider Lehr, Izhak Shafran, Emily Prud’hommeaux,
and Brian Roark. 2013. Discriminative joint model-
ing of lexical variation and acoustic confusion for
automated narrative retelling assessment. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies.

Catherine Lord, Michael Rutter, Pamela DiLavore, and
Susan Risi. 2002. Autism Diagnostic Observation
Schedule (ADOS). Western Psychological Services,
Los Angeles.

Molly Losh and Lisa Capps. 2003. Narrative ability in
high-functioning children with autism or asperger’s
syndrome. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 33(3):239–251.

Katherine Loveland, Robin McEvoy, and Belgin Tu-
nali. 1990. Narrative story telling in autism and
down’s syndrome. British Journal of Developmen-
tal Psychology, 8(1):9–23.

Emily Prud’hommeaux and Masoud Rouhizadeh.
2012. Automatic detection of pragmatic deficits
in children with autism. In Proceedings of the
3rd Workshop on Child, Computer and Interaction
(WOCCI).

Masoud Rouhizadeh, Emily Prud’hommeaux, Brian
Roark, and Jan van Santen. 2013. Distributional
semantic models for the evaluation of disordered
language. In Proceedings of the Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies.

Michael Rutter, Anthony Bailey, and Catherine Lord.
2003. Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ).
Western Psychological Services, Los Angeles.

50


