



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and J D Pawar. Proc. of the 11th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 150–155,
Goa, India. December 2014. c©2014 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

A Sentiment Analyzer for Hindi Using Hindi Senti Lexicon

Raksha Sharma, Pushpak Bhattacharyya
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering

IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India
{raksha,pb}@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract

Supervised approaches have proved their
significance in sentiment analysis task, but
they are limited to the languages, which
have sufficient amount of annotated cor-
pus. Hindi is a language, which is spo-
ken by 4.70% of the world population,
but it lacks a sufficient amount of anno-
tated corpus for natural language process-
ing tasks such as Sentiment Analysis (SA).
With the increase in demand and availabil-
ity of Hindi review websites, an accurate
sentiment analyzer for Hindi has become
a need.

In this paper, we present a bootstrap ap-
proach to extract senti words from Hindi-
WordNet. The approach is designed such
that it minimizes the extraction of the
words with the wrong polarity orientation,
which is a crucial task, because a word can
have positive and negative senses at the
same time. The resultant set of 8061 po-
lar words, we call it Hindi senti lexicon, is
used for sentiment analysis in Hindi. We
get an average accuracy of 87% for sen-
timent analysis in the movie and product
domain.

1 Introduction

In the real world, people find themselves com-
fortable in their national language, both in case
of reading and writing. Hindi is the national lan-
guage of India, spoken and understood almost all
over the country. Keeping this in mind, there is
a tremendous growth in the Hindi review web-
sites1 on the Web. Besides this, a few Hindi lovers
like to post their reviews in Hindi on English
based e-commerce websites also, for example,
we can find Hindi reviews on www.flipkart.com

1hindi.webdunia.com/entertainment/film/review/

or www.homeshop18.com in a big number with
English reviews. Therefore, an efficient senti-
ment analysis system for the Hindi language is
the need of current e-commerce organizations and
their customers.

The general approach of Sentiment Analysis
(SA) is to summarize the semantic polarity (i.e.,
positive or negative) of sentences/documents by
analysis of the orientation of the individual words
(Riloff and Wiebe, 2003; Pang and Lee, 2004;
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2009; Kim and
Hovy, 2004; Takamura et al., 2005). In the ab-
sence of sufficient amount of corpora, the most ef-
ficient way of sentiment analysis is to rely on the
words from sentiment lexicons as a key feature.
There are many sentiment lexicons for English
language, for example, subjectivity lexicon2 by
Wiebe and a list of positive and negative opinion
words3 by Liu, but there are not many instances of
sentiment lexicons in Hindi that can build an ef-
ficient sentiment analysis system for Hindi. The
main contributions of this paper are:

• A Hindi senti lexicon consisting polar words
of four parts of speech: Adjective, Noun,
Verb and Adverb, generated from extensive
analysis of HindiWordNet4.

• A multi module rule based sentiment analysis
system for Hindi that uses words from Hindi
senti lexicon as a polarity clue.

Our approach that generates Hindi senti lexicon is
an improvement over the approach suggested by
Bakliwal et al. (2012). They used the same source,
that is, HindiWordNet for the polar words extrac-
tion, but their approach was not able to handle the
instances, where a word has senses of both the ori-
entations: positive and negative. A word can have

2http://mpqa.cs.pitt.edu/
3http://www.cs.uic.edu/l̃iub/FBS/sentiment-analysis.html
4Available at: www.cfilt.com150



positive and negative senses at the same time. This
combination is exemplified in figure 1. The ap-
proach of Bakliwal et al.(2012) assumes that all
the senses (synsets) of a source word should re-
ceive the polarity same as the source word, conse-
quently all the words in the synsets should bear the
polarity same as the source word. This assumption
will fetch the words with the wrong polarity orien-
tation. Besides this, their approach considers that
antonyms of a word should receive the opposite
polarity of the source word, but it is not always
true. There are the instances, where antonym and
the word have the same polarity orientation. One
such instance of this property is given in figure 2.
In this paper, we present an approach that provides
a very vigilant traversal of the HindiWordNet for
the purpose of generation of senti lexicon. Our
approach also implements that synonyms (words
from a synset) must receive the same polarity, but
it is able to distinguish among the positive and
negative senses of the same word.

Figure 1: Synsets of the same word with opposite
polarities

Results show that the sentiment analysis system
based on sentiment lexicon generated by the pro-
posed bootstrap approach outperforms the Hindi
sentiment analysis system presented by Bakliwal
et al.(2012) for the same data set. By considering
four parts of speech as a source of polar words,
our sentiment lexicon covers more range of polar
words. We achieve an accuracy of 89.45% in the
product domain and 85% in the movie domain.

Figure 2: Antonyms with the same polarity as the
source/index word

Section 2 helps illustrate the generation of senti
lexicon from HindiWordNet. Section 3 provides

the statistics related to sentiment lexicon obtained
as output. Section 4 expands on the the rule based
classification algorithm that is used to find the
overall polarity orientation of the document. Sec-
tion 5 illustrates the results achieved for Sentiment
analysis system. Sections 6 and 7 discuss related
work and conclusion.

2 Identification of Polar Words from
HindiWordNet

All the senses of a word may not necessarily be
polar. In this section, we focus on the extraction
of polar words from HindiWordNet.

2.1 Why HindiWordNet?

We find HindiWordNet the most efficient resource
for generation of senti lexicon. HindiWordNet is
the result of manual identification of all the senses
of the word W , hence it is very accurate in terms
of relations among the words. We give a formal
characterization of HindiWordNet. A WordNet is
a word sense network. A word-synset network N
is a triple (W, S, ε), where W is a finite set of words,
S is a finite set of synsets, ε is a set of undirected
edges to link synsets of words, that is, ε ⊆ W ×
S. Each synset in the Hindi WordNet is linked with
other synsets through the well-known semantic re-
lations of hypernymy, hyponymy, meronymy, tro-
ponymy, antonymy, entailment etc.

In HindiWordNet, the words are grouped in a
synset according to a lexical concept, that is, syn-
onymy. Two words that can be interchanged in a
context are synonymous in that context. We ob-
serve that the synonymy relation is the most spe-
cific candidate for lexicon generation. The other
semantic relations fetch the non polar words on
expansion. This synonymy property assures that
if we know the polarity orientation of a word in
the synset, the same polarity orientation can be
assigned to all the words in the synset. Figure 3
exemplified the inference of polarity orientation
from a seed (index) word to the whole synset.

2.2 A Bootstrap Approach for Polar Words
Identification

The process is based on the phenomenon that if we
know the polarity orientation of a word, the same
polarity orientation can be assigned to a synony-
mous word. Therefore, we start with two seed sets:
positive (Each word has polarity value: +1) and
negative (Each word has polarity value: -1). The151



Figure 3: Polarity identification from a seed word to the whole synset

seed (index) words are manually identified polar
words.

For each index word from seed set, we extract
all the senses, considering they all will have the
same polarity orientation as the index word, but
there are instances where a word can have both
positive and negative senses. To assure the rejec-
tion of opposite polarity sense, we extract all the
words that belong to the sense and check the pres-
ence of any word in the opposite polarity seed-set
or lexicon. For example, for a positive index word,
we look into the negative seed-set or lexicon. For
the first iteration, only seed-set is available for this
check, in further iterations it becomes lexicon. If
any word from the extracted sense is found in the
opposite polarity lexicon, discard the sense and re-
peat the process for the next sense of the index
word, else insert the words into the lexicon having
polarity orientation of index word.

The decision about the discarded sense will re-
main pending till the word from the sense, which
is found in the opposite polarity lexicon encoun-
ters as an index word. The whole process will be
repeated for the newly added words till no new
word is added in the lexicons. Once the process
stops, it results into two separate lexicons: posi-
tive and negative lexicons. We combine these two
as Hindi senti lexicon. The whole process is de-
picted in figure 4.

Objective Sense (synset): A polar index word
may also have objective sense. To minimize the
extraction of objective synsets, we analyzed the
behavior of the words in a synset comprehensively.
The words in a synset in HindiWordNet are ar-
ranged in the order of their frequency of usage.
The words, which are at the head of the synset
(most frequently used) fetch the polar synsets on
further expansions, but the words which are at the
tail of the synset (less frequently used) are prone to
fetch objective synsets on further expansion. The

Figure 4: A bootstrap approach for polar words
identification

152



head words are tightly coupled with polar synsets,
while tail words fetch the polar synsets that can be
extracted from head words, besides this they ex-
tract non polar synsets. To hinder the extraction of
non polar words, we add a restriction that only the
first seven (head) words of a synset will take part
as index word in the next iteration, and the rest will
remain the part of lexicon only. This constant 7 is
selected after experimenting with a range of con-
stants 2 to 10, such that it minimizes the extraction
of the non polar words as well as keeps the lexicon
compact.

3 Hindi Senti Lexicon Statistics

Most of the sentiment lexicons are limited to ad-
jectives and adverbs, but there are many instances
where a noun and verb can bear the polarity. We
apply the same bootstrap approach discussed in
section 2.2 on all four parts of speech, which are
prone to bear polarity. The proposed constrained
approach minimizes the possibility of extraction
of wrong word as polar word. We extracted a
comprehensive list of total 8061 true polar words,
which we name as Hindi senti lexicon. The effi-
cacy of this lexicon is evaluated by implementing
Hindi sentiment analysis system (section 4) in the
movie and product domains.

Number
Adjective Pos:2256 & Neg:2232

Noun Pos:1551 & Neg:1558
Adverb Pos:132 & Neg:94

Verb Pos:83 & Neg:155
Total 8061

Table 1: Number of polar words obtained in dif-
ferent parts of speech

4 A Multi-module Sentiment Analysis
System for Hindi Using Hindi Senti
Lexicon

The Hindi senti lexicon generated by the proposed
bootstrap approach contains polar words from the
four parts of speech. Hence, identification of cor-
rect part of speech of the words in the input doc-
ument, whose polarity has to be determined is the
foremost step. We use Hindi POS tagger tool pro-
vided by CDAC1 to tag the input documents with
part of speech. The implemented rule based sys-
tem is depicted in figure 5.

1Available at: http://nlp.cdacmumbai.in/tools.html

Figure 5: A multi-module sentiment analysis sys-
tem for Hindi using Hindi senti lexicon

The designed SA system provides polarity of
the review document as output. The system pro-
cesses each sentence/line separately, because sen-
tences are the basic units that determine the polar-
ity of the document. The polarity of a sentence is
determined by the analysis of words present in the
sentence. The words in a sentence are observed in
a window of 3 words to include the effect of sev-
eral semantic relations among words, for example,
the phrase “not so comfortable” has negation be-
fore a positive adjective.

The multi-module rule based system decides the
polarity of the window of three words such that if
there is a word from lexicon with matched part of
speech, then the word gets the polarity orientation
as given in senti lexicon. The complete polarity of
window depends on the neighbor words. For this,
the three words window is passed from multiple
modules, depending on the part of speech of the
words.

Module 1: The presence of negation after a po-
lar word in Hindi reverses the orientation of polar-
ity of the word. This module handles the presence
of negation by assigning the reverse polarity of the
polar word to the whole window.

Module 2: The presence of two same polarity
words in a window enhances the polarity of the
posterior polar word. The polarity of the window
is determined by adding the individual polarity of
each word present in the window.153



Module 3: The presence of two opposite po-
larity words together enhances the polarity of the
posterior word (semantic property). If such pat-
tern is observed in the window of three words,
this module assigns double polarity of the poste-
rior word to the whole window.

A few instances from all three modules are de-
picted in figure 6. The ultimate polarity of the doc-
ument is determined by adding up the polarity of
all three words windows of the sentences of the
document.

Figure 6: Modules of the rule based sentiment
analysis system

5 Results of Sentiment Analysis

We validate the efficiency of Hindi senti lexicon
generated from the proposed bootstrap approach
through the implementation of sentiment analysis
(SA) system. We did an extensive validation using
two domains: movie and product. Providing senti-
ment in movie and product domain is a very useful
service in current scenario. Its proof is the pop-
ularity of Hindi review websites and an umpteen
number of Hindi reviews on Web in these two do-
mains.

5.1 Dataset

The movie reviews are manually collected from:
hindi.webdunia.com/entertainment/film/review/.
These reviews are posted by well known critics.
If a reviewer has given below 2.5 (below average)
star then the review is tagged as negative else
the review is tagged as positive. Movie domain
dataset contains 100 positive reviews and 100
negative reviews. The average length of the

review is 50 words. For product domain, we use
the same dataset used by Bakliwal et al. (2012).
The dataset contains 350 negative documents and
350 positive documents.

5.2 Accuracy Obtained

Domain No. of Reviews Accuracy
Movie 200 85

Movie+POS 200 89.5
Product 700 81.4

Product+POS 700 85

Table 2: Average sentiment classification accura-
cies in percentage

Accuracy is calculated as a fraction of correctly
classified documents and total number of docu-
ments. The classification accuracies are depicted
in table 2 . Presence of polar words in the lexicon
from four parts of speech makes it a rich resource
for sentiment analysis task. Improvement in accu-
racy with POS tagging indicates that identification
of correct POS tag helps sentiment analysis sys-
tem. We observe the best accuracy in the movie
domain with POS tagging. We compare the re-
sults obtained using our sentiment lexicon with the
results obtained using graph traversal based sub-
jective lexicon of 8936 words (adjectives and ad-
verbs), presented by Bakliwal et al. (2012) in fig-
ure 7. We observe a significant improvement in
accuracy in both the domains.

Figure 7: Accuracy obtained with our lexicon and
graph traversal based lexicon provided by Bakli-
wal et al.

154



6 Related Work

There are many examples, where a lexical re-
source is used for sentiment analysis in English,
but there are a very few instances of sentiment
analysis in Hindi. Das and Bandyopadhyay (2009)
are the first who report the sentiment analysis in
one of the Indian language, that is, Bengali. Since,
there is a lack of annotated corpus in Bengali also,
their approach was based on sentiment analysis us-
ing subjectivity lexicon. Using the lexicon and a
few other syntactic features , they achieved a pre-
cision of 74.6% and recall of 80.4%.

In case of Hindi, the first work was reported by
Joshi et al. (2010). They created a Hindi Sen-
tiWordNet using English SentiWordNet and link-
ing between English-HindiWordNet. Using their
Hindi SentiWordNet as a lexical resource, they
achieved an accuracy of 60.31% for sentiment
analysis in Hindi. The reason behind the low ac-
curacy is the distribution of polarity value among
the senses of a word in Hindi SentiWordNet, while
the testing corpus was not sense tagged. Getting a
sense tagged corpora is more expensive than get-
ting the corpora. Joshi et al. reported that a su-
pervised sentiment classification is better than re-
source based sentiment classification. They got an
accuracy of 78.14% using unigram based super-
vised classification in Hindi.

In our paper, we get an accuracy which is signif-
icantly higher than the results reported by Joshi et
al. (2010), which indicates that an efficient lexical
resource is a better choice than supervised classi-
fication in case of lack of corpora. Our work has
a close resemblance with the work presented by
Bakliwal et al. (2012). The subjectivity lexicon
reported by them is used to compare the results
(shown in figure 7).

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we present a sentiment lexicon for
Hindi, which is a milestone for sentiment anal-
ysis in a language lacking in annotated corpus.
The proposed bootstrap approach for generation
of sentiment lexicon form HindiWordNet is able
to extract polar words for all four parts of speech:
adjective, noun, adverb and verb.

The senti lexicon obtained from the bootstrap
approach is used to build a multi-module rule
based sentiment analysis system in Hindi. Mul-
tiple modules are embedded to handle the effects
of semantic relations among words on polarity of a

sentence. The resultant sentiment analysis system
is able to produce an average accuracy of 87% for
sentiment analysis in the movie and product do-
main. Besides the betterment of sentiment analy-
sis, the research can be useful for corpora gener-
ation, for creating writing aids for authors and in
natural language generation.

References
Akshat Bakliwal, Piyush Arora, and Vasudeva Varma.

2012. Hindi subjective lexicon: A lexical resource
for hindi polarity classification. In Proceedings of
the Eight International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC).

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Gueorgi Kossinets,
Jon Kleinberg, and Lillian Lee. 2009. How opinions
are received by online communities: A case study
on amazon.com helpfulness votes. In Proceedings
of the 18th International Conference on World Wide
Web, WWW ’09, pages 141–150, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Amitava Das and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2009. Sub-
jectivity detection in english and bengali: A crf-
based approach. Proceeding of ICON.

Aditya Joshi, AR Balamurali, and Pushpak Bhat-
tacharyya. 2010. A fall-back strategy for sentiment
analysis in hindi: a case study. Proceedings of the
8th ICON.

Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2004. Determin-
ing the sentiment of opinions. In Proceedings of
the 20th international conference on Computational
Linguistics, page 1367. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2004. A sentimental educa-
tion: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summa-
rization based on minimum cuts. In Proceedings of
the 42Nd Annual Meeting on Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, ACL ’04, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning ex-
traction patterns for subjective expressions. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 conference on Empirical meth-
ods in natural language processing, EMNLP ’03,
pages 105–112, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Hiroya Takamura, Takashi Inui, and Manabu Okumura.
2005. Extracting semantic orientations of words us-
ing spin model. In Proceedings of the 43rd An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, ACL ’05, pages 133–140, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

155


