



















































Measuring the Public Accountability of New Modes of Governance


Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Language Technologies and Computational Social Science, pages 38–43,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Measuring the Public Accountability of
New Modes of Governance

Bruno Wueest
Institute of Political Science

University of Zurich
wueest@ipz.uzh.ch

Gerold Schneider
Institute of Computational Linguistics

University of Zurich
gschneid@ifi.uzh.ch

Michael Amsler
Institute of Computational Linguistics

University of Zurich
mamsler@ifi.uzh.ch

Abstract
We present an encompassing research en-
deavour on the public accountability of
new modes of governance in Europe. The
aim of this project is to measure the
salience, tonality and framing of regula-
tory bodies and public interest organisa-
tions in newspaper coverage and parlia-
mentary debates over the last 15 years.
In order to achieve this, we use language
technology which is still underused in po-
litical science text analyses. Institution-
ally, the project has emerged from a col-
laboration between a computational lin-
guistics and a political science department.

1 Introduction

The institutionalization of the regulatory state in
Europe entailed new modes of governance such
as transgovernmental networks between officials
and non-state authorities or the involvement of pri-
vate corporations (e.g. rating agencies) in the pol-
icy processes (Gilardi, 2005; Abbott and Snidal,
2008). At the subnational level, the emergence
of regulatory agencies and public-private partner-
ships spreading across metropolitan regions have
come to challenge traditional state institutions
(Kelleher and Lowery, 2009). Since these new
modes of governance organize political authority
along functional rather than territorial lines, many
observers are worried about their potential “demo-
cratic deficit” (Dahl, 1994; Follesdal and Hix,
2006; Keohane et al., 2009). In response to these
considerations, scholars usually point to the ad-
ministrative and professional accountability mech-
anisms of governmental and parliamentary over-
sight as well as judicial review (Majone, 2000;

Lodge, 2002; Busuioc, 2009). Other, more in-
formal accountability mechanisms such as media
coverage and public involvement, in contrast, have
been either neglected, dismissed as scarcely rele-
vant or dealt with only in comparative case stud-
ies (Maggetti, 2012). This is surprising, given that
public communication plays an ever more deci-
sive role for setting the political agenda and estab-
lishing transparency of policy making in modern
democratic societies (Walgrave et al., 2008; Koop-
mans and Statham, 2010; Müller, forthcoming).
With respect to the public accountability of new
modes of governance, the media can thus be ex-
pected to constitute a key intermediary variable for
the progressive formalization and institutionaliza-
tion of voluntary private rules through reputational
mechanisms (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2006).

This paper is structured as follows. In section 2
we present our core research question, in section
3 we summarize our research methods, and in sec-
tion 4 we briefly present a pilot study.

2 Research Question

It is important to ask whether and to what ex-
tent public communication systematically exposes
new modes of governance to public accountabil-
ity. More precisely, the project’s ambition is to
determine how much attention the media and par-
liamentary debates dedicate to survey the regula-
tory bodies and public interest organizations un-
der scrutiny, whether they watch these actors crit-
ically, and whether they report on these actors in
terms of frames which are conductive to their pub-
lic accountability, e.g. norm and rule compliance,
transparency, efficiency or responsiveness to pub-
lic demands.

38



3 Methodology

To answer these questions, the project implements
approaches developed in computational linguistics
and web automation in order to collect and classify
big text data at the European level (European and
internationally relevant newspapers), the domes-
tic level in four countries (newspapers in the U.K.,
France, Germany and Switzerland), and the sub-
national level in eight metropolitan areas (parlia-
mentary debates and newspapers relevant for Lon-
don, Birmingham, Paris, Lyon, Berlin, Stuttgart,
Berne and Zurich). The project (1) starts from an
encompassing gazetteer of actors involved in the
new modes of governance in the areas and coun-
tries mentioned above, (2) uses application pro-
gramming interfaces (API) and webscraping tech-
niques to establish a large representative text cor-
pus in English, French and German, (3) calculates
the salience of the actors of interest by means of
named entity recognition, coreference resolution
and keyword detection, (4) applies sentiment de-
tection and opinion mining to estimate the tonality
of these actors, (5) uses relation mining methods
(Schneider et al., 2009) to detect interactions and
types of interactions between the entities of inter-
est, and (6) intends to automate the recognition of
media frames used in the context of these actors by
identifying hidden topics via latent semantic anal-
ysis (LSA) (McFarlane, 2011; Odijk et al., 2014).

As points 3-6 provide key research challenges,
we will discuss them in more detail in the fol-
lowing subsections. Before that, we present an
overview of our current pipeline.

3.1 Pipeline

The pipeline consists of several components
chained together in a modular way (see Figure 1).
This provides us with the possibility to exchange
components on demand. First, data acquisition is
done via the use of an API to the media content
database (e.g. LexisNexis). This allows us to fully
automate the retrieval and storage of the media
documents.

At a second stage, we employ a full natural lan-
guage processing chain which includes morpho-
logical analysis, tagging, lemmatizing, and depen-
dency parsing. On this basis, we then conduct sev-
eral more layers of analysis. On the one hand, we
use the result of the preprocessing chain for coref-
erence resolution and sentiment analysis as well
as relation mining. On the other hand, we also

integrate further tools such as named entity recog-
nition and LSA which can be applied on the full
text or corpus level. The thus enriched data is then
aggregated and stored in a database.

Figure 1: Scheme of pipeline

Finally, the actual data analysis can be con-
ducted by querying the database, based on the al-
ready available information or an adapted setting
suitable to the requirements of the media content
analysis.

3.2 Salience, Named Entities and
Coreferences

One of the main metrics of interest is the salience
of the entities. Therefore, a reliable detection of
the entities in the articles is a pivotal task. Fur-
thermore it is crucial to find those occurences of
entities in the text which are not directly detectable
by using a gazetter, since journalists often use ref-
erences to the entities in the same article. Hence,
we will integrate coreference resolution (Klenner
and Tuggener, 2011) into our pipeline. In addi-
tion, we will also create a resource which will
allow us to integrate external information on the
entities, thus increasing the performance of the
coreference resolution. For example, politicians
are often mentioned with their name, their func-
tion (e.g. National Council), their party affiliation,
their age, or a combination of such attributes. To-
gether with the metadata of the media documents
(media source, and time of publication) it is then
possible to calculate these attributes and possible
combinations and include them in the coreference
resolution module in order to increase both preci-
sion and recall.

3.3 From Sentiment Detection to Opinion
Mining

Sentiment analysis and opinion mining are re-
search areas in computational linguistics which
have received growing attention in the last decade
(Pang and Lee, 2008; Liu and Zhang, 2012). In or-
der to detect the tonality in the media coverage to-

39



wards the actors under scrutiny, we use a lexicon-
based compositional sentiment analysis system
component similar to Taboada et al. (2011). How-
ever, our approach is additionally based on the out-
put of the full dependency parse and the results of
the named entity recognition and coreference res-
olution. This will provide us with the ability to
perform target-specific tonality calculation.

In addition to the mere calculation of sentiment
or tonality over a whole article, our task includes
the detection of sentiment on the sentence level
and in respect to certain targets (i.e. entities). An
additional challenge is to detect quotations includ-
ing their sources and targets, since they may reveal
the actors’ most opinionated stances towards each
other (Balahur et al., 2009). From this perspec-
tive, opinion mining can be seen as a sister disci-
pline to sentiment analysis, which we can employ
to map utterances of actors towards other actors,
or towards specific political topics, stepping from
classical sentiment detection to relation and opin-
ion mining. We will focus on high precision as-
signment of the source of the statement.

It is important to note that the detection and
determination of sentiment and opinion in me-
dia documents is a challenging endeavour since
it differs in many ways from the task of previ-
ous research which has mostly considered reviews
and other clearly opinionated text (Balahur et al.,
2010). It will therefore also be necessary to adapt
the sentiment analysis system to the domain of
(political) news text and to use advanced tech-
niques to match fine-grained targets and the en-
tity to which they belong. For example, it should
be possible to assign statements of a spokesperson
to the institution he or she represents. However,
we can build on existing research, since such a
mapping can be considered similar to aspect-based
opinion mining (Zhang and Liu, 2014).

3.4 Relation Mining

In well-resourced areas such as biomedical rela-
tion mining, the detection of interactions between
entities such as genes and proteins or drugs and
diseases is an established research focus. Training
resources are abundant, and several systems have
been evaluated in competitive challenges. Polit-
ical science texts are typically less richly anno-
tated. However, it is also possible to learn pat-
terns expressing interactions from lean document-
level annotation, by using distance-learning meth-

ods. If a document is annotated as containing the
key actors A and B, then all syntactic connec-
tions found in that document between A and B can
be assumed to provide patterns typically express-
ing interactions. Such approaches have been used
in biomedicine (Rinaldi et al., 2012) and can be
ported to the political domain.

3.5 Media Frames

Associative Framing (van Atteveldt et al., 2008)
is based on measuring co-occurrence in large con-
text windows. His suggested association measure
is also different, he uses the conditional probabil-
ity of seeing concept 1 (c1) in the context of con-
cept 2 (c2), p(c1|c2). Sahlgren (2006) describes
how short context windows tend to detect syntag-
matic relations like collocations, while large con-
text windows detect paradigmatic relations. In van
Atteveldt et al. (2008), concepts are basically key-
words, while we will use vector space models,
which allow one to automatically detect concepts.
In vector space model approaches, each word is
defined by the sum of its contexts, and words
which have very similar contexts are clustered into
a concept. There are many variants of this ap-
proach: in singular-value decomposition (SVD) or
latent semantic analysis (LSA) approaches (Deer-
wester et al., 1990), the original very high dimen-
sional space is reduced to fewer dimensions. In
Word Space (Schütze, 1998) each word is defined
recursively, by the contexts of its contexts, using
an observation window of up to 100 words be-
fore and after the target word. Rothenhäusler and
Schütze (2009) have shown that approaches using
syntactic relations instead of large context win-
dows can even perform better.

In the political communication literature, the
definition of frames is contested. Matthes and
Kohring (2008) thus suggest a bottom-up, data-
driven and interactive method which on the one
hand offers the possibility to correct and guide au-
tomatic approaches as has been exemplified by Hu
et al. (2011), on the other hand the rigid consis-
tency of automatic approaches can also add new
insights for data interpretation.

4 Pilot Study

As a short glimpse at the potential of our research
we present first data from a small pilot study. The
depth of the analysis is still limited due to the not
yet fully functional pipeline. In a first step, we col-

40



lected 4445 articles from the last ten years in three
large German print and online news sources. The
institutions under scrutiny are (private) associa-
tions for technical inspection in Germany. In this
area, the TÜV (Technischer Überwachungsverein,
i.e., Technical Inspection Association) and its sub-
companies almost exert a regulatory monopoly.
As a first goal, we want to investigate the differ-
ence in the tonality in the media coverage towards
the institutions in this area. We therefore chose to
investigate a public scandal revolving on defective
breast implants that have been tested and certified
by a TÜV subcompany. Table 1 reports the results.

Institution Articles Tonality
Name n negative ambivalent neutral positive
TÜV 57 47 5 3 2
TÜV subcompanies 45 39 3 2 1
Other institutions 10 6 2 0 2

Table 1: Absolute counts of articles about breast
implants and tonality per institution

A first interesting finding is that we only found
articles about breast implants in the last 3 years.
Considering the sentiment analysis results for
these articles, we see a clearly negative aggre-
gated result. 82.1% of the articles were of negative
tonality, compared to only 4.5% positive tonal-
ity. The remaining articles were of neutral (4.5%)
or ambivalent (8.9%) tonality. The percentage of
negative articles is even larger if only articles con-
taining mentions of TÜV and its subcompanies are
considered (84.3%), while the percentage of posi-
tive articles drops to 2.9%.

Furthermore, these findings are in line with the
increase in negative articles on TÜV subcompa-
nies during these years (see Figure 2). In fact,
from all negative articles about the TÜV subcom-
panies, 28.8% in 2012 and even 38.2% in 2013
contained mentions of breast implants. The scan-
dal itself was therefore responsible for the increase
in negative articles in this period.

This development can be interpreted as an in-
dication for the accountability of such institutions
in the public media, although it remains an open
question which aspects were dominant in the pub-
lic discourse considering the scandal about the
breast implants.

In sum, this pilot study increases our confidence
to be able to successfully collect the necessary
data for our main purpose, i.e. to answer the ques-
tion whether new forms of governance are held
accountable in the media. In the near future, we

Figure 2: Percentage and raw counts of negative
(breast implant) articles for TÜV subcompanies

plan to implement approaches that allow us to in-
ductively detect the issues brought forward in the
context of an actor in a selection of texts. More
precisely, we are planning to describe and detect
the dynamics of the debate in articles as well as
the tonality inside them.

5 Conclusions

We have introduced a project measuring media
coverage and applying opinion and relation min-
ing to the question of accountability of new modes
of governance in Europe. To answer how public
communication exposes them to public account-
ability, we apply computational linguistics meth-
ods ranging from named entity recognition, de-
pendency parsing and coreference resolution to
opinion and relation mining and ultimately fram-
ing.

We have given a pilot study on a public scandal
involving defective breast implants that have been
tested and certified by a TÜV subcompany in Ger-
many. We find, on the one hand, that most of the
articles on breast implants during the period are of
negative tonality, and on the other hand, that a cor-
responding proportion of negative articles on TÜV
mentions breast implants, explaining the spike in
negativity. In future research, we will detect such
spikes in a data-driven fashion and with the help of
targeted opinion and relation mining approaches.

Acknowledgments

This research is supported by the Swiss National
Science Foundation project NCCR democracy1.

1http://www.nccr-democracy.uzh.ch

41



References
Kenneth W. Abbott and Duncan Snidal. 2008. The

governance triangle: regulatory standards institu-
tions and the shadow of the state. In Walter Mattli
and Ngaire Woods, editors, The Politics of Global
Regulation. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ.

Alexandra Balahur, Ralf Steinberger, Erik van der
Goot, Bruno Pouliquen, and Mijail Kabadjov. 2009.
Opinion mining on newspaper quotations. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2009 IEEE/WIC/ACM International
Joint Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent
Agent Technology-Volume 03, pages 523–526. IEEE
Computer Society.

Alexandra Balahur, Ralf Steinberger, Mijail Kabadjov,
Vanni Zavarella, Erik van der Goot, Matina Halkia,
Bruno Pouliquen, and Jenya Belyaeva. 2010. Sen-
timent analysis in the news. In Proceedings of the
Seventh conference on International Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta,
may.

Madalina Busuioc. 2009. Accountability, control and
independence: the case of European agencies. Eu-
ropean Law Journal, 15:599–615.

Robert A. Dahl. 1994. A democratic dilemma: System
effectiveness versus citizen participation. Political
Science Quarterly, 109(1):23–34.

Scott Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, George W. Fur-
nas, Thomas K. Landauer, and Richard Harshman.
1990. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Jour-
nal of the American Society of Information Science,
41(6):391–407.

Andreas Follesdal and Simon Hix. 2006. Why there is
a democratic deficit in the EU: A response to Majone
and Moravcsik. JCMS: Journal of Common Market
Studies, 44:533–562.

Matthiew Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2006. Me-
dia bias and reputation. Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 114(2):280–316.

Fabrizio Gilardi. 2005. The institutional foundations
of regulatory capitalism: The diffusion of indepen-
dent regulatory agencies in Western Europe. Annals
of the American Academy of Political and Social Sci-
ence, 598:84–101.

Yuening Hu, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Brianna Sati-
noff. 2011. Interactive topic modeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 248–257, Portland, Ore-
gon, USA, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Christine A. Kelleher and David Lowery. 2009. Cen-
tral city size, metropolitan institutions and political
participation. British Journal of Political Science,
39(1):59–92.

Robert O. Keohane, Stephen Macedo, and Andrew
Moravcsik. 2009. Democracy-enhancing multilat-
eralism. International Organization, 63(1):1–31.

Manfred Klenner and Don Tuggener. 2011. An
incremental entity-mention model for coreference
resolution with restrictive antecedent accessibility.
In G Angelova, K Bontcheva, R Mitkov, and
N Nikolov, editors, Recent Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (RANLP 2011), Proceedings of
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing,
pages 178–185, September.

Ruud Koopmans and Paul Statham. 2010. The Making
of a European Public Sphere. Media Discourse and
Political Contention. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Bing Liu and Lei Zhang. 2012. A survey of opinion
mining and sentiment analysis. In Mining Text Data,
pages 415–463. Springer.

Martin Lodge. 2002. The wrong type of regulation?
regulatory failure and the railways in Britain and
Germany. Journal of Public Policy, 22:271–297.

Martino Maggetti. 2012. The media accountability of
independent regulatory agencies. European Politi-
cal Science Review, 4(3):385–408.

Giandomenico Majone. 2000. The credibility crisis of
community regulation. Journal of Common Market
Studies, 38:273–302.

Jörg Matthes and Matthias Kohring. 2008. The con-
tent analysis of media frames: toward improving re-
liability and validity. Journal of Communication,
58:258–279.

Delano J. McFarlane, 2011. Computational Methods
for Analyzing Health News Coverage. PhD disserta-
tion, Columbia University.

Lisa Müller. forthcoming. Patterns of Media Perfor-
mance: Comparing the Contribution of Mass Me-
dia to Democratic Quality Worldwide. Palgrave
Macmillan, Houndmills, UK.

Daan Odijk, Bjorn Burscher, Rens Vliegenthart, and
Maarten de Rijke, 2014. Automatic Thematic Con-
tent Analysis: Finding Frames in News. unpub. Ms.,
Amsterdam, NL.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and
sentiment analysis. Foundations and trends in infor-
mation retrieval, 2(1-2):1–135.

Fabio Rinaldi, Gerold Schneider, and Simon
Clematide. 2012. Relation mining experi-
ments in the pharmacogenomics domain. Journal
of Biomedical Informatics.

Klaus Rothenhäusler and Hinrich Schütze. 2009.
Unsupervised classification with dependency based
word spaces. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Geometrical Models of Natural Language Seman-
tics, pages 17–24, Athens, Greece, March. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

42



Magnus Sahlgren. 2006. The Word-Space Model: Us-
ing distributional Analysis to represent syntagmatic
and paradigmatic relations between words in high-
dimensional vector spaces. Ph.D. thesis, Stockholm
University.

Gerold Schneider, Kaarel Kaljurand, and Fabio Ri-
naldi. 2009. Detecting protein-protein interactions
in biomedical texts using a parser and linguistic re-
sources. In Computational Linguistics and Intelli-
gent Text Processing, volume 5449, pages 406–417,
Berlin, DE. CICLing, Springer.

Hinrich Schütze. 1998. Automatic word sense dis-
crimination. Computational Linguistics, 24(1):97–
124.

Maite Taboada, Julian Brooke, Milan Tofiloski, Kim-
berly Voll, and Manfred Stede. 2011. Lexicon-
based methods for sentiment analysis. Computa-
tional linguistics, 37(2):267–307.

Wouter van Atteveldt, Jan Kleinnijenhuis, and Nel
Ruigrok. 2008. Parsing, semantic networks, and
political authority: Using syntactic analysis to ex-
tract semantic relations from dutch newspaper arti-
cles. Political Analysis, 16(4):428–446.

Stefaan Walgrave, Stuart Soroka, and Michiel Nuyte-
mans. 2008. The mass media’s political agenda-
setting power: A longitudinal analysis of media, par-
liament, and government in Belgium (1993 to 2000).
Comparative Political Studies, 41:814–836.

Lei Zhang and Bing Liu. 2014. Aspect and entity ex-
traction for opinion mining. In Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery for Big Data, pages 1–40.
Springer.

43


