








































Use of Sense Marking for Improving WordNet Coverage

Neha R Prabhugaonkar
DCST, Goa University
Taleigao Plateau, Goa.

nehapgaonkar.1920@gmail.com

Jyoti D Pawar
DCST, Goa University
Taleigao Plateau, Goa.

jyotidpawar@gmail.com

Abstract

WordNet is a crucial resource that aids
in several Natural Language Processing
(NLP) tasks. The WordNet development
activity for 18 Indian languages has been
initiated in INDIA by the IndoWordNet1

consortium using the expansion approach
with the Hindi WordNet developed by IIT
Bombay, as the source. After linking 20K
synsets, it was decided that each of these
languages should find the coverage of their
respective language WordNets by using
sense marker tool released by IIT Bombay.

The sense marking activity mainly helped
in validation of WordNet and improving
the WordNet coverage. In this paper, the
various effects that sense marking activ-
ity had on the Konkani2 language Word-
Net development are presented.

Keywords: sense marking, IndoWord-
Net, word sense disambiguation, annota-
tion, coverage, challenges in sense mark-
ing.

1 Introduction

The IndoWordNet consortium in India is working
towards the development of a multilingual Word-
Net which includes 18 Indian languages using
the expansion approach with Hindi as source lan-
guage. The IndoWordNet is a multilingual Word-
Net which links WordNets of different Indian lan-
guages on a common identication number called
as synset Id given to each concept (Bhattacharyya,
2010).

1http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/indowordnet/
2Konkani is an Indo-Aryan language and is spoken on the

west coast of India. It is one of the 22 scheduled languages
mentioned in 8th schedule of the Indian Constitution and the
state language of the Indian state of Goa and minority lan-
guage in Maharashtra, Karnataka, Kerala

Synset (Fellbaum, 1998) is composed of a gloss
describing a concept, example sentences and a set
of synonym words that are used for the concept.
Besides synset data, WordNet maintains many lex-
ical and semantic relations. Currently, 11 lan-
guage WordNets out of 18 of the IndoWordNet
have created more than 20K concepts. As of now
this covers around 40-50 percent of the day to
day vocabulary of the respective languages. Cur-
rently, the Konkani WordNet contains 32063 con-
cepts and more than 43200 unique words repre-
senting these concepts.

Sense marking is a task to tag each word of the
corpus accurately with the WordNet sense or lexi-
con. In order to train machine understand the writ-
ten language and thus to ensure speedy and high
quality translation, a huge amount of data needs to
be sense tagged precisely by humans using a stan-
dard lexicon. A word may have multiple senses
and to identify which particular sense has been
used in the given context, word sense disambigua-
tion becomes a critical inevitability (Sarawati et
al., 2010). In a given text, the occurrence of a par-
ticular word will correspond to only one sense and
the nearby words provide strong and consistent ev-
idence to the sense of a target word.

Language No.
of
Files
used

Total
No. of
words

Total
No. of
tagged
words

Percentage

Bengali 11 163360 32952 20.17
Gujarati 101 337094 112884 33.49
Konkani 625 213415 103456 48.48
Kashmiri 350 98350 42290 43.00
Punjabi 45 138735 60182 43.38
Odiya 120 236125 100285 42.27
Urdu 10 100000 68689 68.69

Table 1: Sense marking status

One of the tasks in the first phase of WordNet



development was to sense mark a minimum 100K
words. The source of the corpus used for sense
tagging was local newspaper. The Sense Marker
Tool developed by IIT Bombay was used for the
sense marking activity. The table 1 shows the
sense marking statistics.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows
section 2 describes the Sense Marker Tool usage
and the procedure used for sense-marking. The
experiences of sense marking and the challenges
faced are discussed in section 3. Section 4 gives
the details about how the challenges were over-
come and the results obtained. Section 5 gives the
details about how sense marking activity helped in
improving the quality of the WordNet, followed by
the conclusion and future work.

2 Procedure Used for Sense Marking

The Sense Marker Tool developed by IIT Bombay
was used in the sense marking task. It helps the
lexicographer to efficiently tag the words. Since
WordNet contains only open-class words, Sense
Marker Tool is used to tag only nouns, verbs, ad-
jectives, and adverbs; that is to say, only about 50
percent of the words in the corpus are semanti-
cally tagged. The following procedure was fol-
lowed while sense marking the corpus -

• Examine each word of the text in its context
of use and decide which WordNet sense was
intended. In order to facilitate this task, the
tool displays the word to be tagged in its con-
text, along with the WordNet synsets for all
of the senses of that word.

• Indicate the appropriate sense to the word by
selecting the correct sense from the list of
possible senses.

While sense marking there were situations when
either the sense of the word was not found or the
existing sense was not sufficient to provide the cor-
rect sense.

The main cases encountered by the lexicogra-
phers while sense marking, are listed below -

1. Marking the word with exact sense: The
ideal situation is when the exact sense is
available for the corpus word. Here, the lex-
icographer applying his/her language knowl-
edge has to select the correct sense from the
list of possible senses displayed by the tool.

2. Marking the word using hypernymy:
When the exact sense is not found, the word
can be tagged with its hypernymy depending
on the context of the word.

3. Marking the word with closest sense:
Sometimes the exact sense of a word is not
present in the WordNet. If closest sense is
available and if the lexicographer has knowl-
edge about its existence, then he/she can as-
sign the tag for the word with the closest
sense.

4. Creating a new sense for the word: There
are two situations when the lexicographer
needs to create new sense for the word

• If the sense of the word is not present
in the WordNet. This is obvious in
cases of language specific, culture spe-
cific words, species names or multi-
words. Therefore it was decided that a
new sense should be created for them.

• If the sense of the word is not appropri-
ate in the context.

5. Marking the corpus word with the exact
sense even if the sense/concept does not
have the word in its synonyms set: The
word is tagged with the appropriate synset
and later the word is added to the synset.

The coverage C of language vocabulary by the
WordNet is measured by the following formula -

• Equation 1: C = M*100/N, where M is the
total number of words tagged and N is the
total number of words in the corpus

• Equation 2: c = m * 100/n, where m is the
total number of unique words tagged and n is
the total No. of unique words in the corpus

Equation 1 measures the coverage of more fre-
quent words. If a frequently occurring word is
covered in the WordNet then the count will in-
crease. For Konkani language, this percentage was
48.48 percent.

Equation 2 measures the coverage of the vocab-
ulary. If the number of words in the WordNet is
high then the count will increase. For Konkani
language, this percentage was 53.2 percent.



3 Challenges faced while sense marking

The main challenges faced were handling of com-
pound words, multi-word expressions, language
specific words, word with affixes, etc. They can
be grouped under following heads -

3.1 Tool related challenges:

The challenges faced due to the limitations of the
Sense Marker Tool are as follows:

1. There is no feature in the Sense Marker Tool
to add a new synset directly to the synset file.

2. If two lexicographers are involved in the
sense marking activity and both come across
a same synset which is not found in the Word-
Net then both may end up creating a new
sense. This may result in duplication of work.

3. Though the sense distinctions in the WordNet
are quite fine-grained, there have been cases
when the senses provided there have been in-
adequate or may contain some errors.

4. There is no feature in the tool to update the
synset content in case of any issues like am-
biguity, POS mismatch, false positive or false
negative in the synonymous set, spelling mis-
takes, etc.

The only solution was to keep track of the infor-
mation about the synsets to be created and words
to be added to the existing synsets and then mod-
ify the WordNet accordingly at one place by the
lexicographers. But this was a tedious and time
consuming task.

3.2 Culture-Specific words

For sense marking we used corpus from the
Konkani newspaper, Sunaparant. It is more likely
that culture specific words occur more frequently
in the corpus and these are not found in the Word-
Net. Examples of the frequently occurring concept
specific words in Konkani newspaper corpus are:

• taraMgAM- noun, decorated pole with sym-
bol of tutelary divinity on its top.

• huddameWI- noun, special kind of curry
made with black grams and fenu-greek.

• Sigamo- noun, festival celebrated to welcome
the spring which starts Holy festival.

Similarly, we have come across many such words
belonging to domains such as cuisines, dance, fes-
tivals, culture and traditions, household items, etc.
For the purpose of marking such words with a
proper sense, it is of utmost important that the
senses are to be created for them.

3.3 Named Entity Issue

It is more natural to come across many named enti-
ties such as places, companies, organizations, per-
sons, locations, school names, personalities, etc.
since the newspaper corpus was used for sense
marking and news often contains such information
which is not available in the WordNet.

3.4 Multi-words in the corpus

The newspaper corpus contains news on poli-
tics and critics, description on places, environ-
ment, health topics, and hence one can come
across many multi-word expressions of the type
compound verbs, compound nouns, idioms, echo-
words, reduplication, etc. Currently, the WordNet
does not store multi-word expressions. Creation
of synsets for such words was also a challenging
task for the lexicographers.

3.5 Words with affixes

In Konkani, one can come across a suffix like
(kAr- suffix used for male), (kaAn suffix used
for female) which gives different meaning to the
words it is attached to. For example, (BAjI veg-
etable) when (kAr) is attached to it, it conveys
the sense - the man selling vegetables. Similarly,
when (kaAn) is attached to it, it conveys the sense
the woman selling vegetables which results in the
new word obtained from (BAjI). Such occurrences
are quite huge in number in the corpus. However,
these kinds of words are not found in the respec-
tive WordNets for the reason that all the words
with the suffixes have not been incorporated.

3.6 Other challenges

Other situations where sense marking was difficult
are listed below -

• The newspaper also contains many words
belonging to Hindi and Marathi vocabulary.
This is because Hindi and Marathi are sister
languages of Konkani.

• Sometimes the newspaper articles describe
information about a movie or a play, which



often use Hindi or Marathi terms. This may
be because of the influence of these lan-
guages on the people. Tagging such words
was also a challenge.

• Similarly we came across many foreign
words in the corpus. Foreign words are those
words written in a script other than our own
script.

• Sense marking abbreviations and acronyms
was also a difficult task as WordNet does not
cover all the acronyms and abbreviations.

4 Methodologies used and Results
Obtained

To overcome the challenges discussed above the
following two methods were used

• Method 1: For each polysemous word, ex-
tract all sentences from the corpus in which
that word occurs, categorize the instances
and write definitions for each sense, and cre-
ate a pointer between each instance of the
word and its appropriate sense in the lexi-
con (Miller et. al, 1993). The advantage
of this method was that concentrating on a
single word should produce better definitions
(Miller et al., 1993).

• Method 2: The alternative method is the se-
quential approach that starts with the corpus
and proceeds through it word by word. This
procedure has the advantage of immediately
identifying deficiencies in the lexicon: not
only missing words but also missing senses
and inadequate senses, identifying the false
positives and false negatives, etc.

The results obtained by using the combination of
the above two approaches are given below -

1. Around 130 synsets were linked to Hindi
WordNet and 86 new synsets having high fre-
quency of occurrence in the corpus including
concept/language specific synsets were cre-
ated as a result an additional 1952 words were
sense tagged.

2. Similarly, there were some synonyms which
were found relevant to the context and were
regarded as false negatives i.e. words which
should have been present in the synset. Such
words were added to the existing synsets.

Additional 134 words were added which re-
sulted in tagging of additional 380 words.

3. After analyzing the untagged words, we came
across 11774 named entities in the corpus
which were not available in the WordNet. It
was decided that the proper noun part of the
word would not be tagged, but the common
noun part would be tagged. This decision
helped in tagging additional 180 words.

The above methods helped in improving the Word-
Net coverage of Konkani language from 48.48 per-
cent to 51.5 percent.

5 Role of Sense marking to improve
WordNet Quality

The sense marking activity played a vital role in
improving the quality of the WordNet in the fol-
lowing ways:

• Spelling errors, category mismatch were cor-
rected and also the synsets with incomplete
concept definition were improved.

• Words which had variations in spellings were
added to the synsets.

• The synsets belonging to a language or
language-specific synsets which covers a
wide range of day-to-day language were
added to the WordNet.

• Missed words (false negatives) which should
have been present in the synset were added to
the existing synsets.

• During sense-marking, false positives i.e. the
words which were found to be irrelevant to
the synsets were identified and deleted from
the respective synsets.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we have discussed the importance
of Sense marking activity in the WordNet de-
velopment cycle. The various challenges faced,
methods adopted and results obtained while sense
marking have been presented. The sense marked
data will act as a resource to aid in speedy and effi-
cient machine translation, for developing and test-
ing procedures for the automatic sense resolution
in context. Our future work will be to sense mark
domain specific data and to attempt to further im-
prove the WordNet coverage and quality.



Acknowledgments

This work has been carried out as a part of
the Indradhanush WordNet Project (11(13)/2010-
HCC(TDIL), dated 3-8-2010) jointly carried out
by nine institutions. We wish to express our grat-
itude to the funding agency DeitY, Govt. of India
and also all the members of the Indradhanush Con-
sortium.

References
Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic

Lexical Database. The MIT Press.

George A. Miller, Claudia Leacock, Randee Tengi,
Ross T. Bunker. 1993. A Semantic Concordance,
Pro-ceedings of the workshop on Human Language
Technology, page 303–308. Stroudsburg, PA, USA,
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jaya Sarawati, Rajita Shukla, Sonal Pathade, Tina
Solanki, Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2010. Challenges
in Multilingual Domain-Specific Sense-marking,
Principles, Construction and Application of Mul-
tilingualWordNets, Proceedings of the 5th Global-
WordNet Conference, Mumbai- India.

Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2010. IndoWordNet.
Lexical Resources Engineering Conference 2010
(LREC2010), Malta.


