



















































Qualities of Eventiveness


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation, pages 59–67,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 22-27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Qualities of Eventiveness

Sean Monahan, Mary Brunson

Language Computer Corporation

{smonahan,mary}@languagecomputer.com

Abstract

Events are not a discrete linguistic phe-

nomenon. Different verbal and nomi-

nal predicates express different degrees of

eventiveness. In this paper we analyze

the qualities that contribute to the over-

all eventiveness of a predicate, that is,

what makes a predicate an event. We

provide an in-depth analysis of seven key

qualities, along with experimental assess-

ments demonstrating their contributions.

We posit that these qualities are an impor-

tant part of a functional working definition

of events.

1 Introduction

The problem of event extraction is fundamentally

challenging because many definitions of “event”

exist. Some predicates clearly indicate events, e.g.

“I ran 5 miles to the store”, while others indi-

cate states, e.g. “He is tall”. However, in nat-

ural language text, many predicates fall between

these two extremes, e.g. “He runs frequently”. In

order to successfully extract events, resolve event

coreference across documents, and reason about

the events, we must understand exactly what an

event is. In this paper, we propose a series of qual-

ities that contribute to the overall eventiveness of

a predicate. We define eventiveness as “the degree

to which a predicate is like an event?”.

The concept of “event” is not discrete, but exists

along several dimensions. We identify seven qual-

ities of predicates that lead readers to more readily

consider them to be events. In order to success-

fully utilize events in end applications, we believe

these qualities must be fully understood.

In this paper, we consider the predicate to be the

word (e.g. verb or noun) in the sentence that might

indicate the existence of an event. This is also re-

ferred to as a trigger or anchor in event extraction.

Each of the predicates in the following examples

(indicated by italics) exhibit different degrees of

eventiveness.

1. The tremors have re-awakened bitter memo-

ries of the Asian tsunami that killed 168,000.

2. Indonesia lies in a zone where the plates shift,

sometimes generating tsunamis.

3. Electricity was cut off to the city, where peo-

ple fled their homes fearing a tsunami.

The first example is most clearly an event, refer-

ring to a specific instance of a tsunami. In the sec-

ond sentence, the nominal predicate “tsunamis”

refers to a non-specific event that occurs as a re-

sult a natural occurrence. In the third, a tsunami

has not occurred but is a feared possibility.

Any end application of extracted events must

decide which of these predicates to consider as rel-

evant. An application to “map known tsunamis”

might only consider the first event as relevant. An

application to detect newsworthy or “emerging”

events might only consider the third. An applica-

tion seeking to understand relationships between

events could utilize the second example to deter-

mine that plates shifting causes tsunamis. In or-

der to facilitate a wide range of applications, all of

these predicates should be extracted as “events”,

which can then be separated by the qualities they

possess. Furthermore, consideration of these qual-

ities should reflect human judgment about events.

In this paper, we discuss the different qualities

that contribute to the eventiveness of a predicate.

In Section 2, we describe previous work on defin-

ing events. In Section 3, we describe the quali-

ties that we consider to be most representative of

events. In Section 4, we describe an experiment

we conducted to rate these qualities in terms of

how they contribute to eventiveness. In Section

5, we conclude with a summary of our theory of

events and a description of how this will aid appli-

cations in understanding events.

59



2 Related Work

There have been significant efforts to understand

the idea of “events” in a variety of different com-

munities, including physics, philosophy, psychol-

ogy, and both theoretical and computational lin-

guistics. We draw our qualities of eventiveness

from across this literature in order to form a more

complete view of what an event is.

Quine (1985) considers an event to be a well-

individuated physical object which is clearly de-

fined in space and time. This contrasts with the

TimeML schema (Pustejovsky et al., 2003), which

regards event as a “a cover term for situations that

happen or occur”. Lombard (1986) considers an

event to necessarily be a change. These defini-

tions by themselves do not sufficiently explain the

full boundary between event and non-event, but

are useful in informing our qualities.

In addition to TimeML, a pragmatic definition

of events was also adopted for ACE (2005). ACE

utilized a wide definition of event, though only a

small set of event types were annotated, along with

their specificity, actuality, and arguments. More

recently, TAC KBP (2014) has built on the ACE

definition in order to extract event information to

incorporate into a knowledge base.

Understanding how events are perceived by in-

dividuals has also been researched by psycholo-

gists in order to learn how people construct mental

models of events. Radvansky and Zacks (2011) in-

vestigate the mental representation of an event and

how this encompasses the event’s spatiotemporal

location, the people and objects involved, and the

relations between these elements. A working def-

inition of events should consider these psycholog-

ical conceptions.

The problem of understanding specific events

is closely related to that of event identity, which

considers whether two events mentioned in text

are regarded as the same. Many of the defini-

tions of event identity found in literature (e.g. Be-

jan and Harabagiu, 2010) were established to fa-

cilitate event coreference. Hovy et al. (2013)

move beyond exact event coreference to consider

the notion of quasi-identity. Quasi-identity refers

to events which are the same in some respects,

but not in others. We believe that definitions of

events that restrict certain qualities are not effec-

tive for informing the quasi-identity relationship.

For example, generic events can inform specific

instances of that event type.

In the field of theoretical linguistics, there are

many concepts that contribute to the idea of

eventiveness, including aktionsart and transitiv-

ity. Vendler (1957) introduced the classification

of verbs into different aspectual (aktionsart) cate-

gories, including accomplishments, achievements,

activities, and states. The first three categories

all correspond with the idea of events, though to

varying degrees. In distinguishing between events

and states, Comrie (1976) discusses the important

factor that states do not require energy to main-

tain, while events do. Also, Talmy (2000) and

Croft (2012) discuss at length the related notion

of force-dynamic relations, which deals with the

transmission of force between participants.

Additionally, there exists a significant overlap

between the dimensions of grammatical transitiv-

ity (as a prototypical notion) and the qualities that

define events. The concept of transitivity has been

researched extensively within the linguistics com-

munity, primarily with the goal of understanding

grammatical relationships within clauses.

Hopper and Thompson (1980) propose ten dif-

ferent dimensions intended to measure the notion

of transitivity, which the authors define as a prop-

erty of a clause that communicates how effectively

an action is “transferred” or “carried-over” from

agent to patient. The more effectively the activity

can be carried over, the higher the transitivity.

Although Hopper and Thompson suggest that

there is no single semantic notion that encom-

passes the nature of transitivity, they state that they

have considered terms such as ’activity’ and ’in-

tensity’, both of which are also relevant to the no-

tion of eventiveness. Tsunoda (1981; 1985) adds

several dimensions to the notion of transitivity as

a prototype which we believe further support the

relationship between transitivity and eventiveness,

including genericity, completion, and realization.

Experimental work was conducted by Madnani

et al. (2010) to collect information about subjects’

perception of the various transitivity dimensions

for given actions. However, the authors do not ex-

amine the transitivity dimensions of mode (realis

vs. irrealis), agency, and individuation of the ob-

ject, all of which we regard as also playing a very

important part in a predicate’s measure of “even-

tiveness”. Additionally, they guide the subjects

through the process of measuring transitivity by

prompting them for specific properties, as opposed

to utilizing human intuition.

60



Quality Definition

Occurrence The quality of a predicate that signals that a change in the state of the world has taken place.
Spatio-Temporal Grounding The degree to which the predicate is grounded in time and space.
Lexical Aspect The boundedness and duration of the predicate with respect to time.
Agency The degree to which the main event participant can be regarded as a “causer” or “doer”.
Affectedness The degree to which the action of the predicate affects the semantic patient.
Actuality The knowledge of whether the predicate actually took/takes place.
Specificity The degree to which the predicate refers to a particular instance of an event.

Table 1: Definitions of Event Qualities

3 Qualities of Events

Given the wide array of definitions and descrip-

tions of events from different perspectives, we be-

lieve that each offers a unique insight into this

multi-faceted problem. We seek to identify the

qualities of eventiveness and determine which are

the most salient. The seven qualities we consider

are listed in Table 1. In this section, we provide a

detailed definition, examples, and justification as

to why each quality is important to eventiveness.

For our examples, we consider predicates with

explicit textual indicators of the qualities. How-

ever, many predicates can possess these qualities

independent of textual evidence. Additionally, al-

though every quality is examined in isolation here,

the interaction between these qualities is an im-

portant consideration. In Section 4, we describe

the experiment we conducted in order to demon-

strate the extent to which each quality contributes

to eventiveness.

3.1 Occurrence

Occurrence, the idea of something having hap-

pened, largely coincides with what we believe to

be an event. In fact, the TimeML definition (Puste-

jovsky et al., 2003) of event covers situations that

“happen or occur”. We consider this to be equiv-

alent to the idea of “change in the state of the

world”, because if the final state is the same as

the initial state, then nothing can be said to have

happened or occurred. As such, we contend that

the greater the degree to which an event can be

considered to have “happened” or “occurred”, the

greater the amount of eventiveness it will exhibit.

Note that the determination of ‘state’ here goes

beyond mere appearances: a person who bounces

a ball and catches it appears to be in exactly the

same state as before, but in reality, some energy

has been expended. Most verbs exhibit the qual-

ity of having “occurred”, with the notable excep-

tion of statives1, which are a fairly lexically con-

1Note that TimeML has a special class of events marked
as STATE.

strained category ( copular verbs, many verbs of

cognition, etc.). Thus, for verbal predicates, we

can regard verbs that indicate an action rather than

a state as having “occurred” and being eventive.

In general, the more energy and motion involved

in the predicate, the more eventive it is. In the ex-

ample below, running would be considered more

eventive than sitting.

1. He was running on the track. (high energy)

2. He was sitting in the chair. (low energy)

For nominal events, the situation is more com-

plicated. We must distinguish the set of nouns that

can indicate an event, such as “earthquake”, from

the set of nouns which cannot, such as “epicen-

ter”. For deverbal nouns, we also must distinguish

between process nouns, such as “the building of

the house”, and result nouns, as in “the building I

work in”. In order to distinguish the quality of oc-

currence, we can use the diagnostic of determining

whether the predicate can be appropriately associ-

ated with words such as “happened”, “took place”,

or “occurred”. For example, a presentation event

can “occur”, but the physical materials also called

the presentation cannot be said to have “occurred”.

1. The presentation occurred in the boardroom.

2. *The presentation slides occurred.

3.2 Spatio-Temporal Grounding

Spatio-temporal grounding deals with the degree

to which an event is able to be “pinpointed” to

a particular time and place. We hypothesize that

a predicate that is more able to be grounded in

time and/or space will be perceived as being more

eventive than a predicate which is less able to be

grounded spatio-temporally.

Quine (1985) considers events to be individu-

ated by their placement in space and time, which

implies that any given event should be able to be

associated with both a time and a place. Indeed,

the close association of events with their locations

and times manifests itself in our ability to refer

to well-known events by their time or location,

61



such as Chernobyl or 9/11. Another consequence

of the spatio-temporal grounding of events is that

one can refer to events that happen relative to other

events, e.g. before, after, nearby. Of the following

examples, the last seems most eventive.

1. He fought the law.

2. He fought the law yesterday.

3. He fought the law yesterday in court.

3.3 Lexical Aspect

Lexical aspect deals not with when a predicate oc-

curs in relation to time (i.e. tense), but how. It

examines, as Comrie (1976) puts it, “the internal

temporal constituency of a situation”. This covers

both how the event is bounded in time (telicity)

and how long it lasts (durativity). A durative event

can allow for increased eventiveness in that it al-

lows for more changes in the state of the world

simply because it lasts longer. At the same time,

many punctual (instantaneous) events have the po-

tential to be very eventive because they can pro-

duce large amounts of change in a very short time,

therefore producing a more drastic change (e.g. an

assassination or fatal lightning strike). Thus, both

durative and non-durative events seem to be able

to contribute to eventiveness in unique ways.

Regarding telicity, we believe that events which

are bounded in time (i.e. having endpoints) gen-

erally evoke a more pronounced sense of even-

tiveness because they are more easily distinguish-

able from the “backdrop” of other occurrences and

states. In fact, it is by definition that all events

must have a beginning (otherwise, they would not

be able to be referred to as “occurrences”), and we

believe that event endings or markers of comple-

tion move an event even closer to a prototypical

notion of “high eventiveness”.

Vendler (1957) categorizes verbs into four cat-

egories depending on their durativity and telic-

ity: state, achievement (telic, punctual), accom-

plishment (telic, durative), activity (atelic, dura-

tive). Comrie (1976) adds to this the category of

semelfactive (atelic, punctual). Examples of these

categories follow.

1. He is building a house. (telic, durative)

2. He is swimming. (atelic, durative)

3. He shot the man. (telic, punctual)

4. He is knocking on the door. (atelic, punctual)

3.4 Agency

Agency deals with the amount of control and vo-

lition involved in an event. We regard agency as a

measure of the degree to which a participant will-

fully executes an action and maintains control over

it. As such, we assert that the greater the degree

of agency attributed to the causer or performer of

an predicate, the higher the eventiveness that the

predicate will display. Involved in this idea are

the related notions of frequency/normalcy of oc-

currence and causality. Consider the following.

1. The wine aged in a barrel. (no agent)

2. The vintner aged the wine in a barrel. (agent:

vintner)

The presence of the agent causes the second

predicate to seem more eventive than the first. The

first implies a natural process. The second implies

a volitional effort on the part of the vintner (the

agent) to cause the wine to undergo this process in

a particular location, likely with some control over

when the aging would begin and end before being

bottled. The relevance of these predicates to many

applications is dependent on the existence of the

agent.

Dowty (1991) lists prototypical characteristics

of high and low agency. For high agency, he

lists volition, sentience, effect upon another partic-

ipant, and self-produced mobility. For low agency,

he lists internal change, incremental theme (when

something incrementally disappears or is used up),

and movement induced by another participant.

We can describe “natural processes” as those

occurrences which come about as a result of ac-

tions whose main participants are characterized by

low agency. Most natural processes, such as “ag-

ing”, are not considered very eventive. However,

distinct from these are certain natural occurrences

that do involve movement and great effect on the

world (such as earthquakes, lightning, and land-

slides).

We also hypothesize that the frequency or “nor-

malcy” of predicates is related to the degree to

which they are perceived as eventive. The growth

of grass (low agency) is an extremely frequent and

“normal” type of process (and thus should be seen

as less eventive), whereas an earthquake (higher

agency) is a much rarer occurrence and should

therefore be seen as more eventive. Note that this

factor is also highly relevant to the “newsworthi-

ness” of the predicate.

62



Agency is also intricately linked to causality,

since prototypical agents often cause a change of

state in patients. In many cases, the agent of a par-

ticular event can itself be characterized as an event

(e.g. “The earthquake caused three buildings to

crumble”). In this example, the earthquake - while

formally the agent of the “crumble” event - is itself

considered to be an event.

3.5 Affectedness

Affectedness is the degree to which an event af-

fects its participants, most importantly the partic-

ipant in the semantic patient role of the predicate.

We generally hypothesize that the more affected

a patient is by the event it is a participant of, the

greater the eventiveness of that predicate.

The actual manifestation of the notion of “af-

fectedness” can take a variety of forms. First,

we posit that an event can affect its patient to a

greater extent if the patient is more animate. To

this end, we consider a general animacy hierarchy

that is a modification of the hierarchy proposed by

Silverstein (1976): Human Proper Noun > Hu-
man Common Noun > Animate Noun > Inanimate
Noun, e.g. Sheila > woman > bear > rock.

Second, we suggest that an event can affect its

patient to a greater extent if the action that is tak-

ing place is more severe or extreme. For example,

we would consider “He killed the man” to be more

eventive than “He wounded the man”, simply be-

cause of the longer-lasting effect of “kill”.

Both of these notions are grounded in Hop-

per and Thompson’s (1980) transitivity dimen-

sions of Individuation of O and Affectedness of O,

where O generally represents the semantic patient.

They contend that a particular action is able to be

“more effectively transferred” to a highly individ-

uated patient (one that is a proper noun, human

or animate, concrete, singular, count, and referen-

tial/definite) than to a patient that is low in individ-

uation (one that is common, inanimate, abstract,

plural, mass, and non-referential). We believe that

eventiveness has a direct correlation with patient

individuation in all dimensions but one: the sin-

gular vs. plural distinction. We contend that all

other things being equal, the broader the seman-

tic patient role is, the greater the overall effect of

the event (e.g. He killed five men as opposed to

He killed one man), and therefore the greater the

eventiveness.

1. He punched some pillows. (low individuation)

2. He punched his brother. (high individuation)

3. He bruised the man’s leg. (low affectedness)

4. He broke the man’s leg. (high affectedness)

Tsunoda (1981) notes that this affectedness is

independent of the amount of agency the agent

possesses: a person killed by a stray bullet is just

as affected as a person who is intentionally killed.

Our experiment in this study tests primarily for

individuation, and further testing is required to

specifically examine Hopper and Thompson’s af-

fectedness of O dimension. Additionally, future

studies could examine Tsunoda’s (1981) claim

that resultative predicates (e.g. break, kill) gener-

ally encode higher transitivity than non-resultative

predicates (e.g. hit, shoot). We believe that such

predicates should exhibit higher eventiveness be-

cause they lexically explicate the change in the

world that has taken place as a result of an ac-

tion. Similarly, future experiments could consider

not only the patient, but also how the agent and/or

other participants are affected by the action.

3.6 Specificity

Specificity can be defined as the degree to which

a predicate refers to a particular instance (or

instances) of an event, where that event must

be well-grounded in time and space and well-

individuated from other events. We believe that

as specificity of a predicate increases, eventive-

ness increases as well. Thus, specific events

should have higher eventiveness than habitual

events (ones that recur but do not have a well-

defined spatio-temporal location and/or number of

occurrences), and generic events (where no spe-

cific instance is in focus).

While both habitual and generic predicates are

less eventive, they differ in several ways. Habitual

events typically imply that instances of the event

have occurred, but with no specific information

about these occurrences, whereas generic predi-

cates refer to events that are treated more as gen-

eral classes of occurrences in the world rather than

individuated events. The following examples il-

lustrate this quality.

1. The chicken laid an egg on Tuesday. (specific)

2. The chicken lays two eggs a week. (habitual)

3. Chickens lay eggs when fertile. (generic)

As noted in the example in the introduction, ha-

bitual and generic events are of great value for ac-

quiring world knowledge that can apply to specific

63



instances of those events. We consider this task to

be very similar to detecting when two events share

quasi-identity (Hovy et al., 2013). In the above ex-

ample, the habitual event gives a likely next date

for egg laying, and the generic event gives us the

knowledge that the chicken is fertile and therefore

able to lay eggs.

We also hypothesize that the more specific

the event (e.g. lays an egg on Tuesdays and

Fridays rather than lays two eggs a week), the

more eventive the predicate will seem. This in-

tuition connects with recent research into detect-

ing the difference between habitual and specific

events (Mathew and Katz, 2009), where the exis-

tence of semantic arguments to the predicate con-

tributes to specificity. Often, arguments missing

from generic events would display other properties

of eventiveness (e.g., agency or spatio-temporal

grounding) if they were present.

3.7 Actuality

Actuality refers to whether an action is realis or ir-

realis, that is, whether or not it actually occurs. We

regard actualized (realis) predicates as exhibiting

a higher eventiveness than unactualized (irrealis)

predicates, as the former present actual changes in

the state of the world, whereas the latter posit only

potential or hypothetical changes.

The notion of whether or not a predicate is ac-

tualized corresponds to the “Effectiveness Con-

dition” parameter of realization (Tsunoda, 1981)

in transitivity theory. A predicate’s fulfillment of

the Effectiveness Condition generally correlates to

a greater “completeness” of lexical meaning and

also corresponds to a higher degree of affectedness

of the patient.

There are a wide variety of contexts in which

irrealis predicates can occur; among these, pred-

icates may be modified by epistemic modality

(might have), deontic modality (hopes, orders,

promises), abilities (is able to), and negative polar-

ity (didn’t). We also consider future tense events

to be irrealis, as by definition they have not yet oc-

curred. It should be noted that epistemic events

exist between realis and irrealis, and may exhibit

more eventiveness than other forms of modality.

Within the class of negative events, we can con-

trast simple negation events (events modified by

negators such as no and not) with avoided or pre-

vented events. Avoided events involve a conscious

decision (thus requiring agency) to not perpetrate

the event. Prevented events, on the other hand, in-

volve an external agent preventing the event from

occurring. In general, the act of preventing an

event from occurring is itself an event.

1. He bought a new car. (realis)

2. He might buy a new car. (future)

3. He might have bought a new car. (epistemic)

4. He is able to buy a new car. (ability)

5. He wants to buy a new car. (deontic)

6. He was prevented from buying a new car.

(negative, prevention)

7. He did not buy a new car. (negative, simple nega-

tion)

Typically, systems which utilize events concen-

trate on realis events only; however, when deal-

ing with events across documents, the information

associated with irrealis predicates is very useful

for establishing quasi-identity relationships. There

are several motivating examples of unactualized

event types that are necessary for deeper under-

standing of events. If a crime occurs, for instance,

a particular suspect’s ability to commit that crime

becomes relevant. Likewise, if some order is given

to perform an action, and the action later occurs,

the quasi-identity relationship between the “direc-

tor” and the action is immediately relevant.

4 Experiment

In order to perform a concrete analysis of the qual-

ities of eventiveness in the real world, we under-

took a small experiment in which human partici-

pants rated the eventiveness of different predicates

in context. We hypothesize that a predicate with an

explicit indicator of one of these qualities would

be considered more eventive than a similar predi-

cate without that indicator.

4.1 Methodology

For each quality, we created one sentence with and

one without explicit evidence of that quality. The

two sentences utilize the same predicate and differ

only in their expression of the quality of interest.

For example, “He graduated college” possesses

the positive actuality quality, while “He promised

to graduate college” does not. This allows us to

compare the ratings for these pairs of sentences.

The sentences were placed into example groups

consisting of a pseudo-random sampling of the

sentences, enforced to only have one instance of a

predicate within each group. Each example group

64



Mechanical Turk Instructions
Directions: Please rate the following words in terms of whether they indicate an event in the context of the given sentence
located above each word. A rating of ’5’ means that it is very much an event, and a ’1’ rating means that it is not at all an event.
Read the definition/examples below carefully before beginning.

Definition: An event is a cover term for situations that happen or occur. Events can be punctual (instantaneous) or last for a
period of time.

Examples:

1. I am building a new house. (building is an event)
2. I like the Empire State Building. (Building is not an event, but an object)
3. Robert grew to be tall. (grew is an event)
4. Robert is tall. (is is not an event)

Question Prompt:

How much like an event does this word seem?
1 (not at all) 2 (slightly) 3 (moderately) 4 (fairly) 5 (very)

Table 2: Annotation Instructions

consisted of eight example sentences, with a total

of nine example groups.

We collected the eventiveness ratings from par-

ticipants on Amazon Mechanical Turk, who rated

each predicate in the example group on an inte-

ger scale from one to five. We collected 50 ratings

for each sentence, and participants were allowed

to complete multiple example groups. Overall, we

had 76 unique participants, who completed an av-

erage of 5.9 example groups each. The partic-

ipants spent an average of 9 seconds rating the

predicate in each sentence.

We also included a variety of control “non-

events”, which included result nouns as well as

statives. These exhibited statistically lower even-

tiveness than any of the non-control predicates.

4.1.1 Instructions

We provided instructions to each participant as

shown in Table 2. These instructions contain

a succinct definition of an event, utilizing the

TimeML terminology (Pustejovsky et al., 2003).

Additionally, we provided four example sen-

tences, two illustrating events and two illustrating

non-events. One of the non-events was a stative

(“is”), and the other was a result noun (“Build-

ing”). These examples illustrate that not all verbs

indicate events, and that words like “building” can

be events in some contexts but not others.

4.2 Analysis

For our analysis, we examined the mean, variance,

and ranking of the eventiveness ratings provided

for each predicate by the participants. We com-

pared pairs of sentences2 based on the probabil-

ity that a randomly chosen rating for the sentence

with the quality would be higher than a randomly

chosen rating for the sentence without the quality.

2A complete list is available by request.

The statistical significance of this probability can

be assessed using a Wilcoxin-Mann-Whitney test.

For example, “He played piano” has a mean

eventiveness rating of x=4.56, σ=.80, and “He is
able to play piano” has x=3.82, σ=1.35. A ran-
dom rating for played is 66.3% more likely to be

higher than one for the ability play. This differ-

ence is statistically significant assuming an accept-

able type-I error rate of .05%.

We present in Table 3 results for the pairs of

sentences testing each quality with their probabili-

ties. The > indicates the hypothesis that one value
of the quality is more eventive than the other. The

* indicates statistical significance.

Quality Result Prob

Occurrence Verb > Noun 0.604*
Occurrence High Energy > Low Energy 0.686*
Spatial Grounded > Not 0.526
Temporal Grounded > Not 0.509
Agency Agency > No Agency 0.641*
Aspect Atelic Durative > Telic Punctual 0.628*
Aspect Telic Durative > Atelic Durative 0.471
Affectedness Individuated > Not 0.505
Actuality Actual > Ability 0.663*
Actuality Actual > Epistemic Modality 0.646*
Actuality Actual > Volitive Modality 0.664*
Actuality Actual > Commissive Modality 0.620*
Actuality Actual > Directive Modality 0.642*
Actuality Actual > Polarity 0.681*
Actuality Past Tense > Future 0.635*
Actuality Present Tense > Future 0.626*
Specificity Specific > Habitual 0.667*
Specificity Specific > Generic 0.546

Table 3: Results of Eventiveness for Qualities

4.3 Discussion of Results

As shown in Table 3, many of the factors that have

been identified in various theoretical descriptions

of eventiveness can be shown experimentally to

affect people’s perception of the eventiveness of

a predicate in a sentence. Below, we discuss the

positive results, where our hypotheses were con-

firmed, as well as the negative results.

65



For occurrence, agency, and actuality, we found

strong evidence that these qualities contribute to

eventiveness. For example, “The attack happened

at dawn” was less eventive than “They attacked at

dawn”, “The fire started” was less eventive than

”He started the fire”, and “He hopes to gradu-

ate college” was less eventive than “He graduated

college”. For actuality, realis predicates were al-

ways more eventive than irrealis predicates. An

ANOVA test indicated no significant difference

between the different forms of irrealis (modality,

negation, etc.).

Results for the other qualities were slightly

more mixed. For aspect, we found that activities

were more eventive than achievements, but con-

trary to expectation, accomplishments were not

more eventive than activities. For specificity, there

was a clear distinction between specific and ha-

bitual predicates, but no distinction between spe-

cific and generic predicates. Our example of a

generic predicate, “Football fans watch the Super-

bowl” could be considered either a generic event

or a present tense description, and this might have

confused the results. Also, since the definition

provided for event gave only singular event exam-

ples, this may have biased the results in this case.

For spatio-temporal grounding, there was no

significant effect. We believe that this is due to

the implicit eventive nature of some verbs. We an-

alyzed the predicate “fought”, which was equally

eventive with and without a specified time or lo-

cation. However, such a verb does not require ex-

plicit grounding; the reader can assume that any

given fight happens at a specific time and location.

For affectedness, our examples utilized a verb that

is always highly indicative of affectedness and did

not adequately capture a good distinction between

high and low affectedness. We believe that future

experiments can control for these kinds of cases

and that example predicates can be found that will

isolate the specific qualities.

Another concern is that our design only explic-

itly tested a single predicate for each quality. How-

ever, the nature of the predicates and the sentences

we used allowed for post-hoc analysis of the qual-

ities that existed across more than two sentences.

Empirical testing showed the same pattern of re-

sults across predicates for these qualities.

Overall, the experimental results are extremely

interesting in their congruence with the literature

on events, but further research is required to deter-

mine the exact contribution of each quality. The

current experimental design lacks sufficient power

to reliably rank the qualities due to contrast effects

within example groups. It is likely that the order-

ing/grouping of the examples affected the rating of

individual examples. In future studies, we plan to

control for these effects by controlling the order-

ing of the examples given to each individual.

5 Conclusion

Working definitions of events are often ill-defined

and difficult to apply. We have laid out a series

of qualities which contribute to the overall even-

tiveness of a predicate in a sentence. Our find-

ings indicate that the degree to which a predicate

is considered an event is a function of these qual-

ities. Evidence for these qualities was validated

using participant ratings of predicates.

When developing annotated corpora of events,

the decision of whether or not to consider an in-

dividual predicate as an event is difficult. Under-

standing the qualities of eventiveness can explain

why one predicate seems less eventive than an-

other (e.g. irrealis, generic).

Instead of deciding each predicate on the ba-

sis of the individual qualities being exhibited, an-

notation specifications should consider how these

qualities interact. Drawing an explicit boundary

between events and non-events can cause infor-

mation contained in the non-events to be lost for

reasoning. Along the same lines, event extrac-

tion capabilities could be greatly improved by the

labelling of these qualities on annotated corpora.

This would enable event extraction to preserve the

fine-grained distinctions between events that are

shown to be relevant to human understanding.

In this study, we gave examples of how pred-

icates with lesser eventiveness can provide valu-

able insight into problems such as event corefer-

ence and quasi-identity resolution. These qualities

of eventiveness can serve to inform future research

into those areas, providing a deeper understand-

ing of the meaning of event coreference. While

different applications have different needs, under-

standing the qualities that contribute to eventive-

ness will enable applications to more intelligently

utilize event information.

6 Acknowledgements

This work was sponsored in part by the Air Force

Research Laboratory (AFRL).

66



References

ACE. 2005. In ACE (Automatic Content Extraction)
English Annotation Guidelines for Events Version
5.4.3 2005.07.01.

Cosmin Bejan and Sanda Harabagiu. 2010. Unsu-
pervised event coreference resolution with rich lin-
guistic features. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 1412–1422, Uppsala, Sweden, July.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bernard Comrie. 1976. Aspect: An introduction to the
study of verbal aspect and related problems. Cam-
bridge University Press.

William Croft. 2012. In Verbs: Aspect and Causal
Structure, Oxford. Oxford University Press.

David Dowty. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argu-
ment selection. In Language, Vol. 67, No. 3., pages
547–619, September.

Paul J. Hopper and Sandra A. Thompson. 1980. Tran-
sitivity in grammar and discourse. In Language 56
(2), pages 251–299, June.

Eduard Hovy, Teruko Mitamura, Felisa Verdejo, Jun
Araki, and Andrew Philpot. 2013. Events are not
simple: Identity, non-identity, and quasi-identity. In
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2013.

TAC KBP. 2014.
http://www.nist.gov/tac/2014/kbp/event/.

Lawrence B. Lombard. 1986. In Events: A Metaphys-
ical Study, London. Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Nitin Madnani, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Philip
Resnik. 2010. Measuring transitivity using un-
trained annotators. In Creating Speech and Lan-
guage Data With Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, Los
Angeles, CA.

Thomas A. Mathew and E. Graham Katz. 2009. Su-
pervised categorization of habitual versus episodic
sentences. Dissertation. Georgetown University.

James Pustejovsky, Jose Castano, Bob Ingria, Roser
Sauri, Rob Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, and Graham
Katz. 2003. Timeml: Robust specification of event
and temporal expressions in text. In Proceedings of
the Fifth International Workshop on Computational
Semantics (IWCS).

W. V. O. Quine. 1985. Events and reification. In
E. LePore and B. P. McLaughlin, eds., Actions and
Events: Perspectives on the philosophy of Donald
Davidson, pages 162–171, Oxford: Blackwell.

Gabriel A. Radvansky and Jeffrey M. Zacks. 2011.
Event perception. pages 608–620.

Michael Silverstein. 1976. Hierarchy of features and
ergativity. In Grammatical Categories in Australian
Languages, pages 112–171, Canberra. Australian
Institute of Aboriginal Studies.

Leonard Talmy. 2000. Force dynamics in language
and cognition. In Toward a Cognitive Semantics -
Vol. 1, Cambridge, Mass. The MIT Press.

Tasaku Tsunoda. 1981. Split case-marking patterns
in verb-types and tense/aspect/mood. In Linguistics
19, no. 5-6, pages 389–438.

Tasaku Tsunoda. 1985. Remarks on transitivity. In
Journal of Linguistics 21, pages 385–396.

Zeno Vendler. 1957. Verbs and times. In The Philo-
sophical Review. Vol. 66 No. 2, pages 143–160,
April.

67


