



















































A Framework for the Classification and Annotation of Multiword Expressions in Dialectal Arabic


Proceedings of the EMNLP 2014 Workshop on Arabic Natural Langauge Processing (ANLP), pages 48–56,
October 25, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Framework for the Classification and Annotation of Multiword  
Expressions in Dialectal Arabic 

 
 Abdelati Hawwari, Mohammed Attia, Mona Diab 

Department of Computer Science 
The George Washington University 

{Abhawwari,mohattia,mtdiab}@gwu.edu 

 

 
  

 

Abstract 

In this paper we describe a framework for 
classifying and annotating Egyptian Ara-
bic Multiword Expressions (EMWE) in a 
specialized computational lexical re-
source. The framework intends to en-
compass comprehensive linguistic infor-
mation for each MWE including: a. pho-
nological and orthographic information; 
b. POS tags; c. structural information for 
the phrase structure of the expression; d. 
lexicographic classification; e. semantic 
classification covering semantic fields 
and semantic relations; f. degree of idio-
maticity where we adopt a three-level rat-
ing scale; g. pragmatic information in the 
form of usage labels; h. Modern Standard 
Arabic equivalents and English transla-
tions, thereby rendering our resource a 
three-way – Egyptian Arabic, Modern 
Standard Arabic and English – repository 
for MWEs. 

1 Introduction 
Multiword expressions (MWEs) comprise a wide 
range of diverse, arbitrary and yet linguistically 
related phenomena that share the characteristic of 
crossing word boundaries (Sag et al., 2002). 
MWEs are computationally challenging because 
the exact interpretation of an MWE is not direct-
ly obtained from its component parts. MWEs are 
intrinsically single units on the deep conceptual 
and semantic levels, but on the surface (lexical 
and syntactic) levels they are expressed as multi-
ple units. MWEs vary in their syntactic category, 
morphological behavior, and degree of semantic 
opaqueness. MWEs are pervasively present in 
natural texts, which makes it imperative to tackle 
them explicitly if we aspire to make large-scale, 

linguistically-motivated, and precise processing 
of a human language.  

Integrating MWEs in NLP applications has 
evidently and consistently shown to improve the 
performance in tasks such as Information Re-
trieval (Acosta et al. 2011; da Silva and Souza, 
2012), Text Mining (SanJuan and Ibekwe-
SanJuan, 2006), Syntactic Parsing (Eryiğit et al., 
2011; Nivre and Nilsson, 2004; Attia, 2006; 
Korkontzelos and Manandhar, 2010), Machine 
Translation (Deksne, 2008; Carpuat and Diab, 
2010; Ghoneim and Diab 2013; Bouamor et al., 
2011), Question Answering, and Named-Entity 
extraction (Bu et al., 2011). 

In the current work, we propose guidelines for 
detailed linguistic annotation of an MWE lexicon 
for dialectal (Egyptian) Arabic that covers, 
among other types, expressions that are tradi-
tionally classified as idioms (e.g. على االريیق EalaY 
Alriyq 1  ‘on an empty stomach’), prepositional 
verbs (e.g. توكل على tawak~al EalaY ‘rely on’), 
compound nouns (e.g. إإشاررةة مروورر <i$Arap muruwr 
‘traffic light’), and collocations (e.g. أأخد ددشش 
>axad du$~ ‘to take a shower’).  

Creating a repository of annotated MWEs that 
is focused on dialects is essential for computa-
tional linguistics research as it provides a crucial 
resource that is conducive to better analysis and 
understanding of the user-generated content rife 
in the social media (such as Facebook, Twitter, 
blogs, and forums). Moreover, it helps in under-
standing he correspondences between different 
languages and their representation of the seman-
tic space. We hope that the multilingual data in 
this repository will lead to a significant en-
hancement in the processing of comparable and 
parallel corpora. We believe that our proposed 
framework will contribute to the sustainability of 

                                                
1 In this paper, we use the Buckwalter Transliteration 
Scheme for rendering Romanized Arabic as described 
in www.qamus.com. 

48



MWE research in general, and provide a blue 
print for research on MWEs in dialects, informal 
vernaculars, as well as morphologically rich lan-
guages.  

MWE are not only interesting from an NLP 
perspective but also from a linguistic perspec-
tive, as MWE can help in understanding the link 
between lexicon, syntax and semantics. Until 
now, this is hampered by the lack of comprehen-
sive resources for MWEs with fine-grained clas-
sification on different dimensions related to se-
mantic roles and syntactic functions. Arabic 
comprises numerous divergent dialects, and hav-
ing an annotated MWE lexical resource in dia-
lects and Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) will 
allow for studying transformation, change and 
development in this language. 

From a theoretical linguistic point of view, our 
work will be interesting particularly in studies 
related to Diglossia. Diglossia (Walters, 1996) is 
where two languages or dialects exist side by 
side within a community, where typically one is 
used in formal contexts while the other is used in 
informal communications and interactions. Stud-
ying the MWE space for dialects and MSA as a 
continuum will lead to deeper insights into varia-
tions as we note intersection and overlap be-
tween the two. In many instances, we see that 
MSA MWEs and their dialectal equivalents are 
not necessarily shared as they occupy comple-
mentary linguistic spaces. However, the nature of 
this complementarity and its cultural and social 
implications will need more exploration and in-
vestigation, which will be possible once a com-
plete resource becomes available. 

In the current work, we give detailed descrip-
tion of our methodology and guidelines for anno-
tating phonological, morphological, syntactic, 
semantic and pragmatic information of an Egyp-
tian Multiword Expressions (EMWE) lexical 
resource. Our annotation scheme covers the fol-
lowing areas. 
a) Phonological and orthographic information;  

b) POS tag, based on the observation of how an 
MWE functions as a whole lexical unit; 

c) Syntactic variability and structural composi-
tion;  

d) Lexicographic types, which includes the 
classifications followed in the dictionary-
writing domain (idioms, support verbs, com-
pound nouns, etc.); 

e) Semantic information, where we cover se-
mantic fields and relations; 

f) Idiomaticity Degree; we adopt a three level 
rating scale (Mel’čuk, 1998) to measure the 
degree of semantic opaqueness; 

g) Degree of morphological, lexical and syntac-
tic flexibility (Sag et al., 2002); 

h) Pragmatic information, which includes add-
ing usage labels to MWEs where applicable; 

i) Translation, which includes the MSA and 
English equivalents, either as an MWE in 
MSA and English if available or as a para-
phrase otherwise.  

 

2 Previous Work 
There are four main areas of research on MWEs: 
extraction from structured and unstructured data, 
construction of lexicons for specific languages, 
integration in NLP applications, and the con-
struction of guidelines and best practices. A sig-
nificant amount of research has focused on the 
identification and extraction of MWEs (Ramisch 
et al., 2010; Dubremetz and Nivre, 2014; Attia et 
al., 2010; Weller and Heid, 2010; Schneider et 
al., 2014). Description and specifications of 
MWE lexical resources have been presented for 
Japanese (Shudo et al. 2011), Italian (Zaninello 
and Nissim, 2010), Dutch (Grégoire, 2010; 
Odijk, 2013), and Modern Standard Arabic 
(Hawwari et al., 2012). Moreover, Calzolari et al. 
(2002) presented a project that attempted to in-
troduce best practice recommendations for the 
treatment of MWE in mono- and multi-lingual 
computational lexicons that incorporate both 
syntactic and semantic information, but the limi-
tation of their work is that they focus on only two 
types of MWEs, namely, support verbs and noun 
compounds. 

Apart from Schneider et al. (2014), who fo-
cused on the language of the social web, none of 
these projects dealt with informal or dialectal 
languages, which are rampant in user-generated 
content (UGC). With the explosion of social me-
dia, the language of Web 2.0 is undergoing fun-
damental changes: English is no longer dominat-
ing the web, and UGC is outpacing professional-
ly edited content.  

UGC is re-shaping the way people are con-
suming and dealing with information, as the user 
is no longer a passive recipient, but has now 
turned into an active participant, and in many 
instances, a source or producer of information. 
Social media have empowered users to be more 
creative and interactive, and allowed them to 

49



voice their opinions on events and products and 
exert powerful influence on the behavior and 
opinion of others. Yet, the current overflow of 
UGC poses significant challenges in data gather-
ing, annotation and presentation. 
 

3 MWE Taxonomy 
Although the importance of the MWEs has 

been acknowledged by many researchers in the 
field of NLP as evident by the large number of 
research papers and dedicated workshops in the 
past decade, the theory of MWEs is still 
underdeveloped (Sag et al., 2002). There is 
critical need for studying MWEs both from the 
theoretical and practical point of views. MWEs 
have diverse categories, varying degrees of 
idiomaticity, different syntactic compositions, 
and different morphological, lexical and 
syntactic behavior, and dealing with them is 
complicated even further by the fact that there is 
no “watertight criteria” for distinguishing them 
them (Atkins and Rundell, 2008). 

Moreover, there is no universally-agreed tax-
onomy of MWEs (Ramisch, 2012), and different 
researchers proposed different typology for this 
phenomena. Fillmore et al. (1988) proposed three 
types based on lexical and syntactic familiarity: 
a) unfamiliar pieces familiarly combined, b) fa-
miliar pieces unfamiliarly combined, and c) fa-
miliar pieces familiarly combined. Mel'čuk 
(1989), on the other hand, introduced three 
different classes: a) complete phraseme, b) semi-
phraseme, c) and quasi-phraseme. Sag et al. 
introduced two classes: institutionalized phrases 
and lexicalized phrases, with lexicalized phrases 
subdivided into fixed, semi-fixed and 
syntactically flexible expressions. Ramisch 
(2012) introduced yet another set of classes: 
nominal, verbal and adverbial expressions.  

From the lexicographic point of view, the leg-
acy three-way division of MWEs proved to be 
too coarse-grained to cater for the needs of lexi-
cographers who need to identify the large array 
of sub-types that fall under the umbrella of 
‘MWEs’.  Atkins and Rundell (2008) empha-
sized the need for lexicographers to be able to 
recognize MWE types such as fixed phrases, 
transparent collocations, similes, catch phrases, 
proverbs, quotations, greetings, phatic expres-
sions, compounds, phrasal verbs, and support 
verbs. 

When we look deeply into the different classi-
fications, we notice that each approach has 

looked at the phenomenon from a different angle, 
either focusing on its syntactic regularity, seman-
tic and pragmatic properties, meaning composi-
tionality, surface flexibility, POS (part of speech) 
category, or lexicographic relevance. What we 
propose is that it is not possible to come up with 
a hard and fast classification that cuts through all 
levels of representation. All afore-mentioned 
classifications are valid and can work parallel to 
each other, instead of substituting for each other. 
The assumption that we follow in this paper is 
that MWEs have different classifications at dif-
ferent levels of representation from the very deep 
level of semantics and pragmatics to the very 
shallow level of morphology and phonetics.      
The details of our annotation scheme are ex-
plained in the following section. 

It is worth noting that in our current work, we 
move the focus away from edited text to the 
challenging and creative language found in UGC 
and by trying to close the language resource gap 
between edited and unedited text. We handle this 
gap by focusing on dialects, the language used in 
informal communications such as emails, chat 
rooms, and in social media in general. We cover 
the full range of MWEs (nominal, verbal, adver-
bial, adjectival and prepositional expressions) in 
Egyptian Arabic, covering 7,331 MWEs (col-
lected from corpora and paper dictionaries).  
 

4 Annotation of Linguistic Features in 
MWE 

In this section, we provide a comprehensive 
specification of MWE types and the detailed lin-
guistic information, including the phonological, 
orthographical, syntactic, semantic and pragmat-
ic features.  
 

4.1 Phonological 
Each MWE is provided in full diacritization to 
indicate its common pronunciation in Cairene 
Arabic accent, such as  َيیترِ فْ عَ  فّ ى كَ لَ ع  EalaY kaf~ 
Eaforiyt ‘at high risk’, ‘lit. on the palm of a  de-
mon’. We also list other phonological variants 
when available. 
 

4.2 Orthography 
Since dialects do not have a standard orthogra-
phy, we follow the CODA style (Habash et al., 
2012), which is a devised standard for conven-
tionalizing the orthography of dialectal Arabic. 
CODA takes canonical forms and etymological 

50



facts into consideration. For example, the Egyp-
tian expression أأخد بالهھ >axad bAluh ‘to pay atten-
tion’ is rendered in CODA as أأخذ بالهھ >axa* bAluh. 

4.3 POS 
At this level of annotation we consider the POS 
of the entire MWE when regarded as one unit 
from a functional perspective. We annotate each 
MWE with a POS tag from a predefined tagset. 
We define the POS tag based on the headword 
POS in the MWE. Our POS tagset includes verb, 
noun, adjective, adverb, interjection, proper 
noun, and preposition. The list of POS tags used 
along with examples is shown in Table 1. 

 

 POS Example 

1 verb َجّر على االِحسابب   
jar~ EalaY AlHisAb  
‘pay later’ 

2 noun أأَْكل ااْلِعيْیش  >akol AlEay$  
‘making ends meet’ 
[lit. eating bread] 

3 adjective أأشكالل ووأألواانن  
>a$okAl wa->alowAn  
‘various shapes and colors’ 

4 adverb أأخرةة االمتمة >axorip Al-
matam~ap ‘at the end’ 

5 interjection يیا ناسس يیاهھھھوهه  yA nAs yAhuwh  
‘anybody there’ 

6 proper 
nouns 

ررشجرةة االد   $ajarip Aldur~  
‘Shajar al-Durr’ 

7 preposition  االنظر عنبغض   
bi-gaD~ AlnaZar Eano  
‘irrespective of’ 

Table 1: MWE Examples with their POS Tags 
 

4.4 Syntactic Annotation 
A syntactic variable is a slot that intervenes be-
tween the component parts of an MWE, without 
being itself a part of it, but fills a syntactic gap. 
Syntactic variables are added, when needed, to 
MWEs to represent the syntactic behavior of an 
MWE and they exemplify how the MWE inter-
acts with other elements within its scope. We 
create a tagset of syntactic variables reflecting 
the argument structure of an MWE. Examples 
are shown in Table 2. 

 

No Syntactic  
Variable 

Example 

 فالنُن  1
somebody 
(masc_ 
nominative) 

  جّس (فالنٌن) االنبض
jas~ (fulAn) AlnaboD ‘ 
(somebody) tested the 
waters’ 

 فالنةً  2
somebody 
(fem_ 
accusative) 

فالنة) بعيینيیهھ(أأكل    
>akal (fulAnap) bi-
Eaynayh ‘he devoured 
(some woman/girl) with 
his eyes’ 

 االقوممِ  3
people  
(genitive) 

  ددقق بيین (االقومم) إإسفيین
daq~ bayn (Alqawom) 
<isofiyn ‘he drove a 
wedge between (some 
people)’  

 ااألمرَ  4
some matter 
(accusative) 

 حط (ااألمر) في حسابهھ
Hat~ (Al>amora) fiy 
HisAbihi  

‘he took (some matter) 
into consideration’ 

 االشيُء  5
something 
(nominative) 

 (االشيء) متفصل عليیهھ
(Al$ayo') mitofaS~al 
Ealayh ‘(something) fits 
him perfectly’ 

Table 2: Syntactic variables and example usages 
 

4.5 Lexicographic Annotation 

In the dictionary market there are specialized 
dictionaries for idioms, phrasal verbs, proverbs 
and quotations. However, general domain dic-
tionaries try to avoid the use of too technical 
terms in the description of MWEs and use for the 
sake of simplicity a general term like ‘phrase’ to 
denote them to users. Yet, in the meta language 
of the dictionary compiling profession, lexicog-
raphers make a more fine-grained distinction be-
tween the various types of MWEs. Our lexico-
graphic classification of MWEs is adapted from 
Atkins and Rundell (2008) and includes the fol-
lowing tags. Examples are listed in Table 3.  

1. Idiom: An idiom is an MWE whose mean-
ing is fully or partially unpredictable from 
the meanings of its components (Nunberg et 
al., 1994); 

2. Support verb, or ‘light verbs’, may be 
defined as semantically empty verbs, which 
share their arguments with a noun (Meyers 
et al., 2004); 

51



3. Prepositional verb: These are verbs fol-
lowed by prepositions with impact on the 
meaning; 

4. Compound noun: A compound noun is a 
lexeme that consists of more than one noun; 

5. Compound term: This is a technical com-
pound noun used in a specific technical 
field; 

6. Compound named entity: This is a multi-
word proper name; 

7. Phatic expression: an expression that is in-
tended for performing a social function 
(such as greeting or well-wishing) rather 
than conveying information;  

8. Proverb: We consider proverbs as multi-
word expression if they are used as lexical 
units;  

9. Quotation: We list only quotations that have 
gained currency in the language and have 
become familiar to the majority of the 
community. 
10.  Classification Example 

1 Idiom قبة ةبيیعمل من االحب   
biyiEomil min AlHab~ap 
qub~ap  
‘to make a mountain out 
of a molehill’ 

2 Support verb أأََخد تارر >axad tAr  
‘to take revenge’ 

3 Prepositional 
verb 

  DiHik Ealayh ضحك عليیهھ
‘to play a joke on’ 
[lit. laugh on him]’ 

4 Compound 
noun 

  abuw qirodAn< أأبو قردداانن
‘Cattle egret’ 

5 Compound 
term 

  Eiroq AlnisA عرقق االنسا
‘Sciatica’ 

6 Compound 
named entity 

  abuw Alhuwl< أأَبُو االهھولل
‘the Sphinx’ 

7 Phatic expres-
sion 

  أأشوفف ووشك بخيیر
>a$uwf wu$~ak bi-xayr 
‘see you later’ 

8 Quotation يیا مواليي كما خلقتني  
yA mawolAyA kamA xa-
laqotiniy ‘penniless’ 

9 Proverb االعقل ززيینة  AlEaqol ziynap  
‘wisdom is a blessing’ 

Table 3: Examples of Lexical Types 

4.6 Structural Classification 
We provide the syntactic phrase structure com-
position of the expressions, giving the MWE pat-
tern or the POS of its component elements. The 
purpose is to show the normal productive syntac-

tic patterns underlying the expressions. Table 4 
shows the list of possible structural pattern in 
Egyptian MWEs. 

 
 Structure Example 

1 adjective + 
conjunction 
+ adjective 

فَايیِقووَ يیِق رَراا   rayiq wa-fayiq  
‘happy and relaxed’ 

2 adjective + 
noun 

-tanaboliq Al  تنابلة االسلطانن
sulotAn ‘couch potatoes’ 
[lit. Sultan dependents]’ 

3 noun + noun  ِكْلِمة َحق  kilomiq Haq~  
‘word of truth’ 

4 adjective + 
preposition + 
noun 

  غرقانن لشوشتهھ
garoqAn li-$uw$otuh  
‘up to his ears’ 

5 adverb + 
noun 

  bayn nArayn  بيین نارريین
‘confused’ 
[lit. between two fires] 

6 adverb + 
verb 

ااتَّفَقَ َحْسبََما    HasobamA 
Ait~afaq ‘haphazardly’ 
[lit. as happens] 

7 noun + adjec-
tive 

  nafoxap kad~Abap  نفخة كداابهھ
‘false pride/arrogance’ 
[lit. false blow] 

8  verb + con-
junction + 
verb 

  yilit~ wa-yiEojin  بيِیَلِتُّ وَويیَْعِجنُ 
‘to babble’ 
[lit. knead and fold] 

9  verb + verb نجرّاامشى اا    Aimo$iy Ainojar~  
‘get moving/get out’ 
[lit. walk and drag] 

10  verb + 
preposition + 
noun  

 tawak~al EalaY  تَوكَّل َعلَى هللاَّ 
Allah ‘rely on Allah/go 
away’ 

11  preposition + 
noun  

-EalaY AlTabo على االطبطابب
TAb ‘effortlessly’ 
[lit. on ease] 

12  verb + noun   nafa$ riy$uh  نفش رريیشهھ 
‘show pride’ 
[lit. stretched his feathers] 

13  noun + verb !هللا يیرحمهھ   Allah yiroHamuh  
‘Allah have mercy on him’ 

Table 4: Examples Syntactic Classification 
 

4.7 Semantic Fields 
The entries in the current lexical resource are 
classified into semantic fields based on their se-
mantic contents. The objective is to assign one 
semantic field tag for each MWE in the lexicon. 
Organizing Lexical data in semantic field format 
brings many theoretical and practical benefits, 
one of those is to allow the current lexical re-
source to function both as a lexicon and a thesau-

52



rus. In Table 5 we show a sample of our seman-
tic field classification. 
 

 Semantic Field Example 
1 Social Relation سمن على عسل  

samon EalaY Easal  
‘getting on well’ 
[lit. ghee on honey] 

2 Oath and Em-
phasis 

  ووهللا االعظيیم
wa-Allah AlEaZiym  
‘I swear by Allah’ 

3 Occasions يیتربى في عزكك  
yitrab~aY fiyEiz~ak 
‘congratulations on the 
new baby’ 
[lit. may he grow up in 
your wealth] 

4 Death رربنا اافتكرهه  rab~inA 
Aifotakaruh ‘he died’  
[lit. the Lord remem-
bered him] 

5  wishing and 
cursing 

 ~baEod Al$ar  بَ ْعد االشَّر
‘God forbid’ [lit. may 
the evil be far away] 

6 trickery لبّسهھ االعمة  
lab~isuh AlEim~ap  
‘to hoodwink’ [lit. put 
the turban on him] 

7 Occultism ضربب االرمل  
Darab Alramol  
‘to practice divination’ 
[lit. to strike the sand]’ 

Table 5: Semantic fields 
 

4.8 Semantic Relations 
Aiming at presenting detailed lexical semantic 
information, we further classify our entries based 
on semantic relations like synonymy, antonymy 
and polysemy.  

• Synonymy: MWE synonyms are grouped 
together; as the following expressions which 
all mean ‘to practice divination’ قراا االفنجانن 
qarA AlfinojAn [lit. read the cup], ضربب االوددعع 
Darab AlwadaE [lit. hit the shells], قَراا االكف 
qarA Alkaf~ [lit. read the hand palm]. 

• Antonymy: MWE antonyms are two MWE 
having the opposite meaning to each other. 
For examples, إإيیدهه ناشفة <iyduh nA$ofap ‘ava-
ricious’ [lit. his hand is dry] is the antonym 
of إإيیدهه مخروومة <iyduh maxoruwmap ‘wasteful’ 
[lit. his hand has a hole in it]. 

• Polysemy. This is when an MWE has more 
than one meaning. For example, إإيِیدهه ططويیلة 
<iyduh Tawiylap [lit. his hand is long] can 
mean either a ‘powerful person’ or a ‘thief’. 

 

4.9 Idiomaticity Degree 
Mel’čuk (1998) classified MWEs with regards to 
idiomaticity into three types: full phrasemes, 
quasi-phrasemes and semi-phrasemes.  

• Full phrasemes are when the meaning of the 
expression does not match the meaning of 
the component words, such as ووهھھھلم جراا Wa-
halum~ jar~A ‘and so on’.  

• Quasi-phrasemes are when the meaning of 
the expression matches the meaning of the 
component words in addition to an extra 
piece of meaning that is not directly derived 
from either components, such as مجلس االشعب 
majolis Al$aEob ‘people's assembly’.  

• Semi-phrasemes are when the meaning of 
the MWE is partially directly derived from 
one component and partially indirectly indi-
cated by the other component, such as  ددررااساتت
 .’dirAsAt EuloyA ‘higher studies عليیا

 

4.10 Morpho-lexico-grammatical flexibility 
A scale of three levels is used to measure the de-
gree of morphological, lexical and grammatical 
flexibility of a MWE, adopted from Sag et al. 
(2002). The three levels are as follows: 

• Fixed MWE: An MWE is considered as a 
fixed expression if it does not have any de-
gree of syntactic, morphological or lexical 
flexibility, and its meaning cannot be pre-
dicted from its component elements, for ex-
ample, سدااحح مدااحح sadAH madAH ‘slapdash’. 

• Semi-Fixed MWE: Semi-fixed expressions 
allow for a certain degree of morphological 
and lexical variation, but they are fixed in 
terms of the syntactic word order, for ex-
ample, شعرهھھھم\ماشيیيین على حل شعرهھھھا\ماشيیة  
mA$oyap/mA$oyiyn EalaY Hal~ $aEo-
rahA/$aEoruhum [lit. living by letting down 
her/their hair] ‘whore/whores’ or ‘loose 
women’. 

• Syntactically flexible MWE: A syntacti-
cally flexible MWE is a frequent combina-
tion of two words or more, characterized by 
high degree of morphological and syntactic 
flexibility. Example, إإددىى (فالنن) ددشش <id~aY 

53



(fulAn) du$~ ‘to scold someone harshly’ [lit. 
give someone a shower].  

 

4.11 Pragmatic Annotation (Usage Labels) 
The reason we provide usage labels is inspired 

by the CALLHOME Egyptian Arabic corpus 
(Gadalla et al., 1997)), which is a collection of 
data gathered from spoken colloquial language. 
The usage labels present specifications on who 
uses an MWE and how it is used. The usage label 
tagset in our lexicon includes labels such vulgar, 
youth, aggressive or taboo, as exemplified in 
Table 6. 

 
Who or how Example 

youth  يیسوقق االهھبل فِي االجبلل  
yisuwq Alhabal fiy Aljabal  
‘to act foolishly’ [lit. to act 
madly in the mountain]’ 

women / girls االشاططرةة تغزلل برجل حمارر  
Al$ATrap tigozil birijol HumAr 
‘make do with what you have’ 
[lit. a clever girl will knit with 
a donkey’s leg]’ 

Aggressive أأدديیك في ووشك >ad~iyk fiy wi$~ak  
‘I shall slap you in the face’ 

Table 6: Pragmatic annotation 
 

5 Status of the current resource 
The Egyptian MWE lexical resource at the cur-
rent stage contains 7,331 entries, and work is still 
on going in the linguistic annotation of the dic-
tionary. Table 7 presents the current annotation 
progress statistics regarding the various classifi-
cations and features. 

 
 Feature Completion 

1 Diacritization 34.10% 
2 Syntactic Variables 25.92% 
3 MSA Equivalent 27.28% 
4 POS  34.10% 
5 Syntactic Classification 23.58% 
6 English Equivalent 27.28% 
7 Lexical Type 98.94% 
8 Pragmatics Usage 4.09% 
9 Synonymous 0.14% 

10 Idiomaticity Degree 12.82% 
11 Semantic-Field 2.29% 

Table 7: Annotation work progress 

6 Conclusion 
We have described the annotation guidelines for 
a lexical database of MWE for dialectal Arabic. 
We provide descriptive specifications of MWE at 
the phonological, orthographical, syntactic and 
semantic levels. The main contribution of this 
paper is that it is the first description of a classi-
fication and annotation scheme of a lexical data-
base for dialects, which can be extended for in-
formal languages and with direct applicability on 
user-generated content. 

Acknowledgement 
This work was supported by the Defense Ad-
vanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
Contract No. HR0011-12-C-0014, BOLT pro-
gram with subcontract from Raytheon BBN. 

References 
Acosta, Otavio Costa, Aline Villavicencio, Viviane P. 

Moreira. (2011) Identification and Treatment of 
Multiword Expressions applied to Information Re-
trieval. Proceedings of the Workshop on Multi-
word Expressions: from Parsing and Generation to 
the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 101–109, 
Portland, Oregon, USA, 23 June 2011. 

Atkins, B. T. S. and M. Rundell. 2008. The Oxford 
Guide to Practical Lexicography. Oxford 
University Press. 

Attia, Mohammed, Antonio Toral, Lamia Tounsi, 
Pavel Pecina and Josef van Genabith. 2010. Auto-
matic Extraction of Arabic Multiword Expressions. 
COLING 2010 Workshop on Multiword Expres-
sions: from Theory to Applications. Beijing, China  

Attia, Mohammed. (2006) Accommodating Multi-
word Expressions in an Arabic LFG Grammar. In 
T. Salakoski et al. (Eds.): Advances in Natural 
Language Processing. FinTAL 2006, Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science. Vol. 4139, pp. 87 - 98, 2006. 
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 

Baldwin, T. (2005a). The deep lexical acquisition of 
English verb-particles. Computer Speech and Lan-
guage, Special Issue on Multiword Expressions 19 
(4), 398–414. 

Baldwin, T. (2005b). Looking for prepositional verbs 
in corpus data. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACL-
SIGSEM Workshop on the Linguistic Dimensions 
of Prepositions and their Use in Computational 
Linguistics Formalisms and Applications, Colches-
ter, UK, pp. 115–126. 

Baldwin, Timothy and Su Nam Kim. 2009. Multi-
word expressions. In Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. 
Damerau, editors, Handbook of Natural Language 

54



Processing, pages 267–292. CRC Press, Boca Ra-
ton, USA, 2nd edition. 

Bannard, C. 2007. A Measure of Syntactic Flexibil-
ity for Automatically Identifying Multi Word Ex-
pressions in Corpora. Proceedings of A Broader 
Perspective on Multiword Expressions, Workshop 
at the ACL 2007 Conference: 1–8. 

Benson, M. 1990. Collocations and general-purpose 
dictionaries. International Journal of Lexicogra-
phy, 3(1):23--35. 

Bouamor, Dhouha, Nasredine Semmar and Pierre 
Zweigenbaum. (2011) Improved Statistical Ma-
chine Translation Using MultiWord Expressions. 
International Workshop on Using Linguistic In-
formation for Hybrid Machine Translation LIHMT. 
Barcelona, November 2011 

Bu, Fan, Xiao-Yan Zhu, and Ming Li. (2011) A New 
Multiword Expression Metric and Its Applications. 
In Journal of Computer Science and Technology. 
26(1): 3-13, Jan. 2011. 

Calzolari, Nicoletta, Charles J. Fillmore, Ralph 
Grishman, Nancy Ide, Alessandro Lenci, Catherine 
MacLeod, Antonio Zampolli. (2002) Towards Best 
Practice for Multiword Expressions in Computa-
tional Lexicons. In Proceedings of the Third Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC 2002), Las Palmas, Canary Is-
lands, pp. 1934-1940 

Carpuat, Marine and Mona Diab. (2010) Task-based 
evaluation of multiword expressions: a pilot study 
in statistical machine translation. Human Language 
Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the 
North American Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics. Los Angeles, CA. Pp. 
242-245. 

Chafe, Wallace1968. Idiomaticity as an Anomaly in 
the Chomskyan Paradigm. Foundations of Lan-
guage 4.109-127. 

da Silva, Edson Marchetti and Renato Rocha Souza. 
(2012) Information retrieval system using Multi-
words Expressions (MWE) as descriptors. JISTEM 
- Journal of Information Systems and Technology 
Management. Vol.9 no.2 São Paulo May/Aug. 
2012. 

Deksne, Daiga, Raivis Skadiņš, and Inguna Skadiņa. 
a. 2008. Dictionary of Multiword Expressions for 
Translation into Highly Infliected Languages. In 
the 6th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2008), Marrakech, 
Morocco. 

Dubremetz, Marie and Joakim Nivre. (2014) Extrac-
tion of Nominal Multiword Expressions in French. 
In proceedings of the 10thWorkshop on Multiword 
Expressions (MWE 2014), the 14th Conference of 
the European Chapter of the Association for Com-

putational Linguistics. 26-27 April 2014. Gothen-
burg, Sweden 

Eryiğit, Gülşen, Tugay ˙Ilbay Ozan and Arkan Can. 
(2011) Multiword Expressions in Statistical De-
pendency Parsing. Proceedings of the Second 
Workshop on Statistical Parsing of Morphological-
ly Rich Languages. 

Fillmore, C.J., P. Kay, M. O’Connor. (1988) Regu-
larity and idiomaticity in grammatical construc-
tions: the case of let alone. Language, 64, 3, 501–
538. 

Gadalla, Hassan, Hanaa Kilany, Howaida Arram, 
Ashraf Yacoub, Alaa El-Habashi, Amr Shalaby, 
Krisjanis Karins, Everett Rowson, Robert Mac-
Intyre, Paul Kingsbury, David Graff, Cynthia 
McLemore. (1997) CALLHOME Egyptian Arabic 
Transcripts. LDC catalog number LDC97T19, 
ISBN 1-58563-115-9. 

Ghoneim, Mahmoud and Mona Diab. (2013) Multi-
word Expressions in the context of Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In the Proceedings of IJCNLP 
2013, October, Nagoya, Japan. 

Gibbs, R. W. (1980). Spilling the beans on under-
standing and memory for idioms. Memory & Cog-
nition, 8, 449–456. 

Grégoire, Nicole. (2010) DuELME: a Dutch electron-
ic lexicon of multiword expressions. In Language 
Resources and Evaluation, 44(1-2):23-39 (2010) 

Gross, Maurice, 1986. Lexicon-Grammar. The Repre-
sentation of Compound Words. In COLING-1986 
Proceedings, Bonn, pp. 1-6. 

Habash, Nizar, Mona Diab, Owen Rambow (2012). 
CODA: A Conventional Orthography for Dialectal 
Arabic. Proceedings of LREC, Istanbul Turkey, 
May 2012. 

Hawwari, Abdelati, Kfir Bar, and Mona Diab (2012). 
Building an Arabic Multiword Expressions Reposi-
tory. Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2012 
Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Lit-
erature, Montreal, Canada, June 2012.  

Jackendoff, R. (1973). The base rules for preposition-
al phrases. In A Festschrift for Morris Halle, pp. 
345–356. New York, USA: Rinehart and Winston. 

Korkontzelos, Ioannis, and Suresh Manandhar. (2010) 
Can Recognising Multiword Expressions Improve 
Shallow Parsing? In proceedings of Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference 
of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 
636–644, Los Angeles, California, June 2010. 

Mel’čuk, I. (1998) Collocations and Lexical Func-
tions. In A.P. Cowie (ed.): Phraseology. Theory, 
Analysis, and Applications, Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 23-53. 

55



Mel’čuk, Igor (2004) Verbes supports sans peine. 
Lingvisticæ Investigationes 27: 2, 203-217. 

Nivre, Joakim and Jens Nilsson. 2004. Multiword 
Units in Syntactic Parsing. InWorkshop on Meth-
odologies and Evaluation of Multiword Units in 
Real-World Applications, the 4th International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC 2004), pp. 39-46. Lisbon, Portugal. 

Odijk, Jan. (2013) Identification and Lexical Repre-
sentation of Multiword Expressions. In P. Spyns 
and J. Odijk (eds.), Essential Speech and Language 
Technology for Dutch, Theory and Applications of 
Natural Language Processing 

Palmer, Martha, Dan Gildea, Paul Kingsbury. (2005) 
The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Corpus of 
Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics, 31:1., 
pp. 71-105.  

Ramisch, Carlos, Aline Villavicencio, Christian Boi-
tet, "mwetoolkit: a Framework for Multiword Ex-
pression Identification", Proceedings of the Sev-
enth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC 2010), Valetta, 
Malta, May, 2010. 

Sag, I. A., Baldwin, T., Bond, F., Copestake, A., and 
Flickinger, D. 2002. Multiword Expressions: A 
Pain in the Neck for NLP. Proceedings of the 3rd 
International Conference on Intelligent Text Pro-
cessing and Computational Linguistics, CI-
CLING2002: 1–15. 

SanJuan, Eric and Fidelia Ibekwe-SanJuan. 2006. 
Text mining without document context. In Infor-
mation Processing and Management. Volume 42, 
Issue 6, pp. 1532-1552. 

Schneider, Nathan, Spencer Onuffer, Nora Kazour, 
Emily Danchik, Michael T. Mordowanec, Henriet-
ta Conrad, and Noah A. Smith. (2014) Comprehen-
sive Annotation of Multiword Expressions in a So-
cial Web Corpus. In Proceedings of the Language 
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 
2014), Reykjavik, Iceland, May 2014. 

Shudo, Kosho, Akira Kurahone, and Toshifumi Tana-
be. (2011) A Comprehensive Dictionary of Multi-
word Expressions. Proceedings of HLT '11 Pro-
ceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human 
Language Technologies, Portland, Oregon. Volume 
1, pp. 161-170 

Walters, Keith. Diglossia, linguistic variation, and 
language change in Arabic. 1996. In Eid, Mushira, 
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics VIII. John Ben-
jamins. 1996 

Weller, Marion, Ulrich Heid. (2010) Extraction of 
German Multiword Expressions from Parsed Cor-
pora Using Context Features. In proceedings of the 

seventh international conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC), Val-letta, Malta. 

Zaninello, Andrea, Malvina Nissim. (2010) Creation 
of lexical resources for a characterisation of multi-
word expressions in Italian. In proceedings of the 
seventh international conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC), Valletta, Malta 

 

56


