



















































Developing a Tagalog Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) Disaster Dictionary for Understanding Mixed Language Social Media: A Work-in-Progress Paper


Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH) @ EACL 2014, pages 91–94,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Developing a Tagalog Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC)
‘Disaster’ Dictionary for Understanding Mixed Language Social Media:

A Work-in-Progress Paper
Amanda Andrei, Alison Dingwall, Theresa Dillon, Jennifer Mathieu

MITRE Corporation
7515 Colshire Drive

Mclean, Virginia 22042 USA
aandrei@mitre.org

Abstract

In the wake of super typhoon Yolanda
(known internationally as Haiyan) in the
Philippines in 2013, many individuals in
the Philippines turned to social media to
express their thoughts and emotions in a
variety of languages. In order to under-
stand and analyze the sentiment of pop-
ulations on the ground, we used a novel
approach of developing a conceptual Lin-
guistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC)
dictionary comprised of Tagalog words re-
lating to disaster. This work-in-progress
paper documents our process of filtering
and choosing terms and offers suggestions
for validating the dictionary. When results
on how the dictionary was used are avail-
able, we can better assess the process for
creating conceptual LIWC dictionaries.

1 Background

By engaging in a variety of social networking
and blogging activities, individuals often reveal
their “perceptions, attitudes, beliefs, and behav-
iors” (Maybury, 2010) through multiple social me-
dia platforms such as Facebook and Twitter. In ad-
dition, social media provides an important source
for breaking news, especially during natural disas-
ters and emergencies (Nagar et al., 2012; Crowe,
2012). During events such as the 2010 earthquake
in Haiti and the 2011 tsunami in Japan, individu-
als turned to social media to report injuries, ask for
assistance, and publish personal accounts (Gao et
al., 2011; Abbasi et al., 2012). Likewise, the 2013
disaster of super typhoon Yolanda (known inter-
nationally as Haiyan) in the Philippines triggered
a wide use of social media during the period of the
storm.

1.1 Philippines
With its two official languages (English and Fil-
ipino) and dozens of other local languages and di-
alects, the Philippines has a complex and politi-
cized history of multilingualism (Gonzalez, 1998;
Nical et al., 2004; Ang, 1978). Both the gram-
mar and vocabulary of Filipino (also known as
Pilipino) is based primarily from Tagalog, a lan-
guage originating from the regions surrounding
the capital city of Manila, although some schol-
ars argue that Filipino is essentially Tagalog (Ang,
1978; Baumgartner, 1989).

In 2011, the Philippines had the highest per-
centage of active online users in the world (Global
WebIndex, 2011). In 2012, the nation had more
than 10 million active Twitter users, which ranked
it tenth in countries with the most Twitter users
(Abuy, 2012). Tweets from the Philippines are
in mixed languages, with 80% in English and
the other 20% in Filipino languages (Pilkington,
2011). Furthermore, the Philippines is the most
disaster-prone nation in the world (CDRC Admin,
2013; Bankoff, 2002), making it a prime candidate
for analyzing sentiment in social media during and
following a natural disaster.

1.2 Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
(LIWC)

As social media analysis continues to mature as a
field, if social media is to be leveraged more ef-
fectively for disaster response and relief there is a
need for more quantitative methods to supplement
current qualitative techniques and subject matter
expertise (Servi and Elson, 2012). Servi & El-
son (2012) used the novel approach of combining
mathematical algorithms with a social psychology
tool, Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC)
(Pennebaker et al., 2007), to detect and forecast
emotional trends in Twitter in an unbiased way.

LIWC uses internal “dictionaries” of words
which correspond to various domains of linguistic

91



processes, psychological processes, personal con-
cerns, and spoken categories. For instance, one
dictionary under psychological processes is filled
with positive emotion words (e.g., “love,” “nice,”
and “sweet”). Another dictionary under personal
concerns includes death words (e.g., “bury,” “cof-
fin,” “kill”). When a researcher runs a text file
through LIWC, the program compares the words
in the file to the dictionaries and outputs a ratio
of dictionary words to total words (e.g., 1% of all
words are positive emotion words). Researchers
have used LIWC to analyze a variety of texts, most
notably newspaper coverage of a bonfire tragedy at
Texas A&M (Gortner and Pennebaker, 2003), one
of the earliest examples of using LIWC to under-
stand emotions around disaster management.

First created in English, LIWC has also been
translated into other languages. This project is de-
veloping a set of LIWC dictionaries in Tagalog
in order to understand social media usage in the
Philippines, particularly usage during the typhoon.
Tagalog was chosen and distinguished from Fil-
ipino for three main reasons: namely, that more
information about and translations in Tagalog are
readily available, to highlight the fact that there
are more Philippine languages beyond “Filipino”
that could be translated as well, and because most
tweets originated from Manila, where Tagalog is
the main Philippine language spoken.

2 Process

On November 8, 2013, super typhoon Yolanda
made landfall in the central Philippines. Over 11
million people were affected, with 2.5 million peo-
ple in need of food aid and over 2,000 people dead
(BBC News Asia, 2013).

As the Philippines is linguistically diverse, there
remained a need to also explore the tweets that
were posted in mixed languages, primarily Taga-
log since it is one of the major languages in the na-
tion. A LIWC dictionary of disaster-related words
in Tagalog was developed in order to gauge how
many tweets during the period of the typhoon re-
lated to the disaster. To explore the impact of the
typhoon from the publics perspective in social me-
dia, mixed language Twitter posts geographically
restricted to the Philippines were analyzed.

Using a commercially available social search
and analytics too which filters Twitter content
based on variables such as location, time and date,
tweet type (original, retweet, reply), language (al-

though Tagalog is not included) and others, a vol-
ume of approximately 1.5 million tweets from the
Philippines were identified within a two-week date
range around the typhoon. This set was isolated
based on restricting the tweets to those originating
from the Philippines between the dates of Novem-
ber 3-18, 2013 and included any of the following
terms: typhoon, yolanda, haiyan, supertyphoon,
as well as corresponding hashtags.

A wide range of words and concepts relating
to typhoons and disasters, such as baha (storm),
donasyon (donation), nagugutom (starving), patay
(dead), and sagip (save) were identified. Related
terms were also identified and included in the
search, such as #bangon (rise up), a nationalis-
tic call of inspiration; #walangpasok (no entry),
colloquially a school closing alert; Libreng Tawag
(free calls), used to alert users which telecom-
munication companies were allowing no charge
phone calls; and PAGASA (hope), which is also an
acronym for the Philippine weather alert service.

In order to develop a clean data set, these terms
were then narrowed down based on what would
make appropriate inclusions for a LIWC dictio-
nary, resulting in the discarding of hash tags,
multi-word phrases, and proper nouns. Certain
words were also found to be too broad (i.e., false
positives), such as donasyon, which was used
in non-disaster contexts just as frequently as in
typhoon-related tweets within the date range ana-
lyzed. Words like nagugutom and patay were actu-
ally used more frequently in non-disaster contexts
(e.g., “I am starving, I want a sandwich”).

The dictionary was designed to include differ-
ent grammatical forms of words. For example,
for nouns, both baha (flood) and bahang (flood),
where ng is a linking suffix, were included. For
verbs, different tenses were included, e.g., tulong
(help), tumulong (helped), and tumutulong (helps).
In the case of the verbs, other forms of the words
were searched, but not included in the dictionary
if they were not frequently used in tweets. The
complete dictionary is included in the Appendix.

3 Remarks and Future Work

The Tagalog LIWC disaster dictionary was devel-
oped to quickly explore and understand percep-
tions expressed on social media about the typhoon.
While the terms were included for the 2013 ty-
phoon, additional research and validation is re-
quired for generalization for understanding future

92



natural disasters. While social media can contain
a wealth of information, the processes of filtering
and searching for terms would benefit from a more
rigorous standard of including words in the dictio-
nary. For instance, researchers may want to con-
sider what counts as high frequency for a word,
e.g., if it appears over a certain absolute number of
times or if it appears in high proportion compared
to other words. Overall, a move from qualitative
analysis to more quantitative analysis would clar-
ify the connection between the dictionary and the
source corpus.

The process of creating a conceptual LIWC dic-
tionary should also be vetted against other use
cases and concepts. For instance, the word lin-
dol (earthquake) was included in the dictionary
since earthquakes are common in the Philippines,
although earthquake activity was not recorded dur-
ing the typhoon. The dictionary could be eval-
uated or validated against other social media re-
sponses to other recent disasters, such as the Oc-
tober 2013 earthquake in Bohol, an island near the
typhoon-struck areas, in order to see how users
tweet about disasters.

Geography also plays an important role in how
the disaster dictionary can be used. For the pur-
poses of creating this dictionary, tweets were re-
stricted to the Philippines. It would be worthwhile
to examine if the same words in the dictionary oc-
cur if tweets were collected from different origins,
such as Leyte (the island which sustained most of
the damage) versus Manila (the capital city of the
Philippines) versus a location with a large concen-
tration of Filipino immigrants (such as California,
USA).

Additionally, other concepts related to disas-
ter management should be explored and consid-
ered for inclusion in the dictionary, such as words
relating to property, family, and emotions. As
the original (English-language) LIWC application
already has categories for such concepts, future
work would include translating the complete set of
LIWC dictionaries into Tagalog while also includ-
ing culturally specific words without exact trans-
lations. This work is currently in progress.

Furthermore, the areas hit by the typhoon speak
and use social media in other Philippines lan-
guages in addition to Tagalog (primarily Cebuano
and Waray). It may also be helpful to have dic-
tionaries in other languages predominant in the
area where a disaster occurs. This may be a dif-

ficult task to undertake, as translations for other
Philippine languages are not as readily available
as translations for Tagalog.

This paper details the process for creating the
dictionary; how the dictionary was used in actual
social media datasets concerning the typhoon is
still in progress. Upon reviewing how the disas-
ter dictionary was used, this process of creating
concept LIWC dictionaries and its utility will be
better assessed and validated. Since this tool and
the additional LIWC dictionaries are still in their
preliminary formats, there are no current plans to
make the tools commercially available until they
are reviewed and vetted by native Tagalog speak-
ers. As the work progresses, the disaster dictio-
nary will be maintained and kept up-to-date in or-
der to include additional terms which may apply
to future disasters.

References
Mohammad-Ali Abbasi, Shamanth Kumar, Jose Au-

gusto Andrade Filho, and Huan Liu. 2012. Lessons
learned in using social media for disaster relief
- ASU crisis response game. Social Comput-
ing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling and Prediction,
7227, 282-289.

Abiel Abuy. 2012. “Twitter crosses 500 mil-
lion mark, Philippines in the top 10 in terms of
Twitter accounts.” 2 Aug 2012. KabayanTech.
http://kabayantech.com/2012/08/twitter-crosses-
500-million-mark-philippines-in-the-top-10-in-
terms-of-twitter-accounts/

Gertrudes R. Ang. 1978. The Filipino as a bilingual or
multilingual: Some implications. Philippine Quar-
terly of Culture and Society, 187-189.

Gregory Bankoff. 2002. Cultures of disaster: Society
and natural hazard in the philippines. Routledge-
Curzon, New York, NY.

Joseph Baumgartner. 1989. The controversy about the
national language: Some observations. Philippine
Quarterly of Culture and Society, 168-172.

BBC News Asia. 2013. “Typhoon Haiyan:
Aid in numbers.” 14 Nov 2013. BBC News.
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-pacific-
24899006

CDRC Admin. 2013. “Philippines is most disaster-
affected country in 2012.” 8 Apr 2013. Citizens’
Disaster Response Center. http://www.cdrc-
phil.com/philippines-is-most-disaster-affected-
country-in-2012/

Adam Crowe. 2012. Disasters 2.0: The application
of social media systems for modern emergency man-
agement. CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL.

93



Juiji Gao, Geoffrey Barbier, and Rebecca Goolsby.
2011. Harnessing the crowdsourcing power of so-
cial media for disaster relief. Intelligent Systems,
IEEE, 26(3), pp.10,14, May-June 2011.

Global WebIndex. 2011. “Global Map
of Social Networking 2011.” GlobalWe-
bIndex.Net. https://globalwebindex.net/wp-
content/uploads/downloads/2011/06/Global-Map-
of-Social-Networking-GlobalWebIndex-June-
20112.pdf

Andrew Gonzalez. 1998. The language planning situ-
ation in the Philippines. Journal of Multilingual and
Multicultural Development. 19(5), 487-525.

Eva-Maria Gortner and James W. Pennebaker. 2003.
The archival anatomy of a disaster: Media cover-
age and community-wide health effects of the Texas
A&M bonfire tragedy. Journal of Social and Clini-
cal Psychology. 22, 580-603.

Mark Maybury. 2010. “Social Radar for
Smart Power.” The MITRE Corporation.
http://www.mitre.org/sites/default/files/pdf/10 0745.pdf

Seema Nagar, Aaditeshwar Seth, and Anupam Joshi.
2012. Characterization of social media response to
natural disasters. Proceedings of the 21st interna-
tional conference companion on World Wide Web
(WWW ’12 Companion), ACM, 671-674.

Iluminado Nical, Jerzy J. Smolicz, and Margaret J. Sec-
ombe. 2004. Rural students and the Philippine
bilingual education program on the island of Leyte.
Medium of instruction policies - Which agenda?
Whose agenda?, 153-176. Lawrence Erlbaum As-
sociates, Mahwah, NJ.

James W. Pennebaker, Roger J. Booth, and Martha E.
Francis. 2007. Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count:
LIWC2007 Operators manual. LIWC.net.

Andy Pilkington. 2011 “Axe shows consistency
is key to a successful multi-lingual page in
the Philippines.” 26 Oct 2011. WaveMetrix.
http://wave.wavemetrix.com/content/axe-shows-
consistency-key-successful-multi-lingual-page-
philippines-00844

Les Servi and Sara Beth Elson. 2012. A mathematical
approach to identifying and forecasting shifts in the
mood of social media users. The MITRE Corpora-
tion. Bedford, MA.

Paul Schachter, and Fe T. Otanes. 1972. Tagalog Ref-
erence Grammar. University of California Press,
Berkeley, CA.

A Appendix

The completed dictionary is included in the fol-
lowing table. consists of the Tagalog and English
columns. In some cases, multiple dictionary en-
tries correspond to the same Tagalog lexeme. For
example:

bagyong
bagyo-ng
storm-LIGATURE

For more on Tagalog grammar, see Schachter
and Otanes 1972.

Tagalog English
bagyo storm
bagyong storm
baha flood
bahang flood
biktima victims
hangin wind
lindol earthquake
lumikas evacuate
nagsilikas refugees
nasawi casualty
sagip rescue
sagipin rescue
sinalanta devastated
sugatan wounded
tulong help
tumulong help
tumutulong help
ulan rain

94


