



















































Propositions, Questions, and Adjectives: a rich type theoretic approach


Proceedings of the EACL 2014 Workshop on Type Theory and Natural Language Semantics (TTNLS), pages 89–96,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Propositions, Questions, and Adjectives: a rich type theoretic approach
Jonathan Ginzburg

CLILLAC-ARP
& Laboratoire d’Excellence (LabEx)–Empirical Foundations of Linguistics

Université Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne Paris-Cité
yonatan.ginzburg@univ-paris-diderot.fr

Robin Cooper Tim Fernando
University of Gothenburg Trinity College, Dublin
cooper@ling.gu.se Tim.Fernando@cs.tcd.ie

Abstract

We consider how to develop types cor-
responding to propositions and questions.
Starting with the conception of Proposi-
tions as Types, we consider two empirical
challenges for this doctrine. The first re-
lates to the putative need for a single type
encompassing questions and propositions
in order to deal with Boolean operations.
The second relates to adjectival modifica-
tion of question and propositional entities.
We partly defuse the Boolean challenge
by showing that the data actually argue
against a single type covering questions
and propositions. We show that by ana-
lyzing both propositions and questions as
records within Type Theory with Records
(TTR), we can define Boolean operations
over these distinct semantic types. We ac-
count for the adjectival challenge by em-
bedding the record types defined to deal
with Boolean operations within a theory of
semantic frames formulated within TTR.

1 Introduction

Propositions as types has long been viewed as a
sine qua non of many a type theoretic approach to
semantics (see e.g., the seminal work of (Ranta,
1994)). Although this has lead to a variety of
very elegant formal accounts, one can question its
appropriateness as a type for NL propositions—
the denotata of declaratives and of nouns such as
‘claim’ and the objects of assertion. One imme-
diate issue concerns semantic selection—how to
specify the semantic types of predicates such as
‘believe’ and ‘assert’ so that they will not select
for e.g., the type of biscuits or the type of natural
numbers, given their inappropriateness as objects
of belief or assertion. However, one resolves this
issue, we point to two other significant challenges:

1. Recently there have been a number of pro-
posals that questions and propositions are of a
single ontological category (see (Nelken and
Francez, 2002; Nelken and Shan, 2006)) and
most influentially work in Inquisitive Seman-
tics (IS) (Groenendijk and Roelofsen, 2009).
A significant argument for this is examples
like (1), where propositions and questions
can apparently be combined by boolean con-
nectives.

(1) If Kim is not available, who should
we ask to give the talk?

In Inquisitive Semantics, such data are han-
dled by postulating a common type for ques-
tions and propositions as sets of sets of
worlds. It is not a priori clear how propo-
sitions as types can account for such cases.

2. Adjectives pose a challenge to all existing
theories of questions and propositions, pos-
sible worlds based (e.g., (Karttunen, 1977;
Groenendijk and Stokhof, 1997; Groenendijk
and Roelofsen, 2009), or type theoretic, as in
Type Theory with Records (TTR, (Cooper,
2012; Ginzburg, 2012)). There is nothing
in the semantic entity associated with a po-
lar question as in (2), be it a two cell parti-
tion (as in partition semantics) or a constant
function from records into propositions (as in
Ginzburg 2012) that will allow it to distin-
guish difficult from easy questions. Similarly,
since the denotation of a question is not con-
ceived as an event, this denotation is not ap-
propriate for the adjective quick:

(2) A: I have a quick question: is every
number above 2 the sum of two
primes?

B: That’s a difficult question.

89



And yet, these two distinct classes of adjec-
tives can simultaneously apply to a question
together with ‘resolved’, a target of all exist-
ing theories of questions, as in (3), calling for
a unified notion of question:

(3) The quick question you just posed
is difficult and for the moment unre-
solved.

‘Difficult’ and ‘silly’ apply to both proposi-
tional and question entities, suggesting the
need for a unified meaning for the adjective
and a means of specifying its selection so
that it can modify both questions and propo-
sitions:

(4) a. silly claim (a claim silly to assert)
b. silly question (a question silly to

ask);
c. difficult claim (a claim difficult to

prove)

In this paper we partly defuse the Boolean
challenge by showing that the data actually ar-
gue against a single type covering questions and
propositions. We show that by analyzing both
propositions and questions as records within TTR,
we can define Boolean operations over these dis-
tinct semantic types. We then propose to deal
with the adjectival challenge by embedding the
types initially defined within a theory of semantic
frames (Fillmore, 1985; Pustejovsky, 1995) for-
mulated within TTR.

2 Questions and Propositions: a unified
semantic type?

Although there has been a recent trend to assume
a commonality of type for questions and propo-
sitions, both Hamblin and Karttunen gave argu-
ments for distinguishing questions as an ontologi-
cal category from propositions—(Hamblin, 1958)
pointing out that interrogatives lack truth values;
to which one can add their incompatibility with a
wider scoping alethic modality:

(5) a. It’s true/false who came yesterday

b. # Necessarily, who will leave tomorrow?

Whereas (Karttunen, 1977) pointed to the exis-
tence of predicates that select interrogatives, but
not for declaratives and vice versa:

(6) a. Bo asked/investigated/wondered/#
believed /# claimed who came yesterday.

b. Bo # asked/# investigated/# wondered/
believed /claimed that Mary came yester-
day.

We argue that although speech acts involving
questions and propositions can be combined by
boolean connectives they are not closed under
boolean operations. Furthermore, we argue that
the propositions and questions qua semantic ob-
jects cannot be combined by boolean operations
at all. This, together with the examples above,
strongly suggests that questions and propositions
are distinct types of semantic objects.

We use embedding under attitude verbs as a test
for propositions and questions as semantic objects.
Here we do not find mixed boolean combinations
of questions and propositions. Thus, for exam-
ple, wonder selects for an embedded question and
believe for an embedded proposition but a mixed
conjunction does not work with either, showing
that it is neither a question nor a proposition:

(7) The manager *wonders/*believes that
several people left and what rooms we
need to clean.

The verb know is compatible with both
interrogative and declarative complements,
though(Vendler, 1972; Ginzburg and Sag, 2000)
argue that such predicates do not take questions or
propositions as genuine arguments (i.e. not purely
referentially), but involve coercions which leads
to a predication of a fact. The well formedness
of these coercion processes require that sentences
involving decl/int conjunctions such as (8) can
only be understood where the verb is distributed
over the two conjuncts: “knows that John’s smart
and knows what qualifications he has”:

(8) The manager knows that John’s smart and
what qualifications he has.

Compare (9a,b)—in the second mixed case
there is only a reading which entails that it is sur-
prising the conference was held at the usual time
whereas arguably in the first sentence only the
conjunction but not the individual conjuncts need
be surprising.

(9) a. It’s surprising that the conference was
held at the usual time and so few people
registered.

90



b. It’s surprising that the conference was
held at the usual time and how few peo-
ple registered.

Embedded conditional questions are impossible
although, of course, embedded questions contain-
ing conditionals are fine:

(10) *The manager wonders if Hollande left,
whether we need to clean the west wing.

a. The manager wonders whether, if Hol-
lande left, we need to clean the west wing.

Why, then, do apparent mixed boolean com-
binations appear in root sentences? Our answer
is that natural language connectives, in addition
to their function as logical connectives combin-
ing propositions, can be used to combine speech
acts into another single speech act. This, however,
can only be expressed in root sentences and speech
acts are not closed under operations correspond-
ing to boolean connectives. For example in (11a),
where a query follows an assertion is fine whereas
the combination of an assertion with a preceding
query is not, as in (11b):

(11) a. John’s very smart but does he have any
qualifications?

b. *Does John have any qualifications
and/but he’s smart

This is puzzling because a discourse corre-
sponding to a string of the same separate speech
acts works well:

(12) Does John have any qualifications? (no
answer) But he’s smart.

Similarly, while we can apparently conditionalize
a query with a proposition, we cannot conditional-
ize an assertion with a question, nor can we condi-
tionalize a query with a question:

(13) a. If Hollande left, do we need to clean the
west wing? ( “If Hollande left, I ask you
whether we need to clean the west wing”),

b. *If whether Hollande left/did Hollande
leave, we need to clean the west wing?

c. *If who left, do we need to clean the west
wing?

However we treat these facts, it seems clear that
it would be dangerous to collapse questions and
propositions into the same type of semantic object
and allow general application of semantic boolean
operators. This would seem to force you into a sit-
uation where you have to predict acceptability of
these sentences purely on the basis of a theory of
syntax, although semantically/pragmatically they
would have made perfect sense. It seems to us that
distinguishing between questions and propositions
and combinations of speech acts offers a more ex-
planatory approach.

3 Austinian Types for Propositions and
Questions

3.1 TTR as synthesizing Constructive Type
Theory and Situation Semantics

The system we sketch is formulated in TTR
(Cooper, 2012). TTR is a framework that draws its
inspirations from two quite distinct sources. One
source is Constructive Type Theory, whence the
repertory of type constructors, and in particular
records and record types, and the notion of wit-
nessing conditions. The second source is situa-
tion semantics (Barwise and Perry, 1983; Barwise,
1989) which TTR follows in viewing semantics as
ontology construction. This is what underlies the
emphasis on specifying structures in a model the-
oretic way, introducing structured objects for ex-
plicating properties, propositions, questions etc. It
also takes from situation semantics an emphasis on
partiality as a key feature of information process-
ing. This aspect is exemplified in a key assumption
of TTR—the witnessing relation between records
and record types: the basic relationship between
the two is that a record r is of type RT if each
value in r assigned to a given label li satisfies the
typing constraints imposed by RT on li:

(14) record witnessing

The record:
l1 = a1
l2 = a2
. . .
ln = an


is of type:


l1 : T1
l2 : T2(l1)
. . .
ln : Tn(l1, l2, . . . , ln−1)



91



iff a1 : T1, a2 : T2(a1), . . . , an :
Tn(a1, a2, . . . , an−1)

This allows for cases where there are fields in
the record with labels not mentioned in the record
type. This is important when e.g., records are used
to model contexts and record types model rules
about context change—we do not want to have to
predict in advance all information that could be
in a context when writing such rules. (15) illus-
trates this: the record (15a) is of the type (15b),
though the former has also a field for FACTS;
(15b) constitutes the preconditions for a greeting,
where FACTS—the contextual presuppositions—
has no role to play.

(15) a.


spkr = A
addr = B
utt-time = t1
c1 = p1

Moves =
〈〉

qud =
{}

facts = cg1


b.



spkr : IND
addr : IND
utt-time : TIME
c1 : addressing(spkr,addr,utt-time)

Moves =
〈〉

: list(LocProp)

qud =
{}

: set(Question)


3.2 Propositions
Our starting point is the situation semantics no-
tion of an Austinian proposition (Barwise and
Etchemendy, 1987). (Ginzburg, 2012) introduces
Austinian propositions as records of the form:

(16)

[
sit = s
sit-type = T

]
This gives us a type theoretic object correspond-

ing to a judgement. The type of Austinian proposi-
tions is the record type (17a),where the type Rec-
Type† is a basic type which denotes the type of
(non-dependent) record types closed under meet,
join and negation.1 Truth conditions for Austinian

1When we say ‘the type of record types’, this should be
understood in a relative, not absolute way. That is, this means
the type of record types up to some level of stratification, oth-
erwise foundational problems such as russellian paradoxes
can potentially ensue. See (Cooper, 2012) for discussion and
a more careful development.

propositions are defined in (17b):

(17) a. AustProp =def[
sit : Rec
sit-type : RecType†

]

b. A proposition p =[
sit = s0
sit-type = ST0

]
is true iff

s0 : ST0

We introduce negative types by the clause in
(18a). Motivated in part by data concerning nega-
tive perception complements ((Barwise and Perry,
1983; Cooper, 1998), we can characterize wit-
nesses for negative types by (18b).

(18) a. If T is a type then ¬T is a type

b. a : ¬T iff there is some T ′ such that a : T ′
and T ′ precludes T . We assume the exis-
tence of a binary, irreflexive and symmet-
ric relation of preclusion which satisfies
also the following specification:
T ′ precludes T iff either (i) T = ¬T ′ or,
(ii) T, T ′ are non-negative and there is no
a such that a : T and a : T ′ for any mod-
els assigning witnesses to basic types and
p(red)types

(19a) and (19b) follow from these two defini-
tions:

(19) a. a : ¬¬T iff a : T
b. a : T ∨¬T is not necessary (a may not be

of type T and there may not be any type
which precludes T either).

Thus this negation is a hybrid of classical and
intuitionistic negation in that (19a) normally holds
for classical negation but not intuitionistic whereas
(19b), that is failure of the law of the excluded
middle, normally holds for intuitionistic negation
but not classical negation.

The type of negative (positive) Austinian propo-
sitions can be defined as (20a,b), respctively:

(20) a.

[
sit : Rec
sit-type : RecType¬†

]

b.

[
sit : Rec
sit-type : RecType

]

92



If p:Prop and p.sit-type is T1 ∧ T2
(T1 ∨ T2) we say that p is the conjunction
(disjunction) of

[
sit = p.sit
sit-type = T1

]
and[

sit = p.sit
sit-type = T2

]
.

3.3 Questions

Extensive motivation for the view of questions
as propositional abstracts has been provided in
(Ginzburg, 1995; Ginzburg and Sag, 2000)—TTR
contributes to this by providing an improved no-
tion of simultaneous, restricted abstraction: A (ba-
sic, non-compound) question is a function from
records into propositions. In particular, a polar
question is a 0-ary propositional abstract, which
in TTR makes it a constant function from the uni-
verse of all records into propositions. We pro-
pose a refinement of this view which we believe
maintains the essential insights of the proposi-
tional function approach, motivated in part by the
need to enable conjunction and disjunction to be
defined for questions.

We introduce a notion of Austinian questions
defined as records containing a record and a func-
tion into record types, the latter associated with
the label ‘abstr(act)’. The role of wh-words on
this view is to specify the domains of these func-
tions; in the case of polar questions there is no re-
striction, hence the function component of such a
question is a constant function. (21) exemplifies
this for a unary ‘who’ question and a polar ques-
tion:

(21) a. Who =
[

x1 : Ind
c1 : person(x1)

]
; Whether = Rec;

b. ‘Who runs’ 7→sit =r1
abstr = λr:Who(

[
c : run(r.x1)

]
)

;

c. ‘Whether Bo runs’ 7→sit =r1
abstr = λr:Whether(

[
c : run(b)

]
)


We characterize the type AustQuestion within

TTR by means of the parametric type given in
(22); the parametric component of the type char-
acterizes the range of abstracts that build up ques-
tions:

(22) AustQuestion(T) =def[
sit : Rec
abstr : (T → RecType)

]

Given this, we define the following relation be-
tween a situation and a function, which is the ba-
sis for defining key coherence answerhood no-
tions such as resolvedness and aboutness (weak
partial answerhood (Ginzburg and Sag, 2000))
and question dependence (cf. erotetic implica-
tion,(Wiśniewski, 2001)):

(23) s resolves q, where q is λr : (T1)T2, (in
symbols s?q) iff either

(i) for some a : T1 s : q(a),
or

(ii) a : T1 implies s : ¬q(a)

Austinian questions can be conjoined and dis-
joined though not negated. The definition for
conj/disj-unction, from which it follows that q1
and (or) q2 is resolved iff q1 is resolved and (or)
q2 is resolved, is as follows:

(24)

[
sit = s
abstr = λr : T1 (T2)

]
∧ (∨)[

sit = s
abstr = λr : T3 (T4)

]
=

sit = s

abstr = λr:

[
left:T1
right:T3

]
(q1(r.left) ∧ (∨)q2(r.right))


Following (Cooper and Ginzburg, 2012)) we ar-

gue that “negative questions” involve questions re-
lating to negative propositions rather than nega-
tions of positive questions. As Cooper and
Ginzburg show, such negative questions are cru-
cially distinct from the corresponding positive
question. Since we have a clear way of distin-
guishing negative and positive propositions, we do
not conflate positive and negative polar questions.

4 Connectives in dialogue

We assume a gameboard dialogue semantics
(Ginzburg, 2012) which keeps track of questions
under discussion (QUD). One of the central con-
versational rules in KoS is QSPEC, a conversa-
tional rule that licenses either speaker to follow
up q, the maximal element in QUD with asser-
tions and queries whose QUD update Depends on

93



q. These in turn become MaxQUD. Consequently,
QSPEC seems to be able to handle the commonest
case of successive questions, as in (25).

(25)

a. Ann: Anyway, talking of over the road,
where is she? Is she home?
Betty: No. She’s in the Cottage.

b. Arthur: How old is she? Forty?
Evelyn: Forty one!

Nonetheless, not all cases of successive ques-
tions do involve a second question which is a sub-
question of the first, as exemplified in (26):

(26) On the substantive front, we now have
preliminary answers to two key ques-
tions: What did the agency do wrong?
And who ordered it to target conservative
groups? Notwithstanding Miller’s resig-
nation, which the President himself an-
nounced on Tuesday evening, the answers
appear to be: not nearly as much as re-
cent headlines suggest; and, nobody in
the Obama Administration. (The New
Yorker, May 16, 2013)

In contrast to cases covered by QSPEC, these
cases are strange if the second question is posed
by the addressee of the first question—one gets the
feeling that the original question was ignored:

(27) A: What did the agency do wrong? B:
Who ordered it to target conservative
groups?

(Ginzburg, 2012) postulates an additional con-
versational rule that allows a speaker to follow up
an initial question with a non-influencing question,
where the initial question remains QUD-maximal.
We believes this basic treatment allows one to ex-
plain how the mixed cases involving conjunctions
of assertions and queries can be captured. and,but
and or can be used as discourse particles which
express a relationship between a speech act and
the one preceding it:

• and can indicate that the following question
is Independent of MaxQUD.

• but indicates that the following question
is not independent, but unexpected given
MaxQUD:

– John’s smart (no response) But what
qualifications does he have?

– John’s smart might be offered as an en-
thymematic argument (Breitholtz, 2011;
Breitholtz and Cooper, 2011) to a con-
clusion, e.g. “we should hire John”. but
indicates that the answer to the ques-
tion might present an enthymematic ar-
gument against this conclusion.

• or can indicate that q1 addresses the same
ultimate issue as MaxQUD, so retain both
as MaxQUD; sufficient to address one issue
since it will resolve both simultaneously:

(28) a. Would you like coffee and biscuits
or would you like some fruit or a
piece of bread and jam or what do
you fancy?

b. are you gonna stay on another day or
what are you doing?

c. David Foster Wallace is overrated
or which novel by him refutes this
view?

5 Abstract Entities and Adjectives

How to deal with adjectival modification of propo-
sitional and question entities, exemplified in (3,4)
above? The extended notion of question required
can be explicated within Cooper 2012’s theory
of semantic frames, inspired by (Fillmore, 1985;
Pustejovsky, 1995). Neither Ty2 (Groenendijk and
Stokhof, 1997) nor inquisitive semantics in propo-
sitional or first order formulation support the de-
velopment of such an ontology. Cooper formu-
lates a frame as a record type (RT). In (29) we
exemplify a possible frame for question. Here,
the illoc role represents a question’s role in dis-
course, whereas the telic role describes the goal of
the process associated with resolving a question
— finding a resolving answer. The frame repre-
sents a ‘default’ view of a question, which vari-
ous in effect non-subsective adjectives can modify
(e.g., ‘unspoken question’ negates the existence
of an associated utterance, while ‘open question’
negates the end point of the resolution event).2

2Here Resolve maps an austinian proposition and an aus-
tinian question to a predicate type. In a more detailed account
one would add an additional argument for an information
state, given the arguments that this notion is agent–relative
(Ginzburg, 1995) and much subsequent literature.

94



(29) Question =def

T : Type
external : AustQuestion(T),

illoc :


u : Event
A : Ind
c2 : Ask(A,external,u)


telic :

[
p : AustProp
c1 : Resolve(p,external)

]


A type-driven compositional analysis is for-

mulated with adjectives as record type modifiers
(functions from RTs to RTs) that pick out frame el-
ements of the appropriate type (for a related view
cf. Asher & Luo 2012). For example, difficult
question has the record type in (30):

(30)


T : Type
external : AustQuestion

telic :

[
p : AustProp
c1 : difficult(Resolve(p,external))

]


Records and record types come with a well-
known notion of subtyping, often construed syn-
tactically (see e.g., (Betarte and Tasistro, 1998)).
However, given our ontological perspective on se-
mantics, we take a semantic perspective on sub-
typing (see e.g. (Frisch et al., 2008) for a detailed
exposition of such an approach.), wherein T < T ′

iff {s|s : T} ⊂ {s|s : T ′}. Given this, a record of
the type (29) above can be viewed as also having
type:

(31)
[

T : Type
external : AustQuestion(T)

]
This forms the basis of our account of how an

adjective such as difficult applies simultaneously
to question and to path. Difficult is specified as
in (32)— a function from record types subsumed
by the record type given in the domain whose
output involves a modification of the restriction
field of the telic role. This yields (32b) when
combined with question and (32c) when combined
with path:3

(32) a. f : (RT <
external : Type
P : Type

telic :
[
c1 : P

]

)RT[P;difficult(P)]

3Here difficult maps any type P into the predicate type
difficult(P ). One probably needs to narrow this specifica-
tion somewhat.

b.


T : Type
external : AustQuestion(T)

telic :

[
p : AustProp
c1 : difficult(Resolve(p,external))

]


c.


external : PhysTrajectory

telic :

[
a : Ind
c1 : difficult(Cross(a,external))

]


Turning to propositions, we postulate (33) as a
type for proposition. This allows us, for instance,
to specify the adjective silly as modifying along
the illoc dimension, thereby capturing silly claim
(a claim silly to assert) and silly question (a ques-
tion silly to ask); given the specification of the telic
dimension and our lexical entry for difficult, diffi-
cult claim is correctly predicted to mean ‘a claim
difficult to prove’.

(33) Proposition =def

external : AustProp,

illoc :


u : Event
A : Ind
c2 : Assert(A,external,u)


telic :

[
f : Fact
c1 : Prove(f,external)

]


Subject matter adjectives such as political, per-

sonal, moral, philosophical as in (34) lead us to
another intrinsic advantage for rich type theories
such as TTR over possible worlds based type the-
ories, relating to the types AustQuestion/Prop.

(34) a. A: Are you involved with Demi Lovato?
B: That’s a personal question.

b. A: One shouldn’t eat meat. B:
That’s a moral claim.

Subject matter adjectives target the external role
of a question/proposition. This can be explicated
on the basis of the predicate types which consti-
tute the sit-type (abstr type) field in propositions
(questions). Given the coarse granularity of possi-
ble worlds, it to unclear how to do so in ontologies
based on sets of possible worlds.

Acknowledgments

Earlier versions of portions of this work were
presented at the workshop Conference on Logic,

95



Questions and Inquiry (LoQI) in Paris and at a
course on TTR given in June 2013 in Gothen-
burg. We thanks audiences on those occasions, as
well as two anonymous referees for very stimu-
lating comments. This work is supported by the
French Investissements d’Avenir–Labex EFL pro-
gram (ANR-10-LABX-0083).

References
Jon Barwise and John Etchemendy. 1987. The Liar.

Oxford University Press, New York.

Jon Barwise and John Perry. 1983. Situations and At-
titudes. Bradford Books. MIT Press, Cambridge.

Jon Barwise. 1989. The Situation in Logic. CSLI Lec-
ture Notes. CSLI Publications, Stanford.

Gustavo Betarte and Alvaro Tasistro. 1998. Martin-
löf’s type theory with record types and subtyping.
In G. Sambin and J. Smith, editors, 25 Years of Con-
structive Type Theory. Oxford University Press.

Ellen Breitholtz and Robin Cooper. 2011. En-
thymemes as rhetorical resources. In Ron Artstein,
Mark Core, David DeVault, Kallirroi Georgila, Elsi
Kaiser, and Amanda Stent, editors, SemDial 2011
(Los Angelogue): Proceedings of the 15th Workshop
on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue.

Ellen Breitholtz. 2011. Enthymemes under Discus-
sion: Towards a micro-rhetorical approach to dia-
logue modelling. In Proceedings of SPR-11 ILCLI
International Workshop on Semantics, Pragmatics,
and Rhetoric Donostia, 9-11 November 2011.

R. Cooper and J. Ginzburg. 2012. Negative inquisi-
tiveness and alternatives-based negation. In Maria
Aloni, Vadim Kimmelman, Floris Roelofsen, Gal-
itW. Sassoon, Katrin Schulz, and Matthijs West-
era, editors, Logic, Language and Meaning, volume
7218 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
32–41. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Robin Cooper. 1998. Austinian propositions,
davidsonian events and perception complements.
In Jonathan Ginzburg, Zurab Khasidashvili,
Jean Jacques Levy, Carl Vogel, and Enric Vallduvi,
editors, The Tbilisi Symposium on Logic, Language,
and Computation: Selected Papers, Foundations of
Logic, Language, and Information, pages 19–34.
CSLI Publications, Stanford.

Robin Cooper. 2012. Type theory and semantics in
flux. In Ruth Kempson, Nicholas Asher, and Tim
Fernando, editors, Handbook of the Philosophy of
Science, volume 14: Philosophy of Linguistics. El-
sevier, Amsterdam.

C.J. Fillmore. 1985. Frames and the semantics of un-
derstanding. Quaderni di semantica, 6(2):222–254.

Alain Frisch, Giuseppe Castagna, and Véronique Ben-
zaken. 2008. Semantic subtyping: Dealing set-
theoretically with function, union, intersection, and
negation types. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
55(4):19.

Jonathan Ginzburg and Ivan A. Sag. 2000. Interrog-
ative Investigations: the form, meaning and use of
English Interrogatives. Number 123 in CSLI Lec-
ture Notes. CSLI Publications, Stanford: California.

Jonathan Ginzburg. 1995. Resolving questions, i. Lin-
guistics and Philosophy, 18:459–527.

Jonathan Ginzburg. 2012. The Interactive Stance:
Meaning for Conversation. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.

J. Groenendijk and F. Roelofsen. 2009. Inquisitive se-
mantics and pragmatics. In Meaning, Content, and
Argument: Proceedings of the ILCLI International
Workshop on Semantics, Pragmatics, and Rhetoric.
www. illc. uva. nl/inquisitive-semantics.

Jeroen Groenendijk and Martin Stokhof. 1997. Ques-
tions. In Johan van Benthem and Alice ter Meulen,
editors, Handbook of Logic and Linguistics. North
Holland, Amsterdam.

C. L. Hamblin. 1958. Questions. Australian Journal
of Philosophy, 36:159–168.

Lauri Karttunen. 1977. Syntax and semantics of ques-
tions. Linguistics and Philosophy, 1:3–44.

Rani Nelken and Nissim Francez. 2002. Bilattices and
the semantics of natural language questions. Lin-
guistics and Philosophy, 25:37–64.

Rani Nelken and Chung-Chieh Shan. 2006. A modal
interpretation of the logic of interrogation. Journal
of Logic, Language, and Information, 15:251–271.

James Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon.
MIT Press, Cambridge.

Aarne Ranta. 1994. Type Theoretical Grammar. Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford.

Zeno Vendler. 1972. Res Cogitans. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca.

Andrzej Wiśniewski. 2001. Questions and inferences.
Logique et Analyse, 173:5–43.

96


