









































Toshiba MT System Description for the WAT2014 Workshop

Satoshi Sonoh, Satoshi Kinoshita, Hiroyuki Tanaka and Satoshi Kamatani

Knowledge Media Laboratory, Corporate Research & Development Center,
Toshiba Corporation.

1, Komukai Toshiba-cho, Saiwai-ku, Kawasaki 212-8582, JAPAN
satoshi.sonoo@toshiba.co.jp

Abstract

This paper provides a system description
of Toshiba Machine Translation System
for WAT2014. We participated in two
tasks, namely Japanese-English transla-
tion and Japanese-Chinese translation. In
each task, we submitted two results; one is
a result of a rule-based translation system,
and the other is a result which is an output
of statistical post editing trained with the
ASPEC training corpora. In both tasks,
output by statistical post editing shows
improvement in machine evaluation, but
we obtained different results from human
evaluation.

1 Introduction

Toshiba has been developing a Rule-Based Ma-
chine Translation (RBMT) system. Recently, open
parallel corpora such as ASPEC1 are available
for development of machine translation systems.
However, it is extremely high cost to develop a
large volume of parallel corpora in wide-domain
for commercial use. For this reason, we have de-
veloped translation functions by using a monolin-
gual corpus in the target language in order to im-
prove performance. For example, a target word
selection is possible based on co-occurrence re-
lationship extracted from a monolingual corpus
(Suzuki and Kumano, 2005). Moreover, we tack-
led a domain adaptation by using a parallel corpus
and proposed a system which consists of RBMT
and statistical post editing (SPE) (Suzuki, 2011).
Furthermore, we have developed a word sense dis-
ambiguation based on a monolingual corpus in the
target domain, and it has been applied to Japanese-
Korean/Korean-Japanese translation system (Ku-
mano, 2012).

1http://lotus.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/ASPEC/

In this evaluation task, we submitted two types
of results for each Japanese-English translation
and Japanese-Chinese translation (Nakazawa et
al., 2014). One is our RBMT system which is de-
veloped for translating open domain written texts.
The other is a combination of RBMT and SPE
which is trained by the target domain corpus.

Section 2 describes the overview of our system.
The preparation and results for the task are shown
in Section 3 and 4. A context-aware translation
is discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 con-
cludes this paper.

2 Overview of Toshiba System

2.1 Baseline System

Our system realizes transfer-based machine trans-
lation (Izuha et al., 2008). The core frame-
work consists of morphological analysis, syntac-
tic/semantic analysis, target word selection, struc-
tural transfer, syntactic generation and morpho-
logical generation. Furthermore, huge amount of
rules as translation knowledge including word dic-
tionaries can realize both high translation perfor-
mance and flexibility of customization.

2.2 Statistical Post Editing

Although RBMT may preserve a certain level of
adequacy in expected domain such as a manual
document, translation knowledge for target word
selection is not enough for a specific domain.
Moreover, fluency for RBMT output is typically
low in comparison with Statistical Machine Trans-
lation (SMT).

Statistical post editing by using phrase-based
SMT has been proposed and it is an efficient
method which is able to adapt translation output to
the target domain (Simard et al., 2007). The com-
bination of RBMT and SPE has the potential to
improve the translation quality without additional
rules (Simard et al., 2007).

26
Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Asian Translation (WAT2014), pages 26‒32,

Tokyo, Japan, 4th October 2014.
2014 Copyright is held by the author(s).



In the evaluation task, we realized SPE based on
phrase-based SMT (Kohen et al., 2003) by using
the training corpus (1.0M sentences for English,
0.67M for Chinese) and its translation output by
our RBMT system. We used Moses tools (Kohen
et al., 2007) for English tokenization, and Kytea
(Neubig et al., 2011) for Chinese.

3 Preparation for the Task

3.1 Selecting Technical Term Dictionaries

As a preparation for the evaluation task, we se-
lected technical term dictionaries which improve
the baseline system. Toshiba provides customers
with technical term dictionaries so that they can
get better translation in their target domains. Table
1 shows a list of technical term dictionaries, which
contain about 3 million words and 460 thousand
words in total for Japanese-English and Japanese-
Chinese translation systems respectively. But us-
ing all the available dictionaries does not necessar-
ily lead to better translations because even a tech-
nical term for one domain should be translated dif-
ferently in another domain.

To choose the best dictionary sets, we con-
ducted two-step evaluation using the devset of AS-
PEC corpus. The first step is to find which techni-
cal term dictionary is useful or not by comparing
the BLEU score with that of the baseline system2.
The second step is to decide the best combination
of dictionaries which are judged useful in the first
step by adding them to the baseline system one by
one as long as the addition gives a higher BLEU
score.

In Japanese-English translation, 10 out of 18
technical term dictionaries provide better trans-
lations than the baseline system as shown in
Table 2(a). In the second step, we started
from adding two dictionaries, “namely Chem-
istry” and “Medicine/Pharmacology 2”, and found
that adding 4 technical dictionaries gave the best
BLEU score as shown in Table 2(b).

In Japanese-Chinese translation, the first step
showed that only two dictionaries provided bet-
ter translations than the baseline system. We con-
firmed that this combination provides better result
than those obtained in the previous step as shown
in Table 2(c) and (d).

2The baseline system used technical dictionaries (“Proper
noun” and “Internet”) as default setting. For Japanese-
English, “Natural/Social Sciences” is also used because the
target domain is scientific papers.

JE JC dictionary name
x - Architecture/Civil Engineering
x x Auto
x x Biology
x x Business
x x Chemistry
x x Electricity/Electronics
x x Finance/Law
x x Industrial Technology
x x Information/Telecommunication
x x Internet
x - Japanese Scientific Terms
x - JIS Terms
x - Math/Physics
x x Mechanics
x - Medicine (Basic/Clinical）
x - Medicine/Pharmacology (Regula-

tory terms）
x x Medicine/Pharmacology 1
x x Medicine/Pharmacology 2
x - Military/Defense
x - Natural Science
x - Natural/Social Sciences
x - Nichigai/ Science and Technology

(Basic Science）
x - Nichigai/Medicine (Basic)
x - Nichigai/Medicine (Related fields)
x - Nichigai/Science and Technology

(Engineering）
x - Nichigai/Science and Technology

(Science/Medicine）
x - Nuclear Studies
x - Production/Quality
x x Proper Nouns (standard)
x - Proper Nouns (technical)
x - Textile/Garment
x x Transportation/Logistics

Table 1: List of technical term dictionaries.

27



ID dictionary name BLUE
1 Chemistry 16.04
2 Medicine/Pharmacology 2 15.95
3 Nichigai/Science and Technol-

ogy (Science/Medicine）
15.93

4 Medicine (Basic/Clinical） 15.92
5 Natural/Social Sciences 15.89
6 Nichigai/Medicine (Basic) 15.88
7 Biology 15.88
8 Math/Physics 15.85
9 Information/Telecommunication 15.84

10 Nichigai/Medicine (Related
fields)

15.81

　 Baseline 15.47

(a) Result of step 1 for JE

dictionary ID BLUE
1+2 16.11

1+2+3 16.15
1+2+3+4 16.21

(b) Result of step 2 for JE

ID dictionary name BLUE
1 Chemistry 18.89
2 Biology 18.86
　 Baseline 18.73

(c) Result of step 1 for JC

dictionary ID BLUE
1+2 18.92

(d) Result of step 2 for JC

Table 2: BLEU scores after adding technical term
dictionaries.

3.2 Building Additional Dictionaries

To improve the performance of the baseline sys-
tem, we have built additional dictionaries for
Japanese-Chinese system by using the given train-
ing data. We first built a SMT system by using
the standard Moses system, and extracted word
pairs whose co-occurrence ratio is more than 0.7
from the phrase table. By using sentence pairs
in the training corpus, we got about 10,000 word
pairs as dictionary entry candidates. After filter-
ing noisy results, we checked them manually and
got about 5,400 terms for this task. By using this
dictionary additionally, BLEU score for the devel-
opment data was improved from 18.92 to 18.98.
For Japanese-English system, we have built no ad-
ditional dictionary.

Because the effect of the additional dictionary

was little, finally, we used only selected technical
dictionaries, and not use the additional dictionary.

4 Results

This section shows the evaluation results of our
systems. We analyzed the relationship between
machine evaluation and human evaluation. In ad-
dition to the human evaluation provided by WAT
2014, we evaluated the output by relative rank-
ing of 1(best) to 3(worse) for the three systems
including RBMT, RBMT with SPE and phrase-
based SMT.

4.1 Japanese-English results
Table 3 summarizes the evaluation results of
Japanese-English translation systems. In the
machine evaluation, BLUE score for our tuned
RBMT is 15.69 and 20.61 for RBMT with SPE,
respectively. Adopting SPE achieved an improve-
ment of 31.4% in BLUE score.

System BLUE RIBES HUMAN RANK
RBMT 15.69 0.69 20.25 1.38

+SPE 20.61 0.71 23.25 1.45
SMT 18.45 0.65 - 2.24

Table 3: Japanese-English evaluation results.

In the human evaluation, HUMAN score for
RBMT with SPE is 3 points higher than RBMT.
However, RANK score, which is the average ranks
of 200 setences in testset (not same as HUMAN-
set), shows a different result from crowdsourc-
ing evaluation. In this regard, we have found out
the differences between RBMT and RBMT with
SPE as shown in Table 4. Although SPE surely
achieved improvements of target word selection,
there are some mistranslations such as deletion of
word and disagreement of tense in SPE output. As
a result, RBMT may get a better result than RBMT
with SPE in the RANK evaluation.

4.2 Japanese-Chinese results
Table 4 summarizes the evaluation results
of Japanese-Chinese translation systems. In
Japanese-Chinese, BLUE score for our tuned
RBMT is 19.28 and 27.42 for RBMT with SPE,
respectively. A ratio of improvement is larger
than JE results, and is 42.2%.

In the human evaluation, both HUMAN and
RANK scores show that RBMT with SPE per-
forms better than RBMT. Although results are

28



System BLUE RIBES HUMAN RANK
RBMT 19.28 0.76 -5.25 2.13

+SPE 27.42 0.80 0.75 1.76
SMT 27.96 0.79 - 1.63

Table 4: Japanese-Chinese evaluation results.

partially conflicting between machine and human
evaluations, these results mean that RBMT with
SPE has an equivalent performance of SMT sys-
tem.

In fact, improvements for target word selection,
out of vocabulary words and structural transfer are
realized by SPE that complemented lack of rules
in the target domain, as shown in Table 6. Mean-
while, mistranslations caused by statistical fea-
tures also occurred in SPE output.

5 Issues for Context-aware Machine
Translation

Our translation system has the following context-
aware features, which have been used in our com-
mercial systems (Yoshimura et al., 2011).

• Target word selection based on domain esti-
mation

• Part-of-speech disambiguation and the reuse
of translations by using preceding context

Because our system is a rule-based system, se-
mantic dependencies between source words are
used as key clues for choosing appropriate target
words. Context-aware functions are used when
such clue is not available. First is a function to
choose a target word based on a domain of the
source sentences. Some of the words in transla-
tion dictionaries are assigned domain labels, and
the translation system tries to decide a domain of
input sentence in morphological analysis. For ex-
ample, in the case of English-Japanese translation,
an English word “court” is given a Japanese trans-
lation “コート” by default, but it is translated as
“法廷” if the current domain is estimated as a legal
domain.

Second is used to choose a word of an ap-
propriate part-of-speech, and to output consistent
translations for proper nouns. When the transla-
tion system finds a proper noun which consists
of more than one word, it memorizes a pair of
source and target word, each of which is a con-
stituent of the original proper noun. For example,

if “John Snow” is in a translation dictionary and
translated as “ジョン・スノー”, a memorized
word “Snow” will be preferably analyzed as a
proper noun, and be translated as “スノー” in later
context. If a sequence of words is recognized as a
proper noun by named entity recognition, its con-
stituent is treated in the same manner.

We couldn’t confirm the effectiveness of the
above functions in the translations of the test set
due to time constraints. To get better translations,
we’d like to utilize the context to make syntactic
and semantic analysis more accurate.

6 Conclusion

The overview of Toshiba rule-based ma-
chine　translation system with statistical post
editing for scientific paper translation task is
described in this paper.

A combination of RBMT and SPE achieved
improvements of BLUE score in both Japanese-
English and Japanese-Chinese translation. In con-
trast, in a part of the human evaluation, RBMT
showed better performance than SPE for Japanese-
English translation.

References
Hirokazu Suzuki and Akira Kumano. 2005. Learn-

ing Translations from Monolingual Corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of MT Summit X.

Hirokazu Suzuki. 2011. Automatic Post-Editing based
on SMT and its selective application by Sentence-
Level Automatic Quality Evaluation. In Proceed-
ings of MT Summit XIII.

Akira Kumano. 2013. Korean Translation System for
Patent Documents. In Japio YEAR BOOK, pages
298-301. (In Japanese)

Toshiaki Nakazawa, Hideya Mino, Isao Goto, Sadao
Kurohashi and Eiichiro Sumita. 2014. Overview
of the 1st Workshop on Asian Translation. IN Pro-
ceedings of the 1st Workshop on Asian Translation
(WAT2014).

Tatsuya Izuha, Akira Kumano and Yuka Kuroda. 2008.
Toshiba Rule-Based Translation System at NTCIR-
7 PAT MT. In Proceedings of NTCIR-7 Workshop
Meeting, pages 430-434.

Michel Simard, Cyril Goutte and Pierre Isabell. 2007.
Statistical Phrase-based Post-editing. In Proceed-
ings of NAACL HLT 2007, ACL, pages 508-515.

Michel Simard, Nicola Ueffing, Pierre Isabelle and
Roland Kuhn. 2007. Rule-based Translation With

29



Statistical Phrasebased Post-editing. In Proceed-
ings of the second Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, ACL, pages 203-206.

Philipp Kohen, Franz Josef Och and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical Phrase-Based Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL HLT, pages 127-133.

Philipp Kohen, Marcell Federuci, Brooke Cowan,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar Alexandra
Constantin and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation.
In Proceedings of the ACL, pages 177-180.

Graham Neubig, Yosuke Nakata and Shinsuke Mori.
2011. Pointwise Prediction for Robust, Adaptable
Japanese Morphological Analysis. In Proceedings
of ACL-HLT.

Yumiko Yoshimura, Satoshi Kinoshita and Miwako
Shimazu. 1997. Processing of Proper Nouns and
Use of Estimated Subject Area for Web Page Trans-
lation. In Proceedings of TMI-97: The Seventh In-
ternational Conference on Theoretical and Method-
ological Issues in Machine Translation, pages 240-
251.

30



SRC そこで，流体の性質や条件の違いにより適切なセンサを選択することが必要であ
る。

REF Then, it is necessary to choose the appropriate sensor in accordance with a difference in the
property and condition of the fluid.

RBMT Then, it is required to choose a suitable sensor by the character of a fluid or the difference
among conditions.

+SPE Then, it is necessary to choose the appropriate sensor by the properties of the fluid and the
difference between the conditions.

(a) Improvement of target word selection.

SRC りん酸基をもつ界面鋳型樹脂によるＣｕ（ＩＩ）の吸着量はｐＨの増大に伴い増大
した。

REF The amount of Cu(II) adsorption by the interface template resin with phosphate group in-
creases with an increase in pH value.

RBMT The amount of adsorption of Cu(II) by interface mold resin with a phosphoric acid group in-
creased with increase of pH.

+SPE The adsorption amount of Cu ( II ) by the mold resin with phosphoric acid group increased
with increasing pH.

(b) Mistranslation of noun phrase.

SRC 標題光スイッチングと光記録画像を形成し，その安定性を調べた。
REF The optical switching of the title and its optical recording image were formed, and the stability

was examined.
RBMT Title optical switching and an optical record picture were formed, and the stability was inves-

tigated.
+SPE Titled optical switching and the optical recording images were formed, and the stability is

investigated.

(c) Mistranslation of tense agreement.

Table 5: A comparison between RBMT and RBMT with SPE in Japanese-English translation.

31



SRC またＸＭＬの処理の時間も無視できず，実装上の工夫が必要であろう．
REF 此外，不能忽ＸＭＬ的理，在安装上也需要下功夫。

RBMT 外不能也无ＸＭＬ的理的，要需要上的法。
+SPE 外，也不能忽了ＸＭＬ的理，需要安装上下功夫。

(a) Improvement of target word selection.

SRC ポリエーテルスルホン（ＰＥＳ）非対称ＵＦ膜は高い水浸透率と強度を持つ。
REF 聚（ＰＥＳ）非称ＵＦ膜具有高的水浸透率和度。

RBMT 聚suluhon(PES)不称UF膜有高的水渗透率和度。
+SPE 聚（ＰＥＳ）不称ＵＦ膜具有高的水的渗透率和度。

(b) Improvement of out of vocabulary words.

SRC 図１（ａ）にＪＣＰのチャネル構成を示す．
REF １（ａ）所示ＪＣＰ的道。

RBMT 在１（ａ）表示ＪＣＰ的成。
+SPE １（ａ）所示，ＪＣＰ的道成。

(c) Improvement of structural transfer.

SRC 最低メタンロスはメタン産生量の２％へ低下した。
REF 最低甲浪降低到了甲生量的２％以下。

RBMT 最低甲失甲生成量的２％下降了。
+SPE 最低甲失甲生量的２％。

(d) Mistranslation of verb-phrase.

Table 6: A comparison between RBMT and RBMT with SPE in Japanese-Chinese translation.

32




