










































Instructions for ACL-2010 Proceedings


Semi-Automatic Extension of Sanskrit Wordnet 

using Bilingual Dictionary 

 

Sudha Bhingardive 

Center for Indian Language 

Technology,   

Indian Institute of  

Technology Bombay 

sudha@cse.iitb.ac.

in 

Tanuja Ajotikar 

Department of Humanities 

and Social Sciences,   

Indian Institute of  

Technology Bombay 

gtanu30@gmail.com 

 

Irawati Kulkarni 

Center for Indian Language 

Technology,   

Indian Institute of  

Technology Bombay 

irawatikul-

karni@gmail.com 

 

Malhar Kulkarni 

Department of Humanities  

and Social Sciences,   

Indian Institute Technology Bombay 

malhar@iitb.ac.in 

Pushpak Bhattacharyya 

Center for Indian Language 

Technology,   

Indian Institute Technology Bombay 

pb@cse.iitb.ac.in 

 

 

Abstract 

In this paper, we report our methods and re-

sults of using, for the first time, semi-auto-

matic approach to enhance an Indian language 

Wordnet. We apply our methods to enhancing 

an already existing Sanskrit Wordnet created 

from Hindi Wordnet (which is created from 

Princeton Wordnet) using expansion ap-

proach. We base our experiment on an existing 

bilingual Sanskrit English Dictionary and 

show how lemma in this dictionary can be 

mapped to Princeton Wordnet through which 

corresponding Sanskrit synsets can be popu-

lated by Sanskrit lexemes. This our method 

will also show how absence of resources of a 

pair of languages need not be an obstacle, if 

another resource of one of them is available.  

Sanskrit being historically related to lan-

guages of Indo-European family, we believe 

that this semi-automatic approach will help 

enhance Wordnets of other Indian languages 

of the same family.  

1 Introduction 

Wordnet is a lexical semantic network, widely 

used in various applications of natural language 

processing.  Princeton wordnet (PWN) is the 

mother of all Wordnets (Fellbaum, 1988). It was 

created at the Cognitive Science Laboratory of 

Princeton University. EuroWordNet (Vossen, 

1998; Vossen, 2000), CoreNet (Choi, 2004), In-

doWordNet (Bhattacharyya, 2010), HowNet 

(Zhendong, 2000), MultiWordNet (Bentivogli,   

2000; Bentivogli and Pianta 2000), BabelNet 

(Navigli, 2012) and so many other Nets are also 

some of the most commonly used semantic net-

works. 

PWN is manually created using the 

knowledge from various dictionaries.  Several 

Wordnets are created semi-automatically using 

the expansion approach from PWN. Many of them 

use bilingual dictionaries or Wikipedia. This type 

of creation saves enormous manual efforts and 

time. However, it demands high quality machine-

readable resources in the respective languages.  

Sanskrit wordnet (SWN) (Kulkarni et.al, 

2010) is manually created using the expansion ap-

proach from Hindi wordnet (HWN), which in turn 

was created from the Princeton Wordnet. The cur-

rent status of Sanskrit wordnet is stated in Table 

1. 

Total synsets: 22912 Total unique words: 44950 

 

POS Noun Verb Ad-

verb 

Adjec-

tive 

synset 

counts 

17413 1246 263 3990 

 

Table 1: Sanskrit wordnet current status 

mailto:sudha@cse.iitb.ac.in
mailto:sudha@cse.iitb.ac.in
mailto:irawatikulkarni@gmail.com
mailto:irawatikulkarni@gmail.com
mailto:malhar@iitb.ac.in


2 Motivation 

 In this work, we aim to report our experiences to 

populate SWN by a semi-automated approach. 

Currently, manual approach is used which is time 

consuming and tedious. Following are the reasons 

that make manual approach time consuming. 

2.1 Large number of synonyms for a San-
skrit word 

In the available lexical literature of Sanskrit 

(given below in Section 3), normal range for num-

ber of words in any synset varies between 1–20 

e.g., līlā [a game (6 synset members)], vṛddhaḥ 

[an old man (20 synset members)], bhakṣaṇam [an 

act of eating (20 synset members)]. Synsets with 

only one word are common in the cases of coined 

words, instrument names and kinship relations. 

However, some synsets exceed this limit and have 

huge number of words as its members. We note 

below some of the prominent phenomena.  

 Synsets expressing concepts in the domain 
of mythology, culture, religion and philos-

ophy contain large number of words e.g., 

viṣṇuḥ [Hindu deity (127 synset mem-

bers)], somaḥ [a God (120 sysnet mem-

bers)], yuddha [a war (97 synset mem-

bers)], sūryaḥ [the Sun (85 synset mem-

bers)], samudraḥ [an ocean (synset mem-

bers)]. 

 Synsets of noun/adjective category con-
taining words with features of derivational 

morphology tend to have large number of 

words e.g., dyutimat [bright (246 synset 

members)], Shikhin [one who possesses an-

tenna (40 synset members)]. 

 The process of compound formation in 
Sanskrit allows creation of multiple syno-

nyms and therefore synsets containing such 

compounds tend to have large number of 

words e.g., devaalaya [house of gods = 

temple (50 synset members)], alpamati 

[one who possesses little intellect (40 syn-

set members)]. 

For creating above mentioned synsets, lexi-

cographers gathered information from various re-

sources, e.g., while creating a concept of yuddha 

(a war), 97 words were collected from various lex-

                                                 
1 http://spokensanskrit.de/ 
2 http://www.aa.tufs.ac.jp/~tjun/sktdic/ 

ical resources given below:  Spoken Sanskrit Dic-

tionary1 (7 words), Apate’s Sanskrit-English Dic-

tionar 2  (7 words), Monier William’s English–

Sanskrit Dictionary 3  (57 words) and Shabda-

kalpadrum (80 words). 

After collecting the words, duplicate words 

were eliminated. Words representing proper 

meanings are entered in the synset. This process 

is monetarily expensive and time consuming. Au-

tomatic approach can help populate such synsets 

using bilingual dictionaries. In the process there 

will be over-generation which will have to be con-

trolled by manual approach.  

2.2 Appropriate selection of words for creat-
ing synsets 

While creating the synsets, appropriate selection 

of words is required to express the precise mean-

ing. In Hindu texts, which are mainly in Sanskrit 

there are various names for a single deity e.g., 

Viṣṇu (Hindu deity) has 132 names, Kṛṣṇa has 

132 names and Rāma has 67 names. For creating 

synsets of these deities one must be very careful 

as Kṛṣṇa and Rāma are incarnations of Viṣṇu and 

can easily get interchanged and thereby affecting 

the intended meaning. 

The road-map of the paper is as follows. Sec-

tion 3 presents the related work. Section 4 ex-

plains the methodology used for extension of 

SWN. Section 5 illustrates results. Outcomes are 

presented in Section 6. Section 7 includes conclu-

sion and future work. 

3 Related Work  

Most of the Wordnets are created by expansion 

approach using PWN. Several Wordnets have 

tried to increase their coverage using various au-

tomatic or semi-automatic approaches. Some of 

them are listed below. CoreNet (Choi, 2004) is an 

automatically constructed Wordnet, which uses a 

Japanese–Korean electronic dictionary. Korean 

words are programmatically generated during 

translation from Japanese. BabelNet (Navigli, 

2012) is a very large, wide-coverage, multilingual 

semantic network. This resource is created by 

mapping a multilingual encyclopedic knowledge 

repository (Wikipedia) and a computational lexi-

con of English (PWN). The integration is per-

formed via an automatic mapping and by filling in 

lexical gaps in resource-poor languages with the 

3 http://www.sanskrit-lexicon.uni-ko-
eln.de/monier/mwauthori-

ties/mwauth_SktDevaUnicode.html#rec-

ord_Lalit_ 

http://spokensanskrit.de/


aid of Machine Translation. This provides con-

cepts and named entities, lexicalized in many lan-

guages and connected with large amounts of se-

mantic relations. Chinese Wordnet (Renjie Xu, 

2008) is developed in an automatic manner by 

translating English words to Chinese using Chi-

nese–English dictionary. Czech wordnet (Karel 

Pala, 2008) is automatically extended from PWN 

using machine-readable bilingual dictionary. 

Polish WordNet (M. Derwojedowa, 2008) is de-

signed semi-automatically by extracting lexical 

relations from the large Polish corpora. Lexicog-

raphers are used for mapping these relations with 

PWN. 

3.1 Why was Monier William’s Sanskrit–
English dictionary used for extending 

SWN? 

We have used the publicly available Monier Wil-

liam's Sanskrit–English dictionary for SWN semi-

automatic extension. The list of all the texts used 

by Monier Williams is publicly available. This 

dictionary includes over 1, 80, 000 words and def-

initions. All entries are organized according to the 

root of a word, the dhatu, which offers better un-

derstanding of the meaning of the word. It in-

cludes special references to cognate Indo-Euro-

pean languages as well as literary citations. It pro-

vides precise meanings for the words in the Vedic 

literature, which is useful for studying the scrip-

tures. This is one of the most comprehensive and 

useful Sanskrit–English dictionaries. The other 

reason for using this dictionary for the present 

purpose, fortunately, is availability. Out of all the 

lexical resources mentioned above, only this is 

available in program readable format which 

makes this resource singularly important from the 

point of view of present research. One of the out-

puts of the use of this resource is extraction of 

proper nouns. We have automatically extracted 

them and added to SWN without linking them to 

PWN. This method is explained in Section 4.2. 

4 Methodologies used for extending 
SWN 

SWN is created by expansion approach from 

HWN, which was in turn created by PWN. 

 

 
 

 

Figure 1: SWN manual creation 

 

Our selected resource is in Sanskrit and English.  

Therefore, in order to utilize it for the present pur-

pose we have to link PWN directly to SWN.  

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 2: SWN semi-automatic creation 

 

We link Sanskrit–English dictionary to PWN 

by using a heuristic. This will be automatic ap-

proach. These linkages are validated by lexicog-

raphers. This will be manual approach.  Thus we 

will populate SWN by semi-automatic approach 

using this resource.  

4.1 Heuristics used for linking William’s 
dictionary to PWN 

William’s dictionary contains Sanskrit words 

along with its English description. The description 

is concise for most of the Sanskrit words, e.g., ka-

mala (lotus) has the description ‘a lotus’. In com-

parison, PWN glosses are descriptive as shown in 

Figure 3. 

 
Figure 3: Dictionary and PWN entry for kamala (a lo-

tus) 

 

Finding the maximum overlap between the 

description words in dictionary and PWN gloss 

words is not efficient as we get several possible 

mappings. It is monetarily expensive and time 

consuming to generate and validate these map-

pings. Therefore, this type of heuristic is not suit-

able for linking dictionary to PWN. 

William’s dictionary is a very rich resource in 

Sanskrit language, which is useful for extending 

the SWN. Hence, we linked dictionary to PWN 

using a heuristic, which finds the maximum over-

lap between description words in dictionary and 

words in PWN synsets. Using this heuristic, the 

dictionary entries are linked to PWN. We got 

14653 single and 55059 multiple possible map-

pings. Lexicographers are in the process of vali-

dating these mappings. The architecture diagram 

of the process is shown in Figure 4. Following are 

PWN

N 

HWN SWN 

PWN

N 

HWN SWN 



the steps for the procedure to link dictionary to 

PWN. 

 For a Sanskrit word Sw, from dictionary, its 
equivalent English description is taken and 

its maximum overlap with words in the 

PWN synsets is found. 

  Sw is directly mapped to the synset if the 
word in the description is found to be mon-

osemous in PWN.  

 The mapping is evaluated manually if the 
word in the description is found to be poly-

semous in PWN. 

After successful mapping, all Sanskrit words 

are added in SWN. 

 

 
Figure 4: Architecture diagram 

 

This task can be explained with the help of an 

example, for the word ‘kartr’ (spinner), we found 

three possible mappings in PWN. For validating 

these multiple possible mappings, we designed an 

interface as shown in Figure 5. It provides various 

functionalities on mappings viz., display, search, 

validate and delete. A lexicographer will select an 

appropriate mapping with the synset in PWN of 

correct sense.  

After manual validation, all dictionary entries 

with valid mappings are inserted into the Sanskrit 

wordnet. Adding of all the dictionary entries 

maually requires excessive efforts. Thus, a semi-

automatic approach will save these excessive 

manual efforts. 

4.2 Other automatic application of Wil-
liam’s dictionary to populate SWN 

If the English description of the Sanskrit word be-

gan with the phrase ‘Name of a’, all such words 

can be considered as proper nouns. For example, 

the word ‘Brahamhapuri’ has the description, 

‘Name of a location’. Currently all proper nouns 

are part of the Wordnet. However, it is yet to be 

decided whether these are maintained in a sepa-

rate gazetteer (gazetteers are those which contain 

entities themselves that are proper nouns), which 

will in turn link to SWN. If it is decided that they 

are to be treated as a part of Wordnet then it would 

add 14,339 synsets to SWN.  

Some of the extracted nouns are class names. 

For example, the word ‘Ustika’ has the descrip-

tion ‘Name of a kind of plant’ and the word 

‘Bhaumadevalipi’ has the description ‘Name of a 

kind writing’. Both these words are class names. 

All class names are not stored in a gazetteer. They 

are very much stored in the SWN. So far, fifty-

five class names are extracted from the dictionary 

and stored in SWN. 

5 Results 

As discussed in Section 4.1 we are linking diction-

ary with PWN. There are 14, 653 Sanskrit words 

for which single mappings were found in PWN 

and 55, 059 words for which multiple mappings 

were found in PWN. The work of these mappings 

is still under validation process. We have ex-

tracted 14,339 proper nouns from dictionary, 

which are not covered by SWN.  

These proper nouns must get inserted into 

SWN as these are most frequent occurrences in 

Sanskrit literature. Current synset coverage status 

of SWN is illustrated in Table 1. After adding dic-

tionary entries, SWN coverage will increase con-

siderably. With this semi-automatic approach, 

SWN will be a richer lexical resource in Sanskrit 

language.



 
Figure 5: Interface for validating multiple possible mappings 

 

6 Outcomes: Improving SWN-HWN-
PWN linkages 

6.1 SWN synsets can be corrected with the help 
of William’s dictionary. For example, in 

SWN, one synset containing the word 

‘dīptiḥ’ is linked to the sense of ‘luster’ in 

PWN. However, in William’s dictionary 

sense of ‘dīptiḥ’ is {Brightness, Slight, 

splendor, beauty} which is different than 

this already linked to PWN sense (luster). 

As this dictionary is considered as an au-

thentic lexical resource for Sanskrit we can 

remove the word ‘dīptiḥ’ from the corre-

sponding SWN synset.  

6.2 Coverage of HWN will also improve with 
the help of dictionary. For example, dic-

tionary provides the same English meaning 

‘moonless’ for all the Sanskrit words 

namely ‘acandra’, ‘naṣṭacandra’, 

‘niḥsomaka’,  and ‘visoma’. In the existing 

HWN, the concept of ‘moonless’ is not 

available. It is also not covered in SWN as 

it is created using expansion approach from 

HWN. The above mentioned words form a 

synset and can be added to SWN and then 

be further borrowed in HWN. In this way, 

we are also increasing the HWN coverage 

using dictionary and SWN as shown below. 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 6: HWN enriched with SWN and Wil-

liam’s dictionary 

 

6.3 Some existing SWN synsets are not linked 
with PWN as SWN–PWN linking is via 

HWN. We are also improving these link-

ages using the dictionary. For example, an 

HWN synset corresponding to one of the 

synsets of vilāsin in SWN, is not linked 

with PWN. English description of vilāsin is 

given as ‘coquettish’ in the William’s dic-

tionary. Both Sanskrit and English interpre-

tation are under the same POS category of 

adjective. Thus, now we can link this SWN 

synset to PWN synset. In this way we are 

improving SWN–HWN–PWN linkages.  

7 Conclusion and Future work 

We have attempted to implement a semi-auto-

matic approach for Sanskrit wordnet extension us-

ing Monier William’s Sanskrit–English diction-

ary. Dictionary entries are automatically extracted 

and linked to PWN which need manual validation. 

For this purpose we have created a tool (Figure 5) 

which is language independent and therefore can 

be adopted by other similar language pairs.  Post 

manual validation, all these entries will be in-

serted to SWN. Also, we have automatically ex-

tracted proper nouns from dictionary, which play 

an important role in Sanskrit literature. With the 

help of this approach we are correcting existing 

synset members of SWN and existing SWN–

HWN–PWN linkages. HWN coverage can also be 

increased with the help of this approach. Follow-

ing this approach, we will generate all semantic 

and lexical relations automatically from the same 

bilingual dictionary. This work can be extended 

using other resources like Bӧhtlingk and Roth’s 

Sanskrit–German dictionary along with Monier 

William’s dictionary for learning some useful pat-

terns to make SWN a rich resource in Sanskrit lan-

guage.  

PWN

N 

SWN

N 

HWN

N 

William’s Dictionary 



Acknowledgements 

We thank to Dr. Peter Scharf, President, Sanskrit 

Library, United States of America, for providing 

the database. We acknowledge the work which 

provides an XML encoding of the Monier Wil-

liams Sanskrit-English Dictionary which was 

done in collaboration between the Institute of In-

dology and Tamil Studies (IITS) of the Univer-

sity of Cologne and Brown University's Sanskrit 

Department.  

References  

Luisa Bentivogli, Emanuele Pianta and Fabio Pianesi, 

2000. Coping with lexical gaps when building 

aligned multilingual wordnets, In Proceedings of 

LREC2000, Athens, Greece. 

Luisa Bentivogli, Emanuele Pianta, 2000. Looking for 

lexical gaps, Proceedings of Euralex, Stuttgart, Ger-

many. 

Pushpak Bhattacharyya, 2010. IndoWordNet, Lexical 

Resources Engineering Conference (LREC), Malta. 

Key-Sun Choi and Hee-Sook Bae, 2004. Procedures 

and Problems in Korean-Chinese-Japanese Wordnet 

with Shared Semantic Hierarchy, GWC2004. 

Magdalena Derwojedowa, Maciej Piasecki, Stanisaw 

Szpakowicz, Magdalena Zawisawska and Bartosz 

Broda, 2008. Words, concepts and relations in the 

construction of Polish WordNet, In Proceedings of 

the Global WordNet Conference, Seged, Hungary. 

Dong Zhen Dong, 1988. Knowledge Description: 

What, How and Who? , In Proceedings of the Inter-

national Symposium on Electronic Dictionaries, To-

kyo, Japan. 

Christiane Fellbaum, 1998. WordNet: An Electronic 

Database, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 

Marti Hearst, 1992. Automatic Acquisition of Hypo-

nyms from Large Text Corpora, Proc. of Interna-

tional Conference on Computational Linguistics, 

COLING1992. 

Malhar Kulkarni, Chaitali Dangarikar, Irawati Kul-

karni, Abhishek Nanda and Pushpak Bhattacharyya, 

2010. Introducing Sanskrit Wordnet, 5th Interna-

tional Conference on Global Wordnet (GWC2010), 

Mumbai. 

Malhar Kulkarni, 2008. Lexicographic traditions in In-

dia and Sanskrit, Journal of Language Technology, 

(1) pp. 160-165. 

Roberto Navigli and Simone Ponzetto, 2012. 

BabelNet: The Automatic Construction, Evaluation 

and Application of a Wide-Coverage Multilingual 

Semantic Network, Artificial Intelligence, Elsevier. 

Karel Pala, Dana Hlavácková, and Vašek, 2008. Semi-

automatic Linking of New Czech Synsets Using 

Princeton WordNet, Intelligent Information Sys-

tems. 

Madhukar Mangesh Patkar, 1981. History of Sanskrit 

Lexicography, Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers, 

Delhi. 

Ellen Riloff and Rosie Jones, 1999. Learning Diction-

aries for Information Extraction using Multilevel 

Bootstrapping, Proc. of National Conference on Ar-

tificial Intelligence. 

Piek Vossen, 2002. Euro WordNet General Document, 

University of Amsterdam. 

Piek Vossen, 1998. EuroWordNet: A Multilingual Da-

tabase with Lexical Semantic Networks, Kluwer, 

Dordrecht, Netherlands. 

Renjie Xu, Zhiqiang Gao, Yingji Pan, Yuzhong Qu, 

Zhisheng Huang, 2008. An Integrated Approach for 

Automatic Construction of Bilingual Chinese-Eng-

lish WordNet, ASWC 2008, LNCS 5367, 302–314.  

http://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~pb/papers/lrec2010-indowordnet.pdf
http://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~pb/papers/gwc2010-swn.pdf
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2012.07.001
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2012.07.001
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2012.07.001
http://www.google.co.in/search?tbo=p&tbm=bks&q=inauthor:%22Madhukar+Mangesh+Patkar%22
http://link.springer.com/search?facet-author=%22Renjie+Xu%22
http://link.springer.com/search?facet-author=%22Zhiqiang+Gao%22
http://link.springer.com/search?facet-author=%22Yingji+Pan%22
http://link.springer.com/search?facet-author=%22Yuzhong+Qu%22
http://link.springer.com/search?facet-author=%22Zhisheng+Huang%22

