



















































Inducing Information Structures for Data-driven Text Analysis


Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Language Technologies and Computational Social Science, pages 28–32,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Inducing Information Structures for Data-driven Text Analysis 

 
 

Andrew Salway 

Uni Research Computing 

N-5008 Bergen 

Norway 

andrew.salway@uni.no 

Samia Touileb 

University of Bergen 

N-5020 Bergen 

Norway 

samia.touileb@gmail.com 

Endre Tvinnereim 

Uni Research Rokkansenteret  

N-5015 Bergen 

Norway 

endre.tvinnereim@uni.no 

 

  

 

Abstract 

We report ongoing work that is aiming to 

develop a data-driven approach to text 

analysis for computational social science. 

The novel feature is the use of a grammar 

induction algorithm to identify salient 

information structures from an unannotated 

text corpus. The structures provide richer 
representations of text content than 

keywords, by capturing patterning related to 

what is written about key terms. Here we 

show how information structures were 

induced from texts that record political 

negotiations, and how the structures were 

used in analyzing relations between countries 

and negotiation positions.   

1 Introduction 

There is a widespread need for automated text 
analysis to be integrated into research methods 

for computational social science (e.g. Grimmer 

and Stewart, 2013).  In order to analyze highly 
diverse content, techniques tend to treat texts as 

bags of words, e.g. for search, to summarize 

content with word clouds, and to model topics.  

Such techniques capture the general “aboutness” 
of texts, but they do little to elucidate the actual 

statements that are made about key concepts. 

Conversely, structured representations of 
statements can be generated, up to a point, by 

information extraction systems but these are 

costly to port to new languages and domains. 
Thus, we are motivated to develop a portable 

technique that can generate richer representations 

of text content than keywords. Our idea is to 

adapt and apply a grammar induction algorithm 
to identify salient information structures in the 

surface form of texts. It seems to us that, to the 

extent that there is patterning, information 
structures may be induced from an unannotated 

text corpus with little or no need for language-

specific and domain-specific resources. Unlike 
approaches under the rubrics of unsupervised and 

open information extraction (e.g. Riloff, 1996; 

Sekine, 2006; Etzioni et al., 2008), we avoid the 
use of parsers, part-of-speech taggers, and pre-

specified entities for which relations are sought.  

The approach that we envisage fits with the 

ethos of exploratory “data-driven” research. 
Rather than approaching a corpus with a 

hypothesis and an a priori coding scheme, a 

researcher is given an overview of the content in 
terms of computationally tractable information 

structures that were induced from the corpus. 

Such structures map to surface forms in text and 
can hence be used directly in quantitative 

analyses for further exploration and to test 

hypotheses, once they have been interpreted as 

interesting by a researcher. Working in this way 
will avoid the expense and bottleneck of manual 

coding, and reduce the potential for biases. 

In the following we motivate our use of the 
ADIOS algorithm for grammar induction (2.1), 

and introduce the Earth Negotiations Bulletin 

(2.2). Section 3 describes our method and 
discusses the information structures identified in 

ENB texts. Section 4 takes some preliminary 

steps in using these information structures to 

identify dyads of (dis-) agreement and to extract 
markers of quantifiable negotiation positions.  In 

closing, Section 5 offers some tentative 

conclusions and ideas for future work. 

2 Background 

2.1 Grammar induction for text mining 

Harris (1954; 1988) demonstrated how linguistic 
units and structures can be identified manually 

through a distributional analysis of partially 

aligned sentential contexts. We are struck by 
Harris’ insight that the linguistic structures 

derived from a distributional analysis may reflect 

28



domain-specific information structures, 

especially in the “sublanguages” of specialist 

domains (Harris, 1988). Whilst the textual 

material typically analyzed by social scientists 
may not be as restricted in content and style as 

that analyzed by Harris, our work proceeds on 

the assumption that, at least in some domains, it 
is restricted enough such that there is sufficient 

patterning for an inductive approach. 

Harris’ ideas about distributional analysis have 
become a cornerstone for some of the work in 

the field of automated grammatical inference, 

where researchers attempt to induce grammatical 

structures from raw text. In this field the 
emphasis is on generating complete grammatical 

descriptions for text corpora in order to 

understand the processes of language learning; 
see D’Ulizia et al. (2011) for a review. 

For example, the unsupervised ADIOS 

algorithm (Solan et al., 2005) recursively induces 
hierarchically structured patterns from sequential 

data, e.g. sequences of words in sentences of 

unannotated text, using statistical information in 

the sequential data. Patterns may include 
equivalence classes comprising items that share 

similar distributional properties, where items 

may be words or other patterns. As a toy 
example of a pattern, take ‘(the (woman|man) 

went to the (house|shop|pub))’, with equivalence 

classes ‘(woman|man)’ and ‘(house|shop|pub)’. 

2.2 The Earth Negotiations Bulletin 

Within political science, text corpora provide a 
valuable resource for the analysis of political 

struggle and structures. For international climate 

negotiations, the Earth Negotiation Bulletin 
(ENB) constitutes an online record of the 

positions and proposals of different countries, 

their agreements and disagreements, and changes 
over time. As such it can provide insights into, 

e.g., how institutional structures and bargaining 

strategies affect policy outcomes. Since 1995, 

every day of formal climate negotiations under 
the UN Framework Convention on Climate 

Change (UN FCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol has 

been summarized in a separate 2-4 page issue of 
the ENB

1
. The ENB seeks to cover the major 

topics of discussion and which negotiators 

(referred to by country name) said what. The 

publication is used by scholars to address 
research questions such as whether countries 

with more extreme positions have more or less 

success (Weiler, 2012) and whether democracies 

                                                
1 http://www.iisd.ca/linkages/vol12/ 

and autocracies (Bailer, 2012) or developed and 

developing countries (Castro et al., 2014) behave 

differently in negotiations. From our perspective, 

the ENB’s restricted content and style makes it 
appropriate to test our inductive approach.  

3 Inducing Information Structures 

We are investigating how the ADIOS algorithm 

(Solan et al., 2005) can be adapted and applied 

for mining the content of unannotated corpora; 

cf. Salway and Touileb (2014). Our objective of 
identifying salient information structures, rather 

than generating a complete grammatical 

description, leads us to modify the learning 
regime of ADIOS. Firstly, we modify the way in 

which text is presented to ADIOS by presenting 

sentences containing terms of interest (for the 
ENB texts these were country names), rather 

than processing all sentences: we expect more 

relevant patterning in these sentences, and think 

the patterning will be more explicit if not diluted 
by the rest of the corpus. Secondly, as described 

in more detail below, we focus the algorithm on 

frequent structures through an iterative process 
of selection and substitution.  

3.1 Method 

Our data set comprised all texts from the ENB 

volume 12, numbers 1-594, which cover the 

period 1995-2013. Preprocessing involved 
removing boilerplate text, sentence 

segmentation, and making all text lowercase. 

Then, all sentences mentioning one or more 
countries were selected. Every mention of a 

country, or a list of countries, was replaced with 

the token ‘COUNTRY’: this serves to make 
patterning around mentions of countries more 

explicit. A list of country names was the only 

domain- and language-specific resource required 

for the processing described below. 
The resulting file of 32,288 sentences was 

processed by an implementation of the ADIOS 

algorithm, in which we modified the original 
learning regime to bias it towards frequent 

structures. After one execution of ADIOS we 

selected the five most frequent patterns (and any 

patterns contained within them) and replaced all 
instances of them in the input file with a unique 

identifier for each pattern: as with the 

‘COUNTRY’ token, we believe that this serves 
to make relevant patterning more explicit. We 

executed ADIOS and selected and substituted 

frequent patterns nine more times.  

29



3.2 Results 

In this way 53 patterns were identified, some of 

which are shown in Table 1 (patterns 1-7). Here 

patterns and equivalence classes are bracketed 
and nested. The sequential items in a pattern are 

separated by whitespace and the alternative items 

in an equivalence class are separated by ‘|’. 
‘COUNTRY’ stands for a mention of a country, 

or a list of countries. In some cases we have 

manually merged and simplified patterns for 
clarity, but the structuring that they describe was 

all induced automatically. 

Pattern 1 captures a simple relation between 

countries that appears frequently in sentences 
like ‘China supported by Saudi Arabia said…’. It 

could thus be used as a simple template for 

extracting data about how countries align with 
one another (see section 4.1). Patterns 2-4 

represent a multitude of ways in which a 

country’s stated positions on issues can be 
reported. These patterns do not describe the 

issues, but could be used as cues to locate text 

fragments that do, e.g. by taking the text that 

follows ‘COUNTRY said|noted|recommended| 
(etc.)…’ (see section 4.2). Patterns 5 and 6 

appear to have captured a wide variety of verbs 

and noun phrases respectively. Presumably these 
verbs relate to things that countries say that they 

will do, or that they think should be done. The 

noun phrases appear to raise topics for 

discussion; consider how pattern 6 appears as 

part of 7. There were other patterns that did not 

contain any equivalence classes: these often 

captured domain terminology, e.g. ‘(developing 

countries)’, ‘(commitment period)’. 
Patterns 1-6 all have a relatively shallow 

structure. In order to induce further structure we 

made new input files, based on what we saw in 
the initial patterns.  We chose the most frequent 

‘speech acts’ from patterns 2-4, and for each one 

made a separate file containing only sentences 
that contained ‘COUNTRY SPEECH_ACT’, e.g. 

one file that contained all the sentences matching 

‘COUNTRY expressed’. Each speech act file 

was processed with 10 iterations of selection and 
substitution (cf. section 3.1). The resulting 

patterns, including 8-10 in Table 1, do indeed 

have richer structures and show in a more 
nuanced way how countries’ positions are 

reported in the ENB texts. 

These results are encouraging for the idea of 
inducing information structures from an 

unannotated text corpus. The examples shown in 

Table 1 would not surprise anybody who was 

familiar with the ENB material. However, they 
provide a useful summary view of what is 

typically written about countries. Further, since 

they relate directly to surface forms in the text, 
they may be valuable for guiding further 

quantitative analyses, e.g. by pinpointing where 

significant expressions of country positions, 

arguments and affinities are to be found. 

 

1. (COUNTRY ((supported|opposed) by) COUNTRY) 

2. (COUNTRY (said|noted|recommended|explained|responded|stressed| questioned|addressed|reiterated| 
reported|urged|amended|invited…)); the equivalence class contains 51 words 

3. (COUNTRY ((clarified|urged|reported) that) 

4. (COUNTRY ((presented|demanded|outlined|favored (the|a))  

5. (to (apply|safeguard|undertake|link|deliver…)); the equivalence class contains 63 words 

6. (the (merit|cost effectiveness| merits|importance|idea…) of); the equivalence class contains 84 words 

7. ((COUNTRY (noted|said|questioned|…)) (the (merit|cost effectiveness| merits|importance|idea…) 
of)) 

8. (COUNTRY expressed ((disappointment|concern) that)|((support|appreciation) 
for)|((readiness|willingness) to)|(satisfaction (with the) (outcome|reconstitution|functioning|work) (of 

the))) 

9. (COUNTRY called (((for |on) (parties|(developed countries)) to)|((for a) (cautious|three 
phased|common|phased|bottom up|budget|global) approach to)|(for an 

(overview|elaboration|analysis|evaluation|examination) of))) 

10. (COUNTRY highlighted ((the (need|basis) for)|(the (benefits|possibility|establishment) of)|(the 
(consideration|impact|impacts) of)|(the (use|involvement) of)|((the need to) (err|focus) on)|(the 

(role|importance) (of the)))) 

Table 1: Ten of the patterns automatically induced from Earth Negotiations Bulletin texts. 

30



4 Using selected information structures  

Here we describe our first steps in using some of 

the induced structures to infer coalitions (4.1) 

and to scale negotiation positions (4.2). 

4.1  Dyads of support and opposition  

The pattern ‘(COUNTRY ((supported|opposed) 

by) COUNTRY)’, cf. Table 1,  was used as a 

regular expression to extract instances where 

relations between countries were recorded with 
respect to stated positions. This gave 1145 

instances of support, and 592 of opposition, often 

involving multiple countries; recall that 
‘COUNTRY’ may stand for a list of countries. A 

count was made for each pair of countries in 

support and opposition, with a distinction made 
between ‘C1 supported by C2’ and ‘C2 

supported by C1’. Figure 1 is a scatterplot made 

from these counts. It shows, for example, that the 

US very often finds its statements supported by 
Canada. Further, whilst the US tends to support 

the EU relatively often, the EU supports the US 

only about as often as it opposes the US.  

 
Figure 1: Dyads of support and opposition 

4.2 Scaling negotiation positions 

Patterns 2-4 from Table 1 were combined into a 

regular expression to extract instances of the 
statements made by countries. For each country a 

file was made with the text following every 

instance of ‘COUNTRY said | noted | 

recommended | (etc.)’, until the end of the 
sentence. The collection of country files was then 

analyzed with Wordfish (Slapin and Proksch, 

2008): this tool, which implements a scaling 
model, positions texts (here reflecting countries) 

on a political/ideological dimension based on the 

relative frequency of discriminating words.  

For the 40 countries with the most statements, 

the parameter indicating country position on the 
induced dimension ranged in ascending order 

from Austria (-2.38) via Belgium, Germany, the 

UK, Switzerland, the US, Canada, Australia, 
Norway, France, Russia, New Zealand to Japan 

(-.62) and on to Papua New Guinea (-.26), 

Tuvalu, Peru, Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, 
Malaysia, South Korea, Colombia, Saudi Arabia, 

Chile, Kuwait, Nigeria, Grenada, Uganda, 

Bangladesh, China, Egypt, the Philippines, South 

Africa, Indonesia, Venezuela, Iran, Bolivia, 
Barbados, India and Algeria (1.44).  

The method thus perfectly identifies the main 

cleavage in international climate negotiations 
between developed and developing countries (cf. 

Castro et al., 2014). The bifurcation is robust to 

alternative specifications. Among the ten most 
discriminating lemmas used by developing 

countries are ‘equal’, ‘distribut’, ‘resourc’, 

‘histor’, and ‘equiti’, suggesting an emphasis on 

fairness and rich countries’ historical emissions. 

5 Closing Remarks 

The novel use of a grammar induction algorithm 

was successful in elucidating the content of a 
corpus in a complementary way to bag-of-words 

techniques: some of the induced structures were 

useful for guiding subsequent analyses as part of 
a data-driven approach to computational social 

science. Specifically, in this case, the structures 

facilitated text analysis at the statement level, i.e. 
statements about country relations and countries’ 

positions. This meant we could plot country 

relations and scale country positions even though 

our source texts were not organized by country. 
Given its inherent portability, we see the 

potential for applying the grammar induction 

approach to many other corpora, most obviously 
the other 32 ENB volumes, and other texts with 

similarly restricted content and style, e.g. 

parliamentary proceedings. It remains a largely 
open question as to what happens when the text 

input becomes more heterogeneous, but see 

Salway and Touileb (2014) regarding the 

processing of blog posts. 
In ongoing work we are seeking to understand 

more about how the parameters of the ADIOS 

algorithm, and the modifications we make, affect 
the set of structures that it identifies. Also we are 

considering evaluation metrics to validate the 

induced patterns and to measure recall.  

31



Acknowledgements 

We are very grateful to Zach Solan for providing 

an implementation of the ADIOS algorithm, and 

to Knut Hofland for his help in creating our 
corpus of ENB texts. This research was 

supported by a grant from The Research Council 

of Norway’s VERDIKT program. 

References 

Stefanie Bailer. 2012. Strategy in the climate change 

negotiations: do democracies negotiate differently? 

Climate Policy 12(5): 534-551. 

Paula Castro, Lena Hörnlein, and Katharina 

Michaelowa. 2014. Constructed peer groups and 

path dependence in international organizations. 
Global Environmental Change. 

Arianna D’Ulizia, Fernando Ferri and Patrizia 

Grifoni. 2011. A survey of grammatical inference 

methods for natural language learning. Artificial 

Intelligence Review 36(1):1-27. 

Oren Etzioni, Michele Banko, Stephen Soderland and 

Daniel S. Weld. Open Information Extraction from 

the Web. Comms. of the ACM 51(12): 68-74. 

Justin Grimmer and Brandon M. Stewart. 2013. Text 

as Data: The Promise and Pitfalls of Automatic 

Content Analysis Methods for Political Texts. 
Political Analysis 21(3):267-297. 

Zellig Harris. 1954. Distributional Structure. Word 

10(2/3):146-162. 

Zellig Harris. 1988. Language and Information. 

Columbia University Press, New York. 

Eileen Riloff. 1996. Automatically Generating 

Extraction Patterns from Untagged Text. Procs. 

13th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence 

(AAAI-96):1044-1049. 

Andrew Salway and Samia Touileb. 2014. Applying 

Grammar Induction to Text Mining. To appear in 

Procs. ACL 2014. 

Satoski Sekine. 2006. On-Demand Information 

Extraction. Procs. COLING/ACL 2006: 731-738. 

Jonathan Slapin and Sven-Oliver Proksch. 2008. A 

Scaling Model for Estimating Time-Series Party 

Positions from Texts. American Journal of 

Political Science 52(3):705-722. 

Zach Solan, David Horn, Eytan Ruppin, and Shimon 

Edelman. 2005. Unsupervised learning of natural 

languages. PNAS 102(33):11629-11634. 

Florian Weiler. 2012. Determinants of bargaining 

success in the climate change negotiations. Climate 
Policy 12(5):552-574.  

 

32


