



















































Hiearchie: Visualization for Hierarchical Topic Models


Proceedings of the Workshop on Interactive Language Learning, Visualization, and Interfaces, pages 71–78,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Hiérarchie: Interactive Visualization for Hierarchical Topic Models

Alison Smith, Timothy Hawes, and Meredith Myers
DECISIVE ANALYTICS Corporation

Arlington, VA
{alison.smith, timothy.hawes, meredith.myers}@dac.us

Abstract

Existing algorithms for understanding
large collections of documents often pro-
duce output that is nearly as difficult
and time consuming to interpret as read-
ing each of the documents themselves.
Topic modeling is a text understanding
algorithm that discovers the “topics” or
themes within a collection of documents.
Tools based on topic modeling become in-
creasingly complex as the number of top-
ics required to best represent the collec-
tion increases. In this work, we present
Hiérarchie, an interactive visualization
that adds structure to large topic models,
making them approachable and useful to
an end user. Additionally, we demonstrate
Hiérarchie’s ability to analyze a diverse
document set regarding a trending news
topic.

1 Introduction

In computational linguistics and related fields, sig-
nificant work has been invested in the development
of algorithms for gaining insight from large bod-
ies of text. The raw output of these techniques
can be so complex that it is just as difficult and
time consuming to understand as reading the text.
Therefore, it is an especially challenging problem
to develop visualizations that add analytic value,
making complex analysis accessible by helping a
user to understand and interact with the output of
these algorithms.

Topic Modeling is a common, data-driven tech-
nique for summarizing the content of large text
corpora. This technique models documents as dis-
tributions of topics and topics as distributions of
words. In practice, topic models are used to pro-
vide a high-level overview and guided exploration
of a corpus. Prior work by others (Chaney and

Blei, 2012) and by the author (Smith et al., 2014)
has focused on visualizing the results of topic
modeling to support these two goals, but these
visualizations do not scale beyond 10 to 20 top-
ics1. Topic models with a small number of top-
ics may not accurately represent very diverse cor-
pora; instead, representative topic models require
a number of topics an order of magnitude higher,
for which current visualization methods are not
suitable. We propose a visualization that displays
hierarchically arranged topics. As opposed to a
flat model, which can be thought of as an un-
ordered heap of topics, a hierarchical structure al-
lows a user to “drill into” topics of interest, mean-
ing this technique supports directed exploration of
a corpus regardless of the number of topics in the
model.

Although methods that use inherently hierarchi-
cal generative models do exist, we take a simple
recursive approach that scales to large datasets and
does not change or depend on the underlying topic
modeling implementation. In principle, this tech-
nique could be applied to a range of topic model-
ing algorithms. We present this hierarchical model
to the user through an intuitive interactive visual-
ization, Hiérarchie. Additionally, we demonstrate
the capability with a Case Study on analyzing the
news coverage surrounding the Malaysia Airlines
flight that went missing on March 8, 2014.

2 Related Work

Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al.,
2003b) is an unsupervised algorithm for perform-
ing statistical topic modeling that uses a “bag of
words” approach, treating each document as a set
of unordered words. Each document is repre-
sented as a probability distribution over some top-
ics, and each topic is a probability distribution over

1Either the visualization becomes too confusing to under-
stand or using the visualization to explore the corpus takes
too much time — or both.

71



words. LDA is an effective, scalable approach to
modeling a large text corpus; however, the result
is a flat topic model with no hierarchical structure
for a visualization to exploit.

Approaches exist for learning topic hierarchies
from data, such as the Nested Chinese restaurant
process (Blei et al., 2003a) and Pachinko Alloca-
tion (Li and McCallum, 2006). These approaches
build the intuitions of the hierarchy into the mod-
eling algorithm. This adds additional complexity
and tightly couples the hierarchical process with
the underlying modeling algorithm.

Our Hierarchical Topic Modeling method uses
a simple top-down recursive approach of splitting
and re-modeling a corpus to produce a hierarchi-
cal topic model that does not require a specific un-
derlying topic modeling algorithm. This work is
most similar to Dirichlet Compound Multinomial
Latent Dirichlet Allocation, DCM-LDA, which
processes the corpus via a bottom-up approach.
DCM-LDA first trains unique topic models based
on co-occurrence of words in each document, and
then clusters topics across documents (Mimno and
McCallum, 2007).

Existing visualizations support analysis and ex-
ploration of topic models. Topical Guide (Gardner
et al., 2010), TopicViz (Eisenstein et al., 2012),
and the topic visualization of (Chaney and Blei,
2012) provide visualization and interaction with
topic models for corpus exploration and under-
standing. These visualizations typically repre-
sent topics as word clouds, where the topic model
as a whole is presented as an unordered set of
topics. This approach is not optimal for effi-
cient exploration and understanding, and the sea
of word clouds quickly becomes overwhelming as
the number of topics grows. Termite (Chuang et
al., 2012) uses a tabular layout to represent a topic
model and supports easy comparison of words
within and across topics. The Termite visualiza-
tion organizes the model into clusters of related
topics based on word overlap. This visualization
technique is space saving and the clustering speeds
corpus understanding. Our approach clusters top-
ics by document overlap instead of word overlap
and is hierarchical, providing multiple levels of re-
lated topics for intuitive corpus exploration.

Nested lists, icicle plots (Kruskal and
Landwehr, 1983), and treemaps (Shneider-
man, 1998) are commonly used for visualizing
hierarchical data, but they have limitations and do

not easily support data-dense hierarchies, such as
hierarchical topic models. Nested lists can be hard
to navigate as they fail to maintain the same size
and approximate structure during exploration. An
icicle plot, which is a vertical representation of
a partition chart, suffers from similar rendering
constraints and limits positioning, sizing, and
readability of text labeling. Treemaps use nested
rectangles to display hierarchical data, but have
been criticized as not cognitively plausible (Fab-
rikant and Skupin, 2005), making them difficult
to interpret. Additionally, as is the case for
nested lists and icicle plots, treemaps obscure the
structure of the underlying data to accommodate
layout and sizing constraints.

Hiérarchie uses an interactive sunburst
chart (Stasko et al., 2000), which is a partition
chart with radial orientation that supports visual-
izing large or small hierarchies without requiring
scrolling or other interaction. The sunburst chart
implementation used by Hiérarchie is directly
based upon the Sequences Sunburst (Rodden,
2013) and Zoomable Sunburst (Bostock, 2012b)
examples that are implemented in the Data-Driven
Documents library (Bostock, 2012a).

3 Hierarchical Topic Modeling

The HLDA algorithm takes a simple, top-down
approach for producing hierarchical topic models
by recursively splitting and re-modeling a corpus.
Standard LDA discovers the distribution of words
in topics and topics in documents through an infer-
ence process; our implementation uses Gibbs sam-
pling (Griffiths and Steyvers, 2004) for inference.
As a result of this process, each word in a docu-
ment is assigned to a topic. At the end of sampling,
HLDA uses these word-to-topic assignments to
construct new synthetic documents for each topic
from each of the initial documents. These syn-
thetic documents contain only those words from
the original document that are assigned to the topic
and make up the synthetic corpus for the topic. So,
if there are 10 topics in the topic model, up to 10
new synthetic documents — one for each topic —
will be created for each document, and these doc-
uments will be merged into the topic’s synthetic
corpus.

For each topic, t, we then construct a new topic
model, mt, using the synthetic corpus correspond-
ing to t. The discovered topics in mt represent
the subtopics of t. This process, illustrated in

72



Figure 1: Overview of the HLDA algorithm. The algorithm runs LDA over the original corpus which
results in a topic model and word-topic assignments. These word-topic assignments are used to create
synthetic documents — one for each document/topic pair. The synthetic documents are grouped into
synthetic corpora by topic, and LDA is run for each of the synthetic corpora. This process continues
recursively until the synthetic corpus and documents are too small to model. The result is a hierarchy of
topic distributions.

Figure 1, can be repeated recursively, until the
synthetic corpus and synthetic documents are too
small to model.2 While the number of topics at
each level in the hierarchy must be specified, the
overall number of topics discovered by this ap-
proach is a byproduct of the algorithm.

This modeling approach is a wrapper algorithm
that can be applied to any modeling approach that
assigns individual tokens in documents to specific
topics.

4 Hiérarchie

To effectively visualize the topic hierarchy out-
put from HLDA, it is important to properly con-
vey the relevance and structure of the topics. In-
tuitive interaction with the visualization is impor-
tant so users can easily explore topics and identify
patterns. Without effective visualization, forming
conclusions becomes as difficult as approaching
the raw documents without the benefit of algorith-
mic analysis.

In practice, a diverse set of visualizations are
used to display hierarchical data. An effective vi-
sualization of a hierarchical topic model should
support the following Use Cases:

1. Accuracy - display topics without hiding or
skewing the hierarchical structure

2. Granularity - interact with the visualization
2This is parameterized and can be set based on tolerable

quality degradation from short documents or small corpora.

to explore the topics at all levels of the hier-
archy

3. Accessibility - view the underlying data as-
sociated with the topics

Many of the visualizations we considered for
viewing topic hierarchies obscure or misrepresent
the true structure of their underlying data, largely
due to the amount of space required for rendering.
Others provide less skewing of the structure, yet,
for large hierarchies, require a high degree of user
interaction (clicking and navigating) to expose the
underlying data. We found that a sunburst chart is
best suited to our purposes as it supports visual-
izing large or small hierarchies without requiring
scrolling or other interaction. Unlike other hierar-
chical visualizations, the sunburst can accommo-
date the size of a typical computer screen without
hiding or minimizing structure.

Figure 2 displays a top-level view of the
Hiérarchie visualization for a dataset of Tweets,
Reddit comments, and news articles regarding the
Malaysia Airlines flight. Each level of the hierar-
chical topic model is represented as a ring of the
Sunburst chart where the arcs comprising the rings
represent the individual topics. By not labeling
each arc, or “slice,” within the sunburst, the high-
level overview of the hierarchical topic model is
presented to the user with minimal complexity.

The initial, high-level view of the sunburst
chart follows the design principle of overview
first, zoom and filter, details on demand (Shnei-

73



Figure 2: The top-level view of the Hiérarchie visualization. This visualization uses a sunburst chart,
which is optimal for displaying the topic hierarchy created by the HLDA algorithm without hiding or
skewing the hierarchical structure.

derman, 1996) and does not display details for ev-
ery topic, requiring user interaction to expose ad-
ditional data. In our sunburst visualization, user
interaction allows for exploration of the informa-
tion at a finer granularity. When hovering over a
topic of interest, the words of the topic are dis-
played in the empty center of the sunburst. This is
an efficient use of space and prevents disorienta-
tion, since minimal eye movement is required be-
tween the slice of interest (where the user’s mouse
is located) and the center list of topics.

When a user selects a slice of interest, the sun-
burst zooms in to display the selected topic and
sub-topics. This allows the user to analyze a spe-
cific section of the hierarchy. This interaction is
shown in Figures 4 and 5. The sunburst has re-
oriented to display the selected sub-topic, (plane,
crash, crashed) as the visualization root.

To provide a clean and meaningful display of
topic information for each slice, only one slice’s
information can be shown at a time. As the sun-
burst zooms to display selected topics, it is use-
ful to provide context for the location of the topic
within the overall topic hierarchy. Therefore, two
contextual visualizations — a breadcrumb trail
and a contextual anchor — are provided. Bread-
crumb trails are often utilized to provide context
during navigation, such as when navigating a file
structure or large retail website. The breadcrumb

trail displays the hierarchical path leading to the
current topic (Aery, 2007). A contextual anchor,
or contextual snapshot (Mindek et al., 2013), is
used to provide additional context to the user. The
contextual anchor displays the entire hierarchical
topic model to the user at all times. When the user
selects a topic slice to view a section of the hier-
archy in more detail, the contextual anchor high-
lights the position of the selected topic within the
hierarchical topic model. This offers context to
the user, regardless of their location within the hi-
erarchy. An example of the breadcrumb trail and
contextual anchor is displayed in Figure 3.

5 Case Study

The search for Malaysia Flight MH-370 was on-
going during the composition of this paper, with
few clues indicating what might have actually oc-
curred. In an attempt to organize the various the-
ories, we collected 1600 Tweets and 970 Red-
dit comments containing the keyword “MH370”
in addition to 27 Daily Beast articles returned by
a URL filter for any of the key words “malay,”
“370”, “flight,” “missing,” “hijack,” “radar,” “pi-
lot,” “plane,” “airplane,” and “wreckage.” This
corpus offers a diverse sampling of discussion
concerning the missing airliner that is too large
for a human alone to quickly analyze. We pro-

74



Figure 3: Our simple breadcrumb trail and contex-
tual anchor offer constant context as the user ex-
plores the visualization. Highlighted slices within
the contextual anchor are those currently dis-
played in the sunburst visualization.

cessed the corpus with HLDA using 10 topics for
each level. This number of topics balances gran-
ularity and accuracy. Using too many narrow top-
ics results in information overload, whereas too
few broad topics could be difficult to understand3.
We then visualized the resulting hierarchical topic
model with Hiérarchie as shown in Figure 2. As
we were most interested in looking at the vari-
ous theories surrounding the flight, we chose to
explore one of the high-level topics, (plane, peo-
ple, pilot, think, know), in more detail, because
many of this topic’s sub-topics suggest specific
theories related to the outcome of MH-370. Ta-
ble 1 shows the 10 sub-topics for the “theory”
topic represented by their 3 most probable terms.
The bolded topics are those that suggest theories.
Figure 4 shows the sunburst graph reoriented af-
ter the selection of the main “theory” topic. The
sunburst graph is labeled with the sub-topics that
represent the selection of interesting theories.

These topics suggest four primary theories: that
the plane landed, the plane crashed, the plane
was hijacked by terrorists, or the pilot crashed
the plane in an act of suicide. Hovering over the
(plane, crash, crashed) topic shows the sub topics,
and clicking the topic reorients the sunburst chart,

3Deviating from this number slightly may also be effec-
tive, and experimentation is required to determine the num-
ber of topics that is the best fit for the current data set and end
goal.

plane, crash, crashed
plane, landed, land
plane, think, people

pilot, plane, hijacking
terrorist, terrorism, passports

suicide, pilot, ocean
Shah, Anwar, political

plane, China, world
phone, phones, cell

evidence, think, make

Table 1: The 10 high-level topics of the model
generated from running HLDA on the Malaysia
Flight MH-370 corpus. The bolded topics suggest
specific theories regarding the status of the plane.

crash, water, crashed
failure, catastrophic, mayday

mechanical, failure, days
plane, ocean, did
plane, error, lost

Table 2: A selection of the sub-topics of discus-
sion surrounding a plane crash scenario. These
sub-topics suggest more detailed discussion. For
example, that the plane crash may have resulted
from a catastrophic mechanical failure or other er-
ror.

as shown in Figure 5. The sub-topics under (plane,
crash, crashed) suggest more detailed discussion
of a crash scenario, such as the plane crashing into
the water, and that there may have been a catas-
trophic mechanical failure or other error. Table 2
contains a selection of these sub-topics.

An alternate theory is suggested by the (terror-
ist, terrorism, passports) topic, which is shown in
Figure 6. The sub-topics here suggest more de-
tailed discussion involving terrorism as the cause
for the plane’s disappearance. Table 3 contains a
selection of these sub-topics.

The hierarchical topic model produced by
HLDA and visualized with Hiéarchie provide au-
tomated organization of the many theories regard-
ing the missing Malaysian airliner. The high-level
overview provides a quick summary of all of the
discussion surrounding the event, while the hi-
erarchical organization and intuitive exploration
allows the discussion, and specifically each the-
ory, to be explored in depth, exposing potentially

75



passports, stolen, using
terrorists, crash, terrorist

Muslim, Muslims, Islamic
attack, going, terror

responsibility, common, group

Table 3: A selection of the sub-topics of discus-
sion surrounding a terrorism scenario. These sub-
topics include more details, such as the discussion
of stolen passports, relevant to the theory that the
plane disappearance is the result of an act of ter-
rorism.

Figure 4: Sub-categories of interest have been
purposely numbered for clarity. 1:(plane, crash,
crashed); 2: (plane, landed, land); 3: (terrorist,
terrorism, passports); 4: (suicide, pilot, ocean).

relevant information. Organizing all of this data
by hand would be difficult and time consuming.
This intuitive visualization in combination with
our method for organizing the underlying data
transforms a disparate corpus of documents into
a useful and manageable information source.

6 Future Work and Conclusion

The Hiéarchie visualization and related hierarchi-
cal topic modeling algorithm support the under-
standing and exploration of text corpora that are
too large to read. Although existing topic mod-
eling algorithms effectively process large corpora,
the resulting topic models are difficult to interpret
in their raw format. Current visualization meth-
ods only scale to a small number of topics, which
cannot accurately represent a diverse corpus. Ad-
ditional structure is required to organize a repre-
sentative topic model of a large dataset into an un-

Figure 5: Clicking the (plane, crash, crashed)
topic slice in the top-level (plane, people, pilot)
visualization reorients the sunburst to display the
slice as its root, enabling more detailed explo-
ration of sub-topics.

Figure 6: The(terrorist, terrorism, passports)
topic slice in the top-level (plane, people, pilot)
visualization.

76



derstandable and navigable analysis tool.
Our approach visualizes the hierarchical topic

model produced by the HLDA algorithm to sup-
port intuitive, directed browsing of topical struc-
ture within a diverse collection of documents. As
demonstrated in the Malaysia Airlines case study,
this technique can be used to quickly gain insight
about the diverse speculation surrounding a signif-
icant, inconclusive event. Hiéarchie enables users
to examine and gain insight from large, diverse
datasets more efficiently than if they had to inter-
pret complicated algorithmic output or read raw
documents.

The sunburst visualization provides a clear
overview of the structure of the model; however,
individual topics are currently represented as lists
of words ordered by their probability for the topic.
This is non-optimal for topic understanding. Ad-
ditionally, this topic information is displayed on
hover, which does not easily support making com-
parisons between topics. Future work includes im-
plementing alternative techniques for displaying
the topic information and performing an evalua-
tion to determine which technique is most appro-
priate for the intended use cases.

Future work also includes adding additional in-
formation to the visualization through color and
topic placement. In the current implementation,
topic slices are currently colored by the most
prevalent topic word. Coloring slices by sentiment
or other topic-level metrics will enrich the visual-
ization and improve the user’s ability to quickly
discern different topics and their meaning within
the model as a whole. Similarly, topic position in
the sunburst does not currently provide any useful
information. One possible layout is based on topic
covariance, which is a metric of topic relatedness
based on the frequency of topic pair co-occurrence
within the documents of the corpus. An improved
sunburst layout could take into account topic co-
variance to optimize the layout such that related
topics were positioned together at each level of the
hierarchy.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Andrew McCallum for
discussions related to the ideas behind our topic
modeling approach. We would also like to thank
Mark Frymire, Peter David, Jen Sikos, and Nic-
hole Hansen for their support in the writing pro-
cess. Additionally, we would like to acknowl-

edge that this work was performed under AFRL
contract FA8750-12-C-0077. The opinions and
conclusions do not reflect the position of the Air
Force.

77



References
Sean C Aery. 2007. Breadcrumb navigation deploy-

ment patterns in retail web sites.

David M Blei, Thomas L Griffiths, Michael I Jordan,
and Joshua B Tenenbaum. 2003a. Hierarchical
topic models and the nested chinese restaurant pro-
cess. In NIPS, volume 16.

David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003b. Latent dirichlet allocation. the Journal of
machine Learning research, 3:993–1022.

Mike Bostock. 2012a. Data Driven Documents (d3).
http://d3js.org.

Mike Bostock. 2012b. Zoomable sunburst. http:
//bl.ocks.org/mbostock/4348373.

Allison June-Barlow Chaney and David M Blei. 2012.
Visualizing topic models. In ICWSM.

Jason Chuang, Christopher D Manning, and Jeffrey
Heer. 2012. Termite: Visualization techniques for
assessing textual topic models. In Proceedings of
the International Working Conference on Advanced
Visual Interfaces, pages 74–77. ACM.

Jacob Eisenstein, Duen Horng Chau, Aniket Kittur, and
Eric Xing. 2012. Topicviz: interactive topic explo-
ration in document collections. In CHI’12 Extended
Abstracts, pages 2177–2182. ACM.

Sara Irina Fabrikant and André Skupin. 2005. Cogni-
tively plausible information visualization.

Matthew J Gardner, Joshua Lutes, Jeff Lund, Josh
Hansen, Dan Walker, Eric Ringger, and Kevin Seppi.
2010. The topic browser: An interactive tool for
browsing topic models. In NIPS Workshop on Chal-
lenges of Data Visualization.

Thomas L Griffiths and Mark Steyvers. 2004. Find-
ing scientific topics. Proceedings of the National
academy of Sciences of the United States of Amer-
ica, 101(Suppl 1):5228–5235.

Joseph B Kruskal and James M Landwehr. 1983. Ici-
cle plots: Better displays for hierarchical clustering.
The American Statistician, 37(2):162–168.

Wei Li and Andrew McCallum. 2006. Pachinko allo-
cation: Dag-structured mixture models of topic cor-
relations.

David Mimno and Andrew McCallum. 2007. Orga-
nizing the oca: learning faceted subjects from a li-
brary of digital books. In Proceedings of the 7th
ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on Digital libraries,
pages 376–385. ACM.

Peter Mindek, Stefan Bruckner, and M Eduard Gröller.
2013. Contextual snapshots: Enriched visualization
with interactive spatial annotations. In Proceedings
of the 29th Spring conference on Computer Graph-
ics (SCCG 2013).

Kerry Rodden. 2013. Sequences sunburst. http:
//bl.ocks.org/kerryrodden/7090426.

Ben Shneiderman. 1996. The eyes have it: A task
by data type taxonomy for information visualiza-
tions. In Visual Languages, 1996. Proceedings.,
IEEE Symposium on, pages 336–343. IEEE.

Ben Shneiderman. 1998. Treemaps for space-
constrained visualization of hierarchies.

Alison Smith, Sana Malik, and Ben Shneiderman.
2014. Visual analysis of topical evolution in un-
structured text: Design and evaluation of topicflow.

John Stasko, Richard Catrambone, Mark Guzdial,
and Kevin McDonald. 2000. An evaluation of
space-filling information visualizations for depict-
ing hierarchical structures. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 53(5):663–694.

78


