



















































Detecting drugs and adverse events from Spanish social media streams


Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (Louhi) @ EACL 2014, pages 106–115,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Detecting drugs and adverse events from Spanish health social media 
streams 

 

 

Isabel Segura-Bedmar, Ricardo Revert, Paloma Martínez 
Computer Science Department,  

Carlos III University of Madrid, Spain 
{isegura,rrevert,pmf}@inf.uc3m.es 

 

  

 

Abstract 

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first 
work that does drug and adverse event 
detection from Spanish posts collected from a 
health social media. First, we created a gold-
standard corpus annotated with drugs and 
adverse events from social media. Then, 
Textalytics, a multilingual text analysis 
engine, was applied to identify drugs and 
possible adverse events. Overall recall and 
precision were 0.80 and 0.87 for drugs, and 
0.56 and 0.85 for adverse events. 

1 Introduction 

It is well-known that adverse drug reactions 
(ADRs) are an important health problem. Indeed, 
ADRs are the 4th cause of death in hospitalized 
patients (Wester et al., 2008). Thus, the field of 
pharmacovigilance has received a great deal of 
attention due to the high and growing incidence 
of drug safety incidents (Bond and Raehl, 2006) 
as well as to their high associated costs (van Der 
Hooft et al., 2006). 

Since many ADRs are not captured during 
clinical trials, the major medicine regulatory 
agencies such as the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) or the European 
Medicines Agency (EMA) require healthcare 
professionals to report all suspected adverse drug 
reactions. However, some studies have shown 

that ADRs are under-estimated due to the fact 
that they are reported by voluntary reporting 
systems (Bates et al., 2003; van Der Hooft et al., 
2006; McClellan, 2007). In fact, it is estimated 
that only between 2 and 10 per cent of ADRs are 
reported (Rawlins, 1995). Healthcare 
professionals must perform many tasks during 
their workdays and thus finding the time to use 
these surveillance reporting systems is very 
difficult. Also, healthcare professionals tend to 
report only those ADRs on which they have 
absolute certainty of their existence. Several 
medicines agencies have implemented 
spontaneous patient reporting systems in order 
for patients to report ADRs themselves. Some of 
these systems are the MedWatch from the FDA, 
the Yellow Cards  from the UK Medicines 
agency (MHRA) or the website1 developed by 
the Spanish Agency of Medicines and Medical 
devices (AEMPS). Unlike reports from 
healthcare professionals, patient reports often 
provide more detailed and explicit information 
about ADRs (Herxheimer et al., 2010). Another 
important contribution of spontaneous patient 
reporting systems is to achieve patients having a 
more central role in their treatments. However, 
despite the fact that these systems are well-
established, the rate of spontaneous patient 
reporting is very low probably because many 

                                                             

1 https://www.notificaram.es/  

106



patients are still unaware of their existence and 
even may feel embarrassed when describing their 
symptoms.  

In this study, our hypothesis is that health-
related social media can be used as a 
complementary data source to spontaneous 
reporting systems in order to detect unknown 
ADRs and thereby to increase drug safety. In 
recent days, social media on health information, 
just like has happened in other areas, have seen a 
tremendous growth (Hill et al., 2013). Examples 
of social media sites include blogs, online forums, 
social networking, and wikis, among many 
others. In this work, we focus on health forums 
where patients often exchange information about 
their personal medical experiences with other 
patients who suffer the same illness or receive 
similar treatment. Some patients may feel more 
comfortable sharing their medical experiences 
with each other rather than with their healthcare 
professionals. These forums contain a large 
number of comments describing patient 
experiences that would be a fertile source of data 
to detect unknown ADRs. 

Although there have been several 
research efforts devoted to developing systems 
for extracting ADRs from social media, all 
studies have focused on social media in English, 
and none of them have addressed the extraction 
from Spanish social media. Moreover, the 
problem is that these studies have not been 
compared with each other, and hence it is very 
difficult to determine the current “state-of-art” of 
the techniques for ADRs extraction from social 
media. This comparison has not been performed 
due to the lack of a gold-standard corpus for 
ADRs. Thus, the goal of our work is twofold: i) 
to create a gold-standard corpus annotated with 
drugs and adverse events and ii) to develop a 
system to automatically extract mentions of 
drugs and adverse events from Spanish health-
related social media sites. The corpus is 
composed by patients’ comments from 
Forumclinic2, a health online networking website 

                                                             

2 http://www.forumclinic.org  

in Spanish. This is the first corpus of patient 
comments annotated with drugs and adverse 
events in Spanish. Also, we believe that this 
corpus will facilitate comparison for future 
ADRs detection from Spanish social media.  

This is a preliminary work, in which we have 
only focused on the automatic detection of 
mentions of drugs and adverse events. Our final 
goal will be to develop a system to automatically 
extract drugs and their side effects. We hope our 
system will be beneficial to AEMPS as well as to 
the pharmaceutical industry in the improvement 
of their pharmacovigilance systems. 

2 Related Work 

In recent years, the application of Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) techniques to mine 
adverse reactions from texts has been explored 
with promising results, mainly in the context of 
drug labels (Gurulingappa et al., 2013; Li et al., 
2013; Kuhn et al., 2010), biomedical literature 
(Xu and Wang, 2013), medical case reports 
(Gurulingappa et al., 2012) and health records 
(Friedman, 2009; Sohn et al., 2011). However, as 
it will be described below, the extraction of 
adverse reactions from social media has received 
much less attention. 

In general, medical literature, such as 
scientific publications and drug labels, contains 
few grammatical and spelling mistakes. Another 
important advantage is that this type of texts can 
be easily linked to biomedical ontologies. 
Similarly, clinical records present specific 
medical terminology and can also be mapped to 
biomedical ontologies and resources. Meanwhile 
social media texts are markedly different from 
clinical records and scientific articles, and 
thereby the processing of social media texts 
poses additional challenges such as the 
management of meta-information included in the 
text (for example as tags in tweets) (Bouillot et 
al., 2013), the detection of typos and 
unconventional spelling, word shortenings 
(Neunedert et al, 2013; Moreira et al., 2013) and 
slang and emoticons (Balahur, 2013), among 
others. Moreover, these texts are often very short 

107



and with an informal nature, making the 
processing task extremely challenging. 

Regarding the identification of drug names in 
text, during the last four years there has been 
significant research efforts directed to encourage 
the development of systems for detecting these 
entities. Concretely, shared tasks such as 
DDIExtraction 2013 (Segura-Bedmar et al., 
2013), CHEMDNER 2013 (Krallinger et al., 
2013) or the i2b2 Medication Extraction 
challenge (Uzuner et al., 2010) have been held 
for the advancement of the state of the art in this 
problem. However, most of the work on 
recognizing drugs concerns either biomedical 
literature (for example, MedLine articles) or 
clinical records, thus leaving unexplored this task 
in social media streams.  

Leaman et al., (2010) developed a system to 
automatically recognize adverse effects in user 
comments. A corpus of 3,600 comments from 
the DailyStrength health-related social network 
was collected and manually annotated with a 
total of 1,866 drug conditions, including 
beneficial effects, adverse effects, indications 
and others. To identify the adverse effects in the 
user comments, a lexicon was compiled from the 
following resources: (1) the COSTART 
vocabulary (National Library of Medicine, 2008), 
(2) the SIDER database (Kuhn et al., 2010), (3) 
MedEffect3 and (4) a list of colloquial phrases 
which were manually collected from the 
DailyStrength comments. The final lexicon 
consisted of 4,201 concepts (terms with the same 
CUI were grouped in the same concept). Finally, 
the terms in the lexicon were mapped against 
user comments to identify the adverse effects. In 
order to distinguish adverse effects from the 
other drug conditions (beneficial effects, 
indications and others), the systems used a list of 
verbs denoting indications (for example, help, 
work, prescribe). Drug name recognition was not 
necessary because the evaluation focused only on 
a set of four drugs: carbamazepine, olanzapine, 

                                                             

3 http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/medeff/index-
eng.php 

trazodone and ziprasidone. The system achieved 
a good performance, with a precision of 78.3% 
and a recall of 69.9%.  

An extension of this system was accomplished 
by Nikfarjam and Gonzalez (2011). The authors 
applied association rule mining to extract 
frequent patterns describing opinions about drugs. 
The rules were generated using the Apriori tool4, 
an implementation of the Apriori algorithm 
(Agrawal and Srikant, 1994) for association rule 
mining. The system was evaluated using the 
same corpus created for their previous work 
(Leaman et al., 2010), and which has been 
described above. The system achieved a 
precision of 70.01% and a recall of 66.32%. The 
main advantage of this system is that it can be 
easily adapted for other domains and languages. 
Another important advantage of this approach 
over a dictionary based approach is that the 
system is able to detect terms not included in the 
dictionary.  

Benton et al., (2011) created a corpus of posts 
from several online forums about breast cancer, 
which later was used to extract potential adverse 
reactions from the most commonly used drugs to 
treat this disease: tamoxifen, anastrozole, 
letrozole and axemestane. The authors collected 
a lexicon of lay medical terms from websites and 
databases about drugs and adverse events. The 
lexicon was extended with the Consumer Health 
Vocabulary (CHV)5, a vocabulary closer to the 
lay terms, which patients usually use to describe 
their medical experiences. Then, pairs of terms 
co-occurring within a window of 20 tokens were 
considered. The Fisher’s exact test (Fisher, 1922) 
was used to calculate the probability that the two 
terms co-occurred independently by chance. To 
evaluate the system, the authors focused on the 
four drugs mentioned above, and then collected 
their adverse effects from their drug labels. Then, 
precision and recall were calculated by 
comparing the adverse effects from drug labels 
and the adverse effects obtained by the system. 

                                                             

4 http://www.borgelt.net/apriori.html 
5 http://consumerhealthvocab.org 

108



The system obtained an average precision of 77% 
and an average recall of 35.1% for all four drugs.  

UDWarning (Wu et al., 2012) is an ongoing 
prototype whose main goal is to extract adverse 
drug reactions from Google discussions. A 
knowledge base of drugs and their adverse 
effects was created by integrating information 
from different resources such as SIDER, 
DailyMed6, Drugs.com7 and MedLinePlus. The 
authors hypothesized that unknown adverse drug 
effects would have a high volume of discussions 
over the time. Thus, the systems should monitor 
the number of relevant discussions for each 
adverse drug effect. However, to the best of our 
knowledge, the UDWarning’s component 
devoted to the detection of unrecognized adverse 
drug effects has not been developed yet.  

Bian et al., (2012) developed a system to 
detect tweets describing adverse drug reactions. 
The systems used a SVM classifier trained on a 
corpus of tweets, which were manually labeled 
by two experts. MetaMap (Aronson and Lang, 
2010) was used to analyze the tweets and to find 
the UMLS concepts present in the tweets. The 
system produced poor results, mainly because 
tweets are riddled with spelling and grammar 
mistakes. Moreover, MetaMap is not a suitable 
tool to analyze this type of texts since patients do 
not usually use medical terminology to describe 
their medical experiences.  

As it was already mentioned, the recognition 
of drugs in social media texts has hardly been 
tackled and little research has been conducted to 
extract relationships between drugs and their side 
effects, since most systems were focused on a 
given and fixed set of drugs. Most systems for 
extracting ADRs follow a dictionary-based 
approach. The main drawback of these systems is 
that they fail to recognize terms which are not 
included in the dictionary.  In addition, the 
dictionary-based approach is not able to handle 
the large number of spelling and grammar errors 
in social media texts. Moreover, the detection of 
                                                             

6 http://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/ 
7 http://www.drugs.com/ 

ADRs has not been attempted for languages 
other than English. Indeed, automatic 
information extraction from Spanish-language 
social media in the field of health remains largely 
unexplored. Additionally, to the best of our 
knowledge, there is no corpus annotated with 
ADRs in social media texts available today. 

3 Method  

3.1 Corpus creation 

In order to create the first corpus in Spanish 
annotated with drugs and adverse events, we 
reviewed the main health-related social networks 
in Spanish language to select the most 
appropriate source of user comments. This 
corpus will be used to evaluate our system. 

Twitter was initially our preferred option due 
to the tremendous amount of tweets published 
each day (nearly 400 millions). However, we 
decided to discard it because Twitter does not 
seem to be the preferred source for users to 
describe their ADRs. Gonzalez et al. (2013) 
gathered a total of 42,327 in a one-month period, 
from which only 216 described ADRs. Although 
Facebook is the most popular social media and 
many Facebook groups dedicated to specific 
diseases have emerged in the last years, we 
discarded it because most of these groups usually 
have restricted access to their members.  Online 
health-related forums are an attractive source of 
data for our corpus due to their high dynamism, 
their great number of users as well as their easy 
access. After reviewing the main health forums 
in Spanish, we chose ForumClinic, an interactive 
program for patients, whose main goal is to 
provide rigorous information about specific 
diseases (such as breast cancer, HIV, bipolar 
disorder, depression, schizophrenia, ischemic 
heart disease, among others) and their treatments. 
Also, this platform aims to increase the 
participation of patients maintaining a discussion 
forum where patients can exchange information 
about their experiences. Figure 1 shows the 
distribution of user comments across the main 
twelve categories defined in the forum. We 

109



implemented a web crawler to gather all user 
comments published in ForumClinic to date. 

 

Figure 1 Distribution of user comments. 

Then, we randomly selected a sample of 400 
comments that were manually labeled with drugs 
and adverse events by two annotators with 
expertise in Pharmacovigilance. It should be 
noted that adverse events and ADRs do not refer 
to the same: while an adverse event may or may 
not be caused by a drug, an ADR is an adverse 
event that is suspected to be caused by a drug. A 
drug is a substance used in the treatment, cure, 
prevention or diagnosis of diseases. The corpus 
includes generic and brand drugs as well as drug 
families. Disagreements between the annotators 
were discussed and reconciled during the 
harmonization process, where a third annotator 
helped to make the final decision (some 
examples are shown in Table 1). All the 
mentions of drugs and adverse events were 
annotated, even those containing spelling or 
grammatical errors (for example, hemorrajia). 
Nominal anaphoric expressions, which refer to 
previous adverse events or drugs in the comment, 
were also included in the annotation. The 
annotators found 187 drugs (from which 40 were 
nominal anaphors and 14 spelling errors) and 
636 adverse events (from which 48 were nominal 
anaphors and 17 spelling errors). The corpus is 
available for academic purposes8. 

To measure the inter-annotator agreement we 
used the F-measure metric. This metric 
approximates the kappa coefficient (Cohen, 1960) 

                                                             

8 http://labda.inf.uc3m.es/SpanishADRCorpus 

when the number of true negatives (TN) is very 
large (Hripcsak and Rothschild, 2005). In our 
case, we can state that the number of TN is very 
high since TN are all the terms that are not true 
positives, false positives nor false negatives. The 
F-measure was calculated by comparing the two 
corpora created by the two first annotators. The 
corpus labelled by the first annotator was 
considered the gold-standard. As it was expected, 
drugs exhibit a high IAA (0.89), while adverse 
events point to moderate agreement (0.59). As 
drugs have specific names and there are a limited 
number of them, it is possible to create a limited 
and controlled vocabulary to gather many of the 
existing drugs. On the other hand, patients can 
express their adverse events in many different 
ways due to the variability and richness of 
natural language. 

Sentence Final Decision 

De entre los distintos 
antiretrovirales, transcriptasa 
inversa, proteasa, integrasa y 
fusión, qué grupo sería el 
más potente y cual el menos. 

Names in bold type refer 
to four families of 
inhibitors (that is, drug 
families), and thereby, 
they should be annotated. 

Como complemento proteico 
recomendamos el de los 
laboratorio Vegenat. Si 
compras los complementos 
del Decathlon, asegúrate que 
contenga proteínas. 

The mention 
“complementos del 
Decathlon” should not be 
annotated as a drug since 
it is not a brand-marked 
drug.   

Table 1: Some examples of disagreements between 
annotators 

 

3.2 Constructing a dictionary for drugs and 
adverse events 

Since our goal is to identify drugs and adverse 
events from user comments, the first challenge is 
to create a dictionary that contains all of the 
drugs and known adverse events.  

CIMA9 is an online information center about 
medicines that provides all the daily updated 
official information about drugs. CIMA is 

                                                             

9 http://www.aemps.gob.es/cima/ 

110



maintained by the Spanish Agency for Medicines 
and Health Products (AEMPS). It includes 
information on all drugs authorized in Spain and 
their current authorization status. CIMA contains 
a total of 16,418 brand drugs and 2,228 generic 
drugs. Many brand drug names include 
additional information such as dosages, mode 
and route of administration, laboratory, among 
others (for example, “ESPIDIFEN 400 mg 
GRANULADO PARA SOLUCION ORAL 
SABOR ALBARICOQUE” or “ESPIDIFEN 600 
mg GRANULADO PARA SOLUCION ORAL 
SABOR LIMON EFG, 20 sobres”). Since it is 
unlikely that these long names are used by 
patients, we implemented a method to shorten 
them by removing their additional information 
(for example, “ESPIDIFEN”). After applying 
this method, the resulting list of brand drug 
names consisted of 3,662 terms. The main 
limitation of CIMA is that it only provides 
information about drugs authorized in Spain. 
That is, CIMA does not contain information 
about drugs approved only in Latin America. 
CIMA is free and offers a downloadable version 
in XML format. Thus, it provides the 
information in a well-structured format that 
makes it possible to directly extract generic and 
brand drug names as well as other related 
information such as their ATC codes, their 
pharmaceutical company, among others.  
Unfortunately, CIMA does not provide 
information about drug groups. For this reason, 
we decided to consider the WHO ATC system10, 
a classification system of drugs, as an additional 
resource to obtain a list of drug groups.  

MedDRA 11  is a medical terminology 
dictionary about events associated with drugs. It 
is a multilingual terminology, which includes the 
following languages: Chinese, Czech, Dutch, 
French, German, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, 
Portuguese and Spanish. Its main goal is to 
provide a classification system for efficient 
communication of ADRs data between countries. 
The main advantage of MedDRA is that its 
                                                             

10 http://www.whocc.no/atc_ddd_index/ 
11 http://www.meddra.org/ 

structured format allows easily obtaining a list of 
possible adverse events. MedDRA is composed 
of a five levels hierarchy. We collected the terms 
from the most specific level, "Lowest Level 
Terms" (LLTs)”. This level contains a total of 
72,072 terms, which express how information is 
communicated in practice.  

By analyzing the information from these 
resources, we found that none of them contained 
all of the drugs and adverse events. Patients 
usually use lay terms to describe their symptoms 
and their treatments. Unfortunately, many of 
these lay terms are not included in the above 
mentioned resources. Therefore, we decided to 
integrate additional information from other 
resources devoted to patients to build a more 
complete and comprehensive dictionary. There 
are several online websites that provide 
information to patients on drugs and their side 
effects in Spanish language. For example, 
MedLinePlus and Vademecum contain 
information about drugs and their side effects. 
These websites allow users to browse by generic 
or drug name, providing an information leaflet 
for each drug in a HTML page. Since these 
leaflets are unstructured, the extraction of drugs 
and their adverse effects is a challenging task. 
While drug names are often located in specific 
fields (such as title), their adverse events are 
usually descriptions of harmful reactions in 
natural language. We only developed a web 
crawler to browse and download pages related to 
drugs from Vademecum since this website 
provided an easier access to its drug pages than 
MedLinePlus. We plan to augment the list of 
drugs and adverse events by crawling 
MedLinePlus in future work.  

After extracting drugs and adverse events 
from these different resources, we created a 
dictionary of drugs and adverse events. Table 2 
shows the statistics of our final dictionary. 

Resource Total 

Generic drugs from CIMA 2,228 

Brand drugs from CIMA 3,662   

111



Drug group names from the ATC system 466 

Drug names (which are not in CIMA) from 
Vademecum 

1,237 

Total Drugs: 7,593 

Table 2: Number of drugs in the dictionary. 

Resource Total 

Adverse events from MedDRA 72,072 

Adverse events from Vademecum 
(which are not in MedDRA) 

2,793 

Total adverse events: 74,865 

Table 3: Number of adverse events in the dictionary. 

3.3 Using Textalytics and gazetteers to 
identify drugs and adverse events 

Textalytics 12  is a multilingual text analysis 
engine to extract information from any type of 
texts such as tweets, posts, comments, news, 
contracts, etc. This tool offers a wide variety of 
functionalities such as text classification, entity 
recognition, concept extraction, relation 
extraction and sentiment analysis, among others. 
We used a plugin that integrates Textalytics with 
GATE. In this paper, we applied entity 
recognition provided by Textalytics, which 
follows a dictionary-based approach to identify 
entities in texts. We created a dictionary for 
drugs and adverse events from CIMA and 
MedDRA. This dictionary was integrated into 
Textalytics. Additionally, the lists of drugs and 
adverse events collected from the others 
resources (ATC system and Vademecum) were 
used to create GATE gazetteers.  

4 Results and error analysis 

We evaluated the system on the corpus annotated 
with drugs and adverse events.  The results of 
this study show a precision of 87% for drugs and 
85% for adverse events, and a recall of 80% for 
drugs and 56% for adverse events.  

                                                             

12 https://textalytics.com/ 

We performed an analysis to determine the 
main sources of error in the system. A sample of 
50 user comments were randomly selected and 
analyzed. Regarding the detection of adverse 
events, the major cause of false negatives was 
the use of colloquial expressions to describe an 
adverse event. Phrases like “me deja ko (it makes 
me KO)” or “me cuesta más levantarme (it’s 
harder for me to wake up)” were used by patients 
for expressing their adverse events. These 
phrases are not included in our dictionary. A 
possible solution may be to create a lexicon 
containing this kind of idiomatic expressions. 
The second highest cause of false negatives for 
adverse events was due to the different lexical 
variations of the same adverse event. For 
example, ‘depresión (depression)’ is included in 
our dictionary, but their lexical variations such as 
“depremido (depress)”, “me deprimo (I get 
depressed)”, “depresivo (depressive)” or 
“deprimente (depressing)” were not detected by 
our system since they are not in our dictionary. 
Nominalization may be used to identify all the 
possible lexical variations of a same adverse 
event. Another important error source of false 
negatives was spelling mistakes (eg. hemorrajia 
instead of hemorragia). Many users have great 
difficulty in spelling unusual and complex 
technical terms. This error source may be 
handled by a more advanced matching method 
capable of dealing with the spelling error 
problem. The use of abbreviations (“depre” is an 
abbreviation for “depression”) also produces 
false negatives. Techniques such as 
lemmatization and stemming may help to resolve 
this kind of abbreviations.  

False positives for adverse events were mainly 
due to the inclusion of MedDRA terms referring 
to procedures (such as therapeutic, preventive or 
laboratory procedures) and tests in our dictionary. 
MedDRA includes terms for diseases, signs, 
abnormalities, procedures and tests.  We should 
have not included those terms referring to 
procedures and tests since they do not represent 
adverse events.  

112



The main source of false negatives for drugs 
seems to be that users often misspelled drug 
names. Some generic and brand drugs have 
complex names for patients. Some examples of 
misspelled drugs are avilify (Abilify) or rivotril 
(ribotril). Another important cause of false 
negatives was due to the fact that our dictionary 
does not include drugs approved in other 
countries than Spain (for example, 
Clorimipramina, Ureadin or Paxil). However, 
ForumClinic has a large number of users in Latin 
America. It is possible that these users have 
posted comments about some drugs that have 
only been approved in their countries. The third 
largest source of errors was the abbreviations for 
drug families. For instance, benzodiacepinas 
(benzodiazepine) is commonly used as benzos, 
which is not included in our dictionary. An 
interesting source of errors to point out is the use 
of acronyms referring to a combination of two or 
more drugs. For instance, FEC is a combination 
of Fluorouracil, Epirubicin and 
Cyclophosphamide, three chemotherapy drugs 
used to treat breast cancer. This combination of 
drugs is not registered in the resources (CIMA 
and Vademecum) used to create our dictionary. 

Most false positives for drugs were due to a 
lack of ambiguity resolution. Some drug names 
are common Spanish words such as “Allí” (a 
slimming drug) or “Puntual” (a laxative). These 
terms are ambiguous and resolve to multiple 
senses, depending on the context in which they 
are used. Similarly, some drug names such as 
“alcohol” or “oxygen” can take a meaning 
different than the one of pharmaceutical 
substance. Another important cause of false 
positives is due to the use of drug family names 
as adjectives that specify an effect. This is the 
case of sedante (sedative) or antidepresivo 
(antidepressant), which can refer to a family of 
drugs, but also to the definition of an effect or 
disorder caused by a drug (sedative effects). 

5 Conclusion  

In this research, we created the first Spanish 
corpus of health user comments annotated with 
drugs and adverse events. The corpus is available 

for research. In this work, we only focused on 
the detection of the mentions of drugs and 
adverse events, but not the relationships among 
them. In future work, we plan to extend the 
system to detect the relationships between drugs 
and their side effects. Also, we would like to 
identify their indications and beneficial effects.  

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the EU project 
TrendMiner [FP7-ICT287863], by the project 
MULTIMEDICA [TIN2010-20644-C03-01], and 
by the Research Network MA2VICMR 
[S2009/TIC-1542]. 

References  

Rakesh Agrawal and Ramakrishnan Srikant. 1994. 
Fast algorithms for mining association rules. In 
Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Very Large Data Bases, 
1215:487-499. 

Alan R Aronson and Francois-Michel Lang. 2010. An 
overview of MetaMap: historical perspective and 
recent advances. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, 17(3):229-236.  

Alexandra Balahur. 2013. Sentiment Analysis in 
Social Media Texts. WASSA 2013, 120. 

David W. Bates, R Scott Evans, Harvey Murff, Peter 
D. Stetson, Lisa Pizziferri and George Hripcsak. 
2003. Detecting adverse events using information 
technology. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, 10(2):115-128. 

Adrian Benton, Lye Ungar, Shawndra Hill, Sean 
Hennessy, Jun Mao, Annie Chung, Charles E. 
Leonarda and John H. Holmes. 2011. Identifying 
potential adverse effects using the web: A new 
approach to medical hypothesis generation. 
Journal of biomedical informatics, 44(6): 989-996. 

Jiang Bian, Umit Topaloglu and Fan Yu. 2012. 
Towards large-scale twitter mining for drug-related 
adverse events. In Proceedings of the 2012 
international workshop on Smart health and 
wellbeing, 25-32. 

CA. Bond and Cynthia L. Raehl. 2006. Adverse drug 
reactions in United States hospitals. 
Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human 
Pharmacology and Drug Therapy, 26(5):601-608.  

113



Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for 
nominal scales. Educational and Psychol 
Meas ;20:37e46. 

Ronald A. Fisher. 1922. On the interpretation of χ 2 
from contingency tables, and the calculation of P. 
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 85(1):87-
94. 

Flavien Bouillot, Phan N. Hai, Nicolas Béchet, Sandra 
Bringay, Dino Ienco, Stan Matwin, Pascal 
Poncelet, Mathiue Roche and Maguelonne 
Teisseire. 2013. How to Extract Relevant 
Knowledge from Tweets?. Communications in 
Computer and Information Science.  

Carol Friedman. 2009. Discovering novel adverse 
drug events using natural language processing and 
mining of the electronic health record. In Artificial 
Intelligence in Medicine. LNAI 5651:1 -5. 

Graciela H. Gonzalez, Matthew L Scotch and Garrick 
L Wallstrom. Mining Social Network Postings for 
Mentions of Potential Adverse Drug Reactions. 
HHS-NIH-NLM (9/10/2012 - 8/31/2016). 

Harsha Gurulingappa, Abdul Mateen-­‐Rajput and Luca 
Toldo. 2012. Extraction of potential adverse drug 
events from medical case reports. Journal of 
biomedical semantics. 3(1):15. 

Harsha Gurulingappa, Luca Toldo, Abdul Mateen-
Rajput, Jan A. Kors, Adel Taweel and Yorki 
Tayrouz. 2013. Automatic detection of adverse 
events to predict drug label changes using text and 
data mining techniques. Pharmacoepidemiology 
and drug safety, 22(11):1189-1194. 

A Herxheimer, MR Crombag and TL Alves. 2010. 
Direct patient reporting of adverse drug reactions. 
A twelve-country survey & literature 
review. Health Action International (HAI). Europe. 
Paper Series Reference 01-2010/01. 

Shawndra Hill, Raina Merchant and Lile Ungar. 
(2013). Lessons Learned About Public Health from 
Online Crowd Surveillance. Big Data, 1(3):160-
167.  

George Hripcsak and Adam S. Rothschild. 2005. 
Agreement, the F-measure, and reliability in 
information retrieval. J Am Med Inform 
Assoc.12:296e8. 

 Martin Krallinger, Florian Leitner, Obdulia Rabal, 
Miguel Vazquez, Julen Oyarzabal and Alfonso 
Valencia. 2013. Overview of the chemical 
compound and drug name recognition 

(CHEMDNER) task. In BioCreative Challenge 
Evaluation Worksho. 2:2-33. 

Michael Kuhn, Monica Campillos, Ivica Letunic, Lars 
J. Jensen and Peer Bork. 2010. A side effect 
resource to capture phenotypic effects of drugs. 
Molecular systems biology, 6(343):1-6. 

Robert Leaman, Laura Wojtulewicz, Ryan Sullivan, 
Annie Skariah, Jian Yang and Graciela Gonzalez. 
2010. Towards internet-age pharmacovigilance: 
extracting adverse drug reactions from user posts to 
health-related social networks. In Proceedings of 
the 2010 workshop on biomedical natural 
language processing. 117-125. Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 

Anne J. Leendertse, Antoine C. Egberts, Lennar J. 
Stoker, & Patricia M.L.A. van den Bemt. 2008. 
Frequency of and risk factors for preventable 
medication-related hospital admissions in the 
Netherlands. Archives of internal medicine, 
168(17), 1890.  

Qi Li, Louise Deleger, Todd Lingren, Haijun Zhai, 
Megan Kaiser, Laura Stoutenborough Anil G Jegga, 
Kevin B Cohen and Imre Solti. 2013. Mining FDA 
drug labels for medical conditions. BMC medical 
informatics and decision making, 13(1):53. 

Mark McClellan. 2007. Drug Safety Reform at the 
FDA-Pendulum Swing or Systematic 
Improvement?. New England Journal of Medicine, 
356(17):1700-1702. 

Silvio Moreira, Joao Filgueiras, Bruno Martins, 
Francisco Couto and Mario J. Silva. 2013. 
REACTION: A naive machine learning approach 
for sentiment classification. In 2nd Joint 
Conference on. Lexical and Computational 
Semantics. 2:490-494.  

Melanie Neunerdt, Michael Reyer and Rudolf Mathar. 
2013. A POS Tagger for Social Media Texts 
trained on Web Comments. Polibits, 48:59-66. 

Azadeh Nikfarjam and Graciela H. Gonzalez. 2011. 
Pattern mining for extraction of mentions of 
adverse drug reactions from user comments. 
In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, 
2011:1019-1026. American Medical Informatics 
Association.  

Isabel Segura-Bedmar, Paloma Martınez and María 
Herrero-Zazo. 2013. SemEval-2013 Task 9: 
Extraction of Drug-Drug Interactions from 

114



Biomedical Texts (DDIExtraction 2013). 3206(65): 
341-351. 

Cornelis S. van Der Hooft, Miriam CJM Sturkenboom, 
Kees van Grootheest, Herre J. Kingma and Bruno 
HCh Stricker. 2006. Adverse drug reaction-related 
hospitalisations. Drug Safety, 29(2):161-168.  

Hamish Cunningham. 2002. GATE, a general 
architecture for text engineering. Computers and 
the Humanities, 36(2):223-254. 

M Rawlins. 1995. Pharmacovigilance: paradise lost, 
regained or postponed? The William Withering 
Lecture 1994. Journal of the Royal College of 
Physicians of London, 29(1): 41-49.  

Sunghwan Sohn, Jean-Pierre A. Kocher, Christopher 
G. Chute and Guergana K. Savova. 2011. Drug 
side effect extraction from clinical narratives of 

psychiatry and psychology patients. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, 
18(Suppl 1):i144-i149. 

Özlem Uzuner, Imre Solti and Eithon Cadag. 2010. 
Extracting medication information from clinical 
text. Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association. 17(5):514-518. 

Rong Xu and QuanQiu Wang. 2013. Large-scale 
extraction of accurate drug-disease treatment pairs 
from biomedical literature for drug repurposing. 
BMC Bioinformatics, 14(1):181. 

Karin Wester, Anna K. Jönsson, Olav Spigset, Henrik 
Druid and Staffan Hägg. 2008. Incidence of fatal 
adverse drug reactions: a population based study. 
British journal of clinical pharmacology, 
65(4):573-579. 

 

115


