



















































Context Sense Clustering for Translation


Proceedings of SSST-8, Eighth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 135–137,
October 25, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Context Sense Clustering for Translation

João Casteleiro
Universidade Nova de Lisboa
Departamento de Informática
2829-516 Caparica, Portugal
casteleiroalves@gmail.com

Gabriel Lopes
Universidade Nova de Lisboa
Departamento de Informática
2829-516 Caparica, Portugal

gpl@fct.unl.pt

Joaquim Silva
Universidade Nova de Lisboa
Departamento de Informática
2829-516 Caparica, Portugal

jfs@fct.unl.pt

Extended Abstract

Word sense ambiguity is present in all words 
with more than one meaning in several natural 
languages and is a fundamental characteristic of 
human language. This has consequences in trans-
lation as it is necessary to find the right sense and 
the correct translation for each word. For this 
reason, the English word fair can mean reasona-
ble or market such as plant also can mean factory
or herb.

The disambiguation problem has been recog-
nize as a major problem in natural languages 
processing research. Several words have several 
meanings or senses. The disambiguation task 
seeks to find out which sense of an ambiguous 
word is invoked in a particular use of that word. 
A system for automatic translation from English
to Portuguese should know how to translate the 
word bank as banco (an institution for receiving, 
lending, exchanging, and safeguarding money), 
and as margem (the land alongside or sloping 
down to a river or lake), and also should know 
that the word banana may appear in the same 
context as acerola and that these two belongs to 
hyperonym fruit. Whenever a translation systems 
depends on the meaning of the text being pro-
cessed, disambiguation is beneficial or even nec-
essary. Word Sense Disambiguation is thus es-
sentially a classification problem; given a word X
and an inventory of possible semantic tags for 
that word that might be translation, we seek 
which tag is appropriate for each individual in-
stance of that word in a particularly context.

In recent years research in the field has 
evolved in different directions. Several studies 
that combine clustering processes with word 
senses has been assessed by several. Apidianaki 
in (2010) presents a clustering algorithm for 
cross-lingual sense induction that generates bi-
lingual semantic inventories from parallel corpo-

ra. Li and Church in (2007) state that should not 
be necessary to look at the entire corpus to know 
if two words are strongly associated or not, thus, 
they proposed an algorithm for efficiently com-
puting word associations. In (Bansal et al., 
2012), authors proposed an unsupervised method 
for clustering translations of words through 
point-wise mutual information, based on a mono-
lingual and a parallel corpora. Gamallo, Agustini 
and Lopes presented in (2005) an unsupervised 
strategy to partially acquire syntactic-semantic 
requirements of nouns, verbs and adjectives from 
partially parsed monolingual text corpora. The 
goal is to identify clusters of similar positions by 
identifying the words that define their require-
ments extensionally. In (1991) Brown et al. de-
scribed a statistical technique for assigning sens-
es to words based on the context in which they 
appear. Incorporating the method in a machine 
translation system, they have achieved to signifi-
cantly reduce translation error rate. Tufis et al. in
(2004) presented a method that exploits word 
clustering based on automatic extraction of trans-
lation equivalents, being supported by available 
aligned wordnets. In (2013), Apidianaki de-
scribed a system for SemEval-2013 Cross-
lingual Word Sense Disambiguation task, where 
word senses are represented by means of transla-
tion clusters in a cross-lingual strategy.

In this article, a Sense Disambiguation ap-
proach, using Context Sense Clustering, within a 
mono-lingual strategy of neighbor features is 
proposed. We described a semi-supervised meth-
od to classify words based on clusters of contexts 
strongly correlated. For this purpose, we used a 
covariance-based correlation measure (Equation 
1). Covariance (Equation 2) measure how much 
two random variables change together. If the 
values of one variable (sense x) mainly corre-
spond to the values of the other variable (sense 
y), the variables tend to show similar behavior 

135



and the covariance is positive. In the opposite 
case, covariance is negative. Note that this pro-
cess is computationally heavy. The system needs 
to compute all relations between all features of 
all left words. If the number of features is very 
large, the processing time increases proportional-
ly.

 ( , ) =  ( ,  )( , ) + ( , )
(1)

( , ) = 1− 1 ( ( , ). ( , )) 
(2)

Our goal is to join similar senses of the same 
ambiguous word in the same cluster, based on 
features correlation. Through the analysis of cor-
relation data, we easily induce sense relations. In 
order to streamline the task of creating clusters, 
we opted to use WEKA tool (Hall et al., 2009)
with X-means (Pelleg et al., 2000) algorithm.

Clusters
fructose, glucose
football, chess
title, appendix, annex
telephone, fax
liver, hepatic, kidney
aquatic, marine
disciplinary, infringement, criminal

Table 1. Well-formed resulting clusters

In order to determine the consistence of the 
obtained clusters, all of these were evaluated 
with V-measure. V-measure introduce two crite-
ria presented in (Rosenberg and Hirschberg, 
2007), homogeneity (h) and completeness (c). A 
clustering process is considered homogeneously 
well-formed if all of its clusters contain only data 
points which are members of a single class. 
Comparatively, a clustering result satisfies com-
pleteness if all data points that are members of a 
given class are elements of the same cluster.

Analysing the results of context sense clusters 
obtained (Table 1) we easily understand that al-

most all clusters are generally well formed, get-
ting a final V-measure average rating of 67%.

Finally, in order to train a classifier we choose 
to use a training data set with 60 well formed 
clusters (with V-measure value ranging between 
0.9 and 1). Our testing data set is composed by 
60 words related to the clusters but which are not 
contained there. The classifier used was a Sup-
port Vector Machine (SVM) (2011). The kernel 
type applied was the Radial Basis Function
(RBF). This kernel non linearly maps samples 
into a higher dimensional space, so it can handle 
the case when the relation between class labels 
and attributes is nonlinear, that is the case. Each 
word of training and testing data sets were en-
coded according the frequency in a corpora of all 
characteristics contained in the clusters. Our pur-
pose was to classify each one of the new poten-
tial ambiguous words, and fit it in the corre-
sponding cluster (Table 2 and Table 3).

Test Words Label assigned by (SVM)
Fruit Cluster 29
Infectious Cluster 7
Kiwi Cluster 60
Back Cluster 57
Legislative Cluster 34
Grape Cluster 29
Russian Cluster 59

Table 2. Results generated by (SVM)

Clusters Content of Clusters 
Cluster 7 Viral, contagious, hepatic
Cluster 29 Banana, apple
Cluster 34 Legal, criminal, infringement
Cluster 57 Cervical, lumbar
Cluster 59 French, Italian, Belgian, German
Cluster 60 Thyroid, mammary

Table 3. Cluster correspondence

The obtained results showed that almost all 
words were tagged in the corresponding cluster. 
Evaluating system accuracy we obtained an av-
erage value of 78%, which means that from the 
60 tested words, 47 words were assigned to the 
corresponding context cluster.

136



References

Marianna Apidianaki, Yifan He, et al. 2010. An 
algorithm for cross-lingual sense-clustering 
tested in a mt evaluation setting. In Proceed-
ings of the International Workshop on Spoken 
Language Translation, pages 219–226.

Li, P., Church, K.W.: A sketch algorithm for es-
timating two-way and multi-way associations. 
Computational Linguistics 33 (3), 305 - 354 
(2007).

Bansal, M., DeNero, J., Lin, D.: Unsupervised 
translation sense clustering. In: Proceedings of 
the 2012 Conference of the North American 
Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. 
pp. 773-782. Association for Computational 
Linguistics (2012).

Gamallo, P., Agustini, A., Lopes, G.P.: Cluster-
ing syntactic positions with similar semantic 
requirements. Computational Linguistics 
31(1), 107-146 (2005).

Brown, P.F., Pietra, S.A.D., Pietra, V.J.D., Mer-
cer, R.L.: Word-sense disambiguation using 
statistical methods. In: Proceedings of the 29th 
annual meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. pp. 264-270. Association 
for Computational Linguistics (1991).

TufiS, D., Ion, R., Ide, N.: Fine-grained word 
sense disambiguation based on parallel corpo-
ra, word alignment, word clustering and 
aligned wordnets. In: Proceedings of the 20th 
international conference on Computational 
Linguistics. p. 1312. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (2004).

Apidianaki, M.: Cross-lingual word sense dis-
ambiguation using translation sense clustering. 
In: Proceedings of the 7th International Work-
shop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013). 
pp. 178-182. *SEM and NAACL (2013)

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bern-
hard Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H 
Witten. 2009. The weka data mining software: 
an update. ACM SIGKDD Explorations 
Newsletter, 11(1):10–18.

Dan Pelleg, Andrew W Moore, et al. 2000. X-
means: Extending k-means with efficient es-
timation of the number of clusters. In ICML, 
pages 727–734.

Andrew Rosenberg and Julia Hirschberg. 2007. 
Vmeasure: A conditional entropy-based exter-
nal cluster evaluation measure. In EMNLP-
CoNLL, volume 7, pages 410–420.

Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. 2011. 
Libsvm: a library for support vector machines. 
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and 
Technology (TIST), 2(3):27.

137


