



















































How to semantically relate dialectal Dictionaries in the Linked Data Framework


Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH) @ EACL 2014, pages 9–12,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

How to semantically relate dialectal Dictionaries 

in the Linked Data Framework 

 

 

Thierry Declerck 

University of Saarland 

 Computer Linguistics Department 

Postach 15 11 50 

D-66041 

declerck@dfki.de 

Eveline Wandl-Vogt 
Institute for Corpus Linguistics and 

Text Technology, Austrian Academy of 
Sciences. 

Sonnenfelsgasse 19/8, A-1010 Vienna 

Eveline.Wandl-Vog@ 

oeaw.ac.at 

 

 

Abstract 

We describe on-going work towards publishing 

language resources included in dialectal dictionaries 

in the Linked Open Data (LOD) cloud, and so to 

support wider access to the diverse cultural data 

associated with such dictionary entries, like the 

various historical and geographical variations of the 

use of such words. Beyond this, our approach allows 

the cross-linking of entries of dialectal dictionaries on 

the basis of the semantic representation of their 

senses, and also to link the entries of the dialectal 

dictionaries to lexical senses available in the LOD 

framework. This paper focuses on the description of 

the steps leading to a SKOS-XL and lemon encoding 

of the entries of two Austrian dialectal dictionaries, 

and how this work supports their cross-linking and 

linking to other language data in the LOD. 

1 Introduction 

The starting point for our work is given by two 

Austrian dialectal dictionaries: The Dictionary of 

Bavarian dialects of Austria (Wörterbuch der 

bairischen Mundarten in Österreich, WBÖ)
1
 and 

the Dictionary of the Viennese dialect 

(Wörterbuch der Wiener Mundart, WWM)
2

. 

Both dictionaries have been made available to us 

in an electronic version: WBÖ in a proprietary 

XML schema and WWM in Microsoft Word. We 

                                                           

1
 http://verlag.oeaw.ac.at/Woerterbuch-der-

bairischen-Mundarten-in-Oesterreich-38.-Lieferung-

WBOe  
2
 See (Hornung & Grüner, 2002). 

used the TEI “OxGarage”
3
 service to convert the 

WWM Word document into a TEI compliant 

XML representation. Table 1 below shows 

partially an example of an entry in the printed 

version of WBÖ. 

Table 1: An example for an entry in the WBÖ 

 

In a previous work we ported elements of WBÖ 

onto SKOS
4
 in order to be able to publish entries 

                                                           

3
 See http://oxgarage.oucs.ox.ac.uk:8080/ege-

webclient/ 

4 “SKOS - Simple Knowledge Organization System - 
provides a model for expressing the basic structure 

and content of concept schemes such as thesauri, 

classification schemes, subject heading lists, 

taxonomies, folksonomies, and other similar types of 

controlled vocabulary. As an application of the 

Resource Description Framework (RDF), SKOS 

allows concepts to be composed and published on the 

World Wide Web, linked with data on the Web and 

integrated into other concept schemes.” 

9



of this dictionary in the Linked Data
5

 cloud 

(Wandl-Vogt & Declerck, 2013). We used 

recently a similar approach for porting the TEI 

Version of the WWM dictionary into SKOS, 

leading to few modifications in our previous 

model. 

A motivation for this additional step was to 

investigate if our SKOS-based model can support 

the (automatised) cross-linking of the dialectal 

dictionary data
6
. In this particular case, we can 

take advantage of a property of dialectal 

dictionaries concerning the expression of 

meanings of entries: Although conceived as 

monolingual reference works, dialectal 

dictionaries share with bilingual dictionaries the 

fact that they express the meanings of their 

entries in a different language. The meta-

language for expressing the meanings of entries 

in both WBÖ and WWM is Standard German, 

sometimes accompanied by Austrian German. 

This is exemplified in the WBÖ entry “Puss” in 

Table 1 above, which is using both the Standard 

German “Kuß” and the Austrian German 

“Busserl” for expressing one meaning of the 

word “Puss” (this meaning being “kiss”). Other 

meanings are “Gebäck” and “PflN”
7
. Additional 

lines for the entry “Puss” in WBÖ, not displayed 

in this submission due to lack of space, are 

giving more details on those meanings, précising 

that in the “Gebäck” case we deal with a small 

sweet pastry (“Kl. süßes Gebäck”) and in the 

“PflN” case with a “bellis perennis” flower.
8
  

The related entry in WWM dictionary is 

“Bussal”, which is displayed in Table 2. 

 

 

                                                                                        

(http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-primer/) 
 
5
 For more details see http://linkeddata.org/. 

6
 The topic of “cross-linking” is in fact very relevant 

to lexicographers, as can be seen in (Wandl-Vogt, 

2005). 

7
 The word “Gebäck” (pastry) is Standard German 

and the string “PflN” is an abbreviation for the 

German name “Pflanzenname” (name of a plant) 

8
 More details are given in (Author2 & Author1, 2013). We 

concentrate in this submission on the sense “small sweet 

pastry” to exemplify our approach. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

We can see that this entry carries two meanings, 

which are the same as the two first meanings of 

the WBÖ entry “Puss”.  Linking entries in 

distinct dialectal dictionaries can thus be 

implemented on the basis of meanings that are 

shared across the dictionaries. But, while for the 

second meaning the readers familiar with the 

German language will immediately recognize 

that both strings “Kl. süßes Gebäck” (WBÖ) and 

“kleines Süßgebäck” (WWM) have the same 

meaning, this is not evident for other readers and 

for computer program that should cross-link the 

dictionary data from those two sources.  

In order to automatically cross-link entries from 

both dictionaries, we wrote first a program for 

extracting the strings expressing the meanings 

for each entry and applied an algorithm for 

comparing the extracted strings. For this latter 

task, it is necessary to first linguistically analyse 

the strings, since pure string matching cannot 

provide accurate comparisons: lemma reduction 

and PoS tagging are giving additional indicators 

for matching strings expressing meanings.  To 

mark linguistically analysed meanings as related, 

use also semantic representation languages 

developed in the context of W3C standardization, 

more specifically SKOS-XL
9
 and lemon

10
 

2 Extraction and Linguistic Analysis of 
Strings marking Meanings 

We wrote for the extraction of strings marking 

the meanings of entries task specific Perl scripts, 

adapted to the XML schemas of WBÖ and 

WWM (in its converted TEI format). Second, we 

provided an automatic linguistic analysis of those 

extracted meanings, using lexical and syntactic 

analysis grammars written with the NooJ finite 

                                                           

9
 http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/skos-xl.html 

10
 http://lemon-model.net/ and  (McCrae et al., 2012). 

Bussal, Bussi, Bussl, das, 1) Kuss (Syn.: 

Schm$tss); 2) kleines Süßgebäck; Pl. 
Bussaln; viele Komp. wie Nussbussal 

usw. – 

 

Table 2: The related entry in the WWM 

dictionary 

10



state platform
11

. This included tokenization, 

lemmatisation, Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging 

and constituency as well as dependency analysis. 

The strings marking in both dictionaries the 

“sweet pastry” meaning are enriched with the 

following linguistic features: 

 
WBÖ: (NP süßes (ADJ, lemma = süß, MOD) 

Gebäck (N, lemma = Gebäck, HEAD)) 

 

WWM: (NP (kleines (ADJ, lemma = klein, 

MOD) Süßgebäck (N, compound: süß (ADJ, 

lemma = süß, MOD) + Gebäck (N, lemma = 

Gebäck, HEAD)), HEAD)) 

 

In those examples (sweet pastry and small sweet 

pastry), we can see the distinct serializations of 

similar meanings in German. The second 

example uses a compound noun (“Süßgebäck”), 

which has the same meaning as the simple 

nominal phrase in the first example (“süßes 

Gebäck”). In order to automatically establish this 

similarity, it is necessary to perform a 

morphological decomposition of the head noun 

in the second example. It is also necessary to 

have the lemma of the adjective in the first 

example, in order to compare it with the first 

element of the compound noun in the second 

example. 

The fact, that both linguistically analysed 

meanings (strings) share the same lemmas for 

adjectival modifiers and head nouns is the basis 

for cross-linking the entries. This cross-linking  

has to be expressed in Semantic Web standards 

(e.g. compatible to RDF) in order to be published 

in the Linked Data cloud. 

3 Porting the Dictionary Data into the 
Linked Open Data framework 

3.1 Porting the dictionaries into SKOS 

Analogue to the described SKOSification of 

WBÖ (see Wandl-Vogt & Declerck, 2013), the 

WWM was ported into SKOS. Departing from 

the former experiment, we decided to not encode 

anymore the whole dictionary as a SKOS 

concept scheme. Rather we introduce the listing 

of entries (each encoded as a skos:Concept) as 

being member of a skos:Collection. 

                                                           

11
 See http://www.nooj4nlp.net/pages/nooj.html 

Complementary to this, extracted senses (see 

former section) are each encoded as 

skos:Concept being included in a  

skos:ConceptScheme. This decision is due to the 

fact that the senses can be organized along the 

line of (SKOS) semantic relations, whereas the 

strings marking the entries are in fact just 

member of a list, which is building the dictionary.  

The headword (string) of the dictionary entries is 

encoded as a value of the SKOS-XL prefLabel 

property. Alternative strings (like “Bussi” in the 

WWM example in Table 2) are encoded with the 

SKOS-XL altLabel property. The use of SKOS-

XL allows us to “reify” the value of the range of 

the label properties, and thus to have there not 

only a literal but further information, like PoS. 

Since senses are also represented in the 

dictionaries by strings, we apply the same 

procedure: a sense has skos-xl labels in which we 

can encode the lemma of the components of the 

strings, the corresponding PoS but also related 

senses, within the local concept scheme or in the 

LOD, like for example with objects in the 

DBpedia instantiation of Wiktionary
12

. 

3.2 Representing the meanings in lemon 

The linguistically analysed meanings cannot 

be (straightforwardly) represented in SKOS, 

and for this we opted for the lemon model, 

which has been developed specifically for 

the purpose of representing linguistic 

information of lexical entries related to 

knowledge organization systems.  The lemon 

encoding of the meanings is incorporated as 

the value of the SKOS-XL “Label” property. 

Taking as an example the one meaning of 

“Puss” in WBÖ that consists of two words 

(“süßes Gebäck”, sweet pastry), we can see 

that it is for necessary to tokenize the string 

representing the meaning of the entry 

“Puss”: the first token can then be 

lemmatized to “süß” (sweet), while for the 

second token the lemma is identical to the 

written form used. We represent the 

                                                           

12
 So for example the sense „Kuss“ for both the 

entries „Puss“ and „Bussal“ is declared as being a 

skos:exactMatch with the URL: 

http://wiktionary.dbpedia.org/page/Kuss-German-

Noun-1de. From there we can get then all multilingual 

equivalents listed in this resource. 

11



tokenization information using the lemon 

property “decomposition”.   

4 Cross referencing of dictionary 
entries through similar meanings 

The establishment of a relation between “Puss” 

in WBÖ and “Bussal” in WWM is made possible 

on the base of the successful mapping of both the 

adjectival modifier “süß” and the head noun 

“Gebäck”, which are present in both the 

definitions in WBÖ and WWM. This similarity 

is encoded using the “related” property of SKOS.  

Interesting is also the fact that a user searching 

the electronic version of the dictionaries could 

give the High German form “Gebäck” and would 

get from both dictionaries all the entries which 

have this word in their definition. The same for 

the High German adjectival form “süß”.  

Instead of the meanings we extracted from the 

dictionaries, we can use the DBpedia 

instantiation of Wiktionary as a reference for the 

senses of the entries of the dictionary, pointing 

directly to linguistic and knowledge objects that 

are already in the LOD. Using the 

“decomposition” and “subSenses” properties of 

lemon, we link to URLs in DBpedia/Wiktionary 

representing the sense for each token. 

5 Conclusion 

We described the actual state of 

RDF/SKOS/lemon modeling of (senses of) 

entries of dialectal dictionaries, so that those 

entries can be cross-linked via their similar 

senses. We have shown that NL processing of 

the strings for marking the meanings of the 

entries is necessary in order to make them 

comparable. We further have shown that our 

encoding of the entries of the dictionaries is also 

supporting the linking to already existing lexical 

senses and other language data in the LOD. The 

model have been implemented in the TopBraider 

composer
13

 and all the entries of the dictionaries, 

as instances of the defined classes and properties, 

are automatically mapped onto the corresponding 

Turtle syntax
14

 and will be made available very 

soon as deferentiable URLs, making thus less-

                                                           

13
 http://www.topquadrant.com/tools/IDE-topbraid-

composer-maestro-edition/ 

14
 http://www.w3.org/TeamSubmission/turtle/ 

resourced language data available in the LOD. 

Future work will consist in applying a similar 

approach to historical and geographical contexts 

given in the entries of the dialectal dictionaries. 

Acknowledgments 

The work by University of Saarland described in 

this paper is partially supported by the PHEME 

project, funded by the European Commission 

under number 611233. 

References  

Wandl-Vogt, E. and Declerck, T. (2013) Mapping a 

Traditional Dialectal Dictionary with Linked Open 

Data. In Proc. of eLex 2013, Tallin, Estonia.  

Hornung, M., Grüner, S. (2002) Wörterbuch der 

Wiener Mundart; Neubearbeitung. öbvhpt, Wien. 

McCrae, J., Aguado-de-Cea, G., Buitelaar P., 

Cimiano P., Declerck, T., Gómez-Pérez, A., Gracia, 

J., Hollink, L., Montiel-Ponsoda, E., Spohr, D., 

Wunner, T. (2012) Interchanging lexical resources 

on the Semantic Web. In: Language Resources and 

Evaluation. Vol. 46, Issue 4, Springer:701-719. 

Miles, A., Matthews, B., Wilson, M. D., Brickley, D. 

(2005) SKOS Core: Simple Knowledge 

Organisation for the Web. In Proc. International 

Conference on Dublin Core and Metadata 

Applications, Madrid, Spain,  

Moulin, C. (2010) Dialect dictionaries - traditional 

and modern. In: Auer, P., Schmidt, J.E. (2010) (eds) 

Language and Space. An International Handbook 

of Linguistic Variation. Volume 1: Theories and 

Methods. Berlin / New York. pp: 592-612.  

Romary, L. (2009) Questions & Answers for TEI 

Newcomers. Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie 10. 

Mentis Verlag, 

Schreibman, S. (2009) The Text Encoding Initiative: 

An Interchange Format Once Again. Jahrbuch für 

Computerphilologie 10. Mentis Verlag. 

Wandl-Vogt, E. (2005) From paper slips to the 

electronic archive. Cross-linking potential in 90 

years of lexicographic work at the Wörterbuch der 

bairischen Mundarten in Österreich (WBÖ). In: 

Complex 2005. Papers in computational 

lexicography. Budapest: 243-254. 

Wörterbuch der bairischen Mundarten in Österreich 

(WBÖ) (1963-). Wien.     Accessed at 

http://hw.oeaw.ac.at/wboe/31205.xml?frames=yes 

(25.5.2)

12


