



















































Building a Spanish-German Dictionary for Hybrid MT


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation (HyTra) @ EACL 2014, pages 30–35,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Building a Spanish-German Dictionary for Hybrid MT

Anne Göhring
Institute of Computational Linguistics

University of Zurich
goehring@cl.uzh.ch

Abstract

This paper describes the development of
the Spanish-German dictionary used in
our hybrid MT system. The compilation
process relies entirely on open source tools
and freely available language resources.
Our bilingual dictionary of around 33,700
entries may thus be used, distributed and
further enhanced as convenient.

1 Introduction

Nowadays it is possible to set up a baseline SMT
system for any language pair within a day, given
enough parallel data, as well as the software to
train and decode, is freely available. Whereas
SMT systems profit from large amounts of data,
following the general motto “more data is better
data”, the rule-based MT systems on the other
hand benefit from high quality data. Develop-
ing a hybrid MT system on a rule-based architec-
ture1, one of our aims is to build and extend a high
quality Spanish-German dictionary. We focus on
the unidirectional lexical transfer from Spanish to
German, as we are translating only in this direc-
tion. We want to balance the disadvantage of rule-
based systems with respect to lexical coverage
when compared to statistical MT systems trained
on large scale corpora. To achieve this goal, we
have merged existing resources into one bilingual
dictionary. As a result we now have a consolidated
Spanish-German dictionary of around 33,700 en-
tries.

In the following section, we will give an
overview of resources for German and Spanish re-
lated to our work. In section 3 we will explain
which resources we used and how we combined
them. We will also present some figures about the

1Our system is derived from Apertium/Matxin, and so is
the dictionary format (see 3.1).

coverage of the resulting bilingual dictionary. Sec-
tion 4 is dedicated to specific German linguistic is-
sues we have addressed to complete our dictionary
with the necessary morphological information. In
the last section, we present our ideas for future
work.

2 Related work and resources

Many monolingual and bilingual resources for
Spanish and German already exist, some are pub-
licly available, others only under license. The web
services Canoo, Leo and Systran are freely acces-
sible but prohibit any automated content extrac-
tion. Also the German wordnet GermaNet restricts
its usage to the academic community. The Hygh-
Tra project develops hybrid high quality transla-
tion systems based on commercial resources pro-
vided by Lingenio, a language tool company spe-
cialized in machine translation (Babych et al.,
2012).

In our project we work on similar systems but
we follow a free resources and open source policy.
This is the case of the open source suite of lan-
guage analyzers FreeLing (Padró and Stanilovsky,
2012), which offers a Spanish dictionary that con-
tains over 550,000 full-fledged word forms. The
bilingual dictionary “ding-es-de”2 compiled for
the “ding” dictionary lookup program provides
more than 21,000 entries.

Besides lexicons, other types of resources may
provide us with extra material. Escartı́n (2012) has
built a Spanish-German corpus with the specific
aim to study multiword expressions in a transla-
tion context. There are larger parallel corpora like
Acquis JRC, Europarl (Koehn, 2005), and Mul-
tiUN (Eisele and Chen, 2010), and also different
multilingual wordnets such as BabelNet (Navigli
and Ponzetto, 2012) and the Multilingual Central
Repository (Gonzalez-Agirre et al., 2012).

2savannah.nongnu.org/projects/
ding-es-de

30



Yet another kind of valuable resources are the
monolingual and parallel treebanks like the Span-
ish AnCora (Taulé et al., 2008) and IULA tree-
banks (Marimon et al., 2007), the German TiGer
(Brants et al., 2004), the multilingual ‘universal
dependency treebank’ (McDonald et al., 2013),
and the Spanish-German SQUOIA treebank (Rios
and Göhring, 2012).

All the open resources listed above have played
or will play a role in building and extending our
bilingual dictionary.

3 Compilation of a Spanish-German
dictionary

3.1 Format
As we started our machine translation project us-
ing the Apertium/Matxin framework (Mayor et al.,
2012), we adopted its dictionary format. Though
the XML format is specific to our application, it is
per definition easy to adapt. As shown in Fig. 1, a
bilingual entry <e> has at least a left and a right
side, <l> and <r> respectively, and this pair typ-
ically refers to a paradigm <par>. Furthermore,
attributes can be set to whole paradigms as well as
to individual entries. We have defined general and
more refined paradigms to represent the German
morphological classes and the features we need for
generating the correct word forms.3

<e><p>
<l>nota</l>
<r>Bemerkung</r>

</p><par n=’NC_NN_FEM’/>
</e>
<e><p><l>nota</l>

<r>Hinweis</r>
</p><par n=’NC_NN_MASC’/></e>

Figure 1: Two entries of the Spanish common
noun nota (en: note; grade, mark).

3.2 Synonyms and polysemous words
Often a Spanish word has many German transla-
tions, and vice versa. This fact is of course re-
flected in our dictionary, where a Spanish lexical
unit (a lemma of a given part-of-speech) has mul-
tiple entries, i.e. different corresponding German
lexical units.

Fig. 2 shows the same example as in Fig. 1, the
polysemous Spanish noun nota, together with Ger-
man translations grouped according to the differ-
ent senses. Note that the German word Note is not

3See also Fig. 4 in section 4.2.

nota⇒



Bemerkung, Hinweis, Notiz
(sense 1: memo, note, notice)
Note, Schulnote, Zensur
(sense 2: mark, grade)
Musiknote, Note
(sense 3: musical note)

Figure 2: Different senses of the Spanish noun
nota and their corresponding German translations.

always the correct translation as it does not entail
all senses: it is not a valid translation for sense 1.

On the one hand, the dictionary should contain
as many word translations as possible in order to
achieve a high coverage for both languages. On
the other hand, the more fine-grained the choices
in the lexicon are, the harder the lexical dis-
ambiguation becomes (Vintar et al., 2012). Al-
though hand-written selection rules narrow down
the choice in specific cases, machine learning ap-
proaches are required in order to make better lexi-
cal choices in general.

3.3 First compilation
We first merged the entries of the “ding-es-de” dic-
tionary to the translations of the AnCora/FreeLing
vocabulary we obtained by crawling the Spanish
Wiktionary in 2011. Since this first compilation
period, we have manually added new entries as re-
quired by the development of our MT system. At
the end of 2013, the collected bilingual entries for
the open classes noun, verb, adverb and adjective
amounted to 25,904 (see Tab. 1).

At this point we decided to systematically ex-
tend our bilingual dictionary and evaluate its cov-
erage . Translating from Spanish to German, we
are first of all interested in the coverage of the
source language Spanish. Compared to the more
than 88,000 lemmas with about double as much
senses contained in the DRAE4, our bilingual dic-
tionary covers not even 5% of the monolingual en-
tries. But the DRAE is a reference dictionary, with
certain shortcomings such as missing the newest
neologisms and keeping obsolete words in its lex-
icon. Furthermore, it is not a free resource.

4Diccionario de la Real Academia Española; 22nd edition
DRAE (2001); see www.rae.es.

31



3.4 Exploiting Wiktionary and BabelNet
FreeLing’s Spanish lexicon contains 49,477 lem-
mas of common nouns and 7649 verb lemmas. Be-
fore the addition of more data, our dictionary cov-
ered only 19.44% of FreeLing’s nouns and 22.9%
of its verbs. Crawling the Wiktionary pages for
the missing lemmas, we collected no more than
309 additional noun and 78 verb entries. Due to
this marginal increase, we decided to test other
sources. Through BabelNet’s API we were able
to extract 21,587 German translations of 13,824
Spanish common nouns. We used the morphology
tool mOLIFde (Clematide, 2008) to analyze the
German side of these BabelNet word pairs. We
discarded those pairs that did not receive any anal-
ysis. The remaining candidate entries amount to
7149. Though we have not yet assess the quality
of this material, the observed coverage gain from
these potential bilingual entries looks promising.
Adding entries for 5528 Spanish nominal lemmas
increases the coverage of common nouns by more
than 11% (see Tab. 1).

es-de.dix end 2013 + new current
Spanish-German entries

noun 16,136 7,149 23,285
verb 4,256 4,256
adverb 316 316
adjective 5,196 640 5,836
Total 25,904 33,693

Unique Spanish lemmas
noun 10,559 5,528 16,087
adjective 3,029 627 3,656

Table 1: Size of the Spanish-German dictionary at
the end of 2013 and after adding entries extracted
from BabelNet.

Starting with the vocabulary extracted from a
corpus of European Spanish newspaper texts, we
expect our bilingual dictionary to be biased with
respect to the language variety, register and genre.
In our MT project we focus on Peruvian Spanish.
Therefore, we want to measure the specific lexical
coverage for this variety. In a first step, we com-
pared our Spanish-Quechua dictionary with the
Spanish-German lexicon by computing the over-
lap of their Spanish vocabularies. Only 50% of
the 2215 single Spanish verbs with a Quechua
translation also have a German equivalent. Crawl-
ing Wiktionary for the untranslated 1115 Spanish
verbs, we obtained 33 new German verbs. This

crawl ES Wiktionary

lemma?

query BabelNet
for ES synsets

get DE translations
of ES synsets

DE morphological analysis

get DE translation link

no

yes

add new ES-DE entries

select ES lemmas
not in bilingual dict.

Bilingual dictionary

Spanish lemmas
German lemmas

Figure 3: Compilation workflow

results in a recall of under 3%, which shows the
limit of the method.

In a next step, we measured the overlap for the
nouns5 before and after harvesting the BabelNet
translations: the 594 newly covered nouns repre-
sent an increase of 8%. The following examples
of missing word equivalences show that we can
manually find their German translations: abigeo
(de: Viehdieb; en: rustler, cattle thief), zapallo
(de: Kürbis; en: pumpkin). However, we want
to translate as many of these words as possible au-
tomatically into German. Looking at the failures,
we observe a large number of participles and ad-
jectives analyzed as common nouns. In a next step,
we need to loosen the part-of-speech restriction we
have imposed on the filtering.

3.5 Corpus coverage
We have collected articles from an online news-
paper6 in order to test the coverage on a Peruvian
corpus. This small ad hoc corpus contains about

5Note that the “noun” entries in the Spanish-Quechua dic-
tionary also cover Spanish adjectives as there is no morpho-
logical distinction between nouns and adjectives in Quechua.

6http://diariodelcusco.com

32



10,000 words. In the near future, we will gather
more articles and periodically measure the cover-
age of the growing collection. For the evaluation,
we let the MT system do a raw translation (lexi-
cal transfer) without lexical disambiguation. Be-
fore the extension of the dictionary, the “out-of-
vocabulary” ratio of common nouns was 11.95%
for tokens and 16.66% for types. With the addi-
tional entries extracted from BabelNet, OOV ra-
tios decreased to 7.39% and 11.16%, respectively.
Note that the unknown types not only contain sin-
gle lemmas but also multiword expressions that
are not yet listed in the bilingual dictionary.

Applying the same procedure as described in
section 3.4, we have added 640 new entries for
adjectives to our dictionary. As a result, the
OOV ratios of adjective types have decreased from
41.62% to 37.03%. Although the corpus cover-
age for adjectives improved, it is still low, partly
due to the fact that we have not yet treated the
participles as adjectives. For example, our dictio-
nary does not have adjective entries for common
verb participles like acompañado (en: accompa-
nied). Other examples of untranslated adjectives
are some toponyms like limeño (from Lima), miss-
ing from our bilingual dictionary, and cusqueño
(from Cuzco), absent even from the Spanish full
form lexicon. Some common adjective pairs might
not be found in BabelNet, e.g. virtual - virtuell,
but are present in the Wiktionary, and vice versa.
For this reason, we combined all possible sources
in order to maximize the automatic extension of
our dictionary.

4 German morphology features

Apart from extending the dictionary with new en-
tries, we added the missing parts of the morpho-
logical information needed for the translation from
Spanish to German.

4.1 German noun gender
For German nouns, in addition to the lemmas,
we need at least the gender. In fact, the mini-
mum information depends on the morphological
tool we use to generate the German forms.7 Due
to the German agreement constraints, we need the
gender of a noun in order to generate the correct
inflections on the elements of the noun phrase.8

7This would also be necessary for Spanish, but we are
translating only in one direction, from Spanish to German.

8Note that German adjectives are inflected according to
the gender of the head noun, e.g. in accusative case ’die

Gender information is unequally present in the dif-
ferent sources we have exploited: Almost all the
entries retrieved from the “Ding” lexicon and the
Wiktionary pages contain the gender of the noun,
but BabelNet does not indicate this information.

We applied the same morphology tool
(Clematide, 2008) used for generation to an-
alyze the German side of the –with respect to
the gender– underspecified dictionary entries.
We extracted the analyses with more than one
possible gender and manually checked whether
the selected gender corresponded to the intended
meaning of the Spanish-German lemma pair. We
observe different kind of ambiguities: There are
true gender alternatives, e.g. der/das Hektar is
both masculine and neuter, but also homographs
with different senses: die Flur (en: acre) vs der
Flur (en: hall). Variable word segmentation
within compounds leads to another type of
gender ambiguities: the feminine derivative die
Wahrsagerei (en: fortune telling) is more probable
than the neuter compound das Wahrsager-Ei (en:
the fortune teller’s egg).

Automatic gender attribution through morpho-
logical analysis is error-prone and far from com-
plete. Nearly a third of the candidate entries ex-
tracted from BabelNet received an analysis. We
have manually annotated 5% of those entries to
roughly estimate the a posteriori precision: 78.5%
are correct, 16% wrong, and about 5.5% unclear.

Finally, we need to include the linguistic gender
alternation paradigm to gentry nouns and profes-
sions. For example, the Spanish word periodista
refers to both the male and female journalists, but
German distinguishes between Journalist (masc.)
and Journalistin (fem.).

4.2 German verb auxiliary
German verbs typically use only one of the two
auxiliary verbs –haben or sein– to form the per-
fect tenses. Nevertheless, some verbs may alter-
natively use one or the other, depending on the
context. Reflexive verbs never use the auxiliary
sein nor do verbs with a direct object. The most
common verb type that requires sein as auxiliary
are motion verbs, such as fahren (en: drive). But
if the same verb9 has a direct object, the auxiliary
haben appears in the perfect tense form.

grosse Frau’ (the tall woman) vs ’den grossen Mann (the tall
man).

9The same surface form may have different verb subcate-
gorization frames.

33



sein: Ich bin von A nach B gefahren.

(1) Ich
I

bin
am

von
from

A
A

nach
to

B
B

gefahren.
driven.

“I drove from A to B.”

haben: Ich habe [mein Auto]DirObj von A nach B
gefahren.

(2) Ich
I

habe
have

mein
my

Auto
car

von
from

A
A

nach
to

B
B

gefahren.
driven.
“I drove my car from A to B.”

Where do we get this information from and how
should we best encode this alternative behavior in
our dictionary? Unfortunately we cannot automat-
ically get the auxiliaries for every German verb
from Canoo, so we extracted 4056 verbs from the
Wiktionary dump made available by Henrich et
al. (2011). Furthermore, we collected 5465 pages
by crawling the Wiktionary for German verbs10.
As Tab. 2 shows, there are more verbs with aux-
iliary haben than with sein, therefore we choose
the auxiliary haben to be the default. We filtered
the verbs with sein from both sources and merged
them, which resulted in a list of 394 verbs11.

Source verbs auxiliaries
haben sein both

dump2011 4056 3721 293 17
crawl2013 5469 4814 351 200
merged 394

Table 2: Auxiliary verb distribution

The header of our dictionary contains a specific
paradigm for the verb entries for which the Ger-
man translation has to be generated with sein in
the perfect tenses. This is a derivative version of
the default verb paradigm, as Fig. 4 shows.

To select the correct auxiliary we need the syn-
tactic analysis of the German verb phrase or at
least the information about the presence or ab-
sence of a direct object. If the parse tree obtained
from the analysis of the Spanish source sentence is
erroneous, we must rely on other means to disam-
biguate the verb auxiliaries. Which methods are
best suited to solve this task is a topic for future
work.

10http://de.wiktionary.org/w/index.php?
title=Kategorie:Verb_(Deutsch) [retrieved
2013-12-27]

1143 verbs are only in dump2011, 101 only in crawl2013,
250 in both lists.

<pardef n="VM_VV_MAIN_BE">
<e>
<p>
<l><s n="parol"/>VM</l>
<r><s n="aux"/>sein<s n="pos"/>VV</r>

</p>
<par n="Verb"/>

</e>
</pardef>

Figure 4: Paradigm definition (<pardef>) for
main verb pairs (es:VM–de:VV) with explicit value
sein for the auxiliary attribute (aux) on the Ger-
man side (<r>).

5 Conclusion

In our hybrid MT system with a rule-based kernel,
the bilingual dictionary plays a crucial role. We
have built a Spanish-German dictionary from dif-
ferent freely available resources with general MT
in mind. This dictionary contains around 33,700
entries at the moment of writing.12

This paper describes the extraction of new en-
tries from BabelNet and Wiktionary. We have
shown that these sources can both contribute to the
enhancement of our dictionary, albeit on different
scales and in a complementary manner. Encour-
aged by the coverage boost yielded from the ad-
dition of nouns and adjectives extracted from Ba-
belNet, we want to apply a similar procedure to
verbs. We will also crawl the Wiktionary for the
Spanish adjectives and their German equivalents,
and continue to gather more information from the
net as it gets available. Word derivation is another
issue that we want to address, mainly to cover ad-
verbs with the suffix -mente, and also to include
even more adjectives.

Acknowledgments

The author would like to thank Annette Rios for
her helpful advise and for proof-reading the fi-
nal version of this paper. This work is funded by
the Swiss Nation Science Foundation under grant
100015 132219/1.

12Available from our project’s website: http://tiny.
uzh.ch/2Q

34



References
Bogdan Babych, Kurt Eberle, Johanna Geiß, Mireia

Ginestı́-Rosell, Anthony Hartley, Reinhard Rapp,
Serge Sharoff, and Martin Thomas. 2012. De-
sign of a hybrid high quality machine translation
system. In Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on
Exploiting Synergies between Information Retrieval
and Machine Translation (ESIRMT) and Hybrid Ap-
proaches to Machine Translation (HyTra), pages
101–112, Avignon, France, April. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Peter Eisenberg, Sil-
via Hansen-Schirra, Esther König, Wolfgang Lezius,
Christian Rohrer, George Smith, and Hans Uszko-
reit. 2004. TIGER: Linguistic interpretation of a
German corpus. Research on Language and Com-
putation, 2(4):597–620.

Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck,
Mehmet Uğur Doğan, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mar-
iani, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors. 2012.
Proceedings of the Eight International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12),
Istanbul, Turkey, May. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Simon Clematide. 2008. An OLIF-based open in-
flectional resource and yet another morphological
system for German. In A. Storrer, A. Geyken,
A. Siebert, and K. M. Würzner, editors, Text Re-
sources and Lexical Knowledge, number 8 in Text,
Translation, Computational Processing, pages 183–
194. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, Germany, Septem-
ber. KONVENS 2008: Selected Papers from the 9th
Conference on Natural Language Processing.

Andreas Eisele and Yu Chen. 2010. MultiUN:
A Multilingual Corpus from United Nation Doc-
uments. In Daniel Tapias, Mike Rosner, Ste-
lios Piperidis, Jan Odjik, Joseph Mariani, Bente
Maegaard, Khalid Choukri, and Nicoletta Calzo-
lari (Conference Chair), editors, Proceedings of
the Seventh Conference on International Language
Resources and Evaluation, pages 2868–2872. Eu-
ropean Language Resources Association (ELRA),
May.

Carla Parra Escartı́n. 2012. Design and compilation
of a specialized Spanish-German parallel corpus. In
Calzolari et al. (Calzolari et al., 2012).

Aitor Gonzalez-Agirre, Egoitz Laparra, and German
Rigau. 2012. Multilingual Central Repository ver-
sion 3.0: upgrading a very large lexical knowl-
edge base. In Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Global WordNet Conference (GWC’12), Mat-
sue, Japan.

Verena Henrich, Erhard Hinrichs, and Tatiana Vodola-
zova. 2011. Semi-Automatic Extension of Ger-
maNet with Sense Definitions from Wiktionary. In
Proceedings of the 5th Language & Technology
Conference (LTC 2011), pages 126–130, Pozna,
Poland, November.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: a parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 10th MT Summit, pages 79–86, Phuket, Thai-
land, September. European Association for Machine
Translation.

Montserrat Marimon, Natalia Seghezzi, and Núria Bel.
2007. An Open-source Lexicon for Spanish. Proce-
samiento del Lenguaje Natural, 39:131–137.

Aingeru Mayor, Iñaki Alegria, Arantza Dı́az de Ilar-
raza, Gorka Labaka, Mikel Lersundi, and Kepa Sara-
sola. 2012. Matxin, an open-source rule-based
machine translation system for Basque. Machine
Translation, (25):53–82.

Ryan McDonald, Joakim Nivre, Yvonne Quirmbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipanjan Das, Kuz-
man Ganchev, Keith Hall, Slav Petrov, Hao
Zhang, Oscar Täckström, Claudia Bedini, Núria
Bertomeu Castelló, and Jungmee Lee. 2013.
Universal Dependency Annotation for Multilingual
Parsing. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 92–97, Sofia, Bul-
garia, August. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Roberto Navigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2012.
BabelNet: The Automatic Construction, Evaluation
and Application of a Wide-Coverage Multilingual
Semantic Network. Artificial Intelligence, 193:217–
250.

Lluı́s Padró and Evgeny Stanilovsky. 2012. FreeLing
3.0: Towards Wider Multilinguality. In Calzolari
et al. (Calzolari et al., 2012).

Annette Rios and Anne Göhring. 2012. A tree is a
Baum is an árbol is a sach’a: Creating a trilingual
treebank. In Calzolari et al. (Calzolari et al., 2012),
pages 1874–1879.

Mariona Taulé, M. Antònia Martı́, and Marta Re-
casens. 2008. AnCora: Multilevel Annotated Cor-
pora for Catalan and Spanish. In Nicoletta Calzo-
lari, Khalid Choukri, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mar-
iani, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, and Daniel Tapias,
editors, Proceedings of the Sixth International Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08), Mar-
rakech, Marroco.

Špela Vintar, Darja Fišer, and Aljoša Vrščaj. 2012.
Were the clocks striking or surprising? Using WSD
to improve MT performance. In Proceedings of
the Joint Workshop on Exploiting Synergies be-
tween Information Retrieval and Machine Transla-
tion (ESIRMT) and Hybrid Approaches to Machine
Translation (HyTra), pages 87–92, Avignon, France,
April. Association for Computational Linguistics.

35


