



















































The UA-Prompsit hybrid machine translation system for the 2014 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation


Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 178–185,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26–27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

The UA-Prompsit hybrid machine translation system for the 2014
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation

Vı́ctor M. Sánchez-Cartagena,∗ ‡ Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz,∗ Felipe Sánchez-Martı́nez∗
∗Dep. de Llenguatges i Sistemes Informàtics,

Universitat d’Alacant, E-03071, Alacant, Spain
‡Prompsit Language Engineering,

Av. Universitat, s/n. Edifici Quorum III, E-03202, Elx, Spain

{vmsanchez,japerez,fsanchez}@dlsi.ua.es
Abstract

This paper describes the system jointly de-
veloped by members of the Departament
de Llenguatges i Sistemes Informàtics
at Universitat d’Alacant and the Promp-
sit Language Engineering company for
the shared translation task of the 2014
Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation. We present a phrase-based sta-
tistical machine translation system whose
phrase table is enriched with information
obtained from dictionaries and shallow-
transfer rules like those used in rule-based
machine translation. The novelty of our
approach lies in the fact that the transfer
rules used were not written by humans, but
automatically inferred from a parallel cor-
pus.

1 Introduction

This paper describes the system jointly submitted
by the Departament de Llenguatges i Sistemes In-
formàtics at Universitat d’Alacant and the Promp-
sit Language Engineering company to the shared
translation task of the ACL 2014 Ninth Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT 2014).
We participated in the English–French translation
task with a hybrid system that combines, in a
phrase-based statistical machine translation (PB-
SMT) system, bilingual phrases obtained from par-
allel corpora in the usual way (Koehn, 2010, ch.
5), and also bilingual phrases obtained from the
existing dictionaries in the Apertium rule-based
machine translation (RBMT) platform (Forcada et
al., 2011) and a number of shallow-transfer ma-
chine translation rules automatically inferred from
a small subset of the training corpus.

Among the different approaches for adding lin-
guistic information to SMT systems (Costa-Jussà
and Farrús, 2014), we followed the path we started
with our submission to the Spanish–English WMT
2011 shared translation task (Sánchez-Cartagena

et al., 2011b) which consisted of enriching the
phrase table of a PBSMT system with phrase pairs
generated using the dictionaries and rules in the
Apertium (Forcada et al., 2011) Spanish–English
RBMT system; our approach was one of the win-
ners1 (together with two online SMT systems that
were not submitted for the task but were included
in the evaluation by the organisers and a system by
Systran) in the pairwise manual evaluation of the
English–Spanish translation task (Callison-Burch
et al., 2011). In this submission, however, we
only borrow the dictionaries from the Apertium
English–French RBMT system and use them to au-
tomatically infer the rules from a parallel corpus.
We therefore avoid the need for human-written
rules, which are usually written by trained experts,
and explore a novel way to add morphological
information to PBSMT. The rules inferred from
corpora and used to enlarge the phrase table are
shallow-transfer rules that build their output with
the help of the bilingual dictionary and work on
flat intermediate representations (see section 3.1);
no syntactic parsing is consequently required.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows.
The following section outlines related hybrid ap-
proaches. Section 3 formally defines the RBMT
paradigm and summarises the method followed
to automatically infer the shallow-transfer rules,
whereas the enrichment of the phrase table is de-
scribed in section 4. Sections 5 and 6 describe, re-
spectively, the resources we used to build our sub-
mission and the results achieved for the English–
French language pair. The paper ends with some
concluding remarks.

2 Related work

Linguistic data from RBMT systems have already
been used to enrich SMT systems (Tyers, 2009;
Schwenk et al., 2009; Eisele et al., 2008; Sánchez-
Cartagena et al., 2011a). We have already proved

1No other system was found statistically significantly bet-
ter using the sign test at p ≤ 0.10.

178



that using hand-written rules and dictionaries from
RBMT yields better results than using only dictio-
naries (Sánchez-Cartagena et al., 2011a).

However, in the approach we present in this pa-
per, rules are automatically inferred from a paral-
lel corpus after converting it into the intermedi-
ate representation used by the Apertium RBMT
platform (see section 3.3). It can be therefore
seen as a novel method to add morphological in-
formation to SMT, as factored translation models
do (Koehn and Hoang, 2007; Graham and van
Genabith, 2010). Unlike factored models, we do
not estimate independent statistical models for the
translation of the different factors (lemmas, lexi-
cal categories, morphological inflection attributes,
etc.) and for the generation of the final surface
forms. Instead, we first infer a set of rules that deal
with the grammatical divergences between the lan-
guages involved by performing operations such as
reorderings, gender and number agreements, etc.
Afterwards, we add synthetic phrase pairs gener-
ated from these rules and the Apertium dictionar-
ies to the data from which the well-known, classi-
cal PBSMT models (Koehn, 2010) are estimated.
The rules in our approach operate on the source-
language (SL) morphological attributes of the in-
put words and on the target-language (TL) mor-
phological attributes of their translation according
to a bilingual dictionary. In addition, they do no
contain probabilities or scores, thus they increase
the predictability of the output and can be easily
corrected by humans. This fact also represents a
significant difference with the probabilistic rules
used by certain approaches that aim at improving
the grammaticality of the SMT output (Riezler and
Maxwell III, 2006; Bojar and Hajič, 2008).

With respect to the rule inference approach,
other approaches such as those by Sánchez-
Martı́nez and Forcada (2009) and Caseli et al.
(2006) can be found in literature; however, our ap-
proach is the first strategy for shallow-transfer rule
inference which generalises to unseen combina-
tions of morphological inflection attributes in the
training corpus (Sánchez-Cartagena et al., 2014).

3 Inferring shallow-transfer rules from
parallel corpora

3.1 Shallow-transfer rule-based machine
translation

The RBMT process can be split into three different
steps (Hutchins and Somers, 1992): (i) analysis of
the SL text to build an SL intermediate represen-

tation; (ii) transfer from that SL intermediate rep-
resentation into a TL intermediate representation;
and (iii) generation of the final translation from the
TL intermediate representation.

Shallow-transfer RBMT systems use relatively
simple intermediate representations, which are
based on lexical forms consisting of lemma, part
of speech and morphological inflection informa-
tion of the words, and apply simple shallow-
transfer rules that operate on sequences of lexical
forms: this kind of systems do not perform full
parsing. For instance, for translating the English
sentence I like Pierre’s house into French with
the Apertium shallow-transfer RBMT platform we
have used to build our submission, the following
steps are carried out. First, the sentence is anal-
ysed as the following sequence of lexical forms:

I PRN-p:1.num:sg
like VB-t:pres.p:ǫ:num:ǫ
Pierre PN
’s POS
house N-gen:ǫ.num:sg

This sequence is made up of a personal pronoun
(PRN) in first person (p:1) singular (num:sg)
with lemma I, the verb (VB) like in present tense
(t:pres), a proper noun (PN) with lemma Pierre,
the possessive ending (POS), and a noun (N) in sin-
gular with lemma house. Some morphological in-
flection attributes have an empty value ǫ because
they do not apply to the corresponding language.

Then, structural transfer rules are applied to ob-
tain the TL intermediate representation with the
help of the bilingual dictionary, which provides
the individual translation of each SL lexical form
(including its morphological information). In this
case, two rules are applied: the first one makes the
verb to agree with the personal pronoun, while the
second one translates the English possessive con-
struction into French. The resulting sequence of
TL lexical forms is:

Je PRN-p:1.num:sg
aime VB-t:pres.p:1:num:sg
le DT-gen:f.num:sg
maison N-gen:f.num:sg
de PR
Pierre PN

Note that a preposition (PR) with lemma de and a
determiner (DT) with lemma le and the same gen-
der and number as the common noun have been
added by the rule. Finally, the translation into TL
is generated from the TL lexical forms: J’aime la
maison de Pierre.

179



s1 : PN s2 : POS s3 : N-gen:*.num:*

t1 : le DT-gen:$3t.num:$
3
s t2 : N-gen:$

3
t.num:$

3
s t3 : de PR t4 : PN

Figure 1: Shallow-transfer rule for the translation of the English Saxon genitive construction into French.

3.2 A rule formalism suitable for rule
inference

Figure 1 shows the second rule applied in the
example from the previous section encoded with
the formalism we have defined for rule infer-
ence (Sánchez-Cartagena et al., 2014). Each rule
contains a sequence of SL word classes (depicted
as the sequence of boxes at the top of the figure)
and TL word classes (the sequence of boxes be-
low them). The sequence of SL word classes de-
fines the set of sequences of lexical forms which
will match the rule. Each SL word class si defines
the conditions that must be met by the i-th lexical
form matching the rule and contains an optional
lemma (no lemma means that any SL lemma is al-
lowed), a lexical category and a set of morpholog-
ical inflection attributes and their expected values.
A wildcard (asterisk) as the value of a morpholog-
ical inflection attribute means that it matches any
possible value. Thus, the rule from the example
matches any proper noun followed by a possessive
ending and a noun, regardless of its gender and
number.

As regards the TL word classes, they contain
the same elements as the SL word classes and de-
fine the output of the rule. An empty lemma in a
TL word class means that it is obtained by looking
up in the bilingual dictionary the SL lexical form
matching the aligned SL word class (alignments
are represented as lines connecting SL and TL
word classes). The reference value $is means that
the value of a morphological inflection attribute is
copied from the SL lexical form matching the i-th
SL word class, while the reference value $it means
that the value is taken from the TL lexical form ob-
tained after looking up in the bilingual dictionary
the aforementioned SL lexical form. The rule de-
picted in Figure 1 generates a sequence of four TL
lexical forms. The first one is a determiner whose
lemma is le, its gender is obtained from the gender
of the TL lexical form resulting after looking up in
the bilingual dictionary the third matching SL lex-
ical form ($3t ), that is, the common noun, while its

number is directly obtained from the same SL lexi-
cal form before dictionary look-up ($3s). Although
they have not been used in this example, explicit
values can be used in the morphological inflection
attributes of the SL and TL word classes, thus re-
stricting the SL lexical forms to which the rule can
be applied to those having the values in the corre-
sponding SL word classes,2 and explicitly stating
the value that the TL lexical forms produced by
the rule will have, respectively.

3.3 Rule inference algorithm

The set of rules that will be used to generate the
phrase pairs that will be integrated into the PB-
SMT system’s phrase table, encoded with the for-
malism presented in the previous section, are ob-
tained from the parallel corpus by applying the
steps described in this section. They are a subset
of the steps followed by Sánchez-Cartagena et al.
(2014) to infer shallow-transfer rules to be used in
Apertium from small parallel corpora.

First, both sides of the parallel corpus are mor-
phologically analysed and converted into the inter-
mediate representations used by Apertium. Word
alignments are then obtained by symmetrising
(using the refined intersection method proposed
by Och and Ney (2003)) the set of alignments
provided by GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) when
it is run on both translations directions. After-
wards, the bilingual phrase pairs compatible with
the alignments are extracted as it is usually done
in SMT (Koehn, 2010, Sec. 5.2.3), and those that
are not compatible with the bilingual dictionary of
the Apertium English–French RBMT system3 or

2In addition to that criterion, our formalism also permits
restricting the application of a rule to the SL lexical forms
that, after being looked up in the bilingual dictionary, the
TL lexical forms obtained from them have specific morpho-
logical inflection attribute values (Sánchez-Cartagena et al.,
2014) although no restrictions of this type are imposed in the
rule depicted in Figure 1.

3If the words that belong to open lexical categories (those
that carry the meaning of the sentence: nouns, verbs, adjec-
tives, etc.) are aligned with other words that do not match
the translation present in the bilingual dictionary, the rule in-

180



contain punctuation marks or unknown words are
discarded. Finally, from each bilingual phrase pair,
all the possible rules which correctly reproduce it
—when the rule is applied to the SL side of the
phrase pair, its TL side is obtained— are gener-
ated as follows. First, a very specific rule, which
matches only the SL phrase in the bilingual phrase
pair is generated; more general rules are then cre-
ated by modifying this initial rule. The modifica-
tions to the initial rule consist of removing lem-
mas from the SL and TL word classes, introduc-
ing wildcard values in the morphological inflec-
tion attributes of the SL word classes and adding
reference values in the morphological inflection at-
tributes of the TL word classes. The result of this
process is a huge set of rules with different levels
of generalisation. Obviously, not all the rules in
this set will be used: the best ones are automati-
cally selected by considering all the rules obtained
from the different bilingual phrase pairs extracted
from the corpus and finding the minimum set of
rules that meets the following two conditions:

1. Each bilingual phrase pair is correctly repro-
duced by at least one rule.

2. If a rule matches the SL side of bilingual
phrase pair but does not correctly reproduce
its TL side, there is another rule that is more
specific (i.e. less general) than it, and cor-
rectly reproduces its TL side.

This minimisation problem is formulated as an in-
teger linear programming4 problem (Garfinkel and
Nemhauser, 1972) and solved using the branch
and cut algorithm (Xu et al., 2009).

From the small subset of the huge initial rules
obtained by solving the minimisation problem, the
rules whose effect can be achieved by combining
shorter rules or by translating all or some of the
words in isolation (i.e. word for word) are re-
moved. In this way, the number of rules is further
reduced and long rules, which are more prone to
overgeneralisation because they are inferred from
fewer bilingual phrase pairs, are discarded.5

ference algorithm is likely to infer many very specific rules
that try to correct that lexical mismatch. Since the aim of
our approach is learning general rules that deal with the
grammatical divergences between languages, the bilingual
phrases that contain the aforementioned alignments are dis-
carded. Words from closed lexical categories, that usually
suffer deeper changes when the sentence is translated to a dif-
ferent language, are not subject to this restriction.

4An integer linear programming problem involves the op-
timisation (maximisation or minimisation) of a linear objec-
tive function subject to linear inequality constraints.

5Although longer rules contain more context information,

4 Enhancing phrase-based SMT with
shallow-transfer linguistic resources

The set of shallow-transfer rules inferred from the
parallel corpus are integrated in the PBSMT sys-
tem, together with the RBMT dictionaries, using
the same method we used for our WMT 2011
shared translation task subsmission (Sánchez-
Cartagena et al., 2011b). However, it is important
to stress that, until now, this strategy had only been
tested when the rules to be integrated were hand-
written and not automatically obtained from cor-
pora.

Our strategy involves adding to the phrase ta-
ble of the PBSMT system all the bilingual phrase
pairs which either match a shallow-transfer rule or
an entry in the bilingual dictionary. Generating the
set of bilingual phrase pairs which match bilingual
dictionary entries is straightforward. First, all the
SL surface forms that are recognised by Apertium
and their corresponding lexical forms are gener-
ated. Then, these SL lexical forms are translated
using the bilingual dictionary, and finally their TL
surface forms are generated.

Bilingual phrase pairs which match structural
transfer rules are generated in a similar way. First,
the SL sentences to be translated are analysed with
Apertium to get their SL lexical forms, and then
the sequences of lexical forms that match a struc-
tural transfer rule are translated with that rule and
passed through the rest of the Apertium pipeline
in order to get their translations. If a sequence
of SL lexical forms is matched by more than one
structural transfer rule, it will be used to generate
as many bilingual phrase pairs as different rules
it matches. This differs from the way in which
Apertium translates, as it only applies the longest
rule. Note also that the test set is used to guide the
phrase extraction in order to avoid the generation
of an unmanageable set of phrase pairs.

We add these bilingual phrase pairs directly to
the phrase table, rather than adding them to the
training corpus and relying on the phrase extrac-
tion algorithm (Koehn, 2010, sec. 5.2.3), in order
to avoid splitting the multi-word expressions pro-
vided by Apertium into smaller phrases (Schwenk
et al., 2009, sec. 2). The bilingual phrase pairs
are added only once to the list of corpus-extracted
phrase pairs, and then the phrase translation prob-
abilities are computed by relative frequency as
usual (Koehn, 2010, sec. 5.2.5). A boolean feature

for our rule inferring algorithm there are fewer bilingual
phrases from which to infer them, and consequently fewer
evidence from which to extract the right reference attributes.

181



function to flag bilingual phrase pairs obtained
from the RBMT resources is added to the phrase
table in order to conveniently weight the synthetic
RBMT phrase pairs.

5 System training

We built a baseline PBSMT Moses (Koehn et
al., 2007) system6 from a subset of the paral-
lel corpora distributed as part of the WMT 2014
shared translation task, namely Europarl (Koehn,
2005), News Commentary and Common Crawl,
and a subset of the French monolingual corpora,
namely Common Crawl, Europarl, News Com-
mentary and News Crawl. The language model
was built with the KenLM language modelling
toolkit (Heafield et al., 2013), which was used
to train a 5-gram language model using inter-
polated Kneser-Ney discounting (Goodman and
Chen, 1998). Word alignments were computed
by means of GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003). The
weights of the different feature functions were op-
timised by means of minimum error rate train-
ing (Och, 2003) on the 2013 WMT test set.7

The phrase table of this baseline system was
then enriched with phrase pairs generated from
rules automatically inferred from the concatena-
tion of the test corpora distributed for the WMT
2008–2012 shared translation tasks, and from the
English–French bilingual dictionary in the Aper-
tium platform.8 Since the minimisation problem
which needs to be solved in order to obtain the
rules is very time-consuming, we chose a small
rule inference corpus similar to this year’s test set.
The bilingual dictionary, which contains mappings
between SL and TL lemmas, consists of 13 088 en-
tries and is quite small compared to the Spanish–
English bilingual dictionary we used in our sub-
mission to WMT 2011 (Sánchez-Cartagena et al.,
2011b), which consisted of 326 228 bilingual en-
tries. This is because the English–French Aper-
tium linguistic resources were automatically built
by crossing data from other existing language
pairs.

Table 1 summarises the data about the corpora
used to build our submission, both for the PBSMT
baseline system and for the rules used to enrich its
phrase table.

The corpus used to automatically infer the rules

6No factored models were used.
7The corpora can be downloaded from http://www.

statmt.org/wmt14/translation-task.html.
8https://svn.code.sf.net/p/apertium/

svn/incubator/apertium-en-fr

Task Corpus Sentences

Translation model

Europarl 2 007 723
News Commentary 183 251
Common Crawl 3 244 152
Total 5 435 126
Total clean 4 196 987

Language model

Common Crawl 3 244 152
Europarl 2 190 579
News Commentary 227 013
News Crawl 30 451 749
Total 36 113 493

Rule inference newstest 2008–2012 13 071
Tuning newstest2013 3 000
Test newstest2014 3 003

Table 1: Size of the corpora used in the experi-
ments. The bilingual training corpora was cleaned
up to remove empty parallel sentences and those
containing more than 40 tokens.

was split into two parts: the larger one (4/5 of
the corpus) was used for actual rule inference as
described in section 3.3; the remaining corpus
was used as a development corpus as explained
next. For each rule z, first the proportion r(z) of
bilingual phrase pairs correctly reproduced by the
rule divided by the number of bilingual phrases
it matches is computed. Rules whose proportion
r(z) is lower than a threshold value δ are then
discarded before solving the minimisation prob-
lem. The value of δ is chosen so that it maximises,
on the development corpus, the BLEU score (Pap-
ineni et al., 2002) obtained by an Apertium-based
system which uses the inferred rules; in our sub-
mission δ = 0.15. In addition, rules that do not
correctly reproduce at least 100 bilingual phrase
pairs were also discarded in order to make the min-
imisation problem computationally feasible.

6 Results and discussion

Table 2 reports the translation performance as
measured by BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002),
TER (Snover et al., 2006) and METEOR (Baner-
jee and Lavie, 2005) achieved by the baseline PB-
SMT, our submission (UA-Prompsit), Apertium
when it uses the set of inferred rules, and Aper-
tium when it uses no rules at all (word-for-word
translation). The size of the phrase table and the
amount of unknown words in the test set are also
reported when applicable.

According to the three evaluation metrics, the
translation performance of our submission is very
close to that of the PBSMT baseline (slightly bet-
ter according to BLEU and TER, and slightly
worse according to METEOR). The difference be-
tween both systems computed by paired bootstrap

182



system BLEU TER METEOR # of unknown words phrase table size
baseline 0.3232 0.5807 0.5441 870 100 530 734
UA-Prompsit 0.3258 0.5781 0.5432 861 100 585 182
Apertium-rules 0.0995 0.7767 0.3168 4 743 -
Apertium-word-for-word 0.0631 0.8368 0.2617 4 743 -

Table 2: Case-insensitive BLEU, TER, and METEOR scores obtained, on the newstest2014 test set, by
the baseline PBSMT system (baseline), the hybrid system submitted to the WMT 2014 shared translation
task (UA-Prompsit), Apertium when it uses the set of inferred rules (Apertium-rules), and Apertium
when it uses no rules at all (Apertium-word-for-word). The number of unknown words and the size of
the phrase table are also reported when applicable.

resampling (Koehn, 2004) is not statistically sig-
nificant for any of the three evaluation metrics
(1 000 iterations, p = 0.05).

An inspection of the 86 rules inferred shows
that they encode some of the transformations that
one would expect from a set of English–French
rules, such as gender and number agreements be-
tween nouns, determiners and adjectives, prepo-
sition changes, and the introduction of the aux-
iliary verb avoir for the past tense. In addition,
the improvement over word-for-word translation
achieved when they are used by Apertium is statis-
tically significant for the three evaluation metrics.

One of the reasons for not improving the base-
line PBMT system might be the small coverage
of the Apertium dictionaries. As already men-
tioned in the previous section, the English–French
bilingual dictionary has a low number of entries
compared to more mature language pairs in Aper-
tium which have around 20 times more bilingual
entries. Table 1 shows some effects of such a
small dictionary: the number of unknown words
for the Apertium-based system is really high, and
with regards to UA-Prompsit, its coverage barely
increases when compared to the PBSMT baseline.
We plan to test the approach presented in this paper
with language pairs for which more mature dictio-
naries are available in the Apertium project.

In addition to this, due to the tight schedule, we
had to remove the rules not reproducing at least
100 bilingual phrase pairs in order to solve the min-
imisation problem in a short amount of time. This
has clearly reduced the amount of rules inferred
and prevented some useful information present in
the parallel corpus from being incorporated in the
form of rules. For instance, no rule matching a
sequence longer than 3 lexical forms has been ex-
tracted (long bilingual phrases are less frequent
than short ones). Future research directions for
alleviating this problem include setting the mini-
mum number of reproduced bilingual phrases in-
dependently for each sequence of SL lexical cate-

gories (Sánchez-Cartagena et al., 2014).

7 Concluding remarks

We have presented the MT system submitted
jointly by the Departament de Llenguatges i Sis-
temes Informàtics at Universitat d’Alacant and
Prompsit Language Engineering to the WMT
2014 shared translation task. We developed a
hybrid system for the English–French language
pair which enriches the phrase table of a stan-
dard PBSMT system with phrase pairs generated
from the Apertium RBMT dictionaries and a set of
shallow-transfer rules automatically inferred from
a parallel corpus, also with the help of the dic-
tionaries. This submission aims at solving one
strong limitation of a previous submission of our
team (Sánchez-Cartagena et al., 2011b): the need
for a hand-crafted set of shallow-transfer rules,
which can only be written by people with a deep
knowledge of the languages involved. Our ap-
proach outperforms a standard PBSMT system
built from the same data by a small, non statisti-
cally significant margin, according to two of the
three evaluation metrics used. The low coverage
of the dictionaries used and the aggressive pruning
carried out when solving the minimisation prob-
lem needed to infer the rules are probably the rea-
sons behind such a small improvement over the
baseline.

Acknowledgements

Work funded by Universitat d’Alacant through
project GRE11-20, by the Spanish Ministry
of Economy and Competitiveness through
projects TIN2009-14009-C02-01 and TIN2012-
32615, by Generalitat Valenciana through grant
ACIF/2010/174 (VALi+d programme), and by
the European Union Seventh Framework Pro-
gramme FP7/2007-2013 under grant agreement
PIAP-GA-2012-324414 (Abu-MaTran).

183



References
S. Banerjee and A. Lavie. 2005. Meteor: An auto-

matic metric for mt evaluation with improved corre-
lation with human judgments. In Proceedings of the
ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation
Measures for Machine Translation and/or Summa-
rization, pages 65–72.

O. Bojar and J. Hajič. 2008. Phrase-based and deep
syntactic English-to-Czech statistical machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the third Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine translation, pages 143–146. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

C. Callison-Burch, P. Koehn, C. Monz, and O. Zaidan.
2011. Findings of the 2011 workshop on statisti-
cal machine translation. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
22–64, Edinburgh, Scotland, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

H. M. Caseli, M. G. V. Nunes, and M. L. Forcada. 2006.
Automatic induction of bilingual resources from
aligned parallel corpora: application to shallow-
transfer machine translation. Machine Translation,
20(4):227–245. Published in 2008.

M. R. Costa-Jussà and M. Farrús. 2014. Statistical
machine translation enhancements through linguis-
tic levels: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 46(3).

A. Eisele, C. Federmann, H. Saint-Amand, M. Jelling-
haus, T. Herrmann, and Y. Chen. 2008. Us-
ing Moses to integrate multiple rule-based machine
translation engines into a hybrid system. In Proceed-
ings of the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pages 179–182, Columbus, Ohio.

M. L. Forcada, M. Ginestı́-Rosell, J. Nordfalk,
J. O’Regan, S. Ortiz-Rojas, J. A. Pérez-Ortiz,
G. Ramı́rez-Sánchez F. Sánchez-Martı́nez, and F. M.
Tyers. 2011. Apertium: a free/open-source platform
for rule-based machine translation. Machine Trans-
lation, 25(2):127–144. Special Issue: Free/Open-
Source Machine Translation.

R. S. Garfinkel and G. L. Nemhauser. 1972. Integer
programming, volume 4. Wiley New York.

J. Goodman and S. F. Chen. 1998. An empirical
study of smoothing techniques for language model-
ing. Technical Report TR-10-98, Harvard Univer-
sity, August.

Y. Graham and J. van Genabith. 2010. Factor tem-
plates for factored machine translation models. In
IWSLT 2010 : 7th International Workshop on Spo-
ken Language Translation, pages 275–283.

K. Heafield, I. Pouzyrevsky, J. H. Clark, and P. Koehn.
2013. Scalable modified Kneser-Ney language
model estimation. In Proceedings of the 51st An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 690–696, Sofia, Bulgaria, August.

W. J. Hutchins and H. L. Somers. 1992. An introduc-
tion to machine translation, volume 362. Academic
Press New York.

P. Koehn and Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored trans-
lation models. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 868–876,
Prague.

P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch,
M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen,
C. Moran, R. Zens, et al. 2007. Moses: Open
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation.
In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL), demonstration session.

P. Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests for ma-
chine translation evaluation. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, volume 4, pages 388–395.

P. Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for statisti-
cal machine translation. In Proceedings of the Tenth
Machine Translation Summit, pages 12–16, Phuket,
Thailand, September.

P. Koehn. 2010. Statistical Machine Translation. Cam-
bridge University Press.

F. J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A systematic comparison
of various statistical alignment models. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29:19–51, March.

F. J. Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in statis-
tical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 41st
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 160–167, Sapporo, Japan.

K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W. Zhu. 2002.
Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meet-
ing of the ACL, pages 311–318.

S. Riezler and J. T. Maxwell III. 2006. Grammati-
cal machine translation. In Proceedings of the main
conference on Human Language Technology Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion of Computational Linguistics, pages 248–255.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

V. M. Sánchez-Cartagena, F. Sánchez-Martı́nez, and
J. A. Pérez-Ortiz. 2011a. Integrating shallow-
transfer rules into phrase-based statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the XIII Machine
Translation Summit, pages 562–569, Xiamen, China,
September.

V. M. Sánchez-Cartagena, F. Sánchez-Martı́nez, and
J. A. Pérez-Ortiz. 2011b. The Universitat d’Alacant
hybrid machine translation system for wmt 2011. In
Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 457–463, Edinburgh, Scot-
land, July. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

184



V. M. Sánchez-Cartagena, J. A. Pérez-Ortiz, and
F. Sánchez-Martı́nez. 2014. A generalised align-
ment template formalism and its application to the
inference of shallow-transfer machine translation
rules from scarce bilingual corpora. Computer
Speech and Language. Submitted to the Special Is-
sue on Hybrid Machine Translation.

F. Sánchez-Martı́nez and M. L. Forcada. 2009. Infer-
ring shallow-transfer machine translation rules from
small parallel corpora. Journal of Artificial Intelli-
gence Research, 34(1):605–635.

H. Schwenk, S. Abdul-Rauf, L. Barrault, and J. Senel-
lart. 2009. SMT and SPE Machine Transla-
tion Systems for WMT’09. In Proceedings of the
Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
StatMT ’09, pages 130–134, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

M. Snover, B. Dorr, R. Schwartz, L. Micciulla, and
J. Makhoul. 2006. A study of translation edit rate
with targeted human annotation. In In Proceedings
of Association for Machine Translation in the Amer-
icas, pages 223–231.

F. M. Tyers. 2009. Rule-based augmentation of train-
ing data in Breton–French statistical machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual Confer-
ence of the European Association of Machine Trans-
lation, pages 213–217.

Y. Xu, T. K. Ralphs, L. Ladányi, and M. J. Saltzman.
2009. Computational experience with a software
framework for parallel integer programming. IN-
FORMS Journal on Computing, 21(3):383–397.

185


