

















































Developing and Maintaining a WordNet: Procedures and Tools

Miljana Mladenović
Faculty of Mathematics
University of Belgrade

ml.miljana@gmail.com

Jelena Mitrović
Faculty of Philology

University of Belgrade
jmitrovic@gmail.com

Cvetana Krstev
Faculty of Philology

University of Belgrade
cvetana@matf.bg.ac.rs

Abstract

In this paper we present a set of tools that will
help developers of wordnets not only to in-
crease the number of synsets but also to en-
sure their quality, thus preventing it to become
obsolete too soon. We discuss where the dan-
gers lay in a WordNet production and how they
were faced in the case of the Serbian WordNet.
Developed tools fall in two categories: first are
tools for upgrade, cleaning and validation that
produce a clean, up-to-date WordNet, while
second category consists of tools gathered in
a Web application that enable search, develop-
ment and maintenance of a WordNet. The ba-
sic functions of this application are presented:
XML support and import/export facilities, cre-
ation of new synsets, connection to the Prince-
ton WordNet, sophisticated search possibili-
ties and navigation, production of a WordNet
statistics and safety procedures. Some of pre-
sented tools were developed specifically for
Serbian, while majority of them is adaptable
and can be used for wordnets of other lan-
guages.

1 Introduction

Development of a WordNet is always a labor-
intensive task for which a work of a number of
professionals is needed. If produced from the
scratch and mostly manually the development will
necessarily take many years if aiming at com-
prehensiveness and accuracy. In such a setting
a valuable resource, not yet fully developed, can
easily become obsolete. The reasons for this
are manifold. First, since WordNet is dealing
with “words”, its contents can become out-of-date.
A straightforward example can be found in the
Princeton WordNet 3.0 (PWN): it describes Yu-
goslavia as the Union of Serbia and Montenegro
(which no longer exists) while Serbia is described

as a historical region in central and northern Yu-
goslavia, and not as a Republic (which it is today).
Moreover, new items can be added to a WordNet
content, like domain information or similar. Next,
the format used to represent a WordNet necessar-
ily changes and evolves in time. The early word-
nets did not use XML representation which is al-
most obligatory today. However, new, more pow-
erful representations emerge. Tools used to de-
velop and maintain wordnets have to keep pace
with content enhancement and format changes. Fi-
nally, many wordnets were developed highly rely-
ing on the PWN by using a so-called expand model
in which synsets from the PWN are translated into
a target language (Fellbaum, 2010). Wordnets de-
veloped in this way are all connected through the
Interlingual Index (ILI) that links similar concepts
between languages, which is highly advantageous
for various multilingual applications. However,
in order to maintain this network a WordNet has
to regularly upgrade when new versions of the
Princeton WordNet emerge.

The Serbian WordNet faced all mentioned prob-
lems. The Serbian WordNet (SWN) was ini-
tially produced in the scope of the BalkaNet
project (Stamou et al., 2002). At the end of the
project, in 2004, the Serbian WordNet had 7,000
synsets linked to the Princeton WordNet version
2.0. In the subsequent years approximately 14,000
synsets were added to it thanks to volunteer work
of numerous specialists and the WordNet editor.
The addition was not done at random - as the need
arose, special attention was given to certain con-
ceptual domains - emotions - and scientific do-
mains - biological species, biomedicine, religion,
law, linguistics, literature, librarianship, computer
science, and lately, culinary. Recently, a new im-
petus to the enhancement and upgrade of the SWN
was given by the CESAR project, in the scope of
which many Polish, Slovak, Hungarian, Croatian,
Serbian and Bulgarian resources were thoroughly



described by meta-data and made public through
the META-SHARE 1 repositories (Ogrodniczuk et
al., 2012). The Serbian WordNet is available for
download for non-commercial use under the CC-
BY-NC license.

In the meantime, many new applications based
on natural language processing were being devel-
oped for Serbian and for a number of them the Ser-
bian WordNet became a valuable resource, e.g. for
document classification systems (Pavlović-Lažetić
and Graovac, 2010), multilingual queries into dig-
ital libraries (Stanković et al., 2012), multiword
lexica acquisition (Krstev et al., 2010), domain
specific knowledge-based ontologies and systems
(Mladenović and Mitrović, 2013), etc. However,
in order to profit from it as much as possible it be-
came a necessity not only to upgrade and improve
it but to establish a stable environment for its de-
velopment in the future. The most important steps
in this process were:

1) A safe and unequivocal mapping onto the
current version of the Princeton WordNet (PWN
3.0);

2) A creation of XML Schema that would en-
able a thorough validation of the Serbian WordNet
and automatic correction of many formal inconsis-
tencies;

3) Mapping of Serbian WordNet to SUMO;
4) A conversion from XML format to other rel-

evant formats.
In Section 2 we will present the present envi-

ronment for the development of SWN and its lim-
itations. In order to perform afore mentioned im-
provement tasks we have developed a number of
preparatory tools that will be described in Subsec-
tion 3.1. Our job did not end here: in order to pro-
vide for a continuous development of the Serbian
WordNet a web application that enables browsing
for all and updating and enhancing of its content
for a chosen set of specialists is being developed.
We will present this tool in Subsection 3.2. In Sec-
tion 4 we will give directions for future work.

2 Motivation and discussion

Serbian WordNet was structurally built following
the pattern of EuroWordNet (Vossen, 1998), as
was the case with other wordnets that were built
in the scope of BalkaNet - wordnets for Bulgar-
ian, Czech, Greek, Romanian and Turkish. XML-
like representations of the EuroWordNet data were

1http://www.meta-share.eu

produced with a tool named VisDic (Horák and
Smrž, 2004).

For many years VisDic has proved to be a reli-
able, user-friendly tool for development and main-
tenance of the SWN. It was particularly useful
for simultaneous work on multiple WordNet XML
documents of identical structure. The connection
between those documents was achieved in two
ways - through the AutoLookUp function, which
connected the synsets of different WordNet files
with the same synset identification, where their
side-by-side representation was the result, and
through the function CopyEntryTo which allowed
for copying of the contents of a certain synset from
one WordNet file into another. The search func-
tionality of this tool leaned on the representation
of synsets via a tree-structure in both directions
(towards the root and towards the leaves). Two
operations were implemented in that regard: Top-
mostEntries and FullExpansion. The first one pro-
vided all synsets that presented roots of the rela-
tional hierarchy. The second operation provided
all synsets that represented the parts of a subtree
in the given search. VisDic allowed for a certain
degree of control over the consistency of data. It
could point out to some inconsistencies such as
synsets with identical IDs, duplicate Literal/Sense
pairs or duplicate synset links.

In the first years of the development of the
Serbian WordNet, VisDic, as a free tool, signifi-
cantly contributed to the development of this se-
mantic network. Still, the fact that it was limited
to the desktop surrounding made team work dif-
ficult. This was particularly inappropriate for the
development of the SWN, as a number of volun-
teers frequently worked simultaneously on its de-
velopment (Krstev et al., 2008). Merging of parts
of WordNet files made by many users into one file
was always susceptible to introducing errors and
inconsistencies. For that reason, the accessibility
and usefulness of the WordNet editing tool needed
to be improved. The resource itself did not allow
for automatic processing of XML documents be-
cause the XML-like files used in VisDic did not
have a root element. Furthermore, VisDic did
not have a function for checking whether the in-
put XML document was well-formed and/or valid
against a DTD or XSD Schema. As a result, the
structure of the Serbian WordNet was diverse from
one synset to another. Moreover, due to the lack
of validity control users were allowed to input un-

http://www.meta-share.eu


supported as well as some unexpected tag values.
The limited system of morphological labeling in
VisDic did not serve well to the morphologically
rich language such is Serbian. That is why mor-
phological tags were manually added later, based
on Serbian morphological electronic dictionaries.
This information was added manually by the chief
editor of the SWN inside the element LNOTE that
was not specifically intended for this type of infor-
mation. This method was susceptible to errors and
slowed down the process of adding entries.

The same problem was present with adding
SUMO tags to the synsets that were specifically
present only in the Serbian WordNet, that is, they
were not transferred from the PWN, like synsets
with BILI tags, that is to say, synsets that were
added in the course of the BalkaNet project, or
those synsets that were specific to the Serbian lan-
guage and carried the tag SRP. Also, developers
of the SWN often felt that some other useful and
often needed checking procedures were missing
in VisDic, for instance check for hanging synsets
(missing the hypernym relation). Also, it often
occurred that some basic statistics had to be pro-
duced (number of synsets and literals per Part-of-
Speech, number of multi-word literals vs. simple
literals, literals with the highest number of senses,
synsets with the highest number of literals, etc.). A
number of scripts were written as needed to over-
come this deficiency of VisDic.

Insufficient connection of VisDic with the
SUMO (Pease, 2011) and other upper level ontolo-
gies, as well as with domain ontologies, slowed
down the development of tools for ontological rea-
soning based on the Serbian WordNet. Also, the
impossibility of transformation of the XML doc-
ument to other formats, especially to RDF and
OWL made the development of ontology-based
knowledge bases related to WordNet even more
difficult. Lastly, the search system of VisDic
leaned on elementary queries over the content,
without the possibility of setting logical filters or
the possibility of smart search, e.g. the use of
XPath. Taking into account all advantages and set-
backs of the existing software solution, we took
on the task of designing and building a set of tools
that would improve the development of the Ser-
bian WordNet and other semantic resources for the
Serbian language.

3 Developing the Tools and the Web
application for Semantic Resources for
Serbian

The entire project aimed at enhancing the tools
for developing, maintaining and using SWN was
split into two phases: preparatory phase and oper-
ational phase.

3.1 Preparatory Phase
In this phase, we defined procedures and tools that
enabled the following 6 tasks:

1. In the first step we created a software tool
to upgrade the current version 2.0 of the SWN
onto the version 3.0 of the PWN. This tool uses
the mapping files produced and made available by
The Center for Language and Speech Technolo-
gies and Applications at the Technical University
of Catalunya 2. to translate SynsetID from one
PWN version to SynsetID of the other version of
PWN (Daudé et al., 2003). In general, our soft-
ware tool was created to transform every version
of SWN to any other, as long as the appropriate
mapping is available. For the cases of ambiguous
or nonexistent mappings, the tool produced two
additional files - a file doubled that lists pairs
(or triples) of synset IDs in the version 3.0 that
corresponded to one synset in version 2.0 (there
was a total of 45 such synsets in SWN, version
2.0) and a file missing that lists IDs of synsets
from version 2.0 that could not be mapped to the
new version (a total of 147 synsets with this prob-
lem were retrieved in SWN version 2.0). All these
cases were resolved manually.

2. In the second step we defined the swn.xsd
Schema for validation and control of SWN. The
first introduced XSD schema used for SWN is pre-
sented in (Krstev et al., 2004). A software tool
LeXimir (the old name ILReMat) that used it, was
created to work as a connection between VisDic
and morphological dictionaries for Serbian. Still,
functions for validation of the SWN as an XML re-
source were not implemented. Also, when the new
tags had to be introduced in SWN (such as SNOTE
- a note related to a synset, or SUMO - for SUMO
concepts), the corresponding XSD schema did not
follow those changes. Furthermore, the problem
remained to distribute and install the new schema
to all the desktop applications that would use it.
Now, the new version of the SWN XSD schema
(given in Figure 1) can be easily changed by SWN

2http://bit.ly/18Uf8kX

http://bit.ly/18Uf8kX


administrators, uploaded to the web server, made
available to all other SWN users and maintained
as a part of a web tool for on-line WordNet search,
development and maintenance (presented in Sec-
tion 3.2).

Figure 1: XSD schema for SWN XML

3. In the third step, a module was developed to
validate and correct the SWN in its original Vis-
Dic XML-like representation (with the root ele-
ment added) against the newly developed SWN
XSD Schema. This module performed automatic
correction in all unambiguous cases, such as re-
arrangement of elements, which represented the
majority of cases. In the case of the last version
of the SWN XML file a total of 17,994 POS tags,
6,110 BCS tags, 20,421 ILR tags, 130 BCS tags
and 10 NL tags changed their position in the new
WordNet XML document. For other types of er-
rors, such as inappropriate or empty contents of
elements an error report was issued and those er-
rors were corrected manually. At the end, a well-
formed and valid SWN was obtained.

4. This step is specific to the Serbian language.
Namely, it uses two alphabets equally: Cyrillic
and Latin. Translation from Cyrillic to Latin is
straightforward since to each Cyrillic letter corre-
sponds one Latin letter or digraph. The same is not
valid for translation from Latin to Cyrillic because
digraphs have to be distinguished from consonant
groups. For instance, in nadživeti “outlive” dž rep-
resents a consonant group, while in odžak “chim-
ney” dž is a digraph. When these two words are

written in Cyrillic the problems do not exist any-
more: nad
iveti and o
ak. When the develop-
ment of the first Serbian language resource started
back in early 80s it was still difficult to work with
Cyrillic, especially if it was mixed with the Latin
alphabet which normally happens in Serbian texts.
For that reason a special encoding was invented
that uses the ASCII character set and enables un-
ambiguous mapping to both Serbian Cyrillic and
Serbian Latin. Many valuable Serbian resources
were developed using this encoding. Today, how-
ever, it is obsolete and we decided that it was time
to switch to the Unicode UTF-8 for Serbian Cyril-
lic. This could not be done fully automatically
because there are literals or parts of literals that
have to remain in Latin script, e.g. names of bio-
logical species such as porodica Bovidae “fam-
ily Bovidae”, chemical symbols and formulae, e.g.
H2O and some acronyms, like PC for personal
computer. In order to facilitate this process we
have defined some simple rules that recognize in-
stances that have to remain in the Latin alphabet.
After automatic translation of SWN from ASCII
to Unicode UTF-8 the SWN was checked by Ser-
bian electronic dictionary and incorrect transla-
tions were corrected manually.

5. Serbian WordNet developed using VisDic
did not contain the information about SUMO on-
tology. This information was indirectly available
from the PWN through the alignment process.
However, for one wishing to use the SWN outside
the VisDic environment this information would be
missing. We developed a separate module that ex-
plicitly assigns this information to synsets in the
SWN. For synsets that were taken over from the
PWN this was easily done. In SWN there are spe-
cific concepts: 530 Balkan specific concepts and
174 Serbian specific concepts. They were also ap-
pointed with SUMO tags. The procedure was car-
ried out automatically, by inheriting the tag of the
parent synset, if one existed and if it had a SUMO
tag. After that, the rest of the mappings, that is to
say the unresolved ones, were done manually.

6. In this step automatically are prepared some
useful lists that help users that create new synsets
by the new application to fill some elements with
appropriate values. The first one is the list of
all semantic relations that can be established be-
tween synsets. This list was obtained on the ba-
sis of all semantic relations that exist in PWN.
The second one is the list of SUMO concepts con-



nected to the POS to which they apply. This list
was obtained from existing SUMO tags in PWN
(Niles and Pease, 2003). The third list is the list of
all codes of inflectional paradigms for simple and
multi-word units used in Serbian morphological e-
dictionaries (Krstev, 2008). This list gives an ex-
ample and short explanation beside each code that
can help user to choose one when filling the appro-
priate element - LNOTE. For example (Table 1),
the synset boat:1 from PWN has a corresponding
synset barka:1, čamac:1, čun:1 in the SWN. The
inflectional codes for these three literals are N664,
N41 and N81, respectively. Entries for these three
codes in the prepared list are (if these same literals
were given as examples):

N664 barka the dative singular barci
N41 čamac fleeting a;

the vocative singular čamče
N81 čun the nominative plural čunovi

Table 1: Examples of inflectional codes used in
SWN.

These three lists are used in a form of dropdown
list in the web application for WordNet search, de-
velopment and maintenance presented in the next
section. The first two lists are of general nature,
while the third one is specific to Serbian.

3.2 Operational Phase

In this phase, a web application was developed
and its beta version was uploaded to the address:
http://resursi.mmiljana.com The pur-
pose of this application was to encompass all ben-
efits of the already existing software tool, new de-
mands of the Serbian semantic web users and con-
temporary software development techniques to en-
able a safe, efficient, multi-user, modular and easy
to expand system for development of semantic re-
sources in Serbian. In this phase, the following
procedures and tasks were carried out.

1. A very important module of the web ap-
plication is the XML validator. This module is
able to validate any WordNet file against any XSD
scheme and to obtain validation errors and sug-
gestions for corrections. Also, it enables a seri-
alization into TXT, CSV, RDF or XML formats
with a chosen XSL transformation of a complete
file or parts of search results. RDF representa-
tion is especially interesting to us because it can be
queried and processed by standard Semantic Web

tools, thus facilitating the integration of the Word-
Net data into various Semantic Web applications.

2. The web application was built in order to fa-
cilitate changing and adding of new synsets into
wordnets. The new synsets can be added one at
a time (either by transferring from the PWN - see
item 3 - or independently) or as a batch. The latter
case is particularly useful for addition of language
specific concepts. The prepared synsets have to be
in a valid XML form (except for a root element)
with IDs of linked synsets already filled in appro-
priate elements. This method was used for enhanc-
ing the SWN with Serbian specific concepts from
the culinary domain (Stanković et al., 2014). For
synsets that are added one at a time, a form is pre-
pared for filling obligatory and optional elements,
while a user can open new fields for repeatable
ones. In the case of SWN, the drop down lists that
we described in the previous subsection were used
to input the ILR, LNOTE and SUMO tags which
were filtered automatically according to the POS.

3. Another segment of the application is the op-
tion of forming queries over the PWN resource in
the version 3.0. For that purpose, we used the
WordNetEngine 3 and we enhanced it with the
functionality of copying of a chosen synset from
the PWN into SWN. Search over the PWN can be
carried out in two ways: by entering a word (in the
Word field) or by entering an ID of a synset (in the
synset ID field), in which case the POS must be
chosen from the drop-down list given next to the
synset ID field. If we choose the ID of a synset for
the POS for which it does not exist, the program
will notify us, otherwise it will provide a clickable
link in order to display further details about se-
mantic relations of that synset with other synsets.
The number of shown semantic relations i.e. hi-
erarchical representations of semantic relations of
a particular synset with synsets semantically con-
nected to it, is defined by checking the type of a
semantic relation which we want to represent hier-
archically using the check-box lists named Noun,
Verb, Adjective and Adverb which contain labels
of the most common semantic relations pertaining
to the given POS.

4. The implemented search functions over the
SWN take into consideration all tags from a Word-
Net used. If a user chooses a tag SYNSET, then
a full-text search over a whole wordnet is per-

3http://ptl.sys.virginia.edu/msg8u/
NLP/Source/ResourceAPIs/WordNet/WordNet/

http://resursi.mmiljana.com
http://ptl.sys.virginia.edu/msg8u/NLP/Source/ResourceAPIs/WordNet/WordNet/
http://ptl.sys.virginia.edu/msg8u/NLP/Source/ResourceAPIs/WordNet/WordNet/


Figure 2: User-friendly XPATH queries over different SWN tags

formed. Also, they search data according to the
authoring information. A search function can be
either set to a simple value (Figure 2) or via a logic
filter which is implemented to be user-friendly for
those who are not familiar with XPath.

For example, the filter could be set to search for
all synsets that have the term jabuka “apple” and
whose SUMO tag is “PreparedFood” via an ad-
vanced logic query:

<SUMO> equals "PreparedFood" AND
(<LITERAL> contains "jabuka" OR
<DEF> contains "jabuka")

Or we could find all synsets whose part of a
literal or a literal itself is also contained in the
superior synset as is the case with synsets de-
scribed by LITERALS obrazovna ustanova “ed-
ucational institution”, verska ustanova “religious
institution”, medicinska ustanova “medical insti-
tution” and their hypernym given by the LITERAL
ustanova “institution”.

Similarly, we could find: all antonym synsets
for synsets which have a LITERAL tag that
contains a word ružan “ugly”. The result of an
advanced logic query is a synset whose sense is
lep “handsome”.

(<LITERAL>contains "ružan" AND
<ILR><Type>equals "near_antonym")

All the query results can be displayed in textual
(Figure 3) and graphical tree form. Tree repre-
sentation facilitates navigation through the seman-

Figure 3: Semantic relations tree structure of a
synset jagoda “strawberry”

tic relations tree structure because every synset
in a tree representation is a link to the synset it-
self. The main purpose of textual form is its se-
rialization as a subsegment of SWN structure to
be used later as a resource in some other appli-
cations. For example: if we search for the term
osećanje “feeling”, as a result we obtain a seman-
tic tree where the root synset has the sense of the
searched term and the leaves are synsets represent-
ing emotional states. Such structure can be used
as a separate XML file and mixed with other re-
sources in the process of opinion mining tasks. A
special submodule SWNengine is coded to imple-



ment all functions needed for navigation through
the semantic relations tree structure of SWN.

5. Besides search functions over WordNet
synsets, a separate module is created for providing
statistical information about some valuable param-
eters of a WordNet in use that were often needed
in the past. Table 2 shows some data provided by
this module for the current version of SWN.

POS in Synsets
POS Noun Verb Adj. Adv.
Synsets 16978 2157 1584 121

Inter Lingual Indexes in Synsets
ILI ENG BILI SRB
Synsets 20136 530 174

Semantic Relations in Synsets
ILR Hyper- Holo Holo Holo

nym part mem portion
Synsets 19123 1746 3890 222
ILR Antonym Deri- Deri- Deri-

ved ved ved
gen pos

Synsets 783 665 38 45
Number of Literals in Synsets

Literals 1 2 3 4 5
Synsets 11356 6657 1969 557 190

Table 2: Examples of inflectional codes used in
SWN.

6. The safety of this application was ensured
via roles and levels inside those roles. Roles are
granted by WordNet administrators. The follow-
ing roles were defined: unauthorized users that
have the right of elementary querying over the net-
work, using complex logic filters and statistical re-
porting about connections and meanings inside of
the network itself; WordNet users and administra-
tors. Inside of roles, the levels are defined - or-
dinary users that can input and change only the
synsets which they themselves have defined, and
moderators who have control over the entire re-
source. Tag NL holds the information about status
of a synset. If the moderator has not yet verified
all data concerning the newly inserted synset, NL
tag is set to “no”, and when the new synset has
been approved by the moderator, the value of NL
tag switches to “yes”. Also, for the information
about the “hanging” semantic relations (e.g. if one
of synsets in the relation doesn’t exist) is presented
for each synset in the visual form.

The application is developed as ASP.NET

Framework 4.0 C# web site, corresponding to the
relational database MS SQL Server 2005 and by
using jQuery 1.8.9 library at client’s side. It is
available for non-commercial use under the CC-
BY-NC license.

4 Conclusion

The Serbian WordNet has a potential to develop
with more substantial speed and quality now that
valuable new tools for its usage and development
are available. In this new tool we wanted to keep
all characteristics of the old software VisDic that
proved useful in the past and to add the missing
ones of which the most important are a full XML
support, distributed work, and advanced search.
We have achieved this goal, but it should be noted
that the interface is still under construction and its
development will follow users’ demands in future.
Also, for the time being it is given in Serbian, but
we plan to enable localization for other languages
in the next phase.

We hope to continue the development of SWN
in several directions. In the process of further
extension of this resource, domain knowledge
about agroindustry, medicine, geology etc. will
be added, depending on the scientific fields in
which it will be used. Sentiment labels for synsets
and procedures of parallelization with English re-
sources of the same purpose are also planned in
the near future. Furthermore, we plan on increas-
ing the number of noun-adverb relations in order
to enrich the system of semantic relations and se-
mantic knowledge that would facilitate tagging of
rhetorical figures in Serbian. Finally, mapping
to SUMO ontologies and generating of an appro-
priate ontology from the existing XML resource
will be taken into consideration. We believe that
wordnets developed for other languages can bene-
fit from some of our tools, namely the tool for up-
grading one version of WordNet to another, as well
as other tools - with minor adjustments depending
on the particular needs of the administrators and
users of those wordnets.

Acknowledgments

This research was conducted through the project
III 47003, financed by the Serbian Ministry of Sci-
ence.



References
Jordi Daudé, Lluís Padró and German Rigau. 2003.

Validation and Tuning of Wordnet Mapping Tech-
niques. In Proc. of the International Conference on
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing
(RANLP’03).

Christiane Fellbaum. 2010. WordNet. Springer,
Netherlands.

Matthew Steven Gerber. 2013. WordNetEngine.cs,
Synset.cs. http://ptl.sys.virginia.
edu/msg8u/NLP/Source/ResourceAPIs/
WordNet/WordNet/ (accessed September 2nd
2013).

Aleš Horák and Pavel Smrž. 2004. VisDic - WordNet
browsing and editing tool. In Proc. of the 2nd Inter-
national Global WordNet Conference, Brno, Czech
Republic.

Cvetana Krstev, Duško Vitas, Ranka Stanković, Ivan
Obradović and Gordana Pavlović-Lažetić. 2004.
Combining Heterogeneous Lexical Resources. In
Proc. of the 4th International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, Lisabon, Portugal,
vol. 4, pp. 1103-1106.

Cvetana Krstev, Bojana Djordjević, Sanja Antonić,
Nevena Ivković-Berček, Zorica Zorica, Vesna
Crnogorac and Ljiljana Macura. 2008. Cooperative
Work in Further Development of Serbian WordNet.
INFOtheca 9(1-2):59a-78a.

Cvetana Krstev. 2008. Processing of Serbian - Au-
tomata, Texts and Electronic dictionaries. Faculty
of Philology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade.

Cvetana Krstev, Ranka Stanković, Ivan Obradović,
Duško Vitas and Miloš Utvić. 2010. Auto-
matic Construction of a Morphological Dictionary
of Multi-Word Units. LNCS 6233, Springer, pp.
226-237.

Miljana Mladenović and Jelena Mitrović. 2013. On-
tology of Rhetorical Figures for Serbian. LNAI
8082, Springer pp. 386-393.

Ian Niles and Adam Pease. 2003. Linking Lexicons
and Ontologies: Mapping WordNet to the Suggested
Upper Merged Ontology. In Proc. of the IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Information and Knowledge
Engineering, pp. 412-416.

Maciej Ogrodniczuk, Radovan Garabik, Svetla Koeva,
Cvetana Krstev, Piotr Pȩzik, Tibor Pintér, Adam
Przepiórkowski, György Szaszák, Marko Tadić,
Tamás Váradi and Duško Vitas. 2012. Central
and South-European language resources in META-
SHARE. INFOtheca 13(1): 3-26.

Gordana Pavlović-Lažetić and Jelena Graovac. 2010.
Ontology-driven Conceptual Document Classifica-
tion. In KDIR, pp. 383-386.

Adam Pease. 2011. Ontology: A Practical Guide. Ar-
ticulate Software Press, Angwin, CA.

Sofia Stamou, Kemal Oflazer, Karel Pala, Dimitris
Christodoulakis, Dan Christodoulakis, Svetla Ko-
eva, George Totkov, Dominique Totkov and Maria
Grigoriadou. 2002. BALKANET: A Multilingual
Semantic Network for Balkan Languages. In Proc.
of the 1st International Global WordNet Conference,
Mysore, India.

Ranka Stanković, Ivan Obradović and Aleksandra Tr-
tovac. 2012. An Approach to Development of Bilin-
gual Lexical Resources. In Proc. of the Workshop
on Computational Linguistics and Natural Language
Processing of Balkan Languages - CLoBL 2012, the
Balkan Conference in Informatics, Novi Sad, Serbia,
pp. 101-104.

Staša Vujičić Stanković, Cvetana Krstev, Duško Vitas.
2014. Enriching Serbian WordNet and Electronic
Dictionaries with Terms from the Culinary Domain.
In Proc. of the Global Wordnet Conference (in the
same volume).

The Center for Language and Speech Technolo-
gies and Applications at the Technical University
of Catalunya. (accessed September 2nd 2013).
http://bit.ly/18Uf8kX

Piek Vossen. 1998. Introduction to EuroWordNet.
Computers and the Humanities 32(2-3):73-89.

http://ptl.sys.virginia.edu/msg8u/NLP/Source/ResourceAPIs/WordNet/WordNet/
http://ptl.sys.virginia.edu/msg8u/NLP/Source/ResourceAPIs/WordNet/WordNet/
http://ptl.sys.virginia.edu/msg8u/NLP/Source/ResourceAPIs/WordNet/WordNet/
http://bit.ly/18Uf8kX

	Introduction
	Motivation and discussion
	Developing the Tools and the Web application for Semantic Resources for Serbian
	Preparatory Phase
	Operational Phase

	Conclusion

