



















































Identifying Student Leaders from MOOC Discussion Forums through Language Influence


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 15–20,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identifying Student Leaders from MOOC Discussion Forums through
Language Influence

Seungwhan Moon Saloni Potdar Lara Martin
Language Technology Institute

Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213

{seungwhm, spotdar, ljmartin}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Identifying and understanding the motiva-
tions of student leaders from Massively
Open Online Course (MOOC) discussion
forums provides the key to making the on-
line learning environment engaging, col-
laborative, and instructive. In this pa-
per, we propose to identify student lead-
ers solely based on textual features, or
specifically by analyzing how they influ-
ence other students’ language. We propose
an improved method of measuring lan-
guage accommodation based on people’s
choice of words given a semantic topic of
interest, and show that student leaders in-
deed coordinate other students’ language
usage. We also show that our proposed
method can successfully distinguish stu-
dent leaders from the two MOOC discus-
sion forum datasets.

1 Introduction

One of the challenges Massively Open Online
Courses (MOOCs) face is that they lack a phys-
ical medium that enables active real-time interac-
tion between students and instructors, especially
when compared to the offline learning environ-
ment. While online discussion forums in MOOCs
play an important role in bridging this gap, the
“massiveness” of the student size makes it hard
for instructors to provide sufficient feedback or an-
swers to students’ questions in a timely manner.

It is often the student leaders who accommo-
date this situation by voluntarily helping other stu-
dents and answering their questions in discussion
forums. The student leaders encourage other stu-
dents to participate in the discussion and make the
online learning experience much more collabora-
tive and engaging. Therefore, it is important to
identify student leaders and understand their mo-
tivations, thus promoting more students to act like

leaders. Identifying leadership in MOOCs also
brings new insights to the multi-dimensional eval-
uation of students in online courses. This signif-
icantly builds upon previous literature that evalu-
ates students taking MOOCs solely based on their
task-oriented performance (Foltz and Rosenstein,
2013; Basu et al., 2013).

Identifying student leaders in MOOC courses
is a challenging task, as illustrated in Figure 1.
While most of the student leaders actively inter-
act with other students in a large cluster of people,
some student leaders only lead a small clique of
students. Activeness of student participation can-
not be a sole measure to identify student leaders,
because there are a number of active ‘questioners’
who exhibit very different motivations from stu-
dent leaders. This challenge inspires us to look
closely at the language of the leaders in order to
identify them.

The task of identifying leaders has been well
studied in various domains, but the challenge is of-
ten unique to the specific property of an online net-
work or a community. For example, a frequency-
based data mining approach has been proven par-
ticularly successful for a social network with a
strong visibility control (e.g. a friend network) and
a discrete set of user actions (e.g. sharing of a post,
etc.) (Goyal et al., 2008; Bodendorf and Kaiser,
2009; Shafiq et al., 2013). In their work, they
identify leaders by tracking how a certain action
gets shared and propagated among a given net-
work of users. However, it is challenging to apply
this approach for identifying leaders from MOOC
discussion forums, because a visibility network of
users or community actions are not clearly defined
in MOOCs.

For an online community forum where the
query information and use pattern are accessible,
several studies have proposed to use the link struc-
ture and the topic information about users to iden-
tify opinion leaders (Li et al., 2013; Pal and Kon-

15



Figure 1: An interaction graph of the Python
MOOC discussion forum where each node and
edge represents a student and an interaction of two
students within the forum (e.g. enough number
of conversation exchanges above a threshold), re-
spectively. Larger white nodes refer to the an-
notated student leaders. While most of the lead-
ers are highly connected (actively interacting with
other students), note that the white nodes may also
appear in small cliques as well. Some of the highly
connected nodes are not labeled as leaders, whom
we refer to as active ‘questioners’.

stan, 2010; Sharara et al., 2011). They employ
features such as PageRank, HITS, and other non-
linguistic features such as longevity (how long the
person has stayed on the forum), etc., all of which
serve as a cue in determining and identifying the
extent of users’ expertise and influence.

While some of the MOOC datasets provide this
information, in this paper we only focus on the
textual features of the MOOC discussion forums
so that we can target general MOOC datasets. We
show that we can identify leaders as role models
who influence through language, and show how
a community norm may form within a short life
span of an online course via student leaders. We
also propose a new approach to measure language
accommodation which in our experiment furthers
the previous literature on the subject.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 explains in detail the approach that we
propose to identify leaders. Section 3 gives a brief
overview of the two MOOC datasets from differ-

ent courses, and we present our empirical evalu-
ation in Section 4 on these datasets. Finally, we
give our concluding remarks and proposed future
work in Section 5.

2 Methods

It is well studied by the linguistics community
that people tend to mimic the style of speech or
choices of words made by the people that they
are communicating with (Niederhoffer and Pen-
nebaker, 2002). This phenomena is called lan-
guage coordination, which is frequently observed
especially when there are power differences within
the conversation participants (Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil and Lee, 2011; Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et
al., 2012). We hypothesize that the power differ-
ence may arise within the students as well, espe-
cially through dependence: if a student A needs
knowledge from a student B, and is thus depen-
dent on B, this gives B a temporary power over
A. As such, we identify a set of student leaders by
how much other students accommodate their lan-
guage when they converse with student leaders.

In order to measure students’ language coordi-
nation towards student leaders, we take the similar
approach proposed by (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil
et al., 2012). In their work, they provide a concise
probabilistic coordination measure which defines
language coordination from a speaker to a target
on a set of function words. Specifically, they use 8
pre-defined categories and a total of 451 lexemes
as a set of function words to track the language
influence. Their proposed accommodation mea-
sure is shown to be successful in distinguishing the
individuals of different power status. While this
work bases its motivation from a specific line of
work in the linguistics that defines particular func-
tion words as markers for influence, it does not
fully capture the broad range of linguistic behav-
iors that are reported as language accommodation
(Baxter and Braithwaite, 2008; Hall, 2008).

In this paper, we propose to measure language
coordination based on people’s choice of words,
given a specific theme. Consider word clusters
learned from a large corpus, where words are
grouped by their semantic similarity. During a
conversation between a speaker A and a target B,
they can draw words from any cluster, which is
analogous to choosing a topic or theme to dis-
cuss. Given a theme, people may choose any
words from the chosen cluster, all of which have

16



a semantically similar meaning. However, if A
follows B’s specific choice of words given a clus-
ter, we consider this action as evidence for lan-
guage accommodation of A towards B. Based on
the probabilistic analysis, we measure the overall
language coordination for each conversation par-
ticipant. Note that this definition of language ac-
commodation can capture language coordination
beyond the use of particular function words, and
provide a way to analyze broader language influ-
ence that is unique to the community. Figure 2
shows the illustration of this approach.

Figure 2: Language accommodation based on peo-
ple’s choice of words given a theme (cluster).
Words are clustered based on their semantic simi-
larity. If A (speaker) follows B (target)’s specific
choice of word from a cluster, given all the other
options of similar words within the same cluster,
we define this action as language accommodation
of A towards B.

To cluster words based on their syntactic and
semantic similarity, we take the approach by
(Mikolov et al., 2013a; Mikolov et al., 2013b)
which maps words into high-dimensional vectors
based on their statistical occurrence in relation to
other words in a sentence. We then use the K-
means clustering algorithm (MacQueen, 1967) to
group the words by their Euclidean distance within
the semantic space. To reduce the computational
complexity, we pick the 20 most frequent clusters
from the dataset that we analyze, and we use the
words in those clusters as markers to track lan-
guage coordination.

We then borrow the definition of language ac-
commodation measure by (Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil et al., 2012), and define the language coordi-
nation of a speaker a towards a target b on a marker
wk (that belongs to a word cluster k) as follows:

Cwk(a→ b) = P (Ewkua→ub |Ewkub )− P (Ewkua→ub)
where a is the speaker that coordinates towards the

target b, Ewkua→ub is the event that the utterance of
a exhibits a linguistic marker wk in its reply to the
utterance of b, and Ewkub is the event that the utter-
ance of b exhibits a marker wk. The conversation
set is defined over the exchanges that contain the
words from a given cluster k.

In a thread-based discussion forum like the
MOOC datasets, however, it is ambiguous to tell
who is talking with whom. Therefore, we define
the conversational exchange between b and a if b’s
post appears after a’s post in the same thread.

3 MOOC Dataset

In this section, we describe the two MOOC online
discussion forum datasets we used in our studies.
The datasets consist of the conversations from two
courses from Coursera1: Learn to Program: The
Fundamentals (Python) and Introduction to Psy-
chology as a Science (Psychology). The Python
course consists of 3,509 students, 7 instructors and
24,963 posts across 10 weeks. Each thread con-
sists of replies and comments along with a user-
name associated with it. The Psychology course
spans over 12 weeks and has 1,982 students and
3 instructors. In our studies, we focus on the
interaction between three groups of people: in-
structors (including professors and teaching assis-
tants), student leaders, and non-leaders. In order to
evaluate the performance of the proposed method
on the MOOC discussion forums, we have hand-
annotated leaders and non-leaders from a subset of
the student pool.

4 Results and Discussion

We test the following two hypotheses on lan-
guage accommodation: (1) students coordinate
more towards student leaders than towards non-
student leaders (Htarget), and (2) student leaders
coordinate towards other students less than non-
student leaders coordinate towards other students
(Hspeaker). Figure 3 shows the language accom-
modation of three different groups (instructors,
leaders, and non-leaders) with other students that
are not labeled as any group. We provide the
results for the case when we apply our cluster-
based accommodation measure to test Htarget and
Hspeaker, and for when we use the function words
as markers to track accommodation (Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2012). For the cluster-

1https://www.coursera.org, one of the leading
MOOC providers

17



(a) Python: Cluster-based (b) Python: LIWC-derived Function Words

(c) Psychology: Cluster-based (d) Psychology: LIWC-derived Function Words

Figure 3: The aggregated language accommodation measurement using (a), (c): cluster-based and (b),
(d): LIWC-derived lexemes, (1) from students towards each target class (testing Htarget) and (2) from
each speaker class towards students (testing Hspeaker), for the Python and the Psychology datasets.

based method, we use word2vec2 which pro-
vides the word vectors trained on the Google News
corpus (about 100 billion words) (Mikolov et al.,
2013b). Table 1 directly shows the difference be-
tween the two methods.

Figure 3 shows that student leaders influence
other students’ language more than non-leaders
do (p < 0.05), supporting our first hypothesis
Htarget. It can also be seen that the language
of non-leaders coordinates towards that of other
students more than the language of student lead-
ers does (p < 0.05), supporting our second hy-
pothesis Hspeaker. Note that instructors and lead-
ers exhibit almost the same behavior in terms of
language accommodation. These results coincide
with the observation that student leaders and in-
structors play a similar role in discussion forums.
In addition, while both word cluster-based and
LIWC-derived methods support our hypotheses,
the distinction seen is more significant in the result
from our cluster-based method (summarized in Ta-
ble 1). These results indicate that the proposed
method of measuring accommodation can capture
the language influence more accurately than the
previous method.

Based on our proposed measure of language ac-
2https://code.google.com/p/word2vec/

commodation, we were able to see how language
influence is accumulated throughout the lifetime
of the community. Figure 4 shows that the lan-
guage coordination of students towards student
leaders decreases as the course progresses, even-
tually converging to the level of language coordi-
nation from students to non-student leaders. The
same convergence behavior can be observed from
the language coordination of student leaders and
non-leaders towards students as well. This re-
sult indicates that the distinction between students
and non-student leaders becomes less significant
in terms of their language influence. This result
can also be interpreted as a community norm being
formed throughout the course, which was initiated
by student leaders at first. While MOOC courses
have a relatively short lifespan, the results make
intuitive sense because they often include techni-
cal jargon (e.g. the programming related words
for Python MOOC course) which can be quickly
learned by community members.

Table 2 shows the prediction accuracy on the
task of differentiating between a student leader
and a non-leader given a set of conversation ex-
changes between two people (a,b) with different
status. We used the following features as input to
an SVM classifier. Cluster uses the binary fea-

18



∆ Accommodation (%)

Cluster LIWC

(a)
∆Ctarget 4.58 3.35

∆Cspeaker -3.04 -0.01

(b)
∆Ctarget 5.01 -0.38

∆Cspeaker -4.09 -1.62

Table 1: The difference in language accommo-
dation measure between leaders and non-leaders
for each method (cluster-based, LIWC-derived
function words) on (a) Python and (b) Psychol-
ogy MOOC datasets. ∆Ctarget refers to the stu-
dents’ language accommodation towards leaders
subtracted by their language accommodation to-
wards non-leaders. ∆Cspeaker refers to the lead-
ers’ language accommodation towards students
subtracted by non-leaders’ language accommoda-
tion towards students. Higher absolute value of
∆C indicates that the method can distinguish lead-
ers and non-leaders better.

tures that indicates whether a coordinates towards
b more than b towards a on each marker from the
word cluster-based method. LIWC uses the binary
features as well, using the LIWC-derived function
words as markers for accommodation. BOW refers
to a standard bag of words feature set.

We test the performance on both in-domain and
cross-domain cases using the datasets from the
two different courses. While BOW performs sig-
nificantly better than the other two coordination
features-based methods for the in-domain cases,
it does not generalize well for the cross-domain
cases. This is because there are unique sets of
technical vocabulary that are used in each respec-
tive course, which are often strong indicators of
leadership or expertise in the domain. The pro-
posed cluster-based method performs better than
LIWC in both in-domain and cross-domain cases,
showing that the proposed method better captures
the leader’s language influence on other students.

5 Conclusions

The main contributions of this paper are as fol-
lows: we have proposed that identifying student
leaders from MOOC discussion forums is an im-
portant task that can potentially improve the qual-
ity of the courses by promoting a collaborative and
engaging learning environment. We then proposed

Figure 4: Language accommodation difference at
each period throughout the Python course. The
blue line (upper) refers to ∆Ctarget, whereas the
green line (lower) refers to ∆Cspeaker. Higher ab-
solute value of ∆C indicates that the method can
distinguish leaders and non-leaders better.

In-domain Cross-domain

Train: Python Psych Python Psych
Test: Python Psych Psych Python

Cluster 61.17 57.54 60.01 59.03
LIWC 58.34 55.10 58.52 57.92
BOW 73.12 69.23 53.26 54.07

Table 2: Classification accuracy of identifying a
leader from a pair of students with different la-
beled roles. Cluster and LIWC refer to the coor-
dination features using two different methods to
track influence markers. The chance performance
is 50 %.

a new method to measure language accommoda-
tion based on people’s choices of words given a
theme. We have shown that our proposed ap-
proach can better capture the language influence
than previous literature on accommodation us-
ing the two MOOC datasets. We were also able
to show that a community norm can be formed
throughout the course, evidenced from the time-
based analysis of language accommodation.

We plan to improve this research with respect
to the way we measure language accommodation.
Specifically, we would like to propose a new met-
ric for measuring language accommodation by an-
alyzing the propagation of influence, instead of
looking at conversations locally. Suppose, for in-

19



stance, that during an online discussion a person
b coordinates towards a with respect to a specific
linguistic style marker m, and that within a short
period of time, we find evidence that another per-
son c coordinates towards b on the same marker
m. We argue that c should be considered as per-
taining to the influence graph of a, contributing to
the evidence that a is a leader.

Acknowledgments

We would like to acknowledge the contributions
made by Professor Carolyn Rosé for her valuable
and constructive suggestions.

References
Sumit Basu, Chuck Jacobs, and Lucy Vanderwende.

2013. Powergrading: a clustering approach to am-
plify human effort for short answer grading. NIPS
Workshop on Data Driven Education.

Leslie A. Baxter and Dawn O. Braithwaite. 2008.
Communication Accommodation Theory. Engaging
theories in interpersonal communication: Multiple
perspectives.

Freimut Bodendorf and Carolin Kaiser. 2009. De-
tecting opinion leaders and trends in online social
networks. In Proceedings of the 2Nd ACM Work-
shop on Social Web Search and Mining, SWSM ’09,
pages 65–68, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil and Lillian Lee.
2011. Chameleons in imagined conversations: A
new approach to understanding coordination of lin-
guistic style in dialog. In Proceedings of the ACL
Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 76–87.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee,
Bo Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012. Echoes of
power: Language effects and power differences in
social interaction. Proceedings of WWW 2012.

Peter W. Foltz and Mark Rosenstein. 2013. Tracking
student learning in a state-wide implementation of
automated writing scoring. NIPS Workshop on Data
Driven Education.

Amit Goyal, Francesco Bonchi, and Laks V. S. Laksh-
manan. 2008. Discovering leaders from community
actions. CIKM ’08.

Phil Hall. 2008. Policespeak. Dimensions of Forensic
Linguistics.

Yanyan Li, Shaoqian Ma, Yonghe Zhang, Ronghuai
Huang, and Kinshuk. 2013. An improved mix
framework for opinion leader identification in online
learning communities. Knowledge-Based Systems,
43(0):43 – 51.

J MacQueen. 1967. Some methods for classification
and analysis of multivariate observations. Proceed-
ings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium on Mathemat-
ical Statistics and Probability, Volume 1: Statistics.

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013a. Efficient estimation of word represen-
tations in vector space. CoRR, abs/1301.3781.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Cor-
rado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013b. Distributed repre-
sentations of words and phrases and their compo-
sitionality. Proceedings of the Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS).

K. G. Niederhoffer and J. W. Pennebaker. 2002. Lin-
guistic style matching in social interaction. Journal
of Language and Social Psychology, 21.

Aditya Pal and Joseph A. Konstan. 2010. Expert iden-
tification in community question answering: Ex-
ploring question selection bias. In Proceedings of
the 19th ACM International Conference on Informa-
tion and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’10, pages
1505–1508, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

M. Zubair Shafiq, Muhammad U. Ilyas, Alex X. Liu,
and Hayder Radha. 2013. Identifying leaders and
followers in online social networks. Selected Areas
in Communications, IEEE Journal on (JSAC), 31.

Hossam Sharara, Lise Getoor, and Myra Norton. 2011.
Active surveying: A probabilistic approach for iden-
tifying key opinion leaders. In The 22nd Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJ-
CAI ’11).

20


