



















































Building a Corpus for Palestinian Arabic: a Preliminary Study


Proceedings of the EMNLP 2014 Workshop on Arabic Natural Langauge Processing (ANLP), pages 18–27,
October 25, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Building a Corpus for Palestinian Arabic:  
a Preliminary Study 

Mustafa Jarrar, *Nizar Habash, Diyam Akra, Nasser Zalmout 
 

Birzeit University, West Bank, Palestine 
 {mjarrar,nzalmout}@birzeit.edu, diyam@student.birzeit.edu 

 
*New York University Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates 

  nizar.habash@nyu.edu 
 

 

Abstract 

This paper presents preliminary results in 
building an annotated corpus of the 
Palestinian Arabic dialect. The corpus 
consists of about 43K words, stemming 
from diverse resources. The paper 
discusses some linguistic facts about the 
Palestinian dialect, compared with the 
Modern Standard Arabic, especially in 
terms of morphological, orthographic, 
and lexical variations, and suggests some 
directions to resolve the challenges these 
differences pose to the annotation goal. 
Furthermore, we present two pilot 
studies that investigate whether existing 
tools for processing Modern Standard 
Arabic and Egyptian Arabic can be used 
to speed up the annotation process of our 
Palestinian Arabic corpus.  

1. Introduction and Motivation  
This paper presents preliminary results towards 
building a high-coverage well-annotated corpus 
of the Palestinian Arabic dialect (henceforth 
PAL), which is part of an ongoing project called 
Curras. Building such a PAL corpus is a first 
important step towards developing natural 
language processing (NLP) applications, for 
searching, retrieving, machine-translating, spell-
checking PAL text, etc. The importance of 
processing and understanding such text is 
increasing due to the exponential growth of 
socially generated dialectal content at recent 
Social Media and Web 2.0 breakthroughs. 
 
Most Arabic NLP tools and resources were 
developed to serve Modern Standard Arabic 
(MSA), which is the official written language in 

the Arab World. Using such tools to understand 
and process Arabic dialects (DAs) is a 
challenging task because of the phonological and 
morphological differences between DAs and 
MSA. In addition, there is no standard 
orthography for DAs. Moreover, DAs have 
limited standardized written resources, since 
most of the written dialectal content is the result 
of ad hoc and unstructured social conversations 
or commentary, in comparison to MSA’s vast 
body of literary works. 
 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: 
We present important linguistic background in 
Section 2, followed by a survey of related work 
in Section 3. We then present the process of 
collecting the Curras Corpus (Section 4) and the 
challenges of annotating it (Section 5). 

2. Linguistic Background 
In this section we summarize some important 
linguistic facts about PAL that influence the 
decisions we made in this project. For more 
information on PAL and Levantine Arabic in 
general, see (Rice and Sa’id, 1960; Cowell, 
1964; Bateson, 1967; Brustad, 2000; Halloun, 
2000; Holes, 2004; Elihai, 2004). For a 
discussion of differences between Levantine and 
Egyptian Arabic (EGY), see Omar (1976). 

2.1 Arabic and its dialects 
The Arabic language is a collection of variants 
among which a standard variety (MSA) has a 
special status, while the rest are considered 
colloquial dialects (Bateson, 1967, Holes, 2004; 
Habash, 2010). MSA is the official written 
language of government, media and education in 
the Arab World, but it is not anyone’s native 
language; the spoken dialects vary widely across 
the Arab World and are the true native varieties 

18



of Arabic, yet they have no standard orthography 
and are not taught in schools (Habash et al., 
2012, Zribi et al., 2014). 
  
PAL is the dialect spoken by Arabic speakers 
who live in or originate from the area of 
Historical Palestine. PAL is part of the South 
Levantine Arabic dialect subgroup (of which 
Jordanian Arabic is another dialect). PAL is 
historically the result of interaction between 
Syriac and Arabic and has been influenced by 
many other regional language such as Turkish, 
Persian, English and most recently Hebrew. The 
Palestinian refugee problem has led to additional 
mixing among different PAL sub-dialects as well 
as borrowing from other Arabic dialects. We 
discuss next some of the important 
distinguishing features of PAL in comparison to 
MSA as well as other Arabic dialects. We 
consider the following dimensions: phonology, 
morphology, and lexicon. Like other Arabic 
dialects, PAL has no standard orthography.  

2.2 Phonology 
PAL consists of several sub-dialects that 
generally vary in terms of phonology and 
lexicon preferences. Commonly identified sub-
dialects include urban (which itself varies mostly 
phonologically among the major cities such as 
Jerusalem, Jaffa, Gaza, Nazareth, Nablus and 
Hebron), rural, and Bedouin. The Druze 
community has also some distinctive 
phonological features that set it apart. The 
variations are a miniature version of the 
variations in Levantine Arabic in general. 
Perhaps the most salient variation is the 
pronunciation of the /q/ phoneme (corresponding 
to MSA قق q1), which realizes as /’/ in most urban 
dialects, /k/ in rural dialects, and /g/ in Bedouin 
                                                
1Arabic orthographic transliterations are provided in the 
Habash-Soudi-Buckwalter (HSB) scheme (Habash et al., 
2007), except where indicated. HSB extends Buckwalter’s 
transliteration scheme (Buckwalter, 2004) to increase its 
readability while maintaining the 1-to-1 correspondence 
with Arabic orthography as represented in standard 
encodings of Arabic, i.e., Unicode, etc. The following are 
the only differences from Buckwalter’s scheme (indicated 
in parentheses): Ā آآ (|), Â أأ (>), ŵ ؤؤ (&), Ǎ إإ (<), ŷ ئئ (}), ħ  ةة 
(p), θ ثث (v), ð  ذذ (*), š شش ($), Ď ظظ (Z), ς  عع (E), γ  غغ (g), ý ىى 
(Y), ã  ً ٌ  F), ũ) ـ  K).  Orthographic transliterations are) ـٍ  N), ĩ) ـ
presented in italics. For phonological transcriptions, we 
follow the common practice of using ‘/.../’ to represent 
phonological sequences and we use HSB choices with some 
extensions instead of the International Phonetic Alphabet 
(IPA) to minimize the number of representations used, as 
was done by Habash (2010). 
 

dialects. The Druze dialect retains the /q/ 
pronunciation. Another example is the /k/ 
phoneme (corresponding to MSA كك k), which 
realizes as /tš/ in rural dialects. These difference 
cause the word for قلب   qlb ‘heart’ to be 
pronounced as /qalb/, /’alb/, /kalb/ and /galb/ and 
to be ambiguous out of context with the word  كلب
klb ‘dog’ /kalb/ and /tšalb/. And similarly to 
EGY (but unlike Tunisian Arabic), the MSA 
phoneme /θ/ (ثث θ) becomes /s/ or /t/, and the 
MSA phoneme /ð/ (ذذ ð) becomes /z/ or /d/ in 
different lexical contexts, e.g., MSA كذبب kðb 
/kaðib/ ‘lying’ is pronounced /kizib/ in PAL and 
/kidb/ in EGY.  
  
Similar to many other dialects, e.g. EGY and 
Tunisian (Habash et al., 2012; Zribi et al., 2014), 
the glottal stop phoneme that appears in many 
MSA words has disappeared in PAL: compare 
MSA ررأأسس rÂs /ra’s/ ‘head’ and بئر bŷr /bi’r/ 
‘well’ with their Palestinian urban versions: /rās/ 
and /bīr/. Also, the MSA diphthongs /ay/ and 
/aw/ generally become /ē/ and /ō/; this 
transformation happens in EGY but not in other 
Levantine dialects such as Lebanese, e.g., MSA 
 ./byt /bayt/ ‘house’ becomes PAL /bēt بيیت
  
PAL also elides many short vowels that appear 
in the MSA cognates leading to heavier syllabic 
structure, e.g. MSA جبالل /jibāl/ ‘mountains’ (and 
EGY /gibāl/) becomes PAL /jbāl/. Additionally 
long vowels in unstressed positions in some PAL 
sub-dialects shorten, a phenomenon shared with 
EGY but not MSA: e.g., compare /zāru/ (ززاارروواا 
zAr+uwA) ‘they visited’ with /zarū/ (ززااررووهه 
zAr+uw+h) ‘they visited him’.  Finally, PAL has 
commonly inserted epenthetic vowels 
(Herzallah, 1990), which are optional in some 
cases leading to multiple pronunciations of the 
same word, e.g., /kalb/ and /kalib/ (كلب klb 
‘dog’). This multiplicity is not shared with MSA, 
which has a simpler syllabic structure and more 
limited epenthesis than PAL. 

2.3 Morphology  
PAL, like MSA and its dialects and other 
Semitic languages, makes extensive use of 
templatic morphology in addition to a large set 
of affixations and clitics. There are however 
some important differences between MSA and 
PAL in terms of morphology. First, like many 
other dialects, PAL lost nominal case and verbal 
mood, which remain in MSA. Additionally, PAL 
in most of its sub-dialects collapses the feminine 
and masculine plurals and duals in verbs and 

19



most nouns. Some specific inflections are 
ambiguous in PAL but not MSA, e.g., حبيیت    Hbyt 
/Habbēt/ ‘I (or you [m.s.]) loved’.  
 
Second, some specific morphemes are slightly or 
quite different in PAL from their MSA forms, 
e.g., the future marker is /sa/ in MSA but /Ha/ or 
/raH/ in PAL. Another prominent example is the 
feminine singular suffix morpheme (Ta 
Marbuta), which in MSA is pronounced as /at/ 
except at utterance final positions (where it is 
/a/). In some PAL urban sub dialects, it has 
multiple allomorphs that are phonologically and 
syntactically conditioned: /a/ (after non-front and 
emphatic consonants), /e/ (after front non-
emphatic consonants), /it/ (nouns in construct 
state such as before possessive pronouns) and /ā/ 
(in deverbals before direct objects): e.g. بطة    bTħ 
/baTT+a/ ‘duck’, بةح  Hbħ /Habb+e/ ‘pill’, ابطتن  
bTnA /baTT+it+na/ ‘our duck’ and /mdars+ā 
+hum/ ‘she taught them’.  
 
Third, PAL has many clitics that do not exist in 
MSA, e.g., the progressive particle /b+/ (as in 
/b+tuktub/ ‘she writes’), the demonstrative 
particle /ha+/ (as in /ha+l+bēt/ ‘this house’), the 
negation cirmcumclitic /ma+ +š/ (as in 
/ma+katab+š/ ‘he did not write’) and the indirect 
object clitic (as in /ma+katab+l+ō+š/ ‘he did not 
write to him’). All of these examples except for 
the demonstrative particle are used in EGY. 

2.4 Lexicon 
The PAL lexicon is primarily Arabic with 
numerous borrowings from many different 
languages. MSA cognates generally appear with 
some minor phonological changes as discussed 
above; a few cases include more complex 
changes, e.g. /biddi/ ‘I want’ is from MSA 
/bi+widd+i/ ‘in my desire’ or /illi/ ‘relative 
pronoun which/who/that’ which corresponds to a 
set of MSA forms that inflect for gender and 
number (االذيي Alðy, االتي Alty, etc.). Some common 
PAL words are portmanteaus of MSA words, 
e.g., /lēš / ‘why?’ corresponds to MSA /li+’ayy+i 
šay’/ ‘for what thing?’. Examples of common 
words that are borrowed from other languages 
include the following:  

 (roznama/ ‘calendar’ (Persian/ ررووززنامهھ •
 (kundara/ ‘shoe’ (Turkish/ كندررةة •
 (banadora/ ‘tomato’ (Italian/ بندووررةة •
 (brēk/ ‘brake (car)’ (English/ بريیك •
 (talifizyon/ ‘television’ (French/ تليیفيیزيیونن •
 (maHsūm/ ‘checkpoint’ (Hebrew/ محسومم •

3. Related Work 
3.1 Corpus Collection and Annotation 
There have been many contributions aiming to 
develop annotated Arabic language corpora, with 
the main objective of facilitating Arabic NLP 
applications. Notable contributions targeting 
MSA include the work of Maamouri and Cieri, 
(2002), Maamouri et al. (2004), Smrž and Hajič 
(2006), and Habash and Roth (2009).  These 
efforts developed annotation guidelines for 
written MSA content producing large-scale 
Arabic Treebanks.   

 
Contributions that are specific to DA include the 
development of a pilot Levantine Arabic 
Treebank (LATB) of Jordanian Arabic, which 
contained morphological and syntactic 
annotations of about 26,000 words (Maamouri et 
al., 2006). To speed up the process of creating 
the LATB, Maamouri et al. (2006) adapted MSA 
Treebank guidelines to DA and experimented 
with extensions to the Buckwalter Arabic 
Morphological Analyzers (Buckwalter, 2004). 
The LATB was used in the Johns Hopkins 
workshop on Parsing Arabic Dialect (Rambow et 
al., 2005; Chiang et al., 2006), which 
supplemented the LATB effort with an 
experimental Levantine-MSA dictionary. The 
LATB effort differs from the work presented 
here in two respects. First, the LATB corpus 
consists of conversational telephone speech 
transcripts, which eliminated the orthographic 
variations issues that we face in this paper. 
Secondly, when the LATB was created, there 
were no robust tools for morphological analysis 
of any dialects; this is not the case any more. We 
plan to exploit existing tools for EGY to help the 
annotation effort.   

 
Other DA contributions include the Egyptian 
Colloquial Arabic Lexicon (ECAL) (Kilany, et 
al., 2002), which was developed as part of the  
CALLHOME Egyptian Arabic (CHE) corpus 
(Gadalla, et al., 1997). In addition to YADAC 
(Al-Sabbagh and Girju, 2012), which was based 
on dialectal content identification and web 
harvesting of blogs, micro blogs, and forums of 
EGY content. Similarly, the COLABA project 
(Diab et al., 2010) developed annotated dialectal 
content resources for Egyptian, Iraqi, Levantine, 
and Moroccan dialects, from online weblogs. 

20



3.2 Dialectal Orthography 
Due to the lack of standardized orthography 
guidelines for DA, along with the phonological 
differences in comparison to MSA, and dialectal 
variations within the dialects themselves, there 
are many orthographic variations for written DA 
content. Writers in DA, regardless of the context, 
are often inconsistent with others and even with 
themselves when it comes to the written form of 
a dialect; writing with MSA driven orthography, 
or writing words phonologically sometimes. 
These orthography variations make it difficult 
for computational models to properly identify 
and reason about the words of a given dialect 
(Habash et al, 2012a), hence, a conventional 
form for the orthographic notations is important.  
Within this scope, we can view this problem for 
Levantine dialects as an extension of the work of 
Habash et al. (2012a) who proposed the so-
called CODA (Conventional Orthography for 
Dialectal Arabic). CODA is designed for the 
purpose of developing conventional 
computational models of Arabic dialects in 
general. Habash et al. (2012a) provides a 
detailed description of CODA guidelines as 
applied to EGY.  Eskander et al. (2013) identify 
five goals for CODA: (i) CODA is an internally 
consistent and coherent convention for writing 
DA; (ii) CODA is created for computational 
purposes; (iii) CODA uses the Arabic script; (iv) 
CODA is intended as a unified framework for 
writing all DAs; and (v) CODA aims to strike an 
optimal balance between maintaining a level of 
dialectal uniqueness and establishing 
conventions based on MSA-DA similarities.  
CODA guidelines will be extended to cover PAL 
in this paper, as discussed in Section 5.3. 

3.3 Dialectal Morphological Annotation 
Most of the work that explored morphology in 
Arabic focused on MSA (Al-Sughaiyer and Al-
Kharashi, 2004; Buckwalter, 2004; Habash and 
Rambow, 2005; Graff et al., 2009; Habash, 
2010). The contributions for DA morphology 
analysis, however, are relatively scarce and are 
usually based on either extending available MSA 
tools to tackle DA specificities, as in the work of 
(Abo Bakr et al., 2008; Salloum and Habash, 
2011), or modeling DAs directly, without relying 
on existing MSA contributions (Habash and 
Rambow, 2006). Due to the variations between 
MSA and DAs, available MSA tools and 
resources cannot be easily extended or 
transferred to work properly for DA (Maamouri, 

et al., 2006; Habash, et al., 2012b). Therefore, it 
is important to develop annotated and 
morpheme-segmented resources, along with 
morphological analysis tools, that are specific 
and tailored for DAs.  One of the notable recent 
contributions for EGY morphological analysis 
was CALIMA (Habash et al., 2012b). The 
CALIMA analyzer for EGY and the commonly 
used SAMA analyzer for MSA (Graff et al., 
2009) are central in the functioning of the EGY 
morphological tagger MADA-ARZ (Habash et 
al., 2013), and its successor MADAMIRA 
(Pasha et al., 2014), which supports both MSA 
and EGY.  
 
The work we present in this paper builds on the 
shoulders of these previous efforts from the 
development of guidelines for orthography and 
morphology (in MSA and EGY) to the use of 
existing tools (specifically MADAMIRA MSA 
and EGY) to speed up the annotation process.  

4. Corpus Collection  
Written dialects in general tend to have scarce 
resources in terms of written literature; written 
materials usually involve informal conversations 
or traditional folk literature (stories, songs, etc.). 
It is therefore often difficult to find resources for 
written dialectal content. In addition, resources 
of dialectal content are prone to significant noise 
and inconsistency because they tend to lack 
standard orthographies and rely on ad hoc 
transcriptions and orthographic borrowing from 
the standard variety.  In the case of Arabic, 
unlike MSA that dominates the formal and 
written content outlets, as in the press, scientific 
articles, books, and historical narration, DAs are 
more naturally used in traditional and informal 
contexts, such as conversations in TV series, 
movies, or on social media platforms, providing 
socially powered commentary on different 
domains and topics.  And given the lack of 
standard orthography, there is common mixing 
of phonetic spelling and MSA-cognate-based 
spelling in addition to the so-called Arabizi 
spelling – writing DAs in Roman script, rather 
than Arabic script (Darwish, 2014 and Al-
Badrashiny et al., 2014). Such noise imposes 
many challenges regarding the collection of 
high-coverage high-accuracy DA corpora.  It is 
therefore important to remark that although 
bigger is better when it comes to corpus size, we 
focus more in this first iteration of our PAL 
corpus on precision and variety rather than mere 

21



size. That is, we tried not only to manually select 
and review the content of the corpus, but also to 
assure that we covered a variety of topics and 
contexts, localities and sub-dialects, including 
the social class and gender of the speakers and 
writers. This is because such aspects help us 
discover new language phenomena in the dialect 
as will be discussed in the next section.  
 
Table 1 presents the resources that we manually 
collected to build the PAL Curras corpus. There 
are 133 social media threads (about 16k words) 
from blogs (e.g., مدوونة عبد االحميید االعاططي 
Abdelhameed Alaaty’s blog), forums (e.g.,  شبكة
 ,(The Palestinian dialogue network االحواارر االفلسطيیني 
Twitter, and Facebook. The collection was done 
by reading many discussion threads and 
selecting the relevant ones to assure diversity 
and PAL representative content. Content that is 
heavily written in a mix of languages, or a mix 
of other dialects was excluded. In the same way, 
we also manually collected some PAL stories, 
and a list of PAL terms and their meanings, 
which reflect additional diversity of topics, 
contexts, and social classes. About half of our 
corpus comes from 41 episode scripts from the 
Palestinian TV show ووططن عع ووتر “Watan Aa 
Watar”. Each episode discusses and provides 
satirical critiques regarding different topics of 
relevance to the Palestinian viewers about daily 
life issues. The show’s importance stems from 
the fact that the actors use a variety of 
Palestinian local dialects, hence enriching the 
coverage of the corpus.  
 

Table 1. The Curras Corpus Statistics  
Document Type Word 

Tokens 
Word 
Types 

Documents 

Facebook 3,120  1,985 35 threads 
Twitter 3,541 2,133 38 threads 
Blogs  8,748  4,454 37 threads 
Forums 1,092  798 33 threads 
Palestinian Stories 2,407  1,422 6 stories 
Palestinian Terms 759 556 1 doc 
TV Show: ووططن عع ووتر 
Watan Aa Watar  

23,423 8,459 41 episodes 

Curras Total 43,090  19,807 191 

5. Corpus Annotation Challenges  
This section presents our approach to 

annotating the Curras corpus. We start with a 
specification of our annotation goals, followed 
by a discussion of our general approach. We 
then discuss in more details two important 
challenges that need to be addressed for 

annotation of a new dialectal corpus: 
orthography and morphology. 

5.1 Annotation Specification 
The words are annotated in context. As such, the 
same word may receive different annotations in 
different contexts.  We define the annotation of a 
word as a tuple <w, wB, c, cB, l, pB, g, i> 
described as follow. (Examples of such 
annotations are illustrated in Table 5.): 
 
• w: Raw (Unicode) The raw input word 

defined as a string of letters delimited by 
white space and punctuation. The word is 
represented in Arabic script (Unicode). 

• wB: Raw (Buckwalter) The same raw input 
word in the commonly used Buckwalter 
transliteration (Buckwalter, 2004). 

• c: CODA (Unicode) The Conventional 
Orthography (Habash et al., 2012) version of 
the input word. 

• cB: CODA (Buckwalter) The Buckwalter 
transliteration of the CODA form. 

• l: Lemma The lemma of the word in 
Buckwalter transliteration. The lemma is the 
citation form or dictionary entry that 
abstracts over all inflectional morphology 
(but not derivational morphology). The 
lemma is fully diacritized. We follow the 
definition of lemma used in BAMA 
(Buckwalter, 2004) and CALIMA-ARZ 
(Habash et al., 2012b). 

• pB: Buckwalter POS The Buckwalter full 
POS tag, which identifies all clitics and 
affixes and the stem and assigns each a sub-
tag.  This representation treats clitics as 
separate tokens and abstracts the 
orthographic rewrites they undergo when 
cliticized. See the handling of the 
l/PREP+Al/DET in word #6 in Table 5.  
This representation is used by the LDC in 
the Penn Arabic Treebank (PATB) 
(Maamouri  et al., 2004) and tools such as 
MADAMIRA (Pasha et al., 2014).  It is a 
high granularity representation that allows 
researchers to easily go to coarser 
granularity POS (Diab 2007; Habash, 2010; 
Alkuhlani et al., 2013). The Buckwalter POS 
tag can be fully diacritized or undiacritized. 
Given the added complexity of producing 
diacritized text manually by annotators, we 
opted at this stage to only use undiacritized 
forms. 

22



• g: Gloss The English gloss, an informal 
semantic denotation of the lemma.  In Tables 
3-5, we only use one English word for space 
limitations.   

• i: Analysis A specification of the source of 
the annotation, e.g., ANNO is a human 
annotator, and MADA is the MADAMIRA 
system with some minor  or no automatic 
post-processing. In Tables 3 and 4, which 
are produced automatically, the Analysis 
field is replaced with a status indicating how 
usable the automatic annotation is. 

5.2 General Approach 
To speed up the process of annotating our 

corpus, we made the following decisions. First, 
and quite obviously from the previous section, 
we made a conscious decision to follow on the 
footsteps of previous efforts for MSA and EGY 
annotation done at the Linguistic Data 
Consortium and Columbia’s Arabic Modeling 
group in terms of guidelines for orthography 
conventionalization and morphological 
annotation. This allows us to exploit existing 
guidelines with only essential modification to 
accommodate PAL and produce annotations that 
are comparable to those done for MSA and 
EGY.  This, we hope, will encourage research in 
dialectal adaptation techniques and will make 
our annotations more familiar and thus usable by 
the community.  

Second, and closely related to the first point, 
we exploit existing tools to speed up the 
annotation process. In this paper, we specifically 
use the MADAMIRA tool (Pasha et al., 2014) 
for morphological analysis and disambiguation 
of MSA and EGY. Our choice of using this tool 
is motivated by the assumption that EGY/MSA 
and PAL share many orthographic and 
morphological features. This assumption was 
validated by pilot experiments, presented below, 
and which show most of the PAL annotations 
can be generated automatically. However, a 
manual step is then needed to verify every 
annotation, to correct errors and fill in gaps.  The 
manual annotation has not been completed yet as 
of the writing of this paper submission.  

 
Finally, we made one major simplification to 

the annotations to minimize the load on the 
human annotator: we do not produce diacritized 
morphological analyses in the Buckwalter POS 
tag. The reasons for this decision are the 
following: (i) full diacritization is a complex task 

that most Arabic speakers do not do and thus it 
requires a lot of training and precious attention 
to detail; (ii) MSA and EGY produce many 
morphemes and lexical items that are quite 
similar to PAL except in terms of the short 
vowels (compare the lemmas for word #5 in 
Tables 3, 4 and 5); (iii) PAL has many cases of 
multiple valid diacritizations as mentioned 
above. While we think a convention should be 
defined to explain the variation and model it, it is 
perhaps the topic of a future effort that is more 
focused on PAL phonology. We make an 
exception for the lemmas and diacritize them 
since lemmas are important in indicating the 
core meaning of the word. In case of different 
pronunciations of the lemma, we choose the 
shortest. 

5.3 A Conventional Orthography for PAL 
As explained in Section 2, PAL, like other 
Arabic dialects, does not have a standard 
orthography. Furthermore, there are numerous 
phonological, morphological and lexical 
differences between PAL and MSA that make 
the use of MSA spelling as is undesirable.  PAL 
speakers who write in the dialect produce  
spontaneous inconsistent spellings that 
sometimes reflect the phonology of PAL, and 
other times the word’s cognate relationship with 
MSA. For example, the word for ‘heart’ (MSA 
 qalb) has four spellings that correspond to قلبب
four sub-dialectal pronunciations: قلبب qlb /qalb/, 
 ./jlb /galb جلبب klb /kalb/, and كلبب ,/Âlb /’alb أألبب
Similarly, the common shortening of some long 
vowels (from MSA to PAL) leads to different 
orthographies as in قانوونن qAnwn ‘law’ (MSA 
/qānūn/), which can also be written with a 
shortened first vowel قنوونن qnwn /’anūn/ 
reflecting the PAL pronunciation.  PAL also has 
some clitics that do not exist in MSA, which 
leads to different spellings, e.g. the PAL future 
particle حح H /Ha/ can be written attached to or 
separate from the verb that follows it.  Even 
when a morpheme exists in MSA and PAL, it 
may have additional forms or pronunciations. 
One example is the definite article morpheme االل 
Al /il/ which has a non-MSA/non-EGY 
allomorph /li/ when attached to nominals with 
initial consonant clusters.  As a result, a word 
like /li+blād/ ‘the homeland/countries’ can be 
spelled to reflect the morphology as   AlblAd  االبالدد
or the phonology  lblAd, with the latter being  لبالدد
ambiguous with ‘for countries’ (in PAL 
/la+blād/).  Finally, there are words in PAL that 
have no cognate in MSA and as such have no 

23



clear obvious spelling to go with, e.g., the word 
/barDo/ ‘additionally’ is spontaneously written 
as بررضوو brDw, بررضهھ brDh and بررضة brDħ. 
 
This, of course, is not a unique PAL problem.  
Researchers working on NLP for EGY and 
Tunisian dialects developed CODA guidelines 
for them (Habash et al., 2012a; Zribi et al., 
2014). These guidelines were by design intended 
to apply (or be easily extended) to all Arabic 
dialects, but were only demonstrated for two.  
Our challenge was to take these guidelines 
(specifically the EGY version) and extend them. 
There were three types of extensions. First, in 
terms of phonology-orthography, we added the 
letter كك k to the list of root letters to be spelled in 
the MSA cognate to cover the PAL rural sub-
dialects that pronounces it as /tš/.  Second, in 
terms of morphology, we added the non-EGY 
demonstrative proclitic هه h+ and the conjunction 
proclitic تت t+ ‘so as to’ to the list of clitics, e.g., 
 tyšwf ‘so تيیشووفف bhAlbyt ‘in this house’ and بهھالبيیتت
that he can see’.  Finally, we extended the list of 
exceptional words to cover problematic PAL 
words.  All of the basic CODA rules for EGY 
(and Tunisian) are kept the same.  
 
Pilot Study (I): We conducted a small pilot 
study in annotating the CODA for PAL words. 
We considered 1,000 words from 77 tweets in 
Curras. The CODA version of each word was 
created in context.  15.9% of all words had a 
different CODA form from the input raw word 
form.  42% of these changes involve consonants 
(two-fifths of the cases), vowels (one-fifth of the 
cases) and the hamzated/bare forms of the letter 
Alif اا A. Examples of consonant change can be 
seen in Table 5 (words #4 and #10).  An 
additional 29% word changes involve the 
spelling of specific morpheme. The most 
common change (over half of the time) was for 
the first person imperfect verbal prefix  اا A when 
following the progressive particle بب b: بكتبب bktb 
as opposed to تبباكب  bAktb.  About 18% of the 
changed words experience a split or a merge 
(with splits happening five time more than 
merges). An example of a CODA split is seen in 
Table 5 (word #9).  Finally, only about 8% of the 
changed words were PAL specific terms; and 
less than 7% involved a typo or speech effect 
elongation. These results are quite encouraging 
as they suggest the differences between CODA 
and spontaneously written PAL are not 
extensive. Further analysis is still needed of 
course. 

In Tables 3 and 4 (column CODA), we show the 
results of using the MADAMIRA-MSA and 
MADAMIRA-EGY systems on a set of ten 
words, while Table 5 shows the manually 
selected or corrected CODA.  MADAMIRA 
generates a CODA version (contextually) by 
default. We expect the EGY version to be more 
successful than the MSA version in producing 
the CODA for PAL given the shared presence of 
many morphemes in EGY and PAL. However, 
when we ran the same set of words through 
MADAMIRA-EGY, we encountered many 
errors in words, morphemes and spelling choices 
in PAL that are different from EGY, e.g., the 
raw word منحبب mnHb ‘we love’ (CODA بنحبب  
bnHb) is analyzed as the EGY ما نحبب  mA nHb 
‘we do not love’! 

5.4 Morphological Annotation Process and 
Challenges  

To study the value of using an existing 
morphological analyzer for MSA or EGY in 
creating PAL annotations, we conducted the 
following pilot study.   
 
Pilot Study (II): We ran the words from a 
randomly selected episode of the PAL TV show 
“Watan Aa Watar” (460 words) through both 
MADAMIRA-MSA and MADAMIRA-EGY. 
We analyzed the output from both systems to 
determine its usability for PAL annotations.  We 
consider all analyses that are correct for PAL 
annotation or usable via simple post processing 
(such as removing CASE endings on MSA 
words) to be correct (as in word #2 in Tables 3-
5). Words that receive incorrect analyses or no 
analyses require manual modifications. 
 
The results of this experiment are summarized in 
Table 2. Table 3 and 4 illustrate sample results 
for ten words and Table 5 includes the manually 
created results.2  
  
Table 2. Accuracy of automatic annotation of PAL text  

Statistics MADAMIRA MSA MADAMIRA EGY 
No Analysis 17.78% 7.24% 

Wrongly Analyzed 18.43% 14.75% 
Correctly Analyzed 63.79% 78.01% 
 
The No Analysis (NA) words in Tables 2, 3 and 
4 refer to the words that the morphological 
analyzer couldn't recognize. This failure may be 

                                                
2 The examples in Tables 3-5 are presented in the 
Buckwalter transliteration (Buckwalter, 2004) to match the 
forms as they appear in the annotated corpus. 

24



a result of missing lexical entry, specific PAL 
morphology or typos. As expected, 
MADAMIRA-MSA had 2.5 times the number of 
NA cases compared to MADAMIRA-EGY.  
Examples include dialectal lexical terms (word 
#7) or dialectal morphology (words # 1 and #9).  
 
The wrongly analyzed words are words that 
were assigned incorrect POS tag in context. For 
example, word #3 in Tables 3 and 4 is the result 
of mis-analyzing the proclitic l- as the 
preposition ‘for/to’ as opposed to the non-CODA 
spelling of the definite article in PAL.  The 

analysis provided by MADAMIRA-EGY is 
correct for other contexts than the one illustrated 
here. Another example is word #8, which is a 
Levantine specific term hardly used in EGY and 
not used at all in MSA. MADAMIRA-MSA has 
a higher proportion of wrongly analyzed words 
than MADAMIRA-EGY. 
 
Overall MADAMIRA-EGY produced analyses 
that were either correct and ready to use for PAL 
or requiring some minor modifications such as 
adjusting the vowels on the lemmas (e.g., word 
#5) in one of every five words.  

 

Table 3 Automatic annotations by the MADAMIRA-MSA system. Entries with Status NA had no analysis. 

 Raw CODA Lemma Buckwalter POS (Diacritized) Gloss Status 
1  AbwkwA      AN اابوكواا 
2  Al>kl >akol Al/DET+>akol/NOUN+a/CASE_DEF_ACC eating Usable ااألكل AlAkl ااالكل 
3  lbnwk banok li/PREP+bunuwk/NOUN+K/CASE_INDEF_GEN bank Wrong لبنوكك lbnwk لبنوكك 
4  nyAlt ta>an~iy Al/DET+ta>an~iy/NOUN prudence Wrong< االتأني AltAny االتاني 
5  AlHmAr HimAr Al/DET+HimAr/NOUN+u/CASE_DEF_NOM donkey Usable االحمارر AlHmAr االحمارر 
6  llrAtb rAtib li/PREP+Al/DET+rAtib/NOUN+i/CASE_DEF_GEN salary Usable للرااتب llrAtb للرااتب 
7  Aywp      AN اايیوةة 
8  bdhA bud~ bud~/NOUN+i/CASE_DEF_GEN+hA/POSS_PRON_3FS escape Wrong بدهھھھا bdhA بدهھھھا 
9  bnrdlk      AN بنرددلك 

10  hdwl      AN هھھھدوولل 

Table 4 Automatic annotations by the MADAMIRA-EGY system. Entries with Status NA had no analysis. 

 Raw CODA Lemma Buckwalter POS (Diacritized) Gloss Status 
 Abwkw Abuw Abuw/NOUN+kuw/POSS_PRON_3MS father Correct اابوكو AbwkwA اابوكواا 1
 Al>kl >akl Al/DET+>akol/NOUN eating Correct ااألكل AlAkl ااالكل 2
 lbnwk bank PREP+bunuwk/NOUNli/ bank Wrong لبنوكك lbnwk لبنوكك 3
 AltAny tAniy Al/DET+tAniy/ADJ_NUM second Usable االتاني AltAny االتاني 4
 AlHmAr HumAr Al/DET+HumAr/NOUN donkey Usable االحمارر AlHmAr االحمارر 5
 llrAtb rAtib li/PREP+Al/DET+rAtib/NOUN salary Correct للرااتب llrAtb للرااتب 6
 ywh >ayowah >ayowah/INTERJ yes Correct< أأيیوهه Aywp اايیوةة 7
 bdhA bud~ bud~/NOUN+hA/POSS_PRON_3FS escape Wrong بدهھھھا bdhA بدهھھھا 8
 bnrd_lk rad~ bi/PROG_PART+nu/IV1P+rud~/IV+li/PREP+ak/PRON_2MS answer Usable بنردد_لك bnrdlk بنرددلك 9

 hdwl      NA هھھھدوولل 10
 

Table 5 Manual Annotations in Curras.  Entries with Analysis MADA were automatically converted and validated by 
the annotator. Entries with Analysis ANNO required some modification of the MADAMIRA output or were created 
from scratch. 

 Raw CODA Lemma Buckwalter POS (Undiacritized) Gloss Analysis 
 Abwkw Abuw Abw/NOUN+kw/POSS_PRON_3MS father MADA اابوكو AbwkwA اابوكواا 1
 Al>kl >akl Al/DET+>kl/NOUN eating MADA ااألكل AlAkl ااالكل 2
 lbnwkA bank +bnwk/NOUNDETl/A bank ANNO االبنوكك lbnwk لبنوكك 3
 AlvAny vAniy Al/DET+vAny/ADJ_NUM second ANNO االثاني AltAny االتاني 4
 AlHmAr HmAr Al/DET+HmAr/NOUN donkey MADA االحمارر AlHmAr االحمارر 5
 llrAtb rAtib l/PREP+Al/DET+rAtb/NOUN salary MADA للرااتب llrAtb للرااتب 6
 ywh >ayowah >ywh/INTERJ yes MADA< أأيیوهه Aywp اايیوةة 7
 bdhA bid~ bd/NOUN+hA/POSS_PRON_3FS want ANNO بدهھھھا bdhA بدهھھھا 8
 bnrd_lk rad~ b/PROG_PART+n/IV1P+rd/IV+l/PREP+k/PRON_2MS answer MADA بنردد_لك bnrdlk بنرددلك 9

 h*wl ha*A h*wl/DEM_PRON these ANNO هھھھذوولل hdwl هھھھدوولل 10
 

25



5 Conclusion and Future Work 
We presented our preliminary results towards 
building an annotated corpus of the Palestinian 
Arabic dialect. The challenges and linguistic 
variations of the Palestinian dialect, compared 
with Modern Standard Arabic, were discussed 
especially in terms of morphology, orthography, 
and lexicon. We also discussed and showed the 
potential, and limitations, of using existing 
resources, especially MADAMIRA-EGY, to 
semi-automate and speed up the annotation 
process. 
 
The paper has also pointed out several issues that 
need to be considered and researched further, 
especially the development of Palestinian-
specific morphological annotation and CODA 
guidelines, a Palestinian lexicon, and the 
extension of MADAMIRA to analyze 
Palestinian text. Our corpus will be further 
extended to include more text, and all lexical 
annotations (i.e., Lemmas) will be linked with 
existing Arabic ontology resources such as the 
Arabic WordNet (Black et al., 2006). The corpus 
will be publicly available for research purposes. 

Acknowledgement 
This work is part of the ongoing project Curras, 
funded by the Palestinian Ministry of Higher 
Education, Scientific Research Council. Nizar 
Habash performed most of his work on this 
paper while he was in the Center for 
Computational Learning Systems at Columbia 
University. 

References 
H. Abo Bakr, K. Shaalan, and I. Ziedan. A Hybrid 

Approach for Converting Written Egyptian 
Colloquial Dialect into Diacritized Arabic. In The 
6th International Conference on Informatics and 
Systems, INFOS2008. Cairo University, 2008. 

M. Al-Badrashiny, R. Eskander, N. Habash, and 
O. Rambow. Automatic Transliteration of 
Romanized Dialectal Arabic. CoNLL, 2014. 

S. Alkuhlani, N. Habash and R. M. Roth. Automatic 
Morphological Enrichment of a Morphologically 
Underspecified Treebank. In Proc. of Conference 
of the North American Association for 
Computational Linguistics (NAACL), Atlanta, 
Georgia, 2013. 

R. Al-Sabbagh and R. Girju. YADAC: Yet another 
dialectal Arabic corpus. In Proc. of the Language 
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC), 
pages 2882–2889, Istanbul, 2012. 

M. C. Bateson. Arabic Language Handbook. Center 
for Applied Linguistics, Washington D.C., USA, 
1967. 

W. Black, Elkateb, S., & Vossen, P. (2006). 
Introducing the Arabic wordnet project. In In 
Proceedings of the third International WordNet 
Conference (GWC-06). 

K. Brustad. The Syntax of Spoken Arabic: A 
Comparative Study of Moroccan, Egyptian, 
Syrian, and Kuwaiti Dialects. Georgetown 
University Press, 2000. 

T. Buckwalter. Buckwalter Arabic morphological 
analyzer version 2.0. LDC catalog number 
LDC2004L02, ISBN 1-58563-324-0, 2004. 

D. Chiang, M. Diab, N. Habash, O. Rambow, and S. 
Shareef. Parsing Arabic Dialects. In Proceedings 
of the European Chapter of ACL (EACL), 2006. 

M. W. Cowell. A Reference Grammar of Syrian 
Arabic. Georgetown University Press, 1964. 

Kareem Darwish. Arabizi Detection and Conversion 
to Arabic. In the Arabic Natural Language 
Processing Workshop, EMNLP, Doha, Qatar, 
2014. 

M. Diab. Towards an Optimal POS tag set for 
Modern Standard Arabic Processing. In Proc. of 
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing 
(RANLP), Borovets, Bulgaria, 2007. 

M. Diab, N. Habash, O. Rambow, M. Altantawy, 
and Y. Benajiba. COLABA: Arabic Dialect 
Annotation and Processing. LREC Workshop on 
Semitic Language Processing, Malta, 2010. 

Y. Elihai. The olive tree dictionary: a transliterated 
dictionary of conversational Eastern Arabic 
(Palestinian). Washington DC: Kidron Pub, 2004.  

R. Eskander, N. Habash, O. Rambow, and 
N. Tomeh. Processing Spontaneous Orthography. 
In Proceedings NAACL-HLT, Atlanta, GA, 2013. 

H. Gadalla, H. Kilany, H. Arram, A. Yacoub, A. El-
Habashi, A. Shalaby, K. Karins, E. Rowson, R. 
MacIntyre, P. Kingsbury, D. Graff, and C. 
McLemore. CALLHOME Egyptian Arabic 
Transcripts.  Linguistic Data Consortium, Catalog 
No.: LDC97T19, 1997. 

D. Graff, M. Maamouri, B. Bouziri, S. Krouna, S. 
Kulick, and T. Buckwalter. Standard Arabic 
Morphological Analyzer (SAMA) Version 3.1. 
Linguistic Data Consortium LDC2009E73, 2009. 

N. Habash and O. Rambow. Arabic Tokenization, 
Part-of-Speech Tagging and Morphological 
Disambiguation in One Fell Swoop. In ACL, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, 2005. 

N. Habash, A. Soudi, and T. Buckwalter. On Arabic 
Transliteration. In A. van den Bosch and A. 
Soudi, editors, Arabic Computational 
Morphology: Knowledge-based and Empirical 
Methods. Springer, 2007. 

N. Habash and R. Roth. CATiB: The Columbia 
Arabic Treebank. In ACL, 2009. 

N. Habash. Introduction to Arabic natural language 
processing, volume 3. Morgan & Claypool 
Publishers, 2010. 

26



N. Habash, M. Diab, and O. Rabmow. (2012a)  
Conventional Orthography for Dialectal Arabic. 
In Proc. of LREC, Istanbul, Turkey, 2012. 

N. Habash, R. Eskander, and A. Hawwari. (2012b) 
A Morphological Analyzer for Egyptian Arabic. 
In Proc. of the Special Interest Group on 
Computational Morphology and Phonology, 
Montréal, Canada, 2012. 

N. Habash, R. Roth, O. Rambow, R. Eskander, and 
N. Tomeh. Morphological Analysis and 
Disambiguation for Dialectal Arabic. In Proc. of 
NAACL, Atlanta, Georgia, 2013. 

M. Halloun. A Practical Dictionary of the Standard 
Dialect Spoken in Palestine. Bethlehem 
University, 2000. 

R. Herzallah. Aspects of Palestinian Arabic 
Phonology: A Nonlinear Approach. Ph.D. thesis, 
Cornell University. Distributed as Working Papers 
of the Cornell Phonetics Laboratory No. 4, 1990. 

C. Holes. Modern Arabic: Structures, Functions, 
and Varieties. Georgetown Classics in Arabic 
Language and Linguistics. Georgetown University 
Press, 2004. 

H. Kilany, H. Gadalla, H. Arram, A. Yacoub, A. El-
Habashi, and C. McLemore. Egyptian Colloquial 
Arabic Lexicon. Linguistic Data Consortium, 
Catalog No.: LDC99L22, 1999. 

M. Maamouri, A. Bies, T. Buckwalter, M. Diab, 
N. Habash, O. Rambow, and D. Tabessi. 
Developing and using a pilot dialectal Arabic 
treebank. In Proc. of LREC, Genoa, Italy, 2006. 

M. Maamouri, A. Bies, T. Buckwalter, and 
W. Mekki. The Penn Arabic Treebank: Building a 
Large-Scale Annotated Arabic Corpus. In 
NEMLAR Conference on Arabic Language 
Resources and Tools, Cairo, Egypt, 2004. 

M. Maamouri, A. Bies, S. Kulick, M. Ciul, N. 
Habash and R. Eskander. Developing an Egyptian 
Arabic Treebank: Impact of Dialectal Morphology 
on Annotation and Tool Development. In Proc. of 
LREC, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2014. 

M. Maamouri, and C. Cieri. Resources for Arabic 
Natural Language Processing at the Linguistic 
Data Consortium. In Proc. of the International 
Symposium on Processing of Arabic. Faculté des 
Lettres, University of Manouba, Tunisia, 2002. 

M. Omar. Levantine and Egyptian Arabic: 
Comparative Study. Foreign Service Institute. 
Basic Course Series, 1976. 

A. Pasha, M. Al-Badrashiny, M. Diab, A. El Kholy, 
R. Eskander, N. Habash, M. Pooleery, O. 
Rambow and R. M. Roth. MADAMIRA: A Fast, 
Comprehensive Tool for Morphological Analysis 
and Disambiguation of Arabic. In Proc. of LREC, 
Reykjavik, Iceland, 2014. 

O. Rambow, D. Chiang, M. Diab, N. Habash, R. 
Hwa, K. Sima’an, V. Lacey, R. Levy, C. Nichols, 
and S. Shareef. 2005. Parsing Arabic Dialects. 
Final Report, 2005 JHU Summer Workshop. 

F. Rice and M. Sa'id. Eastern Arabic: an 
introduction to the spoken Arabic of Palestine, 
Syria and Lebanon. Beirut: Khayat's 1960. 

W. Salloum and N. Habash. Dialectal to Standard 
Arabic Paraphrasing to Improve Arabic-English 
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proc. of the 
First Workshop on Algorithms and Resources for 
Modeling of Dialects and Language Varieties, 
Edinburgh, Scotland, 2011. 

O. Smrž and J. Hajič. The Other Arabic Treebank: 
Prague Dependencies and Functions. In Ali 
Farghaly, editor, Arabic Computational 
Linguistics. CSLI Publications, 2006. 

I. Zribi, R. Boujelbane, A. Masmoudi, M. Ellouze 
Khmekhem, L. Hadrich Belguith, and N. Habash. 
A Conventional Orthography for Tunisian Arabic.  
In Proc. of LREC, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2014. 

 

27


