

















































Swesaurus;
or,

The Frankenstein Approach to Wordnet Construction
Lars Borin

Språkbanken
Department of Swedish

University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden

lars.borin@svenska.gu.se

Markus Forsberg
Språkbanken

Department of Swedish
University of Gothenburg

Gothenburg, Sweden
markus.forsberg@svenska.gu.se

Abstract

Swesaurus is a freely available (under a
CC-BY license) Swedish wordnet under
construction, built primarily by scaveng-
ing and recycling information from a num-
ber of existing lexical resources. Among
its more unusual characteristics are graded
lexical-semantic relations and inclusion of
all parts of speech, not only open-class
items.

The materials at present within my command hardly ap-
peared adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but I
doubted not that I should ultimately succeed. I prepared
myself for a multitude of reverses; my operations might
be incessantly baffled, and at last my work be imper-
fect, yet when I considered the improvement which every
day takes place in science and mechanics, I was encour-
aged to hope my present attempts would at least lay the
foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the
magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of
its impracticability. [. . . ] After having formed this deter-
mination and having spent some months in successfully
collecting and arranging my materials, I began.

(Shelley, 1818, Ch. 4)

1 Introduction: Swesaurus – towards a
quiltwork wordnet

Swesaurus is a Swedish open-source “proto-
wordnet” under active development. The main
novel methodological aspect of this development
is its “quiltwork” – or “Frankenstein” – character.
Swesaurus is being constructed mainly by scav-
enging and recycling lexical-semantic information
from a number of existing lexical resources. Other
noteworthy features of Swesaurus which distin-
guish it from most other wordnets is the fact that it
does not practice “part-of-speech discrimination”;
it constitutes a lexical-semantic resource encom-

passing all parts of speech (POS),1 and its graded
lexical-semantic relations.

In the literature we find basically two main
approaches to (manual) wordnet construction
(Vossen, 1998), viz. (1) the merging approach –
based on language-specific lexicographical knowl-
edge and where the synsets and their interrelations
consequently respect the structure of the language
in question, and where any linking to the English
Princeton WordNet (PWN) is made subsequently
to the wordnet construction – or (2) the exten-
sion approach – where the structure is imported
wholesale using bilingual resources (dictionaries
or translation corpora) from another language, typ-
ically English (PWN), and where the linking to
the source wordnet consequently is part of the de-
sign. Good examples of wordnets built using the
merging approach are the Danish wordnet Dan-
Net (Pedersen et al., 2009) and the Polish word-
net plWordNet (Piasecki et al., 2009), while the
extension approach can be well illustrated with
the Finnish wordnet FinnWordNet (Lindén and
Niemi, 2013), where a translation agency was em-
ployed for translating PWN into Finnish, or the
two Norwegian wordnets (for the two written stan-
dards of Norwegian, Bokmål and Nynorsk), which
were translated using partly automatic corpus-
based methods, although not from PWN, but from
DanNet.2

True to its quiltwork character, Swesaurus in-
corporates elements of both approaches. For most
of the Swesaurus components, the merging ap-
proach has been the only choice, utilizing as they
did information from pre-existing monolingual

1Recall that Princeton WordNet covers only the open parts
of speech, the “content words”, specifically nouns, verbs, ad-
jectives, and adverbs. However, because of what seems to be
a specific Anglo-Saxon lexicographical practice (Apresjan,
2002), numerals are also included in WordNet, classified as
nouns (cardinals) or adjectives (ordinals).

2This makes eminent sense, given that one of the two Nor-
wegian written standards is historically based on Danish.



Swedish resources, but in the case of the Core
WordNet component, the extension approach has
been used (see section 3.3).

The motivation for building Swesaurus is
manifold. The utility of having a PWN-like re-
source for a language is often stated in the liter-
ature. Further, the work is driven in part by op-
portunity: The general resource harmonization and
standardization activities described below in sec-
tion 2 open the possibility of mining and compil-
ing similar kinds of information from originally
quite heterogeneous lexical resources, both as to
their content, and above all with respect to their
format.

2 The prerequisites: A unified lexical
infastructure

The construction of Swesaurus would not be pos-
sible without the groundwork laid in the Swedish
FrameNet++ project (Borin et al., 2010), the goals
of which are threefold: (1) creation of an inte-
grated lexical macro-resource; (2) construction of
a Swedish framenet; and (3) creation of open re-
sources.

Crucially, the first goal has been imple-
mented on the content level through a deci-
sion on resource interlinking on the word sense
level. As a consequence of this, a structured
system of persistent identifiers has been de-
signed for word senses, which are used as links
among resources. This does not mean that the
only possible kind of link is based on (word
sense) identity. Especially with diachronic and
cross-language links, other relations are needed,
at least hyponymy/hyperonymy, expressed using
skos:narrower and skos:broader (Miles
and Bechhofer, 2009).

The macro-resource, of which Swesaurus is a
part, is large and diverse, consisting of 23 lexi-
cal resources, ranging from the Swedish FrameNet
to Old Swedish dictionaries, containing a total
of 686,237 lexical entries at the time of writing.
To be able to work productively with this macro-
resource, we need good tools for interacting with
the data, for abstracting, ordering, searching and
visualizing the data itself, for inferring and pre-
senting relations among data items, and for edit-
ing the data. To meet these demands, a generalized
lexical infrastructure is under development (Borin
et al., 2012a; Borin et al., 2013b), geared towards
dealing with large networks of interconnected lex-

icons (Borin, 2010; Borin et al., 2010) that have
been encoded in the LMF format (Lexical Markup
Framework; see ISO 2008; Francopoulo 2013).

One essential component of the lexical infra-
structure is a generic search interface that provides
a plug-and-play search tool for resources already
in LMF, where the LMF format is employed both
internally within the infrastructure and, trivially, as
an export format.

The lexical infrastructure also maintains a
strong bidirectional connection to a general and
flexible corpus infrastructure (Borin et al., 2012b).
For example, the lexical information in the macro-
resource is used in annotating the corpora, and the
language examples for the lexical resources are re-
trieved from the corpus infrastructure.

A pervasive theme for both infrastructures is
openness, which for the lexical infrastructure is
demonstrated through its utilization of open stan-
dards and open-content licenses, as well as the
daily publication of not only the resources but ev-
erything else that is available in-house, such as for-
mal test protocols, change history and the tools
themselves. The tools are available through a set
of web services, which are open for others to use,
and which provide a convenient way of accessing
the lexical information programmatically.

3 The lexical resources

Below, we discuss the existing lexical resources
underlying the component parts of Swesaurus and
how they are processed for inclusion in Swe-
saurus.

3.1 SALDO

The lexical macro-resource described in section
2 is topologically a hub-and-spokes structure.
There is one primary lexical resource, a pivot,
to which all other resources are linked. This is
SALDO (Borin et al., 2013a), a large (130K en-
tries and 1.9M wordforms), freely available (under
a Creative Commons Attribution license) morpho-
logical and lexical-semantic lexicon for modern
Swedish. It has been selected as the pivot partly
because of its size and quality, but also because
its form and sense units are identified by care-
fully designed unique persistent identifiers (PIDs)
to which the lexical information in other resources
are linked.

The standard scenario for a new resource to
be integrated into the macro-resource is to (par-



tially) link its entries to the sense PIDs of SALDO.
This cannot be done automatically on the level
of word senses in the general case. However, like
many other linguistic phenomena, the distribu-
tion of senses over lemmas in lexical resources is
roughly Zipfian (Moon, 2000; Borin, 2010). Thus,
the vast majority of the lemmas are monosemous,
reducing the sense mapping problem to the much
simpler problem of pairing up forms between lex-
ical resources. This is ultimately what makes an
endeavor such as Swesaurus feasible.

Doing this automatic pairing of forms typi-
cally has the effect that the ambiguity of a resource
becomes explicit: the bulk of the resources asso-
ciate lexical information to part-of-speech-tagged
base forms, information not always valid for all
senses of that base form. This is natural since most
of the resources have initially been created for hu-
man consumption, and a human can usually deal
with this kind of underspecification without prob-
lem. Some of these ambiguities can be resolved
automatically – especially if information from sev-
eral resources is combined – but in the end, manual
work is required for complete disambiguation.

SALDO is a kind of lexical-semantic network,
superficially similar to PWN, but quite different
from it in the principles by which it is structured.
SALDO is about the same age as PWN, and it was
developed completely independently of the latter,
inspired more by a Russian tradition of lexical de-
scription, rather than an Anglo-Saxon one; cf., for
example, Igor’ Mel’čuk’s Meaning – Text Model
(Mel’čuk, 1974).

The basic linguistic idea underlying the struc-
ture of SALDO is that, semantically speaking, the
whole vocabulary of a language can be described
as having a center – or core – and (consequently) a
periphery. The notion of core vocabulary is famil-
iar from several linguistic subdisciplines (Borin,
2012). In SALDO this idea is consistently applied
down to the level of individual word senses. Thus,
every entry in SALDO – representing a word sense
– has one or more semantic descriptors, which are
themselves also entries in the dictionary. All en-
tries in SALDO (with one sole exception; see be-
low) are actually occurring words or convention-
alized or lexicalized multi-word units of the lan-
guage.

One of the descriptors, called primary, is
obligatory. The primary descriptor is the entry
which better than any other entry fulfills two re-

quirements: (1) it is a semantic neighbor of the
entry to be described; and (2) it is more central
than it. However, there is no requirement that the
primary descriptor is of the same part of speech
as the entry itself. Thus, the primary descriptor of
kniv ‘knife (n)’ is skära ‘cut (v)’, and that of lager
‘layer (n)’ is på ‘on (p)’.

Through the primary descriptors SALDO is
a single tree, rooted by assigning an artifical top
sense (called PRIM) as primary descriptor to the
42 topmost word senses.

That two words are semantic neighbors means
that there is a direct semantic relationship between
them (such as synonymy, hyponymy, meronymy,
argument-predicate relationship, etc.). As could be
seen from the examples given above, SALDO in-
cludes not only open-class words, but also pro-
nouns, prepositions, conjunctions etc. In such
cases closeness must sometimes be determined
with respect to function or syntagmatic connec-
tions, rather than (“word-semantic”) content.

Centrality is determined by means of several
criteria: frequency, stylistic value, word forma-
tion, and traditional lexical-semantic relations all
combine to determine which of two semantically
neighboring words is to be considered more cen-
tral.

Relevant to the Swesaurus endeavor, the pri-
mary descriptor will in practice quite often be ei-
ther a hyperonym or synonym of the keyword.
Thus, SALDO was mined for Swesaurus candi-
dates by extracting all same-POS entry–primary
descriptor pairs. In the process, some important
special cases were recognized which require very
little manual post-processing, such as noun com-
pound entries where the form of the primary de-
scriptor corresponds to the last member of the
compound, e.g., livförsäkring : försäkring ‘life in-
surance : insurance’, and where the entry in the
overwhelming majority of cases is a hyponym of
the primary descriptor. In this way, a large num-
ber of synonyms, near-synonyms, hyperonyms,
antonyms, and related senses could be extracted
from SALDO, representing all parts of speech.

3.2 Synlex

Synlex (the People’s Synonym Lexicon; Kann and
Rosell 2006) is a lexical resource that has been
created by asking members of the public – users of
an online Swedish-English dictionary – to judge
the degree of synonymy of a random, automati-



cally generated synonym pair candidate, on a scale
from 0 (not synonyms) to 5 (fully synonymous). A
synonym pair list containing all pairs that average
3.0 or more on a large number of judgements is
available for download under an open-source li-
cense. The latest version of the list at the time of
writing is dated 2013-05-23, and contains 19,269
graded synonym pairs (38,538 if symmetry of syn-
onymy is not taken into account).

The members of these pairs are words (i.e.,
text word forms) – not even part of speech is in-
dicated – mainly dictionary base forms (lemmas),
but sometimes inflected forms, and in some cases
multi-word expressions. One problem then be-
comes, in the case of a word having as synonyms
several other words – because of homonymy and
polysemy – to determine how many senses we are
dealing with. Also, for those familiar with PWN,
we should add that synonymy relations in Syn-
lex are sometimes between words with different
POS, just as in EuroWordNet. Although in Eu-
roWordNet this kind of synonymy is still formally
distinct from within-POS synonymy, bearing the
label XPOS_NEAR_SYNONYM (Alonge et al.,
1998).

Since Synlex gives us access to graded syn-
onymy, we may introduce the notion of fuzzy
synsets into Swesaurus (Borin and Forsberg,
2010), i.e., synsets where a word’s membership is
a matter of degree (see section 4 for a discussion
about synsets in Swesaurus).

3.2.1 Wiktionary

Wiktionary is an undertaking similar to Wikipedia,
but for collaborative writing of dictionaries rather
than encyclopedias. The Swedish Wiktionary,3 is
a downloadable free resources that, among other
things, contains some lexical-semantic relations.
The work of extracting such relations from Wik-
tionary is hampered by the fact that the data set
is only partially encoded with a formal structure.
It is the responsibility of the writer to encode the
different information categories in a lexical entry
in the correct wiki format that was intended by the
creator of Wiktionary, but no automatic check of
the encoding is actually done. Since the result of a
faulty encoding may actually look correct for the
human eye, there are in practice a number of er-
rors in Wiktionary that complicate the automatic
information extraction.

3See http://sv.wiktionary.org

We have experimented with extracting syn-
onymy relations between words, with a resulting
set of 10,529 synonymy pairs, of which 3,857
of the word pairs have members with only one
sense in SALDO. Hence, no manual disambigua-
tion is needed, so they may be incorporated im-
mediately into Swesaurus. Some of the pairs are
wrong, since some lexical entries contain infor-
mation from other languages and relation within
them. This results in a few cases where, e.g., a
Swedish word is linked to a Polish one. In prac-
tice, this is not a major problem, since the linking
to SALDO filters out those words that are not in
SALDO.

The synonymy relations in Wiktionary are in
general of higher quality than those in Synlex,
which is to be expected since the author of a lexi-
cal entry in Wiktionary makes a conscious choice
when assigning synonyms to a word, but Syn-
lex, on the other hand, builds upon automatically
generated word pairs, with the consequence that
words that is not normally judged synonymous are
sometimes assigned a degree greater than zero. For
example, consider the pair förlovning : förpliktelse
‘engagement to be married : obligation’, the mem-
bers of which are normally not considered to be
synonymous, but when presented together and you
are asked to quantify their synonymy degree, you
may be tempted to give them at least a small de-
gree of synonymy.

3.3 Core WordNet
As part of the EC-funded META-NORD project
(2011–2013), a linking of the Princeton Core
WordNet (CWN) to Swedish was completed and
included in Swesaurus. The linkage was boot-
strapped by using the Lexin basic Swedish-
English dictionary (∼25,000 entries). Swedish
lemmas in Lexin were automatically linked, in an
overgenerating manner, to SALDO sense identi-
fiers, giving us a set of senses for every lemma.
The glosses of CWN were subsequently, via
Lexin, linked to these sense sets. CWN has 5,000
entries, of which around 89% were covered by
Lexin. Furthermore, 23% had a unique link to one
SALDO sense, and the remaining an average am-
biguity of 4.4 (a rather high ambiguity, but not un-
expected for a core vocabulary).

3.4 The Gothenburg Semantic Database
The Gothenburg Semantic Database (SDB; Jär-
borg 2001) is a lexical database for modern

http://sv.wiktionary.org


Swedish covering 61,000 entries with an extensive
description inflection, morphology and meaning.
Originally building on a lexicographical database
that has been used in producing two modern
Swedish reference dictionaries, SDB has been en-
riched with a deeper semantic description where
many of the verb senses have been provided with
semantic valency information using a set of about
40 general semantic roles and linked to example
sentences in a corpus.

SDB holds two kinds of relevant lexical-
semantic information: (1) explicit lexical se-
mantic relations cross-referencing among different
lexical entries (lemmas); and (2) implicit in its hi-
erarchical organization of lexical entries into main
senses and subsenses, typically corresponding to a
superordinate–hyponym relation.

The linking of SDB senses to SALDO sense
identifiers is ongoing. An initial automatic linking
is now being manually checked and corrected. For
those senses that are already processed in this way,
the explicit lexical semantic relations have been
included in Swesaurus, and some of the derived re-
lations calculated (see section 4), while the entry-
internal hierarchical relations present in SDB have
not yet been extracted. In the process, it has be-
come clear that the explicit relations are not con-
sistent, and will need a good deal of manual cor-
rection, which is ongoing.

3.4.1 Bring’s thesaurus
The author of what is probably the first
Swedish thesaurus, Sven Casper Bring (1842–
1931) worked as a lawyer, district judge and trans-
lator. Besides practicing law, he published sev-
eral translations from French, Italian and English
to Swedish. His final work was an adaptation to
Swedish of Roget’s well-known Thesaurus (Bring,
1930). He writes in his preface to the book that he
was inspired by similar adaptations that had taken
place of Roget’s Thesaurus to German.

Bring’s thesaurus was digitized in the early
1990s and has since been made available under an
open-content license. Work is ongoing to create
a modernized version of Bring by using SALDO
and other modern lexical resources in order to
semi-automatically add modern vocabulary to it.

Like in Roget, the vocabulary included in
Bring is divided into slightly over 1,000 “con-
ceptual classes”. Each class consists of a list
of words, where, when there are enough rele-
vant words, nouns are listed first, followed by

verbs, and finally a mixed group containing ad-
jectives, adverbs, interjections and phrases. Semi-
colons, together with paragraph structure, group
words together, which are thought to be more
closely semantically related. Semicolon groups of-
ten contain synonym clusters, with distance be-
tween words in a cluster roughly correlating to de-
gree of synonymy, and we plan to explore how the
semicolon groups can be used as a source for yet
another Swesaurus component.

4 Some matters of method

Following a long tradition in lexicography and lex-
ical semantics, we posit as primary semantic en-
tities in all our lexical resources word senses, i.e.,
roughly the content side of the Saussurean linguis-
tic sign, paired with a form side on the word level
(a word, a conventionalized or lexicalized multi-
word expression, or, rarely, a sub-word-unit). Im-
portantly in this connection, synsets are not pri-
mary entities in our resources.

As a corollary to the above, all lexical-
semantic relations are between word senses only.
Synonymy is simply one of these relations among
many others. A PWN-style wordnet, on the other
hand, does not have the synonymy relation at all.
Synsets are defined through (one construal of) syn-
onymy, but the relation itself is not present as such
in the wordnet.

The decision not to allow synsets into Swe-
saurus as first-class citizens rests partly on tra-
dition. Importantly, however, in doing this, we
also avoid building in a strong assumption about
the nature of synonymy into the foundations of
our resource. Even though synonym dictionaries
are among the oldest products of lexicography –
even the Sumerians and Akkadians compiled them
(Civil, 1990) – in practice synonymy has turned
out to be a most slippery notion: While synonyms
are self-evidently a central feature of language ac-
cording to Lieber (1841, vii), they are “morally
impossible” to Döderlein (1863, xii). Thus, in con-
structing Swesaurus we have opted for treating
synsets as derived, from a possibly varying or
changing definition of synonymy.

Ockham’s razor also enters into the picture:
Since word senses seem to be needed in any case,
and to be in some sense more basic than synsets –
more than half (54%) of the synsets in PWN have
only one member, arguably a word sense – we see



no pressing need to adopt the synset as basic no-
tion.

This makes the basic information unit in Swe-
saurus the (word-sense) relational triple, whose
three components are: (1) a source word sense;
(2) a graded lexical-semantic relation; and (3) a
target word sense. In addition, each triple has
provenance information, i.e., from which resource
it originates and whether it is primary or derived.
The relations used so far in Swesaurus are the ones
listed in Table 1.

At present, all derived relations except related-
sense are generally taken to hold only within a
part of speech – i.e., source and target words must
have the same part of speech – although this may
change in the future.4 The related-sense relation
is a catchall label covering a mixed bag of se-
mantic and formal relations among word senses,
both more loose “evocation” (Boyd-Graber et al.,
2006) or “associative” (Borin et al., 2013a) se-
mantic relations, and formal derivational relations,
e.g., verbs and the corresponding deverbal nouns,
nouns and their denominal adjectives, etc.

The resources generally have fragmentary in-
formation, for various reasons. From the logical
properties of the relations follow certain inference
rules which allow us to partly ameliorate this situ-
ation.

For example, the transitivity of most of the re-
lations allows us to add many derived relational
triples to Swesaurus. If we have the information
that A is-a-synonym-of B and B is-a-synonym-of C,
we can infer that A is-a-synonym-of C even in the
absence of this explicit information. More subtle
inferences are also possible, for example: If we
have the explicit information that A is-a-hyponym-
of B and C is-a-hyponym-of D and further that A
is-a-cohyponym-of C, we can then infer that B is-a-
synonym-of D.

4Some of the original synonym pairs in Synlex already
cross part-of-speech boundaries, and even SDB has a small
number of such examples, e.g. some color adjectives are
listed as hyponyms of the noun grundfärg ‘primary color’.
Further, we note that especially in linguistic descriptions of
languages with rich derivational morphological systems it is
often taken for granted that, e.g., a verb and the correspond-
ing deverbal action noun express the same concept – are syn-
onymous – so that the difference between to eat (v.) and the
eating (n.) is on a par with the tense difference between eats
and ate. Both express the concept of eating, but in forms de-
termined by the syntactic frame in which they are made to
function (see, e.g., Fellbaum 2005). The differences are in
both cases purely formal, not conceptual.

There are also some less obviously useful en-
tailment relations, which however should be rec-
ognized both for completeness’ sake and for im-
plementing correct behavior in search and brows-
ing tools, such as: Synonymy entails cohyponymy;
and all other relations entail related-sense.

The consequence of this is that Swesaurus
contains two kinds of relational triples: (1) pri-
mary triples, explicitly present in the sources; and
(2) derived triples, automatically computed using
the inference rules for triples.

“Wordnetified” versions of Swesaurus in addi-
tion contain synsets constructed through the tran-
sitive closure of the synonymy relation.

Graded relations complicate this picture, and
it is not completely clear how to best use the de-
gree information in computing derived relations.
Consequently, we must be careful when deriving
new synonym pairs in Synlex, especially if we iter-
ate over already derived ones. A few pairs like the
already mentioned förlovning : förpliktelse ‘en-
gagement to be married : obligation’ may give rise
to a large number of questionable synonymy pairs.
A more conservative approach than general transi-
tivity is to use the existing synonymy cliques in
the derivation process, and only derive new syn-
onyms if we create a new clique by deriving that
synonym. This has been the strategy chosen for
deriving new synonym pairs from Synlex.

According to the website of the Global Word-
Net Association,5 “resources that follow the word-
net design” must include

• links to WordNet (Princeton or others that are
linked to PWN)
• WN structure (minimally: synset, hyponymy)

Swesaurus marginally fulfills the first criterion
– only the CWN component is linked to PWN –
although we acknowledge the usefulness of such a
linking, and are planning to extend it to the other
components of Swesaurus. It also fails the second
criterion, since there are no synsets at all in Swe-
saurus. However, as we have argued and shown
above, A PWN-style wordnet – in fact, many dif-
ferent PWN-style wordnets – can be completely
mechanically derived from Swesaurus, with synset
sizes dependent on the synonymy degree threshold
chosen for synset assembly. The synsets can then
inherit selected lexical semantic relations from
their member word senses.

5See http://globalwordnet.org/?page_id=
38

http://globalwordnet.org/?page_id=38
http://globalwordnet.org/?page_id=38


Relation Logical properties
synonymy symmetric, transitive
antonymy symmetric
related-sense symmetric, transitive(?)
hyponymy/subordinate sense transitive, inverse of hyperonymy
hyperonymy/superordinate transitive, inverse of hyponymy
cohyponymy symmetric, transitive
partonymy transitive(?), inverse of holonymy
holonymy transitive(?), inverse of partonymy

Table 1: Lexical-semantic relations used in Swesaurus

5 Conclusions and future work

All the activities listed in section 3 are ongoing to
various degrees. In summary, approximate current
numbers of primary and derived relational triples
in the different Swesaurus components are as fol-
lows:

Component Primary Derived
Synlex 19,000 9,500
Wiktionary 4,000 –
CWN 4,500 –
SDB 10,000 13,500
SALDO 32,500 –

All numbers are for normalized relational
triples, which means that symmetric relations are
counted only once for a given word-sense pair, and
that for relations with an inverse, only one of the
two is present in the data. Thus, A is-an-antonym-of
B will exclude the presence of B is-an-antonym-of
A, and A is-a-hyperonym-of B will be transformed
into B is-a-hyponym-of A.

We are already starting to see how genuine
synergy could arise from the work described
above. The flow of information is not one-way;
instead, the derived lexical-semantic information
made possible through the construction of Swe-
saurus may in its turn be used to enrich the original
lexical resources. Synonyms may be a good source
of new lexical units in a framenet, for instance,
and the modernization of Bring’s Thesaurus will
probably be easier to accomplish using the lexical-
semantic information from Swesaurus. We have
already mentioned that semicolon groups in Bring
are often made up of synonym clusters, but like
its predecessor and model Roget, Bring, too, or-
ganizes many of its conceptual classes according
to antonymies, making the antonymy information

in Swesaurus a potential source of enrichment of
Bring.

So far our work on Swesaurus has focused
on the crosslinking and consequent synergistic en-
richment of heterogeneous lexical resources. An-
other important line of research found in the lit-
erature on wordnet construction, but that we have
not touched upon in this paper, concerns corpus-
driven, machine-learning based methods for word-
net building. We have conducted some initial ex-
periments based on a large Swedish corpus col-
lection, and this is a direction which we plan to
pursue further in the future. In this connection, a
particularly intriguing question is to what extent
near synonymy of the kind found in Synlex can be
discovered automatically in corpora.

Acknowledgments

The research presented here has been made pos-
sible through financial support from the Swedish
Research Council (Swedish FrameNet++ project,
contract no 2010-6013), from the University of
Gothenburg through its support of the Centre for
Language Technology and through its support of
Språkbanken (the Swedish Language Bank), and
from the European Commission through its sup-
port of the META-NORD project under the ICT
PSP Programme, grant agreement no 270899.

References
Antonietta Alonge, Nicoletta Calzolari, Piek Vossen,

Laura Bloksma, Irene Castellon, Maria Antonia
Marti, and Wim Peters. 1998. The linguis-
tic design of the EuroWordNet database. In
Piek Vossen, editor, EuroWordNet: A Multilingual
Database with Lexical Semantic Networks for Eu-
ropean Languages. Kluwer, Dordrecht. Pages 19–
43.

Yuri D. Apresjan. 2002. Principles of systematic lexi-
cography. In Marie-Hélène Corréard, editor, Lex-



icography and Natural Language Processing. A
Festschrift in Honour of B. T. S. Atkins. Euralex,
Grenoble. Pages 91–104.

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2010. From the peo-
ple’s synonym dictionary to fuzzy synsets - first
steps. In Proceedings of the LREC 2010 work-
shop Semantic relations. Theory and Applications,
pages 18–25.

Lars Borin, Dana Danélls, Markus Forsberg, Dim-
itrios Kokkinakis, and Maria Toporowska Gronos-
taj. 2010. The past meets the present in Swedish
FrameNet++. In 14th EURALEX International
Congress. Leeuwarden. EURALEX. Pages 269–
281.

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, Leif-Jöran Olsson, and
Jonatan Uppström. 2012a. The open lexical
infrastructure of Språkbanken. In Proceedings of
LREC 2012. Istanbul. ELRA. Pages 3598–3602.

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Johan Roxendal.
2012b. Korp – the corpus infrastructure of Språk-
banken. In Proceedings of LREC 2012. Istanbul.
ELRA. Pages 474–478.

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Lennart Lönngren.
2013a. SALDO: a touch of yin to WordNet’s yang.
Language Resources and Evaluation, May. Online
first publication; DOI 10.1007/s10579-013-9233-
4.

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, Leif-Jöran Olsson, Olof
Olsson, and Jonatan Uppström. 2013b. The lex-
ical editing system of karp. In Kosem, I., Kallas,
J., Gantar, P., Krek, S., Langemets, M., Tuulik, M.
(eds.) 2013. Electronic lexicography in the 21st
century: thinking outside the paper. Proceedings
of the eLex 2013 conference, 17-19 October 2013,
Tallinn, Estonia., volume 2013, pages 503–516.

Lars Borin. 2010. Med Zipf mot framtiden – en in-
tegrerad lexikonresurs för svensk språkteknologi.
LexicoNordica, 17:35–54.

Lars Borin. 2012. Core vocabulary: A useful but mys-
tical concept in some kinds of linguistics. In Diana
Santos, Krister Lindén, and Wanjiku Ng’ang’a, ed-
itors, Shall we play the Festschrift game? Essays
on the occasion of Lauri Carlson’s 60th birthday.
Springer, Berlin. Pages 53–65.

Jordan Boyd-Graber, Christiane Fellbaum, Daniel Osh-
erson, and Robert Schapire. 2006. Adding dense,
weighted connections to WordNet. In GWC 2006
Proceedings. Brno. Masaryk University. Pages 29–
35.

Sven Casper Bring. 1930. Svenskt ordförråd ordnat i
begreppsklasser. Hugo Gebers förlag, Stockholm.

Miguel Civil. 1990. Sumerian and Akkadian lexi-
cography. In Oskar Reichmann Hausmann, Franz
Josef and, Herbert Ernst Wiegand, and Ladislav
Zgusta, editors, Wörterbücher: Ein internationales

Handbuch zur Lexikographie. Zweiter Teilband
/ Dictionaries: An international encyclopedia of
lexicography. Second volume / Dictionnaires: En-
cyclopédie internationale de lexicographie. Tome
second. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin. Pages 1682–
1686.

Ludwig Döderlein. 1863. The author’s preface. In
Döderlein’s hand-book of Latin synonymes. Trans-
lated by Rev. H.A. Arnold, B.A., with an introduc-
tion by S.H. Taylor, LL.D. Warren F. Draper, An-
dover. Pages ix–xvi.

Christiane Fellbaum. 2005. Co-occurrence and
antonymy. International Journal of Lexicography,
8(4):281–303.

Gil Francopoulo, editor. 2013. LMF: Lexical Markup
Framework. ISTE/Wiley, London/Hoboken, NJ.

ISO. 2008. Language resource management – Lexical
Markup Framework (LMF). International Stan-
dard ISO 24613:2008.

Jerker Järborg. 2001. Roller i Semantisk databas. Re-
search Reports from the Department of Swedish
No. GU-ISS-01-3. University of Gothenburg, De-
partment of Swedish.

Viggo Kann and Magnus Rosell. 2006. Free construc-
tion of a free Swedish dictionary of synonyms. In
Proceedings of the 15th NODALIDA conference,
Joensuu 2005. Department of Linguistics, Univer-
sity of Joensuu. Pages 105–110.

Francis Lieber. 1841. Preface of the translator.
In Dictionary of Latin synonymes, for the use
of schools and private students, with a complete
index. By Lewis [Ludwig] Ramshorn. From the
German by Francis Lieber, Charles C. Little and
James Brown. Pages iii–viii.

Krister Lindén and Jyrki Niemi. 2013. Is it possible to
create a very large wordnet in 100 days? An eval-
uation. Language Resources and Evaluation, July.
Online first publication; DOI 10.1007/s10579-
013-9245-0.

Igor’ A. Mel’čuk. 1974. Opyt teorii lingvističeskih
modelej «Smysl↔ Tekst». Nauka, Moscow.

Alistair Miles and Sean Bechhofer. 2009. SKOS
Simple Knowledge Organization System Refer-
ence. W3C Recommendation. http://www.
w3.org/TR/skos-reference/.

Rosamund Moon. 2000. Lexicography and disam-
biguation: The size of the problem. Computers
and the Humanities, 34(1–2):99–102.

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Sanni Nimb, Jørg As-
mussen, Nicolai Hartvig Sørensen, Lars Trap-
Jensen, and Henrik Lorentzen. 2009. DanNet:
The challenge of compiling a wordnet for Danish
by reusing a monolingual dictionary. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 43(3):269–299.

http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/
http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/


Maciej Piasecki, Stanisław Szpakowicz, and Bartosz
Broda. 2009. A Wordnet from the Ground Up.
Oficyna Wydawnicza Politechniki Wrocławskiej,
Wrocław.

Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. 1818. Frankenstein; or,
The Modern Prometheus. Lackington, Hughes,
Harding, Mavor & Jones, London.

Piek Vossen. 1998. Introduction to EuroWordNet. In
Piek Vossen, editor, EuroWordNet: A Multilingual
Database with Lexical Semantic Networks for Eu-
ropean Languages. Kluwer, Dordrecht. Pages 1–
17.


