










































Instructions for ACL-2010 Proceedings


Non-Lexicalized Concepts in Wordnets: 

A Case Study of English and Hungarian 

Veronika Vincze
1,2

 
1
MTA-SZTE Research Group 

on Artificial Intelligence 
2
University of Szeged 

vinczev@inf.u-szeged.hu 

Attila Almási 

University of Szeged 

almasia@inf.u-szeged.hu 

 

Abstract 

Here, we investigate non-lexicalized synsets 

found in the Hungarian wordnet, and compare 

them to the English one, in the context of 

wordnet building principles. We propose some 

strategies that may be used to overcome diffi-

culties concerning non-lexicalized synsets in 

wordnets constructed using the expand meth-

od. It is shown that the merge model could al-

so have been applied to Hungarian, and with 

the help of the above-mentioned strategies, a 

wordnet based on the expand model can be 

transformed into a wordnet similar to that con-

structed with the merge model. 

1 Introduction 

Wordnets are lexical databases in which words 

are organized into clusters based on their mean-

ings, and they are linked to each other through 

different semantic and lexical relations, yielding 

a conceptual hierarchy (i.e. lexical ontology) of 

words. Originally, they were designed to show 

how linguistic knowledge is organized within the 

human mind (Miller et al., 1990). Multilinguality 

is also an important aspect in the creation of 

wordnets: builders of new wordnets usually map 

their synsets to those representing the same con-

cept in Princeton WordNet (PWN). 

However, there is no perfect mapping between 

two languages at the conceptual level and the 

lexical level. In this article, we would like to 

compare the wordnets built for Hungarian and 

English and we will discuss problems and possi-

ble solutions concerning discrepancies in the way 

the two languages name certain concepts in the 

context of wordnet-building methods and princi-

ples. First, the wordnets we study are briefly pre-

sented, then the notions of non-lexicalized and 

technical non-lexicalized synsets are illustrated 

with concrete examples. We suggest some ways 

of eliminating non-lexicalized synsets from 

wordnets, and we also show how a Hungarian 

tree can be built without relying on the English 

tree. Lastly, we argue that although a wordnet 

that seeks to represent the hierarchy of the given 

language should not contain non-lexicalized el-

ements, they can prove useful in fields of re-

search such as psycholinguistics, ethnography 

and contrastive linguistics. 

2 Related Work 

The first wordnet was created for the English 

language at Princeton University, so it is called 

the Princeton WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). It is 

now the largest lexical database of the English 

language, and it can be readily adapted to various 

computational applications. Princeton WordNet 

3.0 contains about 155,000 words in approxi-

mately 117,000 synsets. 

Since then, other wordnets have been created 

and developed for different languages. Eu-

roWordNet is a multilingual project, where 

synsets for Dutch, Italian, Spanish, German, 

French, Czech and Estonian are included in the 

database (Alonge et al., 1998). The BalkaNet 

project sought to extend EuroWordNet with lexi-

cal databases created for languages of the Balkan 

Peninsula, namely Bulgarian, Greek, Turkish, 

Serbian and Romanian (Tufiş, 2004; Tufiş et al., 

2004). Other languages for which wordnets have 

been developed include Arabic, Croatian, Chi-

nese, Danish, Slovene, Polish, Russian, Persian, 

Hindi, Tulu, Dravidian, Tamil, Telugu, Sanskrit, 

Assamese, Filipino, Gujarati, Nepali (Tanács et 

al., 2008; Bhattacharyya et al., 2010; Fellbaum 

and Vossen, 2012). 

Typically, there are two major approaches to 

wordnet construction (Vossen, 1998). The first 

approach (merge model) starts by constructing a 

wordnet from scratch (or by using dictionaries 

and other resources developed for the language) 

and then the newly created synsets are linked to 

synsets of another language (most typically Eng-

lish). The second approach (expand model) starts 

by selecting a subset of the PWN synsets and 

then they are transformed into synsets of the tar-

get language, preserving relations between 

vinczev@inf.u-szeged.hu
almasia@inf.u-szeged.hu


synsets. Wordnets created in this way inevitably 

reflect lexicalization of the given language to a 

lesser degree; however, it is known that the 

nodes in PWN form a network, the rendering of 

which into the given language may be unnatural, 

forced and this may result in further difficulties 

concerning multilingual applications (Raffaelli et 

al., 2008). The merge model was used for most 

languages in the EuroWordNet project (Alonge 

et al., 1998), whereas the expand model was used 

for Spanish, Hungarian and some other lan-

guages. 

Now, languages do not overlap completely: 

due to the differences in culture, traditions and 

lifestyle, languages have concepts, words charac-

teristic of the given language alone. They can 

only have approximate equivalents and cannot be 

translated using a single word (Derwojedowa et 

al., 2008), i.e. they cannot be lexicalized.  

Lexicalization is defined in the following way 

(Lipka, 1992: 107): “the process by which com-

plex lexemes tend to become a single unit with a 

specific content, through frequent use. In this 

process, they lose their nature as a syntagma, or 

combination, to a greater or lesser extent.” Thus, 

lexicalization can be regarded as a process that is 

gradual, similar to the scalar view of productivity 

(Jackendoff, 2010). Thus, there are lexicalized 

items in the language, there are non-lexicalized 

ones and there are borderline cases in between. 

For non-lexicalized concepts, artificial nodes 

may be introduced in wordnets so as to have a 

better organized structure (Fellbaum, 1998). The 

original PWN also contains a few such items, 

e.g. bad person. However, there are wordnets 

which contain only lexicalized concepts of a lan-

guage and no non-lexicalized synsets are includ-

ed. For instance, the Dutch wordnet does not in-

clude artificial synsets, producing a much flatter 

hierarchy (Vossen, 1998). Despite this, the crea-

tors of the Basque wordnet tried to include as 

many non-lexicalized multiword expressions as 

possible (Agirre et al., 2006). They differentiate 

between conceptual level imbalances and expres-

sion level imbalances, similar to Vossen (1999), 

who distinguishes cultural gaps and pragmatic 

gaps. The Basque wordnet, which was also built 

following the expand model, explicitly codes 

these non-lexicalized synsets (Pociello et al., 

2011). 

The Hungarian WordNet (HuWN) was devel-

oped by the Research Institute for Linguistics of 

the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, the De-

partment of Informatics of the University of Sze-

ged, and MorphoLogic Ltd. in a 3-year project 

(Alexin et al., 2006; Miháltz et al., 2008). As a 

result, HuWN now contains over 40,000 synsets, 

out of which 2,000 synsets form part of a busi-

ness subontology. Here, Princeton WordNet 2.0 

served as a basis for the construction of HuWN, 

i.e. the expand model was adhered to. More pre-

cisely, synsets belonging to the BalkaNet Con-

cept Set were selected from PWN 2.0 and then 

translated into Hungarian. These were then man-

ually edited, corrected and extended with other 

synonyms using the VisDic editor. The set of 

concepts to be included in HuWN were expand-

ed concentrically later on. That is, descendants of 

the existing synsets were treated as synset candi-

dates. The final decision on their status (whether 

they should be included or excluded) was influ-

enced by several factors such as the frequency of 

the concept and its presence in other WordNets 

(Miháltz et al., 2008). 

In this paper, we examine what the effects of 

the expand model are on the quality of the Hun-

garian WordNet. We investigate the types of 

non-lexicalized synsets and we propose some 

strategies that may be used to overcome difficul-

ties concerning non-lexicalized synsets in word-

nets constructed using the expand method. 

3 Non-Lexicalized Synsets 

At its inception, developers of the Hungarian 

wordnet decided that the so-called expand meth-

od should be used. This implies that HuWN in-

herited the hierarchy of PWN. The nominal and 

adjectival parts
1
 of HuWN were built according 

to the following method: nodes in PWN were 

automatically correlated with Hungarian synsets 

and their relations were adopted; the basic strate-

gy was to attach Hungarian entries of a bilingual 

English-Hungarian dictionary to the nomi-

nal/adjectival synsets of PrincetonWordNet. 

In order not to have “holes” in the constructed 

tree (that is, in order for the English and Hungar-

ian wordnets to overlap as much as possible), 

developers had to find a good way of handling 

such synsets. To indicate that such synsets do not 

exist (at the word level) in the lexicon of the giv-

en language, i.e. they have not become lexical-

ized, the non-lex label was introduced. Now, we 

will give the criteria for a synset to be non-

lexicalized. First, it may be that no such concept 

exists in the given language (especially due to 

cultural differences). Second, the concept may be 

                                                 
1 The verbal part of HuWN was constructed in a different 

way (cf. Kuti et al., 2008), so we did not consider verbs in 

our study. 



expressed by productive and compositional con-

structions (e.g. with adjective + noun combina-

tions), i.e. there is no way of expressing it using 

a single word or a multiword expression. Third, 

the concept may be an umbrella term for several 

single-word concepts, thus, in the other language 

it may only be expressed by a list. Fourth, there 

seemed to be inconsistencies or erroneous defini-

tions and hypernym relations in PWN, which the 

builders of the Hungarian wordnet did not want 

to follow and they marked the problematic synset 

with the non-lex label. 

Some statistics on non-lex synsets in HuWN 

are presented in Table 1. It can be seen that for 

the whole body of HuWN every twentieth synset 

is non-lexicalized and for the basic concept set 

(BCSHu) it is every twelfth synset. Hence, the 

problem is not negligible and it is worth examin-

ing in detail what types of nonlex synsets exist 

and how they can be eliminated. 

 

 HuWN BCSHu 

Synsets 42,292 8446 

Non-lexicalized 1,999 463 

Technical non-lexicalized 454 271 

% of (t)non-lex synsets 5.799 8.69 
Table 1: (Technical) non-lex synsets in HuWN. 

3.1 Types of Non-Lex Synsets 

Non-lex synsets found in HuWN can be classi-

fied into six main groups, which are presented 

below. 

Culturally Determined Concepts. Culturally 

determined concepts are related to differences in 

culture, lifestyle or geographical background. 

Since the American and Hungarian cultures, 

(folk) traditions and backgrounds are quite dif-

ferent, there are concepts which not always have 

verbatim equivalents in the other language. In 

case they have, they may not reflect the feelings 

and moods they evoke, that is, what comes to a 

person‘s mind when he hears them may differ in 

the two cultures (cf. Zidoum, 2008). Here we 

provide two examples: 
 

máglyarakás ‘stake’ (in Hungarian, it refers to 

a kind of confectionery, which is not associated 

with the English word stake). 

Sassenach – a Scot’s term for an English per-

son, where connotations of the original word 

cannot be mirrored in Hungarian. 
 

Culturally determined concepts are called con-

ceptual level imbalances in the Basque wordnet 

(Pociello et al., 2011). 

Geographical background mostly determines 

the named entities included in wordnets. For in-

stance, most Hungarian speakers are not familiar 

with Milk River:1 or White River:1, thus their 

inclusion would be questionable in the Hungari-

an wordnet. However, some of them are included 

in HuWN due to the expand method applied, but 

they are classed as non-lex. 

Split Concepts. Another group of non-lex 

synsets includes elements that simply have no 

counterpart in the given language. Very often, 

certain umbrella terms belonging to this category 

can only be expressed in the other language by 

using a paraphrase or supplying a list. For in-

stance, cycling:1 is used for both riding bicycles 

and motorcycles, which are separate lexical units 

in Hungarian. 

Words with a Negative Prefix. Another basic 

example of non-lex synsets is that of adjec-

tives/nouns formed with negative prefixes such 

as non-, in- and un-. Apart from a couple of cas-

es, in Hungarian, the negated version of such 

lexical units is produced with a negative adverb 

and they together do not constitute a lexicalized 

synset. Examples of non-lex synsets in HuWN 

formed with negative prefixes in PWN include 

unattractive – nem vonzó, ill-timed – rosszul 

időzített and incongruity – meg nem egyezés, 

where the HuWn synsets are marked as non-

lexicalized. 

Adjective + Noun Constructions. Some con-

cepts in PWN are expressed with adjective + 

noun constructions in Hungarian, which cannot 

be regarded as lexicalized units since they are 

productive and their meaning is totally composi-

tional. For instance, words denoting nationalities 

(skót ‘Scottish’, angol ‘English’, magyar ‘Hun-

garian’ etc.) in Hungarian have a peculiar feature 

that although there is no distinction of gender in 

the nominal and pronominal system at the mor-

phological and syntactic levels, when using these 

words we first and foremost mean a male person 

of a nation: e.g. Scotsman:1 was annotated skót 

(a Scottish male person). Their female counter-

part is usually formed by adding an extra noun, 

nő ‘woman’. The two words skót nő ‘Scottish 

woman’ when combined, however, are regarded 

as a productive construction (of adjective + 

noun) and not as a multiword expression, which 

is a prerequisite for Hungarian adjective + noun 

constructions to be admitted into HuWN as valid 

synsets, and hence skót nő is a non-lexicalized 

synset paired with Scotswoman:1, Scotchwom-

an:1. 



Linguistic Differences. Sometimes non-

lexicalized synsets arise due to the ways a con-

cept can be expressed. In the case of people:1 – 

(embercsoport), it can be expressed by a suffix in 

Hungarian: the English phrase 200 people can 

translated as kétszázan two.hundred-ESSIVE 

into Hungarian, which means that a suffix denot-

ing the essive grammatical case is attached to the 

number, and the suffix corresponds to the Eng-

lish noun. 

Technical Terms. Over the course of time, 

some non-lexicalized concepts may become lexi-

calized. One typical domain is technology, where 

such concepts are spreading worldwide at an ev-

er accelerating rate. A few years ago, when 

HuWN was being constructed, RV (recreational 

vehicle) for instance was tagged non-lex, which, 

now, could be accepted as a fully acknowledged 

lexicalized synset. 

3.2 Technical Non-Lexicalized Synsets 

During the construction, it frequently happened 

that two English synsets in hierarchical relation 

had a single Hungarian equivalent; the two con-

cepts are distinct at the conceptual level only. At 

the lexical level, however, it is impossible to find 

two distinct words for them. In other cases, it 

was not possible to find an equivalent for the 

word with the same part of speech. Technical 

non-lexicalized (t non-lex) tags are applied in the 

following cases: (1) identical literals in hyper-

nym-hyponym relation; (2) identical literal in a 

similar_to relation; (3) POS difference, which 

are all illustrated below. 

Identical Literals in Hypernymy Relation. 

The first case of technically non-lexicalized tag-

ging in HuWN is when there are two identical 

literals in synsets in hypernym relation. This 

phenomenon is called autohyponimy in Cruse 

(2000). The developers of HuWN wanted to 

avoid such redundancies in the trees and, as a 

convention, they eliminated the overlapping lit-

eral from one of the synsets. 

Due to entailment, a concept can be replaced 

by its hypernym: if a greyhound barks, then it 

entails that a dog barks. So it seemed reasonable 

to apply this axiom in HuWN building, i.e. to not 

repeat the hypernym in the hyponym synset. 

Here is an example (the numbers denoting levels 

of hierarchy): 
 

1 cube:5  kocka:3 

2 dice:1  dobókocka:1 

 

In this case, due to the above-mentioned con-

vention of having to delete the identical literal in 

the hyponym synset, kocka has been excluded, 

leaving only dobókocka as a hyponym. Thus, 

there is no need to mark the hyponym synset as 

technically non-lexicalized since there is another 

literal which does not coincide with the hyper-

nym. 

In cases where the hyponym synset consists of 

only one literal, coinciding with its hypernym, 

the hyponym synset is marked t non-lex: 
 

1 safety:1  biztonság:1 

2 security:1  biztonság:0 

 

In Hungarian, there is no separate lexical item 

for safety and security, these being roughly 

equivalent to biztonság. In this way, the hypo-

nym synset should be marked as t non-lex. 

Identical Literals in Focal-Satellite Synsets. 

In the case of the adjectival part of the ontology, 

the t non-lex label was also employed. Since its 

construction is based on antonym-pairs and the 

associated, synonymous “satellite” synsets, it 

may well be that while distinct words in English 

are used to express the concept belonging to the 

focal and the satellite synsets, in Hungarian, the 

same word occurs in both positions. Yet, the 

conventions of wordnet building require that the 

focal and the satellite synsets should contain no 

identical literals (cf. identity of hypernym and 

hyponym). Consequently, again, the course to be 

followed is that the focal synset remains lexical-

ized and the more specific, satellite synset gets 

the t non-lex label. For example, {wide:1; 

broad:1}’s “satellite” synset is {heavy:5; 

thick:5}, but in Hungarian széles corresponds to 

both, therefore the focal synset will be 

{széles:2}, and the satellite synset {széles:0}. 

Different Parts of Speech. Sometimes the 

target language equivalent of a synset does not 

share its part of speech with the source language 

word although it can be classified as one of the 

four parts of speech used in wordnets. For in-

stance, the English word afraid is an adjective, 

but its Hungarian counterpart fél is a verb. In 

such cases, we made use of the relation 

eq_xpos_synonym, which designates synonymy 

among different parts of speech: here it relates fél 

and the Hungarian adjectival synset correspond-

ing to afraid, which is marked as t non-lex.  



4 Wordnet Errors Related to Non-
Lexicalized Synsets 

Now we present some of the problematic synsets 

from PWN and HuWN along with their solu-

tions. 

4.1 Problems in the Tree 

In certain cases, there is an incongruence be-

tween a synset and its hypernym. For instance, 

location:1 in PWN is defined as a point or extent 

in space; one of its hyponyms is bilocation:1 

with the definition of the ability (said of certain 

Roman Catholic saints) to exist simultaneously in 

two locations (unique beginner synset: entity:1). 

To our mind, this relation is invalid as their defi-

nitions are incompatible and only seem to make a 

formal hyper-hyponym pair. Instead, bilocation 

should be linked to ability:2, pow-

er:3/képesség:2 on the basis of the definition 

given in PWN, or it could be also linked to phe-

nomenon:1/jelenség:1. If the structure of PWN 

is to be preserved in HuWN, this synset should 

be marked as non-lex and a new synset should be 

created under the correct hypernym (képesség:2 

or jelenség:1). 

4.2 Lexicalized Synsets Marked as Non-Lex 

In our opinion, in certain cases the annotators of 

HuWN made some mistakes. For instance, la-

bor:1 is now a non-lex synset but it should have 

been classed as a full-fledged lexicalized synset, 

a multiword expression fizikai munka ‘physical 

work’. Similarly, we think that seating:1, area:1 

should have been included as ülőhely ‘seat’. 

4.3 Non-Lexicalized Synsets Marked as 
Lexicalized 

An interesting example of non-lex synsets is bow 

and arrow:1/íj és nyílvessző:1. In our view, the 

synset was incorrectly tagged lexicalized as – 

though the two parts make up a single weapon – 

the projector (bow) and the projectile (arrow) do 

not form a lexicalized phrase in Hungarian. 

Attempts to find a Hungarian equivalent for 

PWN synsets sometimes led to such completely 

non-existent (although possible) synsets in Hun-

garian as fúvóeszköz:1 (blower:1). 

5 Eliminating Non-Lex Problems 

The large number of non-lexicalized synsets in 

the Hungarian wordnet raises questions concern-

ing the (organizing) principles of the Hungarian 

wordnet. Non-lex synsets – strictly speaking – 

are not part of the given language, and wordnets 

including many non-lexicalized items can hardly 

be regarded as reflecting the concepts of the giv-

en language. In order to overcome these prob-

lems, we propose to minimize the number of 

non-lexicalized synsets with the help of four 

strategies, which are presented below. 

5.1 Shortening the Tree 

We suggest that non-lex synsets without any hy-

ponym should be deleted from the tree. As hy-

pernyms can substitute hyponyms in every con-

text (see Section 3.2.1), this strategy does not 

undermine the expressibility of certain concepts. 

This might be useful in the following trees: 

 

1 freedom:1  szabadság:1 

2 liberty:1  (szabadság) 

 

There is no distinction made between the 

senses of the PWN concepts in Hungarian, thus, 

the lower non-lex synset should be deleted. This 

solution may be applied to certain culture- or 

geography-specific synsets as well. For instance, 

it proved sufficient to include only the major riv-

ers of the United States in HuWN, as there was 

no need to adapt all the rivers listed in PWN. 

5.2 Flattening the Tree 

Split concepts that can be paraphrased by giving 

a list should simply be deleted from the tree and 

all of their hyponyms can be attached to the hy-

pernym of the deleted synset. For instance, there 

are two non-lex synsets in the following tree: 

 

1 occupation:1, business:6, 

job:1, line of work:1, 

line:19 

foglalkozás:1, 

munka:3, hivatás:2, 

pálya:6 
2 profession:2 (foglalkozás) 

3 learned profession:1 (jog, orvostan és hit-

tudomány) 

4 law:5, practice of law:1 

medicine:3, practice of 

medicine:1 

theology:3 

jog:2, jogtudomány:1 

orvostudomány:1 

 

hittudomány:1 
 

The first non-lex synset corresponds to the 

same lexical item as its hypernym in Hungarian, 

so it is unnecessary to include the non-lex synset 

in the Hungarian wordnet. The second non-lex 

synset corresponds to an umbrella term in Eng-

lish, which has no proper Hungarian counterpart. 

Instead, the following tree should reflect the real 

conceptual hierarchy in Hungarian: 
 



1 foglalkozás:1,munka:3, hivatás:2, pálya:6 
2 jog:2, jogtudomány:1 

orvostudomány:1 

hittudomány:1 

5.3 Restructuring the Tree 

In certain cases, the reconstruction of the tree 

may be the most effective. First of all, let us il-

lustrate the problem with two charts representing 

the corresponding PWN and HuWN tree-sections 

(Hungarian paraphrases are equivalent to PWN 

definitions): 

 

1 building:1 épület:1 
2  

 
place of 

worship:1 

(istentisztelet helye “place of 

worship”) 

3

  
church:2 

 

temple:1 

(keresztény templom “Chris-

tian church”) 

(nem keresztény templom 

“non-Christian church”)  

 

In PWN, church:2 and temple:1 are hyponym 

synsets of place of worship:1 at the same level 

while, at present, they have no lexicalized coun-

terparts in the Hungarian wordnet. In order to 

eliminate the three non-lexicalized synsets in 

HuWN and to have lexicalized items there, we 

propose a solution in which templom (meaning a 

building for the worship of any deity or any reli-

gion in Hungarian, without distinguishing be-

tween a Christian or non-Christian place of wor-

ship) is placed in the hypernym position in paral-

lel with place of worship:1 and the two hypo-

nym synsets in PWN have no counterparts in the 

Hungarian tree. All the original hyponyms of 

church and temple can be linked under tem-

plom in Hungarian now. 
 

1 building:1  épület:1 
2 place of worship:1 templom:1 
3 church:2 

temple:1 

(-) 

(-) 

5.4 Lexicalizing the Concept 

In some cases, it happened that wordnet builders 

had made an error and marked lexicalized con-

cepts as non-lex (see Section 4.2). In other cases 

(see Section 3.1.6), certain concepts (mostly 

from the technological domain) became lexical-

ized over time and now they are genuine mem-

bers of the Hungarian language. The non-lex la-

bel of these synsets should be deleted and the 

synset should be treated as lexicalized, i.e. 

providing the definition, usage and literals for it. 

6 Building Independent Hungarian 
Trees 

At the outset of the project, wordnet builders de-

cided to follow the expand model, which meant 

that HuWN was largely built by simply translat-

ing PWN synsets and taking over its relations. 

To test the validity of this decision, we experi-

mented with the merge model and we also built 

trees that are truly representative of the structure 

of the Hungarian language so as to compare 

Hungarian and English trees.  

Hence, we decided to build an independent 

Hungarian tree from scratch and to examine if 

we could find matches in HuWN and PWN. 

First, we took a brand of the famous Hungarian 

wine called Tokay aszu. The following chart il-

lustrates the newly constructed Hungarian and 

the corresponding English tree from the top 

down. [mX] denotes synsets that make perfect 

matches in the independent Hungarian tree, 

HuWn and PWN. At level 8, there are two rele-

vant concepts that are hyponyms of fehérbor. 

Tokaji aszú at level 10 is a hyponym of both 

aszúbor and tokaji. 
 

1 entitás:1 [m7] entity 

2 anyag:1 [m6] substance 

3 folyadék:2 | táp-

anyag:1 

[m5] liquid |  food 

4 ital:1   [m4] beverage 

5 szeszes ital:1 [m3] alcohol 

6 bor:1 [m2] wine 

7 fehérbor:1 [m1] white wine 

8 desszertbor | tokaji dessert wine   |   Tokaji 

9 aszúbor  

 

aszu wine (botrytized 

wine) 

10 tokaji aszú (hypo-

nym of tokaji too) 

aszu wine from Tokaj 

11 hatputtonyos tokaji 

aszú 

six-puttonyos Tokay aszu 

12 Oremus hatputto-

nyos tokaji aszú 

six-puttonyos Tokay aszu 

from Oremus winery 

 

Concepts at levels 9-12 cannot be found in 

HuWN at all and have no corresponding synsets 

in PWN either. The concepts at level 8 have no 

corresponding synsets in HuWN, however, des-

szertbor has a lexical and conceptual counterpart 

in PWN. 

There seems to be a problem regarding the 

concept tokaji in the above chart and the synset 

Tokay in PWN. Tokaji in Hungarian (and in Eng-



lish language sources as well
2
) refers to all the 

wines produced in the Tokaj district of North-

eastern Hungary. This concept does not seem to 

have an equivalent in PWN: it certainly has no 

formal equivalent and it cannot be decided what 

the definition of the synset Tokay:1 (PWN defi-

nition: Hungarian wine made from Tokay 

grapes) refers to exactly. To our mind, it seems 

closer in meaning to Tokay aszu, which was 

formerly known throughout the English-speaking 

world as Tokay (Webster’s 1913). Thus, it seems 

that the Hungarian concept, tokaji – which was 

not included in HuWN – has no equivalent in 

PWN. 

Fehérbor (white wine) splits into desszertbor 

(dessert wine) and tokaji (Tokaji) at level 8, only 

to merge again at tokaji aszú (Tokay (aszu)), at 

level 10. Aszúbor (botrytized wine) at level 9 is a 

non-existent synset in PWN. 

The tree was built from scratch but it is quite 

evident that – apart from the levels below 7 – it 

matches perfectly the Hungarian wordnet: synset 

numbers are actual sense numbers found in 

HuWN. Ital:1 has two hypernyms, both merging 

into the same hypernym at level 2. These facts 

suggest that a merge model would also have been 

applied in the construction of HuWN. 

7 Discussion 

Since languages and cultures differ from each 

other, there are necessarily concepts that may be 

lexicalized in one but not in the other and vice 

versa. Non-lexicalized elements reflect either 

conceptual or cultural differences between lan-

guages and hence can be used for checking the 

similarities among languages. The Hungarian 

wordnet – having been constructed according to 

the expand model – in its present form contains a 

relatively high number of non-lexicalized synsets 

but should there be a revision, they might be de-

leted from the tree (either by shortening or flat-

tening the tree), the tree might be restructured, or 

they might be lexicalized (if erroneously anno-

tated as non-lex). In this way, the Hungarian 

wordnet would really reflect the hierarchy of the 

Hungarian language. 

Our experiments with building independent 

Hungarian trees showed that it would also have 

been viable to apply the merge model for word-

net building. Most of the synsets within the trees 

can be linked to a corresponding English synset, 

thus, interlinguality can also be assured as well. 

                                                 
2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tokaji 

The results of our experiments also led us to 

ask whether it was justifiable to include non-

lexicalized items in PWN. From a purely lexical 

point of view, these concepts do not exist in the 

language and so may be deleted from the hierar-

chy. The argument that should there be no good 

person and bad person synsets in PWN, offender 

and lover would be sisters, being the hyponyms 

of person (Fellbaum 1998) can be refuted by 

stating that this would not cause much difficulty 

given that among the children of person, we can 

already find synsets denoting positive concepts 

(enjoyer), negative concepts (killer) and neutral 

concepts (candidate). A second issue concerning 

PWN is that although it was intended to model 

the human mind, there are concepts that cannot 

be found there: see the example of elder and 

younger brothers and sisters, which are separate 

lexical items in Hungarian, so they denote differ-

ent concepts and if the original plan had been 

followed, they should occur in PWN too – at 

least as non-lexicalized synsets. A third issue 

with PWN is that no distinction is made between 

lexicalized and non-lexicalized ones, i.e. no la-

bels like non-lex are used, which somewhat un-

dermines its usage as a dictionary. Although 

PWN was intended to reflect the hierarchy of 

concepts thought to be universal, it is very often 

used as a traditional dictionary of lexical units 

and hence it should be the case that lexicalized 

and non-lexicalized concepts are distinguished. 

In spite of this, we argue that the marking of 

non-lex synsets can be profitable as well, espe-

cially in an interlingual context. Researchers 

from different fields can exploit the benefits of 

non-lex synsets. Psycholinguists might want to 

compare the hierarchy of mental concepts of 

speakers of different languages – with the help of 

non-lex labels since differences are explicitly 

marked in wordnets built using the expand meth-

od. Culture-specific non-lex synsets might be 

used in ethnographic research. Non-lex synsets 

associated with linguistic differences (e.g. nega-

tive prefixes) can contribute to theoretical lin-

guistic research and contrastive linguistics. 

Based on the above points, we may conclude 

that the usability of wordnets is greatly influ-

enced by the way they were constructed. Word-

nets based on the merge model match the lexical 

hierarchy of the given language, so they can be 

used as dictionaries as well and they do not in-

clude marked non-lexicalized synsets. Due to the 

absence of non-lex synsets, matching them to 

other languages is quite difficult and they can be 

used for psycholinguistic comparative studies 

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tokaji


only in a limited way. Wordnets based on the 

expand model – such as HuWN – mainly follow 

the conceptual hierarchy defined in PWN, and 

contain a lot of non-lexicalized synsets. They can 

be used for making interlingual or psycholinguis-

tic comparisons, but they reflect the structure of 

the given language to a lesser degree. However, 

with the strategies of deleting unnecessary non-

lex synsets and restructuring the tree, it is possi-

ble to eliminate some of the non-lexicalized 

items and the wordnet based on the expand mod-

el may gradually converge to the one based on 

the merge model, without involving the effort of 

building a new wordnet from scratch. 

8 Summary 

In this study, we examined the precise effects of 

the expand model on the quality of the Hungari-

an WordNet. We investigated the types of non-

lexicalized synsets and we proposed some strate-

gies – including deleting superfluous synsets and 

reorganizing the trees – that may be used to 

overcome difficulties concerning non-lexicalized 

synsets in wordnets constructed with the expand 

method. We also presented an independent Hun-

garian tree – built to reflect Hungarian hierarchy 

and concepts – to see whether we could find 

matches with HuWN and PWN. It was shown 

that the merge model could also have been ap-

plied to Hungarian, and with the help of the 

above-mentioned strategies, a wordnet based on 

the expand model can be transformed to a word-

net similar to the one constructed with the merge 

model, which would reflect the conceptual hier-

archy of Hungarian better. As the way of con-

struction strongly influences the usability of 

wordnets, this latter version can be primarily 

used in intralingual research that focuses on 

Hungarian. Still, marked non-lexicalized ele-

ments could prove useful in different fields of 

research such as psycholinguistics, ethnography 

and contrastive linguistics. Hence, the originally 

published version based on the expand model 

can be also utilized in different fields of research. 

In the future, we would like to modify the 

Hungarian wordnet and by eliminating superflu-

ous non-lexicalized items, we would like to de-

velop a wordnet that really takes into account the 

Hungarian way of lexicalizing mental concepts. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was in part supported by the European 

Union and co-funded by the European Social 

Fund through the project Telemedicine-focused 

research activities in the fields of mathematics, 

informatics and medical sciences (grant no.: 

TÁMOP-4.2.2.A-11/1/KONV-2012-0073). 

References 

Zoltán Alexin, János Csirik, András Kocsor, Márton 

Miháltz, and György Szarvas. 2006. Construction 

of the Hungarian EuroWordNet Ontology and its 

Application to Information Extraction. In Proceed-

ings of GWC 2006, South Jeju Island, Korea, pages 

291–292. 

Eneko Agirre, Izaskun Aldezabal, and Elisabete Poci-

ello. 2006. Lexicalization and multiword expres-

sions in the Basque WordNet. In Proceedings of 

the Third International WordNet Conference 

(GWC2006), Jeju Island, Korea, pages 131–138. 

Antonietta Alonge, Nicoletta Calzolari, Piek Vossen, 

Laura Bloksma, Irene Castellon, Maria Antonia 

Marti, and Wim Peters. 1998. The Linguistic De-

sign of the EuroWordNet Database. Computers and 

the Humanities. Special Issue on EuroWordNet, 

32(2–3): 91–115. 

Pushpak Bhattacharyya, Christiane Fellbaum, and 

Piek Vossen, editors. 2010. Principles, Construc-

tion and Application of Multilingual Wordnets. 

Proceedings of GWC 2010. Mumbai, India, Narosa 

Publishing House. 

Alan Cruse. 2000. Meaning in language: An introduc-

tion to semantics and pragmatics. London, Oxford 

University Press. 

Magdalena Derwojedowa, Maciej Piasecki, Stanisław 

Szpakowicz, Magdalena Zawisłavska, and Bartosz 

Broda. 2008. Words, Concepts and Relations in the 

Construction of Polish WordNet. In Proceedings of 

GWC 2008, Szeged, University of Szeged, De-

partment of Informatics, pages 167–68. 

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-

tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press. 

Christiane Fellbaum, and Piek Vossen, editors. 2012. 

Proceedings of GWC 2012. Matsue, Japan. 

Ray Jackendoff. 2010. Meaning and the Lexicon: The 

Parallel Architecture 1975–2010. Oxford Univer-

sity Press, Oxford. 

Judit Kuti, Károly Varasdi, Ágnes Gyarmati, 

and Péter Vajda. 2008. Language Independent and 

Language Dependent Innovations in the Hungari-

an WordNet. In Proceedings of GWC 2008, Sze-

ged, University of Szeged, Department of Infor-

matics, pages 254–268. 

Leonhard Lipka. 1992. Lexicalization and institution-

alization in English and German. Or: Piefke, Wen-

dehals, smog, perestroika, AIDS etc. Zeitschrift für 

Anglistik und Amerikanistik 40:101–111.  



Márton Miháltz, Csaba Hatvani, Judit Kuti, György 

Szarvas, János Csirik, Gábor Prószéky, and Tamás 

Váradi. 2008. Methods and Results of the Hungari-

an WordNet Project. In Proceedings of GWC 2008, 

Szeged, University of Szeged, Department of In-

formatics, pages 311–320. 

George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fell-

baum, Derek Gross, and Katherine Miller. 1990. 

Introduction to WordNet: an On-line Lexical Data-

base. International Journal of Lexicography, 

3(4):235–244. 

Elisabete Pociello, Eneko Agirre, and Izaskun 

Aldezabal. 2011. Methodology and construction of 

the Basque WordNet. Language Resources and 

Evaluation, 45:121–142. 

Ida Raffaelli, Marko Tadić, Božo Bekavac, and Žel-
jko Agić. 2008. Building Croatian WordNet. In 

Proceedings of GWC 2008, Szeged, University of 

Szeged, Department of Informatics, pages 349–

359. 

Attila Tanács, Dóra Csendes, Veronika Vincze, Chris-

tiane Fellbaum, and Piek Vossen, editors. 2008. 

Proceedings of GWC 2008. Szeged, University of 

Szeged, Department of Informatics. 

Dan Tufiş, editor. 2004. Romanian Journal of Infor-

mation Science and Technology. Special Issue on 

BalkaNet, 7(1–2). 

Dan Tufiş, Dan Cristea, and Sofia Stamou. 2004. Bal-

kaNet: Aims, Methods, Results and Perspectives. 

A General Overview. Romanian Journal of Infor-

mation Science and Technology. Special Issue on 

BalkaNet, 7(1–2):9–43. 

Piek Vossen, editor. 1998. EuroWordNet: a multilin-

gual database with lexical semantic networks for 

European Languages. Dordrecht, Kluwer. 

Piek Vossen. 1999. EuroWordNet general document. 

EuroWordNet (LE2-4003, LE4-8328), part A, final 

document deliverable D032D033/2D014. 

Webster’s New International Dictionary of the Eng-

lish Language. 1913. Springfield, Mass.: G.&C. 

Merriam. 

Hamza Zidoum. 2008. Towards the Construction of a 

Comprehensive Arabic WordNet. In Proceedings 

of GWC 2008, Szeged, University of Szeged, De-

partment of Informatics, pages 531–544. 


