



















































I am borrowing ya mixing ? An Analysis of English-Hindi Code Mixing in Facebook


Proceedings of The First Workshop on Computational Approaches to Code Switching, pages 116–126,
October 25, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

“I am borrowing ya mixing ?” 

An Analysis of English-Hindi Code Mixing in Facebook 

 

 

Kalika Bali          Jatin Sharma           Monojit Choudhury 

Microsoft Research Lab India 

{kalikab,jatin.sharma,monojitc}@microsoft.com 

 

Yogarshi Vyas* 

University of Maryland  

yogarshi@cs.umd.edu 

 

Abstract1 

Code-Mixing is a frequently observed 

phenomenon in social media content gen-

erated by multi-lingual users. The pro-

cessing of such data for linguistic analysis 

as well as computational modelling is 

challenging due to the linguistic complex-

ity resulting from the nature of the mixing 

as well as the presence of non-standard 

variations in spellings and grammar, and 

transliteration. Our analysis shows the ex-

tent of Code-Mixing in English-Hindi 

data. The classification of Code-Mixed 

words based on frequency and linguistic 

typology underline the fact that while 

there are easily identifiable cases of bor-

rowing and mixing at the two ends, a large 

majority of the words form a continuum in 

the middle, emphasizing the need to han-

dle these at different levels for automatic 

processing of the data. 

1 Introduction 

The past decade has seen an explosion of Com-

puter Mediated Communication (CMC) world-

wide (Herring 2003). CMC provides users with 

multiple options, both asynchronous and synchro-

nous, like email, chat, and more recently, social 

media like Facebook and Twitter (Isharayanti et al 

2009, Paolillo 2011). This form of communica-

tion raises interesting questions on language use 

across these media. Language use in CMC lies 

somewhere in between spoken and written forms 

                                                 
1 This work was done during the author’s internship at Mi-

crosoft Research Lab India.  

of a language, and tend to use simple shorter con-

structions, contractions, and phrasal repetitions 

typical of speech (Dannett and Herring 2007) 

Such conversations, especially in social-media are 

also multi-party and multilingual, with switching 

between, and mixing of two or more languages, 

the choice of language-use being highly influ-

enced by the speakers and their communicative 

goals (Crystal 2001). 

Code-Switching and Code-Mixing are stable and 

well-studied linguistic phenomena of multilingual 

speech communities. Code-Switching is “juxta-

position within the same speech exchange of pas-

sages of speech belonging to two different gram-

matical systems or sub-systems” (Gumperz 1982), 

and Code-Mixing refers to the embedding of lin-

guistic units such as phrases, words and mor-

phemes of one language into an utterance of an-

other language (Myers-Scotton 1993, 2002). 

Thus, Code-Switching is usually inter-sentences 

while Code-Mixing (CM) is an intra-sentential 

phenomenon. Linguists believe that there exists a 

continuum in the manner in which a lexical item 

transfers from one to another of two languages in 

contact (Myers-Scotton 2002, Thomason 2003). 

Example (1) below illustrates the phenomenon of 

Code-Switching, while (2) shows Code-Mixing. 

 

(1) I was going for a movie yesterday. raaste 

men mujhe Sudha mil gayi.  

Gloss: [I was going for a movie yesterday.] 

way in I Sudha meet went 

Translation: I was going for a movie yester-

day; I met Sudha on the way. 

116



 

(2) Main kal movie dekhne jaa rahi thi and 

raaste me I met Sudha. 

Gloss: I yesterday [movie] to-see go Contin-

uous-marker was [and] way in [I met] Sudha.  

Translation: I was going for a movie yester-

day and on the way I met Sudha. 

 

The main view held by linguists being that a lexi-

cal item goes from being used as a foreign word 

to a valid loanword indistinguishable from the na-

tive vocabulary by virtue of repeated use and 

adoption of morpho-syntactic features of the re-

cipient language (Auer 1984). However, in the 

case of single words, most scholars agree that it is 

difficult to determine whether or not a word is a 

“bona fide loanword/borrowing” or an instance of 

nonce borrowing2 or CM (Alex 2008, Bentahila 

and Davies, 1991, Field 2002, Myers-Scotton 

2002, Winford 2003). In this study, we only con-

sider Code-mixing examples, i.e., intra-sentential 

embedding of a language in another language. 

Processing such language data is challenging 

from the perspective of linguistic understanding 

vis-à-vis discourse and conversational analysis, as 

well as computational modelling and applications 

to Machine Translation, Information Retrieval 

and Natural Interfaces. Especially, in the case of 

social-media content where there are added com-

plications due to contractions, non-standard spell-

ings, and ungrammatical constructions as well as 

mixing of scripts. Many languages that use non-

Roman scripts, like Hindi, Bangla, Chinese, Ara-

bic etc., are often represented using Roman trans-

literations (Virga and Khudanpur 2003, Sowmya 

et al 2010). This poses additional challenges of ac-

curately identifying and separating the two lan-

guages. Further, it is often difficult to disambigu-

ate a borrowing as a valid native vocabulary from 

a mixing of a second language when dealing with 

single words. An understanding of the nature of 

mixing in such data is one of the first steps to-

wards processing this data and hence, making a 

more natural interaction in CMC a real possibility. 

                                                 
2 Nonce-borrowings are typically borrowings that do 

not necessarily follow any phonological, morpho-syn-

tactic or sociolinguistic constraints on their assimila-

tion into the host language (Poplack et al 1988). How-

ever, it is not clear if this is always a defining feature 

In this paper, we analyze social media content 

from English-Hindi (En-Hin) bilingual users to 

better understand CM in such data. We look at the 

extent of CM in both Hindi embedding in English, 

as well as English in Hindi. Our analysis of the 

type of CM in this context based on frequency of 

use and linguistic typology helps further an under-

standing of the different kinds of CM employed 

by users and emphasizes the need to tackle these 

at different levels. 

Facebook 

Page 

No. of 

likes 

No. of 

posts col-

lected 

No. of 

comments 

collected 

Amitabh 

Bachchan 

12,674,509 5 3364 

BBC 

Hindi 

1,876,306 18 240 

Narendra 

Modi 

15,150,669 15 2779 

Shahrukh 

Khan 

8,699,146 2 600 

Total  40 6983 

 

Table 1: Facebook Data Source  

2 Corpus Creation and Annotation 

For the creation of corpus for studying En-Hin 

CM, data from public Facebook pages in which 

En-Hin bilinguals are highly active was consid-

ered appropriate. Hence, we chose the Facebook 

pages of three Indian public figures, two promi-

nent Bollywood stars viz, Amitabh Bachchan and 

Shahrukh Khan, and the then-PM-elect Narendra 

Modi. We also collected data from the BBC Hindi 

News page. The assumption was that Bollywood, 

politics and news being three very popular areas 

of interest for Indians, we would see a lot of activ-

ity from the community on these pages. A total of 

40 posts from Oct 22- 28, 2013 were manually 

collected and preference was given to posts hav-

ing a long (50+) thread of comments. This is be-

cause CM and non-standard use of language is 

more frequent in comments. In the rest of the pa-

per, we shall use the term posts to cover both com-

ments and posts. The data was semi-automatically 

cleaned and formatted, removing user names for 

privacy. The names of public figures in the posts 

were retained. The final corpus consisted of 6983 

between established loanwords and nonce-borrowing, 

the line between them being extremely tenuous 

(Sankoff et al, 1990) 

117



posts and 113,578 words. Table 1 shows the data 

source statistics.  

While a number of posts were in the Devanagari 

script, the largest representation was that of Ro-

man script. A small number of posts were found 

in the script of other Indian languages like Bangla, 

Telugu etc. Tables 2 (a) and (b) show the distribu-

tion of posts and words by script 

 

 
Facebook 

Page 

Deva-

nagari 

Roman Mixed 

Script 

Other 

Script 

Amitabh 

Bachhcan 

73 3168 112 16 

BBC 

Hindi 

56 175 27 0 

Narendra 

Modi 

77 2633 84 11 

Shahrukh 

Khan 

0 578 23 1 

 

Table 2 (a): Script used for Posts 

 

 
Facebook 

Page 

Deva-

nagari 

Roman Other 

Script 

Symbols 

Amitabh 

Bachhcan 
2661 38144 439 1768 

BBC 

Hindi 
5225 4265 23 160 

Narendra 

Modi 
9509 43,804 217 1470 

Shahrukh 

Khan 
0 5,514 105 274 

 

Table 2(b): Script used for Words 

2.1 Annotation 

As a first step towards analysis, it is imperative 

that an annotation scheme be arrived at that cap-

tures the richness, diversity and uniqueness of the 

data. Any analysis of code-mixed CMC language-

use requires inputs at social, contextual, and dif-

ferent linguistic and meta-linguistic levels that op-

erate on various sub-parts of the conversation. 

This would help label not only the structural lin-

guistics phenomena such as POS tagging, 

Chunks, Phrases, Semantic Roles etc.  but also the 

various socio-pragmatic contexts (User de-

mographics, Communicative intent, Polarity etc.). 

However, an initial attempt at such a rich, layered 

annotation proved the task to be immensely re-

source intensive. Hence, for the initial analysis the 

annotation scheme was scaled down to four la-

bels: 

Matrix: Myers Scotton’s (1993) framework, CM 

occurs where one language provides the morpho-

syntactic frame into which a second language in-

serts words and phrases. The former is termed as 

the Matrix while the latter is called Embedding. 

Usually, matrix language can be assigned to 

clauses and sentences. 

Following this framework, the annotator was 

asked to split all posts into contiguous fragments 

of words such that each fragment has a unique ma-

trix language (En or Hin) 

Word Origin: Every embedded word is marked 

for its origin (En or Hin) depending on whether 

the source language was English or Hindi. A word 

from a language other than English or Hindi was 

marked as Other (Ot). It was assumed that the un-

marked words within a matrix language origi-

nated in that language. In our data we did not find 

examples of sub-lexical CM. For example an Eng-

lish word with Hindi inflection like computeron 

(कम्प्यूटरों) were the English word “computer” is 
inflected by the Hindi plural marker –on. How-

ever, this can be a possible occurrence in En-Hin 

CM and needs to be marked as such. 

Normalization: Whenever a word in its native 

script uses a non-standard spelling (including con-

tractions) it is marked with its correct spellings. 

For transliterations of Hindi in Roman script, the 

word is marked with the correct spelling in Deva-

nagari script.  

POS tagging: Each word is labelled with its POS 

tag following the Universal Tagset proposed by 

Petrov et al (2011). This tagset uses 12 high-level 

tags for main POS classes. While, this tagset is not 

good at capturing granularity at a deeper level, we 

chose this because of a) its applicability to both 

English and Hindi doing away with the need for 

any mapping of labels between the two languages, 

and b) the small size of the corpus posed serious 

doubts on the usefulness of a more granular tagset 

for any analysis. 

The POS tags were decided on the basis of the 

function of the word in a context rather than a de-

contextualized absolute word class. This was done 

because often in the case of embedded words, the 

lexical category of the original language is com-

pletely lost and it is the function of the word in the 

matrix language that applies and assumes im-

portance. 

Named Entities: Named Entities (NE) are per-

haps the most common and amongst the first to 

form the borrowed or mixed vocabulary in CM. 

As the Universal Tagset did not have a separate 

118



category for NEs, we chose to label and classify 

them as people, locations and organizations. It is 

important to remember that while NEs are perhaps 

the most frequent “borrowings” the notion of 

Word Origin in the context of CM is debatable. 

However, these need to be analyzed and processed 

separately for any NLP application. 

1062 posts consisting of 1071 words were ran-

domly selected and annotated by a linguist who is 

a native speaker of Hindi and proficient in Eng-

lish. Non-overlapping subsets of the annotations 

were then reviewed and corrected by two expert 

linguists.  

The two annotated examples from the corpus of 

En in Hin Matrix and Hin in En Matrix are given 

below: 
 

 
<s> 

 <matrix name="Hindi"> 

love_NOUN/E affection_NOUN/E le-

kar_VERB/”ले कर” 
salose_NOUN=saalon/”सालों से” 
sunday_NOUN/E ke_ADP/”के” 
din_NOUN/“दिन” chali_VERB/ “चली” aar-
ahi_VERB/“आ रही” divine_ADJ/E param-
para_NOUN/“परंपरा“ ko_ADP/“को” 
age_NOUN=aage/“आगे” badhha_VERB/“बढ़ा” 
rahe_VERB/”रहे” ho_VERB/“हो” 
 </matrix> 

</s> 

Translation: The divine tradition that (you) have 

been carrying forward every Sunday with love 

and affection.  

 
<s> 
<matrix name="English"> 

 sir_NOUN u_PRON=you r_VERB=are 

blessed_VERB by_ADP entire_ADJ brah-

mand_NOUN/H“ब्रह्माण्ड” 
 </matrix> 

</s> 

Translation: Sir, you are blessed by the entire 

Universe. 

 

It was observed that a large chunk of data con-

sisted of short posts typically a greeting or a eu-

logy from a fan of the public figures and were un-

interesting from a structural linguistic analysis of 

CM. Thus, all such posts (consisting of 5 or less 

words) were deleted from the corpus and the re-

maining corpus of 381 posts and 4135 words was 

used for further analysis. 

3 An Analysis of Code Mixed Data 

The annotated data consists of 398 Hin sentences, 

698 En and 6 Ot in a single language. 45 posts 

show at least one switch in matrix between En and 

Hin. Thus, at least 4.2% of the data is Code-

Switched. It should be noted however that this is 

matrix switching within an utterance. If we con-

sider Code-Switching at a global level to include 

switching from one language to another within a 

conversation thread then all the threads in the data 

show code-switching as they contain utterances 

from both English and Hindi.  

Looking at the 398 Hindi matrices, we find that 

23.7% of them show at least one En embedding as 

compared to only 7.2% of the En matrices with 

Hin embedding. In total 17.2% of all posts which 

consist of nearly a quarter of all words in the data 

show some amount of CM. 

 If we look at the number of points in a single ma-

trix where embedding happens, we find that in 

86% of  the En matrices, Hin embeddings appear 

only once or twice. En embeddings in Hin matrix 

is not only twice as more frequent, but can occur 

more often in a single matrix (more than 3 times 

in at least 10% of the cases). Table 3 shows the 

distribution of CM points for both the cases. 

 

# of points Hin in En En in Hin 

1 11 (36.66%) 19 (31.15%) 

2 15 (50%) 28 (45.9%) 

3 2   (6.67%) 2   (3.28%) 

4 2   (6.67%) 9   (5.49%) 

5 0 2   (3.28%) 

6 0 1   (1.64%) 

Total 30 61 

 

Table 3: Distribution of CM points 

 

 

 

Table 4: Distribution of NE by Type 

 

As expected, NEs are common in the corpus and 

there are a total of 233 NEs in 406 matrices (322 

of 4134 words). The distribution of NEs by sub-

classes is given in Table 4. 

Table 5 shows the distribution of the various POS 

in the entire corpus, as well as for the embedded 

words. Nouns do form the largest class of words 

NE Type Person 159 

NE Type Location 39 

NE Type Organization 35 

Total NE 233 

119



overall as well as for Hin as well as En embed-

ding. In fact, for Hin in English matrix, there are 

only two instances of words which are not Nouns. 

Table 5 shows the distribution of POS for Hin in 

En matrix, and En in Hin matrix 

Looking at these top-level distributions we can 

observe that though there are some similarities be-

tween the patterns of CM for Hin in English and 

En in Hindi matrices (the high frequency of 

nouns, for instance), they both exhibit distinct pat-

terns in terms of how often CM occurs as well as 

in the prevalence of POS other than Nouns. In 

Section 3.1 and 3.2 we will look at both these L1 

embedding in L2 matrix individually in more de-

tail. 

3.1 Hindi words in English matrix 

As mentioned above, most of the Hin embedding 

in En (32 out of 33) matrices are Nouns. The ex-

ception is variation of the particle “ji” used as an 

honorific marker in Hindi. The particle is used to 

denote respect and occurs in formulaic expression 

of the kind <(name/address form)> ji as in: 

 

“Amit ji, I am your fan and have seen all your 

movies” 

 

A closer look at the embedded Hin Nouns shows 

that a large number of them are actually part of 

multi-word Named Entities which do not fall un-

der the categories defined in the annotation guide-

lines. Almost all of them also function as regular 

Nouns or Verbs in Hindi. For example, the word 

“hunkaar” (a roar) is not an NE, however its use 

in the following sentence, where it is used to de 

note the name of a particular rally (event) can be 

viewed as an NE. 

 

“hunkar rally will be held tomorrow” 

 

Similarly, the word “yaatraa” in Hindi means 

journey whereas its use in the phrase “Kerala 

yaatraa” is specific to a tour of Kerala. 

 

There are some instances of nonce-borrowing or 

CM where Hindi Nouns are not used as a part of a 

potential NE or formulaic expressions. For exam-

ple, in the following sentence: 

 

“…and the party workers (will) come with me 

without virodh” 

 

The Hindi word “virodh” is used instead of the 

English alternative “protest” or “objection”. It can 

only be assumed that the user did this for sociolin-

guistic or pragmatic reasons to emphasize or hu-

mour. 

 

Kinship terms form another domain of frequent 

embedding of Hin in En. Hindi has a more com-

plex system of kinship terms where not only are 

there finer distinctions maintained between mater-

nal and paternal relations but also kinship terms 

are used to address older (and hence) respectable 

people. Thus, we find the use of “chacha” (fa-

ther’s younger brother), “bhaiya” (elder brother) 

as well as “baapu” (father) used frequently in the 

data as address forms. 

3.2 English words in Hindi matrix 

There is a far greater use of English words in 

Hindi matrices both as single words as well as 

multi-word expressions. A total of 116 unique 

Hindi words are found embedded in En matrices 

of which 76 are single word embedding and the 

rest are a part of 16 multi-word expressions. 

While Nouns continue to dominate the POS class 

of the Hindi embedding as well, there is far more 

variations in the type of CM that seems to be hap-

pening in this case. 

3.2.1 Single Word Embedding 

As in the case of English embedding (3.1) we find 

a number of Hindi Noun embedding to be of kin-

ship terms, greetings and other address form. 

POS 

Tag 

Over-

all 

En in Hin 

matrix* 

Hin in  En 

matrix* 

NOUN 1260 77 32 

VERB 856 8  
PRON 499 4  
ADP 445 0  
ADJ 302 16  
PRT 241 4 1 
DET 141 2  
. 125 NA  
ADV 104 3  
CNJ 98 2  
NUM 46 0  
X 18 0  
Total 4135   
Table 5: POS distribution for the Annotated 

Corpus.  

* Overall distribution is given at token level 

whereas the embedding En in Hin matrix, and 

Hin in E matrix are at Unique Word level. 

 

120



Words like, “sir”, “uncle”, “hello”, “good morn-

ing” etc are used frequently to start or end a par-

ticular turn.  

A fraction of Nouns are genuine borrowings into 

the language is no Hindi equivalent for that 

word/concept. Common examples are words like 

“goal” and “bomb” which may be considered a 

part of the Hindi vocabulary. What is interesting 

is that users’ variations in spellings these words 

either in English (“goal”, “bomb”) or in equiva-

lent Hindi transliteration (“gol”, “bam”). This 

may be taken as an indication that the user is not 

actively conscious of using an English word. 

However, there are a fairly large number of Nouns 

as single words where this is not applicable as in: 

 

“agar aap BJP ke follower hain to is page ko like 

karen” 

 

(If you are a BJP follower then like this page) 

 

where there are frequently used Hindi equivalents 

but the user seems to be following certain conven-

tions on Facebook (“page” and “like”) or is mix-

ing for other purposes (“follower”) 

 

Single adjectives are not as common and when 

used are mostly intensifiers such as “very” or 

“best” etc. There are some instances of adjectives 

as nonce-borrowings such as in the following ex-

ample: 

 

“…divine paramparaa ko aage…” 

(…(taking the) divine tradition forward…) 

 

Single verb embedding of En words are always of 

the form V + kar in the data. The verb karnaa (“to 

do”) in Hindi is used to form conjunctives in 

Hindi. Thus, we have a number of Hindi phrases 

of the type: kaam karnaa  “ work to do” (to work), 

and a closer look at the English Verbs embedded 

in Hindi shows that most of these are actually in 

their nominalized form, such as “ driving kar-

naa”, or as a V + V conjunct such as “admit kar-

naa”. 

There are fewer instances of other POS classes, 

however, one interesting case is the use of con-

juncts like “but” and “and” to join two Hindi 

clauses as in: 

 

“main to gayi thi but wo wahaan nahi thaa” 

(I had gone but he wasn’t there) 

 

3.2.2 Multi Word Embedding 

Multi word expressions in English used in a Hindi 

matrix range from standard formulaic expressions 

to clause or phrase insertion. Other than standard 

greetings, these formulaic (or frozen) expression 

may work as Named Entities or Nominal com-

pounds as in the case of  “Film star”, “Cricket 

player”, “Health minister”, “Educational Insti-

tutes” and “Participation Certificate”. There are 

also other expressions that border on formulaic in 

English but which nevertheless have an ambigu-

ous status within Hindi, such as, “love and affec-

tion”. Another example of such a case of MW em-

bedding is: 

 

“Befitting reply to mere papa ne maaraa” 

 

(my father gave a befitting reply) 

 

Here, while “befitting reply” is not really a formu-

laic expression in Hindi, the user is clearly using 

it as such with the use of  the  emphatic to and the 

use of the verb maaraa (“hit”) instead of  diyaa 

(“gave”) 

 

Clause or phrase level mixing, though less fre-

quent can also be found in the data. For example,  

 

“Those who support the opposition kabhi Mu-

zaffarnagar aa kar dekho” 

 

(Those who support the opposition should come 

to Muzaffarnagar and see (for themselves)) 

 

This is a classic case of CM where both the 

phrases retain the grammatical structure of the 

language concerned. 

 

As can be seen from the analysis of the annotated 

corpus above, Code-Mixing if understood as the 

insertion of words from a language into the gram-

matical structure of another, can show a wide var-

iation in its structural linguistic manifestation.  

4 Borrowing ya Mixing? 

In linguistic literature on “other language embed-

ding” there has been a long-standing debate on 

what is true Code-mixing, what is nonce-word 

borrowing, and what are  “loanwords” that 

are integrated into the native vocabulary and 

grammatical structure (Bentahila and Davies,  
1991, Field 2002, Myers-Scotton 2002, Winford 

2003, Poplack and Dion 2012). Many linguists be-

lieve that loan-words start out as a CM or Nonce-

121



borrowing but by repeated use and diffusion 

across the language they gradually convert to na-

tive vocabulary and acquire the characteristics of 

the “borrowing” language (see Alex (2008) for a 

discussion). Normally, they look at spoken forms 

to see phonological convergence and inflections 

for morpho-syntactic convergence. However, as 

pointed out by Poplack and Dion (2012) the prob-

lem with this is that in many cases a native “ac-

cent” might be mistaken for phonological conver-

gence, and a morpho-syntactic marking might not 

be readily visible. For example, most Hindi speak-

ers of English would pronounce an English alve-

olar /d/ as a retroflex because an alveolar plosive 

is not a part of the Hindi phonology. However, 

this does not imply that the said English word has 

become a part of the native vocabulary. Similarly, 

if we look at the two sentences: 

 

“sab artists ko bulayaa hai”  

(all artists have been called), 

 

and 

 

“sab artist kal aayenge” 

(all artists will come tomorrow) 

 

In the first sentence the English inflection –s on 

the word artist marks it as plural but in the second 

case, the plural is marked on the Hindi Verb. Does 

this imply that in the first case it is CM and in the 

second a case of borrowing given that both the 

forms and the structures are equally acceptable 

and common in Hindi?  

Many studies (Mysken 2000, Gardner-Chloros. 

2009, Poplack and Dion 2012 etc.) thus point out 

that it is not easy to decide these categories espe-

cially for single words without looking at dia-

chronic data and the inherent fuzziness of the dis-

tinction itself. In general, it is believed that there 

exists a sort of continuum between CM and loan 

vocabulary where the edges might be clearly dis-

tinguishable but it is difficult to disambiguate the 

vast majority in the middle especially for single 

words.  

As we have seen in the preceding Section CM of 

Hin in English matrix mainly follows a very dis-

tinct pattern of using NEs (and functional NEs) 

and formulaic expressions. However, in the case 

of En in Hindi CM, there is a far wider variation 

and it could be difficult in many instances to de-

cide by just looking at the data whether a certain 

embedding is a borrowing or CM. 

One way to make a distinction between a borrow-

ing and CM could be to look at the diffusion of the 

word in the native language. Borrowed words of-

ten appear in monolingual usage long before dic-

tionaries and lexicons adopt them as native vocab-

ulary. Thus, to judge the diffusion of an English 

word one would have to look at the frequency of 

its use in suitable monolingual context such as 

news wire data, chat logs or telephone conversa-

tions.  

For a further analysis of En embedding in Hin 

matrix in our data, we decided to check their fre-

quency based diffusion in a monolingual new cor-

pus of Hindi. For this purpose we took a corpus of 

51,277,891words from Dainik Jagaran 

(http://www.jagran.com/), a popular daily news-

paper in Hindi, and created a frequency count of 

the 230,116 unique words in it. News corpora are 

a reasonable choice for monolingual frequencies 

as code-mixing is relatively rare and frowned 

upon in news unless it refers to a named entity or 

is a part of a direct quote. We then mapped com-

mon Hindi equivalents of all the English words 

used in the corpora. Finally, we checked the fre-

quency of both the English embedding as well as 

their corresponding Hindi equivalents. As men-

tioned before, a number of English words do not 

have Hindi equivalents and for these words we ex-

pect the English words themselves to have a high 

frequency count in the corpus. 

An analysis of the results thus obtained shows 

that the English words do indeed fall into two dis-

tinct buckets at the edges. Thus, for words such as 

“party” (as in “political party”), “vote”, “team” 

we find that not only are the word counts quite 

high (over 67K for “party” and over 18k for 

“vote” and “team”) but the counts for the equiva-

lent Hindi forms are relatively low. Similarly, 

words like “affection”, “driving”, “easily” etc. 

were not found in the corpus, while their Hindi 

equivalents had relatively medium to high counts. 

However, there is a large number of words in the 

middle where both the English and the Hindi 

equivalents have a comparative count or the dif-

ference is not significant. For these words it is dif-

ficult to decide whether they ought to be classified 

as borrowing or CM.  

Let us denote the frequency of an En word as fe 

and that of its Hin synonym as fh. Let δ be an ar-
bitrary margin > 0. The aforementioned intuition 

about the nature of CM and borrowing can be for-

malized as follows:  

 If for a given word log(fh/fe)> δ, we call it 
CM  

122



  If for a given word log(fh/fe) < -δ, we call 
it a borrowing. 

 If -δ  log(fh/fe)  δ, it is not possible to 
decide between the two cases, and hence 

we call the word ambiguous. 

Figure 1 shows the scatter plot of the frequency of 

all the En words that occur within Hin matrix (119 

in total) in the Dainik Jagaran data (x-axis) against 

the frequency of its Hindi synonym (y-axis) in the 

same corpus. Since frequency follows Zipfs law, 

the axes are in log-scale. The words, which are 

represented by dots in Figure 1, are scattered all 

over the plot without any discernable pattern. This 

indicates that there are no distinct classes of words 

that can be called borrowings or mixing; rather, it 

is a continuum. If we assume δ to be 1, an arbi-
trary value, we can divide the plot into three zones 

using the three rules proposed above. These 

zones, bounded by the blue lines are shown in Fig-

ure 1: Mixing – words that are code-mixed (top-

left triangle), borrowings (bottom-right triangle) 

and ambiguous (the narrow zone running diago-

nally between the two with a width of 2δ. 
However, we observe that some En words which 

has very high frequency in our corpus (e.g., vote, 

party, team), are classified as ambiguous because 

their Hin synonyms have a comparable high fre-

quency as well. To a native speaker of Hindi, 

these words are clearly borrowings and used even 

in formal Hin text. In fact, it seems reasonable to 

declare an En word as a borrowing solely on the 

basis of its very high frequency in the monolin-

gual corpus. We could choose another arbitrary 

threshold α = 1000, such that a word is declared 
as a borrowing if the following two conditions are 

satisfied: 

 -δ  log(fh/fe)  δ  

 fe > α 
Note that the choice of α should also depend on 

the size of the corpus. Table 6 reports the number 

of CM in the data with and without applying the 

large frequency rule. We see that the number of 

CM words is the highest followed by ambiguous 

words. This clearly indicates that CM is a very 

common phenomenon on social media. Appendix 

A lists all the En words and their classes.  

 Using arbitrary thresholds, δ and α, to classify the 

words into three distinct set is a convenient tool to 

deal with code-mixing; but it ignores the fact that 

in reality it is not possible to classify words into a 

few distinct categories. There is always a contin-

uum between borrowing and mixing. Figure 1 

shows a more appropriate gradient based visuali-

zation of the space. Words falling on the darker 

regions of this plot are more likely to be borrow-

ing. The gradients reflect the two equations dis-

cussed above. The darkness linearly increases 

with log(fe) and decreases with log(fh/fe). The 
overall darkness is a simple linear combination of 

these two independent factors. Note that this for-

mulation is only for a visualization purpose, and 

should not be interpreted as some formal proba-

bility or measure of “borrowing-ness” of a word. 

 

 

 
Figure 1: Plot of the frequencies of En words em-

bedded in Hin matrix (x-axis) and their Hin syno-

nyms (y-axis) in the Dainik Jagaran corpus. 

 

 CM Ambigu-

ous 

Borrowing 

w/o α-Rule 69 39 11 

w/ α-Rule 69 31 19 

 

Table 6: Classification of embedded En words 

into three classes for δ =1. 
 

A note on synonym selection: Which syno-

nym(s) of an En word should be considered for 

CM vs. borrowing analysis is a difficult question. 

First, a word can have many senses. E.g., the word 

party can mean a political party, a group of peo-

ple, or a social gathering, and also a verb – to par-

ticipate in a social gathering. Each of these senses 

can be translated in, often more than one ways. 

E.g., dala in the sense of political party, 

anusThANa or dAwata in the sense of social gath-

ering, etc. To complicate the situation further, 

these Hindi words can have many senses as well 

(e.g., the word dala can mean a sports team, or a 

political party or group of people or animals).  

Thus, when we compare synonyms without 

context, we cannot be sure in which sense the 

123



words are used and therefore, the frequency 

counts maybe misleading. A second problem arise 

with phrase embedding. While an entire phrase 

can be borrowed, its words may not be (e.g., clean 

chit  -Indian version of the English expression 

“clean sheet”- is a borrowed expression in Hindi, 

but clean is not). However, we had access to only 

the wordlist and word frequencies, which made it 

impossible to disentangle such effects. Compar-

ing contexts automatically deciphering word 

sense is a complex problem in itself. For this 

work, we used an En to Hin lexicon 

(http://shabdkosh.raftaar.in/) to find out the syno-

nyms, and for every synonym extracted the fre-

quency from the wordlist, and deemed the highest 

frequency as the fh for the word. A more thorough 

synonym selection using context and phrase level 

analysis would be an interesting extension of this 

work. 

4.1 Ambiguous Words 

The words classified as ambiguous pose a prob-

lem as we do not know whether these words are 

in the process of being borrowed, or are working 

as near-synonym of the Hindi equivalent, or are 

CMs where the intention of the user is the motiva-

tion for the “other language” use.  

Poplack and Dion (2012) are of the view that there 

does not exist a continuum between CM, Nonce-

borrowing and loanwords. In their diachronic 

study on En-French CM, the authors show that the 

frequency of all three categories remain stable. 

According to them, a user is always aware 

whether they are using an “other language” word 

as a CM (for socio-linguistic purposes) or as a so-

cio-linguistically unmarked borrowing. Our data 

does not capture diachronic statistics neither does 

our monolingual corpus is at the scale at which 

language changes occur. However, we interpret 

our results to indicate that there is indeed a fuzzy 

boundary between CM and borrowing. Neverthe-

less, this distinction may not be readily observable 

through word classification or even diffusion 

and/or other structural linguistic features. The no-

tion of “social acceptance” of a particular word in 

that language community may play a big role. 

Further, the perception of a word as either CM, 

or borrowing could depend on a large number of 

meta- and extra-linguistic factors that may include 

including the fluency of the user in English, famil-

iarity with the word, and the pragmatic/dis-

course/socio-linguistics reasons for using them. 

Thus, for a true bilingual, fluent in both lan-

guages, an adverb like “easily” might be more sta-

ble and almost a borrowing, but for someone with 

less familiarity with English, it might be a mixing.  

Similarly, whether or not a person is consciously 

using the English word to make a point can matter. 

A frequent example of this in our data is the use 

of swear words and expletives which are often ac-

companied by a switch in language. These words 

thus are difficult to disambiguate without more in-

formation and data, and an analysis that takes into 

account the non-structural linguistic motivations.  

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we present an analysis of data from 

Facebook generated by En-Hin bilingual users. 

Our analysis shows that a significant amount of 

this data shows Code Mixing in the form of En in 

Hindi matrix as well as Hin in English matrix. 

While the embedding of Hindi words in English 

mostly follows formulaic patterns of Nouns and 

Particles, the mixing of English in Hindi is clearly 

happening at different levels, and is of different 

types. This can range from single words to multi-

word phrases ranging from frozen expressions to 

clauses. Considering monolingual corpus fre-

quency counts clearly shows that the words them-

selves fall into three categories of clear CM, clear 

Borrowings and Ambiguous where the distinction 

becomes fuzzy. The problem is amplified because 

in transliterated text, even the borrowings are 

mostly in English spellings and sometimes Hindi 

spellings (goal vs gol), and will be identified as 

English words. From an NLP perspective, all 

these have to be handled differently. Some are 

easier to handle (“party” would be in a Hindi lex-

icon, for example, and NEs) and some are more 

difficult for example where Adverbials or clauses 

are involved. 

The insights from this analysis indicate that any 

future work on CM in social media content would 

have to involve a deeper analysis at the intersec-

tion of structural and discourse linguistics. We 

plan to continue our work in this area in the future 

with focus on larger data sets, richer annotations 

which take into account not only structural lin-

guistics annotation but also discourse and prag-

matic level annotations. We believe that an under-

standing of the interaction between morpho-syn-

tax and discourse, and a deeper look at sociolin-

guistic context of the interaction in the future will 

help us to better define and understand this phe-

nomenon and hence, implement suitable NLP 

techniques for processing such data. 

 

 

 

124



Appendix A 

List of English words embedded in Hindi matrix 

found in our data, classified into three classes for 

δ = 1 and α = 1000. 

Code-mixed words: health, public, army, India, 

affection, divine, pm, drama, clean, anti, 

young, follower, page, like, request, easily, In-

dian, uncle, comment, reply, sun, bomb, means, 

game, month, spokesperson, actor, I, word, ad-

mit, good, afternoon, time, look, please, help, 

husband, artists, very, sad, but, higher, plan-

ning, mad, keep, failure, well, strike, sorry, 

girlfriend, those, who, support, opposition, 

and, profile, right, good, men, driving, lady, 

leader, singer, shift, culture, only, with, befit-

ting, reply 

Ambiguous words: blast, daily, love, sir, bloody, 

cheapo, chit, hello, it, football, style, pant, hi, 

commonwealth, participation, certificates, ed-

ucation, robot, Bollywood, player, big, bee, the, 

agency, women, line, trolling, ODI, tiger, com-

edy 

Borrowings: CBI, goal, rally, match, police, film, 

cricket, appeal, Italian, fan, best, vote, party, 

power, minister, team, you, photo, star 

Reference 

Beatrice Alex. 2008.  Automatic Detection of Eng-

lish Inclusions in Mixed-lingual Data with an 

Application to Parsing, Doctor of Philosophy 

Thesis, School of Informatics, University of 

Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 

Celso Alvarez-Cáccamo. 2011. "Rethinking con-

versational code-switching: codes, speech vari-

eties, and contextualization." Proceedings of 

the Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics 

Society. Vol. 16. 

Peter Auer. 1984. The Pragmatics of Code-

Switching: A Sequential Approach. Cambridge 

University Press. 

Abdelali Bentahila and Eirlys E. Davies. 1991. 

"Constraints on code-switching: A look beyond 

grammar. Papers for the symposium on code-

switching in blingual studies: Theory, signifi-

cance and perspectives. Strasbourg: European 

Science Foundation.  

MS Cardenas-Claros and N Isharyanti. 2009. 

Code-switching and code-mixing in internet 

chatting: Between yes, ya, and si- a case study. 

In The JALT CALL Journal, 5 

David Crystal. 2001. Language and the Internet. 

Cambridge University Press. 

B. Danet and S. Herring. 2007. The Multilingual 

Internet: Language, Culture, and Communica-

tion Online. Oxford University Press, New 

York. 

Frederic Field. 2002. Linguistic borrowing in bi-

lingual contexts. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 

Penelope Gardner-Chloros. 2009. Code-Switch-

ing. Cambrudge University Press 

J. Gumperz. 1964. Hindi-Punjabi code-switching 

in Delhi. In Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-

tional Congress of Linguistics, Mouton: The 

Hague. 

J. Gumperz. 1982. Discourse Strategies. Oxford 

University Press. 

S. Herring. 2003. Media and Language Change: 

Special Issue. 

Jeff MacSwan. 2012." Code-Switching and 

Grammatical Theory." In The Handbook of Bi-

lingualism and Multilingualism (2012). 323. 

Carol Myers-Scotton. 1993. Duelling Languages: 

Grammatical Structure in Code-switching. 

Claredon. Oxford. 

Carol Myers-Scotton. 2002. Contact linguistics: 

Bilingual encounters and grammatical out-

comes. Oxford University Press. 

Pieter Muysken. 2000. Bilingual speech: A typol-

ogy of code-mixing. Cambridge University 

Press. 

John C. Paolillo. 2011. “Conversational” 

codeswitching on Usenet and Internet Relay 

Chat. In Language@Internet, 8, article 3. 

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 

2011. A universal part-of-speech tagset. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:1104.2086  

Shana Poplack, D. Sankoff, and C. Miller. 1988. 

The social correlates and linguistic processes of 

lexical borrowing and assimilation. Linguistics 

26:47-104. 

Shana Poplack and Nathalie Dion. 2012. "Myths 

and facts about loanword development." in 

Language Variation and Change 24, 3. 

David Sankoff, Shana Poplack, and Swathi 

Vanniarajan. 1990. The case of the nonce loan 

in Tamil. Language Variation and Change, 2 

(1990), 71-101. Cambridge University Press. 

125



V.B. Sowmya, M. Choudhury, K. Bali, T. Das-

gupta, and A. Basu. 2010. Resource creation for 

training and transliteration systems for Indian 

languages. In Proceedings of Language Re-

source and Evaluations Conference (LREC 

2010). 

Sarah G. Thomason. 2003. Contact as a Source of 

Language Change. In R.D. Janda & B. D. Jo-

seph (eds), A handbook of historical linguistics, 

Oxford: Blackwell. 

Paola Virga and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2003. 

Transliteration of proper names in cross-lingual 

information retrieval. Proceedings of the ACL 

2003 workshop on Multilingual and mixed-lan-

guage named entity recognition-Volume 15. 

Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Donald Winford. 2003. An Introduction to Con-

tact Linguistics. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

126


