



















































Reducing the Impact of Data Sparsity in Statistical Machine Translation


Proceedings of SSST-8, Eighth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 51–56,
October 25, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Reducing the Impact of Data Sparsity in Statistical Machine Translation

Karan Singla1, Kunal Sachdeva1, Diksha Yadav1, Srinivas Bangalore2, Dipti Misra Sharma1

1LTRC IIIT Hyderabad,2AT&T Labs-Research

Abstract

Morphologically rich languages generally
require large amounts of parallel data to
adequately estimate parameters in a statis-
tical Machine Translation(SMT) system.
However, it is time consuming and expen-
sive to create large collections of parallel
data. In this paper, we explore two strate-
gies for circumventing sparsity caused by
lack of large parallel corpora. First, we ex-
plore the use of distributed representations
in an Recurrent Neural Network based lan-
guage model with different morphological
features and second, we explore the use of
lexical resources such as WordNet to over-
come sparsity of content words.

1 Introduction

Statistical machine translation (SMT) models es-
timate parameters (lexical models, and distortion
model) from parallel corpora. The reliability of
these parameter estimates is dependent on the size
of the corpora. In morphologically rich languages,
this sparsity is compounded further due to lack of
large parallel corpora.

In this paper, we present two approaches that
address the issue of sparsity in SMT models for
morphologically rich languages. First, we use an
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) based language
model (LM) to re-rank the output of a phrase-
based SMT (PB-SMT) system and second we use
lexical resources such as WordNet to minimize the
impact of Out-of-Vocabulary(OOV) words on MT
quality. We further improve the accuracy of MT
using a model combination approach.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
We first present our approach of training the base-
line model and source side reordering. In Section
4, we present our experiments and results on re-
ranking the MT output using RNNLM. In Section

5, we discuss our approach to increase the cover-
age of the model by using synset ID’s from the
English WordNet (EWN). Section 6 describes our
experiments on combining the model with synset
ID’s and baseline model to further improve the
translation accuracy followed by results and obser-
vations sections.We conclude the paper with future
work and conclusions.

2 Related Work

In this paper, we present our efforts of re-
ranking the n-best hypotheses produced by a PB-
MT (Phrase-Based MT) system using RNNLM
(Mikolov et al., 2010) in the context of an English-
Hindi SMT system. The re-ranking task in ma-
chine translation can be defined as re-scoring the
n-best list of translations, wherein a number of
language models are deployed along with fea-
tures of source or target language. (Dungarwal
et al., 2014) described the benefits of re-ranking
the translation hypothesis using simple n-gram
based language model. In recent years, the use
of RNNLM have shown significant improvements
over the traditional n-gram models (Sundermeyer
et al., 2013). (Mikolov et al., 2010) and (Liu et
al., 2014) have shown significant improvements in
speech recognition accuracy using RNNLM . Shi
(2012) also showed the benefits of using RNNLM
with contextual and linguistic features. We have
also explored the use of morphological features
(Hindi being a morphologically rich language) in
RNNLM and deduced that these features further
improve the baseline RNNLM in re-ranking the n-
best hypothesis.

Words in natural languages are richly diverse
so it is not possible to cover all source language
words when training an MT system. Untranslated
out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words tend to degrade
the accuracy of the output produced by an MT
model. Huang (2010) pointed to various types
of OOV words which occur in a data set – seg-

51



mentation error in source language, named enti-
ties, combination forms (e.g. widebody) and ab-
breviations. Apart from these issues, Hindi being
a low-resourced language in terms of parallel cor-
pora suffers from data sparsity.

In the second part of the paper, we address the
problem of data sparsity with the help of English
WordNet (EWN) for English-Hindi PB-SMT. We
increase the coverage of content words (exclud-
ing Named-Entities) by incorporating sysnset in-
formation in the source sentences.

Combining Machine Translation (MT) systems
has become an important part of statistical MT in
past few years. Works by (Razmara and Sarkar,
2013; Cohn and Lapata, 2007) have shown that
there is an increase in phrase coverage when com-
bining different systems. To get more coverage of
unigrams in phrase-table, we have explored sys-
tem combination approaches to combine models
trained with synset information and without synset
information. We have explored two methodolo-
gies for system combination based on confusion
matrix(dynamic) (Ghannay et al., 2014) and mix-
ing models (Cohn and Lapata, 2007).

3 Baseline Components

3.1 Baseline Model and Corpus Statistics

We have used the ILCI corpora (Choudhary and
Jha, 2011) for our experiments, which contains
English-Hindi parallel sentences from tourism and
health domain. We randomly divided the data into
training (48970), development (500) and testing
(500) sentences and for language modelling we
used news corpus of English which is distributed
as a part of WMT’14 translation task. The data is
about 3 million sentences which also contains MT
training data.

We trained a phrase based (Koehn et al., 2003)
MT system using the Moses toolkit with word-
alignments extracted from GIZA++ (Och and Ney,
2000). We have used the SRILM (Stolcke and
others, 2002) with Kneser-Ney smoothing (Kneser
and Ney, 1995) for training a language model for
the first stage of decoding. The result of this base-
line system is shown in Table 1.

3.2 English Transformation Module

Hindi is a relatively free-word order language and
generally tends to follow SOV (Subject-Object-
Verb) order and English tends to follow SVO
(Subject-Verb-Object) word order. Research has

Number of Number of Number of
Training Development Evaluation BLEU
Sentences Sentences Sentences
48970 500 500 20.04

Table 1: Baseline Scores for Phrase-based Moses
Model

shown that pre-ordering source language to con-
form to target language word order significantly
improves translation quality (Collins et al., 2005).
We created a re-ordering module for transform-
ing an English sentence to be in the Hindi order
based on reordering rules provided by Anusaaraka
(Chaudhury et al., 2010). The reordering rules are
based on parse output produced by the Stanford
Parser (Klein and Manning, 2003).

The transformation module requires the text to
contain only surface form of words, however, we
extended it to support surface form along with its
factors such as lemma and Part of Speech (POS).

Input : the girl in blue shirt is my sister
Output : in blue shirt the girl is my sister.
Hindi : neele shirt waali ladki meri bahen hai (

blue) ( shirt) (Mod)(girl)(my)(sister)(Vaux)
With this transformation, the English sentence

is structurally closer to the Hindi sentence which
leads to better phrase alignments. The model
trained with the transformed corpus produces a
new baseline score of 21.84 BLEU score an
improvement over the earlier baseline of 20.04
BLEU points.

4 Re-Ranking Experiments

In this section, we describe the results of re-
ranking the output of the translation model us-
ing Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) based lan-
guage models using the same data which is used
for language modelling in the baseline models.

Unlike traditional n-gram based discrete lan-
guage models, RNN do not make the Markov as-
sumption and potentially can take into account
long-term dependencies between words. Since the
words in RNNs are represented as continuous val-
ued vectors in low dimensions allowing for the
possibility of smoothing using syntactic and se-
mantic features. In practice, however, learning
long-term dependencies with gradient descent is
difficult as described by (Bengio et al., 1994) due
to diminishing gradients.

We have integrated the approach of re-scoring

52



100 200 300 400 500

22

24

26

28

30

Number of Hypotheses

B
L

E
U

sc
or

es

Baseline
POS
NONE
Lemma
Oracle
All

Figure 1: BLEU Scores for Re-ranking experi-
ments with RNNLM using different feature com-
binations.

n-best output using RNNLM which has also been
shown to be helpful by (Liu et al., 2014). Shi
(2012) also showed the benefits of using RNNLM
with contextual and linguistic features. Follow-
ing their work, we used three type of features for
building an RNNLM for Hindi : lemma (root),
POS, NC (number-case). The data used was a
Wikipedia dump, MT training data, news arti-
cles which had approximately 500,000 Hindi sen-
tences. Features were extracted using paradigm-
based Hindi Morphological Analyzer 1

Figure 1 illustrates the results of re-ranking per-
formed using RNNLM trained with various fea-
tures. The Oracle score is the highest achievable
score in a re-ranking experiment. This score is
computed based on the best translation out of n-
best translations. The best translation is found us-
ing the cosine similarity between the hypothesis
and the reference translation. It can be seen from
Figure 1, that the LM with only word and POS in-
formation is inferior to all other models. However,
morphological features like lemma, number and
case information help in re-ranking the hypothesis
significantly. The RNNLM which uses all the fea-
tures performed the best for the re-ranking exper-
iments achieving a BLEU score of 26.91, after re-
scoring 500-best obtained from the pre-order SMT
model.

1We have used the HCU morph-analyzer.

System BLEU
Baseline 21.84

Rescoring 500-best with RNNLM

Features

NONE 25.77
POS 24.36
Lemma(root) 26.32
ALL(POS+Lemma+NC) 26.91

Table 2: Rescoring results of 500-best hypotheses
using RNNLM with different features

5 Using WordNet to Reduce Data
Sparsity

We extend the coverage of our source data by us-
ing synonyms from the English WordNet (EWN).
Our main motivation is to reduce the impact of
OOV words on output quality by replacing words
in a source sentence with their corresponding
synset IDs. However, choosing the appropriate
synset ID based upon its context and morphologi-
cal information is important. For sense selection,
we followed the approach used by (Tammewar et
al., 2013), which is also described further in this
section in the context of our task. We ignored
words that are regarded as Named-Entities as in-
dicated by Stanford NER tagger, as they should
not have synonyms in any case.

5.1 Sense Selection

Words are ambiguous, independent of their sen-
tence context. To choose an appropriate sense ac-
cording to the context for a lexical item is a chal-
lenging task typically termed as word-sense dis-
ambiguation. However, the syntactic category of
a lexical item provides an initial cue for disam-
biguating a lexical item. Among the varied senses,
we filter out the senses that are not the same POS
tag as the lexical item. But words are not just am-
biguous across different syntactic categories but
are also ambiguous within a syntactic category. In
the following, we discuss our approaches to select
the sense of a lexical item best suited in a given
context within a given category. Also categories
were filtered so that only content words get re-
placed with synset IDs.

5.1.1 Intra-Category Sense Selection
First Sense: Among the different senses,we se-
lect the first sense listed in EWN corresponding to
the POS-tag of a given lexical item. The choice is
motivated by our observation that the senses of a

53



lexical item are ordered in the descending order of
their frequencies of usage in the lexical resource.

Merged Sense: In this approach, we merge all
the senses listed in EWN corresponding to the
POS-tag of the given lexical item. The motivation
behind this strategy is that the senses in the EWN
for a particular word-POS pair are too finely clas-
sified resulting in classification of words that may
represent the same concept, are classified into dif-
ferent synsets. For example : travel and go can
mean the same concept in a similar context but the
first sense given by EWN is different for these two
words. Therefore, we merge all the senses for a
word into a super sense ( synset ID of first word
occurred in data), which is given to all its syn-
onyms even if it occurs in different synset IDs.

5.2 Factored Model

Techniques such as factored modelling (Koehn
and Hoang, 2007) are quite beneficial for Trans-
lation from English to Hindi language as shown
by (Ramanathan et al., 2008). When we replace
words in a source sentence with the synset IDâs,
we tend to lose morphological information associ-
ated with that word. We add inflections as features
in a factored SMT model to minimize the impact
of this replacement.

We show the results of the processing steps on
an example sentence below.
Original Sentence : Ram is going to market to
buy apples
New Sentence : Ram is Synset(go.v.1)
to Synset(market.n.0) to Synset(buy.v.1)
Synset(apple.n.1)
Sentence with synset ID: Ram E is E
Synset(go.v.1) ing to E Synset(market.n.0) E
to E Synset(buy.v.1) E Synset(apple.n.1) s
Then English sentences were reordered to Hindi
word-order using the module discussed in Section
3.
Reordered Sentence: Ram E Synset(apple.n.1) s
Synset(buy.v.1) E to E Synset(market.n.0) E to E
Synset(go.v.1) ing is E

In Table 3, the second row shows the BLEU
scores for the models in which there are synset IDs
for the source side. It can be seen that the factored
model also shows significant improvement in the
results.

6 Combining MT Models

Combining Machine translation (MT) systems has
become an important part of Statistical MT in
the past few years. There are two dominant ap-
proaches. (1) a system combination approach
based on confusion networks (CN) (Rosti et al.,
2007), which can work dynamically in combin-
ing the systems. (2) Combine the models by lin-
early interpolating and then using MERT to tune
the combined system.

6.1 Combination based on confusion
networks

We used the tool MANY (Barrault, 2010) for sys-
tem combination. However, since the tool is con-
figured to work with TERp evaluation metric, we
modified it to use METEOR (Gupta et al., 2010)
metric since it has been shown by (Kalyani et al.,
2014), that METEOR evaluation metric is better
correlated to human evaluation for morphologi-
cally rich Indian Languages.

6.2 Linearly Interpolated Combination
In this approach, we combined phrase-tables of
the two models (Eng (sysnset) - Hindi and Base-
line) using linear interpolation. We combined the
two models with uniform weights – 0.5 for each
model, in our case. We again tuned this model
with the new interpolated phrase-table using stan-
dard algorithm MERT.

7 Experiments and Results

As can be seen in Table 3, the model with synset
information led to reduction in OOV words. Even
though BLEU score decreased, but METEOR
score improved for all the experiments based on
using synset IDs in the source sentence, but it has
been shown by (Gupta et al., 2010) that METEOR
is a better evaluation metrics for morphologically
rich languages. Also, when synset IDâs are used
instead of words in the source language, the sys-
tem makes incorrect morphological choices. Ex-
ample : going and goes will be replaced by same
synset ID âSynset(go.v.1)â, so this has lead to loss
of information in the phrase-table but METEOR
catches these complexities as it considers features
like stems, synonyms for its evaluation metrics
and hence showed better improvements compared
to BLEU metric. Last two rows of Table 3 show
results for combination experiments and Mixture
Model (linearly interpolated model) showed best

54



System #OOV words BLEU Meteor
Baseline 253 21.8 .492

Eng(Synset ID)-Hindi
Baseline 237 19.2 .494
*factor(inflections) 225 20.3 .506

Ensembled Decoding 213 21.0 .511
Mixture Model 210 21.2 .519

Table 3: Results for the model in which there were Synset ID’s instead of word in English data

results with significant reduction in OOV words
and also some gains in METEOR score.

8 Observations

In this section, we study the coverage of different
models by categorizing the OOV words into 5 cat-
egories.

• NE(Named Entities) : As the data was
from Health & Tourism domain, these words
were mainly the names of the places and
medicines.

• VB : types of verb forms
• NN : types of nouns and pronouns
• ADJ : all adjectives
• AD : adverbs
• OTH : there were some words which did not

mean anything in English

• SM : There were some occasional spelling
mistakes seen in the test data.

Note : There were no function words seen in the
OOV(un-translated) words

Cat. Baseline Eng(synset)-Hin MixtureModel
NE 120 121 115
VB 47 37 27
NN 76 60 47
ADJ 22 15 12
AD 5 5 4
OTH 2 2 2
SM 8 8 8

Table 4: OOV words in Different Models

As this analysis was done on a small dataset and
for a fixed domain, the OOV words were few in
number as it can be seen in Table 4. But the OOV
words across the different models reduced as ex-
pected. The NE words remained almost the same

for all the three models but OOV words from cate-
gory VB,NN,ADJ decreased for Eng(synset)-Hin
model and Mixture model significantly.

9 Future Work

In the future, we will work on using the two ap-
proaches discussed: Re-Ranking & using lexical
resources to reduce sparsity together in a system.
We will work on exploring syntax based features
for RNNLM and we are planning to use a better
method for sense selection and extending this con-
cept for more language pairs. Word-sense disam-
biguation can be used for choosing more appro-
priate sense when the translation model is trained
on a bigger data data set. Also we are looking for
unsupervised techniques to learn the replacements
for words to reduce sparsity and ways to adapt our
system to different domains.

10 Conclusions

In this paper, we have discussed two approaches
to address sparsity issues encountered in training
SMT models for morphologically rich languages
with limited amounts of parallel corpora. In the
first approach we used an RNNLM enriched with
morphological features of the target words and
show the BLEU score to improve by 5 points. In
the second approach we use lexical resource such
as WordNet to alleviate sparsity.

References
Loı̈c Barrault. 2010. Many: Open source machine

translation system combination. The Prague Bul-
letin of Mathematical Linguistics, 93:147–155.

Yoshua Bengio, Patrice Simard, and Paolo Frasconi.
1994. Learning long-term dependencies with gra-
dient descent is difficult. Neural Networks, IEEE
Transactions on, 5(2):157–166.

Sriram Chaudhury, Ankitha Rao, and Dipti M Sharma.
2010. Anusaaraka: An expert system based machine
translation system. In Natural Language Processing

55



and Knowledge Engineering (NLP-KE), 2010 Inter-
national Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE.

Narayan Choudhary and Girish Nath Jha. 2011. Cre-
ating multilingual parallel corpora in indian lan-
guages. In Proceedings of Language and Technol-
ogy Conference.

Trevor Cohn and Mirella Lapata. 2007. Ma-
chine translation by triangulation: Making ef-
fective use of multi-parallel corpora. In AN-
NUAL MEETING-ASSOCIATION FOR COMPU-
TATIONAL LINGUISTICS, volume 45, page 728.
Citeseer.

Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Kučerová.
2005. Clause restructuring for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 43rd annual
meeting on association for computational linguis-
tics, pages 531–540. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Piyush Dungarwal, Rajen Chatterjee, Abhijit Mishra,
Anoop Kunchukuttan, Ritesh Shah, and Pushpak
Bhattacharyya. 2014. The iit bombay hindi-english
translation system at wmt 2014. In Proceedings of
the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 90–96, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sahar Ghannay, France Le Mans, and Loıc Barrault.
2014. Using hypothesis selection based features for
confusion network mt system combination. In Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Hybrid Approaches
to Translation (HyTra)@ EACL, pages 1–5.

Ankush Gupta, Sriram Venkatapathy, and Rajeev San-
gal. 2010. Meteor-hindi: Automatic mt evaluation
metric for hindi as a target language. In Proceed-
ings of ICON-2010: 8th International Conference
on Natural Language Processing.

Chung-chi Huang, Ho-ching Yen, and Jason S Chang.
2010. Using sublexical translations to handle the
oov problem in mt. In Proceedings of The Ninth
Conference of the Association for Machine Transla-
tion in the Americas (AMTA).

Aditi Kalyani, Hemant Kamud, Sashi Pal Singh, and
Ajai Kumar. 2014. Assessing the quality of mt
systems for hindi to english translation. In In-
ternational Journal of Computer Applications, vol-
ume 89.

Dan Klein and Christopher D Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics-Volume 1, pages 423–430. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Reinhard Kneser and Hermann Ney. 1995. Im-
proved backing-off for m-gram language modeling.
In Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 1995.
ICASSP-95., 1995 International Conference on, vol-
ume 1, pages 181–184. IEEE.

Philipp Koehn and Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored trans-
lation models. In EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 868–876.
Citeseer.

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics on Human Language Technology-
Volume 1, pages 48–54. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

X Liu, Y Wang, X Chen, MJF Gales, and PC Wood-
land. 2014. Efficient lattice rescoring using recur-
rent neural network language models.

Tomas Mikolov, Martin Karafiát, Lukas Burget, Jan
Cernockỳ, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2010. Recur-
rent neural network based language model. In IN-
TERSPEECH, pages 1045–1048.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. Improved
statistical alignment models. In Proceedings of the
38th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 440–447. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Ananthakrishnan Ramanathan, Jayprasad Hegde,
Ritesh M Shah, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, and
M Sasikumar. 2008. Simple syntactic and morpho-
logical processing can help english-hindi statistical
machine translation. In IJCNLP, pages 513–520.

Majid Razmara and Anoop Sarkar. 2013. Ensemble
triangulation for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the Sixth International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing, pages 252–
260.

Antti-Veikko I Rosti, Spyridon Matsoukas, and
Richard Schwartz. 2007. Improved word-level sys-
tem combination for machine translation. In AN-
NUAL MEETING-ASSOCIATION FOR COMPU-
TATIONAL LINGUISTICS, volume 45, page 312.
Citeseer.

Yangyang Shi, Pascal Wiggers, and Catholijn M
Jonker. 2012. Towards recurrent neural networks
language models with linguistic and contextual fea-
tures. In INTERSPEECH.

Andreas Stolcke et al. 2002. Srilm-an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In INTERSPEECH.

Martin Sundermeyer, Ilya Oparin, J-L Gauvain, Ben
Freiberg, R Schluter, and Hermann Ney. 2013.
Comparison of feedforward and recurrent neural
network language models. In Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2013 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on, pages 8430–8434. IEEE.

Aniruddha Tammewar, Karan Singla, Srinivas Banga-
lore, and Michael Carl. 2013. Enhancing asr by
mt using semantic information from hindiwordnet.
In Proceedings of ICON-2013: 10th International
Conference on Natural Language Processing.

56


