



















































Adapting SimpleNLG for Brazilian Portuguese realisation


Proceedings of the 8th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 93–94,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19-21 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Adapting SimpleNLG for Brazilian Portuguese realisation

Rodrigo de Oliveira
Department of Computing Science

University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen, UK, AB24 3UE

rodrigodeoliveira@abdn.ac.uk

Somayajulu Sripada
Department of Computing Science

University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen, UK, AB24 3UE

yaji.sripada@abdn.ac.uk

Abstract

This paper describes the ongoing imple-
mentation and the current coverage of
SimpleNLG-BP, an adaptation of Simple-
NLG-EnFr (Vaudry and Lapalme, 2013)
for Brazilian Portuguese.

1 Introduction

Realisation is the last step in natural language gen-
eration (NLG) systems, so the goal of a realisation
engine is to output text. SimpleNLG is a Java li-
brary that employs morphological, syntactic and
orthographical operations on non-linguistic input
to output well-formed sentences in English. Sim-
pleNLG-EnFr (Vaudry and Lapalme, 2013) is an
adaptation of SimpleNLG for French. This paper
describes the current state of SimpleNLG-BP1, an
adaptation of SimpleNLG-EnFr for realisation in
Brazilian Portuguese.

2 Recycling SimpleNLG-EnFr

To implement SimpleNLG-BP, we opted to extend
SimpleNLG-EnFr instead of the original Simple-
NLG. The main reason was the linguistic phe-
nomenon of preposition contraction, which is
what happens in da mesa (of the table): da is the
fusion of de (of ) with a (the.FEM.SNG). Because
preposition contraction happens in French but not
in English, we simply adapted the algorithm in
SimpleNLG-EnFr to suit Brazilian Portuguese.

3 Coverage of SimpleNLG-BP

As of submission date of this paper (May 23,
2014), almost all efforts in implementing Sim-
pleNLG-BP focused on morphological opera-
tions, as described in Moderna Gramática Por-
tuguesa (Bechara, 2009). However, a testbed

1The source code for SimpleNLG-BP can be found at
https://github.com/rdeoliveira/simplenlg-en-fr-pt .

of 43 instances including full sentences in non-
interrogative form and isolated phrases could be
successfully generated by SimpleNLG-BP.

3.1 Morphology

Morphological operations in the current state of
SimpleNLG-BP tackle 3 phrase types: noun
phrases, preposition phrases and verb phrases.

3.1.1 Pluralisation of nouns

Pluralisation rules in Brazilian Portuguese nor-
mally add a final -s to nouns, but word-internal
modifications may also be applied, depending on
the word’s stress, last vowel and/or ending. Pos-
sible noun endings in Brazilian Portuguese are: -l,
-m, -n, -r, -s, -x, -z and vowels. SimpleNLG-BP
currently includes all pluralisation rules for nouns
ending in -m, -r, -s, -x or most vowels, but only
some rules for endings -l, -n, -z and -ão. The plu-
ralisation algorithm will still attempt to pluralise
any string, which is useful to handle neologisms.

3.1.2 Preposition contraction

Similar to French, Brazilian Portuguese provides
a morphophonological mechanism to contract
words in preposition phrases. The prepositions
that undergo contraction are a (by, to), em (in, or,
at), de (from, of ) and por (through, by) – or prepo-
sition complexes ending in those, such as atrás
de (behind) or em frente a (in front of ). When
these precede a determiner or adverb, preposition
and following item combine to form a single word.
Take as (the.FEM.PLR), for instance. If it appears
in a preposition phrase after a, em, de or por, the
result will be às, nas, das and pelas, respectively.
Note that desde (since) ends with -de but does not
undergo contraction. The same applies for contra
(against) and para (to, for); both end in -a but do
not undergo contraction.

93



3.1.3 Verb conjugation

English systematically combines all 3 tenses –
past, present and future – to perfective and/or pro-
gressive aspects. This gives English a total of 12
possible combinations for the same verb, person
and number. Subjunctive or imperative moods are
of little concern to English, since base forms of
verbs are usually identical to non-indicative forms.

Brazilian Portuguese may be said to express
the same number of tenses, aspects and moods.
In practice, this does not apply. Perfectiveness
in Brazilian Portuguese traditional grammars is
seen as a 3-element set – perfective, imperfec-
tive and pluperfective – which apply only to the
past tense. English uses perfectiveness across all
3 tenses (had done, have done, will have done).
Moreover, subjunctive forms in Brazilian Portu-
guese are morphologically distinct from indicative
forms. Conditional is not built by adding an un-
changeable auxiliary (e.g. would), but by mor-
phology as well. Finally, infinitive forms of verbs
may be conjugated or not. Thus, it was more
practical to implement tense in SimpleNLG-BP as
a 10-element set – past, present, future, imper-
fect, pluperfect, conditional, subjunctive present,
subjunctive imperfect, subjunctive future and per-
sonal infinitive – where each tense may already
pack some sense of aspect and mood.

Nevertheless, we implement aspect as a sepa-
rate 3-element set, to be optionally declared as
verb features, in order to trigger verb periphrasis
formation. Modern Brazilian Portuguese uses verb
periphrases extensively; e.g. the periphrastic form
tinha feito (had done) is normally used instead
of the single-verb form fizera (also had done).
SimpleNLG-BP associates ter (have) to perfec-
tiveness and estar (be) to progressiveness, thereby
resembling the grammar of English and preserv-
ing most of the optional verb-phrase features used
in the original SimpleNLG. Additionally, we in-
cluded prospectiveness in the aspect set (as sug-
gested by Bechara (2009) pp. 214-215) to gener-
ate periphrases that express future by means of the
auxiliary ir (go). With a 3-element aspect set and
a 10-element tense set, SimpleNLG-BP is able to
build 80 different forms2 for the same verb, per-
son and number. Additionally, negative, passive
and modalised verb phrases are also supported.
Modals generate prepositions automatically, if re-

2Even though 22 of these don’t seem to be used by Bra-
zilian Portuguese speakers.

quired, such as dar (be able to) and acabar (end),
whose prepositions are para and de respectively.

As far as subject-verb agreement, if the verb to
be conjugated exists in the default lexicon file, the
final string is simply retrieved; if not, a conjuga-
tion algorithm attempts to inflect the verb. For
SimpleNLG-BP, we compiled an XML lexicon file
out of DELAF PB (Muniz, 2004), an 880,000-
entry lexicon of inflected words in Brazilian Por-
tuguese. The original file became too large at first
– 1,029,075 lines, 45.4MB – which turned out to
be an issue. A default run of SimpleNLG com-
piles the default lexicon file a priori to store it in
memory, so a single run (e.g. 1 test case) took an
average of 2.5 seconds, just to build the lexicon
onto memory. Since an inefficiency of that dimen-
sion can be prohibitive in some practical contexts,
we compiled a smaller list of 57 irregular verbs
in Brazilian Portuguese plus personal pronouns,
which became only 4,075-line long (167KB) and
takes only 0.17 seconds for compilation in aver-
age. SimpleNLG-BP includes both the lexicon file
and the lexicon compiler, if one wishes to modify
the default lexicon.

4 Summary

We described SimpleNLG-BP, an ongoing adap-
tation of SimpleNLG for Brazilian Portuguese,
which currently supports noun pluralisation,
preposition contractions and verb conjugation, and
includes a lexicon file and a lexicon compiler.

Acknowledgements

The first author of this paper thanks Ar-
ria/Data2Text Limited for funding his doctoral re-
search at the University ofAberdeen.

References
Evanildo Bechara. 2009. Moderna Gramática Por-

tuguesa. Nova Fronteira & Lucerna, Rio de Janeiro,
37 edition.

Marcelo Caetano Martins Muniz. 2004. A construção
de recursos lingüı́stico-computacionais para o por-
tuguês do Brasil: o projeto Unitex-PB. Master’s the-
sis, USP.

Pierre-Luc Vaudry and Guy Lapalme. 2013. Adapt-
ing SimpleNLG for bilingual English-French real-
isation. In 14th European Conference on Natural
Language Generation, pages 183–187, Sofia, Bul-
garia.

94


