

















































OpenWordNet-PT: A Project Report

Alexandre Rademaker
IBM Research Brazil / FGV/EMAp

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
alexrad@br.ibm.com

Valeria de Paiva
Nunance Communications

Sunnyvale, CA, USA
valeria.depaiva@gmail.com

Gerard de Melo
Tsinghua University

Beijing, China
gdm@demelo.org

Livy Maria Real Coelho
Univ. Federal do Paraná

Curitiba, Brazil
livyreal@gmail.com

Maira Gatti
IBM Research Brazil
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

mairacg@br.ibm.com

Abstract

This paper presents OpenWordNet-PT, a
freely available open-source wordnet for
Portuguese, with its latest developments
and practical uses. We provide a detailed
description of the RDF representation de-
veloped for OpenWordnet-PT. We high-
light our efforts to extend the coverage of
our resource and add nominalization rela-
tions connecting nouns and verbs. Finally,
we present several real-world applications
where OpenWordnet-PT was put to use,
including a large-scale high-throughput
sentiment analysis system.

1 Introduction

Semantic relationships between words are crucial
in many forms of natural language processing.
Computational systems are not aware of the fact
that carro and automóvel both refer to cars, or that
caminhão (truck) is related to these words as well
in that they all share a common more general hy-
pernym.

OpenWordnet-PT (or OpenWN-PT for short)
is a lexical-semantic resource describing (Brazil-
ian) Portuguese words and their relationships. It
is modelled after and fully interoperable with
the original Princeton WordNet for English (Fell-
baum, 1998), relying on the same identifiers as
WordNet 3.0. This means that one can easily
find Portuguese equivalents for specific English
word senses and vice versa. This also means
that OpenWN-PT is part of a large ecosystem
of compatible resources, including domain identi-
fiers (Magnini and Cavaglia, 2000) and mappings
to Wikipedia (de Melo and Weikum, 2010).

In this paper, we specify the RDF-based repre-
sentation chosen for OpenWN-PT (Section 2) and
describe our recent efforts to extend this resource
(Sections 3 to 5), most notably with nominaliza-
tion relations connecting nouns and verbs (Sec-
tion 4). We also highlight several important ap-
plications of OpenWN-PT (Section 6).

2 RDF Representation

Wordnets have been distributed in a wide range of
different incompatible data formats. An increas-
ingly popular way of addressing the issue of in-
teroperability is to rely on Linked Data and Se-
mantic Web standards such as RDF (Cyganiak
and Wood, 2003) and OWL (Hitzler et al., 2012),
which have led to the emergence of a number
of Linked Data projects for lexical resources (de
Melo and Weikum, 2008; Chiarcos et al., 2012).

We believe that OpenWN-PT should best be en-
coded and distributed in RDF/OWL. Not only do
these standards allow us to publish both the data
model and the actual data in the same format.
They also provide for instant compatibility with
a vast range of existing data processing tools, in-
cluding databases (so-called “triple stores”) pro-
viding SQL-like query interfaces based on the
SPARQL standard (Harris and Seaborne, 2013).

Some years ago, a task force of the Semantic
Web Best Practices Working Group proposed a
standard encoding of WordNet in RDF (van As-
sem et al., 2006). This effort made WordNet di-
rectly accessible to Semantic Web applications.
The proposed conversion aimed to be as complete
as possible. The suggested representation also
stayed as close to the original source as possible,
that is, it reflects the original WordNet data model



without interpretation. Comparing with previous
RDF translations of WordNet, the main features
of this version are: (1) It does not model the hy-
ponym hierarchy as a subclass hierarchy. (2) It
represents words and word senses as separate en-
tities with their own URI which makes it possi-
ble to refer to them directly. (3) It contains all
relations that are present in Princeton WordNet.
(4) It provides OWL semantics in the form of in-
verse properties, definition of property character-
istics and property restrictions on classes that can
be used by both the RDFS and OWL infrastruc-
tures.

The schema of the conversion has three main
classes: Synset, Word and WordSense. There
are three kinds of properties in the schema.
A first set of properties connects instances of
the main classes together. The class Synset
is linked to its WordSenses with the prop-
erty containsWordSense, and WordSense
to its Word with the property word. A sec-
ond set of properties represents the WordNet re-
lations such as hyponymy and meronymy, in-
cluding those that relate two Synsets to each
other (e.g. hyponymOf), those that relate two
WordSenses to each other (e.g. antonymOf),
and a miscellaneous set containing gloss and
frame. Finally, a third set of properties pro-
vides additional information about entities using
literals. Examples are synsetId, which records
the original ID given in Princeton WordNet to a
synset, and the tagCount of a WordSense.
The actual lexical form of a Word is recorded with
the property lexicalForm. Each synset has an
rdfs:label that is filled with the lexical form
of the first word sense in the synset.

OpenWN-PT is completely aligned to Prince-
ton WordNet. This means that each OpenWN-
PT synset is a translation of an original Prince-
ton WordNet synset, with no additional synsets
or relations so far. Given this direct relation, we
decided that our RDF representation does not re-
quire a full redundant modeling of all relations and
information in Princeton WordNet. Instead, we
chose to model our RDF as an add-on to Word-
Net 3.0 that extends it with information about the
Portuguese language. For this, we simply add
new Synset and WordSense instances that are
linked to the English WordNet.

OpenWN-PT’s RDF will thus only be useful to-
gether with an RDF version of Princeton WordNet.

While there is a previous RDF version of WordNet
3.0 online, 1 we wanted to ensure that all infor-
mation in the WordNet 3.0 distribution was trans-
formed to RDF. To this end, we wrote our own
Common Lisp code to translate the WordNet 3.0
data files to RDF, following the W3C model (van
Assem et al., 2006) with a few modifications as
follows.

1. We add two more classes named
BaseConcept and CoreConcept to
identify the synsets that are base con-
cepts (Vossen, 2002) or core concepts (Boyd-
Graber et al., 2006), respectively.

2. We have added properties to capture infor-
mation from WordNet 3.0 not available in
the Prolog distribution nor in the “database
files only” distribution. To this end, we
have parsed and read the files sents.vrb, sent-
idx.vrb and lexnames. A WordSense can
have a lexFile, lexId, senseKey, and
an example sentence (for a WordSense of
a VerbSynset). A synset can have a
lexicographerFile and a frame (in
the case of a VerbSynset).

3. We omitted redundant subclasses of
WordSense like NounWordSense,
as the part-of-speech can be derived from the
corresponding synset. A subclass of Word
called Collocation is also omitted, as the
lexical form of Word instances can easily be
examined to check for collocations.

4. We have adopted a different schema for nam-
ing the resources identifiers (URIs).

In Figure 1, we show the synset 00001740-n en-
coded in RDF in its more readable N3 notation
variant (Berners-Lee and Connolly, 2011). Word
instances are blank resources, that is, resources
without a URI or unnamed resources. In Figure 2,
we present the same synset in a graphical way, ad-
ditionally showing its connection with the corre-
sponding synset in the Princeton WordNet, includ-
ing relevant semantic relations. Our code for this
RDF version of WordNet 3.0 is freely available. 2

1See http://bit.ly/1cVExvj.
2See http://bit.ly/1ctbGSL. The code requires

AllegroGraph and Allegro Common Lisp. Both are commer-
cial tools but free editions can be obtained on the Franz Inc.
website at http://www.franz.com.

http://bit.ly/1cVExvj
http://bit.ly/1ctbGSL
http://www.franz.com


@pref ix r d f : <h t t p : / / www. w3 . org /1999/02/22 − r d f−syn t ax−ns#> .
@pref ix wn30 : <h t t p : / / a r ademake r . g i t h u b . com / wn30 / schema/> .
@pref ix wn30en : <h t t p : / / a r ademake r . g i t h u b . com / wn30−en / i n s t a n c e s /> .
@pref ix wn30br : <h t t p : / / a r ademake r . g i t h u b . com / wn30−br / i n s t a n c e s /> .

wn30br : s y n s e t −00001740−n wn30 : s y n s e t I d ”00001740” ;
r d f : t y p e wn30 : NounSynset ; r d f : t y p e wn30 : BaseConcept ;
owl : sameAs wn30en : s y n s e t −00001740−n ;
wn30 : co n t a in sWo rd Sen se wn30br : wordsense −00001740−n−1 ;
wn30 : co n t a in sWo rd Sen se wn30br : wordsense −00001740−n−3 ;
wn30 : g l o s s ” o que é p e r c e b i d o , c o n h e c i d o ou i n f e r i d o como
t e n d o e x i s t ê n c i a p r ó p r i a ( v i v e n t e ou n ã o v i v e n t e ) ” .

wn30br : wordsense −00001740−n−1 wn30 : wordNumber ”1” ;
r d f s : l a b e l ” s e r ” ;
r d f : t y p e wn30 : WordSense ;
wn30 : word : anon642 .

wn30br : wordsense −00001740−n−3 r d f s : l a b e l ” e n t i d a d e ” ;
wn30 : wordNumber ”3” ;
r d f : t y p e wn30 : WordSense ;
wn30 : word : anon24777 .

: anon24777 wn30 : l e x i c a l F o r m ” e n t i d a d e ” ; r d f : t y p e wn30 : Word .
: anon642 wn30 : l e x i c a l F o r m ” s e r ” ; r d f : t y p e wn30 : Word .

Figure 1: The synset 00001740-n in N3 notation

Figure 2: Synset 00001740-n and its neighbors in Princeton WordNet and OpenWordNet-PT



3 Extending the Coverage

The first version of OpenWN-PT was created us-
ing a semi-automated process drawing on UWN
(de Melo and Weikum, 2009) and on manual re-
visions and gloss translations (Rademaker et al.,
2012). Table 1 summarizes how OpenWN-PT has
increased over the last two years. The number
of synsets should be understood as the number of
synsets with at least one Portuguese word. The
sources of the new data were (Bond and Foster,
2013) and some manual addition of entries while
working on projects that make use of the resource.
These use cases are described later in Section 6.

2011 2013 increase
synsets 41,810 43,895 5%
words 52,220 54,125 3%
senses 68,285 74,054 8%

Table 1: OpenWN-PT’s coverage development

Among resources that we can use to expand
OpenWN-PT, we are considering (Dias-Da-Silva
and de Moraes, 2003) and (Gonçalo Oliveira,
2013). Both projects are also concerned with the
construction of a WordNet-like lexical resource
for Portuguese. The former is more limited, of-
fering around 19,888 synsets without any links to
the Princeton WordNet and no relations between
synsets, other than synonymy. The latter has al-
ready incorporated OpenWN-PT and is also en-
coded in RDF following the same vocabulary of
(van Assem et al., 2006). This means that it should
be straightfoward to obtain data from Onto.PT.

Besides the continuous work on increasing the
number of translated synsets, we have also in-
vested some time to expand the relations. All
semantic relations in Princeton WordNet 3.0 are
included in our RDF export. Figure 2 shows
how one can navigate from a OpenWN-PT synset
in the graph to the Princeton WordNet synset.
Most semantic relations also apply to the Por-
tuguese words. However, since the first version
of OpenWN-PT came from the UWN, which does
not have word sense-specific relations, we do not
have any generic way to map the lexical relations
(relations between word senses) from Princeton
WordNet to specific words in OpenWN-PT.

Mainly because of the sentiment analysis
project described later in Section 6, we focused
in particular on antonomy relationships. Study-
ing the plot in Figure 3, which shows the dis-

tribution of the number of senses per synset in
both wordnets, it is clear that we could take ad-
vantage of the fact that the majority of synsets in
both wordnets have only one sense to propagate
the antonoym pairs in Princeton WordNet to the
senses in OpenWN-PT with also only one sense.
We search for synsets A in Princeton WordNet
with only one sense, where this specific sense is
related to another sense that is also unique in its
synset in Princeton WordNet, say B. We can prop-
agate this antonymy relation to OpenWN-PT if
synset A and B in OpenWN-PT also have only
one sense each. Using this idea, we were able to
add 707 antonymy relation instances to OpenWN-
PT (only about 10% of the number of pairs in the
antonym relation of Princeton WordNet 3.0). In
the future, we plan to additionally use common
prefixes like “des”, “in” to match senses.

Figure 3: distribution of senses per synset

4 Nominalizations and NomLex-BR

Another extension of OpenWN-PT aims at incor-
porating links to connect deverbal nouns with their
corresponding verbs. A sentence like “Alexander
destroyed the city in 332 BC” can easily be parsed
to obtain its semantic arguments, such as the agent
(Alexander), the object destroyed (the city), and
the time of the destruction (332 BC). In contrast, a
sentence like “Alexander’s destruction of the city
happened in 332 BC” is typically much harder to
interpret correctly. The latter sentence describes
the same event with the same semantic arguments,
but these arguments are usually much harder to ob-
tain automatically from a syntactic parser, given



that the event is described in terms of its nominal-
ization destruction instead of its verbal form de-
stroy. A proper handling of nominalizations (we
are especially interested here in nominalizations of
verbs, also called deverbal nouns) is important in
numerous natural language understanding and in-
ference tasks (Gurevich et al., 2008).

For English, NOMLEX (Macleod et al., 1998)
has provided extensive descriptions of nominal-
izations. The original NOMLEX was constructed
starting out with nominalizations with the suffixes
-ion, -ment and -er, relying on frequent words in a
corpus. NOMLEX sought not only to describe the
possible complements for a nominalization, but
also to relate the nominal complements to the ar-
guments of the corresponding verb.

Our NomLex-BR project (Coelho et al., 2014)
started with a manual translation of NOMLEX
to Brazilian Portuguese, as NOMLEX is rela-
tively small but still covers the most salient vo-
cabulary. Many cases were very straightforward,
due to the morphology of the words with sim-
ilar nominalizer morphemes in both languages,
e.g. pairs like adjournment/adiamento, ben-
eficiary/beneficiário, corrosion/ corrosão.

Overall, we have created over 1,000 entries.
These have been integrated into OpenWN-PT,
which we hope will facilitate their use for lin-
guistic research of the traditional kind. For now,
most of the words from NomLex-BR are linked to
Word instances of OpenWN-PT. Eventually, we
would like to have entries of NomLex-BR linked
to specific WordSense instances of OpenWN-
PT to the extent possible. We are currently also
devising strategies to create entries and model phe-
nomena specific to Portuguese.

Incorporating NomLex-BR data into OpenWN-
PT has shown itself useful in pinpointing some is-
sues with the coherence and richness of OpenWN-
PT. In particular, it seems that 20% of words in
NomLex-BR (which were manually chosen) are
missing in OpenWN-PT. For instance, the word
abasement corresponds in NOMLEX to the verb
abase, and thus we would like a similar correspon-
dence between the Portuguese noun aviltamento
and the verb aviltar (our suggested translations).
However, while abasement in English is present
in two synsets with Portuguese equivalents, the
synsets for the verb abase have a repetition in
Portuguese. OpenWN-PT simply has two synsets
humilhar, abaixar and humilhar, rebaixar. The

more common verb humilhar is repeated, while
the uncommon aviltar was left out. Thus by veri-
fying that verb-noun pairs in English are mapped
to verb-noun pairs in Portuguese, we help ensure
that the richness of synonyms in Portuguese is not
lost in OpenWN-PT, which, being automatically
derived from connectivity graphs, often gives pref-
erence to more commonly used words.

Other useful kinds of relationships between
parts of speech (say the connections between ad-
jectives and adverbs) are likely to also help to
improve the accuracy and richness of our auto-
matically derived resource. Altogether we reckon
that by examining at random relationships that we
know hold in the English WordNet in its translated
Portuguese version, we should be able to both
check the accuracy of OpenWordNet-PT and si-
multaneously investigate the parallelism between
the two languages. From this perspective, one of
the more interesting relationships, as far as knowl-
edge representation is concerned, is the relation-
ship of entailment between synsets. We have a
goal of checking some 200 random English rela-
tionships in their translated forms as a way of mea-
suring accuracy of the OpenWN-PT in the very
immediate future.

5 Accuracy

Following the ideas of (Cruse, 1986), both
(Vossen, 2002) and (Marrafa, 2002) used
diagnostic templates of sentences to ver-
ify relations between synsets. We started
a similar exercise. We choose six rela-
tions: hypernymOf, memberHolonymOf,
instanceOf, substanceHolonymOf,
entails and causes. For each of these
relations, we randomly chose 30 pairs of synsets
and then random words from each synset. Note
that we had to keep drawing random synset
relationships until both synsets included at least
one Portuguese word. We ended up with 180
random sentences that we submitted to a linguist
for manual verification (a single linguist to begin
with). The linguist had to mark each sentence
as being “correct”, “wrong” or “dubious”. As
a result, we obtained 150 sentences marked as
correct (83% of the sentences), 17 marked as
wrong (one of the two words used to fill the
template is probably placed in a wrong synset),
and 13 marked as dubious (the linguist was not
sure about the semantics of the sentence). In some



cases, the linguist was able to give detailed feed-
back like indicating misspelt words or providing
a more specific reason for why the sentence was
considered wrong. There were also trivial pairs
in which the same word was chosen from both
synsets. We hope to improve our tests in these
cases.

Finally, some data mining could also help us
to improve the accuracy of OpenWN-PT. For in-
stance, synsets with an uncommonly high number
of senses or words with an unexpected number of
senses should be reviewed.

6 Usage Reports

6.1 Word Sense Disambiguation
OpenWN-PT has been incorporated into Freel-
ing (Padró and Stanilovsky, 2012), a well-known
suite of NLP tools. With OpenWN-PT’s data and
Freeling’s word sense disambiguation framework,
a given Portuguese text can automatically be an-
notated with word senses, and we can use these
annotations in the projects below.

6.2 Sentiment Analysis
We have been investigating the OpenWN-PT us-
age in one of our projects at IBM Research-Brazil.
In this project the main concern is to gather the
sentiment of microblogging posts about football
matches in Portuguese in real-time. The most
famous microblogging online social network is
Twitter3. As of 2013, there are more than 550 mil-
lion active registered users and 58 million tweets
are posted per day on average. These tweets are
short messages that people send to provide up-
dates on their activities, observations, or other in-
teresting content, directly or indirectly to others.
In sports, for instance, a lot of sentiment is ex-
pressed during a game match. Recently there have
been several approaches that tackle the problem
of classifying tweet sentiments using supervised
or semi-supervised machine learning approaches
(Celikyilmaz et al., 2010; Bakliwal et al., 2012)
or lexicon-based methods, which are mostly unsu-
pervised approaches (Li et al., 2011; Hogenboom
et al., 2013).

As people react to events and generate a large
Twitter stream of data, it is impossible to manu-
ally process and analyze all these data during the
event’s lifespan. There are several challenges re-
lated to analyzing all this data as quickly as possi-

3See http://twitter.com

ble. First, the system must be reliable: no informa-
tion should be lost. This means that a highly avail-
able system is called for, with redundancy and ac-
tive fault tolerance mechanisms. Second, it must
have a high throughput, which leads us to an in-
frastructure that allows parallelism. Thirdly, sen-
timent classifiers should be able to work with lim-
ited resources in both time and space. The training
phase should handle an unbalanced distribution of
sentiments and in real time, it should be adaptive.

OpenWN-PT, Princeton WordNet, and Senti-
WordNet (Baccianella et al., 2010) were used with
the goal of assessing a Machine Learning-based
sentiment analysis component integrated into the
IBM InfoSphere Streams (ISS) platform. ISS was
used to address the problem of handling large
streaming Twitter data with availability and scal-
ability in real-time. One main advantage of us-
ing OpenWN-PT and SentiWordNet during the de-
velopment of the Machine Learning-based classi-
fier was that we could start experimenting without
training data. The experiment was possible be-
cause OpenWN-PT synsets are linked to Princeton
WordNet synsets which, in turn, have their senti-
ment scores in SentiWordNet. In order to train the
classifiers for sentiment analysis, we have built a
training corpus comprising data posted on Twitter
during four friendly matches of the Brazilian team
in 2013. About 1 million tweets have been gath-
ered from these games. We built an online inter-
face for a collaborative labeling of the tweets with
respect to seven different classes: Certainly Neg-
ative (CN), Negative (N), Maybe Negative (MN),
Neutral (N), Maybe Positive (MP), Positive (P),
and Certainly Positive (CP). Here, we divided both
negative and positive sentiment into three more
specific classes in order to capture the degree of
confidence for which the user is able to associate
that tweet with one of these two main sentiment
classes. Another class, Don’t Know (D), repre-
sents tweets for which the sentiment could not be
identified by the user. We used this annotated cor-
pus to train a Naı̈ve Bayes classifier. OpenWN-PT
and SentiWordNet were used to check the consis-
tency of the annotations and to provide insights
during the entire course of the project. Unfortu-
nately, given the real-time characteristic of project
we were not able to run both classifiers on all
collected data. As future work, we plan to use
OpenWN-PT to expand the training corpus. For
instance, from the manually annotated tweets we

http://twitter.com


can produce others tweets with synonym words
which are likely to retain the same semantics and
thus also the same sentiment with high probability.

6.3 Historical Biographic Dictionary

The second project we used OpenWN-PT for is
related to the digitalization of a dictionary of his-
torical biographies. The Getulio Vargas Founda-
tion (FGV) maintains the Brazilian Dictionary of
Historical Biographies (DHBB), a resource with
7,000 entries, the majority of which are biograph-
ical entries about politicians in Brazil’s recent his-
tory. The FGV would like to transform this static
collection of entries into new methods of learning,
teaching, acquiring, storing, and using informa-
tion. Thus we decided that this knowledge would
be more actionable if we could operate on it with
semantic tools.

We used Freeling to automatically process this
data by performing tokenization, sentence split-
ting, part-of-speech tagging, and finally word
sense disambiguation with respect to OpenWN-
PT. The DHBB corpus has a vocabulary size of
247,063 words. Table 2 shows the most frequent
synsets in the corpus. The first line refers to the
number of tokens without any associated synset.
For instance, synset 00024720-n refers to “the
way something is with respect to its main at-
tributes” and synset 08050678-n is about “the
organization that is the governing authority of a
political unit” which, in OpenWN-PT, contains the
word “governo”. Note that synset 10467395-n
is about “ the person who holds the office of
head of state of the United States government”,
for which OpenWN-PT contains the word “pres-
idente” (president) as one of its words.

Var1 Freq
- 7343611

01835496-v 76589
02604760-v 47854
00047534-r 30351
00065639-v 28571
15202634-n 27294
08050678-n 26527
10467395-n 23238
00024720-n 23026
00118531-r 20434

Table 2: Frequent synsets in DHBB entries

Table 3 presents some of the most frequent to-

kens (after lemmatization) that could not be found
in OpenWN-PT. The entries are not very surpris-
ing, as our efforts have not focused on domain-
specific vocabulary from the political/historical
domain.4 The exercise of running FreeLing on
the DHBB entries gave us good insights about the
coverage of OpenWN-PT and we plan to extend
the translations of synsets from the most frequent
missing words in OpenWN-PT to the less frequent
ones.

Token Freq
[??:??/1/??:??.??:??] 15294
partido 15292
durante 10962
contra 10180
tornar 9991
militar 9906
outro 9739
segundo 9577
são paulo 8803
estadual 8727
voto 8287
pmdb 6615
câm 6271
direito 6170
câmara dos deputados 5849

Table 3: Frequent tokens without synset

7 Conclusion

We have discussed the implementation and some
applications of OpenWordNet-PT, an open Word-
Net for Brazilian Portuguese. Recent improve-
ments include better coverage and nominaliza-
tion links connecting nouns and verbs. The
resource has been used in developing a high-
throughput commercial system as well as in a
cultural heritage project, and we anticipate that
numerous further applications will follow. The
data is freely available from http://github.
com/arademaker/wordnet-br/ and via a
SPARQL endpoint5. We are also grateful to Fran-
cis Bond for providing an online interface via the
Open Multilingual Wordnet website6.

4The first entry is the January encoded as a date template.
5See http://logics.emap.fgv.br:10035
6See http://bit.ly/1aN0Xxd

http://github.com/arademaker/wordnet-br/
http://github.com/arademaker/wordnet-br/
http://logics.emap.fgv.br:10035
http://bit.ly/1aN0Xxd


References
Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-

tiani. 2010. Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining.
In LREC, volume 10, pages 2200–2204.

Akshat Bakliwal, Piyush Arora, Senthil Madhappan,
Nikhil Kapre, Mukesh Singh, and Vasudeva Varma.
2012. Mining sentiments from tweets. In Proc. of
the 3rd Workshop in Computational Approaches to
Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, pages 11–18.

Tim Berners-Lee and Dan Connolly. 2011. Notation3
(N3): A readable RDF syntax. http://bit.ly/
1bYAs8y.

Francis Bond and Ryan Foster. 2013. Linking and ex-
tending an open multilingual wordnet. In Proc. of
ACL 2013, pages 1352–1362, Bulgaria. ACL.

Jordan Boyd-Graber, Christiane Fellbaum, Daniel Os-
herson, and Robert Schapire. 2006. Adding dense,
weighted connections to wordnet. In Proc. of the
3th Global WordNet Conf., pages 29–36, Jeju Island,
Korea, January.

Asli Celikyilmaz, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, and Junlan Feng.
2010. Probabilistic model-based sentiment analy-
sis of twitter messages. In IEEE Spoken Language
Technology Workshop (SLT), pages 79–84.

Christian Chiarcos, Sebastian Nordhoff, and Sebastian
Hellmann. 2012. Linked data in linguistics: Repre-
senting and connecting language data and language
metadata. Springer.

Livy Maria Real Coelho, Alexandre Rademaker,
Valeria De Paiva, and Gerard de Melo. 2014.
Embedding NomLex-BR nominalizations into
OpenWordnet-PT. In Proc. of Global WordNet
Conf. 2014. to appear.

Alan Cruse. 1986. Lexical semantics. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Richard Cyganiak and David Wood. 2003. RDF
1.1 concepts and abstract syntax. Technical Report
Draft 23 July 2013, W3C.

Gerard de Melo and Gerhard Weikum. 2008. Lan-
guage as a foundation of the Semantic Web. In Proc.
of ISWC 2008, volume 401.

Gerard de Melo and Gerhard Weikum. 2009. Towards
a universal wordnet by learning from combined evi-
dence. In Proc. of CIKM 2009, pages 513–522, New
York, USA. ACM.

Gerard de Melo and Gerhard Weikum. 2010. MENTA:
inducing multilingual taxonomies from Wikipedia.
In Proc. of CIKM 2010, pages 1099–1108. ACM.

Bento Carlos Dias-Da-Silva and Helio Roberto
de Moraes. 2003. A construçao de um thesaurus
eletrônico para o português do brasil. ALFA: Revista
de Linguı́stica, 47(2).

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An electronic
lexical database. The MIT press.

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira. 2013. Onto.PT: Towards the
Automatic Construction of a Lexical Ontology for
Portuguese. Ph.D. thesis, University of Coimbra.

Olga Gurevich, Richard Crouch, Tracy Holloway King,
and Valeria de Paiva. 2008. Deverbal nouns in
knowledge representation. J. Log. and Comput.,
18(3):385–404.

Steve Harris and Andy Seaborne. 2013. SPARQL
1.1 query language. Technical Report W3C Recom-
mendation 21 March 2013, W3C.

Pascal Hitzler, Markus Krotzsch, Bijan Parsia, Peter F.
Patel-Schneider, and Sebastian Rudolph. 2012.
OWL 2 web ontology language primer. Technical
Report W3C Rec 11 Dec 2012, W3C.

Alexander Hogenboom, Daniella Bal, Flavius Frasin-
car, Malissa Bal, Franciska de Jong, and Uzay Kay-
mak. 2013. Exploiting emoticons in sentiment anal-
ysis. In Proc. of the ACM Symposium on Applied
Computing, pages 703–710, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Lin Li, Yunqing Xia, and Pengzhou Zhang. 2011. An
unsupervised approach to sentiment word extraction
in complex sentiment analysis. International Jour-
nal of Knowledge and Language Processing, 2(1).

Catherine Macleod, Ralph Grishman, Adam Meyers,
Leslie Barret, and Ruth Reeves. 1998. Nomlex:
A lexicon of nominalizations. In Proc. of Euralex
1998, pages 187–193, Liege, Belgium.

Bernardo Magnini and Gabriela Cavaglia. 2000. Inte-
grating subject field codes into WordNet. In Proc. of
LREC, pages 1413–1418.

Palmira Marrafa. 2002. Portuguese wordnet: gen-
eral architecture and internal semantic relations.
DELTA: Documentação de Estudos em Lingüı́stica
Teórica e Aplicada, 18(SPE):131–146.

Lluı́s Padró and Evgeny Stanilovsky. 2012. Freeling
3.0: Towards wider multilinguality. In Proc. of the
8th Intern. Conf. on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’12), pages 23–25, Istanbul, Turkey,
may.

Alexandre Rademaker, Valeria De Paiva, and Gerard
de Melo. 2012. Openwordnet-pt: An open brazilian
wordnet for reasoning. In Proc. of COLING 2012,
pages 353–360, Mumbai.

Mark van Assem, Aldo Gangemi, and Guus Schreiber.
2006. RDF/OWL representation of WordNet. Tech-
nical Report W3C Working Draft 19 June 2006,
W3C. http://bit.ly/1jtGsA8.

Piek Vossen. 2002. EuroWordNet general document.
Technical Report Version 3 Final July 1, University
of Amsterdam.

http://bit.ly/1bYAs8y
http://bit.ly/1bYAs8y
http://bit.ly/1jtGsA8

