



















































Sociolinguistics for Computational Social Science


Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Language Technologies and Computational Social Science, page 3,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Sociolinguistics for Computational Social Science

Sali Tagliamonte
University of Toronto

Abstract

In recent years, a major growth area in applied natural language processing has been the appli-
cation of automated techniques to massive datasets in order to answer questions about society,
and by extension people. Sociolinguistics, which combines anthropology, statistics and linguis-
tics (e.g. Labov 1994, 2001), studies linguistic data in order to answer key questions about the
relationship of language and society. Sociolinguists focus on frequency and patterns in linguistic
usage, correlations, strength of factors and significance, which together reveal information about
the sex, age, education and occupation of speakers/writers but also their history, culture, place of
residence, social relationships and affiliations. The findings arising from this type research offer
important insights into the nature of human organizations at the global, national or community
level. They also reveal connections and interactions, the convergence and divergence of groups,
historical associations and developing trends.

In this paper, I will introduce sociolinguistic research and the nature of sociolinguistic field tech-
niques and sample design. I will argue that socially embedded data is critical for analyzing and
discovering social meaning. Then, I will summarize the findings of several case studies. What
does the use of a 3rd singular morpheme -s, as in (1), tell us about the history and culture of a
community (Tagliamonte 2012, 2013)? How is quotative be like, (2), spreading in geographic
space (Tagliamonte to appear)? What is the mechanism that underlies linguistic change (Taglia-
monte & D’Arcy 2009) and by extension cultural trends and projections?

1. The English people speaks with grammar.
2. I was like, “Hey how are you going?” And hes like, “Im fine.”

Using sociolinguistic datasets, the answers to these questions have successfully addressed pre-
vailing puzzles and offered solutions to real world problems. However this type of research is
only be as good as the quality of the data, the capability of the technologies for extracting and
analyzing what is important, and the relevance of the socially cogent and statistically sound inter-
pretations. I will argue that Sociolinguists and Computational Scientists could be powerful allies
in uncovering the complex structure of language data and in so doing, offer unsurpassed insight
into varying human states and conditions.

References
William Labov. 1994. Principles of Linguistic Change: Volume 1: Internal Factors. Blackwell.

William Labov. 2001. Principles of Linguistic Change: Volume 2: Social Factors. Blackwell.

Sali A. Tagliamonte and Alexandra D’Arcy. 2009. Peaks beyond phonology: Adolescence, incrementation, and
language change. Language, 85(1):58–108.

Sali A. Tagliamonte. 2012. Variationist Sociolinguistics: Change, Observation, Interpretation. Wiley-Blackwell.

Sali A. Tagliamonte. 2013. Roots of English: Exploring the History of Dialects. Cambridge University Press.

Sali A. Tagliamonte. To appear. System and society in the evolution of change: The view from Canada. In
E. Green and C. Meyer, editors, Faces of English. De Gruyter-Mouton.

3


