



















































Personal Attributes Extraction in Chinese Text Bakeoff in CLP 2014: Overview


Proceedings of the Third CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language Processing, pages 108–113,
Wuhan, China, 20-21 October 2014

 

Personal Attributes Extraction in Chinese Text Bakeoff in CLP 2014：
Overview 

 
Ruifeng Xu, Shuai Wang, Feng Shi 
Key Laboratory of Network Oriented 

Intelligent Computation, Shenzhen Graduate 
School, Harbin Institute of Technology, 

China  
xuruifeng@hitsz.edu.cn 

Jian Xu 
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong 

Polytechnic University, Hong Kong 
 

csjxu@comp.polyu.edu.hk 

 
 

Abstract 

This paper presents the overview of 
Personal Attributes Extraction in Chinese 
Text Bakeoff in CLP 2014. Personal 
attribute extraction plays an important 
role in information extraction, event 
tracking, entity disambiguation and other 
related research areas. This task is 
designed to evaluate the techniques for 
extracting person specific attributes from 
unstructured Chinese texts, which is 
similar to slot filling, but focuses on 
person attributes. This task brings some 
challenges issues because Chinese 
language contains some common words 
and lacks of capital clues as in English. 
The task organizer manually constructs 
the query names and corresponding 
documents. The value/presence of the 
texts corresponding 25 pre-defined 
attributes are annotated to construct the 
training and testing dataset. The bakeoff 
results achieved by the participators show 
the good progress in this field. 

1 Introduction 
Personal Attributes Extraction in Chinese Text 
Task is designed to evaluate the techniques for 
extracting person specific attributes, such as birth 
date, spouse, children, education, and title etc. 
from unstructured Chinese texts. These 
techniques play an important role in information 
extraction, event tracking, entity disambiguation 
and other related research areas. 
  Slot filling task has been proposed as one of 
shared tasks in the TAC KBP workshop since 
2009 [1]. Generally speaking, the mainstream 
techniques for slot filling and person attributes 

extraction may be camped into two major 
approaches, namely: Rule-based approach and 
statistics-based ones [2,3,4]. Rule-based 
approach normally defines the extraction rules 
manually or learns the rules automatically. The 
rules play the key role in this approach. As long 
as finding the constraint information which 
matches the rules in the text, the system may 
extract the target extraction information. As for 
the statistics-based approach, it has good 
portability to this extraction problem. Several 
statistics machine learning models such as 
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) and Condition 
Random Fields (CRFs) are employed. The 
shortcoming for this approach is that it requires 
large amount of training data which is always 
unavailable. 
  Currently, there are limited existing works on 
personal attributes extraction in Chinese text. 
Comparing to the works on English, the 
characteristics of Chinese language including the 
Chinese word segmentation, the confusion of 
named entity with common words, lack of capital 
clues bring more difficulties for person attributes 
extraction in Chinese. 
  The task of person attributes extraction in 
Chinese text in CLP 2014 bakeoff is designed on 
the basis of the slot filling task in the TAC KBP 
workshop [1]. The task organizer provides a 
collection of documents corresponding to a target 
person and a knowledge base which contains 
partial list of attributes for the person. 
Participants are required to extract additional 
attributes from the collections of documents. The 
task is similar to the slot filling, but it focuses on 
person attributes extraction. Furthermore, the 
collection of documents is not limited to the 
news corpus. 

108



 

2 Task Definition 
2.1 Task description 
The Personal Attributes Extraction in Chinese 
Text Task is motivated by a component of a full 
slot filling (SF) system. This task focuses on the 
refinement of output from Chinese slot filling 
systems. Especially, personal attributes extracted 
from the unstructured text is useful for the 
construction of Chinese knowledge graph. 

In this task, the participants are provided a set 
of document collection in several person name 
folders. In each folder, source documents named 
as XXX_Ti.xml and Wikipedia knowledge base 
named as XXX 维基百科记录.xml are given. 
The Wikipedia knowledge base for each person 
is an XML document, in which attributes are 
located in the tags of Facts. In addition, 
unstructured text for that person is also provided 
with the wiki_text tag. Example 1 gives a sample 
record in Wikipedia knowledge base.  
 
<entity wiki_title=" 周强 " type="PER" id="" 
name="周强"> 

<facts class="Infobox"> 
<fact name="nationality">中国</fact> 
<fact name="birthdate">1960年 4月</fact> 
<fact name="education">西南政法大学

</fact> 
</facts> 
<wiki_text>周强（1960 年 4 月－），湖北黄

梅人，西南政法大学民法专业毕业，法学硕士。 
</wiki_text> 

</entity> 
Example 1: A Sample Wikipedia knowledge 

base. 
 
The extraction task focused on extracting 

values for a set of pre-defined attributes (“slots”) 
for target person entity from given source 
documents. Given an entity, the system is 
required to extract the correct value(s) for that 
pre-defined attribute from source documents and 
return the slot filler together with its provenance, 
which is a set of text spans from source 
document that justify the correctness of the slot 
filler. The extraction system need not extract the 
attribute values given in the Wikipedia 
knowledge base. 

2.2 Dataset preparation 
The person names are manually selected from 
the web, in which 10 person names are used in 
training dataset and 90 person names, including 

48 names for Chinese person and 42 names for 
foreign person are used in testing dataset. The 
corresponding knowledge base is constructed 
from Wikipedia person entity while the source 
documents in each folder are constructed based 
on search engine output with manually selection. 
  The personal attributes are categorized as 
being Person (PER) slots based on the type of 
entities about which they seek to extract 
information. The attributes are also categorized 
by the content and quantity of their fillers [5]. 

 
2.2.1 Attribute slot content 
Attribute slot content are divided into three 
categorizations, namely Name, Value, or String. 
  Name slots are required to be filled by the 
name of a person. Name slots including the 
alternative name, spouse name, city of birth, 
country of death and so on. The detailed slot 
descriptions are given in the Personal Attributes 
Extraction in Chinese Text Task website. 
  Value slots are required to be filled by either a 
numerical value or a date such as age and birth 
date. The numbers and dates in these fillers can 
be spelled out (forty-two; December 7, 1941) or 
written as numbers (42; 12/7/1941). 
  String slots are basically a “catch all”, 
meaning that their fillers cannot be neatly 
classified as names or values. The text excerpts 
(or “strings”) that make up these fillers can 
sometimes be just a name, but are often 
expected to be more than a name. The typical 
string slots including cause of death and 
religion. 
 
2.2.2 Attribute slot quantity 
Slots are labeled as Single-value or List-value 
based on the number of fillers they can take. 
Since one slot may have different 
representations, participant is required to extract 
all of these representations. 
  Single-value slots can have only single 
filler. While most single-value slots are 
obvious (e.g., a person can only have one date 
of birth), some may be less apparent. 
  List-value slots can take multiple fillers as 
they are likely to have more than one correct 
answer in the source data. For example, people 
may have multiple children, employers, or 
alternate names. 
 
2.2.3 Attribute Table 

109



 

The following table of all 25 pre-defined 
attribute slots and their categorizations is given 
below. 
 
Slot name Content Quantity 
Alternate Names  Name List 
Children  Name List 
Cities of Residence   Name List 
City of Birth Name Single 
City of Death Name Single 
Countries of Residence   Name List 
Country of Birth   Name Single 
Country of Death   Name Single 
Other Family Name List 
Parents  Name List 
Schools Attended   Name List 
Siblings Name List 
Spouses   Name List 
Stateorprovince of Birth Name Single 
Stateorprovince of 
Death   Name Single 
Statesorprovinces of 
Residence  Name List 
Age   Value Single 
Date of Birth   Value Single 
Date of Death   Value Single 
Cause of Death   String Single 
Charges String List 
Religion   String List 
Title Name List 
Member of Name List 
Employee of Name List 

Table 1. Attribute slots 
 
In this task, the organizer collects the source 

documents under each person name by using the 
search engine. Using the person name and the 
related attribute names as the query to search on 
the Internet, the top N high quality web pages are 
manually selected as the source documents. 
During the set construction, the organizer avoids 
to the attribute slots overlapping between 
different source documents. Table 2 gives the 
statistical information for source document. 

 
Sets Max Min Average Total

Train set 4 1 2 24
Test set 5 1 2 235

Table 2．Statistical information of source 
documents 

 
The instance means one person's attribute slot 

appears in one source document. Table 3 lists the 

detail information about the instance number of 
one related person attribute in one source 
document. 
attributes Max Min Average 

Single 6 0 1 
List 47 0 1 
Table 3． Instances in source documents 

 
As mentioned above, the person attributes are 

divided into two categorizations: Single and 
List. The total instance numbers for the two 
categorizations in the training set and testing 
set are shown as follows. 

 
Figure 1. The instance numbers in the training 

set and testing set. 

3 Evaluation Metrics 
In the evaluation, both the lenient evaluation and 
strict evaluation are performed. In the strict 
evaluation, all instance attributes are compared 
to the answers while in the lenient evaluation, the 
offset string_begin and string_end are ignored. 
The detail evaluation metrics are shown as 
follows. 

3.1 Single Attributes Evaluation Metric Score =       (1) 
When numCorrect is zero, the numCorrect is set 
to 1.0; 

3.2 List Attributes Evaluation Metric = ( )∗ ∗∗( )      (2) 
 

      = ∑        (3) 
 

When IP is the instance precision and IR is the 
instance recall, in the evaluation we set the 
weight F = 2, and when both IP and IR are 
zero, we set the ListSlotValue to zero; 

3.3 Overall Evaluation Metric = + 	   (4) 

35
325250

2247

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

Train set Test set

Single

List

110



 

 
The overall evaluation metric is the average of 
single attributes evaluation score and list 
attributes evaluation score. The participant 
systems are ranked according to . 

4 Performance of the Participants 
In this bakeoff, 6 teams submitted 6 valid results. 
The team ID and the corresponding participants 
are listed in Table 4. 

 
Team ID Organization 

CIST-BUPT 北京邮邮大学 
ICTNET_002 中国科学院计算所 
WZ_v4 法国 INALCO 
BLCU-yudong 北京语言大学 
Result-BUPT 北京邮邮大学 
CASIA_CUC_PAES 中国科学院自动化所 

Table 4. The Bakeoff Participants 
 

The achieved performances of these systems 
under lenient and strict evaluations, are shown in 
Figure 2 and Figure 3, respectively. the 
performances of Personal Attributes Extraction 
in Chinese Text (the SF_Value) are uniformly 
lower than 0.5. Especially the ListScore lower 
than 0.4.  

Figure 2. The lenient evaluation results 
 

 
Figure 3. The strict evaluation results 

 
Three participants submit the technical reports 

for this task.  
Dong YU et al. [6] use a mixture framework 

consists of supervised learning and rule based 
extractor and human knowledge database. Firstly, 
they divide 25 attributes into several groups. A 
specific combination of methods for extracting 
the values for each group is developed. The CRF 
model and regular expression are employed to 
extract the instances, and the protagonist 
dependency relationship based filter and attribute 
keywords based filter are employed to 
post-process the answers extract. This system 
achieves the SF_Value of 0.309 under lenient 
evaluation and 0.293 under strict evaluation.  

Kailun Zhang et al. [7] propose a method 
based on the combination of trigger words, 
dictionary and rules. This system narrow down 
the extraction scope by building attributes trigger 
words. The attributes such as state, province, and 
school, the cause of death and some similar fixed 
attributes are extracted by dictionary lookup 
directly through building the attributes dictionary. 
Some attributes extraction rules are developed to 
extract other instances. This system achieves the 
SF_Value of 0.363 under lenient evaluation and 
0.352 under the strict evaluation.  

Zhen Wang et al. [8] use a dependency 
patterns matching technique to extract the 
attribute instances. In order to get the ontology, 
they use some patterns to match dependency 
relations and save the extracted information into 
RDF format file. An alignment process is used to 
group same classes and remove duplicates in 
RDF files. Finally, they align their ontology to 
CLP's. The performance of this system may be 
limited to some language process problems. It 
achieves SF_Value of 0.0043 under lenient 
evaluation and 0.0025 under strict evaluation.  

The top performance system, CASIA_CUC_ 
PAES did not provide the technical report. This 
system achieves SF_Value of 0.507 under lenient 
evaluation and 0.490 under strict evaluation. 

5 Analysis 
The SF_Value performances of Personal 
Attributes Extraction in Chinese Text systems 
are lower than 0.5 while the Single Score is 
lower than 0.7 and the ListScore is lower than 
0.4. In this section, we analyze the factors 
influence the extraction performance.  
  (1) One object sometimes have different 
expressions in Chinese language, for example, 

0.563

0.351

0.004

0.429

0.121

0.671

0.164 0.205

0.004

0.189

0.0217

0.3440.363
0.278

0.004

0.309

0.072

0.507

CIST ICTNET WZ BLCU BUPT CASIA

SingleScore ListScore SF_Value

0.55

0.3511

0.004

0.411

0.061

0.645

0.155 0.1975

0.001

0.174

0.011

0.3340.352
0.274

0.002

0.293

0.036

0.49

CIST ICTNET WZ BLCU BUPT CASIA

SingleScore ListScore SF_Value

111



 

the capital of China 北京 can be expressed as 
北京市 or 京，and even the date 1990 年 5 月 6
日  can be expressed as May 6, 1941, or 
1990-5-6, or 5/6/1990 and so on. The extraction 
system has the difficulty to extract all of these 
instances.  
  (2) In this evaluation, most system distinguish 
the titles and the alternate names hardly. 
Generally, alternate names refer to the assigned 
persons that are distinct from the "official" name. 
Alternate names may include aliases, stage 
names, alternate transliterations, abbreviations, 
alternate spellings, nicknames, or birth names. 
Compared with other slots, more inference 
should be used for selecting appropriate fillers 
for Alternate Names because the canonical 
names of entities often absent from source 
documents. As for the Titles or other extraneous 
information added to a name do not justify an 
alternate name. Generally, a given name alone is 
not a correct alternate name unless the person is 
unambiguously known that way. 
  (3)  The administrative region divisions in 
different countries are not the same. Thus, most 
systems distinguish the city and the state or 
province hardly. For example, the 福冈县 in 
Japan is divided as state or province level, but 
the 浮山县 in China should be divided as city 
level. In the bakeoff, the geopolitical entities are 
divided to three levels (city, town, or village). 
Thus, these attributes are hardly distinguished, 
especially for the statistical-based system. 
(4) Another problem is that attributes of string 
value are not be extracted exactly. For example, 
a mention of a serious illness is not an acceptable 
filler of cause of death unless it is explicitly 
linked to the death of the assigned person in the 
document. Assessors should be lenient in their 
judgment of the fullness of selected strings for 
cause of death. These types of attributes are 
basically a “catch all”, meaning that their fillers 
cannot be neatly classified as names or values. 
The text excerpts (or “strings”) that make up 
these fillers can sometimes be just a name, but 
are often expected to be more than a name.  

Due to various factors and complication of 
the evaluations, the organizer may only ensure 
the relative fairness for each system. Meanwhile, 
it is observed that some errors in the submitted 
results are come at very small points. The 
carefully development will be helpful.  
 Furthermore, to make the evaluation results 
comparable, the organizer should use a uniform 

standard in te evaluation (besides the 
SingleScore, ListScore, and the SF_Value). 
 

6 Conclusion 
The Personal Attributes Extraction in Chinese 
Text task for CLP2014 has raised the problem in 
Chinese personal attributes extraction. Besides 
the basic difficulty of Chinese nature language 
processing and  information extraction, there 
are other difficulties like common words 
detection, co-reference resolution. 6 teams have 
submitted their results. Most teams use 
rule-based methods or matching techniques 
while other team utilizes the statistical-based 
technique. Some proposed techniques are shown 
effective in person attribute extraction. The 
organizer expects this bakeoff is helpful to the 
research on person attribute extraction in Chinese 
text.  
   

 
Acknowledgements 

This study was supported by the National 
Natural Science Foundation of China No. 
61370165, Natural Science Foundation of 
Guangdong Province S2013010014475, MOE 
Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral 
Program of Higher Education 20122302120070, 
Open Projects Program of National Laboratory 
of Pattern Recognition, Shenzhen International 
Co-operation Research Funding GJHZ20120613 
110641217, Shenzhen Foundational Research 
Funding JCYJ20120613152557576. 

 
 

Reference 
 

[1] Heng Ji and Raslfph Grishman. 2011. 
Knowledge Base Population: Successful 
Approaches and Challenges. Proc. 49th 
Annual Meeting Assn. Computational 
Linguistics. 
 

[2] Zheng Chen, Suzanne Tamang, Adam Lee, 
Xiang Li, Wen-Pin Lin, Matthew Snover, 
Javier Artiles, MarissaPassantino and Heng 
Ji. 2010. CUNYBLENDER TAC-KBP2010 
Entity Linking and Slot Filling System 
Description. Proc. TAC 2010 Workshop. 
 

[3] Guillermo Garrido, Anselmo Peñas and 
Bernardo, Cabaleiro. 2013. UNED Slot 
Filling and Temporal Slot Filling systems at 
TAC KBP 2013. System description. Proc. 

112



 

TAC 2013 Workshop. 
 

[4] Bryan Kisiel, Justin Betteridge, Matt 
Gardner, Jayant Krishnamurthy, Ndapa 
Nakashole, Mehdi Samadi, Partha Talukdar, 
Derry Wijaya, Tom Mitchell. 2013. 
CMUML System for KBP 2013 Slot Filling. 
Proc. TAC 2013 Workshop. 
 

[5] Joe Ellis, Heather Simpson, Kira Griffitt, 
Hoa Trang Dang etc, TAC KBP Slot. 
http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/kbp/. 
 

[6] Dong YU, Cheng YU, Gongbo TANG, Qin 
QU, Chunhua LIU, Yue TIAN, Jing YI. 
2014. An Introduction to BLCU Personal 
Attributes Extraction System. Proc. Third 
SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language 
Processing. 
 

[7] Kailun Zhang, Mingyin Wang, Xiaoyue 
Cong, Fang Huang, Hongfa Xue, Lei Li. 
2014. Personal Attributes Extraction Based 
on the Combination Trigger Words, 
Dictionary and Rules. Proc. Third SIGHAN 
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing. 
 

[8] Zhen Wang. 2014. Extraction system for 
Personal Attributes Extraction of CLP2014. 
Proc. The Third SIGHAN Workshop on 
Chinese Language Processing.

113


