











































Instructions for ACL-2013 Proceedings


The SAS Statistical Machine Translation System for WAT 2014 

Rui Wang, Xu Yang and Yan Gao 

SAS Institute Inc 

 Beijing, China 

rui.wang|xu.yang|yan.gao@sas.com 

Abstract 

This paper is a description of the tech-

niques and experiment results by SAS In-

stitute Inc in WAT 2014 evaluation cam-

paign. We participate in two subtasks of 

WAT 2014:  the Chinese to Japanese track 

and the English to Japanese track. Our 

baseline system is MOSES statistical ma-

chine translation toolkit. We propose syn-

tactic reordering approaches for English 

to Japanese and Chinese to Japanese trans-

lation which transform the order of source 

sentence into the target-like order. In ad-

dition, we apply the segmentation tool in 

SAS® Text Miner to enhance the transla-

tion results. Several contrastive experi-

ments are presented based on the auto-

matic evaluation results.  

1 Introduction 

This paper describes the machine translation 

system employed by SAS Institute Inc in the 1st 

Workshop on Asian Translation. We participate in 

two subtasks in this year’s WAT evaluation cam-

paign:  

1) Chinese to Japanese;

2) English to Japanese.

We apply MOSES toolkit as the baseline system. 

The sentence structure of Japanese is different 

with that of English and Chinese. Japanese is typ-

ically a Subject-Object-Verb (SOV) language 

while Chinese and English are Subject-Verb-Ob-

ject (SVO) languages, as illustrated in Figure 1. 

The statistic machine translation between Japa-

nese and the SVO language is particularly diffi-

cult because of the long distance difference of 

word orders. We propose a simple syntactic reor-

dering approach for Chinese to Japanese and Eng-

lish to Japanese SMT in order to transform Chi-

nese and English into SVO languages. Our sub-

mission mainly focuses on using the syntactic ap-

proaches to improve effectively improve the 

translation results. In addition, unlike the alpha-

betic languages, Chinese and Japanese need to be 

segmented into words of characters before trans-

lation. The accuracy of segmentation highly influ-

ences the performance of translation for Chinese 

and Japanese. We apply the tokenization tool in 

SAS® Text Miner to the corpus and obtain im-

provement of the translation results.  

Japanese： 私は     日本語   を好きです 。
( I )    (Japanese)    (like)    (.)

S            O              V

Chinese：     我        喜欢       日语 。
( I ) (like)     (Japanese) (.)

S V            O

English：    I  like     Japanese .
 S        V         O

English：    I like Japanese .
S V O 

Figure 1: Word order differences of Japanese, 

Chinese and English. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: 

in section 2 we describe the background; in sec-

tion 3 we present the architecture of our system; 

Section 4 is the detailed description of the syntac-

tic reordering rules we propose; experiment re-

sults are shown in section 5 and conclusion is 

made in section 6. 

2 Background  

The state of the art Statistical Machine Translation 

(SMT), phrase-based SMT (Koehn et al., 2003), 

works well on the translation between short 

phrases as well as on long sentences pairs with 

similar word orders. However the phrase-based 

SMT has limited capacity for long distance reor-

dering since it does not consider the syntactic in-

formation in the translation. A great deal of recent 

research enhances the translation results by add-

ing syntactic features, such syntactic-based SMT 

64
Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Asian Translation (WAT2014), pages 64‒68,

Tokyo, Japan, 4th October 2014.
2014 Copyright is held by the author(s).



(Liu et al., 2006), or forest-based SMT (Mi et al., 

2008). The language-independent methods parse 

the input sentences and then train reordering 

model from these parsed trees, such as Quirk et al. 

(2005), Li et al. (2007). These approaches im-

prove the translation considerably but they are 

time consuming during decoding. Syntactic reor-

dering approaches effectively improve the trans-

lation results by transforming the order of source-

side language into target-like order. 

Previous studies have proposed the syntactic 

reordering approach which is regarded as a pre-

processing step on the source side language. Xia 

et al. (2004) automatically extract reordering rules 

on source side for English to French translation. 

Collins et al. (2005) improve the German to Eng-

lish translation by combining morphological and 

syntactical information into SMT system. Wang 

et al. (2007) extract the syntactic reordering rules 

manually on Chinese to English translation. 

Isozaki et al. (2010) propose a simple head final-

ized approach to reorder English into Japanese or-

der based on Enju parser. We apply the head fi-

nalized method to our system and achieve im-

provement on the translation from English to Jap-

anese. Dan et al. (2012) carry out a similar head 

finalized approach for Chinese to Japanese trans-

lation using a Chinese Enju parser (Yu et al., 

2011). We propose a simple reordering methods 

for Chinese based on the accurate Berkeley Parser 

(Petrov et al., 2006). 

3 System Architecture 

We use the open-source SMT toolkit MOSES as 

the baseline to train translation model and to de-

code the test set for submission.  SRILM (Stolcke 

et al. 2002) toolkit is applied to train the N-gram 

statistical language model. All the corpus are to-

kenized and lowercased before training and de-

coding. All the submitted results are detokenized. 

In addition to the basic phrase-based model, we 

also try hierarchical model (Chiang et al., 2007) 

using MOSES. 

We use the segementation tool in SAS® Text 

Miner to tokenize Japanese and Chinese corpus 

(IP (NP (NR 本文 (this paper) )) 

      (VP (VV 汇总 (summarize) ) 

       (AS 了) 

(NP (NP (CP (IP (VP (NP (NT 目前 (current) )) 

     (VP (VRD (VV 查) (VV 到) (found) )))) 

(DEC 的 (of) )) 

        (NP (NN 影响 (influence) ))) 

(CC 以及 (and) ) 

(NP (CP (IP (VP (NP (NT 今后 (future) )) 

(VP (VV 预测 (predicted) )))) 

           (DEC 的 (of) )) 

(NP (NN 影响 (influence) ))))) 

      (PU 。))

(IP (NP (NR 本文 (this paper) )) 

      (VP (NP (NP (CP (IP (VP (NP (NT 目前 (current) )) 

 (VP (VRD (VV 查) (VV 到) (found) ))))

(DEC 的 (of) )) 

 (NP (NN 影响 (influence) )))

(CC 以及 (and) ) 

 (NP (CP (IP (VP (NP (NT 今后 (future) )) 

(VP (VV 预测 (predicted) )))) 

 (DEC 的 (of) ))

(NP (NN 影响 (influence) ))))) 

 (VV 汇总 (summarize) ) 

 (AS 了) 

 (PU 。))

(IP (NP (NR 本文 (this paper) )) 

      (VP (NP (NP (CP (IP (VP (NP (NT 目前 (current) )) 

(VP (VRD (VV 查) (VV 到) (found) )))) 

(DEC 的 (of) )) 

(NP (NN 影响 (influence) ))) 

(CC 以及 (and) ) 

(NP (CP (IP (VP (NP (NT 今后 (future) )) 

(VP (VV 预测 (predicted) )))) 

   (DEC 的 (of) )) 

(NP (NN 影响 (influence) ))))) 

   (VV 汇总 (summarize) ) 

       (AS 了) 

      (PU 。))

本文   汇总 了     目前    查到 的    影响    以及     今后    预测 的     影响  。

時点 で  検出されて いる  影響  および  今後  予測さ  れる  影響  を まとめた 。 時点 で  検出されて いる  影響  および  今後  予測さ  れる  影響  を まとめた 。時点 で  検出されて いる  影響  および  今後  予測さ  れる  影響  を まとめた 。

本文     目前    查到 的       影响    以及     今后    预测 的     影响       汇总了  。本文     目前    查到 的       影响    以及     今后    预测 的     影响       汇总了  。

      (IP (VP (PP (P 根据 (based on) ) 

(NP (ADJP (JJ 大型 (large) )) 

(NP (NN 零售 (retail) ) (NN 商店 (shop) ) 

          (NN 选址法 (locating method) ))))  

 (VP (VV 进行 (process) ) 

(NP (NN 方针 (policy) ))

 (DEC 的)) 

(NP (NN 修改 (modify) ))))

      (IP (VP (PP (NP (ADJP (JJ 大型 (large) )) 

 (NP (NN 零售 (retail) ) (NN 商店 (shop) ) 

(NN 选址法 (locating method) ))))  

 (P 根据 (based on) )

 (VP (NP (NN 方针 (policy) ))

 (DEC 的)) 

(NP (NN 修改 (modify) ))))

   (VV 进行 (process) ) 

      (IP (VP (PP (NP (ADJP (JJ 大型 (large) )) 

(NP (NN 零售 (retail) ) (NN 商店 (shop) ) 

(NN 选址法 (locating method) )))) 

   (P 根据 (based on) ) 

(VP (NP (NN 方针 (policy) ))

 (DEC 的)) 

(NP (NN 修改 (modify) ))))

  (VV 进行 (process) ) 

根据   大型   零售商店   选址法   进行   方针   的    修改

大規模 小売店舗 立地法 に 基づく 指針 の 改定 に ついて

大型   零售商店    选址法    根据   方针   的    修改   进行

大規模 小売店舗 立地法 に 基づく 指針 の 改定 に ついて

大型   零售商店    选址法    根据   方针   的    修改   进行

大規模 小売店舗 立地法 に 基づく 指針 の 改定 に ついて

(a)

(b)

65



for training, tuning and testing. Then we use MO-

SES tool to lowercase the corpus and to clean long 

sentences. The syntactic reordering approach is 

applied on source-side cleaned sentences for Eng-

lish and Chinese.  Finally the cleaned and reor-

dered corpus is sent to MOSES to train models 

and decode results.  

We use Berkeley parser (Petrov et al., 2006) to 

parse the source side Chinese sentence into syn-

tactic tree and develop the reorder rules based on 

the grammatical structure of the sentence. English 

sentence is parsed by Enju parser and the head fi-

nalized reorder is applied as described by Isozaki 

et al. (2010). 

4 Syntactic Reordering Approach 

4.1 Chinese to Japanese reordering 

The Chinese sentence is parsed into a grammatical 

tree using Pen Treebank syntactic tagset as illus-

trated in Figure 2. The main difference between 

Chinese and Japanese is the position of Verb 

Phrase (VP) and Prepositional Phrase (PP). We 

develop two simple reordering rules, VP-rule and 

PP-rule, based on the syntactic tree.  

We develop the VP-rule, ‘VP (VV AS (XXX)) 
→VP ( (XXX) VV AS)’, which means to move 
the verb (VV) and the auxiliary word (AS) behind 

VV to the end of the verb phrase (VP). For exam-

ple, in Figure 2 (a), ‘VV 汇总 (summarize)’ and 

‘AS 了’ are moved to the end of VP. The reor-
dered Chinese sentence has more similar order 

with the Japanese translation than the original one.  

The Preposition (P) is always at the end the 

Prepositional Phrase (PP) in Japanese while in 

Chinese P is located at the beginning of PP. We 

imply the PP-rule, ‘PP (P (XXX)) → PP ((XXX) 
P)’, to move P to the end of PP. In Figure 2 (b), 

the preposition ‘根据 (based on)’ is move to the 

end of PP. The reordered sentence reduce the long 

distance order differences between the source 

Chinese and the target Japanese.  

4.2 English to Japanese reordering 

For English to Japanese translation, we use the 

head finalization approach proposed by Isozaki et 

al. (2010). In Japanese, the syntactic head word is 

located behind the dependent words while English 

is the opposite. The dependency parser, Enju par-

ser, is applied on the source side which can output 

syntactic head, as illustrated in Figure 3. A simple 

reorder rule is defined: to move the syntactic head 

to the end of non-head words. In Figure 3, node 

C3 is the head of node C2. According to the head 

finalized reordering rule, C3 should be moved be-

hind the other child of C2, C4. After reordering, 

the English sentence has the similar order with the 

Japanese sentence. 

The head finalized reorder rule will reorder the 

coordination expressions such as, ‘A and B’, into 

‘B and A’. We add a coordination exception rule 

to stop reordering at coordination nodes. 

5 Experiments 

The experiment is conducted on the training data 

from ASPEC, consists of approximately 3 million 

 

Figure 3: Example of reordering rules for English to Japanese translation. * represents the head of 

the node. (a) is the original sentence; (b) is the reordered sentence by head finalized rule. 

C0C0

C1C1 C2C2

C3 C4C4

C5C5 C6C6

T1T1 T2 T3T3 T4T4

I                   love                      the                  children 

私は            子供 を             愛していま              す

*

*

*

C0C0

C1C1 C2C2

C4C4

C5C5 C6C6

T1T1 T3T3 T4T4

I                 the                        children             love

私は            子供 を             愛していま              す

*

*

* C3

T2

(a) Original sentence (b) Reordered sentence

66



Japanese-English parallel sentences and approxi-

mately 0.7 million Japanese-Chinese. BLEU and 

RIBES are used as evaluation metrics. On the 

evaluation websites, for Chinese to Japanese and 

English to Japanese evaluation, the results of 

BLEU and RIBES are measured under three Jap-

anese segmentation tools: Juman, Kytea and 

Mecab. For the sake of brevity, we calculate the 

average score of the three segmentation tools for 

each evaluation metric. 

5.1 Effect of the segmentation tool of SAS® 
Text Miner 

We use phrase-based model as baseline for the 

Chinese to Japanese track to evaluate the effect of 

SAS segmentation tool. The result of baseline is 

provided by the WAT organizer (Toshiaki, et al. 

2014). Table 1 shows that both the BLEU and 

RIBES are increased by using the segmentation 

tool of SAS® Text Miner for Chinese and Japa-

nese corpus compared with the Juman segmenta-

tion tool for Japanese and Stanford Word Seg-

menter for Chinese. We conduct the other experi-

ments using the segmentation tool of SAS® Text 

Miner because of its good performance. 

 BLEU RIBES 

Baseline  34.86 0.769962 

SAS segmentation 35.31 0.809631 

Table 1: Effect of the segmentation tool of SAS® 

Text Miner.  

5.2 Chinese to Japanese translation 

 BLEU RIBES 

Baseline 34.86 0.769962 

Baseline+VP 36.19 0.826146 

Baseline+PP 36.30 0.815694 

Baseline+PP+VP 36.40 0.826015 

Hierarchical 36.06 0.814207 

Hierarchical+PP+VP 37.38 0.830909 

Table 2: Effect of reordering rules for Chinese to 

Japanese translation. 

Table 2 shows the effect of reordering rules for 

Chinese to Japanese translation. The baseline is 

the results from the WAT organizer (Toshiaki, et 

al. 2014). We propose two reordering rules: VP 

rule and PP rule. The baseline is the phrase-based 

machine translation using MOSES. We apply the 

VP rule, PP rule and the combination of the two 

rules to the corpus separately and send the reor-

dered sentences to the baseline system. Both the 

VP rule and PP rule have contribution to the im-

provement of BLEU scores.  We also apply the 

reorder rules to the hierarchical model and gain 

2.07 in BLEU scores compared with the baseline 

system. 

5.3 English to Japanese translation 

The effect of the head finalized reordering rule 

for English to Japanese translation is reported in 

Table 3. The phrase-based model is applied as 

baseline system. After head finalized reordering, 

the BLEU score is increased from 28.52 by the or-

ganizer (Toshiaki, et al. 2014) to 31.09.  We gain 

3.13 in BLEU score by applying the hierarchical 

model with pre-reordering.  

 BLEU RIBES 

Baseline 28.52 0.690350 

Baseline+reorder 31.09 0.765005 

Hierarchical 31.23 0.743135 

Hierarchical+reorder 31.65 0.767323 

Table 3: Effect of the head finalized reordering 

rule for English to Japanese translation. 

6 Conclusion 

This paper describes the techniques and experi-

ment results in WAT 2014 evaluation campaign 

submitted by SAS Institute Inc. By applying the 

tokenization tool in SAS® Text Miner and the 

syntactic reordering rules, we achieve significant 

improvements on Chinese to Japanese translation 

and English to Japanese translation. We also re-

port some extensive experiment results to illus-

trate the contribution on different parts.  

In the future, we intend to consider case mark-

ers in Japanese which other languages do not 

have. Since the form of Japanese case markers is 

known, we may define rules to insert particular 

tags to the source languages. We expect improve-

ments of translation by adding the rules of case 

markers in Japanese. 

Reference 

Koehn, Philipp, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu. 

2003. "Statistical phrase-based translation." Pro-

ceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North Amer-

ican Chapter of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics on Human Language Technology-Vol-

ume 1. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Liu, Yang, Qun Liu, and Shouxun Lin. 2006. "Tree-to-

string alignment template for statistical machine 

translation." Proceedings of the 21st International 

Conference on Computational Linguistics and the 

67



44th annual meeting of the Association for Compu-

tational Linguistics.  

Mi, Haitao, Liang Huang, and Qun Liu. 2008. "Forest-

Based Translation." ACL. 

Quirk, Chris, Arul Menezes, and Colin Cherry. 2005. 

"Dependency treelet translation: Syntactically in-

formed phrasal SMT." Proceedings of the 43rd An-

nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-

guistics.  

Li, Chi-Ho, et al. 2007. "A probabilistic approach to 

syntax-based reordering for statistical machine 

translation." ANNUAL MEETING-ASSOCIATION 

FOR COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS. Vol. 45. 

No. 1.  

Xia, Fei, and Michael McCord. 2004. "Improving a sta-

tistical MT system with automatically learned re-

write patterns." Proceedings of the 20th interna-

tional conference on Computational Linguistics. 

Association for Computational Linguistics.  

Collins, Michael, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Kučerová. 

2005. "Clause restructuring for statistical machine 

translation." Proceedings of the 43rd annual meet-

ing on association for computational linguistics. 

Association for Computational Linguistics.  

Wang, Chao, Michael Collins, and Philipp Koehn. 

2007. "Chinese Syntactic Reordering for Statistical 

Machine Translation." EMNLP-CoNLL.  

Isozaki, Hideki, et al. 2010. "Head finalization: A sim-

ple reordering rule for sov languages." Proceedings 

of the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statistical Machine 

Translation and MetricsMATR. Association for 

Computational Linguistics. 

Dan, Han, et al. 2012. "Head finalization reordering for 

Chinese-to-Japanese machine translation." Pro-

ceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Syntax, Seman-

tics and Structure in Statistical Translation. Associ-

ation for Computational Linguistics. 

Yu, Kun, et al. 2011. "Analysis of the difficulties in 

Chinese deep parsing."Proceedings of the 12th In-

ternational Conference on Parsing Technologies. 

Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Stolcke, Andreas. 2002. "SRILM-an extensible lan-

guage modeling toolkit."INTERSPEECH.  

Chiang, David. 2007. "Hierarchical phrase-based 

translation." computational linguistics 33.2: 201-

228. 

Petrov, Slav, et al. 2006. "Learning accurate, compact, 

and interpretable tree annotation." Proceedings of 

the 21st International Conference on Computa-

tional Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics. Associ-

ation for Computational Linguistics. 

Toshiaki Nakazawa, et al. 2014. "Overview of the 1st 

Workshop on Asian Translation". Proceedings of 

the 1st Workshop on Asian Translation (WAT2014) 

68




