



















































Requirement Mining in Technical Documents


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Argumentation Mining, pages 108–109,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Requirement Mining in Technical Documents

Juyeon Kang
Prometil

42 Avenue du Général De Croutte
31100 Toulouse, France

j.kang@prometil.com

Patrick Saint-Dizier
IRIT-CNRS

118 route de Narbonne
31062 Toulouse, France
stdizier@irit.fr

Abstract

In this paper, we first develop the linguis-
tic characteristics of requirements which
are specific forms of arguments. The dis-
course structures that refine or elaborate
requirements are also analyzed. These
specific discourse relations are conceptu-
ally characterized, with the functions they
play. An implementation is carried out
in Dislog on the <TextCoop> platform.
Dislog allows high level specifications in
logic for a fast and easy prototyping at a
high level of linguistic adequacy.

1 The Structure of Requirement
Compounds

Arguments and in partticular requirements in writ-
ten texts or dialogues seldom come in isolation,
as independent statements. They are often em-
bedded into a context that indicates e.g. circum-
stances, elaborations or purposes. Relations be-
tween a requirement and its context may be con-
ceptually complex. They often appear in small and
closely related groups or clusters that often share
similar aims, where the first one is complemented,
supported, reformulated, contrasted or elaborated
by the subsequent ones and by additional state-
ments.

The typical configuration of a requirement com-
pound can be summarized as follows:
CIRCUMSTANCE(S)/CONDITION(S),PURPOSE(S)-->
[REQUIREMENT CONCLUSION + SUPPORT(S)]*
<-- PURPOSE(S), , ELABORATION(S)
CONCESSION(S) / CONTRAST(S)

In terms of language realization, clusters of re-
quirements and their related context may be all
included into a single sentence via coordination
or subordination or may appear as separate sen-
tences. In both cases, the relations between the
different elements of a cluster are realized by
means of conjunctions, connectors, various forms

of references and punctuation. We call such a clus-
ter an requirement compound. The idea behind
this term is that the elements in a compound form
a single, possibly complex, unit, which must be
considered as a whole from a conceptual and ar-
gumentative point of view. Such a compound con-
sists of a small number of sentences, so that its
contents can be easily assimilated.

2 Linguistic Analysis

2.1 Corpus characteristics

Our corpus of requirements comes from 3 orga-
nizations and 6 companies. Our corpus contains
1,138 pages of text extracted from 22 documents.
The main features considered to validate our cor-
pus are the following:
- specifications come form various industrial ar-
eas;
- documents are produced by various actors;
- requirement documents follow various authoring
guidelines;
- requirements correspond to different conceptual
levels.

A typical simple example is the following:
<ReqCompound> <definition> Inventory of qualifications

refers to norm YY. < /definition>

<mainReq> Periodically, an inventory of supplier’s qualifi-

cations shall be produced. < /mainReq>

<secondaryReq>In addition, the supplier’s quality de-

partment shall periodically conduct a monitoring audit

program.< /secondaryReq>

<elaboration> At any time, the supplier should be able

to provide evidences that EC qualification is maintained.

</elaboration> < /ReqCompound>

2.2 The model

Let us summarize the processing model.
Requirement indetification in isolation: Re-

quirements are identified on the basis of a small
number of patterns since they must follow precise

108



formulations, according e.g. to IEEE guidelines.
On a small corpus of 64 pages of text (22 058
words), where 215 requirements have been man-
ually annotated, a precision of 97% and a recall of
96% have been reached.

Identification and delimitation of require-
ment compounds The principle is that all the
statements in a compound must be related either
by the reference to the same theme or via phrasal
connectors. These form a cohesion link in the
compound. The theme is a nominal construction
(object or event, e.g. inventory of qualifications)).
This is realized by (1) the use of the theme in
the sentences that follow or precede the main re-
quirement with possible morphological variations,
a different determination or simple syntactic vari-
ations, This situation occurs in about 82% of the
cases. (2) the use of a more generic term than the
theme or a generic part of the theme, (3) the refer-
ence to the parts of the theme, (3) the use of dis-
course connectors to introduce a sentence, or (4)
the use of sentence binders.

Relations between requirements in a com-
pound Our observations show that the first re-
quirement is always the main requirement of the
compound. The requirements that follow develop
some of its facets. Secondary requirements essen-
tially develop forms of contrast, concession, spe-
cializations and constraints.

Linguistic characterization of discourse
structures in a compound Sentences not
identified as requirements must be bound to
requirements via discourse relations and must
be characterized by the function they play e.g.
(Couper-Khulen et al. 2000). The structure and
the markers and connectors typical of discourse
relations found in technical texts are developed
in (Saint-Dizier 2014) from (Marcu 2000) and
(Stede 2012). These have been enhanced and
adapted to the requirement context via several
sequences of tests on our corpus. The main
relations are the following: information and
definitions which always occur before the main
requirement, elaborations which always follow
a requirement, since this relation is very large,
we consider it as the by-default relation in the
compound, result which specifies the outcome
of an action, purpose which expresses the
underlying motivations of the requirements, and
circumstance which introduces a kind of local
frame under which the requirement compound is

valid or relevant.
A conceptual model is constructed in a first

stage from the discourse relations and functions
presented above, and the notion of polarity and
strength for requirements. Its role is to represent
the relations between the various units of the com-
pound in order to allow to draw inferences be-
tween compounds, to make generalizations and to
check coherence, e.g. (Bagheri et al. 2011).

2.3 Indicative evaluation

The system is implemented in Dislog on our
TextCoop platform. The first step, requirement
identification, produces very good results since
their form is very regular: precision 97%, recall
96%. The second step, compound identification,
produces the following results:

precision recall
identification 93% 88%
opening boundary 96% 91%
closing boundary 92% 82%

The identification of discourse structures in a
compound produces the following results:

relations nb of nb of precision recall
rules annotations

contrast 14 24 84 88
concession 11 44 89 88
specialization 5 37 72 71
information 6 23 86 80
definition 9 69 87 78
elaboration 13 107 84 82
result 14 97 86 80
circumstance 15 102 89 83
purpose 17 93 91 83

References

Ebrahim Bagheri, Faezeh Ensan. 2011. Consolidating
Multiple Requirement Specifcations through Argu-
mentation, SAC’11 Proceedings of the 2011 ACM
Symposium on Applied Computing.

Elena Couper-Kuhlen, Bernt Kortmann. 2000. Cause,
Condition, Concession, Contrast: Cognitive and
Discourse Perspectives, Topics in English Linguis-
tics, No 33, de Gryuter.

Dan Marcu. 2000. The Theory and Practice of Dis-
course Parsing and Summarization, MIT Press.

Patrick Saint-Dizier, 2014 Challenges of Discourse
Processing: the acse of technical documents, Cam-
bridge Scholars.

Manfred Stede. 2012 Discourse Processing, Morgan
and Claypool Publishers.

109


