



















































A Comparison of MT Methods for Closely Related Languages: a Case Study on Czech - Slovak Language Pair


Language Technology for Closely Related Languages and Language Variants (LT4CloseLang), pages 92–98,
October 29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Comparison of MT Methods for Closely Related Languages: a Case
Study on Czech – Slovak Language Pair ∗

Vladislav Kuboň1
1Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Charles University in Prague

vk@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Jernej Vičič2,3
2FAMNIT

University of Primorska,
3Fran Ramovš Institute of the

Slovenian Language, SRC SASA,
jernej.vicic@upr.si

Abstract
This paper describes an experiment compar-
ing results of machine translation between two
closely related languages, Czech and Slovak.
The comparison is performed by means of two
MT systems, one representing rule-based ap-
proach, the other one representing statistical
approach to the task. Both sets of results are
manually evaluated by native speakers of the
target language. The results are discussed both
from the linguistic and quantitative points of
view.

1 Introduction
Machine translation (MT) of related languages is a spe-
cific field in the domain of MT which attracted the at-
tention of several research teams in the past by promis-
ing relatively good results through the application of
classic rule-based methods. The exploitation of lexi-
cal, morphological and syntactic similarity of related
languages seemed to balance the advantages of data-
driven approaches, especially for the language pairs
with smaller volumes of available parallel data.

This simple and straightforward assumption have led
to the construction of numerous rule-based translation
systems for related (or similar) natural languages. The
following list (ordered alphabetically) includes several
examples of those systems:

• (Altintas and Cicekli, 2002) for Turkic languages.
• Apertium (Corbi-Bellot et al., 2005) for Romance

languages.

• (Dyvik, 1995; Bick and Nygaard, 2007; Ahren-
berg and Holmqvist, 2004) for Scandinavian lan-
guages.

• Česı́lko (Hajič et al., 2000), for Slavic languages
with rich inflectional morphology, mostly lan-
guage pairs with Czech language as a source.

• Ruslan (Oliva, 1989) full-fledged transfer based
RBMT system from Czech to Russian.
∗This work has been using language resources devel-

oped and/or stored and/or distributed by the LINDAT-Clarin
project of the Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic
(project LM2010013).

• (Scannell, 2006) for Gaelic languages; Irish
(Gaeilge) and Scottish Gaelic (G‘aidhlig).

• (Tyers et al., 2009) for the North Sami to Lule
Sami language pair.

• Guat (Vičič, 2008) for Slavic languages with rich
inflectional morphology, mostly language pairs
with Slovenian language.

Many of the systems listed above had been created
in the period when it was hard to obtain a good qual-
ity data-driven system which would enable comparison
against these systems. The existence of Google Trans-
late1 which nowadays enables the automatic translation
even between relatively small languages made it possi-
ble to investigate advantages and disadvantages of both
approaches. This paper introduces the first step in this
direction - the comparison of results of two different
systems for two really very closely related languages -
Czech and Slovak.

2 State of the art

There has already been a lot of research in Machine
Translation evaluation. There are quite a few confer-
ences and shared tasks devoted entirelly to this problem
such as NIST Machine Translation Evaluation (NIST,
2009) or Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(Bojar et al., 2013). (Weijnitz et al., 2004) presents
a research on how systems from two different MT
paradigms cope with a new domain. (Kolovratnık et
al., 2009) presents a research on how relatedness of
languages influences the translation quality of a SMT
sytem.

The novelty of the presented paper is in the focus on
machine translation for closely related languages and in
the comparison of the two mostly used paradigms for
this task: shallow parse and transfer RBMT and SMT
paradigms.

3 Translation systems

The translation systems selected for the experiment are:

• Google Translate
1Google Translate: https://translate.google.

com/.

92



• Česı́lko (Hajič et al., 2003)
Google Translate was selected as the most used trans-
lation system. Česı́lko belongs to the shallow-parse
and shallow-transfer rule based machine translation
paradigm which is by many authors the most suitable
for translation of related languages.

Česı́lko (Hajič et al., 2003) was used as a representa-
tive of rule-based MT systems, the translation direction
from Czech to Slovak was naturally chosen because
this is the only direction this system supports for this
particular language pair.

The on-line publicly available versions of the sys-
tems sere used in the experiment to ensure the repro-
ducibility of the experiment. All the test data is pub-
licly available at the language technologies server of
the University of Primorska2.

Let us now introduce the systems in a more detail.

3.1 Google Translate

This system is currently probably the most popular and
most widely used MT system in the world. It belongs
to the Statistical Machine Translation – SMT paradigm.
SMT is based on parametric statistical models, which
are constructed on bilingual aligned corpora (training
data). The methods focus on looking for general pat-
terns that arise in the use of language instead of ana-
lyzing sentences according to grammatical rules. The
main tool for finding such patterns is counting a variety
of objects – statistics. The main idea of the paradigm
is to model the probability that parts of a sentence from
the source language translate into suitable parts of sen-
tence in the target language.

The system takes advantage of the vast parallel re-
sources which Google Inc. has at their disposal and
it is therefore able to translate a large number of lan-
guage pairs. Currently (July 2014), this system offers
automatic translation among 80 languages. This makes
it a natural candidate as a universal quality standard for
MT, especially for pairs of smaller (underrepresented)
languages for which there are very few MT systems.

3.2 Česı́lko

One of the first systems which fully relied on the simi-
larity of related languages, Česı́lko (Hajič et al., 2003),
had originally a very simple architecture. Its first im-
plementation translated from Czech to Slovak. It used
the method of direct word-for-word translation (after
necessary morphological processing). More precisely,
it translated each lemma obtained by morphological
analysis and morphological tag provided by a tagger to
a lemma and a corresponding tag in the target language.
For the translation of lemmas it was necessary to use a
bilingual dictionary, the differences in morphology of
both languages, although to a large extent regular, did
not allow to use a simple transliteration. The translation

2 Test data: http://jt.upr.si/research_
projects/related_languages/

of lemmas was necessary due to differences in tagsets
of the source and target language.

The syntactic similarity of both languages allowed
the omission of syntactic analysis of the source lan-
guage and syntactic synthesis of the target one, there-
fore the dictionary phase of the system had been im-
mediately followed by morphological synthesis of the
target language. No changes of the word order were
necessary, the target language order of words preserved
the word order of the source language.

Later versions of the system experimented with
the architecture change involving the omission of the
source language tagger and the addition of a stochas-
tic ranker of translation hypothesis at the target lan-
guage side. The purpose of this experiment was to
eliminate tagging errors at the beginning of the transla-
tion process and to enable more variants of translation
from which the stochastic ranker chose the most prob-
able hypothesis. This change has been described for
example in (Homola and Kuboň, 2008). For the pur-
pose of our experiment we are using the original ver-
sion of the system which has undergone some minor
improvements (better tagger, improved dictionary etc.)
and which is publicly available for testing at the web-
site of the LINDAT project3. The decision to use this
version is natural, given the fact that this is the only
publicly available version of the system.

4 Methodology
In the planning phase of our experiment it was neces-
sary to make a couple of decisions which could cause
certain bias and invalidate the results obtained. First
of all, the choice of the language pair (Czech to Slo-
vak) was quite natural. These languages show very
high degree of similarity at all levels (morphological,
syntactic, semantic) and thus they constitute an ideal
language pair for the development of simplified rule-
based architecture. We are of course aware that for a
complete answer to this question it would be necessary
to test more systems and more language pairs, but in
this phase of our experiments we do not aim at obtain-
ing a complete answer, our main goal is to develop a
methodology and to perform some kind of pilot testing
showing the possible directions of future research.

The second important decision concerned the
method of evaluation. Our primary goal was to set up a
method which would be relatively simple and fast, thus
allowing to manually (the reasons for manual evalua-
tion are given in 4.2.1 subsection) process reasonable
volume of results. The second goal concerned the en-
deavor to estimate evaluator’s confidence in their judg-
ments.

4.1 Basic properties of the language pair
The language pair used in our experiment belongs to
western Slavic language group. We must admit that

3Česı́lko: http://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/
services/cesilko/

93



the reason for choosing this language group was purely
pragmatic – there is an extensive previous experience
with the translation of several language pairs from this
group, see, e.g. (Hajič et al., 2003), (Homola and
Kuboň, 2008) or (Homola and Vičič, 2010). On top
of that, the availability of the Česı́lko demo in the LIN-
DAT repository for the free translation of up to 5000
characters naturally led to the decision to use this sys-
tem (although it is in fact the original version of the
system with very simple architecture).

Czech and Slovak represent the closest language pair
among the western Slavic languages. Their morphol-
ogy and syntax are very similar, their lexicons slightly
differ, their word order is free (and also similar). In
the former Czechoslovakia it was quite common that
people understood both languages very well, but after
the split of the country the younger people who don’t
have regular contact with the other language experience
certain difficulties because the number of the words un-
known to them is not negligible.

However, the greatest challenge for the word-for-
word translation approach is not the lexicon (the dif-
ferences in the lexicon can be handled by a bilingual
dictionary), but the ambiguity of word forms. These
are typically not part-of-speech ambiguities, they are
quite rare although they do exist (stát [to stay/the state],
žena [woman/chasing] or tři [three/rub(imper.)]), how-
ever, the greatest challenge is the ambiguity of gender,
number and case (for example, the form of the adjec-
tive jarnı́ [spring] is 27-way ambiguous). Resolving
this ambiguity is very important for translation because
Czech has very strict requirements on agreement (not
only subject - predicate agreement, but also agreement
in number, gender and case in nominal groups). Even
though several Slavic languages including Slovak ex-
hibit similar richness of word forms, the morphological
ambiguity is not preserved at all or it is preserved only
partially, it is distributed in a different manner and the
“form-for-form” translation is not applicable.

For example, if we want to translate the Czech ex-
pression jarnı́ louka [a spring meadow] into Slovak
word for word, it is necessary to disambiguate the ad-
jective which has the same form in Czech for all four
genders (in Czech, there are two masculine genders -
animate and inanimate) while in Slovak, there are three
different forms for masculin, feminin and neutral gen-
der - jarný, jarná, jarné. The disambiguation is per-
formed by a state-of-the art stochastic tagger. Although
this brings a stochastic factor into the system, we still
consider Česı́lko to be primarily rule based system.

4.2 Experiment outline

The aim of the experiment was double: to show the
quality of the simple RBMT methods (shallow-parse
and shallow transfer RBMT) in comparison to the state-
of-the-art SMT system. The second part of the exper-
iment was to outline the most obvious and most chal-
lenging errors produced by each translation paradigm.

4.2.1 Translation quality evaluation
This part of the experiment relied on the methodology
similar to that used in the 2013 Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation (Bojar et al., 2013). We con-
ducted manual evaluation of both systems’ outputs con-
sisting of ranking individual translated sentences ac-
cording to the translation quality (the evaluators had
access to the original sentence). Unlike the ranking of
the SMT Workshop which worked always with 5 trans-
lations, our task was much simpler and the ranking nat-
urally consisted of ranking translated sentences of both
systems. The evaluator indicated which of the two sys-
tems is better, having also the chance to indicate that
both translations are identical, because the systems pro-
duced relatively large number of identical results - see
section 5).

The reason why we didn’t automatic measures of
translation quality was quite natural. After a period
of wide acceptance of automatic measures like BLEU
(Papineni et al., 2001) or NIST (NIST, 2009), re-
cent MT evaluation experiments seem to prefer man-
ual methods. Many papers such as Callison-Burch et
al. (2006) and authors of workshops such as WMT
2013 (Bojar et al., 2013) contend that automatic mea-
sures of machine translation quality are an imperfect
substitute for human assessments, especially when it is
necessary to compare different systems (or, even worse,
the systems based on different paradigms).

4.2.2 Test data
Our evaluation is based upon a small, yet relevant, test
corpus. Because one of the systems undergoing the
evaluation has been developed by Google, the creation
of the test set required special attention. We could not
use any already existing on-line corpus as Google reg-
ularly enhances language models with new language
data. Any on-line available corpus could have already
been included in the training data of Google Translate,
thus the results of the evaluation would have been bi-
ased towards the SMT system. Therefore we have de-
cided to use fresh newspaper texts which cannot be part
of any training data set used by Google.

We have selected 200 sentences from fresh newspa-
per articles of the biggest Czech on-line daily news-
papers. Several headline news were selected in order
to avoid author bias although the the domain remained
daily news. We have selected articles from ”iDnes”4,
”Lidovky”5 and ”Novinky”6. The test set was created
from randomly selected articles on the dates between
14.7.2014 and 18.7.2014.

All the test-data is publicly available at the language
technologies server of the University of Primorska2.

This part of the experiment consisted in manually ex-
amining the translated data from the translation quality
evaluation task (described in section 4.2.1). As we have

4iDnes: http://www.idnes.cz/
5Lidovky: http://www.lidovky.cz/
6Novinky: http://www.novinky.cz/

94



expected, the most common errors of Česı́lko were out
of the vocabulary errors. The dictionary coverage of
the system has apparently been inadequate for a wide
variety of topics from daily news. The results are pre-
sented in section 5.1.

5 Results

The results of our experiment are summarized in Ta-
ble 1. The evaluation has been performed by 5 na-
tive speakers of Slovak, the sentences have been ran-
domized so that no evaluator could know which of the
two systems produced which translation. The evalua-
tors were asked to mark which translation they consider
to be better. Ties were not allowed, but the evaluators
were also asked to mark identical sentences. This re-
quirement served also as a kind of thoroughness check,
too many unrecognized identical sentences could in-
dicate that the evaluator lost concentration during the
task.

Sent. count Percentage
Identical sentences 43 21.5%
Clear win of RBMT 10 5%
Clear win of SMT 59 29.5%
Win by voting - RBMT 23 11.5%
Win by voting - SMT 62 31%
Draw 3 1.5%
Total 200 100%

Table 1: Evaluation of results

The rows of Table 1 marked as Clear win of one of
the systems represent the sentences where none of the
evaluators marked the other system as the better one.
Win by voting does not distinguish how many evalua-
tors were against the system marked by the majority as
being the better of the two. The 3 sentences in the Draw
row represent the cases when 1 or 3 evaluators mistak-
enly marked the pair of translations as being identical
and there was no majority among the remaining ones.

The results clearly indicate that the quality of Google
Translate is better, although it clearly dominates in less
than one third of translations. The large number of
identical sentences also means that although Česı́lko
produced only 5% of translations which were clearly
better than those of Google, it reached absolutely iden-
tical quality of translation in yet another 21.5%. This
actually means that the top quality translations have
been achieved in 26.5% by Česı́lko and in 51% by
Google Translate. According to our opinion, this ra-
tio (approximately 2:1 in favor of the SMT approach)
more realistically describes the difference in quality
than the ratio of clear wins (approx. 6:1 for Google
Translate).

5.1 Errors

This section presents the most obvious errors detected
in the evaluation of both systems.

First of all, before we’ll look at individual types
of errors of both systems, it is necessary to men-
tion one very surprising fact concerning the transla-
tions. Although we have expected substantial differ-
ences between the corresponding sentences, the trans-
lations produced by both systems are surprisingly sim-
ilar, 21.5% of them being absolutely identical. On top
of that, when we have compared the first 100 translated
sentences, we have discovered that the edit distance be-
tween the two sets is only 493 elementary operations.
Given that the translations produced by Google Trans-
late contain 9.653 characters in the first 100 sentences
of the test set, this actually represents only about 5%
difference.

This looks much more like the results of two variants
of the same system than the results of two different sys-
tems based upon two completely different paradigms.
Because no details about the Google translate for this
language pair have been published, it is impossible to
judge the reasons for such a similarity. The following
example demonstrates this similarity, it represents quite
typical example of a long sentence with very few differ-
ences between both translations. Errors in translations
are stressed by a bold font.
Example 1.

Source: ”V momentě, kdy by třeba Praha chtěla
převést systém na Plzeňskou kartu či kartu Českých
drah, musela by porušit autorský zákon, protože jedině
autor může se softwarem nakládat,“ vysvětluje mluvčı́
EMS.
Google: ”V momente, kedy by potrebné Praha chcela
previesť systém na Plzeňskú kartu či kartu Českých
dráh, musela by porušiť autorský zákon, pretože jedine
autor môže so softvérom zaobchádzať,“ vysvetľuje
hovorca EMS.
Česı́lko: ”V momente, kedy by naprı́klad Praha chcela
previesť systém na Plzenskú karta či karta Český
dráh, musela by porušiť autorský zákon, pretože
jedině autor môže so softwarom nakladať,“ vysvetľuje
hovorca EMS.
English translation: ”In the moment when Prague
would like for example to transfer the system to Pilsen
card or the Czech railways card, it would have to
violate the copyright law, because the author is the
only person which can modify the software,” explains
the speaker of the EMS.

Even more suspicious are translated sentences which
are identical, incorrect and both contain the same error.
If something like that happens in a school, the teacher
has all reasons to think that one of the two pupils is
cheating and that he copied from his neighbor. The
systems had no chance to cheat, what makes identical
results as in the following example very weird. It would
be very interesting to perform more detailed tests in the
future and to investigate the reasons for such behavior
of two completely different systems. The straightfor-
ward explanation that both languages are so similar that

95



these identical errors simply happen, seems to be too
simplistic. Example 2 clearly shows that both systems
misinterpreted the Czech adjective právnı́ (legal) in the
context which allowed reading the first three words of
the source sentence as ”It is legal” without the regard
to the context of the rest of the sentence.
Example 2.

Source: Je to právnı́, ale i technologický problém.
Both systems: Je to právne, ale aj technologický
problém.
English: It is a legal, but also a technological problem.

Let us now look at individual categories of errors.

Lexical errors
The most frequent lexical errors are untranslated
words. This happens solely in the translations
performed by the RBMT system Česı́lko due to
inadequate coverage of the wide domain of newspaper
articles. Some of the cases of untranslated words
may have escaped the evaluatorś attention simply
because Česı́lko leaves out-of-the-vocabulary words
unchanged. Because Czech and Slovak are really very
close also at the lexical level, some of the word forms
used in both languages are identical, and thus they fit
into the target sentence. Increasing the coverage of the
bilingual dictionary (it currently contains about 40,000
lemmas) would definitely improve the translation
quality.

Another lexical error produced entirely by the
RBMT system is a wrong translation of some irregular
words, as in the following example.

Example 3.
Source: Mnozı́ lidé si téměř neumějı́ představit, že

by zapomněli svůj rodný jazyk.
Google: Mnohı́ ľudia si takmer nevedia predstaviť, že
by zabudli svoj rodný jazyk.
Česı́lko: Mnohı́ človek si takmer nevedia představit,
že by zabudli svoj rodný jazyk.
English translation: Many people cannot imagine that
they could forget their native language.

The plural of člověk [human] is irregular in Czech
(lidé [people]). Although this error looks like a lexical
error, it is more likely caused by the conceptual
differences between the morphological analysis of
Czech (which recognizes the form as a plural of the
lemma člověk) and the synthesis of Slovak which uses
two lemmas instead of one, one for singular (človek)
and one for plural (ľudia). The Czech plural word form
is then never correctly translated to the Slovak plural
form.

Much more serious errors are mistranslated words
produced by Google Translate. Such errors are quite
typical for phrase-based SMT systems. Let us present
an example which appeared a couple of times in our

test corpus.
Example 4.

Source: Česká veřejnost si na omezenı́ zvykla a
většinou je respektuje.
Google: Slovenská verejnosť si na obmedzenie zvykla
a väčšinou je rešpektuje.
Česı́lko: Český verejnosť si na obmedzenie zvykla a
väčšinou ich rešpektuje.
English translation: Czech public got used to the limits
and mostly accepts them.

The incorrect translation of the adjective Česká
[Czech] as Slovenská [Slovak] has most probably
been caused by the language model based upon target
language text where the occurrences of the adjective
Slovak probably vastly outnumber the occurrences
of the word Czech. The same incorrect translations
appeared also in different contexts in other sentences
of the test corpus.

Morphological errors
Both languages are very similar also with regard to
the number of inflected word forms derived from one
lemma. This property seems to cause certain problems
to both systems, as we can see in the Example 5, where
both systems use an incorrect (but different) form of
the same adjective. It is interesting that in this specific
case the correct translation actually means no transla-
tion at all because the correct Czech and Slovak forms
are identical in this context.
Example 5.

Source: V březnu malajsijské aerolinky přišly o
Boeing 777 s 239 lidmi na palubě, který se ztratil z
leteckých radarů cestou z Kuala Lumpuru do Pekingu.
Google: V marci malajzijského aerolinky prišli o
Boeing 777 s 239 ľuďmi na palube, ktorý sa stratil z
leteckých radarov cestou z Kuala Lumpur do Pekingu.
Česı́lko: V marci malajsijský aerolinky prišli o Boeing
777 s 239 človek na palube, ktorý sa stratil z leteckých
radarov cestou z Kuala Lumpuru do Pekingu.
English translation: In March, Malaysian Airlines lost
Boeing 777 with 239 people on board, which got lost
from air radars on the way from Kuala Lumpur to Bei-
jing.

Although the morphological errors have a negative
influence on automatic measures like BLEU or NIST
(incorrect form of a correct word influences the score
to the same extent as completely incorrect word), they
usually do not change the meaning of the translated
sentence and the speakers of the target language can
easily reconstruct their correct form and understand
the translation. From this point of view both systems
perform very well because the relatively low number
of incorrect word forms produced by both systems
doesn’t reach the threshold when the sentence as a
whole would be unintelligible.

Word order
Both systems follow very strictly the order of words

96



of source sentences. This is not surprising in the case
of the RBMT system, because its simple architecture
is exploiting the fact that the word order of both lan-
guages is extremely similar. As we have already men-
tioned in the section 3, Česı́lko translates word by
word. The strict correspondence of the word order of
source and target sentences is a bit more surprising in
the case of the SMT system, whose language model is
probably based on a large volume of texts with a wide
variety of word order variants. Czech and Slovak lan-
guages both have very few restrictions on the order of
words and thus we have supposed that the translated
sentences might have an altered word order compared
to the source sentences. The only difference in the or-
der of words appeared in the sentence presented below,
where the RBMT system followed the original word or-
der strictly, while the SMT system made changes (ac-
ceptable ones) to the order of clitics.
Example 6.

Source: Ačkoli vyšetřovatelé už jsou si jisti, že stroj
se odklonil ze své trasy a zřı́til se pravděpodobně po
dlouhém letu nad Indickým oceánem, nevědı́ dodnes,
co bylo přı́činou nehody a nenašli ani trosky stroje.
Google: Hoci vyšetrovatelia sú si už istı́, že stroj sa
odklonil zo svojej trasy a zrútil sa pravdepodobne po
dlhom lete nad Indickým oceánom, nevedia dodnes, čo
bolo prı́činou nehody a nenašli ani trosky stroja.
Česı́lko: Bárs vyšetrovatelia už sú si istı́, že stroj sa
odklonil zo svojej trasy a zrútil sa pravdepodobne po
dlhom lete nad Indickým oceánom, nevedia dodnes, čo
bolo prı́činou nehody a nenašli ani trosky stroja.
English translation: Although the investigators are now
sure that the plane swerved from its path and fell down
probably after a long flight over the Indian ocean, they
didn’t find out till today what was the cause of the
accident and they even didn’t find any remains of the
plane.

Syntactic errors
There are no errors which could be classified as purely
violating the syntax of the target language. The use
of an incorrect form of direct or indirect object can be
attributed to the category of morphological errors, be-
cause neither of the two systems deals with syntax di-
rectly. The RBMT system ignores syntax on the basis
of the fact that both languages are syntactically very
similar; the SMT system probably primarily relies on
phrases discovered in large volumes of training data
and thus it takes the syntactic rules into account only
indirectly.

Errors in meaning
There were very few errors in incorrectly translated
meaning of the source sentence into the target one.
Although some SMT systems are infamous for issues
related to the preservation of negated expressions, the
only two examples of such errors were produced by the
RBMT system in our tests. The sentence which was
affected by this error to a greater extent is listed below.

No other errors in the translation of the original mean-
ing have been encountered in our tests.

Source: Vedenı́ školy odpovı́dá na některé oficiálnı́
dotazy rodičů až po opakované urgenci a chovánı́
ředitelky Kozohorské je podle slov rodičů alibistické,
nevstřı́cné a nezřı́dka arogantnı́.
Google: Vedenie školy odpovedá na niektoré oficiálne
otázky rodičov až po opakovanej urgencii a správanie
riaditeľky Kozohorský je podľa slov rodičov alibistické,
nevstřı́cné a nezriedka arogantný.
Česı́lko: Vedenie školy odpovedá na niektorých
oficiálne otázky rodičov až po opakovanej urgencii a
chovanı́ ředitelka Kozohorský je podľa slov rodičov
alibistické, vstřı́cný a zriedka arogantnı́.
English translation: The school management answers
some official questions of parents after repeated
reminders and the behavior of director Kozohorská is,
in the words of parents, buck-passing, unresponsive
and often arrogant.

The sentence produced by Česı́lko has lost two nega-
tions making the behavior of the director responsive
and seldom arrogant. This is probably caused by the
fact that both the positive and negative forms have the
same lemma - the negation constitutes only a small part
of the morphological tag7 and thus it may easily be for-
gotten or lost in the process of transfer of a Czech tag
into a Slovak one (a different system of tags is used for
Slovak).

6 Conclusions and further work
Although our experiment represents only the first step
in systematic evaluation of machine translation re-
sults between closely related languages, it has already
brought very interesting results. It has shown that con-
trary to a popular belief that RBMT methods are more
suitable for MT of closely related languages, Google
Translate outperforms the RBMT system Česı́lko. The
similarity of source and target language apparently not
only allows much simpler architecture of the RBMT
system, it also improves the chances of SMT systems
to generate good quality translation, although this re-
sults need further examination.

The most surprising result of our experiment is the
high number of identical translations produced by both
systems not only for short simple sentences, but also
for some of the long ones, as well as very similar results
produced for the rest of the test corpus. The minimal
differences between two systems exploiting different
paradigms deserve further experiments. These exper-
iments will involve a phrase-based SMT system based
on Moses (in this way we are going to guarantee that
we are really comparing two different paradigms) and
we will investigate its behavior on the same language
pair. A second interesting experimental direction will

7Česı́lko exploits a positional system of morphological
tags with 15 fixed positions, the negation marker occupies
only one of these positions.

97



be the investigation whether the results for another pair
of languages related not so closely as Czech and Slovak
would confirm the results obtained in this experiment.

References
Lars Ahrenberg and Maria Holmqvist. 2004. Back to

the Future? The Case for English-Swedish Direct
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of The Confer-
ence on Recent Advances in Scandinavian Machine
Translation. University of Uppsala.

Kemal Altintas and Ilyas Cicekli. 2002. A Machine
Translation System between a Pair of Closely Re-
lated Languages. In Proceedings of the 17th Inter-
national Symposium on Computer and Information
Sciences (ISCIS 2002), page 5. CRC Press.

Eckhard Bick and Lars Nygaard. 2007. Using Danish
as a CG Interlingua: A Wide-Coverage Norwegian-
English Machine Translation System. In Proceed-
ings of NODALIDA, Tartu. University of Tartu.

Ondřej Bojar, Christian Buck, Chris Callison-Burch,
Christian Federmann, Barry Haddow, Philipp
Koehn, Christof Monz, Matt Post, Radu Soricut, and
Lucia Specia. 2013. Findings of the 2013 Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation. In 2013
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
1–44.

Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and Philipp
Koehn. 2006. Re-evaluating the role of BLEU
in machine translation research. In Proceedings of
EACL, pages 249–256. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Antonio M Corbi-Bellot, Mikel L Forcada, and Ser-
gio Ortiz-Rojas. 2005. An open-source shallow-
transfer machine translation engine for the Romance
languages of Spain. In Proceedings of the EAMT
conference, pages 79–86. HITEC e.V.

Helge Dyvik. 1995. Exploiting Structural Similarities
in Machine Translation. Computers and Humani-
ties, 28:225–245.

Jan Hajič, Jan Hric, and Vladislav Kuboň. 2000.
Machine translation of very close languages. In
Proceedings of the 6th Applied Natural Language
Processing Conference, pages 7–12. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Jan Hajič, Petr Homola, and Vladislav Kuboň. 2003.
A simple multilingual machine translation system.
In Eduard Hovy and Elliott Macklovitch, editors,
Proceedings of the MT Summit IX, pages 157–164,
New Orleans, USA. AMTA.

Petr Homola and Vladislav Kuboň. 2008. A method of
hybrid MT for related languages. In Proceedings of
the IIS, pages 269–278. Academic Publishing House
EXIT.

Petr Homola and Jernej Vičič. 2010. Com-
bining MT Systems Effectively. In Proceed-
ings of the 23th International Florida-Artificial-
Intelligence-Research-Society Conference (FLAIRS
2010), pages 198–203, Daytona Beach, Florida,
USA. Florida {AI} Research Society, Florida AI Re-
search Society.

David Kolovratnık, Natalia Klyueva, and Ondrej Bo-
jar. 2009. Statistical machine translation between
related and unrelated languages. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Theory and Practice on Informa-
tion Technologies, pages 31–36.

NIST. 2009. NIST 2009 Open Machine Translation
Evaluation (MT09). Technical report, NIST.

Karel Oliva. 1989. A Parser for Czech Implemented in
Systems Q. MFF UK Prague.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2001. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. Technical report,
IBM.

Kevin P Scannell. 2006. Machine translation for
closely related language pairs. In Proceedings of
the Workshop Strategies for developing machine
translation for minority languages, pages 103–109.
Genoa, Italy.

Francis M Tyers, Linda Wiechetek, and Trond
Trosterud. 2009. Developing prototypes for ma-
chine translation between two Sámi languages. In
Proceedings of EAMT. HITEC e.V.

Jernej Vičič. 2008. Rapid development of data
for shallow transfer RBMT translation systems for
highly inflective languages. In Language technolo-
gies: proceedings of the conference, pages 98–103.
Institut Jožef Stefan, Ljubljana.

Per Weijnitz, Eva Forsbom, Ebba Gustavii, Eva Petters-
son, and Jorg Tiedemann. 2004. MT goes farming:
Comparing two machine translation approaches on a
new domain. In LREC, pages 1–4.

98


