



















































Contexts, Patterns, Interrelations - New Ways of Presenting Multi-word Expressions


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 82–88,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Contexts, Patterns, Interrelations - New Ways of Presenting Multi-word
Expressions

Kathrin Steyer
Institute for the German Language

R 5, 6-13
D-68161 Mannheim, Germany
steyer@ids-mannheim.de

Annelen Brunner
Institute for the German Language

R 5, 6-13
D-68161 Mannheim, Germany

brunner@ids-mannheim.de

Abstract

This contribution presents the newest
version of our ’Wortverbindungsfelder’
(fields of multi-word expressions), an ex-
perimental lexicographic resource that fo-
cusses on aspects of MWEs that are rarely
addressed in traditional descriptions: Con-
texts, patterns and interrelations. The
MWE fields use data from a very large
corpus of written German (over 6 billion
word forms) and are created in a strictly
corpus-based way. In addition to tradi-
tional lexicographic descriptions, they in-
clude quantitative corpus data which is
structured in new ways in order to show
the usage specifics. This way of looking
at MWEs gives insight in the structure of
language and is especially interesting for
foreign language learners.

1 Our concept of MWEs

We study MWEs from a linguistic perspective
and are mainly interested in two questions: What
can we learn about the nature of MWEs and their
status in language by studying large corpora? And
how can we present MWEs in novel lexicographic
ways that reflect our findings? The MWE field
presented in this contribution is a prototype
that reflects our current ideas regarding these
questions. It can be explored online free of charge
at http://wvonline.ids-mannheim.
de/wvfelder-v3/index.html.

Our approach is based on the concept ’Usuelle
Wortverbindungen’ (UWV, Steyer 2000; Steyer
2004; Steyer 2013), which defines MWEs as con-
ventionalized patterns of language use that man-
ifest themselves in recurrent syntagmatic struc-
tures. This includes not only idioms and idiosyn-
cratic structures, but all multi-word units which
have acquired a distinct function in communica-

tion. Our focus is on real-life usage, pragmat-
ics and context. We work bottom-up in detecting
and describing MWE units in a strongly corpus-
driven way (Sinclair 1991; Tognini-Bonelli 2001;
Hanks 2013), taking iterative steps to arrive at
conclusions about language use. Methologi-
cally, our approach bears some similarities to
Stefanowitsch/Gries’ ’collostructions’ (Stefanow-
itsch/Gries 2003) though we are less interested in
syntactic and grammatical structures - as it is com-
mon in construction grammar approaches - but see
MWEs primarily as parts of the lexicon and feel
closer to phraseology.

The basis of our research is DeReKo (Deutsches
Referenzkorpus, Institut für Deutsche Sprache
2012), the largest collection of written German
available today which has over six billion word to-
kens and is located at the Institute for the German
Language (IDS). In the current stage of our work,
which is mainly explorative, we use DeReKo as
it is. This means our text basis is dominated by
newspaper texts from the last 10-15 years. Though
this is surely not a ’balanced’ corpus, we argue that
it still reflects much of contemporary written lan-
guage use, as newspaper texts are a medium that
is widely disseminated.

Though the interpretation and main analysis is
done manually, automatic methods form an im-
portant basis to our work. We use a sophisti-
cated method of collocation analysis developed at
the IDS (Belica 1995) to get indications which
word combinations constitute MWEs and to ex-
plore contexts in which an MWE is commonly
used. In addition to that, we use a pattern matching
tool developed in our project to explore and struc-
ture corpus evidence and gain further insight into
the behavior and variations of MWE candidates.

Our special interest lies in the fact that MWEs
are not as fixed as is often assumed, but often be-
have as patterns and show multiple interrelations.
Therefore, we also describe MWE patterns - a

82



Figure 1: Part of the MWE field centered around Grund and preposition aus.

more abstract form of MWEs which are only par-
tially fixed. An example for a fixed MWE is Pi
mal Daumen (pi times thumb - ’approximately’),
a multi-word expression that is always used in ex-
actly this form. MWE patterns on the other hand
consist of fixed lexical components as well as slots
that can be filled in different ways. In spite of this
variability, the whole pattern has a holistic mean-
ing and function. An example is the expression
wie NOUN in jemandes Ohren klingen (to sound
like NOUN in someone’s ears - ’to be perceived in
a certain way’ (specified by NOUN)). The NOUN
slot can be filled with different words in order to
specify the general meaning of the pattern. In sec-
tion 2.3 we will go into further detail about how a
slot in an MWE pattern can be filled.

The MWE field presented in this contri-
bution centers around the word Grund (rea-
son/basis/foundation) combined with several
prepositions. It is the newest of several versions
of MWE fields which have been described
elsewhere (cf. Brunner/Steyer 2009; Brunner/
Steyer 2010) and are available at our website
http://wvonline.ids-mannheim.de
as well. This newest version focusses more on
hierarchies of MWEs and MWE patterns and
incorporates additional resources like collocation
analyses in its descriptive texts. In the following,
we will highlight some features of the MWE
field which illustrate our focus on interrelations,
contexts and patterns.

2 MWE field Grund

2.1 Interrelations

Figure 1 shows a part of the MWE field, centered
on the word Grund and preposition aus. Each
node is linked to a lexicographic description. Fig-
ure 2 presents a screenshot of one of those articles.
In addition to narrative descriptions and manu-
ally selected usage examples from our corpus, the
articles also include components that are derived
from quantitative corpus data. Specifically, these
are collocation analyses as well as filler tables for
MWE patterns. The function of these components
will be explained in more detail in sections 2.2 and
2.3.

In Figure 1, you can observe the relations be-
tween MWEs (thick border) and MWE patterns
(regular border). The nodes with the dashed bor-
der represent repeating surface structures which
themselves have no common holistic meaning but
show the lexical interconnectedness between the
MWEs and MWE patterns.

All nodes enclosed in the square field contain
the elements Grund and auf. The nodes on the
far right are extensions which do not belong to
the core of the MWE field as it was defined, but
are connected lexically and functionally to MWEs
that do. We decided to include those ’external
nodes’ to give a glimpse of how the building
blocks of language connect even beyond the arti-
ficial borders that where necessary when defining
the MWE field.

83



Figure 2: MWE article Aus welchen Gründen auch immer from the MWE field Grund. The article parts
are ’Frequency in the Corpus’, ’General description’, ’Context Analysis’, ’Contrast Analysis’ and ’Su-
perordinated Nodes’. The part ’Context Analysis’ contains links to a filler table and to the corresponding
KWIC lines.

In this example the core field contains the
MWEs aus welchem Grund auch immer and aus
welchen Gründen auch immer (’for whatever rea-
son/s’). However, the lexical components auch
immer are part of more general patterns as well.
The word form Grund can be substituted by differ-
ent nouns in the MWE pattern aus welch- SUB-G
auch immer (e.g. Motiv (motive), Richtung (di-
rection)). In the MWE pattern PRON auch im-
mer the place is taken by an interrogative pronoun
(e.g. was (what), wo (where), wer (who), warum
(why)). One of those pronoun fillers, wie (how),
is much more frequent than the others, which jus-
tifies the definition of a separate MWE wie auch
immer, which can be translated as ’howsoever’ or
’to whatever extent’ (see section 2.3 for more de-
tails).

The basic structure of the MWE field thus
highlights the different degrees of abstraction of
MWEs and the functional use of lexical clusters
like auch immer. The lexicographic descriptions
linked to the nodes explain the interrelations and
the differences in usage and meaning.

2.2 Contexts

Another important aspect of our approach to
MWEs is that we pay close attention to the con-
texts in which they are commonly used. A good
tool to explore this empirically is collocation anal-
ysis. In addition to narrative descriptions and man-
ually selected corpus examples we therefore in-
clude the results of collocation analysis in our ar-
ticles.

One interesting aspect is the difference between

84



Figure 3: Highest ranking results of the collocation analysis for eigentlich (scope: 5 words in front).

MWEs and their single-lexeme quasi-synonyms.
For example the meaning of the MWE im Grunde
is very close to the lexeme eigentlich (actually).
Figures 3 and 4 show the highest ranking results
of a collocation analysis that focusses on a window
of five words in front of the units eigentlich and im
Grunde respectively and calculates the log likeli-
hood ratio.1 When comparing the results for these
two units you can see that there are some con-
texts that are strongly preferred by eigentlich but
are not highly ranked for im Grunde. Notable are
the combination schade eigentlich (sad actually)
as well as combinations with interrogative adverbs
like wie (how), was (what), warum (why). The
MWE im Grunde, on the other hand, has strong
collocation partners that are capitalized conjunc-
tions like aber (but) or denn (because). This in-
dicates a clear tendency to appear near the begin-
ning of a sentence in contexts where an argument
is made, which is not prominent for eigentlich. So
even if a quasi-synonymous single lexeme exists,
the MWE shows differences in usage which be-
come apparent when studying large quantities of
data.

1For details on the collocation analysis used here see
Perkuhn/Belica 2004. The settings were: Korpus: W-
gesamt - alle Korpora des Archivs W (mit Neuakquisitionen);
Archiv-Release: Deutsches Referenzkorpus (DeReKo-2013-
II); Analyse-Kontext : 5. Wort links bis 0. Wort rechts; Gran-
ularität: grob; Zuverlässigkeit: analytisch; Clusterzuord-
nung: mehrfach; Auf 1 Satz beschränkt: ja; Lemmatisierung:
nein; Funktionswörter: zugelassen; Autofokus: aus

2.3 Patterns

As mentioned before, MWE patterns are of special
interest to us. When exploring MWEs, we use a
pattern matching tool that allows us to search large
quantities of keyword in context lines (KWICs) for
combinations of fixed strings and slots. The lexi-
cal fillers of these slots can also be counted and
presented in the form of frequency tables. This al-
lows us to explore which kinds of variations are
possible and typical for an MWE. The filler tables
can show quite different ’profiles’ for a slot. In the
following, we will give some examples.

For the MWE aus welchen Gründen auch im-
mer (for whatever reasons) we checked whether
the element Gründen can be modified by searching
for the pattern aus welchen #* Gründen
auch immer (#* stands for a slot that can be
filled by any number of words). Table 1 shows the
absolute and relative frequencies that where calcu-
lated from KWIC lines of our corpus. In the vast
majority of cases, the slot is empty, which means
that the MWE is used exactly in the form cited
above: aus welchen Gründen auch immer. It is
thus very stable, though not completely inflexible,
as there is also evidence of adjectives that are used
to further specify the reasons in question, e.g. per-
sönlichen Gründen (personal reasons).

A different example of filler behavior can be
observed when studying the pattern # auch
immer (# marks a slot that has to be filled with
exactly one word). Table 2 shows that this slot

85



Figure 4: Highest ranking results of the collocation analysis for im Grunde (scope: 5 words in front).

Filler Freq Rel Freq
1239 98.33

unerfindlichen 3 0.24
persönlichen 2 0.16
legitimen 1 0.08
durchsichtigen 1 0.08
politischen 1 0.08
rätselhaften 1 0.08
psychologisch-persönlichen 1 0.08
mir nicht verständlichen 1 0.08
besagten 1 0.08
(PR-) 1 0.08
psychologischen 1 0.08
(un)berechtigten 1 0.08
" 1 0.08
(oft ökonomischen) 1 0.08
. . . . . . . . .

Table 1: Fillers of the pattern aus welchen #*
Gründen auch immer.

is filled by wie (capitalized or non-capitalized) in
nearly 18 percent of the matches. In this case, a
single lexical filler is very dominant. This was a
strong indication for us that the pattern wie auch
immer functions as an MWE while at the same
time being a prototypical realization of the pat-
tern PRON auch immer. Also quite frequent is the
filler Gründen, which indicates the pattern [aus
welchen] Gründen auch immer, and other inter-
rogative pronouns and adverbs like was (what),

Filler Freq Rel Freq
Wie 9611 10.08
wie 7389 7.75
was 5289 5.55
aber 3397 3.56
Gründen 3157 3.31
es 2288 2.40
Was 1953 2.05
Wer 1825 1.91
sich 1677 1.76
warum 1529 1.60
wo 1486 1.56
wer 1446 1.52
ja 1333 1.40
wem 1292 1.35
ist 1276 1.34
. . . . . . . . .

Table 2: Fillers of the pattern # auch immer.

wer (who), wem (whom) etc. This lead us to de-
fine the MWE hierarchies as shown in figure 1 and
explained in section 2.1.

A different filler profile (Table 3) can be ob-
served for the pattern aus # Gründen (for #
reasons). This is a true MWE pattern, as it has
a specific communicative function tied to the plu-
ral form of Grund: reasons are mentioned, but left
intentionally vague. Table 3 shows that there is a
large number of adjectives that can fill the gap. In
contrast to the example X auch immer above,

86



Label Aus|aus # Gründen
SOZ07_10 weshalb das Orato-

rium
aus akustischen Gründen auch nicht in einer

Kirche aufgeführt
WPD11_4133 werden, deren Aus-

bau
aus unerfindlichen Gründen gestoppt wurde, die

Brutalität
BRZ11_258 dem sie sich bisher aus finanziellen Gründen immer zurückhiel-

ten. Um sich auch
M07_208 Oliver Kahn aus disziplinarischen Gründen für das Hertha-

Spiel an Schärfe
E98_409 möglicherweise aus wirtschaftlichen Gründen zurückgehalten.

Schliesslich ist Epo
WDD11_305 schlage diesen Ar-

tikel
aus folgenden Gründen als lesenswert vor:

fachlich
NUN11_144 die Polizei aus ermittlungstaktischen Gründen nicht mitteilen.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Table 4: KWIC lines of the pattern aus # Gründen.

Filler Freq Rel Freq
gesundheitlichen 7355 10.03
beruflichen 6311 8.60
finanziellen 4708 6.42
persönlichen 2660 3.63
organisatorischen 2585 3.52
politischen 2499 3.41
wirtschaftlichen 2180 2.97
privaten 1941 2.65
welchen 1849 2.52
verschiedenen 1779 2.43
diesen 1494 2.04
anderen 1381 1.88
technischen 1260 1.72
zwei 1237 1.69
familiären 1219 1.66
. . . . . . . . .

Table 3: Fillers of the pattern aus # Gründen.

none of these is so dominant and striking that a
separate MWE needs to be considered. However,
the fillers can be grouped into functional groups,
like type of the reasons (e.g. politisch (political),
persönlich (personal), finanziell (financial)), va-
lidity of the reasons (e.g. nachvollziehbar (under-
standable), gut (good), triftig (valid)) or relevance
of the reasons (e.g. wichtig (important), zwingend
(imperative)).

You can see that filler tables are very useful for
different purposes: To confirm the fixedness of an
MWE and explore occasional variations, to con-
ceptualize lexical units in order to build up hierar-
chies, and to further describe and understand the
behavior of MWE patterns. Not only do we work
with such patterns and filler tables when building

the MWE field, we also include them in our de-
scriptions - another way to give a user access to
original corpus data structured in an informative
way.

Additionally, we provide access to the KWIC
lines that were used to calculate the filler tables.
Table 4 shows some of the lines that match the
pattern aus # Gründen. These lines are struc-
tured in fields according to the search pattern and
the different columns can be sorted. In this way,
you can explore the use of specific MWE struc-
tures yourself.

3 Conclusion

We believe that our MWE fields allow a different
way to look at MWEs which is very useful to un-
derstand the structure of language. As they are
strictly based on data from a large modern lan-
guage corpus, our findings also reflect real, con-
temporary language use. This is especially useful
for foreign language learners who struggle to nav-
igate the complexities of fixedness and variability
in the German language. In continuing our MWE
research, we strive to refine our strategies for de-
scription and visualization and also plan to add
contrastive studies in the future.

References

Belica, Cyril: Statistische Kollokationsanal-
yse und Clustering. Korpusanalytische
Analysemethode, 1995 〈URL: http:
//www1.ids-mannheim.de/kl/
projekte/methoden/ur.html〉 –
visited on 28.01.2014.

Brunner, Annelen/Steyer, Kathrin: A Model
for Corpus-Driven Exploration and Pre-
sentation of Multi-Word Expressions, in:

87



Levická, Jana/Garabík, Radovan, edi-
tors: NLP, Corpus Linguistics, Corpus
Based Grammar Research (= Proceedings
of SLOVKO 2009, held 25-27.11.2009 in
Smolenice, Slovakia), 2009, pp. 54–64.

Brunner, Annelen/Steyer, Kathrin:
Wortverbindungsfelder: Fields of Multi-
Word Expressions, in: Granger, Silviane/
Paquot, Magali, editors: eLexicography
in the 21st century: New challenges, new
applications. Proceedings of the eLex 2009.
Louvaine-la-Neuve: Presses universitaires
de Louvain, 2010, Cahiers du CENTAL,
pp. 23–31.

Hanks, Patrick: Lexical Analysis: norms and ex-
ploitations, Cambridge [u.a.]: MIT Press,
2013.

Institut für Deutsche Sprache: Deutsches
Referenzkorpus/Archiv der Korpora
geschriebener Gegenwartssprache
(DeReKo 2012-II), Webseite, 2012 〈URL:
http://www.ids-mannheim.de/
DeReKo〉 – visited on 28.01.2014.

Perkuhn, Rainer/Belica, Cyril: Eine kurze
Einführung in die Kookkurrenzanalyse
und syntagmatische Muster. Institut für
Deutsche Sprache, Mannheim, 2004 〈URL:
http://www1.ids-mannheim.de/
kl/misc/tutorial.html〉 – visited
on 28.01.2014.

Sinclair, John: Corpus, Concordance, Collo-
cation, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1991.

Stefanowitsch, Anatol/Gries, Stephan Th.: Col-
lostructions: Investigating the interaction of
words and constructions, in: International
Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 8 2003, Nr. 2,
pp. 209–243.

Steyer, Kathrin: Usuelle Wortverbindungen
des Deutschen. Linguistisches Konzept
und lexikografische Möglichkeiten, in:
Deutsche Sprache, 28 2000, Nr. 2, pp. 101–
125.

Steyer, Kathrin: Kookkurenz. Korpusmethodik,
linguistisches Modell, lexikographische
Persepektiven, in: Steyer, Kathrin, editor:
Wortverbindungen - mehr oder weniger
fest, Berlin/New York: de Gruyter, 2004,
Jahrbuch des Instituts für Deutsche Sprache,
pp. 87–116.

Steyer, Kathrin: Usuelle Wortverbindungen.
Zentrale Muster des Sprachgebrauchs aus
korpusanalytischer Sicht, Tübingen: Narr,
2013.

Tognini-Bonelli, Elena: Corpus Linguistics at
Work, Amsterdam/Philadelphia: J. Ben-
jamins, 2001.

88


