



















































Dynamic Wordclouds and Vennclouds for Exploratory Data Analysis


Proceedings of the Workshop on Interactive Language Learning, Visualization, and Interfaces, pages 22–29,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Dynamic Wordclouds and Vennclouds for Exploratory Data Analysis

Glen Coppersmith
Human Language Technology Center of Excellence

Johns Hopkins University
coppersmith@jhu.edu

Erin Kelly
Department of Defense

elkelly8@gmail.com

Abstract

The wordcloud is a ubiquitous visualiza-
tion of human language, though it falls
short when used for exploratory data anal-
ysis. To address some of these shortcom-
ings, we give the viewer explicit control
over the creation of the wordcloud, allow-
ing them to interact with it in real time–
a dynamic wordcloud. This allows itera-
tive adaptation of the visualization to the
data and inference task at hand. We next
present a principled approach to visualiza-
tion which highlights the similarities and
differences between two sets of documents
– a Venncloud. We make all the visual-
ization code (primarily JavaScript) freely
available.

1 Introduction

A cornerstone of exploratory data analysis is visu-
alization. Tremendous academic effort and engi-
neering expertise has created and refined a myriad
of visualizations available to the data explorer, yet
there still exists a paucity of options for visualizing
language data. While visualizing human language
is a broad subject, we apply Polya’s dictum, and
examine a pair of simpler questions for which we
still lack an answer:

• (1) what is in this corpus of documents?
• (2) what is the relationship between these

two corpora of documents?

We assert that addressing these two questions is
a step towards creating visualizations of human
language more suitable for exploratory data anal-
ysis. In order to create a meaningful visualiza-
tion, one must understand the inference question
the visualization is meant to inform (i.e., the rea-
son for which (1) is being asked), so the appro-
priate aspects of the data can be highlighted with

the aesthetics of the visualization. Different infer-
ence questions require different aspects to be high-
lighted, so we aim to create a maximally-flexible,
yet simple and intuitive method to enable a user
to explore the relevant aspects of their data, and
adapt the visualization to their task at hand.

The primary contributions of this paper are:

• A visualization of language data tailored for
exploratory data analysis, designed to exam-
ine a single corpus (the dynamic wordcloud)
and to compare two corpora (the Venncloud);

• The framing and analysis of the problem in
terms of the existing psychophysical litera-
ture;

• Distributable JavaScript code, designed to be
simple to use, adapt, and extend.

We base our visualizations on the wordcloud,
which we deconstruct and analyze in §3 and §4.
We then discuss the literature on wordclouds and
relevant psychophysical findings in §5, taking
guidance from the practical and theoretical foun-
dations explored there. We then draw heavily on
similarities to more common and well understood
visualizations to create a more useful version of
the wordcloud. Question (1) is addressed in §7,
and with only a small further expansion described
in §8, an approach to (2) becomes evident.
2 Motivating Inference Tasks

Exploratory data analysis on human language en-
compasses a diverse set of language and infer-
ence tasks, so we select the following subset for
their variety. One task in line with question (1)
is getting the general subject of a corpus, high-
lighting content-bearing words. One might want
to examine a collection of social media missives,
too numerous to read individually, perhaps to de-
tect emerging news (Petrovic et al., 2013). Sepa-
rately, author identification (or idiolect analysis)

22



attempts attribution of documents (e.g., Shake-
speare’s plays or the Federalist papers) by com-
paring the author’s writing style, focusing on
stylistic and contentless words – for a review see
(Juola, 2006). Further, some linguistic psycho-
metric analysis depends on the relative distribu-
tion of pronouns and other seemingly contentless
words (Coppersmith et al., 2014a; Chung and Pen-
nebaker, 2007).

Each of these questions involves some analy-
sis of unigram statistics, but exactly what analy-
sis differs significantly, thus no single wordcloud
can display all of them. Any static wordcloud is
a single point in a distribution of possible word-
clouds – one way of calculating statistics from the
underlying language and mapping those calcula-
tions to the visual representation. Many such com-
binations and mappings are available, and the opti-
mal wordcloud, like the optimal plot, is a function
of the data and the inference task at hand. Thus,
we enable the wordcloud viewer to adjust the rela-
tionship between the aspects of the data and the
aesthetics of the display, which allows them to
view different points in the distribution of possi-
ble wordclouds. The dynamic wordcloud was im-
plicitly called for in (Rayson and Garside, 2000)
since human expertise (specifically knowledge of
broader contexts and common sense) is needed
to separate meaningful and non-meaningful differ-
ences in wordclouds. We enable this dynamic in-
teraction between human and visualization in real-
time with a simple user interface, requiring only a
modicum more engineering than the creation of a
static wordcloud, though the depth of extra infor-
mation conveyed is significant.

3 Wordcloud Aesthetics

We refer to each visual component of the visual-
ization as an aesthetic (ala (Wickham, 2009)) –
each aesthetic can convey some information to the
viewer. For context, the aesthetics of a scatterplot
include the x and y position, color, and size of
each point. Some are best suited for ordinal data
(e.g., font size), while others for categorical data
(e.g., font color).

Ordinal data can be encoded by font size,
the most prominent and noticeable to the viewer
(Bateman et al., 2008). Likewise, the opacity
(transparency) of the word is a prominent and or-
dinal aesthetic. The order in which words are dis-
played can convey a significant amount of infor-

mation as well, but using order in this fashion gen-
erally constrains the use of x and y position.

Categorical data can be encoded by the color
of each word – both the foreground of the word
itself and the background space that surrounds it
(though that bandwidth is severely limited by hu-
man perception). Likewise for font weight (bold-
ness) and font decoration (italics and underlines).
While font face itself could encode a categorical
variable, making comparisons of all the other as-
pects across font faces is likely to be at best unin-
formative and at worst misleading.

4 Data Aspects

As the wordcloud has visual aesthetics that we can
control (§3), the data we need to model has aspects
that we want to represent with those aesthetics.
This aspect-to-aesthetic mapping is what makes a
useful and informative visualization, and needs to
be flexible enough to allow it be used for a range
of inference tasks.

For clarity, we define a word (w) as a unique
set of characters and a word token (w) as a sin-
gle usage of a word in a document. We can ob-
serve multiple word tokens (w) of the same word
(w) in a single document (d). For any document d
we represent the term frequency of w as tfd(w).
Similarly, the inverse document frequency of w
as idf(w). A combination of tf and idf is often
used to determine important words in a document
or corpus. We focus on tf and idf here, but this is
just an example of an ordinal value associated with
a word, there are many other such word-ordinal
pairings that are worth exploring (e.g., weights in
a classifier).

The dynamic range (“scaling” in (Wickham,
2009)) also needs to be considered, since the data
has a natural dynamic range – where meaningful
differences can be observed (unsurprisingly, the
definition of meaningful depends on the inference
task). Likewise, each aesthetic has a range of val-
ues for which the users can perceive and differen-
tiate (e.g., words in a font size too small are illeg-
ible, those too large prevent other words from be-
ing displayed; not all differences are perceptible).
Mapping the relevant dynamic range of the data
to the dynamic range of the visualization is at the
heart of a good visualization, but to do this algo-
rithmically for all possible inference tasks remains
a challenge. We, instead, enable the user to adjust
the dynamic range of the visualization explicitly.

23



5 Prior Art

Wordclouds have a mixed history, stemming from
Jim Flanagan’s “Search Referral Zeitgeist”, used
to display aggregate information about websites
linking to his, to its adoption as a visual gim-
mick, to the paradoxical claim that ‘wordclouds
work in practice, but not in theory’ (see (Viégas
and Wattenberg, 2008) for more). A number
of wordcloud-generators exist on the web (e.g.,
(Feinberg, 2013; Davies, 2013)), though these
tend towards creating art rather than informative
visualizations. The two cited do allow the user
limited interaction with some of the visual aesthet-
ics, though not of sufficient scope or response time
for general exploratory data analysis.

Enumerating all possible inference tasks involv-
ing the visualization of natural language is impos-
sible, but the prior art does provide empirical data
for some relevant tasks. This further stresses the
importance of allowing the user to interact with
the visualization, since optimizing the visualiza-
tion a priori for all inference tasks simultaneously
is not possible, much like creating a single plot for
all numerical inference tasks is not possible.

5.1 Psychophysical Analyses

The quintessential studies on how a wordcloud
is interpreted by humans can be found in (Ri-
vadeneira et al., 2007) and (Bateman et al.,
2008). They both investigated various measures of
impression-forming and recall to determine which
aesthetics conveyed information most effectively
– font size chief among them.

Rivandeneira et al. (Rivadeneira et al., 2007)
also found that word-order was important for im-
pression forming (displaying words from most fre-
quent to least frequent was most effective here),
while displaying words alphabetically was best
when searching for a known word. They also
found that users prefer a search box when search-
ing for something specific and known, and a word-
cloud for exploratory tasks and things unknown.

Bateman et al. (Bateman et al., 2008) examined
the relative utility of other aesthetics to convey in-
formation, finding that font-weight (boldness) and
intensity (opacity) are effective, but not as good
as font-size. Aesthetics such as color, number of
characters or the area covered by the word were
less effective.

Significant research has gone in to the place-
ment of words in the wordcloud (e.g., (Seifert et

al., 2008)), though seemingly little information
can be conveyed by these layouts (Schrammel et
al., 2009). Indeed, (Rivadeneira et al., 2007) in-
dicates that words directly adjacent to the largest
word in the wordcloud had slightly worse recall
than those not-directly-adjacent – in essence, get-
ting the most important words in the center may
be counterproductive. Thus we eschew these algo-
rithms in favor of more interpretable (but perhaps
less aesthetically pleasing) linear ordered layouts.

5.2 Wordclouds as a tool

Illustrative investigations of the wordcloud as a
tool for exploratory data analysis are few, but en-
couraging.

In relation to question (1), even static word-
clouds can be useful for this task. Users per-
forming an open-ended search task preferred us-
ing a wordcloud to a search box (Sinclair and
Cardew-Hall, 2008), possibly because the word-
cloud prevented them from having to hypothesize
what might be in the collection before searching
for it. Similarly, wordclouds can be used as a
follow-up display of search results from a query
performed via a standard text search box (Knautz
et al., 2010), providing the user a crude summary
of the results. In both of these cases, a simple
static wordcloud is able to provide some useful
information to the user, though less research has
been done to determine the optimal composition
of the wordcloud. What’s more, the need for a
dynamic interactive wordcloud was made explicit
(Knautz et al., 2010), given the way the users iter-
atively refined their queries and wordclouds.

Question (2) has also been examined. One ap-
proach is to make a set of wordclouds with soft
constraints that the same word appears in roughly
the same position across multiple clouds to fa-
cilitate comparisons (Castella and Sutton, 2013).
Each of these clouds in a wordstorm visualizes a
different collection of documents (e.g., subdivi-
sions via metadata of a larger corpus).

Similarly addressing our second question, Par-
allel Tag Clouds (Collins et al., 2009) allow the
comparison of multiple sets of documents (or dif-
ferent partitions of a corpus). This investigation
provides a theoretically-justified approach to find-
ing ‘the right’ static wordcloud (for a single in-
ference task), though this does depend on some
language-specific resources (e.g., stopword lists
and stemming). Interestingly, they opt for ex-

24



plicit removal of words and outliers that the user
does not wish to have displayed (an exclusion
list), rather than adjusting calculations of the en-
tire cloud to remove them in a principled and fair
manner.

5.3 Wordclouds and Metadata

Wordclouds have previously been extended to
convey additional information, though these adap-
tations have been optimized generally for artistic
purposes rather than exploratory data analysis.

Wordclouds can been used to display how lan-
guage interacts with a temporal dimension in (Du-
binko et al., 2007; Cui et al., 2010; Lee et al.,
2010). Dubinko and colleagues created a tag cloud
variant that displays trends in tag usage over time,
coupled with images that have that tag (Dubinko et
al., 2007). An information-theoretic approach to
displaying information changing in time gives rise
to a theoretically grounded approach for display-
ing pointwise tag clouds, and highlighting those
pieces that have changed significantly as com-
pared to a previous time period (Cui et al., 2010).
This can be viewed as measuring the change in
overall language usage over time. In contrast, us-
ing spark lines on each individual word or tag can
convey temporal trends for individual words (Lee
et al., 2010).

Meanwhile, combining tag clouds with geospa-
tial data yields a visualization where words can be
displayed on a map of the world in locations they
are frequently tagged in, labeling famous land-
marks, for example (Slingsby et al., 2007).

6 Desiderata

In light of the diverse inference tasks (§2) and
prior art (§5), the following desiderata emerge for
the visualization. These desiderata are explicit
choices, not all of which are ideal for all infer-
ence tasks. Thus, chief among them is the first:
flexibility to allow maximum extensions and mod-
ifications as needed.

Flexible and adjustable in real time: Any sin-
gle static wordcloud is guaranteed to be subopti-
mal for at least some inference tasks, so allowing
the user to adjust the aspect-to-aesthetic mapping
of the wordcloud in real time enables adaptation
of the visualization to the data and inference task
at hand. The statistics described in §4 are relevant
to every language collection (and most inference
tasks), yet there are a number of other ordinal val-

ues to associate a word (e.g., the weight assigned
to it by a classifier). Thus, tf and idf are meant
to be illustrative examples though the visualization
code should generalize well to others.

Though removal of the most frequent words
(stopwords) is useful in many natural language
processing tasks, there are many ways to define
which words fall under this category. Unsurpris-
ingly, the optimal selection of these words can also
depend upon the task at hand (e.g., psychiatric v.
thematic analysis as in §2), so maximum flexibility
and minimum latency are desirable.

Interpretable: An explicit legend is needed to
interpret the differences in visual aesthetics and
what these differences mean with respect to the
underlying data aspects.

Language-Agnostic: We need methods for ex-
ploratory data analysis that work well regard-
less of the language(s) being investigated. This
is crucial for multilingual corpora, yet decidedly
nontrivial. These techniques must be maximally
language-agnostic, relying on only the most rudi-
mentary understanding of the linguistic structure
of the data (e.g., spaces separate words in English,
but not in Chinese), so they can be extended to
many languages easily.

This precludes the use of a fixed set of stop
words for each language examined, since a new set
of stopwords would be required for each language
explored. Alternatively, the set of stopwords can
be dealt with automatically, either by granting the
user the ability to filter out words in the extremes
of the distributions (tf and df alike) through the
use of a weight which penalizes these ubiquitous
or too-rare words. Similarly precluded is the use
of stemming to deal with the many surface forms
of a given root word (e.g., type, typing, typed).

7 Dynamic Wordclouds

We address Question (1) and a number of our
desiderata with the addition of explicitly labeled
controls to the static wordcloud display, which al-
lows the user to control the mapping from data
aspects to the visualization aesthetics. We sup-
plement these controls with an explicit explana-
tion of how each aesthetic is affected by each
aspect, so the user can easily read the relevant
mappings, rather than trying to interpret the loca-
tion of the sliders. An example of which is that
“Larger words are those that frequently occur in
the query”, when the aspect tf is mapped to the

25



[X] entities commoncloud
tf

filter
idf

filter
size

controls
opacity
controls

sort
by

wordcloud
description

do not
redraw

highlight
keywords

orioles at to for in
baltimore a game i
and yankees of go
on is this vs w/ o's
are it win with be i'm
my you that others new
have just 2 3 up 1 let's first so all
tonight fans but out season we now get sox
an time md series al baseball will about me not
like as 5 playoff lets from over was they if what 4 good no
great year day one love back amp fan magic can east playoffs beat gt
red sports rt today do going how last more place team games night blue

file:///Users/gcoppersmith/Desktop/dwc_dev/orioles.html

1 of 2 2/24/14, 4:36 PM

[X] entities commoncloud
tf

filter
idf

filter
size

controls
opacity
controls

sort
by

wordcloud
description

do not
redraw

highlight
keywords

13 espn fox leads md ny report star
usa buck chris glove mark move press
14 gold hamilton jim third birds gonzalez j
o september white homers rangers tigers 15 fall
yankee sox yard al happen pick blue cc extra m old
card closer hits tie tied face omg ravens says yahoo city
saying second starting stay ass manager players real lt three
bout football left sunday sweep goes hey gets wild yanks adam job
news times won't magic place innings 2013 base gt hr pitching does
fucking os rain 10 friday outs suck coming makes also check wearing
haha show through god los losing may always being keep 9 hate gotta looks
making posted away free im life we're weekend call give little bar bring didn't
doing least look stop thing top where giants long photo record johnson league
most thank tv ? please proud walk wish 2012 any end every hell post same
because many pitch said its new runs everyone excited field finally bullpen let red
yes believe fun made these boys hit into those against mlb race i'll teams amazing say
w years another people 1st both postseason wait before 8 looking loss him lead man shit
feel inning damn oh 7 baby i've again should bad then thanks two wins nice much that's
winning yankees than gonna playing tickets yeah awesome beat why division lol wow
congrats lost ready lose us big could never even fuck our want since ball ever happy start am
better make run hope think only over he were getting has sports really his u work 6 next won
checked chicago did them some after well best tomorrow watch take their when had too orioles there an
games world need who 0 stadium clinch your been down love don't way by east or know off play would 4
more o's it's no can't rt playoffs right as still how can back here playoff 1 5 year 3 night watching team do last
one amp got day series home see come great today from like 2 will fan going what pic they about time good lets first
season if get was tonight we not fans let's all me baseball out now up just so but have be win you that with i'm it are my
others this is washington on vs of w/ go i and

file:///Users/gcoppersmith/Desktop/dwc_dev/orioles.html

1 of 1 2/24/14, 4:35 PM

[X] entities commoncloud
tf

filter
idf

filter
size

controls
opacity
controls

sort
by

wordcloud
description

do not
redraw

highlight
keywords

0 1 1st 2 2012 3 4 5 6 7 ? a about after again against al all amp an and are as

at back baltimore baseball be beat been best better
big birds blue buck but by can can't card checked chicago come could
day did do don't down east espn even ever fan fans first for from fuck game
games get go going gonna good got great gt had has have he here his hit home how i i'm
if in inning is it it's johnson just keep know last lead let's lets like lol lose love
magic make mark md me mlb more my need new news next
night no not now o's of off on one only or orioles others our
out over photo pic place play playoff playoffs post postseason rangers
ravens really red report right rt run season see series should since so some
sox sports start still take team than that their them there they think this tied time
times to today tomorrow tonight two up vs w/ was watch watching way we well were
what when white who why wild will win with won world would yahoo
yankees yanks year years you your

file:///Users/gcoppersmith/Desktop/dwc_dev/orioles.html

1 of 1 2/24/14, 4:37 PMFigure 1: Three example settings of the dynamic wordcloud for the same set of tweets containing “Orioles”. Left: size
reflects tf , sorted by tf ; Center: size reflects idf , sorted by idf ; Right: size reflects tf*idf , sorted alphabetically.

aesthetic font-size (and this description is tied to
the appropriate sliders so it updates as the slid-
ers are changed). The manipulation of the visu-
alization in real time allows us to take advantage
of the human’s adept visual change-detection to
highlight and convey the differences between set-
tings (or a range of settings), even subtle ones.

The data aspects from §4 are precomputed and
mapped to the aesthetics from §3 in a JavaScript
visualization displayed in a standard web browser.
This visualization enables the user to manipulate
the aspect-to-aesthetic mapping via an intuitive
set of sliders and buttons, responsive in real time.
The sliders are roughly segmented into three cat-
egories: those that control which words are dis-
played, those that control how size is calculated,
and those that control how opacity is calculated.
The buttons control the order in which words ap-
pear.

One set of sliders controls which words are
displayed by examining the frequency and rar-
ity of the words. We define the range τFreq =
[tminFreq, t

max
Freq] as the range of tf values for words to

be displayed (i.e., tf(w) ∈ τFreq). The viewer is
granted a range slider to manipulate both tminFreq and
tmaxFreq to eliminate words from the extremes of the
distribution. Similarly for df and τRarity. Those
words that fall outside τFreq or τRarity are not dis-
played. Importantly, tf is computed from the cur-
rent corpus displayed while df is computed over a
much larger collection (in our running examples,
all the works of Shakespeare or all the tweets for
the last 6 months). Those with high df or high
tf are often stopwords, those with low tf and low
df are often rare, sometimes too rare to get good
estimates of tf or idf (e.g., names).

A second set of sliders controls the mapping be-
tween aspects and aesthetics for each individual
word. Each aesthetic has a weight for the impor-
tance of rarity (γRarity) and the importance of fre-
quency (γFreq), corresponding to the current val-
ues of their respective slider (each in the range
[0, 1]). For size, we compute a weight attributed
to each data aspect:

ωFreq(w) = (1− γFreq) + γFreqtf(w)
and similarly for Rarity.

In both cases, the aesthetic’s value is computed
via an equation similar to the following:

a(w) = ωFreq(w)ωRarity(w)γRangeb

where a(w) is either font size or opacity, and b
is some base value of the aesthetic (scaled by a
dynamic range slider, γRange) and the weights for
frequency and rarity of the word. In this manner,
the weights are multiplicative, so interactions be-
tween the variables (e.g., tf*idf ) are apparent.

Though unigram statistics are informative, see-
ing the unigrams in context is also important for
many inference tasks. To enable this, we use reser-
voir sampling (Vitter, 1985) to maintain a repre-
sentative sample of the observed occurrences of
each word in context, which the user can view by
clicking on the word in the wordcloud display.

Examples of the dynamic wordcloud in various
settings can be found in Figure 1, using a set of
tweets containing “Orioles”. The left wordcloud
has tf mapped to size, the center with idf mapped
to size, and the right with both high tf and high
idf mapped to size. We only manipulate the size
aesthetic, since the opacity aesthetic is sometimes
hard to interpret in print. To fit the wordclouds

26



to the small format, various values for τFreq and
τRarity are employed, and order is varied – the
left is ordered in descending order in terms of fre-
quency, the center is ordered in descending order
in terms of rarity, and the right is in alphabetical
order.

8 Vennclouds

Question (2) – “how are these corpora related” re-
quires only a single change to the dynamic sin-
gle wordcloud described in §7. We refer to two
corpora, left and right, which we abbreviate L
and R (perhaps a set of tweets containing “Ori-
oles” for left and those containing “Nationals” for
right as in Figure 2). For the right documents, let
R = {d1, ..., dnR} so |R| = nR and let TR be the
total number of tokens in all the documents in R

TR =
∑
d∈R
|Td|

We separate the wordcloud display into three re-
gions, one devoted to words most closely associ-
ated with R, one devoted to words most closely
associated with L, and one for words that should
be associated with both. “Association” here can be
defined in a number of ways, but for the nonce we
define it as the probability of occurrence in that
corpus – essentially term frequency, normalized
by corpus length. Normalizing by length is re-
quired to prevent bias incurred when the corpora
are different sizes (TL 6= TR). Specifically, we
define the number of times w occurs in left (tf ) as

tfL(w) =
∑
di∈L

T (w, di)

and this quantity normalized by the number of to-
kens in L,

tfL(w) = tfL(w)/TL

and this quantity as it relates to the term frequency
of this w in both corpora

tfL|R(w) =
tfL(w)

tfL(w) + tfR(w)

Each word is only displayed once in the Ven-
ncloud (see Figure 2, so if a word (w) only occurs
in R, it is always present in the right region, and
likewise for L and left. If w is in both L and R,
we examine the proportion of documents in each
that w is in and use this to determine in which re-
gion it should be displayed. In order to deal with

Figure 2: Three example Vennclouds, with tweets contain-
ing “Orioles” on the left, “Nationals” on the right, and com-
mon words in the middle. From top to bottom we allow pro-
gressively larger common clouds. The large common words
make sense – both teams played a Chicago team and made
the playoffs in the time covered by these corpora.

the cases where w occurs in approximately similar
proportions of left and right documents, we have
a center region (in the center in Figure 2). We
define a threshold (τCommon) to concretely define
“approximately similar”. Specifically,

• if tfR(w) = 0, w is displayed in left.
• if tfL(w) = 0, w is displayed in right.
• if tfR(w) > 0 and tfL(w) > 0,

– if tfR|L(w) > tfL|R(w) + τCommon, w
is displayed in right.

– if tfL|R(w) > tfR|L(w) + τCommon, w
is displayed in left.

– Otherwise, w is displayed in center.

The user is given a slider to control τCommon, al-
lowing them to determine what value of “approx-
imately similar” best fits the data and their task at
hand.

9 Anecdotal Evaluation

We have not yet done a proper psychophysical
evaluation of the utility of dynamic wordclouds

27



[X][X] entitiesentities common cloudcommon cloud tf filtertf filter idf filteridf filter size controlssize controls opacity controlsopacity controls sort bysort by legendlegend do not redraw do not redraw highlight keywords highlight keywords 

@ 
@nationals am 
baseball best bryce but 

cardinals cards clinch
come cubs dc did

getting go going got 
here home if

know 
louis lt marlins me 

nationals 
nats nl not or others

park philadelphia phillies pic 
see st stadium 

strasburg teddy 
today too u w/ 
was washington watching well werth 

work 

0 2 4 5 6 7 8 9 ? a about 
after again all 

amp and another any are as awesome baby back
bar be because been

before being believe better big boys
bring bullpen by call can can't 

checked chicago 
could damn day 

division do don't down east end
even ever every everyone excited fan fans feel 

field finally first for free
from fuck game games get 

give gonna good great had 
has have he hell him his

hope how i i'll i'm im
in inning into is it it's its just 

last league let let's lets life like little
lol long look looking lose losing loss love made

make man many 

more most much my need
next night no now of off oh on one only 

our out pitch play
playing playoff playoffs please postseason proud 

ready really right rt run runs said
say season series 
should since so some 

start still 
take team than

thank thanks that that's their them then there these they thing 

think this those time to 
tomorrow tonight two 

up vs wait want watch way we 
were what when where

who why will win winning wish with won world
would yeah year yes you your

1 1st 2012 3 @orioles against al an at
baltimore beat birds 

blue buck card 
espn 

gt hit 

johnson keep lead magic mark md

mlb new news o's 

orioles over photo place
post rangers ravens

red report 
sox sports 

tied 

white wild yahoo yankees yanks years

Words displayed occur at least 22 and at most 6590 times in the query.
Words displayed occur in fewer than 5 and more than 10000 documents in the whole corpus.
Larger words frequently occur in the query and rarely occur in the corpus (TF*IDF). [TF:0.92,IDF:1]
Darker words are more frequent in the query (TF). [TF:1]
Words are sorted alphabetically.

[X]
go o's @ oriole park at camden yards for boston red
sox vs baltimore orioles w/ 163 others

i'm at oriole park at camden yards for chicago white
sox vs baltimore orioles baltimore md

#orioles 5 things the boston red sox can learn from the
baltimore orioles oakland a's bleacher
#sportsroadhouse

[X]
nats white sox south carolina 100 to win 450

#orioles welcome to red sox nation orioles' and
nationals' fans #sportsroadhouse

god damn nats just tried to boo in a dc bar almost got
chased out since my sox are out i just want the cards
to do well #problems #mlb

file:///Users/gcoppersmith/src/dwc_dev/nats_v_orioles.html

1 of 1 4/24/14, 9:53 AM

Figure 3: Screenshot of a Venncloud, with controls. The sliders are accessible from the buttons across the top, displaying as
a floating window above the wordcloud itself (replacing the current display of the legend). Also note the examples in the lower
left and right corners, accessed by clicking on a word of interest (in this case “Sox”).

and Vennclouds for various tasks as compared to
their static counterparts (and other visualizations).
In part, this is because such an evaluation requires
selection of inference tasks to be examined, pre-
cisely what we do not claim to be able to do. We
leave for future work the creation and evaluation
of a representative sample of such inference tasks.

We strongly believe that the plural of anecdote
is not data – so these anecdotes are intended as
illustrations of use, rather than some data regard-
ing utility. The dynamic wordclouds and Ven-
nclouds were used on data from across the spec-
trum, from tweets to Shakespeare and political
speeches to health-related conversations in devel-
oping nations. In Shakespeare, character and place
names can easily be highlighted with one set of
slider settings (high tf*idf ), while comparisons
of stopwords are made apparent with another (high
tf , no idf ). Emerging from the debates between
Mitt Romney and Barack Obama are the common
themes that they discuss using similar (economics)
and dissimilar language (Obama talks about the
“affordable care act” and Romney calls it “Oba-
macare”). These wordclouds were also used to do
some introspection on the output of classifiers in
sentiment analysis (Mitchell et al., 2013) and men-
tal health research (Coppersmith et al., 2014b) to
expose the linguistic signals that give rise to suc-
cessful (and unsuccessful) classification.

10 Conclusions and Future Directions

Exploratory data analysis tools for human lan-
guage data and inference tasks have long lagged
behind their numerical counterparts, and here we

investigate another step towards filling that need.
Rather than determining the optimal wordcloud,
we enable the wordcloud viewer to adapt the visu-
alization to the data and inference task at hand. We
suspect that the pendulum of control has swung
too far, and that there is a subset of the possi-
ble control configurations that produce useful and
informative wordclouds. Work is underway to
collect feedback via instrumented dynamic word-
clouds and Vennclouds as they are used for various
inference tasks to address this.

Previous research, logic, and intuition were
used to create this step, though it requires fur-
ther improvement and validation. We provide
anecdotes about the usefulness of these dynamic
wordclouds, but those anecdotes do not provide
sufficient evidence that this method is somehow
more efficient (in terms of human time) than ex-
isting methods. To make such claims, a controlled
human-factors study is required, investigating (for
a particular inference task) how this method af-
fects the job of an exploratory data analyst. In
the meantime, we hope making the code freely
available1 will better enable our fellow researchers
to perform principled exploratory data analysis of
human language content quickly and encourage a
deeper understanding of data, within and across
disciplines.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Carey Priebe for in-
sightful discussions on exploratory data analysis,

1from https://github.com/Coppersmith/vennclouds

28



Aleksander Yelskiy, Jacqueline Aguilar, Kristy
Hollingshead for their analysis, comments, and
improvements on early versions, and Ainsley
R. Coppersmith for permitting this research to
progress in her early months.

References
Scott Bateman, Carl Gutwin, and Miguel Nacenta.

2008. Seeing things in the clouds: the effect of vi-
sual features on tag cloud selections. In Proceedings
of the nineteenth ACM conference on Hypertext and
hypermedia, pages 193–202. ACM.

Quim Castella and Charles A. Sutton. 2013. Word
storms: Multiples of word clouds for visual compar-
ison of documents. CoRR, abs/1301.0503.

Cindy Chung and James W Pennebaker. 2007. The
psychological functions of function words. Social
communication, pages 343–359.

Christopher Collins, Fernanda B Viegas, and Martin
Wattenberg. 2009. Parallel tag clouds to explore
and analyze faceted text corpora. In Visual Analyt-
ics Science and Technology, 2009. VAST 2009. IEEE
Symposium on, pages 91–98. IEEE.

Glen Coppersmith, Mark Dredze, and Craig Harman.
2014a. Quantifying mental health signals in twitter.
In Proceedings of ACL Workshop on Computational
Linguistics and Clinical Psychology. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Glen Coppersmith, Craig Harman, and Mark Dredze.
2014b. Measuring post traumatic stress disorder in
Twitter. In Proceedings of the International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM).

Weiwei Cui, Yingcai Wu, Shixia Liu, Furu Wei,
Michelle X Zhou, and Huamin Qu. 2010. Context
preserving dynamic word cloud visualization. In
Pacific Visualization Symposium (PacificVis), 2010
IEEE, pages 121–128. IEEE.

Jason Davies. 2013. Wordcloud generator using d3,
April.

Micah Dubinko, Ravi Kumar, Joseph Magnani, Jas-
mine Novak, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Andrew
Tomkins. 2007. Visualizing tags over time. ACM
Transactions on the Web (TWEB), 1(2):7.

Jason Feinberg. 2013. Wordle, April.

Patrick Juola. 2006. Authorship attribution. Founda-
tions and Trends in information Retrieval, 1(3):233–
334.

Kathrin Knautz, Simone Soubusta, and Wolfgang G
Stock. 2010. Tag clusters as information retrieval
interfaces. In System Sciences (HICSS), 2010 43rd
Hawaii International Conference on, pages 1–10.
IEEE.

Bongshin Lee, Nathalie Henry Riche, Amy K Karl-
son, and Sheelagh Carpendale. 2010. Spark-
clouds: Visualizing trends in tag clouds. Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on,
16(6):1182–1189.

Margaret Mitchell, Jacqueline Aguilar, Theresa Wil-
son, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2013. Open domain
targeted sentiment. In Proceedings of the 2013 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1643–1654. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Saša Petrovic, Miles Osborne, Richard McCreadie,
Craig Macdonald, Iadh Ounis, and Luke Shrimpton.
2013. Can twitter replace newswire for breaking
news. In Seventh International AAAI Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media.

Paul Rayson and Roger Garside. 2000. Comparing
corpora using frequency profiling. In Proceedings
of the workshop on Comparing Corpora, pages 1–6.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

AW Rivadeneira, Daniel M Gruen, Michael J Muller,
and David R Millen. 2007. Getting our head in the
clouds: toward evaluation studies of tagclouds. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems, pages 995–998. ACM.

Johann Schrammel, Michael Leitner, and Manfred
Tscheligi. 2009. Semantically structured tag
clouds: an empirical evaluation of clustered presen-
tation approaches. In Proceedings of the 27th inter-
national conference on Human factors in computing
systems, pages 2037–2040. ACM.

Christin Seifert, Barbara Kump, Wolfgang Kienreich,
Gisela Granitzer, and Michael Granitzer. 2008. On
the beauty and usability of tag clouds. In Informa-
tion Visualisation, 2008. IV’08. 12th International
Conference, pages 17–25. IEEE.

James Sinclair and Michael Cardew-Hall. 2008. The
folksonomy tag cloud: when is it useful? Journal of
Information Science, 34(1):15–29.

Aidan Slingsby, Jason Dykes, Jo Wood, and Keith
Clarke. 2007. Interactive tag maps and tag
clouds for the multiscale exploration of large spatio-
temporal datasets. In Information Visualization,
2007. IV’07. 11th International Conference, pages
497–504. IEEE.

Fernanda B Viégas and Martin Wattenberg. 2008.
Timelines tag clouds and the case for vernacular vi-
sualization. interactions, 15(4):49–52.

Jeffrey S Vitter. 1985. Random sampling with a reser-
voir. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software
(TOMS), 11(1):37–57.

Hadley Wickham. 2009. ggplot2: elegant graphics for
data analysis. Springer Publishing Company, Incor-
porated.

29


