




































RuThes Linguistic Ontology vs. Russian Wordnets

Natalia Loukachevitch
Research Computing Center
of Lomonosov Moscow State 

University 
louk_nat@mail.ru

Boris Dobrov
Research Computing Center
of Lomonosov Moscow State 

University 
dobrov_bv@mail.ru

Abstract

The paper describes the structure and current 
state of RuThes – thesaurus of Russian lan-
guage, constructed as a linguistic ontology. 
We compare RuThes structure with the  
WordNet structure, describe principles for in-
clusion of multiword expressions, types of re-
lations, experiments and applications based on 
RuThes. For a long time RuThes has been de-
veloped within various NLP and information-
retrieval projects, and now it became available 
for public use.

1 Introduction

Since its appearance Princeton WordNet has at-
tracted a lot of attention of researchers and other 
specialists in natural language processing and 
information retrieval (Fellbaum, 1998). National 
wordnets for many languages in the world were 
initiated.

For developing a wordnet for a new language, 
several approaches can be applied. The first ap-
proach is based on automated or manual transla-
tion of Princeton WordNet (Balkova et al., 2008; 
Linden and Carlson, 2010). The second approach 
consists in creating of a wordnet from scratch 
using language-specific dictionaries and corpora
(Climent et al., 1996; Azarowa, 2008; Kunze and
Lemnitzer, 2010).  This approach often implies 
the modification of the initial set of Princeton 
WordNet lexical relationships, introduction and 
justification of new relations, which usually re-
quires additional time-consuming efforts (Ma-
ziarz et al., 2013; Pedersen et al., 2012).

At least three attempts to create a Russian 
wordnet are known. RussNet (Azarowa, 2008) 
began to be developed from scratch and at this 
moment continues to be quite small (not more 
than 20 thousand synsets). Two other Russian 

wordnets were generated using automated trans-
lation (Gelfenbeyn et al., 2003; Balkova et al., 
2008). The former one is publicly available 
(http://wordnet.ru/) but represents the di-
rect translation from Princeton Wordnet without 
any manual revision. The webpage of the latter 
one ceased to exist.

The structure of Princeton WordNet (and other 
wordnets) is based on sets of partial synonyms –
synsets, organized in hierarchical part-of-speech-
based lexical nets according mainly to hypony-
my-hypernymy relations. Every part-of-speech 
net has its own system of relations. 

Wordnets are often referred as linguistic or 
lexical ontologies (Magnini and Speranza, 2002; 
Veale and Hao, 2007), synsets of WordNet  are 
often considered as lexicalized concepts. How-
ever, wordnets are mainly intended to describe 
lexical relations, what is quite different from the 
primary aim of ontologies to describe knowledge 
about the world, not about the language (Buite-
laar et al., 2009; Nirenburg and Raskin, 2004).
This difference reveals, for example, in the 
above mentioned division of wordnets to differ-
ent part-of-speech subnets, because a part of 
speech cannot be a divisive feature in construc-
tion of ontologies.

In this paper we will consider the structure and 
current state of Thesaurus of Russian language 
(linguistic ontology) RuThes, which for a long 
time has been developed within various NLP and 
information-retrieval projects (Loukachevitch 
and Dobrov, 2002), and now it is prepared to 
become available for public use. In this resource 
we attempted to create a linguistically moti-
vated ontology (not a lexical net), based on the 
denotational part of lexical senses and concept-
based (not lexical) relations. At present, RuThes 
comprises more than 158 thousand unique words 
and expressions, which are structured into 53.5 
thousand concepts.



The structure of this paper is as follows. Sec-
tion 2 is devoted to the comparison of units in 
ontologies, wordnets and information-retrieval 
thesauri. In Section 3 main components of 
RuThes are considered. In Section 4 we describe 
several applications and the evaluation of 
RuThes. At last in Section 5 we describe our li-
censing policy for RuThes distribution.

2 Units in Ontologies, Wordnets and 
Information-Retrieval Thesauri

Ontologies are often considered as logical theo-
ries, which should be independent of natural lan-
guage (Buitelaar et al., 2009; Smith, 2004). The 
general recommendations on the ontology con-
cepts (classes) are usually described as follows
(Noy and McGuinness, 2001; Nirenburg and
Raskin, 2004):

 one needs to distinguish the concept and 
its name, i.e. synonyms do not represent 
different classes, synonyms are just differ-
ent names of the concepts

 a concept should be distinctly different 
from its parent and from the concepts at 
the same level (sibling concepts).

However, to use ontologies in natural lan-
guage processing, concepts of ontologies should 
be associated with language expressions and 
structures. In (Maedche and Zacharias, 2002;
Buitelaar et al., 2006; Buitelaar et al., 2009) spe-
cial models for linking natural language expres-
sions and ontological entities are proposed.

From another point of view, an ontology can-
not be fully independent of natural language. Ch. 
Brewster and colleagues (Brewster et al., 2005)
stress that people manipulate concepts through 
words. In all known ontologies the words are 
used to represent concepts. Therefore, phenome-
na that are not verbalized, cannot be modeled. 
Y. Wilks (Wilks, 2008) asserts that the symbols 
in representation languages are fundamentally 
based on the natural language. 

WordNet was created as a lexical rather than 
ontological resource (Fellbaum, 1998). However, 
over time, the growing importance of the onto-
logical research, as well as the similarity of the 
WordNet noun hierarchy with an ontology be-
came apparent (Miller and Hristea, 2006). 

At the same time there exist a lot of deficien-
cies of WordNet descriptions from the ontologi-
cal point of view (Guarino, 1998). Numerous 
examples of confusion between a concept and its 
names can be found in WordNet (Loukachevitch, 

2009).  Separate synsets are introduced for dif-
ferent ways of naming the same entities includ-
ing the support of specific hierarchies for differ-
ent parts of speech, for description of old and 
new names of the same entities, specific word 
usage in different dialects of the language or text 
genres (moke - donkey, nose - nozzle) etc. This is 
due to the fact that the basic relation in WordNet 
is the synonymy, based on the principle of subs-
titution of one for another in sentences (Fell-
baum, 1998). Some of new wordnets enhance the 
diversity of lexical relations between words to 
describe mainly their derivational links (Azaro-
wa, 2008; Derwojedowa et al., 2008; Maziarz et 
al., 2013; Bosch et al., 2008).

However, it was supposed in (Edmonds and
Hirst, 2002; Hirst, 2009) that a fine-grained hie-
rarchy is inappropriate as a model for the rela-
tionship between the senses of near-synonyms in 
a lexicon for any practical use in tasks such as 
machine translation and other applications. They 
assert that, "what is required is a very coarse-
grained conceptual hierarchy so that whole clus-
ters of near-synonyms are mapped to a single 
node: their core meaning”.

If to look at information-retrieval thesauri as 
representative sources of the terminology and 
domain knowledge one can see that most stan-
dards and guidelines for information-retrieval 
thesauri construction highlight the connection 
between the terms and concepts of a subject field
(ISO 2788-1986, 1986; Z39.19, 2005). So the 
American standard Z39.19 points out that a term 
is one or more words referring to a concept 
(Z39.19, 2005). A concept is considered as a unit 
of a thought, regardless of the terms that express 
them.

Creating RuThes as an ontology with concept-
based (not lexical) relations, we assumed that the 
concept-oriented approach to the lexical know-
ledge representation gives the possibility of bet-
ter matching between languages (Edmonds and
Hirst, 2002), more natural connection with do-
main terminologies, which are inherently con-
cept-based (Z39.19, 2005); and more reliable
logical inference based on current ontological 
research (Masolo et al., 2003; Guarino, 2009; 
Guizzardi, 2011).

3 RuThes linguistic ontology

RuThes Thesaurus of Russian language can be 
called a linguistic ontology for natural language 
processing, i.e. an ontology, where the majority 



of concepts are introduced on the basis of actual 
language expressions.

In construction of RuThes we combined three 
different methodologies:

 methods of construction of information-
retrieval thesauri (concept-based units, a 
small set of relation types, rules of multi-
word expression inclusion)

 development of wordnets for various 
languages (language-motivated units, de-
tailed sets of synonyms, description of 
ambiguous expressions)

 ontology research (concepts as main 
units, strictness of relation description, ne-
cessity of many-step inference).

RuThes is a hierarchical network of concepts. 
Each concept has a name, relations with other 
concepts, a set of language expressions (words, 
phrases, terms) whose meanings correspond to 
the concept. 

3.1 RuThes units

In RuThes, a unit is presented not by a set of 
similar words or terms, as it is done in the 
WordNet thesaurus, but by a concept – as a unit 
of thought, which can be associated with several 
synonymic language expressions. Every concept 
should have distinctions from related concepts, 
which are independent from context and should 
be expressed in specific set of relations or 
associated language expressions – text entries.

Words and phrases, which meanings are 
represented as references to the same concepts of 
the thesaurus, are called ontological synonyms. 
Ontological synonyms can comprise:

 words belonging to different parts of 
speech (stabilization, stabilize, stabilized)
– therefore the number of RuThes 
concepts is approximately 2.5 times less 
than in a wordnet-like resource of the 
same size. Text entries are provided with 
part-of speech information;

 language expressions relating to different 
linguistic styles, genres;

 idioms and even free multiword ex-
pressions (for example, synonymous to 
single words).

Each concept should have a clear, univocal 
and concise name. Such names often help to 
express, delimit the denotational scope of the
concept. Besides, such names facilitate the ana-

lysis of the results of natural language
processing.

Name of a concept can be:
 one of unambiguous text entries;

 an unambiguous multiword expression;

 a pair of synonyms that uniquely iden-
tifies the concept;

 an ambiguous word with a relator similar 
to those used in traditional information 
retrieval thesauri (Z39.19, 2005).

If necessary, a concept may have a gloss, 
which is not a part of the concept name. 

Language expressions that may give rise to a 
separate concept in RuThes belong not only to 
the general vocabulary, but also can be terms of 
specific subject domains within the broad scope 
of social life (economy, law, international 
relations, politics, transport, banks, etc.), so-
called socio-political domain (Loukache-
vitch and Dobrov, 2004). 

This is due to the fact that many professional 
concepts, terms, and slang of these domains pe-
netrate easily into the general language, and can 
be widely discussed in mass media. Besides,
such a scope of concepts facilitates the app-
lication of RuThes in specialized subdomains of 
the broad socio-political  domain. Examples of 
such concepts in RuThes include: EMERGENCY 
LOAN, TAX EXEMPTION, IMPORT TAX, DE-
MOGRAPHIC INDICATOR  etc.

In fact, we subdivide the whole scope of
RuThes concepts to:

 General Lexicon comprising concepts 
that can be met in various specific 
domains. In this, General Lexicon app-
roximately corresponds to the Factotum 
domain in the Wordnet domain set
(Gonzalez et al., 2012; Bentivogli et al., 
2004),

 and Socio-political Thesaurus con-
taining thematically oriented lexemes and 
multiword expressions as well as domain-
specific terms of the broad sociopolitical 
domain.

After a concept has been introduced, an expert 
searches for all possible synonyms or derivative 
synonyms (that is derivates preserving the sense 
of an initial word), single words and phrases that 
can be associated with this concept. For example, 
a concept ДУШЕВНОЕ СТРАДАНИЕ (wound 
in the soul) has more than 20 text entries inclu-
ding such as: боль, боль в душе, в душе на-



болело, душа болит, душа саднит, душевная
пытка, душевная рана, душевный недуг, 
наболеть, рана в душе, рана в сердце, рана
души, саднить (several English translations
may be as follows: wound, emotional wound, 
pain in the soul etc.).

At present RuThes includes 53.5 thousand 
concepts, 158 thousand unique text entries (75 
thousand single words), 178 thousand concept-
text entry relations, more than 215 thousand 
conceptual relations.

3.2 Multiword expressions in RuThes

One of difficult issues in wordnet development is 
inclusion of synsets based on senses of multi-
word expressions, for example noun compounds
(Bentivogli and Pianta, 2004; Agirre et al., 2006;
Kunze and Lemnitzer, 2010). Two main ques-
tions are usually discussed here: what are the
principles of inclusion of multiword expressions 
(especially compositional or semi-compositional 
ones) and what types of relations should connect 
a multiword expression and its components in
the wordnet structure. 

In RuThes introduction of concepts based on 
multiword expressions is not restricted and even 
encouraged if (and only if) this concept adds 
some new information to knowledge described in 
RuThes. 

Such additional information may be 
subdivided into several types.

A concept denotes an important entity. So in 
our Russia-oriented resource ПРЕЗИДЕНТ 
РОССИЙСКОЙ ФЕДЕРАЦИИ (Russian Pre-
sident) is an example of such a concept. Another 
variant of the same issue is the existence of im-
portant parts or participants for an entity or 
event. So, for АРЕНДА (lease) concept, such 
additional concepts as АРЕНДНАЯ ПЛАТА
(lease payment), АРЕНДНЫЙ ДОГОВОР (lea-
se agreement), АРЕНДНОЕ ИМУЩЕСТВО
(leasehold property) are introduced, because they 
present important issues of lease services. At the 
same time concept АРЕНДНЫЙ ДОГОВОР
(lease agreement) is an important subtype of 
concept ГРАЖДАНСКО-ПРАВОВОЙ ДОГО-
ВОР (legal agreement).

A new concept has relations that do not follow 
from the component structure of an underlying 
multiword expression. This is a reason to intro-
duce concept ИЗБРАНИЕ ПАПЫ РИМСКОГО
(papal election) - it has a relation to concept 
КОНКЛАВ (papal conclave). Another example 
is concept ТЮНИНГ АВТОМОБИЛЯ (car 

tuning) having relations to concepts
АВТОСЕРВИС (auto service).

A new multiword-based concept has a text 
entry that is not motivated by the component 
structure of a basic expression, for example, con-
cept ЗАСНУТЬ ЗА РУЛЕМ  describes also an 
"interesting" synonym заснуть во время дви-
жения (compare English expressions falling 
asleep at the wheel and falling asleep while dri-
ving). Also this concept has an "interesting" rela-
tion to concept ДОРОЖНО-ТРАНСПОРТНОЕ
ПРОИСШЕСТВИЕ (road accident).

At last, an important additional factor, which 
can stimulate inclusion of a concept to the 
thesaurus, is the ambiguity of components of an 
unambiguous phrase, such as положение дел
(state of affairs).

3.3 RuThes relations 

RuThes relations are of conceptual nature, not 
lexical ones. It is not a simple task to choose an 
appropriate set of relations for such a broad and 
diverse scope of concepts. RuThes has a small 
set of conceptual relations consisting of three 
main relations that are also applicable to a lot of 
various domains (Dobrov and Loukachevitch, 
2006) and describe the most important links of a 
concept.

The first relation is the traditional hyponymic
(taxonomic) relation. To establish such relations 
we apply additional tests similar to ones used in 
ontology development. The tests are directed to 
avoid incorrect use of taxonomic relations and 
not to mix them up with other types of relations, 
because errors in relation types degrade logical 
inference Gangemi et al., 2001).

We consider role-type relations as especially 
dangerous ones when a role concept (such as 
EMPLOYEE) is located as a parent concept for a 
type (as PERSON) (see discussion about roles 
and related problems in (Guarino, 1998;
Gangemi et al., 2001; Fellbaum, 2002)). 
Therefore establishing the taxonomic 
relationship we also check the fulfillment of the 
following principle: every instance of a child 
concept should be at the same time the instance 
of a parent concept (not every person is an emp-
loyee).

The second conceptual relation used in 
RuThes is the part-whole relation. The part-
whole relations can be applied in various 
domains, exist in diverse forms. Therefore in 
computer resources different approaches 
representing these relations can be taken 
(Winston et al., 1987; Guarino, 2009; Sowa, 



2000). So, for example, the tradition to describe 
part-whole relations in wordnets differs 
considerably from the guidelines of information-
retrieval thesauri construction (Z39.19, 2005; 
Fellbaum, 1998).

In RuThes we use the generalized part-whole 
relation, which means that besides traditional 
types of part-whole relations (physical parts, 
process parts), relations between the following 
types of entities can be considered as part-whole 
relations: 

 an attribute and its bearer, 

 a role or a participant of a situation and 
the situation: investor - investing, player -
playing (compare (Loebe, 2007)),

 entities and situations in the encompass-
ing sphere of activity: industrial plant -
industry, tennis racket - tennis, tennis
player - tennis. So these subtypes of part-
whole relations in RuThes play the role of 
so-called WordNet domains, which were 
introduced to alleviate “tennis problem” –
the lack of relations between synsets in-
volved to the same situation or domain 
(Bentivogli et al., 2004; Gonzalez et al., 
2012)

and several others.
In such a broad scope RuThes part-whole rela-

tions are close to so called internal relations
(parthood, constitution, quality inherence, and 
participation) as described in (Guarino, 2009).

At the same time RuThes part-whole relations 
have a very important restriction: a concept-part 
should be related to its whole during normal ex-
istence of its instances: so called inseparable 
parts or mandatary wholes (Guizzardi, 2011).
From this point of view, TREE concept is not 
described as part of FOREST concept, because 
trees can grow in many places, not only in fo-
rests.

Thus, the inference mechanism can rely on the 
chain of part-whole relations so we use the tran-
sitivity of such restricted part-whole relations
(Guizzardi, 2011).

Let us see examples of the transitivity chain of 
part-whole relations:

• (whole (ACCUSED PERSON, PUBLIC 
PROSECUTION),

• whole (PUBLIC PROSECUTION , 
JUDICIAL TRIAL ),

• whole (JUDICIAL TRIAL, JUDICIAL 
PROCEEDINGS))

•  whole (ACCUSED PERSON, 
JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS)

The next relation in RuThes ontology is un-
symmetrical association asc1-asc2, which 
represents external dependence in ontological 
terms (Gangemi et al., 2001; Guarino, 2009). 

This relation is established between two con-
cepts C1 and C2 when two requirements are ful-
filled:

 neither taxonomic nor part-whole rela-
tions can be established between C1 and C2
in RuThes linguistic ontology,

 the following assertion is true: C2 exists 
means C1 exists (necessarily existent enti-
ties are excluded from consideration).

These two conditions mean that concept C2
(dependent concept) externally depends on C1: 

asc1 (C2, C1) = asc2 (C1, C2)

Examples of dependent concepts for 
AUTOMOBILE concepts are as follows:

 asc2 (AUTOMOBILE, AUTOMOTIVE 
INDUSTRY): concept AUTOMOTIVE 
INDUSTRY exists only if concept  
AUTOMOBILE exists;

 asc2 (FOREST, TREE) concept FOREST
exists only if concept TREE exists.

Relations of ontological dependence are appli-
cable in various domains, therefore they are
usually used in top-level ontologies (Sowa, 2000;
Masolo et al., 2003; Grenon, 2003). Besides in 
(Kumar and Smith, 2004) authors discuss the 
importance of such a relation for the biology 
domain: cell movement cannot exist without 
cells. It is the first time when such relations are 
basic relations for a linguistic ontology.

An additional advantage of using this relation 
in linguistic ontologies consists in its usefulness 
for description of links between a concept based 
on the sense of a compositional multiword ex-
pression and concepts corresponding to the com-
ponents of this multiword expression.



DMOZ categorization webpages 2007, or onlyJudged

0

0,1

0,2

0,3

0,4

0,5

0,6

0,7

0,8

0,9

F1 F1 (micro
average)

Precision Precision (micro
average)

Recall Recall (micro
average)

xxxx-1

xxxx-2

xxxx-3

xxxx-4

thescateg

Fig 1. F1-measure, precision and recall of text categorization systems at ROMIP 2007.

So a multiword-based concept (for example, 
AUTOMOBILE RACING) is described as a de-
pendent concept and its component concept 
(AUTOMOBILE) as a main concept. This allows 
us to introduce concepts based on various types 
of multiword expressions as described in section 
3.2 and establish their necessary relations.

To conclude this section, we would like to 
stress there exists the similarity between all 
above-mentioned relations, which determines 
their considerable importance in concept descrip-
tion. These relations are established when con-
cept instances or concepts themselves should 
coexist, what means that using these relations, 
we describe the most inherent (and, therefore, 
reliable) relations of concepts. 

4 Testing RuThes in Automatic Docu-
ment Processing

RuThes lingustic ontology provides the detailed 
coverage of single words, expressions and senses 
of contemporary written Russian (mainly, news 
articles, laws and official documents). The quali-
ty of descriptions originates from several 
sources.

First, since 1996 RuThes was used in various 
projects with governmental bodies and commer-
cial organizations (in such applications as con-
ceptual indexing in information-retrieval sys-
tems,  knowledge-based text categorization, au-
tomatic summarization of single and multiple 
documents, question-answering etc.) and every 
project gave us the possibility to improve de-
scriptions of lexical senses, to reveal useful ex-
pressions.

Second, 200 thousand words in a dictionary 
form (so called lemmas) ordered in decreasing 
frequency were extracted from the document fre-

quency list of information-retrieval system 
RUSSIA (www.uisrussia.msu.ru/), in 
which contemporary Russian legal documents 
and newspaper materials are stored (2 million 
documents). The contemporary usage of these 
lemmas (distinct from proper names) was 
checked out during ten years of work mainly in 
news collections of online news services. 

In combination with other techniques we ap-
plied RuThes in tasks of Russian Information 
Retrieval Evaluation Seminar (ROMIP) (Dobrov 
et al., 2004). So in 2007 we tested our know-
ledge-based text categorization system in 
ROMIP text categorization evaluation (Ageev et
al., 2008a). The task was to automatically classi-
fy documents of 1.5 mln. webpages using 247 
categories (Russian part of DMOZ categories 
www.dmoz.org). The training collection in-
cluded 300 thousand documents with DMOZ 
category labels.

For every category, we created a Boolean ex-
pression over a relative small number of “sup-
porting” concepts of the thesaurus. After that 
initial Boolean expressions were expanded on the 
basis of properties of the thesaurus relations. Fi-
nal Boolean expressions usually include much 
more disjunctive and conjunctive components, 
sometimes in hundreds times more. Thus, these 
expanded Boolean descriptions of categories 
were used in automatic categorization of docu-
ments.

For example, Music category was described 
with single concept MUSICAL ARTY, where Y
means full expansion to lower levels of the hie-
rarchy including hyponyms, parts and dependent 
concepts. So the full Boolean expression for this 
category looks like a disjunction of more than 



400 concepts: ADAGIO  ACCORDION
… ORCHESTRA …).

The aim of our experiment was to obtain the 
best results of text categorization by minimal 
human efforts. The given system of 247 catego-
ries was described during eight hours by two 
knowledge engineers (overall time) (Ageev et al.
2008a). Fig. 1 demonstrates the performance of 
the created categorization system (thescateg)  in 
comparison to machine learning approaches 
(SVM-based runs).

It is possible to see that the results of the 
knowledge-based system are considerably better. 
In our opinion, the achievement of such results is 
due to large volumes of knowledge described in 
RuThes and its consistent representation.  Be-
sides, in this evaluation machine learning ap-
proaches should process a highly inconsistent 
training collection because DMOZ manual labels 
were provided for the whole websites, but the 
contents of specific pages from these sites could 
be quite different from title pages.

In fact, more than twenty knowledge-based 
text categorization systems were implemented on 
the RuThes basis.

At last, Socio-political thesaurus (see section 
3.1) is used as a search and visualization tool in 
several information-retrieval systems. Also in 
experiments the usefullness of Socio-political 
thesaurus for processing of long information-
retrieval queries and as a basis for text clustering 
was proved (Ageev et al., 2008b; Dobrov and 
Pavlov, 2010). 

5 Publication of RuThes

At present, RuThes thesaurus is partially in-
volved in several commercial projects with other 
organizations and therefore it cannot be pub-
lished as a whole. But the interest in a large the-
saurus of Russian language is considerably grow-
ing therefore we decided to publish RuThes par-
tially. 

The first publicly available version of RuThes 
(RuThes-lite) contains around 50 thousand   
words and expressions and is available from 
http://www.labinform.ru/ruthes/index
.htm. The next version including 100 thousand 
text entries will be published in the beginning of 
2014. We distribute RuThes-lite as free for non-
commercial use (Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 3.0 Unported license).

6 Conclusion

In this paper we presented RuThes linguistic on-
tology. This resource has been developed for a 
long time (more than fifteen years) and was used 
as a resource in various applications of NLP and 
information retrieval such as conceptual index-
ing, semantic search, query expansion, automatic 
text categorization and clustering, automatic 
summarization of a single document and multiple 
documents. 

Now we decided to provide public access to 
RuThes and in this paper we described its struc-
ture and current state. We hope that this resource, 
having the broad and detailed lexical and termi-
nological coverage of contemporary Russian 
news articles and official documents, will facili-
tate development of NLP techniques and re-
search for Russian language.

7 Acknowledgements

The work is partially supported by Dmitrii Zimin 
Dynastia Foundation with financial support of 
Yandex founders.

References 

Mikhail Ageev, Boris Dobrov, Pavel Krasilnikov, 
Natalia Loukachevitch, Andrey Pavlov, Alexey Si-
dorov, and Sergey Shternov. 2008a. UIS RUSSIA 
at ROMIP-2007: Search and classification. In Pro-
ceedings of Russian Seminar on Information-
Retrieval Methods ROMIP 2007-2008 (In Rus-
sian). 

Mikhail Ageev, Boris Dobrov, Natalia Loukache-
vitch,  and Sergey Shternov. 2008b. UIS RUSSIA 
at ROMIP-2008: Search and classification of legal 
documents. In Proceedings of Russian Seminar on 
Information-Retrieval Methods ROMIP 2007-2008
(In Russian).

Eneko Agirre, Izaskun Aldezabal, and  Eli Pociello. 
2006. Lexicalization and multiword expressions in 
the Basque WordNet. In Proceedings of Third In-
ternational WordNet Conference, Jeju Island (Ko-
rea):131-138.

Irina Azarowa. 2008. RussNet as a Computer Lexicon 
for Russian. In Proceedings of the Intelligent In-
formation systems IIS-2008: 341-350.

Valentina Balkova, Andrey Suhonogov, and Sergey 
Yablonsky. 2008. Some Issues in the Construction 
of a Russian WordNet Grid. In Proceedings of the 
Forth International WordNet Conference, Szeged, 
Hungary:44-55.

Luisa Bentivogli and Emanuele Pianta. 2004. Extend-
ing wordnet with syntagmatic information. In Pro-



ceedings of Second Global WordNet Confe-
rence:47-53.

Luisa Bentivogli, Pamela Forner, Bernardo Magnini,
and Emanuele Pianta. 2004. Revising WordNet 
domains hierarchy: semantics, coverage, and ba-
lancing. In Proceedings of COLING 2004, Geneva, 
Switzerland:101-108.

Sonya Bosch, Christiane Fellbaum, and Karel Pala. 
2008. Enhancing WordNets with Morphological 
Relations: A Case Study from Czech, English and 
Zulu. In Proceedings of the Fourth Global Word-
Net Conference:74-90.

Christopher A. Brewster, Jose Iria, Fabio Ciravegna,
and Yorick Wilks. 2005. The Ontology: Chimaera 
or Pegasus. In Proceedings Dagstuhl Seminar Ma-
chine Learning for the Semantic Web: 89-101.

Paul Buitelaar, Philipp Cimiano, Peter Haase, and
Michael Sintek. 2009. Towards Linguistically 
Grounded Ontologies. The Semantic Web: Re-
search and Applications. In Proceedings of the Eu-
ropean Semantic Web Conference. Springer Ver-
lag, LNCS 5554:111-125.

Paul Buitelaar, Michael Sintek, and Malte Kiesel. 
2006. A lexicon model for multilingual/multimedia 
ontologies. In Proceedings of the 3rd European 
Semantic Web Conference (ESWC06).

Salvador Climent, Horacio Rodriguez, and Julio Gon-
zalo. 1996. Definitions of the links and subsets for 
nouns of the EuroWordNet project.  Deliverable 
D005, EurоWordNet, LE2-4003, Computer Cen-
trum Letteren, University of Amsterdam.

Magdalena Derwojedowa, Maciej Piasecki, Stanisław
Szpakowicz,  Magdalena Zawisawska, and Bartosz
Broda. 2008. Words, Concepts and Relations in the 
Construction of Polish WordNet.  In Proceedings 
of GWC-2008:162-177.

Boris Dobrov, Igor Kuralenok, Natalia Loukache-
vitch, Igor Nekrestyanov, and Ilya Segalovich. 
2004. Russian Information Retrieval Evaluation 
Seminar. In Proceedings of LREC-2004:1359-
1362.

Boris Dobrov and Batalia Loukachevitch. 2006. In 
Development of Linguistic Ontology on Natural 
Sciences and Technology." In Proceedings of 
LREC-2006.

Boris Dobrov and Andrey Pavlov. 2010. Basic line 
for news clusterization methods evaluation. In Pro-
ceedings of Russian Conference on Digital Libra-
ries RCDL-2010: 287-295 (in Russian).

Philip Edmonds and Graeme Hirst. 2002. Near-
synonymy and lexical choice. Computational lin-
guistics, 28 (2):105-144.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic 
Lexical Database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Christiane Fellbaum. 2002. Parallel Hierarchies in the 
Verb Lexicon.  In Proceedings of ‘The Ontologies 
and Lexical Knowledge bases’ workshop. Las Pal-
mas, Spain:27-31.

Aldo Gangemi, Nikola Guarino, Claudio Masolo, and 
Alessandro Oltramari. 2001. Understanding Top-
Level Ontological Distinctions. In Proceedings of 
IJCAI 2001 workshop on Ontologies and Informa-
tion Sharing:26-33.

Ilia Gelfenbeyn, Artem Goncharuk, Vlad Lehelt, An-
ton Lipatov,  and Viktor Shilo. 2003. Automatic 
translation of WordNet semantic network to Rus-
sian language. In Proceedings of International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics and In-
tellectual Technologies Dialog-2003.

Aitor Gonzalez, German Rigau, and Mauro Castillo.
2012. A graph-based method to improve wordnet 
domains. Computational Linguistics and Intelligent 
Text Processing, Springer, LNCS-7181: 17-28.

Pierre Grenon. 2003. Spatio-temporality in Basic 
Formal Ontology: SNAP and SPAN, upper-level 
ontology, and framework for formalization. PART 
I. IFOMIS Report 05/2003.

Nicola Guarino. 1998. Some ontological principles 
for designing upper level lexical   resources. In 
Proceedings of First International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation: 527-534.

Nicola Guarino. 2009. The ontological Level: Revi-
siting 30 years of Knowledge Representa-
tion. Conceptual Modeling: Foundations and Ap-
plications. Springer-Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg: 52-
67.

Giancarlo Guizzardi. 2011. Ontological foundations 
for conceptual part-wholes relation: the case of col-
lectives and their parts. Advanced Information Sys-
tems Engineering, Springer CAiSE, LNCS 
6741:138–153.

Graeme Hirst. 2009. Ontology and the Lexicon. In: 
Staab S., Studer R. (eds.) Handbook on Ontologies 
in Information Systems: 269-292.

ISO 2788-1986. 1986. Guidelines for the establish-
ment and development of monolingual thesauri. 

Anand Kumar and Barry Smith. 2004. The ontology 
of blood pressure: a case study in creating ontolog-
ical partitions in biomedicine. 

Claudia Kunze and Lothar Lemnitzer. 2010. Lexical-
Semantic and Conceptual relations in GermaNet. In 
Storjohann P (ed) Lexical-semantic relations: 
Theoretical and practical perspectives, 28:163-
183.

Krister Linden and Lauri Carlson. 2010. Finnwordnet
— wordnet på finska via översättning. LexicoNor-
dica — Nordic Journal of Lexicography, 17:119–
140.



Frank Loebe. 2007. Abstract vs. Social Roles: To-
wards a general theoretical account of roles. Ap-
plied Ontology, v2 (2):127-158.

Natalia Loukachevitch and Boris Dobrov. 2002. De-
velopment and Use of Thesaurus of Russian Lan-
guage RuThes. In Proceedings of workshop on 
WordNet Structures and Standartisation, and How 
These Affect WordNet Applications and Evalua-
tion. LREC-2002:65-70.

Natalia Loukachevitch and Boris Dobrov. 2004. Soci-
opolitical Domain as a Bridge  from General 
Words to Terms of Specific Domains. 
In Proceedings of Second International WordNet 
Conference GWC-2004:163-168.

Natalia Loukachevitch. 2009. Concept Formation in 
Linguistic Ontologies.  Conceptual Structures: Le-
veraging Semantic Technologies.  In Proceedings 
of ICCS-2009. Springer Verlag, LNAI-5662:2-22.

Claudio Masolo, Stefano Borgo, Aldo Gangemi, 
Nicola Guarino, and Alessandro Oltramari. 
2003. WonderWeb Deliverable D18: Ontology li-
brary (final). Technical report, Laboratory for Ap-
plied Ontology, ISTC-CNR, Trento, Italy.

Alexander Maedche and Valentine Zacharias. 2002.
Clustering Ontology-based Metadata in the Seman-
tic Web. In Proceedings PKKD-2002:342-360.

Bernardo Magnini and Manuela Speranza M. 2002. 
Merging Global and Specialized Linguistic 
Ontologies. In Proceedings of OntoLex:43-48.

Marek Maziarz, Maciej Piasecki, and Stanisław
Szpakowicz. 2013. The chicken-and-egg problem 
in wordnet design: synonymy, synsets and costitu-
tive relations. Language Resources & Evaluation .

George Miller and Florentina Hristea. 2006. WordNet 
Nouns: Classes and Instances. Journal of 
Computational linguistics, 32(1):1-3.

Sergey Nirenburg and Viktor Raskin. 2004. Ontologi-
cal Semantics. Cambridge, MIT Press. 

Natalia F.Noy and Deborah McGuinness. 2001.
Ontology Development 101: A Guide to Creating 
Your First Ontology. Stanford Knowledge Systems 
Laboratory Technical Report KSL-01-05 and Stan-
ford Medical Informatics Technical Report SMI-
2001-0880.

Bolette Pedersen, Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, 
Krister Linden K., Heili Orav, and E´ırikur
Rognvaldsson. 2012. Linking and Validating Nor-
dic and Baltic Wordnets. A Multilingual Action in 
META-NORD. In Proceedings of GWC-2012:
254-259.

Barry Smith. 2004. Beyond Concepts: Ontology as 
Reality Representation. Proceedings of Interna-
tional Conference on Formal Ontology and Infor-
mation Systems FOIS-2004. 

John Sowa. 2000. Knowledge Representation: Logi-
cal, Philosophical, and Computational Founda-
tions. Brooks Cole Publishing Co., Pacific Grove, 
CA.

Tony Veale and Yanfen Hao. 2007. A context-
sensitive framework for lexical ontologies. Know-
ledge Engineering Review, 23(1):101-115.

Yorick Wilks. 2008. The Semantic Web: Apotheosis 
of annotation, but what are its semantics? IEEE In-
telligent Systems, 23(3):41-49.

Morton Winston, Roger Chaffin, and Douglas 
Herrmann. 1987. A taxonomy of part-whole 
relations. Cognitive science, 11(4):417-444.

Z39.19. 2005. Guidelines for the Construction, 
Format and Management of Monolingual Thesauri.  
NISO.


