



















































Research on Chinese discourse rhetorical structure representation scheme and corpus annotation


Proceedings of the Third CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language Processing, page 1,
Wuhan, China, 20-21 October 2014

Research on Chinese discourse rhetorical structure representation 
scheme and corpus annotation 

 
Guodong Zhou 

Soochow University, China 
gdzhou@suda.edu.cn 

 

Abstract: It is well-known that interpretation of a text requires understanding of its rhetorical 
relation hierarchy since discourse units rarely exist in isolation. Such discourse structure is 
fundamental to document-level applications, such as text understanding, summarization, 
knowledge extraction and question-answering. In comparison with English, there are only a 
few studies on Chinese discourse analysis, due to the lack of appropriate theories to Chinese 
discourse structure representation and large-scale well-accepted corpora. In this talk, I will 
present a novel discourse structure representation scheme for Chinese, called Connective-
driven Dependency Tree (CDT), and describe our adventure in corpus annotation of the 
Chinese Discourse Treebank (CDTB) of 500 documents, using a top-down strategy to keep 
consistent with Chinese native’s cognitive habit. 

BIO: Zhou Guodong received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the National 
University of Singapore in 1999. He joined the Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore, 
in 1999, and had been an associate scientist, scientist and associate lead scientist at the 
institute until August 2006. Currently, he is a distinguished professor at the School of 
Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China. His research 
interests include natural language processing, information extraction and machine learning. 
Currently, he is an associate editor of ACM Transaction on Asian Language Information 
Processing(2010.07-2016.06), an editorial member of Journal of Software (Chinese)(2012.01-
2014.12) and a vice chair of Technical Committees on Chinese Information/China Computer 
Federation(2010.12-2016.12), Computational Linguistics/Chinese Information Processing 
Society of China and Natural Language Understanding/Artificial Intelligence Society of 
China. Besides, he had been a member of the Editorial Board of Computational Linguistics 
(2010.01-2012.12). 

1


