



















































Generating Subjective Responses to Opinionated Articles in Social Media: An Agenda-Driven Architecture and a Turing-Like Test


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Social Dynamics and Personal Attributes in Social Media, pages 58–67,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, 27 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating Subjective Responses to Opinionated Articles in Social Media:
An Agenda-Driven Architecture and a Turing-Like Test

Tomer Cagan
School of Computer Science
The Interdisciplinary Center

Herzeliya, Israel
cagan.tomer@idc.ac.il

Stefan L. Frank
Centre for Language Studies

Radboud University
Nijmegen, The Netherlands
s.frank@let.ru.nl

Reut Tsarfaty
Mathematics and Computer Science

Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel

tsarfaty@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract

Natural language traffic in social media
(blogs, microblogs, talkbacks) enjoys vast
monitoring and analysis efforts. How-
ever, the question whether computer sys-
tems can generate such content in order
to effectively interact with humans has
been only sparsely attended to. This pa-
per presents an architecture for generat-
ing subjective responses to opinionated
articles based on users’ agenda, docu-
ments’ topics, sentiments and a knowledge
graph. We present an empirical evalua-
tion method for quantifying the human-
likeness and relevance of the generated re-
sponses. We show that responses gen-
erated using world knowledge in the in-
put are regarded as more human-like than
those that rely on topic, sentiment and
agenda only, whereas the use of world
knowledge does not affect perceived rel-
evance.

1 Introduction

Digital media, user-generated content and social
networks enable effective human interaction; so
much so that much of our day-to-day interaction
is conducted online (Viswanath et al., 2009). In-
teraction in social media fundamentally changes
the way businesses and consumers behave (Qual-
man, 2012), can be instrumental to the success
of individuals and businesses (Haenlein and Ka-
plan, 2009), and even affects the stability of polit-
ical regimes (Howard et al., 2011; Lamer, 2012).
These facts force organizations (businesses, gov-
ernments, and non-profit organizations) to be con-
stantly involved in the monitoring of, and the inter-
action with, human agents in digital environments
(Langheinrich and Karjoth, 2011).

Automatic analysis of user-generated online
content benefits from extensive research and com-

mercial opportunities. In natural language pro-
cessing, there is ample research on the analysis
of subjectivity and sentiment of content in social
media. The development of tools for sentiment
analysis (Davidov et al., 2010), mood aggregation
(Agichtein et al., 2008), opinion mining (Mishne,
2006), and many more, now enjoys wide inter-
est and exposure, as is also evident by the many
workshops and dedicated tracks at ACL venues.1

Methods are also developed for the analysis of po-
litical texts (O’Connor et al., 2010; O’Connor et
al., 2013) and for text-driven forecasting based on
these data (Yano et al., 2009). A related strand
of research uses computational methods to find
out what kind of published utterances are influ-
ential, and how they affect linguistic communi-
ties (Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2009). Such
work complements, and contributes to, studies
from sociology and sociolinguistics that aim to de-
lineate the process of generating meaningful re-
sponses (e.g., Amabile (1981)).

In contrast to these analysis efforts, the topic
of generating responses to content in social me-
dia is only sparsely explored. Commercially, there
is movement towards online response automation
(Owyang, 2012; Mah, 2012).2 Research on user
interfaces is trying to move away from script-
based interaction towards the development of chat
bots that attempt natural human-like interaction
(Mori et al., 2003; Feng et al., 2006). However,
these chat bots are typically designed to provide
an automated one-size-fits-all type of interaction.

A study by Ritter et al. (2011) addresses
the generation of responses to natural language
tweets in a data-driven setup. It applies a
machine-translation approach to response gener-
ation, where moods and sentiments already ex-

1E.g., the ACL series LASM http://tinyurl.com/
ludyrkz; WASSA http://tinyurl.com/kjjdhax.

2There is a general debate on the efficiency of automated
tools (Nall, 2013) and whether such tools are desirable in so-
cial media (McConnell (2012); responses to Owyang (2012)).

58



pressed in the past are replicated or reused. A re-
cent study by Hasegawa et al. (2013) modifies Rit-
ter’s approach to produce responses that elicit an
emotion from the addressee. Yet, these responses
do not target particular topics and are not driven
by a user agenda.

The present paper addresses the problem of
generating novel, subjective, responses to on-
line opinionated articles. We formally define the
document-to-response mapping problem and sug-
gest an end-to-end system to solve it. Our sys-
tem integrates a range of NLP and NLG technolo-
gies (including topic models, sentiment analysis,
and the integration of a knowledge graph) to de-
sign a flexible generation mechanism that allows
us to vary the information in the input to the gen-
eration procedure. We then use a Turing-inspired
test to study the different factors that contribute to
the perceived human-likeness and relevance of the
generated responses, and show how the perception
of responses depends on external knowledge and
the expressed sentiment.

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. The next section presents our proposal: Sec-
tion 2.1 describes our approach, Section 2.2 for-
malizes the proposal, and Section 2.3 presents our
end-to-end architecture. This is followed by our
evaluation method and empirical results in Sec-
tion 3. We discuss related and future work in Sec-
tion 4, and in Section 5 we conclude.

2 The Proposal: Generating Subjective
Responses

2.1 Our Approach

Natural language is, above all, a communicative
device that we employ to achieve certain goals.
In social media, the driving force behind generat-
ing responses is a responder’s disposition towards
some topic. This topic could be a political cam-
paign or a candidate, a product, or some abstract
idea, which the responder has a motive to promote.
Let us call this goal our user’s agenda.

User response generation, like any other natu-
ral language utterance generation, is triggered by
a certain event that is related to the communica-
tive goal. In a social media setting, this event
is often a new online document. The document
and the agenda thus form the input to our gener-
ation system. Each document and each agenda
contain (possibly many) topics, each of which is
associated with a (positive or negative) sentiment.

Document sentiments are attributed to the author,
whereas agenda sentiments are attributed to the
user (henceforth: the responder).

For each non-empty intersection of the topics
in the document and in the agenda, our response-
generation system aims to generate utterances that
are fluent, human-like, and effectively engage
readers. The generation is based on three assump-
tions, roughly reflecting the Gricean maxims of
cooperative interaction (Grice, 1967). Online user
responses should then be:

• Economic (Maxim of Quantity): Responses
are brief and concise;

• Relevant (Maxim of Relation): Responses di-
rectly address the documents’ content.

• Opinionated (Maxim of Quality): Responses
express responders beliefs, sentiments, or
dispositions towards the topic(s).

2.2 The Formal Model
Let D be a set of documents and let A be a set
of user agendas as we define shortly. Let S be a
set of English sentences over a finite vocabulary
S = Σ∗. Our system implements a function that
maps each 〈document, agenda〉 pair to a natural
language response sentence s ∈ S.

fresponse : D ×A→ S
Response generation takes place in two phases,

roughly corresponding to macro and micro plan-
ning in Reiter and Dale (1997):

• Macro Planning (below, the analysis phase):
What are we going to talk about?

• Micro Planning (below, the generation
phase): How are we going to say it?

The analysis function p : D → C maps a docu-
ment to a subjective representation of its content.3

The generation function g : C × A → S inter-
sects the content elements in the document and in
the user agenda, and generates a response based
on the content of the intersection. All in all, our
system implements a composition of the analysis
and the generation functions:

fresponse(d, a) = g(p(d), a) = s
3A content element may conceivably encompass a topic,

its sentiment, its objectivity, its evidentiality, its perceived
truthfulness, and so on. In this paper we focus on topic and
sentiment, and leave the rest for future research.

59



Each content element c ∈ C or an agenda item
a ∈ A is composed of a topic t associated with a
sentiment value sentimentt ∈ [−n..n] that sig-
nifies the (negative or positive) disposition of the
document’s author (if c ∈ C) or the user’s agenda
(if a ∈ A) towards the topic. We assume here that
a topic is simply a bag of words from our vocabu-
lary Σ. Thus, we have the following:

A, C ⊆ P(Σ)× [−n..n]
Our generation component accepts the result of

the intersection as input and relies on a template-
based grammar and a set of functions for generat-
ing referring expressions in order to construct the
output. To make the responses economic, we limit
the content of a response to one statement about
the document or its author, followed by a state-
ment on the relevant topic. To make the response
relevant, the templates that generate the response
make use of topics in the intersection of the docu-
ment and the agenda. To make the response opin-
ionated, the sentiment of the response depends on
the (mis)match between the sentiment values for
the topic in the document and in the agenda. Con-
cretely, the response is positive if the sentiments
for the topic in the document and agenda are the
same (both positive or both negative) and it is neg-
ative otherwise.

We suggest two variants of the generation func-
tion g. The basic variant implements the baseline
function defined above:

gbase(c, a) = s

c ∈ C, a ∈ A, s ∈ Σ∗
For the other variant we define a knowledge

base (KB) as a directed graph in which words
w ∈ Σ from the topic models correspond to nodes
in the graph, and relations r ∈ R between the
words are predicates that hold in the real world.
Our second generation function now becomes:

gkb(c, a, KB) = s

KB ⊆ {(wi, r, wj)|wi, wj ∈ Σ, r ∈ R}
with c ∈ C, a ∈ A, s ∈ Σ∗ as defined in gbase
above.

2.3 The Architecture
The system architecture from a bird’s eye view
is presented in Figure 1. In a nutshell, a docu-
ment enters the analysis phase, where topic infer-
ence and sentiment scoring take place, resulting

in 〈topic, sentiment〉-pairs. During the subsequent
generation phase, these are intersected with the
〈topic, sentiment〉-pairs in the user agenda. This
intersection, possibly augmented with a knowl-
edge graph, forms the input for a template-based
generation component.

Analysis phase For the task of inferring the top-
ics of the document we use topic modeling: a
probabilistic generative modeling technique that
allows for the discovery of abstract topics over
a large body of documents (Papadimitriou et al.,
1998; Hofmann, 1999; Blei et al., 2003). Specif-
ically, we use topic modeling based on Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003; Blei,
2012). Given a new document and a trained
model, the inference method provides a weighted
mix of topics for that document, where each topic
is represented as a vector containing keywords as-
sociated with probabilities. For training the topic
model and inferring the topics in new documents
we use Gensim (Rehurek and Sojka, 2010), a fast
and easy-to-use implementation of LDA.

Next, we wish to infer the sentiment that is ex-
pressed in the text with relation to the topic(s)
identified in the document. We use the seman-
tic/lexical method as implemented in Kathuria
(2012). We rely on a WSD sentiment classifier
that uses the SentiWordNet (Baccianella et al.,
2010) database and calculates the positivity and
negativity scores of a document based on the pos-
itivity and negativity of individual words. The re-
sult of the sentiment analysis is a pair of values,
indicating the positive and negative sentiments of
the document-based scores for individual words.
We use the larger of these two values as the senti-
ment value for the whole document.4

Generation phase Our generation function first
intersects the set of topics in the document and the
set of topics in the agenda in order to discover rel-
evant topics to which the system would generate
responses. A response may in principle integrate
content from a range of topics in the topic model
distribution, but, for the sake of generating concise
responses, in the current implementation we focus
on the single most prevalent, topic. We pick the
highest scoring word of the highest scoring topic,
and intersect it with topics in the agenda. The sys-
tem generates a response based on the identified

4Clearly, this is a simplifying assumption. We discuss this
assumption further in Section 4.

60



Figure 1: The system architecture from a bird’s eye view. Components on gray background are executed
offline.

topic, the sentiment for the topic in the document,
and the sentiment for that topic in the user agenda.

The generation component relies on a template-
based approach similar to Reiter and Dale (1997)
and Van Deemter et al. (2005). Templates are
essentially subtrees with leaves that are place-
holders for other templates or for functions gener-
ating referring expressions (Theune et al., 2001).
These functions receive (relevant parts of) the in-
put and emit the sequence of fine-grained part-of-
speech (POS) tags that realizes the relevant refer-
ring expression. The POS tags in the resulting
sequences are ultimately place holders for words
from a lexicon Σ. In order to generate a variety of
expression forms — nouns, adjectives and verbs
— these items are selected randomly from a fine-
grained lexicon we defined. The sentiment (posi-
tive or negative) is expressed in a similar fashion
via templates and randomly selected lexical en-
tries for the POS slots, after calculating the over-
all sentiment for the intersection as stated above.
Our generation implementation is based on Sim-
pleNLG (Gatt and Reiter, 2009) which is a surface
realizer API that allows us to create the desired
templates and functions, and aggregates content
into coherent sentences. The templates and func-
tions that we defined are depicted in Figure 2.

In addition, we handcrafted a simple knowledge
graph (termed here KB) containing the words in a
set of pre-defined user agendas. Table 1 shows a
snippet of the constructed knowledge graph. The
knowledge graph can be used to expand the re-
sponse in the following fashion: The topic of the
response is a node in the KB. We randomly se-
lect one of its outgoing edges for creating a related

Source Relation Target
Apple CompetesWith Samsung
Apple CompetesWith Google
Apple Creates iOS

Table 1: A knowledge graph snippet.

statement that has the target node of this relation
as its subject. The related sentence generation uses
the same template-based mechanism as before. In
principle, this process may be repeated any num-
ber of times and express larger parts of the KB.
Here we only add one single knowledge-base re-
lation per response, to keep the responses concise.

3 Evaluation

We set out to evaluate how computer-generated re-
sponses compare to human responses in their per-
ceived human-likeness and relevance. More in
particular, we compare different system variants
in order to investigate what makes responses seem
more human-like or relevant.

3.1 Materials
Our empirical evaluation is restricted to topics re-
lated to mobile telephones, specifically Apple’s
iPhone and devices based on the Android operat-
ing system. We collected 300 articles from lead-
ing technology sites in the domain to train the
topic models on, settling on 10 topics models.
Next, we generated a set of user agendas refer-
ring to the same 10 topics. Each agenda is rep-
resented by a single keyword from a topic model
distribution and a sentiment value sentimentt ∈
{−8,−4, 0, 4, 8}. Finally, we selected 10 new ar-
ticles from similar sites and generated a pool of

61



Sresponse

NP

I

VP

V↓
belief

SBAR

that (Sresponse )

Sresponse

Sarticle Sitem (Srelation )

Sitem

NP↓
itemRef

VP↓
sentii

Sarticle

NP↓
articleRef

VP↓
sentia

Srelation

NP↓
relationRef

VP↓
sentir

articleRef ← ExpressArticle(...)
itemRef ← ExpressItem(...)
relationRef ← ExpressRelation(...)
sentimenta ← ExpressArticleSentiment(...)
sentimenti ← ExpressItemSentiment(...)
sentimentr ← ExpressRelationSentiment(...)
belief ← ExpressBelief(...)

Figure 2: Template-based response generation. The templates are on the left. The Express* functions on
the right uses regular expressions over the arguments and vocabulary items from a closed lexicon.

1000 responses for each, comprising 100 unique
responses for each combination of sentimentt
and system variant (i.e., with or without a knowl-
edge base). Table 2 presents an example response
for each such combination. In addition, we ran-
domly collected 5 to 10 real, short or medium-
length, online human responses for each article.

3.2 Surveys

We collected evaluation data via two online
surveys on Amazon Mechanical Turk (www.
mturk.com). In Survey 1, participants judged
whether responses to articles were written by hu-
man or computer, akin to (a simplified version of)
the Turing test (Turing, 1950). In Survey 2, re-
sponses were rated on their relevance to the ar-
ticle, in effect testing whether they abide by the
Gricean Maxim of Relation. This is comparable
to the study by Ritter et al. (2011) where people
judged which of two responses was ‘best’.

Each survey comprises 10 randomly ordered tri-
als, corresponding to the 10 selected articles. First,
the participant was presented with a snippet from
the article. When clicking a button, the text was
removed and its presentation duration recorded.
Next, a multiple-choice question asked about the
snippet’s topic. Data on a trial was discarded from
analysis if the participant answered incorrectly or
if the snippet was presented for less than 10 msec
per character; we took these to be cases where the
snippet was not properly read. Next, the partic-
ipant was shown a randomly ordered list of re-
sponses to the article.

In Survey 1, four responses were presented for
each article: three randomly selected from the
pool of human responses to that article and one
generated by our system. The task was to cate-
gorize each response on a 7-point scale with la-

bels ‘Certainly human/computer’, ‘Probably hu-
man/computer’, ‘Maybe human/computer’ and
‘Unsure’. In Survey 2, five responses were pre-
sented: three human responses and two computer-
generated. The task was to rate the responses’
relevance on a 7-point scale labeled ‘Completely
(not) relevant’, ‘Mostly (not) relevant’, ‘Some-
what (not) relevant’, and ‘Unsure’. As a con-
trol condition, one of the human responses and
one of the computer responses were actually taken
from another article than the one just presented.
In both surveys, the computer-generated responses
presented to each participant were balanced across
sentiment levels and generation functions (gbase
and gkb). After completing the 10 trials, partic-
ipants provided basic demographic information,
including native language. Data from non-native
English speakers was discarded. Surveys 1 and 2
were completed by 62 and 60 native speakers, re-
spectively.

3.3 Analysis and Results

Survey 1: Computer-Likeness Rating. Table 3
shows the mean ‘computer-likeness’-ratings from
1 (‘Certainly human’) to 7 (‘Certainly computer’)
for each response category. Clearly, the human
responses are rated as more human-like than the
computer-generated ones: our model did not gen-
erally mislead the participants. This may be due
to the template-based response structure: over the
course of the survey, human raters are likely to
notice this structure and infer that such responses
are computer-generated. To investigate whether
such learning indeed occurs, a linear mixed-
effects model was fitted, with predictor variables
IS COMP (+1:computer-generated, −1:human re-
sponses), POS (position of the trial in the survey, 0
to 9), and the interaction between the two. Table 4

62



Sent. KB Response

−8 No Android is horrendous so I think that the writer is completely correct!!!
Yes Apple is horrendous so I feel that the author is not really right!!! iOS is horrendous as well.

−4 No I think that the writer is mistaken because apple actually is unexceptional.
Yes I think that the author is wrong because Nokia is mediocre. Apple on the other hand is pretty good ...

0
No The text is accurate. Apple is okay.
Yes Galaxy is okay so I think that the content is accurate. All-in-all samsung makes fantastic gadgets.

4
No Android is pretty good so I feel that the author is right.
Yes Nokia is nice. The article is precise. Samsung on the other hand is fabulous...

8
No Galaxy is great!!! The text is completely precise.
Yes Galaxy is awesome!!! The author is not completely correct. In fact I think that samsung makes

awesome products.

Table 2: Responses generated by the system with or without a knowledge-base (KB), with different
sentiment levels.

Response Type Mean and CI
Human 3.33 ± 0.08
Computer (all) 4.49 ± 0.15
Computer (−KB) 4.66 ± 0.20
Computer (+KB) 4.32 ± 0.22

Table 3: Mean and 95% confidence interval of
computer-likeness rating per response category.
±KB indicates whether gbase or gkb was used.

Factor b t P (b < 0)
(intercept) 3.590
IS COMP 0.193 2.11 0.015
POS 0.069 4.76 0.000
IS COMP × POS 0.085 6.27 0.000

Table 4: Computer-likeness rating regression re-
sults, comparing human to computer responses.

presents, for each factor in the regression analysis,
the coefficient b and its t-statistic. The coefficient
equals the increase in computer-likeness rating for
each unit increase in the predictor variable. The t-
statistic is indicative of how much variance in the
ratings is accounted for by the predictor. We also
obtained a probability distribution over each co-
efficient by Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling
using the R package lme4 version 0.99 (Bates,
2005). From each coefficient’s distribution, we es-
timate the posterior probability that b is negative,
which quantifies the reliability of the effect.

The positive b value for POS shows that re-
sponses drift towards the ‘computer’-end of the
scale. More importantly, a positive interaction
with IS COMP indicates that the difference be-
tween human and computer responses becomes
more noticeable as the survey progresses —
the participants did learn to identify computer-
generated responses. However, the positive coef-
ficient for IS COMP means that even at the very
first trial, computer responses are considered to be
more computer-like than human responses.

Factors Affecting Human-Likeness. Our find-
ing that the identifiability of computer-generated
responses cannot be fully attributed to their repet-
itiveness, raises the question: What makes a such
a response more human-like? The results provide

several insights into this matter.
First, the mean scores in Table 3 suggest that in-

cluding a knowledge base increases the responses’
human-likeness. To further investigate this, we
performed a separate regression analysis, using
only the data on computer-generated responses.
This analysis also included predictors KB (+1:
knowledge base included, −1: otherwise), SENT
(sentimentt, from −8 to +8), absolute value of
SENT, and the interaction between KB and POS.
As can be seen in Table 5, there is no reliable in-
teraction between KB and POS: the effect of in-
cluding the KB on the human-likeness of responses
remained constant over the course of the survey.

Furthermore, we see evidence that responses
with a more positive sentiment are considered
more computer-like. The (only weakly reliable)
negative effect of the absolute value of senti-
ment suggests that more extreme sentiments are
considered more human-like. Apparently, people
count on computer responses to be mildly positive,
whereas human responses are expected to be more
extreme, and extremely negative in particular.

Survey 2: Relevance Rating. The mean rele-
vance scores in Table 6 reveal that a response is
rated as more relevant to a snippet if it was actu-
ally a response to that snippet, rather than to a dif-
ferent snippet. This reinforces our design choice

63



Factor b t P (b < 0)
(intercept) 4.022
KB −0.240 −2.13 0.987
POS 0.144 5.82 0.000
SENT 0.035 2.98 0.002
abs(SENT) −0.041 −1.97 0.967
KB × POS 0.023 1.03 0.121

Table 5: Computer-likeness rating regression re-
sults, comparing systems with and without KB.

Response Type Source Mean and CI

Human
this 4.85 ± 0.11
other 3.56 ± 0.18

Computer (all)
this 4.52 ± 0.16
other 2.52 ± 0.15

Computer (−KB) this 4.53 ± 0.23
other 2.46 ± 0.21

Computer (+KB)
this 4.51 ± 0.23
other 2.58 ± 0.22

Table 6: Mean and 95% confidence interval of
relevance rating per response category. ‘Source’
indicates whether the response is from the pre-
sented text snippet or a random other snippet.
±KB indicates whether gbase or gkb was used.

Factor b t P (b < 0)
(intercept) 3.861
IS COMP −0.339 −7.10 1.000
SOURCE 0.824 16.80 0.000
IS COMP × PRES 0.179 5.03 0.000

Table 7: Relevance ratings regression results,
comparing human to computer responses.

Factor b t P (b < 0)
(intercept) 3.603
KB 0.026 0.49 0.322
SOURCE 1.003 15.90 0.000
SENT 0.023 1.94 0.029
abs(SENT) −0.017 −0.93 0.819
KB × SOURCE −0.032 −0.61 0.731

Table 8: Relevance ratings regression results,
comparing systems with and without KB.

to include input items referring specifically to the
topic and sentiment of the author. However, hu-
man responses are considered more relevant than
the computer-generated ones. This is confirmed
by a reliably negative regression coefficient for
IS COMP (see regression results in Table 7).

The analysis included the binary factor SOURCE
(+1 if the response came from the presented snip-
pet, −1 if it came from a random article). We
see a positive interaction between SOURCE and
IS COMP, indicating that presenting a response
from a random article is more detrimental to rel-
evance of computer-generated responses than that
of the human responses. This is not surprising, as
the computer-generated responses (unlike the hu-
man responses) always includes the article’s topic.

When analyzing only data on computer-
generated responses, and including predictors for
agenda sentiment and for presence of the knowl-
edge base, we see that including the KB does not
affect response relevance (see Table 8). Also, there
is no interaction between KB and SOURCE, that
is, the effect of presenting a response from a dif-
ferent article does not differ between the models
with and without the knowledge base. Possibly,
responses are considered as more relevant if they
have more positive sentiment, but the evidence for
this is fairly weak.

4 Related and Future Work

In contrast to the vast amount of research on sen-
timent and topic analysis, as well as generation
tasks in which the input is artificial or pre-defined,
our system implements a full end-to-end cycle
from natural language analysis to natural language
generation with applications in social media and
automated interaction in real-world settings.

The only two other studies on response gener-
ation in social media we know of are Ritter et al.
(2011) and Hasegawa et al. (2013). Ritter’s and
Hasegawa’s approaches differ from ours in their
objective and their approach to generation. Specif-
ically, Ritter’s approach is based on machine trans-
lation, creating responses by directly re-using pre-
vious content. Their data-driven approach gener-
ates relevant, but not opinionated responses. In
addition, both Ritter’s and Hasegawa’s systems re-
spond to tweets, while our system analyzes and re-
sponds to complete articles. Hasegawa’s approach
is closer to ours in that it generates responses that
are intended to elicit a specific emotion from the
addressee. However, it still differs considerably in
settings (dialogues versus online posting) and in
the goal itself (eliciting emotion versus expressing
opinion). Thus, we see these studies as comple-
mentary to ours in the realm of response genera-
tion in social media.

64



A natural contact point of our work with exist-
ing work in social media analysis is the investiga-
tion of how a change in the implementation of in-
dividual components (e.g., topic inference or sen-
timent scoring) would affect the result of the over-
all generation. In particular, it would be interesting
to test whether a novel mechanism for joint infer-
ence of topic/sentiment distributions could lead to
improvement in the human-likeness of the gener-
ated responses.

The syntactic and semantic means of expres-
sion that we use are based on bare bone templates
and fine-grained POS tags (Theune et al., 2001).
These may potentially be expanded with different
ways to express subject/object relations, relations
between phrases, polarity of sentences, and so on.
Additional approaches to generation can factor in
such aspects, e.g., the template-based methods in
Becker (2002) and Narayan et al. (2011), or gram-
mar based methods, as in DeVault et al. (2008).
Using more sophisticated generation methods with
a rich grammatical backbone may combat the sen-
sitivity to computer-generated response patterns as
acquired by our human raters over time.

Furthermore, our result concerning the human-
likeness of gkb clearly demonstrates that semantic
knowledge must be brought in to support better,
and more human-like, response generation. Large-
scale knowledge graphs such as Freebase support
many semantic tasks (Jacobs, 1985), and can be
used for providing richer context for automatically
generating human-like responses.

From a theoretical viewpoint, the system will
clearly benefit from rigorous analysis of human
interaction in online media. Responses to user-
generated content on the Internet share some
linguistic characteristics in structure, length and
manner of expression. Studying these features the-
oretically and then examining them empirically
using a Turing-like evaluation as presented here
can take us a big step in the direction of better gen-
eration, and also better understanding of the pro-
cesses underlying human response generation.

This latter understanding may be complemented
with insights into the causes, motivations and in-
tricacies of human interaction in such environ-
ments, as studied by sociologists and psychol-
ogists. In particular, our preliminary interac-
tion with colleagues from communication stud-
ies suggests that the present endeavor nicely com-
plements that of “persuasive computing” (Fogg,

1998; Fogg, 2002), and we hope that this collabo-
ration will lead to valuable synergies.

Finally, bridging the gap between the technical
and the theoretical, it would be fascinating to test
the responses in the context for which they are
generated – social media. Generated texts may
be posted as a response to the original article, or
shared with a link of the original article, followed
by measuring the responses to, and shares of, that
response. Such real-world evaluation could indi-
cate that generated responses are indeed believable
and engaging, and may better simulate a Turing-
like test in which machine-generated responses
cannot be distinguished from human responses.

5 Conclusion

We presented a system for generating responses
that are directly tied to responders’ agendas and
document content. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first system to generate subjective re-
sponses directly reflecting users’ agendas. Our re-
sponse generation architecture provides an easy-
to-use and easy-to-extend solution encompassing
a range of NLP and NLG techniques. We evalu-
ated both the human-likeness and the relevance of
the generated content, thereby empirically quan-
tifying the efficacy of computer-generated re-
sponses compared head-to-head against human re-
sponses.

Generating concise, relevant, and opinionated
responses that are also human-like is hard — it
requires the integration of text-understanding and
sentiment analysis, and it is also contingent on the
expression of the agents’ prior knowledge, reasons
and motives. We suggest our architecture and eval-
uation method as a baseline for future research
on generated content that would effectively pass
a Turing-like test, and successfully convince hu-
mans of the authenticity of generated responses.5

Acknowledgments

We thank Yoav Francis for his contribution in the
early stages of this research. We further thank
our anonymous reviewers for their insightful com-
ments on an earlier draft.

5Our code, training data, experimental data (computer and
human responses) and analysis scripts are publicly available
via www.tsarfaty.com/nlg-sd/.

65



References
Eugene Agichtein, Carlos Castillo, Debora Donato,

Aristides Gionis, and Gilad Mishne. 2008. Finding
high-quality content in social media. In Proceed-
ings of the international conference on Web search
and web data mining, pages 183–194. ACM.

Teresa M. Amabile. 1981. Brilliant but Cruel: Per-
ceptions of Negative Evaluators. Washington, DC:
ERIC Clearinghouse.

Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Se-
bastiani. 2010. SentiWordNet 3.0: An enhanced
lexical resource for sentiment analysis and opinion
mining. In Proceedings of the Seventh International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10), Valletta, Malta. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Douglas M. Bates. 2005. Fitting linear mixed models
in R. R News, 5:27–30.

Tilman Becker. 2002. Practical, template-based natu-
ral language generation with TAG. In Proceedings
of the 6th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining
Grammars and Related Frameworks (TAG+6).

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 3:993–1022.

David M. Blei. 2012. Probabilistic topic models.
Commun. ACM, 55(4):77–84.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Gueorgi Kossinets,
Jon Kleinberg, and Lillian Lee. 2009. How opinions
are received by online communities: A case study
on amazon.com helpfulness votes. In Proceedings
of the 18th International Conference on World Wide
Web, WWW ’09, pages 141–150, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Enhanced sentiment learning using Twitter hashtags
and smileys. In Proceedings of the 23rd Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 241–249, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

David DeVault, David Traum, and Ron Artstein. 2008.
Practical grammar-based NLG from examples. In
Proceedings of the Fifth International Natural Lan-
guage Generation Conference, INLG ’08, pages 77–
85, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Donghui Feng, Erin Shaw, Jihie Kim, and Eduard
Hovy. 2006. An intelligent discussion-bot for
answering student queries in threaded discussions.
In Proceedings of Intelligent User Interface (IUI-
2006), pages 171–177.

B. J. Fogg. 1998. Persuasive computers: Perspec-
tives and research directions. In Proceedings of the

SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems, CHI ’98, pages 225–232, New York,
NY, USA. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing
Co.

B. J. Fogg. 2002. Persuasive technology: Using com-
puters to change what we think and do. Ubiquity,
December.

Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. SimpleNLG: A
realisation engine for practical applications. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natu-
ral Language Generation, ENLG ’09, pages 90–93,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

H. P. Grice. 1967. Logic and conversation. In H. P.
Grice, editor, Studies in the ways of words, pages
22–40. Harvard University Press.

Michael Haenlein and Andreas M. Kaplan. 2009.
Flagship brand stores within virtual worlds: The im-
pact of virtual store exposure on real-life attitude
toward the brand and purchase intent. Recherche
et Applications en Marketing (English Edition),
24(3):57–79.

Takayuki Hasegawa, Nobuhiro Kaji, Naoki Yoshinaga,
and Masashi Toyoda. 2013. Predicting and eliciting
addressee’s emotion in online dialogue. In Proceed-
ings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers), pages 964–972, Sofia, Bulgaria, August. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Thomas Hofmann. 1999. Probabilistic Latent Seman-
tic Indexing. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR
’99, pages 50–57, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Philip N. Howard, Aiden Duffy, Deen Freelon, Muza-
mmil Hussain, Will Mari, and Marwa Mazaid.
2011. Opening closed regimes: What was the role
of social media during the Arab spring? Project on
Information Technology and Political Islam.

Paul S Jacobs. 1985. A knowledge-based approach to
language production. Technical report, University
of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.

Pulkit Kathuria. 2012. Sentiment Clas-
sification using WSD, Maximum En-
tropy and Naive Bayes Classifiers.
https://github.com/kevincobain2000/sentiment classifier.
Visited March 2014.

Wiebke Lamer. 2012. Twitter and tyrants: New me-
dia and its effects on sovereignty in the Middle East.
Arab Media and Society.

Marc Langheinrich and Günter Karjoth. 2011. Social
networking and the risk to companies and institu-
tions. Information Security Technical Report. Spe-
cial Issue: Identity Reconstruction and Theft, pages
51–56.

66



Paul Mah. 2012. Tools to automate your
customer service response on social me-
dia. http://www.itbusinessedge.com/blogs/smb-
tech/tools-to-automate-your-customer-service-
response-on-social-media.html. Visited August
2013.

Chris McConnell. 2012. When brands auto-
mate Twitter and Facebook responses I’ll re-
volt. http://dailytekk.com/2012/06/07/brands-
automating-social-media/. Visited August 2013.

Gilad Mishne. 2006. Multiple ranking strategies for
opinion retrieval in blogs. In Proceedings of the 15th
Text Retrieval Conference.

Kyoshi Mori, Adam Jatowt, and Mitsuru Ishizuka.
2003. Enhancing conversational flexibility in multi-
modal interactions with embodied lifelike agent. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces, IUI ’03, pages 270–272,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Mickey Nall. 2013. You can’t automate so-
cial media engagement, argues PRSA’s Mickey
Nall. http://www.prmoment.com/1359/you-cant-
automate-social-media-engagement-argues-prsas-
mickey-nall.aspx. Visited August 2013.

Karthik Sankaran Narayan, Charles Lee Isbell Jr., and
David L. Roberts. 2011. Dextor: Reduced effort
authoring for template-based natural language gen-
eration. In Vadim Bulitko and Mark O. Riedl, ed-
itors, Proceedings of the Seventh Artificial Intelli-
gence and Interactive Digital Entertainment Confer-
ence. The AAAI Press.

Brendan O’Connor, Ramnath Balasubramanyan,
Bryan R. Routledge, and Noah A. Smith. 2010.
From tweets to polls: Linking text sentiment to
public opinion time series. In William W. Cohen
and Samuel Gosling, editors, ICWSM. The AAAI
Press.

Brendan O’Connor, Brandon M. Stewart, and Noah A.
Smith. 2013. Learning to extract international rela-
tions from political context. In Proceedings of the
51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1094–1104. The Association for Computer Linguis-
tics.

Jeremiah Owyang. 2012. Brands Start Automating
Social Media Responses on Facebook and Twitter.
http://techcrunch.com/2012/06/07/brands-start-
automating-social-media-responses-on-facebook-
and-twitter/. Visited August 2013.

Christos H. Papadimitriou, Hisao Tamaki, Prabhakar
Raghavan, and Santosh Vempala. 1998. La-
tent Semantic Indexing: A probabilistic analy-
sis. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth ACM
SIGACT-SIGMOD-SIGART Symposium on Princi-
ples of Database Systems, PODS ’98, pages 159–
168, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Erik Qualman. 2012. Socialnomics: How social media
transforms the way we live and do business. John
Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2nd edition.

Radim Rehurek and Petr Sojka. 2010. Software frame-
work for topic modelling with large corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Chal-
lenges for NLP Frameworks, pages 45–50, Valletta,
Malta, May. ELRA.

Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 1997. Building applied
natural language generation systems. Nat. Lang.
Eng., 3(1):57–87.

Alan Ritter, Colin Cherry, and William B. Dolan. 2011.
Data-driven response generation in social media. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP ’11,
pages 583–593, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

M. Theune, E. Klabbers, J. R. De Pijper, E. Krahmer,
and J. Odijk. 2001. From data to speech: A general
approach. Nat. Lang. Eng., 7(1):47–86.

Alan M. Turing. 1950. Computing machinery and in-
telligence. Mind, LIX:433–460.

Kees Van Deemter, Emiel Krahmer, and Mariët The-
une. 2005. Real versus template-based natural lan-
guage generation: A false opposition? Comput. Lin-
guist., 31(1):15–24.

Bimal Viswanath, Alan Mislove, Meeyoung Cha, and
Krishna P. Gummadi. 2009. On the evolution of
user interaction in Facebook. In Proceedings of
the 2nd ACM Workshop on Online Social Networks,
WOSN ’09, pages 37–42, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Tae Yano, William W. Cohen, and Noah A. Smith.
2009. Predicting response to political blog posts
with topic models. In Proceedings of Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, NAACL ’09, pages
477–485, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

67


