



















































Keynote Talk: Analytics: climbing up the ladder of behavior control


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), page 38,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Analytics: climbing up the ladder of behavior control 

 
 

 Patrick Jermann 
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale  

de Lausanne 
Station 20  

CH-1015 Lausanne 
Patrick.Jermann@epfl.ch 

 

 
  

 

Abstract 

Learning Analytics can be conceptual-
ized as an action control process. Infor-
mation is collected at the behavioral level 
and then re-mapped to serve diagnosis at 
higher levels of control. We describe the 
rationale for moving up the ladder of be-
havior control with examples from eye-
tracking and clickstream analysis. 

1 Overview 
Sensors used in analytics collect data at low tem-
poral resolutions. Eye-tracking systems for ex-
ample record gaze at a very high rate (250 Hz) 
without semantic information. Similarly, click-
stream data collected online represent atomic 
actions that do not reflect the orientation of the 
learner’s behavior. On the opposite, the expected 
output of an analytics system should inform de-
cision-making at a much higher level, for exam-
ple, is a learner going to drop out of a course at 
the end of a week, or do partners understand each 
other. The gap between sensor data and indica-
tors useful for decision requires the re-mapping 
of behavioral streams into cognitively meaning-
ful indicators. The computation of indicators 
should ideally be content independent and cali-
bration free.  

We will describe the development of 
gaze indicators that reflect the breadth of the fo-
cus of attention and the coupling between a lis-
tener and a speaker. In dyadic interaction, these 
indicators are related to the level of abstraction 
of dialogue and the quality of interaction. We 
extended the rationale of these indicators to the 
case of one user listening to a video lecture with 
the notion of with-me-ness: similar to teachers 

wondering whether their students are “with 
them”. Students who attend more closely to the 
references made by the teacher indeed achieve 
better learning. 

 An obvious limitation of gaze-based ana-
lytics is that eye-trackers are not (yet) wide-
spread. We are investigating whether video-
watching behavior captured by clickstream logs 
can serve as a proxy for attention. First results 
are encouraging and show that it is possible to 
define an information-processing index that re-
flects the engagement of learners with the video. 
This indicator is sensitive to both in video drop-
out and course drop-out and reflects whether stu-
dents process video superficially (speeding up, 
scrolling forward) or more intensively (checking 
back for reference, rewatching). Similar to the 
approach we followed for gaze re-mapping, we 
aggregate the atomic actions (Play, Pause, Seek 
back) into more meaningful actions that are psy-
chologically more meaningful to assess learning 
strategies. 

   
 

 

38


