



















































Modeling the Noun Morphology of Plains Cree


Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on the Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages, pages 34–42,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, 26 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Modeling the Noun Morphology of Plains Cree

Conor Snoek1, Dorothy Thunder1, Kaidi Lõo1, Antti Arppe1,
Jordan Lachler1, Sjur Moshagen2, Trond Trosterud2

1 University of Alberta, Canada
2 University of Tromsø, Norway

snoek@ualberta.ca, dthunder@ualberta.ca, kloo@ualberta.ca,
arppe@ualberta.ca, lachler@ualberta.ca,

sjur.n.moshagen@uit.no, trond.trosterud@uit.no

Abstract

This paper presents aspects of a com-
putational model of the morphology of
Plains Cree based on the technology of
finite state transducers (FST). The paper
focuses in particular on the modeling of
nominal morphology. Plains Cree is a
polysynthetic language whose nominal
morphology relies on prefixes, suffixes
and circumfixes. The model of Plains
Cree morphology is capable of handling
these complex affixation patterns and
the morphophonological alternations
that they engender. Plains Cree is an
endangered Algonquian language spo-
ken in numerous communities across
Canada. The language has no agreed
upon standard orthography, and exhibits
widespread variation. We describe prob-
lems encountered and solutions found,
while contextualizing the endeavor in the
description, documentation and revitaliza-
tion of First Nations Languages in Canada.

1 Introduction

The Department of Linguistics at the University of
Alberta has a long tradition of working with First
Nations communities in Alberta and beyond. Re-
cently a collaboration has begun with Giellatekno,
a research institute at the University of Tromsø,
which has specialized in creating language tech-
nologies, particularly for the indigenous Saami
languages of Scandinavia, but also for other lan-
guages that have received less attention from the
computational linguistic mainstream. This collab-
oration is currently focusing on developing com-
putational tools for promoting and supporting lit-
eracy, language learning and language teaching.
Plains Cree is a morphologically complex lan-
guage, especially with regard to nouns and verbs.

While we are working to develop a complete
finite-state model of Plains Cree morphology, we
focus on nominal morphology in this paper.

In the first section we briefly describe Plains
Cree nominal morphology and give some back-
ground on the language. This is followed by de-
tails on the model and its implementation. Fi-
nally, we discuss the particular situation of de-
veloping tools for a language that lacks a formal,
agreed-upon standard and the challenges that this
presents. We conclude with some comments on
the benefits of this technology to language revital-
ization efforts.

2 Background

2.1 Plains Cree

Plains Cree or nêhiyawêwin is an Algonquian
language spoken across the Prairie Provinces in
what today is Canada. It forms part of the
Cree-Montagnais-Naskapi dialect continuum that
stretches from Labrador to British Columbia. Es-
timates as to the number of speakers of Plains Cree
vary a lot and the exact number is not known,
from a high of just over 83,000 (Statistics Canada
2011, for Cree without differentiating for Cree di-
alects) to as low as 160 (Ethnologue 2013). Wol-
fart (1973) estimated there to be about 20,000 na-
tive speakers, but some recent figures are more
conservative.

Regardless of the exact number of speakers,
there is general agreement that the language is un-
der threat of extinction. In many, if not most, com-
munities where Cree is spoken, children are learn-
ing English as a first language, and encounter Cree
only in the language classroom. However, vigor-
ous revitalization efforts are underway and Cree is
regarded as one of the Canadian First Nations lan-
guages with the best chances to prosper (Cook and
Flynn, 2008).

As a polysynthetic language (Wolvengrey,

34



2011, 35), Plains Cree exhibits substantial mor-
phological complexity. Nouns come in two gen-
der classes: animate and inanimate. Each of these
classes is associated with distinct morphological
patterns. Both animate and inanimate nouns carry
inflectional morphology expressing the grammati-
cal categories of number and locativity. The num-
ber suffixes for animate and inanimate nouns are
different, the plural being marked by -ak in ani-
mates and -a in inanimates. Locativity is marked
by a suffix taking the form -ihk (with a number of
allomorphs). The locative suffix cannot co-occur
with suffixes marking number or obviation, but
does occur in conjunction with possessive affixes.
Obviation is a grammatical category marked on
animate nouns that indicates relative position on
the animacy hierarchy, when there are two third
person participants in the same clause. Obviation
is expressed through the suffix -a, which forms a
mutually exclusive paradigmatic structure with the
locative and number prefixes.

The possessor of a noun in Plains Cree is ex-
pressed through affixes attached to the noun stem.
These affixes mark person and number of the
possessor by means of a paradigmatic inflectional
pattern that includes both prefixes and suffixes.
Since matching prefixes and suffixes need to
co-occur with the noun when it is possessed, it
is possible to treat such prefix-suffix pairings as
circumfixes expressing a single person-number
meaning. The noun maskisin in (1) below1 is
marked for third person plural possessors as well
as being plural itself. The inanimate gender class
is recognizable in the plural suffix -a, which
would be -ak in the case of an animate noun.

(1)
omaskisiniwâwa
o-maskisin-iwâw-a
3PL.POSS-shoe-3PL.POSS-PL.IN
‘their shoes’

Nouns also occur with derivational morphology
in the form of diminutive and augmentative
suffixes. The diminutive suffix is productive and
forms taking the diminutive suffix can occur with
all the inflectional morphology described above.

1The following abbreviations are used POSS = possessive
prefix/suffix; LOC = locative suffix; OBV = obviative suffix;
DIM = diminutive suffix; NUM = number marking suffix; IN
= inanimate; PL = plural.

(2)
omaskisinisiwâwa
o-maskisin-is-iwâw-a
3PL.POSS-shoe-DIM-3PL.POSS-PL.IN
‘their little shoes’

The particular form of the diminutive, how-
ever, varies considerably. For example, the most
common form of the suffix is -is.

The suffix triggers morphophonemic changes in
the stem. For example, the ‘t’ in oskâtâskw- ‘car-
rot’ changes to ‘c’ (the alveolar affricate [ts]) when
the diminutive suffix is present resulting in the
form oskâcâskos. Since the form oskâtâskw- is a -
w final form a further phonological change occurs,
namely the initial vowel in the suffix changes from
i > o.

To sum up, Plains Cree nominal morphology
allows the following productive pattern types:

(3)
stem+NUM
stem+OBV
stem+LOC
stem+DIM+NUM
stem+DIM+OBV
stem+DIM+LOC
POSS+stem+POSS+NUM
POSS+stem+DIM+POSS+NUM
POSS+stem+DIM+POSS+OBV
POSS+stem+POSS+LOC
POSS+stem+DIM+POSS+LOC

Plains Cree can be written both with the Ro-
man alphabet and with a Syllabary. Theoretically
there is a one-to-one match between the two.
However, a number of factors complicate this
relationship. Differing punctuation conventions,
such as capitalization, and the treatment of
loanwords make conversion from one writing
system to another anything but a trivial matter.
Orthography presents a general problem for the
development of computer-based tools, because
unlike nationally standardized languages, ortho-
graphic conventions can vary considerably from
community to community, even from one user
to another. Certain authors have argued for the
adoption of orthographic standards for Plains
Cree (Okimâsis and Wolvengrey, 2008), but there
simply is no centralized institution to enforce

35



orthographic or other standardization. This means
that the wealth of varying forms and dialectal
diversity of the language are apparent in each in-
dividual community. This situation poses specific
challenges to the project of developing language
tools that are more seldom encountered when
making spell-checkers and language learning
tools for more standardized languages.

Similar situations have been encountered in
work on the Saami languages of Scandinavia
(Johnson, 2013). Following their work, we in-
clude dialectal variants in the model, but mark
them with specific tags. This permits a tool such as
a spell-checker to be configured to accept and out-
put a subset of the total possible forms in the mor-
phological model. An example here is the distribu-
tion of the locative suffix described in more detail
in section 4. There is a disparity between com-
munities regarding the acceptability of the occur-
rence of the suffix with certain nouns. The suffix
can be marked with a tag in the FST-model. This
tag can then be used to block the acceptance or
generation of this particular form. The key notion
here is that language learning and teaching tools
are built on the basis of the general FST model.
For Plains Cree there is one inclusive model, en-
compassing as much dialectal variation as possi-
ble. From this, individual tools are created, e.g.
spell-checkers, that selects an appropriate subset
of the dialectally marked forms. A community
can therefore have their own spell-checker, spe-
cific to their own preferences. It is also possi-
ble to allow for “spelling relaxations” (Johnson,
2013, 67) at the level of user input, meaning that
variant forms will be recognized, but constraining
the output to a selection of forms deemed appro-
priate for a given community. Hence, the spell-
checker used in one particular community could
accept certain noun-locative combinations. At the
same time, other tools, such as paradigm learn-
ing applications, could block this particular noun-
locative combination from being generated: cer-
tain forms are understood, but not taught by the
model. In general, the variation is not difficult to
deal with in terms of the model itself, rather it rep-
resents a difficulty in the availability of accurate
descriptions, since their specifics must be known
and understood to be successfully included in the
model.

This method could, in principle, be used to ex-
tend the Plains Cree FST-model to closely related

Algonquian languages. However, rather than cre-
ating a proliferation of dialectal tags, it is easier
to reproduce the architecture of the model and use
it to create a new model for the related language.
This allows the preservation of formal structures
that follow essentially the same pattern, such as
possessive inflection for example, while replacing
the actual surface forms with those of the target
language.

2.2 Previous computational modeling of
Algonquian languages

Previous work on Algonquian languages that has
taken a computational approach is not extensive.
Hewson (1993) compiled a dictionary of Proto-
Algonquian terms generated through an algorithm.
His data were drawn from fieldwork carried out
by Leonard Bloomfield. Kondrak (2002) applied
algorithms for cognate identification to Algon-
quian data with considerable success. Wolfart and
Pardo (1973) worked on a sizable corpus of Cree
data and developed tools for data management and
analysis in PL/I. Junker and Stewart (2008) have
written on the difficulties of creating search engine
tools for East Cree and describe challenges simi-
lar to the ones we have encountered with regard
to dialectal variation and the absence of agreed on
standard orthographies and other widespread con-
ventions.

In general, computational approaches to Algon-
quian, and other Indigenous North American lan-
guages, have been hampered by the fact that in
many cases large bodies of data to develop and test
methods on are just not available. Even for Plains
Cree, which is relatively widely spoken, and rela-
tively well documented, the available descriptions
are still lacking in many places. As a result, field-
work must be undertaken in order to establish pat-
terns that can be modeled in the formalism neces-
sary for the finite state transducer (FST) to work,
a point that will be expanded on below.

3 Modeling Plains Cree morphology

The finite state transducer technology that forms
the backbone of our morphological model, and
consequently of all the language applications we
are currently developing, is based historically on
work on computational modeling of natural lan-
guages known as two-level morphology (TWOL)
by Koskenniemi (1983). His ideas were further
developed by Beesley and Karttunen (2003).

36



Their framework offers two basic formalisms with
which to encode linguistic data, lexc and twolc.
The Lexicon Compiler, or lexc, is “a high-level
declarative language and associated compiler”
(Beesley and Karttunen, 2003, 203) used for
encoding stem forms and basic concatenative
morphology. The source files are structured in
terms of a sequence of continuation lexica. Begin-
ning with an inventory of stems the continuation
lexica form states along a path, adding surface
morphological forms and underlying analytic
structure at each stage. A colon (:) separates
underlying and surface forms. Example (4)
demonstrates paths through just three continua-
tion lexica for the animate nouns apiscacihkos
‘antelope’ and apisimôsos ‘deer’. By convention,
the names of continuation lexica are given in
upper case. Stems and affixes represent actual
word forms, and are thus given in lower case. The
‘+’ sign indicates a morphological tag.

(4)
LEXICON ANSTEMLIST

apiscacihkos ANDECL ;

apisimôsos ANDECL ;

LEXICON ANDECL

< +N:0 +AN:0 +Sg:0 @U.noun.abs@ # > ;

< +N:0 +AN:0 @U.noun.abs@ OBVIATIVE > ;

LEXICON OBVIATIVE

< +Obv:a # > ;

Both forms are directed to the continuation
lexicon here named ANDECL which provides
some morphological tagging in the form of +N to
mark the word as a noun and +AN to denote the
gender class ‘animate’. Each of the two nouns has
the possibility of passing through the continuation
lexicon ANDECL as an ‘absolutive’ noun – as
indicated by the tag @U.noun.abs@ (a flag
diacritic, as will be explained below). The colons
in the code indicate a distinction between upper
and lower levels of the transducer. The upper form
to the left of the colon is a string containing the
the lemma as well as a number of tags that contain
information about grammatical properties. For
the word form apiscacihkos, the analysis once it
has passed through the ANDECL continuation
lexicon is apiscacihkos+N+AN+Sg.

The surface forms apiscacihkos and apisimôsos
are well-formed strings of Plains Cree, following
the Standard Roman Orthography. Hence, the

path can terminate here as indicated by the hash
mark. The other path, also open to both forms
since they pass through the same continuation
lexicon, leads to a further continuation lexicon
named OBVIATIVE. This rather small lexicon
adds a final -a suffix and the tag +Obv indicating
that the form is inflected for the grammatical
category of obviation. Since no number suffixes
can occur in this form the path does not add a +Sg
or +Pl tag to the underlying form.

(5)
apiscacihkos+N+AN+Obv
apiscacihkosa
‘antelope’

These circumfixes were modeled using Flag
Diacritics, which are an “extension of the finite
state implementation, providing feature-setting
and feature-unification operations” (Beesley and
Karttunen, 2003, 339). Flag diacritics make it
possible for the transducer to remember earlier
states. The transducer may travel all paths through
the prefixes via thousands of stems to all the
suffixes, but the flag diacritics ensure that only
strings with prefixes and suffixes belonging to
the same person-number value are generated. In
our solution for nouns, the continuation lexica
allow all combinations of possession suffixes
and prefixes, but the flag diacritics serve to filter
out all undesired combinations. For example, in
the noun omaskisiniwâwa from (1) above, the
third person prefix o- and the suffix marking both
person and number -iwâw are annotated in the
lexc file with identical flag diacritics, so that they
will always occur together.

Plains Cree has some very regular and pre-
dictable morphophonological alternations that
can be modeled successfully in the finite state
transducer framework. The formalism used here
is not lexc as in the listing of stems and the
concatenative morphology, but an additional for-
malism called the two-level compiler or twolc that
is well suited to this task. The twolc formalism
was developed by Lauri Karttunen, Todd Yampol,
Kenneth R. Beesley and Ronald M. Kaplan based
on ideas set forth in Koskenniemi (1983).

37



(6)
acâwewikamikosis
atâwewikamikw-isis
store-DIM
‘little store’

In (6) above, atâwewikamikw- ‘store’ is modi-
fied by the derivational suffix -isis marking the
diminutive form. This derivation is highly pro-
ductive in Plains Cree. The underlying form of the
suffix is -isis but in conjunction with a stem-final
-w, the initial vowel of the suffix changes to -o.
This morphophonemic alternation can be written
in twolc much like a phonological rule:

(7)
i:o <=> w: %>:0 s: +Dim ;

The sign %> is used to mark a suffix bound-
ary, which, along with the +Dim tag, ensures that
it is the first vowel of the suffix that undergoes
substitution. Thus the context is given by the
occurrence of a -w before the suffix boundary,
i.e. stem finally. An additional complication here
is that the presence of the diminutive suffix in a
form again triggers a phonological change in the
stem by which all t’s change to c’s (phonetically
[ts]). In twolc the rules dictating morphophono-
logical alternations apply in parallel, avoiding
possible problems caused by sequential rule
interactions. The noun completes the path through
the continuation lexica and is passed to twolc as
atâwewikamikwisis. There it undergoes two
morphophonological changes giving the correct
surface form acâwewikamikosis.

Twolc is a powerful mechanism for dealing with
regular alternations. Reliance on twolc can reduce
the number of continuation lexica and hence com-
plexity of the morphology modeling carried out in
lexc. The downside of using large numbers of
twolc rules is the increasing complexity of rule
interactions. We have found that decisions about
which strategy to pursue in the modeling of a par-
ticular morphological pattern must frequently be
made on a case by case basis. For example, in
modeling the interesting case of the form atimw-
‘dog’ several strategies needed to be employed.
The form triggers a vowel change i > o in con-
junction with the diminutive suffix -isis resulting
in -osis, a change falling under a rule described
in (8) above. A further change here is that the t

in atimw- ‘dog’ changes to c when the diminutive
suffix is present resulting in the surface form aci-
mosis. Both these forms can be handled by twolc
rules such as the one exemplified in (8) above.
However, atimw- also undergoes changes in the
stem vowel when the noun is marked for a pos-
sessor so that a > i and i > ê. In the first person,
the possessive prefix takes the form ni- leading to
a sequence of two vowels arising from the prefix
final -i- and stem initial -i-, which is not permit-
ted in Plains Cree. This situation is handled by a
general rule deleting the first vowel in preference
for the latter. However, a set of twolc rules would
be required to change the stem vowels – a set that
would be specific to this particular word only. The
full set of two level rules are accessible online2.

Since the addition of further rules poses the risk
of rule conflicts in an increasingly complex twolc
code, the stem vowel changes are handled in lexc
instead. There are currently over 40 continuation
lexica in the model of nominal morphology alone.

(8)
LEXICON IRREGULARANIMATESTEMS

atim IRREGULARINFLECTION-1 ;

atim:têm IRREGULARINFLECTION-2 ;

The continuation lexicon contains two ver-
sions of the form atim with two different paths
leading to further inflectional suffixes. In the
second instance of atim, writing the base form to
the left of the colon and the suppletive stem to
the right ensures both that the form -têm surfaces
correctly. In the analysis the base form atim can
still be recovered. The forms are sent to differing
continuation lexica, since only the suppletive
forms occurs within the paradigm of possessive
prefixes. The word meaning ‘my little dog’ is
given as an example in (10) below.

(9)
nicêmisis
ni-atimw-isis
1SG.POSS-dog-DIM
‘my little dog’

The suppletive form also does not carry an
underlying -w and hence no longer triggers the
vowel change in the diminutive suffix. With this

2https://victorio.uit.no/langtech/
trunk/langs/crk/src/phonology/crk-phon.
twolc

38



solution we can handle the regular and more
straightforward morphophonological alternations
in twolc, while avoiding undue complexity by
modeling the suppletive forms in lexc.

Finally, we have adopted a system of using spe-
cial tags to denote dialectal variants that are not
equally acceptable in different communities. The
seemingly high level of variation found in Plains
Cree can be related to several reasons described
in more detail in the next section. The variation
is dealt with in the morphological model with a
tagging strategy that marks dialectal forms. This
tagging allows for the systems based on the mor-
phological model to behave in accordance with
the wishes of the user or community of users.
In the setting of a particular teaching institution,
for instance, only a certain subset of the vari-
ants encoded in the morphological model might be
deemed acceptable. Our model permits this com-
munity to adjust the applications they are employ-
ing, e.g. a spell-checker, so that their community-
specific forms are accepted as correct.

The stems are accessible online3, and may be
analysed and generated at the webpage for Plains
Cree grammar tools4.

4 The necessity for fieldwork in modeling
Plains Cree

We began working on the morphological model
of Plains Cree by examining published sources,
such as Plains Cree: A grammatical study (Wol-
fart, 1973) and Cree: Language of the Plains
(Okimâsis, 2004). Okimâsis’ work is clearly
structured and contains a wealth of information.
Nevertheless, the level of explicitness required to
capture the nature of a language in enough de-
tail for applications such as, for example, spell-
checkers is beyond the scope of her work. This
is to say that in formalizing Okimâsis’ descrip-
tion we needed to generalize grammatical patterns
that were not always explicitly spelled out in her
work in every detail. It should be apparent here
that a number of factors come in to play here that
make working on Plains Cree quite a different un-
dertaking from working on a European language
with a long history of research in the Western aca-
demic tradition. While official national European
languages such as German, Finnish or Estonian

3https://victorio.uit.no/langtech/
trunk/langs/crk/src/morphology/stems/

4http://giellatekno.uit.no/cgi/index.
crk.eng.html

can look on scholarly work dating back some cen-
turies, and are supported by work from a com-
munity of specialists numbering hundreds of peo-
ple, work on Plains Cree (and other languages in
similar situations) is being carried out by what
is at best a handful of people. While Cree lan-
guage specialists form a professional body of re-
searchers with a proud tradition, they are faced
with the enormous task of documenting a language
spoken in many small communities spread over a
huge geographical area. In addition, many of those
specialists are also involved with language revi-
talization and language teaching, with the result
that less time can be devoted to language descrip-
tion, scholarship and the pursuit of larger projects
such as the development of corpora. While such
projects are under development in many areas, the
demands placed on individual researchers and ac-
tivists has resulted in an overall scarcity of re-
sources. While compared to other Indigenous
languages spoken in Canada, Plains Cree is rel-
atively well documented, many of the resources
that would be desirable assets for the development
of a finite state model are not available. As a re-
sult, we have carried out fieldwork to further make
explicit the full inflectional paradigm of nouns in
Plains Cree.

There is considerable variation among speak-
ers and specialists regarding the acceptability of
certain inflectional possibilities. For example, in
the case of one animate noun atim ‘dog’ it seems
formally reasonable to allow its combination with
the locative suffix -ohk rendering atimohk. This
combination of stem and affix was considered im-
possible or at least implausible by some of our
native speaker consultants. However, the form
itself does occur, albeit in the guise of a place
name for a lake island in northern Saskatchewan
named atim ‘dog’. Therefore the form atimohk ‘on
the dog’ with locative suffix attached can occur
in this very specific and geographically bounded
context5. The way of coping with this is to lexi-
calize atimohk as locative of the island Atim, and
to keep the noun atim outside the set of nouns get-
ting regular locatives.

Further inquiry into this matter revealed that
some speakers see the locative suffix as potentially
occurring quite widely, while others are more re-
strictive (Arok Wolvengrey – p.c.). Here again
there is a problem of scale: individual speakers of

5Thanks to Jan Van Eijk for pointing this out.

39



any language have only a partial experience of the
possible extent of the language. In the modeling
of the morphology for the purposes of such tech-
nologies as spell-checkers, for example, the expe-
rience of any potential speaker must be taken into
account. While the information that this particu-
lar form is rare or semantically not well-formed
is valuable, retaining the form is important, if the
model is to cover the range of potential usage pat-
terns of all Plains Cree speakers. Ideally, if the
written use of the language is supported by the
tools that can be developed based on our morpho-
logical model, that would lead to a gradually in-
creasing electronic corpus of texts, providing fre-
quency information on both the stems and mor-
phological forms.

We have developed a workflow in which we
construct the maximal paradigms that are theoreti-
cally possible and then submit them to intense na-
tive speaker scrutiny. Only once native speakers
and specialists have approved the forms do they
become part of the actual model. The paradigms
are chosen so as to provide the coverage of the
entire span of morphologically possible forms as
well as all morphophonemic alternations. As such
they present a maximal testbed for the patterns en-
coded in the formalism. Each paradigm consists
of about sixty inflected forms.

Overall, a careful balance must be struck be-
tween directly explicit speaker/specialist input and
theoretically possible forms. We aim to achieve
this balance by taking a threefold approach: First,
by careful consultation with speakers and special-
ists; second, by building a corpus6 which can serve
as a testing ground for the morphological analyzer
and as a source of data, and third by working
closely with communities willing to test the model
and provide feedback.

5 Applications in language teaching and
revitalization

The development of an explicit model of the mor-
phology of Plains Cree as outlined above is of
benefit not just to researchers but also those in-
volved in teaching and revitalizing the language
within their home communities. Using the gen-
eral technological infrastructure developed by the
researchers at Giellatekno, we are able to take the

6As noted above, a tool like a spell-checker promotes lit-
eracy and hence contributes naturally to the increase in tex-
tual materials. Until that begins to happen, however, we are
collecting texts through recording and transcription.

FST model of Plains Cree morphology and use it
to create in one go a variety of language tools in-
cluding a spellchecker, a morphological analyzer
and a paradigm generator, which can be integrated
as modules within general software applications
such as a word-processor, an electronic dictionary
or a intelligent computer-aided language learning
(ICALL) application. Each of these tools can as-
sist fluent speakers, as well as new learners, in
their use of Plains Cree as a written language.

The spellchecking functionality within a word-
processor will be a valuable tool for the small-but-
growing number of Plains Cree language profes-
sionals who are engaged in the development of
teaching and literary resources for the language.
It will allow for greater accuracy and consistency
in spelling, as well as faster production of materi-
als. Because dialectal variation is being encoded
directly into the FST model, the spellchecker can
be configured so that writers from all communities
and dialects can use this tool, without worry that
the technology is covertly imposing particular or-
thographic standards which the communities have
not all agreed upon.

The morphological analysis functionality built
from the FST model and integrated within e.g. a
web-based electronic dictionary will allow readers
to highlight Plains Cree text in a document or web-
page to perform a lookup of words in any inflected
form, and not only with the citation (base) form.
This will enable readers to more easily read Plains
Cree documents with unfamiliar words without
needing to stop to repeatedly consult paper dic-
tionaries and grammars. While this does not obvi-
ate the need for printed resources in learning and
teaching of the language, such added functional-
ity can greatly increase the pace at which texts
are read through by language learners. This is not
inconsequential as it can slow down considerably
the onset of weariness brought on by needing to
interrupt the reading process to consult reference
materials, and hence maintain the motivation for
language learning.

The paradigm generation functionality within
e.g. an electronic dictionary allows users to se-
lect a word and receive the full, or alternatively a
smaller but representative, inflected paradigm of
that word. This will be of direct benefit to in-
structors developing materials to teach the com-
plex morphology of the Plains Cree, as well as
their students.

40



We are working in collaboration with Plains
Cree communities in the development and piloting
of these tools, to ensure their accuracy and their
usefulness for teachers, developers, learners and
other community members. The full range of uses
that these tools will be put to will only become ap-
parent over time, but we expect that they will have
a positive impact for community language main-
tenance by supporting the continued development
Plains Cree literacy.

6 Conclusion

We have found the technology of Finite State
Transducers so useful in developing language ap-
plications for Plains Cree because it permits us
to integrate native speaker competence and spe-
cialized linguistic understanding of grammatical
structures into the model directly.

At present the analyzer contains 72 nominal lex-
emes, carefully chosen to cover all morphologi-
cal and morphophonological aspects of the Plains
Cree nominal system. Once the morphological
modeling of this core set of nouns has been final-
ized, scaling up the lexicon will be a trivial task,
as all lexicographic resources classify their stem
in the same way as is done in the morphological
transducer.

We have described our method of working with
native speaker specialists and how their insights
are reflected in the design of the model. This in-
teraction also allows enough possibilities for in-
teractions with language teachers, learners and ac-
tivists so that we make our work truly useful to the
effort of preserving and revitalizing the precious
cultural heritage that is Plains Cree. We are aware
of the limits of tools that relate primarily to the
written forms for languages that have rich oral his-
tories and cultures, but feel that writing and read-
ing Plains Cree will play an ever growing role in
the future of this language.

This work makes practical contributions to lin-
guistic research on Plains Cree. On the one hand,
creating the model required the formalization of
many aspects of Plains Cree morphology which
had not previously been spelled out in full detail,
i.e. it makes explicit what is known, or not known,
about Plains Cree morphology, and thus allows us
to extend the description of Plains Cree morphol-
ogy accordingly. On the other, the morphological
analyses can aid in future linguistic discovery es-
pecially when used in conjunction with corpora.

In the future, we will continue to expand the
morphological model both in its grammatical cov-
erage and in the size of the lexical resources which
go into it. In regard to the latter, we are working
with Cree-speaking communities in Alberta to ex-
pand on existing dictionaries and develop collec-
tions of recordings. The development of this mor-
phological model has led us to carry out fieldwork
on Plains Cree and to actively engage with Cree-
speaking communities. We have worked hard to
bridge the unfortunate gap that sometimes forms
between the linguistic work being carried within
academia and the needs of communities that are
active in language documentation and revitaliza-
tion. We look forward to further fruitful coopera-
tion between activists, educators and researchers.

Acknowledgments

Building a computational model of Plains Cree
morphology is a task that relies on the knowl-
edge, time and goodwill of many people. We
thank the University of Alberta’s Killam Re-
search Fund Cornerstones Grant for supporting
this project. We would like to acknowledge in par-
ticular the crucial advice, attention and effort of
Jean Okimâsis and Arok Wolvengrey, and thank
them for the resources they have contributed. We
wish also to thank Jeff Muehlbauer for his time
and materials, as well as the attendees of the first
Prairies Workshop on Language and Linguistics
for their insights and expertise. Further, it is im-
portant to acknowledge the helpfulness of Earle
Waugh who at the very start of our project made
his dictionary available to us, and who has been
very supportive. Arden Ogg has worked tirelessly
to build connections among researchers working
on Cree, which has greatly promoted and facili-
tated our work. Ahmad Jawad and Intellimedia,
Inc. who have for some time provided the tech-
nological platform to make available a number
of Plains Cree dictionaries through a web-based
interface, have given us invaluable assistance in
terms of resources and introductions. We would
also especially like to thank the staff at Miyo
Wahkohtowin Education for their wonderful en-
thusiasm, and for welcoming us into their commu-
nity. Last but by no means least, we are indebted to
innumerable Elders and native speakers of Plains
Cree whose contributions have made possible all
the dictionaries and text collections we are fortu-
nate to have today.

41



References
Kenneth R. Beesley and Lauri Karttunen. 2003. Fi-

nite State Morphology. CSLI Publications, Stanford
(CA).

Eung-Do Cook and Darin Flynn. 2008. Aborigi-
nal languages of Canada. In: O’Grady, William
and John Archibald (eds.) Contemporary Linguistic
Analysis. Pearson, Toronto (ON).

John Hewson. 1993. A computer-generated dictionary
of Proto-Algonquian, Canadian Museum of Civ-
ilization and Canadian Ethnology Service, Ottawa
(ON).

Ryan Johnson, Lene Antonsen and Trond Trosterud.
2013. Using Finite State Transducers for Making
Efficient Reading Comprehension Dictionaries. In
Stephan Oepen & Kristin Hagen & Janne Bondi Jo-
hannessen (eds.), Proceedings of the 19th Nordic
Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODAL-
IDA 2013), 378-411. Linköping Electronic Confer-
ence Proceedings No. 85.

Marie-Odile Junker and Terry Stewart. 2008. Build-
ing Search Engines for Algonquian Languages. In
Karl S. Hele & Regna Darnell (eds.), Papers of the
39th Algonquian Conference, 59-71. University of
Western Ontario Press, London (ON).

Grzegorz Kondrak. 2002. Algorithms for Language
Reconstruction, Department of Computer Science,
University of Toronto.

Kimmo Koskenniemi. 1983. Two-level Morphology:
A General Computational Model for Word-Form
Recognition and Production, Publication No. 11.
Department of General Linguistics, University of
Helsinki.

Jean Okimâsis. 2004. Cree: Language of the Plains,
Volume 13 of University of Regina publications.
University of Regina Press, Regina (SK).

Jean Okimâsis and Arok Wolvengrey. 2008. How to
Spell it in Cree. miywâsin ink, Regina (SK).

H. Christoph Wolfart. 1973. Plains Cree: A grammati-
cal study, Transactions of the American Philosoph-
ical Society No. 5.

H. Christoph Wolfart and Francis Pardo 1973.
Computer-assisted linguistic analysis, University of
Manitoba Anthropology Papers No. 6. Department
of Anthropology, University of Manitoba.

Arok E. Wolvengrey. 2011. Semantic and pragmatic
functions in Plains Cree syntax, LOT, Utrecht (NL).

42


