









































Terminology in WordNet and in plWordNet

Marta Dobrowolska
Institute of Informatics

Wrocław University of Technology
Wrocław, Poland

martadobr@gmail.com

Stan Szpakowicz
Institute of Computer Science
Polish Academy of Sciences

Warsaw, Poland
&

School of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
University of Ottawa

Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
szpak@eecs.uottawa.ca

Abstract

We examine the strategies of organizing termino-

logical information in WordNet, and describe an

analogous strategy of adding terminological senses

of lexical units to plWordNet, a large Polish word-

net. Wordnet builders must cope with differences

in lexical and terminological definitions of a term,

and with the boundaries between terminological

and lexical information. A somewhat adjusted strat-

egy is required for Polish, though both WordNet and

plWordNet rely mainly on semantic relations in

organizing the terminological and general-language

units. The proposed guidelines for plWordNet, built

on several distinct combinations of denotation and

connotation, have a solid theoretical underpinning

but will require a large-scale verification of their ef-

fectiveness in practice.

1 Introduction

The study of lexicography invokes three types of
definition: lexicographic, encyclopedic and termi-
nological.

The object of a lexicographic definition is
[...] the verbal representation, the word it-
self; the object of the terminological defini-
tion is the concept, the abstract representa-
tion of the entity existing in the real world
(Hudon, 1998, pp. 80-81).

The third definition type describes the real-
world object itself, recalling everything that is
known about it (Hudon, 1998, p. 81). The

three types broadly correspond to linguistic dictio-
naries, encyclopaedias and specialised dictionar-
ies respectively. It would be very unlikely, how-
ever, to find a purely linguistic dictionary with
entries devoid of encyclopaedic or terminologi-
cal elements. Section 2 describes how different
kinds of information can be included in a dic-
tionary entry, how they are combined or sepa-
rated. We first compare lexicographic and ency-
clopaedic aspects of definitions, and then consider
how the lexicographic and terminological aspects
are related. Section 3 presents data from Prince-
ton WordNet1 (Fellbaum, 1998) and demonstrates
the strategies used by its authors to solve the prob-
lem of the kinds-of- information diversity. Sec-
tion 4 proposes guidelines for adding terminology
to plWordNet, a large Polish wordnet. The prob-
lem of the diversity of kinds of information can be
framed as three questions:

1. What relations should link units differing in
the kind of knowledge to which they refer?

2. Are the relations sufficient to pinpoint the dif-
ferences between stylistic registers?

3. How do glosses help diversify PWN units by
the kind of knowledge they represent?

2 Lexicography versus terminology

Svensén (2009, p. 289) holds that most lexicogra-
phers consider boundaries between linguistic and
encyclopaedic information to be fluid, and often

1abbreviated as PWN throughout this paper



find it hard to define what to regard as linguistic or
encyclopaedic. An encyclopaedic definition may
be included in typologies of lexical definitions:

maximally rich definition, reflecting world
knowledge rather than merely knowledge of
the language, contains all kinds of highly
specific information and a lot of practical
which is not universally invalid (Geeraerts,
2003, p. 90).

It is, however, impossible to distinguish between
lexical and encyclopaedic information:

in the final account, the lexical information
is determined by the encyclopaedic fact of
particular real-world features. Thus the lex-
ical information is derivable from and not
independent of the encyclopaedic informa-
tion [...] (Bauer, 2005, p. 127).

Some words, mainly nouns but also verbs and
adjectives, should have a considerably stronger
direct connection with the world than function
words such as pronouns, conjunctions and prepo-
sitions (Svensén, 2009, p. 292). Dictionaries, de-
pending on the amount and organization of the
encyclopaedic element, occupy different positions
on the scale of encyclopaedicity. Differences oc-
cur at the level of entries as well:

• an encyclopaedic entry is mainly headed by a
common noun or a proper name, a linguistic
entry – by any type of word;

• a linguistic entry is attached to the item
serving as a lemma, whereas an ency-
clopaedic entry dealing with a certain sub-
ject could have another lemma without hav-
ing to change the content of the entry (Sven-
sén, 2009, p. 290);

• a linguistic entry may contain information
about lexical and grammatical collocations of
lexical units, their pragmatic functions, syn-
tactic behaviour and so on (Fuertes-Olivera
and Arribas-Baño, 2008, p. 2).

Definitions of technical and other specialized
terms, like encyclopaedic definitions, do not re-
late to linguistic units with their universally under-
standable and accepted meanings, but to specific
concepts established in their areas of knowledge.
Traditional terminology also declares the indepen-
dence of linguistics and follows its own rigorous
principles:

• the onomasiological perspective (how to ex-
press a given concept);

• univocity (one term should only refer to one,
clear-cut concept);

• synchrony (focus on the present meaning of
terms);

• compliance of the definitions with ISO stan-
dards (Temmerman, 2000).

This may suggest a vast distance between ter-
minography and lexicography (which treats those
principles as options), but many lexicographers
note that these two sciences should meet on sev-
eral planes. One of the mentioned fields is Lan-
guage for Specific Purposes (LSP), a term cur-
rently used to refer to specialized communica-
tion. The methodological confluence between ter-
minography and lexicography is driven by a move
away from the concept as the centre of attention.

This change of emphasis has deep method-
ological repercussion, which imply the
abandoning of the traditional method of
onomasiological work in favor of semasi-
ological approach which has a great deal
in common with lexicography (Fuertes-
Olivera and Arribas-Baño, 2008, p. 8).

Confluences between terminology and lexicol-
ogy were the focus of the experiment which was
designed to check whether the application of the
terminological definitions will streamline the pro-
cess of human-based subject indexing. Terms and
descriptors (basic thesaurus units, selected to rep-
resent a specific concept in a thesaurus and in in-
dexed documents) share these essential properties
(Hudon, 1998, pp. 72-73):

• they represent single concepts in a domain,

• they are signs founded in natural language,

• they reflect language patterns established in a
field of specialty.

Whereas definitions are the key component of
a term bank, the heart of a thesaurus has tradi-
tionally been its relational structure. Hudon con-
cludes, however, that definitions and relationships
are assigned complementary roles in a terminolog-
ical thesaurus. Definitions precisely characterize
the meaning of the descriptor, while relationships



pinpoint the place of the unit in the lexical hierar-
chy (Hudon, 1998, p. 78).

We will tackle the questions posed in Section 1,
given that PWN is (among other things) a kind of
thesaurus which contains both definitions and re-
lations, and that lexical, encyclopaedic and termi-
nological information is interrelated.

3 Terminology in PWN

In its role as a thesaurus, PWN brings together,
often in the same synsets, elements of general lan-
guage usage and LSP units absent from general-
purpose dictionaries. Experts and laymen some-
times react differently to the same word,2 and
some words are not even in a typical layman’s id-
iolect.3 Svensén (2009, p. 243) notes: “To the
expert, the extension of a technical terms is often
small [...] whereas the intension is large”.

Terminological definitions tend to refer to other
terms. In a wordnet, therefore, the presence of a
terminological synset requires the presence of its
hypernyms, hyponyms, meronyms and so on. It
makes little practical sense to put specialist lan-
guage in a separate network. The difference be-
tween the professional and lay point of view is
seldom clear, and even if it were, it might be too
subtle to be captured by semantic relations alone.

We see two methods of putting terminology in
a wordnet when the same denotation corresponds
to a terminological and a general connotation:

• create two lexical units and differentiate them
by the hypernyms of their two synsets;

• create one lexical unit and define it by two or
more hypernyms of the synset to which it be-
longs (or by one hypernym if both meanings
have the same genus proximum).

Lay and specialist meanings may also differ
both in connotation and denotation. For exam-
ple, the PWN 3.0 synsets star 1 and star 3 refer
to different concepts but have the same hyponym
celestial body, heavenly body. The difference is
signalled by glosses, by other relations (the sci-
entific term star 1 has two holonyms and several
instances), and by domain (star 1 is linked to as-
tronomy).

2Such a word has the same denotation (literal meaning),
but different connotations (intepretations).

3Try penicillamine, enterotoxin and modiolus without
peeking in a dictionary!

Another strategy is needed when two or
more different lemmas have the same denotation,
but different connotations and probably different
stylistic registers. Should units belonging to gen-
eral language and LSP be placed in one synset, or
should they be linked by the another semantic re-
lation, such as hyponymy (the general meaning as
a hypernym of the specialist sense) or some form
of relatedness?

We examined a sample of 200 nouns drawn in-
dependently and at random from a homogeneous
population of PWN nouns. There are 94 com-
mon nouns belonging to general language (includ-
ing those both in general and specialist registers,
e.g., western hemisphere), 20 proper names and 86
terms. Interestingly, most of those 200 nouns have
glosses without a usage example. Only 23 synsets
have usage examples and just one of them is a ter-
minological synset. One can observe a tendency:
the less encyclopaedic the noun, the more likely
its usage is to be noted. Grammatical and lexical
collocations are typically the kind of linguistic in-
formation not necessary in an encyclopaedic def-
inition (Fuertes-Olivera and Arribas-Baño, 2008,
p. 2).

Coming back to the role of glosses (question 3
in Section 1): they may contain information which
is distinctly lexical (e.g., usage examples) or en-
cyclopaedic (e.g., dates of birth and death), and
so signal the character of the concept. They do
not, however, pinpoint all the necessary features
of terms, because they are not terminological def-
initions as discussed by Hudon (1998, p. 81).

A significant part of the sample, 32 lexical units,
belongs to the biological taxonomy. Synsets refer-
ring to taxonomic definitions often contain several
lexical units: purely scientific terms, such as Latin
names of the taxa, as well as names in the ver-
nacular. In this case, the strategy is to join in one
synset all units, no matter to what register of lan-
guage they belong. That is the case of the synset
oxeye daisy 2, ox-eyed daisy 1, marguerite 1, moon
daisy 1, white daisy 1, Leucanthemum vulgare 1,
Chrysanthemum leucanthemum 1.

Merging different kinds of knowledge and thus
registers of language is also noticeable outside
synsets, in relations between them. For example,
another taxon name from our sample, genus Co-
laptes 1, is a holonym of flicker 2. It is not a species
but a general name of certain woodpeckers, and
its hyponyms are the names of the species of such



woodpeckers. This is one of many examples of
the impossibility of organising lexical and termi-
nological synsets in independent networks. On the
other hand, to distinguish terminology from gen-
eral language, terms are often linked by several
domain relations to synsets which refer to certain
domains. Such relations signal that some synsets
(e.g., atom) are members of the domains named by
other synsets (e.g., physics, chemistry). This rela-
tion has three types: topic, region and usage.

As it happens, our sample does not contain units
which have counterparts with the same lemma
and denotation, but different connotation, which
would be signalled by double hypernymy. This
may suggest that the strategy adopted by PWN au-
thors is to not single out senses on the grounds of
subtle differences of lay and specialist knowledge,
but to concentrate on the same denotation.

4 A design for plWordNet

The basic element of plWordNet is not a synset,
but a lexical unit (Maziarz et al., 2013), which
can be assigned its own register/stylistic label and
a gloss containing a usage example. It is, then,
appropriate to consider distinct meanings of the
same unit in different language registers. Tak-
ing into account the connection between a lemma,
denotation and connotation, we propose a strat-
egy of putting terminology into plWordNet, which
considers three cases. The guidelines have al-
ready been put to a practical test: they inform the
work of a team charged with adding terminology
to plWordNet.

Case 1
There are two different words: a (technical)

term and a word from general language, with
the same denotation but different connotations,
e.g., kot domowy ‘domestic cat’ and kot ‘cat’.
When two words denote the same object, their
register determines whether they land in one
synset or in two synsets. In plWordNet, certain
pairs of registers are considered close, others –
distant (Maziarz et al., 2014). The specialist and
general registers are close, so we put kot domowy
and kot in the same synset. Substantially different
registers, e.g., specialist and obsolete, are distant,
so we put pies ‘domestic dog’ and sobaka ‘dog (a
borrowing from Russian, obsolete and stylistically marked

in contemporary Polish)’ in different synsets and link
those synsets by relatedness.

Case 2
There is one word with two connotations but

one denotation, e.g., krew ‘blood’.4 The boundary
between specialist and general knowledge is not
sharp: elements of specialist knowledge can enter
the general vocabulary. So, we create one unit but
describe it in two ways: it should have both termi-
nological and lexical hyponyms.

Case 3
There is one word with two connotations, as

well as two denotation, e.g., para 1 ‘a substance in
the gas phase at a temperature lower than its crit-
ical point’ (vapour) and para 2 ‘the hot mist that
appears when water is boiled’ (steam). We insert
two lexical units and describe them differently.
Different meanings of one word can be closely re-
lated. Consider, e.g., the word jeżyna: jeżyna 1
‘Rubus L.’ is a hypernym of jeżyna 3 ‘blackberry
bush’. As this example shows, general words can
be defined, via hyponymy and hypernymy, by spe-
cialist terms.

The meaning of lexical units and synsets in
plWordNet – as in any wordnet – is defined prin-
cipally by semantic relations. Whatever defining
phrases appear in glosses have an auxiliary char-
acter. On the other hand, the role of stylistic reg-
ister is noteworthy: they allow the reconstruction
of specialist definition paths and distinguish them
from general-language paths. We note that labels
play the same role as domain relations in PWN.

The distinction between general and specialist
registers may sometimes lead to an excessive spe-
cialisation of the meanings. This effect can be sig-
nificantly reduced if encyclopaedic and lexical in-
formation is placed in the same synset.

5 Conclusions

This study has proposed a precise strategy of
adding terminological senses of lexical units to
plWordNet. We began by investigating the strate-
gies adopted by the authors of PWN. While dis-
cussing the choices, we considered three aspects
of a lexical unit: its lemma, denotation and con-
notation. There are, naturally, differences be-
tween PWN and plWordNet, due to the typolog-
ical differences between the languages and the to
the model adopted for plWordNet (Maziarz et al.,
2013). Some choices made in the two wordnets

4The terminological definition is “a connective tissue
composed of blood cells suspended in blood plasma”, and
the general-language definition is “a red fluid in animals cir-
culating in veins and arteries”.



are quite dissimilar: plWordNet avoids, for exam-
ple, putting in one synset units with the same de-
notation, but with distant stylistic registers. It ap-
pears that register values will play a more signif-
icant role in plWordNet than in PWN, and more
emphasis will be placed on differences in conno-
tation. We observed, however, two similarities
between the English and Polish wordnet. They
both reflect the fluidity of the boundaries between
specialist and general knowledge, and in both of
them semantic relations remain the principal tool
for defining senses.

The accuracy and effectiveness of the strategy
we have proposed in this paper must be verified
in practice by a large team of plWordNet builders.
The observations thus gathered may also lead to
a refinement of the strategy. The ultimate test of
plWordNet with terminology in place will be its
successful applications, but that is quite beyond
the scope of this paper.

Acknowledgment

Financed by the Polish National Centre for Re-
search and Development project SyNaT.

References
Laurie Bauer. 2005. The Illusory Distinction be-

tween Lexical and Encyclopedic Information. In
Arne Zettersten Henrik Gottlieb, Jens Erik Mo-
gensen, editor, Proc. Eleventh International Sym-
posium on Lexicography, May 2002, University of
Copenhagen, pages 111–116.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet – An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press.

Pedro A. Fuertes-Olivera and Ascensión Arribas-Baño.
2008. Pedagogical Specialised Lexicography: The
representation of meaning in English and Span-
ish business dictionaries, volume 11 of Terminol-
ogy and Lexicography Research and Practice. John
Benjamins.

Dirk Geeraerts. 2003. Meaning and definition. In Piet
van Sterkenburg, editor, A practical guide to lexi-
cography, pages 83–93. John Benjamins.

Michèle Hudon. 1998. An assessment of the usefulness
of standardized definitions in a thesaurus through
interindexer terminological consistency measure-
ments. PhD thesis, University of Toronto.

Marek Maziarz, Maciej Piasecki, and Stanisław Sz-
pakowicz. 2013. The chicken-and-egg problem in
wordnet design: synonymy, synsets and constitu-
tive relations. Language Resources and Evaluation,
47(3):769–796.

Marek Maziarz, Maciej Piasecki, Ewa Rudnicka, and
Stan Szpakowicz. 2014. Registers in the System of
Semantic Relations in plWordNet. In Proc. Global
WordNet Conference, Tartu, Estonia.

Bo Svensén. 2009. A handbook of lexicography: the
theory and practice of dictionary-making. Cam-
bridge University Press.

Rita Temmerman. 2000. Towards New Ways of Termi-
nology Description: The sociocognitive approach,
volume 3 of Terminology and Lexicography Re-
search and Practice. John Benjamins.


