



















































Adventures in Multilingual Parsing


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation (HyTra) @ EACL 2014, pages 67–68,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Adventures in Multilingual Parsing

Joakim Nivre
Uppsala university

Department of Linguistics and Philology
Uppsala, Sweden

1 Introduction

The typological diversity of the world’s languages
poses important challenges for the techniques used
in machine translation, syntactic parsing and other
areas of natural language processing. Statisti-
cal models developed and tuned for English do
not necessarily perform well for richly inflected
languages, where larger morphological paradigms
and more flexible word order gives rise to data
sparseness. Since paradigms can easily be cap-
tured in rule-based descriptions, this suggests that
hybrid approaches combining statistical modeling
with linguistic descriptions might be more effec-
tive. However, in order to gain more insight into
the benefits of different techniques from a typolog-
ical perspective, we also need linguistic resources
that are comparable across languages, something
that is currently lacking to a large extent.

In this talk, I will report on two ongoing projects
that tackle these issues in different ways. In the
first part, I will describe techniques for joint mor-
phological and syntactic parsing that combines
statistical dependency parsing and rule-based mor-
phological analysis, specifically targeting the chal-
lenges posed by richly inflected languages. In the
second part, I will present the Universal Depen-
dency Treebank Project, a recent initiative seeking
to create multilingual corpora with morphosyntac-
tic annotation that is consistent across languages.

2 Morphological and Syntactic Parsing

In Bohnet et al. (2013), the goal is to improve pars-
ing accuracy for morphologically rich languages
by performing morphological and syntactic analy-
sis jointly instead of in a pipeline. In this way, we
can ideally make use of syntactic information to
disambiguate morphology, and not just vice versa.
We use a transition-based framework for depen-
dency parsing, and explore different ways of in-
tegrating morphological features into the model.

Furthermore, we investigate the use of rule-based
morphological analyzers to provide hard or soft
constraints in order to tackle the sparsity of lexi-
cal features. Evaluation on five morphologically
rich languages (Czech, Finnish, German, Hungar-
ian, and Russian) shows consistent improvements
in both morphological and syntactic accuracy for
joint prediction over a pipeline model, with further
improvements thanks to the morphological ana-
lyzers. The final results improve the state of the
art in dependency parsing for all languages.

3 Treebanks for Multilingual Parsing

In McDonald et al. (2013), we present a new col-
lection of treebanks with homogeneous syntactic
annotation for six languages: German, English,
Swedish, Spanish, French and Korean. The an-
notation is based on the Google universal part-of-
speech tags (Petrov et al., 2012) and the Stanford
dependencies (de Marneffe et al., 2006), adapted
and harmonized across languages. To show the
usefulness of such a resource, we also present a
case study of cross-lingual transfer parsing with
more reliable evaluation than has been possible be-
fore. The ‘universal’ treebank is made freely avail-
able in order to facilitate research on multilingual
dependency parsing.1 A second release including
eleven languages is planned for the spring of 2014.

4 Conclusion

Although both projects reviewed in the talk may
contribute to a better understanding of how natu-
ral language processing techniques are affected by
linguistic diversity, there are still important gaps
that need to be filled. For instance, the universal
treebank annotation still fails to capture most of
the morphological categories used by the parser.
In the final part of the talk, I will try to outline
some of the challenges that lie ahead of us.

1Downloadable at https://code.google.com/p/uni-dep-tb/.

67



References
Bernd Bohnet, Joakim Nivre, Igor Boguslavsky,

Richárd Farkas, Filip Ginter, and Jan Hajič. 2013.
Joint morphological and syntactic analysis for richly
inflected languages. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 1:415–428.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC).

Ryan McDonald, Joakim Nivre, Yvonne Quirmbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipanjan Das, Kuz-
man Ganchev, Keith Hall, Slav Petrov, Hao
Zhang, Oscar Täckström, Claudia Bedini, Núria
Bertomeu Castelló, and Jungmee Lee. 2013. Uni-
versal dependency annotation for multilingual pars-
ing. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 2: Short Papers), pages 92–97.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. In Proceedings of
the 8th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC).

68


