



















































Postech's System Description for Medical Text Translation Task


Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 229–232,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26–27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Postech’s System Description for Medical Text Translation Task 

Jianri Li Se-Jong Kim Hwidong Na Jong-Hyeok Lee 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 

Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, Republic of Korea 
{skywalker, sejong, leona, jhlee}@postech.ac.kr 

 
 
 

Abstract 

This short paper presents a system description 
for intrinsic evaluation of the WMT 14’s med-
ical text translation task. Our systems consist 
of phrase-based statistical machine translation 
system and query translation system between 
German-English language pairs. Our work fo-
cuses on the query translation task and we 
achieved the highest BLEU score among the 
all submitted systems for the English-German 
intrinsic query translation evaluation.  

1 Overview 
The goal of WMT14’s medical text translation 
task is investigation of capability of machine 
translation (MT) technologies when it is applied 
to translating texts and query terms in medical 
domain. In our work, we focus on its application 
on cross-lingual information retrieval (CLIR) 
and evaluation of query translation task. 

CLIR techniques aim to increase the accessi-
bility of web documents written by foreign lan-
guage. One of the key techniques of cross-lingual 
IR is query translation, which aims to translate 
the input query into relevant terms in target lan-
guage.  

One way to translate queries is dictionary-
based query translation. However, an input query 
usually consists of multiple terms, which cause 
low coverage of bilingual dictionary. Alternative 
way is translating queries using statistical ma-
chine translation (SMT) system. However, trans-
lation model could contain some noise that is 
meaningless translation. The goal of our method 
is to overcome the shortcomings of these ap-
proaches by a heuristic hybrid approach.  

As a baseline, we use phrase-based statistical 
machine translation (PBSMT) (Koehn, Och, & 
Marcu, 2003) techniques to handle queries that 
consist of multiple terms. To identify multiple 
terms in a query, we analyze three cases of the 
formation of queries and generate query transla-
tion candidates using term-to-term dictionaries 
and PBSMT system, and then score these candi-

dates using co-occurrence word frequency meas-
ure to select the best candidate.  

We have done experiment on two language 
pairs 

• English-German 

• German-English 
The rest of parts in this paper are organized as 

following: section 2 describes the techniques and 
system settings used in our experiment, section 3 
presents used corpus and experiment result, and 
section 4 shows a brief conclusion of our work.  

2 Method 
2.1 Phrase-based machine translation sys-

tem 

The phrase-based statistical machine translation 
system is implemented using MOSE’S toolkits 
(Koehn et al., 2007). Bidirectional word align-
ments were built by MGIZA 1 , a multi-thread 
version of GIZA++ (Och & Ney, 2003), run on a 
24 threads machine. The alignment symmetriza-
tion method is grow-diag-final-and (Koehn et al., 
2003), and lexicalized-reordering method is msd-
bidirectional-fe (Koehn et al., 2007). 

For each monolingual corpus, we used a five-
gram language model, which was built by 
IRSTLM toolkit2 (Federico, Bertoldi, & Cettolo, 
2008) with improved Kneser Ney smoothing 
(Chen & Goodman, 1996; Kneser & Ney, 1995). 
The language model was integrated as a log-
linear feature to decoder.  

All the sentences in the training, development 
and test corpus were tokenized by inserting spac-
es between words and punctuations, and then 
converted to most probable cases by truecaseing. 
Both tokenization and truecasing were done by 
embedded tools in the MOSE’S toolkits. Finally, 
all the sentences in the train corpus were cleaned 
with maximum length 80.  

1 http://www.kyloo.net/software 
2 http://sourceforge.net/projects/irstlm 

                                                 

229



 
Figure 1. Flow from queries to query translation candidates for each case. 

 
2.2 Query translation system 
In general, an input query is not a full sentence. 
Instead, most of queries contain one or more 
phrases that consist of several keywords. Fur-
thermore, in the medical domain, many key-
words are unfamiliar terminologies for general 
users. Therefore, term-to-term translation dic-
tionaries in medical domain could be useful re-
sources to translate the queries. In our experi-
ment, we used the parallel terms from Unified 
Medical Language System (UMLS) and titles of 
Wikipedia in medical domain, as the term-to-
term translation dictionary. 

First of all, if a given query is a combination 
of two or more phrases that concatenated by 
terms like comma, coordinate conjunction, then 
the given query is divided into several single 
phrases, and each of them is translated by our 
SMT system as a new single query. If the new 
query satisfies one of cases shown in Figure 1, 
then its query translation candidates are selected 
according to the corresponding case, and select 
the best one of them using proposed measures. 
Otherwise, if the new query does not satisfy any 
case, the top 1 result by our PBSMT system is 
selected as the best query translation candidate. 
Our method combines the translation results of 
single queries by following rules: 1) if the origi-

nal query consists of multiple phrases concate-
nated by functional words like coordinate con-
junctions, then the translation results are com-
bined by translated functional words, 2) if the 
original query is concatenated by punctuation, 
then the results are combined by the original 
punctuation. Finally, the final result is selected 
by comparing the result from QT system and 
PBSMT system using the co-occurrence word 
frequency measure (see Section 2.2.4). The fol-
lowing three subsections describe how we select 
translation candidate case by case. 

2.2.1 Case 1: Full matching 
If a single query exactly matches one instance in 
the dictionary, query translation candidates are 
the target-side entries in the translation diction-
ary (Case 1 in Figure 1). If a query translation 
candidate qt is a sequence of words (w1 to wn), it 
is ranked by the co-occurrence word frequency 
measure (CF) using the provided articles of Wik-
ipedia in the medical domain: 

 

,              (1) 

where freq(w1) is the frequency of a unigram w1 
in the articles; freq(wi, wi-1) is the frequency of a 

230



bigram “wi wi-1” in the articles; and Nuni and Nbi is 
the sum of frequency of all unigram and bigram, 
respectively. 

2.2.2 Case 2: Full inclusion 
If a source-side entry of the term-to-term transla-
tion dictionary exactly includes a query, its query 
translation candidate is its SMT result whose all 
words appear in the target-side entry of the trans-
lation dictionary (Case 2 in Figure 1). Among the 
top 10 results by our PBSMT system, we select 
the results satisfying this case, and rank them 
using CF and our PBSMT result score 
(ScoreSMT): 

 

,  (2) 

where λ is the weight by the provided develop-
ment set; and QT is the set of query translation 
candidates for a query. 

2.2.3 Case 1: Full matching 
If the left phrase tleft or right phrase tright of a que-
ry exactly matches one instance in the dictionary, 
its query translation candidate is its SMT result 
that includes all words in the target-side entry of 
the translation dictionary (Case 3 in Figure 1). 
To rank our SMT results satisfying this case, if 
the total number of words in tleft and tright is same 
or larger than that in a query, ScoreQT is used, 
and the other case uses the weighted ScoreQT 
(WScoreQT): 

 
,  (3) 

where N(tleft) is the number of words in tleft; and q 
is a given query. 

2.2.4 Select final result 
If a query satisfies any case above, and the can-
didate with highest score is selected, then we 
compare the candidate with translation of origi-
nal query directly obtained from PBSMT system 
using equation (1). The final result would be the 
result with higher score between them.  

3 Experiment  
3.1 Corpus 
We only use constrained data provided by WMT 
2014 medical translation task.  

To train PBSMT system, we use parallel cor-
pora 

• EMEA 

• MuchMore 

• Wikipedia-titles 

• Patent-abstract, claim, title 

• UMLS 
We simply mixed up all available parallel cor-

pora to train a unique translation model.  
And for English-German language pair we use 

monolingual corpora 

• Wikipedia-articles 

• Patent-descriptions 

• UMLS descriptions 
And for German-English language pair we use 

monolingual corpora 

• Wikipedia-articles 

• Patent-descriptions 

• UMLS descriptions 

• AACT 

• GENIA 

• GREC 

• FMA 

• PIL 
We also use target side of parallel corpora as 

additional monolingual resource to train lan-
guage model. We separately train a 5-gram lan-
guage model for each monolingual corpus and 
integrate them as features to log-linear model in 
the PBSMT system.  

For the query translation (QT) system, we use 
parallel corpus Wikipedia-titles and UMLS dic-
tionary, and use monolingual corpus Wikipedia-
articles.  

3.2 Experiment Setting 
For the tuning of PBSMT system, we use devel-
opment set provided by WMT 14 medical task 
(khresmoi-summary-dev). And we use query 
translation development set (khresmoi-query-
dev) for the tuning of QT system.  

We test our systems on two test set provided 
by WMT 14 medical task. 

• khresmoi-summary-test (for PBSMT) 

• khresmoi-query-test (for QT) 

231



For comparison with result from QT system, 
we translate the test set of query translation task 
(khresmoi-query-test) using PBSMT system 
without any post-processing. 

In our experiment, the performance of transla-
tion system is measured by BLEU (%) and trans-
lation error rate - TER (%). All these results are 
evaluated from the evaluation website3.  

3.3 Experiment Result 
Table 1 shows the results for the task of transla-
tion of sentences from summaries of medical 
articles.  

Table 2 shows the results for the task of trans-
lation of queries entered by users of medical in-
formation search engines. The performance of 
QT system is relatively higher than PBSMT sys-
tem. Especially, the BLEU score of QT system 
on English-German language pair is the highest 
score among the all submitted systems.  

 
Language Pair BLEU TER 
English-German 15.8 0.746 
German-English 26.9 0.618 

 
Table 1: BLEU scores of result from PBSMT system 

for summary translation task. 
 

Language Pair BLEU TER 
PBSMT English-German 15.1 0.748 

 German-English 22.1 0.638 
QT English-German 15.3 0.746 
 German-English 24.5 0.586 

 
Table 2: BLEU scores of result for query translation 

task. 

4 Conclusion 
We describe the PBSMT system and QT system 
that are developed for summary translation and 
query translation of WMT 14 medical translation 
task. We focus on intrinsic query translation 
evaluation and propose a hybrid approach by 
combining dictionary-based approach and SMT 
based approach using heuristics. The result of 
query translation experiment shows that our 
method obtained higher translation accuracy than 
the baseline (PBSMT) system. 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
This work was supported in part by the National 
Korea Science and Engineering Foundation 

3 http://matrix.statmt.org 

(KOSEF) (NRF-2010-0012662), in part by the 
Brain Korea 21+ Project, and in part by the Ko-
rea Ministry of Knowledge Economy (MKE) 
under Grant No.10041807. 

References  
Chen, S. F., & Goodman, J. (1996). An empirical 

study of smoothing techniques for language 
modeling. Paper presented at the Proceedings of 
the 34th annual meeting on Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 

Federico, M., Bertoldi, N., & Cettolo, M. (2008). 
IRSTLM: an open source toolkit for handling large 
scale language models. Paper presented at the 
Interspeech. 

Kneser, R., & Ney, H. (1995). Improved backing-off 
for m-gram language modeling. Paper presented at 
the Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 1995. 
ICASSP-95., 1995 International Conference on. 

Koehn, P., Hoang, H., Birch, A., Callison-Burch, C., 
Federico, M., Bertoldi, N., . . . Herbst, E. (2007). 
Moses: open source toolkit for statistical machine 
translation. Paper presented at the Proceedings of 
the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL on Interactive 
Poster and Demonstration Sessions, Prague, Czech 
Republic.  

Koehn, P., Och, F. J., & Marcu, D. (2003). Statistical 
phrase-based translation. Paper presented at the 
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North 
American Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics on Human Language 
Technology-Volume 1. 

Och, F. J., & Ney, H. (2003). A systematic 
comparison of various statistical alignment models. 
Comput. Linguist., 29(1), 19-51. doi: 
10.1162/089120103321337421 

 

                                                 

232


