



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and J D Pawar. Proc. of the 11th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 162–166,
Goa, India. December 2014. c©2014 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

PaCMan : Parallel Corpus Management Workbench

Diptesh Kanojia
CSE, IIT Bombay

diptesh@cse.iitb.ac.in

Raj Dabre
GSI, Kyoto University
prajdabre@gmail.com

Manish Shrivastava
CSE, IIIT Hyderabad

mani.shrivastava@gmail.com

Pushpak Bhattacharyya
CSE, IIT Bombay
pb@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract

We present a Parallel Corpora Manage-
ment tool that aides parallel corpora gen-
eration for the task of Machine Translation
(MT). It takes source and target text of a
corpus for any language pair in text file
format, or zip archives containing multi-
ple corresponding text files. Then, it pro-
vides with a helpful interface to lexicog-
raphers for manual translation / validation,
and gives out the corrected text files as out-
put. It provides various dictionary refer-
ences as help within the interface which
increase the productivity and efficiency of
a lexicographer. It also provides automatic
translation of the source sentence using an
integrated MT system. The tool interface
includes a corpora management system
which facilitates maintenance of parallel
corpora by assigning roles such as man-
ager, lexicographer etc. We have designed
a novel tool that provides aides like ref-
erences to various dictionary sources such
as Wordnets, Shabdkosh, Wikitionary etc.
We also provide manual word alignment
correction which is visualized in the tool
and can lead to its gamification in the fu-
ture, thus, providing a valuable source of
word / phrase alignments.

1 Introduction

Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) depends
primarily on parallel corpora. The quality of par-
allel corpora available can make or break a SMT
system. The process of creating a parallel corpus
is neither easy nor cheap. It is essential to produce
good quality parallel corpus efficiently to ensure
time and cost effectiveness of the process.

Traditional method of parallel corpus creation
involves manual translation of every sentence by

inputting a monolingual corpus and translating
its each sentence. But, strict quality checks and
skilled translators need to be employed to ensure
correctness and, usually, the process of translation
is followed by a validation phase to ensure quality
and reliability.

The process of parallel corpora generation can
be divided into the following phases: translation,
validation and sentence alignment. Furthermore,
to help SMT tools like Moses (Koehn et al., 2007),
it would be desirable to manually correct word
alignments generated by an automatic tool such as
GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003).

We present a comprehensive workbench to
streamline the process of corpora creation for
SMT. This common workbench allows for corpora
generation, validation, evaluation, alignment and
management simultaneously. We aim to simplify
the laborious manual task of corpora generation
for all language pairs, and provide with aides at
each step.

2 Related Work

There are a wide class of document management
solutions and products which fall under the cate-
gory of “corpora and text mining”. We find that
though a lot of effort has gone into creating tools
to aid in corpora generation for lower level NLP
tasks such as POS tagging and chunking, but not
much work has gone in the direction of corpora
generation aid for Machine Translation (MT). The
few similar works that we did find are noted below.

PolyPhraZ (Hajlaoui and Boitet, 2004) is one
such tool which helps in visualizing, editing and
evaluating MT systems on parallel corpora. Ca-
sualConc (Imao, 2008) is a parallel concordancer
which generates keyword in context concordance
lines, word clusters, collocation analysis, and
word counts.

MemoQ (Kilgray, 2006) and Trados (SDL,
2007) are also Computer Aided Translation (CAT)162



Figure 1: Snapshot of PaCMan on validation /
translation screen

systems which are commercially available with
features like Translation memory, and Term Ex-
traction.

Wordfast is CAT system having just one free
version “WordFast Anywhere”. We studied and
used the system, but found the interface less in-
tuitive, and hard to use. “WordFast Anywhere”
also has an integrated MT system which provides
translations via Microsoft Bing and an integrated
MT system.

Another system we came across is a web
based text corpora development system (Yablon-
sky, 2003) that focuses on the development of
UML-specifications, architecture and implemen-
tations of DBMS tools.

None of the above mentioned systems provide
a word alignment visualization, which can be
corrected manually, and saved to provide perfect
phrase tables later.

3 Parallel Corpora Management System

Parallel Corpora Management System (PaCMan)
(Figure: 1) is a platform-independent web-based
workbench for managing all the processes in-
volved in the generation of good quality parallel
corpora. Along with covering the procedural /
managerial aspects of the parallel corpora gener-
ation process, this tool also provides the means to
track and manage the assignment and reporting of
tasks in real-time.

As noted earlier, the tasks involved in the gen-
eration of a good quality parallel corpora can be
broadly classified as follows:

• Translation

• Validation

• Sentence Alignment

• Word Alignment

Figure 2: Workflow of the system

Apart from these, there is also a need to manage
the complete process. For an on-line tool such as
the one we present, following activities need to be
considered:

• User Registration for Superusers (Manager),
translators / validators and aligners

• Task assignment and Tracking

• User session management

We have developed PaCMan to aid at every step of
the process while ensuring high quality assistance.
In the following sections we cover the various fea-
tures that the tool provides.

3.1 Translation
Manual translation is the first step towards creat-
ing a parallel corpus. It is usually done by ex-
perienced translators who rely on their knowledge
of source and target language to perform the task.
But still, it proves a difficult task. From our expe-
rience in creating parallel corpus, we have learned
that the task of manual translation can be made
much easier if some assistances like dictionary
aids, automated translations etc. are provided to
the translators. We find that translators could do
with some help on the following fronts:

• Translation of rare source language words

• Language input for non-standard scripts (De-
vanagari in case of Hindi and Marathi)

• Access to automatic translation of source text
to speed up the translation process

• Access to previous translations of recurring
phrases

In this tool, we have successfully addressed the
above mentioned issues.163



Figure 3: Snapshot of Right Click context menu

Figure 4: Snapshot of dictionary suggestions

3.1.1 Customized Context Menu Help

It is often the case that the translators, even with
their substantial experience, find it hard to re-
call the meaning of some rare source language
words. PaCMan helps overcome this difficulty by
integrating various dictionary resources, and ref-
erences. These dictionaries are provided on the
translation screen as right-click menu items. Us-
ing these dictionaries the translator can get the
meaning of a word simply by highlighting the
word and choosing the preferred dictionary from
the right-click menu (Figure: 3).

We have also integrated the corresponding UNL
dictionary (Bhattacharyya, 2006) in the tool so
that a user can select a word and can get its mean-
ing on the same screen simply at the click of a
button (Figure: 4). Further, we have integrated
language specific Wordnets (Fellbaum, 1998) and
(Dipak Narayan and Bhattacharyya, 2002), Shab-
dKosh (a Hindi-English dictionary) (Soni, 2003),
Wikipedia and Wiktionary for these languages in
the right-click menu. While these dictionaries pro-
vide the different meanings of a word, the user can
also choose to translate a word or phrase directly
by choosing “Google Translate” from the right-
click context menu.

We found that the requirement of inputting data
in Indian langugages can be easily overcome by

Figure 6: Snapshot of Word Alignment Box

integrating a transliteration API, using which the
roman script should be converted to the chosed
Indian script automatically. Thus, We integrated
“Google Transliteration API” in our tool.

Further, if the user wants to see the word’s use in
contexts other than the given source language sen-
tence, she can choose to fire a Google search query
by choosing “Search in Google” option from the
right-click menu.

3.1.2 Automatic Translation
It is sometimes easier and faster to correct a trans-
lation than to translate from scratch. Also, even
if a machine generated translation is syntactically
or semantically incorrect, it can give the translator
a kernel around which the final correct translation
may be built.

Thus, we have integrated Sata-Anuvadak
(Anoop Kunchukuttan and Bhattacharyya, 2014),
a Moses Decoder based SMT system for multiple
Indic languages with our tool which can generate
an automatic translation of a given English sen-
tence at the click of a button. In the worst case,
the translator would still need to manually trans-
late but she would have gotten a fair idea of the
possible translation, given some words get trans-
lated correctly.

3.1.3 Previous Translations
Parallel corpora generation very quickly becomes
a repetitive task. A translator at times would like
to find previously translated sentences. This has
been made easy by introducing at ability to search
for a word or a phrase and find the parallel sen-
tences with the translations for that particular word
or phrase (Figure: 5).

3.2 Validation

Validation or quality control of the translated sen-
tences is the next logical step. Even the best trans-
lators can make mistakes, so it is imperative that
we re-check the translations. Validation is very
similar to translation except that the translations
are already available. All the aids available to a164



Figure 5: Snapshot of Search Results

translator are also available to a validator. A val-
idator may change a sentence completely or make
minor modifications as the need may be.

A validator can also be given fresh parallel cor-
pus which is not generated on this work bench.
Such corpus may be uploaded by any superuser
responsible for a language pair.

3.3 Word Alignment Visualization and
Gamification

The accuracy of a SMT system depends on the
quality of word alignment produced by an aligner.
For free word ordered languages and languages
with rich morphology, aligners can often make
many mistakes which eventually have dire effect
on decoder accuracy. We aim to provide word
level alignment for every sentence in the corpus
(Figure: 6). It is expected that this will greatly en-
hance the performance of an SMT system trained
on the alignment data provided by our tool. Cur-
rently, we have trained GIZA++ on nearly 48000
sentences.

We provide the means to augment the word
alignments to eventually aid in higher accuracy
for SMT. We have integrated GIZA++ aligner with
our tool to allow a user to correct the alignments
provided by it. A user might also choose to do
the alignment completely manually using the vi-
sual drag and drop interface provided in the tool.
Its rich interface lets you align words and phrases
with a lot of ease. This can easily be pushed to-
wards a crowd sourced word alignment collector
with some gamification. We believe it can lead to
a very high amount of perfect word / phrase align-
ments.

3.4 Administrative Tasks

Corpora Management System provides for vari-
ous roles a user might need to play in the process
of parallel corpus generation. The system is de-
signed to work for multiple language pairs simul-
taneously. Each corpus can have its own superuser
(manager). The superuser then distributes tasks
among other users to work.

3.4.1 Corpora Upload and Download

Superusers can upload corpora to be translated,
validated or aligned. Corpora upload is in the
form of two plain text files in unicode encoding
or two archives containing plain text files. For
translation, only a single source file needs to be
uploaded whereas for any other task two parallel
files are needed. Once the assigned task has been
performed the registered user can download com-
plete or partial data or can commit the data which
the superuser would finally commit to the master
database.

3.4.2 Task Assignment

Superusers can assign tasks to different users. A
superuser chooses complete or partial corpora and
assigns it to a user who can perform the assigned
task. At the time of corpora assignment a copy of
the data is created specific to the user while the
master database remains untouched. The master
database can only be changed when the user fin-
ishes the task and sends the data back to the supe-
ruser. At which point the superuser commits the
data back to the master database. A superuser can
track the work done by any user who has been as-
signed a task by her.165



3.4.3 Session Management

The system is equipped with both browser based
and internal session management. When a user
logs in, she is taken directly to the last sentence
that was being validated / translated at the time of
previous logout.

While navigating through the sentences a user
can choose to skip sentences if she so desires.
At any point of time she can choose to “View
Skipped” sentences and work with them. When
she is finished with the skipped sentences, she can
go back to the normal view, landing on the last un-
saved sentence.

4 Design

The system is developed in PHP and uses MySQL
as backend. Various Javascript and jQuery snip-
pets have b een developed along with AJAX to
make sure the user stays on the same page. The
system has been designed such that user would
find every validation aid on the same screen, de-
creasing the shuffles between screens thus increas-
ing productivity. The advantage of such a design is
that the user would not have to change application
for different tasks like referring to dictionaries etc.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

We have presented PaCMan, a web-based system
that aids parallel corpora generation for the task
of machine translation. The system provides an
intuitive interface and many valuable features that
increase the productivity at every stage of corpora
generation process. It provides the user with dic-
tionary references, and automatic translations dur-
ing translation and validation of parallel corpus.
The system also aids word pair alignments. It
provides an authentication based corpora manage-
ment system where multiple parallel corpora can
be maintained. The system is open for use to ev-
erybody. We expect further extensions of our sys-
tem will support the development of better parallel
corpora and aid machine translation further.

We believe gamification of our word pair align-
ment feature will help in collecting perfect word /
phrase pair alignments which can result in a bet-
ter performing Moses decoder, and thus a higher
accuracy of an SMT system. We aim at providing
such an extension of our system soon.

References
Rajen Chatterjee Ritesh Shah Anoop Kunchukuttan,

Abhijit Mishra and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2014.
Shata-anuvadak: Tackling multiway translation of
indian languages. In Proceedings of the 9th Edition
of its Language Resources and Evaluation Confer-
ence., LREC ’14.

Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2006. English - hindi dic-
tionary. http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/
˜hdict/webinterface_user/.

Prabhakar Pande Dipak Narayan, Debasri Chakrabarti
and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2002. An experience
in building the indo wordnet - a wordnet for hindi. In
Proceesdings of First International Conference on
Global WordNet, Mysore, India.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. Bradford Books.

Najeh Hajlaoui and Christian Boitet. 2004. Polyphraz:
A tool for the management of parallel corpora.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multilingual
Linguistic Ressources, MLR ’04, pages 109–116,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Yasu Imao. 2008. Casualconc. http://sites.
google.com/site/casualconc/.

Kilgray. 2006. memoq [computer software]. http:
//kilgray.com/products/memoq.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL
on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
ACL ’07, pages 177–180, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

SDL. 2007. Sdl trados studio [computer soft-
ware]. http://www.translationzone.
com/products/sdl-trados-studio/.

Manish Soni. 2003. Shabdkosh. http://www.
shabdkosh.com.

Serge Yablonsky. 2003. The corpora management
system based on java and oracle technologies. In
Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics - Volume 2, EACL ’03, pages 179–182,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

166


