





























Leveraging Morpho-semantics for the Discovery of Relations in
Chinese Wordnet

Shu-Kai Hsieh
Graduate Institute of Linguistics

National Taiwan University
Taipei, Taiwan

shukaihsieh@ntu.edu.tw

Yu-Yun Chang
Graduate Institute of Linguistics

National Taiwan University
Taipei, Taiwan

yuyun.unita@gmail.com

Abstract
Semantic relations of different types have
played an important role in wordnet, and have
been widely recognized in various fields. In re-
cent years, with the growing interests of con-
structing semantic network in support of in-
telligent systems, automatic semantic relation
discovery has become an urgent task. This
paper aims to extract semantic relations re-
lying on the in situ morpho-semantic struc-
ture in Chinese which can dispense of an
outside source such as corpus or web data.
Manual evaluation of thousands of word pairs
shows that most relations can be successful
predicted. We believe that it can serve as a
valuable starting point in complementing with
other approaches, which will hold promise for
the robust lexical relations acquisition.

1 Introduction
Semantic relations are at the core of WordNet-
alike architecture, and constitute the essential
and integral part of linguistic and conceptual
knowledge formalization. However, the man-
ual labeling task of semantic relations is very
laborious.

To minimize the labor, in recent years,
automatic ways of extracting semantic rela-
tions from textual data have been proposed.
Among these methods, extensive works have
been done based on the so-called pattern-based
approaches, which was pioneered by (Hearst,
1992). The patterns predefined or plucked out
of a corpus are often referred to as lexico-
syntactic patterns, which serve as an infor-
mation marker for a certain relation between
two concepts. Later representative works us-
ing such approaches include (Cimiano et al.,
2005), and (Pantel and Pennacchiotti, 2006),
etc. Pattern-based extraction has shown quite
reasonable success characterized by a (rela-
tively) high precision rate, but suffers from
a very low recall resulting from the fact that
the patterns are rare in corpora. Remedies
against the problem involve exploiting scaled

data from the web (Cimiano et al., 2005),
but runs the risk of influenced by the web
genre (Alain, 2010).

To enrich the relations coverage in Chinese
Wordnet (CWN), in this paper, we propose
an in situ approach by exploiting the morph-
semantic information. This method, simple
and straightforward as it seems, does not incur
the difficulties associated with lexical gaps in
cross-language mapping that any translation-
based model would encounter; and it is also
economic and complementary with previous
approaches in that we can dispense of an out-
side corpus resource.

In what follows, Section 2 gives a brief sum-
mary of lexical semantic relations acquisition
from two perspectives. Section 3 explains the
proposed methods for the automatic discovery
of semantic relations, which are the main focus
of this study. Section 4 shows the experiment
results and discussion. Finally, we conclude
this paper in Section 5.

2 Relations in Chinese Wordnet
Modelling on English WordNet, CWN has
been launched by Academia Sinica in 2006 and
continuously broadened its scope (Huang et
al., 2010).1. The initial version of CWN con-
tains a manually created fine-grained senses
repository but sparse relations. However, se-
mantic relation labeling is a time-consuming
and labor-demanding task. Two main meth-
ods were employed to automatic relation ac-
quisition.

2.1 Bilingual Bootstrapping Approach
Though lexical semantic relations (LSRs)
could be presumed to be more universal than
word senses in human languages, a direct

1Freely available at http://lope.linguistics.
ntu.edu.tw/cwn



copying or simple porting of LSRs from one
wordnet to another could possibly lead to
invalid relations in the target wordnet. A
broader view on the underlying inference logic
of cross-language LSRs with 26 rules was first
proposed by (Huang et al., 2002) and for-
mally introduced in (Hsieh, 2009). A series
of large-scaled bilingual bootstrapping experi-
ments showed substantial improvements (with
55% precision) over baseline model (47%).
However, it was also reported that among the
correctly predicted LSRs, a large portion (c.a.
60%) belongs to non-lexical relations such as
similar to, pertainym, also see, etc.

To look deeper into the issues, second ex-
periment focusing only on the hypernymy-
troponymy among the verbs was conducted.
The bootstrapping model returned totally
12214 verb pairs mapped from WordNet 3.0,
which were manually evaluated. The analy-
sis shows that around 50% verb pairs can be
recognized as fit in CWN, however, two main
error types are identified: [1] Lexicalization of
verbs: similar to the problems of lexical gap
appeared in the cross-language sense mapping,
a single word in English often has meanings
that require several words in Chinese to ex-
plain. By analyzing the results, it is found that
many verbs could not be described by a sin-
gle lexeme in Chinese. [2] Mismatch of synset:
other than the above, there are cases when the
hypernymy-troponymy relations of the verb
pairs are approved, but the synset that CWN
chooses is not the same with that of PWN.
This could be due to the different semantic
ranges between CWN and PWN hypernymy-
troponymy pairs, or due to the subtlety of
sense division when the sense levels are sim-
ilar.

The bilingual bootstrapping experiments
showed that lexical relations turn out to be
not subject to automatic importing and would
still require tremendous human efforts of vali-
dations.

2.2 Pattern-based Approach
There has been a variety of studies on the
automatic acquisition of lexical semantic re-
lations, Hearst (Hearst, 1992) first proposed a
lexico-syntactic pattern based method for au-
tomatic acquisition of hyponymy from unre-
stricted texts, and since then automatically

finding semantic relations by using various
pattern-based algorithm has become the most
common approach.

We (Lo et al., 2008) have tried to define
some patterns (e.g., a manner of ) to extract
troponymy among verbs in Chinese. To avoid
the interference of unnecessary contextual in-
formation which may include modal verbs,
hedging, negation that often occur in different
corpus genres, we applied the proposed pat-
terns on the gloss of CWN. The results were
evaluated with the substitution tests. Substi-
tution test is commonly used in linguistic lit-
erature (Tsai et al., 2002); EuroWordnet pro-
vided linguistic tests for each semantic rela-
tion to examine the validity. In (Tsai et al.,
2002), sentence formulae were created follow-
ing the frame in EuroWordnet to examine the
validity of certain semantic relations in Chi-
nese. Linguistic semantic tests help researcher
check if two word meanings have a certain kind
of semantic relation or not, and further ensure
the quality and consistence of the database.
Therefore, following the previous framework,
a set of sentence formulae based on properties
of troponymy was created to verify the cor-
rectness of hypernymy-troponymy verb pairs.
However, due to data sparseness, the system
can achieve only high precision but low recall.

3 Morpho-semantic Linkage

Instead of assuming any external context in
which words to be linked appear, we propose
to exploit the language-internal evidence man-
ifested at the morpho-syntactic levels in Chi-
nese, which is assumably guided by underlying
semantic composition of morphemes.

3.1 Morpho-semantics in WordNets
The idea of exploiting morpho-semantic in-
formation for the enrichment of WordNet has
been discussed and implemented in the Word-
Net community for a while. (Miller and Fell-
baum, 2003) first described the importance of
adding ”morphosemantic links” to WordNet,
with later works (Fellbaum et al., 2009) on the
classification of regular polysemous patterns of
morphosemantic V-N pairs related via -er af-
fixation (e.g., build-builder).

The notion of morpho-semantic links
(MSLs) has been applied to other



(morphologically-rich) languages such as
Czech (Pala and Hlavác̆ková, 2007) (in terms
of D-relations), Turkish (Bilgin et al., 2004)
and Bantu languages (Bosch et al., 2008).
It is worth of mentioning that the proposed
morpho-semantic relations or derivational
relations are relations that hold among literals
(lemmas) rather than synsets, which leaves
some room of discussion about the extra
level these relations should be anchored
because neither paradigmatic nor syntagmatic
relations would fit.

It is note here that for morphologically-poor
languages like Chinese, the MSLs are quite dif-
ferent in that they do not exist between stems
and suffixes, but between word-to-be/word-
used-to-be morphemes instead. This has the
practical advantages for the enrichment of ex-
isting paradigmatic relations, as we will intro-
duce in the following.

3.2 Probing Morpho-Semantic
Relations in Chinese

The vast majority of Chinese characters rep-
resent the morphemes. It has been always a
controversy over the notion of wordhood in the
lexical history of Chinese. In a way any Chi-
nese character can be seen as word-to-be or
word-used-to-be morphemes. Given the fact
that the relative predominance of the mono-
syllabic word in ancient Chinese has shifted to
bi-syllabic words in modern Chinese, the huge
semantic weight carried by the morphemes
has made the idea of character-centered lex-
icon deeply ingrained in Chinese mind. Or-
thographically, the lack of word delimiter
(such as space) in texts worsens the achieve-
ment of consensus regarding the distinction
between words, compounds and phrases, and
thus makes the segmentation a long-standing
heated topic in Chinese NLP.

We follow the cognitive-functional stance
in the respect that lexicon and syntax form
a continuum rather than two strictly sepa-
rated modules. We argue that the Morpho-
Semantic Relations (MSRs), i.e., the ways
morphemes combine to form composite mean-
ings, can function as the organic linkage in re-
vealing the composition mechanism among the
continuum of different lexical units in varied
contexts. In terms of WordNet’s paradigmatic
relations, this means that morpho-semantic in-

formation in Chinese can be used to identify
these relations based on the position and se-
mantic role of morphemes in modification.

In the case of Verb-Verb (compound) words,
where the word is composed of two verbal
morphemes, linguistics have sorted out differ-
ent types resulting from the interplay of mor-
phemes within (Li and Thompson, 1981). For
instance, for the type of so-called ‘parallel’
VV compounds, V1 (verb in the first position)
and V2 (verb in the second position) share
the similar meaning (near synonyms), such as
bang-zhu ‘help-assist’ (help), fang-qi ‘loosen-
abandon’ (give up). With a fine-grained sense
analysis, we can label the troponymy between
V1 and V1V2, where V1 is widely recognized as
the component that carries heavier semantic
load in VV compound (a.k.a. left-headedness).

In the case of Noun-Noun (compound)
words, e.g., noodle-shop ‘mian-dian’ (noodle
shop), where the word is composed of two
nominal morphemes, the N1modifier - N2head
structure is prevalently observed (a.k.a. right-
headedness). The linkage between N1N2 and
N2 can be labeled as hypernymy-hyponymy.

4 From MSL to Lexical Semantic
Relations

4.1 Hypothesis
As argued in previous section, Morpho-
Semantic Linkage abound in abundant rela-
tional knowledge. In this study, we aim to
enrich the CWN with relations leveraged by
operationalizing MSL.

The automatic labeling of the lexical seman-
tic relations on word-pairs is quite straightfor-
ward. For N1N2 compounds, ≺ N1N2, N2≻
pairs are labeled with hypernymy-hyponymy,
and ≺N1N2, N1≻ pairs are labeled with
meronymy-holonymy.

The cases of VV compounds are trickier, the
flow of judgement is shown in algorithm 1.
When V1 has synonymy or near-synonymy
with V2, then V1V2 are troponyms of both
V1 and V2. If V2 is on the list of 完住掉開壞
成, which is a subclass of the VV compounds
that are often called resultative compounds, for
there is a causal relation between the event
represented by the first compound of such a
compound and the event/state represented by
the second component.



Data: VV compounds
Result: Labeled relations between V1V2

and V1/V2
initialization (POS tagging);
if V1 is V2 then

return troponymy;
else

if V2 is 完住掉開壞成 then
return causality;

if V2 is 上下來去進回出落入向往過起
then

return directional;
end
else

return pertainymy;
end

end
Algorithm 1: Pseudo code for relations la-
beling between V1V2 and V1/V 2

4.2 Experiments
In this section, we discuss the experiment we
designed, the evaluation and error analysis.

The first step is to create a list of term
pairs, which a total of 561,703 words covered
in CWN 2, Sinica BOW 3, and Ministry of Ed-
ucation Online Chinese Dictionary 4. In this
experiment, we focus only on bi-syllabic words
represented by two characters, which consti-
tute the largest proportion of Chinese vocab-
ulary repository.

In order to filter out a coarse-grained bi-
syllabic word list, only both characters of a
bi-syllabic word that could be found in the
big word list, are preserved. Additionally, four
principles are applied to construct a more fine-
grained word list: [1] the part-of-speech tags
of both characters within a bi-syllabic word
should be NN or VV; [2] bi-syllabic words con-
taining metaphors are excluded; [3] bi-syllabic
morphemic word (e.g., 齷齪 (sordid)) or ar-
chaic words (e.g.,搗家) are not included; and
[4] proper nouns, (e.g.,成龍(Jackie Chan)) are
not considered. Therefore, a list with 1482 bi-
syllabic words are produced. Using the hy-
potheses proposed in section 4.1, the relations

2See http://lope.linguistics.ntu.edu.tw/cwn/
3See http://bow.sinica.edu.tw/
4See http://dict.revised.moe.edu.tw/

are automatically labelled on the related word
pairs.

A manual evaluation of the resulting seman-
tic relations lists was conducted. We have cre-
ated a wiki-based collaborative platform5 on
which registered users can contribute to CWN
by adding new entries, editing existing ones
and rating one another’s contribution to en-
sure the quality of collective intelligence (Lee
et al, 2013). Figure 1 shows the snapshot of
the system.

With three linguistic graduate students
judging the correctness, the inter-annotator
agreement measured by Fleiss kappa (Fleiss,
1971) was used, which is defined as:

k =
P − Pe
1− Pe

where the numerator expresses the degree of
agreement actually achieved, and the denom-
inator the degree of agreement that is possi-
ble above chance. As a result, it’s interest-
ing to see that there is a very poor agree-
ment between three raters (k = −0.7069972)
on the predicted relations of ≺ W1 − W1W2
≻, which also gets low precision rate; while
agreement achieves a moderate degree (with
k = 0.5835113) on the predicted relations of
≺ W2−W1W2 ≻, which also gets high perfor-
mance in precision.6 Figure 2 shows the en-
richment of relations through the experiment.

4.3 Discussion
The experiment we carried out gives rise to
some issues for discussion. Table 1 shows
the performance for each predicted relation.
When we scrutinize the portion with low pre-
cision rate, we found that the problematic
cases are mostly from the predicted meronymy-
holonymy relations between NN compounds,
i.e., ≺ N1N2 − N1 ≻. It is in fact not sur-
prising in that the definition of part-whole is
not easily stated, and the judgement criteria in
the previous literature are not unproblematic
too. For instance, given the restrictive rules

5See http://lope.linguistics.ntu.edu.tw/
cwikin/

6The results will be accessible at http://140.112.
147.131/



Figure 1: User graphical interface of CWIKIN

Figure 2: Relations added



that Cruse (1986) sets on the meronymy rela-
tion with the co-existence of both the ‘N1N2
is part of N1’ and ‘N1 has N1N2’ paraphrases,
the raters did not all agree that the relation
hold between黨部 (party headquarter) and黨
(political party).

Another main error sources come from the
predicted troponymy-hypernymy relations be-
tween ≺ V1V2 − V1 ≻. Recall that we hy-
pothesize that if V1 and V2 are synonymous,
then V1V2 is automatically labeled as tro-
ponym of V1. The errors arose here can be
mainly ascribed to the lack of consistent Chi-
nese thesaurus. In this experiment, the CWN
synset (fine-grained synonym determination)
and CILIN semantic class (coarse-grained syn-
onym determination) are integrated for predic-
tion, both has different criteria regarding the
sameness or nearness of senses between two
verbs. In addition, no proper rules for the eval-
uation of troponymy among raters constitute
the difficulties as well.

Furthermore, there are two points can be
made. [1], the experiment of relation discov-
ery is conducted at the level of word-lemma,
not concept(word-sense), in terms of wordnet,
the generic label ’semantic relations’ are re-
garded as the relation occurring between lin-
guistic units rather than between concepts
(i.e., synsets.) Currently, the predicted re-
lations are presumably connected with the
first sense of the word lemma in CWN. A
fine-grained annotation will be left for future
work. [2], in the evaluation task, when the
raters did not agree with the predicted rela-
tion type, they also provide proper relation
types for the pair, which are not named rela-
tions explicitly defined in WordNet. For ex-
ample, the qualia modification between cer-
tain N1N2 and N2, such as 肉醬(meat sauce)
- 醬(sauce). This is different from patterned-
based approaches where a bottom-up method-
ology is taken because named and explicitly
defined semantic relations of interest are pre-
sumed before lexico-syntactic patterns are ex-
tracted and utilized to search for instances of
the relations

5 Conclusion

Lexical semantic relations offers rich linguis-
tic and conceptual knowledge information and
are the most to fill in for wordnets. Semantic
relations extraction has been one of the most
important tasks in many fields. The challenges
pertaining to this task are multifaceted. The
most active pattern-based approaches provide
a reasonable solution, but poses difficulties as
well.

In this paper, we have presented a linguistic
alternative to the task in Chinese by resort-
ing to resources of language in itself. Rather
than focusing on the patterns design - relation
extraction model, a notion of Morpo-semantic
links is proposed to support the extraction and
labeling of a wide variety of semantic relations
in Chinese. The experiment shows that it is
possible to discover semantic relations with-
out being influenced by corpus size and gen-
res. This simple strategy can also serve as the
linguistic baseline for related works.

Future works include: [1] extending to VN
and NV compounds (Song and Qiu, 1981),
and more fined-grained classification of seman-
tic relations among these word-pairs, and [2]
mapping with Japanese Wordnet where an
amount of Chinese characters are employed for
advanced cross-linguistic validation. We also
hope that the work presented here will shed
new light on the understanding of morpho-
semantic representation of natural languages.

References
Alain Auger and Caroline Barrière (eds). 2010.

Probing Semantic Relations. John Benjamins
Publishing, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.

Orhan Bilgin, Özlem Çetinoglu and Kemal Oflazer.
2004. Morphosemantic Relations In and Across
Wordnets: A Study Based on Turkish. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Second Global WordNet Confer-
ence, 60–66.

Sonja Bosch, Christiane Fellbaum and Karel Pala.
2008. Enhancing WordNets with Morphological
Relations: A Case Study from Czech, English
and Zulu. In: Proceedings of the Fourth Global
WordNet Conference, 74–90.

Philipp Cimiano, Aleksander Pivk Lars, Schmidt-
Thieme and Steffen Staab. 2005. Learning Tax-
onomic Relations from Heterogeneous Sources of



Word Pairs Type of Relations Precision Observations

W1-W1W2
Meronymy 33% 956
Pertainymy 25% 352
Troponymy 29% 174

W2-W1W2

Causality 90% 73
Directional 90% 43
Hypernymy/Hyponymy 95% 956
Pertainymy 93% 241
Troponymy 92% 169

Table 1: Inter-annotator agreement across all relations

Evidence. In: Buitelaar (eds),Ontology Learn-
ing from Text: Methods, Evaluation and Appli-
cations, 55–73.

Christiane Fellbaum, Anne Osherson, and Peter.
E. Clark. 2009. Putting Semantics into Word-
Net’s ”Morphosemantic” Links. In: Zygmunt
Vetulani and Hans Uszkoreit (eds). Human Lan-
guage Technology. Challenges of the Information
Society, 350-358.

Joseph. L. Fleiss. 1971. Measuring Nominal Scale
Agreement among Many Raters. Psychological
Bulletin, 76(5): 378–382.

Marti A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic Acquisition of
Hyponyms from Large Text Corpora. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING), 539–
545.

Shu-Kai Hsieh. 2009. Formal Description of Lexi-
cal Semantic Relations. Concentric: Studies in
Linguistics, 35(1):87–109.

Chu-Ren Huang, I-Ju Tseng, and Dylan Tsai.
2002. Translating Lexical Semantic Relations.
In: SEMANET ’02 Proceedings of the 2002
workshop on Building and using Semantic Net-
works, 1–7.

Chu-Ren Huang,Shu-Kai Hsieh,Jia-Fei Hong,Yun-
Zhu Chen,I-Li Su,Yong-Xiang Chen and Sheng-
Wei Huang. 2010. Chinese Wordnet: Design,
Implementation, and Application of an Infras-
tructure for Cross-Lingual Knowledge Process-
ing. Journal of Chinese Information Processing,
24(2):14–23.

Chih-Yao Lee, Yu-Yun Chang, Shu-Kai Hsieh, Jia-
Fei Hong and Chu-Ren Huang. 2013. CWIKIN:
A wiki that Helps Quicken the Development of
Chinese Wordnet. The 8th International Confer-
ence of the Asian Association for Lexicography.
Bali, Indonesia.

Charles N. Li and Sandra A. Thompson. 1981.
Mandarin Chinese: A Functional Reference
Grammar. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

Chiao-Shan Lo, Yi-Rung Chen, Chih-Yu Lin, and
Shu-Kai Hsieh. 2008. Automatic Labeling of
Troponymy for Chinese Verbs. In: Proceedings
of the 20th Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics and Speech Processing (ROCLING).

George Miller and Christiane Fellbaum. 2003.
Morphosemantic Links in WordNet. Traitement
Automatique de Langue, 44(2):69–80.

Karel Pala and Dana Hlavác̆ková. 2007. Deriva-
tional Relations in Czech WordNet. In: ACL ’07
Proceedings of the Workshop on Balto-Slavonic
Natural Language Processing: Information Ex-
traction and Enabling Technologies. Strouds-
burg, PA, USA.

Patrick Pantel and Marco Pennacchiotti. 2006.
Espresso: Leveraging Generic Patterns for Au-
tomatically Harvesting Semantic Relations. In:
Proceedings of Conference on Computational
Linguistics / Association for Computational
Linguistics (COLING/ACL-06).

Gerardo Sierra, Rodrigo Alarcón, César Aguilar
and Carme Bach. 2010. Definitional Verbal
Patterns for Semantic Relation Extraction. In:
Alain Auger and Caroline Barrière (eds). Prob-
ing Semantic Relations. John Benjamins Pub-
lishing, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.

Zuoyan Song and Qiu Likun. 2013. Qualia Rela-
tions in Chinese Nominal Compounds Contain-
ing Verbal Elements. International Journal of
Knowledge and Language Processing, 28(1):114–
133.

Dylan B. Tsai, Chu-Ren Huang, Shu-Chuan Tseng,
Elanna J.I.Lin, Keh-jiann Chen and Yuan-hsun
Chuang. 2002. Chinese Lexical Semantic
Relations: Definition and Classification Crite-
ria. Journal of Chinese Information Processing,
2002(4):21–31.


