



















































Challenging incrementality in human language processing: two operations for a cognitive architecture


Proc. of 5th Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Computational Language Learning (CogACLL) @ EACL 2014, pages 1–2,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Challenging incrementality in human language processing: two
operations for a cognitive architecture

Philippe Blache
Aix-Marseille Université & CNRS

LPL (UMR7309), 13100, Aix-en-Provence, France
blache@blri.fr

The description of language complexity and the
cognitive load related to the different linguistic
phenomena is a key issue for the understanding
of language processing. Many studies have fo-
cused on the identification of specific parameters
that can lead to a simplification or on the con-
trary to a complexification of the processing (e.g.
the different difficulty models proposed in (Gib-
son, 2000), (Warren and Gibson, 2002), (Hawkins,
2001) ). Similarly, different simplification fac-
tors can be identified, such as the notion of activa-
tion, relying on syntactic priming effects making it
possible to predict (or activate) a word (Vasishth,
2003). Several studies have shown that complex-
ity factors are cumulative (Keller, 2005), but can
be offset by simplification (Blache et al., 2006). It
is therefore necessary to adopt a global point of
view of language processing, explaining the inter-
play between positive and negative cumulativity,
in other words compensation effects.

From the computational point of view, some
models can account more or less explicitly for
these phenomena. This is the case of the Surprisal
index (Hale, 2001), offering for each word an as-
sessment of its integration costs into the syntactic
structure. This evaluation is done starting from the
probability of the possible solutions. On their side,
symbolic approaches also provide an estimation
of the activation degree, depending on the num-
ber and weight of syntactic relations to the current
word (Blache et al., 2006); (Blache, 2013).

These approaches are based on the classical idea
that language processing is incremental and oc-
curs word by word. There are however several ex-
perimental evidences showing that a higher level
of processing is used by human subjects. Eye-
tracking data show for example that fixations are
done by chunks, not by words (Rauzy and Blache,
2012). Similarly, EEG experiments have shown
that processing multiword expressions (for exam-
ple idioms) relies on global mechanisms (Vespig-

nani et al., 2010); (Rommers et al., 2013).
Starting from the question of complexity and its

estimation, I will address in this presentation the
problem of language processing and its organiza-
tion. I propose more precisely, using computa-
tional complexity models, to define a cohesion in-
dex between words. Such an index makes it possi-
ble to define chunks (or more generally units) that
are built directly, by aggregation, instead of syn-
tactic analysis. In this hypothesis, parsing consists
in two different processes: aggregation and inte-
gration.

Acknowledgments

This work, carried out within the Labex BLRI
(ANR-11-LABX-0036), has benefited from sup-
port from the French government, managed by
the French National Agency for Research (ANR),
under the project title Investments of the Future
A*MIDEX (ANR-11-IDEX-0001-02).

Short biography

Philipe Blache is Senior Researcher at CNRS
(Aix-Marseille University, France). He is the
Director of the BLRI (Brain and Language Re-
search Institute), federating 6 research laborato-
ries in Linguistics, Computer Science, Psychology
and Neurosciences.

Philippe Blache earned an MA in Linguistics
from Université de Provence and a MSc in Com-
puter Science from Université de la Méditerranée,
where he received in 1990 his PhD in Artificial In-
telligence.

During his career, Philippe Blache has focused
on Natural Language Processing and Formal Lin-
guistics, with a special interest in spoken language
analysis. He has proposed a linguistic theory,
called Property Grammars, suitable for describ-
ing language in its different uses, and explaining
linguistic domains interaction. His current aca-

1



demic works address the question of human lan-
guage processing and its complexity.

Philippe Blache has been director of two CNRS
laboratories in France (2LC and LPL). He has
served on numerous boards (European Chapter
of the ACL, ESSLLI standing committee, CSLP,
etc.). He is currently member of the Scien-
tific Council of Aix-Marseille Université, mem-
ber of the “Comité National de la Recherche Sci-
entifique” in computer science and he chairs the
TALN conference standing committee.

References
Philippe Blache, Barbara Hemforth, and Stéphane

Rauzy. 2006. Acceptability prediction by means of
grammaticality quantification. In ACL-44: Proceed-
ings of the 21st International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, July.

Philippe Blache. 2013. Chunks et activation : un
modèle de facilitation du traitement linguistique. In
Proceedings of TALN-2014.

Edward Gibson. 2000. The Dependency Locality The-
ory: A Distance-Based Theory of Linguistic Com-
plexity. In Alec Marantz, Yasushi Miyashita, and
Wayne O’Neil, editors, Image, Language, Brain,
pages 95–126. Cambridge, Massachussetts, MIT
Press.

John Hale. 2001. A probabilistic earley parser as a
psycholinguistic model. In Proceeding of 2nd Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Pittsburgh,
PA.

John Hawkins. 2001. Why are categories adjacent.
Journal of Linguistics, 37.

Frank Keller. 2005. Linear Optimality Theory as a
Model of Gradience in Grammar. In Gradience in
Grammar: Generative Perspectives. Oxford Univer-
sity Press.

Stéphane Rauzy and Philippe Blache. 2012. Robust-
ness and processing difficulty models. a pilot study
for eye-tracking data on the french treebank. In
Proceedings of the 1st Eye-Tracking and NLP work-
shop.

Joost Rommers, Antje S Meyer, Peter Praamstra, and
Falk Huettig. 2013. Neuropsychologia. Neuropsy-
chologia, 51(3):437–447, February.

Shravan Vasishth. 2003. Quantifying processing dif-
ficulty in human sentence parsing: The role of de-
cay, activation, and similarity-based interference.
In Proceedings of the European Cognitive Science
Conference 2003.

Francesco Vespignani, Paolo Canal, Nicola Molinaro,
Sergio Fonda, and Cristina Cacciari. 2010. Predic-
tive mechanisms in idiom comprehension. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(8):1682–1700.

Tessa Warren and Ted Gibson. 2002. The influence of
referential processing on sentence complexity. Cog-
nition, 85:79–112.

2


