



















































The Role of Adverbs in Sentiment Analysis


Proceedings of Frame Semantics in NLP: A Workshop in Honor of Chuck Fillmore (1929–2014), pages 38–41,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Role of Adverbs in Sentiment Analysis

Eduard C. Dragut
Computer and Information Sciences Dept.

Temple University
edragut@temple.edu

Christiane Fellbaum
Department of Computer Science

Princeton University
fellbaum@princeton.edu

Abstract

Sentiment Analysis, an important area of
Natural Language Understanding, often
relies on the assumption that lexemes carry
inherent sentiment values, as reflected in
specialized resources. We examine and
measure the contribution that eight intensi-
fying adverbs make to the sentiment value
of sentences, as judged by human anno-
tators. Our results show, first, that the
intensifying adverbs are not themselves
sentiment-laden but strengthen the senti-
ment conveyed by words in their contexts
to different degrees. We consider the con-
sequences for appropriate modifications of
the representation of the adverbs in senti-
ment lexicons.

1 Introduction

It was probably Chuck who coined the term “arm-
chair linguist” (Svartvik, 1991). Chuck Fillmore’s
deep commitment to the study of language — in
particular lexical semantics — on the basis of cor-
pus data served as a model that kept many of us
honest in our investigation of language. Today,
we are lucky to be able to work from our office
chairs while collecting data from a broad speaker
group by means of crowdsourcing. And Chuck’s
FrameNet taught us the importance of consider-
ing word meanings in their contexts. Our paper
presents work that tries to take this legacy to heart.

2 Sentiment Analysis

Broadly speaking, sentiment analysis (SA) at-
tempts to automatically derive a writer’s “senti-
ment” about the topic of a text. “Sentiment” is
usually categorized into “positive,” “neutral” and

“negative,” where positive corresponds to satisfac-
tion or happiness and “negative” to dissatisfaction
or unhappiness. Some work in SA further dis-
tinguishes degrees of positive and negative senti-
ment. SA often refers to lexical resources where
words are annotated with a sentiment value. Sen-
tiWordNet (SWN) (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006) as-
signs one of three sentiment values to each synset
in WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). Opinion Finder
(OF) (Wilson et al., 2005) identifies the sentiment
of the writer. Other resources include Appraisal
Lexicon (AL) (Taboada and Grieve, 2004) and
Micro-WNOp (Cerini et al., 2007).

Much of this work relies on the assumption that
specific lexemes (unique mappings of word forms
and word meanings) carry an inherent sentiment
value. This seems intuitively correct for words like
enjoy (positive), pencil (neutral) and pain (nega-
tive).

Other words may not carry inherent sentiment
value yet, in context, contribute to that of the
words they co-occur with or modify. One such
class of words comprises what we call polarity
intensifiers. In this preliminary study, we ana-
lyze the contribution of adverbial intensifiers to
the sentiment value of the sentences in which they
occur.

Consider the adverb absolutely in two sam-
ple sentences from movie reviews:

S1 He and Leonora have absolutely no chemistry
on screen whatsoever.

S2 I was absolutely delighted by the simple story
and amazing animation.

The goal of this preliminary experimental study
is to seek answers to the following questions

38



Adverbs OF AL SWN
absolutely Neu. – Neu.

awfully Neg. Neg. Neu.
enormously Neg. – Neu.
extremely Neg. – Pos.
horribly Neg. Neg. Neu.

incredibly Pos. Pos. Neu.
pretty Pos. Pos. Neu.

seriously Neg. – Neu.

Table 1: Eight intensifying adverbs and their po-
larities in sentiment lexicons.

1. Do the adverbs we investigate carry inherent
sentiment values, as postulated by some sen-
timent lexicons?

2. Which adverbs have the strongest sentiment
intensifying effect?

3. Do some adverbs have a stronger effect on
sentences with a negative polarity or on sen-
tences with a positive polarity?

4. Does the presence or absence of each adverb
affect the direction of the polarity of the sen-
tence?

3 The Experiment

We analyze whether human judgments show an ef-
fect on the sentiment ratings of sentences in the
presence or absence of selected adverbs, and how
strong the effect of each adverb is.

Let S1’ be the sentence S1 from which an ad-
verb like absolutely is removed. S2’ is de-
fined similarly. Three main observations can be
made: (1) the adverb appears in both positive and
negative sentiment-bearing sentences (S1 is nega-
tive and S2 is positive); (2) its removal from either
S1 or S2 does not change the overall polarity of the
sentence; (3) intuitively, S1 has a stronger negative
polarity value than S1’ and S2 has a stronger posi-
tive polarity value than S2’. We conduct a prelim-
inary study of polarity intensifier words and show
that they all have characteristics (1) - (3). We ex-
amine data with eight different adverbs (Table 1).

3.1 Data
We extracted sentences containing the target ad-
verbs from a corpus of 50,000 movie reviews
(Maas et al., 2011). Each sentence is extracted
from a review that is labeled either “positive” or
“negative” and correlated with a star rating. We

manually inspected the sentences and discarded
those where the target adverb was used in a modal
sense, as in Seriously, there was not one re-
spectable character in the entire script while re-
taining sentences like There is no doubt that Al-
fred Hitchcock was a seriously talented director.
For each adverb, we retained ten sentences from
positive and negative reviews each, for a total 160
sentences. We copied the original sentences, re-
moved the adverbs without making additional al-
terations. Our final dataset consisted of a total
of 320 sentences with 160 sentence pairs whose
members were identical except for the presence or
absence of the target adverbs. Below is an exam-
ple of a sentence pair, where the original sentence
with the adverbs was pre-classified by (Pang and
Lee, 2004) as carrying positive sentiment.

1. I was absolutely delighted by the simple story
and amazing animation.

2. I was delighted by the simple story and amaz-
ing animation.

3.2 Collecting Judgments via Crowdsourcing
We submitted single sentences (not pairs) to be
annotated with sentiment scores for crowdsourc-
ing, using Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT). To
avoid any bias we shuffled the sentences and dis-
played them individually. We asked the Turkers
to select, for each sentence, one of five sentiment
scores: strong positive (2), positive (1), neutral (0),
negative (-1), strong negative (-2). Each sentence
was rated by five annotators. Altogether, twenty
annotators completed the task within eight hours.
Since the annotators did not all judge the same set
of sentences, we computed the agreement between
annotators as follows. For each annotator, his/her
agreement with the others is given be the follow-

ing formula:
1

|S(i)|
∑

j∈S(i)
psji,

where S(i) is the set of sentences annotated by
the ith Turker and psji is the percentage of Turkers
who have the same annotation with the ith Turker
for sentence j. |S(i)| is the cardinality of set S(i).
The agreement ranges from 0.52 to 0.8. Although
the annotation of some Turkers is close to that of
flipping a coin, all judgments were retained and
included in the results reported here.

3.3 Results
We report the main results. The polarity rating of
a sentence j is the (un-weighted) average rating

39



Adverbs Avg. Pol. Change Pol. Reversal
absolutely 0.2 0/20

awfully 0.6 2/20
enormously 0.2 1/20
extremely 0.2 2/20
horribly 0.2 0/20

incredibly 0.2 4/20
pretty 0.2 1/20

seriously 0.4 3/20

Table 2: Effects of adverbs on sentiment ratings.

of the five annotators for the sentence, denoted αj
and αj =

∑
i

psji. We use uniform weighting. A

sentence j is classified into one of the five polarity
categories according to the following criteria:

strong positve if αj ∈ [1.5, 2]
positive if αj ∈ (1.5, 0.5]
neutral if αj ∈ (0.5,−0.5)
negative if αj ∈ [−0.5,−1.5)
strong negative if αj ∈ [−0.5,−2]

3.3.1 Do Adverbs Change Sentiment Rating?
We first examine the polarity intensifying effects
of the eight adverbs and determine their relative
intensifying effects. For each adverb we compute
the average polarity rating change between the
members of the 20 sentence pairs with and with-
out the target adverb. The second column of Table
2 shows the average polarity rating change for the
adverbs. All adverbs have polarity intensifying ef-
fect, which ranges from 0.2 to 0.6. Awfully and
seriously have the strongest effect.

3.3.2 Change of Sentiment Rating in Positive
vs. Negative Contexts

Next we ask whether the adverbs have a stronger
polarity intensifying effect on sentences with a
negative, positive or neutral ratings. We partition
the 20 sentences with/without each adverb into
the three polarity categories according to their av-
erage polarity ratings. A sentence j is negative
(positive) if αj ≤ −0.5 (αj ≥ 0.5). Figure 1
shows the results. For six out of the eight adverbs,
the graph follows a V-shaped pattern, indicating
that the adverbs have stronger polarity influence
on sentences conveying opinionated, but not neu-
tral, statements. Pretty shows the weakest ef-
fect across, which makes intuitive sense, as this

Figure 1: The polarity intensifying effects of ad-
verbs over the sentiment categories.

adverb seems to have a “softening/weakening” ef-
fect: consider “pretty good,” which one could
judge to be slightly less good than “good.” For ex-
ample, the sentence

He has a pretty strident rant about how impor-
tant it is.

received an average rating score of 0 with the
adverb present and -0.2 without it. The results
for awfully and extremely are surprising. A
closer look at the annotations revealed some pos-
sible unreliable ratings. For example, the sentence

The part of the movie set in Vietnam was
extremely inaccurate.

has average polarity score of 0 (i.e., neutral)
with the adverb and -0.8 without. Intuitively,
it seems that the first sentence conveys a strong
negative sentiment. Such data indicate the need
for further study. A more complex scheme for
computing the average polarity scores, such as
weighted by inter-annotator agreement, might pro-
duce better results.

3.3.3 Can Adverbs Reverse Sentiment
Orientation?

We ask whether their presence can have the effect
of reversing the polarity of a sentence. We again
consider three sentiment categories: positive, neg-
ative and neutral. The third column in Table 2
shows for each adverb, how many sentences out
of the total of 20 were judged to have a reversed
polarity when the adverb was removed. Overall,
the polarities of only 13 out of 160 sentences (i.e.,
about 8%) change.

3.3.4 Do Adverbs Have an Inherent
Sentiment Value?

Our target adverbs have inherent polarity as
claimed in some sentiment lexicons (see Table 1).

40



If the polarity of a sentence does not change when
the adverbs is present or absent, we conclude that
the adverb has no inherent polarity but may merely
affect the intensity of the constituents that it mod-
ifies. These results, as displayed in Figure 1 indi-
cate that our target adverbs do not carry inherent
polarity. Instead, they modify the intensity of the
sentiment connoted by the context.

4 Discussion

We examined the effect of eight intensifying ad-
verbs on the sentiment ratings of the sentences in
which they occur. Our study showed that, contrary
to their representation in some widely used senti-
ment lexicons, these adverbs do not carry an inher-
ent sentiment polarity, but merely alter the degree
of the polarity of the constituents they modify; cor-
rections of the corresponding entries in the senti-
ment resources seem warranted. Our results show
further that all adverbs strengthen the polarity of
the context to different degrees. If confirmed on a
larger data set, this indicates that the intensifying
force of different adverbs should be reflected in
lexical resources, perhaps along an ordered scale.

5 Related Work

Two recent surveys give a detailed account of the
SL acquisition techniques (Feldman, 2013; Liu,
2012). We give only an overview of the related
work here. SLs are acquired by one of three meth-
ods. Manual tagging is performed by human an-
notators: e.g., OF, and AL. Dictionary-based ac-
quisition relies on a set of seed words that is ex-
panded by using external resources, such as Word-
Net: e.g., (Dragut et al., 2010; Hassan and Radev,
2010; Mohammad et al., 2009; Dragut et al., 2012;
Takamura et al., 2005). In corpus-based acquisi-
tion a set of seed words is expanded by using a
large corpus of documents (Feng et al., 2013; Lu
et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2013; Wu and Wen, 2010).

To our knowledge, none of these works include
the polarity intensifiers that we introduce in this
paper.

References
S. Cerini, V. Compagnoni, A. Demontis, M. For-

mentelli, and G. Gandini, 2007. Language resources
and linguistic theory: Typology, second language
acquisition, English linguistics.

Eduard C. Dragut, Clement T. Yu, A. Prasad Sistla, and

Weiyi Meng. 2010. Construction of a sentimental
word dictionary. In CIKM, pages 1761–1764.

Eduard C. Dragut, Hong Wang, Clement Yu, Prasad
Sistla, and Weiyi Meng. 2012. Polarity consistency
checking for sentiment dictionaries. In ACL.

A. Esuli and F. Sebastiani. 2006. Sentiwordnet: A
publicly available lexical resource for opinion min-
ing. In LREC.

Ronen Feldman. 2013. Techniques and applications
for sentiment analysis. CACM, 56(4):82–89, April.

C. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An On-Line Lexical
Database and Some of its Applications. MIT Press.

Song Feng, Jun Sak Kang, Polina Kuznetsova, and
Yejin Choi. 2013. Connotation lexicon: A dash of
sentiment beneath the surface meaning. In ACL.

Ahmed Hassan and Dragomir Radev. 2010. Identify-
ing text polarity using random walks. In ACL.

Bing Liu. 2012. Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Min-
ing. Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Tech-
nologies. Morgan & Claypool Publishers.

Yue Lu, Malu Castellanos, Umeshwar Dayal, and
ChengXiang Zhai. 2011. Automatic construction of
a context-aware sentiment lexicon: an optimization
approach. In WWW, pages 347–356. ACM.

Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham,
Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher Potts.
2011. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis.
In ACL, pages 142–150.

Saif Mohammad, Cody Dunne, and Bonnie Dorr.
2009. Generating high-coverage semantic orienta-
tion lexicons from overtly marked words and a the-
saurus. In EMNLP.

B. Pang and L. Lee. 2004. A sentimental education:
Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization
based on minimum cuts. In ACL.

Jan Svartvik, editor. 1991. Directions in Corpus Lin-
guistics. Nobel Symposium 82, Mouton de Gruyter.

M. Taboada and J. Grieve. 2004. Analyzing appraisal
automatically. In AAAI Spring Symposium.

Hiroya Takamura, Takashi Inui, and Manabu Okumura.
2005. Extracting semantic orientations of words us-
ing spin model. In ACL, pages 133–140.

T. Wilson, J. Wiebe, and P. Hoffmann. 2005. Recog-
nizing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment
analysis. In HLT/EMNLP.

Yunfang Wu and Miaomiao Wen. 2010. Disambiguat-
ing dynamic sentiment ambiguous adjectives. In
COLING, pages 1191–1199.

Hongliang Yu, Zhi-Hong Deng, and Shiyingxue Li.
2013. Identifying sentiment words using an
optimization-based model without seedwords. In
ACL.

41


