



















































Is It All in the Phrasing? Computational Explorations in How We Say What We Say, and Why It Matters


Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Language Technologies and Computational Social Science, page 1,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Is It All in the Phrasing? Computational Explorations in How We Say
What We Say, and Why It Matters

Lillian Lee
Cornell University

Abstract

Louis Armstrong (is said to have) said, “I don’t need words — it’s all in the phrasing”. As
someone who does natural-language processing for a living, I’m a big fan of words; but lately, my
collaborators and I have been studying aspects of phrasing (in the linguistic, rather than musical
sense) that go beyond just the selection of one particular word over another. I’ll describe some of
these projects in this talk. The issues we’ll consider include: Does the way in which something
is worded in and of itself have an effect on whether it is remembered or attracts attention, beyond
its content or context? Can we characterize how different sides in a debate frame their arguments,
in a way that goes beyond specific lexical choice (e.g., “pro-choice” vs. “pro-life”)? The settings
we’ll explore range from movie quotes that achieve cultural prominence; to posts on Facebook,
Wikipedia, Twitter, and the arXiv; to framing in public discourse on the inclusion of genetically-
modified organisms in food.

Joint work with Lars Backstrom, Justin Cheng, Eunsol Choi, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil,
Jon Kleinberg, Bo Pang, Jennifer Spindel, and Chenhao Tan.

References
Lars Backstrom, Jon Kleinberg, Lillian Lee, and Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil. 2013. Characterizing and

curating conversation threads: Expansion, focus, volume, re-entry. In Proceedings of WSDM, pages 13–22.

Eunsol Choi, Chenhao Tan, Lillian Lee, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and Jennifer Spindel. 2012. Hedge
detection as a lens on framing in the GMO debates: A position paper. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics, pages 70–79.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Justin Cheng, Jon Kleinberg, and Lillian Lee. 2012. You had me at hello: How
phrasing affects memorability. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 892–901.

Chenhao Tan and Lillian Lee. 2014. A corpus of sentence-level revisions in academic writing: A step towards
understanding statement strength in communication. In Proceedings of ACL (short paper).

Chenhao Tan, Lillian Lee, and Bo Pang. 2014. The effect of wording on message propagation: Topic- and author-
controlled natural experiments on twitter. In Proceedings of ACL.

1


