










































Instructions for ACL-2010 Proceedings


Concept Space Synset Manager Tool 

 

 

Apurva S Nagvenkar 

DCST, Goa University 

Taleigao Plateau, Goa. 

apurv.nagvenkar@gmail.com 

Neha R Prabhugaonkar 

DCST, Goa University 

Taleigao Plateau, Goa. 

nehapgaonkar.1920@gmail.com 

 

Venkatesh P Prabhu 

Thyway Creation 

Mapusa, Goa. 

venkateshprabhu@thywayindia.com 

Ramdas N Karmali 

DCST, Goa University 

Taleigao Plateau, Goa. 

rnk@unigoa.ac.in 

 

Jyoti D Pawar 

DCST, Goa University 

Taleigao Plateau, Goa. 

jyotidpawar@gmail.com 

 

 

Abstract 

The IndoWordNet
1
 Consortium consists of mem-

ber institutions developing WordNet using the 

expansion approach.  

The WordNets developed using expansion ap-

proach are very much influenced by the source 

language and may not reflect the richness of the 

target language (Walawalikar et al., 2010). And 

therefore the IndoWordNet Community decided 

to develop concepts which were specific to their 

respective language viz. language-specific con-

cepts which will help in increasing the WordNet 

coverage. Besides the above requirement it was 

also felt that it should be possible to maintain ad-

ditional information about the concepts i.e. an 

image, document describing the concept, links to 

websites and other resources, etc.  

In this paper, we discuss a Concept Space Synset 

Management Tool (CSS)
2
 which was developed 

to assist creation of language specific con-

cepts/synsets and manage their linkages to other 

Indian language WordNets. 

1 Background and Motivation 

The IndoWordNet is a multilingual WordNet 

which links WordNets of different Indian lan-

guages on a common identification number 

                                                 
1
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/indowordnet 
2
http://indradhanush.unigoa.ac.in/concep

tspace 

called as synset Id given to each concept 

(Bhattacharyya, 2010). WordNet is designed to 

capture the vocabulary of a language and can be 

considered as a dictionary cum thesaurus and 

much more (Miller, et al., 1993; Miller, 1995; 

Fellbaum, 1998).  

 

Synset (Fellbaum, 1998) is composed of a gloss 

describing the concept, example sentences and a 

set of synonym words that are used for the con-

cept. Besides synset data, WordNet maintains 

many lexical and semantic relations. Table1 

gives the number of concepts/synsets created by 

the language groups of the Indradhanush Word-

Net Consortium which is a part of the In-

doWordNet Consortium. 

 

 
 

Table1: Synset linkage status 

 

mailto:jyotidpawar@gmail.com
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/indowordnet/
http://indradhanush.unigoa.ac.in/conceptspace
http://indradhanush.unigoa.ac.in/conceptspace


Also a sense marked newspaper corpus (sense 

marking is a task to tag each word of the corpus 

with the WordNet sense) consisting of minimum 

1,00,000 words has been created by each of the 

members of the Indradhanush WordNet Consor-

tium. The coverage is found to be low. In order 

to increase the coverage of the WordNet it was 

decided that a corpus will be created by all lan-

guage groups and the corpus will be sense 

marked. 

To increase the coverage it was decided to add 

the concepts which were specific to their respec-

tive language viz. language-specific concepts and 

nullify the effect of influence of the source lan-

guage on the target language WordNet. The CSS 

Manager Tool
3
 was developed to assist in crea-

tion of language-specific concepts, linking to 

other language WordNets, providing additional 

information about synsets, etc. The features and 

the detailed framework of the CSS Manager Tool 

is explained in section 3 and 4. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows – 

section 2 introduces the related work. The fea-

tures of CSS Manager Tool are presented in sec-

tion 3; section 4 presents the architecture of CSS 

Manager Tool. Section 5 presents the implemen-

tation details followed by the conclusion and fu-

ture work. 

2 Related Work 

For many Indian languages, WordNets are con-

structed using the expansion model where Hindi 

WordNet synsets are taken as a source using the 

MultiDict Tool (Chatterjee, 2010) created by IIT 

Bombay. The tool also had feature to add com-

ments and references but it was not an ideal tool 

for creation of language-specific synsets.  

The limitations of the MultiDict Tool are:  

 Creating and linking of language-
specific synsets across languages was 

not possible,  

 finding the overlap of synsets across lan-
guages was not possible,  

 Feature to provide additional information 
about the synset was not present, 

 Validation of synsets was not possible. 

 Features to search synsets based on do-
main, date, category was not present.  

And therefore the CSS Manager Tool was devel-

oped in order to overcome the above limitations. 

                                                 
3
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BMhixBI

7xOY&feature=youtu.be 

3 Features of CSS Tool 

CSS Manager Tool is a centralized tool meant 

for effective creation and management of 

synsets. The features supported currently by the 

CSS Manager Tool are as follows: 

1.  Synset Creation: 

 Addition/updation/validation of synsets, 
linking of two or more synsets with simi-

lar gloss across languages,  

 Comments- Comments can be provided 
in case of any issue in the synset content.  

 Allows adding additional information 
about the synset (images, documents, 

links, etc.). 

 

2.  Interactive User Interface: 

 The CSS Manager Tool is designed 
keeping in mind the broadest range of 

users and contexts of use. 

 Supports both left-to-right and right-to-
left text rendition. 

 Allows adjustment of the layout as per 
direction in which content language is 

written through a simple setting of a flag. 

 Viewing various media added for clarity 
on synsets, etc.  

 

3.  Security:  

 The CSS Manager Tool stores infor-
mation in a centralized database system 

where access control mechanisms can 

more easily restrict access to your con-

tent. 

 User Management supports adding/ 
blocking/ unblocking users, and assigns 

privileges to the users.  

 

4.  Use of RBAC approach 

 Role-based access control (RBAC) is an 
approach to restricting system access to 

authorized users.  

 Roles are created for various functions. 
The permissions to perform certain oper-

ations are assigned to specific roles. 

 Members or staff are assigned particular 
roles, and through those role assignments 

acquire the permissions to perform par-

ticular functions.  

 Roles can be easily created, changed, or 
discontinued as the needs evolve, with-

out having to individually update the 

privileges for every user.  

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BMhixBI7xOY&feature=youtu.be
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BMhixBI7xOY&feature=youtu.be


4 Architecture of CSS Tool 

Figure 1 represents the architecture of CSS Man-

ager Tool. The CSS Manager Tool is implement-

ed in three blocks: User block, Super Admin 

block, and the Database. The CSS Manager tool 

is developed using the Hierarchical Role Based 

system with Access Control (RBAC) to control 

the access to certain parts and features of the 

CSS Manager Tool across different users. Refer 

Figure 2 for the block diagram of RBAC.  

 
Figure1: Architecture of CSS Manager Tool 

 

 The User block is responsible for crea-
tion/updation/validation of synsets, link-

ing of synsets across languages, adding 

comments, source, and domain.  

 The Super-Admin block is responsible 
for the creation of groups, users, roles to 

be assigned to the members in a group, 

modules and its operations, etc. 

 The heart of the CSS Manager Tool is a 
centralized database that stores all the 

CSS data.  

 

4.1 Modules of CSS Manager Tool 

A module is an independent component which 

offers specific functionality. Each module is as-

signed different operations related to the module. 

The different operations are: Advance search, 

add/view/edit/delete/link synsets, and add/delete/ 

change priority of example, add source, up-

load/delete file/add/view/reply comments, etc. 

Only those operations that need to be performed 

by members of a language group are assigned to 

the modules and these modules are allotted to the 

roles. These modules depend on CSS database. 

While the addition of new modules does not re-

quire any changes to the CSS database, new ta-

bles may need to be added to store data specific 

to module functionality.  

 

Presently there are five modules, they are: 

1. View All Synset: The view synset mod-
ule allows the linguist to view synsets 

belonging to a language group/ category/ 

domain/source. The linguist/ lexicogra-

pher can perform the operations which 

are assigned for this module.  

2. Synset Creation: Allows the linguist to 
create synsets. The linguist/ lexicogra-

pher can also add source/domain/images/ 

documents/links in order to give addi-

tional information about the synset. 

3. View Linked Synset: Allows the lin-
guist to view the list of synsets linked 

across languages. 

4. User Management: Allows the adminis-
trator of a group to create new users, to 

block/unblock user, to assign privileges 

to the users, etc. 

5. Synset Validation: Allows validation of 
synsets.  

4.2 Role-Based system used in CSS Manag-
er Tool 

A role hierarchy is a way of organizing roles to 

reflect authority, responsibility, and competency.  

Some general operations may be performed by 

all the group members such as adding, viewing, 

searching synsets. In this situation, it would be 

inefficient and administratively cumbersome to 

specify repeatedly these general operations for 

each role that gets created. Therefore role hierar-

chy is used in order to avoid repetitive tasks. Al-

so when a user is associated with a role, the user 

can be given additional privileges.  

Currently, the CSS Manager Tool has four roles: 

Super admin, Admin, senior linguist and junior 

linguist.  

 The super admin is responsible for crea-
tion of groups, users of a group, creation 

of roles to be assigned to the members in 

a group, addition of new modules and 

operations, and various other administra-

tive operations such as adding source, 

domain, etc. which other roles cannot 

perform.  



 
Figure2: Role Based system with Access Control 

 

 The Admin is responsible for managing 
his/her language group created by the 

Super admin. The admin of a group can 

add/block users to his group. And can 

use all the modules which are assigned 

to the Admin by the Superadmin. 

 The linguists are part of a language 
group. The operations (such as creating/ 

validating/ linking of synsets) performed 

by the junior linguists are further vali-

dated and approved by the senior lin-

guists of the group. 

5 Implementation Details 

The CSS Manager Tool is developed using PHP 

scripting language and is hosted on a Web Server 

supporting PHP version 5.3.15. Currently 

MySQL version 5.5.21 is used as database. The 

CSS Manager Tool was developed using 

XAMPP on 32 bit Microsoft Windows platform. 

It has been deployed on Fedora 16 Linux Plat-

form using Apache version 2.2.22 and MySQL 

version 5.5.21 which come bundled with Fedora 

16 Linux Platform. The screenshots of the tool 

are shown at the end of the paper. 

6 Conclusion and Future Work 

The advantages of CSS Manager Tool can be 

summarized as follows: 

 Ease in accessing synsets: The synset is 
represented by an identification number 

called as synset id. Remembering id’s is 

difficult for user, than remembering the 

concept of the synset. Earlier, the lin-

guists had to remember synset id in order 

to perform any operation on synset in fu-

ture. In CSS Manager Tool, the user 

need not remember the synset ids, all the 

operations can be performed with the 

help of concept and synonymous set of 

the words. 

 Decentralized maintenance: Need of 
specialized software or any specific kind 

of technological environment to access 

the tool is not required. Any browser de-

vice connected to the Internet would be 

sufficient for the job. 

 WordNet Enhancement: Creation of 
language specific concepts/synsets, add-

ing additional information about the syn-

set and their linkages to other Indian 

language WordNets is possible. The tool 

is being enhanced to support validation 

of WordNets. 

 

Acknowledgement 
This work has been carried out as a part of the 

Indradhanush WordNet Project (11(13)/2010-

HCC(TDIL), dated 3-8-2010) jointly carried out 

by nine institutions. We wish to express our grat-

itude to the funding agency DeitY, Govt. of India 

and also all the members of the Indradhanush 

Consortium. 

References  

Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2010. IndoWordNet, Lexical 

Resources Engineering Conference 2010 

(LREC2010), Malta. 

Arindam Chatterjee, Salil Joshi, Mitesh Khapra, 

Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2010. Introduction to 

Tools for IndoWordNet and Word Sense Disam-

biguation. 3
rd

 IndoWordNet workshop, Interna-

tional Conference on Natural Language Procesing.  

Christiane Fellbaum (ed). 1998. WordNet: An Elec-

tronic Lexical Database. Cambridge, MA: MIT 

Press. 

George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fell-

baum, Derek Gross, and Katherine Miller. 1993. 

Introduction to WordNet: An On-line Lexical Da-

tabase.  

George A. Miller. 1995. WordNet: A Lexical Data-

base for English. Communications of the ACM 

Vol. 38, No. 11: 39-41.  

Shantaram Walawalikar, Shilpa Desai, Ramdas Ka 

rmali, Sushant Naik, Damodar Ghanekar, Chan-

drekha D’souza and Jyoti Pawar. 2010. Experienc-

es in Building the Konkani Word Net using the ex-

pansion Approach. In Proceedings of the 5th Glob-

alWordNet Conference on Principles, Construction 

and Application of Multilingual WordNets (Mum-

bai-India). 



Konkani WordNet: WordNet For Konkani Language:   
http://konkaniwordnet.unigoa.ac.in 

IndoWordNet Website: Multilingual WordNet which 

links WordNets of eighteen Indian languages: 
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/indowo

rdnet/ 

Indradhanush Website: WordNets for seven Indian 

Languages: 
http://indradhanush.unigoa.ac.in 

Concept Space Synset Manager Tool (CSS Manager 

Tool) : 

http://indradhanush.unigoa.ac.in/c

onceptspace/ 

Concept Space Manager Tool Tutorial link:  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BM

hixBI7xOY&feature=youtu.be 

 

 

 

 

 

Snapshots 

1. Login Page: The login page of the CSS Manager Tool is shown below. 

 

2. SuperAdmin: The super admin is the highest role in the role hierarchy. The super admin 
owns all the privileges which the admin, linguist or lexicographer have. The super admin is 

accountable for creation of groups, users of a group, creation of roles to be assigned to the 

members in a group, addition of new modules and operations, and various other administrative 

operations such as adding source, domain, etc. which other roles cannot perform. The snap-

shot of the super admin interface is shown below. 

 

 

http://konkaniwordnet.unigoa.ac.in/
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/indowordnet/
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/indowordnet/
http://indradhanush.unigoa.ac.in/
http://indradhanush.unigoa.ac.in/conceptspace/
http://indradhanush.unigoa.ac.in/conceptspace/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BMhixBI7xOY&feature=youtu.be
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BMhixBI7xOY&feature=youtu.be


3. User Management: This module allows the administrator to view the users in a group, to add 
new users, to block or unblock user, to assign privileges to the users, etc. The User Manage-

ment module is only available to the administrator of the group and not the linguist/ lexicog-

rapher. 

 

To add a new User, 

The Modules which are available to the linguist and lexicographers are as follows: 

 Create Synset: This module allows the user to create a new synset.  



 

 

 View All Synset: This module allows the user to view all the synsets created so far. On 
selecting ‘View All Synset’ menu link, the user can view synsets belonging to a language. 

It also allows the user to select the number of synsets to be displayed per page, to view 

synsets based on the date of creation. Each module provides the user with the help files to 

assist in tool usage.  

The ‘Advance search’ option allows the user to view synsets belonging to a particular 

grammatical category i.e Noun, Verb, Adverb, Adjective, a domain, a source and also to 

view the synsets created by a user of a group.  



 

 

Based on the operations assigned to the modules and roles, the user can edit, view or validate the 

synsets. 

 

 View Linked Synsets: This module is similar to the View All synset module, but it only 
allows the users to view the synsets which are linked across languages. 

 Change Password: This module allows the user to change the password. 



 

 Log Out: To log out from the CSS Manager Tool, the user needs to click on ‘Log Out’ 
from the menu list. 

 

 

 


