



















































Function Words in Authorship Attribution. From Black Magic to Theory?


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature (CLfL) @ EACL 2014, pages 59–66,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Function Words in Authorship Attribution
From Black Magic to Theory?

Mike Kestemont
University of Antwerp

CLiPS Computational Linguistics Group
Prinsstraat 13, D.188

B-2000, Antwerp
Belgium

mike.kestemont@uantwerpen.be

Abstract

This position paper focuses on the use
of function words in computational au-
thorship attribution. Although recently
there have been multiple successful appli-
cations of authorship attribution, the field
is not particularly good at the explication
of methods and theoretical issues, which
might eventually compromise the accep-
tance of new research results in the tra-
ditional humanities community. I wish to
partially help remedy this lack of explica-
tion and theory, by contributing a theoreti-
cal discussion on the use of function words
in stylometry. I will concisely survey the
attractiveness of function words in stylom-
etry and relate them to the use of charac-
ter n-grams. At the end of this paper, I
will propose to replace the term ‘function
word’ by the term ‘functor’ in stylometry,
due to multiple theoretical considerations.

1 Introduction

Computational authorship attribution is a popu-
lar application in current stylometry, the compu-
tational study of writing style. While there have
been significant advances recently, it has been no-
ticed that the field is not particularly good at the
explication of methods, let alone at developing a
generally accepted theoretical framework (Craig,
1999; Daelemans, 2013). Much of the research
in the field is dominated by an ‘an engineering
perspective’: if a certain attribution technique per-
forms well, many researchers do not bother to ex-
plain or interpret this from a theoretical perspec-
tive. Thus, many methods and procedures con-
tinue to function as a black box, a situation which
might eventually compromise the acceptance of
experimental results (e.g. new attributions) by
scholars in the traditional humanities community.

In this short essay I wish to try to help partially
remedy this lack of theoretical explication, by con-
tributing a focused theoretical discussion on the
use of function words in stylometry. While these
features are extremely popular in present-day re-
search, few studies explicitly address the method-
ological implications of using this word category.
I will concisely survey the use of function words in
stylometry and render more explicit why this word
category is so attractive when it comes to author-
ship attribution. I will deliberately use a generic
language that is equally intelligible to people in
linguistic as well as literary studies. Due to mul-
tiple considerations, I will argue at the end of this
paper that it might be better to replace the term
‘function word’ by the term ‘functor’ in stylome-
try.

2 Seminal Work

Until recently, scholars agreed on the supremacy
of word-level features in computational authorship
studies. In a 1994 overview paper Holmes (1994,
p. 87) claimed that ‘to date, no stylometrist has
managed to establish a methodology which is bet-
ter able to capture the style of a text than that based
on lexical items’. Important in this respect is a
line of research initiated by Mosteller and Wal-
lace (1964), whose work marks the onset of so-
called non-traditional authorship studies (Holmes,
1994; Holmes, 1998). Their work can be con-
trasted with the earlier philological practice of au-
thorship attribution (Love, 2002), often character-
ized by a lack of a clearly defined methodological
framework. Scholars adopted widely diverging at-
tribution methodologies, the quality of whose re-
sults remained difficult to assess in the absence of
a scientific consensus about a best practice (Sta-
matatos, 2009; Luyckx, 2010). Generally speak-
ing, scholars’ subjective intuitions (Gelehrtenintu-
ition, connoisseurship) played far too large a role
and the low level of methodological explicitness in

59



early (e.g. nineteenth century) style-based author-
ship studies firmly contrasts with today’s prevail-
ing criteria for scientific research, such as replica-
bility or transparency.

Apart from the rigorous quantification
Mosteller and Wallace pursued, their work is
often praised because of a specific methodolog-
ical novelty they introduced: the emphasis on
so-called function words. Earlier authorship
attribution was often based on checklists of
stylistic features, which scholars extracted from
known oeuvres. Based on their previous reading
experiences, expert readers tried to collect style
markers that struck them as typical for an oeuvre.
The attribution of works of unclear provenance
would then happen through a comparison of
this text’s style to an author’s checklist (Love,
2002, p. 185–193). The checklists were of course
hand-tailored and often only covered a limited set
of style markers, in which lexical features were
for instance freely mixed with hardly compara-
ble syntactic features. Because the checklist’s
construction was rarely documented, it seemed
a matter of scholarly taste which features were
included in the list, while it remained unclear why
others were absent from it.

Moreover, exactly because these lists were
hand-selected, they were dominated by striking
stylistic features that because of their low over-
all frequency seemed whimsicalities to the human
expert. Such low-frequency features (e.g. an un-
common noun) are problematic in authorship stud-
ies, since they are often tied to a specific genre
or topic. If such a characteristic was absent in
an anonymous text, it did not necessarily argue
against a writer’s authorship in whose other texts
(perhaps in different topics or genres) the charac-
teristic did prominently feature. Apart from the
limited scalability of such style (Luyckx, 2010;
Luyckx and Daelemans, 2011), a far more trou-
blesome issue is associated with them. Because of
their whimsical nature these low-frequency phe-
nomena could have struck an author’s imitators or
followers as strongly as they could have struck a
scholar. When trying to imitate someone’s style
(e.g. within the same stylistic school), those low-
frequency features are the first to copy in the eyes
of forgers (Love, 2002, p. 185–193). The funda-
mental novelty of the work by Mosteller and Wal-
lace was that they advised to move away from a
language’s low-frequency features to a language’s

high-frequency features, which often tend to be
function words.

3 Content vs Function

Let us briefly review why function words are in-
teresting in authorship attribution. In present-day
linguistics, two main categories of words are com-
monly distinguished (Morrow, 1986, p. 423). The
open-class category includes content words, such
as nouns, adjectives or verbs (Clark and Clark,
1977). This class is typically large – there are
many nouns – and easy to expand – new nouns
are introduced every day. The closed-class cat-
egory of function words refers to a set of words
(prepositions, particles, determiners) that is much
smaller and far more difficult to expand – it is
hard to invent a new preposition. Words from the
open class can be meaningful in isolation because
of their straightforward semantics (e.g. ‘cat’).
Function words, however, are heavily grammati-
calized and often do not carry a lot of meaning
in isolation (e.g. ‘the’). Although the set of dis-
tinct function words is far smaller than the set
of open-class words, function words are far more
frequently used than content words (Zipf, 1949).
Consequently, less than 0.04% of our vocabulary
accounts for over half of the words we actually use
in daily speech (Chung et al., 2007, p. 347). Func-
tion words have methodological advantages in the
study of authorial style (Binongo, 2003, p. 11), for
instance:

• All authors writing in the same language and
period are bound to use the very same func-
tion words. Function words are therefore a
reliable base for textual comparison;

• Their high frequency makes them interesting
from a quantitative point of view, since we
have many observations for them;

• The use of function words is not strongly af-
fected by a text’s topic or genre: the use of
the article ‘the’, for instance, is unlikely to be
influenced by a text’s topic.

• The use of function words seems less under
an author’s conscious control during the writ-
ing process.

Any (dis)similarities between texts regarding
function words are therefore relatively content-
independent and can be far more easily associated

60



with authorship than topic-specific stylistics. The
underlying idea behind the use of function words
for authorship attribution is seemingly contradic-
tory: we look for (dis)similarities between texts
that have been reduced to a number of features in
which texts should not differ at all (Juola, 2006,
p. 264–65).

Nevertheless, it is dangerous to blindly over-
estimate the degree of content-independence of
function words. A number of studies have shown
that function words, and especially (personal) pro-
nouns, do correlate with genre, narrative perspec-
tive, an author’s gender or even a text’s topic (Her-
ring and Paolillo, 2006; Biber et al., 2006; New-
man et al., 2008). A classic reference in this
respect is John Burrows’s pioneering study of,
amongst other topics, the use of function words
in Jane Austen’s novels (Burrows, 1987). This
explains why many studies into authorship will
in fact perform so-called ‘pronoun culling’ or the
automated deletion of (personal) pronouns which
seem too heavily connected to a text’s narrative
perspective or genre. Numerous empirical studies
have nevertheless demonstrated that various anal-
yses restricted to higher frequency strata, yield re-
liable indications about a text’s authorship (Arga-
mon and Levitan, 2005; Stamatatos, 2009; Koppel
et al., 2009).

It has been noted that the switch from content
words to function words in authorship attribution
studies has an interesting historic parallel in art-
historic research (Kestemont et al., 2012). Many
paintings have survived anonymously as well,
hence the large-scale research into the attribu-
tion of them. Giovanni Morelli (1816-1891) was
among the first to suggest that the attribution of,
for instance, a Quattrocento painting to some Ital-
ian master, could not happen based on ‘content’
(Wollheim, 1972, p. 177ff). What kind of coat
Mary Magdalene was wearing or the particular de-
piction of Christ in a crucifixion scene seemed all
too much dictated by a patron’s taste, contempo-
rary trends or stylistic influences. Morelli thought
it better to restrict an authorship analysis to dis-
crete details such as ears, hands and feet: such
fairly functional elements are naturally very fre-
quent in nearly all paintings, because they are to
some extent content-independent. It is an inter-
esting illustration of the surplus value of function
words in stylometry that the study of authorial
style in art history should depart from the ears,

hands and feet in a painting – its inconspicuous
function words, so to speak.

4 Subconsciousness

Recall the last advantage listed above: the argu-
ment is often raised that the use of these words
would not be under an author’s conscious control
during the writing process (Stamatatos, 2009; Bi-
nongo, 2003; Argamon and Levitan, 2005; Peng et
al., 2003). This would indeed help to explain why
function words might act as an author invariant
throughout an oeuvre (Koppel et al., 2009, p. 11).
Moreover, from a methodological point of view,
this would have to be true for forgers and imitators
as well, hence, rendering function words resistant
to stylistic imitation and forgery. Surprisingly, this
claim is rarely backed up by scholarly references
in the stylometric literature – an exception seems
Koppel et al. (2009, p. 11) with a concise refer-
ence to Chung et al. (2007). Nevertheless, some
attractive references in this respect can be found in
psycholinguistic literature. Interesting is the ex-
periment in which people have to quickly count
how often the letter ‘f’ occurs in the following sen-
tence:

Finished files are the result
of years of scientific study

combined with the experience
of many years.

It is common for most people to spot only
four or five instances of all six occurrences of
the grapheme (Schindler, 1978). Readers com-
monly miss the f s in the preposition ‘of’ in the
sentence. This is consistent with other reading
research showing that readers have more difficul-
ties in spotting spelling errors in function words
than in content words (Drewnowski and Healy,
1977). A similar effect is associated with phrases
like ‘Paris in the the spring’ (Aronoff and Fude-
man, 2005, p. 40–41). Experiments have demon-
strated that during their initial reading, many peo-
ple will not be aware of the duplication of the ar-
ticle ‘the’. Readers typically fail to spot such er-
rors because they take the use of function words
for granted – note that this effect would be absent
for ‘Paris in the spring spring’, in which a content
word is wrongly duplicated. Such a subconscious
attitude needs not imply that function words would
be unimportant in written communication. Con-

61



sider the following passage:1

Aoccdrnig to a rscheearch at Cmabrigde
Uinervtisy, it deosn’t mttaer in waht
oredr the ltteers in a wrod are, the olny
iprmoetnt tihng is taht the frist and lsat
ltteer be at the rghit pclae. The rset can
be a toatl mses and you can sitll raed
it wouthit porbelm. Tihs is bcuseae the
huamn mnid deos not raed ervey lteter
by istlef, but the wrod as a wlohe.

Although the words’ letters in this passage seem
randomly jumbled, the text is still relatively read-
able (Rawlinson, 1976). As the quote playfully
states itself, it is vital in this respect that the first
and final letter of each word are not moved – and,
depending on the language, this is in fact not the
only rule that must be obeyed. It is crucial how-
ever that this limitation causes the shorter func-
tion words in running English text to remain fairly
intact (McCusker et al., 1981). The intact nature
alone of the function words in such jumbled text,
in fact greatly adds to the readability of such pas-
sages. Thus, while function words are vital to
structure linguistic information in our communi-
cation (Morrow, 1986), psycholinguistic research
suggests that they do not attract attention to them-
selves in the same way as content words do.

Unfortunately, it should be stressed that all ref-
erences discussed in this section are limited to
reader’s experience, and not writer’s experience.
While there will exist similarities between a lan-
guage user’s perception and production of func-
tion words, it cannot be ruled out that writers will
take on a much more conscious attitude towards
function words than readers. Nevertheless, the
apparent inattentiveness with which readers ap-
proach function words might be reminiscent of
a writer’s attitude towards them, although much
more research would be needed in order to prop-
erly substantiate this hypothesis.

5 Character N-grams

Recall Holmes’s 1994 claim that ‘to date, no sty-
lometrist has managed to establish a methodol-
ogy which is better able to capture the style of

1Matt Davis maintains an interesting website on this
topic: http://www.mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk/people/
matt.davis/Cmabrigde/. I thank Bram Vandekerck-
hove for pointing out this website. The ‘Cmabridge’-passage
as well the ‘of’-example have anonymously circulated on the
Internet for quite a while.

a text than that based on lexical items’ (Holmes,
1994, p. 87). In 1994 other types of style mark-
ers (e.g. syntactical) were – in isolation – never
able to outperform lexical style markers (Van Hal-
teren et al., 2005). Interestingly, advanced fea-
ture selection methods did not always outperform
frequency-based selection methods, that plainly
singled out function words (Argamon and Levitan,
2005; Stamatatos, 2009). The supremacy of func-
tion words was challenged, however, later in the
1990s when character n-grams came to the fore
(Kjell, 1994). This representation was originally
borrowed from the field of Information Retrieval
where the technique had been used in automatic
language identification. Instead of cutting texts up
into words, this particular text representation seg-
mented a text into a series of consecutive, partially
overlapping groups of n characters. A first order
n-gram model only considers so-called unigrams
(n = 1); a second order n-gram model consid-
ers bigrams (n = 2), and so forth. Note that word
boundaries are typically explicitly represented: for
instance, ‘ b’, ‘bi’, ‘ig’, ‘gr’, ‘ra’, ‘am’, ‘m ’.

Since Kjell (1994), character n-grams have
proven to be the best performing feature type
in state-of-the-art authorship attribution (Juola,
2006), although at first sight, they might seem
uninformative and meaningless. Follow-up re-
search learned that this outstanding performance
was not only largely language independent but
also fairly independent of the attribution algo-
rithms used (Peng et al., 2003; Stamatatos, 2009;
Koppel et al., 2009). The study of character n-
grams for authorship attribution has since then sig-
nificantly grown in popularity, however, mostly
in the more technical literature where the tech-
nique originated. In these studies, performance
issues play an important role, with researchers fo-
cusing on actual attribution accuracy in large cor-
pora (Luyckx, 2010). This focus might help ex-
plain why, so far, few convincing attempts have
been made to interpret the discriminatory qualities
of characters n-grams, which is why their use (like
function words) in stylometry can be likened to a
sort of black magic. One explanation so far has
been that these units tend to capture ‘a bit of ev-
erything’, being sensitive to both the content and
form of a text (Houvardas and Stamatatos, 2006;
Koppel et al., 2009; Stamatatos, 2009). One could
wonder, however, whether such an answer does
much more than reproducing the initial question:

62



Then why does it work? Moreover, Koppel et al.
expressed words of caution regarding the caveats
of character n-grams, since many of them ‘will be
closely associated to particular content words and
roots’ (Koppel et al., 2009, p. 13).

The reasons for this outstanding performance
could partially be of a prosaic, information-
theoretical nature, relating to the unit of stylis-
tic measurement. Recall that function words are
quantitatively interesting, at least partially because
they are simply frequent in text. The more obser-
vations we have available per text, the more trust-
worthily one can represent it. Character n-grams
push this idea even further, simply because texts
by definition have more data points for character
n-grams than for entire words (Stamatatos, 2009;
Daelemans, 2013). Thus the mere number of ob-
servations, relatively larger for character n-grams
than for function words, might account for their
superiority from a purely quantitative perspective.

Nevertheless, more might be said on the topic.
Rybicki & Eder (2011) report on a detailed com-
parative study of a well-known attribution tech-
nique, Burrows’s Delta. John Burrows is consid-
ered one of the godfathers of modern stylometry –
D.I. Holmes (1994) ranked him alongside the pi-
oneers Mosteller and Wallace. He introduced his
influential Delta-technique in his famous Busa lec-
ture (Burrows, 2002). Many subsequent discus-
sions agree that Delta essentially is a fairly intu-
itive algorithm which generally achieves decent
performance (Argamon, 2008), comparing texts
on the basis of the frequencies of common func-
tion words. In their introductory review of Delta’s
applications, Rybicki and Eder tackled the as-
sumption of Delta’s language independence: fol-
lowing the work of Juola (2006, p. 269), they ques-
tion the assumption ‘that the use of methods rely-
ing on the most frequent words in a corpus should
work just as well in other languages as it does in
English’ (Rybicki and Eder, 2011, p. 315).

Their paper proves this assumption wrong, re-
porting on various, carefully set-up experiments
with a corpus, comprising 7 languages (English,
Polish, French, Latin, German, Hungarian and
Italian). Although they consider other parameters
(such as genre), their most interesting results con-
cern language (Rybicki and Eder, 2011, p. 319–
320):

while Delta is still the most successful method
of authorship attribution based on word frequen-
cies, its success is not independent of the lan-

guage of the texts studied. This has not been
noticed so far for the simple reason that Delta
studies have been done, in a great majority, on
English-language prose. [. . . ] The relatively
poorer results for Latin and Polish, both highly
inflected in comparison with English and Ger-
man, suggests the degree of inflection as a pos-
sible factor. This would make sense in that the
top strata of word frequency lists for languages
with low inflection contain more uniform words,
especially function words; as a result, the most
frequent words in languages such as English are
relatively more frequent than the most frequent
words in agglutinative languages such as Latin.

Their point of criticism is obvious but vital: the
restriction to function words for stylometric re-
search seems sub-optimal for languages that make
less use of function words. They suggest that this
relatively recent discovery might be related to the
fact that most of the seminal and influential work
in authorship attribution has been carried out on
English-language texts.

English is a typical example of a language that
does not make extensive use of case endings or
other forms of inflection (Sapir, 1921, chapter
VI). Such weakly inflected languages express a lot
of their functional linguistic information through
the use of small function words, such as preposi-
tions (e.g. ‘with a sword’). Structural information
in these languages tends to be expressed through
minimal units of meaning or grammatical mor-
phemes, which are typically realized as individ-
ual words (Morrow, 1986). At this point, it makes
sense to contrast English with another major his-
torical lingua franca but one that has received far
less stylometric attention: Latin.

Latin is a school book example of a heavily in-
flected language, like Polish, that makes far more
extensive use of affixes: endings that which are
added to words to mark their grammatical func-
tion in a sentence. An example: in the Latin word
ensi (ablative singular: ‘with a sword’) the case
ending (–i) is a separate morpheme that takes on
grammatical role which is similar to that of the
English preposition ‘with’. Nevertheless, it is not
realized as a separate word separated by whites-
pace from surrounding morphemes. It is rather
concatenated to another morpheme (ens-) express-
ing a more tangible meaning.

This situation renders a straightforward appli-
cation of the Delta-method – so heavily biased to-
wards words – problematic for more synthetic or
agglutinative languages. What has been said about
function words in previous stylometric research,

63



obviously relates to their special status as func-
tional linguistic items. The inter-related character-
istics of ‘high frequency’, ‘content-independence’
and ‘good dispersion’ (Kestemont et al., 2012)
even only apply to them, insofar as they are gram-
matical morphemes. Luckily for English, a lot of
grammatical morphemes can easily be detected by
splitting running text into units that do not con-
tain whitespace or punctuation and selecting the
most frequent items among them (Burrows, 2002;
Stamatatos, 2009). For languages that display an-
other linguistic logic, however, the situation is far
more complicated, because the functional infor-
mation contained in grammatical morphemes is
more difficult to gain access to, since these need
not be solely or even primarily realized as separate
words. If one restricts analyses to high-frequency
words in these languages, one obviously ignores
a lot of the functional information inside less fre-
quent words (e.g. inflection).

6 Functors

At the risk of being accused of quibbling about
terms, I wish to argue that the common empha-
sis on function words in stylometry should be re-
placed by an emphasis on the broader concept of
functors, a term which can be borrowed from psy-
cholinguistics, used to denote grammatical mor-
phemes (Kwon, 2005, p. 1–2) or:

forms that do not, in any simple way, make ref-
erence. They mark grammatical structures and
carry subtle modulatory meanings. The word
classes or parts of speech involved (inflections,
auxiliary verbs, articles, prepositions, and con-
junctions) all have few members and do not read-
ily admit new members (Brown, 1973, p. 75).

In my opinion, the introduction of the term ‘func-
tor’ would have a number of advantages – the first
and least important of which is that it is aestheti-
cally more pleasing than the identical term ‘gram-
matical morphemes’. Note, first of all, that func-
tion words – grammatical morphemes realized as
individual words – are included in the definition
of a functor. The concept of a functor as such does
not replace the interest in function words but rather
broadens it and extends it towards all grammatical
morphemes, whether they be realized as individ-
ual words or not. Note how all advantages, previ-
ously only associated with function words in sty-
lometry (high frequency, good dispersion, content-
independence, unconscious use) apply to every
member in the category of functors.

A second advantage has to do with language
independence. Note that stylometry’s ultimate
goal regarding authorship seems of a universal na-
ture: a majority of stylometrists in the end are
concerned with the notorious Stylome-hypothesis
(Van Halteren et al., 2005) or finding a way to
characterize an author’s individual writing style,
regardless of text variety, time and, especially, lan-
guage. Restricting the extraction of functional in-
formation from text to the word level might work
for English, but seems too language-specific a
methodology to be operable in many other lan-
guages, as suggested by Rybicki and Eder (2011)
and earlier Juola (2006, p. 269). Stylometric re-
search into high-frequency, functional linguistic
items should therefore break up words and harvest
more and better information from text. The scope
of stylistic focus should be broadened to include
all functors.

The superior performance of character n-grams
in capturing authorial style – in English, as well as
other languages – seems relevant in this respect.
First of all, the most frequent n-grams in a corpus
often tend to be function words: ‘me’, ‘or’ and
‘to’ are very frequent function words in English,
but they are also very frequent character bigrams.
Researchers often restrict their text representation
to the most frequent n-grams in a corpus (2009,
p. 541), so that n-gram approaches include func-
tion words rather than exclude them. In addition,
high-frequency n-grams are often able to capture
more refined grammatical information. Note how
a text representation in terms of n-grams subtly
exploits the presence of whitespace. In most pa-
pers advocating the use of n-grams, whitespace
is explicitly encoded. Again, this allows more
observations-per-word but, in addition, makes a
representation sensitive to e.g. inflectional infor-
mation. A high frequency of the bigram ‘ed’ could
reflect any use of the character series (reduce vs.
talked). A trigram representation ‘ed ’ reveals a
word-final position of the character series, thus in-
dicating it being used for expressing grammatical
information through affixation. Psycholinguistic
research also stresses the important status of the
first letter(s) of words, especially with respect to
how words are cognitively accessed in the lexicon
(Rubin, 1995, p. 74). Note that this word-initial
aspect too is captured under an n-gram representa-
tion (‘ aspect’).

64



A widely accepted theoretical ground for the
outstanding performance of character n-grams,
will have to consider the fact that n-grams offer
a more powerful way of capturing the functional
information in text. They are sensitive to the inter-
nal morphemic structure of words, capturing many
functors which are simply ignored in word-level
approaches. Although some n-grams can indeed
be ‘closely associated to particular content words
and roots’ (Koppel et al., 2009, p. 13), I would
be inclined to hypothesize that high-frequency n-
grams work in spite of this, not because of this.
This might suggest that extending techniques, like
Delta, to all functors in text, instead of just func-
tion words, will increase both their performance
and language independence.

A final advantage of the introduction of the con-
cept of a functor is that it would facilitate the team-
ing up with a neighbouring field of research that
seems extremely relevant for the field of stylome-
try from a theoretical perspective, but so far has
only received limited attention in it: psycholin-
guistics. The many parallels with the reading re-
search discussed above indicate that both fields
might have a lot to learn from each other. An il-
lustrative example is the study of functor acquisi-
tion by children. It has been suggested that simi-
lar functors are not only present in all languages
of the world, but acquired by all children in an
extremely similar ‘natural order’ (Kwon, 2005).
This is intriguing given stylometry’s interest in the
Stylome-hypothesis. If stylometry is ultimately
looking for linguistic variables that are present in
each individual’s parole, the universal aspects of
functors further stress the benefits of the term’s
introduction. All of this justifies the question
whether the functor should not become a privi-
leged area of study in future stylometric research.

Acknowledgments

The author was funded as a postdoctoral research
fellow by the Research Foundation of Flanders
(FWO). The author would like to thank Matthew
Munson, Bram Vandekerckhove, Dominiek San-
dra, Stan Szpakowicz as well as the anonymous re-
viewers of this paper for their substantial feedback
on earlier drafts. Finally, I am especially indebted
to Walter Daelemans for the inspiring discussions
on the topic of this paper.

References
S. Argamon and S. Levitan. 2005. Measuring the use-

fulness of function words for authorship attribution.
In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the Asso-
ciation for Computers and the Humanities and the
Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing
(2005). Association for Computing and the Human-
ities.

S. Argamon. 2008. Interpreting Burrows’s Delta: Ge-
ometric and Probabilistic Foundations. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, (23):131–147.

M. Aronoff and K. Fudeman. 2005. What is Morphol-
ogy? Blackwell.

D. Biber, S. Conrad, and R. Reppen. 2006. Corpus lin-
guistics - Investigating language structure and use.
Cambridge University Press, 5 edition.

J. Binongo. 2003. Who Wrote the 15th Book of Oz?
An application of multivariate analysis to authorship
attribution. Chance, (16):9–17.

R. Brown. 1973. A First Language. Harvard Univer-
sity Press.

J. Burrows. 1987. Computation into Criticism: A
Study of Jane Austen’s Novels and an Experiment in
Method. Clarendon Press; Oxford University Press.

J. Burrows. 2002. ‘Delta’: a measure of stylistic dif-
ference and a guide to likely authorship. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, (17):267–287.

C. Chung and J. Pennebaker. 2007. The psychologi-
cal functions of function words. In K. Fiedler et al.,
editor, Social Communication, pages 343–359. Psy-
chology Press.

H. Clark and E. Clark. 1977. Psychology and lan-
guage: an introduction to psycholinguistics. Har-
court, Brace & Jovanovich.

H. Craig. 1999. Authorial attribution and computa-
tional stylistics: if you can tell authors apart, have
you learned anything about them? Literary and Lin-
guistic Computing, 14(1):103–113.

W. Daelemans. 2013. Explanation in Computa-
tional Stylometry. In Proceedings of the 14th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics and Intelligent Text Processing - Volume 2,
CICLing’13, pages 451–462, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Springer-Verlag.

A. Drewnowski and A. Healy. 1977. Detection errors
on the and and: Evidence for reading units larger
than the word. Memory & Cognition, (5).

S. Herring and John C. Paolillo. 2006. Gender and
genre variation in weblogs. Journal of Sociolinguis-
tics, 10(4):439–459.

D. Holmes. 1994. Authorship Attribution. Computers
and the Humanities, 28(2):87–106.

65



D. Holmes. 1998. The Evolution of Stylometry in Hu-
manities Scholarship. Literary and Linguistic Com-
puting, 13(3):111–117.

J. Houvardas and E. Stamatatos. 2006. N-gram feature
selection for authorship identification. In J. Euzenat
and J. Domingue, editors, Proceedings of Artificial
Intelligence: Methodologies, Systems, and Applica-
tions (AIMSA 2006), pages 77–86. Springer-Verlag.

P. Juola. 2006. Authorship Attribution. Foundations
and Trends in Information Retrieval, 1(3):233–334.

M. Kestemont, W. Daelemans, and D. Sandra. 2012.
Robust Rhymes? The Stability of Authorial Style in
Medieval Narratives. Journal of Quantitative Lin-
guistics, 19(1):1–23.

B. Kjell. 1994. Discrimination of authorship using
visualization. Information Processing and Manage-
ment, 30(1):141–50.

M. Koppel, J. Schler, and S. Argamon. 2009. Compu-
tational Methods in Authorship Attribution. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 60(1):9–26.

E. Kwon. 2005. The Natural Order of Morpheme
Acquisition: A Historical Survey and Discussion
of Three Putative Determinants. Teachers’ College
Columbia Working Papers in TESOL and Applied
Linguistics, 5(1):1–21.

H. Love. 2002. Authorship Attribution: An Introduc-
tion. Cambridge University Press.

K. Luyckx and W. Daelemans. 2011. The effect of
author set size and data size in authorship attribution.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, (26):35–55.

K. Luyckx. 2010. Scalability Issues in Authorship At-
tribution. Ph.D. thesis, University of Antwerp.

L. McCusker, P. Gough, and R. Bias. 1981. Word
recognition inside out and outside in. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 7(3):538–551.

D. Morrow. 1986. Grammatical morphemes and con-
ceptual structure in discourse processing. Cognitive
Science, 10(4):423–455.

F. Mosteller and D. Wallace. 1964. Inference and dis-
puted authorship: The Federalist. Addison-Wesley.

M. Newman, C. Groom, L. Handelman, and J. Pen-
nebaker. 2008. Gender Differences in Language
Use: An Analysis of 14,000 Text Samples. Dis-
course Processes, 45(3):211–236, May.

F. Peng, D. Schuurmans, V. Keselj, and S. Wang. 2003.
Language independent authorship attribution using
character level language models. In Proceedings of
the 10th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
267–274.

D. Rubin. 1995. Memory in Oral Traditions. The Cog-
nitive Psychology of Epic, Ballads and Counting-out
Rhymes. Oxford University Press.

J. Rybicki and M. Eder. 2011. Deeper Delta across
genres and languages: do we really need the most
frequent words? Literary and Linguistic Comput-
ing, pages 315–321.

E. Sapir. 1921. Language: An Introduction to the
Study of Speech. Harcourt, Brace & Co.

R. Schindler. 1978. The effect of prose context on
visual search for letters. Memory & Cognition,
(6):124–130.

E. Stamatatos. 2009. A survey of modern author-
ship attribution methods. Journal of the American
Society For Information Science and Technology,
(60):538–556.

H. Van Halteren, H. Baayen, F. Tweedie, M. Haverkort,
and A. Neijt. 2005. New Machine Learning Meth-
ods Demonstrate the Existence of a Human Stylome.
Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, (12):65–77.

R. Wollheim. 1972. On Art and the Mind: Essays and
Lectures. Harvard University Press.

G. Zipf. 1949. Human Behavior and the Principle of
Least Effort. Addison-Wesley.

66


