



















































Towards an Empirical Subcategorization of Multiword Expressions


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 77–81,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards an Empirical Subcategorization of Multiword Expressions

Luigi Squillante
Dipartimento di Scienze Documentarie, Linguistico-filologiche e Geografiche

“Sapienza” - Università di Roma
Roma, Italy

luigi.squillante@uniroma1.it

Abstract

The subcategorization of multiword ex-
pressions (MWEs) is still problematic be-
cause of the great variability of their phe-
nomenology. This article presents an at-
tempt to categorize Italian nominal MWEs
on the basis of their syntactic and seman-
tic behaviour by considering features that
can be tested on corpora. Our analysis
shows how these features can lead to a
differentiation of the expressions in two
groups which correspond to the intuitive
notions of multiword units and lexical col-
locations.

1 Introduction

In contemporary linguistics the definition of those
entities which are referred to as multiword ex-
pressions (MWEs) remain controversial. It is in-
tuitively clear that some words, when appearing
together, have some “special bond” in terms of
meaning (e.g. black hole, mountain chain), or lex-
ical choice (e.g. strong tea, to fill a form), con-
trary to free combinations. Nevertheless, the great
variety of features and anomalous behaviours that
these expressions exhibit makes it difficult to or-
ganize them into categories and gave rise to a
great amount of different and sometimes over-
lapping terminology.1 In fact, MWEs can show
non-grammatical constructions, syntactic fixed-
ness, morphological frozeness, semantic restric-
tions, non-compositionality, strong pragmatic con-
notation, etc. These features are not necessary and
sufficient conditions for each expression, but rep-
resent only possible behaviours that can be exhib-
ited together or individually and to a different ex-
tent.

1See Bartsch (2004) or Masini (2007) for an overview on
the historical development of MWE terminology.

Traditionally MWEs are seen as entities lying
on a continuum between two poles that go from
a maximum of semantic opacity (green thumb) to
compositional expressions that show only lexical
restrictions (to catch a cold). However the “com-
positional criterion” is a problematic concept in
semantics, since it has been shown how difficult it
is, in language, to define component parts, rules or
functions involved in compositionality (Casadei,
1996) and, above all, that it is impossible to give
words an absolute meaning independently from
their context (Firth, 1957; Hanks, 2013). Because
of this, the problem of subcategorizing the hetero-
geneous set of MWEs must be based on more re-
liable and testable criteria.

This work presents a study conducted on the
Italian language that aims at dividing MWEs in
subcategories on the basis of empirical syntactic
and semantic criteria different from composition-
ality. We show how these features are able to sep-
arate two poles of entities which approximately
correspond to what is intuitively known as mul-
tiword units (polirematiche in the Italian lexico-
graphic tradition)2 as opposed to (lexical) colloca-
tions.

2 The need to go beyond statistics

In recent years, the fact that MWE components
tend to cooccur more frequently than expected led
to the development of several statistical associa-
tion measures3 (AMs) in order to identify and au-
tomatically extract MWEs. However, as pointed
out in Evert (2008), it is important not to confuse
the empirical concept of recurrent or statistically
relevant word combination in a corpus (empirical
collocation) with the theoretical concept of MWE
(which assumes phraseological implications), al-
though the two sets overlap. In fact, it is common

2cf. De Mauro (2007).
3See Evert (2004) for a general overview.

77



that AMs can extract expressions such as leggere
un libro ‘to read a book’ or storcere il naso ‘to
stick up [one’s] nose’ just because the components
tend to cooccur often in corpora. However, while
the first one seems not to need its own categori-
cal status (Bosque, 2004), the latter is usually de-
noted as a metaphoric MWE or idiom. AMs are
not able to distinguish between the two or even
differentiate subtypes of true MWEs on the basis
of phraseological relevance (e.g. AMs are not able
to assign a higher score to more opaque MWEs
in opposition to lexical collocations). It is pos-
sible, however, to integrate statistical information
with the results of syntactic and semantic tests per-
formed on corpora in order to identify subgroups
of MWEs.4

3 Methodology

As a first approach, in this work only Italian nomi-
nal MWE of the form [noun + adjective]5 are cho-
sen. The corpus used in our study is PAISÀ6, a
freely available large Italian corpus, composed of
ca. 250 million tokens and morpho-syntactically
annotated. By means of mwetoolkit (Ramisch et
al., 2010) the 400 most frequent [noun + adjec-
tive] bigrams are extracted from the corpus and
assigned the pointwise mutual information (PMI)
association score (Church and Hanks, 1990). Then
the bigrams are ordered according to PMI and only
the first 300 are retained.7 The number of oc-
currences of the expressions contained in this set
varies between 20.748 and 641.

Then, we implemented a computational tool
that performs empirical tests on modifiability. We
chose to study three features, which are a) inter-
ruptibility, b) inflection and c) substitutability8 and
for each of them an index is calculated.

4The idea is not new, since already Fazly and Stevenson
(2007) showed how lexical and syntactic fixedness is relevant
in subcategorizing MWEs. However, their work focused only
on a set of English verbal MWEs and subclasses were deter-
mined initially and not at the end of the analysis.

5This is the unmarked Italian noun phrase.
6www.corpusitaliano.it
7The first frequency threshold is necessary since PMI

tends to overestimate expressions with very low numbers of
occurrences (Evert, 2008). Then, considering only the 300
best candidates increases the chances to have a majority of
MWEs. In a later stage of our analysis also the top-300 can-
didates extracted by the log-likelihood (LL) AM (Dunning,
1993) have been considered, in order to check if the initial
choice of PMI could affect somehow our results. The LL set
was 66% coincident with the PMI set. However, the new ex-
pressions seem to show the same tendencies of distributions
(cf. Section 4) as those in the PMI set.

8In fact, in Italian: a) some nominal MWEs do not allow

Given the expression, the index of interruptibil-
ity (Ii) compares the occurrences of the sequence
in its basic form [noun + adjective] (nbf ), with
the occurrences of the same sequence with one
word occurring between the two components (ni).
The queries are made over lemmas and its value is
given by the ratio: Ii = ni/(nbf + ni).

The index of inflection (If ) compares the num-
ber of occurrences of the prevalent (most frequent)
inflected form (npf ) with those of the basic lem-
matized form9 (nbf ) and its value is given by the
ratio: If = (nbf − npf )/nbf .

Finally, the index of substitutability (Is) com-
pares the number of occurrences of the basic form
(nbf ), regardless of inflection, with the occur-
rences ns of all the sequences in which one of
the two components is replaced by one of its
synonyms (if present). If ns1,i is the number
of occurrences of the i-th synonym of the first
component word and ns2,i is an analogous quan-
tity for the second component word, then ns =∑

i ns1,i +
∑

i ns2,i and Is = ns/(nbf + ns). In
order to calculate Is the tool needs an external syn-
onym list; we chose the GNU-OpenOffice Italian
Thesaurus10 because of its immediate availability,
open-source nature and ease of management.11

Then the three indices are calculated for each of
the 300 MWEs of the candidate list.

4 Results

Figure 1 shows the distribution of the expressions
in the planes defined by Ii, If ,Is. It is evident that
there is a tendency for the expressions to gather
more along the axes rather than in the planes, i.e.
where one of the indices has low values.

for the insertion of other words between the components (e.g.
carro armato ‘tank’; cfr. *carro grande armato) while others
do (e.g. punto debole ‘weak point’; cf. punto più debole); b)
some nominal MWEs exhibit inflection frozeness (e.g. diritti
umani ‘human rights’; cf. *diritto umano), while others can
be freely inflected (e.g. cartone animato ‘cartoon’; cfr. car-
toni animati); c) some nominal MWEs do not allow for the
substitution of one of their components with a synonym (e.g.
colonna sonora ‘soundtrack’; cf. *pilastro sonoro) while oth-
ers do (e.g. guerra mondiale ‘world war’; cf. conflitto mon-
diale).

9Although Nissim and Zaninello (2011) show how Ital-
ian nominal MWEs can exhibit several distinct morphologi-
cal variations, we chose to consider only the proportion be-
tween the prevalent form and the total number of expressions
since our pattern generally admits only singular and plural
forms, with noun and adjective coherently coupled.

10http://linguistico.sourceforge.net/pages/thesaurus italiano.html
11However, other more specific and complete resources

could be attached instead in the future, in order to improve
the quality of the results.

78



Figure 1: Distribution of MWE candidates according to the values of their indices of inflection (If ),
substitutability (Is) and interruptibility (Ii).

Since the plane IfIs shows the highest disper-
sion of points, we chose to consider in this plane
4 polarities defined by the intersection of high/low
values for both If and Is. We consider a value
high (and indicate I+) when I > 0.33 and low
(I−) when I < 0.1. In this way we obtain 4 sets
of expressions lying at the extreme corners of the
plane and denote them I+f I

+
s , I

+
f I

−
s , I

−
f I

+
s , I

−
f I

−
s .

Ii has a small range of variation (97% of the
candidates have Ii < 0.1), nevertheless it can dif-
ferentiate, as a third dimension, the expressions in
the 4 groups defined above from a minimum to a
maximum of interruptibility.

As one could presume, the expressions appear-
ing in the group I−f I

−
s with the lowest score of Ii

are examples of opaque, crystallized or termino-
logical expressions, such as testamento biologico
‘living will’ (If = 0.066, Is = 0.004, Ii = 0), valor
militare ‘military valour’ (If = 0, Is = 0, Ii =
0), anidride carbonica ‘carbon dioxide’ (If = 0,
Is = 0, Ii = 0.001). However expressions in the
same group with the highest values of interrupt-
ibility12 seem to be compositional and just lexi-
cally restricted: carriera solista ‘solo career’ (If
= 0.067, Is = 0.018, Ii = 0.280), sito ufficiale ‘of-
ficial website’ (If = 0.043, Is = 0.077, Ii = 0.076).

Similar results come out for the group I+f I
−
s ,

where expressions like cartone animato ‘cartoon’
(If = 0.333, Is = 0.033, Ii = 0.0004), macchina
fotografica ‘camera’ (If = 0.374, Is = 0.058, Ii =
0.004), appear with low scores of interruptibility,
while punto debole ‘weak point’ (If = 0.4, Is =
0.066, Ii = 0.052), figlio maschio ‘male son’ (If
= 0.479, Is = 0.098, Ii = 0.037), have the highest
values of interruptibility.

12Recall that here, due to the high frequency of the expres-
sions and to Ii’s range of variation, values of Ii close to 0.1
represent expressions that are sufficiently interrupted.

For I−f I
+
s , we have free combinations for higher

Ii, such as colore bianco ‘white colour’ (If =
0.097, Is = 0.385, Ii = 0.129) or colore rosso ‘red
colour’ (If = 0.066, Is = 0.362, Ii = 0.097), and
more lexically restricted expressions for lower val-
ues, such as corpo umano ‘human body’ (If =
0.077, Is = 0.534, Ii = 0.008), fama internazionale
‘international fame’ (If = 0.011, Is = 0.441, Ii =
0.007).

Finally the group I+f I
+
s presents only expres-

sions with very low values of Ii depending on
the fact that expressions with high interruptibility,
high substitutability and free inflection have been
presumably excluded from the list because of their
low AM scores. The remaining expressions in the
group are of the kind of spettacolo teatrale ‘theatre
performance’ (If = 0.468, Is = 0.365, Ii = 0.006),
partito politico ‘political party’ (If = 0.471, Is =
0.562, Ii = 0.003), thus mainly compositional.

5 Discussion and Interpretation

By analysing the distribution of MWE candidates,
it is possible to consider the scheme of Table 1 in
which the following three categories appear: free
combinations, multiword units and lexical collo-
cations. As one can note, inflection variability
does not play a role in discriminating between the
categories.

It must be underlined that the three indices
group the expressions into sets that appear to be
more or less homogeneous with respect to the intu-
itive distinction between semantic units and com-
positional, lexically restricted expressions.

Free combinations represent the “false posi-
tives” of the list, i.e. expressions that do not need
a special categorical status in phraseology.

Multiword units (polirematiche) represent here
a subcategory of MWEs which exhibit the fol-

79



Inflection variability
low high

Substitutability
high

more Interruption Free Combinations //
less Interruption Lexical Collocations Lexical Collocations

low
more Interruption Lexical Collocations Lexical Collocations
less Interruption Multiword Units Multiword Units

Table 1: Definition of MWE subcategories with respect to their syntactic and semantic empirical be-
haviour shown in our experiment. The upper right cell is empty since all the expressions in the group
I+f I

+
s have Ii � 0.1.

lowing features: they can be metaphoric (catena
montuosa ‘mountain chain’), completely crystal-
lized (quartier generale ‘headquarter’), termino-
logical (amministratore delegato ‘managing direc-
tor’), they can present an unpredictable semantic
addition (gas naturale, ‘natural gas’, meaning the
gas provided in houses for domestic uses), or one
of the components assumes a specific and unusual
meaning (casa automobilistica ‘car company’, lit.
‘car house’). Despite their variability, the entities
in this group are all perceived as “units” of mean-
ing because the lack of one of the components
makes the expressions lose their overall meaning.

Finally, lexical collocations represent here those
entities that are generally perceived as fully com-
positional, being “not fixed but recognizable
phraseological units” (Tiberii, 2012). They ex-
hibit the following possible features: one of the
component is used only in combination with the
other one (acqua potabile ‘drinking water’, where
potabile only refers to water), or although other
synonymous words are available and could give
the expression the same meaning, just one specific
component word is preferred (sito ufficiale ‘offi-
cial site’; cf. *sito autorizzato).

6 Further considerations and limits

Although not reported here, expressions with val-
ues for If , Is ∈ [0.1, 0.33] show continuity be-
tween the categories of Table 1.13 Moreover, since
our thesaurus does not deal with sense disam-
biguation, a manual check on concordances was
performed. For very few metaphorical expres-
sions, Is produced non-reliable values, since it can
happen that, once a synonym of one component
has been substituted for the original word, the new

13E.g. intervento chirurgico ‘surgery’ has If = 0.27, Is =
0.22 and Ii = 0 and moves between multiword unit and lexical
collocation; stile barocco ‘baroque style’, with If = 0.005, Is
= 0.20 and Ii = 0.07, moves between lexical collocation and
free combination.

expression is still highly attested in the corpus, al-
though it has lost the original metaphorical mean-
ing.14 In order to correct this bias in the future,
the criterion of substitutability should check, for
example, not only the number of attested replaced
expressions, but also if they share the same context
words of the basic expression.

7 Conclusion and future work

Our analysis shows that the intuitive distinction
between two main subcategories of MWEs (multi-
word units vs. lexical collocations) can be empir-
ically reproduced by testing the syntactic and se-
mantic behaviour of the expressions on corpora. In
this way we provide an empirical criterion, related
to the intuitive and hardly definable notion of com-
positionality, able to attest how expressions exhibit
different restrictions depending on their subcate-
gory. Multiword units are characterized by low
values of interruptibility and low values of substi-
tutability. Lexical collocations can be more easily
interrupted if they have low values of substitutabil-
ity, while they do not allow for interruptibility if
they have high substitutability. Since also a sub-
group of free combinations is identified when in-
tersecting the values of the indices, our methodol-
ogy can be useful as well for automatic removal of
false positives from MWE candidate lists.15

Future work must include the extension of the
analysis to other forms of nominal MWEs as well
as other grammatical categories by the develop-
ment of tools which can deal with verbal or adver-
bial MWEs, as well as tests on different corpora.

14This is the case of braccio destro ‘right-hand man’, lit.
‘right arm’, that could be substituted by ala destra (right
wing) since both braccio and ala can refer to a part of a build-
ing.

15This consideration relates our work to that of Baldwin et
al. (2003), Bannard (2007), Weller and Fritzinger (2010), Cap
et al. (2013), whose goal is to implement the identification of
true positive candidates by using both syntactic or semantic
features and AMs.

80



References
Timothy Baldwin, Colin Bannard, Takaaki Tanaka, and

Dominic Widdows. 2003. An empirical model of
multiword expression decomposability. In Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions:
Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment (ACL 2003),
pages 89–96.

Colin Bannard. 2007. A measure of syntactic flexibil-
ity for automatically identifying multiword expres-
sions in corpora. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on a Broader Perspective on Multiword Expressions,
pages 1–8.

Sabine Bartsch. 2004. Structural and Func-
tional Properties of Collocations in English. Narr,
Tübingen.

Ignacio Bosque. 2004. Combinatoria y significación.
Algunas reflexiones. In REDES, Diccionario Com-
binatorio del Español Contemporaneo. Hoepli.

Fabienne Cap, Marion Weller, and Ulrich Heid. 2013.
Using a Rich Feature Set for the Identification of
German MWEs. In Proceedings of Machine Trans-
lation Summit XIV, Nice, France.

Federica Casadei. 1996. Metafore ed Espressioni Id-
iomatiche. Uno studio semantico sull’italiano. Bul-
zoni Editore, Roma.

Kenneth W. Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word
association norms, mutual information, and lexicog-
raphy. Computational Linguistics, 16(1):22–29.

Tullio De Mauro. 2007. GRADIT, Grande Dizionario
Italiano dell’Uso. UTET.

Ted Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statis-
tics of surprise and coincidence. Computational
Linguistics, 19(1):61–74.

Stefan Evert. 2004. The Statistics of Word Cooccur-
rences: Word Pairs and Collocations. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Stuttgart.

Stefan Evert. 2008. Corpora and Collocations. In
A. Lüdeling and M. Kytö, editors, Corpus Lin-
guistics. An International Handbook. Mouton de
Gruyter, Berlin.

Afsaneh Fazly and Suzanne Stevenson. 2007. Dis-
tinguishing subtypes of multiword expressions us-
ing linguistically-motivated statistical measures. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on A Broader Perspec-
tive on Multiword Expressions. ACL, pages 9–16.

J. R. Firth. 1957. Papers in Linguistics. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford.

Patrick Hanks. 2013. Lexical Analysis. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Francesca Masini. 2007. Parole sintagmatiche in ital-
iano. Ph.D. thesis, Università degli Studi di Roma
Tre.

Malvina Nissim and Andrea Zaninello. 2011. A quan-
titative study on the morphology of italian multi-
word expressions. Lingue e linguaggio, (2):283–
300.

Carlos Ramisch, Aline Villavicencio, and Christian
Boitet. 2010. mwetoolkit: a Framework for Mul-
tiword Expression Identification. In Proceedings of
the Seventh International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2010), Valletta,
Malta.

Paola Tiberii. 2012. Dizionario delle collocazioni. Le
combinazioni delle parole in italiano. Zanichelli.

Marion Weller and Fabienne Fritzinger. 2010. A hy-
brid approach for the identification of multiword ex-
pressions. In Proceedings of the SLTC 2010 Work-
shop on Compounds and Multiword Expressions.

81


