



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and J D Pawar. Proc. of the 11th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 305–314,
Goa, India. December 2014. c©2014 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Making Verb Frames for Bangla Vector Verbs 

 

 
Sanjukta Ghosh 

Department of Linguistics 

Banaras Hindu University 

Varanasi, INDIA 

san_subh@yahoo.com 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Abstract 

This paper is an initial attempt to make verb 

frames for some Bangla verbs. For this pur-

pose, I have selected 15 verbs which are used 

as vectors in the compound verb constructions 

of Bangla. The frames are made to show their 

number of arguments as well as case markings 

on those arguments when these verbs are ued 

alone and when they form part of compound 

verb constructions. This work can be extended 

further to make similar verb frames for all 

other verbs and can be used as a rich lexical 

resource. 

Keywords: verb frames, compound verbs, 

Bangla, arguments and case markings, lexical 

resource. 

1 Introduction 

Compound verbs had always taken a pivotal role in 

the linguistic research of Indian languages. They 

are composed of two verbs and together make a 

complex predicate. The typical property of the 

compound verbs in Indian languages is that the 

second verb or V2 does play a very important role 

in the meaning composition of the complex predi-

cate and occasionally also retains its own argument 

while forming a compound verb. For these interest-

ing properties of the compound verbs, they have 

been studied extensively in almost all major Indian 

languages (Hook (1974), Kachru and 

Pandharipande (1980), Butt (1993, 1995), Kachru 

(1993) on Hindi, Bashir (1993) on Kalasa, 

Pandharipande (1993) on Marathi, Fedson (1993) 

on Tamil, Hook (1996) on Gujrarti, Kaul Vijay on 

Kashmiri (1985), Rajesh Kumar and Nilu (2012) 

on Magahi, Mohanty (1992) on Oriya and Paul 

(2004, 2005) on Bangla). The first verb appears in 

its perfective form in Bangla compound verbs and 

the second takes the inflection as in other lan-

guages. 

The vectors of the compound verbs are responsible 

for providing certain kinds of senses cross-

linguistically as shown by Abbi and Gopalkrishnan 

(1992) with data taking from all four major lan-

guage families of India.  They have categorized 

these senses into three types: Aspectual, Adverbial 

and Attitudinal with some sub-types under these. 

Under aspectual cross-linguistically a sense of 

perfectivity or completeness of event (telicity) is 

found. Adverbial is further divided by them into 

three types: manner, benefactive and others all 

showing some way the action of the V1 performed. 

Under attitudinal type, comes the attitude of the 

speaker or the narrator towards the action men-

tioned by the V1 such as anger, surprise, contempt, 

disgust etc.  These three senses are observed in 

Bangla compound verbs also. While aspectual and 

adverbial are most common senses, some cases are 

found (vectors bOS and rakh) with attitudinal 

sense of undesirability and intention to make the 

hearer attentive towards the speaker.  

305



 

The present paper takes total 15 major vector 

verbs of Bangla listed in the work of Paul and pro-

vides syntactic frames for them when used alone as 

well as when used as a V2 in a compound verb 

construction. The goal of the paper is to see wheth-

er in a compound verb construction the V2 retains 

its argument structure and case marking properties 

or not. The paper as far as my knowledge goes, 

makes the first attempt to build verb frames for 

Bangla. The syntactic and semantic information 

associated with the verb frames can be very useful 

for classifying and analyzing the verbs as well as 

for many NLP applications such as information 

retrieval, text processing, building parser, Machine 

Translation etc. 

2 Syntactic Frames of Bangla Vector 
Verbs  

Attempt for classification of verbs is not a new 

phenomenon for a resource-rich language like Eng-

lish. Levin’s verb classification (Levin 1993), 

based on syntactic and semantic properties is a gi-

gantic classic work. VerbNet is a broad-coverage 

freely available online verb lexicon of English 

based on Levin’s classification and provides in-

formation about thematic roles and syntactic and 

semantic representations. It is linked to other lexi-

cal resources like FrameNet, PropBank and 

WordNet.  However, Indian languages still lack 

such kind of broad coverage verb resource. Apart 

from some initial attempt for making verb frames 

for Hindi (Rafiya et al, undated online version), we 

don’t find any other work in this direction.
1
  

For the present work, to build a frame for a 

verb, I take the syntactic categories in a sentence 

where the verb appears. Then the NPs of the sen-

tence are marked with the thematic roles they bear 

and the case marker or postposition they take. 

Apart from the traditional thematic roles found in 

standard GB theory like agent, experience, patient, 

instrument, benefactive, source, location and goal, 

I have used some other roles like associative for 

the accompanying NP with an agent, distinguished 

between causer, cause and an intermediate agent in 

case of a verb which provides the semantics of 

causation. The noun phrases are classified into lo-

cation, time and matter and they bear locative case 

markers. Therefore, in the frames these different 

types of NPs are mentioned. Case markers are very 

important for Indian languages. For one particular 

theta role, there may be more than one case mark-

er.   After providing the frame schema, an example 

sentence of Bangla is given for that particular 

frame with a gloss and translation in English.  

In the following subsections the verb frames are 

developed and described for each of the vectors 

found in a compound verb construction. 
 

1. /aSa/ ‘come’ 

Sense 1: Deixis 

The deictic verb aSa may focus on the source of 

the movement, the path or the goal. If the source is 

in focus, the frame has a theke marked source loca-

tion NP, if the goal is in focus the argument is 

locative –e marked and when the path is in focus it 

is –die or -hoe marked path NP.  

 

NP1(Agent) NP2-theke (source) V 

1. ami baRi theke aSchi.  

I house-from come-pr-prog-1p 

 ‘I am coming from the house.’ 

 

NP1-Agent NP2-e(goal) V 

2. pOrpOr kotogulo durbOl Sorkar khOmotay   

aSe. 

   Consecutively some weak government power- 

loc come-pr-3p 

  ‘Some weak governments came to power consec-

utively.’ 

 

NP1(Agent) NP2-hoe/die (Path) V1 

3. amra kalna hoe elam. 

   We Kalna via come-pt-1p      

   ‘We came via Kalna.’ 

4. amra    men lain die elam. 

    We main line by com-pt-1p   

   ‘We came by main line.’ 

 

The verb may also take an associative argument 

marked with –r SoMge/Sathe as in (5). 

          

NP1(agent) NP2-r SOMge (associative) V 

5. bacchaTa kar SoMge eSeche? 

    Child-cl who-gen with come-pr-pft-3p 

    ‘With whom has the child come?’ 

 

The V1 which are compatible with deictic senses 

are ghora ‘to roam’, phera ‘to return’, bERano 

’to travel, to stroll’. The frames of the verbs 

ghora and bERano require a locative argument. 

This argument, when combined with aSa in a 

306



 

compound verb is merged with the source argu-

ment of aSa. As a result, there is only one source 

marked argument in the compound verb frames 

of ghure aSa and beRie aSa, which may be 

dropped occasionally.  E.g. 

 

NP1(agent) NP2 –theke(source) V1 V2. 

6. amra ladakh theke beRie elam. 

     We Ladakh from o travel come-pt-1p  

    ‘We came back travelling from Ladakh.’ 

 

When the path is focused in the deictic sense the 

argument is case marked with postposition die as 

in the next sentence.  

NP1(agent) NP2-die(path)    V1 V2 

7. je pOth die cole eli, Se pOth Ekhon bhule geli. 

(Tagore song) 

    which way by walk come-pt-2p-NH, that way 

now forget go-pt-2p-NH 

    ‘Now you forgot the way by which you came 

past.’ 

 

When the goal is in focus, however, the argument 

of the same compound verb becomes a locative –

e/te marked place noun.  

  

NP1(agent)  NP-e(goal) V1 V2 

8. hElheD istinDia kompanir cakri nie bharote cole 

aSen. 

    Halhed East India Company-gen job with India-

loc come-pr-3p-hon back 

  ‘Halhed came back to India with a job in East 

India Company.’ 

 

When the source is in focus, the argument will be 

theke marked source. 

 

NP1(agent)   NP2(temporal)  V1 V2 

9. kintu uni jodi ajkaler moddhei phire aSen.. 

    but he-hon if by today or tomorrow return come  

‘What if he comes back by today or tomorrow.’ 

 

aSa may also be combined with some verb with 

one object argument (e.g. phEla ‘to drop’) and in 

that case that object argument is realized in the 

frame of the compound verb as the following. 

However, there is still the deictic sense of the vec-

tor retained in such construction. The place of 

speaking and the place of the first verb cannot be 

same. 

 

NP1(agent) NP20/ke/re (theme) V1 V2  

10. tui phele eSechiS kare? 

      You-NH drop come-pr-pft-2p-NH whom (poet-

ic)  

‘Whom have you left behind?’ 

      

NP1(agent) NP2-ke(patient) V1 V2 

11. make bole eSechiS? (alternatively bOla may 

also take locative argument like baRite)  

     Mother-obj. tell come-pr-pft-2p-NH   

‘Have you informed mother?’ 

 

Sense 2: Duration 

When aSa as a V2 is used in the sense of duration 

of the event of V1, it may have a temporal NP with 

postpositions like theke, dhore (kOtodin dhore).  

 

NP1(agent) NP2 (temporal) V1 V2 

12. ami kObe theke bole aSchi. 

      I when from say come-pr-prog-3p 

      ‘I have been saying it for a long time.’  

 

NP1(agent) NP2(matter/višay)  V1 V2   

13. Se tar pitar onukOroNe o nirdeSe ei karjo kore 

aSche. 

   (s)he his/her father-gen following-loc and in-

struction-e this work do come-pr-prog-3p-NH 

   ‘She has been doing this work following her fa-

ther’s instruction.’ 

 

Sense 3: gradualness of the event 

When aSa is used in the sense of gradualness of 

the event of V1 it may optionally take a manner 

adverb phrase like dhire dhire, aste aste ‘slowly’. 

 

(AdvP) NP1(undergoer) V1 V2 

14. (dhire dhire) cokh (ghume) juRe aSche. 

      Slowly eyes in sleep close come-3p-pr-prog        

‘The eyes have been closing slowing.’ 

 

2. rakha ‘to keep’: This verb when used alone 

takes a locative place argument. 

        

NP1(agent) NP2 (theme) NP3-e/-er +a locative 

postposition V (locative) 

15. boiTa kothay rekhechiS? 

      book-cl where keep-pr-pft-2p-NH  

     ‘Where have you kept the book?’ 

 

Sense 1: Aspectual  

307



 

When used in the aspectual sense as a vector, it 

combines with verbs which take one object argu-

ment and that is realized in the frame of the com-

pound verb, aspectual difference of the two senses 

of rakha as a vector is not reflected in the verb 

frame. In both cases the V1 is verb with one object 

argument but the difference is in the type of the 

verb, with the first sense a process verb and with 

the second sense a perceptual verb resulting some 

cognitive effect is found as a V1. E.g. 

 

NP1(agent) NP2-0/ke (patient) V1 V2 

16. phulTa tule rakhiS.  

      flowers pick keep-2p-fut-imp-NH   

     ‘Pick up the flowers (with a telic reading).’ 

17. benarOs tar oitijjho dhore rekheche. 

      Benaras its tradition hold keep-pr-pft-3p ‘Va-

ranasi has kept up its tradition.’ 

 

Sense 2: to make the hearer attentive/attitudinal 

sense of the speaker 

It is often used in imperative mood and generally 

comes with the adverbial phrase bhalo kore or mon 

die which in this context mean carefully/with at-

tention. E.g.  

 

NP1(agent)NP2-0/ke (patient) AdvP V1(perception 

verb) V2 

18. kOthaTa bhalo kore Sune rakho. 

      Word-cl   well         hear keep-pr-imp-2p-NH          

     ‘Listen to the words carefully.’  

 

3. ana ‘to bring’: The basic frame has a subject 

and an object argument and a source from where 

the object is brought. The verb ana semantically 

involves a movement of things from one place to 

another. 

 

NP1(agent) NP2-theke(source) NP2-0/ke (theme) 

V 

19. tumi dilli theke ki enecho? 

      you what bring-pr-pft-2p-MH  

     ‘What have you brought?’ 

 

When it is combined with another verb with an 

object argument there is sharing of argument and 

only one object is realized in the frame of the com-

pound verb. 

 

NP1(agent) NP2-0/ke (theme) V1 V2 

20. kake dhore enechi, dEkho. 

      whom catch bring-pr-pft-1p see-imp-2p  

     ‘See, whom have I brought?’ 

 

4. dea ‘to give’:  It loses its core sense when used 

as a vector. The frame of dea alone is the follow-

ing. 

NP1 (agent) NP2-ke (recipient) NP3 (theme) V 

21. ke kake ki dilo?   

      Who whom what give-pt-3p-NH 

      ‘Who gave what to whom?’ 

 

When used as a vector with any other process verb 

in complete aspectual sense, it does not retain any 

of its arguments. The resulting sentence structure 

has the arguments of V1. The semantics of this 

vector is the action of V1 will be beneficial for 

somebody other than the actor.  

 

NP1(agent) NP2-0/ke (patient) V1 V2 

22. tumi ki kajTa kore debe?  

       you QP work-cl do-give-fut-2p-MH 

      ‘Will you do the work?’ 

 

5. nea ‘to take’ 
The basic frame of the verb is the following with a 

theke marked source argument. 

 

NP1(agent) NP-2-theke (source) V 

23. eTa kotha theke nile? 

      This-cl where from take-pt-3p  

     ‘Where did you take it from?’ 

 

However, the source argument is lost when it is 

used in a compound verb frame as a V2 and the 

frame follows the first verb completely. The se-

mantics is the action of V1 is done for the benefit 

of the actor. E.g. 

 

24. taRataRi khee ne, iskuler deri hoe jacche. 

      quickly eat take-pr-imp-2p-NH, school-gen. 

late become go-pr-prog  

      ‘Take the food quickly, (you) are getting late 

for the school.’ 

  

6. tola ‘to pick up’ 
The basic frame of the verb consists of an agent of 

picking up, a source of pick up and the theme/ pa-

tient to be picked up.  

 

NP1(agent) NP2- 0/ke (theme) NP3-theke (source) 

V 

308



 

25. ami bacchader skul theke tulbo 

      I children school from pick up-fut-1p   

     ‘ I will pick up the children from the school.’ 

 

The source argument is not found in the frame of 

the compound verb with an accomplishment V1. 

 

NP1(agent) NP2-0/ke (patient) (AdvP) V1 V2 

26. Condrobabu naiDuke notun rajdhani SohorTa 

dhire dhire goRe tulte hObe. 

     Candrababu Naidu-Dat new capital city-cl 

slowly   build pick be-fut-modal 

     ‘Candrababu Naidu has to build up the new 

capital city slowly.’ 

 

7. /oTha/ ‘to rise’ 
Primary frame of the verb has an agent argument 

with a locative/temporal argument if it is used in 

the sense of physical rising or ascending or getting 

up or some change in the position.  

 

NP1(agent) NP2-0/e (location/temporal) V 

27. bacchara chade uTheche. 

      kids roof-loc ascend-pr-pft-3p   

     ‘The kids have ascended on the terrace.’ 

28. amra bhorbEla uThechi. 

      We dawn  get up-pr-pft-1p   

     ‘We have got up early in the morning.’ 

29. Surjo purbodike oThe. 

      The sun east-loc rise-generic-pr-3p    

      ‘The sun rises in the east.’  

 

This verb when used as a vector with gORa ‘to 

build’ makes an unaccusative complex predicate 

where the subject of the construction is actually the 

complement of the verb.  

 

NP1(patient) NP2  (location/temporal) V1 V2 

30. Sob purono Sobbhotai nodir dhare goRe 

uThechilo. 

      All old civilizations river-gen side-loc build 

rise-pt-3p 

     ‘All the old civilizations were built in the river 

banks.’ 

 

In the second sense of the vector, it contributes to 

the modality of the first verb and mostly used with 

interrogation or negation. The V2 oTha in this 

sense is always with the suffix –te with the auxilia-

ry para denoting ability.  

 

NP1(agent)  NP2(patient)  V1 V2-te para  

31. ami Ekhono lekhaTa likhe uThte pari ni. 

      I   so far  article-cl write rise can not 

     ‘So far I have not been able to manage to write 

the article.’ 

 

NP1(agent) ki NP2-0(patient) V1 V2 para? 

32. tumi ki kajTa kore uThte perecho?  

      you QP work-cl do rise can-pr-pft 

     ‘Have you been able to manage to do the 

work?’ 

 

In the third use of the vector oTha it is used very 

commonly with the manner adverb hOthat ‘sud-

denly’ and denotes the suddenness or unexpected-

ness of the first event. 

 

NP1(agent) AdvP V1 V2 

33. baccaTa hOThat keMde uThlo 

       child-cl suddenly cry  rise-pt-3p     

      ‘Suddenly the child cried.’   

 

8. pORa ‘to fall’ 

The verb pORa as mentioned before denotes a 

change of place of its subject. The subject under-

goes an action of falling from a certain source of-

ten marked with theke. The location of falling may 

also be marked in the sentence occasionally with 

locative –e. However, none of these may be pre-

sent in a sentence. The subject gets the theme theta 

role and it is actually raised to the position of the 

subject from the complement position of the verb. 

Therefore, pORa is an unaccusative predicate. 

 

NP1-theke(source)  NP2-e(location)  NP3 (theme)     

V 

34. kal rate gach theke bagane Onek am poReche. 

      last night tree from garden-loc many mangoes 

fall-pr-pft-3p 

      ‘Many mangoes have fallen in the garden last 

night.’ 

 

When it is used with a stative V1 in a compound 

verb frame it emphasizes the resulting state of the 

V1 after certain motion. The frame needs only one 

compulsory theme argument which is realized as 

subject NP. The argument is actually a theme can 

be checked from the fact that in this construction 

another object is not allowed. For instance, * 

baccchaTa lOmba ghum ghumie poReche is un-

grammatical where lOmba ghum ‘long sleep’ is 

309



 

inserted as an object. However, with the single 

verb ghumono ‘sleep’ the object argument is per-

fectly acceptable.  

 

NP1(theme) V1 V2 

35. bacchaTa ghumie poReche. 

       Child-cl sleep fall-pr-pft-3p   

      ‘The child has fallen asleep.’ 

 

9. bOSa ‘to sit’ 

The verb frame of the single intransitive verb boSa 

has one compulsory agent argument with one op-

tional (often unrealized in a sentence) location of 

seating. 

 

NP1(agent) NP2-e/te (location) V 

36. tumi maTite boSle kEno? 

       You floor-loc sit-pt-2p-NH why 

       ‘Why did you sit on the floor?’  

 

However, when used in a compound verb frame it 

refers to only aspectual function of the V1, sud-

denness or unexpected nature of the event. The 

verbs with which it goes are transitive like bOla ‘to 

say’, kOra ‘to do’. 

 

NP1(agent) NP2(time or location) V1 V2  (ke jane) 

37. meeTa kOkhon ki bole boSbe ke jane 

      girl-cl when what say sit-fut-3p who knows 

     ‘Who knows, when the girl will say what (un-

expected)!’ 

 

10. phEla ‘to drop’ 

 The verb phEla when used alone takes an agent 

argument, a theme and optionally a location of 

dropping. 

 

  NP1(agent) NP2(theme) NP3-e/te (location) V  

38. baccaTa cabiTa nice phelechilo 

       child-cl key-cl downstairs-loc drop-pt-pft-3p           

      ‘The child had dropped the key downstairs.’ 

 

As a vector it is used in the sense of ‘to do the 

event of V1 without hesitation or further consid-

eration’ as in bole phEla ‘speak out’, kore phEla 

‘do without hesitation’. The frame has one agent 

and patient with some manner adverbial.   

 

NP1(agent) NP2(patient)  AdvP   V1 V2 

39. Oto bhabchiS ki, kajTa cOTpOT kore phEl. 

      Much think-pr-prog-2p-NH what, work-cl fast 

do drop-imp-2p-NH 

     ‘What are you thinking so much? Do the job 

quickly.’ 

 

The second use in the sense of an unwanted event 

of V1 can be found with the same set of verbs. The 

frame typically generally has question words 

kOkhon/kothay and ki as time location and patient 

argument. 

 

NP1(agent) NP2(time or location) NP3(patient) V1 

V2  

40. o  je kOkhon ki kore phelbe tar Thik nei. 

     (s)he comp when what do drop-fut-3p its clear 

not 

     ‘It is not clear, when he will do what (unexpect-

edly).’ 

 

Notice that same verb may be used with both the 

senses.  

 

The third use is completely aspectual and it indi-

cates the telicity of the event of V1. The transitive 

verbs with an overt argument go with this reading 

of phEla. E.g.  chuMRe phEla ‘to throw out’, 

bheMe PhEla ‘ to break’, gile phEla ‘to swallow’. 

 

NP1(agent) NP2(theme) NP3-e/te(location)  V1 V2 

41. tini phuler toRaTa baje kagojer jhuRite 

chuMRe phellen. 

      (s)he flower-gen bouquet-cl waste paper bas-

ket-loc throw drop-pt-3p 

     ‘She threw the bouquet of flowers in the waste 

paper basket.’  

 

11. jaoa ‘to go’ 

As a single verb jaoa has an agent of the motion 

and a goal or destination where the agent goes. It 

may also alternatively refer to the path of the mo-

tion marked by the postposition –die/hoe. 

 

 NP1(agent) NP2 (goal) V 

43. ami dilli jacchi. 

       I    delhi go-pr-prog-1p  

      ‘I am going to Delhi.’ 

 

When it is used as a vector, it loses the goal argu-

ment and it is used with some time adverbial de-

noting duration of the event. The TAM expressed 

is either present perfect continuous or habitual pre-

310



 

sent and it is realized by either simple present con-

tinuous or simple present in the language. 

 

   NP1(agent) NP2(temporal) V1 V2 

44. meeTa Sokal theke khele jacche. 

       girl-cl since morning play go-pr-prog-3p 

      ‘The girl has been playing (continuously) since 

morning.’ 

 

NP1(agent) NP2(temporal) AdvP V1 V2 

45. lokTa Saradin cupcap kaj kore jay. 

       man-cl whole day silently work do go-pr-3p 

      ‘The man keeps on working silently for the 

whole day.’ (habitually) 

 

12. cOla ‘to go on/to work (for a thing)’  

cOla as a main verb may mean ‘to walk or move’ 

or ‘to go on or to work (for a thing)’. In the first 

sense, it takes an agent and a path or  a goal argu-

ment as in (44). 

 

NP1(agent) NP2 (path) V 

46. amra Onek rasta collam. 

      We long way walk-pt-1p  

     ‘We walked a long way.’   

47. tumi kothay colle? 

      You where go-pt-2p   

     ‘Where are you going?’ (past form used in pre-

sent sense) 

 

When used in the sense of ‘to go on’, cOla takes 

one theme argument which is realized as the sub-

ject. The verb frame may occasionally have a 

manner adverbial.   

 

 NP1(theme) AdvP V 

48. purodOme kaj colche. 

      in full swing work go on pr-prog-3p  

     ‘The work is going on in full swing’. 

49. ghoRiTa ThikThak cloche. 

      Clock-cl alright work-pr-prog-3p  

     ‘The clock is working alright.’   

  

The verb when used as a vector provides aspectual 

information of the main verb. It is used with pre-

sent perfect continuous TAM realized as present 

perfect and often has a time adverbial denoting 

duration of the V1. 

 

NP1(agent) NP2 (temporal) V1 V2 

50. cheleTa Sokal theke kaj kore coleche. 

       boy-cl morning since work do move-pr-pft-3p 

      ‘The boy has been working continuously since 

morning.’ 

 

13. paThano ‘to send’ 
As a main  verb paThano takes two object argu-

ments one theme and one recipient along with an 

agent. 

 

  NP1(agent) NP2(recipient)  NP3(theme)  V 

51. ami tomake boiTa paThacchi. 

       I   you-obj book-cl send-pr-prog-1p 

       ‘I am sending you the book.’ 

  

As a vector it is used in the sense of 

causativization. There are causer, causee and an 

intermediates agent with postposition die.  

 

NP1(causer agent) NP2-die (instrument) NP3-ke 

(causee) V1 V2 

52. SahoS dEkho, jhike die amake Deke 

paThieche. 

      audacity look, maid-obj by summon send-pr-

pft-3p 

     ‘Look at the audacity, (she) has summoned me 

through a maid-servant.’ 

 

14. bERano ‘to roam’ 
When used alone bERano takes an agent and a lo-

cation argument. 

 

NP1(agent) NP2-te(location) V1 

53. tOkhon amra bagane beRacchilam. 

      Then we garden-loc roam-pt-prog-3p  

      ‘Then we were roaming in the garden.’ 

 

When used as a vector it is used in the sense of 

‘non-directional movement’ (Paul (2010) says this 

as random action of V1 without discretion) and 

instead of a location may take a temporal or man-

ner adverbial.  

 

NP1(agent) NP2 (temporal) V1 V2  

54. ma-mOra meeTa Saradin keMde bERacche. 

       mother-died girl-cl whole day cry roam-pr-

prog-3p 

      ‘The girl whose mother has died has been cry-

ing here and there for the whole day.’ 

 

 AdvP NP1(agent)  V1 V2  

55. Sudhu Sudhu ghure bERaccho kEno? 

311



 

      worthlessly wander roam-pr-prog-2p why 

     ‘Why are you wandering here and there worth-

lessly?’   

 

15. mOra ‘to die’ 
mOra is used as an intransitive verb with one 

undergoer of the event. 

 

NP1(undergoer) V 

56. lokTa moreche 

      man-cl die-pr-pft-3p ‘The man has died.’ 

 

When used in a compound verb construction, it 

denotes futility of the event of V1.  

NP1(agent) (AdvP) V1 V2 

57. orOkom keMde morchiS kEno? 

      Such cry  die-pr-prog-3p why 

     ‘Why are you crying such futile?’ 

 

When it is combined with a transitive verb like 

bhaba ‘to think’, it retains the object argument of 

that verb in the resulting compound verb frame. 

 

NP1(agent) NP2 (patient) V1 V2 

58. ami Saradin tomar kOtha bhebe morchi ar 

tomar kono kheali nei?  

       I whole day your word think die-pr-prog-3p 

and you-gen any concern-emph neg 

      ‘I have been thinking of you only for the whole 

day and you don’t have any concern at all?’and 

tables below the body, using 10 point text. 

3. Findings and Results 

From the above data total 45 tokens of verb frames 

are found and they are listed below together with 

their respective verbs.  

 

i. NP1(Agent) NP2-theke (source) V 

ii. NP1(Agent)  NP2-e(goal)V 

iii. NP1(Agent) NP2-hoe/die (Path) V 

iv. NP1(agent) NP2-r SOMge (associative) V 

v. NP1(agent) NP2-0/ke/re (patient) V1 V2                            

aSa 

vi. NP1(agent) NP20/ke/re (theme) V1 V2 

vii. NP1(agent)   NP2(temporal)  V1 V2 

viii. NP1(agent) NP2((matter/višay) V1 V2 

ix. (AdvP) NP1(undergoer) V1 V2 

x. NP1(agent) NP2-e/-er +a locative postposition 

(location) V 

xi. NP1(agent) NP2 0/ke/re (patient) V1 V2                                   

rakha 

xii. NP1(agent) NP20/ke (patient) AdvP V1 V2 

xiii. NP1(agent) NP-theke (source) NP20/-ke/re 

(theme) V 

xiv. NP1(agent) NP2-0/ke/re (theme) V1 V2                                    

ana 

xv. NP1(agent) NP2-ke (recipient) NP3 (theme) 

V 

xvi. NP1(agent) NP2-0/ke (patient) V1 V2                             

dea  

xvii. NP1(agent) NP-2-theke (source) NP3 

(theme) V  

As a vector it follows frame of V1.                                    

Nea 

xviii. NP1(agent) NP2- 0/ke (theme) NP3-theke 

(source) V 

xix. NP1(agent) NP2 (patient) (AdvP) 

V1(accomplishment) V2          tola  

xx. NP1(agent) NP2  (location/temporal) V 

xxi. NP1(theme) NP2  (location/temporal) V1 

V2 

xxii. NP1(agent) NP2(patient) V1 V2-te para neg                   

oTha 

xxiii. NP1(agent) ki (QP) NP2(patient) V1 V2 

para?           

xxiv. NP1-theke(source) NP2-e(location) 

NP3(theme)  V 

xxv.NP1(patient) V1 V2 pORa  

xxvi. P1(agent) NP2(theme) NP3-e/te(location) V 

xxvii. NP1(agent)  NP2(patient) AdvP  V1 V2 

xxviii. NP1(agent) NP2 (temporal/location) 

NP3(patient) V1 V2 

xxxix. NP1(agent) NP2(theme) V1 V2                                                        

phEla 

xxx. NP1(agent) NP2 (goal) V 

xxxi. NP1(agent)  NP2 (temporal) V1 V2                               

jaoa  

xxxii. NP1(agent)  NP2 (temporal) AdvP V1 V2  

xxxiii. NP1(agent) NP2-0(theme) NP3-

ke(recipient)   V 

xxxiv. NP1(causer) NP2-die (instrument) NP3-

ke(causee) V1 V2          paThano  

xxxv. NP1(agent) NP2-te(location) V1 

xxxvi. NP1(agent) NP2(temporal) V1 V2 

xxxvii. AdvP NP1(agent)  V1 V2                          

bERano  

xxxviii. NP1(undergoer) (AdvP/AdvCl) V 

xxxix. (AdvP) NP1(agent) NP2 (patient)V1 V2             

mOra 

312



 

 xl. NP1(agent) NP2-0/te or  -r locative postposi-

tion (location)V 

xli. NP1(agent) NP2(temporal/location) NP3 (pa-

tient) V1 V2  (ke jane)             bOSa  

xlii. AdvP NP1(theme) V 

xliii. NP1(agent) NP2 (temporal) V1 V2                  

cOla in the sense of ‘go on/work’ 
xliv. NP1(agent) NP2(path) V 

xlv. NP1 (agent) NP2(goal) V  cOla in the sense of 

‘move’ 

 

We can classify these 45 tokens of verb frames 

into 17 types. 

 

i. NP1(Agent) NP2-theke (source) V 

ii. NP1(Agent)  NP2-e(goal)V  

iii. NP1(Agent) NP2-hoe/die (Path) V1 

iv. NP1(agent) NP2-r SOMge (associative) V 

v. NP1(agent) NP2-0/ke/re (patient) V1 V2                      

vi. NP1(agent) NP20/ke/re (theme) V1 V2  

vii. NP1(agent)   NP2(temporal)  V1 V2 

viii. NP1(agent) NP2((matter/višay)  ) V1 V2   

ix. (AdvP) NP1(undergoer) V1 V2 

x. NP1(agent) NP2-e/-er +a locative postposition 

(location) V 

xi. NP1(agent) NP20/ke (patient) AdvP V1 V2 

xii. NP1(agent) NP-theke (source) NP20/-ke/re 

(theme) V 

xiii. NP1-theke(source) NP2-e(location) 

NP3(theme)  V 

xiv. NP1(agent) NP2-ke (recipient) NP3 (theme) V 

xv. NP1(undergoer) (AdvP/AdvCl) V 

xvi. AdvP NP1(theme) V 

xvii. NP1(causer) NP2-die (instrument) NP3-

ke(causee) V1 V2 

 

The general observation which comes out from 

these frames are intransitive verbs are generally 

used with an adverbial phrase or clause which de-

picts the manner of the event. They may also have 

a temporal or spatial NP in their frames which de-

note the time or the location of the event. Howev-

er, they no longer need their compulsory locative 

NP argument or manner adverbial phrase or clause 

in the compound verb structure. The V2s when 

used in pure aspectual sense as in jaoa, aSa (one 

sense is aspectual), rakha (one sense only) and 

cOla or aspectual and some benefactive adverbial 

sense as in deoa and nea do not retain their original 

syntactic arguments in the compound verb struc-

ture. With the other adverbial senses like sudden-

ness or unexpectedness of the event with the V2s 

phEla and bOSa, the argument and case marking 

of the vector verb are not retained in the new com-

pound verb structure. The deictic motion verb aSa 

may retain its goal, source or path arguments in a 

compound verb structure when it is combined with 

a non-directional motion verb which talks about 

manner of the motion. The other verb ana which 

has a source deictic motion sense retains it in the 

compound verb structure also.  

3 Conclusion 

This work is only a first attempt to build a 

knowledge-base lexical resource for Bangla verbs 

and has a very wide scope to extend it to fully de-

velop frames for all the verbs of Bangla and classi-

fy them on the basis of syntactic and semantic 

information. At present, the work does not incor-

porate any semantic feature in the argument struc-

ture of the verbs but a future work can incorporate 

that to classify the nature of the arguments with 

same semantic or theta role. Once such a resource 

is fully developed it can be linked to the Indo 

Wordnet also.  

References  

Abbi, A. and Gopalkrishnan, D. 1992. “Semantic Ty-

pology of Explicator Compound verbs in South 

Asian Languages”.  Paper retrieved online. 

Bashir, Elena (1993) “Causal chains and compound 

verbs.” In M. K. Verma ed. (1993) Complex Predi-

cates in South Asian Languages. Manohar Publishers 

and Distributors, New Delhi. 

Butt, Miriam (1993) “Conscious choice and some light 

verbs in Urdu.” In M. K. Verma ed.(1993) Complex 

Predicates in South Asian Languages. Manohar Pub-

lishers and Distributors, New Delhi. 

Butt, M. 1995. The Structures of Complex Predicates in 

Urdu. Dissertations in Linguistics. Stanford: CSLI. 

Fedson, V. J. (1993) “Complex verb-verb predicates in 

Tamil.” In M. K. Verma ed. (1993) Complex Predi-

cates in South  Asian Languages. Manohar Publishers 

and Distributors,  New Delhi. 

Hook, Peter (1974) The compound verb in Hindi. Ann 

Arbor: University of Michigan center for South and 

Southeast  Asian Studies. 

Hook, Peter (1996). The Compound Verb in Gujarati 

and its Use in Connected Text.  R.T. Vyas (ed.) Con-

sciousnessManifest: Studies in Jaina Art and Iconog-

raphy and Allied Subjects in Honour of Dr. U.P. 

Shah. Vadodara: Oriental Institute. 339-56. 

313



 

Kachru, Yamuna (1982) “Pragmatics and compound 

verbs in Indian languages.” O. N. Kaul ed. Topics in 

Hindi Linguistics. Bahari Publications, New Delhi. 

Kachru, Yamuna and R. Pandharipande (1980) “To-

wards a typology of compound verbs in South Asian 

Languages.” Studies in Linguistic Sciences, 10:1, 

113-24. 

Kaul, Vijay. K. (1985) The Compound Verb in Kash-

miri. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Kurukshetra 

University. 

Levin, B. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alternations: 

A Preliminary Investigation. The University of Chi-

cago Press. 

Mohanty G. 1992.The Compound Verbs in Oriya. PhD 

dissertation. Deccan College Post-graduate and Re-

search  Institute. 

Paul, S. 2004. An HPSG Account of Bangla Compound 

Verbs with LKB Implementation. Ph.D disserta-

tion,University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad. 

Paul,S. 2005. The semantics of Bangla Compound 

Verbs. Yearbook of South Asian Languages and Lin-

guistics. 101-112.  

Rafiya Begum et al (undated online version). Develop-

ing Verb Frames for Hindi. IIITH. 

Rajesh Kumar and Nilu. 2012. Magahi Complex Predi-

cates. IJDL. 

 

 

314


