



















































Standing on the shoulders of giants: attacking the meta-problems of technical AAC research


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies (SLPAT), pages 1–8,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, August 26 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Standing on the shoulders of giants: attacking the meta-problems of
technical AAC research

Joseph Reddington
joe@joereddington.com

Abstract

Augmentative Alternative Communica-
tion (AAC) policy suffers from a lack of
large scale quantitative evidence on the de-
mographics of users and diversity of de-
vices.

The 2013 Domesday Dataset was created
to aid formation of AAC policy at the
national level. The dataset records pur-
chases of AAC technology by the UK’s
National Health Service between 2006 and
2012; giving information for each item on:
make, model, price, year of purchase, and
geographic area of purchase. The dataset
was designed to help answer open ques-
tions about the provision of AAC services
in the UK; and the level of detail of the
dataset is such that it can be used at the
research level to provide context for re-
searchers and to help validate (or not) as-
sumptions about everyday AAC use.

This paper examine three different ways
of using the Domesday Dataset to pro-
vide verified evidence to support, or refute,
assumptions, uncover important research
problems, and to properly map the tech-
nological distinctiveness of a user commu-
nity.

1 Introduction

Technical researchers in the AAC community are
required to make certain assumptions about the
state of the community when choosing research
projects that are calculated to make the most ef-
fective use of research resources for the greatest
possible benefit.

A particular issue is estimating how easily tech-
nical research can achieve wide scale adoption or
commercial impact. For example, (Szekely et al.,
2012) uses a webcam and facial analysis to al-
low a user to control expressive features of their
synthetic speech by means of facial expressions.
Such work is clearly useful, but it is difficult to as-
sess its potential commercial impact without also
knowing what proportion of currently available
AAC devices include webcams and how that pro-
portion is changing over time. Similarly, corpus
based approaches such as (Mitchell and Sproat,
2012) could potentially be brought to market very
quickly, but that potential can only be assessed
if we also have some awareness of the range and
popularity of AAC devices that either have space
for such a corpus or the internet capability to ac-
cess one. Unfortunately, even though there are a
range of AAC focused meta-studies in the litera-
ture (see, for example, (Pennington et al., 2003;
Pennington et al., 2004; Hanson et al., 2004; Al-
well and Cobb, 2009)) they give little information
on the technical landscape of AAC.

This paper examines three issues of interest to
technical researchers in AAC, each from a differ-
ent stage in the research lifecycle. It then shows
how the Domesday Dataset (Reddington, 2013)
can provide evidence to support, or refute, as-
sumptions, uncover important research problems,
and map the technological distinctiveness of a user
community.

This paper is structured as follows, Section 2 in-
troduces the Domesday Dataset and discusses the
context it is used in in this work. Section 3 exam-
ines the issue that little is known about the preva-
lence of equipment within the AAC user commu-
nity, and because of this lack of information it is
difficult to establish baselines, or contexts. We

1



show how the Domesday Dataset can allow re-
searchers to ground their assumptions in empirical
data.

Section 4 examines a cultural shift in AAC tech-
nology. The arrival of the iPad and other tablets in
the field has caused a great deal of change and it
is unclear what the long term implications will be.
We believe it is important to provide hard data on
the direct economic changes that have occurred in
the marketplace. The Domesday Dataset allows
us to examine the number of physical devices pur-
chased before and after the tablet explosion.

Section 5 examines the issue of transferability.
It is assumed by many AAC professionals that the
ability for AAC users to transfer page sets between
different devices is a significant issue for AAC
users. This section first shows how we can de-
rive some context information from the Domesday
Dataset and goes on to discuss the sociotechnical
context of the problem space.

2 The Domesday Dataset

In 2013 the Domesday Dataset was created to aid
formation of AAC policy at the national level. The
dataset records purchases of AAC technology by
the UK’s National Health Service between 2006
and 2012; giving information on make, model,
price, year of purchase, and geographic area of
purchase for each item. It was formed by sub-
mitting freedom of information requests to every
NHS (National Health Service) trust asking for de-
tails of all AAC devices provided since 2006. The
requests required the year of purchase, make, and
manufacture of each device. The full details of the
construction are reported in (Reddington, 2013).

At the time of writing, the Domesday Dataset
contained details of 9,157 purchases from NHS
Trusts. (Reddington, 2013) estimates that the
trusts that have responded cover approximately
90% of the UK population. All versions of the
dataset are held online and licensed under an Open
Data Commons Attribution License. The dataset
meets the requirements for three star linked open
data according to (Berners-Lee, 2010). A sample
of information appearing in the Domesday Dataset
is given in Table 1. The dataset was not only in-
tended to shape UK policy and research, but also
as a snapshot for international researchers: allow-
ing comparison of manufacturers, types of aids,
budgets, and prevalence within a tight geograph-
ical domain.

There are, of course, caveats to consider before
using the Domesday Dataset. Firstly, for privacy
reasons, it is presented with no connection to any
other element of AAC provision: it is impossible
to match equipment with a particular user.

Secondly, the NHS does not have the complete
information: information from AAC manufactur-
ers shows that only 44% of sales and 38% of
the spend were by the NHS. Even with complete
data from the public bodies, researchers would be
forced to extrapolate the information, perhaps con-
firming the trends by means of another research
methodology. This work makes the assumption
that the relative frequency of AAC purchases and
trends in the UK are reflected in the dataset. We
are careful not to over-analyse this information,
but we do note that having a complete list of
NHS purchases, even if they only cover 44% of
a county’s purchases, is vastly more detailed than
any previous record of AAC provision. Potential
problems with the dataset underrepresenting tablet
sales are discussed in Section 4.

3 Research Granularity

Little is known about the prevalence of equipment
within the AAC user community, and because of
this lack of information it is difficult to establish
baselines, or contexts. Perhaps worse, when re-
searchers propose solutions, they must also make
a range of assumptions about the applicability of
their work to the wider AAC audience. We can,
for example, imagine an innovative new model
for AAC not being successful because it requires
a consistent internet connection from the device,
which perhaps only 5% of users have. The ma-
jority of AAC research is devoted to building up
a library of case studies to show the benefits of
AAC for user groups. This focus on social is-
sues in AAC research is laudable, and vital for
the overall area; however, researchers working in
the assistive technology field would be more ef-
fective if they could answer direct questions about
need, capability and technology. For example, a
researcher who must choose between supporting a
project that reduces errors in word-prediction us-
ing eye-gaze by 20%, or a project that makes Step-
By-Step devices more responsive and intuitive to
use for children, faces a difficult choice without
evidence. If the researcher could check that in a
particular geographic area there were 45 eye-gaze
systems and nearly 600 Step-by-Steps, then that

2



Purchase year Manufacturer Model Num. Unit Price Total Price
2006 Liberator E-Tran Frame 1 £120.00 £120.00
2006 Servox Digital Electronic Larynx 2 £520.00 £1,040.00
2006 Ablenet Armstrong Mount 1 £190.00 £190.00
2006 Ablenet Big Mack 6 £84.00 £504.00
2007 Inclusive Switchit “Bob the Builder” 1 £49.00 £49.00
2007 Cricksoft Crick USB Switch Box 2 £99.00 £198.00
2007 Sensory Software Joycable2 1 £49.00 £49.00
2007 Dynavox Boardmaker 1 £209.00 £209.00
2007 ELO LCD Touch Monitor 1 £419.00 £419.00
2008 Ablenet iTalk2 Communication Aid 2 £95.00 £190.00
2008 Attainment Company Inc Go Talk(unknown type) 4 £130.00 £520.00
2008 Aug. Communication Inc. Talking Photo Album 2 £18.91 £37.82

Table 1: Extract from the Domesday Dataset, taken from (Reddington, 2013) (Geograpic information
held seperately)

might influence the decision1 (at a higher level this
is, of course, the calculation that one expects fund-
ing bodies to make when awarding the grants that
allow projects to even begin). Having quantita-
tive manufacturing data also supports much more
general estimations of research impact, as well
as helping research groups evaluate possible com-
mercial partners.

Even within the United States, which is the ma-
jor market for manufacturers, and the most ac-
tive area for AAC research, the complexities of its
healthcare system, differing state legislation, and
disability culture make estimation difficult. Even
the strong efforts that have been made (Matas et
al., 1985; Bloomberg and Johnson, 1990; Binger
and Light, 2006; Huer, 1991) give estimations of
need and use, but none that can be expected to give
the granularity that technologists need for their in-
vestigation, or even to frame research questions.

3.1 What Domesday tells us

To illustrate the use of the Domesday Dataset for
technical researchers, we give some simple results
regarding the popularity of various types of AAC
device. Table 2 shows the list of most common
‘high tech’ AAC purchases by the NHS in Scot-
land, ordered by the number of units purchased be-
tween 2006 and 2012. Table 3 gives the same table
for purchases in England. Both tables are based on
a relatively open definition of ‘high tech’ AAC:
these lists include only devices that can produce a
range of different utterances, and allow those ut-

1In either direction of course, depending on the weighting
given to a variety of other factors.

Rank Model Units
1 Lightwriter (SL35/SL40) 37
2 GoTalk (all types) 34
3 iPads and iPods 15
4 Springboard Lite 12
5 Vantage Lite 6
6 SuperTalker 6
7 Dynamo 6
8 V Max 5
9 Tech/Speak 32 x 6 4

10 Liberator 14 4
11 C12 + CEYE 4

Table 2: The 11 most common ‘high tech’ speech
aids purchased by the NHS in Scotland 2005-2011

terances to be selected by icon, or keyboard. As
a result they do not include such devices as, for
example: Big Macks; Digital Electronic Larynxs;
Jelly Bean Twists; Step–by-Steps; MegaBees and
many others, which are included in the Domesday
Dataset. As discussed in Section 2 we do not ad-
vise the direct quoting of these figures without first
being familiar with the caveats discussed in (Red-
dington, 2013). The figures should be considered
comparative only.

Some of the more counter-intuitive results from
Tables 2 and 3 include the general absence (with
the notable exception of the iPad/iPod) of touch
screen devices. Indeed, both the Lightwriter and
the GoTalk range comfortably sell more than twice
as many units as their nearest touchscreen rival.

A more sobering result to consider for re-
searchers in technical AAC is the popularity of

3



Rank Model Units
1 Lightwriter (SL35/SL40) 77
2 GoTalk (all types) 74
3 iPad/iPod/iPhone 29
4 Springboard Lite 27
5 V Max 11
6 Dynamo 10
7 SuperTalker 7
8 Vantage Lite 6
9 Tech/Speak 32 x 6 6

10 Chatbox 5
11 C12 + CEYE 4

Table 3: The 11 most common ‘high tech’ speech
aids purchased by the NHS in England 2005-2011

devices that are less obvious targets for cus-
tomisation and improvement. The GoTalk and
Tech/Speak ranges are solid favourites for a par-
ticular section of the market and part of their ap-
peal is that they are relatively ’non-technical’2 and
are much easier for users and staff to get to grips
with: this appeal is somewhat in tension with ad-
vanced features like automatic generation of con-
tent and voice banking. It is entirely possible that
technical research would have more impact if it
focuses on making high-capability devices more
acceptable to existing users rather than increasing
the already impressive capability of existing de-
vices.

Another aspect of interest is the speed at which
the AAC market changes with respect to the ex-
isting landscape. The Dynavox Dynamo, for ex-
ample, is a popular device in both tables, but it
has been discontinued for some time. Section 5
explores some of the issues that this situation can
raise. Finally we consider that there are some sys-
tems that we would have expected to appear in
these lists that are absent: for example, Dynavox’s
Xpress and Maestro or Tobii’s MyTobii, and Lib-
erator’s Nova. Speculating on why some products
become more popular is beyond the scope of this
work; however, we do consider it an area for future
interest.

This section has shown that examining the
Domesday Dataset at even the most basic level
identifies a range of factors that can help contex-
tualise the technical landscape for researchers in
AAC. To return to the examples given in the in-

2For example, neither device has a LCD screen, instead
they have buttons with printed icons

troduction, we can see how it would be simple
for (Szekely et al., 2012) to use the iPod and iPad’s
position in the marketplace as evidence for the po-
tential of their work and we can see how corpus
based approaches such as (Mitchell and Sproat,
2012) can use the range of AAC devices with in-
ternet connections to inform the design process.
We note that as the data covers a five year period
it is possible to examine ‘fashions’ as purchases
rise and fall and even map the gradual spread geo-
graphically.

4 Tablets and other animals

This section examines the extent to which the in-
troduction of tablet-based AAC has altered the
user community at the technical level and dis-
cusses how this data can be used by technical re-
searchers.

Since 2010, when Apple released the iPad, there
have been major upheavals in the AAC market,
caused by the explosion in tablet computing. From
an engineering perspective, the iPad only suf-
fers in comparison to existing devices in terms
of ruggedness; however, at potentially one quarter
the price3, it is comparatively replaceable. From a
software perspective the iPad gives many ‘cottage
industry’ developers for AAC a low cost way to
enter the market. Such developers already include
Alexicom, TapToTalk, AssistiveWare, and over
100 others. Such developers are well placed to
take advantage of the platform’s underlying hard-
ware.

Apples’s position as a top-tier technology gi-
ant, along with the iPad’s position as the dominant
tablet platform can be seen as a serious change
to the AAC industry as a whole. However, for
many working within the AAC community, it is
unclear what the long term implications will be.
Apple represents the most successful of a large
group of companies such as Samsung, HP, and (via
the Android operating system, and the purchase
of Motorola) Google (Weber, 2011) that have in-
vested heavily in tablet technology. It is conceiv-
able that one or more manufacturers will develop
a ‘ruggedised’ tablet for military or medical use.
Such a tablet, particularly if using the Android op-
erating system, which has a large group of dedi-
cated AAC developers (Higginbotham and Jacobs,
2011), would open a ‘second front’ from the point
of view of the existing manufacturers, as it would

3Based on estimates from (Reddington, 2013)

4



remove many of the perceived weaknesses of the
iPad (fragility, waterproofing, volume).

The picture is muddied greatly because neither
the major AAC manufacturers nor Apple release
reliable sales figures. This results in the uncom-
fortable situation for users, professionals, and re-
searchers alike, that we are simultaneously being
told that “The iPad is simply the flavour of the
month at the moment and it is just the effect of
hype” and “The major manufacturers simply can’t
compete at any level other than eye-gaze”.

Of course, the issue of the overall effective-
ness of tablet-based AAC must be paramount for
the general AAC community, and there is a large
amount of research resources investigating this.
This paper simply attempts to provide some hard
data on the technical changes that have occurred
in the marketplace since 2010.

4.1 Domesday on tablet AAC

If we assume an average lifespan of four years per
device, then Table 2 and Table 3 can be consid-
ered to give a reasonable approximation of the rel-
ative popularity of AAC devices currently active
in the UK AAC community. As discussed in Sec-
tion 3, touchscreen and other high-capability de-
vices are not dominating the market, but we can
deduce that Apple devices have a strong market
share compared to devices with similar capabili-
ties. In Table 2 and Table 3 iPads and other Ap-
ple devices are shown to be approximately even
in terms of units shipped with established touch-
screen systems such as the Springboard Lite. It
would be difficult to argue that Apple devices were
not a major part of the AAC landscape.

A factor in these estimations must be the rela-
tively recent explosion in table computing. If we
limit our data to only purchases since 2010 (as
shown in Table 4), we see that Apple devices dom-
inate the sector and we would expect that when the
Domesday Dataset is extended in 2014, we shall
see that Apple devices have achieved the position
of market leader in terms of AAC devices in use.

4.1.1 Other tablets
We note that, other than some appearances of the
FuturePad Windows system (running Grid 2 soft-
ware and predating the tablet explosion), there are
no tablet purchases in the dataset that are not an
Apple device. This is a somewhat unexpected find:
the Android app store shows hundreds of thou-
sands of downloads (worldwide) for AAC appli-

cations for the Android platform. Some potential
explanations for this tension are discussed in the
following section, but we consider this an area for
future research.

4.1.2 Potential understatement of tablet sales
Section 2 discussed some caveats about informa-
tion in the Domesday Dataset, in particular that it
only examines purchases in the medical sector and
is understood to cover less than half of the AAC
market. We note here that these caveats may dis-
proportionately affect tablet computing purchases.
For example, the relatively low cost of tablet
devices means that there is a growing possibil-
ity that the paradigms used by service providers
are no longer fit for purpose. Whereas previous
paradigms may have involved users waiting two
years for a £7000 communication aid, with £3000
worth of support and training, the same users may
now, out of desperation, opt to pay out of their own
pocket for a £700 tablet with ‘app’. In terms of the
goals of this paper, such situations artificially de-
press the recorded purchases of tablet devices, and
in terms of the goals of the AAC community, the
choice of a ‘better device later or cheaper device
now’ may not be to the long term benefit of users,
or society.

Moreover, we can also imagine situations where
tablet devices are already present in an AAC user’s
life before they become used as a dedicated de-
vice. In the same way that family members often
‘hand down’ older phones to parents or children
when they upgrade, we have anecdotal evidence
of situations were “Chris can try an app on Steve’s
old iPad while he is at university and then we’ll
buy Steve a new one if that works”. Such prac-
tices would again artificially depress the number
of purchases recorded.

In this work we concentrate on only the re-
ports of purchase of physical tablets. Although
the Domesday Dataset does contain app purchases
where they have been recorded by the NHS, the
wide range of AAC applications, both free and
paid for, and their transferability between devices
mean that only the most vague of comparisons
could be made.

Even without these caveats, it is clear from ex-
amination of the Domesday Dataset that, in the
UK at least, Apple devices like the iPad have be-
come a large part of the technical AAC landscape
and we note that their level of hardware and strong
developer communities make them attractive tar-

5



Rank Model Units
1 iPad/iPod/iPhone 25
2 GoTalk (all types) 10
3 Lightwriter (SL35/SL40) 10
4 Springboard Lite 6
5 EC02 6
6 C12 + CEYE 3
7 SuperTalker 2
8 Dynavox Maestro 2
9 Powerbox 7 2

10 S5 2
11 Dynavox (type unknown) 2

Table 4: The 11 most common ‘high tech’ speech
aids purchased by the NHS in England 2010-2011

gets for researchers building prototype AAC de-
vices.

5 Transferability of data

It is assumed by many AAC professionals that
transferability, the ability for AAC users to trans-
fer page sets between different devices, is a sig-
nificant issue for AAC users. Unfortunately there
is no previous academic research to support this
in general or estimate the size of the problem
space. This section first shows how we can derive
some contextual information from the Domesday
Dataset and goes on to discuss the sociotechnical
context of the problem space.

We can examine the set of devices purchased
in the years 2006-2012 and check to see if they
were still available to purchase in 2012. From this
we can estimate the lifespan of each device to ex-
tract the set of devices that are ‘irreplaceable’ in
the sense that the same model cannot be purchased
in cases of loss.

A large proportion of the devices listed in the
Domesday Dataset are no longer available to buy4;
however, they are still in service and, in some
cases, still in manufacturer’s warranty. The result-
ing set of irreplaceable devices is large and this
information supports a need for more research.

These irreplaceable devices contextualise a
space in which a range of sociotechnical issues at
the social and economic level have special reso-
nance with the AAC user community (for work
examining the reliability of AAC devices and their

4The Domesday Dataset has examples from major man-
ufactures that include the DV4, the Dynamo, the Vanguard,
the Springboard, and many others.

likely length of time before needing repairs please
see, for example, (Shepherd et al., 2009; Ball et
al., 2007)).

As discussed in (Reddington and Coles-Kemp,
2011; Coles-Kemp et al., 2011), the custom utter-
ances and user history on a device form not only a
large part of the user’s way of interacting with the
world, but often, their memories and sense of self.

It is recognised by manufacturers that this data
is precious and many manufacturers of electronic
AAC systems offer the functionality to back up the
devices to external storage. However, in the event
of irrecoverable hardware failure, such backups
are only generally useful if the user’s replacement
device is of the same model as the existing device
(in some cases, manufacturers can transfer back-
ups between different models of the same manu-
facturer). If it is the case that an AAC device’s
functional lifespan is longer than the device sales
lifespan, then it is also the case that massive in-
formation loss must occur when a range’s devices
reach the end of their lifespan and users are shifted
onto other devices.

Moreover, because AAC device backups are
not held in a common format, it is difficult for
AAC users to transfer sets of pages between de-
vices at all. If a user wishes to switch from, say
Proloque2go to Dynavox, then the only way to
transfer potentially key parts of their identity and
memory between the devices is for the user, or
care staff, to laboriously recreate systems by hand.
This results in users having difficulties ‘trying out’
new systems, and the occasional sight of a user
with two AAC devices: one that is failing but
has the full range of utterances, and a more mod-
ern device that may be clearer and more effective,
but which does not yet have all the necessary ut-
terances. Finally, the lack of a common format
stands as a barrier to the deployment of a truly
‘open source’ page and symbol set that could be
used across formats and developed independently
of hardware manufactures.

It is the author’s position that this shows a clear
and present need for not only a standardised for-
mat for transferring sets of pages between devices
but also that this standardised format be open and
accessible to researchers. We consider these to
be a counterpart of the work in (Deruyter et al.,
2007); however, where (Deruyter et al., 2007) fo-
cused on increased interoperability between AAC
and mainstream technologies, we argue in favour

6



of increased interoperability between the devices
themselves. The work is perhaps philosophically
closer to the work of (Lesher et al., 2000b; Lesher
et al., 2000a), which seeks to produce universal
standards of logging of AAC utterances for re-
search purposes. We argue that a standardised
format would also allow technical researchers to
develop their prototypes to interface directly with
a user’s existing systems. This would produce a
much more seamless way of testing innovations,
without the need to introduce users to dedicated
equipment or a specialised app for testing a partic-
ular innovation in AAC technology.

6 Discussion

Research in AAC policy and technology suffers
greatly from a lack of large scale quantitative ev-
idence on the prevalence of devices, and the de-
mographics of users. This work has shown that
the Domesday Dataset can be used at the research
level to provide context for researchers and to help
validate (or not) assumptions about everyday AAC
use. This work examined three different issues
of interest to technical researchers in AAC, each
from a different stage in the research lifecycle. It
provided a case study in using the dataset to gain
an understanding of the level of technology cur-
rently deployed in the UK AAC community, and
exposed a number of open research questions.

This work also gave an analysis of the impact
of the explosion in tablet computing on the AAC
technological landscape. We provided evidence
that Apple devices are already a significant part
of the AAC community and that we expect their
presence to grow as older devices phase out of the
market.

Finally we considered how the Domesday
Dataset suggests that product function lifespan
may be longer than the product sales lifespan in
AAC technology and discussed the consequences
of this from a sociotechnological perspective. This
work has pushed the AAC research agenda in a
direction more attractive to larger studies, com-
mercial manufactures, and quantitative research
to support the traditionally qualitatively focused
field. The range of possibilities for AAC research
includes: more accurate estimates of populations
of AAC users, and levels of AAC use; the ability
to evaluate the potential impact of research pro-
totypes and methodologies; and the ability to ex-
amine those sectors of the AAC industry that have

been most successful at delivering improved func-
tionality to users.

6.1 Future research agenda
At the more fundamental level we hope that this
work encourages public debate about where the
trade-offs lie in terms of targeting technical re-
search in both AAC and the wider intellectual dis-
ability field. It is the author’s position that stake-
holders at all levels in AAC should be involved in
debate on the areas of focus for research resources.

Moreover, we believe that an open format
for transferring sets of pages between devices is
needed, and that such a format will improve both
user experience, commercial competition, and re-
search effectiveness. We would welcome further
work.

Acknowledgments

This research was made possible by the large
range of contributors to the construction of
the Domesday Dataset, including staff at Toby
Churchill and Liberator Ltd. We also thank, Pam
Enderby, Alex John, Sarah Creer, and the team
at Sheffield University, along with Tom Bamber
at Loughborough University, and Selina Sutton at
Newcastle University.

7



References
Morgen Alwell and Brian Cobb. 2009. Social

and communicative interventions and transition out-
comes for youth with disabilities a systematic re-
view. Career Development for Exceptional Individ-
uals, 32(2):94–107.

Laura J Ball, David R Beukelman, Elizabeth Anderson,
Denise V Bilyeu, Julie Robertson, and Gary L Pat-
tee. 2007. Duration of aac technology use by per-
sons with als. Journal of Medical Speech Language
Pathology, 15(4):371.

Tim Berners-Lee. 2010. Linked
data. Personal website
(‘http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html’),
Jun.

Cathy Binger and Janice Light. 2006. Demographics
of preschoolers who require aac. Language, Speech,
and Hearing Services in Schools, 37(3):200.

Karen Bloomberg and Hilary Johnson. 1990. A
statewide demographic survey of people with severe
communication impairments. Augmentative and Al-
ternative Communication, 6(1):50–60.

L. Coles-Kemp, J. Reddington, and P.A.H. Williams.
2011. Looking at clouds from both sides: The ad-
vantages and disadvantages of placing personal nar-
ratives in the cloud. Information Security Technical
Report, 16(3):115–122.

Frank Deruyter, David McNaughton, Kevin Caves,
Diane Nelson Bryen, and Michael B Williams.
2007. Enhancing aac connections with the
world. Augmentative and Alternative Communica-
tion, 23(3):258–270.

EK Hanson, KM Yorkston, and DR Beukelman. 2004.
Speech supplementation techniques for dysarthria: a
systematic review. Journal of Medical Speech Lan-
guage Pathology, 12.

Jeff Higginbotham and Steve Jacobs. 2011. The fu-
ture of the android operating system for augmen-
tative and alternative communication. Perspectives
on Augmentative and Alternative Communication,
20(2):52–56.

Mary Blake Huer. 1991. University students using
augmentative and alternative communication in the
usa: A demographic study. Augmentative and Alter-
native Communication, 7(4):231–239.

Gregory W Lesher, Bryan J Moulton, Gerard Rinkus,
and D Jeffery Higginbotham. 2000a. A univer-
sal logging format for augmentative communication.
Citeseer.

Gregory W Lesher, Gerard J Rinkus, Bryan J Moulton,
and D Jeffery Higginbotham. 2000b. Logging and
analysis of augmentative communication. In Pro-
ceedings of the RESNA Annual Conference.

Judy Matas, Pamela Mathy-Laikko, David Beukelman,
and Kelly Legresley. 1985. Identifying the non-
speaking population: A demographic study. Aug-
mentative and Alternative Communication, 1(1):17–
31.

Margaret Mitchell and Richard Sproat. 2012.
Discourse-based modeling for aac. In Proceedings
of the Third Workshop on Speech and Language
Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 9–18,
Montréal, Canada, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Lindsay Pennington, Juliet Goldbart, and Julie Mar-
shall. 2003. Speech and language therapy to im-
prove the communication skills of children with
cerebral palsy. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, 3.

Lindsay Pennington, Juliet Goldbart, and Julie Mar-
shall. 2004. Interaction training for conversational
partners of children with cerebral palsy: a system-
atic review. International Journal of Language &
Communication Disorders, 39(2):151–170.

J. Reddington and L. Coles-Kemp. 2011. Trap hunt-
ing: Finding personal data management issues in
next generation aac devices. Proceedings of the sec-
ond workshop on speech and language processing
for assistive technologies, pages 32–42.

Joseph Reddington. 2013. The Domesday dataset:
linked and open data in disability studies. Journal
of Intellectual Disabilities, 17(2):107–121.

Tracy A Shepherd, Kent A Campbell, Anne Marie Ren-
zoni, and Nahum Sloan. 2009. Reliability of speech
generating devices: A 5-year review. Augmentative
and Alternative Communication, 25(3):145–153.

Eva Szekely, Zeeshan Ahmed, Joao P. Cabral, and Julie
Carson-Berndsen. 2012. Winktalk: a demonstra-
tion of a multimodal speech synthesis platform link-
ing facial expressions to expressive synthetic voices.
In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Speech
and Language Processing for Assistive Technolo-
gies, pages 5–8, Montréal, Canada, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Tim Weber. 2011. BBC News - Google to buy Mo-
torola Mobility, last retrieved September 2011.

8


