



















































Structure-based Clustering of Novels


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature (CLfL) @ EACL 2014, pages 31–39,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Structure-based Clustering of Novels

Mariona Coll Ardanuy
Trier University

ardanuy@uni-trier.de

Caroline Sporleder
Trier University

sporledc@uni-trier.de

Abstract
To date, document clustering by genres
or authors has been performed mostly by
means of stylometric and content features.
With the premise that novels are societies
in miniature, we build social networks
from novels as a strategy to quantify their
plot and structure. From each social net-
work, we extract a vector of features which
characterizes the novel. We perform clus-
tering over the vectors obtained, and the
resulting groups are contrasted in terms of
author and genre.

1 Introduction

In recent years, the interest for quantitative meth-
ods of literary analysis has grown significantly.
Humanities scholars and researchers are increas-
ingly aware of the potential of data-driven ap-
proaches in a field that has traditionally been stud-
ied from a ‘close reading’ perspective. Large
repositories of literary text together with the devel-
opment of promising techniques from fields such
as text mining or information extraction offer ad-
vantages that open new possibilities to the field of
literature studies.

So far, most quantitative studies of literature
have focused mainly on form and content. Struc-
ture and plot, considered key dimensions in a
novel, have often been ignored due to the com-
plexity in quantifying them. In this study, we ex-
plore the contribution of features that are directly
related to them. With this goal, we represent a
novel as a social network of characters (a tech-
nique that is not novel in the field of quantitative
literary analysis), from which to extract features
that can be used to perform document clustering.
The outcome of the clustering will be a grouping
of novels according to their structural similarity.

This is an exploratory study to determine to
what degree the structure and plot of a novel are

representative of the genre to which it belongs and
characteristic of the style of its author. Two hy-
potheses are made on the basis of this premise.
The first is that the structure and plot of the novel
represented as a static and dynamic social network
is key to predict the literary genre to which a novel
belongs. The second is that the inner structure of
the society depicted by the author in a novel is
representative of this author. This approach intro-
duces the use of automatically extracted static and
dynamic networks to perform large-scale analyses
of novels, by representing them as vectors of fea-
tures that can then be used to compare the novels
in terms of genre and authorship.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2 we present the related work. Section 3
describes the method employed in turning a novel
into the vector of features chosen to characterize
it. The experiments conducted are discussed in
Section 4 and the results and analysis of them in
Section 5. We discuss the results in Section 6 and
conclude in Section 7.

2 Related Work

2.1 Unsupervised Document Classification

Unsupervised document classification (or ‘docu-
ment clustering’) consists in automatically group-
ing a set of documents based on the similarities
among them. Unlike its supervised counterpart,
it does not require neither labeled training data
nor prior knowledge of the classes into which the
texts are to be categorized. Instead, documents—
represented as vectors of features—that are similar
are grouped together, yielding a clustering that is
dependent on the features chosen to characterize
the document. Due to the lack of supervision, it
is not guaranteed that the resulting clustering cor-
responds to the classes in which we are interested
(Zhang, 2013).

Unsupervised authorship analysis from docu-

31



ments is the task of automatically grouping texts
that share the same author, by determining the set
of features that distinguish one author from any
other. The first approaches focused mainly on sty-
lometrics (Ledger and Merriam (1994), Holmes
and Forsyth (1995), Baayen et al. (1996), and
Aaronson (2001)). More recent approaches use
content-based features, such as Akiva and Kop-
pel (2012) and Layton et al. (2011). Pavlyshenko
(2012) brings document clustering by author to the
literature domain. The lexicon of the author is in
this work represented as semantic fields (the au-
thor’s idiolect) on which Singular Value Decom-
position is applied.

Much less effort has been devoted to the task of
clustering documents by the genre in which they
fall. Examples of this are Gupta et al. (2005),
Poudat and Cleuziou (2003), and Bekkerman et
al. (2007). The work of Allison et al. (2011) uses
stylometric features to cluster 36 novels accord-
ing to genre. The resulting clustering is only par-
tially successful, but made its authors realize that
the classification was not only obeying to genre
criteria, but also to authorship. The stylistic signa-
ture of every document corresponded to a strong
‘author’ signal, rather than to the ‘genre’ signal.

2.2 Literary Quantitative Analysis

The reviewed approaches have in common that
they use stylometric or content-based features.
However, a novel should not be reduced to the di-
mensions of punctuation, morphology, syntax and
semantics. This literary form has a depth, a com-
plex structure of plot, characters and narration.
The plot of a novel is defined in the Russian struc-
turalism school by the collection of its characters
and the actions they carry out (Bakhtin (1941),
Propp (1968)). It could be said that every novel is
a society in miniature.1 Moretti (2011), concerned
about how plot can be quantified, explores exten-
sively the impact characters have on it. To this
end, Moretti represents the characters of William
Shakespeare’s Hamlet as a social network. Sev-
eral experiments (removing the protagonist, iso-
lates, or a connecting character from the network)
show how the plot changes accordingly to the al-
teration in the structure of characters. Sack (2012)

1This is particularly evident in William M. Thackeray’s
novel Vanity Fair through the ironic and mocking voice of
the narrator, making the reader aware of his describing much
more than just the adventures and missfortunes of a collection
of invented characters.

proposes using social networks of characters as a
mechanism for generating plots artificially.

One of the first attempts of combining so-
cial networks and literature was in Alberich et
al. (2002). They built a social network from the
Marvel comics in which characters are the nodes,
linked by their co-occurrence in the same book.
The authors note that the resulting network was
very similar to a real social network. In Newman
and Girvan (2003), the authors used a hand-built
social network with the main characters of Vic-
tor Hugo’s Les Misérables to detect communities
of characters that were densely connected. These
communities, in the words of the authors, “clearly
reflect[ed] the subplot structure of the book”.

Elson et al. (2010) introduced an interesting
idea: so far, two characters had always been linked
by an edge if they occurred in the same text-
window. In their approach, characters are linked
if they converse. The networks are built in an au-
tomatic fashion, and heuristics are used to clus-
ter co-referents. The authors’s analysis of the net-
works debunks long standing literary hypotheses.
Celikyilmaz et al. (2010) extracts dialogue inter-
actions in order to analyze semantic orientations
of social networks from literature. In order to
perform large-scale analyses of the works, both
Rydberg-Cox (2011) and Suen et al. (2013) extract
networks from structured text: Greek tragedies the
first, plays and movie scripts the latter.

All the approaches mentioned above produce
static networks which are flat representations of
the novel as a whole. In them, past, present, and
future are represented at once. By means of static
networks, time turns into space. The recent work
by Agarwal et al. (2012) questions the validity of
static network analysis. Their authors introduce
the concept of dynamic network analysis for lit-
erature, motivated by the idea that static networks
can distort the importance of the characters (ex-
emplified through an analysis of Lewis Carroll’s
Alice in Wonderland). A dynamic social network
is but the collection of independent networks for
each of the parts in which the novel is divided.

3 Turning Novels into Social Networks

3.1 Human Name Recognition

A social network is a structure that captures the
relations between a set of actors. The actors in a
novel are its characters, and thus extracting person
names from the raw text is necessarily the first step

32



to construct a social network from a novel. To that
end, we used the Stanford Named Entity
Recognizer (Stanford NER)2, to which we ap-
plied post-processing recognition patterns in or-
der to enhance its performance in the literary do-
main.3 Stanford NER tags the entities on a per-
token basis. The name ‘Leicester’ might be tagged
as person in one paragraph and as location
in the next one. With the assumption that a novel
is a small universe in which one proper name is
likely to refer to the same entity throughout the
novel, we eliminate these inconsistencies by re-
tagging the file, so that each entity recognized dur-
ing the filtering is tagged as person throughout
the file. Each proper name that has been tagged
as a person more times than as a location is
also re-tagged consistently as person.

Table 1 shows the evaluation of the person name
recognizer in novels both originally in English and
translated, both before (StanfordNER) and af-
ter (FilteredNER) the filtering. The filtering
improves the performance of the entity recognizer
significantly in the case of English literature, and
only slightly in foreign literature. We evaluated
eight chapters randomly picked from eight differ-
ent novels.4

Precision Recall F1Score
StanfordNER-Eng 0.9684 0.8101 0.8822
FilteredNER-Trn 0.9816 0.9970 0.9892
StanfordNER-Eng 0.9287 0.7587 0.8351
FilteredNER-Trn 0.8589 0.8277 0.8430

Table 1: Evaluation of person recognition.

3.2 Character Resolution
A list of person names is not a list of char-
acters. Among the extracted names are ‘Miss
Lizzy’, ‘Miss Elizabeth’, ‘Miss Elizabeth Bennet’,
‘Lizzy’, ‘Miss Eliza Bennet’, ‘Elizabeth Bennet’,
and ‘Elizabeth’, all of them names correspond-
ing to one only character, the protagonist of Jane

2http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/
CRF-NER.shtml

3A list of 178 honorifics such as ‘Sir’, ‘Lady’, or ‘Pro-
fessor’ indicating that the adherent proper name is a person,
and a list of 83 verbs of utterance such as ‘say’, ‘complain’
or ‘discuss’ in both present and past forms indicating the im-
mediate presence of a person.

4Little Dorrit and The Pickwick Papers by Charles Dick-
ens, Pride and Prejudice from Jane Austen, Dr. Jekyll and
Mr. Hyde by R. L. Stevenson, The Hunchback of Notre-Dame
by Victor Hugo, The Phantom of the Opera by Gaston Ler-
oux, War and Peace by Leo Tolstoy, and Don Quixote of La
Mancha by Miguel de Cervantes.

Austen’s Pride and Prejudice. A social network
relates entities, and thus it is a crucial step to group
all the co-referents together. The task of character
resolution has been done in three steps:

• Human name parsing. We used an
extended version of the Python module
python-nameparser5 to parse the rec-
ognized names into its different components,
so that a name like ‘Mr. Sherlock Homes’,
would have ‘Mr.’ tagged as title, ‘Sherlock’
as first name and ‘Holmes’ as last name.

• Gender assignation. Each human name is as-
signed a gender (male, female, or unknown).
We have four lists: with typical male ti-
tles (‘Sir’, ‘Lord’, etc.), with female titles
(‘Miss’, ‘Lady’, etc.), with 2579 male first
names6 and with 4636 female first names7.
To assign a gender to a human name, first
the title is considered. If the title is empty or
non-informative, the first name is considered.
If none are informative of the gender of the
character, immediate context is considered:
a counter keeps track of counts of ‘his’ and
‘himself’ (on the one hand), and of ‘her’ and
‘herself’ (on the other) appearing in a win-
dow of at most 3 words to the right of the
name. Depending on which of the two coun-
ters is higher, the human name is assigned
one gender or the other. If the conditions are
not met, the gender remains unknown.

• Matching algorithm. A matching algorithm
is responsible for grouping the different co-
referents of the same entity from less to more
ambiguous:

1. Names with title, first name and last
name (e.g. ‘Miss Elizabeth Bennet’).

2. Names with first name and last name
(e.g. ‘Elizabeth Bennet’).

3. Names with title and first name
(e.g. ‘Miss Elizabeth’).

4. Names with title and last name
(e.g. ‘Miss Bennet’).

5. Names with only first name or last
name (e.g. ‘Elizabeth’ or ‘Bennet’).

For each matching step, three points are con-
sidered: a first name can appear as a nick-

5http://code.google.com/p/
python-nameparser/

6Source: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/Groups/AI/
areas/nlp/corpora/names/male.txt

7Source: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/Groups/AI/
areas/nlp/corpora/names/female.txt

33



name (‘Lizzy’ is ‘Elizabeth’)8, a first name
can appear as an initial (‘J. Jarndyce’ is
‘John Jarndyce’), and the genders of the
names to match must agree (‘Miss Sed-
ley’ matches ‘Amelia Sedley’, but not ‘Jos
Sedley’). If after these steps a referent is
still ambiguous, it goes to its most common
match (e.g. ‘Mr. Holmes’ might refer both to
‘Sherlock Holmes’ and to his brother ‘My-
croft Holmes’. According to our algorithm,
‘Mr. Holmes’ matches both names, so we as-
sume that it refers to the most relevant char-
acter of the novel, in this case the protagonist,
‘Sherlock Holmes’.

Evaluating character resolution is not a simple
task, since the impact of a misidentification will
depend on the relevance of the wrongly identified
character. The evaluation that we propose (see Ta-
ble 2) for this task takes into consideration only
the 10 most relevant characters in 10 novels.9

Precision Recall F1Score
EnglishLit 0.9866 0.9371 0.9612
ForeignLit 0.9852 0.9086 0.9454

Table 2: Evaluation of character resolution.

The evaluation of the gender assignment task (see
Table 3) is done on the total number of characters
from six different novels.10

Precision Recall F1Score
EnglishLit 0.9725 0.8676 0.9171
ForeignLit 0.9603 0.5734 0.7175

Table 3: Evaluation of gender assignment.

3.3 Network Construction
As mentioned in Section 2, two main approaches
to create character networks from literary fiction

8A list of names and their hypocoristics is used to
deal with this. Source: https://metacpan.org/
source/BRIANL/Lingua-EN-Nickname-1.14/
nicknames.txt

9The Mystery of Edwin Drood and Oliver Twist by Charles
Dickens, Sense and Sensibility by Jane Austen, Vanity Fair
by William M. Thackeray, The Hound of the Baskervilles by
Arthur Conan Doyle, Around the World in Eighty Days by
Jules Verne, The Phantom of the Opera by Gaston Leroux,
Les Misérables by Victor Hugo, The Three Musketeers by
Alexandre Dumas, and Madame Bovary by Gustave Flaubert.

10Oliver Twist by Charles Dickens, Sense and Sensibility
by Jane Austen, The Hound of the Baskervilles by Arthur Co-
nan Doyle, Around the World in Eighty Days by Jules Verne,
The Phantom of the Opera by Gaston Leroux, On the Eve by
Ivan Turgenev.

have been proposed. In the first one (hereafter
conversational network), nodes (i.e. characters)
are related by means of an edge if there is a spo-
ken interaction between them. In the second ap-
proach (hereafter co-occurrence network), nodes
are linked whenever they co-occur in the same
window of text. A conversational network is well-
suited to represent plays, where social interaction
is almost only represented by means of dialogue.
However, much of the interaction in novels is done
off-dialogue through the description of the narra-
tor or indirect interactions. Thus, using a conver-
sational network might not suffice to capture all
interactions, and it would definitely have severe
limitations in novels with unmarked dialogue, lit-
tle dialogue or none.11

The networks built in this approach are static
and dynamic co-occurrence networks.12 A static
network allows better visualization of the novel
as a whole, and the features extracted from it cor-
respond to a time agnostic analysis of the novel’s
plot. A dynamic network is a sequence of sub-
networks, each of which constructed for each of
the chapters into which the novel is divided. In it,
one can visualize the development of the charac-
ters throughout the novel. In both networks, nodes
are linked if they co-occur in the same window of
text, which in our case is set to be a paragraph,
a natural division of text according to discourse.
The graph is undirected (the direction of the in-
teraction is ignored) and weighted (the weight is
the number of interactions between the two linked
nodes). In 1st person novels, the off-dialogue oc-
currences of pronoun “I” are added to the node of
the character who narrates the story, in order to
avoid the narrator (probably the protagonist of the
novel) to be pushed to the background.

We used the python library Networkx13 to
construct the networks and the network analysis
software Gephi14 to visualize them.

11Examples are Cormac McCarthy’s On the road, George
Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four, and Margaret Yourcenar’s
Memoirs of Hadrian.

12In section 3.4, we offer a qualitative analysis of some net-
works. We have already motivated our choice for using co-
occurrence networks instead of conversational. Both meth-
ods would yield very different networks. The reason why we
do not provide compared results between both approaches is
that we do not consider them quantitatively comparable, since
they represent and capture different definitions of what a so-
cial relation is.

13http://networkx.github.io/
14http://gephi.org/

34



Figure 1: Static network of Pride and Prejudice.

3.4 Network Analysis

The aim of extracting social networks from nov-
els is to turn a complex object (the novel) into a
schematic representation of the core structure of
the novel. Figures 1 and 2 are two examples of
static networks, corresponding to Jane Austen’s
Pride and Prejudice and William M. Thackeray’s
Vanity Fair respectively. Just a glimpse to the net-
work is enough to make us realize that they are
very different in terms of structure.

Pride and Prejudice has an indisputable main
character (Elizabeth) and the whole network is or-
ganized around her. The society depicted in the
novel is that of the heroine. Pride and Prejudice is
the archetypal romantic comedy and is also often
considered a Bildungsroman.

The community represented in Vanity Fair
could hardly be more different. Here the novel
does not turn around one only character. Instead,
the protagonism is now shared by at least two
nodes, even though other very centric foci can be
seen. The network is spread all around these char-
acters. The number of minor characters and isolate
nodes is in comparison huge. Vanity Fair is a satir-
ical novel with many elements of social criticism.

Static networks show the skeleton of novels, dy-
namic networks its development, by incorporating
a key dimension of the novel: time, represented as
a succession of chapters. In the time axis, charac-
ters appear, disappear, evolve. In a dynamic net-
work of Jules Verne’s Around the World in Eighty
Days, we would see that the character Aouda ap-
pears for the first time in chapter 13. From that

Figure 2: Static network of Vanity Fair.

moment on, she is Mr. Fogg’s companion for the
rest of the journey and the reader’s companion for
the rest of the book. This information is lost in a
static network, in which the group of very static
gentlemen of a London club are sitting very close
from a consul in Suez, a judge in Calcutta, and a
captain in his transatlantic boat. All these char-
acters would never co-occur (other than by men-
tions) in a dynamic network.

4 Experiments

At the beginning of this paper we ask ourselves
whether the plot of a novel (here represented as
its structure of characters) can be used to identify
literary genres or to determine its author. We pro-
pose two main experiments to investigate the role
of the novel structure in the identification of an au-
thor and of a genre. Both experiments are consid-
ered as an unsupervised classification task.

4.1 Document Clustering by Genre

Data collection.15 This study does not have a
quantified, analogous experiment with which to
compare the outcome. Thus, our approach has
required constructing a corpus of novels from
scratch and building an appropriate baseline. We
have collected a representative sample of the most
influential novels of the Western world. The re-
sulting dataset contains 238 novels16. Each novel

15The complete list of works and features used
for both experiments can be found in http:
//www.coli.uni-saarland.de/˜csporled/
SocialNetworksInNovels.html.

16Source: http://www.gutenberg.org/

35



was annotated with the genre to which it belongs.
The task of assigning a genre to a novel is not triv-
ial. The Russian literary critic Mikhail Bakhtin
relates the inherent difficulties in the study of the
novelistic genre, being the novel the “sole genre
that continues to develop, that is as yet uncom-
pleted” (Bakhtin, 1981). Different sources dif-
fer in categorizing the same novels, some novels
are labeled with more than one genre, and even
some novels are not categorized at all. The pro-
cess of building and labeling the corpus has there-
fore been long and laborious.

The decision on how many genres there should
be was taken based on observation, resulting in 11
most seen genres: adventure, historical, romance,
satirical, gothic, Bildungsroman, picaresque, mys-
tery, social criticism, science fiction, and children
fiction. In order to annotate the data, different
sources were contrasted, among which the study
guides from Spark Notes17 and Shmoop18, pop-
ular reading web portals such as Goodread19, the
Wikipedia20, and different literary research studies
for each particular novel. Each novel has been an-
notated with a maximum of three genres in those
cases in which sources did not agree.

Experimental Setup. We propose four differ-
ent set-ups, representing different fractions of the
data set. The enCorpus is the set of 184 novels
originally written in English. The trCorpus is the
set of 54 novels originally not written in English,
in their translated version. The alCorpus is the
whole dataset, 238 novels. The 19Corpus is a sub-
set of 118 British novels from the 19th Century.

4.2 Document Clustering by Author

Data collection. The evaluation of document clus-
tering by author does not pose nearly as many
challenges. For this experiment, we have disre-
garded 1st person narratives.21 We collected 45
novels from 7 different authors: five British au-
thors from the 19th Century (Jane Austen (6 nov-
els), Charles Dickens (11), Elizabeth Gaskell (5),
George Eliot (7), and William Thackeray (6)), and
two Russian realism authors (Ivan Turgenev (6)

17http://www.sparknotes.com/
18http://www.shmoop.com/literature/
19http://www.goodreads.com/
20http://www.wikipedia.org
21Whereas the point of view in which the story is written

might be indicative of a genre (e.g. some genres might be
more prone to use 1st person), in most cases it is not of an
author, since they are many the authors that equally use dif-
ferent points of view in their novels.

and Fyodor Dostoyevsky (4)). For investigative
reasons, we have also included the seven novels
from the Harry Potter fantasy series, by the con-
temporary British author J. K. Rowling.

Experimental Setup. We propose four different
set-ups, focusing on the author. Table 4 shows the
authors included in each experiment.

#Corpus Authors
Corpus1 Austen, Dickens, Thackeray, Eliot, Gaskell
Corpus2 Austen, Dickens, Thackeray, Eliot, Gaskell,

Dostoyevsky, Turgenev
Corpus3 Austen, Dickens, Thackeray, Eliot, Gaskell,

Rowling
Corpus4 Austen, Dickens, Thackeray, Eliot, Gaskell,

Dostoyevsky, Turgenev, Rowling

Table 4: Authors in each corpus fraction.

4.3 Feature Selection
The static features that we have used for cluster-
ing are mostly well-known metrics drawn from
social network analysis. These include measures
such as graph density, average clustering coeffi-
cient, diameter, radius, proportion of eccentric,
central and isolate nodes, and relevance of the
main node. Variations of social network analysis
metrics are: proportion of male characters, rela-
tive weight of the main node, relative weight of
the second biggest node, of the ten most impor-
tant nodes, and of the isolate nodes, and propor-
tion of edges of the main character. Dynamic fea-
tures control the continued presence of the protag-
onist throughout the novel, the varying proportion
of characters in each stage of the novel, and pro-
portion of characters appearing in only one stage.

In the clustering experiment by genre, we dif-
ferenciate between features that apply to 1st and
3rd person point-of-view to avoid the dispropor-
tionate weight of the narrator to incline the results.
Some features not used in the author experiment
are added, such as the absolute size of the network
both in terms of nodes and of length of the novel,
the presence of the main character in the title of the
book, the point-of-view, the number of chapters
and whether the narrator is known. The author ex-
periment has a total of 27 features, while the genre
experiment has 5522. The baseline we propose is
based on content: for each novel a vector with a
raw Bag-of-words representation is generated.

For the clustering, we use the Weka EM imple-
mentation, in which the number of clusters was al-

22See footnote 15.

36



ready pre-defined to the desired number of classes
(11 in the case of clustering by genre, 5-8 in the
case of clustering by author).

5 Results and Analysis

The results of the clustering are evaluated with re-
spect to the annotated data. The task of evaluat-
ing the results of a clustering is not trivial, since
one cannot know with certainty which labels cor-
respond to which clusters. In this approach, the
labelling of the classes relies on Weka’s23(Hall et
al., 2009) Classes to clusters evaluation function-
ality, which assigns a label to the cluster which
contains most of the elements of the labeled class,
as long as the class is not defining another cluster.
The evaluation is based on three popular metrics:
purity, entropy and F1 measure. In the clustering
experiments by genre, if one novel is classified as
at least one of the correct classes, we consider it to
be correct.

#Corpus Baseline Our approach
Metric Pur Ent F1S Pur Ent F1S
enCorpus 0.45 0.34 0.31 0.46 0.34 0.33
trCorpus 0.56 0.28 0.34 0.44 0.31 0.27
alCorpus 0.42 0.35 0.27 0.40 0.36 0.26
19Corpus 0.53 0.29 0.34 0.58 0.29 0.40

Table 5: Genre clustering evaluation.

Table 5 shows the results of both the baseline and
our approach in the clustering task by genre.24

The clustering results are negative, even though
not random. The performance is slightly better in
works originally written in English (enCorpus
and 19Corpus). The reason why the 19Corpus
performs significantly better than the rest of the
collections is probably to be found in the fact that
all other collections contain documents from very
different ages (up to five centuries of difference)
and countries of origin. Since novels usually de-
pict the society of the moment, it is not surpris-
ing that the more local the collection of texts, the
higher the performance of the approach is.

As can be seen in Table 6, the performance of
both the baseline and our approach in clustering
by author is much higher than by genre.25 The
performance of the baseline approach decreases as

23http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/index.
html

24The yielded clusters and their quality can be
found in http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/
˜csporled/SocialNetworksInNovels.html

25See footnote 24.

#Corpus Baseline Our approach
Metric Pur Ent F1S Pur Ent F1S
Corpus1 0.74 0.20 0.74 0.63 0.26 0.63
Corpus2 0.64 0.23 0.55 0.60 0.28 0.60
Corpus3 0.74 0.19 0.71 0.71 0.22 0.71
Corpus4 0.58 0.25 0.52 0.62 0.24 0.60

Table 6: Author clustering evaluation.

it goes away from the same period and same ori-
gin, but also as the number of authors in which
to cluster the novels increases. Our approach does
not suffer too much from the increasing number of
classes in which to cluster. Interesting enough, we
see how the baseline and our approach yield simi-
lar results in both clustering tasks even if the fea-
tures could not be more different from one vector
to the other. As future work, we plan to combine
both methods in order to enhance the results.

6 Discussion

6.1 Clustering by Genre

Genres are not clear and distinct classes. By ob-
serving the ‘incorrectly labeled’ cases from our
network-based method, we find some interesting
patterns: some genres tend to be misclassified al-
ways into the same “incorrect” genre. It is the
case, for example, of the categories Bildungsro-
man and picaresque. Some novels that should
have been labeled Bildungsroman are instead con-
sidered picaresque, or vice versa. Indeed, one can
easily find certain characteristics that are shared
in both genres, such as a strong protagonist and
a whole constellation of minor characters around
him or her. What distinguishes them from being
the same genre is that the focus and goal in a Bil-
dungsroman is on the development of the main
character. Picaresque novels, on the contrary, usu-
ally have no designed goal for the protagonist,
and consist of a sequence of adventures, most of
them unrelated and inconsequential to each other.
The same kind of strong relationship exists, in a
lesser extent, between historical, social and satir-
ical genres. These three genres are somewhat in-
tertwined. Social criticism might be carried out
through a satirical novel, which might be set to
take place in the past, making it a historical novel.
Our method classifies these three genres indis-
tinctly together, and this might well be because of
their very similar structural characteristics.

We consider this experiment a first step in the
task of novel clustering by genre. The method that

37



we have presented is far from being perfected. We
have used all the features that we have designed in
an unweighted way and without optimizing them.
However, it is assumed that some features will
have a bigger impact than others at determining
genres. A blunt analysis of the role of the fea-
tures informs that the relevance of the protagonist
node is key, for example, to identify genres such
as Bildungsroman and picaresque. A high propor-
tion of minor or isolate nodes is, for example, a
very good indicator of satirical, social, and histor-
ical genres. An unknown narrator is a good indi-
cator that we are in front of a science fiction novel,
while a mixed point of view is usually kept for ei-
ther science fiction, gothic, or mystery novels.

6.2 Clustering by Author

The clustering by author is much clearer than the
clustering by genre, and very interesting patterns
can be found when looked in detail. One can learn,
for instance, that the structure of Jane Austen nov-
els are in the antipodes of the structure of William
M. Thackeray’s works (as could be inferred from
Figures 1 and 2). These two authors are, alongside
Rowling, the easiest authors to identify. In fact,
a clustering of only the novels by these three au-
thors result in a perfectly clear-cut grouping with
no misclassifications. Dickens and Eliot are on the
other hand the most difficult authors to identify,
partly because their structures are more varied.

An in-depth study of the role of each feature
in the clustering provides a very interesting view
of the literary work of each author. We can see
in our sample that female writers (in particular
Austen and Gaskell) have a much higher propor-
tion of female characters than male writers (in par-
ticular Dickens, Turgenev, and Dostoyevsky), with
Thackeray and Rowling depicting a more equal
society. Examples of behaviors that can be read
from the clustering are many. The very low graph
density of Thackeray’s novels contrasts with the
high density of the novels by Austen and Tur-
genev, whereas all of Gaskell’s novels have a strik-
ingly similar graph density. In the case of the
Harry Potter books, the first ones are significantly
denser than the last ones. The role of the protago-
nist also varies depending on the author. It is very
important in the works by Austen, Gaskell, and
Rowling, in which the presence of the protagonist
is constant throughout the novel. Turgenev’s pro-
tagonists are also very strong, even though their

presence varies along the chapters. Thackeray, on
the other hand, is by far the author that gives more
weight to minor characters and isolates. Turgenev
has a high proportion of isolate nodes, while they
are almost null in works by Rowling and Austen.
The dynamic features show the different distribu-
tions of characters over the time of the novel. They
allow us see very clearly in which stages coincide
the maximum number of characters (the falling
action in the case of Austen, the dénouement in
the case of Eliot, the rising action in the case of
Rowling). They allow us to see also how a very
high proportion of characters in Thackeray’s nov-
els appear in only one stage in the novel, to then
disappear. In the other side of the spectrum are
Austen and Dostoyevsky, whose characters arrive
in the novel to stay. These are only some of the
most evident conclusions that can be drawn from
the author-clustering experiment. A more in-depth
analysis could be useful, for example, to identify
changes in the work of one same author.

7 Conclusion

This work is a contribution to the field of quantita-
tive literary analysis. We have presented a method
to build static and dynamic social networks from
novels as a way of representing structure and plot.
Our goal was two-fold: to learn which role the
structure of a novel plays in identifying a novel-
istic genre, and to understand to what extent the
structure of the novel is a fingerprint of the style
of the author. We have designed two experiments
shaped as unsupervised document classification
tasks. The first experiment, clustering by genre
resulted in a negative clustering but, if analyzed
qualitatively, shows that the approach is promis-
ing, even if it must be polished. The second ex-
periment, clustering by author, outperformed the
baseline and obtained good enough positive re-
sults. Authorship attribution is mostly used for ei-
ther forensic purposes or plagiarism identification.
However, we have shown that an analysis of the
features and yielded clustering can also be used
to explore structural inter- and intra-similarities
among different authors.

8 Acknowledgements

The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for
their helpful comments and suggestions.

38



References
Scott Aaronson. 2001. Stylometric clustering: A com-

parison of data-driven and syntactic features. Tech-
nical report, Computer Science Department, Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley.

Apoorv Agarwal, Augusto Corvalan, Jacob Jensen, and
Owen Rambow. 2012. Social network analysis of
alice in wonderland. In Workshop on Computational
Linguistics for Literature, Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 88–96.

Navot Akiva and Moshe Koppel. 2012. Identify-
ing distinct components of a multi-author document.
EISIC, pages 205–209.

Ricardo Alberich, Josep Miró-Julià, and Francesc
Rosselló. 2002. Marvel universe looks almost like a
real social network. cond-mat/.

Sarah Allison, Ryan Heuser, Matthew Jockers, Franco
Moretti, and Michael Witmore. 2011. Quantitative
formalism: an experiment. Literary Lab, Pamphlet
1.

Harald Baayen, Hans van Halteren, and Fiona Tweedie.
1996. Outside the cave of shadows: using syntactic
annotation to enhance authorship attribution. Liter-
ary and Linguistic Computing, 11:121–131.

Mikhail Bakhtin. 1981. Epic and novel: Towards
a methodology for the study of the novel. In
J. Michael Holquist, editor, The dialogic imagina-
tion: four essays. Unversity of Texas Press.

Ron Bekkerman, Hema Raghavan, and James Al-
lan Koji Eguchi. 2007. Interactive clustering of
text collections according to a user-specified crite-
rion. In In Proceedings of IJCAI, pages 684–689.

Asli Celikyilmaz, Dilek Hakkani-tur, Hua He, Greg
Kondrak, and Denilson Barbosa. 2010. The actor-
topic model for extracting social networks in literary
narrative. In NIPS Workshop: Machine Learning for
Social Computing.

David K. Elson and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2010. Au-
tomatic attribution of quoted speech in literary nar-
rative. In Association for the Advancement of Artifi-
cial Intelligence.

David K. Elson, Nicholas Dames, and Kathleen R.
McKeown. 2010. Extracting social networks from
literary fiction. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Suhit Gupta, Hila Becker, Gail Kaiser, and Salvatore
Stolfo. 2005. A genre-based clustering approach to
content extraction. Technical report, Department of
Computer Science, Columbia University.

Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard
Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, and Ian H. Witten.
2009. The weka data mining software: An update.
SIGKDD Explorations, Volume 11.

David I. Holmes and Richard S. Forsyth. 1995. The
federalist revisited: New directions in authorship
attribution. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
10:111–127.

Robert Layton, Paul Watters, and Richard Dazeley.
2011. Automated unsupervised authorship analy-
sis using evidence accumulation clustering. Natural
Language Engineering, 19:95–120.

Gerard Ledger and Thomas Merriam. 1994. Shake-
speare, fletcher, and the two noble kinsmen. Liter-
ary and Linguistic Computing, 9:235–248.

Franco Moretti. 2011. Network theory, plot analysis.
Literary Lab, Pamphlet 2.

M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan. 2003. Finding and
evaluating community structure in networks. Physi-
cal Review E, 69:1–16.

Bohdan Pavlyshenko. 2012. The clustering of author’s
texts of english fiction in the vector space of se-
mantic fields. The Computing Research Repository,
abs/1212.1478.

Céline Poudat and Guillaume Cleuziou. 2003. Genre
and domain processing in an information retrieval
perspective. In ICWE, pages 399–402.

Vladimir I. A. Propp. 1968. Morphology of the folk-
tale. University of Texas Press.

Jeff Rydberg-Cox. 2011. Social networks and the lan-
guage of greek tragedy. Journal of the Chicago Col-
loquium on Digital Humanities and Computer Sci-
ence, 1:1–11.

Graham Alexander Sack. 2011. Simulating plot: To-
wards a generative model of narrative structure. In
Complex Adaptive Systems: Energy, Information
and Intelligence: Papers from the 2011 AAAI Fall
Symposium (FS-11-03), pages 127–136.

Graham Sack. 2012. Character networks for narrative
generation. In Intelligent Narrative Technologies:
Papers from the 2012 AIIDE Workshop, AAAI Tech-
nical Report WS-12-14, pages 38–43.

Caroline Suen, Laney Kuenzel, and Sebastian Gil.
2013. Extraction and analysis of character inter-
action networks from plays and movies. Retrieved
from : http://dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-251.html,
July.

Bin Zhang. 2013. Learning Features for Text Classifi-
cation. Ph.D. thesis, University of Washington.

39


