



















































Medical text simplification using synonym replacement: Adapting assessment of word difficulty to a compounding language


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Predicting and Improving Text Readability for Target Reader Populations (PITR) @ EACL 2014, pages 57–65,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Medical text simplification using synonym replacement:
Adapting assessment of word difficulty to a compounding language

Emil Abrahamsson1 Timothy Forni1 Maria Skeppstedt1 Maria Kvist1,2
1Department of Computer and Systems Sciences (DSV)

Stockholm University, Sweden
{emab6827, tifo6794, mariask}@dsv.su.se

2Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics (LIME)
Karolinska Institutet, Sweden

maria.kvist@karolinska.se

Abstract

Medical texts can be difficult to under-
stand for laymen, due to a frequent occur-
rence of specialised medical terms. Re-
placing these difficult terms with eas-
ier synonyms can, however, lead to im-
proved readability. In this study, we have
adapted a method for assessing difficulty
of words to make it more suitable to med-
ical Swedish. The difficulty of a word
was assessed not only by measuring the
frequency of the word in a general cor-
pus, but also by measuring the frequency
of substrings of words, thereby adapt-
ing the method to the compounding na-
ture of Swedish. All words having a
MeSH synonym that was assessed as eas-
ier, were replaced in a corpus of medical
text. According to the readability measure
LIX, the replacement resulted in a slightly
more difficult text, while the readability
increased according to the OVIX measure
and to a preliminary reader study.

1 Introduction

Our health, and the health of our family and
friends, is something that concerns us all. To be
able to understand texts from the medical domain,
e.g. our own health record or texts discussing sci-
entific findings related to our own medical prob-
lems, is therefore highly relevant for all of us.

Specialised terms, often derived from latin or
greek, as well as specialised abbreviations, are,
however, often used in medical texts (Kokkinakis
and Toporowska Gronostaj, 2006). This has the
effect that medical texts can be difficult to compre-
hend (Keselman and Smith, 2012). Comprehend-
ing medical text might be particularly challenging
for those laymen readers who are not used to look-
ing up unknown terms while reading. A survey of

Swedish Internet users showed, for instance, that
users with a long education consult medical infor-
mation available on the Internet to a much larger
extent than users with a shorter education (Find-
ahl, 2010, pp. 28–35). This discrepancy between
different user groups is one indication that meth-
ods for simplifying medical texts are needed, to
make the medical information accessible to every-
one.

Previous studies have shown that replacing dif-
ficult words with easier synonyms can reduce the
level of difficulty in a text. The level of diffi-
culty of a word was, in these studies, determined
by measuring its frequency in a general corpus of
the language; a measure based on the idea that
frequent words are easier than less frequent, as
they are more familiar to the reader. This syn-
onym replacement method has been evaluated on
medical English text (Leroy et al., 2012) as well
as on Swedish non-medical text (Keskisärkkä and
Jönsson, 2012). To the best of our knowledge, this
method has, however, not previously been evalu-
ated on medical text written in Swedish. In ad-
dition, as Swedish is a compounding language,
laymen versions of specialised medical terms are
often constructed by compounds of every-day
Swedish words. Whether a word consists of easily
understandable constituents, is a factor that also
ought to be taken into account when assessing the
difficulty of a word.

The aim of our study was, therefore, to in-
vestigate if synonym replacement based on term
frequency could be successfully applied also on
Swedish medical text, as well as if this method
could be further developed by adapting it to the
compounding nature of Swedish.

2 Background

The level of difficulty varies between different
types of medical texts (Leroy et al., 2006), but
studies have shown that even brochures intended

57



for patients, or websites about health issues, can be
difficult to comprehend (Kokkinakis et al., 2012;
Leroy et al., 2012). Bio-medical texts, such as
medical journals, are characterised by sentences
that have high informational and structural com-
plexity, thus containing a lot of technical terms
(Friedman et al., 2002). An abundance of med-
ical terminology and a frequent use of abbrevia-
tions form, as previously mentioned, a strong bar-
rier for comprehension when laymen read medical
text. Health literacy is a much larger issue than
only the frequent occurrence of specialised terms;
an issue that includes many socio-economic fac-
tors. The core of the issue is, however, the read-
ability of the text, and adapting word choice to the
reader group (Zeng et al., 2005; Leroy et al., 2012)
is a possible method to at least partly improve the
readability of medical texts.

Semi-automatic adaption of word choice has
been evaluated on English medical text (Leroy et
al., 2012) and automatic adaption on Swedish non-
medical text (Keskisärkkä and Jönsson, 2012).
Both studies used synonym lexicons and replaced
words that were difficult to understand with more
easily understandable synonyms. The level of dif-
ficulty of a word was determined by measuring its
frequency in a general corpus. The English study
based its figures for word frequency on the number
of occurrences of a word in Google’s index of En-
glish language websites, while the Swedish study
used the frequency of a word in the Swedish Pa-
role corpus (Gellerstam et al., 2000), which is a
corpus compiled from several sources, e.g. news-
paper texts and fiction.

The English study used English WordNet as the
synonym resource, and difficult text was trans-
formed by a medical librarian, who chose eas-
ier replacements for difficult words among candi-
dates that were presented by the text simplifica-
tion system. Also hypernyms from semantic cat-
egories in WordNet, UMLS and Wiktionary were
used, but as clarifications for difficult words (e.g.
in the form: ’difficult word, a kind of semantic cat-
egory’). A frequency cut-off in the Google Web
Corpus was used for distinguishing between easy
and difficult words. The study was evaluated by
letting readers 1) assess perceived difficulty in 12
sentences extracted from medical texts aimed at
patients, and 2) answer multiple choice questions
related to paragraphs of texts from the same re-
source, in order to measure actual difficulty. The

evaluations showed that perceived difficulty was
significantly higher before the transformation, and
that actual difficulty was significantly higher for
one combination of medical topic and test setting.

The Swedish study used the freely available
SynLex as the resource for synonyms, and one
of the studied methods was synonym replacement
based on word frequency. The synonym replace-
ment was totally automatic and no cut-off was
used for distinguishing between familiar and rare
words. The replacement algorithm instead re-
placed all words which had a synonym with a
higher frequency in the Parole corpus than the fre-
quency of the original word. The effect of the
frequency-based synonym replacement was auto-
matically evaluated by applying the two Swedish
readability measures LIX and OVIX on the orig-
inal and on the modified text. Synonym replace-
ment improved readability according to these two
measures for all of the four studied Swedish text
genres: newspaper texts, informative texts from
the Swedish Social Insurance Agency, articles
from a popular science magazine and academic
texts.

For synonym replacement to be a meaningful
method for text simplification, there must exist
synonyms that are near enough not to change the
content of what is written. Perfect synonyms are
rare, as there is typically at least one aspect in
which two separate words within a language dif-
fer; if it is not a small difference in meaning, it
might be in the context in which they are typi-
cally used (Saeed, 1997). For describing med-
ical concepts, there is, however, often one set
of terms that are used by health professionals,
whereas another set of laymen’s terms are used by
patients (Leroy and Chen, 2001; Kokkinakis and
Toporowska Gronostaj, 2006). This means that
synonym replacement could have a large poten-
tial for simplifying medical text, as there are many
synonyms within this domain, for which the dif-
ference mainly lies in the context in which they
are typically used.

The availability of comprehensive synonym re-
sources is another condition for making it possi-
ble to implement synonym replacement for text
simplification. For English, there is a consumer
health vocabulary initiative connecting laymen’s
expressions to technical terminology (Keselman
et al., 2008), as well as several medical termi-

58



Original Med röntgen kan man se en ökad trabekulering, osteoporos
samt pseudofrakturer.

Transformed Med röntgen kan man se en ökad trabekulering, benskörhet
samt pseudofrakturer.

Translated original With X-ray, one can see an increased trabeculation, osteoporosis
and pseudo-fractures.

Translated transformed With X-ray, one can see an increased trabeculation, bone-brittleness
and pseudo-fractures.

Table 1: An example of how the synonym replacement changes a word in a sentence.

nologies containing synonymic expressions, e.g.
MeSH1 and SNOMED CT2. Swedish, with fewer
speakers, also has fewer lexical resources than En-
glish, and although SNOMED CT was recently
translated to Swedish, the Swedish version does
not contain any synonyms. MeSH on the other
hand, which is a controlled vocabulary for index-
ing biomedical literature, is available in Swedish
(among several other languages), and contains
synonyms and abbreviations for medical concepts
(Karolinska Institutet, 2012).

Swedish is, as previously mentioned, a com-
pounding language, with the potential to create
words expressing most of all imaginable concepts.
Laymen’s terms for medical concepts are typi-
cally descriptive and often consist of compounds
of words used in every-day language. The word
humerusfraktur (humerus fracture), for instance,
can also be expressed as överarmsbenbrott, for
which a literal translation would be upper-arm-
bone-break. That a compound word with many
constituents occurring in standard language could
be easier to understand than the technical terms
of medical terminology, forms the basis for our
adaption of word difficulty assessment to medical
Swedish.

3 Method

We studied simplification of one medical text
genre; medical journal text. The replacement
method, as well as the main evaluation method,
was based on the previous study by Keskisärkkä
and Jönsson (2012). The method for assessing
word difficulty was, however, further developed
compared to this previous study.

As medical journal text, a subset of the journal
Läkartidningen, the Journal of the Swedish Med-
ical Association (Kokkinakis, 2012), was used.

1www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/
2www.ihtsdo.org

The subset consisted of 10 000 randomly selected
sentences from issues published in 1996. As syn-
onym lexicon, the Swedish version of MeSH was
used. This resource contains 10 771 synonyms,
near synonyms, multi-word phrases with a very
similar meaning and abbreviation/expansion pairs
(all denoted as synonyms here), belonging to 8 176
concepts.

Similar to the study by Keskisärkkä and Jönsson
(2012), the Parole corpus was used for frequency
statistics. For each word in the Läkartidningen
subset, it was checked whether the word had a syn-
onym in MeSH. If that was the case, and if the
synonym was more frequently occurring in Parole
than the original word, then the original word was
replaced with the synonym. An example of a sen-
tence changed by synonym replacement is shown
in Table 1.

There are many medical words that only rarely
occur in general Swedish, and therefore are not
present as independent words in a corpus of stan-
dard Swedish, even if constituents of the words
frequently occur in the corpus. The method used
by Keskisärkkä and Jönsson was further developed
to handle these cases. This development was built
on the previously mentioned idea that a compound
word with many constituents occurring in standard
language is easier to understand than a rare word
for which this is not the case. When neither the
original word, nor the synonym, occurred in Pa-
role, a search in Parole was therefore instead car-
ried out for substrings of the words. The original
word was replaced by the synonym, in cases when
the synonym consisted of a larger number of sub-
strings present in Parole than the original word.
To insure that the substrings were relevant words,
they had to consist of a least four characters.

Exemplified by a sentence containing the word
hemangiom (hemangioma), the extended replace-
ment algorithm would work as follows: The al-

59



gorithm first detects that hemangiom has the syn-
onym blodkärlstumör (blood-vessel-tumour) in
MeSH. It thereafter establishes that neither he-
mangiom nor blodkärlstumör is included in the
Parole corpus, and therefore instead tries to find
substrings of the two words in Parole. For he-
mangiom, no substrings are found, while four
substrings are found for blodkärlstumör (Table
2), and therefore hemangiom is replaced by
blodkärlstumör.

Word 1 2 3 4
hemangiom - - - -
blodkärlstumör blod kärl blodkärl tumör

Table 2: Example of found substrings

As the main evaluation of the effect of the syn-
onym replacement, the two readability measures
used by Keskisärkkä and Jönsson were applied,
on the original as well as on the modified text.
LIX (läsbarhetsindex, readability measure) is the
standard metric used for measuring readability of
Swedish texts, while OVIX (ordvariationsindex,
word variation index) measures lexical variance,
thereby reflecting the size of vocabulary in the text
(Falkenjack et al., 2013).

The two metrics are defined as follows
(Mühlenbock and Johansson Kokkinakis, 2009):

LIX =
O

M
+

L · 100
O

Where:

• O = number of words in the text
• M = number of sentences in the text
• L = number of long words in the text (more

than 6 characters)

OVIX =
log(O)

log(2− log(U)log(O))
Where:

• O = number of words in the text
• U = number of unique words in the text
The interpretation of the LIX value is shown in

Table 3, while OVIX scores ranging from 60 to 69
indicate easy-to-read texts (Mühlenbock and Jo-
hansson Kokkinakis, 2009).

LIX-value Genre
less than 25 Children’s books
25-30 Easy texts
30-40 Normal text/fiction
40-50 Informative texts
50-60 Specialist literature
more than 60 Research, dissertations

Table 3: The LIX-scale, from Mühlenbock and Jo-
hansson Kokkinakis (2009)

To obtain preliminary results from non-
automatic methods, a very small manual evalua-
tion of correctness and perceived readability was
also carried out. A randomly selected subset of
the sentences in which at least one term had been
replaced were classified into three classes by a
physician: 1) The original meaning was retained
after the synonym replacement, 2) The original
meaning was only slightly altered after the syn-
onym replacement, and 3) The original meaning
was altered more than slightly after the synonym
replacement. Sentences classified into the first cat-
egory by the physician were further categorised
for perceived readability by two other evaluators;
both with university degrees in non-life science
disciplines. The original and the transformed sen-
tence were presented in random order, and the
evaluators were only informed that the simplifica-
tion was built on word replacement. The follow-
ing categories were used for the evaluation of per-
ceived readability: 1) The two presented sentences
are equally easy/difficult to understand, 2) One of
the sentences is easier to understand than the other.
In the second case, the evaluator indicated which
sentence was easier.

4 Results

In the used corpus subset, which contained
150 384 tokens (26 251 unique), 4 909 MeSH
terms for which there exist a MeSH synonym were
found. Among these found terms, 1 154 were
replaced with their synonym. The 15 most fre-
quently replaced terms are shown in Table 4, many
of them being words typical for a professional lan-
guage that have been replaced with compounds
of every-day Swedish words, or abbreviations that
have been replaced by an expanded form.

The total number of words increased from
150 384 to 150 717 after the synonym replace-

60



Original term (English) Replaced with (Literal translation) n
aorta (aorta) kroppspulsåder (body-artery) 34
kolestas (cholestasis) gallstas (biliary-stasis) 33
angioödem (angioedema) angioneurotiskt ödem (angio-neurotic-oedema) 29
stroke (stroke) slaganfall (strike-seizure) 29
TPN (TPN) parenteral näring, total (parenteral nutrition, total) 26
GCS (GCS) Glasgow Coma Scale (Glasgow Coma Scale) 20
mortalitet (mortality) dödlighet (deathrate) 20
ödem (oedema) svullnad (swelling) 20
legitimation (licensure) licens (certificate) 18
RLS (RLS) rastlösa ben-syndrom (restless legs-syndrome) 18
anemi (anemia) blodbrist (blood-shortage) 17
anhöriga (family) familj (family) 17
ekokardiografi (echocardiography) hjärtultraljuds- (heart-ultrasound 17

undersökning -examination)
artrit (arthritis) ledinflammation (joint-inflammation) 16
MHC (MHC) histokompatibilitets- (histocompatibility- 15

komplex complex)

Table 4: The 15 most frequently replaced terms. As the most frequent synonym (or synonym with most
known substrings) is always chosen for replacement, the same choice among a number of synonyms, or
a number of abbreviation expansions, will always be made. The column n contains the number of times
the original term was replaced with this synonym.

ment. Also the number of long words (more than
six characters) increased from 51 530 to 51 851.
This resulted in an increased LIX value, as can be
seen in Table 5. Both before and after the transfor-
mation, the LIX-value lies on the border between
the difficulty levels of informative texts and non-
fictional texts. The replacement also had the effect
that the number of unique words decreased with
138 words, which resulted in a lower OVIX, also
to be seen in Table 5.

For the manual evaluation, 195 sentences, in
which at least one term had been replaced, were
randomly selected. For 17% of these sentences,
the original meaning was slightly altered, and for
10%, the original meaning was more than slightly
altered. The rest of the sentences, which re-
tained their original meaning, were used for mea-
suring perceived readability, resulting in the fig-
ures shown in Table 6. Many replaced terms oc-
curred more than once among the evaluated sen-
tences. Therefore, perceived difficulty was also
measured for a subset of the evaluation data, in
which it was ensured that each replaced term oc-
curred exactly once, by only including the sen-
tence in which it first appeared. These subset fig-
ures (denoted Unique in Table 6) did, however,
only differ marginally from the figures for the en-

tire set. Although there was a large difference be-
tween the two evaluators in how they assessed the
effect of the synonym replacement, they both clas-
sified a substantially larger proportion of the sen-
tences as easier to understand after the synonym
replacement.

LIX OVIX
Original text 50 87.2
After synonym replacement 51 86.9

Table 5: LIX and OVIX before and after synonym
replacement

5 Discussion

According to the LIX measure, the medical text
became slightly more difficult to read after the
transformation, which is the opposite result to
that achieved in the study by Keskisärkkä and
Jönsson (2012). Similar to this previous study,
however, the text became slightly easier to read
according to the OVIX measure, as the number
of unique words decreased. As words longer
than six characters result in a higher LIX value, a
very plausible explanation for the increased LIX-
value, is that short words derived from Greek or
Latin have been replaced with longer compounds

61



Perceived effect Evaluator 1 Evaluator 2
of replacement All (Unique) All (Unique)
No difference 51% (52%) 29% (28%)
Easier 42% (42%) 54% (52%)
More difficult 7% (7%) 17% (21%)

Table 6: Results for the manual classification
of perceived difficulty. Evaluator 1 classified
143 sentences and Evaluator 2 classified 140 sen-
tences. The (Unique) column contains results
when only the first a occurrence of a replacement
of a particular term is included. A binomial sign
test (Newbold et al., 2003, p. 532) was performed
on the effect of the replacement, with the null hy-
pothesis that the probability of creating a more dif-
ficult sentence was equal to that of creating an eas-
ier one. This hypothesis could be rejected for both
evaluators; when including all sentences and also
when only including the (Unique) subset, show-
ing that the differences were statistically signifi-
cant (p�0.01).

of every-day words. Replacing an abbreviation or
an acronym with its expanded long form has the
same effect. Expanding acronyms also increases
the number of words per sentence, which also re-
sults in a higher LIX value.

Studies on English medical text indicate, how-
ever, that simple surface measures do not accu-
rately reflect the readability (Zeng-Treitler et al.,
2007; Wu et al., 2013), and user studies have been
performed to construct readability measures bet-
ter adapted to the domain of medical texts (Kim et
al., 2007; Leroy and Endicott, 2012). Therefore,
although the manual evaluation was very limited
in scope, the results from this evaluation might
give a better indication of the effects of the sys-
tem. This evaluation showed that the perceived
readability often improved with synonym replace-
ment, although there were also replacements that
resulted in a decrease of perceived readability.
Further studies are required to determine whether
these results are generalisable to a larger group of
readers. Such studies should also include an eval-
uation of actual readability, using methods similar
to those of Leroy et al. (2012). The cases, in which
the synonym replacement resulted in a perceived
decrease in readability should also be further stud-
ied. It might, for instance, be better to use a fre-
quency cut-off for distinguishing between rare and
frequent words, as applied by Leroy et al. (2012),

rather than always replacing a word with a more
frequent synonym.

The manual evaluation also showed that the
original semantic meaning had been at least
slightly altered in almost a third of the sentences,
which shows that the set of synonyms in Swedish
MeSH might need to be adapted to make the syn-
onyms suitable to use in a text simplification sys-
tem. The replacements in Table 4 show three
types of potential problems. First, there are also
distant synonyms, as exemplified by oedema and
swelling, where oedema means a specific type of
swelling in the form of increased amount of liq-
uid in the tissues, as opposed to e.g. increased
amount of fat. Second, the MeSH terms are not
always written in a form that is appropriate to use
in running text, such as the term parenteral nu-
trition, total. Such terms need to be transformed
to another format before they can be used for au-
tomatic synonym replacement. Third, although
the abbreviations included in the manual evalua-
tion were all expanded to the correct form, ab-
breviations within the medical domain are often
overloaded with a number of different meanings
(Liu et al., 2002). For instance, apart from be-
ing an acronym for restless legs syndrome, RLS
can also mean reaction level scale (Cederblom,
2005). Therefore, in order to include abbrevia-
tions and acronyms in the synonym replacement
method studied here, an abbreviation disambigua-
tion needs to be carried out first (Gaudan et al.,
2005; Savova et al., 2008). An alternative could
be to automatically detect which abbreviations and
acronyms that are defined in the text when they
first are mentioned (Dannélls, 2006), and restrict
the replacement method to those.

The sentence in Table 1 shows an example of
a successful synonym replacement, replacing a
word typically used by health professionals (os-
teoporosis) with a word typically used in every-
day language (bone-brittleness). This sentence
also gives an example of when not enough is
replaced in the sentence for it to be easy to
understand. Neither trabeculation, nor pseudo-
fractures, are included in MeSH, which shows the
importance of having access to comprehensive ter-
minological resources for the method of synonym
replacement to be successful. Extracting terms
that are frequently occurring within the text genre
that is to be simplified, but which are neither in-
cluded in the used terminology, nor in a corpus

62



of standard language such as Parole, could be a
method for finding candidates for expanding the
terminological resources. Semi-automatic meth-
ods could be applied for finding synonyms to these
new candidate terms, as well as to existing terms
within the terminology for which no synonyms are
provided (Henriksson et al., 2013).

Table 1 also exemplifies a further issue not ad-
dressed here, namely the frequent occurrence of
inflected words in Swedish text. No morphologic
normalisation, e.g. lemmatisation, was performed
of the text that was to be simplified or of the
terms in MeSH (e.g. normalising pseudo-fractures
to pseudo-fracture). Such a normalisation would
have the potential of matching, and thereby replac-
ing, a larger number of words, but it would also re-
quire that the replaced word is inflected to match
the grammatical form of the original word.

An alternative to using frequency in the Parole
corpus, or occurrence of substrings in a word in
Parole, for determining when a synonym is to be
replaced, is to use the frequency in a medical cor-
pus. That corpus then has to be targeted towards
laymen, as word frequency in texts targeted to-
wards health professionals would favour word re-
placements with words typical to the professional
language. Examples of such patient corpora could
be health related web portals for patients (Kokki-
nakis, 2011). However, as also texts targeted to-
wards patients have been shown to be difficult to
understand, the method of searching for familiar
words in substrings of medical terms might be
relevant for assessing word difficulty also if easy
medical corpora would be used.

6 Future work

A number of points for future work have al-
ready been mentioned, among which evaluating
the method on a large set of target readers has
the highest priority. Adapting the method to han-
dle inflected words, studying how near synonyms
and ambiguity of abbreviations affect the content
of the transformed sentences, as well as studying
methods for semi-automatic expansion of termi-
nologies, are other topics that have already been
mentioned.

It might also be the case that what synonym re-
placements are suitable are dependent on the con-
text in which a word occurs. Methods for adapting
assessment of word difficulty to context have been
studied within the Semeval-2012 shared task on

English lexical simplification (Specia et al., 2012),
although it was shown that infrequent words are
generally perceived as more difficult, regardless of
context.

In addition to these points, it should be noted
that we in this study have focused on one type
medical text, i.e. medical journal text. As men-
tioned in the introduction, there is, however,
another medical text type on which applying
text simplification would also be highly relevant,
namely health record text (Kvist and Velupillai,
2013; Kandula et al., 2010). The electronic health
record is nowadays made available to patients via
e-services in a number of countries, and there is
also an on-going project constructing such a ser-
vice in Sweden. Apart from health record text
also containing many words derived from greek
and latin, there are additional challenges associ-
ated with this type of text. As health record text is
written under time pressure, it is often written in
a telegraphic style with incomplete sentences and
many abbreviations (Friedman et al., 2002; Aan-
taa, 2012). As was exemplified among the top 15
most frequently replaced words, abbreviations is
one of the large problems when using the synonym
replacement method for text simplification, as they
are often overloaded with a number of meanings.

Future work, therefore, also includes the eval-
uation of synonym replacement on health record
text. It also includes the study of writing tools for
encouraging health professionals to produce text
that is easier to understand for the patient, or at
least easier to transform into more patient-friendly
texts with methods similar to the method studied
here (Ahltorp et al., 2013).

7 Conclusion

A method used in previous studies for assess-
ing difficulty of words in Swedish text was fur-
ther developed. The difficulty of a word was as-
sessed not only by measuring the frequency of
the word in a general corpus, but also by measur-
ing the frequency of substrings of words, thereby
adapting the method to the compounding nature of
Swedish. The replacement was mainly evaluated
by the two readability measures LIX and OVIX,
showing a slightly decreased OVIX but a slightly
increased LIX. A preliminary study on readers
showed, however, an increased perceived readabil-
ity after the synonym replacement. Studies on a
larger reader group are required to draw any con-

63



clusions on the general effect of the method for as-
sessment of word difficult. The preliminary results
are, however, encouraging, showing that a method
that replaces specialised words derived from latin
and greek by compounds of every-day Swedish
words can result in a increase of the perceived
readability.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the three reviewers for
many useful comments. This work was partly sup-
ported by a grant from the Vårdal Foundation

References
Kirsi Aantaa. 2012. Mot patientvänligare epikriser,

en kontrastiv undersökning [towards more patient
friendly discharge letters, a contrastive study]. Mas-
ter’s thesis, Department of Nordic Languages, Uni-
versity of Turku.

Magnus Ahltorp, Maria Skeppstedt, Hercules Dalianis,
and Maria Kvist. 2013. Using text prediction for fa-
cilitating input and improving readability of clinical
text. Stud Health Technol Inform, 192:1149.

Staffan Cederblom. 2005. Medicinska förkortningar
och akronymer (In Swedish). Studentlitteratur,
Lund.

Dana Dannélls. 2006. Automatic acronym recogni-
tion. In Proceedings of the 11th conference on Eu-
ropean chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL).

Johan Falkenjack, Katarina Heimann Mühlenbock, and
Arne Jönsson. 2013. Features indicating readability
in Swedish text. In Proceedings of the 19th Nordic
Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODAL-
IDA 2013), pages 27–40.

Olle Findahl. 2010. Svenskarna och Internet. .se.

Carol Friedman, Pauline Kra, and Andrey Rzhetsky.
2002. Two biomedical sublanguages: a description
based on the theories of zellig harris. J Biomed In-
form, 35(4):222–35, Aug.

S. Gaudan, H. Kirsch, and D. Rebholz-Schuhmann.
2005. Resolving abbreviations to their senses
in medline. Bioinformatics, 21(18):3658–3664,
September.

M Gellerstam, Y Cederholm, and T Rasmark. 2000.
The bank of Swedish. In LREC 2000. The 2nd In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, pages 329–333, Athens, Greece.

Aron Henriksson, Mike Conway, Martin Duneld, and
Wendy W. Chapman. 2013. Identifying syn-
onymy between SNOMED clinical terms of vary-
ing length using distributional analysis of electronic

health records. In Proceedings of the Annual Sym-
posium of the American Medical Informatics Asso-
ciation (AMIA 2013), Washington DC, USA.

Sasikiran Kandula, Dorothy Curtis, and Qing Zeng-
Treitler. 2010. A semantic and syntactic text sim-
plification tool for health content. AMIA Annu Symp
Proc, 2010:366–70.

Karolinska Institutet. 2012. Hur man använder
den svenska MeSHen (In Swedish, trans-
lated as: How to use the Swedish MeSH).
http://mesh.kib.ki.se/swemesh/manual se.html.
Accessed 2012-03-10.

Alla Keselman and Catherine Arnott Smith. 2012. A
classification of errors in lay comprehension of med-
ical documents. Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
45(6):1151–1163.

Alla Keselman, Robert Logan, Catherine Arnott Smith,
Gondy Leroy, and Qing Zeng-Treitler. 2008. Devel-
oping informatics tools and strategies for consumer-
centered health communication. In J Am Med In-
form Assoc, volume 15:4, pages 473–483.

Robin Keskisärkkä and Arne Jönsson. 2012. Auto-
matic text simplification via synonym replacement.
In Proceedings of Swedish Language Technology
Conference 2012.

Hyeoneui Kim, Sergey Goryachev, Graciela Rosem-
blat, Allen Browne, Alla Keselman, and Qing Zeng-
Treitler. 2007. Beyond surface characteristics: a
new health text-specific readability measurement.
AMIA Annu Symp Proc, pages 418–422.

Dimitrios Kokkinakis and Maria Toporowska Gronos-
taj. 2006. Lay language versus professional lan-
guage within the cardiovascular subdomain - a con-
trastive study. In Proceedings of the 2006 WSEAS
Int. Conf. on Cellular & Molecular Biology, Bio-
physics & Bioengineering.

Dimitrios Kokkinakis, Markus Forsberg, Sofie Johans-
son Kokkinakis, Frida Smith, and Joakim Öhlén.
2012. Literacy demands and information to cancer
patients. In Proceedings of the 15th International
Conference on Text, Speech and Dialogue, pages
64–71.

Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2011. Evaluating the coverage
of three controlled health vocabularies with focus on
findings, signs and symptoms. In NEALT Proceed-
ings Series, editor, NODALIDA, volume 12, pages
27–31.

Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2012. The journal of the
Swedish medical association - a corpus resource for
biomedical text mining in Swedish. In The Third
Workshop on Building and Evaluating Resources for
Biomedical Text Mining (BioTxtM), an LREC Work-
shop. Turkey.

64



Maria Kvist and Sumithra Velupillai. 2013. Profes-
sional language in swedish radiology reports – char-
acterization for patient-adapted text simplification.
In Scandinavian Conference on Health Informatics,
Copenhagen, Denmark, August.

Gondy Leroy and Hsinchun Chen. 2001. Meeting
medical terminology needs-the ontology-enhanced
medical concept mapper. IEEE Transactions on
Information Technology in Biomedicine, 5(4):261–
270.

Gondy Leroy and James E. Endicott. 2012. Com-
bining nlp with evidence-based methods to find text
metrics related to perceived and actual text difficulty.
In IHI, pages 749–754.

Gondy Leroy, Evren Eryilmaz, and Benjamin T.
Laroya. 2006. Health information text character-
istics. In AMIA Annu Symp Proc, pages 479–483.

Gondy Leroy, James E Endicott, Obay Mouradi, David
Kauchak, and Melissa L Just. 2012. Improving
perceived and actual text difficulty for health infor-
mation consumers using semi-automated methods.
AMIA Annu Symp Proc, 2012:522–31.

Hongfang Liu, Alan R Aronson, and Carol Friedman.
2002. A study of abbreviations in medline abstracts.
Proc AMIA Symp, pages 464–8.

Katarina Mühlenbock and Sofie Johansson Kokkinakis.
2009. Lix 68 revisited - an extended readabil-
ity measure. In Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics
2009.

Paul Newbold, William L. Carlson, and Betty Thorne.
2003. Statistics for business and economics.
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, N. J., 5. ed. edi-
tion.

John I. Saeed. 1997. Semantics. Blackwell Publishers,
Oxford.

Guergana K. Savova, Anni Coden, Igor L. Sominsky,
Rie Johnson, Philip V. Ogren, Piet C. de Groen, and
Christopher G. Chute. 2008. Word sense disam-
biguation across two domains: Biomedical literature
and clinical notes. Journal of Biomedical Informat-
ics, 41(6):1088–1100.

Lucia Specia, Sujay Kumar Jauhar, and Rada Mihal-
cea. 2012. Semeval-2012 task 1: English lexical
simplification. In *SEM, First Joint Conference on
Lexical and Computational Semantics, pages 347–
355, Montréal, Canada.

Danny T Y Wu, David A Hanauer, Qiaozhu Mei, Pa-
tricia M Clark, Lawrence C An, Jianbo Lei, Joshua
Proulx, Qing Zeng-Treitler, and Kai Zheng. 2013.
Applying multiple methods to assess the readability
of a large corpus of medical documents. Stud Health
Technol Inform, 192:647–51.

Qing T. Zeng, Tony Tse, Jon Crowell, Guy Divita,
Laura Roth, and Allen C. Browne. 2005. Identify-
ing consumer-friendly display (cfd) names for health
concepts. In Proceedings of AMIA Annual Sympo-
sium, pages 859–863.

Qing Zeng-Treitler, Hyeoneui Kim, Sergey Goryachev,
Alla Keselman, Laura Slaughter, and Catherine. A.
Smith. 2007. Text characteristics of clinical reports
and their implications for the readability of personal
health records. Medinfo, 12(Pt 2):1117–1121.

65


