



















































Likelihood of External Causation in the Structure of Events


Proceedings of the EACL 2014 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Causality in Language, pages 40–47,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Likelihood of external causation in the structure of events

Tanja Samardžić
CorpusLab, URPP Language and Space

University of Zurich
tanja.samardzic@uzh.ch

Paola Merlo
Linguistics Department
University of Geneva

Paola.Merlo@unige.ch

Abstract

This article addresses the causal structure
of events described by verbs: whether
an event happens spontaneously or it is
caused by an external causer. We automat-
ically estimate the likelihood of external
causation of events based on the distribu-
tion of causative and anticausative uses of
verbs in the causative alternation. We train
a Bayesian model and test it on a monolin-
gual and on a bilingual input. The perfor-
mance is evaluated against an independent
scale of likelihood of external causation
based on typological data. The accuracy
of a two-way classification is 85% in both
monolingual and bilingual setting. On the
task of a three-way classification, the score
is 61% in the monolingual setting and 69%
in the bilingual setting.

1 Introduction

Ubiquitously present in human thinking, causal-
ity is encoded in language in various ways. Com-
putational approaches to causality are mostly
concerned with automatic extraction of causal
schemata (Michotte, 1963; Tversky and Kahne-
man, 1982; Gilovich et al., 1985) from sponta-
neously produced texts based on linguistic encod-
ing. A key to success in this endeavour is under-
standing how human language encodes causality.

Linguistic expressions of causality, such as
causative conjunctions, verbs, morphemes, and
constructions, are highly ambiguous, encoding not
only the real-world causality, but also the struc-
ture of discourse, as well as speakers’ attitudes
(Moeschler, 2011; Zufferey, 2012). Causality
judgements are hard to elicit in an annotation
project. This results in a low inter-annotator agree-
ment and makes the evaluation of automatic sys-
tems difficult (Bethard, 2007; Grivaz, 2012).

Our study addresses the relationship between
world-knowledge about causality and the gram-
mar of language, focusing on the causal structure
of events expressed by verbs. In current analyses,
the meaning of verbs is decomposed into multiple
predicates which can be in a temporal and causal
relation (Pustejovsky, 1995; Talmy, 2000; Levin
and Rappaport Hovav, 2005; Ramchand, 2008).

(1) a. Causative: Adam broke the laptop.
b. Anticausative: The laptop broke.

We propose a computational approach to the
causative alternation, illustrated in (1), in which
an event (breaking the laptop in (1)) can be disso-
ciated from its immediate causer (Adam in (1a)).
The causative alternation has been attested in al-
most all languages (Schafer, 2009), but it is re-
alised with considerable cross-linguistic variation
in the sets of alternating verbs and in the grammat-
ical encoding (Alexiadou et al., 2006; Alexiadou,
2010).

Since the causative alternation involves most
verbs, identifying the properties of verbs which al-
low them to alternate is important for developing
representations of the meaning of verbs in gen-
eral. Analysing the structural components of the
meaning of verbs proves important for tasks such
as word sense disambiguation (Lapata and Brew,
2004), semantic role labelling (Màrquez et al.,
2008), cross-linguistic transfer of semantic anno-
tation (Padó and Lapata, 2009; Fung et al., 2007;
van der Plas et al., 2011). The knowledge about
the likelihood of external causation might be help-
ful in the task of detecting implicit arguments of
verbs and, especially deverbal nouns (Gerber and
Chai, 2012; Roth and Frank, 2012). Knowing,
for example, that a verb expresses an externally
caused event increases the probability of an im-
plicit causer if an explicit causer is not detected in
a particular instance of the verb. Our study should

40



contribute to the development of formal and exten-
sive representations of grammatically relevant se-
mantic properties of verbs, such as Verb Net (Kip-
per Schuler, 2005) and PropBank (Palmer et al.,
2005).

2 External Causation and the Grammar
of Language

The distinction between external and internal cau-
sation in events described by verbs is introduced
by Levin and Rappaport Hovav (1994) to account
for the fact that the alternation is blocked in some
verbs such as bloom in (2). In Levin and Rappa-
port Hovav’s account, verbs which describe ex-
ternally caused events alternate (1), while verbs
which describe internally caused events do not (2).

(2) a. The flowers suddenly bloomed.
b. * The summer bloomed the flowers.

The main objection to this proposed generali-
sation is that it does not account for the cross-
linguistic variation. Since the distinction concerns
the meaning of verbs, one could expect that the
verbs which are translations of each other alter-
nate in all languages. This is, however, often not
true. There are many verbs that do alternate in
some languages, while their counterparts in other
languages do not (Alexiadou et al., 2006; Schafer,
2009; Alexiadou, 2010). For example, appear and
arrive do not alternate in English, but their equiv-
alents in Japanese or in the Salish languages do.

To account for the variation in cross-linguistic
data Alexiadou (2010) introduces the notion of
cause-unspecified events, a category between ex-
ternally caused and internally caused events. In-
troducing gradience into the classification allows
Alexiadou to propose generalisations which apply
across languages: cause-unspecified verbs alter-
nate in all languages, while only some languages
allow the alternation if the event is either exter-
nally or internally caused. To allow the alterna-
tion in the latter cases, languages need a special
grammatical mechanism. In English, for example,
this mechanism is not available, which is why only
cause-unspecified verbs alternate. The alternation
is thus blocked in both verbs describing externally
caused and internally caused events.

Alexiadou’s account is based not only on the
observations about the availability of the alterna-
tion, but also about morphological encoding of
the alternation across languages. Unlike English,

which does not mark the alternation morphologi-
cally (note that the two versions of English verbs
in (1-3) are morphologically identical), other lan-
guages encode the alternation in different ways, as
shown in (3).

(3)

Causative Anticausative
Mongolian xajl-uul-ax xajl-ax

’melt’ ’melt’
Russian rasplavit rasplavit-sja

’melt’ ’melt’
Japanese atum-eru atum-aru

’gather’ ’gather’

An analysis of the distribution of morpholog-
ical marking across languages leads Haspelmath
(1993) to introduce the notion of likelihood into
his account of the meaning of the alternating
verbs. In a study of 31 verbs in 21 languages
from all over the world, Haspelmath notices that
certain verbs tend to get the same kind of mark-
ing across languages. For each verb, he calcu-
lates the ratio between the number of languages
which mark the anticausative version and the num-
ber of languages which mark the causative version
of the verb. He interprets this ratio as a quantita-
tive measure of how spontaneous events described
by the verbs are. As each verb is assigned a dif-
ferent score, ranking the verbs according to the
score results in a “scale of increasing likelihood of
spontaneous occurrence”. Events with a low anti-
causative/causative ratio (e.g. boil, dry, melt) are
likely to occur spontaneously, while events with a
high ratio (e.g. break, close, split) are likely to be
caused by an external causer.

3 The Model

Our study pursues the quantitative assessment of
the likelihood of external causation in the events
described the alternating verbs. We estimate the
likelihood by means of a Bayesian model which
divides events into classes based on the distribu-
tion of causative and anticausative uses of verbs in
a corpus. By varying the settings of the model, we
address two questions discussed in the linguistic
literature: 1) Is the distinction between externally
caused and internally caused events binary,, as ar-
gued by Levin and Rappaport Hovav (1994), or are
there are intermediate classes, as argued by Alex-
iadou (2010)? and 2) Do we obtain better esti-
mation of the likelihood from cross-linguistic than
from monolingual data?

41



We design a probabilistic model which esti-
mates the likelihood of external causation and gen-
erates a probability distribution over a given num-
ber of event classes for each verb in a given set
of verbs. The model formalises the intuition that
an externally caused event tends to be expressed
by a verb in its causative realisation. In other
words, if the likelihood of external causation of the
event is encoded in the use of the verb which de-
scribes the event, then the causer is expected to ap-
pear frequently in the realisations of the verb. The
opposite is expected for internally caused events.
Cause-unspecified events are expected to appear
with and without the causer equally.

To take into account the two questions discussed
in the theoretical approaches, namely the number
of classes and the role of cross-linguistic data in
the classification of events, we design four ver-
sions of the model, varying the input data and the
number of classes in the output: a) monolingual
input and two classes; b) cross-linguistic input
and two classes; c) monolingual input and three
classes; d) cross-linguistic input and three classes.

The current cross-linguistic versions of the
model include only two languages, English and
German, because we test the models in a minimal
cross-linguistic setting. In principle, the approach
can be easily extended to include any number of
languages.

As it can be seen in its graphical representation
in Figure 1, the model consists of three variables
in the monolingual version and of four variables in
the cross-linguistic version.

V

Caus

En

V

Caus

En Ge

Figure 1: Two version of the Bayesian net model
for estimating external causation.

The first variable in both versions is the set of
verbs V . This can be any given set of verbs.

The second variable is the event class of the
verb, for which we use the symbol Caus. The val-
ues of this variable depend on the assumed classi-
fication. In the two-class version, the values are
causative, representing externally caused events,
and anticausative, representing internally caused
events. In the three-class version, the variable
can take one more value, unspecified, representing
cause-unspecified events.

The third (En) and the fourth (Ge) (in the cross-
linguistic version) variables are the surface realisa-
tions of the verbs in parallel instances. These vari-
ables take three values: causative for active tran-
sitive use, anticausative for intransitive use, and
passive for passive use in the languages in ques-
tion.

We represent the relations between the variables
as a Bayesian network. The variable that rep-
resents the event class of verbs (Caus) is unob-
served. The values for the other three variables
are observed in the data source. Note that the in-
put to the model does not contain the information
about the event class at any point.

The dependence between En and Ge in the
bilingual version of the model represents the fact
that the two instances of a verb are translations
of each other, but does not represent the direction
of translation in the actual data. The form of the
instance in one language depends on the form of
the parallel instance because they express the same
meaning in the same context, regardless of the di-
rection of translation.

Assuming that the variables are related as in
Figure 1, En and Ge are conditionally indepen-
dent of V given Caus, so we can calculate the
probability of the model as in (4) for the monolin-
gual version and as in (6) for the cross-linguistic
version.

(4)

P (v, caus, en) = P (v) · P (caus|v) · P (en|caus)

(5)

P (caus|v, en) = P (v)·P (caus|v)·P (en|caus)∑
caus P (v)·P (caus|v)·P (en|caus)

We estimate the conditional probability of the
event class given the verb (P (caus|v)) by query-
ing the model, as shown in (5) for the monolingual
version and in (7) for the bilingual version..

42



(6)

P (v, caus, en, ge) =
P (v) · P (caus|v) · P (en|caus) · P (ge|caus, en)

(7)

P (caus|v, en, ge) =
P (v)·P (caus|v)·P (en|caus)·P (ge|caus,en)∑

caus P (v)·P (caus|v)·P (en|caus)·P (ge|caus,en)

We assign to each verb the event class that is
most probable given the verb, as in (8).

(8)

caus class(verb) = arg maxcausP (caus|v)
All the variables in the model are defined so that

the parameters can be estimated on the basis of
frequencies of instances of verbs automatically ex-
tracted from parsed corpora.

4 Experiments

The accuracy of the predictions of the model is
evaluated in experiments.

4.1 Materials and Methods
The verbs for which we estimate the likelihood are
the 354 verbs that participate in the causative alter-
nation in English, as listed by Levin (1993), and
the 26 verbs listed as alternating in a typological
study (Haspelmath, 1993).

We estimate the parameters of the model by
implementing the expectation-maximisation algo-
rithm. The algorithm is initialised by assigning
different arbitrary values to the parameters of the
model. The classification reported in the paper is
obtained after 100 iterations.

We train the classifier using the data automat-
ically extracted from an English-German parallel
corpus (Europarl (Koehn, 2005)). Both monolin-
gual and bilingual input data are extracted from
the parallel corpus. All German verbs which are
word-aligned with the alternating English verbs
listed in the literature are regarded as German
equivalents. By extracting cross-linguistic equiv-
alents automatically from a parallel corpus, we
avoid manual translation into German of the lists
of English verbs discussed in the literature. In this
way, we eliminate the judgements which would be
involved in the process of translation.

The corpus is syntactically parsed (using the
MaltParser (Nivre et al., 2007)) and word-aligned

(using GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003)). For both
the syntactic parses and word alignments, we
reuse the data provided by Bouma et al. (2010).

We extract only the instances of verbs where
both the object (if there is one) and the sub-
ject are realised in the same clause, excluding
the instances involving syntactic movements and
coreference. Transitive instances are considered
causative realisations, intransitive anticausative.
We count passive instances separately because
they are formally transitive, but they usually do not
express the causer.

German equivalents of English alternating verbs
are extracted in two steps. First, all verbs occur-
ring as transitive, intransitive, and passive were
extracted from the German sentences that are
sentence-aligned with the English sentences con-
taining the instances of alternating verbs. These
instances were considered candidate translations.
The instances that are the translations of the En-
glish instances were then selected on the basis of
word alignments. Instances where at least one el-
ement (the verb, the head of its object, or the head
of its subject) is aligned with at least one element
in the English instance were considered aligned.

Only the instances of English verbs that are
translated with a corresponding finite verbal form
in German are extracted, excluding the cases
where English verbs are translated into a corre-
sponding non-finite form such as infinitive, nomi-
nalization, or participle in German.

4.2 Evaluation
We evaluate the performance of the models against
the scale of spontaneous occurrence proposed by
Haspelmath (1993), shown in (9). We expect the
verbs classified as internally caused by our models
to correspond to the verbs with a low morpholog-
ical anticausative/causative ratio (those on the left
side of the scale). The opposite is expected for
externally caused verbs. Cause-unspecified verbs
are expected to be in the middle of Haspelmath’s
scale.

(9) boil, dry, wake up, sink, learn-teach, melt,
stop, turn, dissolve, burn, fill, finish, begin,
spread, roll, develop, rise-raise, improve,
rock, connect, change, gather, open, break,
close, split

To evaluate the output of our models against the
scale, we discretise the scale so that the agreement

43



is maximised for each version of the model. For
example, the threshold which divides the verbs
into anticausative and causative in the two-way
classification is set after the verb turn.

By evaluating the performance of our models
against a typology-based measure, we avoid elic-
iting human judgements, which is a known prob-
lem in computational approaches to causality. The
downside of this approach is that such evaluation
is currently possible for a relatively small number
of verbs.

5 Results and Discussion

Table 1 shows all the confusion matrices of the
classifications performed automatically in com-
parison with the classifications based on the typol-
ogy rankings.1

In the two-way classification, the two versions
of the model, with monolingual and with bilingual
input, result in identical classifications. The agree-
ment of the models with the typological ranking
can be considered very good (85%). The optimal
threshold divides the verbs into two asymmetric
classes: eight verbs in the internally caused class
and eighteen in the externally caused class. The
agreement is better for the internally caused class.

In the three way-classification, the performance
of both versions of the model drops. In this set-
ting, the output of the two versions differs: there
are two verbs which are classified as externally
caused by the monolingual version and as cause-
unspecified by the bilingual version, which results
in a slightly better performance of the bilingual
version. Given the small number of evaluated
verbs, however, this tendency cannot be consid-
ered significant.

The three-way classification is more difficult
than the two-way classification, but the difficulty
is not only due to the number of classes, but also
to the fact that two of the classes are not well-
distinguished in the data. While the class of in-
ternally caused events is relatively easily distin-
guished (small number of errors in all classifica-
tions), the classes of externally caused and cause-
unspecified verbs are hard to distinguish. This
finding supports the two-way classification argued
for in the literature.

The classification performed by the bilingual
1The table contains 26 instead of 31 verbs because corpus

data could not be reliably extracted for some phrasal verbs
listed by Haspelmath.

model indicates that the distinction between ex-
ternally caused and cause-unspecified verbs might
still exist. Compared to the monolingual clas-
sification, more verbs are classified as cause-
unspecified, and they are grouped in the middle of
the typological scale. Since the model takes into
account cross-linguistic variation in the realisa-
tions of the alternating verbs, the observed differ-
ence in the performance could be interpreted as a
sign that the distinction between cause-unspecified
and externally caused events does emerge in cross-
linguistic contexts.

While supporting the two-way classification of
events, our experiments do not provide a defi-
nite answer to the question of whether there are
more than two classes of events. To obtain sig-
nificant results, more verbs need to be evaluated.
However, the typological data used in our exper-
iments (Haspelmath, 1993) are not easily avail-
able. This kind of data are currently not included
in the typological resources (such as the WALS
database (Dryer and Haspelmath, 2013)), but they
can, in principle, be collected from other elec-
tronic sources of language documentation, which
are increasingly available for many different lan-
guages.

6 Related Work

The proposed distinction between externally and
internally caused events is addressed by McKoon
and Macfarland (2000). They study twenty-one
verbs defined in the linguistic literature as describ-
ing internally caused events and fourteen verbs de-
scribing externally caused events. Their corpus
study shows that the appearance of these verbs as
causative (transitive) and anticausative (intransi-
tive) cannot be used as a diagnostic for the kind
of meaning that has been attributed to them.

Since internally caused verbs do not enter the
alternation, they were expected to be found in in-
transitive clauses only. This, however, was not the
case. The probability for some of these verbs to
occur in a transitive clause is actually quite high
(0.63 for the verb corrode, for example). More
importantly, no difference was found in the prob-
ability of the verbs denoting internally caused and
externally caused events to occur as transitive or
as intransitive. This means that the acceptability
judgements used in the qualitative analysis do not
apply to all the verbs in question, and, also, not to
all the instances of these verbs.

44



Model 2-class 3-class
Monolingual Bilingual Monolingual Bilingual

Typology acaus caus acaus caus acaus caus unspec. acaus caus unspec.
acaus 8 0 8 0 6 0 1 6 0 1
caus 4 14 4 14 0 3 0 0 3 0
unspec. — — — — 4 5 7 4 3 9
Agreement 85% 85% 61% 69%

Table 1: Per class and overall agreement between the corpus-based and the typology-based classification
of verbs; acaus = internally caused, caus = externally caused, unspec. = cause-unspecified.

Even though the most obvious prediction con-
cerning the corpus instances of the two groups of
verbs was not confirmed, the corpus data were
still found to support the distinction between the
two groups. Examining 50 randomly selected in-
stances of transitive uses of each of the studied
verbs, McKoon and Macfarland (2000) find that,
when used in a transitive clause, internally caused
change-of-state verbs tend to occur with a limited
set of subjects, while externally caused verbs can
occur with a wider range of subjects. This differ-
ence is statistically significant.

The relation between frequencies of certain uses
and the lexical semantics of English verbs has
been explored by Merlo and Stevenson (2001) in
the context of automatic verb classification. Merlo
and Stevenson (2001) show that information col-
lected from instances of verbs in a corpus can be
used to distinguish between three different classes
which all include verbs that alternate between
transitive and intransitive use. The classes in ques-
tion are manner of motion verbs (10), which alter-
nate only in a limited number of languages, exter-
nally caused change of state verbs (11), alternating
across languages, and performance/creation verbs,
which are not lexical causatives (12).

(10) a. The horse raced past the barn.
b. The jockey raced the horse past the barn.

(11) a. The butter melted in the pan.
b. The cook melted the butter in the pan.

(12) a. The boy played.
b. The boy played soccer.

One of the most useful features for the classi-
fication proved to be the causativity feature. It
represents the fact that, in the causative alterna-
tion, the same lexical items can occur both as sub-
jects and as objects of the same verb. This feature

sets apart the two causative classes from the per-
formance class.

In the context of psycholinguistic empirical ap-
proaches to encoding causality in verbs, it has
been established that assigning a causal relation
to a sequence of events can be influenced by the
native languages (Wolff et al., 2009a; Wolff and
Ventura, 2009b). English speakers, for instance,
tend to assign causal relations more than Russian
speakers.

In our study, we draw on the fact that the se-
mantic properties of verbs are reflected in the way
they are used in a corpus, established by the pre-
vious studies. We explore this relationship further,
relating it to a deeper semantic analysis and to the
typological distribution of grammatical features.

7 Conclusion and Future Work

The experiments presented in this article provide
empirical evidence that contribute to a better un-
derstanding of the relationship between the causal
semantics of verbs, their formal morphological
and syntactic properties, and the variation in their
use. We have shown that the likelihood of external
causation of events is encoded in the distribution
of the causative and anticausative uses of verbs.
Two classes of events, externally caused and inter-
nally caused events, can be distinguished automat-
ically based on corpus data.

In future work, we will further investigate the
question of whether there are more than two
classes of events and how they are distinguished.
We will explore potential tendencies indicated by
our findings. We will apply the approach proposed
in this article to an extended data set. On one hand,
we will collect typological data for more verbs, ex-
ploring possibilities of automatic data extraction.
On the other hand, we will include more languages
in the model to ensure a better representation of
cross-linguistic variation.

45



References
Artemis Alexiadou, Elena Anagnostopoulou, and Flo-

rian Schfer. 2006. The properties of anticausatives
crosslinguistically. In Mara Frascarelli, editor,
Phases of Interpretation, pages 187–212, Berlin,
New York. Mouton de Gruyter.

Artemis Alexiadou. 2010. On the morpho-syntax of
(anti-)causative verbs. In Malka Rappaport Hovav,
Edit Doron, and Ivy Sichel, editors, Syntax, Lexical
Semantics and Event Structure, pages 177–203, Ox-
ford. Oxford University Press.

Steven Bethard. 2007. Finding Event, Temporal and
Causal Structure in Text: A Machine Learning Ap-
proach. Ph.D. thesis, University of Colorado at
Boulder.

Gerlof Bouma, Lilja Øvrelid, and Jonas Kuhn. 2010.
Towards a large parallel corpus of cleft construc-
tions. In Proceedings of the Seventh conference on
International Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10), Valletta, Malta. European Language Re-
sources Association.

Matthew S. Dryer and Martin Haspelmath, editors.
2013. WALS Online. Max Planck Institute for Evo-
lutionary Anthropology, Leipzig.

Pascale Fung, Zhaojun Wu, Yongsheng Yang, and
Dekai Wu. 2007. Learning bilingual semantic
frames: Shallow semantic parsing vs. semantic role
projection. In 11th Conference on Theoretical and
Methodological Issues in Machine Translation (TMI
2007), pages 75–84, Skovde, Sweden.

Matthew Gerber and Joyce Y. Chai. 2012. Seman-
tic role labeling of implicit arguments for nominal
predicates. Computational Linguistics, 38(4):755–
798.

Thomas Gilovich, Robert Vallone, and Amos Tversky.
1985. The hot hand in basketball: On the misper-
ception of random sequences. Cognitive Psychol-
ogy, 17(3):295–314.

Cécile Grivaz. 2012. Automatic extraction of causal
knowledge from natural language texts. Ph.D. the-
sis, University of Geneva.

Martin Haspelmath. 1993. More on typology of
inchoative/causative verb alternations. In Bernard
Comrie and Maria Polinsky, editors, Causatives
and transitivity, volume 23, pages 87–121, Amster-
dam/Philadelphia. John Benjamins Publishing Co.

Karin Kipper Schuler. 2005. VerbNet: A broad-
coverage, comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Pennsylvania.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of MT Summit 2005, Phuket, Thailand.

Mirella Lapata and Chris Brew. 2004. Verb class
disambiguation using informative priors. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 30(1):45–73.

Beth Levin and Malka Rappaport Hovav. 1994. A pre-
liminary analysis of causative verbs in English. Lin-
gua, 92:35–77.

Beth Levin and Malka Rappaport Hovav. 2005. Ar-
gument realization. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Beth Levin. 1993. English verb classes and alterna-
tions : a preliminary investigation. The University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Lluı́s Màrquez, Xavier Carreras, Kenneth C.
Litkowski, and Suzanne Stevenson. 2008. Se-
mantic role labeling: An introduction to the special
issue. Computational Linguistics, 34(2):145–159.

Gail McKoon and Talke Macfarland. 2000. Externally
and internally caused change of state verbs. Lan-
guage, 76(4):833–858.

Paola Merlo and Susanne Stevenson. 2001. Automatic
verb classification based on statistical distribution
of argument structure. Computational Linguistics,
27(3):373–408.

Albert Michotte. 1963. The perception of causality.
Basic Books, Oxford, England.

Jacques Moeschler. 2011. Causal, inferential and
temporal connectives: Why ‘parce que’ is the only
causal connective in French. In S. Hancil, editor,
Marqueurs discursifs et subjectivité, pages 97–114,
Rouen. Presses Universitaires de Rouen et du Havre.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Chanev
Atanas, Gleşen Eryiğit, Sandra Kbler, Svetoslav
Marinov, and Erwin Marsi. 2007. MaltParser:
A language-independent system for data-driven de-
pendency parsing. Natural Language Engineering,
13(2):95–135.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–52.

Sebastian Padó and Mirella Lapata. 2009. Cross-
lingual annotation projection of semantic roles.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 36:307–
340.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71–105.

James Pustejovsky. 1995. The generative lexicon.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Gillian Ramchand. 2008. Verb Meaning and the Lex-
icon: A First Phase Syntax. Cambridge Studies
in Linguistics. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge.

46



Michael Roth and Anette Frank. 2012. Aligning predi-
cate argument structures in monolingual comparable
texts: A new corpus for a new task. In *SEM 2012:
The First Joint Conference on Lexical and Compu-
tational Semantics – Volume 1: Proceedings of the
main conference and the shared task, and Volume 2:
Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2012), pages 218–
227, Montréal, Canada, 7-8 June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Florian Schafer. 2009. The causative alternation.
In Language and Linguistics Compass, volume 3,
pages 641–681. Blackwell Publishing.

Leonard Talmy. 2000. Towards a cognitive semantics.
The MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.

Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. 1982. Causal
schemata in judgments under uncertainty. In Daniel
Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky, editors,
Judgement Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Bi-
ases.

Lonneke van der Plas, Paola Merlo, and James Hen-
derson. 2011. Scaling up automatic cross-lingual
semantic role annotation. In Proceedings of the 49th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 299–304, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Phillip Wolff and Tatyana Ventura. 2009b. When Rus-
sians learn English: How the semantics of causation
may change. Bilingualism: Language and Cogni-
tion, 12(2):153–176.

Phillip Wolff, Ga-Hyun Jeon, and Yu Li. 2009a.
Causal agents in English, Korean and Chinese: The
role of internal and external causation. Language
and Cognition, 1(2):165–194.

Sandrine Zufferey. 2012. ‘Car, parce que, puisque’
revisited: Three empirical studies on French causal
connectives. Journal of Pragmatics, 44:138–153.

47


