



















































In-Car Multi-Domain Spoken Dialogs: A Wizard of Oz Study


Proceedings of the of the EACL 2014 Workshop on Dialogue in Motion (DM), pages 1–9,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

In-Car Multi-Domain Spoken Dialogs: A Wizard of Oz Study

Sven Reichel, Ute Ehrlich, André Berton
Speech Dialogue Systems

Daimler AG
Ulm, Germany

{sven.reichel, ute.ehrlich,
andre.berton}@daimler.com

Michael Weber
Institute of Media Informatics

Ulm University
Germany

michael.weber@uni-ulm.de

Abstract

Mobile Internet access via smartphones
puts demands on in-car infotainment sys-
tems, as more and more drivers like to ac-
cess the Internet while driving. Spoken
dialog systems support the user by less
distracting interaction than visual/haptic-
based dialog systems. To develop an intu-
itive and usable spoken dialog system, an
extensive analysis of the interaction con-
cept is necessary. We conducted a Wizard
of Oz study to investigate how users will
carry out tasks which involve multiple ap-
plications in a speech-only, user-initiative
infotainment system while driving. Re-
sults show that users are not aware of dif-
ferent applications and use anaphoric ex-
pressions in task switches. Speaking styles
vary and depend on type of task and di-
alog state. Users interact efficiently and
provide multiple semantic concepts in one
utterance. This sets high demands for fu-
ture spoken dialog systems.

1 Introduction

The acceptance of smartphones is a success story.
These devices allow people to access the Internet
nearly anywhere at anytime. While driving, using
a smartphone is prohibited in many countries as it
distracts the driver. Regardless of this prohibition,
people use their smartphone and cause severe in-
juries (National Highway Traffic Safety Adminis-
tration (NHTSA), 2013). In order to reduce driver
distraction, it is necessary to integrate the smart-
phone’s functionality safely into in-car infotain-
ment systems. Since hands and eyes are involved
in driving, a natural and intuitive speech-based in-
terface increases road safety (Maciej and Vollrath,
2009). There are already infotainment systems
with Internet applications like e.g. weather, music

streaming, gas prices, news, and restaurant search.
However, not all of them can be controlled by nat-
ural speech.

In systems based on graphic and haptic modal-
ity, the functionality is often grouped into various
applications. Among other things, this is due to
the limited screen size. The user has to start an
application and select the desired functionality. A
natural speech interface does not require a frag-
mentation of functionalities into applications, as
people can express complex commands by speech.
In single-application tasks, such as calling some-
one, natural speech interfaces are established and
proven. However, users often encounter complex
tasks, which involve more than one application.
For example, while hearing the news about a new
music album, the driver might like to start listen-
ing to this album via Internet radio. Spoken lan-
guage allows humans to express a request such
as “Play this album” easily, since the meaning is
clear. However, will drivers also use this kind of
interaction while using an in-car spoken dialog
system (SDS)? Or is the mental model of ap-
plication interaction schema dominant in human-
computer interaction? In a user experiment, we
confront drivers with multi-domain tasks, to ob-
serve how they interact.

While interacting with an SDS, one crucial
problem for users is to know which utterances the
system is able to understand. People use different
approaches to solve this problem, for example by
reading the manual, using on-screen help, or rely-
ing on their experiences. In multi-domain dialog
systems, utterances can be quite complex, thus re-
membering all utterances from the manual or dis-
playing them on screen would not be possible. As
a result, users have to rely on their experience in
communications to know what to say. Thus, an
advanced SDS needs to understand what a user
would naturally say in this situation to execute a
certain task.

1



In this paper, we present results from a Wizard
of Oz (WoZ) experiment on multi-domain in-
teraction with an in-car SDS. The goal of this
study is to build a corpus and analyze it ac-
cording to application awareness, speaking styles,
anaphoric references, and efficiency. Our results
provide a detailed insight how drivers start multi-
application tasks and switch between applications
by speech. This will answer the question whether
they are primed to application-based-interaction
or use a natural approach known from human-
human-communication. The results will be used
to design grammars or language models for work-
ing prototypes, which establish a basis for real
user tests. Furthermore, we provide guidelines for
multi-domain SDSs.

The remainder of this paper is structured as fol-
lows: Section 2 provides an overview of other
studies in this context. Section 3 describes the do-
main for the user experiment which is presented
in Section 4. Data analysis methods are defined
in Section 5. We present the results in Section 6
and discuss them in Section 7. Finally, we con-
clude and give guidelines for multi-domain SDSs
in Section 8.

2 Related Work
Many studies exist which evaluate SDSs concern-
ing performance, usability, and driver distraction
(a good overview provides Ei-Wen Lo and Green
(2013)). Usually, participants are asked to com-
plete a task, while driving in a simulated envi-
ronment or in real traffic. Geutner et al. (2002),
for example, showed that a virtual co-driver con-
tributes to ease of use with little distraction effects.
In their WoZ experiment, natural language was
preferred to command-and-control input. How-
ever, no in-depth analysis of user utterances is pre-
sented. Cheng et al. (2004) performed an analy-
sis of natural user utterances. They observed that
drivers, occupied in a driving task, use disfluent
and distracted speech and react differently than by
concentrating on the speech interaction task. None
of the studies provide in-depth analysis of multi-
domain tasks, as our work does.

Multi-domain SDS exist like e.g. SmartKom
(Reithinger et al., 2003) or CHAT (Weng et al.,
2007). They presented complex systems with
many functionalities, however, they do not eval-
uate subtask switching from users’ point of view.
In CHAT, the implicit application switch was even
disabled due to “extra burden on the system”. Do-

main switches are analyzed in human-human com-
munication as e.g. in Villing et al. (2008). How-
ever, people interact differently with a system than
with a human. Even in human-computer commu-
nication, speaking styles differ depending on type
of task, as (Hofmann et al., 2012) showed in a
web-based user study. In order to develop an intu-
itive multi-application SDS, it is necessary to an-
alyze how users interact in a driving situation by
completing tasks across different domains.

3 User Tasks
In a user experiment it is crucial to set real tasks
for users, since artificial tasks will be hard to re-
member and can reduce their attention. We ana-
lyzed current in-car infotainment systems with In-
ternet access and derived eight multi-domain tasks
from their functionality (see Table 1). The sub-
tasks were classified according to Kellar et al.
(2006)’s web information classification schema in
information seeking (Inf), information exchange,
and information maintenance. Since information
maintenance is not a strong automotive use case,
these tasks were grouped together with informa-
tion exchange. We call them action subtasks (Act)
as they initiate an action of the infotainment sys-
tem (e.g. “turn on the radio”).

No App 1 App 2 App3
1 POI Search Restaurant Call
2 Knowledge Ski Weather Navigation
3 Weather Hotel Search Address book
4 Play Artist News Search Forward by eMail
5 Navigation Restaurant Save as Favorite
6 News Search Play Artist Share on Facebook
7 News Search Knowledge Convert Currency
8 Navigation Gas Prices Status Gas Tank

Table 1: Multi-application user tasks.

Since only few use cases involve more than
three applications, every user task is a story of
three subtasks. In task number 5 for example, a
user has to start a subtask, which navigates him
to Berlin. Then he would like to search an Italian
restaurant at the destination. Finally, he adds the
selected restaurant to his favorites. The focus is on
task entry and on subtask switch, thus the subtasks
require only two to four semantic concepts (like
Berlin or Italian restaurant). One of these con-
cepts is a reference to the previous subtask (like
at the destination or the selected restaurant) to en-
sure a natural cross-application dialog flow. After
the system’s response for one subtask the user has
to initiate the next subtask to complete his task.

2



4 User Experiment

Developing an SDS means specifying a grammar
or training statistical language models for speech
recognition. These steps precede any real user test.
In system-initiated dialogs, with a few possible ut-
terances, specifying a grammar is feasible. How-
ever, in strictly user-initiative dialogs with mul-
tiple applications, this is rather complicated. A
WoZ study does not require to develop speech
recognition and understanding as this is performed
by a human. Analyzing the user utterances of a
WoZ experiment provides a detailed view of how
a user will interact with the SDS. This helps in de-
signing spoken dialogs and specifying grammars
and/or training language models for further eval-
uations (Fraser and Gilbert, 1991; Glass et al.,
2000).

Interaction schemes of people vary among each
other and depend on age, personality, experience,
context, and many more. It is essential to con-
duct a user study with people who might use the
SDS later on. A study by the NHTSA (National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA),
2013) showed that in 2011 73% of the drivers in-
volved in fatal crashes due to cell phone use, were
less than 40 years old. For this reason, our study
considers drivers between 18 and 40 years who
are technically affine and are likely to buy a car
equipped with an infotainment system with Inter-
net access.

4.1 Experimental Set-Up

When designing a user interaction experiment, it
is important that it takes place in a real environ-
ment. As driving on a real road is dangerous, we
used a fixed-base driving simulator in a laboratory.
In front of the car, a screen covers the driver’s field
of view (see Figure 1). Steering and pedal signals
are picked from the car’s CAN bus. It is impor-
tant that the user assumes he is interacting with
a computer as “human-human interactions are not
the same as human-computer interactions” (Fraser
and Gilbert, 1991). The wizard, a person in charge
of the experiment, was located behind the car and
mouse clicks or any other interaction of the wizard
was not audible in the car. To ensure a consistent
behavior of the wizard, we used SUEDE (Klem-
mer et al., 2000) to define the dialog, which also
provides an interface for the wizard. SUEDE de-
fines a dialog in a state machine, in which the sys-
tem prompts are states and user inputs are edges

between them. The content of system prompts was
synthesized with NUANCE Vocalizer Expressive1

version 1.2.1 (Voice: anna.full). During the ex-
periment, after each user input the wizards clicks
the corresponding edge and SUEDE plays the next
prompt. All user utterances are recorded as audio
files.

Figure 1: Experimental Set-Up

4.2 Experiment Design

Infotainment systems in cars are used while driv-
ing. This means the user cannot concentrate on the
infotainment system only, but also has to focus on
the road. According to multiple resource theory,
the human’s performance is reduced when human
resources overlap (Wickens, 2008). In a dual-task
scenario, like using the infotainment system while
driving, multiple resources are allocated and may
interfere. Considering this issue, we use a driving
task to keep the participants occupied while they
interact with the SDS. This allows us to observe
user utterances in a stressful situation.

Infotainment systems in cars are often equipped
with large displays providing visual and haptic
interaction. These kinds of interaction compete
for human resources which are needed for driv-
ing. This results in driver distraction, especially
in demanding secondary tasks (Young and Regan,
2007). Furthermore, a visual interface can also in-
fluence the communication of users (e.g. they ut-
ter visual terms). As we intent to study how a user
interacts naturally with a multi-domain SDS, we
avoid priming effects by not using any visual in-
terface.

4.2.1 Primary Task: Driving Simulator
One major requirement for the driving task is to
keep the driver occupied at a constant level all
the time. Otherwise, we would not be able to
analyze user utterances on a fine-grained level.

1http://www.nuance.com/for-business/mobile-
solutions/vocalizer-expressive/index.htm

3



Therefore, we used the Continuous Tracking and
Reaction (ConTRe) task (Mahr et al., 2012) which
allows controlled driving conditions. It consists of
a steering and a reaction task, which require oper-
ating the steering wheel and pedals. In the steering
task, a yellow cylinder moves unpredictable right
and left at a constant distance from the driver and
the driver must always steer towards it. This is
similar to driving on a curved road. Sometimes a
driver needs to react to sudden events to prevent an
accident. For this a traffic light shows randomly
red and green and requires the driver to push the
throttle or brake pedal. The movement of the yel-
low cylinder and the appearance of the stop light
can be controlled by manipulating control vari-
ables. The “hard driving setting” from Mahr et al.
(2012) was used in this study.

4.2.2 Secondary Task: cross application tasks
with speech interaction

As described in Section 3, a task consists of three
subtasks and each subtask requires two to four se-
mantic concepts. For a user it is possible to insert
multiple concepts at once:

U: “Search an Italian restaurant at the destination”

or as single utterances in a dialog:
U: “Search an Italian restaurant”

S: “Where do you search an Italian restaurant?”

U: “At my destination”

For all possible combinations prompts were speci-
fied. SUEDE provides a GUI for the wizard to se-
lect which semantic concept a user input contains.
Dependent on the selection, either another concept
is requested or the answer is provided. Further-
more, a user input can optionally contain a verb
expressing what the system should do. For exam-
ple, if users say “Italian Restaurant” the reaction
is the same as they would say “Search an Italian
restaurant”.

The user has basically two options to select or
switch to an application. Either an explicit selec-
tion such as:

U: “Open restaurant application”

S: “Restaurant, what do you want?”

or an implicit selection such as:
U: “Search an Italian restaurant”

By using an explicit selection, users assume they
have to set the context to a specific application.
After that, they can use the functionality of this
application. This is a common interaction schema
for visual-based infotainment systems or smart-
phones, as they cluster their functionality into var-

ious applications. An implicit selection is rather
like current personal assistants interact, as they do
not cluster their functionality. Implicit selection
facilitates the interaction for users since they can
get an answer right away. After the user provided
the necessary input for one subtask, the system re-
sponds for example:

S: “There is one Italian restaurant: Pizzeria San Marco.”

Then the user needs to initiate an application
switch to proceed with his task.

A system enabling user-initiated dialogs cannot
always understand the user correctly. Especially in
implicit selection, the language models increase,
and thus recognition as well as understanding is
error prone (Carstensen et al., 2010). Further-
more, the user could request a functionality which
is not supported by the system. Therefore, error
handling strategies need to be applied. In terms
of miscommunication, it can be distinguished be-
tween misunderstanding and non-understanding
(Skantze, 2007). In the experiment, two of our
tasks do not support an implicit application switch,
but require an explicit switch. So if users try to
switch implicitly, the system will not understand
their input in one task and will misinterpret it in
the other task. A response to misunderstanding
might look like:

U: “Search an Italian restaurant”

S: “In an Italian restaurant you can eat pizza”

A non-understanding informs the user and encour-
ages him to try another request:

S: “Action unknown, please change your request”

These two responses are used until the user
changes his strategy to explicit selection. If that
does not happen, the task is aborted by the wizard
if the user gets too frustrated. This enables us to
analyze whether users will switch their strategy or
not and how many turns it will take.

4.3 Procedure

The experiment starts with an initial questionnaire
to create a profile of the participant, concerning
age, experience with smartphones, infotainment
systems and SDSs. Then participants are intro-
duced to the driving task and they have time to
practice till being experienced. After complet-
ing a baseline drive, they start to use the SDS.
For each spoken dialog task users get a story de-
scribing in prose what they like to achieve with
the system. To minimize priming effects, they
have to remember their task and are not allowed to
keep the description during the interaction. There

4



is no explanation or example of the SDS, apart
from a start command for activation. After the
start command, the system plays a beep and the
user can say whatever he likes to achieve his
task. The exploration phase consists of four tasks,
in which users can switch applications implic-
itly and explicitly. Then they rate the usability
of the system with the questionnaire: Subjective
Assessment of Speech System Interfaces (SASSI)
(Hone and Graham, 2000). In the second part of
the experiment, four tasks with different interac-
tion schemes for application switches are com-
pleted randomly: implicit & explicit switch pos-
sible, misunderstanding, non-understanding, and
dialog-initiative change.

5 Dialog Data Analysis

All audio files of user utterances were transcribed
and manually annotated by one person concerning
the application selection/switch, speaking style,
anaphoric references, and semantic concepts.

First of all, for each application entry and switch
it was classified whether the participant used an
implicit or explicit utterance. Additionally, the
non-understanding and misunderstanding data sets
were marked whether the dialog strategy was
changed and how many dialog turns this took.

Since most of the user utterances were implicit
ones (see Section 6.1), we classified them fur-
ther into different speaking styles. In the data
set of implicit utterances, five different speaking
styles could be identified. Table 2 shows them
with an example. The illocutionary speech act to
search a hotel is always the same, but how users
express their request varies. Keyword style and
explicit demand is rather how we expect people
to speak with machines, as these communication
forms are short commands and might be regarded
as impolite between humans. Kinder and gentler
communications forms are implicit demands, Wh-
questions, and Yes-No-Questions. This is how we
would expect people to interact with each other.

Keyword Style “Restaurant search. Berlin”
Implicit Demand “I’d like to search a restaurant in

Berlin.”
Wh-Question “Which restaurants are in Berlin?”
Yes-No-Question “Are there any restaurants in Berlin?”
Explicit Demand “Search restaurants in Berlin”

Table 2: Speaking styles of user utterances.

Two applications are always linked with a com-
mon semantic concept. The user has to refer to

this concept which he can do in various ways with
anaphoric expressions. The annotation of the data
set is based on Fromkin et al. (2003) and shown
in Table 3 (Examples are user utterances in re-
sponse to the system prompt “Navigation to Berlin
started”). In an elliptic anaphoric reference the
concept is not spoken, but still understood because
of context - also called gapping. Furthermore,
pronominalization can be used as an anaphor. We
distinguish between a pronoun or adverb anaphor
and an anaphor with a definite noun phrase, since
the later contains the type of semantic concept.
Another way is simply to rephrase the semantic
concept.

Elliptic “Search restaurants.”
Pronoun, Adverb “Search restaurants there.”
Definite Noun Phrase “Search restaurants in this city.”
Rephrase “Search restaurants in Berlin.”

Table 3: Anaphoric reference types.

6 Results
In the following, results on application awareness,
speaking style, anaphoric expressions, efficiency,
and usability are presented. We analyzed data
from 31 participants (16m/15f), with average age
of 26.65 (SD: 3.32). 26 people possess and use a
smartphone on a regular basis and 25 of them are
used to application-based interaction (18 people
use 1-5 apps and 7 people use 6-10 apps each day).
Their experience with SDS is little (6-Likert Scale,
avg: 3.06, SD: 1.48) as well as the usage of SDSs
(5-Likert Scale, avg: 2.04, SD: 1.16). We asked
them how they usually approach a new system or
app to learn its interaction schema and scope of
operation. On the smartphone, all 31 of them try
a new app without informing themselves how it is
used. Concerning infotainment systems, trying is
also the most used learning approach, even while
driving (26 people). This means, people do not
read a manual, but the system has to be naturally
usable.

In total, we built a corpus of interactions with 5h
25min with 3h 08min of user speech. It contains
243 task entries and 444 subtask switches. Due to
data loss 5 task entries could not be analyzed. Sub-
task switches were less than theoretically possible,
because misunderstanding and non-understanding
tasks were aborted by the wizard if the user did
not change his strategy. Concerning the type of
subtask, we analyzed 91 action and 152 informa-
tion seeking subtasks for task entries, as well as

5



236 actions and 208 information seekings for task
switches.

6.1 Application Awareness

The SDS was designed to be strictly user-
initiative: after a beep users could say whatever
they liked. We counted 4.9% of user utterances as
explicit entries to start a task, which means users
in general assume either the SDS is already in the
right application context or it is not based on dif-
ferent applications. This is an interaction schema
which would rather be used with a human com-
munication partner. 1.1% explicit utterances in
subtask switches reinforce this assumption. Utter-
ances addressing more than one application could
not be observed.

Furthermore, we analyzed whether users
change their strategy from implicit to explicit
subtask switch if the system does not react as
expected. The implicit switch was prevented
and the system answered as if a misunderstand-
ing or a non-understanding has occurred. Ta-
ble 4 shows results for the number of subtask
switches (subt. sw.), number of successful strategy
changes (succ.), and average number of user utter-
ances (avg. UDT) till the strategy was changed.
In total, only in 43.7% subtask switches users
changed their strategy. The difference between
non-understanding and misunderstanding was not
significant (p=0.051), however, this might due to
small sample size.

subt. sw. succ. avg. UDT
non-underst. 42 15 2.93 (SD=1.91)
misunderst. 45 23 3.74 (SD=1.79)

Table 4: Dialog repair changes to explicit strategy.

In summary, only 6% of user utterances ad-
dressed the application explicitly and only 43.7%
of users changed their strategy from implicit to ex-
plicit. These results reveal that most users are not
aware of different applications or do not address
applications differently in a speech-only infotain-
ment system. They interact rather like with a hu-
man being or with a personal assistant than with a
typical in-car SDS.

6.2 Speaking styles of implicit application
selection

Even if people interact without being aware of dif-
ferent applications, they might speak to a system
in another way than to a human. We analyzed

the implicit user utterances according to different
speaking styles (see Figure 2). Overall, explicit
demand dominates with 37.07% for task entry and
42.42% for subtask switching. Keyword style is
used in 16.16% for task entry and 9.29% for sub-
task switches. As mentioned, explicit demand and
keyword style are rather used in human-computer
interaction. Here, slightly more than half of the
participants (entry: 53.23%; switch: 51.71%) use
this kind of interaction. The other half interacts
in kinder and gentler forms known from human-
human communication.

Comparing task entry and subtask switch, dif-
ferences could be found in keyword style, implicit
demand, and Yes-No-Question. In the first contact
with the system, users might be unsure what it is
capable of, therefore, often keywords were used
to find out how the system reacts. Additionally,
the task description was formulated in implicit de-
mand style, thus an unsure user might remember
this sentence and use it. Concerning the Yes-No-
Questions, they might be a reaction to the naturally
formulated system prompts, thus the user adapts to
a human-human-like communication style.

Finally, we compare information seeking sub-
tasks with action subtasks. In action subtasks, im-
plicit and explicit demand style dominate. This
is reasonable, as people give commands in either
form and expect a system reaction. Likewise, it
was anticipated that question styles are used for in-
formation seeking. One interesting finding is that
keyword style is more often used in information
seeking. This could be due to priming effects of
using search engines like Google2, in which users
only insert the terms they are interested in and
Google provides the most likely answers.

In summary, speaking styles vary. Sometimes
the system is considered as a human-like commu-
nication partner and sometimes users try to reach
their goal as fast as possible by giving short com-
mands. However, speaking styles depend on the
type of subtask and dialog state.

6.3 Anaphoric Expressions

In a cross-application task, it is of interest how
users refer to application-linking semantic con-
cepts. Figure 3 shows which kind of anaphoric ex-
pressions were used in implicit utterances. Nearly
half of the utterances (47.68%) contain a rephrase
of the semantic concept and further 31.57% a def-

2www.google.de

6



5,95% 
1,08% 

17,26% 

9,27% 

0,00% 
3,23% 0,60% 

3,45% 

26,19% 
32,76% 

10,20% 

8,21% 

5,78% 

1,93% 22,11% 
22,71% 

1,02% 

7,00% 

10,88% 

9,66% 

0,0%

5,0%

10,0%

15,0%

20,0%

25,0%

30,0%

35,0%

40,0%

45,0%

Entry Switch Entry Switch Entry Switch Entry Switch Entry Switch

Keyword Style Implicit Demand Wh-Question Yes-No-Question Explicit Demand

Inf

Act

Act 
Inf 
 
Act 
Inf 

Figure 2: Speaking styles of implicit task entry and subtask switch distinguished by action (Act) and
information seeking (Inf)

inite noun phrase. A rephrase utterance can be
interpreted easily for an SDS, since there is no
need to determine the right antecedent from dia-
log history. A definite noun phrase contains the
semantic type of the antecedent and can be ref-
ered easily in a semantic annotated dialog history.
However, a pronoun or elliptic anaphoric expres-
sion is harder to resolve, as the former only de-
scribes the syntactic form of the antecedent and
the later does not contain any information of the
antecedent. Sometimes, also humans are not able
to resolve an anaphoric expression easily. Com-
paring information seeking and action subtasks,
the only difference can be identified between def-
inite noun phrases and rephrase. In information
seeking subtasks, participants rephrased more of-
ten than using definite noun phrases.

4,98% 
8,87% 

17,53% 18,61% 
2,22% 

4,68% 

14,04% 

29,06% 

0,0%

10,0%

20,0%

30,0%

40,0%

50,0%

60,0%

Elliptic Pronoun,
Adverb

Definite NP Rephrase

Inf

Act

Figure 3: Anaphoric expressions used in implicit
application switches.

6.4 Efficiency

Especially in the car it is essential to support short
and efficient interactions. In this study, partici-
pants used on average 6.27 (SD: 2.62) words for
one utterance. However, the word length of a user
utterance is only one part which influences dialog
length. The number of semantic concepts uttered
is more important, as the more semantic concepts
are spoken, the less system prompts are needed to
request missing information. The semantic con-
cepts of each user utterance were annotated and

counted (avg: 2.77; SD: 0.73; min: 1; max: 6).
They are set in relation to the maximum required
semantic concepts (avg: 3.26; SD: 0.59; min: 2;
max: 4) for the corresponding subtask. We divide
the spoken concepts by the maximum concepts to
calculate an efficiency score (avg: 0.86; SD: 0.22).
This means 86% of user utterances contain all nec-
essary semantic concepts to answer the request.
Therefore, in-car SDS need to understand multiple
semantic concepts in one utterance to keep a dia-
log short, such as the city, street and street number
for a destination entry.

0,88 0,91 

0,69 
0,87 

0

0,2

0,4

0,6

0,8

1

Entry Switch

Act

Inf

Act 
Inf 
 
Act 
Inf 

Figure 4: Efficiency scores of user utterances.

Figure 4 shows efficiency scores split into task
entry and subtask switch as well as action and
information seeking. In total, there is no sig-
nificant difference between task entry and sub-
task switch concerning number of words, seman-
tic concepts, or efficiency score. Comparing types
of subtasks at task entry, the efficiency score for
action subtasks (avg: 0.69; SD: 0.2) is signifi-
cantly (p=0.0018) less than for information seek-
ing subtasks (avg. 0.88; SD 0.22). Although, sig-
nificantly (p=0.0003) more semantic concepts in
actions were required (avg: 3.66; SD: 0.48) than
in information seekings (avg: 3.2; SD: 0.4), users
do not utter more semantic concepts. How many
semantic concepts users can utter in one sentence
while driving, needs to be addressed in the future.

6.5 Usability
Usability is a necessary condition in order to eval-
uate if people will use a system. The SASSI scores

7



provide valid evidence of a system’s usability. Fig-
ure 5 shows results separated into the six dimen-
sions System Response Accuracy (SRA), Like-
ability (Like), Cognitive Demand (Cog Dem), An-
noyance (Ann), Habitability (Hab), and Speed. A
7-Likert scale was used and recoded to values [-
3, ..., 3]. If a system is less annoying, its usabil-
ity will be better. Thus, except of cognitive de-
mand and habitability, the usability of our SDS is
rated good. The low habitability score is due to the
fact that we did not explain the SDS and after four
tasks users are not completely accustomed to the
system.

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

SRA Like Cog Dem Ann Hab Speed

SASSI

Figure 5: SASSI Usability scores.

7 Discussion and Further Research

The results show, that users are in general not
aware of different applications in speech-only in-
car SDSs and switch implicitly between different
domains. This interaction schema is similar to
human-human communication, but may differ if
the user is primed through a visual representation.
Concerning speaking styles, more than half of the
participants used keyword style and explicit de-
mand, which might be regarded impolite between
humans. They are aware to communicate with
a system lacking emotions. A user, who is not
sure about the system’s functions, will rather start
with keywords and, after hearing natural formu-
lated system prompts, is likely to adapt to natu-
ral speaking styles. A human-like prompt (instead
of our beep) may ensure the user from the begin-
ning. Obviously, speaking styles depend on type
of task, thus question and keyword style is used
for information seeking and demand style to initi-
ate an action. More than 50% of the participants
used anaphoric expressions, which have to be re-
solved within dialog context. This is comprehen-
sible, as for people it is usually easier and more ef-
ficient to pronounce an anaphor than to pronounce
the antecedent. For reaching their interaction goal
fast and efficient, the participants used multiple se-
mantic concepts in utterances. In total, 86% of
user utterances contain all necessary information

to answer the request. This results in less dialog
turns and thus is fundamental for in-car systems.
In addition, the usability is rated good, thus the
system might be accepted by drivers.

Another crucial point for in-car systems is that
they should distract the driver as little as possible.
It can be assumed that without visual and haptic
distractions, the driver would keep his focus on
the road. However, cognitive demand also causes
distraction. The moderate SASSI score for cogni-
tive demand requires an objective test. Therefore,
we will analyze multi-domain interactions with re-
spect to mental pressure and driver performance
for further research. So far, we have only consid-
ered multi-domain dialogs with one common se-
mantic concept. By referring to multiple seman-
tic concepts, drivers might use more anaphoric ex-
pressions or aggregate them with a general term,
which needs to be address in further experiments.

8 Conclusions

This paper presents results on how young and
technically affine people interact with in-car SDSs
in performing multi-domain tasks. 31 participants
completed all together 243 tasks (each with two
application switches) while driving in a fixed-base
driving simulator. In this experiment, a controlled
WoZ setup was used instead of a real speech
recognition system.

The results identify important guidelines for
multi-domain SDSs. Since users are in general not
aware of applications in speech-only dialog sys-
tems, implicit application switching is required.
However, this should not replace explicit switch-
ing commands. Speaking styles vary and depend
on type of task, and dialog state. Thus language
models must therefore consider this issue. Peo-
ple rely on anaphora, which means an SDS must
maintain a extensive dialog history across multi-
ple applications to enable coreference resolution.
It is further necessary that the SDS supports multi-
ple semantic concepts in one utterance since it en-
ables an efficient interaction and drivers use this.
The SDS’s usability was rated good by the partici-
pants. For further research, we will analyze multi-
domain interaction with respect to driver perfor-
mance and multiple semantic concept anaphora.

Acknowledgments
The work presented here was funded by
GetHomeSafe (EU 7th Framework STREP
288667).

8



References
Kai-Uwe Carstensen, Christian Ebert, Cornelia Ebert,

Susanne Jekat, Ralf Klabunde, and Hagen Langer.
2010. Computerlinguistik und Sprachtechnologie.
Spektrum, Akad. Verl.

Hua Cheng, Harry Bratt, Rohit Mishra, Elizabeth
Shriberg, Sandra Upson, Joyce Chen, Fuliang
Weng, Stanley Peters, Lawrence Cavedon, and John
Niekrasz. 2004. A wizard of oz framework for col-
lecting spoken human-computer dialogs. In Proc. of
ICSLP-2000.

Victor Ei-Wen Lo and Paul A. Green. 2013. Devel-
opment and evaluation of automotive speech inter-
faces: Useful information from the human factors
and the related literature. Int. Journal of Vehicular
Technology, 2013:13.

Norman M. Fraser and G.Nigel Gilbert. 1991. Sim-
ulating speech systems. Computer Speech & Lan-
guage, 5(1):81 – 99.

Victoria Fromkin, Robert Rodman, and Nina Hyams.
2003. An Introduction to Language. Rosenberg,
Michael, 7 edition.

Petra Geutner, Frank Steffens, and Dietrich Manstetten.
2002. Design of the vico spoken dialogue system:
Evaluation of user expectations by wizard-of-oz ex-
periments. In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Language
Resources and Evaluation, volume 2.

James Glass, Joseph Polifroni, Stephanie Seneff, and
Victor Zue. 2000. Data collection and performance
evaluation of spoken dialogue systems: The mit ex-
perience. In Proc. of 6th INT.

Hansjörg Hofmann, Ute Ehrlich, André Berton, and
Wolfgang Minker. 2012. Speech interaction with
the internet - a user study. In Intelligent Environ-
ments, Guanajuato, Mexico.

Kate S Hone and Robert Graham. 2000. Towards a
tool for the subjective assessment of speech system
interfaces (sassi). Natural Language Engineering,
6(3&4):287–303.

Melanie Kellar, Carolyn Watters, and Michael Shep-
herd. 2006. A goal-based classification of web in-
formation tasks. In In 69th Annual Meeting of the
American Society for Information Science and Tech-
nology (ASIST).

Scott R. Klemmer, Anoop K. Sinha, Jack Chen,
James A. Landay, Nadeem Aboobaker, and Annie
Wang. 2000. Suede: a wizard of oz prototyping
tool for speech user interfaces. In Proc. of the 13th
annual ACM symposium on User interface software
and technology, New York. ACM.

Jannette Maciej and Mark Vollrath. 2009. Compari-
son of manual vs. speech-based interaction with in-
vehicle information systems. Accident Analysis and
Prevention, 41(5):924 – 930.

Angela Mahr, Michael Feld, Mohammad Mehdi
Moniri, and Rafael Math. 2012. The contre (con-
tinuous tracking and reaction) task: A flexible ap-
proach for assessing driver cognitive workload with
high sensitivity. In Andrew L. Kun, Linda Ng Boyle,
Bryan Reimer, and Andreas Riener, editors, Adj.
Proc. of the 4th International Conference on Au-
tomotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular
Applications, Portsmouth. ACM.

National Highway Traffic Safety Administra-
tion (NHTSA). 2013. Distracted driving 2011.
Technical report.

Norbert Reithinger, Jan Alexandersson, Tilman
Becker, Anselm Blocher, Ralf Engel, Markus
Löckelt, Jochen Müller, Norbert Pfleger, Peter
Poller, Michael Streit, and Valentin Tschernomas.
2003. Smartkom: Adaptive and flexible multimodal
access to multiple applications. In Multimodal
interfaces, New York.

Gabriel Skantze. 2007. Error Handling in Spoken Di-
alogue Systems. Ph.D. thesis, KTH Computer Sci-
ence and Communication.

Jessica Villing, Cecilia Holtelius, Staffan Larsson, An-
ders Lindstrm, Alexander Seward, and Nina berg.
2008. Interruption, resumption and domain switch-
ing in in-vehicle dialogue. In Bengt Nordstrm and
Aarne Ranta, editors, Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, volume 5221 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 488–499. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.

Fuliang Weng, Baoshi Yan, Zhe Feng, Florin Ratiu,
Madhuri Raya, Brian Lathrop, Annie Lien, Se-
bastian Varges, Rohit Mishra, Feng Lin, Matthew
Purver, Harry Bratt, Yao Meng, Stanley Peters, To-
bias Scheideck, Badri Raghunathan, and Zhaoxia
Zhang. 2007. Chat to your destination. In Proc. of
8th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue.

Christopher D Wickens. 2008. Multiple resources and
mental workload. In Human factors, volume 50,
pages 449–55. USA.

Kristie Young and Michael Regan. 2007. Driver dis-
traction: A review of the literature. Distracted Driv-
ing, pages 379–405.

9


