



















































Unsupervised Construction of a Lexicon and a Repository of Variation Patterns for Arabic Modal Multiword Expressions


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 114–123,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Unsupervised Construction of a Lexicon and a Repository of Variation
Patterns for Arabic Modal Multiword Expressions

Rania Al-Sabbagh†, Roxana Girju†, Jana Diesner‡
†Department of Linguistics and Beckman Institute

‡School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

{alsabba1, girju, jdiesner}@illinois.edu

Abstract
We present an unsupervised approach to build
a lexicon of Arabic Modal Multiword
Expressions (AM-MWEs) and a repository of
their variation patterns. These novel resources
are likely to boost the automatic identification
and extraction  of AM-MWEs1.

1 Introduction

Arabic Modal Multiword Expressions (AM-
MWEs) are complex constructions that convey
modality senses. We define seven modality
senses, based on Palmer's (2001) cross-lingual
typology, which are (un)certainty, evidentiality,
obligation, permission, commitment, ability and
volition.

AM-MWEs range from completely fixed,
idiomatic and sometimes semantically-opaque
expressions, to morphologically, syntactically
and/or lexical productive constructions. As a
result, the identification and extraction of AM-
MWEs have to rely on both a lexicon and a
repository of their variation patterns. To-date and
to the best of our knowledge, neither resource is
available. Furthermore, AM-MWEs are quite
understudied despite the extensive research on
general-purpose Arabic MWEs.

To build both the lexicon and the repository,
we design a four-stage unsupervised method.
Stage 1, we use Log-Likelihood Ratio and a
root-based procedure to extract candidate AM-
MWEs from large Arabic corpora. Stage 2, we
use token level features with k-means clustering
to construct two clusters. Stage 3, from the
clustering output we extract patterns that
describe the morphological, syntactic and
semantic variations of AM-MWEs, and store

1 Both resources are available at
http://www.rania-alsabbagh.com/am-mwe.html

them in the pattern repository. Stage 4, we use
the most frequent variation patterns to bootstrap
low-frequency and new AM-MWEs. The final
lexicon and repository are manually inspected.
Both resources are made publicly available.

The contributions of this paper are: (1) we
address the lack of lexica and annotated
resources for Arabic linguistic modality; and
hence, we support NLP applications and domains
that use modality  to identify (un)certainty (Diab
et al. 2009), detect power relations (Prabhakaran
and Rambow 2013), retrieve politeness markers
(Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil et al. 2013), extract
and reconstruct storylines (Pareti et al. 2013) and
classify request-based emails (Lampert et al.
2010); (2) we provide both a lexicon and a
repository of variation patterns to help increase
recall while keeping precision high for the
automatic identification and extraction of
productive AM-MWEs; and (3) we explore the
morphological, syntactic and lexical properties of
the understudied AM-MWEs.

For the rest of this paper, Section 2 defines
AM-MWEs. Section 3 outlines related work.
Sections 4 describes our unsupervised method.
Section 5 describes manual verification and the
final resulting resources.

2 What are AM-MWEs?

AM-MWEs are complex constructions that
convey (un)certainty, evidentiality, obligation,
permission, commitment, ability and volition.
Based on their productivity, we define five types
of AM-MWEs:

Type 1 includes idiomatic expressions like حتما 
والبد HtmA wlAbd (must), لعل وعسى lEl wEsY
(maybe) and فیما یبدو fymA ybdw (seemingly).

Type 2 covers morphologically productive
expressions such as یرغب في yrgb fy (he wants to)
and واثق من wAvq mn (sure about). They inflect

114



AM-MWEs Unigram Synonym(s)
English Gloss

Arabic Transliteration Arabic Transliteration
عقدت العزم على Eqdt AlEzm ElY نویت-عزمت  Ezmt - nwyt I intended (to)
في امكاني ان fy AmkAny An یمكنني ymknny I can/I have the ability to
لدي اعتقاد بان ldy AEtqAd bAn اعتقد AEtqd I think
ھناك احتمال بان hnAk AHtmAl bAn یُْحتََمل yuHotamal possibly/there is a possibility that

Table 1: Example AM-MWEs and their unigram synonyms

for gender, number, person, and possibly for
tense, mood and aspect. Neither the head word
nor the preposition is replaceable by a synonym.
In the literature of MWEs, Type 2 is referred to
as phrasal verbs. In the literature of modality, it
is referred to as quasi-modals (i.e. modals that
subcategorize for prepositions).

Type 3 comprises lexically productive
expressions whose meanings rely on the head
noun, adjective or verb. If the head word is
replaced by another of the same grammatical
category but a different meaning, the meaning of
the entire expression changes. Hence, if we
replace the head adjective الضروري AlDrwry
(necessary) in ان من الضروري mn AlDrwry An (it
is necessary to) with الممكن Almmkn (possible),
the meaning changes from obligation to
uncertainty.

Type 4 comprises syntactically productive
expressions. It is similar to Type 3 except that
the head words are modifiable and their
arguments, especially indirect objects, can be
included within the boundaries of the MWE.
Thus, the same expression from Type 3 can be
modified as in ان جدا من الضروري mn AlDrwry jdA
An (it is very necessary to). Furthermore, we can
have an inserted indirect object as in من الضروري
ان للمصریین mn AlDrwry llmSryyn An (it is
necessary for Egyptians to).

Type 5 includes morphologically, lexically
and syntactically productive expressions like لدي 
یقین ان ldy yqyn An (I have faith that).
Morphologically, the object pronoun in لدي ldy (I
have) inflects for person, gender and number.
Syntactically, the head noun can be modified by
adjectives as in ان لدي یقین راسخ ldy yqyn rAsx An
(I have a strong faith that). Lexically, the
meaning of the expression relies on the head
noun یقین yqyn (faith) which is replaceable for
other modality-based nouns such as ان لدي نیة ldy
nyp An (I have an intention to).

Despite the semantic transparency and the
morpho-syntactic and lexical productivity of the

expressions in Types 3-5, we have three reasons
to consider them as AM-MWEs:

First, although the head words in those
expressions are transparent and productive, the
other components, including prepositions,
relative adverbials and verbs, are fixed and
conventionalized. In من الضروري ان mn AlDrwry
An (literally: from the necessary to; gloss: it is
necessary to), the preposition من mn (from)
cannot be replaced by any other preposition. In
احتمال بان ھناك hnAk AHtmAl bAn (there is a
possibility that), the relative adverbial ھناك hnAk
(there is) cannot be replaced by another relative
adverbial such as ھنا hnA (there is). In االمل یحدوني 
في ان yHdwny AlAml fy An (hope derives me to),
the head is the noun االمل AlAml (the hope).
Therefore, the lexical verb یحدوني yHdwny (drives
me) cannot be replaced by other synonymous
verbs such as یقودني yqwdqny (leads me) or یدفعني
ydfEny (pushes/drives me).

Second, each of those expressions has a strictly
fixed word order. Even for expressions that allow
the insertion of modifiers and verb/noun
arguments, the inserted elements hold fixed
places within the boundaries of the expression.
Complex constructions that adhere to strict
constraints on word order but undergo lexical
variation are classified by Sag et al. (2002) as
semi-fixed MWEs.

Finally, each expression of those types is
lexically perceived as a one linguistic unit that
can be replaced in many contexts by a unigram
synonym as illustrated in Table 1. According to
Stubbs (2007) and Escartín et al. (2013), the
perception of complex constructions as single
linguistic units is characteristic of MWEs.

3 Related Work

There is a plethora of research on general-
purpose Arabic MWEs. Yet, no prior work has
focused on AM-MWEs. Hawwari et al. (2012)
describe the manual construction of a repository
for Arabic MWEs that classifies them based on
their morpho-syntactic structures.

115



Corpus Token # Types # Description
Ajdir 113774517 2217557 a monolingual newswire corpus of Modern Standard Arabic
LDC ISI 28880558 532443 an LDC parallel Arabic-English corpus (Munteanu & Marcu 2007)
YADAC 6328248 457361 a dialectal Arabic corpus of Weblogs and tweets (Al-Sabbagh & Girju 2012)
Tashkeel 6149726 358950 a vowelized corpus of Classical and Modern Standard Arabic books

Total 41472307 3566311
Table 2: Statistics for the extraction corpora

Attia et al. (2010) describe the construction of
a lexicon of Arabic MWEs based on (1)
correspondence asymmetries between Arabic
Wikipedia titles and titles in 21 different
languages, (2) English MWEs extracted from
Princeton WordNet 3.0 and automatically
translated into Arabic, and (3) lexical association
measures.

Bounhas and Slimani (2009) use syntactic
patterns and Log-Likelihood Ratio to extract
environmental Arabic MWEs. They achieve
precision rates of 0.93, 0.66 and 0.67 for
bigrams, trigrams and quadrigrams, respectively.

Al-Sabbagh et al. (2013) manually build a
lexicon of Arabic modals with a small portion of
MWEs and quasi-modals. In this paper, quasi-
modals are bigram AM-MWEs. Hence, their
lexicon has 1,053 AM-MWEs.

Nissim and Zaninello (2013) build a lexicon
and a repository of variation patterns for MWEs
in the morphologically-rich Romance languages.
Similar to our research, their motivation to
represent the productivity of Romance MWEs
through variation patterns is to boost their
automatic identification and extraction. Another
similarity is that we define variation patterns as
part-of-speech sequences. The  difference
between their research and ours is that our
variation patterns have a wider scope because we
cover both the morpho-syntactic and lexical
variations of AM-MWEs, whereas their variation
patterns deal with morphological variation only.

4 The Unsupervised Method

4.1 Extracting AM-MWEs

4.1.1 Extraction Resources

Table 22 shows the token and type counts as well
as the descriptions of the corpora used for
extraction. For corpus preprocessing, (1) html
mark-up and diacritics are removed. (2) Meta-

2Ajdir: http://aracorpus.e3rab.com/
Tashkeel: http://sourceforge.net/projects/tashkeela/

linguistic information such as document and
segment IDs, section headers, dates and sources,
as well as English data are removed. (3)
Punctuation marks are separated from words. (4)
Words in Roman letters are removed. (5)
Orthographical normalization is done so that all
alef-letter variations are normalized to A, the
elongation letter (_) and word lengthening are
removed. (6) Finally, the corpus is tokenized and
Part-of-Speech (POS) tagged by MADAMIRA
(Pasha et a. 2014); the latest version of state-of-
the-art Arabic tokenizers and POS taggers.

4.1.2 Extraction Set-up and Results

We restrict the size of AM-MWEs in this paper
to quadrigrams. Counted grams include function
and content words but not affixes. Working on
longer AM-MWEs is left for future research.

The extraction of candidate AM-MWEs is
conducted in three steps:

Step 1: we use root-based information to
identify the words that can be possible
derivations of modality roots. For modality roots,
we use the Arabic Modality Lexicon from Al-
Sabbagh et al. (2013).

In order to identify possible derivations of
modality roots, we use RegExps. For instance,
we use the RegExp (\w*)m(\w*)k(\w*)n(\w*) to
identify words such as الممكن Almmkn (the
possible), اتمكن Atmkn (I manage) and بامكاني
bAmkAny (I can) which convey modality.

This RegExp-based procedure can result in
noise. For instance, the aforementioned RegExp
also returns the word االمریكان AlAmrykAn
(Americans) which happens to have the same
three letters of the root in the same order
although it is not one of its derivations. Yet, the
procedure still filters out many irrelevant words
that have nothing to do with the modality roots.

Step 2: for the resulting words from Step 1, we
extract bigrams, trigrams and quadrigrams given
the frequency thresholds of 20, 15 and 10,
respectively.

116



In previous literature on MWEs with corpora
of 6-8M words, thresholds were set to 5, 8 and
10 for MWEs of different sizes. Given the large
size of our corpus, we decide to use higher
thresholds.

Step 3: for the extracted ngrams we use the
Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) to measure the
significance of association between the ngram
words. LLR measures the deviation between the
observed data and what would be expected if the
words within the ngram were independent. Its
results are easily interpretable: the higher the
score, the less evidence there is in favor of
concluding that the words are independent.

LLR is computed as  in Eq. 1 where Oij and Eij
are the observed and expected frequencies,
respectively3. LLR is not, however, the only
measure used in the literature of MWEs.
Experimenting with more association measures
is left for future work.

Eq. 1: LLR = 2 ∑ O log
Table 3 shows the unique type counts of the

extracted ngrams. The extracted ngrams include
both modal and non-modal MWEs. For instance,
both من الممكن لنا ان mn Almmkn lnA An (it is
possible for us to) and في اقرب وقت ممكن fy Aqrb
wqt mmkn (as soon as possible) are extracted as
valid quadrigrams. Both have the word ممكن
mmkn (possible) derived from the root m-k-n.
Both are frequent enough to meet the frequency
threshold. The words within each quadrigram are
found to be significantly associated according to
LLR. Nevertheless, mn Almmkn lnA An is an
AM-MWE according to our definition in Section
2, but fy Aqrb wqt mmkn is not. This is because
the former conveys the modality sense of
possibility; whereas the latter does not.
Therefore, we need the second clustering stage in
our unsupervised method to distinguish modal
from non-modal MWEs.

Ngram size Unique Types
Bigrams 86645
Trigrams 43397

Quadrigrams 25634
Total 96031

Table 3: Statistics for the extracted MWEs

3 We use Banerjee and Pedersen's (2003) Perl
implementation of ngram association measures.

4.2 Clustering AM-MWEs

Clustering is the second stage of our
unsupervised method to build the lexicon of the
AM-MWEs and the repository of their variation
patterns. This stage takes as input the extracted
ngrams from the first extraction stage; and aims
to distinguish between the ngrams that convey
modality senses and the ngrams that do not.

4.2.1 Clustering Set-up

The clustering feature set includes token level
morphological, syntactic, lexical and positional
features. It also has a mixture of nominal and
continuous-valued features as we explain in the
subsequent sections.

4.2.1.1 Morphological  Features

Roots used to guide the extraction of candidate
AM-MWEs in Section 4.1.2 are used as
clustering morphological features. The reason is
that some roots have more modal derivations
than others. For instance, the derivations of the
root ر- ر- ض D-r-r include ضروري Drwry
(necessary), لضرورةاب bAlDrwrp (necessarily),
and یضطر yDTr (he has to); all of which convey
the modality sense of obligation. Consequently,
to inform the clustering algorithm that a given
ngram was extracted based on the root D-r-r
indicates that it is more likely to be an AM-
MWE.

4.2.1.2 Syntactic Features

In theoretical linguistics, linguists claim that
Arabic modality triggers (i.e. words and phrases
that convey modality senses) subcategorize for
clauses, verb phrases, to-infinitives and deverbal
nouns. For details, we refer the reader to Mitchell
and Al-Hassan (1994), Brustad (2000), Badawi
et al. (2004) and Moshref (2012).

These subcategorization frames can be
partially captured at the token level. For
example, clauses can be marked by
complementizers, subject and demonstrative
pronouns and verbs. To-infinitives in Arabic are
typically marked by نا An (to). Even deverbal
nouns can be detected with some POS tagsets
such as Buckwalter's (2002) that labels them as
NOUN.VN.

Based on this, we use the POS information
around the extracted ngrams as contextual
syntactic features for clustering. We limit the

117



window size of the contextual syntactic features
to ±1 words.

Furthermore, as we mentioned in Section 2, we
define AM-MWEs as expressions with fixed
word order. That is, the sequence of the POS tags
that represent the internal structure of the
extracted ngrams can be used as syntactic
features to distinguish modal from non-modal
MWEs.

4.2.1.3 Lexical Features

As we mentioned in Section 2, except for the
head words of the AM-MWEs, other components
are usually fixed and conventionalized.
Therefore, the actual lexical words of the
extracted ngrams can be distinguishing features
for AM-MWEs.

4.2.1.4 Positional Features

AM-MWEs, especially trigrams and quadrigrams
that scope over entire clauses, are expected to
come in sentence-initial positions. Thus we use
@beg (i.e. at beginning) to mark whether the
extracted ngrams occur at sentence-initial
positions.

4.2.1.5 Continuous Features

Except for nominal morphological and lexical
features, other features are continuous. They are
not extracted per ngram instance, but are defined
as weighted features across all the instances of a
target ngram.

Thus, @beg for ngrami is the probability of
ngrami to occur in a sentence-initial position. It
is computed as the frequency of ngrami
occurring at a sentence-initial position
normalized by the total number n of ngrami in
the corpus.

Similarly, POS features are continuous. For
instance, the probability that ngrami is followed
by a deverbal noun is the frequency of its POS+1
tagged as a deverbal noun normalized by the
total number n of ngrami in the corpus.

4.2.2 Clustering Resources

As we mentioned earlier, the extracted ngrams
from the extraction stage are the input for this
clustering stage. The root features are the same
roots used for extraction. The POS features are
extracted based on the output of MADAMIRA
(Pasha et al. 2014) that is used to preprocess the
corpus - Section 4.1.1. The positional features

are determined based on the availability of
punctuation markers for sentence boundaries.

We implement k-means clustering with k set to
two and the distance metric set to the Euclidean
distance4. The intuition for using k-means
clustering is that we want to identify AM-MWEs
against all other types of MWEs based on their
morpho-syntactic, lexical and positional features.
Thus the results of k-means clustering with k set
to two will be easily interpretable. Other
clustering algorithms might be considered for
future work.

4.2.3 Clustering Evaluation and Results

4.2.3.1 Evaluation Methodology

We use precision, recall and F1-score as
evaluation metrics, with three gold sets: BiSet,
TriSet and QuadSet, for bigrams, trigrams and
quadrigrams, respectively. Each gold set has
1000 positive data points (i.e. AM-MWEs).

The gold sets are first compiled from multiple
resources, including Mitchell and Al-Hassan
(1994), Brustad (2000), Badawi et al. (2004) and
Moshref (2012). Second, each compiled gold set
is further evaluated by two expert annotators.
They are instructed to decide whether a given
ngram is an AM-MWE or not according to the
following definitions of AM-MWEs:

 They convey modality senses - Section 1
 They have unigram synonyms
 They have fixed word orders
 Their function words are fixed

Inter-annotator kappa κ scores for the BiSet,
TriSet and QuadSet are 0.93, 0.95 and 0.96,
respectively. Most disagreement is attributed to
the annotators' failure to find unigram synonyms.

The positive BiSet includes (1) phrasal verbs
such as یتمكن من ytmkn mn (he manages to), یعجز 
عن yEjz En (he fails to) and یحلم ب yHlm be (he
longs for), (2) prepositional phrases such as من
الممكن mn Almmkn (it is possible that) and في
الحقیقة fy AlHqyqp (actually), (3) nominal phrases
such as املي ھو Amly hw (my hope is to) and (4)
AM-MWEs subcategorizing for
complementizers such as یصرح بان ySrH bAn (he
declares that) and یعرف ان yErf An (he knows
that).

4 We use the k-means clustering implementation from
Orange toolkit http://orange.biolab.si/

118



The positive TriSet includes verb phrases like
یفشل في ان yf$l fy An (he fails to) and prepositional
phrases like من المستحیل ان mn AlmstHyl An (it is
impossible to) and عندي ایمان بان Endy AymAn bAn
(I have faith that).

The positive QuadSet includes verb phrases
such as في انیحدوني االمل  yHdwny AlAml fy An
(hope drives me to) and prepositional phrases
such as من غیر المقبول ان mn gyr Almqbwl An (it is
unacceptable to).

With these gold sets, we first decide on the
best cluster per ngram size. We use an all-or-
nothing approach; that is, for the two clusters
created for bigrams, we select the cluster with
the highest exact matches with the BiSet to be
the best bigram cluster. We do the same thing for
the trigram and quadrigram clusters. With
information about the best cluster per ngram
size, our actual evaluation starts.

To evaluate clustered bigram AM-MWEs, we
consider the output of best bigram, trigram and
quadrigram clusters to allow for evaluating
bigrams with gaps. We also tolerate
morphological differences in terms of different
conjugations for person, gender, number, tense,
mood and aspect.

For example, true positives for the bigram
AM-MWE یتمكن من ytmkn mn (he manages to)
include its exact match and the morphological
alternations of اتمكن من Atmkn mn (I manage to)
and نتمكن من ntmkn mn (we manage to), among
others. In other words, if the output of the bigram
clustering has Atmkn mn or ntmkn mn but the
BiSet has only ytmkn mn, we consider this as a
true positive.

The bigram ytmkn mn can have a (pro)noun
subject after the verb ytmkn: ytmkn ((pro)noun
gap) mn. Thus, we consider the output of the
trigram best cluster. If we find instances such as
یتمكن الرئیس من ytmkn Alt}ys mn (the president
manages to) or نتمكن نحن من ntmkn nHn mn (we
manages to), we consider them as true positives
for the bigram ytmkn mn as long as the trigram
has the two defining words of the bigram,
namely the verb ytmkn in any of its conjugations
and the preposition mn.

The same bigram - ytmkn mn - can have two
gaps after the head verb ytmkn as in یتمكن الرئیس 
المصري من ytmkn Alr}ys AlmSry mn (the
Egyptian president manages to). For that reason,
we consider the best quadrigram cluster. If we

find ytmkn ((pro)noun gap) ((pro)noun gap) mn,
we consider this as a true positive for  the bigram
ytmkn mn as long as the two boundaries of the
bigrams are represented. We could not go any
further with more than two gaps because we did
not cluster beyond quadrigrams.

False positives for the bigram ytmkn mn would
be the bigrams یتمكن الرئیس ytmkn Alr}ys (the
president manages) and الرئیس من Alr}ys mn (the
president to) in the bigram cluster where one of
the bigram's components - either the verb or the
preposition - is missing.

False negatives of bigrams would be those
bigrams that could not be found in any of the
best clusters whether with or without gaps.

Similar to evaluating bigrams, we consider the
output of the trigram and quadrigram best
clusters to evaluate trigram AM-MWEs. We also
tolerate morphological productivity.

For instance, the trigram عندنا ایمان بان EndnA
AymAn bAn (we have faith that) conjugated for
the first person plural is a true positive for the
gold set trigram عندي ایمان بان Endy AymAn bAn
(I have faith that), that is conjugated for the first
person singular.

The same trigram Endy AymAn bAn can have
two types of gaps. The first can be a noun-based
indirect object after the preposition End. Thus,
we can have عند الناس ایمان بان End AlnAs AymAn
bAn (people have faith that). The second can be
an adjective after the head noun AymAn. Thus we
can have عندي ایمان مطلق بان Endy AymAn mTlq
bAn (I have a strong faith that).

Consequently, in the output of the quadrigram
best cluster, if we find matches to Endy AymAn
(adjective gap) bAn in any conjugations of Endy,
or if we find any matches for End (noun gap)
AymAn bAn, we consider them as true positives
for the trigram Endy AymAn bAn .

If the pronoun in End is replaced by a noun
and the adjective gap is filled, we will have a
pentagram like عند الناس ایمان مطلق بان End AlnAs
AymAn mTlq bAn (people have a strong faith
that). Since we do not extract pentagrams, we
consider chunks such as عند الناس ایمان End AlnAs
AymAn (people have faith) and ایمان مطلق بان
AymAn mTlq bAn (strong faith that) as false
positive trigrams. This is because the former
misses the complementizer بان bAn (in that), and
the latter misses the first preposition عند End
(literally: in; gloss: have).

119



Since we do not cluster pentagrams, we could
not tolerate gaps in the output of the
quadrigrams. We, however, tolerate
morphological variation. As a result, یحدونا االمل 
في ان yHdwnA AlAml fy An (hope drives us to) is
considered as a true positive for یحدوني االمل في ان
yHdwny AlAml fy An (hope derives me to).

It is important to note that we do not consider
the next best cluster of the larger AM-MWEs
unless we do not find any true positives in the
AM-MWE's original cluster. For example, we do
not search for bigrams' true positives in the
trigram and quadrigram clusters, unless there are
not any exact matches of the gold-set bigrams in
the bigrams' best cluster itself. The same thing
applies when evaluating trigram AM-MWEs.

4.2.3.2 Clustering Results and Error Analysis

Table 4 shows the evaluation results for bigrams,
trigrams and quadrigrams. We attribute the good
results to our evaluation methodology in the first
place because it allows counting true positives
across clusters of different ngram sizes to
account for gaps and tolerates morphological
variations. Our methodology captures the
morphological productivity of AM-MWEs which
is expected given that Arabic is morphologically-
rich. It also accounts for the syntactic
productivity in terms of insertion.

Precision Recall F1
Bigrams 0.663 0.776 0.715
Trigrams 0.811 0.756 0.783
Quadrigrams 0.857 0.717 0.780

Table 4: Clustering evaluation results

Long dependencies are a source of errors at the
recall level. Clustering could not capture such
instances as بالرئیس المصري حسني مبارك صرح SrH
Alr}ys AlmSry Hsny mbArk b (the Egyptian
president Hosni Mubarak declared to) because
they go beyond our quadrigram limit.

Another type of recall errors results from AM-
MWEs that do not meet the extraction frequency
threshold despite the large size of our corpus.
Our positive gold sets are sampled from
theoretical linguistics studies in which the
included illustrative examples are not necessarily
frequent. For example, we could not find
instances for the volitive یتوق الى ytwq Aly (he
longs for).

Precision errors result from the fact that our
RegExp-based procedure to guide the first
extraction stage is noisy. For instance, the
RegExp (\w*)t(\w*)w(\w*)q(\w*) that was
supposed to extract the volitive یتوق ytwq (he
longs) did not return any instances for the
intended modal but rather instances for یتوقف
ytwqf (he stops) which interestingly
subcategorizes for a preposition and a
complementizer as in یتوقف عن ان ytwqf En An
(literally: stops from to). This subcategorization
frame is the same for modals such as یعجز عن ان
yEjz En An (literally: unable from to).
Consequently, یتوقف عن ان ytwqf En An (he stops
from to) has been clustered as a trigram AM-
MWE although it does not convey any modality
senses. This highlights another reason for
precision errors. The subcategorization frames
and hence the syntactic features used for
clustering are not always distinctive for AM-
MWEs.

The @beg feature was the least informative
among all features. In the case of bigrams, they
are mostly lexical verbs that do not occur in
sentence initial positions. Meanwhile,
punctuation inconsistencies do not enable us to
reliably mark @beg for many ngrams.

4.3 Identifying Variation Patterns

Our target is to build a lexicon and a repository
of the variation patterns for AM-MWEs to boost
their automatic identification and extraction,
given their morpho-syntactic and lexical
productivity.

In order to identify variation patterns, we use
as input the best clusters from the previous
clustering stage and follow these steps:

 We keep all function words as is with their
lexical and POS representations

 We collapse all morphological tags for
gender, number, person, tense, mood, aspect
and case

 We add a HEAD tag to the head words (i.e.
words whose roots were used for extraction)

 We add a GAP tag for adverbs, pronouns and
other gap fillers to explicitly mark gap
locations

An example pattern for the root ح- م - ط  T-m-H
(wish) is  ((HEAD/*IV*) + (AlY/PREP) +
(An/SUB_CONJ)) which reads as follows: a

120



trigram AM-MWE whose head is a verb in any
conjugation followed by the preposition AlY (to)
and the subordinate conjunction An (that; to).
Another pattern that results from the
aforementioned steps for the same root of T-m-H
is ((HEAD/*IV*) + (ADV/GAP) + (AlY/PREP) +
(An/SUB_CONJ)). It means that an adverb can be
inserted in-between the HEAD and the preposition
AlY (to).

4.4 Bootstrapping AM-MWEs

We use the patterns identified in the previous
stage in two ways: first, to extract low-frequency
AM-MWEs whose HEADs have the same roots as
the pattern's HEAD; and second, to extract AM-
MWEs that have the same lexical, POS patterns
but are not necessarily derived from the modality
roots we used in extraction.

For example, from the previous section we
used ((HEAD/*IV*) + (AlY/PREP) +
(An/SUB_CONJ)) to extract the third person
feminine plural conjugation of the root T-m-H in
the trigram محن الى انیط yTmHn AlY An (they
wish for) that occurred only once in the corpus.
We used the same pattern to extract یصبو الى ان
ySbw AlY An (he longs for) that has the same
pattern but whose HEAD'S root S-b-b was not in
our list of modality roots.

Among the new extracted AM-MWEs are the
expressions من الواضح ان mn AlmwADH An (it is
clear that) and من الطبیعي ان mn AlTbyEy An (it is
normal that) that share the same pattern with من 
الممكن ان mn Almmkn An (it is possible that). We
decide to consider those expressions as AM-
MWEs although they are not epistemic in the
conventional sense. That is, they do not evaluate
the truth value of their clause-based propositions,
but rather presuppose the proposition as true, and
express the speakers' sentiment towards it.

This bootstrapping stage results in 358 AM-
MWEs. They are inspected during manual
verification.

5 Manual Verification and Final Results

We manually verify the best clusters, the
bootstrapped AM-MWEs and the constructed
patterns before including them in the final
lexicon and repository to guarantee accuracy.
Besides, we manually add modality senses to the
lexicon entries. We also manually complete the
morphological paradigms of the morphologically

productive AM-MWEs. That is, if we only have
the bigram یرغب في yrgb fy (he longs for)
conjugated for the third singular masculine
person, we manually add the rest of the
conjugations.

The final lexicon is represented in XML and is
organized by modality senses and then roots
within each sense. The lexicon comprises 10,664
entries. The XML fields describe: the Arabic
string, the size of the AM-MWE, the corpus
frequency and the pattern ID. The pattern ID is
the link between the lexicon and the repository
because it maps each lexicon entry to its lexical,
POS pattern in the repository.

Roots Senses Sizes
A-m-l 710 Epistemic 4233 Bigrams 4806
A-k-d 693 Evidential 811 Trigrams 3244
r-g-b 396 Obligative 748 Quadrigrams 2614
$-E-r 378 Permissive 755
H-s-s 370 Commissive 111
q-n-E 312 Abilitive 676
E-q-d 293 Volitive 3330

Total: 10,664
Table 5: Statistics for the AM-MWE lexicon for the
top 7 roots and the distributions of modality senses

and AM-MWE sizes

If a lexicon entry is manually added, the tag
MANUAL is used for the corpus frequency field.
Table 5 gives more statistics about the lexicon in
terms of modality senses, AM-MWE sizes and
the top 7 frequent modality roots.

The XML repository is given in the three  POS
tagsets supported by MADAMIRA. The XML
fields describe: the pattern's ID, the POS of the
head and the pattern itself with the HEADs and
GAPs marked. Appendices A and B give
snapshots of the lexicon and the repository in
Buckwalter's POS tagset.

6 Conclusion and Outlook

We described the unsupervised construction of a
lexicon and a repository of variation patterns for
AM-MWEs to boost their automatic
identification and extraction. In addition to the
creation of novel resources, our research gives
insights about the morphological, syntactic and
lexical properties of such expressions. We also
propose an evaluation methodology that accounts
for the productive insertion patterns of AM-
MWEs and their morphological variations.

For future work, we will work on larger AM-
MWEs to cover insertion patterns that we could

121



not cover in this paper. We will experiment with
different association measures such as point-wise
mutual information. We will also try different
clustering algorithms.

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by grant NPRP 09-410-
1-069 of the Qatar National Research Fund. We
would also like to thank the four anonymous
reviewers for their constructive comments.

References
Rania Al-Sabbagh and Roxana Girju. 2012. YADAC:

Yet another Dialectal Arabic Corpus. Proc. of
LREC'12, Istanbul, Turkey, May 23-25 2012

Rania Al-Sabbagh, Jana Diesner and Roxana Girju.
2013. Using the Semantic-Syntactic Interface for
Reliable Arabic Modality Annotation. Proc. of
IJCNLP'13, Nagoya, Japan, October 14-18 2013

Mohammed Attia, Antonio Toral, Lamia Tounsi,
Pavel Pecina and Josef van Genbith. 2010.
Automatic Extraction of Arabic Multiword
Expressions. Proc. of the Workshop on MWE 2010,
Beijing, August 2010

Elsaid Badawi, M.G. Carter and Adrian Gully. 2004.
Modern Written Arabic: A Comprehensive
Grammar. UK: MPG Books Ltd

Satanjeev Banerjee and Ted Pedersen. 2003. The
Design, Implementation, and Use of the Ngram
Statistic Package. Proc. of CiCling'03,  Mexico
City, USA

Ibrahim Bounhas and Yahya Slimani. 2009. A Hybrid
Approach for Arabic Multi-Word Term Extraction.
Proceedings of NLP-KE 2009, Dalian, China,
September 24-27 2009

Kristen E. Brustad. 2000. The Syntax of Spoken
Arabic: A Comparative Study of Moroccan,
Egyptian, Syrian and Kuwaiti Dialects.
Georgetown Uni. Press, Washington DC, USA

Tim Buckwalter. 2002. Arabic Morphological
Analyzer. Technical Report, Linguistic Data
Consortium, Philadelphia

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Moritz Sudhof,
Dan Jurafsky, Jure Leskovec and Christopher Potts.
2013. A Computational Approach to Politeness
with Application to Social Factors. Proc. of the 51st

ACL, , Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9  2013
Mona Diab, Lori Levin, Teruko Mitamura, Owen

Rambow, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, and Weiwei
Guo. 2009. Committed Belief Annotation and
Tagging. Proc. of the 3rd LAW Workshop, ACL-
IJCNLP'09, pp. 68-73, Singapore

Carla Parra Escartín, Gyri Smørdal Losnegaard, Gunn
Inger Lyse Samdal and Pedro Patiño García. 2013.
Representing Multiword Expressions in Lexical and

Terminological Resources: An Analysis for Natural
Language Processing Purposes. Proc. of eLex 2013,
pages 338-357, Tallinn, Estonia, October 17-19
2013

Abdelati Hawwari, Kfir Bar and Mona Diab. 2012.
Building an Arabic Multiword Expressions
Repository. Proc. of the 50th ACL, pages 24-29,
Jeju, Republic of Korea, July 12 2012

Andrew Lampert, Robert Dale and Cecile Paris. 2010,
Detecting Emails Containing Requests for Action.
Proc. of the 2010 ACL, pages 984-992, Los
Angeles, California, June 2010

F. Mitchell and S. A. Al-Hassan. 1994. Modality,
Mood and Aspect in Spoken Arabic with Special
Reference to Egypt and the Levant. London and
NY: Kegan Paul International

Ola Moshref. 2012. Corpus Study of Tense, Aspect,
and Modality in Diglossic Speech in Cairene
Arabic. PhD Thesis. University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign

Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2007. ISI
Arabic-English Automatically Extracted Parallel
Text, Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia

Malvin Nissim and Andrea Zaninello. 2013. A
Repository of Variation Patterns for Multiword
Expressions. Proc. of the 9th Workshop of MWE,
pp. 101-105, Atlanta, Georgia, June 13-14 2013

Frank R. Palmer. 2001. Mood and Modality. 2nd

Edition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK

Silvia Pareti, Tim O'Keefe, Ioannis Konstas, James R.
Curran and Irena Koprinska. 2013. Automatically
Detecting and Attributing Indirect Quotations.
Proc. of the 2013 EMNLP, pages. 989-1000,
Washington, USA, October 18-21 2013

Arfath Pasha, Mohamed Al-Badrashiny, Ahmed El
Kholy, Ramy Eskander, Mona Diab, Nizar Habash,
Manoj Pooleery, Owen Rambow and Ryan Roth.
2014. MADAMIRA: A Fast, Comprehensive Tool
for Morphological Analysis and Disambiguation of
Arabic. Proc. of the 9th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation, Reykjavik,
Iceland, May 26-31 2014

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran and Owen Rambow. 2013.
Written Dialog and Social Power: Manifestations of
Different Types of Power in Dialog Behavior.
Proceedings of the 6th IJCNLP, pp. 216-224,
Nagoya, Japan, October 14-18  2013

Ivan Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword
Expressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP.
Proceedings of CiCling 2002, pages 1-15, Mexico
City, Mexico

Michael Stubbs. 2007. An Example of Frequent
English Phraseology: Distributions, Structures and

122



Functions. Language and Computers: Corpus
Linguistics 25 Years on, pages 89-105, (17)

Appendix A: A snapshot of the XML lexicon
<lexicon name="AM-MWE Lexicon v1.0">

<modality sense="abilitive">
<head root="q-d-r">

<am-mwe string="قادر على"  len="2" freq="283" patternID="23"> </am-mwe>
<am-mwe string="لدیھ القدرة على" len="3" freq="7" patternID="45"> </am-mwe>
...

</head>
</modality>
<modality sense="epistemic">

<head root="g-l-b">
<am-mwe string="في الغالب" len="2" freq="122" patternID="15"> </am-mwe>
...

</head>
<head root="H-w-l">

<am-mwe string="یستحیل ان" len="2" freq="70" patternID="10"> </am-mwe>
...

</head>
<head root="n-Z-r">

<am-mwe string="من المنتظر ایضا ان " len="4" freq="38" patternID="50"> </am-mwe>
...

</head>
</modality>

</lexicon>

Appendix B: A snapshot of the XML repository
<repository name="AM-MWE Variation Patterns v1.0">

<tagset name="Buckwalter" pos-tagger="MADAMIRA v1.0">
...
<pattern ID="10" head-pos="*+IV+*" pos="(HEAD)+ (An/SUB_CONJ)"></pattern>
...
<pattern ID="15" head-pos="DET+NOUN+*" pos="(fy/PREP)+(HEAD)"></pattern>
...
<pattern ID="23" head-pos="ADJ+*" pos="(HEAD)+(ElY/PREP)"> </pattern>
...
<pattern ID="45" head-pos="DET+NOUN+*" pos="(lyd/NOUN)+(PRON*/GAP)*+(HEAD)+(ElY/PREP)">
</pattern>
...
<pattern ID="50" head-pos="DET+NOUN+*" pos="(mn/PREP)+(HEAD)+(ADV/GAP)*+(An/SUB_CONJ)">
</pattern>
....

</tagset>
</repository>

123


