










































Instructions for ACL-2010 Proceedings


Morphosemantic relations between verbs in Croatian WordNet 

 

 

Krešimir Šojat 

Faculty of Humanities and Social Sci-

ences, University of Zagreb, Croatia 

ksojat@ffzg.hr 

Matea Srebačić 

University of Zagreb, 

Croatia 

msrebaci@unizg.hr 

 

  

 

Abstract 

 

This paper deals with morphosemantic rela-

tions between Croatian verbs and discusses 

their inclusion in Croatian WordNet. Mor-

phosemantic relations refer to semantic rela-

tions between morphologically related verbs, 

i.e., between verbs from the same derivational 

family. A derivational family consists of verbs 

with the same lexical morpheme grouped 

around a base form. Generally, a verb with the 

simplest morphological structure serves as a 

base form for derivational processes. In Croa-

tian, verbs are derived from base forms 

through prefixation and suffixation. Both deri-

vational processes trigger aspectual and se-

mantic changes. The focus is on semantic rela-

tions that regularly appear in various deriva-

tional families and consequently in various 

semantic fields. It is argued that these mor-

phosemantic relations are crucial for the fur-

ther development of Croatian WordNet. 

 

1 Introduction 

Croatian WordNet is a lexical database built 

through the so-called expand model (Vossen, 

1998), i.e., by translating and adapting synsets 

from Princeton WordNet (further PWN) into 

Croatian. The building of Croatian WordNet 

(CroWN) can roughly be divided into two major 

phases. The first phase consisted of the transla-

tion and adaptation of the so-called basic concept 

sets from the multilingual projects EuroWordNet 

(EWN) and BalkaNet (BN) (cf. (Raffaelli et al., 

2008). At present, CroWN contains 10,000 

synsets. 8500 of these are from the basic concept 

sets of EWN and BN. Each synset was manually 

translated and provided with meaning definitions 

and usage examples. Synsets contain lexical 

units of the same part of speech. Since CroWN is 

a relatively small resource, the second phase of 

the project is primarily oriented toward its en-

largement. Approximately 1500 noun synsets 

were added using the same procedure. This 

freely available version of CroWN contains 7391 

noun synsets, 2318 verb synsets, and 310 adjec-

tive synsets.
1
 As the numbers indicate, nouns 

make up almost 75% of the whole lexicon.
2
 Such 

a strong predominance of this part of speech was 

a motivation to make CroWN a more balanced 

and representative resource for Croatian. The 

second phase of the project is primarily focused 

on enlarging the number of verbal synsets. How-

ever, this task required a re-examination of the 

building strategy applied so far.  

2 Motivation 

We decided to re-examine our building strategy 

for two reasons. The first pertains to differences 

between English and Croatian verbs that are 

more significant than was assumed. The second 

reason is an attempt to speed up the building of 

CroWN by using other available language re-

sources for Croatian. As far as the first reason is 

concerned, the lexical hierarchies and word sens-

es from PWN in numerous cases differ signifi-

cantly from the lexical meaning, number of sens-

es, and sense relations in their Croatian counter-

parts. For example, the verb dati appears in 28 

synsets in CroWN (i.e. it is marked for 28 sens-

es), but such a particularization of meaning is a 

consequence of the adopted expand model, and 

does not reflect its true semantic structure. Alt-

                                                 
1
 CroWN can be downloaded from the following site: 
http://meta-

share.ffzg.hr/repository/browse/croatian

-wordnet/  
2 Similar situation is frequent in other wordnets. Maziarz et 

al. (2012) provide detailed statistics of POS distribution 

across major wordnets. 

http://meta-share.ffzg.hr/repository/browse/croatian-wordnet/
http://meta-share.ffzg.hr/repository/browse/croatian-wordnet/
http://meta-share.ffzg.hr/repository/browse/croatian-wordnet/


hough dati is a highly polysemous verb in Croa-

tian, we found only 12 different senses of this 

verb listed in various monolingual dictionaries.
3
 

Apart from issues concerning conceptual systems 

and semantic representation, rich derivational 

processes between Croatian verbs bring about 

relations that cannot be captured by presently 

used semantic relations.
4
 Verbs in Croatian are 

derived from other verbs by prefixation and suf-

fixation. Both processes can trigger a change in 

aspect and the addition of a new semantic com-

ponent to the base form. In accordance with 

Binnick (1991), we treat aspect as a grammatical 

feature, but predictable shifts in meaning, fre-

quently referred to as Aktionsarten, as lexical 

features, pertaining to classes of verbs. This dis-

tinction is reflected in the structure of verbal 

synsets in CroWN. True aspectual pairs, i.e., im-

perfectives and perfectives denoting completion 

of an action, are members of the same synset. 

The lexical meaning of these perfectives differs 

from imperfectives only in this temporal distinc-

tion. Apart from aspectual change, semantic 

components brought by affixes can produce 

combinations that, in terms of meaning, can vary 

from compositional to completely idiosyncratic. 

E.g., the verb crtati ‘to drawipf’ has a true aspec-

tual pair nacrtati ‘to drawpf’, but there are six 

other prefixed perfectives as well: 1. pre+crtati 

‘to copy (by drawing)pf’, 2. pod+crtati ‘to under-

linepf’, 3. o+crtati ‘to outlinepf’, 4. is+crtati ‘to 

draw completelypf’, 5. u+crtati ‘to draw intopf’, 

and 6. za+crtati ‘to make a planpf’. The same 

prefixes can be used with other base forms, e.g. 

pre+pisati ‘to copy (by writing)pf’, pre+slikati 

‘to copy (by painting)pf. The base form crtati ‘to 

drawipf’ can also be suffixed, e.g. 1. crt-k-ati ‘to 

drawipf, diminutive’, 2. crt-kar-ati ‘to drawipf, 

pejorative’.
5
 Suffixes with diminutive and pejo-

rative meanings can also combine with other 

base forms. We pose two basic questions: Which 

semantic regularities can be spotted in combina-

tions of particular affixes and various base 

forms? and How can thereby established mor-

                                                 
3
 More examples can be found in Šojat et al. (2012: 

111 – 112). 
4
 We use the same semantic relations between verbal 

synsets as in EWN and BN. These relations are syn-

onymy, hyponymy/hypernymy, antonymy, cause, and 

subevent. 
5
 Suffixes -k- and -kar- occupy the first position on 

the right side of the verbal root crt-. The full 

morphological analysis of the verbs crtati, crtkati and 

crtkarati is thus: crt-ø-ø-a-ti, crt-k-ø-a-ti and crt-kar-

ø-a-ti (cf. Section 3).  

phosemantic relations be used in our further 

work? In order to address these issues, as well as 

to speed up the building of CroWN, we have de-

cided to use data from CroDeriV, a large mor-

phological database of Croatian verbs. In the fol-

lowing section we shall briefly describe this re-

source (for a full description, see Šojat et al., 

2012). 

3 CroDeriV 

CroDeriV is a computational lexicon containing 

data on the morphological structure of approxi-

mately 14 300 Croatian verbs collected from 

freely available dictionaries and corpora. The 

compiled verbal lemmas were analyzed for mor-

phemes with a rule-based approach and the re-

sults were checked manually. Each lexical entry 

in CroDeriV consists of verbs decomposed into 

morphemes and linguistic metadata. The struc-

ture for all analyzed verbs consists of 11 mor-

pheme slots and covers all combinations of rec-

orded lexical and grammatical morphemes. 

There are four types of slots for morphemes: (1) 

derivational prefixes (four slots), (2) the lexical 

part (three slots – in the majority of cases only 

one is filled, the three slots are provided for ver-

bal compounds of two roots and an interfix), (3) 

derivational and conjugational suffixes (three 

slots), and (4) infinitive ending (one slot). The 

metadata in lexical entries indicate verbal aspect 

and types of reflexivity.
6
 The database enables 

queries across the full derivational span of a par-

ticular base form and provides extensive data 

about the distribution and frequency of affixes in 

the derivation of Croatian verbs.
7
 In the follow-

ing section, the underlying analysis of affixal 

meanings is described.  

4 Affixal Meanings 

The majority of verbal prefixes in Croatian de-

veloped from prepositions, and the original loca-

tive component pervades in their meaning. How-

ever, they are highly polysemous units and in 

various combinations they can differently modify 

the meaning of base forms. For example, the 

                                                 
6
 CroDeriV resembles databases like CatVar for Eng-

lish 

(http://clipdemos.umiacs.umd.edu/catvar) 

and Unimorph for Russian 

(http://courses.washington.edu/unimorph/

index.html). 
7
 For data on the productivity and frequency of affixes 

in Croatian, see Šojat et al. (2013). 

http://clipdemos.umiacs.umd.edu/catvar
http://courses.washington.edu/unimorph/index.html
http://courses.washington.edu/unimorph/index.html


verbal prefix na- 'on' can have at least eight dif-

ferent meanings (divided further into several sub-

groups) in combinations with various base forms: 

1) pure aspectual meaning: pisati 'to writeipf' – 

napisati 'to writepf' 

2) locative meanings: 

a. top-down: baciti 'to throwpf' – nabaciti 

'to throw ontopf' 

b. proximity: letjeti 'to flyipf' – naletjeti 

'to bump intopf' 

c. putting something on something: 

slagati 'to pileipf' – naslagati 'to pile one 

on anotherpf'' 

3) inchoativity: trunuti 'to rotipf' – natrunuti 'to 

begin to rotpf' 

4) distributivity: bacati 'to throwipf' – nabacati 'to 

throw one by onepf' 

5) sufficiency: jesti 'to eatipf' – najesti se 'to stuff 

oneselfpf' 

6) excessiveness: piti 'to drinkipf' – napiti se 'to 

get drunkpf' 

7) addition: gomilati 'to accumulateipf' – 

nagomilati 'to accumulate a lot of Xpf' 

8) intensitiy:  

a. low intensity: gristi 'to biteipf' – nagris-

ti 'to bite a bitpf' 

b. high intensity: pisati 'to writeipf' – na-

pisati se 'to tire oneself with writingpf' 

 

All 19 verbal prefixes recorded in CroDeriV 

were analyzed in the same manner.
8
 This analy-

sis enabled the recognition of the same or similar 

semantic components shared by different prefix-

es as well as the division of prefixal meanings 

into four major semantic groups. The four major 

groups of prefixal meanings are location, time, 

quantity, and manner. Each group has several 

subgroups. An analysis of suffixal meanings 

yielded an additional semantic group of diminu-

tive and pejorative verbs.
9
 Before further discus-

sion, we shall briefly present the morphoseman-

tic relations between verbs in other Slavic word-

nets and compare them with the relations used in 

CroWN. 

5 Related Work 

Rich derivational morphology in Slavic lan-

guages and problems faced in the building of 

                                                 
8
 These prefixes are: do-, iz-, na-, nad-, o-/ob-, obez-, 

od-, po-, pod-, pre-, pred-, pri-, pro-, raz-, s-, su-, u-, 

uz-, and za-. 
9
 An analysis of prefixal meanings is given in Šojat et 

al. (2012); suffixal meanings are discussed in Šojat et 

al. (2013). 

Czech, Bulgarian, and Serbian wordnets are dis-

cussed in Pala and Hlaváčková (2007), Koeva 

(2008), and Koeva et al. (2008). The discussion 

refers mainly to derivational relations across dif-

ferent parts of speech. Pala and Hlaváčková 

(2007) list 14 derivational processes in Czech 

introduced into Czech WordNet as relations be-

tween derived and base forms. This results in a 

“two-level network”, where the higher level in-

cludes semantic relations between synsets, and 

the lower level includes derivational relations 

between single synset members. Although the 

verb-verb pairs are linked through prefixation, 

this relation is not used in further analysis. 

Koeva (2008) points out the relation between 

verbal aspectual pairs as the most productive der-

ivational relation in Bulgarian and argues that 

perfective and imperfective verbs in Bulgarian 

WordNet should be split into separate synsets. 

While the hypernymy would be based on imper-

fective verbs only, synsets would be linked with 

the morphosemantic relation aspect. Relations 

between prefixed derivatives and base forms, 

apart from aspectual, are not discussed. The 

work presented in Koeva et al. (2008) concerning 

Serbian WordNet refers mainly to derivational 

relations across different parts of speech. Aspec-

tual pairs in Serbian WordNet are members of 

the same synset. The most elaborate account of 

relations between verbs in Slavic is given in Ma-

ziarz et al. (2011) and Maziarz et al. (2012). In 

Polish WordNet 2.0 aspectual pairs are kept apart 

and lexical hierarchies consist of either perfec-

tive or imperfective verbs. Relations between 

verbs are divided into purely semantic relations 

(e.g., synonymy, hyponymy, meronymy holon-

ymy, antonymy, processuality, causality, inchoa-

tivity, presupposition, and preceding) and deriva-

tionally-motivated relations (e.g., pure aspectual-

ity, secondary aspectuality, iterativity, and deri-

vationality). Some of the relations hold between 

lexical units (word-sense pairs, e.g., antonymy or 

pure aspectuality), while others hold between 

synsets (e.g., hyponymy and processuality). In 

CroWN, pure aspectual pairs are members of the 

same synset. Pure aspectual pairs are determined 

primarily by the test of secondary imperfectiviza-

tion (cf. Jelaska, 2005; Maziarz et al., 2011), but 

also by additional criteria pertaining to semantics 

of affixes. The relation of pure aspectuality exists 

between a base form and a derivative with an 

affix which does not contain any other semantic 

components except perfectiveness, e.g. pisati ‘to 

writeipf’ – napisati ‘to writepf’ are members of the 

same synset. The same holds for iterative verbs 



and perfective base forms. Although iterative 

verbs have the additional semantic component of 

repetitiveness, they differ from their perfectives 

only in this temporal component. E.g., pisati ‘to 

writeipf’ – prepisati ‘to copy by writingpf’ are not 

members of the same synset. However, prepisati 

‘to copy by writingpf’ – prepisivati ‘to copy by 

writingipf-iter’ are members of the same synset. 

Each synset member is tagged with one of the 

following aspect labels: IPF, PF, BI, or ITER, 

representing imperfective, perfective, bi-

aspectual and iterative forms. This distinction is 

also reflected in different aspectual forms used in 

definitions, although they are structurally and 

semantically the same. Finally, all mor-

phosemantic relations in CroWN discussed be-

low hold between single members of synsets, i.e. 

lexical units, and not between whole synsets.  

6 Morphosemantic Relations in CroWN 

Morphosemantic relations are based on overlap-

ping components of affixal meanings in combi-

nations with various base forms. The analysis 

described in Section 4 enabled the classification 

of affixal meanings into four broad semantic 

groups for prefixes and one for suffixes. Four 

major groups for prefixes – location, time, quan-

tity, and manner – are further divided into sub-

groups (28 in total). Morphosemantic relations 

and a variety of sub-relations based upon this 

classification are listed below: 

 

1. PREFIXES: 

a) location group: bottom-up, top-down, 
proximity, through, apart, to/towards, 

over, into, around, under, re-location, 

behind, across, from 

b) time group: inchoativity, finitiveness, 
distributivity, preceding 

c) quantity group: sufficiency (+/-), ex-
cessiveness, intensity (+/-), exceeding, 

deprivation, addition 

d) manner group: inter-connection, change 
of property. 

SUFFIXES: 

a) diminutive group: diminutive, pejora-
tive 

 

As far as the semantic impact of prefixes is con-

cerned, relations in the location group predomi-

nantly hold between verbs of movement, but also 

between numerous other base verbs and deriva-

tives with spatial relations pervading their lexical 

meaning (e.g., udahnuti 'to inhale' or uvući 'to 

drag into'). Derivatives in time group refer to dif-

ferent phases of actions denoted by base verbs 

(e.g., beginning or termination). The subtype dis-

tributivity is on the border between the time and 

quantity groups since the derivatives denote re-

petitive actions performed by one or more agents 

on one or more objects. Since distributive actions 

are performed iteratively, this relation is listed in 

the time group. Relations from the quantity group 

hold when derivatives denote various degrees of 

an action (e.g. naraditi se 'to tire oneself out 

(with work)', najesti se 'to eat one’s fill'). The 

smallest group – manner – contains only two 

relations denoting changes of properties (e.g., 

uprljati se 'to become dirty') and actions per-

formed in a specific manner (e.g. sufinancirati 'to 

co-finance'). The semantic impact of suffixes is 

limited to diminutive and pejorative meaning 

expressed by derivatives (e.g., jeduckati 'to nib-

ble'). The aim of this classification is to establish 

the set of morphosemantic relations and use them 

within derivational families of verbs in CroWN. 

To determine which verbs are derivationally re-

lated and therefore are candidates for further 

analysis, we compared the list of verbs from 

CroWN and CroDeriV. All verbs from the 2318 

verbal synsets in CroWN are recorded in Cro-

DeriV. 

The full list of verbs from CroWN was filtered 

into those sharing the same root. The list of verbs 

recognized as derivatives comprises 2530 base 

forms and prefixed derivatives. This list was fur-

ther filtered for verbs marked as aspectual pairs 

in CroWN. In the next step, prefixed forms were 

segmented into prefixes and base forms. Thus we 

obtained 572 base forms and 1476 derivatives as 

candidates for the assignment of morphoseman-

tic relations. In the final step, the relations were 

manually assigned to derivationally related verbs 

from CroWN. When no morphosemantic relation 

was appropriate due to the idiosyncratic nature of 

the combinations, we tagged this relation as 

DERIV (144 verbs). 

The result of the whole procedure is a list of 572 

base forms and 1186 prefixed verbs marked for 

morphosemantic relations. There are also 19 lex-

ical units marked as diminutives in CroWN. In 

CroDeriV, derivational suffixes for diminutives 

always occupy the first slot to the right of the 

root (cf. Section 3). Table 1 contains the overall 

frequency of relations in four major groups as 

well as the frequency of the three most promi-

nent subrelations for prefixed derivatives (man-

ner contains only two subrelations). The last row 

indicates the frequency of suffixed derivatives. 



 

Group Freq Subgroup Freq 

Loc 598 loc_apart 141 

  loc_around 87 

  loc_from 70 

Time 276 time_fin 132 

  time_inch 109 

  time_distr 28 

Quan 190 quan_int 126 

  quan_exc 25 

  quan_suff 20 

Mann 122 mann_prop 88 

  mann_conn 34 

Dim 19 pejorative 8 

 

Table 1: Frequency of MS relations in CroWN 

 

7 Discussion and Future Work 

None of the discussed morphosemantic relations 

between members of different synsets can be 

completely subsumed by any of semantic rela-

tions between synsets in terms of semantic con-

tent. Base verbs and their derivatives are fre-

quently not members of same lexical hierarchies, 

such as synsets containing derivationally related 

verbs like ići 'to go', ući 'to go into', izaći 'to go 

out' and otići 'to go away'. Although the verbs ući 

and izaći are marked as antonyms, the related-

ness of the whole group is not indicated. The 

relation cause partially overlaps with our mor-

phosemantic relation change of property, but 

cause cannot encompass reflexive non-agentive 

counterpart pairs of transitive verbs in Slavic 

(e.g. topiti se – otopiti se ’to meltipf-pf'’ – to be-

come soft or liquid vs. topiti – otopiti ’to meltipf-

pf' – to cause to become soft or liquid. The rela-

tion of subevent refers to two simultaneous ac-

tions or to an action which is a part of the action 

denoted by another synset, but it does not reflect 

particular parts of events, such as its beginning 

or terminating point, as morphosemantic rela-

tions of inchoativity or finitiveness do. In order 

to capture the semantic relatedness between 

verbs usually scattered across different hierar-

chies, we have introduced a set of 28 mor-

phosemantic relations. This "two-level network," 

as defined by Pala and Hlaváčková (2007), along 

with extensive data from CroDeriV, provides an 

excellent basis for further work. Although Cro-

DeriV does not contain data about lexical mean-

ing and semantic relations between verbs, infor-

mation about the morphological structure of 

verbs proved valuable for the detection of deriva-

tionally related verbs and the assignment of mor-

phosemanic relations. Information about com-

plete derivational families is also valuable for the 

further expansion of CroWN, which is one of our 

primary goals. It can be used both to complete 

already present derivational families and to in-

troduce new ones. Finally, the importance of 

morphosemantic relations in the description of 

the verbal system in Croatian can be demonstrat-

ed with the Croatian verb gristi 'to biteipf'. This 

verb appears in CroWN only in this form, 

whereas CroDeriV contains ten other derivatives 

from this base form. Only the derivative marked 

with the relation DERIVED in Figure 1 below 

can be straightforwardly connected to other 

synsets in CroWN via semantic relations. All 

other derivatives, i.e., 90% of this derivational 

family, should be connected to this base form 

primarily by morphosemantic relations as de-

scribed here. Although the full set of mor-

phosemantic relations as discussed here provides 

a more densed and fine-grained structure of the 

Croatian lexicon, we are aware that in numerous 

cases it is hard to maintain the consistency and 

clear-cut distinctions among 28 presented rela-

tions. However, we are convinced that even a set 

of morphosemantic relations limited to four ma-

jor groups of prefixed derivatives (location, time, 

quantity and manner) and one group of suffixed 

derivatives (diminutive/pejorative) can substan-

tially enrich wordnets for Slavic languages. 

 

 
 

Figure 1: MS relations across a derivational 

family 



Acknowledgements  

The research was supported by MZOS RH pro-

ject 130-1300646-1002 and partially by XLike 

project (FP7, Grant 288342). 

References  

Robert I. Binnick. 1991. Time and the Verb: A Guide 

to Tense & Aspect. Oxford University Press, Ox-

ford, UK.  

Zrinka Jelaska. 2005. Hrvatski kao drugi i strani jezik. 

Hrvatska sveučilišna naklada: Zagreb. 

Svetla Koeva. 2008. Derivational and Morphoseman-

tic Relations in Bulgarian WordNet. Proceedings 

of the Intelligent Information Systems 2008, 359–

368. 

Svetla Koeva, Cvetana Krstev and Duško Vitas. 2008. 

Morpho-semantic Relations in WordNet – a Case 

Study for two Slavic Languages. Proceedings of 

the 4th Global WordNet Conference, 239–254. 

Marek Maziarz, Maciej Piasecki, Stanislaw 

Szpakowicz, Joanna Rabiega-Wisniewska, Bozena 

Hojka 2011. Semantic Relations between Verbs in 

Polish WordNet 2.0. Cognitive studies, 11:183–

200. 

Marek Maziarz, Maciej Piasecki and Stanisław Szpa-

kowicz. 2012. An Implementation of a System of 

Verb Relations in plWordNet 2.0. Proceedings of 

the 6th Global WordNet Conference, 181–188. 

Karel Pala and Dana Hlaváčková. 2007. Derivational 

Relations in Czech WordNet. Proceedings of the 

Workshop on Balto-Slavonic Languages, 75–81. 

Ida Raffaelli, Marko Tadić, Božo Bekavac, Željko 

Agić 2008. Building Croatian WordNet. Proceed-

ings of the 4th Global WordNet Conference, 349-

360. 

Krešimir Šojat, Matea Srebačić and Marko Tadić. 

2012. Derivational and Semantic Relations of Cro-

atian Verbs. Journal of Language Modelling, 0 (1): 

111-142. 

Krešimir Šojat, Matea Srebačić and Vanja Štefanec. 

2013. CroDeriV i morfološka raščlamba hrvatsko-

ga glagola. Suvremena lingvistika, 39 (75): 75 – 96. 

Piek Vossen. (Ed.) 1998. EuroWordNet. A Multilin-

gual Database with Lexical Semantic Networks, 

Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dodrecht, Boston, 

London. 


