



















































Representing Caused Motion in Embodied Construction Grammar


Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Semantic Parsing, pages 39–44,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Representing Caused Motion in Embodied Construction Grammar 

 

Ellen K. Dodge 

International Computer Science Institute 

Berkeley, CA, USA 94704 

edodge@icsi.berkeley.edu 

Miriam R. L. Petruck 

International Computer Science Institute 

 Berkeley, CA, USA 94704 

miriamp@icsi.berkeley.edu 

 

 

Abstract 

This paper offers an Embodied Construc-

tion Grammar (Feldman et al. 2010) rep-

resentation of caused motion, thereby al-

so providing (a sample of) the computa-

tional infrastructure for implementing the 

information that FrameNet has character-

ized as Caused_motion1 (Ruppenho-

fer et al. 2010). This work specifies the 

semantic structure of caused motion in 

natural language, using an Embodied 

Construction Grammar analyzer that in-

cludes the semantic parsing of linguisti-

cally instantiated constructions. Results 

from this type of analysis can serve as the 

input to NLP applications that require 

rich semantic representations. 

1 Introduction 

Computational linguistics recognizes the difficul-

ty in articulating the nature of complex events, 

including causation, while understanding that 

doing so is fundamental for creating natural lan-

guage processing (NLP) systems (e.g. Girju 

2003, Quang et al. 2011), and more generally for 

other computational techniques (Guyon et al. 

2007, Friedman et al. 2000).  Also, although in-

sightful, linguistic analyses of causation are in-

sufficient for systems that require drawing the 

inferences that humans draw with ease. Such sys-

tems must incorporate information about the pa-

rameters that support drawing these inferences. 

Embodied Construction Grammar (ECG) pro-

vides the computational and representational ap-

paratus for capturing what language expresses. 

FrameNet (FN) frames capture event structure 

in terms of the participants that play a role in that 

event. ECG provides a means for the automatic 

identification of frames and frame roles ex-

                                                 
1
 Courier New font indicates a FrameNet frame; 

and small CAPS indicate a FE in a FN frame.  

pressed in any given sentence. Here, we focus on 

a pair of sentences that illustrate the rich mean-

ings and relations characterized in FN frames as 

represented in ECG.  

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 

includes background information on FrameNet 

(FN) and ECG; Section 3 describes the FN 

treatment of Caused_motion, and the ECG 

representation of the CauseMotion schema, 

which constitutes the meaning block of the 

Cause_motion construction; Section 4 summa-

rizes the ECG analysis of motion and caused mo-

tion example sentences; and Section 5 discusses 

new directions for future work with ECG repre-

sentations of information structured in FrameNet 

frames (http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu). 

2 Background 

Chang et al. (2002) constitutes the first effort to 

represent the prose description of the information 

that FN has defined in semantic frames in formal 

terms. The work provided an ECG representation 

of FN’s (then) Commerce frame, showing the 

perspicuity of doing so to account for linguistic 

perspective, and ultimately useful in translating 

FN information into a representation needed for 

event simulation (Narayanan 1997). Building on 

Chang et al. (2002), this paper focuses on the 

analysis and representation of the meanings of 

sentences describing different kinds of motion 

events, using a set of related semantic frames.   

Before detailing the examples that illustrate the 

analysis and representation, we offer a very brief 

overview of FN and ECG. 

2.1 FrameNet 

The FrameNet knowledge base holds unique 

information on the mapping of meaning to form 

via the theory of Frame Semantics (Fillmore and 

Baker 2010), at the heart of which is the seman-

tic frame, i.e. an experience-based schematiza-

tion of the language user’s world that allows in-

ferences about participants and objects in and 

across situations, states of affairs, and events. FN 

39



has characterized nearly 1,200 frames, more than 

12,740 lexical units (LUs), where a lexical unit is 

a pairing of a lemma and a frame, and approxi-

mately 200,000 manually annotated example 

sentences that illustrate usage of each LU. 

A FN frame definition includes a prose de-

scription of a prototypical situation, along with a 

specification of the frame elements (FEs), or se-

mantic roles, that uniquely characterize that situ-

ation. For example, FN has defined Motion as a 

situation in which a THEME starts out at a 

SOURCE, moves along a PATH, and ends up at a 

GOAL.
2
  Example (1) illustrates FN’s analysis of 

SLIDE, one of many LUs, in the Motion 

frame, also indicating which constituents in the 

sentence are the linguistic realizations of the FEs 

THEME and GOAL. 

(1) [The envelope THEME] SLID [into  

the mailbox GOAL]. 

2.2 Embodied Construction Grammar 

An ECG grammar (Feldman et al. 2010) consists 

of structured lattices of two basic primitives: 

schemas and constructions. As with other forms 

of construction grammar, a key tenet of ECG is 

that each construction is a form-meaning pair. 

Constructional meaning is represented using 

schemas, which are analogous to FN frames. 

Each schema includes several roles (comparable 

to FN’s FEs), and specifies various types of con-

straints on its roles.  Thus, the ECG formalism 

provides the means for representing frame struc-

ture and relations in a precise and computational-

ly tractable manner.  

Crucially, our computationally implemented 

system (Bryant 2008) uses an ECG grammar for 

sentence interpretation and produces construc-

tion-based semantic parses. The Constructional 

Analyzer utilizes form and meaning infor-

mation in the constructional analysis of a given 

sentence. Thus, constructional analysis is not just 

a form match; importantly, it is a meaning match 

as well.  The output of the analysis is a semantic 

specification, a meaning representation in the 

form of schemas, roles, bindings, and role-filler 

information. Constructional analysis is part of a 

larger model of language understanding, in 

which the semantic specification, in conjunction 

with discourse and situational context, serves as 

an input for a simulation process, which fleshes 

                                                 
2 FN also describes another scenario for Motion, not 
included here for space-saving reasons. 

out and supports further inferences about the rel-

atively schematic meaning specified in the text.   

Among the potential applications for such 

deep semantic analysis are question-answering 

tasks, information extraction, and identifying 

different political viewpoints.  Each task has its 

own requirements in terms of constructions and 

semantic representations.  This paper illustrates a 

computationally implemented means for deter-

mining the frames and frame roles in a given 

sentence, as well as the particular entities that 

link to those roles. 

Figure 1 shows the ECG formalism that repre-

sents the semantic structure of FN’s Motion 

frame, where the MotionPath schema specifies 

the structural relationships among the partici-

pants (FEs) in FN’s Motion frame. 

 

 

Figure 1: MotionPath Schema 

ECG defines MotionPath as a subcase of the 

very general Motion schema; as a child of the 

Motion schema, MotionPath inherits the struc-

ture of Motion, the latter including a mover role. 

Also, MotionPath evokes a Source-Path-Goal 

(SPG) schema, which includes the roles source, 

path, and goal, for the initial, medial, and final 

locations, respectively, of a trajector. MotionPath 

also includes a constraint that the mover is 

bound to the trajector role. 

A construction is a pairing between form and 

meanng, the ECG representation of which con-

sists of a form block and a meaning block.  To 

illustrate, in Figure 2, which shows the simple 

lexical construction Slid_Past, the form block 

indicates the orthographic form associated with 

the lexical construction. The form constraint in-

dicates that the constraint applies to the form of 

the construction (self.f.orth <-- “slid”), where 

.orth indicates that the form is a text string, in 

this case “slid”.   ECG represents constructional 

meaning using schemas; in the Slid_Past con-

struction, (Figure 2), the meaning is identified 

with the MotionPath schema (as shown in Figure 

1). Constructions also define relations to other 

40



constructions in the grammar. For instance, 

Slid_Past is a subcase of a more general 

PastTense construction. The PastTense construc-

tion is one of several general verb conjugation 

constructions in the grammar, each of which cap-

tures general facts about tense and aspect associ-

ated with different verb conjugation forms. For 

example, all past tense verbs, including slid (an 

instantiation of Slid_Past), use PastTense.   

 

 

Figure 2: Slid_Past Construction 

3 Caused_motion 

This section describes FN’s characterization of 

Caused_motion and provides the ECG rep-

resentation of the CausedMotion schema, i.e., the 

meaning of the Cause_motion construction. 

3.1 FrameNet 

FrameNet characterizes Caused_motion as 

a situation in which an AGENT causes a THEME 

to undergo translation motion, where the motion 

also may always be described with respect to a 

SOURCE, PATH, and GOAL.
3
   Example (2) shows 

the FN analysis with SLIDE as the target verb in 

Caused_motion, marking the constituents 

that fill the AGENT, THEME, and GOAL roles. 

(2) [Smedlap AGENT] SLID [the envelope 

 THEME] into the mailbox GOAL]. 

Note that whereas FN’s Caused_motion 

frame has an AGENT FE, Motion does not. 

 

 
Table 1: FN’s Motion and Caused_motion 

                                                 
3 As with Motion, FN also defines another scenario 
for Caused_motion, specifically one with a CAUSE 

FE, excluded here because of space limitations. 

3.2 Embodied Construction Grammar 

The ECG representation of CauseMotion, given 

in Figure 3, is a complex schema that combines 

the structure of causation with that of transla-

tional motion. The causal structure is supplied by 

defining CauseMotion as a subcase of a more 

general CauseEffect schema, which includes 

roles for a causal agent and an affected entity. 

Also, CauseMotion specifies that the effect is 

translational motion, indicated with the addition 

of a type constraint that identifies the effect with 

the MotionPath schema. 

 

Figure 3: CauseMotion Schema 

 

Additional constraints bind the mover role of 

MotionPath (Figure 1) to the affected role of 

CauseMotion. Thus, the ECG mover (i.e. the FE 

THEME) is bound to the affected role; and the 

motion itself is bound to the effect. ECG uses the 

CauseMotion schema to analyze sentences such 

as Example (2), an instance of the Cause_motion 

construction, a summary of which follows below 

in Section 4. 

4 ECG for Linguistic Analysis 

Here, we provide an overview of the ECG analy-

sis process for the examples discussed above.  

A basic tenet of construction grammar is that 

each sentence instantiates multiple constructions.  

Bryant’s (2008) computationally implemented 

Constructional Analyzer uses an ECG grammar 

to determine the set of constructions that best-fit 

a given sentence.
4
  The assessment of “best-fit” 

takes both syntactic and semantic information 

into account. Constructional unification requires 

compatibility between unifying elements.  Unifi-

cation tests the compatibility of the constraints 

that these constructions specify, and leads to var-

ious bindings. The analyzer produces a SemSpec, 

i.e. a semantic specification of the sentence, that 

is, a meaning representation in the form of a 

network of schemas, with bindings between 

schema roles and fillers of these roles. 

                                                 
4
 ECG Workbench provides an interface to the ana-

lyzer, and allows the viewing of analysis results. 

41



To illustrate the analysis process, we revisit 

Example (1) The envelope slid into the mailbox, 

which instantiates some of the following lexical 

and grammatical constructions: 

 Lexical constructions for slid,  nouns (enve-
lope, mailbox), and determiners (the) 

 NP constructions (the envelope, the mailbox) 

 Declarative construction, a clause-level con-
struction spanning the sentence as a whole. 

In what follows, we define and explain the 

constructions in Example (1) that are crucial for 

the present analysis of Motion and CausedMo-

tion. Specifically, the Active_Motion_Path con-

struction (Figure 4) is a sub-case of a more gen-

eral Argument Structure construction (Goldberg 

1995, Dodge 2010).  Argument Structure (A-S) 

constructions specify general patterns of role ex-

pression associated with the description of basic 

experiences, such as those involving motion, 

perception, object transfer, actions and/or causa-

tion.  Schemas represent each type of experience 

and include roles for the relevant participant(s). 

A-S constructions include one or more constitu-

ent constructions, specified within their con-

structional block. All A-S constructions include 

a verb constituent (V: Verb); here, note that the 

Active_Motion_Path construction also contains a 

prepositional phrase constituent (PP), con-

strained to be of type Path-PP, a general con-

struction that identifies its meaning with the SPG 

schema.   The form block specifies ordering con-

straints: the V constituent comes before the PP 

constituent. The meaning block specifies that the 

construction’s meaning is identified with the Mo-

tionPath schema, indicating that the construction 

describes translational motion events. Con-

straints within the meaning block specify how 

the meaning of the construction as a whole com-

poses with the meanings of its constituents. As is 

usually the case, the ‘V’ constituent shares the 

same schematic meaning as the A-S construc-

tion. These constraints indicate that the A-S con-

struction will unify with verbs that identify their 

meaning with the MotionPath schema, as in the 

motion verbs roll, slip, bounce, etc, along with 

slide.  Thus, this A-S construction captures a par-

ticular valence pattern associated with several 

semantically similar verbs.  

A further meaning constraint indicates that the 

meaning of the PP constituent serves to elaborate 

the SPG schema that forms part of the meaning 

of the MotionPath schema. That is, whichever 

specific PP serves as a constituent in a given ex-

ample will supply more information about the 

particular path of motion the mover is following.  

Additionally, the mover role of MotionPath is 

bound to the profiledParticipant role (i.e., the 

semantic correlate of the role expressed in the 

sentence’s subject slot), and the meaning of the 

construction as a whole binds to an eventProcess 

role, which indicates the type of event that this 

A-S construction describes. 

 

 

Figure 4: Active_Motion_Path Construction 

 

Constraint-based unification of the instantiated 

construction produces a SemSpec that includes 

the following information: (1) a MotionPath 

schema is co-indexed with the ‘eventProcess’ 

role, indicating that the sentence describes an 

event of translational motion; (2) the meaning of 

the envelope is co-indexed with the profiledPar-

ticipant role, the mover of MotionPath, and the 

trajector of SPG, indicating that this object is the 

semantic subject of the sentence, and that it is the 

entity that moves and changes location with re-

spect to a landmark; and (3) the meaning of the 

mailbox is co-indexed with the landmark of SPG, 

and the boundedObject role of a BoundedObject 

schema.  The source of SPG is bound to the exte-

rior role of boundedObject. The goal of SPG is 

bound to the interior of boundedObject. Togeth-

er, these bindings indicate that the mailbox is 

conceptualized as a bounded object or container, 

the envelope’s initial location (source) is outside 

of the mailbox, and its final location is inside.  

Having analyzed a sentence about motion, we 

return to our example of caused motion: (2) 

Smedlap slid the envelope into the mailbox. This 

sentence instantiates many of the same construc-

tions as does Example (1).  The key difference 

between the two is the A-S construction, here the 

42



Active_Transitive_Caused_Motion construction, 

shown below in Figure 5. 
 

 
 

Figure 5:Active_Transitive_Caused_Motion 

 

This is similar to the Active_Motion_Path con-

struction in that it has both a V and a PP constit-

uent.  However, as with other A-S constructions 

that characterize transitives, this A-S construc-

tion also includes an NP constituent, whose form 

follows that of the verb. Crucially, this A-S con-

struction identifies its meaning with CauseMo-

tion, indicating that it is used to describe scenes 

which a causal agent causes the translational mo-

tion of some other entity.   Meaning constraints 

specify that the affected role of CauseMotion is 

bound to the meaning of the NP constituent, and 

the causer role is bound to the profiled partici-

pant role. This latter constraint indicates that this 

active voice construction describes caused mo-

tion events from the causer’s perspective. 

Using these constructions, the analysis of Ex-

ample (2) produces a SemSpec that is similar to 

that produced for Example (1), with the follow-

ing key differences:  

 the eventProcess is CausedMotion (ra-
ther than MotionPath);  

 the profiledParticipant role is bound to 
the causer role of CauseMotion, and to 

Smedlap; 

 the envelope is bound to the affected 
role of CauseMotion, as well as to the 

mover role of MotionPath, and the tra-

jector role of SPG.   

 

This SemSpec for Example (2) indicates that: 

 the sentence describes an event of caused 
motion, represented by the CauseMotion 

schema; 

 the caused effect is motion, represented 
by the MotionPath schema; 

 the subject (Smedlap) is the causer of the 
motion; 

 the direct object (the envelope) is the 
causally affected entity that moves.  

 the path of motion is one where with the 
goal location inside the entity that the 

prepositional phrase object (the mailbox) 

specifies, just  as in Example (1). 

 

To summarize, the semantic representation 

output of the ECG analysis process for each of 

Examples (1) and (2) identifies that they evoke 

the MotionPath and CauseMotion schemas, re-

spectively (analogous to FN’s Motion and 

Cause_Motion, respectively).  Also, the out-

put specifies the different roles (FEs) that the 

different constituents of each sentence realize. 

Thus, the information provided by such output 

identifies the frames and frame roles expressed 

in each sentence.  

5 Extensions 

Given the compositional nature of the ECG 

grammar, it will also support the analysis of oth-

er sentences describing translational motion and 

caused motion events that differ in terms of the 

lexical items that are realized. Consider the fol-

lowing new examples. 

 His hat is slipping off his head. 

 Did the dog roll the ball under the table?  

 Which leaf fell off the tree?  
Moreover, the approach outlined here clearly 

also would apply to the analysis of all FrameNet 

frames that characterize, for instance, cognition, 

perception, communication or other causal 

events or transitive actions.  

Research has begun to extend the present work 

to support the analysis of metaphorical uses of 

motion and caused motion frame structure, as in: 

The young family slid into poverty or Their huge 

debts dragged the young family into poverty.  

This research requires the specification of appro-

priate constraints on the fillers of the roles that 

will facilitate distinguishing between the literal 

and the metaphorical.  

References 

J. Bryant. 2008. Best-Fit Constructional Analysis. 

Ph.D. Thesis, University of California, Berkeley. 

N. Chang, S. Narayanan, M. R. L. Petruck. 

2002. Putting frames in perspective, Proc. of the 

19
th

 COLING, International Conference on Com-

putational Linguistics. Taipei, Taiwan. 

43



E. K. Dodge. 2010.Constructional and Conceptual 

Composition Ph.D. Thesis, University of Califor-

nia, Berkeley. 

J. Feldman, E. Dodge, J. Bryant. 2010. Embodied 

Construction Grammar. In B. Heine and H. Narrog 

(eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Analy-

sis, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 111-158. 

A. Goldberg. 1995. Constructions: A Construction 

Grammar Approach to Argument Structure.  Chi-

cago: University of Chicago Press. 

N. Friedman, M. Linial, I. Nachman and D. Pe’er. 

2000. Using Bayesian networks to analyze expres-

sion data. Journal of Computational Biology 7.3-4: 

601-620. 

R. Girju. 2003. Automatic detection of causal rela-

tions for question answering, Proceedings of the 

ACL Workshop on Multilingual Summarization and 

Question Answering: 76-83. 

I. Guyon, A. Elisseeff and C. Aliferis. 2007. Causal 

feature selection, Computational Methods of Fea-

ture Selection Data Mining and Knowledge Dis-

covery Series. Chapman and Hall/CRC, Boca Ra-

ton, London, New York, pp. 63-85. 

S. Narayanan. 1997. Knowledge-based Action Repre-

sentations for Metaphor and Aspect (KARMA). 

Ph.D. Thesis, University of California, Berkeley.  

Q. Do, Y. Chan, and D. Roth. 2011. Minimally super-

vised event causality identification, Proceedings of 

Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-

cessing (EMNLP), Edinburgh, Scotland, UK. 

J. Ruppenhofer, M. Ellsworth, M. R. L. Petruck, C. R. 

Johnson, and J. Scheffczyk. 2010. FrameNet II: 

Extended Theory and Practice (Web Publication 

available via http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu). 

44


