





































Assamese WordNet based Quality Enhancement of Bilingual Machine
Translation System

Anup Kumar Barman
Dept. of IT

Gauhati University
Guwahati, India

anupbarman.gu@gmail.com

Jumi Sarmah
Dept. of IT

Gauhati University
Guwahati, India

jumis884@gmail.com

Prof. Shikhar Kumar Sarma
Dept. of IT

Gauhati University
Guwahati, India

sks001@gmail.com

Abstract

Machine Translation is a task to trans-
late the text from a source language to
a target language in an automatic man-
ner. Here, we describe a system that trans-
late the English language to Assamese lan-
guage text which is based on Phrase based
statistical translation technique. To over-
come the translation problem related with
highly open word class like Proper Noun
or the Out Of Vocabulary words we de-
velop a transliteration system which is
also embedded with our translation sys-
tem. We enhance the translation output
by replacing words with their most appro-
priate synonymous word for that particular
context with the help of Assamese Word-
Net Synset. This Machine Translation sys-
tem outcomes with a reasonable transla-
tion output when analyzed by linguist for
Assamese language which is a less com-
putationally aware language among the In-
dian languages.

1 Introduction

Machine Translation (MT) is a system that can
automatically generate translation output from
source language to target language. In country
like India, the MT system are very much essen-
tial due to their language diversity. The highly in-
creasing rate of digital information indicates the
top level requirement of MT system so that ev-
ery people irrespective to their language can ac-
quire and utilize those information. There are
basically three approaches to develop a MT sys-
tem which are Rule based approach, Statistical
approach and some Hybrid approaches. In Rule
based approach, various naturally occurring phe-
nomenon on source language text are investigated
and then extract them as some rules and analyze

them to fit to embed for generating target lan-
guage text. By using some parser from the source
text they produce some intermediate representa-
tion and then the target language text is generated
from the intermediate representation. In Statisti-
cal approach, to train up various parameters large
number of parallel corpus are required. A Statis-
tical approach derives with a better result when
the size of the corpus is increased. Here, the best
translation are performed based on some decision.
Some Example based approaches are also used to
translate the source language text to target lan-
guage text. Due to the less amount of digitized
documents as the parallel corpus some tries to
correct their statistical translation output by using
some Linguistic Rules. Such type of approaches
are considered to be the hybrid approaches.

Assamese is a language spoken by the North-
East people of India. It is one of the less compu-
tationally aware Indian language belonging to the
Indo-Aryan Family. It is spoken by approximately
14 million people of the North-East region of In-
dia. Unfortunately, this language has less amount
of computational linguistic resources. The linguis-
tics researches are still in traditional mode. But,
recently some researchers have made a deliberate
attempt to study Assamese language from techno-
logical perspective. They have started to work in
the development and enrichment of the language
of Assamese in the field of Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP). The Machine Translation task for
Assamese language is very difficult as the amount
of parallel corpus is very less.

WordNet, a lexical database was developed
by Prof George A Miller for English language
in 1985. Based on English WordNet structure,
Indo-WordNet was being developed. Assamese
WordNet was developed as a part of the Indo-
WordNet project. Assamese WordNet, a lexical
database was first developed in Gauhati Univer-
sity, 2009 by (Sarma et al., 2010). Assamese



WordNet comprises of contents that are linked to
both English and Hindi WordNet. A combina-
tion of dictionary and thesaurus, Assamese Word-
Net comprises of four major components. They
are ID which act as a primary key for identify-
ing any synset in WordNet, CAT indicates the
Parts Of Speech category, SYNSET lists the syn-
onymous words in a most used frequency order
and GLOSS describes the concept of any synset.
GLOSS consist of Text-Definition and Example-
Sentence. Text Definition contains concepts de-
noted by synset and Example shows the use of
any synset entry. There are various semantic re-
lation that occur between synsets in WordNet.
They are Hypernymy-Hyponymy(IS-A/Kind of),
Entailment-Troponymy (Manner-of for verbs),
Meronymy-Holonymy (HAS-A/ PART-WHOLE).
Synset, the basic building block of WordNet can
explore the semantically related terms. For in-
stance these words খা (kharu: Bangles), কংকণ
(kankan: Bangles), ক ণ (kangkan: Bangles) de-
scribes the same concept হাতত িপ া এিবধ গহনা
(haatat pindhaa ebidh gahanaa:A hand wearing or-
nament).This structure of WordNet helps in au-
tomatic text analysis and various artificial intel-
ligence applications as a combination of dictio-
nary and thesaurus. Assamese WordNet has been
used for a number of different purposes in text
analysis such as Automatic document classifica-
tion (Sarmah et al., 2012), Automatic text sum-
marization (Kalita et al., 2012) etc. Here, we
tried to use the Assamese WordNet basically the
synsets for fine tuning the translated output by re-
placing words with their most appropriate synony-
mous word for that particular sentence.

This paper presents a MT system for English-
Assamese which is based on Statistical Phrase
based translation approach. Here we first devel-
oped a MOSES based translation system which
we consider as the baseline translation system.
For linguistically open class Proper Noun or some
other Out of vocabulary words we implemented
a MOSES based transliteration system which
transliterate the English word to Assamese word
in Character level. Then we embed this translit-
eration system with our Base line Translation sys-
tem. The output of the new system was enhanced
by mapping the words with Assamese WordNet
synset so that we can put the most appropriate syn-
onymous word for that particular sentence. This
will give us a more relevant translation output

when reviewed by some linguistic persons.
This paper further continues with a description

of Previous Notable Work done while implement-
ing a MT system for other Indian Languages in
Section2, Section3 portrays our methodology to
implement a English-Assamese MT system . This
section starts with a description of tools used in
implementing our system, an explanation of our
English-Assamese parallel corpus, a system ar-
chitecture where it gives us a overview of our
baseline translation system, an elaboration of our
transliteration system and the process of enhanc-
ing the translation output through mapping with
the Assamese WordNet synsets. Section4 analyzes
the result of our system. Finally conclusions are
drawn in section5.

2 Related Study

Though spoken by major population of North-East
India, Assamese language is still behind in compu-
tational perspective, basically processing the MT
system. No work on MT system was researched
or developed for Indian language like Assamese
till date. To develop any MT system for a specific
language requires collaboration among computer
researchers, linguistics and expert manual transla-
tors. Although in languages like English or some
other foreign language, the MT task is very well
processed, the Machine Translation in Indian lan-
guages is still an open problem. MT in Indian lan-
guages was developed using various approaches.

(Devi et al., 2010; Goyal and Lehal, 2009)
used Direct Machine Translation Systems for lan-
guages Hindi and Punjabi respectively. Another
one MT system was developed based on the
Paninian Grammar (Goyal and Lehal, 2010) us-
ing this approach. The other approach found while
developing an MT system for Indian Languages
is the Rule based approach. In rule based ap-
proach Transfer based machine translation is used
in (Saha, 2005; Bandyopadhyay S, 2000) where
there are three modules - analyzed, transfer and
generation module. One another Transfer based
MT system was developed at Resource Centre for
Indian Language Technology solution (Dwivedi
and Sukhadeve, 2010) to translate English to Can-
nada Text. Pseudo Interlingua approach of Rule
Based was used to develop Anglabharti MT sys-
tem for translating English to Indian languages. To
reduce the human labour than the Rule based ap-
proach a Corpus-based MT approach was used. In



statistical approach, the open source software like
GIZA++ can be used to align the parallel corpus
and then the aligned corpus is processed to gener-
ate the Phrase based Translation model. Tool like
SRILM may be used to generate the statistical lan-
guage model. The Phrase based MOSES decoder
can be used to translate the sentences after finding
the translation model and language model. Statis-
tical MT system for English-Hindi (Ahsan et al.,
2010) and English-Malayalam was developed by
using English-Hindi and English-Malayalam par-
allel corpus. Some Example based MT system was
developed where the hypothesis is that a transla-
tion will be considered as most appropriate if it
was occurred previously. Anubharti is an exam-
ple based MT system which was developed by
IIT kanpur (Sinha, 2004) where some grammati-
cal analysis was also performed to reduce the size
of the parallel corpus.

3 Our Approach

This section describes verious software tools used
for developing our proposed Machine Translation
system, portrays our system architecture and de-
scription of each modules of our system.

3.1 Used Tools

In order to develop an English -Assamese Machine
Translation System we used various open source
software tools. The phrase based machine transla-
tion system MOSES (Koehn et al., 2007) is used to
perform the translation task. Through this statisti-
cal machine translation tool we train up a trans-
lation module by using English-Assamese Paral-
lel corpus. MOSES implies an efficient search
algorithm called beam-search which can quickly
find the highest probability translation from huge
numbers of choices. Another statistical machine
translation toolkit GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003)
was used to align our parallel corpus. For align-
ment task, GIZA++ is used to train IBM models
1-5 and HMM word alignment model. To gener-
ate the word classes which is necessary for training
the aligned models this machine translation toolkit
uses mkcls tool. A bilingual dictionary can be
produced from that parallel corpus using GIZA++.
We use SRILM toolkit to develop a statistical lan-
guage model which has been under development
in the SRI Speech Technology and Research Lab-
oratory since 1995. In SRILM (Stolke, 2002) a set
of C++ class libraries are available to implement

a language model. To accomplish some standard
task like training a language model or testing on
data there are also a set of executable programs
and some auxiliary scripts which are built on top
of these class libraries. We run all these toolkits
on LINUX platform.

3.2 System Architecture

In our English-Assamese MT system, we inte-
grated the baseline statistical MT model with a
statistical transliteration model. The translitera-
tion model helps us to improve the translation
output by providing the transliteration basically
for Proper Noun or some other Out of vocabu-
lary(OOV) words. Mapping the translated output
with WordNet synset gives us more suitable syn-
onymous word for that specific sentence. Below
given a architecture diagram for our MT system.

Figure 1: System Diagram

3.3 Data

Since digitized documents for Assamese language
are very less in amount so to collect the parallel
corpus for MT task was very difficult. For our
approach, we prepare a parallel corpus of English-
Assamese at Gauhati University NLP lab. This
parallel-corpus contains data basically of tourism
domain. In our parallel-corpus there were 100
files for each English and Assamese language.
This parallel-corpus contains a collection of
14,371 English sentences with their respective
translations in Assamese language. The corpus
contains 326804 and 267224 words for English
and Assamese language respectively. To fit this
parallel-corpus in our translation model we follow



the below pre-processing steps-
File Format Conversion:- We converted the file
format of each file from UTF-16 to UTF-8 and
we convert the line encoding from Windows to
Unix/Linux.
Sentence Extraction:- Sentences were extracted
from XML mark-up text.
Corpus Cleaning:- We clean-up the whole
parallel-corpus by removing all unwanted charac-
ters, junk values and blank spaces etc.
Sentence Alignment:- We align each English
sentence with respective Assamese sentences.

3.4 Baseline Translation System

To set-up our baseline translation system for
English-Assamese we use the English-Assamese
parallel corpus. By using the GIZA++ toolkit,
we convert this sentence aligned parallel corpus to
word aligned corpus and then processed them to
fit in our phrase based translation model. We use
the SRILM tool to develop our statistical language
model from our corpus. For phrase based trans-
lation, we use MOSES decoder after getting the
translation model and language model. To make
this MOSES system learn we use this English-
Assamese parallel corpus. Sample output of our
Baseline Translation system is given below:

SNo. English Text Assamese Text

1. Tiger is India’s ব া ভাৰতৰ ৰা ীয়
national animal জ

2. Tiger is a violent ব া িহংসুক জ
animal

3. Mumbai is an ancient Mumbai আিদম চহৰ
city

4. Assam is a beautiful Assam ধুনীয়া ৰাজ
state

5. Times of India সময় ভাৰত

Table 1: Output of Baseline Translation

3.5 Transliteration System

Since Assamese is a less computationally aware
language, the parallel corpus is very less in size.
Moreover, for some linguistically open word class
like Proper Noun are very less available in the par-
allel corpus. The statistical MT system, acquires
knowledge from the trained English-Assamese
parallel corpus. From the above Table 1 which

shows the results of our baseline translation sys-
tem, we found that some words which are trans-
lated as source input word is. Those non-translated
words are not found in the trained parallel corpus
of English-Assamese. To overcome the transla-
tion problem basically related with Proper Noun
word we develop a Statistical transliteration sys-
tem. But, for other Out of vocabulary words
we cannot implement the transliteration system
since transliteration cannot represent the concept
of those word in target language. To implement
our transliteration system, we collect nearly 0.1
million unique Proper Noun in English and we
transliterate them to Assamese. For transliteration,
we consider each Proper Noun as a sequence of
characters separated by a space. Then we create
the language model by using SRILM tool. For
alignment purpose , we use the same GIZA++
tool. Then we train up the MOSES decoder by
using the Name Entity parallel corpus for English
Assamese. We take the best output from n num-
bers of output from our statistical transliteration
system. Output are also generated with a space in
between each character. Finally, we combine this
characters to get our transliterated output. Follow-
ing Table 2 shows the sample result of our statisti-
cal transliteration system.

SNo. Input Term Transliterated Term

1. Mumbai মু াই
2. Assam অসম
3. Times of India টাইম অফ ইি য়া
4. Rajasthan ৰাজ ান
5. Brahmaputra পু

Table 2: Output of Transliteration System

3.6 Combined System

A combined system was formed by combining the
statistical transliteration with the baseline transla-
tion system. The statistical transliteration system
is only for Proper Noun. We use one Named Entity
dictionary comprising 1 lakh English Named Enti-
ties to recognize the Named Entities. The translit-
erated form was XML marked up. These XML
files later were provided as an external knowledge
to MOSES decoder for decoding. Combined sys-
tem gives us the output provided by the baseline
system with the Transliterated System. Following
Table 3 shows the result of our combined system.



SNo. English Text Assamese Text

1. Tiger is India’s ব া ভাৰতৰ ৰা ীয়
national animal জ

2. Tiger is a violent ব া িহংসুক
animal জ

3. Mumbai is an ancient মু াই আিদম চহৰ
city

4. Assam is a beautiful অসম ধুনীয়া ৰাজ
state

5. Times of India টাইম অফ ইি য়া

Table 3: Output of Combined System

3.7 Enhancement Using WordNet

The representation of a single concept using vari-
ous words (synonymous words) in one language
made influence in MT task. All synonymous
words are not equally appropriate for all sentences
in terms of their context. In a statistical MT sys-
tem, for a source language term the most weighted
target language term is always selected for every
sentence containing that term without considering
the appropriateness of that sentence. But, in natu-
ral language one individual concept is represented
by using various synonymous term in various sen-
tences. To overcome this statistical MT problem,
we take help of the lexical resource Assamese
WordNet where the set of synonymous terms to
represent each concept are available. We enhance
the output of our Combined System by select-
ing the appropriate synonymous term for that sen-
tence through mapping each term to their respec-
tive WordNet synset. Selection of the appropri-
ate synonymous terms in context of various sen-
tences was done by checking manually through
some Linguist fellows. Then we replace each term
by the using the selected synonymous term so that
our statistical MT output becomes more relevant
in terms of Assamese language. Following Table
4 shows the final translation output after enhance-
ment of the output produced by the combined sys-
tem using Assamese WordNet.

4 Result Analysis

To evaluate our system performance, we take 500
English sentences for testing our statistical MT
system. In the above tables, we show a sample out-
put of each modules. Table 1 shows the baseline
system’s output where some of the Proper Nouns
like India was translated to ভাৰত(Bharat:India) and

SNo. English Text Assamese Text

1. Tiger is India’s বাঘ ভাৰতৰ ৰা ীয়
national animal জ

2. Tiger is a violent ব া িহং জ
animal

3. Mumbai is an ancient মু াই াচীন চহৰ
city

4. Assam is a beautiful অসম ধুনীয়া ৰাজ
state

5. Times of India টাইম অফ ইি য়া

Table 4: A sample of Final Output

some others remain the same like Mumbai and
Assam. In Table 2 we show a sample output of
our Transliterated system. The statistical translit-
erated system outcomes with a state-of-art accu-
racy. Then we mixed the Statistical Baseline Sys-
tem and Transliteration system to produce a com-
bined system and a sample output of the system is
shown in Table 3. Here the translation problem re-
lated with Proper Noun was solved with the proper
transliteration form of them. As shown in Table
3 the term Assam, Mumbai, Times Of India was
transliterated to অসম(assam),মু াই(Mumbai), টাইম
অফ ইি য়া(Times of India) respectively which were
not correct in Table1. Our combined system trans-
lation output was more or less correct but there are
several words which are not appropriate for that
specific sentence. To handle that type of inappro-
priateness problem we enhance our combined sys-
tem output by mapping each term to their respec-
tive synset i.e, if a synset s have n entries for a
word w in a sentence st then we have n number of
possibilities to replace that particular word. Now
we discover all possible such sentences which was
later judged by the linguist to determine the most
appropriate one. As in Table 3, we have seen that
for the English sentence -Mumbai is an ancient
city, the output is মু াই আিদম চহৰ (mumbai aadim
sahar)but the term আিদম(aadim )is not relevant
to that particular sentence. In Assamese Word-
Net, there is a synset পুৰিণ, পুৰণা, াচীন, পুৰাতন,
পুৰাকালীন, া -কালীন, আিদম. Id 1661 where includ-
ing this word আিদম there are seven synonymous
words. Among these, the term পুৰিণ(puroni) is the
most appropriate as per linguist judgement. In our
1st and 2nd example sentences the words like ব া
and িহংসুক are replaced with the most appropriate
synset terms বাঘ and িহং respectively. In this way,



we found the enhance result of our combined sys-
tem’s translation output which is depicted in Table
4.

5 Conclusions

We sum up our translation task by developing a
English-Assamese translation system which is a
combination of a statical phrase based translation
and a statistical transliteration system and later the
output was fine tuned by using Assamese Word-
Net. This introducing English-Assamese Statisti-
cal MT system gains a satisfactory output. The
more strength of the parallel-corpus better the
result of the Statistical MT system. Assamese
is a less computationally aware language so the
strength of English-Assamese parallel-corpus is
weak. A statistical transliteration module is also
embedded with our translation system so that we
can overcome the translation problem related with
Proper Nouns and some out-of vocabulary words.
The transliteration module with a good accuracy
helped in improving our translation system’s per-
formance. Also the lexical resource Assamese
WordNet gives us a significant improvement in
our translation output by providing the most ac-
curate synonymous word for a specific context.
A state-of-art translation results are generated by
our Statistical MT system. As this is a first ap-
proach towards developing a English-Assamese
Machine Translation system this will contribute
significantly towards Assamese Natural Language
Processing.

References

Arafat Ahsan, Prasanth Kolachina, Sudheer Kolachina,
Dipti Misra Sharma and Rajeev Sangal. 2010.
Coupling Statistical Machine Translation with Rule-
based Transfer and Generation. In Proceedings of
AMTA- The Ninth Conference of the Association
for Machine Translation in the Americas. Denver,
Colorado,.2010.

Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2000. ANUBAAD - The Trans-
lator from English to Indian Languages. In Pro-
ceedings of VIIth State Science and Technology
Congress, Calcutta, India, 2000.

Sobha Lalitha Devi, Pravin Pralayankar, S. Maneka,
T. Bakiyavathi, R.V.S. Ram and V. Kavitha. 2010.
Verb Transfer in a Tamil to Hindi Machine Transla-
tion System. In Proccedings of International Confer-
ence of Asian Language Processing, 2010, Harbin,
China, pp. 261-264.

Sanjay Kumar Dwivedi and Pramod Premdas
Sukhadeve. 2010. Machine translation sys-
tems in Indian perspective. Journal of computer
science, pp.1082-1087,2010.

Vishal Goyal and Gurpreet Singh Lehal. 2009. Evalu-
ation of Hindi to Punjabi Machine Translation Sys-
tem. International Journal of Computer Science Is-
sues, vol4 no1, 2009, pp. 36-39.

Vishal Goyal and Gurpreet Singh Lehal. 2010. Web
Based Hindi to Punjabi Machine Translation Sys-
tem. Journal of Emerging Technologies in Web In-
telligence, Vol.2, 2010, pp.148-151.

Chandan Kalita, Navanath Saharia and Utpal Sharma.
2012. An Extractive Approach of Text Summariza-
tion of Assamese using WordNet. In Proccedings
of 6th International Global WordNet Conference
(GWC 12) Japan, January 9-13 2012, pp. 149-154.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch,
Chris Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola
Bertoldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen,Christine
Moran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondej Bojar,
Alexandra Constantin and Evan Herbst. 2007.
Moses: Open Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine
Translation. In Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics(ACL),2007.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic
comparison of various statistical alignment models.
Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19-51,2003.

Goutam Kumar Saha. 2005. The EB-Anubad trans-
lator: A hybrid scheme. Journal of Zhejiang Uni-
versity SCIENCE 2005, ISSN 1009-3095, pp.1047-
1050.

Shikhar Kr. Sarma, Moromi Gogoi, Utpal Saikia and
Rakesh Medhi 2010. Foundation and structure of
Developing Assamese WordNet. In Proceedings of
5th International Conference of the Global WordNet
Association.

Jumi Sarmah, Navanath Saharia and Shikhar Kr.
Sarma. 2012. A Novel Approach for classification
of Document using Assamese WordNet. In Procced-
ings of 6th International Global WordNet Confer-
ence (GWC 12) Japan, January 9-13 2012, pp. 324-
329.

R. Mahesh K. Sinha. 2004. An Engineering Perspec-
tive of Machine Translation: AnglaBharti-II and
AnuBharti-II Architectures. In Proceedings of Inter-
national Symposium on Machine Translation, NLP
and Translation Support System (iSTRANS- 2004),
November 17-19, 2004.

Andreas Stolke. 2002. SRILM-an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the ICSLP,2002.


