



















































Towards Creation of a Corpus for Argumentation Mining the Biomedical Genetics Research Literature


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Argumentation Mining, pages 11–18,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Towards Creation of a Corpus for Argumentation Mining                                  

the Biomedical Genetics Research Literature 

 

 

 Nancy L. Green 

Dept. of Computer Science 

U. of N. Carolina Greensboro 

Greensboro, NC 27402, USA 

nlgreen@uncg.edu 

 

 

  

 

Abstract  

Argumentation mining involves automat-

ically identifying the premises, conclu-

sion, and type of each argument as well 

as relationships between pairs of argu-

ments in a document. We describe our 

plan to create a corpus from the biomedi-

cal genetics research literature, annotated 

to support argumentation mining re-

search. We discuss the argumentation el-

ements to be annotated, theoretical chal-

lenges, and practical issues in creating 

such a corpus. 

1 Introduction 

Argumentation mining is a relatively new chal-

lenge in corpus-based discourse analysis that in-

volves automatically identifying argumentation 

within a document, i.e., the premises, conclusion, 

and type of each argument, as well as relation-

ships between pairs of arguments in the docu-

ment. To date, researchers have investigated 

methods for argumentation mining of non-

scientific text and dialogue. However, the lack of 

appropriately annotated corpora has hindered 

research on argumentation mining of scientific 

research articles. Using the term „argument‟ in a 

related but different sense than here, researchers 

have investigated annotation of scientific ab-

stracts and full-text articles (e.g. Teufel, 2002; 

Mizuta et al., 2005; Liakata et al., 2012). How-

ever, the annotated corpora they have created are 

not designed for argumentation mining in the 

above sense.   

   Our goal is to create a freely available corpus 

of open-access, full-text scientific articles from 

the biomedical genetics research literature, anno-

tated to support argumentation mining research. 

The corpus also would provide a rich new re-

source for researchers in related areas including 

information retrieval, information extraction, 

summarization, and question-answering. There is 

a critical need for automated analysis of the rap-

idly growing genetics research literature. Availa-

bility of the corpus should promote the develop-

ment of computational tools for use by biomedi-

cal and genetics researchers. In the future, e.g., a 

tool enabled by argumentation mining could be 

used to automatically summarize arguments in 

the research literature that a certain genetic muta-

tion is a cause of breast cancer.  Methods devel-

oped from experimentation with this corpus 

should be adaptable to other scientific domains 

as well. 

Section 2 of this paper discusses some terms 

from argumentation theory that are relevant to 

our goals and surveys related work. Section 3 

discusses examples of argumentation in the tar-

get literature. The next three sections discuss 

challenges, practical issues, and future plans for 

creating the corpus. 

2 Background 

2.1 Argumentation Theory  

Traditionally, an argument is said to consist of a 

set of premises and a conclusion, and a formal 

model such as deductive logic is used to deter-

mine whether the argument is valid. An argu-

ment can be attacked by refuting a premise or by 

presenting an argument for a conclusion in con-

tradiction to the original conclusion. However 

Toulmin (1998), who was concerned with mod-

eling arguments in fields such as law and sci-

ence, argued that logical validity is too restrictive 

a criterion for determining argument acceptabil-

ity. Toulmin distinguished two types of premis-

11



es: data, i.e., observations or conclusions of oth-

er arguments, and warrant, i.e., a field-

dependent accepted principle (such as a legal 

rule or a “law” of science).  

    Argumentation schemes are abstract descrip-

tions of forms of argument that are used to con-

struct acceptable arguments in everyday conver-

sation, law, and science (Walton et al., 2008). 

Argumentation schemes may describe non-

deductively valid arguments, and their conclu-

sions may be retracted when more information is 

obtained. For example, an abductive argumenta-

tion scheme, often used in genetic counseling 

(Green et al., 2011), is reasoning from observa-

tions to a hypothesized cause. Critical questions 

associated with argumentation schemes play an 

important role in evaluating argument acceptabil-

ity (Walton et al., 2008). For example, one of the 

critical questions of the abductive argumentation 

scheme is whether there is an alternative, more 

plausible explanation for the observation used as 

a premise.  An enthymeme is an argument with 

implicit premises or conclusion. Argumentation 

schemes are sometimes useful in reconstruction 

of missing components of enthymemes. 

2.2 Argumentation Corpora  

A corpus of genetic counseling patient letters 

was analyzed in several ways to design a compu-

tational model for generation of arguments from 

healthcare experts to patients (Green et al., 

2011). An annotation scheme was developed to 

describe the conceptual model of genetic disease 

and inheritance communicated to patients 

(Green, 2005a). Formal argumentation schemes 

describing arguments found in the corpus were 

defined (Green et al., 2011). Analyses of prag-

matic features included rhetorical relations 

(Green, 2010a), ordering constraints and dis-

course markers (Green et al., 2011), point of 

view (Green 2005b), and use of probability ex-

pressions (Green 2010b). However, it was not a 

goal of that project to provide a publicly availa-

ble corpus.       

   The Araucaria argumentation diagramming 

tool was developed to aid human analysts and 

students to visualize and annotate naturally oc-

curring arguments (Reed and Rowe, 2004). Dia-

grams can be stored as text files with stand-off 

annotation of premises and conclusions, argu-

mentation schemes, and relationships between 

arguments. The Araucaria project has created a 

publicly available corpus of annotated argumen-

tation from newspaper articles, parliamentary 

records, magazines, and on-line discussion 

boards (Reed et al., 2010). The corpus has been 

used in some argumentation mining research 

(Mochales and Moens, 2011; Feng and Hirst, 

2011; Cabrio and Villata, 2012).  

2.3 Argumentation Mining  

To date, researchers have investigated methods 

for argumentation mining of non-science con-

tent: legal documents (Mochales and Moens, 

2011; Bach et al., 2013; Ashley and Walker, 

2013; Wyner et al., 2010), on-line debates (Cab-

rio and Villata, 2012), product reviews (Villalba 

and Saint-Dizier, 2012; Wyner et al., 2012), and 

newspaper articles and court cases (Feng and 

Hirst, 2011). Here we summarize the work that is 

most relevant to our project. 

   Mochales and Moens (2011) experimented 

with the Araucaria corpus and a legal corpus.  

They developed a multi-stage approach to argu-

mentation mining. The first stage, argumentative 

information detection, addresses the problem of 

classifying a sentence (or sentential subunit) as 

being part of an argument or not. Next, argument 

boundary detection, or segmentation, is the prob-

lem of determining the boundaries of each argu-

ment. Third, argumentative proposition classifi-

cation labels the sentences in an argument ac-

cording to their role as a premise or the conclu-

sion. Lastly, argumentation structure detection is 

the problem of detecting the relationships be-

tween arguments, i.e., whether two atomic argu-

ments are “chained” (the conclusion of one is a 

premise of another), whether multiple arguments 

are provided in support of the same conclusion, 

and whether one argument attacks another argu-

ment in some way. Statistical techniques were 

used for the first three stages, while manually 

constructed context-free grammar rules were 

used for argumentation structure detection. 

    Cabrio and Villata (2012) used an approach to 

argumentation structure detection based on cal-

culating textual entailment (Dagan 2006) to de-

tect support and attack relations between argu-

ments in a corpus of on-line dialogues stating 

user opinions.  

   Feng and Hirst (2011) focused on the problem 

of argumentation scheme recognition in the Ar-

aucaria corpus. Assuming that the conclusion 

and premises of an argument have been identi-

fied already, classification techniques achieved 

high accuracy for two argumentation schemes 

described in (Walton et al., 2008), argument 

from example and practical reasoning. Those 

schemes are less likely to be useful in analysis of 

scientific texts however. 

12



   In fact, since scientific research articles sub-

stantially differ from the genres that have been 

explored for argumentation mining so far, it is an 

open question what techniques will be successful 

in the scientific literature.   

 

2.4 Argumentative Zoning and Related 
Annotation Schemes   

Some NLP researchers have studied ways to au-

tomatically identify discourse structure in scien-

tific text. The motivation is to provide contextual 

information that will improve automatic infor-

mation access without the need to represent or 

reason about domain knowledge (Teufel, 2010). 

These researchers have developed several anno-

tation schemes.  

    The argumentative zoning (AZ) annotation 

scheme was developed for automatically classi-

fying the sentences of a scientific article in terms 

of their contribution of new knowledge to a field 

(Teufel and Moens, 2002; Teufel, 2010).  Ap-

plied to articles in computational linguistics, AZ 

labels “zones” or variable-length sequences of 

sentences with one of seven categories:  AIM 

(the research goal of the article), BASIS (the 

contribution of existing knowledge to a 

knowledge claim of the article), CONTRAST 

(criticizing or negatively contrasting competi-

tors‟ knowledge claims to a knowledge claim of 

the article), TEXTUAL (indicating the structure 

of the article), BACKGROUND (generally ac-

cepted background knowledge), OTHER (exist-

ing knowledge claims), and OWN (describing 

any aspect of a new knowledge claim made by 

the authors).  

   An extension of AZ (AZ-II) developed for ap-

plication to chemistry articles, refined AZ‟s dis-

tinctions into fifteen categories (Teufel, 2010). In 

another extension of AZ developed for genetics 

articles (Mizuta et al., 2005), the AZ OWN cate-

gory was replaced by categories distinguishing 

descriptions of methodology (MTH), experi-

mental results (RSL), insights from experimental 

results or previous work (INS), and implications 

(such as conjectures and applications) of experi-

mental results or previous work (IMP).   

    The CoreSC (Core Scientific Concepts) anno-

tation scheme was developed for automatic clas-

sification of sentences in terms of the compo-

nents of a scientific investigation: Hypothesis, 

Motivation, Goal, Object, Background, Method, 

Experiment, Model, Observation, Result and 

Conclusion (Liakata et al., 2012a). An automatic 

classifier for CoreSC was developed and evalu-

ated on a corpus of 265 full-text articles in bio-

chemistry and chemistry. A comparison study 

(Liakata et al., 2012b) in which articles were an-

notated with both AZ-II and CoreSC “found that 

CoreSC provides finer granularity … while the 

strength of AZ-II lies in detecting the attribution 

of knowledge claims and identifying the different 

functions of background information” (Liakata et 

al. 2012b, p. 45). Liakata et al. (2012b) com-

pared CoreSC to two other scientific discourse 

annotation schemes (Thompson et al., 2011; De 

Waard and Pander Maat, 2009). The three 

schemes were found to be complementary, oper-

ating at different levels of granularity.     

    However, none of the above annotation 

schemes address argumentation as described in 

section 2.3. They are not designed to identify the 

premises and conclusion of each argument (in-

cluding missing components of enthymemes) 

and the argumentation scheme, nor relationships 

between pairs of arguments. Nevertheless, we 

plan to coordinate our efforts with that research 

community to benefit from their expertise and to 

ensure that our corpus will ultimately provide a 

valuable resource for their research.    

3 Examples 

In this section we discuss examples of some of 

the arguments in an article (Schrauwen et al., 

2012) that is representative of the articles to be 

included in the corpus. The main claim of this 

article is that a c.637+1G>T mutation of the 

CABP2 gene in the region 11q12.3-11q13.3 

(DFNB93) is a cause of autosomal recessive 

non-syndromic hearing loss (arNSHL) in hu-

mans. The article‟s body is divided into four sec-

tions: Introduction, Material and Methods, Re-

sults, and Discussion. The following examples in 

Table 1 are from the first subsection of the Re-

sults section (under the subheading “Next-

Generation Sequencing of the DFNB93 Region 

Identifies a Splice-Site Mutation in CABP2”). 

The excerpt has been manually segmented into 

regions of text conveying arguments. Adjacent 

segments not conveying arguments have been 

omitted to save space; the approximate number 

of omitted lines is given in square brackets. Also, 

for readability, alternative identifiers of genetic 

variants have been replaced by ellipses. 

 

 

 

 

 

13



1 ¶The DFNB93 region contains more than 

300 annotated and hypothetical genes, 

and several genes are expressed in the 

mouse and human inner ear. Because 

there are many strong candidate genes in 

the region, we sequenced all genes and 

noncoding genes in this region by using 

a custom DNA capture array to identify 

the disease-causing mutation in one af-

fected individual from the family. 

 [skip next 5 lines] 

2 ¶After the identified homozygous vari-

ants were filtered through the 1000 Ge-

nomes Project November 2010 release 

and dbSNP131, 47 previously unreported 

variants remained and included two exo-

nic mutations, one splicing mutation, six 

nontranslated mutations, 16 intergenic 

(downstream or upstream) mutations, 

and 22 intronic mutations. 

3 The two exonic variants included one 

nonsynonymous variant, c.1379A>G … 

in PPFIA1 … and synonymous variant 

c.174G>A … in GAL3ST3 ... The 

splice-site variant, c.637+1G>T … was 

located at the 5′ donor site of intron 6 of 

CABP2 (Figure 1 and Figure S1, availa-

ble online). 

¶The variants in PPFIA1 and CABP2 

were subsequently validated by Sanger 

DNA sequencing, which only confirmed 

the splicing variant in CABP2. 

 [skip next 4 lines] 

4 Next, we checked the inheritance of the 

CABP2 variant in the entire Sh10 family 

(Figure 1) and screened an additional 

100 random Iranian controls to ensure 

that the variant is not a frequent poly-

morphism. The mutation was not detect-

ed in any of the controls, and inheritance 

was consistent with hearing loss in the 

family. 

 

Table 1. Excerpt from (Schrauwen et al., 2012) 

 

In an annotation scheme such as AZ, the first 

sentence of segment 1 might be classified as 

BKG (background) and the second as MTH 

(methodology).  In CoreSC, the second sentence 

might be classified as Hypothesis and Method. 

However, the following argument is also com-

municated in (1) to the intended audience of sci-

entists. (A genetics researcher has confirmed our 

interpretation of the arguments in this paper.) 

Note that in the following analyses in our paper, 

square brackets indicate implicit information de-

rivable from the discourse context or domain 

knowledge. In the following argument, two of 

the premises are implicit, i.e., this is an example 

of an enthymeme. Also, premises are distin-

guished as Data or Warrant, where the former 

type of premise corresponds to old or new evi-

dence or a conclusion of another argument in the 

article, and the latter to generally accepted prin-

ciples or assumptions in genetics. It is under-

stood by the intended audience that warrants may 

have exceptions and that the conclusions of the 

following arguments are tentative.  

    Note that the conclusion of Argument 1 has 

been recovered from the phrase there are many 

strong candidate genes in the region. The argu-

ment can be analyzed in terms of a type of ab-

ductive argumentation scheme, i.e., reasoning 

from effect (arNSHL) to plausible cause (a muta-

tion in the DFNB932 region).  For a specification 

of the argumentation schemes identified in the 

genetics paper, see (Green and Schug, in prepa-

ration). 

 

Argument 1:  

Data: Several genes in the DFNB93 region are 

expressed in the human inner ear. 

Data: [arNSHL involves the inner ear] 

Warrant: [If a gene is expressed in a tissue relat-

ed to a genetic condition then a mutation of that 

gene may be a cause of that condition] 

Warrant: [Autosomal recessive genetic condi-

tions are caused by homozygous mutations.]  

Conclusion: A [homozygous] mutation of a gene 

in the DFNB93 region may be a cause of 

arNSHL in humans. 

 

    In an annotation scheme such as AZ, the sub-

ordinate clause at the beginning of segment 2 

might be classified as MTH, and the main clause 

as RSL (results). However it has been analyzed 

in Argument 2 as an instance of an argumenta-

tion scheme involving the elimination of candi-

dates. Note that the identity of the arNSHL-

affected individual whose DNA was tested 

(V:14) and the family to which she belonged (Sh 

10) was not specified in this section, but was 

given in the Material and Methods section. Also 

note that the first premise in Argument 2 is the 

conclusion of the preceding Argument 1. In our 

paper, this is indicated by providing the previous 

argument‟s identifier in parentheses. 

   

 

 

14



Argument 2:  

Data: (Argument 1) [A homozygous mutation of 

a gene in the DFNB93 region may be a cause of 

arNSHL in humans] 

Data: [In a DNA sample from one arNSHL-

affected individual, identified as V:14 of family 

Sh10] 47 previously unreported [i.e. not frequent 

polymorphisms] homozygous variant alleles in 

the DFNB93 region were identified.   

Warrant: [If a variant is a frequent polymorphism 

then it is not a cause of a genetic condition] 

Conclusion: [One of the 47 variants may be the 

cause of arNSHL in individual V:14] 

 

   Various clauses in segment 3 might be classi-

fied as MTH or RSL in a scheme such as AZ. In 

an argumentation analysis, however, it conveys 

an argument that the CABP2 mutation may be 

the cause of arNSHL in one individual (:V14), 

after the elimination of the other candidates.  

  

Argument 3  

Data: (Argument 2) [One of the 47 variants may 

be the cause of arNSHL in individual V:14] 

Data: Only splice-site variant c.637+1G>T of 

CABP2 was confirmed. 

Warrant: [Only confirmed exonic or splice-site 

variants may be the cause of arNSHL.] 

Conclusion: [The c.637+1G>T variant of CABP2 

may be the cause of arNSHL in individual V:14] 

 

    Segment 4 uses two different sets of data to 

argue that the c.637+1G>T variant of CABP2 

may be the cause of arNSHL in the family of 

V:14,  Sh10. In a scheme such as AZ, the first 

sentence would probably be described as MTH 

and the second as RSL. However, an argumenta-

tion analysis provides two arguments, 4a and 4b. 

They each support the same conclusion, which is 

not explicitly stated in the text.    

 

Argument 4a 

Data: (Argument 3) [The c.637+1G>T variant of 

CABP2 may be the cause of arNSHL in individ-

ual V:14] 

Data: Inheritance of the variant segregates with 

arNSHL in family Sh10. 

Warrant: [A mutation that is present in one af-

fected family member may be the cause of an 

autosomal recessive genetic condition in the rest 

of the family if the mutation segregates with the 

genetic condition in the family (i.e., the mutation 

is present in all and only the family members 

who have the genetic condition, and the oc-

curence of the condition is consistent with auto-

somal recessive inheritance)] 

Conclusion: [The c.637+1G>T variant of CABP2 

may be the cause of arNSHL in family Sh10] 

 

Argument 4b 

Data: Inheritance of the variant c.637+1G>T of 

CABP2 segregates with arNSHL in family Sh10. 

Data: The variant c.637+1G>T of CABP2 is not 

found in the DNA of a control group of 100 indi-

viduals [who are not in family Sh10 and who are 

not affected with arNSHL] 

Warrant: [If a variant segregates with an autoso-

mal recessive condition in a family but is not 

found in the DNA of a control group of individu-

als who are not affected with the condition, then 

it may be the cause of the condition in that    

family] 

Conclusion: [The c.637+1G>T variant of CABP2 

may be the cause of arNSHL in family Sh10] 

     

    In addition to identifying individual argu-

ments, argumentation mining addresses relation-

ships between pairs of arguments. Arguments 1-

4a illustrate a chain of arguments, i.e., where the 

conclusion of Argument i is a premise of Argu-

ment i+1. Also, arguments 4a and 4b illustrate 

two arguments in support of the same conclu-

sion. Note that, individually, Arguments 1-3 are 

relatively weak. However, Argument 1 might be 

useful in answer to a query such as What regions 

may carry a mutation leading to arNSHL? Ar-

guments 2-3 might be useful in answer to a query 

such as Have any individual cases of arNSHL 

been attributed to a mutation of CABP2? Argu-

ments 1-4a and Argument 4b could be given as 

the answer to the query What mutation may be 

the cause of arNSHL in an affected family? (Note 

that in an interactive query facility, instead of 

presenting the user with a chain of arguments, 

the system could leave it up to the user to “drill 

down” to see the subarguments in a chain.) 

    The above arguments are provided here for 

purposes of illustration. In the remainder of the 

genetics article the main claim (that the CABP2 

mutation is a cause of arNSHL in humans) is 

supported by arguments that the mutation is the 

cause of arNSHL in two other families. Also, 

using a different type of argumentation, it pro-

vides a biochemical explanation for how the mu-

tation may cause an abnormality in the inner ear 

that could cause hearing loss. In addition to the 

main claim, the article contains several other 

supported claims, e.g., that the c.637+1G>T var-

iant of CABP2 may be a founder mutation. 

15



4 Challenges 

Argumentation mining of this type of discourse 

will be challenging. A challenge that is shared 

with BioNLP text mining in general is dealing 

with the extensive use of biological, chemical, 

and clinical terminology in the BioNLP domain. 

A number of challenges specific to argumenta-

tion mining are discussed next. 

   To specify an argument it is necessary to iden-

tify the premises (or data and warrant), conclu-

sion, and argumentation scheme. However, as 

illustrated in the previous examples, arguments 

with implicit components (enthymemes) are 

common, e.g., where a conclusion is implicit or 

used as an implicit premise of another argument. 

A related challenge is to supply domain 

knowledge for reconstructing implicit warrants 

in this genre. Another related challenge is the 

need to make use of discourse context to supply 

missing information, e.g., where context is re-

quired to supply the identity of individual V:14 

in Argument 2. Note that in that case, it was nec-

essary to read the previous Materials and Meth-

ods section to supply that information. 

    Another problem illustrated in the example is 

that argument boundaries do not coincide with 

sentential subunit boundaries. For example, seg-

ment 4 contains parts of Argument 4a and 4b in 

the first sentence and parts of those two argu-

ments in the second sentence. Furthermore, iden-

tification of argument components does not ap-

pear to be systematically associated with dis-

course markers such as „therefore‟. However, the 

arguments contain lexical items relating to scien-

tific discovery (e.g., „confirmed‟, „detected‟, 

„consistent with‟, „indicate‟, „is likely that‟, „ex-

pected to‟, „showed‟, „suggests‟) that may aid in 

automatic identification of the components. 

   Our analysis of argumentation in genetic coun-

seling (Green et al., 2011) and in the genetics 

research literature (Green and Schug, in prepara-

tion) has identified other (and more specific) ar-

gumentation schemes and critical questions than 

those listed in (Walton et al., 2008). Since some 

of the argumentation schemes we have identified 

are causal, lexical patterns of causality may be 

useful features for use in argumentation mining. 

5 Practical Considerations for Creating 
the Corpus 

In order to ensure that the future corpus can be 

freely disseminated, we will select articles from 

journals that are fully open-access, i.e., that are 

published under the Creative Commons attribu-

tion license “which allows articles to be re-used 

and re-distributed without restriction, as long as 

the original work is correctly cited” 

(http://www.biomedcentral. com.about). To date, 

we have identified the following fully open-

access journals that contain biomedical genetics 

research articles: 

 BMC http://www.biomedcentral.com jour-
nals: BMC Genetics, BMC Genomics, BMC 

Medical Genetics, BMC Medical Genomics 

and BMC Molecular Biology,  

 PLoS http://www.plos.org/ journals: Genet-
ics, Biology, Medicine 

A number of other journals (e.g. American Jour-

nal of Human Genetics), indexed by PubMed 

http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov, make a sub-

set of their articles available as open-access. 

   After selecting articles for the corpus, we will 

define and evaluate the intercoder reliability (Ar-

stein and Poesio, 2008) of the following types of 

annotations: 

 Data, warrant, and conclusion and argumen-
tation scheme of each argument,  

 Multiple arguments for the same conclusion, 
and 

 Chained relationships between arguments, 
i.e., where the conclusion of an argument is 

the premise of a subsequent argument. 

Note that we plan to employ graduate students 

with a background in genetics and biochemistry 

as coders.   

   Identifying implicit components of arguments 

will be challenging for coders. However, there 

are a number of constraints that will be given in 

the instructions to help the coders.  First, they 

will be given a list of commonly accepted princi-

ples of genetics as possible warrants, such as 

Mendel‟s laws, the concept of segregation in a 

pedigree, etc. Second, coders will be instructed 

to look for chained arguments, i.e., where the 

premises/conclusions of chained arguments can 

be reconstructed from the relationship between 

two arguments. Third, coders will be given a de-

scription of argumentation schemes, which also 

constrain the interpretation of argument compo-

nents.  

   A pilot annotated corpus and associated docu-

mentation of the argumentation coding scheme 

will be made available to other researchers on a 

temporary basis for the purpose of publicizing 

the planned corpus and getting feedback from 

potential stakeholders.   

   An important consideration is the selection of 

corpus annotation tools to facilitate argumenta-

tion mining research. On the one hand, the text 

16



mining community uses linguistic annotation 

tools such as GATE (http://gate.ac.uk/), UIMA 

(http://www.ibm.com/research/uima), and Open-

NLP tools http://opennlp.sourceforge.net). It 

would be advisable to use tools that would allow 

that community to benefit from the argumenta-

tion corpus, as well as to allow argumentation 

mining researchers to use previously developed 

tools. For example, argumentation mining re-

searchers may find it useful to automatically pre-

process the corpus with linguistic annotations as 

well as the annotation schemes described in sec-

tion 2.4. BioNLP researchers may find it useful 

to consider argumentation annotations as well. 

Just as modality and negation currently are used 

for BioNLP tasks, a text segment‟s participation 

in argumentation as outlined in this paper may 

provide useful context at a deeper level of analy-

sis.   

   On the other hand, the argumentation and edu-

cational community uses tools for diagramming 

argumentation, e.g.  

Araucaria http://arg.computing.dundee.ac.uk and 

LASAD http://cscwlab.in.tu-clausthal.de/ lasad). 

It is important to maintain compatibility between 

argumentation mining corpora developed with 

linguistic annotation tools and corpora developed 

with diagramming tools. 

6 Conclusion 

This paper described our plan to create a freely 

available corpus of open-access, full-text scien-

tific articles from the biomedical genetics re-

search literature, annotated to support argumen-

tation mining research. It discussed the argumen-

tation elements to be annotated, theoretical chal-

lenges, and practical issues in creating such a 

corpus. We hope this workshop will provide an 

opportunity for us to get feedback from potential 

users (or contributors) to this effort, and possibly 

even identify synergistic research opportunities. 

 

Acknowledgments  
 

We thank Dr. Malcolm Schug of the Biology 

Department of the University of North Carolina 

Greensboro for verifying our interpretation of the 

arguments in the genetics article.  

References  

Artstein, R. and Poesio, M. 2008. Inter-Coder Agree-      

    ment for Computational Linguistics. Computational    

    Linguistics 34(4): 555-596. 

 

Ashley, K.D. and Walker, V.R. 2013. Towards Con 

    structing Evidenced-Based Legal Arguments Using   

    Legal Decision Documents and Machine Learning.    

    In Proc. ICAIL 2013, June 10-14, Rome. 

 

Bach, N.X., Minh, N.L., Oanh, T.T., and Shimazu, A.  

   2013. A Two-Phase Framework for Learning Logi 

   cal Structures of Paragraphs in Legal Articles. ACM   

   Trans. Asian Lang. Inform. Process. 12, 1, Article 3  

   (March 2013). 

 

Cabrio, E. and Villata, S. 2012. Generating Abstract  

   Arguments: A Natural Language Approach. In Ver 

   heij, B., Szeider, S., and Woltran, S. (eds.) Compu- 

   tational Models of Argument: Proceedings of  

   COMMA 2012. Amsterdam, IOS Press, 454-461.   

 

Dagan, I., Dolan, B., Magnini, B., and Roth, D. 2009.  

   Recognizing textual entailment: Rationale, evalua 

   tion, and approaches. Natural Language Engineer 

   ing 15(4): i-xvii. 

 

De Waard, A. and Pander Maat, H. 2012. Knowledge  

   Attribution in Scientific Discourse: A Taxonomy of  

   Types and Overview of Features. In Proc. of the  

   ACL 2012 Workshop on Detecting Structure in Sci 

   entific Discourse. 

 

Feng, V.W. and Hirst, G. 2011. Classifying Argu 

   ments by Scheme. In Proceedings of the 49
th

 Annual  

   Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin 

   guistics, Portland, OR, 987-996. 

 
Green, N. 2005a. A Bayesian Network Coding  

   Scheme for Annotating Biomedical Information  

   Presented to Genetic Counseling Clients. Journal of  

   Biomedical Informatics 38: 130-144. 

 

Green, N. 2005b. Analysis of Linguistic Features As 

   sociated with Point of View for Generating Stylisti 

   cally Appropriate Text. In J. G. Shanahan, James  

   G., Qu, Y., and Wiebe, J. (Eds). Computing Attitude  

   and Affect in Text: Theory and Applications, 33-40.  

   Secaucus, NJ: Springer-Verlag. 

 

Green, N. 2010a. Representation of Argumentation in  

   Text with Rhetorical Structure Theory. Argumenta 

   tion 24(2): 181-196. 

 

Green, N. 2010b. Analysis of communication of un 

   certainty in genetic counseling patient letters for  

   design of a natural language generation system. So 

   cial Semiotics. 20(1):77-86.  

 

Green, N., Dwight, R.,  Navoraphan, K., and Stadler,  

   B. 2011. Natural Language Generation of Transpar 

   ent Arguments for Lay Audiences. Argument and  

   Computation 2(1): 23-50. 

 

 

17



Green, N. and Schug, M. In preparation. Modeling  

   Argumentation in Scientific Discourse. 

 

Liakata, M, et al. 2012a. Automatic recognition of  

   conceptualization zones in scientific articles and  

   two life science applications. Bioinformatics 28(7).  

 

Liakata, M., et al. 2012b. A Three-Way Perspective  

   on Scientific Discourse Annotation for Knowledge  

   Extraction. In Proc. of the ACL 2012 Workshop on     

   Detecting Structure in Scientific Discourse, 37-46. 

 

Mizuta, Y., Korhonen, A., Mullen, T. and Collier, N.  

   2005. Zone Analysis in Biology Articles as a Basis  

   for Information Extraction. International Journal of  

   Medical Informatics 75(6): 468-487. 

 

Mochales, R. and Moens, M. 2011. Argumentation  

   mining. Artificial Intelligence and Law 19, 1-22.  

 

Monteserin, A. and Amandi, A. 2010. Building user  

   argumentative models. Applied Intelligence 32, 131- 

   145. 

 

Reed, C. and Rowe, G. 2004. Araucaria: Software for  

   argument analysis, diagramming and representation.  

   International Journal of Artificial Intelligence Tools  

  14, 961-980. 

 

Reed, C., Mochales-Palau, R., Moens, M., and Mil- 

   ward, D. 2010. Language resources for studying  

   argument. In Proceedings of the 6
th

 Conference on    

   Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC2008,  

   ELRA, 91-100. 

 

Schrauwen et al. 2012. A Mutation in CABP2, Ex- 

   pressed in Cochlear Hair Cells, Causes Autosomal- 

   Recessive Hearing Impairment. The American  

   Journal of Human Genetics 91, 636-645, October 5,  

   2012.  

 

Teufel, S. and Moens, M. 2002. Summarizing Scien 

   tific Articles: Experiments with Relevance and  

   Rhetorical Status. Computational Linguistics 28(4),    

   409-445. 

 

Teufel, S. 2010. The Structure of Scientific Articles:  

   Applications to Citation Indexing and Summariza-      

   tion. Stanford, CA, CSLI Publications. 

 

Thompson, P., Nawaz, R., McNaught, J. and Anani- 

   adou, S. 2011. Enriching a biomedical event corpus  

   with meta-knowledge annotation. BMC Bioinfor 

   matics, 12: 393. 

 

Toulmin, S. E. 1998. The Uses of Argument, Cam- 

   bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

 

 

 

Villalba, M.P.G. and Saint-Dizier, P. 2012. Some      

   Facets of Argument Mining for Opinion Analysis.    

   In Proc. COMMA 2012, 23-34. 

 

Walton, D., Reed, C., and Macagno, F. 2008. Argu- 

   mentation Schemes. Cambridge University Press. 

 

Wyner, A., Mochales-Palau, R., Moens, M-F, and  

   Milward, D. 2010. Approaches to Text Mining  

   Arguments from Legal Cases. In Semantic Pro 

   cessing of Legal Texts, 60-79. 

 

Wyner, A., Schneider, J., Atkinson, K., and Bench- 

   Capon, T. 2012. Semi-Automated Argumentative  

   Analysis of Online Product Reviews. In Proc.  

   COMMA 2012, 43-50. 

 

18


