



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and J D Pawar. Proc. of the 11th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 82–88,
Goa, India. December 2014. c©2014 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Anou Tradir: Experiences In Building Statistical Machine Translation 

Systems For Mauritian Languages – Creole, English, French 

 

 

Raj Dabre 

CFILT 

IIT Bombay 

prajdabre 

@gmail.com 

Aneerav Sukhoo 

Central Informatics Bureau 

Quatre Bornes, Mauritius 
aneeravsukhoo 

@yahoo.com 

Pushpak Bhattacharyya 

CFILT 

IIT Bombay 
pushpakbh 

@gmail.com 

 

  

 

Abstract 

We present, in this paper, our experienc-

es in developing Statistical Machine 

Translation (SMT) systems involving 

English, French and Mauritian Creole, 

the languages most spoken in Mauritius. 

We give a brief overview of the peculi-

arities of the language phenomena in 

Mauritian Creole and indicate the differ-

ences between it and English and French. 

We then give descriptions of the devel-

oped corpora used for the various MT 

systems where we also explore the possi-

bility of using French as a bridge lan-

guage when translating from English to 

Creole. We evaluate these systems using 

the standard objective evaluation meas-

ure, BLEU. We postulate and through an 

error analysis, indicated by examples, 

verify that when English to French trans-

lations are perfect, the subsequent trans-

lation of French to Creole results in better 

quality translations than direct English to 

Creole translation. 

1 Introduction 

Mauritius1 is an island nation in the Indian Ocean 

about 2000 km off the south-east coast of the 

African continent. The population of Mauritius is 

approximately 1.3 million and it is the 151st most 

populated country in the world. While English 

language is the official language, French lan-

guage is spoken to a greater extent and the Mau-

ritian Creole (henceforth called creole) is the 

most common language used by the majority of 

                                                 
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mauritius 

the population. In addition, since the people of 

Mauritius have Indian ancestors, Indian lan-

guages such as Marathi, Hindi and Bhojpuri (a 

Bihari language) are also spoken amongst the 

populace. Mauritius is an extremely popular 

tourist spot and attracts many thousands of peo-

ple every year and has such involves interaction 

with the local inhabitants. Although English is 

the main language, lack of knowledge of the 

Mauritian Creole (which is based on French) 

does lead to a gap in communication. 

Various organisations have been actively in-

volved in give the Mauritian Creole a new di-

mension, whereby a trilingual dictionary has 

been prepared by the University of Mauritius and 

a bilingual dictionary has also been provided 

online by Ledikasyon pu Travayer2 on its web-

site.  There is room for further research in the 

area to come up with a dictionary for technical 

terms. Computational Linguistics can help to 

take the Mauritian Creole language to greater 

heights.  

Google provides translation services between 

many languages but Mauritian Creole is not one 

of them which prompted us to begin the devel-

opment of machine translation systems to 

achieve this end. To the best of our knowledge 

this is the first of its kind work involving transla-

tion to and from Mauritian Creole on such a 

large scale. We hope that this work will attract 

and help researchers in the development of ma-

chine translation systems involving a variety of 

Creole languages. 

                                                 
2 http://www.lalitmauritius.org/dictionary.php 

82



1.1 Related Work 

Sukhoo et al. (2014) had developed a basic Eng-

lish Creole SMT system with a very small 

amount of parallel corpus (10000-13000 lines 

including many dictionary words). They manage 

to get simple sentences translated with reasona-

ble quality but fail when longer sentences (more 

than five words) are tested. This corpus, after 

considerable augmentation was used in our ex-

periments. Significant work has been done in 

using bridge languages (Bertoldi et al. (2008), 

Utiyama et al. (2007)) to improve translation 

quality. In many of these works, they develop 

translation systems from languages A to C using 

B, where A-B and B-C are resource rich, by ei-

ther synthesizing new phrase tables or modifying 

existing corpora. In our case, we had a huge Eng-

lish French corpus but a very small French Cre-

ole corpus. Moreover no linguistic processing 

modules for Creole exist, which would help in 

reducing data sparsity. Thus we decided to adopt 

the “transfer method” described by Wu et al. 

(2009). The remainder of the paper involves a 

chapter on Linguistic phenomena in Mauritian 

Creole; describing peculiarities and how it is dif-

ferent from English and French; followed by a 

chapter describing the corpora used, the systems 

developed, the results and error analyses via ex-

amples finally leading to the conclusion and fu-

ture works. 

1.2 Purpose of the work  

The outcome of our work is a set of online trans-

lation systems aiming to: 

1. Assist young students to learn English as a 
second language. 

2. Help tourists to learn the basics of the Creole 
language so as to enhance communication 

with the local community.  This can provide 

better enjoyment during their stay. 

3. Assist expatriates and foreign business peo-
ple to interact with the people of Mauritius. 

4. Assist the local people, who do not master 
the English language to be able to translate 

and understand English texts, which are 

available in huge amount online as well as 

from other sources. 

2 Mauritian Creole 

The Mauritian Creole is spoken in Mauritius and 

Rodrigues islands.  A variation of the language is 

also spoken in Seychelles. Mauritius was colo-

nized successively by the Dutch, French and 

English.  Even though the English took over the 

island from the French in the early 1800, French 

remained as a dominant language and as such 

Creole language shares many features with 

French. 

2.1 Similarities with French 

The same alphabets are used in both cases and 

they are pronounced in a similar manner.  In ad-

dition, some words are written and pronounced 

in the same way.  These include words as per the 

table below (the English translation is also 

shown in the 3rd column): 

French  Creole  English 

avion avion aeroplane 

bon bon good 

gaz gaz gas 

bref bref brief 

pion pion pawn 
Table 1: Words with similar orthography in 

French and Creole 

One must note that, in French there is a heavy 

usage of accents while writing which is absent in 

Creole. Many words are pronounced similarly in 

French and Creole, but the grapheme is different.  

These include: 

French 

(Fr) 

Creole (Cr)  English 

(En) 

mauvais move move 

confort konfor comfort 

méditation meditasion meditation 

insecte insekt insect 

condition kondision State, terms 

or provision 
Table 2: Words with same pronunciation but dif-

ferent orthography 

2.2 Creole Grammar 

The grammar of Creole has been published in 

2011 (Police-Michel, Carpooran and Florigny, 

2011).  The Mauritian Creole language has sen-

tences with structure of Subject-Verb-Object as 

in the case of English and French language.  

Some differences with English language can be 

noted as follows: 

1. Adjectives are sometimes moved after the 
object: 

“The brown bird” is translated as: Zwazo 

maron-la 
Here: “maron” for “brown” is moved after the 

object (Zwazo). “The” is moved at the end 

(“la”). However, the French translation fol-

lows the same pattern as Creole, e.g. 

“L’oiseau maron” 83



2. Difference between singular and plural: 
“There are many birds” is translated as: 

Ena boukou zwazo laba 

Here: The plural form does not take “s”.   

The word “boukou” indicates “many” and 

therefore, it can be deduced that there are 

many birds. In French, the translated sen-

tence is “Il y a beaucoup d’oiseaux là-bas”  

3. Dropping of verb: 
“He is bad” is translated as:  

Li move 

Here: “He” is translated to “Li” and “bad” to 

“méchant”.  The verb “is” is dropped. In 

French, the translated sentence becomes “Il 

est méchant”, where the verb is retained. 

 

This concludes the explanation of Creole lin-

guistics. Due to the similar SVO syntax and lim-

ited morphological complexity of English, 

French and Creole, translation between them be-

comes tractable even which working without lin-

guistic processing and small corpora. We now 

describe our experiments and systems developed. 

3 Experiments 

We begin by listing the various SMT systems 

developed. We have used only phrase-based 

methods due to the lack of linguistic processing 

modules for Creole.  

3.1 Systems developed 

All the systems developed and hosted are given 

below: 

1. Direct  English to Creole  
2. Direct Creole to English 
3. Direct French to Creole 
4. Direct Creole to French 
5. English to Creole using French as bridge 

 

The front-end of our system was developed using 

a combination of HTML and DJANGO (Python). 

The SMT models, at the back end, are provided 

as services accessible by XMLRPC. 

3.2 Corpora details 

Plenty of parallel corpus is available for English-

French however we had to manually, from 

scratch, create parallel corpus for Creole-French 

and Creole-English. These sets of corpora were 

developed by the sole Creole speaker in our 

group over a period of six months. A significant 

part of the corpora consists of dictionary words 

which ensure basic word substitution. Table 3 

gives the details of the corpora used.  

Language 

pair 

#lines #words 

(L1-L2) 

Source 

En-Fr 2000000   127405- 

147812 

Europarl 

En-Cr 25010 16294-

17389 

Manually 

created 

Fr-Cr 18354 13769-

13725 

Manually 

created 
Table 3: Corpora Details 

In the French-Creole corpus 11,208 entries 

were just dictionary words and thus the number 

of parallel sentences was just around 7146. Simi-

larly for the English-Creole corpus 11,423 en-

tries were dictionary words making the number 

of parallel sentences around 13,795. For creole 

we had a monolingual corpus of around 100k 

lines. 

3.3 Training and development 

For purposes of training we used IBM models 

(Brown et al., 1993) implemented in GIZA++ for 

alignment and Moses (Koehn et al., 2007, 2003) 

for phrase extraction and decoding. Standard pa-

rameters were used. Training procedure follow-

ing which the phrase tables and reordering tables 

were binarized in order to ensure on demand 

memory loading thereby reducing the require-

ment of RAM. The services for each language 

pair are hosted using mosesserver. The English-

French system took the maximum training time; 

a total of 24 hours, including the time for tuning. 

All the other systems took around 5 minutes of 

training. Due to lack of corpora we did not per-

form tuning for these systems. For each system 

the target side corpus was used for generating the 

language model. For creole we used the mono-

lingual corpus for language modelling. Tuning 

was done using MERT. 

3.4 Using French as a bridge language 

We used the “transfer method” or “sentence 

translation strategy”, proposed by Utiyama and 

Isahara (2007) and described by Wu and Wang 

(2009), to translate from English to Creole using 

French; wherein the first translated from English 

to French using the En-Fr system and then from 

French to Creole using the Fr-Cr system. This 

method is only applicable when either both the 

En-Fr and Fr-Cr systems or only the En-Fr sys-

tem is of high quality. The main idea is that 

French is close to Creole and thus an SMT sys-

tem built on a small corpus would suffice for 

good translations. As long as the English-French 
84



SMT system gives good translations the resulting 

Creole translations can be expected to be good. 

The Moses decoder allows for n-best translations 

to be generated as outputs which we exploit to 

obtain improvements in translations. When Mo-

ses translates a sentence it uses 8 main features 

for decoding. These are: n-gram language model 

probability of the target language (1 feature), two 

phrase translation probabilities (both directions, 

2 features), two lexical translation probabilities 

(both directions, 2 features), a word penalty (1 

feature), a phrase penalty (1 feature), a linear 

reordering penalty (1 feature). Each of above is a 

feature for decoding procedure (Hoang et al., 

2007; Koehn et al., 2003). The decoder gives 

values for each feature for a translation candi-

date. The final score of the translation is a 

weighted sum of the values of the above men-

tioned features. The weights are obtained using 

MERT. 

Let “f” denote the source language, “p” the 

pivot language and “e” the target language. Let 

L1-P denote the system that translates from 

source to pivot and P-L2 the system that trans-

lates from pivot to target. In our case L1 is Eng-

lish, P is French and L2 is Creole. The sentence 

translation strategy is: 

1. Translate source language sentence “f” into 
“N” intermediate sentences using L1-P sys-

tem. 

a. f  p1, p2, p3 .... pN 
b. 8 values of feature functions per pi: hpi1, 

hpi2,....., hpi8  

2. Translate each candidate into “N” target lan-
guage sentences (e) using P-L2 system 

a. pi  ei1, ei2, ei3, ... eiN 
b. 8 values of feature functions per eij: heij1, 

heij2,....., heij8 

3. Score N*N target translations using feature 
values and Moses tuning parameters 

a. Each feature has a weight 
b. Weights obtained by tuning via MERT 
c. λpm (m=1 to 8): Parameter of L1-P system 
d. λem (m=1 to 8): Parameter of P-L2 system 

4. Select the sentence eij with the highest score. 
The formula for scoring is: 

 
 

We experimented with 2 values of “N” where 

N=1 and N=10. The above method has a time 

complexity of O(N*N) and hence we refrained 

from going for any higher values of “N”. Using 

this mechanism we tested sentences to validate 

the following hypothesis: “For simple sentences 

the translation of English to Creole using French 

as a bridge is much better than direct English to 

Creole translation”. Although the Fr-Cr system is 

built from a relatively small corpus, we believe 

in the validity of this hypothesis because French 

is much closer to Creole than English. 

3.5 Testing and Results 

For the purpose of testing an additional 142 sen-

tence triplets were created, one each for English, 

French and Creole. These are sentences with 

more than 10 words per sentence on an average. 

The number of OOV’s was more in these sen-

tences. Extra 142 simple (short) sentence pairs 

for English and Creole were created to verify our 

hypothesis mentioned above. These contained an 

average of 5 words per sentence with relatively 

lesser number of OOV’s compared to the earlier 

sentences. We evaluated the quality using BLEU 

(Papineni et al. 2002). The scores are given in 

Table 4 below. In the table “easy” indicates that 

the simple (short) sentence pairs were used for 

testing whereas “hard” indicates that the longer 

ones were used for testing. For the Creole to 

English, Creole to French and French to Creole 

systems the pivot language mechanism was not 

applicable since effective pivot languages were 

not available. 

 

Language Pair BLEU 

En-Cr (direct, hard) 12.90 

En-Cr (direct, easy) 25.31 

En-Cr (bridge (N=1), 

hard) 

9.44 

En-Cr (bridge (N=10), 

hard) 

10.96 (increase 

compared to N=1) 

En-Cr (bridge (N=1), 

easy) 

26.12 (increase) 

En-Cr (bridge (N=10), 

easy) 

29.77 (increase) 

Cr-En (direct, hard) 17.58 

Cr-En (direct, easy) 22.58 

Fr-Cr (direct, hard) 15.97 

Cr-Fr (direct, hard) 14.54 
Table 4: BLEU scores of systems 

As expected, the English to creole translation 

using French as bridge yields a BLEU score 

higher than the direct translation for simple 

(short) sentences. This improvement is higher 

when the number of intermediate translations is 

increased from N=1 to N=10 (from 25.31 (direct) 

to 26.12 to 29.77). This is because when N=10 
85



we may have a better intermediate French trans-

lation as compared to when N=1. The limitation 

is that when N=10 the time taken is 100 times 

more than when N=1. The increase is not ob-

served for “hard” sentences. This is because their 

translations from English to French (as interme-

diates) were not of good quality and this led to a 

multiplicative degradation when translating the 

intermediate French sentence to Creole. However 

there is an improvement in BLEU from 9.44 to 

10.96 when N is increased from 1 to 10. 

We did significance testing using bootstrap-

ping sampling and also performed subjective 

analysis for the bridge translations to verify that 

the increase in BLEU was not coincidental. We 

also observed the effects of the change in BLEU 

with increase in corpus size used for training for 

En-Cr and Cr-En which is given in the table 5 

below. The BLEU scores are different here be-

cause the test set used was different from the 142 

sentences mentioned before. The main difference 

between the corpus at 20000 size and 25000 is 

the increase in the number of non-dictionary sen-

tences which indicates that even with small but 

good corpus size increments we can achieve tre-

mendous improvement in quality. 

No of training sentences En-Cr 

(direct) 

Cr-En 

5,000 5.36 7.47 

10,000 6.17 8.57 

15,000 6.07 9.16 

20,000 6.25 9.69 

25,000 (full) 7.71 11.64 
Table 5: Change in BLEU with corpus size 

3.6 Example Translations and Error Anal-
ysis 

For each language pair we give below examples 

of good and bad translations. 

3.6.1 En-Cr 

1. Input: They all had big ears and long legs. 
Direct Creole: zot tu ti ena gran zorey e 

longay mole. 

French (Bridge): ils avaient tous grandes 

oreilles et long jambes. 

Resulting Creole: zot ti ena tou gran zorey e 

long lazam. 

Evaluation: In this case, the French transla-

tion is of high quality and the Creole through 

bridge language is equally of high quality 

and is preferred as compared to the direct 

Creole translation. 

 

2. Input: My name is John. 
Direct Creole: mo apel li. 

French (Bridge): mon nom est john. 

Resulting Creole: mo apel zan. 

Evaluation: Because the French translation 

is correct the Creole translation as compared 

to the direct Creole translation, whereby the 

name “John” has not been translated. 

 

3. Input: There are birds like no other birds 
because they are not real. 

Direct Creole: ena bann zwazo kuma okenn 

lezot zwazo parski zot pa vre. 

French (Bridge): il y a des oiseaux comme 

aucun autre oiseaux car ils ne sont pas vraies. 

Resulting Creole: ena bann zwazo kuma 

okenn lot zwazo parski zot pa vraies. 

Evaluation: The direct Creole translation is 

correct. The French translation is correct, but 

the only issue in the Creole through bridge 

translation is the word “vraies” in French, 

that was left as it is given that it is not a stem 

word.  The small size of the French-Creole 

parallel corpora has been a limitation to this 

translation.  The translation of the other 

words, including the order, is also correct. 

3.6.2 Cr-En 

1. Input: mo pa kontan fason to koz ar mwa 
English: i don't like the way you talk with 

me 

Evaluation: Correct translation. 

 

2. Input: boukou touris pou vizit Moris sa lane 
la 

English: many tourist to visit to mauritius 

this year 

Evaluation: The correct tense of the verb “to 

visit” is “will visit”, otherwise the rest of the 

sentence is correct. 

 

3. Input: alor li ti dir sa grenouy la , "si to pou 
donn mwa enn zafer , mo pou fer tou seki to 

dimande" 

English: so he said to the frog, if you will 

give me a thing, i will do what you ask 

Evaluation: Almost correct translation, apart 

from the elimination of the quotes. “a thing” 

should have been “something”. 

3.6.3 Fr-Cr 

1. French: je voudrais regarder un film (I want 
to watch a movie) 

Creole: mo anvi get enn fim 
86



Evaluation: This translation is perfect. 
 

2. French: il y a des tigres et des lions dans la 
forêt (There are tigers and lions in the forest) 

Creole: ena bann tigres ek bann lions dan 

afore 

Evaluation: Here the Creole sentence 

sounds like “There are the tigers and the li-

ons in the forest”. The word “bann” (the) 

should be absent. 

 

3. French: pourquoi êtes-vous en colère contre 
moi? (Why are you angry with me?) 

Creole: kifer eski zot ankoler kont mwa? 

Evaluation: This translation is particularly 

bad. The correct is: “kifer to ankoler ar 

mwa”. The system was unable to correctly 

translate “êtes-vous” (are you). This we be-

lieve is a major limitation of small corpus 

size. 

3.6.4 Cr-Fr 

1. Creole: mo anvi manz enn dipin (I want to 
eat bread) 

French: je veux manger un pain 

Evaluation: This translation is perfect. 

 

2. Creole: kifer to ankoler ar mwa (Why are 
you angry with me?) 

French: pourquoi vous en colère avec moi. 

Evaluation: The translation is almost perfect 

except that it sounds like “Why you angry 

with me?”. “are” is missing as “vous” should 

have had “êtes“ with it. 

 

3. Creole: sa lane la Moris finn gagn boukou 
touris (This year Mauritius had a lot of tour-

ists.) 

French: cette année de l'île maurice a eu 

beaucoup de tourists 

Evaluation: Here the French translation 

sounds like: “this year's maurice island had a 

lot of tourists”. Here “la Moris” is a named 

Entity which actually means Mauritius and 

its translation as “l'île maurice” is acceptable. 

The “de” after “année” is incorrect. 

3.7 Discussion 

The examples given above should indicate that 

survival sentences are translated with a very high 

quality in most cases. Common mistakes are 

those involving incorrect tenses, dropping of 

words although they are present in the corpus, 

adding articles like “bann” (the) for each noun 

and the inability to handle named entities. The 

main reason for this we narrow down to the fol-

lowing: 

1. Poor language model for creole due to rela-
tively small corpus. The creole monolingual 

corpus was around 100k lines but not clean 

since it was collected from a variety of 

sources. Also it is common knowledge that a 

corpus of atleast 1 million lines is good for 

language modelling. 

2. Insufficient decoding options due to lack of 
evidence in corpora (small corpus size) and 

hence phrase table. 

3. Lack of factors (linguistic cues) leading to 
surface forms being un-translated. 

4. Lack of lower/upper case information which 
can help recognize named entities; which is 

again due to small corpus size. (We lower-

case then translating from/to Creole as true-

casing is ineffective due to a small corpus.) 

5. If a pivot language is used then the final 
quality depends on the quality of the inter-

mediate translations which, if bad, lead to 

poorer target translations. 

This gives sufficient reason for us to look deeper 

into the decoding procedure and perhaps fine 

tune it for our purposes. Also the development of 

a larger corpus is a necessary activity. Finally 

more linguistic phenomena have to be studied 

and uncovered which would eventually lead to 

analysis modules for Creole. 

4 Conclusion and Future Work 

We have presented our experiences in develop-

ing statistical machine translation systems for 

Mauritian languages. As can be seen, even with 

small amount of corpus, we are able to get rea-

sonable quality translations which we believe 

will gradually improve as the dictionary and cor-

pora size increases. We also validated our hy-

potheses that French, being closer to Mauritian 

Creole, is a good bridge language and translation 

from English to Creole via French, rather than 

directly, gives better translations when the Eng-

lish to French translation is near about perfect. In 

the future we plan to experiment with factored 

models (Koehn et al., 2007), which we were not 

able to use due to the lack of linguistic pro-

cessing modules for Creole. We also plan to ex-

periment on translating Creole to English using 

French as a bridge language when our Creole 

French corpora size becomes large. Naturally 

this would lead to work on the lesser spoken lan-

guages in Mauritius as also on other Creoles. 

87



Reference 

Aneerav Sukhoo, 2014. Translation between English 

and Mauritian Creole: A Statistical Machine 

Translation Approach. IST-2104, Mauritius, May,  

2014. 

Peter E Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra. Vincent J. 

Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The 

Mathematics of Statistical Machine Translation: 

Parameter Estimationn. Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics. 

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris 

Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Ber-

toldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Mo-

ran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alex-

andra Constantin, Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open 

Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation, 

Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics (ACL), demonstration session, 

Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. 

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu. 

2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. Asso-

ciation for Computational Linguistics 2003. 

Philipp Koehn and Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored 

translation models. In Proceedings of the 2007 

Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 

Language Processing and Computational Natural 

Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 

868-876, Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. As-

sociation for Computational Linguistics. 

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward and 

Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a Method for Auto-

matic Evaluation of Machine Translation, Pro-

ceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Asso-

ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 

Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 311-318. 

Nicola Bertoldi, Madalina Barbaiani, Marcello Fed-

erico, and Roldano Cattoni. 2008. Phrase-based 

statistical machine translation with pivot lan-

guages. Proceeding of IWSLT, pages 143–149. 

Masao Utiyama and Hitoshi Isahara. 2007. A compar-

ison of pivot methods for phrase-based statistical 

machine translation. In Human Language Tech-

nologies 2007: The Conference of the North 

American Chapter of the Association for Compu-

tational Linguistics; Proceedings of the Main Con-

ference, pages 484–491, Rochester, New York, 

April. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Hua Wu and Haifeng Wang. 2009. Revisiting pivot 

language approach for machine translation. In 

Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the 47th 

Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th Interna-

tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-

cessing of the AFNLP, pages 154–162, Suntec, 

Singapore, August. Association for Computational 

Linguistics. 88


