



















































Encoding of Compounds in Swedish FrameNet


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 67–71,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Encoding of Compounds in Swedish FrameNet

Karin Friberg Heppin
Språkbanken

University of Gothenburg
karin.heppin@svenska.gu.se

Miriam R L Petruck
International Computer Science Institute

Berkeley, CA
miriamp@icsi.berkeley.edu

Abstract

Constructing a lexical resource for
Swedish, where compounding is highly
productive, requires a well-structured
policy of encoding. This paper presents
the treatment and encoding of a certain
class of compounds in Swedish FrameNet,
and proposes a new approach for the au-
tomatic analysis of Swedish compounds,
i.e. one that leverages existing FrameNet
(Ruppenhofer et al., 2010) and Swedish
FrameNet (Borin et al. 2010), as well as
proven techniques for automatic semantic
role labeling (Johansson et al., 2012).

1 Introduction

Like other Germanic languages (e.g. Dutch, Ger-
man), compounding is a very productive word for-
mation process in Swedish. Swedish FrameNet,1

which is part of the larger Swedish FrameNet++
effort to create Swedish resources for language
technology purposes, analyzes Swedish composi-
tional compounds in a way that reflects the lan-
guage’s grammatical structure, records informa-
tion about the internal structure of these com-
pounds in Frame Semantic terms, and proposes us-
ing that information to automate the analysis.

2 Swedish FrameNet

Swedish FrameNet (SweFN), which began in
2011, is part of Swedish FrameNet++ (Borin et al.,
2010), a larger project whose main goal is build-
ing a panchronic lexical macro-resource for use
in Swedish language technology. Basing its work
on the original FrameNet developed in Berkeley
(BFN) (Fonetenelle, 2003), SweFN is creating a
lexical resource of at least 50,000 lexical units

1SweFN, <http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/swefn>, a free
resource (CC-BY-SA 3.0, LGPL 3.0) funded by Veten-
skapsrådet under contract 2010-6013.

(LUs) with the express goal of automating as much
of the process as possible.

Swedish FrameNet bases its contents on three
resources: (1) BFN’s frames, frame definitions
and frame-to-frame relations, for efficiency and
compatibility with other FrameNet-like resources;
(2) lexical entries from the SALDO lexicon; and
(3) example sentences from the KORP corpus col-
lection (Ahlberg et al., 2013).

Building SweFN frames includes several steps.
The SweFN researcher chooses a BFN frame with
a Swedish analogue, and populates that frame with
appropriate LUs. LU selection involves deter-
mining which of the BFN LUs have equivalents
in Swedish, or searching SALDO for LUs of the
frame. Using the KORP corpora, the researcher
finds example sentences that illustrate the LU’s
meaning and annotates each sentence with the
frame’s FEs. SweFN draws all examples from cor-
pus data; this paper also provides the larger con-
text in which compounds occur.

SweFN LUs, be they single words or multiword
expressions (MWEs), evoke frames, i.e. cognitive
structuring constituting the basic building blocks
of any framenet knowledge base. LUs are pairings
of lemmas and frames, the latter schematic repre-
sentations of events, objects, situations or states of
affairs. Frame elements (FEs) identify the seman-
tic roles of the participants of the scenario char-
acterized in a frame, e.g. AGENT, THEME, or
TIME. For each frame, example sentences illus-
trate the linguistic realization of LUs together with
the frame’s FEs for the Frame Semantic annotation
of the sentence’s constituents (Borin et al., 2013a;
Borin et al., 2013b).

3 Multiword expressions in SALDO

As mentioned above, the SALDO lexicon serves
as the primary resource for LUs in SweFN++ and
consequently also for LUs in SweFN. SALDO
contains almost 6,000 MWEs of three types, dis-

67



tinguished as follows (Borin et al., 2013a):

• Continuous MWEs corresponding to fixed
and semi-fixed expressions2, which may have
internal inflection, but no intervening words,
e.g. enarmad bandit (one-armed bandit) -
‘slot machine’.

• Discontinuous MWEs corresponding to
syntactically flexible expressions2, which
may have intervening words, such as parti-
cle or phrasal verbs, e.g. ge ut (give out) -
‘publish’.

• Constructions partially schematic construc-
tions or syntactic templates with one or more
slots filled with items of specific types, those
described in construction grammars, e.g. ju
X desto Y - ‘The Xer the Yer’ (Fillmore et al.,
1988).

SALDO treats solid compounds, i.e. single
orthographic words, just as it treats single-word
items, and does not normally define their for-
mal structure explicitly. In most cases, Swedish
compounds are written without space between
its constituents, as in korvgubbe (sausage+man)
- ‘hot dog seller’. However, different possible
forms yield different meanings. The adjective +
noun NP varm korv literally means ‘hot sausage’
(in the temperature sense); the continuous MWE
varm korv means ‘hot dog’; and the solid com-
pound varmkorv refers to not necessarily prepared
sausage for making hot dogs. As LUs in a SweFN
frame, the solid compounds, when compositional
or partially transparent, have constituents which
manifest FEs or other LUs in the same frame. The
next section discusses these compounds and their
annotation in SweFN.

4 MWEs and compounds as LUs

SALDO’s continuous MWEs, discontinuous
MWEs, and solid compounds are candidates
for SweFN LUs, much like simplex words.
Solid endocentric compounds, which identify a
more specific instance of the compound’s head,
constitute a large group of words in Swedish.
SweFN provides an analysis for these, even
though BFN does not (Friberg Heppin and
Toporowska Gronostaj, 2012). In frames where
solid endocentric compounds are LUs, SweFN

2As described by Sag et al. (2001)

records the pattern FE+LU, where the com-
pound’s modifier is a FE of the given frame and
the head is another LU in the same frame. Thus,
among others, Observable body parts
has ATTACHMENT, and DESCRIPTOR, and
POSSESSOR FEs. SweFN records the analysis
shown below with segmentation points between
compound parts marked with ‘|’.

• ATTACHMENT+LU stortå|nagel
(big+toe+nail) - ‘big toe nail’,
pekfinger|nagel (point+finger+nail) - ‘index
finger nail’

• DESCRIPTOR+LU ring|finger - ‘ring finger’,
pek|finger (point+finger) - ‘index finger’,
stor|tå ‘big toe’

• POSSESSOR+LU häst|hov ‘horse hoof’
Generally, compounds with more than two con-

stituents consist of one or more constituents that
are themselves compounds. SweFN treats such
compounds in the same way as it treats other com-
pounds. For example, stortå|nagel (big+toe+nail)
- ‘big toe nail’ instantiates ATTACHMENT+LU ,
where stortå (big+toe) - ‘big toe’ itself is analyzed
as DESCRIPTOR+LU.

SweFN analyzes example sentences that in-
clude compounds of different types with FE and
LU annotation tags. The next section describes
this encoding.

5 Encoding of compounds

Ruppenhofer et al. (2010) describes two ways that
BFN treats noun compounds. Conventionalized
two-part words are treated as single LUs with no
internal analysis, e.g., firing squad, sugar daddy,
and wine bottle. When a frame-evoking compound
has a modifier that happens to be a noun or re-
lational adjective e.g., restoration costs, military
supremacy, the compound’s head is annotated as a
LU of the frame in question and the modifier in-
stantiates a FE of the same frame. Ruppenhofer et
al. (2010) point out that the division between the
two groups is not always clear.

SweFN relies on degree of compositionality to
determine the extent to which compound analysis
is encoded in a frame’s example sentences, not the
compound’s degree of lexicalization. Thus far, the
analysis has been produced manually. Section 6
presents a proposal for the automatic Frame Se-
mantic analysis of compounds.

68



5.1 Non-compositional compounds
Typically, non-compositional compounds are lex-
icalized. Otherwise, understanding them is not
possible, since the sense of the compound is
not apparent from its parts. SALDO lists lexi-
calized non-compositional compounds as individ-
ual entries, like simplex words. Taking its lead
from SALDO, and because constituents of non-
compositional compounds do not instantiate FEs,
SweFN does not analyze such compounds further,
as in (1), where hästhov (horse+hoof) - ‘coltsfoot’
(Plants) is annotated only as a whole.

(1) och
and

[hästhovarna]LU
coltsfeet+DEF

lyser
shine

som
like

solar
suns

...and the coltsfeet are shining like suns.

5.2 Compositional compounds
SALDO also treats solid compositional com-
pounds as simplex words. In contrast, SweFN
treats compositional compounds as LUs, analyz-
ing them as FE+LU, as described above in section
4. Furthermore, SweFN annotates compositional
compounds in example sentences both as wholes
and with respect to their constituent parts, as in
(2).

(2) ...klappret
...clatter+DEF

från
from

[snabba]Descriptor
fast

[[häst]Possessor[hovar]LU]LU
horse+hooves
...the clatter from fast horse hooves.

Rather than serving as a modifier, the first ele-
ment of some compounds is the semantic head of
that compound. In such cases, the syntactic head
can be semantically transparent, as in bakteri-
etyp (bacteria+type) - ‘type of bacteria’ and kaffe-
sort (coffee+kind) - ‘kind of coffee’, or show the
speaker’s attitude toward the entity identified in
the semantic head of the compound as in gubbslem
(old man+mucus) - ‘dirty old man’ or hästkrake
(horse+wretch) - ‘wretched horse’. For this type of
compound the modifier and the whole compound
are annotated as LUs in the given frame, as illus-
trated in (3); the syntactic head of the compound
does not realize any frame element in the frame.

(3) Han
He

fick
got

syn
sight

på
of

en
an

[gammal]Age
old

[vit]Persistent characteristics
white

[[häst]LUkrake]LU
horse+wretch

He caught sight of an old wretched white
horse.

5.3 Partially transparent compounds
For some non-compositional compounds, one
constituent clearly instantiates a FE or LU of the
frame that the compound evokes, but the other is
opaque, as in ryggskott (back+shot) - ‘lumbago’
from Medical disorders. The modifier rygg
- ‘back’ is the body part location of the disorder;
the head skott - ‘shot’ is interpreted as something
that appears suddenly, as a gunshot, but its mean-
ing is not transparent. Example (4) shows that
SweFN treats the compound as a LU, and the mod-
ifier as instantiating the FE BODY PART; SweFN
does not treat the head separately.

(4) [Han]Patient
He

fick
got

[[rygg]Body Partskott]LU
back+shot

[under
during

uppvärmningen]Time
up+warming+DEF

och
and

tvingades
forced+PASS

vila
rest+INF

He got lumbago during the warm-up and
had to rest.

Naming different types or species of a class
of entities often results in groups of compounds
whose heads are the name of the class, e.g. blåbär
(blue+berry) - ‘blueberry’, where the compound
names a type of berry. In these compounds, the
modifier may not have an independent meaning,
e.g. körsbär (?+berry) - ‘cherry’, where körs is a
cran morph, i.e. it has no meaning outside of its
use as a modifier in the compound. SweFN an-
notates the modifiers of these compounds with the
FE TYPE, as in (5), since they have no meaning
except to discern one type (cherry) of the LU in
question (berry) from other types.

(5) Ska
Shall

vi
we

plocka
pick

[[körs]Type[bär]LU]LU
cherries

Do you want to pick cherries?

5.4 Modifier as lexical unit
SweFN also chooses to analyze sentences (that
illustrate the use of a LU) where a compound’s
modifier evokes the frame under consideration.
For example, the compound gasdetektor - ‘gas de-
tector’ is analyzed with respect to the Devices
frame, given the head detektor - ‘detector’. How-
ever, the modifier gas - ‘gas’ is analyzed with re-
spect to Substances. Typically, SweFN does
not choose sentences for annotation where only
the modifier of a compound evokes the frame in
question. Still, doing so is possible, as in (6).

69



(6) En
A

vätesensor
hydrogen+sensor

är
is

en
a

[gas]LUdetektor
gas+detector

som
which

visar
shows

närvaron
presence+DEF

av
of

väte
hydrogen

A hydrogen sensor is a gas detector show-
ing the presence of hydrogen.

If analyzing a sentence where the LU under
consideration is a modifier of a compound, SweFN
does not annotate the compound’s head. This
practice reflects that of BFN (Ruppenhofer et al.,
2010, 42).

[W]e never annotate the head noun
as a frame element of a frame that may
be evoked by the non-head...While the
non-head must figure in some frame
evoked by the head, the reverse is not
true in the same way. . . .

6 Future Research

With a well-designed encoding for compounds,
SweFN is positioned to develop ways to automate
its heretofore manual annotation of compounds.
Here, we sketch out plans to pursue the automatic
Frame Semantic annotation of modifiers of com-
pounds.

Johansson and Nugues (2006) demonstrated
the effective use of FN annotation for automatic
semantic role labeling (ASRL) of Swedish text
to produce annotation (comparable to Padó and
Lapata (2005)). More recently, Johansson et
al. (2012) investigated the feasibility of using
Swedish FrameNet annotation as a resource in
constructing an automatic semantic role analyzer
for Swedish. We suggest the possibility of using
comparable techniques for the analysis of Swedish
compound forms, also including FN data for de-
veloping and testing the efficacy of the algorithms.

This proposal involves the following: (1) man-
ually add solid compounds from SALDO to ap-
propriate frames based on the head of the com-
pound; (2) use Kokkinakis’s (2001) compound
analysis technique to identify the component parts
of the compound, by finding n-grams of charac-
ters which do not occur in simplex words; (3) ex-
ploit existing SweFN annotation for adjacent non-
compounded words to develop an ASRL system
to annotate modifiers of Swedish compounds and

test the system; (4) exploit existing SweFN anno-
tation of full sentences to determine if a system
trained on that data would improve ASRL of mod-
ifiers in compounds; (5) using the same basic tech-
niques for developing training data, determine if
BFN data would benefit ASRL of modifiers, as
Johansson and Nugues (2006) demonstrated for
Swedish text in general.

Initially, the proposed plan for ASRL of mod-
ifiers of compounds addresses compounds with
(only) two elements. In principle, the same ap-
proach can be expanded to annotate multiple mod-
ifiers of head nouns, i.e. compounds with more
than two elements. These compounds consist at
least one constituent that is itself a compound, i.e.
the compounding process has occurred more than
once as described in section 4.

As more language technology and NLP re-
searchers develop FrameNet knowledge bases for
languages other than English, the need for auto-
matic processes to produce annotation that suits
the grammatical requirements of the particular
language will increase, as will the importance of
using existing resources efficiently and effectively.
The research proposed here offers the possibility
of providing an automatic process that would be
useful for the Frame Semantic analysis of Swedish
in particular and for other compounding languages
(e.g. Dutch, German). Additionally, the technique
may prove useful for the processing of compounds
more generally.

7 Conclusion

Given the highly productive nature of Swedish
compounding, lexical resources such as Swedish
FrameNet must attend to the representation and
analysis of compounds. This paper has presented
a new feature in SweFN, the explicit recording of
the FE+LU pattern for the analysis of composi-
tional compounds, and suggests a research plan to
analyze Swedish compounds automatically.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for
their helpful comments. The Swedish Re-
search Council (grant agreement 2010-6013) and
the University of Gothenburg via its support
of the Centre for Language Technology and
Språkbanken have supported this work.

70



References
Malin Ahlberg, Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, Martin

Hammarstedt, Leif Jöran Olsson, Olof Olsson, Jo-
han Roxendal, and Jonatan Uppström. 2013. Korp
and Karp – a bestiary of language resources: the re-
search infrastructure of Språkbanken. In Proceed-
ings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computa-
tional Linguistics, NODALIDA.

Lars Borin, Dana Dannélls, Markus Forsberg,
Maria Toporowska Gronostaj, and Dimitrios Kokki-
nakis. 2010. The past meets the present in Swedish
Framenet++. In Proceedings of the 14th EURALEX
International Congress.

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Lennart Lönngren.
2013a. SALDO: a touch of yin to WordNet’s yang.
Language Resources and Evaluation, 47(4).

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Benjamin Lyngfelt.
2013b. Close encounters of the fifth kind: Some
linguistic and computational aspects of the Swedish
FrameNet++ project. Veredas: Frame Semantics
and Its Technological Applications, 17(1).

Charles J. Fillmore, Paul Kay, and Mary Catherine
O’Connor. 1988. Regularity and idiomaticity in
grammatical constructions: The case of let alone.
Language, 64.

Thierry Fonetenelle, editor. 2003. FrameNet and
frame semantics. Number 16.3: 231–385 in Inter-
national Journal of Lexicography. Oxford University
Press.

Karin Friberg Heppin and Maria Toporowska Gronos-
taj. 2012. The rocky road towards a Swedish
FrameNet. In Proceedings of the 8th Conference on
International Language Resources and Evaluation,
Istanbul.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2006. A
FrameNet-based semantic role labeler for Swedish.
Sydney.

Richard Johansson, Karin Friberg Heppin, and Dim-
itrios Kokkinakis. 2012. Semantic role label-
ing with the swedish framenet,. In Proceedings
of the 8th Conference on International Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2012);, Istanbul,
Turkey.

Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2001. A framework for the
aquisition of lexical knowledge; Description and ap-
plications. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Swedish,
University of Gothenburg.

Sebastian Padó and Mirella Lapata. 2005. Cross-
lingual bootstrapping of semantic lexicons: The case
of framenet. In Proceedings of the American Asso-
ciation of Artificial Intelligence Conference.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R.L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson, and Jan Schef-
fczyk. 2010. FrameNet II: Extended theory

and practice. <https://framenet2.icsi. berkeley.edu/
ocs/r1.5/book.pdf>.

Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2001. Multiword
expressions: A pain in the neck for NLP. In Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
Intelligent Text Processingand Computational Lin-
guistics (CICLing-2002. Berlin: Springer.

71


