



















































Extracting Higher Order Relations From Biomedical Text


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Argumentation Mining, pages 100–101,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Extracting Higher Order Relations From Biomedical Text

Syeed Ibn Faiz
Department of Computer Science
The University of Western Ontario
syeedibnfaiz@gmail.com

Robert E. Mercer
Department of Computer Science
The University of Western Ontario

mercer@csd.uwo.ca

Abstract

Argumentation in a scientific article is
composed of unexpressed and explicit
statements of old and new knowledge
combined into a logically coherent tex-
tual argument. Discourse relations, lin-
guistic coherence relations that connect
discourse segments, help to communicate
an argument’s logical steps. A biomedi-
cal relation exhibits a relationship between
biomedical entities. In this paper, we are
primarily concerned with the extraction
of connections between biomedical rela-
tions, a connection that we call a higher
order relation. We combine two methods,
namely biomedical relation extraction and
discourse relation parsing, to extract such
higher order relations from biomedical re-
search articles. Finding and extracting
these relations can assist in automatically
understanding the scientific arguments ex-
pressed by the author in the text.

1 Introduction

We use the term higher order relation to denote
a relation that relates two biomedical relations.
Consider, for example, the following sentence:

(1) Aspirin appeared to prevent VCAM-1 tran-
scription, since it dose-dependently inhibited
induction of VCAM-1 mRNA by TNF.

We can find two biomedical relations involving
Aspirin: Aspirin–prevents–VCAM-1 transcrip-
tion and Aspirin–inhibits–induction of VCAM-1
mRNA. These two relations are connected by the
word since. The higher order relation conveys a
causal sense, which indicates that the latter rela-
tion causes the earlier one. In genetic transcrip-
tion mRNA is generated (a process known by the
reader, so not expressed in the argument). This

piece of the author’s argument is that by observing
inhibition of mRNA induction (the genetic process
that activates transcription) by different doses of
aspirin, the inference that aspirin prevents the tran-
scription can be made. This inference is textually
signalled by the discourse connective since.

Formally, we define a higher order relation as a
binary relation that relates one biomedical relation
with another biomedical relation. In this paper we
propose a method for these extracting higher or-
der relations using discourse relation parsing and
biomedical relation extraction.

2 Extracting Higher Order Relations

There are two stages in our method for extracting
higher order relations from text. In the first stage
we use a discourse relation parser to extract the ex-
plicit discourse relations from text. In the second
stage we analyze each extracted explicit discourse
relation to determine whether it can produce a
higher order relation. We use a biomedical rela-
tion extraction system in this process. For each ar-
gument of an explicit discourse relation we find all
occurrences of biomedical relations in it. Higher
order relations are then constructed by pairing the
biomedical relations or observations found in the
discourse arguments. The sense of the explicit dis-
course relation is used to interpret all the higher
order relations derived from it.

Parsing an explicit discourse relation involves
three steps: identifying the explicit discourse con-
nective, the arguments and the sense. In (Faiz
and Mercer, 2013) we showed how to use syntac-
tic and surface level context to achieve a state-of-
the-art result for identifying discourse connectives
from text. Our work on a complete explicit dis-
course relation parser is presented in (Faiz, 2012).
For identifying the arguments of discourse con-
nectives we use the head-based representation pro-
posed by Wellner and Pustejovsky (Wellner and
Pustejovsky, 2007). We found that this head-based

100



representation is very suitable for the task of ex-
tracting higher order relations. The head of an
argument plays an important role in selecting a
biomedical relation as an argument to a higher or-
der relation.

This observation regarding the heads of the dis-
course arguments has another useful implication.
Since the biomedical relations that we have to con-
sider need to involve the argument head, we only
have to extract the portion of the argument that is
influenced or dominated by the head. One simple
way to do this is to consider the dependents of the
head in the dependency representation. Wellner
(2009) reported that finding the dependents of the
syntactic head of an argument often gives a good
approximation of the argument extent .

3 Evaluation

Our algorithm for extracting higher order relations
depends on discourse parsing and biomedical rela-
tion extraction. We have discussed our implemen-
tation of these components and evaluated their per-
formance in previous work (Faiz, 2012; Faiz and
Mercer, 2013). We have evaluated the algorithm
we present in this paper in terms of how accurately
it can use those components in order to find higher
order relations. More specifically, we will mea-
sure how accurately it can determine the part of
the full argument extent that contains the biomed-
ical entities in it.

For this evaluation we used the AIMed corpus
(Bunescu et al., 2005). This corpus contains an
annotation for protein-protein interactions. From
this corpus we collected 69 discourse relations.

For both ARG1 and ARG2 we performed two
tests. We measured from the argument heads how
many protein mentions occurring within the argu-
ment extent (the True Positives) are found and how
many protein mentions that lie beyond the argu-
ment extent (the False Positives) are found. For
ARG1, we found that our algorithm missed only
one protein mention and incorrectly found three
proteins from outside the argument extent, a pre-
cision of 98% and a recall of 99.32%. For ARG2,
we obtained a 100% precision and a 99% recall.

We conducted another experiment, which is
similar to the previous one except that now instead
of counting only the protein mentions, we counted
all the words that can be reached from an argument
head. In other words, this experiment evaluates
our algorithm in terms of how accurately it can

identify the full argument extent (i.e., the words
in it). For ARG1 and ARG2 we got an F-score of
91.98% and 92.98% respectively.

4 Discussion

Extraction of many higher order relations is de-
pendent on coreference resolution. For exam-
ple, in (1), Aspirin is anaphorically referred to in
ARG2. In our current implementation we lack
coreference resolution. Therefore, augmenting
a coreference resolution module in our pipeline
would be an immediate improvement.

In our implementation, we used a simple but
imperfect method to determine whether a biomed-
ical relation involves the head of a discourse ar-
gument. We checked whether the head appears
between the biomedical entities or within a short
distance from either one in the sentence. How-
ever, this simple rule may produce spurious higher
order relations. One way to improve this method
would be to consider the rules we presented for
rule-based biomedical relation extraction. Most of
the rules give a dependency path corresponding to
the relation they can extract. That path can then
be analyzed to determine whether the relation de-
pends on the head.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially funded by a Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grant to R. Mercer.

References
Razvan Bunescu, Ruifang Ge, Rohit J. Kate, Ed-

ward M. Marcotte, Raymond J. Mooney, Arun K.
Ramani, and Yuk W. Wong. 2005. Comparative
experiments on learning information extractors for
proteins and their interactions. Artificial Intelligence
in Medicine, 33(2):139–155, February.

Syeed Ibn Faiz and Robert E. Mercer. 2013. Identify-
ing explicit discourse connectives in text. In Cana-
dian Conference on AI, pages 64–76.

Syeed Ibn Faiz. 2012. Discovering higher order rela-
tions from biomedical text. Master’s thesis, Univer-
sity of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.

Ben Wellner and James Pustejovsky. 2007. Automati-
cally identifying the arguments of discourse connec-
tives. In EMNLP-CoNLL, pages 92–101. ACL.

Ben Wellner. 2009. Sequence models and ranking
methods for discourse parsing. Ph.D. thesis, Bran-
deis University, Waltham, MA, USA. AAI3339383.

101


