



















































Extended HMM and Ranking Models for Chinese Spelling Correction


Proceedings of the Third CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language Processing, pages 133–138,
Wuhan, China, 20-21 October 2014

Extended HMM and Ranking models for Chinese Spelling Correction 

 

 

Jinhua Xiong, Qiao Zhao, Jianpeng Hou,  

Qianbo Wang, Yuanzhuo Wang and Xueqi Cheng 

CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology 

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 

xjh@ic.ac.cn, zhangqiao@software.ict.ac.cn 

 

  

 

Abstract 

Spelling correction has been studied for 

many decades, which can be classified 

into two categories: (1) regular text 

spelling correction, (2) query spelling 

correction. Although the two tasks share 

many common techniques, they have dif-

ferent concerns. This paper presents our 

work on the CLP-2014 bake-off. The task 

focuses on spelling checking on foreigner 

Chinese essays. Compared to online 

search query spelling checking task, 

more complicated techniques can be ap-

plied for better performance. Therefore, 

we proposed a unified framework for 

Chinese essays spelling correction based 

on extended HMM and ranker-based 

models, together with a rule-based model 

for further polishing. Our system showed 

better performance on the test dataset. 

1 Introduction 

The number of people learning Chinese as a For-

eign Language (CFL) is booming in recent dec-

ades, and the number is expected to become even 

larger for the years to come
1
. Therefore spelling 

correction tool to support such learners to correct 

and polish their essays becomes very valuable. 

Spelling correction has been studied for many 

years on regular text and web search query. Alt-

hough the two tasks share many common tech-

niques, they have different concerns. Compared 

to web search query spelling correction which 

normally need to give corrections instantly, 

complicated techniques can be applied to 

                                                 
1http://www.cipsc.org.cn/clp2014/webpage/en/four_bakeoff

s/Bakeoff2014cfp_ChtSpellingCheck_en.htm 

spelling correction on essays, in order to improve 

the performance. Spelling correction on Chinese 

essays of CFL learners faces the following chal-

lenges:  

(1) There is no word boundary between Chinese 

word, which may result in the error on splitting, 

and the error may accumulate.  

(2) The number of error type is more than other 

case, because CFL learners are prone to different 

kinds of error which we can not imagine as a na-

tive speaker. Meanwhile, more errors can be 

caused by various Chinese input methods. As 

illustrated in Table 1, some errors can be found 

only in the essays of CFL learners, e.g. the 3
rd

 

and the last errors. 

 

Error Types 
Misspelled Corrections 

Homophone 
聯合國公布 聯合國公佈 

Near-homophone 
好碼差不多

一樣 

號碼差不多

一樣 

Similar-shape 
列如：家庭

會變冷漠 

例如：家庭

會變冷漠 

Others errors 

每個禮拜

１、３、５ 

每個禮拜

一、三、五 

受了都少苦 受了多少苦 

Table 1. Examples of spelling error 

 

 (3) Chinese language is continuously evolving, 

for example, traditional Chinese and simple Chi-

nese may have different choices for the same 

word. In some cases, it is very difficult to distin-

guish them. Therefore, online high quality corpus 

is needed for decision-making. 

To address the above challenges, we present a 

unified framework, named HANSpeller, to com-

bine different methods for Chinese essays 

spelling detecting and correction. The contribu-

133



tion of our approach is as follows: (1) A HMM-

based approach is used to segment sentences and 

generate candidates for sentences spelling cor-

rection. (2) Under this framework, all kinds of 

error types can be easily integrated for candi-

dates generating. We collected some error types 

which only may be found in CFL learner essays, 

and add them into candidates generating process. 

And then ranking-based approach is used for 

choosing candidates for correction. (3) In order 

to address the evolving feature of Chinese, we 

not only collect high quality Taiwan web pages 

and also use search engine results to help deci-

sion-making on candidates. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follow. In 

Section 2, we introduce related work on spelling 

checking. Then our unified framework approach 

is discussed in detail in Section 3. Section 4 pre-

sents the detailed experiment on the task. Section 

5 concludes the paper and discusses future work. 

2 Related work 

Chinese essays spelling correction as a special 

kind of spelling correction research effort has 

been promoted by efforts such as the SIGHAN 

bake-offs (Wu et al., 2013). 

Spelling correction was first proposed for 

English (Peterson, 1980). And it can be mainly 

divided into single word and context-sensitive 

spelling correction technology.  

For the single word spelling error, it common-

ly uses dictionary-based method. It matches the 

original word with all the words in dictionaries to 

determine whether the word has spelling errors. 

For the context-sensitive spelling errors, there 

are two major kinds of processing methods: 

Rule-based methods and Statistics-based meth-

ods. Rule-based methods use some rules generat-

ed fromrelevant grammars, the collocation of 

words, syntactic knowledge, etc, for spelling cor-

rection. Mangu and Bill (1997) proposed a tran-

sition-based learning method for spelling correc-

tion. Their methods generated three types of 

rules from training data, which constructs a high 

performance and concise system for English. A 

statistics-based method first finds related candi-

dates, and then ranks the candidates based on the 

statistical model. Atwell and Elliott (1987) used 

n-gram and part-of-speech language models for 

spelling correction. Cucerzan and Brill (2004) 

presented an iterative process for query spelling 

check, using a query log and trust dictionary. 

And the noisy channel mode is used to select the 

best correction. Ahmad and Kondrak (2005) also 

learned a spelling error model from search query 

logs to improve the quality of query spelling 

check. Li et al. (2006) applied distributional sim-

ilarity based models for query spelling correction. 

Gao et al. (2010) presented a large scale ranker-

based system for search query spelling correction, 

the ranker uses web scale language models and 

many kinds of features for better performance, 

including: surface-form similarity, phonetic-form 

similarity, entity, dictionary, and frequency fea-

tures. Microsoft (2010) provides Microsoft web 

n-gram services. Google (2010) has developed a 

Java API for Google spelling check service. 

As for Chinese spelling correction, an early 

work was by (Chang, 1995), which used a char-

acter dictionary of similar shape, pronunciation, 

meaning, and input-method-code to deal with the 

spelling correction task. The system replaced 

each character in the sentence with the similar 

character in dictionary and calculated the proba-

bility of all modified sentences based on lan-

guage model.  

Zhang et al. (2000) introduced a method that 

can handle not only Chinese character substitu-

tion, but also insertion and deletion errors. They 

distinguished the way of matching between the 

Chinese and English, thus largely improved the 

performance over the work of (Chang 1995). 

Huang et al. (2007) used a word segmentation 

tool (CKIP) to generate correction candidates, 

and then to detect Chinese spelling errors. 

Hung et al. (2008) introduced a method which 

used the manually edited error templates to cor-

rect errors. 

Zheng et al. (2011) found the fact that when 

people typed Chinese Pinyins, there are several 

wrong types. Then they introduced a method 

based on a generative model and the typed wrong 

types to correct spelling errors. 

Liu et al. (2011) pointed out visually and pho-

nologically similar characters are major factors 

for errors in Chinese text. And by defining ap-

propriate similarity measures that consider ex-

tended Cangjie codes, visually similar characters 

can be quickly identified. 

Note that all spelling correction methods re-

quire lexicons and/or language corpora. And 

Chinese essays spelling correction has some dif-

ferent concerns with query spelling correction. In 

our approach, we adopt the method based on sta-

tistics combining with lexicon and rule-based 

methods. 

134



3 The Unified Framework for Chinese 
Spelling Correction 

In this section we present a unified framework, 

named HANSpeller, for Chinese spelling correc-

tion based on extended HMM and ranking mod-

els. The major idea of our approach is to model 

the spelling correction process as a ranking and 

decision-making problem. Generally speaking, 

our approach has four major steps: Firstly the 

spelling correction process generates lots of can-

didates for sentences being checked; and then a 

ranking algorithm is applied to rank top-k correc-

tion candidates for later decision; the third step 

conducts rule-based analysis for specific correc-

tion task, e.g. the correction rule of the usage of 

three confusable words “的”, “地” and “得”. Fi-
nally, the system makes decision whether to out-

put the correction or not based on the previous 

output and global constrains.  

The system architecture is illustrated in Figure 

1. This framework provides a unified approach 

for spelling correction tasks, which can tailored 

to different scenarios and can be regarded as a 

language independent framework. To move to 

another language scenario, you only need to col-

lect some language related corpus, but you don’t 

need to be a language expert. 

Preprocess

HMM-based Correction 

Candidates Generating

Candidates Re-Ranking 

Syntactic Rule based 

Correction 

Other Rules for 

Exception

Global Decision-Making 

for Correction

Output Correction 

Result

Input sentence

Figure1. The Unified Framework (HANSpeller) 

for Chinese Spelling Correction 

3.1 Generating Candidates 

Generating candidates of spelling correction task 

is the basic part for the whole task, because it 

determines the upper bound of precision and re-

call rate of the approach. The spelling correction 

problem can be typically formulated under the 

framework of noisy channel model. According to 

such a model, the spelling correction task is to 

find the correction with the highest probability of 

yielding the misspelled input sentence. Formally, 

given an “observed” sentence S which might 

contain error characters, we need to find the cor-

rected sentence    with the highest probability of 
different replacement  . Symbolically, it is rep-
resented by: 

 

                 (1) 
 

By applying Bayes’ Rule, we can rewrite 

Formula 1 as: 

         
          

    
  

                    (2) 
where       , called the “error model”, repre-
sents the chance that a correct Chinese character 

could be written to the wrong one, while      is 
the n-gram language model which evaluates the 

quality of the corrected Chinese sentence. 

To solve the above problem, the HMM ap-

proach can be used. And the spelling correction 

can then be ranked by multiplying the error mod-

el and language model. 

The above one step method for Chinese essays 

spelling correction faces the following challeng-

es: (1) For high quality spelling correction, the 

training of HMM is not a trivial task. (2) The 

long-span dependency in sentences makes first-

order hidden Markov model not enough to catch 

context information. (3) Too many candidates 

make the algorithm not efficient enough, and 

right corrections may be concealed by the wrong 

corrections. 

To address the above issues, some extensions 

have been made on HMM-based spelling correc-

tion approach. Firstly, the HMM-based method is 

used only for candidates generating, not for final-

ly output correction generating. And all kinds of 

possible error transformations can be integrated 

into the framework of HMM approach, so as to 

get high recall rate. Secondly, higher-order hid-

den Markov model is used to capture long-span 

context dependency. Thirdly, a pruning dynamic 

programming algorithm is adopted to dynamical-

135



ly select the best correction candidates for each 

round of sentence segmentation and correction. 

3.2 Ranking Candidates 

In the candidates generation phase, top-k best 

candidates for a sentence are generated, but the 

HMM-based framework does not have the flexi-

bility to incorporate a wide variety of features 

useful for spelling correction, such as the online 

search results and CKIP Parser results, which can 

significantly improve the precision of spelling 

correction. 

Given the original sentence, our system first 

creates a list of candidate sentences. The candi-

dates in the list will be re-ranked at this stage 

based on the confidence score generated by a 

ranker, herein by a SVM classifier. We choose 

the top-2 candidates in the re-ranked candidate 

list to make the final decision.  

We use a lot of features in the re-ranking 

phase. The features can be grouped into the fol-

lowing categories: 

1) Language model features, which calcu-
late the n-gram probability of a candidate 

sentence. 

2) Dictionary features, which check wheth-
er parts of a candidate sentence can match 

to one or more words or idioms in the 

dictionaries. 

3) Edit Distance features, which compute 
the edit number and its weight, from the 

original sentence to the candidate sentence. 

4) Segmentation features, which use the re-
sults of the maximum matching segmenta-

tion algorithm and that of CKIP Parser 

segmentation.  

5) Online Resources features, which use 
Bing or other search engine’s search re-

sults, when submitting the spelling correc-

tion part and the corresponding part of the 

original sentence to the search engine. 

3.3 Rule-based Correction for Errors 

As illustrated in Figure 1, the third step conducts 

rule-based analysis for specific correction task. 

One of most common errors is the usage of three 

confusable words “的”, “地” and “得”. To cor-
rect such common errors, syntactic analysis is 

needed. For other errors, some other specific 

rules can be developed for them.  

The following sentence contains an error of 

Chinese syntax: 

今天/我/穿著/剛/買/地/新/衣服。 

Here the character “地” should be corrected to 

another character “的”. To deal with such kind of 
errors, sentence parsing must be done before the 

syntactic rules are applied to check and correct 

such errors. We have summarized three rules 

according to Chinese grammar as follows: 

1) The Chinese character “的” is the tag of 
attributes, generally used in front of sub-

jects and objects. Words in front of “的” 
are generally used to modify, restrict 

things behind “的”. 

2) The Chinese character “地” is adverbial 
marker, usually used in front of predi-

cates(verbs, adjectives). Words in front of 

“地” are generally used to describe actions 

behind “地”. 

3) The Chinese character “得 ” marks the 
complement, generally used behind predi-

cates. The part follows “得” is generally 
used to supplement the previous action. 

3.4 Decision-making on Corrections 

Through the above processing steps, top candi-

dates for each sub-sentence have been generated. 

To make the final decision on spelling correction, 

global constrains should be considered, including 

the whole error rate of the corpus, which error 

type should be paid more weight than others, 

which sub-sentence corrects should be output, 

etc. Combining the above constrains together, the 

system determines the final decision for spelling 

corrections. 

4 Experiment and Evaluation 

4.1 Experimental Setting 

The following corpora are used to train our mod-

el, including Taiwan Web as Corpus, SogouW 

dictionary, a traditional Chinese dictionary of 

words and idioms, a pinyin mapping table and a 

cangjie code table of common words. The details 

of them are described below. 

1) Taiwan Web Pages as Corpus 
As we known, Taiwan web pages contain high 

quality traditional Chinese text, so we gathered 

pages from the Web under .tw domain to build 

the corpus, containing around 3.2 million web 

pages. And then the content extracted from these 

pages is used to build traditional Chinese n-gram 

model, where n is from 2 to 4. 

2) SogouW Dictionary 

136



SougoW dictionary
2
 is built from the statistical 

analysis of Chinese Internet corpus by Sogou 

Search Engine. It contains about 150,000 high-

frequency words of the Chinese Internet. But 

words in the corpus are simple Chinese charac-

ters; it is then translated into traditional Chinese 

by Google translating service. 

3) Chinese Words and Idioms Dictionary 
As introduced in [Chiu et al. 2013], we also ob-

tained the Chinese words 
3
and Chinese idioms

4
 

published by Ministry of Education of Taiwan, 

which are built from the dictionaries and related 

books. There are 64,326 distinct Chinese words 

and 48,030 distinct Chinese idioms. And we 

combine these two dictionaries with SogouW 

dictionary to build our trie tree dictionary. 

4) Pinyin and Canjie Code Tables  
We collected more than 10000 pinyins of words 

commonly used in Taiwan to build the homo-

phone and near-homophone words table, which 

will be used in candidate generation phase. In 

addition, cangjie code can be used to measure the 

form/shape similarity between Chinese charac-

ters. Therefore, we collected cangjie codes to 

build the table of Similar-form characters. 

5) Segmentation Resources 
Besides using the Maximum Matching Method 

for Chinese word segmentation, we also use the 

CKIP Parser results to help ranking the candi-

dates. For example, the segmentation of “特續下

滑” is “特/續/下滑” while “持續下滑” is “持續/

下滑”. Thus the segmentation results of wrong 
candidate sentence will have more words than 

the correct one. 

6) Online Resource 
In addition to the above, we use the Bing search 

results as one feature in candidates ranking phase, 

which improve the performance obviously. For 

example, the sentence “根據聯合國公布的數字” 
has several candidate sentences, one of them may 

be “根據聯合國公佈的數字”. If we use Bing to 
search the error correction part and the corre-

sponding part of the original sentence “聯合國公

佈” and “聯合國公布”, the search results will be 
obviously enough to identify the correct candi-

                                                 
2 http://www.sogou.com/labs/dl/w.html 
3http://www.edu.tw/files/site_content/m0001/pin/yu7.htm?o

pen 
4 http://dict.idioms.moe.edu.tw/cydic/index.htm 

date sentence, because the first one is more 

popular than the second one on the web corpus.  

4.2 Evaluation Results 

At the CLP-2014 bake-off, the evaluation task is 

to correct errors in sentences. It is divided into 

two related subtasks. One is error detection and 

the other is error correction. There are 1062 sen-

tences with/without spelling errors. The evalua-

tion metrics, including false positive rate, accu-

racy rate, precision rate, recall rate and F1-score, 

is provided by the Chinese Spelling Check Task 

group. The confusion matrix as follow is to help 

to calculate the related indicators. 

 
Confusion Matrix System Results 

Positive 

(Error) 

Negative 

(No Error) 

Gold 

Standard 

Positive TF FN 

Negative FP TN 

Table 2. Confusion Matrix 

 

Each index calculation is as follows: 

False Positive Rate (FPR) = FP / (FP + TN) 

Accuracy (A) =  

(TP + TN) / (TP + TN + FP + FN) 

Precision (P) = TP / (TP + FP) 

Recall (R) = TP / (TP + FN) 

F1-score = 2 * P * R / (P + R) 

 

Our system showed good performance on the 

evaluation test. Among all 13 teams, our perfor-

mance ranks second place. The two submitted 

test results are illustrated in Table 3. Meanwhile, 

since such an open test is an extremely challeng-

ing task, there is still much room for further im-

provement. 

 
 RUN1 RUN2 

 Detection  

Level 

Correction 

 Level 

Detection 

Level 

Correction 

Level 

FPR 0.1525 0.1563 

A 0.6149 0.5829 0.613 0.581 

P 0.7148 0.676 0.7098 0.6706 

R 0.3823 0.3183 0.3823 0.3183 

F1 0.4982 0.4328 0.4969 0.4317 

Table 3. Evaluation at CLP-2014 Bake-off 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 

This paper proposed a unified framework 

(HANSpeller) for Chinese essays spelling cor-

rection based on extended HMM and ranker-

137



based models. The rule-based strategy is used for 

further correction polishing, and for final deci-

sion on whether outputs the correction or not. 

Our approach has been evaluated at CLP-2014 

bake-off on Chinese spelling correction task, and 

made good performance with ranking second 

among 13 teams.  

Some interesting future works on Chinese 

spelling correction include: (1) collecting and 

considering more error types in the candidates 

generating process, (2) how to better dealing 

with the difference between traditional and sim-

ple Chinese. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the National Basic 

Research Program of China (Grant No. 

2014CB340406), the National High Technology 

Research and Development Program of China 

(Grant No. 2014AA015204) and the NSFC for 

the Youth (Grant No. 61402442). 

Reference 

Shih-Hung Wu, Chao-Lin Liu, and Lung-Hao Lee 

(2013). Chinese Spelling Check Evaluation at 

SIGHAN Bake-off 2013. Proceedings of the 7th 

SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Pro-

cessing (SIGHAN’13), Nagoya, Japan, 14 October, 

2013, pp. 35-42. 

Chao-Lin Liu, Min-Hua Lai, Kan-Wen Tien, Yi-

Hsuan Chuang, Shih-Hung Wu, and Chia-Ying Lee. 

2011. Visually and Phonologically similar charac-

ters in incorrect Chinese Words: analyses, Identifi-

cation, and Applications. ACM Transactions on 

Asian Language Information Processing, 10(2), 

10:1-39.  

James L. Pterson. 1980. Computers programs for de-

tecting and correcting spelling errors. Communica-

tions of the ACM, pp 23: 676-687 

Lidia Mangu and Eric Bill. 1997. Automatic rule ac-

quisition for spelling correction. In Proceeding of 

the 14
th

 International Conference on Machine 

Learning, pp 187-194, San Francisco, CA 

Eric Atwell and Stephen Elliott. 1987. Dealing with 

ill-formed English text. In the Computational 

Analysis of English: A Corpus-Based Approach, 

London.  

Ahmad, F., and Kondrak, G. 2005. Learning a 

spelling error model from search query logs. In 

HLT_EMNLP, pp 955-962. 

Li, M., Zhu, M., Zhang, Y. and Zhou, M. 2006. Ex-

ploring distributional similarity based models for 

query spelling correction. Proceedings of ACL 

2006, pp 2025-1032. 

Jianfeng Gao, Xiaolong Li, Daniel Micol, Chris Quirk, 

and Xu Sun. 2010. A large scale ranker-based sys-

tem for search query spelling correction. The 23rd 

International Conference on Computational Lin-

guistics 2010 (COLING 2010). pp 358-366. 

Microsoft Microsoft web n-gram services. 2010. 

http://research.microsoft.com/web-ngram 

Google. 2010. A Java API for Google spelling check 

service. http//code.google.com/p/google-api-

spellingjava/ 

Chang-Huang Chang. 1995. A new approach for au-

tomatic Chinese spelling correction, Proceedings of 

Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Sympo-

sium. pp 278-283 

Lei Zhang, Ming Zhou, Chang-Ning Huang, and Hui-

Hua Pan. 2000b. Automatic detecting/correcting 

errors in Chinese text by an approximate word-

matching algorithm. In Proceedings of the 38the 

Annual Meeting on Association for Computational 

Linguistics, pp 248-254, Morristwon NJ.  

S. Cucerzan and E. Brill. 2004. Spelling correction as 

an iterative process that exploits the collective 

knowledge of web users. In Proceedings of 

EMNLP, volume 4, pp 293-300.  

Huang, Chuen-Min and Wu, Mei-Chen and Chang, 

Ching-Che. 2007, Error detection and correction 

based on Chinese phonemic alphabet in Chinese 

text. Modeling Decisions for Artificial Intelligence. 

pp. 463-476. 

Hung, Ta-Hung and Wu, Shih-Hung. 2008. Chinese 

Essay Error Detection and Suggestion System. 

Taiwan E-Learning Forum. 

Y. Zheng, C. Li, and M. Sun. 2011. Chime: An effi-

cient error-tolerant Chinese pinyin input method. In 

Proceedings of the 22
nd

 International Joint Confer-

ence on Artificial Intelligence. 

 

138


