



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and J D Pawar. Proc. of the 11th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 119–125,
Goa, India. December 2014. c©2014 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Learning phrase-level vocabulary in second language using 
pictures/gestures and voice 

Lavanya Prahallad 
International Institute of 
Information Technology, 

Hyderabad 
lavanya.prahallad@resea

rch.iiiit.ac.in  
 
 

Prathyusha Danda 
International Institute of 
Information Technology, 

Hyderabad 
danda.prathyusha@resea

rch.iiit.ac.in  

Radhika Mamidi 
International Institute 

of Information 
Technology, 
Hyderabad 

radhika.mamidi@
iiit.ac.in 

Abstract 

Earlier works has explored that a foreign 
language can be learnt from pictures than 
merely using native language word 
translations. These efforts on language 
learning using pictures were limited to 
colors, animals, birds, vehicles and common 
noun categories. In this paper, we present 
our research that learning of verbs is also 
possible by using right set of pictures and 
gestures, and we show that this is effective 
in second language learning. We report the 
acquisition of words in tourist domain in a 
second language by working with subjects 
who are between 14 and 48 years of age. 
From pre-learning and post-learning 
evaluations, we show that acquisition of 
vocabulary like nouns and verbs in a new 
language is better with the fusion of pictures 
and voice. We also show the subjects are 
able to generalize their learning towards 
phrase-level vocabulary without any 
additional training and efforts.  

1. Introduction 

Recalling the famous saying “A picture is worth 
thousand words”, we explore whether a good 
enough vocabulary acquisition is possible using 
pictures as medium to learn an Indian language 
as a second language.  India is a wide 
subcontinent broken down into states, where in 
each state has its own language; also many states 

or villages do not speak English. It is necessary 
for an Indian to learn another Indian language as 
second language. Typically a language deals 
with objects/persons and actions. We consider 
the fact that the actions exist for practical 
purposes are limited. Signs (gestures/pictures) 
used to express these actions appear same 
throughout the world, except the languages call 
the same action with different names depending 
on the spatial, cultural regions. For example, the 
sign or a picture depicting the action of eating 
would be same, however, has different names in 
different languages. Thus pictures supplement 
learning, helps to understand the words in a 
more meaningful method. This will indeed 
enable learners to learn, understand, and utilize 
that vocabulary in all aspects of their lives. With 
the recent advances made in education and 
technology language learning has been easier 
when voice is added with the picture and the 
learner hears the word in the second language 
and learns it by repeating any number of times. 
This combination enhances once language 
learning significantly. 

Many researchers have explored this area of 
vocabulary acquisition and demonstrated that 
using pictures is better than just textual format in 
vocabulary acquisition while learning a 
foreign/second language. Experiments 
conducted by Carpenter and Olson (2011) shows 
that Swahili words were learned better from 
pictures than from translations. It appears, 
therefore, that pictures can facilitate learning of 

119



foreign language vocabulary.  Taking the idea 
from the Dominance, Gentner and Boroditsky 
(2001) work, we exploit that words can be learnt 
by using pictures because of their concept-to-
word mapping. Cognitive dominance prevails 
when concepts are simply named by language as 
in the case of nouns. Though the inspiration for 
this work is from earlier research, our approach 
differs in the following ways: 

• This study is done for a set of Indian 
languages and can however easily be 
extended to other languages of the 
world. 

• We show that even verbs can be learnt 
using right set of pictures in addition to 
nouns. 

• Our study shows that the subjects can 
learn the phrase-level vocabulary as a 
generalization of their training on nouns 
and verbs.  

• Use of voice with pictures aids in 
learning the second language and can 
relate that sound to the picture. 

In our study we explore teaching a good enough 
way of learning verbs in Indian languages taken 
as second language. The medium is chosen to be 
pictures/signs, which are universal throughout 
the world; hence no first language influence is 
seen on the acquisition. This idea coupled with 
the voice has helped the learner to pronounce the 
word equivalent to a native language speaker. 
Even the illiterate folks can be benefitted with 
this research as objects he knows and sees 
everyday can be related to the audio being 
spoken out. This research is language 
independent and can be useful to learn any 
language as second language with the 
appropriate dataset. The idea is exploited from 
Chomsky’s universal grammar that this theory 
suggests that linguistic ability manifests itself 
without being taught and that there are 
properties that all natural human languages 
share, the pictures of the actions will 

immediately get related to a person’s mental 
picture making him understand what that picture 
means, now with the help of voice he learns 
what the action is called in that second language.  

2. Nouns and Verbs in second language 
learning 

Nouns and Verbs form a pivotal part of learning 
a vocabulary in any language. Noun is an entity 
that denotes objects and Verb tells us about the 
action in a situation. There are several kinds of 
verbs. Though nouns and verbs exist universally 
in all languages of the world, the structure and 
the position of the verb and the object in a 
sentence varies. Unlike English, Indian 
languages have SOV word order where verb 
appears at the end of the sentence. The verbs in 
Indian languages are inflected gender and 
number and also for tense, aspect modality 
(TAM) where as in English they appear 
separately. In our work, we attempt to show that 
nouns and verbs can be learnt in a second 
language by using just pictures and there by one 
can achieve good enough vocabulary in a chosen 
domain.  

3. Dataset 

We have chosen ‘tourist’ domain to show that a 
related vocabulary in the domain can be 
acquired in a second language.  As a pilot for 
our experiments and to present in this paper we 
have chosen the following Indian languages as 
second language: Kannada and Tamil. Any 
tourist or a visitor can benefit with this idea and 
can learn a good enough vocabulary when 
he/she visits a state where that particular 
language is spoken. The medium of learning is 
pictures, which prove to be more advantageous 
as a learner need not use first language to learn. 

We carefully chose a set of pictures of nouns 
and a set of pictures of verbs that belong to 
tourist domain.  Subjects of age 14-48 years 
participated in this experiment; a webpage is 

120



created with just pictures as shown in the Figure 
1. These images are collected from Internet. 
When a learner clicks on the picture the 
corresponding audio of the picture is played in 
the second language. Learner can hear to this 
audio any number of times until he gets the word 
and learns the word in the second language.  

 

4. Experimental Procedure 

The experimental procedure consists of three 
phases: 1. Learning phase 2. Post-learning 3. 
Check for retention. Three experiments are 
conducted for this study dedicated for nouns, 
verbs and small phrases in the combination of 
already learnt nouns and verbs. Participants were 
informed at the beginning of the experiment that 
they would be learning Kannada/Tamil/Telugu 
words by viewing the picture and hearing the 
sound.  All participants were instructed to try 
their best to learn the words in second language 
and that later their memory for these items 
would be tested. Once they complete the 
learning and proceed for test, participants cannot 
go back to the lesson. Participants would know 
their performance at the end of the test.  

4.1 Experiment 1 – Nouns 

A set of 25 images of Nouns is collected and 
shown to the learner. The images denote the 
names of the objects like transport, food, and 
professionals all are related to the tourist 
domain. Learner clicks on the each image to 
listen to the corresponding audio indeed to learn 
the word in the second language.  

Learning phase: The web application was 
shown to the 10 subjects of age group (14-
48years) and they were asked to go through the 
application if images of nouns for 20 minutes. 
Learners could hear the word by clicking on the 
image any number of times till they were 

comfortable in remembering the word. (Shown 
in Figure 1) 

 

Figure1: Demonstration of learning phase of 
experiment-one with nouns related to tourist 
domain using picture/gestures. Learner clicks on 
the word to hear the voice in second language 

Post Learning: After 20 minutes, each person 
was given a test to evaluate the learning. 
Participants were then given a test with set of 10 
questions in which they were asked to recall the 
word in the second language and chose the 
correct answer, given the picture and the four 
options. The performance of the test will be 
shown to the participant at the end of the test.  
We refer to this as error in retention. (Shown in 
Figure 2) 

 

 
Figure2: Testing phase of nouns related to 
tourist domain using pictures. Learner has to 
listen to all four options of audio files and 

121



selects the voice option that is a match for the 
given picture 

 
Retention after 2 days: This post-learning phase 
was conducted again after 2 days to check the 
error in retention. 

4.2 Experiment 2 – Verbs 

In this experiment, a set of 25 images of verbs is 
collected. The images denote the actions that are 
carried by individuals as a tourist. These images 
are selected as such it is performing an action. 
The experimental procedure is same as 
explained in section 4.1 with learning phase, 
post learning phase and check for retention is 
done for verbs. Figure 3 below shows the set of 
images of verbs shown to user in learning phase. 

 

Figure 3: Demonstration of learning phase of 
experiment-two with verbs related to tourist 
domain using picture/gestures. Learner clicks on 
the word to hear the voice in second language 

Figure 4 shows an evaluation test of post 
learning for verbs.  

 

Figure 4: Testing phase of verbs related to 
tourist domain using pictures. Learner has to 
listen to all four options of audio files and 
selects the voice option that is a match for the 
given picture 

 

4.3 Experiment 3 – Small Phrases 

This is the last experiment in the study. Please 
note that this experiment does not have a 
training test. A test is conducted by creating a 
small parse in combination of noun and verb. 
Learner uses their knowledge of already learnt 
nouns and verbs Figure 5 shows the test in small 
phrase-level.  

This section which is an evaluation to test the 
memory of the learner on how much he/she 
remembers the experiment 1 and 2.  A set of 10 
combinations of verbs and nouns are displayed 
for the learner, where he/she is required to listen 
to the four options of the audio and select the 
right audio combination of noun and verb.  

Retention after 2 days: This process was 
conducted again after 2 days to check the error 
in retention. 

122



 

Figure5: Demonstration of testing phase of 
phrase-like sentences related to tourist domain 
using pictures. Learner has to listen to all four 
options of audio files and selects the voice that is 
a match for the given picture. There is no 
training for this phase. Learner has to create the 
right sentences with previous knowledge of 
already learnt nouns and verbs in second 
language. 

 

5. Results  

Table 1 and Table 2 show the results of the 
retention of nouns and verbs including small 
phrases immediately after learning-retention 
after 2 days. The average shows that 
performance of the participant is better in 
learning nouns and the retention percentage is 
also good when compared to verbs. It can be 
observed from the Table 1 and Table 2 that the 
retention after 2 days is also fairly well to 
indicate that learning through pictures helps in 
remembering the vocabulary learnt. 

Participant 
 number 

Nouns Verbs Small 
Phrases 

1 10-10 9-9 8-9 
2 10-10 9-9 10-10 
3 10-10 9-9 10-10 
4 10-10 8-10 10-10 
5 10-10 4-5 7-6 
6 10-10 10-10 10-10 

7 10-10 10-9 9-10 
8 10-10 9-10 9-9 
9 10-10 8-7 9-8 
10 10-10 10-10 10-10 
Average 10-10 8.3-8.8 9.2-9.2 
 
Table1:  Retention results of Kannada Nouns, 
Verbs and small phrases. Each entry indicates 
immediate retention-retention after 2 days.  

 

Participant 
 number 

Nouns Verbs Small 
Phrases 

1 10-10 8-9 9-9 
2 10-10 10-10 8-10 
3 8-7 7-6 9-7 
4 10-10 10-10 10-10 
5 10-10 10-10 10-10 
6 8-7 8-6 9-7 
7 10-10 9-8 9-8 
8 10-10 9-8 9-8 
9 8-7 7-8 8-9 
10 10-10 9-9 10-9 
Average 9.4-9.1 8.3-8.4 9.1-8.7 
 
Table2:  Retention results of Tamil Nouns, 
Verbs and small phrases. Each entry indicates 
immediate retention-retention after 2 days.  
 

5.1 Observations 

It is observed that a learner clicks 2 or more 
times to hear to the word in a second language 
and memorize the word and relate the picture to 
that sound. Also learners are able to relate to the 
language of same type. Though Tamil, Telugu, 
Kannada belongs to same language family of 
Dravidian there is more similarity between the 
structure, inflections between Kannada and 
Telugu. For learners whose first language is 
Telugu are able to perform better in Kannada but 
they are more time in understanding the accent, 
words, phones of Tamil. Learners of Telugu as 
first language feel that Tamil takes more time in 
learning even through pictures. 

123



Another observation shows that nouns are easier 
to learn than verbs supporting previously done 
research. Another crucial observation is that the 
performance of the learner decreases or learners 
are taking more time in memorizing ambiguous 
words or similar sounding words. For example 
in Kannada “kudi – Drink”, hidi – “catch”. 

For words, which are multi syllable or complex, 
learners find difficult to memorize it, they take 
more time in hearing these words again and 
again. Example in Kannada is “kaleduhoyitu – 
lost and karemadu – calling”.  

The performance of the learners while taking the 
test in constructing the small phrases is good 
compared to their performance in verbs as they 
are able to guess with their world knowledge 
and can relate the pictures of nouns with verbs. 
This shows that learning nouns and memorizing 
them is playing a crucial factor in constructing 
the small sentences. It’s a time taking factor in 
learning verbs but they are able to memorize it 
and use it better as pictures are involved.  

6. Conclusion 

We conclude that our current study provides 
pivotal insight into the importance of pictures 
and gestures as educational tools in second 
language vocabulary learning. The novelty of 
this work is introducing a foreign word by 
means of a picture and no other medium of 
instruction. Learners are able to construct the 
small phrases by learning nouns and verbs and 
the score is around 9.2 in Kannada and 8.7 in 
Tamil. Our experiments explained in the section 
4 are carried on 10 subjects of age group (14-
48years). However, we plan to extend the scope 
of this experiment by extending to more 
languages as second language learning and 
conduct the experiments on more subjects of 
different age groups. This would also help us to 
analyze the learning capabilities of second 

language among the different age groups from 
younger to older. 

This could be further extended in learning 
advanced features of second language such as 
grammar structure such as inflections, 
postpositions, tense aspect modality and 
sentence comprehension.  

This application helps to learn a good enough 
vocabulary acquisition tailored to tourist 
domain. Traveling nationally and internationally 
has exponentially increased in today’s world for 
various reasons like business or vacation. 
Learning a language of the visited places is 
always helpful to interact with localities, 
therefore as the part of phase one of this project; 
tourism domain is chosen as we see great 
potential of second language learning using 
pictures in this domain. However we plan to 
extend our project to different domains as 
medical, supermarkets etc. 

Our idea of vocabulary learning using pictures 
can be easily ported to mobile phones. 
Moreover, the use of mobile phones and 
platforms could be effectively employed in 
acquiring a second language using contextual 
learning.   This application is more helpful to 
tourists as adults are often busy and do not have 
the time to go through books which give an 
insight to a language that is spoken in other 
states if he/she visits a different place to cope up 
with transport, directions, food etc. This helps 
learning environment to be mobile and anytime 
anywhere. 

7. Future Work 

Our study for this paper paved a way to work 
further in this area of language learning using 
pictures and gestures. Important points to be 
addressed in future research include exploring 
more on the issue of showing expression, 
emotion, a short clip of an action captured as a 
video for verbs that are cognitive related to 

124



reduce ambiguity and bring clarity of the 
intended verb by showing action. The current 
limitation of our work is that we are not 
addressing to make them learn the inflections, 
grammar and the postpositions, which are 
pivotal in Indian languages; these issues need to 
be carefully worked out on to how to teach them 
using pictures. Also the issue of accuracy in 
recalling the pictures by the participants when 
checked after a week or a month should be taken 
care.  This particular problem gave us an idea 
contextual learning by developing a mobile 
application on a smart phone where the learner 
can always use the app location and language 
based.  We think that contextual learning using 
pictures and gestures (learning the words on the 
spot and using them with the native speakers) 
helps in learning the language better.  

In keeping the view of learning a second 
language is a global requirement; we intend to 
extend our research for learning a second 
language that belongs to different language 
family with addition to add more languages to 
the list of same language family. Our work will 
be based on the idea that nouns and verbs of 
similar kind exist in all languages of the world; 
in this case pictures help to identify the words 
even they are of different language family. 
Voice coupled with the image helps the learner 
to build on their knowledge of language by 
making connections and comparisons between 
the home language and the target language. 

8. Acknowledgements 

We would like to thank all the participants for 
their participation in user studies. 

9. References 

Shana K. Carpenter and Kellie M. Olson. 2011. Are 
Pictures Good for Learning New Vocabulary in a 
Foreign Language? Only If You Think They Are Not, 
Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition. 
 

Dedre Gentner and Lera Boroditsky. Early 
Acquisition of Nouns and Verbs Evidence from 
Navajo. 
 
 K.G. Vijayakrishnan. 2007. The ''Noun Advantage'' 
in English as a Second Language: A Study of the 
Natural Partitions Hypothesis'. Dissertation in 
English and Foreign Languages University, 
Hyderabad, English Language Education. 

Noam Chomsky. Universal Grammar. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.rit.edu/cla/philosophy/quine/universal_gr
ammar.html and 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_grammar 

Handley Z. 2012. Text-to-Speech Synthesis in 
Computer-Assisted Language Learning. The 
Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics. 

Verbs in English Grammar. Retrieved from web 
https://www.tesol-direct.com/guide-to-english-
grammar/verbs  

Liz Stinson. 2014. A Brilliant Way to Learn Chinese 
Through Pictures. Retrieved from 
http://www.wired.com/2014/03/chineasy/ 	  

Timothy G. Collins. 2005. English Class on the Air: 
Mobile Language Learning with Cell Phones. 
Proceedings of the Fifth IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies 
(ICALT’05). 

Darren Edge, Elly Searle, Kevin Chiu, Jing Zhao, and 
James A. Landay. 2011. MicroMandarin: mobile 
language learning in context. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI '11). ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, 3169-3178.  

 

	  

125


