



















































Generating Summaries of Line Graphs


Proceedings of the 8th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 95–98,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19-21 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating Summaries of Line Graphs 

 
Priscilla Moraes, Gabriel Sina, Kathleen McCoy and Sandra Carberry 

Department of Computer and Information Sciences 
University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware, USA 

 [pmoraes | gsina | mccoy | carberry]@udel.edu 
 

Abstract 

This demo presents a Natural Language Gener-
ation (NLG) system that generates summaries 
of informational graphics, specifically simple 
line graphs, present in popular media. The sys-
tem is intended to capture the high-level 
knowledge conveyed by the graphic and its out-
standing visual features. It comprises a content 
selection phase that extracts the most important 
content of the graphic, an organization phase, 
which orders the propositions in a coherent 
manner, and a realization phase that uses the 
text surrounding the article to make decisions 
on the choice of lexical items and amount of ag-
gregation applied to the propositions to gener-
ate the summary of the graphic. 

1 Introduction 
Multimodal documents from online popular me-
dia often contain information graphics that aug-
ment the information found in the text. These 
graphics, however, are inaccessible for visually 
impaired users or in environments where the im-
age cannot be processed/displayed. Our system 
captures the high-level content of the graphic and 
produces a textual summary that conveys it. Fig-
ure 1 shows the system architecture.  

The first step is the identification of the pres-
ence of a graphical image in the web page by a 
Browser Helper Object (BHO) (Elzer et al., 2007). 
If a graphic is present on the web page, the Graph-
ical Information Extraction Module (VEM) 
(Chester & Elzer, 2005) is triggered by the BHO  
in order to extract the data from the image. The 
VEM then produces an XML representation of the 
graphic that is used by the Intention Recognition 
Module (IRM) for simple bar charts (Elzer, 
Green, Carberry, & Hoffman, 2006), simple line 
graphs (Wu, Carberry, Elzer, & Chester, 2010) 
and grouped bar charts (R. Burns, Carberry, & 
Elzer, 2010; R. Burns, Carberry, & Schwartz, 
2013; R. J. Burns, 2013). The XML representation 

1 http://ir.cis.udel.edu/~moraes/udgraphs 

of the graphic, along with the intended message 
identified by the IRM, is sent to the Generation 
Module (GM), which produces a textual summary 
of the most important content presented in the 
graphic. The system produces an initial summary 
and follow-up responses for simple bar charts 
(Demir, Carberry, & Elzer, 2009; Demir, 
Carberry, & McCoy, 2008) and this demo pre-
sents the GM for simple line graphs. 

This demo focuses on presenting the generation 
phase of the system. For that, we will demonstrate 
the generation of summaries in the context of a 
digital library that is available online 1 and that 
contains information graphics collected from 
online popular media, along with the articles con-
taining the graphics. In addition, we have included 
hand-generated XML representations for the 
graphics (the current VEM is not fully robust). For 
each article that contains a graph, the user can 
choose to have access to the generated summary 
by clicking on the “Generate summary” button 
(highlighted in Figure 2). Figure 2 shows a screen-
shot on which the graph shown in Figure 3 has its 
article featured. 

For accessibility projects that may use our sys-
tem (applications developed for visually impaired 
users, for example), the application might use a 
combination of key strokes to allow user interac-
tion. The module of the system that is the focus of 
this demo is the Generation Module. 

 

 
Figure 1: System Architecture

                                                

95



 
Figure 2: Digital library screenshot where we have added summary generation functionality. 

2 Generation Module 
For generating summaries of line graphs, the first 
step is the selection of content. In order to select 
the most important features of the line graph that 
should be conveyed in the summary, the system 
represents the intended message and the visual 
features identified by a human subject experiment 
(Greenbacker, Carberry, & McCoy, 2011) using a 
graph. A centrality-based algorithm, which is an 
adapted version of PageRank (Page, Brin, 
Motwani, & Winograd, 1999), is then imple-
mented to select the most important information 
(represented as nodes in the graph). This imple-
mentation allows semantic relationships between 
propositions to be represented on the edges of the 
graph. The core of the content selection frame-
work is to detect present outstanding visual fea-
tures in the graphic, along with its intended mes-
sage, in order to select nodes. Details in the con-
tent selection phase are available in the work pre-
sented at (P. S. Moraes, Carberry, & McCoy, 
2013). 

The next phase is the organization of the se-
lected content. The organization phase works by 
ordering the selected propositions such that the 
delivered summary is fluent and coherent. The 
summaries are organized having an introduction 
section, a detailed section and a conclusion. The 
introduction consists of overall information about 
the line graph (the type of the graph, the entity be-
ing measured, the volatility of the graph and its 
intended message). The identified trends are de-
scribed in the detail section. For this part of the 
summary, pieces of the graphic that outstand due 
to its visual features may be described first, being 
followed by other trends. Finally, the conclusion 
section of the summary presents computational 

information about the graphic (overall value and 
rate change, time span of the graphic, maximum 
and minimum points and dates when they occur). 
The strategies on organizing the summaries are 
described in (P. Moraes, McCoy, & Carberry, 
2014). 

The last step of the Generation Module is the 
aggregation of propositions into more complex 
sentences. This decision is usually left to the de-
signer’s choice on how much aggregation to per-
form when generating text. Some systems are de-
signed to generate simple text for people with low 
reading abilities (Williams & Reiter, 2005a). As 
stated by (Williams & Reiter, 2005b), most NLG 
systems available generate text for high-skilled 
users. Our system generates line graph summaries 
that fit the reading level of the article in which the 
line graph appears. We contend that users gener-
ally read articles from venues they feel comforta-
ble with reading. In this manner, we intrinsically 
assess the user’s reading level without needing to 
actively survey it. 

 
Figure 3: A line graph present in popular media. 

96



The first step of the aggregation phase is to as-
sess the reading level of the article’s text. There is 
a myriad of techniques to measure the reading 
level of text. Much of them use machine learning 
techniques in order to learn text constructions and 
lexicalization used in different grade levels. As 
presented in (P. Moraes et al., 2014), simpler and 
well established reading level measurement tech-
niques suffice for our scenario. The work shows 
that Flesh-Kincaid (Kincaid, Fishburne, Rogers, 
& Chissom, 1975) and SMOG (Laughlin, 1969) 
provide the set of information needed by the sys-
tem in order to make decisions of syntactical text 
complexity. 

After assessing the reading level of the article, 
the system then uses the text plan that applies to 
the identified reading level. Text plans define 
rules on Noun Phrase (NP) density and lexical 
choice. When describing an entity, attributes of 
this entity can be added to the NP as modifiers us-
ing either adjectives e.g. “a highly volatile rising 
trend”, conjunctions e.g., “the rising trend is vol-
atile and steep” or relative clauses e.g. “a rising 
trend, which is highly volatile”. When the modi-
fier of an NP is a Verb Phrase (VP), it is combined 
using a relative clause e.g., “the line graph, which 
presents the number of jackets sold in 2013...” 
VPs can be modified by adverbs e.g., “the falling 
trend is very steep”. The text plans apply rules 
within sets of propositions that are grouped hier-
archically. The system then uses the appropriate 
lexical items (highly volatile vs ups and downs; 
conveys vs shows) and applies the appropriate 
amount of aggregation in order to realize sen-
tences. 

 
Figure 4: Pop up window with the resulting sum-
mary generated by the system. 

Figure 4 and Figure 5 display the summaries 
generated for a user whose reading level is 11th-
13th grade and 5th-7th grade respectively. From 
these one can see the different aggregation and 

lexical choice decisions made for the different 
reading levels. The system also includes appropri-
ate pronominalization in order to avoid repetition 
of the referring expressions (P. Moraes et al., 
2014). 

 
Figure 5: Example of a summary adapted to the 
reading level of grades 5 to 7. 

For the surface realization phase we use 
FUF/SURGE (Elhadad & Robin, 1999) to create 
the templates for realization. The template are cre-
ated based on the text plans defined for a given 
reading level, as described above. 

3 Conclusion 
This paper presents the demonstration of the gen-
eration module of SIGHT. For the demo, the gen-
eration module works on a digital library that ar-
chives informational graphics collected from pop-
ular media available online. The aggregation 
phase of the generation module tailors the syntac-
tical complexity of the generated text to that of the 
article’s text in which the graphic appears.  

An evaluation of the text summaries generated 
at different reading level is presented at (P. 
Moraes et al., 2014). It shows that, indeed, differ-
ent users have different preferences regarding dif-
ferent text designs. 

4 Future Work 
A more automated way of defining a text plan for 
a given reading level is under investigation. We 
will explore techniques for learning how different 
text constructions can affect reading measures and 
then using these learned models when choosing an 

97



adjective over a relative clause for increasing the 
NP density and use of passive voice, for example.  

Choosing lexical items that are classified by 
age is another possibility. We plan on investigat-
ing how the usage of word frequency by age/grade 
level (Carroll, 1972) might influence the overall 
generated summaries. 

5 Acknowledgement 
Gabriel Sina was supported by the Coor-

denação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível 
Superior from Brazil CAPES – in Portuguese. 

References  
Burns, R., Carberry, S., & Elzer, S. (2010). Visual and 

spatial factors in a bayesian reasoning 
framework for the recognition of intended 
messages in grouped bar charts. Paper 
presented at the Proceedings of the AAAI 
Workshop on Visual Representations and 
Reasoning. 

Burns, R., Carberry, S., & Schwartz, S. E. (2013). 
Modeling a Graph Viewer's Effort in 
Recognizing Messages Conveyed by Grouped 
Bar Charts. Paper presented at the UMAP. 

Burns, R. J. (2013). Automated intention recognition of 
grouped bar charts in multimodal documents. 
University of Delaware, Ann Arbor. 
Retrieved from 
http://search.proquest.com/docview/1318643
227?accountid=10457   

Carroll, J. B. (1972). A New Word Frequency Book. 
Elementary English, 49(7), pp. 1070-1074.  

Chester, D., & Elzer, S. (2005). Getting computers to 
see information graphics so users do not have 
to. Paper presented at the the Proceedings of 
the 15th International Symposium on 
Methodologies for Intelligent Systems. 

Demir, S., Carberry, S., & Elzer, S. (2009). Issues in 
Realizing the Overall Message of a Bar Chart. 
In N. Nicolov, G. Angelova & R. Mitkov 
(Eds.), Recent Advances in Natural Language 
Processing V (pp. 311-320): John Benjamins. 

Demir, S., Carberry, S., & McCoy, K. F. (2008). 
Generating textual summaries of bar charts. 
Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 
Fifth International Natural Language 
Generation Conference, Stroudsburg, PA, 
USA. 

Elhadad, M., & Robin, J. (1999). SURGE: a 
comprehensive plug-in syntactic realization 
component for text generation. 
Computational Linguistics.  

Elzer, S., Green, N., Carberry, S., & Hoffman, J. 
(2006). A Model of Perceptual Task Effort for 
Bar Charts and its Role in Recognizing 
Intention. International Journal on User 

Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 
16(1), 1-30.  

Elzer, S., Schwartz, E., Carberry, S., Chester, D., 
Demir, S., & Wu, P. (2007). A Browser 
Extension For Providing Visually Impaired 
Users Access To The Content Of Bar Charts 
On The Web. Paper presented at the the 
Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Web Information Systems and 
Technologies. 

Greenbacker, C., Carberry, S., & McCoy, K. (2011, 
July). A Corpus of Human-written Summaries 
of Line Graphs. Paper presented at the 
Proceedings of the UCNLG+Eval: Language 
Generation and Evaluation Workshop, 
Edinburgh, Scotland. 

Kincaid, J. P., Fishburne, R. P., Rogers, R. L., & 
Chissom, B. S. (1975). Derivation of New 
Readability Formulas (Automated 
Readability Index, Fog Count and Flesch 
Reading Ease Formula) for Navy Enlisted 
Personnel. 

Laughlin, G. H. M. (1969). SMOG Grading-a New 
Readability Formula. Journal of Reading, 
12(8), pp. 639-646.  

Moraes, P., McCoy, K., & Carberry, S. (2014). 
Adapting Graph Summaries to the Users’ 
Reading Levels. Paper presented at the 
Proceedings of the 8th International Natural 
Language Generation Conference. 

Moraes, P. S., Carberry, S., & McCoy, K. (2013). 
Providing access to the high-level content of 
line graphs from online popular media. Paper 
presented at the Proceedings of the 10th 
International Cross-Disciplinary Conference 
on Web Accessibility, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 

Page, L., Brin, S., Motwani, R., & Winograd, T. 
(1999). The PageRank Citation Ranking: 
Bringing Order to the Web: Stanford InfoLab. 

Williams, S., & Reiter, E. (2005a). Appropriate 
Microplanning Choices for Low-Skilled 
Readers. Paper presented at the IJCAI. 

Williams, S., & Reiter, E. (2005b). Generating 
readable texts for readers with low basic 
skills. Paper presented at the Proceedings of 
the 10th European Workshop on Natural 
Language Generation (EWNLG 2005). 

Wu, P., Carberry, S., Elzer, S., & Chester, D. (2010). 
Recognizing the intended message of line 
graphs. Paper presented at the Proceedings of 
the 6th international conference on 
Diagrammatic representation and inference, 
Berlin, Heidelberg. 

 

98


