



















































Annotating Causality in the TempEval-3 Corpus


Proceedings of the EACL 2014 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Causality in Language, pages 10–19,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating causality in the TempEval-3 corpus

Paramita Mirza
FBK, Trento, Italy

University of Trento
paramita@fbk.eu

Rachele Sprugnoli
FBK, Trento, Italy

University of Trento
sprugnoli@fbk.eu

Sara Tonelli
FBK, Trento, Italy

satonelli@fbk.eu

Manuela Speranza
FBK, Trento, Italy

manspera@fbk.eu

Abstract
While there is a wide consensus in the NLP
community over the modeling of temporal
relations between events, mainly based on
Allen’s temporal logic, the question on how
to annotate other types of event relations, in
particular causal ones, is still open. In this
work, we present some annotation guide-
lines to capture causality between event
pairs, partly inspired by TimeML. We then
implement a rule-based algorithm to auto-
matically identify explicit causal relations
in the TempEval-3 corpus. Based on this
annotation, we report some statistics on the
behavior of causal cues in text and perform
a preliminary investigation on the interac-
tion between causal and temporal relations.

1 Introduction

The annotation of events and event relations in
natural language texts has gained in recent years in-
creasing attention, especially thanks to the develop-
ment of TimeML annotation scheme (Pustejovsky
et al., 2003), the release of TimeBank (Pustejovsky
et al., 2006) and the organization of several eval-
uation campaigns devoted to automatic temporal
processing (Verhagen et al., 2007; Verhagen et al.,
2010; UzZaman et al., 2013).

However, while there is a wide consensus in the
NLP community over the modeling of temporal
relations between events, mainly based on Allen’s
interval algebra (Allen, 1983), the question on how
to model other types of event relations is still open.
In particular, linguistic annotation of causal rela-
tions, which have been widely investigated from
a philosophical and logical point of view, are still
under debate. This leads, in turn, to the lack of
a standard benchmark to evaluate causal relation
extraction systems, making it difficult to compare
systems performances, and to identify the state-of-
the-art approach for this particular task.

Although several resources exist in which causal-
ity has been annotated, they cover only few aspects
of causality and do not model it in a global way,
comparable to what as been proposed for temporal
relations in TimeML. See for instance the annota-
tion of causal arguments in PropBank (Bonial et al.,
2010) and of causal discourse relations in the Penn
Discourse Treebank (The PDTB Research Group,
2008).

In this work, we propose annotation guidelines
for causality inspired by TimeML, trying to take ad-
vantage of the clear definition of events, signals and
relations proposed by Pustejovsky et al. (2003). Be-
sides, as a preliminary investigation of causality in
the TempEval-3 corpus, we perform an automatic
analysis of causal signals and relations observed in
the corpus. This work is a first step towards the an-
notation of the TempEval-3 corpus with causality,
with the final goal of investigating the strict connec-
tion between temporal and causal relations. In fact,
there is a temporal constraint in causality, i.e. the
cause must occur BEFORE the effect. We believe
that investigating this precondition on a corpus ba-
sis can contribute to improving the performance of
temporal and causal relation extraction systems.

2 Existing resources on Causality

Several attempts have been made to annotate causal
relations in texts. A common approach is to look
for specific cue phrases like because or since or to
look for verbs that contain a cause as part of their
meaning, such as break (cause to be broken) or
kill (cause to die) (Khoo et al., 2000; Sakaji et al.,
2008; Girju et al., 2007). In PropBank (Bonial et
al., 2010), causal relations are annotated in the form
of predicate-argument relations, where ARGM-CAU
is used to annotate “the reason for an action”, for
example: “They [PREDICATE moved] to London
[ARGM-CAU because of the baby].”

Another scheme annotates causal relations be-
tween discourse arguments, in the framework of

10



the Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB). As opposed
to PropBank, this kind of relations holds only be-
tween clauses and do not involve predicates and
their arguments. In PDTB, the Cause relation type
is classified as a subtype of CONTINGENCY.

Causal relations have also been annotated as re-
lations between events in a restricted set of linguis-
tic constructions (Bethard et al., 2008), between
clauses in text from novels (Grivaz, 2010), or in
noun-noun compounds (Girju et al., 2007).

Several types of annotation guidelines for causal
relations have been presented, with varying de-
grees of reliability. One of the simpler approaches
asks annotators to check whether the sentence they
are reading can be paraphrased using a connective
phrase such as and as a result or and as a conse-
quence (Bethard et al., 2008).

Another approach to annotate causal relations
tries to combine linguistic tests with semantic rea-
soning tests. In Grivaz (2010), the linguistic para-
phrasing suggested by Bethard et al. (2008) is
augmented with rules that take into account other
semantic constraints, for instance if the potential
cause occurs before or after the potential effect.

3 Annotation of causal information

As part of a wider annotation effort aimed to an-
notate texts at the semantic level (Tonelli et al.,
2014), we propose guidelines for the annotation of
causal information. In particular, we define causal
relations between events based on the TimeML def-
inition of events (ISO TimeML Working Group,
2008), as including all types of actions (punctual
and durative) and states. Syntactically, events can
be realized by a wide range of linguistic expres-
sions such as verbs, nouns (which can realize even-
tualities in different ways, for example through a
nominalization process of a verb or by possessing
an eventive meaning), and prepositional construc-
tions.

Following TimeML, our annotation of events in-
volved in causal relations includes the polarity
attribute (see Section 3.3); in addition to this, we
have defined the factuality and certainty
event attributes, which are useful to infer informa-
tion about actual causality between events.

Parallel to the TimeML tag <SIGNAL> as an
indicator for temporal links, we have also intro-
duced the notion of causal signals through the use
of the <C-SIGNAL> tag.

3.1 C-SIGNAL
The <C-SIGNAL> tag is used to mark-up textual
elements that indicate the presence of a causal rela-
tion (i.e. a CLINK, see 3.2). Such elements include
all causal uses of:

• prepositions, e.g. because of, on account of,
as a result of, in response to, due to, from, by;

• conjunctions, e.g. because, since, so that,
hence, thereby;

• adverbial connectors, e.g. as a result, so,
therefore, thus;

• clause-integrated expressions, e.g. the result
is, the reason why, that’s why.

The extent of C-SIGNALs corresponds to the
whole expression, so multi-token extensions are
allowed.

3.2 CLINK (Causal Relations)
For the annotation of causal relations between
events, we use the <CLINK> tag, a directional
one-to-one relation where the causing event is the
source (the first argument, indicated as S in the
examples) and the caused event is the target (the
second argument, indicated as T). The annotation
of CLINKs includes the c-signalID attribute,
whose value is the ID of the C-SIGNAL indicating
the causal relation (if available).

A seminal research in cognitive psychology
based on the force dynamics theory (Talmy, 1988)
has shown that causation covers three main kinds of
causal concepts (Wolff, 2007), which are CAUSE,
ENABLE, and PREVENT, and that these causal
concepts are lexicalized as verbs (Wolff and Song,
2003): (i) CAUSE-type verbs: bribe, cause, com-
pel, convince, drive, have, impel, incite, induce,
influence, inspire, lead, move, persuade, prompt,
push, force, get, make, rouse, send, set, spur, start,
stimulate; (ii) ENABLE-type verbs: aid, allow, en-
able, help, leave, let, permit; (iii) PREVENT-type
verbs: bar, block, constrain, deter, discourage, dis-
suade, hamper, hinder, hold, impede, keep, prevent,
protect, restrain, restrict, save, stop. CAUSE, EN-
ABLE, and PREVENT categories of causation and
the corresponding verbs are taken into account in
our guidelines.

As causal relations are often not overtly ex-
pressed in text (Wolff et al., 2005), we restrict the
annotation of CLINKs to the presence of an explicit

11



causal construction linking two events in the same
sentence1, as detailed below:

• Basic constructions for CAUSE, ENABLE
and PREVENT categories of causation as
shown in the following examples:
The purchaseS caused the creationT of the cur-
rent building
The purchaseS enabled the diversificationT of
their business
The purchaseS prevented a future transferT

• Expressions containing affect verbs, such as
affect, influence, determine, and change. They
can be usually rephrased using cause, enable,
or prevent:
Ogun ACN crisisS affects the launchT of the
All Progressives Congress→ Ogun ACN cri-
sis causes/enables/prevents the launch of the
All Progressives Congress

• Expressions containing link verbs, such as
link, lead, and depend on. They can usually
be replaced only with cause and enable:
An earthquakeT in North America was linked
to a tsunamiS in Japan → An earthquake
in North America was caused/enabled by a
tsunami in Japan
*An earthquake in North America was pre-
vented by a tsunami in Japan

• Periphrastic causatives are generally com-
posed of a verb that takes an embedded clause
or predicate as a complement; for example,
in the sentence The blastS caused the boat
to heelT violently, the verb (i.e. caused) ex-
presses the notion of CAUSE while the em-
bedded verb (i.e. heel) expresses a particular
result. Note that the notion of CAUSE can
be expressed by verbs belonging to the three
categories previously mentioned (which are
CAUSE-type verbs, ENABLE-type verbs and
PREVENT-type verbs).

• Expressions containing causative conjunc-
tions and prepositions as listed in Section
3.1. Causative conjunctions and prepositions
are annotated as C-SIGNALs and their ID is

1A typical example of implicit causal construction is rep-
resented by lexical causatives; for example, kill has the em-
bedded meaning of causing someone to die (Huang, 2012). In
the present guidelines, these cases are not included.

to be reported in the c-signalID attribute
of the CLINK.2

In some contexts, the coordinating conjunction
and can imply causation; given the ambiguity of
this construction and the fact that it is not an ex-
plicit causal construction, however, we do not an-
notate CLINKs between two events connected by
and. Similarly, the temporal conjunctions after and
when can also implicitly assert a causal relation
but should not be annotated as C-SIGNALs and no
CLINKs are to be created (temporal relations have
to be created instead).

3.3 Polarity, factuality and certainty

The polarity attribute, present both in TimeML
and in our guidelines, captures the grammatical
category that distinguishes affirmative and negative
events. Its values are NEG for events which are
negated (for instance, the event cause in Serotonin
deficiencyS may not cause depressionT) and POS
otherwise.

The annotation of factuality that we added
to our guidelines is based on the situation to which
an event refers. FACTUAL is used for facts, i.e. sit-
uations that have happened, COUNTERFACTUAL
is used for counterfacts, i.e. situations that have no
real counterpart as they did not take place, NON-
FACTUAL is used for possibilities, i.e. speculative
situations, such as future events, events for which
it is not possible to determine whether they have
happened, and general statements.

The certainty attribute expresses the binary
distinction between certain (value CERTAIN) and
uncertain (value UNCERTAIN) events. Uncer-
tain events are typically marked in the text by the
presence of modals or modal adverbs (e.g. per-
haps, maybe) indicating possibility. In the sentence
DrinkingS may cause memory lossT, the causal con-
nector cause is an example of a NON-FACTUAL
and UNCERTAIN event.

In the annotation algorithm presented in the fol-
lowing section, only the polarity attribute is
taken into account, given that information about
factuality and certainty of events is not annotated
in the TempEval-3 corpus. In particular, at the
time of the writing the algorithm considers only the
polarity of causal verbal connectors, because this
information is necessary to extract causal chains

2The absence of a value for the c-signalID attribute
means that the causal relation is encoded by a verb.

12



between events in a text. However, adding informa-
tion on the polarity of the single events involved in
the relations would make possible also the identifi-
cation of positive and negative causes and effects.

4 Automatic annotation of explicit
causality between events

In order to verify the soundness of our annotation
framework for event causality, we implement some
simple rules based on the categories and linguistic
cues listed in Section 3. Our goal is two-fold: first,
we want to check how accurate rule-based identifi-
cation of (explicit) event causality can be. Second,
we want to have an estimate of how frequently
causality can be explicitly found in text.

The dataset we annotate has been released for
the TempEval-3 shared task3 on temporal and event
processing. The TBAQ-cleaned corpus is the train-
ing set provided for the task, consisting of the Time-
Bank (Pustejovsky et al., 2006) and the AQUAINT
corpora. It contains around 100K words in total,
with 11K words annotated as events (UzZaman et
al., 2013). We choose this corpus because gold
events are already provided, and because it allows
us to perform further analyses on the interaction
between temporal and causal relations.

Our automatic annotation pipeline takes as in-
put the TBAQ-cleaned corpus with gold annotated
events and tries to automatically recognize whether
there is a causal relation holding between them.
The annotation algorithm performs the following
steps in sequence:

1. The TBAQ-cleaned corpus is PoS-tagged and
parsed using the Stanford dependency parser
(de Marneffe and Manning, 2008).

2. The corpus is further analyzed with the ad-
dDiscourse tagger (Pitler and Nenkova, 2009),
which automatically identifies explicit dis-
course connectives and their sense, i.e. EX-
PANSION, CONTINGENCY, COMPARISON
and TEMPORAL. This is used to disambiguate
causal connectives (e.g. we consider only the
occurrences of since when it is a causal con-
nective, meaning that it falls into CONTIN-
GENCY class instead of TEMPORAL).

3. Given the list of affect, link, causative verbs
(basic and periphrastic constructions) and
causal signals listed in Sections 3.1 and 3.2,

3http://www.cs.york.ac.uk/semeval-2013/task1/

the algorithm looks for specific dependency
constructions where the causal verb or signal
is connected to two events, as annotated in the
TBAQ-cleaned corpus.

4. If such dependencies are found, a CLINK is
automatically set between the two events iden-
tifying the source (S) and the target (T) of the
relation.

5. When a causal connector corresponds to an
event, the algorithm uses the polarity of the
event to assign a polarity to the causal link.

Specific approaches to detect when ambiguous
connectors have a causal meaning are implemented,
as in the case of from and by, where the algorithm
looks for specific structures. For instance, in “The
building was damagedT by the earthquakeS”, by is
governed by a passive verb annotated as event.

Also the preposition due to is ambiguous as
shown in the following sentences where it acts as a
causal connector only in b):
a) It had been due to expire Friday evening.
b) It cutT the dividend due to its third-quarter lossS

of $992,000.
The algorithm performs the disambiguation by
checking the dependency structures: in sentence a)
there is only one dependency relation xcomp(due,
expire), while in sentence b) the dependency rela-
tions are xcomp(cut, due) and prep to(due, loss).
Besides, both cut and loss are annotated as events.

We are aware that this type of automatic anno-
tation may be prone to errors because it takes into
account only a limited list of causal connectors.
Besides, it only partially accounts for possible am-
biguities of causal cues and may suffer from pars-
ing errors. However, this allows us to make some
preliminary remarks on the amount of causal in-
formation found in the TempEval-3 corpus. Some
statistics are reported in the following subsection.

4.1 Statistics of Automatic Annotation
Basic construction. In Table 1 we report some
statistics on the non-periphrastic structures
identified starting from verbs expressing the three
categories of causation. Note that for the verbs
have, start, hold and keep, even though they
connect two events, we cannot say that there
is always a causal relation between them, as
exemplified in the following sentence taken from
the corpus:
a) Gen. Schwarzkopf secretly pickedS Saturday

13



night as the optimal time to start the offensiveT.
b) On Tuesday, the National Abortion and
Reproductive Rights Action League plansS to hold
a news conferenceT to screen a TV advertisement.

Types Verbs CLINK

CAUSE

have 1
start 2
cause 1
compel 1

PREVENT

hold 1
keep 3
block 7
prevent 1

ENABLE - -
Total 17

Table 1: Statistics of CLINKs with basic construc-
tion

Affect verbs. The algorithm does not annotate
any causal relation containing affect verbs mostly
because the majority of the 36 affect verb occur-
rences found in the corpus connect two elements
that are not events, as in “These big stocks greatly
influence the Nasdaq Composite Index.”

Link verbs. In total, we found 50 occurrences of
link verbs in the corpus, but the algorithm identifies
only 4 causal links. Similar to affect verbs, this is
mainly due to the fact that two events are not found
to be involved in the relation. For instance, the
system associated only one CLINK to link (out
of 12 occurrences of the verb) and no CLINKs
to depend (which occurs 3 times). Most of the
CLINKs identified are signaled by the verb lead;
for example, “Pol Pot is considered responsible for
the radical policiesS that led to the deathsT of as
many as 1.7 million Cambodians.”

Periphrastic causative verbs. Overall, there are
around 1K potential occurrences of periphrastic
causative verbs in the corpus. However, the algo-
rithm identifies only around 14% of them as part
of a periphrastic construction, as shown in Table 2.
This is because some verbs are often used in non-
periphrastic structures, e.g. make, have, get, keep
and hold. Among the 144 cases of periphrastic con-
structions, 41 causal links are found by our rules.

In Table 2, for each verb type, we report the list
of verbs that appear in periphrastic constructions
in the corpus, specifying the number of CLINKs
identified by the system for each of them.

Some other CAUSE-type (move, push, drive, in-
fluence, compel, spur), PREVENT-type (hold, save,

impede, deter, discourage, dissuade, restrict) and
ENABLE-type (aid) verbs occur in the corpus but
are not involved in periphrastic structures. Some
others do not appear in the corpus at all (bribe, im-
pel, incite, induce, inspire, rouse, stimulate, hinder,
restrain).

Types Verbs Periphr. CLINK All

CAUSE

have 34 0 239
make 6 2 125
get 1 0 50
lead 2 1 38
send 5 1 34
set 2 0 23
start 1 0 22
force 2 1 15
cause 3 2 12
prompt 3 2 6
persuade 2 1 3
convince 1 1 2

PREVENT

keep 1 1 58
stop 3 0 24
block 2 2 21
protect 2 1 15
prevent 6 2 12
hamper 1 0 2
bar 1 0 1
constrain 1 0 1

ENABLE

help 31 13 45
leave 2 2 45
allow 22 3 39
permit 2 1 6
enable 4 2 5
let 4 3 5

Total 144 41 848

Table 2: Statistics of periphrastic causative verbs

Causal signals. Similar to periphrastic causative
verbs, out of around 1.2K potential causal connec-
tors found in the corpus, only 194 are automatically
recognized as actual causal signals after disam-
biguation, as detailed in Table 3. Based on these
identified causal signals, the algorithm derives 111
CLINKs.

Even though the addDiscourse tool labels 11
occurrences of the adverbial connector so as having
a causal meaning, our algorithm does not annotate
any CLINKs for such connector. In most cases, it
is because it acts as an inter-sentential connector,
while we limit the annotation of CLINKs only to
events occurring within the same sentence.

CLINKs polarity. Table 4 shows the distribution
of the positive and negative polarity of the detected
CLINKs.

Only two cases of negated CLINKs are automat-
ically identified in the corpus. One example is the
following: “Director of the U.S. Federal Bureau of

14



Types C-SIGNALs Causal CLINK All

prep.

because of 32 11 32
on account of 0 0 0
as a result of 13 9 13
in response to 7 1 7
due to 2 1 6
from 2 2 500
by 23 24 465

conj.
because 58 37 58
since 26 19 72
so that 5 4 5

adverbial

as a result 3 0 3
so 11 0 69
therefore 4 0 4
thus 6 2 6
hence 0 0 0
thereby 1 0 1
consequently 1 1 1

clausal
the result is 0 0 0
the reason why 0 0 0
that is why 0 0 0

Total 194 111 1242

Table 3: Statistics of causal signals in CLINKs

Investigation (FBI) Louis Freeh said here Friday
that U.S. air raidT on Afghanistan and Sudan is
not directly linked with the probeS into the August
7 bombings in east Africa.”

Connector types POS NEG

Basic
CAUSE 5 0
PREVENT 12 0
ENABLE - -

Affect verbs - -
Link verbs 3 1

Periphrastic
CAUSE 10 1
PREVENT 6 0
ENABLE 24 0

Total 60 2

Table 4: Statistics of CLINKs’ polarity

CLINKs vs TLINKs. In total, the algorithm iden-
tifies 173 CLINKs in the TBAQ-cleaned corpus,
while the total number of TLINKs between pairs of
events is around 5.2K. For each detected CLINK
between an event pair, we identify the underlying
temporal relations (TLINKs) if any. We found that
from the total of CLINKs extracted, around 33%
of them have an underlying TLINK, as detailed in
Table 5. Most of them are CLINKs signaled by
causal signals.

For causative verbs, the BEFORE relation is the
only underlying temporal relation type, with the
exception of one SIMULTANEOUS relation.

As for C-SIGNALs, the distribution of temporal
relation types is less homogeneous, as shown in Ta-
ble 6. In most of the cases, the underlying temporal
relation is BEFORE. In few cases, CLINKs sig-

Connector types CLINK TLINK

Basic
CAUSE 5 2
PREVENT 12 0
ENABLE - -

Affect verbs - -
Link verbs 4 1

Periphrastic
CAUSE 11 1
PREVENT 6 0
ENABLE 24 0

C-SIGNALs 111 54
Total 173 58

Table 5: Statistics of CLINKs’ overlapping with
TLINKs

naled by the connector because overlap with an AF-
TER relation, as in “But some analysts questionedT
how much of an impact the retirement package will
have, because few jobs will endS up being elimi-
nated.”

In some cases, CLINKs signaled by the con-
nector since match with a BEGINS relation. This
shows that since expresses merely a temporal and
not a causal link. As it has been discussed before,
the connector since is highly ambiguous and the
CLINK has been wrongly assigned because of a
disambiguation mistake of the addDiscourse tool.

5 Evaluation

We perform two types of evaluation. The first is
a qualitative one, and is carried out by manually
inspecting the 173 CLINKs that have been auto-
matically annotated. The second is a quantitative
evaluation, and is performed by comparing the au-
tomatic annotated data with a gold standard corpus
of 100 documents taken from TimeBank.

5.1 Qualitative Evaluation

The automatically annotated CLINKs have been
manually checked in order to measure the precision
of the adopted procedure. Out of 173 annotated
CLINKs, 105 were correctly identified obtaining a
precision of 0.61.

Details on precision calculated on the different
types of categories and linguistic cues defined in
Section 3.2 are provided in Table 7. Statistics show
that performances vary widely depending on the
category and linguistic cue taken into consideration.
In particular, relations expressing causation of PRE-
VENT type prove to be extremely difficult to be
correctly detected with a rule-based approach: the
algorithm precision is 0.25 for basic constructions
and 0.17 for periphrastic constructions.

During the manual evaluation, two main types

15



C-SIGNALs BEFORE AFTER IS INCLUDED BEGINS others
because of 5 - - - -
as a result of 2 - - - -
in response to 1 - - - -
due to 1 - - - -
by 11 - 1 2 3
because 14 2 1 - 1
since 4 1 - 3 -
so that 1 - - - -
thus 1 - - - -
Total 40 3 2 5 4

Table 6: Statistics of CLINKs triggered by C-SIGNALs overlapping with TLINKs

Connector types Extracted Correct P

Basic
CAUSE 5 3 0.60

PREVENT 12 3 0.25
ENABLE 0 n.a. n.a.

Affect Verbs 0 n.a. n.a.
Link Verbs 4 3 0.75

Periphrastic
CAUSE 11 8 0.73

PREVENT 6 1 0.17
ENABLE 24 17 0.71

C-SIGNALs 111 70 0.63
Total 173 105 0.61

Table 7: Precision of automatically annotated
CLINKs

of mistakes have been observed: the wrong iden-
tification of events involved in CLINKs and the
annotation of sentences that do not contain causal
relations.

The assignment of a wrong source or a wrong
target to a CLINK is primarily caused by the de-
pendency parser output that tends to establish a
connection between a causal verb or signal and the
closest previous verb. For example, in the sentence

“StatesWest Airlines said it withdrewT its offer to
acquire Mesa Airlines because the Farmington car-
rier did not respondS to its offer”, the CLINK is
annotated between respond and acquire instead of
between respond and withdrew. On the other hand,
dependency structure is very effective in identify-
ing cases where one event is the consequence or
the cause of multiple events, as in “The president
offered to offsetT Jordan’s costs because 40% of
its exports goS to Iraq and 90% of its oil comesS
from there.” In this case, the algorithm annotates a
causal link between go and offset, and also between
comes and offset.

The annotation of CLINKs in sentences not con-
taining causal relations is strongly related to the
ambiguous nature of many verbs, prepositions and
conjunctions, which encode a causal meaning or
express a causal relation only in some specific
contexts. For instance, many mistakes are due to
the erroneous disambiguation of the conjunction

since. According to the addDiscourse tool, since is
a causal connector in around one third of the cases,
as in “For now, though, that would be a theoretical
advantage since the authorities have admitted they
have no idea where Kopp is.” However, there are
many cases where the outcome of the tool is not
perfect, as in “Since then, 427 fugitives have been
taken into custody or located, 133 of them as a
result of citizen assistance, the FBI said”, where
since acts as a temporal conjunction.

5.2 Quantitative Evaluation

In order to perform also a quantitative evaluation of
our automatic annotation, we manually annotated
100 documents taken from the TimeBank corpus
according to the annotation guidelines discussed
before. We then used this data set as a gold stan-
dard.

The agreement reached by two annotators on a
subset of 5 documents is 0.844 Dice’s coefficient
on C-SIGNALS (micro-average over markables)
and of 0.73 on CLINKS.

We found that there are several cases where the
algorithm failed to recognize causal links due to
events that were originally not annotated in Time-
Bank. Therefore, as we proceed with the manual
annotation, we also annotated missing events that
are involved in causal relations. Table 8 shows that,
in creating the gold standard, we annotated 61 new
events. As a result, we have around 52% increase
in the number of CLINKs. Nevertheless, explicit
causal relations between events are by far less fre-
quent than temporal ones, with an average of 1.4
relations per document.

If we compare the coverage of automatic anno-
tation with the gold standard data (without newly
added events, to be fair), we observe that automatic
annotation covers around 76% of C-SIGNALs and
only around 55% of CLINKs. This is due to the
limitation of the algorithm that only considers a

16



Annotation EVENT C-SIGNAL CLINK
manual 3933 78 144
manual-w/o new events 3872 78 95
automatic 3872 59 52

Table 8: Statistics of causality annotation in manual
versus automatic annotation

precision recall F1-score
C-SIGNAL 0.64 0.49 0.55
CLINK 0.42 0.23 0.30

Table 9: Automatic annotation performance

small list of causal connectors. Some examples of
manually annotated causal signals that are not in
the list used by the algorithm include due mostly
to, thanks in part to and in punishment for.

Finally, we evaluate the performance of the algo-
rithm for automatic annotation (shown in Table 9)
by computing precision, recall and F1 on gold stan-
dard data without newly added events. We observe
that our rule-based approach is too rigid to capture
the causal information present in the data. In partic-
ular, it suffers from low recall as regards CLINKs.
We believe that this issue may be alleviated by
adopting a supervised approach, where the list of
verbs and causal signals would be included in a
larger feature set, considering among others the
events’ position, their PoS tags, the dependency
path between the two events, etc.

6 Conclusions

In this paper, we presented our guidelines for an-
notating causality between events. We further tried
to automatically identify in TempEval-3 corpus the
types of causal relations described in the guide-
lines by implementing some simple rules based on
causal cues and dependency structures.

In a manual revision of the annotated causal
links, we observe that the algorithm obtains a pre-
cision of 0.61, with some issues related to the class
of PREVENT verbs. Some mistakes are introduced
by the tools used for parsing and for disambiguat-
ing causal signals, which in turn impact on our
annotation algorithm. Another issue, more related
to recall, is that in the TBAQ-cleaned corpus not all
events are annotated, because it focuses originally
on events involved in temporal relations. There-
fore, the number of causal relations identified auto-
matically would be higher if we did not take into
account this constraint.

From the statistics presented in Section 4.1, we
can observe that widely used verbs such as have or

keep express causality relations only in few cases.
The same holds for affect verbs, which are never
found in the corpus with a causal meaning, and for
link verbs. This shows that the main sense of causal
verbs usually reported in the literature is usually
the non-causal one.

Recognizing CLINKs based on causal signals is
more straightforward, probably because very fre-
quent ones such as because of and as a result are
not ambiguous. Others, such as by, can be identi-
fied based on specific syntactic constructions.

As for the polarity of CLINKs, which is a very
important feature to discriminate between actual
and negated causal relations, this phenomenon is
not very frequent (only 2 cases) and can be easily
identified through dependency relations.

We chose to automatically annotate TBAQ-
cleaned corpus because one of our goals was to
investigate how TLINKs and CLINKs interact.
However, this preliminary study shows that there
are only few overlaps between the two relations,
again with C-SIGNALs being more informative
than causal verbs. This may be biased by the fact
that, according to our annotation guidelines, only
explicit causal relations are annotated. Introducing
also the implicit cases would probably increase the
overlap between TLINKs and CLINKs, because
annotator would be allowed to capture the tempo-
ral constrains existing in causal relations even if
the are not overtly expressed.

In the near future, we will complete the manual
annotation of TempEval-3 corpus with causal in-
formation in order to have enough data for training
a supervised system, in which we will incorpo-
rate the lessons learnt with this first analysis. We
will also investigate the integration of the proposed
guidelines into the Grounded Annotation Format
(Fokkens et al., 2013), a formal framework for cap-
turing semantic information related to events and
participants at a conceptual level.

Acknowledgments

The research leading to this paper was partially
supported by the European Union’s 7th Frame-
work Programme via the NewsReader Project (ICT-
316404).

References
James F. Allen. 1983. Maintaining knowledge about

temporal intervals. Commun. ACM, 26(11):832–
843, November.

17



Steven Bethard, William Corvey, Sara Klingenstein,
and James H. Martin. 2008. Building a corpus of
temporal-causal structure. In European Language
Resources Association (ELRA), editor, Proceedings
of the Sixth International Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’08), Marrakech, Morocco, may.

Claire Bonial, Olga Babko-Malaya, Jinho D.
Choi, Jena Hwang, and Martha Palmer.
2010. Propbank annotation guidelines, De-
cember. http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/
Catalog/docs/LDC2011T03/propbank/
english-propbank.pdf.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008. The Stanford typed dependencies rep-
resentation. In Coling 2008: Proceedings of the
workshop on Cross-Framework and Cross-Domain
Parser Evaluation, pages 1–8. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Antske Fokkens, Marieke van Erp, Piek Vossen, Sara
Tonelli, Willem Robert van Hage, Luciano Ser-
afini, Rachele Sprugnoli, and Jesper Hoeksema.
2013. GAF: A Grounded Annotation Framework
for Events. In Workshop on Events: Definition, De-
tection, Coreference, and Representation, pages 11–
20, Atlanta, Georgia, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Roxana Girju, Preslav Nakov, Vivi Nastase, Stan Sz-
pakowicz, Peter Turney, and Deniz Yuret. 2007.
Semeval-2007 task 04: Classification of semantic
relations between nominals. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tions (SemEval-2007), pages 13–18, Prague, Czech
Republic, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Cécile Grivaz. 2010. Human Judgements on Causation
in French Texts. In Proceedings of the Seventh con-
ference on International Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta, may. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Li-szu Agnes Huang. 2012. The Effectiveness of a
Corpus-based Instruction in Deepening EFL Learn-
ers’ Knowledge of Periphrastic Causatives. TESOL
Journal, 6:83–108.

ISO TimeML Working Group. 2008. ISO TC37 draft
international standard DIS 24617-1, August 14.
http://semantic-annotation.uvt.nl/
ISO-TimeML-08-13-2008-vankiyong.
pdf.

Christopher S. G. Khoo, Syin Chan, and Yun Niu.
2000. Extracting causal knowledge from a medi-
cal database using graphical patterns. In In Proceed-
ings of 38th Annual Meeting of the ACL, Hong Kong,
2000, pages 336–343.

Emily Pitler and Ani Nenkova. 2009. Using syn-
tax to disambiguate explicit discourse connectives
in text. In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009

Conference Short Papers, ACLShort ’09, pages 13–
16, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

James Pustejovsky, J. Castano, R. Ingria, Roser Saurı́,
R. Gaizauskas, A. Setzer, G. Katz, and D. Radev.
2003. TimeML: Robust specification of event and
temporal expressions in text. In Proceedings of the
Fifth International Workshop on Computational Se-
mantics.

James Pustejovsky, Jessica Littman, Roser Saurı́, and
Marc Verhagen. 2006. Timebank 1.2 documenta-
tion. Technical report, Brandeis University, April.

Hiroki Sakaji, Satoshi Sekine, and Shigeru Masuyama.
2008. Extracting causal knowledge using clue
phrases and syntactic patterns. In Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on Practical Aspects
of Knowledge Management, PAKM ’08, pages 111–
122, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.

Leonard Talmy. 1988. Force dynamics in language
and cognition. Cognitive science, 12(1):49–100.

The PDTB Research Group. 2008. The PDTB 2.0. An-
notation Manual. Technical Report IRCS-08-01, In-
stitute for Research in Cognitive Science, University
of Pennsylvania.

Sara Tonelli, Rachele Sprugnoli, and Manuela Sper-
anza. 2014. NewsReader Guidelines for Annotation
at Document Level, Extension of Deliverable
D3.1. Technical Report NWR-2014-2, Fondazione
Bruno Kessler. https://docs.google.
com/viewer?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.
newsreader-project.eu%2Ffiles%
2F2013%2F01%2FNWR-2014-2.pdf.

Naushad UzZaman, Hector Llorens, Leon Derczyn-
ski, Marc Verhagen, James Allen, and James Puste-
jovsky. 2013. Semeval-2013 task 1: Tempeval-3:
Evaluating events, time expressions, and temporal
relations. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2013).

Marc Verhagen, Robert Gaizauskas, Frank Schilder,
Mark Hepple, Graham Katz, and James Pustejovsky.
2007. Semeval-2007 task 15: Tempeval tempo-
ral relation identification. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tions (SemEval-2007), pages 75–80, Prague, Czech
Republic, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Marc Verhagen, Roser Saurı́, Tommaso Caselli, and
James Pustejovsky. 2010. Semeval-2010 task 13:
Tempeval-2. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pages 57–62, Up-
psala, Sweden, July. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Phillip Wolff and Grace Song. 2003. Models of cau-
sation and the semantics of causal verbs. Cognitive
Psychology, 47(3):276–332.

18



Phillip Wolff, Bianca Klettke, Tatyana Ventura, and
Grace Song. 2005. Expressing causation in english
and other languages. Categorization inside and out-
side the laboratory: Essays in honor of Douglas L.
Medin, pages 29–48.

Phillip Wolff. 2007. Representing causation. Journal
of experimental psychology: General, 136(1):82.

19


