



















































Titles That Announce Argumentative Claims in Biomedical Research Articles


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Argumentation Mining, pages 98–99,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Titles That Announce Argumentative Claims in Biomedical Research
Articles

Heather Graves
Roger Graves

Department of English and Film Studies
The University of Alberta

Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
graves1,hgraves@ualberta.ca

Robert E. Mercer
Mahzereen Akter

Department of Computer Science
The University of Western Ontario

London, Ontario, Canada
mercer@csd.uwo.ca

Abstract

In the experimental sciences authors use
the scientific article to express their find-
ings by making an argumentative claim.
While past studies have located the claim
in the Abstract, the Introduction, and in
the Discussion section, in this paper we fo-
cus on the article title as a potential source
of the claim. Our investigation has sug-
gested that titles which contain a tensed
verb almost certainly announce the argu-
ment claim while titles which do not con-
tain a tensed verb have varied announce-
ments. Another observation that we have
confirmed in our dataset is that the fre-
quency of verbs in titles of experimental
research articles has increased over time.

1 Introduction

In this paper we are interested in determining
what is being claimed in articles in experimen-
tal (not clinical) biomedical literature, in partic-
ular. Claims have been studied in the argumen-
tation literature from many different standpoints
(White, 2009). Rhetorical structure theory was
developed from systemic functional linguistics to
map connections among texts (Mann and Thomp-
son, 1987); Argumentative zoning was developed
from Swales’ CARS model of moves made in re-
search articles (Teufel, 1999; Teufel and Moens,
1999; Teufel and Moens, 2002). Toulmin-based
analysis has also been used to map the argumen-
tative structure of articles (Toulmin, 1958 2003;
Jenicek, 2006; Reed and Rowe, 2006; Graves et
al., 2013; Graves, 2013). With these models of
argument in mind, we view the claim of a scien-
tific argument as the conclusion that the authors
infer from known information and new informa-
tion (results from an experiment or other forms of
observations). Past studies locate the claim in the

Abstract (Kanoksilapatham, 2013), at the end of
the Introduction (Swales, 1990; Swales and Najjar,
1987; Kanoksilapatham, 2005; Kanoksilapatham,
2012), and in the Discussion section (Kanoksilap-
atham, 2005). Our observations of changes in the
genre of the research article have led us to per-
form a preliminary investigation of titles with the
outcome being a provisional typology.

2 Method

The Genia Tagger uses the Penn Treebank Tagset.
In the following we mention the verb tags from
this tagset: VB – base form, VBD – past tense,
VBG – gerund, VBN – past participle, VBP
– present tense non-3rd person singular, VBZ
– present tense 3rd person singular. We ap-
plied these tags to the dataset of biomedical ar-
ticle titles and abstracts used in this preliminary
study has been taken from MEDLINE, the well-
known biomedical bibliographic repository that
contains over 19 million citations and abstracts for
about 81% of these citations from approximately
5600 journals (NLM, 2013 accessed 3 February
2014). We have curated a small database using
biotextEngine and some locally developed tools.

3 Analysis

For each title we collect the following:

• cumulative frequency of all verb categories
• whether the title contains a VBP, VBZ, or

passive verb

• whether the title contains a nominalization

4 Findings

Our analysis so far has identified three typologies.
The articles can be categorized according to genre,
purpose and structure. For titles with verbs the
claim of the title is repeated several times: in the

98



5

Our  analysis  so  far  has  identified  three  typologies.  The  articles  can  be  categorized  
according  to  genre,  purpose  and  structure.  A  typology  based  on  genre  distinguishes
among  review  articles,  methodological  articles,  and  experimental  research  articles.  
Experimental  research  articles  are  divided  into  those  that  report  clinical  advances  and  
those  that  report  new  contributions  to  knowledge.  A  second  typology  divides  articles  by  
purpose:  some  articles  summarize  the  state  of  knowledge  in  a  specialty  area  while  others  
present  an  argument  for  the  results  they  report.  A  third  typology  distinguishes  among  
articles  based  on  the  structure  of  their  titles.  Some  contain  nouns  and  noun  phrases  that  
describe  the  paper  topic;;  others  contain  verbs  and  verb-­like  structures  to  indicate  the  
authors’  stance  towards  the  topic.  

To  highlight  connections  between  these  typologies,  we  conducted  some  theoretical  
sampling  (Eisenhardt  &  Graebner  2007,  Eisenhardt  1989)  by  analyzing  the  argument  
structure  in  the  titles  and  abstracts  of  about  10  sample  articles.  These  samples  provided  
cases  for  use  to  test  and  inductively  develop  theoretical  concepts  to  begin  to  account  for  
the  relationships  between  the  article  genres,  their  purposes,  and  the  title  structure.  This  
analysis  suggested  several  points  of  connection.  For  example,  articles  that  summarize  
knowledge  use  nouns  and  noun  phrases;;  review  articles  summarize  knowledge  to  inform  
readers,  and  their  titles  describe  the  topic.  Experimental  research  articles  that  make  a  
contribution  to  knowledge  present  an  argument;;  their  titles  can  contain  verbs  or  verb-­like  
structures  that  explicitly  state  the  major  claim.  

Figure 1: Genre typology

Abstract, Introduction, and Discussion sections.
For articles without verbs, the claim does not ap-
pear in the title or introduction (it does appear in
the abstract and discussion sections). A third find-
ing: the frequency of verbs in titles of experimen-
tal research articles has increased over time.

5 Discussion

We believe that our methods for identifying titles
could lead to better literature search techniques.
If researchers are able to identify the claim of
an article from a search of titles alone, they will
be able to evaluate the relevance of each article
more efficiently. We suspect that the increase in
titles with verbs and claims in them is an emerg-
ing trend, possibly the result of explicit editorial
policy. One side effect of including claims in ti-
tles may be higher quality writing by the authors.
Another result from using verbs in titles could be
the automation of claim extraction. Finally, hav-
ing research scientists use clear language to state
their claim can have the added benefit of making
knowledge translation more effective by lessening
the difficulty of reading scientific texts. This, in
turn, might afford greater access to the research
outcomes by clinical practitioners (one of the main
readerships of biomedical research).

References
Heather Graves, Shahin Moghaddasi, and Azirah

Hashim. 2013. Mathematics is the method: Explor-
ing the macro-organizational structure of research
articles in mathematics. Discourse Studies, 15:421–
438.

Heather Graves. 2013. The trouble with Toulmin for
teaching argument in science. In 11th Annual Tech-
nology for Second Language Learning Conference:
Technology and Teaching Writing for Academic Dis-
ciplines. ms.

Milos Jenicek. 2006. How to read, understand, and
write discussion sections in medical articles: An ex-
ercise in critical thinking. Med. Sci. Monitor, 12.

Budsaba Kanoksilapatham. 2005. Rhetorical structure
of biochemistry research articles. English for Spe-
cific Purposes, 24:269–292.

Budsaba Kanoksilapatham. 2012. Structure of re-
search article introductions in three engineering sub-
disciplines. IEEE Transactions on Professional
Communication, 55:294–309.

Budsaba Kanoksilapatham. 2013. Generic characteri-
sation of civil engineering research article abstracts.
3L: The Southeast Asian Journal of English Lan-
guage Studies, 19:1–10.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1987.
Rhetorical structure theory: Description and con-
struction of text structures. In G. Kempen, editor,
Natural language generation: New results in artifi-
cial intelligence, psychology and linguistics, pages
85–95. Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff.

U.S. National Library of Medicine NLM. 2013 (ac-
cessed 3 February 2014). ”ncbi: Pubmed overview.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
entrez/query/static/overview.html.

Chris Reed and Glenn Rowe. 2006. Translating Toul-
min diagrams: Theory neutrality in argument repre-
sentation. In David Hitchcock and Bart Verheij, ed-
itors, Arguing on the Toulmin model: New essays in
argument analysis and evaluation, pages 341–358.
Dordrecht: Springer.

John Swales and Hazem Najjar. 1987. The writing of
research article introductions. Written Communica-
tion, 4:175–192.

John Swales. 1990. Genre Analysis: English in Aca-
demic and Research Settings. Cambridge Applied
Linguistics. Cambridge University Press.

Simone Teufel and Mark Moens. 1999. Argumentative
classification of extracted sentences as a first step
towards flexible abstracting. In Inderjeet Mani and
Mark Maybury, editors, Advances in automatic text
summarization, pages 155–171. MIT Press.

Simone Teufel and Marc Moens. 2002. Summariz-
ing scientific articles: Experiments with relevance
and rhetorical status. Computational Linguistics,
28(4):409–445.

Simone Teufel. 1999. Argumentative Zoning : Infor-
mation Extraction from Scientific Text. Ph.D. the-
sis, School of Cognitive Science, University of Ed-
inburgh.

Stephen Toulmin. 1958-2003. The uses of argument.
Cambridge University Press.

Barbara White. 2009. Annotating a corpus of biomed-
ical research texts: Two models of rhetorical analy-
sis. Ph.D. thesis, The University of Western Ontario,
Canada.

99


