



















































Local Phrase Reordering Model for Chinese-English Patent Machine Translation


Proceedings of the Third CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language Processing, pages 76–84,
Wuhan, China, 20-21 October 2014

 

Local Phrase Reordering Model for Chinese-English Patent Machine 

Translation 

Xiaodie Liu  

Institute of Chinese 

Information Processing, 

Beijing Normal 

University, Beijing 

100875, China  
liuxiaodie2009@ho

tmail.com

Yun Zhu  

Institute of Chinese 

Information Processing, 

Beijing Normal 

University, Beijing 

100875, China 
zhuyun@bnu.edu.co

m 

Yaohong Jin 

Institute of Chinese 

Information Processing, 

Beijing Normal 

University, Beijing 

100875, China 
jinyaohong@bnu.ed

u.cn 

Abstract: We focused on when and how to 
reorder the Chinese NPs with two, three 

translation units for reordering in 

Chinese-English Machine Translation. By 

analyzing the features of translation units of the 

Chinese NPs, we built some formalized rules to 

recognize the boundaries of translation units 

using the boundary words to recognize what to 

reorder. By comparing the orders of Chinese 

and English NPs, we developed a strategy a 

local phrase reordering model on how to 

reorder the translation units. At last, we used a 

rule-based MT system to test our work, and the 

experimental results showed that our 

rule-based method and strategy were very 

efficient. 

1 Introduction 

Over the past decade, machine translation 

(MT) has seen many exciting developments, but 

phrase-based models, syntax-based models, 

dependency-based models cannot deal with the 

reordering at the sentence level very well, 

particularly the reordering in a hierarchical 

structure in which the reordering of Chinese NPs 

is dependent on. The Hierarchical 

Semantic-Category-Tree (HSCT) Model
[1]

 used 

semantic features to handle the reordering at 

sentence level with a rule-based method. The 

system based on HSCT model could partition a 

sentence into a predicate and noun phases (NPs 

for short) and reorder them in sentence level, but 

this system did not reorder the inner orders in a 

NP. This paper aims to solve a type of the 

problem: reorder the inner components in a NP. 

In Chinese-English MT, the structural 

difference in NPs between Chinese to English is 

a difficult problem, such as the different 

positions for the head of the NPs: the head of a 

Chinese NP is in the front; however that of an 

English NP is in the end. The language for patent 

usually was inclined to express complicated 

thought in long and complex words. Here is an 

example wherein the number of the translation 

units in a complicated Chinese NP happens to be 

three. 

Example: 

Chinese NP:所述图像传感器于红色、蓝色和

绿色色彩通道的光谱灵敏度  
English in Chinese order: the image sensor 

device in red, blue, and green color channels de 

the spectral sensitivities 

Reference: the spectral sensitivities of the 

image sensor device in red, blue, and green color 

channels 

Google: an image sensor means in said red, 

blue and green spectral sensitivity of color 

channel. 

The Chinese NP “所述图像传感器于红色、

蓝色和绿色色彩通道的光谱灵敏度”consists of 

a Chinese character “的” and a function word 

“于” and three translation units: A“所述图像传

感器”、B“于红色、蓝色和绿色色彩通道” and 

C“光谱灵敏度”, and the right English order of 
translation units was “C A B” according to the 

reference. However, the boundaries of “B and C” 

and the order of “A, B and C” in English of 

Google were wrong.  

How to recognize the boundaries of the 

translation units “A, B, C” and how to reorder 

them were the main problems that to be solved in 

this paper.  

The remainder of this paper is organized as 

follows. In Section 2, we at first the examined 

the features of translation units and sum 

boundary words for recognizing them, then 

analyzed differences in the orders of complicated 

Chinese-English NPs and summed a strategy on 

how to reorder the translation units when 

translate the complicated Chinese NPs to English. 

In Section 3, we used a rule-based method and 

designed a algorithm to recognize the translation 

units to solve what to reorder and how to reorder. 

In Section 4, we discussed the experiment results. 

Section 5 is the related work. Finally, a 

76



 

conclusion is given and the further work is 

expected in Section 6. 

2 Analyses of the Chinese NPs 

In this section, we intent to develop a strategy 

on reorder Chinese NP based on the translation 

units. 

2.1 Translation units 

This part focused on examining the features 

of the translation units and tried to sum some 

laws on the boundaries for recognizing the 

translation units. 

A translation unit was a word or word-group 

of expressing the same meaning both in Chinese 

and English. Translation units were the 

equivalent in Chinese and English NPs, and it is 

certain that this study can only be based on 

contrasting Chinese and English NPs. The 

complicated Chinese NP consists of NP or 

prepositional phrases (PP for short), locative 

phrase (LP for short) etc. The translation unit 

may be as follows: 

(1) NP, which was a smallest unit for 
reordering in Chinese-English machine 

translation;  

(2)PP with a “preposition” and (1) 

(3)LP with a “localizer” and (1) 

(4)PP with a “preposition”, (1) and a 

“localizer” 

(5) PP with a “preposition”, some (1) and a 

“localizer”. 

2.1.1 Outer Characteristics 

In English, prepositions with flexible 

meanings are frequently used. They function as 

bonding agents in NPs. In English NPs, the 

translation units can be obtained by the 

prepositions, such as “the spectral sensitivities of 

the image sensor device in red, blue, and green 

color channels”, the prepositions “of” and “in” 

can partition the NP into three translation units.  

In Chinese NPs, the translation units can be 

obtained by the prepositions, localizers and the 

structural particle “的(de)”. 

 structural particle “的(de)” 

Compare and analyze the difference as well 

as locations between English modifiers and 

Chinese auxiliary words so that the “的(de)” is 

especial, which servers two functions. First, “的
(de)”, marked as “de1”, was a boundary of two 

translation units and should be excluded from the 

two translation units, such as the “的” in the 

phrase “本发明的实施方式”, which consist two 

translation units “本发明”and “实施方式”. “的

2”; second,“的(de)”, marked as “de2” , is an inner 

conjunction of a translation unit, such as the “的” 

in the phrase “简明的装置”. 

Here we focuses on “de1” and should 

distinguish it from “de2”. Based on the studying 

of the “的(de)”,we discovered some language 
rules from authentic contexts: “de2” were often 

behind of adjective, quantifier, verb and pronoun. 

In view of the cost and practicability,  “de2”can 

be eliminated more easily. 

 prepositions 

Preposition is one of Chinese functional 

words which have a complex function, involving 

various factors, such as “在(zai),根据(gen ju),作

为(zuo wei)”etc. For example, 

 localizers 

There is a special grammatical method in 

Chinese language—the words of locality which 

represent pure directions, such as “上(on),中(in),

外(outside)”.  

 others 

Some time nouns, such as “时(when)”and 

some auxiliary words, such as “而言(er yan)”. 

Some prepositions and some localizers work 

hand in hand, such as “当……时”, “在……中”, 

“对……而言”etc. 
The prepositions and localizers always 

worked with “de1”, for example, for Chinese NP 

“ 一 种 或 多 种 作 为 湿 润 剂 的 醇 类 ”,the 

preposition “作为” and structural particle “de1” 
could partition it into three translation units, for 

Chinese NP “通常运转时的气体压力”, the 

localizer “时”and structural particle “de1” could 
partition it into two translation units. 

From the above analysis we could see 

structural particle “ 的 (de)”, prepositions, 
localizers and others could be outer boundaries 

words for recognize the translation units. 

2.1.2 Inner Characteristics 

In Chinese NPs, the NPs may modify the NPs 

without any prepositions, localizers and 

structural particle, but not in English NPs. 

This section explores some laws at the 

beginning word and the end word of translation 

units in Chinese-English translation. 

2.1.2.1 Left Characteristics 

Chinese and English belong to two different 

77



 

language families, in most cases, the source 

language cannot correspond to the target 

language well. However, the internal 

components of translation units shared some 

characters in common as the result of linguistic 

universality and identity of human thinking form.  

By comparing the translation units, we can 

obtain some features of the beginning of 

translation units, which can be some implicit 

boundaries of two translation units. 

 demonstrative pronoun 

In English NPs, the translation units also can 

be obtained by the definite articles and 

 demonstrative pronoun. In Chinese NPs, the 

translation units also can be obtained by 

 demonstrative pronoun. For example, the 

word “这些(these)” is demonstrative pronoun in 

translation unit“这些业务(these services)” 

 quantitative phrases 

In Chinese NPs, the translation units could 

not obtained by indefinite articles and 

quantitative phrases. For example, the Chinese 

phases “一个,一种” and so on correspond to the 
English words “a, an, one” . 

The Chinese words “第一, 第二, 第三, 第

四 ” correspond to the English words “first, 
second, third, fourth”.  

 adjectives 

An adjective usually modifies the noun. 

The difference of Chinese and English exists in 

many ways such as morphological structure and 

word-formation which leads to the different 

words for a semantic feature between Chinese 

and English. Some adjectives, past participles, 

present participles in English were expressed in 

phase in Chinese.  

 degree adverbs 

The English adjective “notable” in translation 

unit “notable features” which are unique for 

English, thus appropriate version cannot find in 

Chinese vocabulary and expressed in phases 

“很显著” in translation unit “很显著的特点”, 

wherein “很” is a degree adverb. There are 
many degree adverbs in Chinese, for example "

很(very), 非常(extremely), 十分(very much), 

特别 (specially), 极 (too),(little), 更 (more), 较

(better),比较(better), 最(best)" etc. 

 time adverbs 

The past participle “coated” in translation unit 

“coated tank” which are unique for English, 

thus appropriate version cannot find in Chinese 

vocabulary and expressed in phases “已涂覆” 

in translation unit “已涂覆罐”, wherein “已” is 
a time adverb. There are many time adverbs in 

Chinese, for example " 已经 (already), 曾经

(once), 早已 (already), 刚刚 (just now), 正 (be 

being),正在(be being),就(be going to),就要(be 

going to),将(be going to),将要(be going to),曾

(once),刚(just now),才(already),在(be being)" 
etc. 

 negative adverbs 

The English adjective negative prefixes, such 

as “negative, opposite, and reverse” etc, 

corresponds to the negative adverbial words “不

(un-),非(un-),没(dis-),没有(dis-),不用（un-）,未

（dis-）”etc. 

 others 

The “resulting” in translation unit “resulting 

decoded” which are unique for English, thus 

appropriate version cannot find in Chinese 

vocabulary and expressed in phases “经解码” 

in translation unit “经解码语音”.  

The past participle “refrigerated” in 

translation unit “refrigerated substances” which 

are unique for English, thus appropriate version 

cannot find in Chinese vocabulary and 

expressed in phases “被制冷” in translation unit 

“被制冷物质”, wherein “被” is an auxiliary 
word. There are many auxiliary words in 

Chinese, such as “所(suo)” etc. 

The English adjective “movable” in 

translation unit “rotatable structure” which are 

unique for English, thus appropriate version 

cannot find in Chinese vocabulary and expressed 

in phases “可旋转” in translation unit “可旋转结

构”. 
2.1.2.1 Right Characteristics 

 Noun 

In general, the end of a translation unit in 

Chinese patent was a noun. 

 number words 

The number words consist of the numbers 

from 0 to 9 and were labels related to the new 

inventions. Huge numbers of number words 

could not enter the knowledge base and were 

generated dynamically as NUM when knowledge 

78



 

base was loaded.  

 letter words 

 The letter words consist of numbers from 0 to 

9 and 26 English letters. As with the number 

words, Huge numbers of number words could 

not enter the knowledge base and were generated 

dynamically as SPN when knowledge base was 

loaded. 

 auxiliary word “等(Deng)” 

The auxiliary word “等(Deng)” Displays the 
enumeration entry. 

As can be seen above, although Chinese does 

not have much overt morphology, it still 

distinguishes a translation unit from another by 

lexical devices. 

 When they were not outer boundary words in 
one continuous string, we used demonstrative 

pronoun, degree adverb, quantitative phrase, 

adjective,  time adverbs,  negative adverbs 

and others as the left boundary words to partition 

the string into two translation units utilizing 

contextual clues such as right characteristics. See 

table 1 for examples.  

When they were not outer boundary words in 

one continuous string, we used number words, 

letter words, auxiliary word “等(Deng)” as the 
right boundary words to partition the string into 

two translation units.See table 2 for examples.

Table1.The left boundary words and examples 

Table 2.The right boundary words and examples 

Right Boundary 

Words 

Examples 

number words (水箱 300)(底部组件 303) ->(a base assembly 303)( for the tank 300) 
letter words (主体部 400a)(膛)-> (the bore )of (the host section 400a) 

等(deng) (牵引电动机等) (负载装置)->(a load device)( such as the traction motor) 
Taken together, the boundary words have 

two types: 1) The out boundary words ,such as 

“的(de)” , propositions and locatives; 2) The 
inner boundary words, which include left 

boundary words and right boundary words. The 

left boundary words lie in the first word or 

phrase in a translation unit and the right 

boundary words lie in the last word.  

2.1 Reordering  

Once the translation units had been 

recognized, a new process called reordering can 

be applied to them. 

This part compared and analyzed the 

differences in the orders of Chinese-English NPs 

so as to find out the law and develop a strategy 

on how to translate the complicated Chinese NPs 

to English effectively.    

According to the boundary words above, we 

found that there are three types of translation 

units: 

 PPs 

PPs with a preposition, such as “根据该形式” 

NP “ 根 据 该 形 式 的 模 具 ”, PPs with a 

preposition and a localizer, such as “在外模具部

件 601 和管子 400 外表面之间” in NP “在外模

具部件 601 和管子 400 外表面之间的界面” 
 LPs 

LPs are unique to Chinese, such as “主体

上” in NP“主体上的主要压力”,  

Left Boundary Words Examples 

demonstrative 

pronoun 
(如权利要求 5)(所述的方法)->(the method) (according to claim 5) 

degree adverb (这项发明)(非常显著地一个特点)->(a very significant feature) of (this 
invention) 

quantitative phrase (这种丙烯酸树脂)(一个来源)->(one suitable source) of (these acrylic 
acrylate resins) 

adjective (支撑表面)(可能的总体压力)->(the possible total fluid pressure)of(a 
support surface) 

time adverb  (该容器)(已经清洗的表面)-> (the cleaned surface) of (the containers) 
negative adverb (取向膜) (未拉伸的酰化纤维素膜)-> (unstretched cellulose acylate 

films) of (Orientation film) 

others (该工件)(被照射区)-> (the irradiated region) of (the work) 

79



 

 NPs 

It could be one or more word, such as “/详视

图/(a detailed view), /所述/局部/缩放/估算/器
/( said local scale estimator)” and could include a 

“de2” , such as 大部分常规的交通工具布线系

统(most conventional vehicle wiring systems)” . 
 NP_Bs 

NP_Bs is unique to Chinese. It could be 

adjectives, pronouns, numerals and quantitative 

phrases in special position, such as “一些” which 

could occur in the NP “一些基于环保溶剂的清

洗剂” which consist of  three translation units 

“一些”, “基于环保溶剂” and “清洗剂”. 
  The Chinese NPs consist of NPs, PPs, LPs and 

NP_Bs; otherwise, the English NPs consist of 

NPs and PPs only. 

The Chinese and English NPs share some 

characters in common:1) the NPs consist of PPs 

and NPs, 2) the PPs could not be head translation 

units, 3) the NPs must be the head translation 

units.  

However, the position and order between the 

NPs and PPs in Chinese were different from 

English as the result of different culture and 

tradition, especially, the NP_Bs, LPS are unique 

for Chinese NPs. The primary dissimilarity is 

that the head translation unit must locate in the 

end and others translation units such as NPs, PPs 

and LPs must be modifiers to some extent, 

otherwise, in English, the beginning translation 

unit is the head translation unit and followed by 

other PPs as modifiers. 

Based on aligned Chinese-English NP-pairs 

from 15 Patent documents, this paper compared 

the differences in orders of Chinese-English NPs 

and analyzed types of translation units so as to 

find out the laws in translating Chinese NPs to 

English. 

  For Chinese NPs, the PPs and LPs shared 

same function, so we use PPs for PPs and LPs. 

2.1.1 Chinese NPs with two translation 

units 

All combinations and the structure relations 

about two translation units can be listed in table 

2, and we can see that in combinations of “NP1 

NP2”, the NP1 or NP2 were the NPs and the 

NP1 must modify NP2; in combinations of “PP 

NP”, the NP must be the NPs and PP must 

modify the NP.  

For the PPs and LPs, the prepositions were 

before the NPs and the locatives were behind the 

NPs, but the PPs or LPs could be moved as a 

whole. In table 2, we can see that there only one 

reordering way for the Chinese NPs with two 

translation units and b).  

All structure relations between two translation 

units occur in Chinese, and we can find some 

examples to illustrate our reduction were right in 

table 3. 

Table3: Chinese and English orders of NPs with 

two translation units 

 Order in Chinese 
Order in 

English 
 Combinations  Structure 

Relations  

a) NP1 NP2
1
 NP1 NP2 NP2 NP1 

b) PP
2
 NP  PP NP NP PP 

Table4: examples of orders of Chinese and 

English NPs with two translation units 

Chinese Orders -> English orders  

NP1 NP2-> NP2 NP1 

( 模制工艺 ) 的 ( 操作参数 )->the operating 
parameters of the molding process 

PP NP -> NP PP 

(在前面实施方案中)(所述的相同类型的聚合

材料)-> the same types of polymeric material in 
the earlier embodiment 

2.1.2 Chinese NPs with three translation 

units 

We can list all combinations and the structure 

relations about three translation units in the 

Chinese NPs. In table 4, we can see that: a) has 

three structure relations: (NP1 (NP2 NP3)) 

indicated that at first NP2 modified NP3, then 

they acted as a whole to be modified by NP1, 

((NP1 NP2) NP3) indicated that at first NP1 

modified NP2, then they acted as a whole to 

modify NP3,and ((NP1) (NP2) NP3) indicated 

that NP1 and NP2 respectively modify NP3.b) 

has three structure relations: ((PP NP1) NP2) 

indicated that at first NP1 modified NP2, then 

they acted as a whole to be modified by PP, ((PP 

NP1) NP2) indicated that at first PP modified 

NP1, then they acted as a whole to modify 

NP2,and ((PP1)(NP2) NP3) indicated that PP 

and NP1 respectively modify NP2, and c) has 

three structure relations:(PP1 (PP2 NP)) 

indicated that at first PP2 modified NP, then they 

acted as a whole to be modified by PP1, ((PP1 

PP2) NP) indicated that PP1 and PP2 acted as a 

whole to modify NP, and ((PP1)(PP2) NP) 

                                                        
1
 The number behind NP or PP notes the order they appear 

in the linear sequence of Chinese NPs. The space among NP 
and PP is used to split the different translation units, and 

can stand for “的” in authentic Chinese NPs. 
2
  

80



 

indicated that PP1  and PP2 respectively modify 

NP. d) has two structure relations: (NP1 (PP 

NP2)) indicated that at first PP modified NP2, 

then they acted as a whole to be modified by 

NP1, and ((NP1)(PP )NP2) indicated that NP1 

and PP respectively modify NP2.e) has one 

structure relation (NP_B (PP NP)) which 

indicated at first PP modified NP, then they acted 

as a whole to be modified by NP_B.  

Although, not all the structure relations 

among three translation units occur in Chinese, 

we can find some examples to illustrate our 

reduction were right in table 5.

Table5: Chinese and English orders of NPs with three translation units 

 Order in Chinese 
Order in English 

 Combinations” Structure Relations  

a) NP1 NP2 NP3 

(NP1(NP2 NP3)) 

NP3 NP2 NP1 ((NP1 NP2) NP3) 

((NP1)(NP2) NP3) 

b) PP NP1 NP2 

(PP (NP1 NP2)) 

NP2 NP1 PP ((PP NP1) NP2) 

((PP)(NP1) NP2) 

c) PP1 PP2 NP 

(PP1 (PP2 NP)) 
NP PP2 PP1 

((PP1)(PP2) NP) 

((PP1 PP2) NP) NP PP1 PP2 

d) NP1 PP NP2 
(NP1 (PP NP2)) 

NP2 PP NP1 
((NP1 )(PP)NP2) 

e) NP_B PP NP (NP_B (PP NP)) NP_B NP PP 

Table 6: Examples of orders of Chinese and English NPs with three translation units

 Chinese Orders  ->   English Orders  

1 NP1 NP2 NP3 -> NP3  NP2  NP1 

1.1((材料)的(捏合度))的(调节范围)->the adjusting range for the kneading degree of the 
material  

=>(NP1 NP2) NP3 -> NP3  NP2  NP1 

1.2(这些模具)的((一种形式)的(结构))-> the construction of one form of the moulds  
=>NP1 (NP2 NP3) -> NP3  NP2  NP1 

2 PP1 PP2 NP-> NP  PP2  PP1 

(闸板部件接近于圆筒段时)的(材料间)的(捏合度)->the kneading degree between the 
material when the gate member is moved close to the cylindrical segment 

=>PP1 PP2 NP-> NP1  PP2  PP1 

3 PP NP1 NP2-> NP2  NP1  PP  

3.1 ((在内模具部件上)的(第一密封装置))的(优点)-> the high vapor pressure of the propellant in 
the MDI 

=>(PP NP1) NP2-> NP2  NP1  PP 

3.2 (调节捏合度时)的((装置)的(操作性))->the operability of the apparatus at the time of 
adjusting the kneading degree 

=>PP (NP1 NP2)-> NP2  NP1  PP 

4 NP1 PP NP2-> NP2 NP1 PP 

(上述旋转轴部)的((绕水平轴)的(旋转力))-> the rotation force around the horizontal axis of the 
rotation axis part 

=>NP1 PP+ +NP2-> NP2 NP1 PP 

5 NP_B PP NP-> NP_B  NP  PP 

(一些) ((基于环保溶剂)的(清洗剂))-> some cleaner based on environment-friendly  solvent 
=>NP_B PP NP-> NP_B  NP  PP 

We all know that ambiguity can be caused by 

multiple and different semantic relations. So, 

how to reorder seems to be a big problem. 

However we could conclude some laws about 

how to reorder the English orders of Chinese 

NPs with three translation units as follows:  

81



 

1) The reversed order is the only way for 

Chinese NPs “NP1 NP2 NP3” which had three 

modifications and three semantic relations; 

2) The first NP and the reversed order for PP 

is the only way for Chinese NPs “PP PP NP”. 

For the pattern “((PP1 PP2) NP)->NP PP1 PP2”, 

it only occurs in a kind of special Chinese NPs, 

such as “从(from)……”, “到/向(to)……”;  
3) The first NP2, second NP1 and third PP is 

the only way for Chinese NPs “PP NP1 NP2” 

which had three structure relations and for 

Chinese NPs “NP1 PP NP2”. For the pattern is 

(NP1 PP NP2)->NP2 PP NP1, the PP in English 

has the front boundary, and there is ambiguity, 

too;  

4) The first NP_E, second NP and third PP is 

the only way for Chinese NPs “NP_B PP NP” in 

e). 

3  Method  
In our existing MT system, the Chinese NPs 

were given, but how to recognize the two or 

three translation units in the Chinese NPs were 

unknown. They can be obtained by using 

boundary words, for an effective boundary word 

or a combination of boundary words could not be 

the end or beginning of a base NP in semantic 

and partition a language string into two 

translation units. 

3.1 Recognitions  

The boundary words have two types: 1) the 

out boundary word ,such as “ 的 (de)” and 
propositions, 2) the inner boundary words, which 

include left boundary words and right boundary 

words. The left boundary words lie in the first 

word or phrase in a translation unit and the right 

boundary words lie in the last word. 

The Chinese NPs are stored using a tree 

structure. Thus how to distinguish the “的(de)” 
into “de1” and “de2”, how to recognize the front 

and rear boundaries and how to combine the 

words of a unit is important. 

Using a rule-base method, we designed some 

tags and attributes for nodes to recognize the 

translation units:  

1) Tag for Nodes 

 MK  
It was a node for “de1” and means there is 

a reordering operation.  

 MK_Q  
It need to add a new node “de1” before the 

left boundary words. 

 MK_H  
It need to add a new node “de1” after the 

right boundary words. 

 L1 
L1s were the front boundaries of 

translation units. 

 L1H 
L1Hs were the rear boundaries of 

translation units 

 NP_Bng% 
 was the beginning position of 

an Chinese NP. 

 NP_End%  
NP_END% was the end position of an 

Chinese NP. 

2) Attributes for Node 

 LEVEL  

It was used to put this attribute to “的
(de)”,if value=-1, recognize it as “de1”,  if 

value=0 (default value), recognize it as 

“de2”. 

 NOT_CHANGE 
It was used to keep a translation unit not 

moving. 

We designed the algorithm as follows: 

Step1: distinguishing the “的(de)” into“de1” 
and  “de2” 

 building 12 rules to rule out the “de2” 
by putting a value “2”to the attribute 

“level” of  “的(de)” when the words 

before “ 的 (de)” were adjective, 
quantifier, verb and pronoun; 

 building 1 rule to identify the “de1” by 
putting the “de1” with a tag “MK”; 

step2: recognizing the front and right 

boundaries 

 recognizing the front boundaries L1 
when the words were prepositions  

 putting a tag “MK_Q” on the left 
boundary words when the words were 

nouns, NUM or SPN before the left 

boundary words;  

 recognizing the rear boundaries L1H 
when the words were locatives etc;  

 putting a tag “MK_H” on the right 
boundary words when the words 

behind the right boundary words were 

noun; 

step3: Generating the PPs and NPs 

 generating the PPs by combining the 
words  by the combination pattern

3
 of 

boundary: (L1,L1H) (L1,L1] , 

                                                        
3
 Combination pattern (A,B) and [A,B] indicated combining 

the word from A to B, and “(“indicate A or B was included, 
and A or B was excluded. 

82



 

[L1H,L1H), (L1,MK], [MK,L1], 

(NP_Bng%,L1H), [MK,L1H) by 

programming.  

 generating the NPs from some 
combinations of [L1H,NP_End%), 

(MK,MK) by programming. 

 generating the NP_Bs from some 
combinations of (NP_Bng%,L1 ] by 

programming and put an attribute 

“NOT_CHANGE”. 

 Through three steps above, we could obtain 

all the translation units “PPs, NPs and NP_Bs” 

for reordering.  

3.2 Reordering  

In reordering phase, we defined the head NP 

at the end as NP_E. Then, the NPs contained PPs, 

NP_Bs, DE1, NP and NP_E. The strategies for 

reordering the Chinese NPs are as follows: 

Step1: building 1 reorder rule for the Chinese 

NPs “NP_B PP NP”; 

Step2: keeping the NP_Bs not moving and 

move the PPs behind the NP_Es in reverse;  

Step3: moving the other NPs behind the 

NP_Es in reverse, delete the “的(de)” and add 
the English word “of”. 

4   Experiments and Results 
In order to test the result of this rule-based 

method and the strategy of reordering, the 

experiments takes 500 authentic patent texts 

provide by SIPO as the training set. The 

evaluation will use the development data for the 

NTCIR-9 Patent Machine Translation Pilot Task, 

containing 2,000 bilingual Chinese-English 

sentence pairs. After integrating the method into 

an existing rule-based system (HSCTMT), we 

take a closed test on training set and an open text 

on evaluation set.  

Table 7. Accuracy of  Translation Units 

System Precision (%) 

Closed test 99.26 

Open test 98.77 

In table 7, the accuracy of translation units 

using boundary words in our system was very 

high and the results illustrated our rule-based 

method was efficient.  

Table 8. Accuracy of Reordering of Chinese NPs 

in our system and Google 

System Closed test 

Precision (%)  

Open test 

Precision (%) 

HSCTMT 97.26 89.77 

Google 57.47 59.92 

 In table 8, the result of two test shows the 

strategy of reordering was efficient, the semantic 

analysis in a rule-based method has effectively 

improved the recognition result of units for 

reordering, and Google performs poorly in tests. 

There are two factors affecting the performance:  

 Incorrect boundaries of the nested PPs 
and PPs with a boundary affected the 

results. 

 The multi-category words affected the 
results. 

5  Related Works 
Many reordering methods or strategy have 

been proposed in recent years to address this 

problem from different aspects. Phrase-based 

models excel at capturing local reordering 

phenomena and memorizing multi-word 

translation 
[2]

, but they perform poorly in the long 

and nested sentences in Patent. Syntax-based 

models handle long-distance reordering better 

than phase-based models. Reference [3] 

introduced a set Syntax-based rules to decide if a 

DE construction should be reordered or not 

before translating to English. Reference [4] 

focused on a Chinese noun phrase [A DE B] and 

explored a log-linear DE classifier by using 

syntactic, semantic and discourse context to 

producing an English translation strategy. 

Reference [1] explored a Hierarchical 

Semantic-Category-Tree (HSCT) model, which 

present a sentence as a hierarchical structure 

based on the Hierarchical Network of Concepts 

theory(HNC theory) and handle the reordering in 

three levels: Sentence Level, Chunk Level and 

Word Level. Reference [5,6,7] designed a 

Chinese-English Patent Machine Translation 

system based on the  HSCT model. 

6   Conclusions and Future Work 

Based on analysis of translation units, we 

used a rule-based method to recognize the 

boundaries of the translation units using 

boundary words. Based on the analysis 

Chinese-English orders of Chinese NPs with two 

or three translation units, we developed a 

strategy on how to reorder the Chinese NPs. The 

experimental results showed that our rule-based 

method and strategy were very efficient on the 

reordering the NPs.  

In future, we will enrich and refine the rules 

to improve the performance and research on how 

translate Chinese NPs fluently.  

83



 

Acknowledgement 

The authors are grateful to Multi-level Kn

owledge Representation of Mass Texts and C

hinese Language Understanding System (Nat

ional 863 Program, No.2012AA011104) and 

the Fundamental Research Funds of Central 

Universities for financial support.  

 

Reference 
[1]Zhu Xiaojian, Jin Yaohong,2010, Hierarchical 

Semantic-Category-Tree Model for 

Chinese-English Machine Translation, China 

Communications, Beijing,80-92 

[2]KOEHN P,MARCU D. Statistical Phrase-based 

Translation [C]//Proceeding of the 2003 

Conference of the North American Chapter of the 

A ssociation for Computational Linguistics on 

Human Language Technology, 48-54. 

[3]Chao Wang, Michael Collins and Philipp Koehn. 

2007 , Chinese syntactic reordering for statistical 

machine translation. In Proceeding of 

EMNLP-CoNLL, Prague, Czech Republic, June. 

Association for Computational Linguistics, 

737-745. 

[4]PiChuan Chang, Dan Jurafsky and  

Chrisstopher D. Manning.2009, Disambiguating 

“DE” for Chinese-English Machine Translation. 
In Proceeding fo the Fourth Workshop on 

Statistical Machine Translation, Athens, Greece, 30 

March-31 March. Association for Computational 

Linguistics. 215-223. 

[5]Yun Zhu, Yaohong Jin.: A Chinese-English 

Patent Machine Translation System Based on the 

Theory of Hierarchical Network of Concepts .J: 

The Journal of China Universities and 

Tele-communications, Beijing, 140–146. (2012) 
 

84


