



















































New Technologies for Old Germanic. Resources and Research on Parallel Bibles in Older Continental Western Germanic


Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH) @ EACL 2014, pages 22–31,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

New Technologies for Old Germanic. Resources and Research on Parallel
Bibles in Older Continental Western Germanic

Christian Chiarcos, Maria Sukhareva, Roland Mittmann,
Timothy Price, Jens Chobotsky, and Gaye Detmold

Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany
{lastname}@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Abstract

We provide an overview of on-going ef-
forts to facilitate the study of older Ger-
manic languages currently pursued at the
Goethe-University Frankfurt, Germany.

We describe created resources, such as a
parallel corpus of Germanic Bibles and a
morphosyntactically annotated corpus of
Old High German (OHG) and Old Saxon,
a lexicon of OHG in XML and a multi-
lingual etymological database. We discuss
NLP algorithms operating on this data,
and their relevance for research in the Hu-
manities.

RDF and Linked Data represent new and
promising aspects in our research, cur-
rently applied to establish cross-references
between etymological dictionaries, infer
new information from their symmetric clo-
sure and to formalize linguistic annota-
tions in a corpus and grammatical cate-
gories in a lexicon in an interoperable way.

1 Background

We describe on-going efforts at the Goethe Uni-
versity Frankfurt on the study of older Continen-
tal Western Germanic languages, in particular, Old
High German (OHG, ancestor of German), Old
Saxon (OS, ancestor of Low German) and (to a
lesser extent) Old Low Franconian (OLF, ancestor
of Dutch) and their relation to Old English (OE),
Gothic, German and other Germanic languages as
well as the relation of OHG and OS religious texts
to their Latin sources. This line of research is con-
ducted in the context of two larger efforts, the Old
German Reference Corpus and the LOEWE clus-
ter “Digital Humanities”, in collaboration with the
Applied Computational Linguistics group at the
Goethe-Universitt Frankfurt.

The Old German Reference Corpus is a DFG-
funded project that emerged from the Deutsch Di-
achron Digital (DDD) initiative, conducted in co-
operation between HU Berlin, U Frankfurt and
U Jena, and aims to provide a morphosyntacti-
cally annotated, exhaustive reference corpus of
Old High German and Old Saxon. The LOEWE
cluster “Digital Humanities”,1 funded through a
programm of the State of Hessen, is a collabo-
ration between U Frankfurt, TU Darmstadt and
Freies Deutsches Hochstift Frankfurt aiming to
develop methodologies and infrastructures to fa-
cilitate information-technological support of re-
search in the humanities.

The collaboration between the humanities and
NLP described here is guided by different, though
converging interests: For the humanities, the lan-
guage resources, annotations, alignment and tools
created in collaboration with NLP researchers
represent novel instruments complementing tradi-
tional philological approaches, e.g., to investigate
emergence and decay of syntactic patterns.

From an NLP perspective, the Germanic lan-
guages provide a test-bed to develop strategies
for novel algorithms for alignment and annotation
projection. In particular, the abundance of parallel
(Bible) texts for all major language stages of most
Germanic languages, the excellent NLP support
for modern Germanic languages, and the availabil-
ity of a considerable body of annotated historical
texts allow us to study the impact of the factor
of diachronic relatedness when building resources
for low-resource languages.

2 Corpus Data

Along with annotated corpora provided by third
parties (Tab. 1), two important data sets have been
constructed in the course of our research. These
include a massive, verse-aligned Bibles corpus

1
http://www.digital-humanities-hessen.de

22



covering all Germanic languages, and the Old Ger-
man Reference Corpus. In additional, a thematical
alignment of quasi-parallel text within and across
biblical texts was extrapolated from the literature.

2.1 Germanic parallel Bible corpus
Bible data represents the majority of parallel data
available for historical Germanic languages, and
for the case of OS and OHG, gospel harmonies
represent even the majority of data currently
known. Hence, we began compiling a corpus of
Bible texts, excerpts and fragments for all Ger-
manic languages marked up with IDs for verses (if
possible), chapters and books. For data represen-
tation, we employed an XML version of the CES-
scheme developed by (Resnik et al., 1997). Hav-
ing outgrown the scale of Resnik’s earlier project
by far, we are currently in transition to TEI P5
XML format. At the moment, 271 texts with about
38.4M tokens have already been processed (Tab.
2). Copyright prevents redistributing most of this
data under a free or an academic license, but we
plan to share the extraction and conversion scripts
we used. . Except for automatically parsed Bibles
in modern English, German and Swedish, the texts
in this collection are not annotated. Where anno-
tations are available from other corpora (Tab. 1),
however, these were aligned with our Bibles.

2.2 Old German Reference Corpus
The Old German Reference Corpus (Referenzkor-
pus Altdeutsch) (Mittmann, 2013) is a joint project
in cooperation between HU Berlin, U Frankfurt
and U Jena, conducted in the wider context of the
Deutsch Diachron Digital (DDD) initiative. The
DDD initiative aims to provide deeply-annotated
reference corpora of different historical stages of
German. The Old German Reference Corpus com-
prises all preserved texts from the oldest stages of
continental Western Germanic (OHG and OS) dat-
ing from ca. 750 to 1050 CE, 650,000 tokens in
total. Among the largest coherent subcorpora are
Tatian (OHG), Otfrid of Weissenburg (OHG) and
the Heliand (OS). From these, only Tatian can be
verse-aligned with the gospels (and is included in
Tab. 1 and 2), while the Heliand and Otfrid are free
renderings of the gospels. For these, the literature
provides a section-level alignment only.

The DDD builds on the earlier efforts of the
TITUS project (Thesaurus of Indo-European Text
and Language Materials, Thesaurus Indogerman-
ischer Text- und Sprachmaterialien) that pro-

vided digitized editions of texts in old Germanic
languages as well as other Indo-European and
selected non-Indo-European languages (Gippert,
2011).2

The annotations are mostly derived from the lit-
erature and existing glossaries that provide gram-
matical information for all known OHG and OS
words, together with their exact source. These
have been digitized, automatically applied to the
text, manually refined using the annotation soft-
ware ELAN,3 augmented with metadata, and fi-
nally published via the ANNIS database (Linde
and Mittmann, 2013).

The annotated corpus is published under a CC-
BY-SA license over http://www.laudatio.
org, where ELAN and relANNIS files are pro-
vided. So far, the OHG Tatian is available, further
data sets are currently in preparation.

2.3 Thematical alignment within and across
biblical texts

Translations of religious texts are well-suited for
language comparison as well as NLP experiments
exploiting parallel data as they are not only faith-
fully translated, but also, they come with a verse-
level alignment which can serve as a basis for sta-
tistical word-level alignment, using, e.g., GIZA++
(Och and Ney, 2003). Where such a verse-level is
not explicitly given, it can be automatically iden-
tified for actual translations. However, for inde-
pendent compositions such as gospel harmonies,
alignment is harder to identify and can only be es-
tablished at the level of sections. In addition, sim-
ilar links also exist between different parts of the
Bible, e.g., parallel passages in different gospels.

For these, an index providing a coarse-grained
thematical alignment at the level of sections was
extrapolated from the literature. This index can
be exploited to increase the coverage of the align-
ment: where no exact translation is available (his-
torical language data is often fragmentary), a the-
matically matching section is retrieved. Further-
more, consulting the verse under consideration to-
gether with renderings of quasiparallel parts of the
same text allows historical linguists to grasp the
degree of grammatical variability for the phenom-
ena they are interested in. Language comparison
can thus be particularly well accomodated if mul-

2http://titus.uni-frankfurt.de/texte/
texte2.htm#ahd and #asachs

3http://www.lat-mpi.eu/tools/elan

23



language period syntax tok. corpus

English

Modern 19th CS 21K (Kroch et al., 2010)
British 18th CS 32K (Kroch et al., 2010)
Early 17th CS 22K (Kroch et al., 2004)
Modern 16th CS 21K (Kroch et al., 2004)
Middle 14th CS 66K (Kroch and Taylor, 2000)
Old 10th CS 78K (Taylor et al., 2003b)

DS 7K (Haug and Jøhndal, 2008)
Icelandic Middle 16th CS 40K (Rögnvaldsson et al., 2012)
High Early Mod.16th CS 27K (Light, 2013)
German Old 9th CH 41K Sect. 2.2
Gothic 4th DS 56K (Haug and Jøhndal, 2008)

Table 1: Verse-aligned older Germanic Bible texts
from various corpora with manual annotations for
morphosyntax and syntax (CH chunks, CS con-
stituents, DS dependencies)

after 1800- 1600- 1400- 1100- before
1900 1900 1800 1600 1400 1100

Insular West Germanic
English 2 2 2 6 3 (+2) 1

Pidgin/Creol 2
Scots (6) (1)
Frisian 2 (+8) (12) Continental West Germanic
Dutch 4 1 5 (1)

L. Franconian (47) 21
Afrikaans 3

German 3 1 (19) 1 (+4) 1 (+1) 1
dialects 3 (+2)

Yiddish 1
Low German 3 (+18) (66) (2) 1

Plautdietsch 2
Danish 1 North & East Germanic
Swedish 3 (3) (1)
Bokmål 2
Nynorsk 2
Icelandic 1 1
Faroese 1
Norn (2)
Gothic 1
tokens 21.8M 3.2M 2.7M 9.2M 1.2M 0.2M

Table 2: Verse-aligned texts in the Germanic par-
allel Bible corpus (parentheses indicate marginal
fragments with less than 50,000 tokens)

tiple versions of the same passage in the same lan-
guage can be provided.

To exploit redundancy and to enlarge the num-
ber of parallel and quasi-parallel passages for a
given phenomenon searched in the corpus, cross-
references within the Bible and between the Bible
and derived texts have been identified. For ex-
ample, coarse-grained thematical alignment be-
tween different gospels is provided by the Euse-
bian Canon Tables and their subordinate Ammo-
nian sections and are extendable to the Latin Ta-
tian. For OS Heliand, a free adaptation of gospels,
we have only a section-level thematical alignment
with Tatian provided by Sievers (1872).

Information on these cross-references has been
digitized and employed to create an interlinked in-
dex of thematically similar sections in the gospels
and the OS and OHG gospel harmonies. Our Bible

West Germanic other reconstr.
lexicon OE OHG OS OLF OFr ON Got PGmc PIE
entries (XML, in K)

25 24 9 2 13 12 5 9 7
triples (RDF, in M)

1.2 1.6 .6 .2 .6 .7 .4 .2 .2
lemon:Words & links (in K)
OE 25 1
OHG 2 26 7 2 3 1
OS 1 4 9 1 2 1
ON 1 1 14
Got 1 1 1 1 6
PGmc 5 3 3 1 2 4 2 8
PIE 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 8

German 16 23 8 4 10 12 7 6 3
English 10 4 2 5 9 2
symmetric closure of etym. links (triples per lang. in K)

+11 +14 +11 +5 +9 +8 +5 +21 +9
links to (L)LOD data sets (triples per data set in K)
OLiA 24 22 8 2 12 11 5 8 7
lexvo 132 186 82 21 68 82 49 14 15
Glottolog 15 11 8 3 7 11 6 9 13

Table 3: Statistics on the etymological dictio-
naries, including Old Low Franconian (OLF),
Old Frisian (OFr), Old Norse (ON), Gothic
(Got), Proto-Germanic (PGmc) and Proto-Indo-
European (PIE)

data is thus accompanied with an index that links
disparate texts from different time periods and in
distinctive styles and variant languages on the ba-
sis of thematical similarity as identified in the liter-
ature. For gospels and gospel harmonies, we iden-
tified 4560 inter-text groups made up of the related
chunks between all the originals and languages in-
volved that represents the basis for a more fine-
grained level of alignment (Price, 2012).

3 Linked Lexicon Data

A large lexical database of etymologically linked
dictionaries of old Germanic languages (OS,
OHG, OE, Gothic, Old Norse, Old Frisian, Old
Low Franconian, Proto-Germanic; also Proto-
Indo-European) has been developed in the con-
text of the LOEWE cluster ‘Digital Humanities’
at the U Frankfurt. Building on the etymologi-
cal and translational dictionaries of Old Germanic
languages by Gerhard Köbler,4 the project ‘Histor-
ical Linguistic Database’ developed user-friendly
means of comparing etymologically related forms
between historical dialects and their daughter lan-
guages (Price, 2012). The original PDF data
were converted into an XML representation, cross-
references have been resolved and the results are

4http://www.koeblergerhard.de/
ahdwbhin.html

24



imported into an XML database. A web interface
has been developed, that transforms user queries
into XQuery and visualizes the results in a conve-
nient way using XSLT.

To provide a machine-readable representation
of the etymological dictionaries, an RDF version
has been compiled. Applying the Linked Data
paradigm (Bizer et al., 2009) to etymological lex-
icons is particularly promising as they are char-
acterized by a heavy linkage across different lan-
guages, so that etymological lexicons for differ-
ent languages are very likely to complement each
other. RDF provides the means to represent the
cross-language linking using a uniform formalism,
and subsequently, to facilitate information aggre-
gation over multiple etymological lexicons as well
as language-specific lexical resources.

We converted the Köbler lexicons to RDF in
conformance to the Lemon model (McCrae et
al., 2011), an LMF-based vocabulary to repre-
sent machine-readable lexicons by using Semantic
Web standards. This conversion followed the three
main objectives:

(i) linkability: XML-based query languages
such as XQuery and XPath, used to create the user
interface to the lexicons, limit our lexicon to a
tree-structure representation. However, as our lex-
icons complement each other, it would be desir-
able to provide explicit cross-references between
these entries, and to allow them to be queried
jointly. Within the RDF data model, the relations
within and beyond a single lexicon can be repre-
sented and queried with equal ease, surmounting
constraint imposed by XML.

(ii) interoperability: Instead of resource-
specific abbreviations for languages and gram-
matical categories, we represent linguistic
information and meta data by reference to
community-maintained vocabularies publicly
available as part of the (Linguistic) Linked Open
Data cloud, namely lexvo (de Melo, to appear,
ISO 639-3 language codes), Glottolog (Nordhoff
and Hammarström, 2011, language families) and
OLiA (Chiarcos, 2008, linguistic categories).
Reusing vocabularies shared among many parties
over the Web of Data has the advantage that
resources dealing with related phenomena in
the same language can be easily identified and
their information integrated without additional
conversion steps.

(iii) inference: The original lexicons were dis-
tributed in individual PDF files, and the XML rep-
resentation was created as a faithful representation
of their content, augmented with markup for rele-
vant linguistic features. These files, however, pro-
vided complementary information, so that, say, a
lexicon entry in the OS dictionary provided a ref-
erence to an etymological corresponding OHG en-
try, but this reference was not found in the OHG
dictionary. Such gaps can be easily detected (and
filled) through symmetric closure in the RDF data
model.

The results of this conversion are summarized in
Tab. 3. In the original XML (first row), every en-
try corresponds to a lemma of the language under
consideration, with different etymologies (and/or
senses) being associated with it. In RDF (second
row), each of these homographs (together with its
definition number) is defined as a lemon:Word
with a homography relation with the homograph
set (represented by a lemon:Word without defi-
nition number). The number of lemon:Words
is thus slightly higher than the number of en-
tries in the original dictionaries. Differently from
the XML, however, information from different
data sets can be easily aggregated, and triples
originating from one document can be comple-
mented with triples from another, shown here for
the symmetric closure of etymological relations
(third row) that can be easily generated using a
simple SPARQL pattern like CONSTRUCT { ?o
?p ?s } WHERE {?s ?p ?o}. The last row
shows links to other data sets from the (Linguis-
tic) Linked Open Data cloud. Most original en-
tries were complemented with grammatical infor-
mation using different (and not fully consistent)
abbreviations. For the most frequent abbrevia-
tions used, a link to the corresponding OLiA con-
cept was generated. These definitions are thus
interoperable beyond these lexicons and can be
compared, e.g., with those of lexical-semantic re-
sources for Modern German and English as com-
piled in (Eckle-Kohler et al., to appear). Similarly,
language abbreviations were mapped to ISO 639-
3 codes (in lexvo), or, where these were not avail-
able, to Glottolog. Even though the number of data
in historical languages is constantly increasing and
there is a demand for fine-grained language codes
for them, neither of the aforementioned resources
provide such codes. So we had to use a link to the
corresponding language family instead.

25



language period scheme corpus reference

English

Modern PTB (Taylor et al., 2003a; Kroch et al., 2010)
Early Mod. PPCEME (Kroch et al., 2004)

Middle PPME2 (Kroch and Taylor, 2000)

Old
YCOE (Taylor et al., 2003b)

PROIEL (Taylor et al., 2003b)

High German

Modern STTS (Schiller et al., 1999)
Early Mod. PCENHG (Light, 2013)

Old
Sect. 2.2

T-CODEX (Petrova et al., 2009)

Dutch Modern Alpino (Bouma et al., 2001)

Old Norse Menota (Haugen et al., 2008)

Danish Modern EAGLES (Leech and Wilson, 1996)

Swedish Modern Mamba (Nivre et al., 2006)

Icelandic IcePaHC (Rögnvaldsson et al., 2012)

Gothic PROIEL (Haug and Jøhndal, 2008)

(a) Morphosyntactic annotations

language period scheme corpus reference

English

Modern
PTB (Taylor et al., 2003a; Kroch et al., 2010)

Stanford deps (De Marneffe and Manning, 2008)
Penn2Malt deps (Johansson and Nugues, 2007)

Early Mod. PPCEME (Kroch et al., 2004)
Middle PPME2 (Kroch and Taylor, 2000)

Old
YCOE (Taylor et al., 2003b)

PROIEL (Taylor et al., 2003b)

High German
Modern

TIGER (Brants et al., 2004)
Tüba-D/Z (Telljohann et al., 2003)
NEGRA (Skut et al., 1997)

Early Mod. PCENHG (Light, 2013)

Dutch Modern Alpino (Bouma et al., 2001)

Swedish Modern Mamba (Nivre et al., 2006)

Icelandic IcePaHC (Rögnvaldsson et al., 2012)

Gothic PROIEL (Haug and Jøhndal, 2008)

(b) Syntactic annotations

Table 4: List of annotation schemes represented as OWL2/DL ontologies and relevant Germanic corpora

4 NLP methods applied

We sketch selected NLP applications developed on
the data described before, the automated phrase-
level alignment of quasi-parallel text, and two
experiments on annotation projection on parallel
text. All of these experiments are still in a rela-
tively early stage.

4.1 Automated phrase-level alignment of
quasi-parallel text

The needs of historical lingustics demand a more
fine-grained alignment than the currently avail-
able thematical alignment of Heliand with Ta-
tian and the gospels. We thus investigate parallel
phrase detection between Heliand (OS) and Tatian
(OHG), resp., Heliand and the West Saxon gospels
(OE).

To identify cognate phrases, we explore 6 types
of similarity metrics δ(wOS , wOHG) for every OS
word wOS and its potential OHG cognate wOHG.

1. geometry δg = difference between the relative
positions of wOS and wOHG.

2. identity δi(wOS , wOHG) = 1 iff wOHG =
wOS (0 otherwise)

3. lexicon δlex(wOS , wOHG) = 1 iff wOHG ∈
W (0 otherwise) where W is a set of possible
OHG translations for wOS suggested by a lexicon,
i.e., either

direct etymological link in (the symmetric
closure of) the etymological dictionaries, or

indirect shared German gloss in the etymo-
logical dictionaries

4. orthography similarity measure based on
character replacement likelihood:

relative Levenshtein similarity
δlev(wOS , wOHG) = 1 − ld|wOS |+|wOHG|
where ld is the standard Levenstein distance
and |wOS | and |wOHG| are the number of
characters in each word.

statistical character replacement probability
as approximated by a character-based statisti-
cal machine translation system (Neubig et al.,
2012)

5. normalization δnorm(wOS , wOHG) =
δi(w′OS , wOHG) , with w

′
OS being the OHG ‘nor-

malization’ of the original wOS . Here, normaliza-
tion uses a weighted Levenshtein distance and a
fixed list of OHG target words (Bollmann et al.,
2011).

6. cooccurrences δp(wOS , wOHG) =
P (wOS |wOHG)P (wOHG|wOS), calculated
on thematically aligned sections from both texts.

For any two thematically aligned OS and OHG
word vectors, we thus span up a similarity ma-
trix between both word vectors on the basis of
these metrics. On the matrices, different opera-
tions can be applied to calculate similarity derived
metrics, including point-wise multiplication or ad-
dition, thresholds and a smoothing operator, that
aligns words due to the similarity of its neighbors.
The resulting matrix is then decoded by a greedy
algorithm that aligns the words with the highest
score, and then iterates for the remaining words.

At the moment, we provide a graphical interface
over a webpage that allows a philologist to dynam-

26



ically define an alignment function and that pro-
vides a graphical visualization of the result. Dur-
ing a partial qualitative evaluation a historical lin-
guist was asked to compare the results of align-
ment based on various metrics applied to a small
text passage. He took into consideration the over-
all match of the topic of the aligned passages as
well as the number of parallel passages that the
metrics failed to align. Eventually, it was indi-
cated that the best results can be achieved by com-
bining multiple metrics. A combination of either
direct lexicon-based or normalization-based align-
ment and geometrical alignment appears to be par-
ticularly promising. Yet, systematic experiments
to automatically explore this feature space are still
being prepared and depend on the availability of a
gold alignment for selected verses.

4.2 Projecting dependency relations

As shown in Tab. 1, we only possess shallow syn-
tactic annotations of OHG (and OS) text. We are
thus particularly interested in establishing richer
syntactic annotations. A challenging aspect in this
respect is the limited availability of parallel train-
ing data for historical language stages. However,
due to diachronic relatedness, we may expect that
syntactic patterns of Old Germanic languages are
preserved in their modern descendants. Such an
approach requires a consistent hyperlemmatiza-
tion, e.g., against a modern language

We tested this idea on Bible texts from four cor-
pora with closely related annotation schemes for
syntax (Tab. 1, corpora with CS-syntax): Icelandic
(IS), Early Modern High German (DE), Mid-
dle English (ME) and Old English (OE). These
schemes originate in the Penn Treebank scheme
(Taylor et al., 2003a), and we thus parsed a mod-
ern English Bible with a parser trained on the Penn
Treebank. As older Germanic languages are char-
acterized by a higher degree of word order flexi-
bility than Modern English, we converted histor-
ical and modern annotations to dependency rela-
tions using standard tools for this task (Johans-
son and Nugues, 2007). Word-alignment was ob-
tained with GIZA++ and 1:1 alignment was en-
forced using the translation table. Then, we pro-
jected dependency relations and the English words
as hyperlemmas for the historical texts. The his-
torical texts had comparable POS annotation that
was only slightly normalized across the corpora as
it preserved more morphological information than

Modern English POS tags.

On these projections, a fragment-aware parser
was trained using the English (hyper)lemmas and
the original POS tags (Spreyer and Kuhn, 2009).
We limited the amount of parallel data available to
a training set of 437 sentences per language and a
test set of 174 per language. Our hypothesis was
that in this setting, (projected) training data from
related languages can be used in place of train-
ing data for the language under consideration, if
the amount of data is sufficient and the languages
are sufficiently closely related. Furthermore, we
assumed that with an increasing number of lan-
guages considered (and thus training set size), the
quality of the projected annotations would contin-
uously improve as long as the languages are suffi-
ciently closely related.

For evaluation, we employed the unlabeled at-
tachment score (UAS) (Collins et al., 1999) on
the test data and compared with the (dependency
version of) the original annotation in these cor-
pora. Tab. 5 compares the performance of a
parser trained on target language data with parsers
trained on (hyperlemmatized) related languages.
The scores in the second column are the baseline
UAS where the parser was applied to the same
language as it was trained on. The third column
shows the difference with the parser applied to a
language but trained on projections into another
language. The fourth and the fifth column pro-
vides the results of the parser trained on one or
two additional related languages respectively.

The results showed that, among the West Ger-
manic languages (but not IS), a parser trained
on two or more related languages can reach the
same performance or even outperforms a parser
trained on the target language. Furthermore, a
parser trained on (projected) annotations from two
or more related languages is likely to outperform
a parser trained on a single related language. Ac-
cordingly, in absence of parallel texts for the target
language, the parser can be successfully trained on
annotation projections from two or more related
languages. It should be noted, however, that the
overall performance of the parser was relatively
poor. This may be, however, an artifact of the great
grammatical divergency between Modern English
(and, to a limited degree, ME: reduced morphol-
ogy, strict word order) and older Germanic lan-
guages (rich morphology, flexible word order).

Subsequent experiments will thus address the

27



inclusion of richer morphological features, projec-
tions from other languages and evaluation against
another set of dependency (DS) annotations for
Gothic and Old English (Tab. 1), for which related
annotation schemes for Latin, Greek and Czech
are available – all of these languages are charac-
terized by rich morphology and flexible syntax.

on on related languages
Tgt Tgt Best monoling. Best biling. Triling.

lang. model ∆UAS model ∆UAS model ∆UAS
DE .41 IS +.02n.s. +ME +.05∗ +OE +.04∗∗

IS .32 ME −.06∗∗∗ +DE −.03n.s. +OE −.04∗
ME .60 IS −.04∗∗∗ +OE −.01n.s. +DE −.02n.s.
OE .30 ME .00n.s. +IS .00n.s. +DE .00n.s.

Table 5: Performance of parsing models (UAS dif-
ference vs. 2nd col. with χ2: ∗ p < .05, ∗∗

p < .01, ∗∗∗ p < .005)

4.3 Harmonization of grammatical features

Another line of studies addresses the projection of
grammatical features as represented in POS tags
and dependency labels. Unfortunately, modern
and historical language stages are annotated ac-
cording to a great variety of annotation schemes
which can not be trivially mapped to a general-
ization without substantial loss of information (as,
e.g., in the approach by Petrov et al., 2012). For
processing of multilingual corpora the problem of
heteroginity of linguistic annotations is very acute.
Above, we described an experiment that used PTB
style annotations only. This limitation was im-
posed by the annotation schema of the target cor-
pora that had PTB style syntactic annotations.

We thus follow Chiarcos (2008) and represent
the most relevant Germanic annotation schemes
as OWL2/DL ontologies, and link these to an
overarching Reference Model. Unlike a tagset,
whose string-based annotations require disjoint
categories at a fixed level of granularity, this
ontology-based approach allows to decompose the
semantics of annotations and consider all aspects
independently. For example, a tagger may cor-
rectly identify plural agreement but incorrectly as-
sume that it pertains a noun, as in the Penn Tree-
bank tag NNS. In the original tagset, a correspond-
ing tag for, say, adjectives, does not exist, but us-
ing the ontology, a plural adjective could neverthe-
less be represented in the form of different RDF
triples. With lexicon data being available in RDF
and linked to the OLiA Reference Model, as well
(Sect. 3), the incorrect word class can be spot-

ted, and corrected, but the agreement information
could remain unaffected.

These annotations have also been successfully
employed in ensemble combination architectures,
where information from different sources (say,
NLP tools) was integrated on the basis of the
Reference Model and disambiguated using onto-
logical axioms (Chiarcos, 2010; Pareja-Lora and
Aguado de Cea, 2010). In an annotation pro-
jection scenario, these sources could be projec-
tions from different languages annotated accord-
ing to different schemes, e.g., German, English,
Swedish or Latin. These experiments are currently
being conducted, but Annotation Models for sev-
eral schemes are already available (Tab. 4).

5 Digital Humanities

Our ultimate goal is to facilitate studies of histori-
cal and empirical linguists and philologists.

One research question under consideration is
whether the Heliand influenced Luther (Price,
2012), who, apparently, possessed one copy.
Based on a thorough comparison of thematically
aligned passages, evidence for or against this hy-
pothesis may be gathered, and this investigation
can be simplified by limiting the search to parallel
phrases automatically identified (Sect. 4.1).

Another research question pertains to divergen-
cies between, e.g., OHG texts and their Latin
source. As most OHG material is translated in a
literal fashion, and the word order was relatively
flexible, the OHG syntax may have been adjusted
to mirror the Latin original. Research of OHG
syntax thus concentrates on passages where OHG
syntax differs from the Latin source (Hinterhölzl
and Petrova, 2009).

Different types of divergencies have been iden-
tified by qualitative research. Early translations
unlike modern ones tend to be very literal, of-
ten not being only word by word translation but
also preserving the syntax of the original. Nev-
ertheless, due to strong grammatical differences
between two languages, various divergencies on
(morpho)syntactic and lexical levels were un-
avoidable. Such, the transition from the Latin syn-
thetic to OHG analytic wordforms in case of the
deponent verbs is systematically observed. Also
the changes of the word position as well as miss-
ing a word in translation or adding a word that is
not present in the Latin original can be frequently
found. Such divergencies can be often explained

28



by stylistic or pragmatic reasons as well as by per-
sonal preferences of the translator.

This line of research is currently supported
through automated word-level alignment between
the OHG and Latin versions of Tatian. We built
a parallel corpus using GIZA++ and used the
TreeAligner (Lundborg et al., 2007) for search and
evaluation. On this basis, a philological compari-
son of OHG Tatian and its Latin source is being
conducted. More helpful, however, would be a
comparison of different syntactic patterns in OHG
and Latin which motivates our experiments in an-
notation projection (Sect. 4.2).

Finally, our experiments in the ontology-based
harmonization of different annotation schemes
(Sect. 4.3) will facilitate subsequent typological
and linguistic comparison across corpora with
manual annotations for syntax and/or morphology
according to different schemes.

6 Summary

We sketched major research directions on the de-
velopment of resources, NLP tools and algorithms
to facilitate the study Old Germanic languages
currently pursued at the Goethe-University Frank-
furt in the context of two related research initia-
tives, the LOEWE cluster ‘Digital Humanities’
and the project ‘Old German Reference corpus’.

Our efforts resulted in the creation of the fol-
lowing resources:

• a massive parallel corpus of TEI-
conformant Bibles including all con-
temporary Germanic languages as well as
early stages of Germanic languages (Sect.
2.1).

• an exhaustive, morphosyntactically anno-
tated corpus of OHG and OS with mor-
phosyntactic annotations. Annotations were
automatically derived from glossaries and
manually refined (Sect. 2.2).

• an index providing a thematical alignment
of the four gospels with each other as well as
with OHG and OS gospel harmonies (Sect.
2.3). This high quality alignment provides a
solid basis for further more fine-grained au-
tomatic alignment (Sect. 4.1).

• XML versions of lexical resources, includ-
ing etymological dictionaries of Old Ger-
manic languages (Sect. 3)

• an RDF-based linked etymological
database of Old Germanic languages
compiled from the latter (Sect. 3)

• a Linked Data representation of annotation
schemes for corpora, NLP tools and gram-
matical features in the linked lexicon data
(Sect. 3, 4.3)

The resources created provide an excellent test-
bed for various NLP algorithms, particularly for
experiments on alignment and annotation projec-
tion techniques: We developed different metrics
for quasi-parallel alignment applied to the cor-
pus of gospel harmonies (Sect. 4.1). For subse-
quent analysis, evaluation and refinement by his-
torical linguists, we provide a graphical visualiza-
tion and user interface in a form of a webpage.
This is an on-going project and further research
will aim at refining metrics and their combination.

Our massive parallel corpus is a perfect prereq-
uisite for annotation projection (Sect. 4.2). Our
experiments on annotation projections and cross-
lingual parser adaptation showed that it is possible
to use (hyperlemmatized) training data from mul-
tiple closely related languages in place of training
data for the language under consideration, and on
small sets of parallel training data available, this
did not lead to a significant loss of performance.
The only exception in the experiment (IS) is also
most remote from the other languages considered.

A severe limitation of this experiment was that
it required operating on (variants of) the same an-
notation scheme. Another line of our research is
focused on researching of ways to surmount such
restrictions. We thus adopt a modular approach
with annotation schemes linked to the OLiA Ref-
erence Model to harmonize annotations and gram-
matical features from lexicons (Sect. 4.3).

Finally, applications of these algorithms and re-
sources in research questions in philology, histor-
ical linguistics and comparative linguistics were
sketched in Sect. 5.

While most resources described in this pa-
per have been developed for several years at the
Goethe-University Frankfurt, the increased focus
on NLP and Linked Data represent novel develop-
ments pursued by the newly established Applied
Computational Linguistics Lab at the Goethe Uni-
versity Frankfurt. Different aspects of research
sketched in this paper thus describe on-going ac-
tivities at different degrees of completion.

29



Acknowledgements
The research of Christian Chiarcos, Maria
Sukhareva, Tim Price, Gaye Detmold, and Jens
Chobotsky described in this paper was supported
by the research cluster ‘Digital Humanities’ at the
Goethe-University Frankfurt, funded through the
LOEWE programme of the federal state of Hes-
sia. The research of Roland Mittmann was con-
ducted in the project ‘Old German Reference cor-
pus’, funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG).

References
Christian Bizer, Tom Heath, and Tim Berners-Lee.

2009. Linked Data – The story so far. International
Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems
(IJSWIS), 5(3):1–22.

Marcel Bollmann, Florian Petran, and Stefanie Dip-
per. 2011. Rule-based normalization of historical
texts. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Language
Technologies for Digital Humanities and Cultural
Heritage (LaTeCH-2011), pages 34–42, Hissar, Bul-
garia, September.

Gosse Bouma, Gertjan Van Noord, and Robert Malouf.
2001. Alpino: Wide-coverage computational analy-
sis of Dutch. Language and Computers, 37(1):45–
59.

Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Peter Eisenberg, Sil-
via Hansen-Schirra, Esther König, Wolfgang Lezius,
Christian Rohrer, George Smith, and Hans Uszkor-
eit. 2004. Tiger: Linguistic interpretation of a ger-
man corpus. Research on Language and Computa-
tion, 2(4):597–620.

Christian Chiarcos. 2008. An ontology of linguistic
annotations. LDV Forum, 23(1):1–16.

Christian Chiarcos. 2010. Towards robust multi-tool
tagging. An OWL/DL-based approach. In Proc. of
the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL-2010), pages 659–670,
Uppsala, Sweden.

Michael Collins, Lance Ramshaw, Jan Hajič, and
Christoph Tillmann. 1999. A statistical parser for
Czech. In Proc. of the 37th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-
1999), pages 505–512, Maryland, June.

Marie-Catherine De Marneffe and Christopher D Man-
ning. 2008. The Stanford typed dependencies rep-
resentation. In Proceedings of the COLING-2008
Workshop on Cross-Framework and Cross-Domain
Parser Evaluation, pages 1–8.

Gerard de Melo. to appear. Lexvo.org: Language-
related information for the linguistic linked data
cloud. Semantic Web Journal, pages 1–7.

Judith Eckle-Kohler, John McCrae, and Christian
Chiarcos. to appear. lemonUby – A large, in-
terlinked, syntactically-rich resource for ontologies.
Semantic Web Journal: Multilingual Linked Open
Data.

Jost Gippert. 2011. The TITUS Project. 25 years
of corpus building in ancient languages. In Per-
spektiven einer corpusbasierten historischen Lin-
guistik und Philologie. Internationale Tagung des
Akademienvorhabens “Altägyptisches Wörterbuch”
an der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften, pages 169–192, Berlin, December.

Dag TT Haug and Marius Jøhndal. 2008. Creat-
ing a parallel treebank of the old Indo-European
bible translations. In Proceedings of the Language
Technology for Cultural Heritage Data Workshop
(LaTeCH 2008), pages 27–34, Marrakech, Morocco,
June.

Odd Einar Haugen, Tone Merete Bruvik, Matthew
Driscoll, Karl G Johansson, Rune Kyrkjebø, and
Tarrin Wills. 2008. The Menota handbook: Guide-
lines for the electronic encoding of Medieval Nordic
primary sources.

Roland Hinterhölzl and Svetlana Petrova. 2009. In-
formation Structure and Language Change: New
Approaches to Word Order Variation in Germanic.
Mouton de Gruyter.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2007. Ex-
tended constituent-to-dependency conversion for
English. In Proceedings of the 16th Nordic Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics (NoDaLiDa-
2007), pages 105–112, Tartu, Estonia, May.

Anthony Kroch and Ann Taylor. 2000. The
Penn-Helsinki Parsed Corpus of Middle English
(PPCME2). Department of Linguistics, University
of Pennsylvania. CD-ROM.

Anthony Kroch, Beatrice Santorini, and Lauren Delfs.
2004. The Penn-Helsinki Parsed Corpus of Early
Modern English (PPCEME). Department of Lin-
guistics, University of Pennsylvania. CD-ROM.

Anthony Kroch, Beatrice Santorini, and Ariel Diertani.
2010. The Penn-Helsinki Parsed Corpus of Modern
British English (PPCMBE). Department of Linguis-
tics, University of Pennsylvania. CD-ROM.

Geoffrey Leech and Andrew Wilson. 1996. EAGLES
guidelines: Recommendations for the morphosyn-
tactic annotation of corpora.

Caitlin Light. 2013. Parsed Corpus of Early
New High German (PCENHG), v. 0.5. Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, http://enhgcorpus.
wikispaces.com/.

Sonja Linde and Roland Mittmann. 2013. Old German
Reference Corpus. Digitizing the knowledge of the
19th century. In Paul Bennett, Martin Durrell, Silke

30



Scheible, and Richard J. Whitt, editors, New Meth-
ods in Historical Corpus Linguistics = Korpuslin-
guistik und interdiziplinre Perspektiven auf Sprache
– Corpus linguistics and Interdisciplinary perspec-
tives on language (CLIP), volume 3 of Korpuslin-
guistik und interdiziplinre Perspektiven auf Sprache
– Corpus linguistics and Interdisciplinary perspec-
tives on language (CLIP), Tübingen. Narr.

Joakim Lundborg, Torsten Marek, Maël Mettler, and
Martin Volk. 2007. Using the Stockholm
TreeAligner. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop
on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT-2007),
pages 73–78.

John McCrae, Dennis Spohr, and Philipp Cimiano.
2011. Linking lexical resources and ontologies on
the semantic web with lemon. In The Semantic
Web: Research and Applications, pages 245–259.
Springer.

Roland Mittmann. 2013. Digitalisierung historischer
Glossare zur automatisierten Vorannotation von
Textkorpora am Beispiel des Altdeutschen. Journal
for Language Technology and Computational Lin-
guistics (JLCL), 27(2):39–52.

Graham Neubig, Taro Watanabe, Shinsuke Mori, and
Tatsuya Kawahara. 2012. Machine translation with-
out words through substring alignment. In Proc. of
the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL-2012), pages 165–174,
Jeju Island, Korea, July.

Joakim Nivre, Jens Nilsson, and Johan Hall. 2006. Tal-
banken05: A Swedish treebank with phrase struc-
ture and dependency annotation. In Proc. of the 5th
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC-2006), pages 1392–1395.

Sebastian Nordhoff and Harald Hammarström. 2011.
Glottolog/langdoc: Defining dialects, languages,
and language families as collections of resources. In
Proceedings of the First International Workshop on
Linked Science 2011 (LISC-2011).

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.

Antonio Pareja-Lora and Guadalupe Aguado de Cea.
2010. Ontology-based interoperation of linguistic
tools for an improved lemma annotation in Span-
ish. In Proc. of the 6th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2010),
Valetta, Malta, May.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. In Proc. of the 8th
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC-2012), pages 2089–2096, Is-
tanbul, Turkey.

Svetlana Petrova, Michael Solf, Julia Ritz, Christian
Chiarcos, and Amir Zeldes. 2009. Building and

using a richly annotated interlinear diachronic cor-
pus: The case of Old High German Tatian. TAL,
50(2):47–71.

Timothy Blaine Price. 2012. Multi-faceted alignment:
Toward automatic detection of textual similarity in
gospel-derived texts. In Proceedings of Historical
Corpora 2012, Frankfurt, Germany.

Philip Resnik, Mari Broman Olsen, and Mona Diab.
1997. Creating a parallel corpus from the book of
2000 tongues. In Proc. of the Text Encoding Initia-
tive 10th Anniversary User Conference (TEI-10).

Eirı́kur Rögnvaldsson, Anton Karl Ingason, Einar Freyr
Sigurdsson, and Joel Wallenberg. 2012. The Ice-
landic Parsed Historical Corpus (IcePaHC). In Proc.
of the 8th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2012), Istanbul,
Turkey, May.

Anne Schiller, Simone Teufel, Christine Stöckert, and
Christine Thielen. 1999. Guidelines für das Tagging
deutscher Textcorpora mit STTS. Technical report,
Universitäten Stuttgart und Tübingen.

Wojciech Skut, Brigitte Krenn, Thorsten Brants, and
Hans Uszkoreit. 1997. An annotation scheme for
free word order languages. In Proc. of the 5th Con-
ference on Applied Natural Language Processing,
pages 88–95.

Kathrin Spreyer and Jonas Kuhn. 2009. Data-driven
dependency parsing of new languages using incom-
plete and noisy training data. In Proc. of the
13th Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL-2009), pages 12–20, Boul-
der, CO, June.

Ann Taylor, Mitchell Marcus, and Beatrice Santorini.
2003a. The Penn Treebank: An overview. In Anne
Abeill, editor, Treebanks, pages 5–22. Springer,
Dordrecht.

Ann Taylor, Anthony Warner, Susan Pintzuk, and
Frank Beths. 2003b. The York-Toronto-Helsinki
parsed corpus of Old English prose.

Heike Telljohann, Erhard W Hinrichs, Sandra Kübler,
Heike Zinsmeister, and Kathrin Beck. 2003. Style-
book for the Tübingen treebank of written German
(TüBa-D/Z). Technical report, Seminar für Sprach-
wissenschaft, Universität Tübingen, Germany.

31


