



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and J D Pawar. Proc. of the 11th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 186–195,
Goa, India. December 2014. c©2014 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Translation of TO infinitives in Anusaaraka Platform:
an English Hindi MT system

Akshar Bharati, Sukhada, Soma Paul
Language Technology Research Center

International Institute of Information Technology
Hyderabad, India

sukhada@research.iiit.ac.in
soma@iiit.ac.in

Abstract
In this paper, we study the infinitive TO
constructions of English which can be
variedly translated into Hindi. We ob-
serve that there can be different equiva-
lents of infinitive TO into Hindi. Fac-
tors such as numerous semantic variants
in translated equivalents and the syntac-
tic complexity of corresponding English
expressions of infinitive TO cause great
difficulties in the English-Hindi transla-
tion. We systematically analyze and de-
scribe the phenomenon and propose trans-
lation rules for the conversion of English
infinitive TO into Hindi. The rules have
been implemented in the Anusaaraka Plat-
form, an open source English-Hindi Ma-
chine Translation tool. The problem has
been treated as translation disambiguation
of the infinitive TO. We examine contexts
of infinitive TO when it occurs as a depen-
dent of various kinds of main verbs and at-
tempt to discover clues for different trans-
lations into Hindi. We achieved a trans-
lation accuracy of over 80%. The experi-
ments show that Anusaaraka gives signifi-
cant improvement in translation quality of
infinitive TO over Google Translator and
Anuvad MT systems.

1 Introduction

We study the infinitive TO constructions of En-
glish which can be variedly translated into Hindi.
The translation of infinitive TO in “TO verb” con-
structions is -nā form of the verb which is a
kr. danta (participial) form in Hindi, as illustrated
in (1) and (2).

(1) I want to go.
maim. cāha-tā1 hūm. jā-nā

1Following conventions for writing gloss are followed in

maim. jā-nā cāha-tā hūm.
(2) I prefer to be in the woods alone.

maim. pasanda karatā hūm. raha-nā
jam. gala mem. akelā
maim. akelā jam. gala mem. rahanā pasanda
karatā hūm.

However we observe that there can be different
equivalents of infinitive TO into Hindi. Factors
such as numerous semantic variants in translated
equivalents and the syntactic complexity of cor-
responding English expressions of infinitive TO
cause great difficulties in English-Hindi trans-
lation. Therefore an English-Hindi translation
software such as Google Translator2 gives non-
satisfactory translations and another MT system
Anuvad3 gives poor translations of infinitive TO.

We systematically analyze and describe the
problem and propose translation rules for the con-
version of English infinitive TO into Hindi. The
rules have been implemented in Anusaaraka Plat-
form4, an open source English-Hindi Machine
Translation tool. The problem has been treated as
word translation disambiguation (WTD) of the in-
finitive TO.

This paper examines the behavior of the main
verb on which the infinitive TO is a dependent and
attempts to discover clues for translation varia-
tions in Hindi. We discover some interesting clues
for translation as discussed below:

1. Structural Clue: The raising, exceptional case
marking (ECM), control verbs license infini-
tive TO as their dependents. Translation of
infinitives in the context of these type of verbs

this paper: ’-’ between morph boundary; ’ ’ between word
boundary in case of local word grouping. TO has been con-
sistently glossed as -nā. In actual translation layer (3rd layer)
the translation of infinitive TO construction has been given.

2http://translate.google.com
3http://nlp.cdacmumbai.in:8081/anuvad/
4http://anusaaraka.iiit.ac.in/186



systematically vary. English also uses pe-
riphrastic compounds with the verb ‘get’ in
the causative sense when we want “to con-
vince someone or trick someone into do-
ing something” (Section 5 discusses all these
verb types in detail).

2. Translation Clue: The translation of main
verbs determines the translation of its TO in-
finitival dependent. This presents an impor-
tant case that shows how the translation of the
target language determines the information
flow in that language. For example, the En-
glish verb want in I want to go home can have
three translation equivalents: (i) cāhanā, (ii)
icchā karanā and (iii) icchā rakhanā. If want
is translated as cāhanā in Hindi then infinitive
TO translates into -nā, with other two trans-
lations it translates into -ne kā5, as shown
in (3).

(3) I want to go home.
maim. ghara jā-nā cāhatā hūm.
maim. ghara jāne kı̄ icchā rakhatā
hūm.
maim. ghara jāne kı̄ icchā karatā hūm.

3. Verb specific semantic Clue: The -nā form in
Hindi takes different postpositions such as -
ne kā, -ne mem. , -ne se and so on. We consider
that such variation is typically dependent on
the semantics of source language verbs which
might be sometimes difficult to formalize in
terms of rules or conditions.

This paper explores the possibilities of identify-
ing contexts that will help us predict the translation
of infinitive TO. For the above mentioned cases we
have created rules for translation disambiguation.
We understand that there are cases where it is dif-
ficult to determine a specific rule for disambigua-
tion because either we do not discover the context
or it is difficult to translate the contextual clue into
a rule that can be implemented. These cases can
be handled through case-based reasoning where a
deterministic rule is not available. Thus the WTD
module proposed in this paper follows a hybrid
approach. We have made an attempt to find out
structural and semantic clues in the source lan-
guage that can help us to predict translation vari-
ations. We have generated an output on the basis

5In case the following word is a feminine, the postposition
kā takes feminine gender and becomes kı̄.

of the rules we framed. We manaually evaluated
100 such test sentences and achieved 80% accu-
racy. In comparision with Google Translator and
Anuvad, we achieved significant improvement in
translation.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2
presents a brief review of word translation dis-
ambiguation. Section 3 gives an overview of
the Anusaaraka system which has been used as a
translation platform for implementing the transla-
tion rules. Section 4 briefly presents insights from
Sanskrit grammar for the interpretation of infini-
tive TO. The insights have motivated the design of
our rules. Section 5 illustrates different contexts
where TO construction occur and also presents the
translation equivalents in Hindi. Section 6 delib-
erates on our approach in handling infinitive TO
Finally Section 7 presents the results.

2 Related Work

Earlier WSD based approaches like the one used
in (Chan et al., 2007) assumed that different senses
of a word in a source language may have differ-
ent translations in the target language, depending
on the particular meaning of the word in context.
Hence, the assumption is that in resolving sense
ambiguity on the source side, a WSD system will
be able to help an MT system to determine the
correct translation of an ambiguous word. How-
ever, in the context of translation, word sense dis-
ambiguation amounts to selecting the correct tar-
get translation which is termed as word transla-
tion disambiguation (WTD). This aims to select
the best translation(s) given a source word in a
context and from a set of target candidates.

In the current predominant paradigm for data
driven phrase based statistical machine translation,
the task of WTD is not explicitly addressed. In-
stead the influence of context on word translation
probabilities is implicitly encoded in the model
both in the phrasal translation pairs learned from
parallel texts and stored in the phrase translation
table and in the target language model (Bungum
and Gambäck, 2011). The assumption is that both
phrase table and n-gram language model in a way
capture collocation and local dependencies and
thus helps to disambiguate a possible translation
candidate. (Chan et al., 2007) have made an effort
to integrate a state-of-the-art WSD system into a
state-of-the-art hierarchical phrase-based MT sys-
tem, Hiero. They show that integrating a WSD187



system improves the performance of a state-of-
the-art statistical MT system on an actual trans-
lation task. For their WSD classifier they select
a window of three words (w−1, w, w+1), where
w is the word to be disambiguated. One poten-
tial problem of such approach is that the amount
of context taken into account is rather small. It
is clear that WTD often depends on cues from a
wider textual context, for instance, elsewhere in
the same sentence, paragraph of the document as
a whole. This is beyond the scope of most phrase-
based MT approaches which work with relatively
small phrases.

(Li and Li, 2004) propose a bilingual bootstrap-
ping (BB) approach to disambiguate words to be
translated. This approach does not require parallel
corpora. Instead they make use of a small amount
of classified data and a large amount of unclas-
sified data in both the source and the target lan-
guage in translation. It repeatedly constructs clas-
sifiers by classifying data in each of the languages
and by exchanging information regarding the clas-
sified data between the two languages (Li and Li,
2004).

(Bharati et al., 2005) have made an attempt
to disambiguate English infinitive TO from the
MT perspective. They have devised rules for
translating infinitive TO in Hindi. They analyze
the phenomena which are discussed in Pān. ini’s
As.t.ādhyaı̄ for Sanskrit language. They missed the
cases where a verb along with the dependent “TO
VERB” translates into one verb unit in target lan-
guage, such as causativization (see Section 5.4)
and the cases where the “infinitive TO” marks sub-
junctive mood in TL as shown in “Rule 6” in Sec-
tion 6.2.

3 Anusaaraka as an MT platform

Anusaaraka, a machine translation cum language
accessor system, is a unique approach to develop
machine translation system based on the insights
of information dynamics from Paninian Grammar
Formalism. The major goals of the system as
stated in (Chaudhury et al., 2010) are the follow-
ing:

• Reduce the language barrier by felicitating
access from one language to others.

• Demonstrate the practical usability of the In-
dian traditional grammatical system in the
modern context.

Figure 1: Anusaaraka interface showing output for
the sentence He seems to be intelligent.

• Provide a free and open source machine
translation platform for Indian language.

The Anusaaraka system prefers faithful represen-
tation of information to naturalness of translation
because it aims at no loss of information. In order
to achieve that it has designed a special graphical
interface as shown in Fig. 1:

The layered output represented by this interface
provides an access to all the stages of translation
making the whole process transparent. For in-
stance the output in Fig. 1 shows that the infini-
tival verb group to be can be translated as honā in
isolation as it is clear in the initial layer. But it
is dropped in the final Hindi output as shown in
the final layers. Thus Anusaaraka provides a “Ro-
bust Fall Back Mechanism” which ensures a safety
net by providing a “padasutra layer6 ”, which is
a word to word translation represented in special
formulatic form, representing various senses of the
source language word. Users get opportunity to
select one of the senses and continue reading the
source text with better comprehension.

One of the unique ideas of Anusaaraka system
is to utilize human intervention from the earlier
stage of development of the system. It talks about
a need for sharing the load between man and ma-
chine. Machines are equipped with large memory
storage, they can “remember” large quantities of
information. Humans are good at interpretation.

4 Insights from Sanskrit Grammar

Most of the infinitive TO verb constructions in
English correspond to the kr. t (non-finite) suffix,
tumun (tum) in Sanskrit. According to Sanskrit
grammar, a word ending in a kr. t affix, where the
kr. t affix ends in the letter m, is designated as
an avyaya (indeclinable) (A. 1-1-39). Patanjali

6The concept of padasutra assumes that polysemous
words have a ”core meaning“ and other meanings are natu-
ral extension of that meaning. In Anusaaraka, an attempt is
made to relate all these meanings and show their relationship
by means of a formula. This formula is termed as padasutra.188



says the meaning of the affix tumun is bhāva (ac-
tion)7 (Patanjali, 1975).

Another law avyayakr. to bhaāve says that the kr. t
affixes which are also avyayas denote bhāva (ac-
tion). In English and Hindi bhāva is denoted by to
and -nā affixes respectively. Ex.
Eng: ‘to go’, ‘to read’, ‘to eat’, ‘to dance’, ‘to be’,
‘to feed’ etc.
Hnd: ‘jānā’, ‘padh. anā’, ‘khānā’, ‘nācanā’,
‘honā’, ‘khilānā’ etc.
The ‘infinitive TO’ forms of a verb in English
seem to be indeclinable as these forms do not take
any affixes further. In Hindi, though the affix de-
notes bhāva, it is not indeclinable. Hence the
words ending in the affix -nā can take zero or some
postposition like ‘kā’, ‘ke liye’ etc. So, the ‘to’ in
Hindi is translated as ‘-nā *’ where ‘*’ denotes
zero or a postposition like kā, se, mem. , ke liye etc.

5 Contexts of infinitive TO and their
translation equivalents in Hindi

We have focused on the following constructions
where infinitive TO occurs: the context of raising,
control (subject control and object control) and
ECM verbs in English. The examples of each case
are illustrated below with their Hindi equivalents.
We attempt to identify contexts that might account
for the translation variations of these constructions
into Hindi. Both raising and control verbs take
an infinitival complement with ‘TO’, however they
differ in what they take as their subject.

5.1 Raising verbs

Raising verbs are those verbs whose subject is not
its logical subject. We notice that the infinitive TO
is represented in Hindi in two different ways de-
pending on what the infinitive verb is. If the infini-
tive verb is any verb other than copula, it occurs in
its participial form as exemplified below in (4) and
(5):

(4) The girl appeared to enjoy the film.
lar.akı̄{fem} laga{3,pt} ānanda ut.hā-
nā{fem} philma
lar.akı̄ philma kā ānanda ut.hātı̄ huı̄ lagı̄

(5) The boy seems to know everything.
lar.akā laga{3,pr} jāna-nā{masc} saba-
kucha
lar.akā saba-kucha jānatā huā lagatā hai

7tumarthas̀cha kah. ? bhāvah. . What is the meaning of the
words that end in tumun affix? It is bhāvah. (action) (3.4.26.2)

It is interesting to note that the Hindi equiva-
lent expression corresponding to the infinitive TO
(as ānanda ut.hānā in (4) agrees with the subject
(lar.akı̄) of the sentence. We consider this non-
finite form to be a kr. danta vis̀es. an. a (adjectival par-
ticipial) of the subject lar. akı̄. Given this observa-
tion, we propose to make a dependency represen-
tation of the above case as shown in Fig. 2:

lar.akı̄ philma kā ānanda ut.hātı̄ huı̄ lagı̄

abhihita

kr.danta vis̀es.an. a

Figure 2: Dependency tree of example (4)

The tree in Fig. 2 represents information better
than the one in Fig. 3, which does not account for
the feminine marking on kr. danta vis̀es. an. a:

lar.akı̄ philma kā ānanda ut.hātı̄ huı̄ lagı̄

abhihita

kr.danta vis̀es.an. a

Figure 3: Dependency tree of example (4)

The analysis represented by Fig. 2 correctly pre-
dicts the translation equivalent in Hindi and thus
can be used as a clue for determining the Hindi
equivalents of the English raising verbs ‘seem’ and
‘appear’.

When the infinitive TO takes the verb ‘be’, we
note that the infinitives are consistently dropped in
Hindi as shown below:

(6) The car proved to be expensive.
gār.ı̄ nikala{3,pt} ho-nā mahangı̄
gār.ı̄ mahangı̄ nikalı̄

(7) Ram turned out to be a smart guy.
rāma nikala{3,pt} ho-nā eka buddhimāna
lar.akā
rāma eka buddhimāna lar.akā nikalā

(8) Higher floors tend to be hotter.
jyādā um. cı̄ manjila{pl} jā{3,pr} ho-nā
garama{comp degree}
jyādā um. cı̄ manjilem. jyādā garama hotı̄
haim.189



(9) The boy seems to be intelligent.
lar.akā laga{3,pr} ho-nā buddhimāna
lar.akā buddhimāna lagatā hai

The syntactic analysis of these sentences are same
as the one given in Fig. 4. For example, the trans-
lation equivalent of the sentences from (6)-(9) will
have the following dependency analysis:

gār.ı̄ mahangı̄ nikalı̄

abhihita

kr.danta vis̀es.an. a

Figure 4: Dependency tree of example (6)

Aspectual and modal verbs of English have also
been treated as raising verbs (Taylor, 2006). The
verbs with infinitive TO are consistently translated
into -nā form in Hindi as shown below:

(10) Mohan began to feel useless.
mohana s̀uru kara{3,pt}mahasusa kara-
nā bekāra
mohana ne bekāra mahasūsa karanā
s̀uru kiyā

(11) She will continue to do the work.
vaha jārı̄ rakha{3,ft,fem} kara-nā kāma
vaha kāma karanā jārı̄ rakhegı̄

(12) This ought to be a very good moment for
him.
yaha cāhiye ho-nā eka bahuta acchā
ks.an. a liye usake
yaha usake liye eka bahuta acchā ks.an. a
honā cāhiye

5.2 Control verbs

Control verbs are the verbs which share one of its
arguments with that of the infinitive TO argument.
When the subject is shared, those verbs are called
subject control verbs. We note that the translation
of infinitive TO in the context of subject control
verb is always into -nā kr. danta form. However,
different postpositions can occur with the kr.danta
form depending on the semantics of the main verb
of which the infinitive TO is an object:

(13) He forgot to tell you something.
vaha bhūla jā{3,pt} batā-nā āpako kucha
vaha āpako kucha batānā bhūla gayā

(14) I hate to say this.
maim. nāpasanda kara{3,pr} kaha-nā
yaha
maim. yaha kahanā nāpasanda karatā hūm.

(15) He is presently attempting to do the trans-
lation work.
vaha rahā hai abhı̄ prayāsa kara kara-nā
anuvāda kārya
vaha abhı̄ anuvāda kārya karane kā
prayāsa kara rahā hai

(16) He decided to take a nap on the sofa.
usane phaisalā kara{3,pt} le-nā jhapakı̄
para sophā
usane sophe para jhapkı̄ lene kā phaisalā
kiyā

(17) He managed to get home on Sunday
vaha kāmayāba raha{3,pt} ā-nā ghara
para ravivāra
vaha ravivāra ko ghara āne mem.
kāmayāba rahā

(18) They failed to make remarkable discov-
eries.
ve asaphala raha{3,pt,pl} kara-nā
ullekhanı̄ya khoja
ve ullekhanı̄ya khoja karane mem.
asaphala rahe

The Hindi correspondence of the infinitive TO
in (13) and (14) is kr.danta form -nā; this form
occurs in its s.as.t.hı̄ (6th case maker) variant (-ne8

kā) in (15) and (16) and saptamı̄ (7th case marker)
variant (-ne mem. ) in (17) and (18).

When the infinitive TO is not an argument of the
subject control verbs, it conveys a sense of “pur-
pose”. In Hindi the postposition ke liye expresses
the semantics of purpose.

(19) She moved to stand behind Fiona.
vaha kadama badhā{3,pt} khadā ho-nā
pı̄che Phionā
usane Phionā ke pı̄che khadā hone ke
liye kadama bar.hāye

(20) Dad is negotiating to sell his property.
pitā bātacı̄ta kara{3,pr cont} beca-nā
vaha{gen,fem} sampatti
pitā usakı̄ sampatti becane ke liye
bātacı̄ta kara rahe haim.

8“-ne” is the oblique form of the suffix -nā which appears
when it is followed by postpositions.190



(21) The staff bribed police to get information
on politicians.
karmacāri{pl} rishvata de{3,pt}
pulisa ko prāpta kara-nā sūcanā
para rājanı̄tijñom.
karmacāriyom. ne rājanı̄tijñom. para
sūcanā prāpta karane ke liye pulisa ko
ris̀vata dı̄

In case of object control verb the object of the
main verb and the subject of the embedded in-
finitive TO verb are co-indexed. We note that the
Hindi equivalent of infinitive TO in the context of
object control verb is mainly -ne ke liye as exem-
plified below:

(22) We ask students to write something
about themselves.
hama kaha{3,pr} vidyārthiyom. likha-nā
kucha bāre mem. khuda
hama vidyārthiyom. se khuda ke bāre
mem. kucha likha-ne ke liye kaha-
te haim.

(23) New rules push members to share more
information about themselves.
naye niyama{pl} bādhya kara{3,pr,pl}
sadasya-pl sām. jhā kara-nā aura adhika
jānakārı̄ bāre mem. khuda
naye niyama sadasyom. ko khuda ke
bāre mem. aura adhika jānakārı̄ sām. jhā
karane ke liye bādhya karate haim.

We understand from the aforementioned discus-
sion that infinitive TO is translated into kr.danta
form in Hindi. It appears that the selection of post-
positions in different contexts depends on the se-
mantics of the control verb. Similar observation is
made in (Bharati et al., 2005).

5.3 Exceptional Case Marking verbs

In English, there are verbs which assign accusative
case to nouns which are not its argument but
the argument of the embedded infinitive TO con-
structions. Such constructions are very differently
translated in Hindi as shown below:

(24) I want the students to go.
maim. cāha{1,pr} vidyārthı̄ jā-nā
mem. cāhatā hum. ki vidyārthı̄ jāyem.

(25) We need volunteers to serve as medical
assistants.
hama ko jarurata hai svayam. sevaka

sevā kara-nā ke rūpa me aus.adhı̄y
sahāyaka
hamem

¯
jarurata hai kı̄ svayam. sevaka

aus.adhı̄ya sahāyaka ke rūpa me sevā
karem. .

In (24) and (25), the infinitive TO is translated as
a clause with subjunctive form of the verb. How-
ever we notice that ECM verbs can be variedly
translated in Hindi for which no immediate con-
textual clue is available.

5.4 Causative periphrastic compound

English causative construction is periphrastic in
nature where the grammatical meaning is dis-
tributed among more than one words. One
causative construction in English uses ‘get’ as ex-
emplified below:

(26) They got me to talk to the police.
ve{nom} prāptā kara{3,pt} maim. {acc}
bāta kara-nā se - pulisa
unhom. ne merı̄ pulisa se bāta karavāyı̄

(27) I got the mechanic to check the brakes of
my car.
mem. prāpta kara{3,pt} kārı̄gara
jām. ca kara-nā breka kā merı̄ kāra
maim. ne kārı̄gara se merı̄ kāra ke breka kı̄
jām. ca karavāyı̄

This form of causative construction is used
when we want to convince someone or trick some-
one into doing something. Such construction is
systematically translated into causative form of the
embedded verb with the drop of equivalent of ‘get’
in Hindi.

6 Our Approach to WTD

We have distributed the task of WTD in two
parts in consonance with the observation made
in (Kulkarni, 2003) in the context of design and
development of Anusaaraka system:

1. A need to share load between man and ma-
chine.

2. Distinguish reliable knowledge from heuris-
tics.

We often come across ambiguous cases where
it is difficult to state the choice of a particular tar-
get translation for a word in terms of certain con-
ditions from the context. This is so because the191



information is not easily logically available in the
context, but is rather distributed hence difficult to
tap through certain conditions. Therefore, we pro-
pose to handle the WTD task of infinitive TO at
two levels:

1. Rule based approach

2. Case based reasoning approach

1. Rule based approach: In order to handle logi-
cal type of cases, linguistic knowledge is rep-
resented in terms of rules. The discussion
in Section 5 guides us to formulate rules and
implement them. When number of rules in-
crease, maintenance of rules becomes impor-
tant in the sense that no rule should clash with
any other rule and the syntactic format of the
rules should be correct. The use of expert
system CLIPS9 for the rule writing makes the
task simple. While making the rules, the de-
veloper is also requested to give at least one
example English sentence with its translation
for which the rule is written. Such an effort
also helps in growing the parallel corpora.

2. Case based reasoning approach: We have
identified cases where it is difficult to iden-
tify context which can be used as conditions
in the rules. For example, the discussion in
Section 5 illustrates that -nā kr.danta form oc-
curs with different postpositions such as -ne
kā, -ne mem. , -ne ke liye and so on while trans-
lating infinitive TO in the context of control
verbs the semantics of individual verbs might
give us clue for selecting the right postposi-
tion in a given case. But specifying that se-
mantics in concrete fact is not easy. Also, we
noted that the infinitive TO in the context of
ECM verbs can be translated in various ways.
For such cases, we have decided to adopt the
case based reasoning option. We will develop
translation copora for such cases and use ma-
chine learning technique for learning the cor-
rect translation automatically. However, fur-
ther discussion on this approach is beyond the
scope of this paper.

6.1 Data Preparation
We have taken the list of ECM, control and rais-
ing verbs from Treebank IIa Guidelines10. The

9http://clipsrules.sourceforge.net/
10Treebank IIa is the annotation style used in the English

Treebank being created as part of the OntoNotes Project

guidelines have 31 ECM, 34 raising verbs, 99 sub-
ject control verbs, 52 object control verbs and 34
raising verbs. We extracted sentences for these
verbs from COCA11 (Zhou and McKinley, 2005).
Then the sentences were simplified as and when
required and were manually translated into Hindi.
We observed the patterns of translation from these
translated pairs of sentences.

6.2 Formulation of Rules

Rule 1. The ‘to’ in ‘infinitive TO’ constructions
translates into nā in Hindi if it occurs as an infini-
tival predicate of the following verbs when they
have a PRO embedded subject, (with an embed-
ded subject they will follow “Rule 6”): apt, be-
gin, choose, continue, end, fail, figure, forget, hap-
pen, hate, keep, learn, like, love, need, ought, pre-
fer, prove, quit, remain, start, stop, tend, want and
wind. Ex.

(28) a. Jennifer began to take precautions.
Jeniphar s̀uru kara{3,pt} barata-nā
sāvadhanı̄{fem}
Jeniphar ne sāvadhanı̄ baratanā
s̀uru kiyā

b. He chose to go into teaching.
vaha{masc} cuna{3,pt} jā-nā mem.
s̀iks.an. a
usane s̀iks.an. a mem. jā-nā cunā

Rule 2. If the ‘infinitive TO’ constructions are ar-
guments of the verbs ‘appear’ or ‘seem’ then ‘to’
translates into ‘verb + -tā huā’ in Hindi. Ex.

(29) a. It appears to move.
yaha laga{3,pr} cala-nā
yaha calatā huā lagatā hai

b. She appeared to enjoy it.
vaha{3,fem} laga{3,pt,fem}
ānanda ut.hā-nā yaha{acc}
vaha isakā ānanda ut.hātı̄ huı̄ lagı̄

Rule 3. If “infinitive TO” verb is an argument of
a verb that translates into a conjunct verb and the
first part of the verb is a noun as in phaisalā kara,

(DARPA GALE). It is based on the original Penn Treebank II
Style (Taylor, 2006). http://www-users.york.ac.
uk/˜lang22/TB2a_Guidelines.htm

11COCA (Corpus of Contemporary American English) is
the largest freely-available corpus of English. It contains
more than 450 million words of text and is equally divided
among spoken, fiction, popular magazines, newspapers, and
academic texts. It allows limit searches by frequency and
compare the frequency of words, phrases, and grammatical
constructions. http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/192



nis̀caya kara, ānanda ut.hā, ās̀ā kara, paravāha
kara, laks. ya rakha, anumati de etc. in Hindi then
it is translated as ‘-ne kā’. Ex.

(30) a. I decided to go ahead.
maim. phaisalā kara 3,pt{jā-nā āge
maim. ne āge jāne kā phaisalā kiyā

b. We have opted to take the research.
hama{1,pl} phaisalā le le-nā -
s̀odhakārya
hamane s̀odhakārya lene kā phaisalā
liyā hai

Exception to this rule:

(31) She declined to comment.
vaha{1,sg,fem}manā kara tippan. ı̄ kara-
nā
usane tippan. ı̄ karane se manā kiyā

Rule 4.: If the ‘infinitive TO’ constructions are ‘to
BE’ where ‘BE’ occurs as a ‘copula’ verb then ‘to
BE’ is dropped while translating it into Hindi. Ex.

(32) a. The car proved to be expensive.
- kāra sābita ho{3,pl} ho-nā
maham. gā{fem}
kāra maham. gı̄ sābita huı̄

b. The number of inputs is assumed to
be two.
- sam. khyā kā{fem} inaputa hai
māna{1,sg,passive} ho-nā do
inaputa kı̄ sam. khyā do mānı̄ gayı̄ hai

Rule 5.: English uses MAKE, HAVE and GET
verbs for causativization, whereas Hindi uses -ā
and -vā suffixes to the root to represent direct and
indirect causation respectively (Ramchand, 2008).
The pattern GET + animate + to + Verb marks
causatives in English. For example in (33-a) the
main verb ‘got’ and to-infinitive ‘to paint’ form a
causative verb. Hence we group these verbs to-
gether and causativize them in Hindi.

(33) a. I got the boy to paint my house.
maim. {nom} prāpta kara{pt} -
ladakā ram. ga-nā merā ghara
maine ladake se merā ghara
ram. gavāyā

b. They got me to talk to the police.
ve{nom} prāpta kara{pt} merı̄ bāta
kara-nā se - pulisa
unhom. ne pulisa se merı̄ bāta
karavāı̄

Rule 6. The ‘TO infinitive dependent’ of some
verbs gets transferred into subjunctive clause in
Hindi. Some verbs in this category are command,
demand, insist, order, recommend, suggest, want
and wish.

(34) I want him to go.
*maim. usako jānā cāhatā hūm.
*maim. usakā jānā cāhatā hūm.
maim. cāhatā hūm. ki vaha jāye

Rule 7. By default the ‘infinitive TO’ construc-
tions translate into ‘verb + -ne ke liye’ in Hindi.
Ex.

(35) a. 7000 people turned out to see him.
7000 loga ā{3,pl,pt} - dekha-nā use
7000 loga use dekhane ke liye āye.

b. You were elected to do something.
āpa the cuna{2,pt} kara-nā kucha
āpa kucha karane ke liye cune gaye
the

7 Results and Error Analysis

We randomly picked 100 sentences from COCA
for testing the rules. We ran three translation sys-
tems Anusaaraka, Google and Anuvad on these
100 test sentences. Three evaluators evaluated the
output of the systems for their accuracy. Accuracy
was measured on a scale of 0-2; 0 being incom-
prehensible, 2 being comprehensible and 1 com-
prehensible with some effort. Generally when the
output is not grammatical but the reader can com-
prehend the meaning from the output, the score 1
was given for such cases. Table 1 reports the re-
sults.

From Table 1, we observe that the performance
of Anusaaraka is distinctly better than the two
other systems.

Anusaaraka Google Anuvad
Correct

80 70 46
Translation
Incorrect

20 30 54
Translation
Accuracy 80% 70% 46%

Table 1: Anusaaraka accuracy results compared
with other MT systems.

We also compared the output of Anusaaraka
with revised rules with the performance of the
older version of Anusaaraka where the default193



translation of TO infinitive was given as -ne ke
liye. We observed a distinct improvement of the
system when we implemented our rules as shown
in Table 2:

Without With
Formulated Formulated

Rules Rules
Correct

50 80
Translation
Incorrect

50 20
Translation
Accuracy 50% 80%

Table 2: Anusaaraka accuracy results before and
after application of the to-infinitive rules.

We categorized the verbs which the TO infini-
tive is a dependent of into different verb types and
examined the performance of Anusaaraka for each
type of verb class.

Verb Type Total Correct Accuracy
Aspectual 12 9 75%
Causative 4 4 100%

ECM 13 12 92%
Object control 25 20 80%

Raising 9 4 44%
Subject control 37 31 83%

Table 3: Accuracy results for various type of verbs
present in the test set.

We observe from Table 3 that the TO infinitive
with Raising type of verbs have mostly been in-
correctly translated. The errors in various types of
verb translations can be classified as follows:

1. Parser Error: Sometimes, the ‘TO’ is tagged
as preposition and the parser inadvertently
considers the infinitive TO as preposition
and as a consequence the whole parse goes
wrong. For example, infinitive TO (in bold
characters) has been wrongly projected as a
prepositional phrase (PP) for the following
sentence: I am going to direct people to read
your writings at our website.

2. For rule 3, it is important that our conjunct
verb list be exhaustive. If a conjunct verb is
not identified while translation, this rule will
not fire and the translation of TO infinitive
will be incorrect. For example, in (36), the

word ‘advise’ is translated as sujhāva denā
in Hindi. Since we do not have that conjunct
verb present in the list, hence, the TO infini-
tive “to pay” was translated as dhyāna de-ne
ke liye while it should have been translated as
dhyāna de-ne kā:

(36) I have advised them to pay attention
to their intuition.
maim. sujhāva de{1,pt} unako
dhyāna de-nā apane antarjñāna ko
maim. ne unako apane antarjñāna kı̄
ora dhyāna dene kā sujhāva diyā

3. Sometimes, a specific verb of a verb class has
a very different behavior and therefore they
cannot be handled with rules. For example
the raising verb ‘happen’ with its dependent
TO infinitive is translated into different con-
structions into Hindi such as:

(37) a. He happened to see the article.
vaha ho{pt} dekh-nā - lekha
usakı̄ lekha para najara padı̄

b. I happened to go to the market
one Saturday.
meim. ho{pt} jā-nā ko - bājāra
eka s̀anivāra
merā eka s̀anivāra ko bājāra
jānā huā

c. I happen to disagree with my
husband on a lot of issues.
meim. ho{1,pr} matab-
heda ho-nā ke sātha merā
pati para bahuta sāre vis.ayom.
para
merā mere pati ke sātha bahuta
sāre vis.ayom. para matabheda
rahatā hai

We observe that the word ‘happen’ is not a
straightforward case to translate into Hindi.
At present, our system does not handle ‘hap-
pen to V’ constructions.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, we presented the design and imple-
mentation of a resource namely WTD rules for
disambiguating English infinitive TO in the con-
text of English-Hindi machine translation. The re-
sults are promising and show that with the use of194



contextual knowledge, machine can produce satis-
factory translation of English ‘infinitive TO’ in the
context of raising, control, ECM and periphrastic
causative constructions. Since availability of these
constructions in parallel copora is not always pos-
sible, hence, we chose to utilize contextual trans-
lation and semantic clues for writing WTD rules.
However, we also recognize cases where contex-
tual clue is not available. Thus the method of
WTD in this system respects the concept of shar-
ing the work load between man and machine. As
future work, we will create parallel corpora for
such cases for case base reasoning.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Prof. Vineet Chaitanya,
Dr. Dipti Misra Sharma and Dr. Aditi Mukherjee
for having useful discussions on various aspacts
of the subject. We also thank Banasthali Vidyap-
ith students, especially Ayushi Agarwal, Shivani
Pathak, Anshika Sharma and Prajya Jha for evalu-
ating the test output.

References
Akshar Bharati, R Vaishnavi Rao, and AP Tirupati.

2005. WSD of To-Infinitive into Hindi: An Infor-
mation Based Approach.

Erwin Marsi André Lynum Lars Bungum and Björn
Gambäck. 2011. Word Translation Disambiguation
without Parallel Texts. LIHMT 2011, page 66.

Yee Seng Chan, Hwee Tou Ng, and David Chi-
ang. 2007. Word sense disambiguation im-
proves statistical machine translation. In Annual
Meeting-Association for Computational Linguistics,
volume 45, page 33. Citeseer.

Sriram Chaudhury, Ankitha Rao, and Dipti M Sharma.
2010. Anusaaraka: An expert system based machine
translation system. In Natural Language Processing
and Knowledge Engineering (NLP-KE), 2010 Inter-
national Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE.

Amba P Kulkarni. 2003. Design and Architecture of
Anusaaraka-An Approach to Machine Translation.
Volume, 1:Q4.

Hang Li and Cong Li. 2004. Word translation disam-
biguation using bilingual bootstrapping. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 30(1):1–22.

Patanjali. 1975. Patanjali’s Vyakarana mahabhasya
: with English translation and notes. Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute.

Gillian Catriona Ramchand. 2008. Verb meaning and
the lexicon: A first phase syntax, volume 116. Cam-
bridge University Press.

Ann Taylor. 2006. Treebank 2a guidelines.

Zhinan Zhou and Philip K. McKinley. 2005. COCA:
A Contract-Based Infrastructure for Collaborative
Quality-of-Service Adaptation. Technical report,
July.

195


