



















































From Syntax to Semantics. First Steps Towards Tectogrammatical Annotation of Latin


Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH) @ EACL 2014, pages 100–109,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

From Syntax to Semantics. First Steps Towards Tectogrammatical 

Annotation of Latin 

 

 

Marco Passarotti 
CIRCSE Research Centre 

Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore 
Largo Gemelli, 1 – 20123 Milan, Italy 
marco.passarotti@unicatt.it 

 

  

 

Abstract 

Assuming that collaboration between 
theoretical and computational linguistics is 
essential in projects aimed at developing 
language resources like annotated corpora, this 
paper presents the first steps of the semantic 
annotation of the Index Thomisticus Treebank, 
a dependency-based treebank of Medieval 
Latin. The semantic layer of annotation of the 
treebank is detailed and the theoretical 
framework supporting the annotation style is 
explained and motivated. 

1 Introduction 

Started in 1949 by father Roberto Busa SJ, the 
Index Thomisticus (IT; Busa, 1974-1980) has 
represented a groundbreaking project that laid 
the foundations of computational linguistics and 
literary computing. The IT is a morphologically 
tagged and lemmatized corpus of Medieval Latin 
containing the opera omnia of Thomas Aquinas 
(118 texts), as well as 61 texts by other authors 
related to Thomas, for a total of around 11 
million tokens. 

The Index Thomisticus Treebank (IT-TB: 
http://itreebank.marginalia.it) is the syntactically 
annotated portion of the IT. Presently, the IT-TB 
includes around 220,000 nodes (approximately, 
12,000 sentences). 

The project of the IT-TB is now entering a 
new phase aimed at enhancing the available 
syntactic annotation with semantic metadata. 
Starting such a task needs to choose a theoretical 
approach and framework that supports the 
annotation style. Indeed, performing linguistic 
annotation of a textual corpus should be strictly 
connected to fundamental issues in theoretical 
linguistics in a kind of virtuous circle. On its 
side, theoretical linguistics serves as the 
necessary backbone for solid annotation 
guidelines; no theory-neutral representation of a 
sentence is possible, since every representation 
style needs a theory to extract its meaning. On 
the other hand, applying a theoretical framework 
to real data makes it possible to empirically test 
and possibly refine it. According to Eva 
Hajičová, “corpus annotation serves, among 
other things, as an invaluable test for the 
linguistic theories standing behind the annotation 
schemes, and as such represents an irreplaceable 
resource of linguistic information for the 
construction and enrichment of grammars, both 
formal and theoretical” (Hajičová, 2006: 466). 

Further, the task of developing language 
resources like annotated corpora supports 
interaction between intuition-based and corpus-
based/-driven approaches in theoretical 
linguistics (Tognini-Bonelli, 2001). No intuition-
based grammar is able to manage all the possible 

100



variations in real data, and no induction-based 
grammar can reflect all the possible well-formed 
constructions of a language (Aarts, 2002; 
Sinclair, 2004a). 

This paper describes the first steps towards the 
semantic annotation of the IT-TB, by first 
presenting and motivating its theoretical 
background (section 2) and then sampling a 
number of specific aspects of annotation (section 
3). Finally, section 4 reports a discussion and 
sketches the future work. 

2 The Theoretical Background of the 

Index Thomisticus Treebank 

Hosted at the CIRCSE research centre of the 
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore in Milan, 
Italy (http://centridiricerca.unicatt.it/circse), the 
IT-TB is a dependency-based treebank 
(McGillivray et al., 2009). The choice of a 
representation framework alone does not 
determine the representation for a given 
sentence, as there can be many (correct) 
dependency-based (as well as constituency-
based) trees for even simple sentences. Thus, a 
fine-grained linguistic theory must be selected to 
support the specific aspects raised by a large-
scale annotation of real data. In this respect, the 
annotation style of the IT-TB is based on 
Functional Generative Description (FGD; Sgall 
et al., 1986), a dependency-based theoretical 
framework developed in Prague and intensively 
applied and tested while building the Prague 
Dependency Treebank of Czech (PDT). 

FGD is rooted in Praguian structuralism-
functionalism dating back to the 30s, one 
assumption of which is the stratificational 
approach to sentence analysis pursued by 
Functional Sentence Perspective (FSP), a 
linguistic theory developed by Jan Firbas in the 
mid-1950s on the basis of Vilém Mathesius’ 
work (Firbas, 1992). According to FSP, the 
sentence is conceived as: (a) a singular and 
individual speech event [utterance-event]; (b) 
one of the possible different minimal 
communicative units (means) of the given 

language [form]; (c) an abstract structure (a 
pattern) [meaning]. 

Considering language as a form-meaning 
composite is a basic assumption also of FGD, 
which is particularly focused on the last point 
above, aiming at the description of the so-called 
‘underlying syntax’ of the sentence. Underlying 
syntax (the meaning) is separated from (but still 
connected with) surface syntax (the form) and 
represents the linguistic (literal) meaning of the 
sentence, which is described through dependency 
tree-graphs. 

This approach is consistent with the functional 
and pragmatic analysis of language pursued by 
the Prague Linguistic Circle since its very 
beginning, along the so-called ‘first period’ of 
the Circle (Raynaud, 2008). Language is 
conceived as “un système de moyens 
d’expression appropriés à un but” (“a system of 
purposive means”; Cercle linguistique de Prague, 
1929: 7). The “moyens d’expression” correspond 
to the ‘form’ (surface syntax), while the fact that 
they are “appropriés à un but” corresponds to the 
‘meaning’ (underlying syntax). 

The description of surface and underlying 
syntax in FGD is dependency-based mostly 
because dependency grammars are predicate-
focused grammars. This enables FGD to face one 
of the basic statements of the Prague Linguistic 
Circle: “l’acte syntagmatique fondamental […] 
est la prédication” (“the basic syntagmatic act is 
predication”; Cercle linguistique de Prague, 
1929: 13). Further, during the second period of 
the theory of predication pursued by the Circle, 
while accounting for the three-level approach to 
sentence in FSP, Daneš claims that “[t]he kernel 
syntactic relation is that of dependance” (Daneš, 
1964: 227) and stresses the strict connection 
holding between form and meaning: “we are 
convinced that the interrelations of both levels, 
semantic and grammatical must necessarily be 
stated in order to give a full account of an overall 
linguistic system” (Daneš, 1964: 226). 

Consistently with such a theoretical 
background, the PDT (as well as the IT-TB) is a 

101



dependency-based treebank with a three-layer 
structure, in which each layer corresponds to one 
of the three views of sentence mentioned above 
(Hajič et al., 2000). The layers are ordered as 
follows: 

- a morphological layer: morphological 
tagging and lemmatization; 

- an ‘analytical’ layer (i.e. the presently 
available layer of annotation of the IT-
TB): annotation of surface syntax; 

- a ‘tectogrammatical’ layer: annotation of 
underlying syntax. 

The development of each layer requires the 
availability of the previous one(s). Both the 
analytical and the tectogrammatical layers 
describe the sentence structure with dependency 
tree-graphs, respectively named analytical tree 
structures (ATSs) and tectogrammatical tree 
structures (TGTSs). 

In ATSs every word and punctuation mark of 
the sentence is represented by a node of a rooted 
dependency tree. The edges of the tree 
correspond to dependency relations that are 
labelled with (surface) syntactic functions called 
‘analytical functions’ (like Subject, Object etc.). 

TGTSs describe the underlying structure of 
the sentence, conceived as the semantically 
relevant counterpart of the grammatical means of 
expression (described by ATSs). The nodes of 
TGTSs represent autosemantic words only, while 
function words and punctuation marks are left 
out. The nodes are labeled with semantic role 
tags called ‘functors’. These are divided into two 
classes according to valency: (a) arguments, 
called ‘inner participants’, i.e. obligatory 
complementations of verbs, nouns, adjectives 
and adverbs: Actor, Patient, Addressee, Effect 
and Origin; (b) adjuncts, called ‘free 
modifications’: different kinds of adverbials, like 
Place, Time, Manner etc.. The ‘dialogue test’ by 
Panevová (1974-1975) is used as the guiding 
criterion for obligatoriness. TGTSs feature two 
dimensions that represent respectively the 
syntactic structure of the sentence (the vertical 

dimension) and its information structure (‘topic-
focus articulation’, TFA), based on the 
underlying word order (the horizontal 
dimension). In FGD, TFA deals with the 
opposition between contextual boundness (the 
‘given’ information, on the left) and contextual 
unboundness (the ‘new’ information, on the 
right). Also ellipsis resolution and coreferential 
analysis are performed at the tectogrammatical 
layer and are represented in TGTSs through 
newly added nodes (ellipsis) and arrows 
(coreference). 

Since its beginning, the IT-TB has been 
following the PDT annotation style for both 
typological and structural reasons. As far as the 
former are concerned, Latin and Czech share 
certain relevant properties, such as being richly 
inflected, showing discontinuous phrases, and 
having a moderately free word-order and a high 
degree of synonymity and ambiguity of the 
endings. Both languages have three genders 
(masculine, feminine, neuter), cases with roughly 
the same meaning and no articles. As for the 
latter, the tight connection between the three-
layer structure of the PDT and a sound 
background theory like FGD integrates each 
layer of annotation into a more general 
framework driven by a functional perspective 
aimed at understanding the underlying meaning 
of sentences through its relation with the surface 
form. Moreover, tectogrammatical annotation 
includes several pragmatic aspects that, although 
much present in Latin linguistics research, are 
still missing from the available treebanks of 
Latin1. 

The organization of functors into inner 
participants and free modifications is further 
exploited by linking textual tectogrammatical 
annotation with fundamental lexical information 
                                                           

1 Some semantic-pragmatic annotation of Latin texts 
is available only in the PROIEL corpus (Haug & 
Jøndal, 2008). The Latin subset of PROIEL includes 
Classical texts from the 1st century BC (Caesar, 
Cicero), the Peregrinatio Aetheriae and the New 
Testament by Jerome (both from the 5th century AD). 

102



provided by a valency lexicon that features the 
valency frame(s) for all those verbs, nouns, 
adjectives and adverbs capable of valency that 
occur in the treebank. The valency lexicon of the 
IT-TB is being built in a corpus-driven fashion, 
by adding to the lexicon all the valency-capable 
words that annotators progressively get through2. 

3 Moving From Analytical to 

Tectogrammatical Tree Structures 

As the tectogrammatical annotation of the IT-TB 
has just started and no Latin texts annotated at 
the tectogrammatical layer are available yet, we 
cannot train and use probabilistic NLP tools to 
build TGTSs. Thus, the annotation workflow is 
based on TGTSs automatically converted from 
ATSs. The TGTSs that result from conversion 
are then checked and refined manually by two 
independent annotators. Conversion is performed 
by adapting to Latin a number of ATS-to-TGTS 
scripts provided by the NLP framework Treex 
developed in Prague (Popel and Žabokrtský, 
2010). Relying on ATSs, the basic functions of 
these scripts are: (a) to collapse ATSs nodes of 
function words and punctuation marks, as they 
no longer receive a node for themselves in 
TGTSs, but are included into the autosemantic 
nodes; (b) to assign basic functors (such as Actor 
and Patient); (c) to assign ‘grammatemes’, i.e. 
semantic counterparts of morphological 
categories (for instance, pluralia tantum are 

tagged with the number grammateme ‘singular’). 

The annotation guidelines are those for the 
tectogrammatical layer of the PDT (Mikulová et 
al., 2006). 

In the following, three examples of 
tectogrammatical annotation of sentences taken 
from the IT-TB are reported and discussed in 
detail. 

                                                           

2 A syntactic-based valency lexicon of the IT-TB 
(named IT-VaLex) was induced automatically from 
the analytical layer of the treebank and made available 
on-line (http://itreebank.marginalia.it/itvalex) 
(McGillivray and Passarotti, 2009). 

3.1 Example A 

Figure 1 reports the ATS of the following 
sentence of the IT-TB: “tunc enim unaquaeque 
res optime disponitur cum ad finem suum 
convenienter ordinatur;” (“So, each thing is 
excellently arranged when it is properly directed 
to its purpose;”, Summa contra Gentiles 1.1). 

 

Figure 1. Analytical Tree Structure A 

Except for the technical root of the tree 
(holding the textual reference of the sentence), 
each node in the ATS corresponds to one word 
or punctuation mark in the sentence. Nodes are 
arranged from left to right according to surface 
word-order. They are connected in governor-
dependent fashion and each relation is labelled 
with an analytical function. For instance, the 
relation between the word res and its governor 
disponitur is labelled with the analytical function 
Sb (Subject), i.e. res is the subject of disponitur. 

Four kinds of analytical functions that occur in 
the tree are assigned to auxiliary sentence 
members, namely AuxC (subordinating 
conjunctions: cum), AuxK (terminal punctuation 
marks), AuxP (prepositions: ad) and AuxY 
(sentence adverbs: enim, tunc). The other 
analytical functions occurring in this sentences 
are the following: Atr (attributes), Adv (adverbs 
and adverbial modifications, i.e. adjuncts), AuxS 

103



(root of the tree), Obj (direct and indirect 
objects), Pred (main predicate of the sentence). 

Figure 2 shows the TGTS corresponding to the 
ATS of this sentence. 

 

Figure 2. Tectogrammatical Tree Structure A3 

As only autosemantic nodes can occur in 
TGTSs, auxiliary sentence members labelled 
with AuxC, AuxK, or AuxP are collapsed. 

Analytical functions are replaced with 
functors. The nodes of the lemmas tunc and enim 
are both assigned the functor PREC, since they 
represent expressions linking the clause to the 
preceding context; further, tunc and enim are 
given nodetype ‘atom’ (atomic nodes), which is 
used for adverbs of attitude, intensifying or 
modal expressions, rhematizers and text 
connectives (which is the case of tunc and enim) 
(Mikulová et al., 2006: 17). Res is the Patient 
(PAT) of dispono, as it is the syntactic subject of 
a passive verbal form (disponitur)4. Both the 
adverbial forms of bonus (optime) and convenio 
(convenienter) are labelled with functor MANN, 
which expresses manner by specifying an 
evaluating characteristic of the event, or a 

                                                           

3 In the default visualization of TGTSs, wordforms 
are replaced with lemmas. 

4 Conversely, syntactic subjects of active verbal forms 
are usually labelled with the functor ACT (Actor). 
However, this does not always hold true, since the 
functor of the subject depends on the semantic 
features of the verb. 

property. Unusquisque is a pronominal restrictive 
adnominal modification (RSTR) that further 
specifies the governing noun res. The clause 
headed by ordinatur (lemma: ordino; analytical 
function: Adv) is assigned the functor COND, as 
it reports the condition on which the event 
expressed by the governing verb (disponitur; 
lemma: dispono) can happen. The lemma finis is 
assigned the functor DIR3 (Directional: to), 
which expresses the target point of the event. 
Finis is then specified by an adnominal 
modification of appurtenance (APP). 

Three newly added nodes occur in the tree 
(square nodes), to provide ellipsis resolution of 
those arguments of the verbs dispono and ordino 
that are missing in the surface structure. Dispono 
is a two-argument verb (the two arguments being 
respectively the Actor and the Patient), but only 
the Patient is explicitly expressed in the sentence, 
i.e. the syntactic subject res. The missing 
argument, i.e. the Actor (ACT), is thus replaced 
with a ‘general argument’ (#Gen), because the 
coreferred element of the omitted modification 
cannot be clearly identified, even with the help 
of the context. The same holds also for the Actor 
of the verb ordino (#Gen), whose Patient 
(#PersPron, PAT) is coreferential with the noun 
res, as well as the possessive adjective suus 
(#PersPron, APP). In the TGTS, these 
coreferential relations are shown by the blue 
arrows that link the two #PersPron nodes with 
the node of res. #PersPron is a ‘t-lemma’ 
(tectogrammatical lemma) assigned to nodes 
representing possessive and personal pronouns 
(including reflexives). 

The nodes in the TGTS are arranged from left 
to right according to TFA, which is signalled by 
the colour of the nodes (white nodes: topic; 
yellow nodes: focus) A so-called ‘semantic part 
of speech’ is assigned to each node: for instance, 
‘denotational noun’ is assigned to finis. Finally, 
the illocutionary force class informing about the 
sentential modality is assigned to the main 
predicate of the sentence dispono (‘enunciative’). 

104



3.2 Example B 

Figure 3 shows the ATS of this sentence: “unde 
et earum artifices, qui architectores vocantur, 
nomen sibi vindicant sapientum.” (“Thus, also 
the makers of them, who are called architects, 
claim the title of wise men for themselves”, 
Summa contra Gentiles 1.1). 

 

Figure 3. Analytical Tree Structure B 

In addition to the analytical functions assigned 
to auxiliary sentence members in the tree of 
figure 1, this tree features one occurrence of 
AuxZ (particles that emphasize a specific 
sentence member) and two of AuxX (commas). 

Figure 4 presents the TGTS of the sentence in 
question. 

 

Figure 4. Tectogrammatical Tree Structure B 

Sentence members labelled with AuxK, or 
AuxX are collapsed. 

The tree reported in figure 4 features arrows of 
different colour. The red arrows that link both 
the relative pronoun qui and the reflexive 
pronoun sibi (assigned t-lemma #PersPron) with 
the noun artifex stand for so-called ‘grammatical 
coreferences’, i.e. coreferences in which it is 
possible to pinpoint the coreferred expression on 
the basis of grammatical rules. Instead, the blue 
arrow represents a ‘textual coreference’, i.e. a 
coreference realized not only by grammatical 
means, but also via context (mostly with 
pronouns) (Mikulová et al., 2006: 998 and 
1,100). In figure 4, a blue arrow links earum 
(#PersPron) with the word ars, which occurs in 
the previous sentence in the text. 

Sibi (#PersPron) is assigned the functor BEN, 
because it is the beneficiary of the action carried 
out by the Actor (artifex) of the verb vindico. 
Sapiens has functor ID (Identity), which labels 
explicative genitives. Earum (#PersPron) is the 
Patient (PAT) of the noun artifex, because agent 
nouns are valency-capable nouns; for this reason, 
a newly added node with functor PAT is made 
dependent on the agent noun architector. This is 
assigned functor EFF (Effect), which is used for 
arguments referring to the result of the event, 
among which are obligatory predicative 
complements (i.e. the role played by architector 
with respect to voco). Voco is a RSTR, which is 
the functor assigned to the main predicates of 
attributive relative clauses. Et is a rhematizer, 
which has the noun artifex in its scope. 
According to Mikulová et al. (2006: 1,170), in a 
TGTS the node representing the rhematizer is 
placed as the closest left sister of the first node of 
the expression that is in its scope. This is why the 
node of et in the TGTS reported in figure 4 
depends on vindico instead of artifex, while in 
the ATS of figure 3 it depends on the node of 
artifices. Despite its left position in the TGTS, 
the node of et is marked as focus in TFA and 
thus the colour of its node is yellow. 

105



3.3 Example C 

Figure 5 presents the ATS of the following 
sentence: “ego in hoc natus sum, et ad hoc veni 
in mundum, ut testimonium perhibeam veritati.” 
(“For this I was born and for this I came to the 
world, to provide the truth with evidence”, 
Summa contra Gentiles 1.1, quoting the Gospel 
of John 18:37). 

 

Figure 5. Analytical Tree Structure C 

This sentence features two main predicates 
coordinated by the conjunction et: veni and natus 
sum, the latter being a complex verb, formed by 
the perfect participle natus and by the auxiliary 
verb sum, which is assigned the analytical 
function AuxV (collapsed in the corresponding 
TGTS). The fact that the two predicates are 
coordinated is signalled by the suffix _Co 
appendend to their analytical function (Pred). 
Those nodes that depend on the coordinating 
conjunction et and are not labelled with an 
analytical function suffixed with _Co are meant 
to depend on every member of the coordination. 
Thus, ego is the subject of both natus sum and 
veni, as well as the subordinate clause headed by 
perhibeam (via the subordinative conjunction ut) 
represents an adverbial modification of both the 
verbs. 

Figure 6 presents the TGTS corresponding to 
the ATS of figure 5. 

 

Figure 6. Tectogrammatical Tree Structure C 

The conjunction et is assigned nodetype 
‘coap’ (coordinations and appositions) and 
functor CONJ (Conjunction), used for the root 
nodes of paratactic structures. 

Veritas is the Addressee (ADDR) of the verb 
perhibeo5. Mundus is assigned functor DIR3 and 
subfunctor ‘basic’, the latter specifying that here 
the meaning of DIR3 is the basic one, i.e. “where 
to”6. The two occurrences of hic are respectively 
the Aim (AIM) of the verb nascor and of the 
verb venio, as well as the subordinate clause 
headed by perhibeo represents the Aim of both 
the coordinated predicates. 

The TGTS in figure 6 presents two textual 
coreferences, linking both the occurrences of hic 
with perhibeo. Indeed, the subordinate clause 
“[…] ut testimonium perhibeam veritati” is 
coreferent with the two occurrences of hic and 
makes their meaning explicit in a cataphoric 
manner; this is signalled by the direction of the 
arrows, which go from left to right (cataphora) 
instead of from right to left (anaphora), like in 
figures 2 and 4. 

4 Discussion and Future Work 

Recently funded by the Italian Ministry of 
Education, Universities and Research (MIUR), 
the project aimed at both providing semantic 
annotation of Latin texts and building a 
semantic-based valency lexicon of Latin has just 
                                                           

5 On the bordeline between Beneficiary and Addresse, 
see Mikulová et al. (2006: 123-126). 

6 Instead, the DIR3 node occurring in the tree of 
figure 2 is specified by subfunctor ‘target’. 

106



started. So far, only the first 200 sentences of 
Summa contra Gentiles of Thomas Aquinas have 
been fully annotated at tectogrammatical level 
(corresponding to 3,112 words and 451 
punctuation marks). Such a limited experience 
on data does not make it possible to provide an 
evaluation neither of the ATS-to-TGTS 
conversion scripts nor of the inter-annotator 
agreement. Presently, the valency lexicon 
contains 221 verbs; the task of building the 
lexical entries for nouns, adjectives and adverbs 
is going to start in the very near future. 

Analytical annotation is available not only for 
Medieval Latin texts, but also for Classical Latin, 
as the guidelines for the analytical layer of 
annotation of the IT-TB are shared with the Latin 
Dependency Treebank (LDT; 
http://nlp.perseus.tufts.edu/syntax/treebank/), a 
dependency-based treebank including around 
55,000 words from texts of different authors of 
the Classical era (Bamman et al., 2007). By 
exploiting the common annotation style of the 
IT-TB and the LDT, our project will also 
perform tectogrammatical annotation of the 
Classical Latin texts available in the LDT and 
will build the corresponding valency lexicon.  

While enhancing a corpus with a new layer of 
annotation from scratch still remains a labor-
intensive and time-consuming task, today this is 
simplified by the possibility of exploiting the 
results provided by previous similar experiences 
in language resources development. Such results 
can be used for porting background theories, 
methods and tools from one language to another 
in a rapid and low-cost fashion. This is the 
approach pursued by our project, which wants to 
apply to Latin a treebank scenario originally 
created for Czech and now used also for other 
languages (including Arabic and English). Such 
an application meets and raises a number of 
issues specifically related to corpora of ancient 
languages, which make tectogrammatical 
annotation of such data a particularly difficult 
task. For instance, while treebanks of modern 
languages mostly include texts taken from 
newspapers, this does not hold true for both the 

IT-TB and the LDT, which contain respectively 
philosophical (IT-TB) and literary texts (LDT). 
These textual genres present several specific 
linguistic features in terms of syntax (quite 
complex in poetry), semantics (some words 
undergo a kind of technical shift of meaning in 
philosophical texts) and lexicon (high register 
words are pretty frequent). Further, the absence 
of native speakers often makes different 
interpretations of texts possible and increases the 
difficulty of tasks like TFA. 

As mentioned above, a large-scale application 
of a linguistic theory to real data helps to 
empirically test how much sound the theory is. In 
our case, the evaluation of the degree of 
applicability of FGD to Latin is at its very 
beginning. However, analytical annotation has 
shown a strong compatibility between the ATS-
based description of surface syntax and its 
application to Latin. As a matter of fact, the PDT 
manual for analytical annotation was adapted in 
just a few details for the treatment of specific 
constructions of Latin (such as the ablative 
absolute or the passive periphrastic) that could be 
syntactically annotated in several different ways 
(Bamman et al., 2008). This experience 
represents a positive background for a project 
that wants to build a set of theoretically-
motivated advanced language resources for Latin 
that will provide users with information about 
morphology, surface syntax and semantics at 
both textual and lexical level. 

Such advanced language resources for Latin 
will both improve the understanding of Latin 
language and question the usual research 
methods pursued by scholars in Classics. 

As for the former, research in Latin linguistics 
dealing with issues like semantic role labelling, 
valency, ellipsis resolution, coreferential analysis 
and information structure will finally be able to 
ground on a relevant amount of empirical 
evidence not created for the aims of one specific 
research, thus preventing the vicious circle of 
building a corpus just for studying a single 
linguistic phenomenon (Sinclair, 2004b). Also, 
making available language resources that both 

107



feature Latin texts of differents eras and share the 
same annotation style with language resources of 
modern languages will impact diachronic 
research and support studies in comparative 
linguistics. 

As for the latter, building advanced language 
resources for Latin by connecting a large-scale 
empirical analysis of Latin data with a modern 
and broadly evaluated linguistic theory 
represents a challenging and unconventional 
approach, which is expected to strongly impact 
the usual research methods in the field of 
Classics. Indeed, due to an age-old split holding 
between linguistic and literary studies, the study 
of Latin (and of Ancient Greek, as well) has been 
primarily pursued by focusing on literary, 
philological and glottological aspects. Further, a 
large number of classicists is, still today, 
unwilling both to apply computational methods 
to textual analysis and to use language resources 
like annotated corpora and computational lexica. 
Computational linguists, in turn, are more prone 
to develop language resources and NLP tools for 
living languages, which have stronger 
commercial, media and social impact. 
Considering collaboration between Classics and 
computational linguistics to be essential, this 
project provides an opportunity for innovation of 
both fields. 

Both the treebanks and the valency lexicon 
will be publicly available datasets with explicit 
annotation guidelines. This will make the results 
achieved by using these language resources 
replicable, which is a not yet consolidated 
practice in Classics. 

Acknowledgments 

This research is part of the project “Developing 
and Integrating Advanced Language Resources 
for Latin”, supported by the Italian Ministry of 
Education, Universities and Research (MIUR) as 
part of the grant FIR-2013. 

References 

Jan Aarts. 2002. Does corpus linguistics exist? Some 
old and new issues. Leiv Breivik and Angela 

Hasselgren (eds.), From the COLT‘s mouth…and 
others. Rodopi, Amsterdam, 1-17. 

David Bamman, Marco Passarotti, Gregory Crane and 
Savina Raynaud. 2007. Guidelines for the Syntactic 
Annotation of Latin Treebanks. «Tufts University 
Digital Library». Available online from 
http://hdl.handle.net/10427/42683. 

David Bamman, Marco Passarotti, Roberto Busa and 
Gregory Crane. 2008. The annotation guidelines of 
the Latin Dependency Treebank and Index 
Thomisticus Treebank. The treatment of some 
specific syntactic constructions in Latin. 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference 
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 
2008). ELRA, Marrakech, 71-76. 

Roberto Busa. 1974-1980. Index Thomisticus. 
Frommann-Holzboog, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt. 

Cercle linguistique de Prague. 1929. Thèses 
présentées au Premier Congrès des philologues 
slaves. Travaux du Cercle linguistique de Prague 
1: Mélanges linguistiques dédiés au Premier 
Congrès des philologues slaves. Jednota 
Československých matematiků a fysiků, Prague, 5-
29. 

František Daneš. 1964. A three-level approach to 
syntax. Josef Vachek (ed.), Travaux linguistiques 
de Prague 1: L’École de Prague d’aujourd’hui. 
Éditions de l’Académie Tchécoslovaque des 
Sciences, Prague, 225-240. 

Jan Firbas. 1992. Functional Sentence Perspective in 
Written and Spoken Communication. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Jan Hajič, Alena Böhmová, Eva Hajičová and 
Barbora Vidová Hladká. 2000. The Prague 
Dependency Treebank: A Three-Level Annotation 
Scenario. Anne Abeillé (ed.), Treebanks: Building 
and Using Parsed Corpora. Kluwer, Amsterdam, 
103-127. 

Eva Hajičová. 2006. Old Linguists Never Die, They 
Only Get Obligatorily Deleted. Computational 
Linguistics, 32(4): 457-469. 

Dag Haug and Marius Jøhndal. 2008. Creating a 
Parallel Treebank of the Old Indo-European Bible 
Translations. Proceedings of the Language 
Technology for Cultural Heritage Data Workshop 
(LaTeCH 2008). ELRA, Marrakech, 27-34. 

Barbara McGillivray and Marco Passarotti. 2009. The 
Development of the Index Thomisticus Treebank 

108



Valency Lexicon. Proceedings of LaTeCH-
SHELT&R Workshop 2009, Athens, March 30, 
2009. 43-50. 

Barbara McGillivray, Marco Passarotti and Paolo 
Ruffolo. 2009. The Index Thomisticus Treebank 
Project: Annotation, Parsing and Valency Lexicon. 
Traitement Automatique des Langues, 50(2): 103-
127. 

Marie Mikulová, et alii. 2006. Annotation on the 
Tectogrammatical Layer in the Prague 
Dependency Treebank. Institute of Formal and 
Applied Linguistics, Prague. Available online from 
http://ufal.mff.cuni. cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/en/t-
layer/html/index.html. 

Jarmila Panevová. 1974-1975. On verbal Frames in 
Functional Generative Description. Prague Bulletin 
of Mathematical Linguistics, 22: 3-40. Part II 
published in PBML, 23: 17-52. 

Martin Popel and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2010. 
TectoMT: Modular NLP Framework. Proceedings 
of IceTAL, 7th International Conference on 
Natural Language Processing, Reykjavík, Iceland, 
August 17, 2010. 293-304. 

Savina Raynaud. 2008. The basic syntagmatic act is 
predication. Slovo a slovesnost, 69(1-2): 49-67. 

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 
1986. The Meaning of the Sentence in its Semantic 
and Pragmatic Aspects. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, NL. 

John Sinclair. 2004a. Intuition and Annotation – the 
Discussion Continues. Karin Aijmer & Bengt 
Altenberg (eds.), Advances in Corpus Linguistics. 
Papers from the 23rd International Conference on 
English Language Research on Computerized 
Corpora (ICAME 23). Rodopi, Amsterdam, 39-59. 

John Sinclair. 2004b. Corpus and Text: Basic 
Principles. Martin Wynne (ed.), Developing 
Linguistic Corpora: a Guide to Good Practice. 
Oxbow Books, Oxford, 1-16. Available online 
from http://ahds.ac.uk/linguistic-corpora/ 

Elena Tognini-Bonelli. 2001. Corpus Linguistics at 
Work. J. Benjamins, Amsterdam Philadelphia. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

109


