



















































Bridging Text and Knowledge with Frames


Proceedings of Frame Semantics in NLP: A Workshop in Honor of Chuck Fillmore (1929–2014), pages 22–25,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Bridging Text and Knowledge with Frames

Srini Narayanan
Google Zurich / Brandschenkestrasse 110, 8002 Zurich, Switzerland

snarayanan0@gmail.com

Abstract

FrameNet is the best currently operational
version of Chuck Fillmore’s Frame Se-
mantics. As FrameNet has evolved over
the years, we have been building a se-
ries of increasingly ambitious prototype
systems that exploit FrameNet as a se-
mantic resource. Results from this work
point to frames as a natural representation
for applications that require linking textual
meaning to world knowledge.

1 Introduction

Frame Semantics (Fillmore, 1976) defines the
meaning of a word with respect to the conceptual
structure (Frame) that it evokes. The promise of
Frame Semantics is that it is a principled method
to connect language analysis with concepts and
knowledge. This paper summarizes over a decade
of research at Berkeley1 on computational models
bridging text and inference using Frame Seman-
tics. We will start with a brief description of the
lexical resource, FrameNet2, designed with the ex-
plicit goal to capturing insights and findings from
Frame Semantics in an on-line lexicon. We then
describe computational models that exploit the se-
mantic information in FrameNet for a variety of
NLP tasks.

2 FrameNet

The Berkeley FrameNet project (Fillmore, John-
son, & Petruck, 2003) is building a lexicon based
on the theory of Frame Semantics. In FrameNet,
the meanings of lexical items (lexical units (LU))
are defined with respect to larger structured repre-
sentations, called Frames. Individual lexical units

1All the work described was done while the author was
at the University of California, Berkeley and the Interna-
tional Computer Science Institute (ICSI) / 1947 Center Street,
Berkeley CA 94704.

2http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu

evoke specific frames and establish a binding pat-
tern to specific slots or roles (frame elements (FE))
within the frame. FrameNet describes the under-
lying frames for different lexical units, examines
sentences related to the frames using a very large
corpus, and records (annotates) the ways in which
information from the associated frames are ex-
pressed in these sentences. The result is a database
that contains a set of frames (related through hier-
archy and composition), a set of frame elements
for each frame, and a set of frame annotated sen-
tences that covers the different patterns of usage
for lexical units in the frame. Collin Baker’s pa-
per in this conference has more details on the
FrameNet project including the current state of the
resource which is now available in multiple lan-
guages. This paper summarizes the results of ap-
plying FrameNet in a variety of NLP applications.

2.1 FrameNet data as seed patterns for
Information Extraction

While FrameNet frames and FE tags are mean-
ingful to human interpreters, they are not suit-
able for direct use in NLP applications. One
early project explored using the FrameNet anno-
tated dataset to automatically compile patterns and
a lexicon for Information Extraction (IE) (Mohit
and Narayanan, 2003). A distinguishing feature
that made FrameNet attractive for this purpose was
its explicit mandate to cover all the valence pat-
terns for a target word, not just the frequent ones.
Thus, FrameNet annotations and valence alterna-
tions were designed to capture the long tail for
every target lexeme. We hypothesized that us-
ing a highly precise set of patterns and a lexicon
automatically compiled from the FrameNet frame
relational database and annotations should result
good performance for the task. To increase cover-
age, we extended the frame lexicon with WordNet
synsets. As a first test, we culled a set of news
stories from Yahoo News Service with topics re-

22



lated to the topic of crime. We also compiled a
set of IE patterns and lexicon from several crime
related frames (such as Arrest, Detain, Arraign
and Verdict.) We were able to achieve an aver-
age precision of 76.5% and an average recall to
66% for the stories in this domain. However, the
relatively sparse and uneven domain coverage of
FrameNet and the absence of high quality parsers
and named entity annotators (used for building ex-
pressive and general patterns) at the time made the
pilot task difficult to repeat in an open domain set-
ting. While the coverage of FrameNet is still an
issue, the enormous gains made in the quality and
amount of parsed and named entity annotated data
could make this early work attractive again where
FrameNet can be used as a high precision seed pat-
tern generator in a semi-supervised IE setting.

3 From Frames to Inference

A fundamental aspect of Frame Semantics, one
that directly connected the linguistic insights of
Chuck Fillmore to the early work in AI by Schank,
Abelson, Minsky, and others was the idea that
Frames were central to how inferences were pack-
aged. In this view, framing provided preferential
access to specific expected inferences. These in-
ferences were said to be in the frame. Schankian
scripts (such as the famous restaurant script)
(Schank and Abelson, 1977) are a good example
of such inferential packaging in terms of expected
sequences of events, participants, and outcomes.
In addition to providing such general inferences,
Chuck Fillmore observed that linguistic framing
also provided a way to delineate multiple perspec-
tives on an event (including foregrounding, back-
grounding, and participant perspective). An exam-
ple can be found in the perspective difference pro-
vided by the lexical items sell, buy, or pay, which
all evoke the commercial transaction frame.

(Chang, Narayanan, & Petruck, 2002), built a
computational formalism that captured structural
frame relationships among participants in a dy-
namic scenario. This representation was used to
describe the internal structure and relationships
between FrameNet frames in terms of parameters
for active event simulations for inference. We ap-
plied our formalism to the commerce domain and
showed how it provides a flexible means of han-
dling linguistic perspective and other challenges
of semantic representation. While this work was
able to computationally model subtle inferential

effects in perspective and framing choice, it re-
mains a proof of concept demonstration and there
was a need to do an automatic translation to an in-
ference formalism which would enable us to use
more robust reasoners (the trade-off was of course
that these off the shelf reasoners produced shal-
lower inferences).

(Scheffczyk, Baker, & Narayanan, 2010) auto-
matically translated a crucial portion of FrameNet
to the description logic based web ontology lan-
guage OWL, and showed how state-of-the-art de-
scription logic reasoners can make inferences over
FrameNet-annotated sentences. Thus, annotated
text becomes available to the Semantic Web and
FrameNet itself can be linked to other ontolo-
gies. While our OWL translation is limited to facts
included in FrameNet, links to ontologies make
world knowledge available to reasoning about nat-
ural language. Therefore, are linked FrameNet to
the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO).
This ground work gives a clear motivation for the
design of further ontology bindings and defines the
baseline for measuring their benefits.

Fillmore’s further insights into the connections
between textual inference and world knowledge
led us to ask the question of how a linguistic
analysis of a written document can contribute to
identifying, tracking and populating the eventu-
alities that are presented in the document, either
directly or indirectly, and representing degrees of
belief concerning them. This work, reported in
(Fillmore, Narayanan, & Baker, 2006), attempts
to clarify the boundary between on the one hand
the information that can be derived on the basis
of linguistic knowledge alone (composed of lex-
ical meanings and the meanings of grammatical
constructions) and on the other hand, reasoning
based on beliefs about the source of a document,
world knowledge, and common sense. In particu-
lar, we show that the kind of information produced
by FrameNet can have a special role in contribut-
ing to text understanding, starting from the ba-
sic facts of the combinatorial properties of frame-
bearing words (verbs, nouns, adjectives and prepo-
sitions) and arriving at the means of recognizing
the anaphoric properties of specific unexpressed
event participants. Framenet defines a new layer of
anaphora resolution and text cohesion based on the
annotations of the different types of null instantia-
tions (Definite Null Instantiation (DNI), Indefinite
Null Instantiation (INI), and Constructional Null

23



Instantiation (CNI)). A full exploitation of these
linguistic signals in a coreference resolver is still
pending.

4 Frame Semantics in Question
Answering

As FrameNet matured, we started asking if it could
be used for semantically based question answering
for questions that went beyond factoids and re-
quired deeper semantic information. (Narayanan
and Harabagiu, 2004; Sinha and Narayanan, 2005;
Sinha, 2008) report on a prototype question an-
swering system that attempted to answer questions
related to causality, event structure, and tempo-
rality in specific domains. The project on Ques-
tion Answering (QA) was a joint effort with Sanda
Harabagiu’s group at UT Dallas.

The QA work was based on the fact that events,
while independent of language themselves, are
frequently discussed in natural language, yield-
ing copious data in that form. To reason about
complex events requires an interface from event
models to data sources. We sought to exploit se-
mantic frames as an intermediate structure and in-
terface between event descriptions in natural lan-
guage and event models that produce inferences
to answer questions. In the course of this project,
we came up with the basic framework and algo-
rithms combining a variety of NLP techniques in-
cluding Parsing, Topic Modeling, Named Entity
Recognition, and Semantic Role Labeling with
deep event structure inference in multiple do-
mains. The frame structure in language provides
a bi-directional mapping from language to event
models, enabling us to link information found in
text about an event of interest to models that repre-
sent that event. The proof of concept system used
frame parsed input with a set of hand built domain
ontologies for specific domains. The system was
able to answer domain questions involving causal,
diagnostic, and hypothetical reasoning. While the
results clearly showed the utility of FrameNet as
a resource supporting deep semantic inference, it
also delineated the necessity and role of domain
specific ontologies and inference required to real-
ize an end-to-end system using FrameNet.

5 Frames, Constructions and Grammar

Yet another of Fillmore’s profound insights was
the observation that every unit of grammar is most
effectively described as a pairing between form

and meaning, aka a construction. Constructions
exist at lexical (and sub-lexical) levels as well as
at larger granularities (phrases, discourse) play-
ing a crucial role in the compositionally of lan-
guage. This proposal, entitled construction gram-
mar, has gained considerable empirical support in
large part due to the investigations of Fillmore,
his colleagues and students, reported in a series of
beautiful papers on the grammatical and composi-
tional properties of constructions.3

Research on construction grammar has played
a fundamental role within our Berkeley interdis-
ciplinary project, NTL4, which is attempting to
build cognitively plausible computational mod-
els of language acquisition and use. Specifically,
NTL research has resulted in the grammar for-
malism called Embodied Construction Grammar
(ECG), where the meaning pole of a construction
is expressed in terms of bindings between bodily
schemas (also called Image Schemas) and frames.
ECG allows constraints of all kinds (phonological,
syntactic, semantic, etc.) in a unification based
probabilistic framework, where the best fitting in-
terpretation in context is selected as the analysis
of the input. ECG is formally defined and com-
putationally implemented, and has been used for
linguistic analysis, in models of language com-
prehension, and for cognitive models of language
learning5.

6 Frame Semantics and Metaphor

FrameNet has long held the goal of including in-
formation about metaphorical usage in language.
The most recent project on Frame Semantics is the
ICSI MetaNet project, where the goal is to build
a system that extracts linguistic manifestations of
metaphor (words and phrases that are based on
metaphor) from text and interprets them automati-
cally in four different languages.

The MetaNet project, is a multi-lingual, multi-
university, multi-disciplinary effort that incorpo-
rates FN methodology as well as corpus and ma-
chine learning techniques, deep cognitive linguis-
tics, and behavioral and imaging experiments.

MetaNet models metaphor as a mapping be-
tween two different frames. Such mappings

3http://www.constructiongrammar.org/ is a
currently active resource on the topic with contributions from
a variety of international scholars.

4http://ntl.icsi.berkeley.edu/ntl
5http://ecgweb.pbworks.com/w/page/

15044343/FrontPage

24



project information from a source frame to a tar-
get frame. The information projected is par-
tial and can include the frame, its slots, and
filler constraints. An initial repository of map-
pings that draws on FrameNet frames as sources
and targets of the mappings is used as base in-
formation by a system that extracts additional
metaphors using machine learning. The sys-
tem uses what it has learned about the relation-
ships between the frame elements of conceptual
metaphors to find new metaphors in text. The
MetaNet Wiki6 is a database of such mappings,
drawing on FrameNet’s inventory of Frames. The
mappings currently exist in four different lan-
guages. FrameNet frames and mappings constrain
the search for new metaphors, and the discovery of
new metaphors by a corpus based machine learn-
ing algorithm both a) provides empirical support
for the existing frames and mappings and b) more
importantly potentially extends the set by identi-
fying gaps and inconsistencies in coverage. This
interaction facilitates an iterative design process
in MetaNet which is empirically driven and usage
based, just as Fillmore would have insisted.7

7 Conclusion and Future Directions

Frame semantics in general and FrameNet in par-
ticular show considerable promise for use in deep
semantic analysis. FrameNet frames are intended
to capture crucial generalizations not available in
other lexical resources. Various prototype sys-
tems have clearly demonstrated the potential of
FrameNet to make a qualitative difference in se-
mantic NLP. There remain two crucial gaps that
have to be bridged. One is the issue of cover-
age. The second is the lack of a formal repre-
sentation covering the more subtle inferential as-
pects of FrameNet. Progress is being made of both
fronts as is evidenced in some of the papers in this
workshop. If successful, the next few years should
see an increasing use and acceptance of FrameNet
as a crucial semantic resource bridging language
analysis with inference. This will lead to scalable
versions of the systems described in this paper,
but will also give rise to new applications. One
particularly intriguing area of research is the use
of frames for cross-modal semantic representation

6http://metaphor.icsi.berkeley.edu
7Even at 83, Chuck’s brilliant attention to detail and in-

fectious enthusiasm fundamentally shaped the early MetaNet
project on a day-to-day basis, till his illness sadly made direct
participation impossible after 2012.

bridging text, speech, and vision.

Acknowledgments

All the projects described here were collaborations
with the FrameNet and NTL groups at ICSI and
Berkeley. This line of inquiry will continue to be
dedicated to and guided by Chuck Fillmore’s in-
valuable insights, vision, and body of work.

References
Nancy Chang, Srini Narayanan, and Miriam R. L.

Petruck. 2002. Putting Frames in Perspective. Pro-
ceedings of 19th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics. Taipei: COLING, 2002.

Charles Fillmore. 1976. Frame semantics and the na-
ture of language. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences: Conference on the Origin and Develop-
ment of Language and Speech, 280, 1,20-32, 1976.

Charles Fillmore, Christopher R. Johnson, and Miriam
R. L. Petruck. 2003. Background to FrameNet. In-
ternational Journal of Lexicography. 16.3 (2003):
235-250.

Charles Fillmore, Srini Narayanan, Collin Baker.
2006. What Linguistics can contribute to Event
Extraction. AAAI Workshop on Event Extraction,
AAAI 2006, Boston.

Behrang Mohit and Srini Narayanan. 2003. Semantic
Extraction from Wide-Coverage Lexical Resources,
HLT-NAACL, Short Papers, 2003.

Srini Narayanan and Sanda Harabagiu 2004. Ques-
tion Answering based on Semantic Structures. In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING 2004), Geneva, Switzerland, August
22-29, 2004.

Roger Schank and Robert P. Abelson. 1977 Scripts,
plans, goals and understanding: An inquiry into hu-
man knowledge structures, Erlbaum, 1977. ISBN 0-
470-99033-3.

Jan Scheffczyk, Collin F. Baker, Srini Narayanan.
2010. Reasoning over Natural Language Text by
Means of FrameNet and Ontologies. Ontology and
the Lexicon: A Natural Language Processing Per-
spective. Eds. Chu-ren Huang, et al. Studies in Nat-
ural Language Processing. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2010. 53-71.

Steve Sinha and Srini Narayanan. 2005. Model Based
Answer Selection. Textual Inference in Question
Answering Workshop, AAAI 2005, Pittsburgh, July
2005.

Steven Sinha. 2008. Answering Questions about Com-
plex Events PhD Dissertation, Department of EECS,
Berkeley, CA, 2008.

25


