



















































Paraphrasing Swedish Compound Nouns in Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 99–103,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Paraphrasing Swedish Compound Nouns in Machine Translation

Edvin Ullman and Joakim Nivre
Department of Linguistics and Philology, Uppsala University

edvinu@stp.lingfil.uu.se joakim.nivre@lingfil.uu.se

Abstract

This paper examines the effect of para-
phrasing noun-noun compounds in statis-
tical machine translation from Swedish
to English. The paraphrases are meant
to elicit the underlying relationship that
holds between the compounding nouns,
with the use of prepositional and verb
phrases. Though some types of noun-noun
compounds are too lexicalized, or have
some other qualities that make them un-
suitable for paraphrasing, a set of roughly
two hundred noun-noun compounds are
identified, split and paraphrased to be
used in experiments on statistical machine
translation. The results indicate a slight
improvement in translation of the para-
phrased compound nouns, with a minor
loss in overall BLEU score.

1 Introduction

Swedish is a highly productive language, new
words can be constructed fairly easily by concate-
nating one word with another. This is done across
word classes, although, as can be expected, pre-
dominantly with content words. Due to this high
productivity, an exhaustive dictionary of noun
compounds in Swedish does not, and can not exist.
Instead, in this project, noun compounds are ex-
tracted from the Swedish Europarl corpus (Koehn,
2005) and a subset of Swedish Wikipedia,1 using
a slight modification of the splitting method de-
scribed in Stymne and Holmqvist (2008), based
on previous work by Koehn and Knight (2003).

The assumption that paraphrases of noun com-
pounds can help in machine translation is sup-

1http://sv.wikipedia.org/

ported in Nakov and Hearst (2013). Although
this study was conducted with English compound
nouns, a similar methodology is applied to the
Swedish data. The split compound nouns are para-
phrased using prepositional and verb phrases, rely-
ing on native speaker intuition for the quality and
correctness of the paraphrases. A corpus is then
paraphrased using the generated paraphrases and
used to train a statistical machine translation sys-
tem to test whether or not an improvement of qual-
ity can be observed in relation to a baseline sys-
tem trained on the unmodified corpus. The results
show a minor improvement in translation quality
for the paraphrased compounds with a minor loss
in overall BLEU score.

2 Background

Previous studies on the semantics of compound
nouns have, at least for the English language, in
general focused on finding abstract categories to
distinguish different compound nouns from each
other. Although different in form, the main idea
is that a finite set of relations hold between the
constituents of all compound nouns. Experiments
have been done to analyse such categories in Girju
et al. (2005), and applied studies on paraphrasing
compound nouns with some form of predicative
representation of these abstract categories were
performed in Nakov and Hearst (2013).

Studies on Swedish compound nouns have had
a slightly different angle. As Swedish noun com-
pounding is done in a slightly different manner
than in English, two nouns can be adjoined to
form a third, two focal points in previous studies
have been detecting compound nouns (Sjöbergh
and Kann, 2004) and splitting compound nouns
(Stymne and Holmqvist, 2008; Stymne, 2009).

Swedish nouns are compounded by concatenat-

99



Type Interfixes Example
None riskkapital

(risk + kapital)
risk capital

Additions -s -t frihetslängtan
(frihet + längtan)
longing for peace

Truncations -a -e pojkvän
(pojke + vän)
boyfriend

Combinations -a/-s -a/-t arbetsgrupp
-e/-s -e/-t (arbete + grupp)

working group

Table 1: Compound formation in Swedish;
adapted from Stymne and Holmqvist (2008).

ing nouns to each other, creating a single unbroken
unit. Compound nouns sometimes come with the
interfixes -s or -t, sometimes without the trailing -e
or -a from the first compounding noun, and some-
times a combination of the two. It should be noted
that this is not an exhaustive list of interfixes, there
are some other, more specific rules for noun com-
pounding, justified by for example orthographic
conventions, not included in Table 1, nor covered
by the splitting algorithm. Table 1, adapted from
Stymne and Holmqvist (2008), shows the more
common modifications and their combinations.

In Koehn and Knight (2003) an algorithm for
splitting compound nouns is described. The algo-
rithm works by iterating over potential split points
for all tokens of an input corpus. The geometri-
cal mean of the frequencies of the potential con-
stituents are then used to evaluate whether the to-
ken split actually is a compound noun or not.

3 Paraphrasing Compound Nouns

To extract candidate compound nouns for para-
phrasing, we first tagged the Swedish Europarl
corpus and a subset of Swedish Wikipedia us-
ing TnT (Brants, 2000) trained on the Stockholm-
Umeå Corpus. The resulting corpus was used to
compile a frequency dictionary and a tag dictio-
nary, which were given as input to a modified ver-
sion of the splitting algorithm from Koehn and
Knight (2003), producing a list of nouns with pos-
sible split points and the constituents and their
tags, if any, sorted by descending frequency. The
modifications to the splitting algorithm include a
lower bound, ignoring all tokens shorter than 6

characters in the corpus. This length restriction
is added with the intention of removing noise and
lowering running time. Another constraint added
is not to consider substrings shorter than 3 char-
acters. The third and last change to the algorithm
is the addition of a length similarity bias heuristic
to decide between possible split points when there
are multiple candidates with a similar result, giv-
ing a higher score to a split point that generates
substrings which are more similar in length.

Due to the construction of the splitting algo-
rithm, not all split nouns are noun compounds,
and without any gold standard to verify against,
a set of 200 compound nouns were manually se-
lected by choosing the top 200 valid compounds
from the frequency-sorted list. The split com-
pound nouns were then paraphrased by a native
speaker of Swedish and validated by two other na-
tive speakers of Swedish. The paraphrases were
required to be exhaustive (not leave out important
semantic information), precise (not include irrel-
evant information), and standardized (not deviate
from other paraphrases in terms of structure).

Nakov and Hearst (2013) have shown that ver-
bal paraphrases are superior to the more sparse
prepositional paraphrases, but also that preposi-
tional paraphrases are more efficient for machine
translation experiments. However, when examin-
ing the compound nouns closely it becomes ob-
vious that the potential paraphrases fall in one of
the following four categories. The first category is
compound nouns that are easy to paraphrase by
a prepositional phrase only, (Examples 1a, 1b),
sometimes with several possible prepositions, as
in the latter case.

(1) a. psalmförfattare (hymn writer)
författare
writer

av
of

psalmer
hymns

b. järnvägsstation (railway station)
station
station

{för,
{for,

pȧ,
on,

längs}
along}

järnväg
railway

The second category overlaps somewhat with the
first category in that the compound nouns could be
paraphrased using only a prepositional phrase, but
some meaning is undoubtedly lost in doing so. As
such, the more suitable paraphrases contain both
prepositional and verb phrases (Examples 2a, 2b).

(2) a. barnskȧdespelare (child actor)
skȧdespelare
actor

som
who

är
is

barn
child

100



b. studioalbum (studio album)

album
album

inspelat
recorded

i
in

en
a

studio
studio

The third and fourth category represent noun com-
pounds that are not necessarily decomposable into
their constituents. Noun compounds in the third
category can be paraphrased with some difficulty
using prepositional phrases, verb phrases as well
as deeper knowledge of the semantics and prag-
matics of Swedish (Examples 3a, 3b).

(3) a. världskrig (world war)

krig
war

som
that

drabbar
affects

hela
whole

världen
world

b. längdskidȧkning (cross-country ski-
ing)

skidȧkning
skiing

pȧ
on

plan
level

mark
ground

Noun compounds in the fourth category are even
harder, if not impossible to paraphrase. The mean-
ing of compound nouns that fall into this category
cannot be extracted from the constituents, or the
meaning has been obscured over time (Examples
4a, 4b). There is no use paraphrasing these com-
pound nouns, and as such they are left out.

(4) a. stadsrättighet (city rights)

b. domkyrka (cathedral)

All compound nouns that are decomposable into
their constituents were paraphrased according to
the criteria listed above as far as possible.

4 Machine Translation Experiments

To evaluate the effect of compound paraphrasing,
a phrase-based statistical machine translation sys-
tem was trained on a subset of roughly 55,000
sentences from Swedish-English Europarl, with
the Swedish compound nouns paraphrased before
training. The system was trained using Moses
(Koehn et al., 2007) with default settings, using a
5-gram language model created from the English
side of the training corpus using SRILM (Stolcke,
2002). A test set was paraphrased in the same way
and run through the decoder. We tested two ver-
sions of the system, one where all 200 paraphrases
were used, and one where only the paraphrases in
the first two categories (transparent prepositional
and verb phrases) were used. As a baseline, we
used a system trained with the same settings on

the unmodified training corpus and applied to the
unmodified test corpus.

The systems were evaluated in two ways. First,
we computed standard BLEU scores. Secondly,
the translation of paraphrased compounds was
manually evaluated, by the author, in a random
sample of 100 sentences containing one or more of
the paraphrased compounds. Since the two para-
phrase systems used different paraphrase sets, the
manual evaluation was performed on two different
samples, in both cases comparing to the baseline
system. The results are shown in Table 2.

Looking first at the BLEU scores, we see that
there is a small drop for both paraphrase systems.
This drop in performance is most certainly a side
effect of the design of the paraphrasing script.
There is a certain crudeness in how inflections
are handled resulting in sentences that may be un-
grammatical, albeit only slightly. Inflections in the
compounding nouns is retained. However, in para-
phrases of category 2 and 3, the verbs are always
in the present tense, as deriving the tense from the
context can be hard to do with enough precision
to make it worthwhile. Consequently, the slightly
better score for the system that only uses para-
phrases of category 1 and 2 is probably just due
to the fact that fewer compounds are paraphrased
with verbal paraphrases.

Turning to the manual evaluation, we see first of
all that the baseline does a decent job translating
the compound nouns, with 88/100 correct transla-
tions in the first sample and 81/100 in the second
sample. Nevertheless, both paraphrase systems
achieve slightly higher scores. The system using
all paraphrases improves from 88 to 93, and the
system that only uses the transparent paraphrases
improves from 81 and 90. Neither of these differ-
ences is statistically significant, however. McNe-
mar’s test (McNemar, 1947) gives a p value of 0.23
for S1 and 0.11 for S2. So, even if it is likely that
the paraphrase systems can improve the quality of
compound translation, despite a drop in the overall
BLEU score, a larger sample would be needed to
fully verify this.

5 Discussion

The results from both the automatic and the man-
ual evaluation are inconclusive. On the one hand,
overall translation quality, as measured by BLEU,
is lowered, if only slightly. On the other, the
manual evaluation shows that, for the paraphrased

101



System BLEU Comp
S1 S2

Baseline 26.63 88 81
All paraphrases 26.50 93 –
Paraphrases 1–2 26.59 – 90

Table 2: Experimental results. Comp = translation
of compounds; S1 = sample 1; S2 = sample 2.

compound nouns, the experimental decoders per-
form better than the baseline. However, this im-
provement cannot be established to be statistically
significant. This does not necessarily mean that
paraphrasing as a general concept is flawed in
terms of translation quality, but judging from these
preliminary results, further experiments with para-
phrasing compound nouns need to address a few
issues.

The lack of quality in the paraphrases, proba-
bly attributable to how inflections are handled in
the paraphrasing scripts, might be the reason why
the first experimental system performs worse than
the second. This could indicate that there is lit-
tle to be won in paraphrasing more complex com-
pound nouns. Another possible explanation lies in
the corpus. The tone in the Europarl corpus is very
formal, and this is not necessarily the case with the
more complex paraphrases.

The number of compound nouns actually para-
phrased might also attribute to the less than stel-
lar results. If, when training the experimental
systems using the paraphrased Swedish corpora,
the number of non-paraphrased compound nouns
outweigh the number of paraphrased compound
nouns the impact of the paraphrases might actu-
ally only distort the translation models. This could
very well be the problem here, and it is hard from
these experiments to judge whether or not the so-
lution is to have more paraphrasing, or none at all.

6 Conclusion

We have reported a pilot study on using paraphras-
ing of compound nouns to improve the quality
of machine translation from Swedish to English,
building on previous work by Nakov and Hearst
(2013). The experimental results are inconclusive,
but there is at least weak evidence that this tech-
nique may improve translation quality specifically
for compounds, although it may have a negative
effect on other aspects of the translation. Further
experiments could shed some light on this.

There are a couple of routes that are interesting
to follow from here. In Nakov and Hearst (2013),
a number of verbal and prepositional paraphrases
are gathered through the means of crowd sourc-
ing, and compared to paraphrases gathered from
a simple wild card keyword search using a web
based search engine. Since the paraphrases in the
experiments described in this paper are done by
the author and verified by no more than two other
native speakers of Swedish, the paraphrases might
not be generic enough. By crowd sourcing para-
phrase candidates the impact of one individual’s
personal style and tone can be mitigated.

Another interesting topic for further research is
the one of automated compound noun detection.
The algorithm used for splitting compound nouns
returns a confidence score which is based on the
geometrical mean of the frequencies of the con-
stituents together with some heuristics based on
things such as relative length of the constituents
and whether or not the constituent was found at all
in the corpus. This confidence score could poten-
tially be used for ranking not the most frequently
occurring compound nouns, but the compounds
where the classifier is most confident.

A number of improvements on the applied sys-
tem can probably lead to a wider coverage. For
one, to alter the algorithm so as to allow for re-
cursive splitting would help in detecting and dis-
ambiguating compound nouns consisting of three
or more constituents. This might be helpful since,
as previously mentioned, Swedish is a highly pro-
ductive language, and it is quite common to see
compound nouns consisting of three or more con-
stituents. It should be noted however, that for this
to have the desired effect, the paraphrasing would
have to be done recursively as well. This could
potentially lead to very long sentences generated
from very short ones, if the sentence includes a
compound consisting of three or more parts.

Some other minor improvements or possible ex-
tensions over the current implementation includes
taking into account all orthographical irregulari-
ties to get a broader coverage, running the algo-
rithm over a more domain specific corpus to get
more relevant results, and finally, automating the
actual paraphrasing. This last step, however, is of
course far from trivial.

102



References
Thorsten Brants. 2000. TnT: A statistical part-of-

speech tagger. In Proceedings of the 6th Con-
ference on Applied Natural Language Processing,
pages 224–231.

Roxana Girju, Dan Moldovan, Marta Tatu, and Daniel
Antohe. 2005. On the Semantics of Noun Com-
pounds. Computer Speech & Language, 19(4):479–
496.

Philipp Koehn and Kevin Knight. 2003. Empirical
methods for compound splitting. In Proceedings of
the 10th Conference on European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 187–
193.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, and
Richard Zens. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL on Interactive
Poster and Demonstration Sessions, pages 177–180.

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
10th Machine Translation Summit, pages 79–86.

Quinn McNemar. 1947. Note on the Sampling Error
of the Difference Between Correlated Proportions or
Percentages. Psychometrika, 12(2):153–157.

Preslav I. Nakov and Marti A. Hearst. 2013. Seman-
tic Interpretation of Noun Compounds Using Ver-
bal and Other Paraphrases. ACM Transactions on
Speech and Language Processing, 10(3):1–51.

Jonas Sjöbergh and Viggo Kann. 2004. Finding the
correct interpretation of swedish compounds, a sta-
tistical approach. In Proceedings of the 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM: An extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Spoken Language Pro-
cessing.

Sara Stymne and Maria Holmqvist. 2008. Process-
ing of swedish compounds for phrase-based statisti-
cal machine translation. In Proceedings of the 12th
Annual Conference of the European Association for
Machine Translation, pages 180–189.

Sara Stymne. 2009. Compound Processing
for Phrase-Based Statistical Machine Translation.
Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer and Informa-
tion Science, Linköpings Univ.

103


