



















































FrameNet and Linked Data


Proceedings of Frame Semantics in NLP: A Workshop in Honor of Chuck Fillmore (1929–2014), pages 18–21,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

FrameNet and Linked Data

Nancy Ide
Department of Computer Science, Vassar College

Poughkeepsie, New York USA
ide@cs.vassar.edu

Abstract

FrameNet is the ideal resource for repre-
sentation as linked data, and several ren-
derings of the resource in RDF/OWL have
been created. FrameNet has also been
and continues to be linked to other major
resources, including WordNet, BabelNet,
and MASC, in the Linguistic Linked Open
Data cloud. Although so far the supporting
technologies have not enabled easy and
widespread access to the envisioned mas-
sive network of language resources, a con-
flation of recent efforts suggests this may
be a reality in the not-too-distant future.

FrameNet (Fillmore et al., 2002; Ruppenhofer
et al., 2006) is the ideal resource for representation
in the Semantic Web (SW) as what is now widely
known as “linked data”. The Semantic Web con-
sists of objects whose properties are represented
by named links to other objects that constitute
their values and supports representing and reason-
ing over ontologies defined the the SW frame-
work. FrameNet is also a complex semantic net-
work linking lexical units to semantic frames, and
semantic frames to one another in a shallow hier-
archy, over which inheritance and sub-frame re-
lations are defined. In sentences annotated for
FrameNet frame elements, the role is a property
of a frame object that is linked to the entity (ob-
ject) that fills it; FrameNet also includes a hierar-
chy of semantic types that constrain the possible
fillers for a given role. FrameNet thus defines a
dense network of objects and properties supported
by ontological relations–exactly what the Seman-
tic Web is intended to be.1

The suitability of FrameNet for representation
in the Semantic Web was recognized fairly early
on in the development of the family of Semantic

1For a fuller description of the structure of FrameNet data,
see (Scheffczyk et al., 2008).

Web formats, which include the Resource Defi-
nition Framework (RDF) and the Web Ontology
Language (OWL), which first became available as
W3C standards in the late 90s and early 2000s. In
one of the earliest projects to adapt linguistic re-
sources to the Semantic Web, FrameNet was ren-
dered in RDF and DAML+OIL (the precursor to
OWL) in 2003, soon after these formats first be-
came standardized, for the stated goal of providing
“a potential resource to aid in the automatic iden-
tification and disambiguation of word meanings
on the semantic web” (Narayanan et al., 2003a).
Later, the DAML+OIL portion was converted to
OWL (Scheffczyk et al., 2008; Scheffczyk et al.,
2010). Other conversions include (Coppola et al.,
2009) and (Narayanan et al., 2003b); most re-
cently, FrameNet was ported to RDF/OWL for in-
clusion in the Linked Open Data (LOD) cloud2

(Nuzzolese et al., 2011). The possibility of link-
ing WordNet and FrameNet in the Semantic Web
has also spawned efforts such as (Bryl et al., 2012)
that build on numerous efforts over the past several
years to align and/or extend these two resources
(Burchardt et al., 2005; Ide, 2006; De Cao et al.,
2008; de Melo et al., 2012; Bryl et al., 2012). Oth-
ers have analyzed FrameNet in order to formalize
its semantics so as to be appropriate for use with
Description Logic (DL) reasoners compatible with
OWL-DL (Ovchinnikova et al., 2010).

Given all of the activity surrounding FrameNet
as a resource for the Semantic Web, one would ex-
pect to see multiple examples of the use of Seman-
tic Web implementations of FrameNet for NLP de-
velopment and research. However, these exam-
ples do not exist, for two reasons. The first is
a reality of the Semantic Web: simply put, the
Semantic Web has not yet come to fruition, de-
spite its having been around as a concept for well
over a decade, and despite the development of a
suite of W3C standard technologies to support it.

2http://linkeddata.org

18



One of the most important of these technologies is
SPARQL (Prud’hommeaux and Seaborne, 2008),
a query language for data in RDF format, which
is the crucial tool for exploiting the inter-linkages
among linguistic resources to support NLP. Un-
fortunately, SPARQL is new enough that it is not
yet widely deployed and has not had the bene-
fit of decades of optimization to improve its per-
formance, which so far often suffers from slug-
gishness. The good news is that new research
and implementations are rapidly contributing to
the improvement of SPARQL and other Semantic
Web technologies, and as a result, we are seeing
signs that the requisite base infrastructure may be
(or may soon be) in place to support accelerated
growth and deployment.

At the same time, over the past four or five years
several efforts in Semantic Web development–in
particular, the deployment of knowledge bases,
lexicons, ontologies, and similar resources as
linked data–have made notable progress, includ-
ing the LOD cloud and, of special interest for
the NLP community, its companion Linguistic
Linked Open Data (LLOD) cloud (Chiarcos et
al., 2012a). Efforts to link, especially, lexical-
semantic databases like FrameNet, WordNet, and
BabelNet (Navigli and Ponzetto, 2010) are under-
way, although full, operational linkage may not
be immediate. At the same time, however, there
is virtually no language data in the form of cor-
pora in the LLOD, and none that contains annota-
tions that can be linked to lexicons and knowledge
bases.

This suggests a second reason why FrameNet as
linked data has not yet been used in NLP research:
a more useful configuration for a FrameNet-based
resource in the Semantic Web would include link-
age from frame governors and frame elements to
(many) examples in corpora, rather than a sim-
ple rendering of linkages among lexical units,
frames, and frame elements. Coupled with linkage
to WordNet and multilingual semantic resources
such as BabelNet (which has also been recently
ported to RDF–see (Navigli, 2012)), a Semantic
Web resource of this type and magnitude would
enable SPARQL queries that collect information
across several linguistic phenomena and levels, for
example, “find all tokens in English and Russian
that refer to land as a political unit (synonyms
from the WordNet synset land%1:15:02::) in the
VICTIM role of the ATTACK frame”. This is a

trivial example; the full range of possibilities is left
to the reader’s imagination, and awaits SPARQL’s
transition to full adulthood.

FrameNet has always hand-annotated sample
sentences as input to frame construction, due to the
insistence by FrameNet’s founder on grounding
the theory in real language data. FrameNet’s early
annotation efforts used examples from the British
National Corpus (BNC); however, as time went
on, FrameNet and similar annotation projects3

found that usage examples extracted from the
BNC were often unusable or misrepresentative
for developing templates to describe semantic ar-
guments and the like, due to significant syntac-
tic differences between British and American En-
glish. This motivated a proposal for an American
National Corpus (ANC)4 (Fillmore et al., 1998),
comparable to the BNC but including genres non-
existent at the time of BNC development (blogs,
email, chat rooms, tweets, etc.) as well as annota-
tions beyond part-of-speech, to serve as basis for
the development of lexical-semantic resources and
NLP research in general.5

In 2006, the ANC, FrameNet, and WordNet
projects received a substantial grant from the U.S.
National Science Foundation6 to produce a half-
million word Manually Annotated Sub-Corpus
(MASC)7 (Ide et al., 2010), consisting of data
drawn from the ANC and annotated for multiple
types of linguistic phenomena. The project in-
cluded a component to annotate portions of the
corpus for WordNet senses and FrameNet frame
elements, in order to provide input to an effort to
harmonize these two resources (Baker and Fell-
baum, 2009). The first full version of the cor-
pus, released in 2012, included over 16 different
annotation types and was coupled with a separate
sentence corpus (Passonneau et al., 2012) that in-
cludes WordNet 3.1 sense-tags for approximately
1000 occurrences of each of 114 words chosen by
the WordNet and FrameNet teams (ca. 114,000
annotated occurrences). Of these, 100 occurrences
of each word (over 1000 sentences) are also anno-

3E.g., Comlex (http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/comlex/) and Nom-
Lex (http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/nomlex/)

4http://www.anc.org/
5The ANC never received the substantial funding and text

contributions enjoyed by the BNC, and as a result has so far
released only 22 million words of data, including a 15 million
word subset that is unrestricted for any use called the Open
ANC” (OANC), available at http://www.anc.org/data/oanc/.

6NSF CRI 0708952
7http://www.anc.org/data/masc/

19



tated for FrameNet frame elements. These annota-
tions were subsequently used in a major WordNet-
FrameNet alignment effort (de Melo et al., 2012).

MASC provides a missing link in the Semantic
Web scenario for FrameNet and related resources.
The corpus contains not only FrameNet and Word-
Net annotations, but also annotations over parts
or all the corpus at several other linguistic layers
including morphosyntax, syntax (shallow parse,
Penn Treebank annotation), semantics (named en-
tities, opinion, PropBank), and discourse (corefer-
ence, clause boundaries and nucleus/satellite rela-
tions). All of MASC is currently being incorpo-
rated into the LLOD cloud, and its FrameNet and
WordNet annotations will be linked to the linked
data versions of those resources.8 The resulting
resource, connecting multiple major semantic re-
sources and a broad-genre corpus, will be unpar-
alleled as a foundation for NLP research and de-
velopment.

When the annotations for other phenomena in
MASC are added into the mix, the potential to
study and process language data across multiple
linguistic levels becomes even greater. It is in-
creasingly recognized that to perform human-like
language understanding, NLP systems will ulti-
mately have to dynamically integrate information
from all linguistic levels as they process input,
but despite this recognition most work in the field
continues to focus on isolated phenomena or uti-
lizes only selected phenomena from a few lin-
guistic levels. Some corpora with multiple anno-
tation layers, including MASC and a (very few)
others such as OntoNotes (Pradhan et al., 2007),
have recently been created, but due to the high
costs of their development they are limited in size
and do not include annotations across the gamut
of linguistic phenomena. Similarly, standardized
formats for annotated data (e.g., (ISO, 2012)),
lexical-semantic resources (ISO, 2008), and ref-
erence categories for linguistic annotations (Marc
Kemps-Snijders and Wright, 2008) have been de-
veloped to enable merging of annotations of differ-
ent types and formats, but there still remains con-
siderable disparity among and/or lack of support
for processing merged resources.

8See (Chiarcos et al., 2012b) for a discussion of the pro-
cess and benefits. BabelNet annotations of MASC, which are
in turn linked to wordnets in multiple languages, have also
been recently contributed (Moro et al., 2014), thus opening
up the possibility for linkage from MASC to that resource
as well–and, by extension, linkage between BabelNet and
MASC’s existing FrameNet and WordNet annotations.

Is the Semantic Web the answer? Will it be the
vehicle for a paradigm shift in NLP research and
development? Likely, it or something it evolves
into will ultimately provide the required common
representation and processing framework which,
coupled with potentially enormous advances in
computer and network speed, data capacity, neu-
rotechnology, network-on-chip technologies, and
the like, will fundamentally change our approach
to NLP in the decades to come. In the meantime,
it remains to be seen how quickly Semantic Web
technology will progress, and how soon most or
all language resources will reside in places like the
LLOD cloud, so that they can begin to be fully
and readily exploited. But whether the Semantic
Web as we know it now is the ultimate solution or
simply a developmental step, the direction seems
clear; and fittingly, FrameNet is one of the first re-
sources on board.

References
Collin F. Baker and Christiane Fellbaum. 2009. Word-

Net and FrameNet as Complementary Resources for
Annotation. In Proceedings of the Third Linguistic
Annotation Workshop, pages 125–129.

Volha Bryl, Sara Tonelli, Claudio Giuliano, and Lu-
ciano Serafini. 2012. A novel Framenet-based re-
source for the semantic web. In SAC, pages 360–
365.

Aljoscha Burchardt, Katrin Erk, and Anette Frank.
2005. A WordNet detour to FrameNet. In Proceed-
ings of the GLDV 2005 workshop GermaNet II.

Christian Chiarcos, Sebastian Hellmann, and Sebas-
tian Nordhoff. 2012a. Linking Linguistic Re-
sources: Examples from the Open Linguistics Work-
ing Group. In Linked Data in Linguistics, pages
201–216. Springer.

Christian Chiarcos, John McCrae, Philipp Cimiano,
and Christiane Fellbaum. 2012b. Towards open
data for linguistics: Linguistic linked data. In New
Trends of Research in Ontologies and Lexical Re-
sources. Springer.

Bonaventura Coppola, Aldo Gangemi, Alfio Massimil-
iano Gliozzo, Davide Picca, and Valentina Presutti.
2009. Frame Detection over the Semantic Web. In
Proceedings of the 6th European Semantic Web Con-
ference.

Diego De Cao, Danilo Croce, Marco Pennacchiotti,
and Roberto Basili. 2008. Combining Word Sense
and Usage for Modeling Frame Semantics. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2008 Conference on Semantics in
Text Processing, pages 85–101.

20



Gerard de Melo, Collin F. Baker, Nancy Ide, Rebecca
Passonneau, and Christiane Fellbaum. 2012. Em-
pirical Comparisons of MASC Word Sense Annota-
tions. In Eighth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012).

Charles J. Fillmore, Nancy Ide, Daniel Jurafsky, and
Catherine Macleod. 1998. An American National
Corpus: A Proposal. In Proceedings of the First An-
nual Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation, pages 965–969, Granada, Spain.

Charles J. Fillmore, Collin F. Baker, and Hiroaki Sato.
2002. The FrameNet Database and Software Tools.
In Proceedings of the Third International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation, vol-
ume IV.

Nancy Ide, Collin Baker, Christiane Fellbaum, and Re-
becca Passonneau. 2010. The Manually Annotated
Sub-Corpus: A Community Resource for and by the
People. In Proceedings of ACL 2010, pages 68–73.

Nancy Ide. 2006. Making Senses: Bootstrapping
Sense-Tagged Lists of Semantically-Related Words.
In Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text,
pages 13–27.

2008. Language Resource Management – Lexical
Markup Framework. International Standard ISO
24613.

2012. Language Resource Management – Linguistic
Annotation Framework. International Standard ISO
24612.

Peter Wittenburg Marc Kemps-Snijders, Menzo Wind-
houwer and Sue Ellen Wright. 2008. ISOCat: Cor-
ralling Data Categories in the Wild. In Proceedings
of the Sixth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’08).

Andrea Moro, Roberto Navigli, Francesco Maria
Tucci, and Rebecca J. Passonneau. 2014. Annotat-
ing the MASC corpus with babelnet. In Proceedings
of the Ninth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’ 2014).

Srini Narayanan, Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore,
and Miriam R.L. Petruck. 2003a. FrameNet Meets
the Semantic Web: Lexical Semantics for the Web.
In The Semantic Web - ISWC 2003, pages 771–787.
Springer.

Srinivas Narayanan, Miriam R.L. Petruck, Collin F.
Baker, and Charles J. Fillmore. 2003b. Putting
FrameNet Data into the ISO Linguistic Annotation
Framework. In Proceedings of the ACL 2003 Work-
shop on Linguistic Annotation: Getting the Model
Right, page 22–29.

Roberto Navigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2010.
BabelNet: Building a Very Large Multilingual Se-
mantic Network. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 216–225.

Roberto Navigli. 2012. BabelNet goes to the (Multi-
lingual) Semantic Web. In ISWC 2012 Workshop on
Multilingual Semantic Web.

Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese, Aldo Gangemi, and
Valentina Presutti. 2011. Gathering lexical linked
data and knowledge patterns from FrameNet. In K-
CAP, pages 41–48.

Ekaterina Ovchinnikova, Laure Vieu, Alessandro
Oltramari, Stefano Borgo, and Theodore Alexan-
drov. 2010. Data-Driven and Ontological Anal-
ysis of FrameNet for Natural Language Reason-
ing. In Proceedings of the Seventh conference on
International Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10).

Rebecca J. Passonneau, Collin F. Baker, Christiane
Fellbaum, and Nancy Ide. 2012. The MASC Word
Sense Corpus. In Proceedings of the Eighth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC 2012).

Sameer S. Pradhan, Eduard H. Hovy, Mitchell P.
Marcus, Martha Palmer, Lance A. Ramshaw, and
Ralph M. Weischedel. 2007. Ontonotes: A unified
relational semantic representation. In Proceedings
of the First IEEE International Conference on Se-
mantic Computing (ICSC 2007), pages 517–526.

Eric Prud’hommeaux and Andy Seaborne. 2008.
SPARQL Query Language for RDF.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R.L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson, and Jan Schef-
fczyk. 2006. FrameNet II: Extended Theory and
Practice. International Computer Science Institute.

Jan Scheffczyk, Collin F. Baker, and Srini Narayanan.
2008. Ontology-Based reasoning about lexical re-
sources. In Ontologies and Lexical Resources for
Natural Language Processing. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Jan Scheffczyk, Collin Baker, and Srrini Narayanan,
2010. Reasoning over Natural Language Text by
Means of FrameNet and Ontologies, pages 53–71.
Cambridge University Press.

21


