



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and J D Pawar. Proc. of the 11th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 113–118,
Goa, India. December 2014. c©2014 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Improving the accuracy of pronunciation lexicon using Naive Bayes 
classifier with character n-gram as feature: for language classified 

pronunciation lexicon generation 
 

 
Aswathy P V 

Language Technolo-
gy Section 
CDAC-T 

India 
aswa-

thypv@cdac.in 

Arun Gopi 
Language Technolo-

gy Section 
CDAC-T 

India 
arungo-

pi@cdac.in 

Sajini T 
Language Technolo-

gy Section 
CDAC-T 

India 
sajini@cdac.in 

Bhadran V K 
Language Technolo-

gy Section 
CDAC-T 

India 
bha-

dran@cdac.in 

 
  

 

Abstract 

This paper looks at improving the accu-
racy of pronunciation lexicon for Malayalam 
by improving the quality of front end 
processing. Pronunciation lexicon is an in 
evitable component in speech research and 
speech applications like TTS and ASR. This 
paper details the work done to improve the 
accuracy of automatic pronunciation lexicon 
generator (APLG) with Naive Bayes clas-
sifier using character n-gram as feature. n-
gram is used to classify Malayalam native 
words (MLN) and Malayalam English 
words (MLE). Phonotactics which is unique 
for Malayalam is used as the feature for 
classification of MLE and MLN words. Na-
tive and nonnative Malayalam words are 
used for generating models for the same. 
Testing is done on different text input col-
lected from news domain, where MLE fre-
quency is high.  

1 Introduction 
Automatic pronunciation generator is one of 

the main modules in speech application which 
determines the quality of the output. In speech 
applications, pronunciation is generated online 
from the given input using dictionary or rules. 
For a language like Malayalam which has agglu-
tination, rule based approach is more suitable 
than look up.  Since English is the official lan-
guage, the influence is such that the usage of 
English words is very common in Indian lan-
guage scripts and texts. So APLG must be able to 
handle the pronunciation of these English words.    

The inputs given to TTS are normally bilin-
gual with English words in Latin script and na-

tive language script. In most cases the pronuncia-
tion model for MLE is different and depends on 
explicit knowledge of the language. Hence, it 
must be identified by the system in order to en-
able the correct model. Language identification 
is often based on only written text, which creates 
an interesting problem. User intervention is al-
ways a possibility, but a completely automatic 
system would make this phase transparent and 
increase the usability of the system (William. B).  

In this paper we brief about the language 
identification from text, which is typically a 
symbolic processing task. Language identifica-
tion is done to classify MLN and MLE and apply 
LTS to generate Indian English pronunciation. 
We used Naive Bayes classifier with character n-
grams as feature, to identify whether the given 
word belongs to native or non-native Malayalam.  

2 Structure of Malayalam 

Malayalam is an offshoot of the Proto-Tamil-
Malayalam branch of the Proto Dravidian 
Language.  Malayalam belongs to the southern 
group of Dravidian Language. There are 
approximately 37 million Malayalam speakers 
worldwide, with 33,066,392 speakers in India, as 
of the 2001 census of India. Basically Malayalam 
words are derived from Sanskrit and Tamil. 
Malayalam script contains 51 letters including 15 
vowels and 36 consonants, which forms 576 
syllabic characters, and contains two additional 
diacritic characters named anuswara and visarga.  

In the writing system of syllabic alphabet, all 
consonants have an inherent vowel. Diacritics, 
which can appear above, below, before or after a 
consonant, are used to change the inherent 
vowel. When they appear at the beginning of a 

113



syllable, vowels are written as independent 
letters. When certain consonants occur together, 
special conjunct symbols are used which 
combine the essential parts of each letter 
(omniglot). Consonants with vowel omission are 
used to represent the 5 chillu, which occurs in 
around 25% of words.   

Malayalam has a canonical word order of 
SOV (subject–object–verb) as do other 
Dravidian languages. Phonetically a syllable in 
Malayalam consists of an obligatory nucleus 
which is always characterized by a vowel or 
diphthongal articulation; preceded and followed 
optionally by a ‘releasing’ and an ‘arresting 
‘consonant articulation respectively 
(Prabodachandran, 1967 pp 39-40).  

Among the vowel phonemes in Malayalam, 
two fronts, two are back and one is a low central 
vowel. Front vowels are unrounded and back 
vowels are rounded ones (Prabodachandran, 
1967 pp 39-40). All vowels both short and long 
except |o| occurs initially medially and finally. 
Short |o| does not occur word finally medially 
short |e| and short |o| occur only in the first 
syllable. Malayalam has also borrowed the 
Sanskrit diphthongs of /äu/ (represented in 
Malayalam as ഔ, au) and /ai/ (represented in 
Malayalam as ഐ, ai), although these mostly 
occur only in Sanskrit loanwords.   

In a syllable there will be at least one 
consonant and a vowel. By the combination of a 
consonant and a vowel, Malayalam syllable 
structure may be expressed by the simple 
formula (c) v (c).  

The syllable structure occurring in Malayalam 
corpus and its frequency is shown in figure 1: 
C*VC* patterns occur in English words.  

Harmonic sequence of vowels is one of the 
main characteristics of the Dravidian family of 
languages (Prabodhachandran).That is one vowel 
can influence sound of other. 

 
Figure 1. Syllable pattern and frequency  

3 Malayalam corpus collection 

The main input for speech research is a huge 
corpus, both text and speech properly annotated. 
For the major world languages, large corpora are 
publicly available. But for most other languages, 
they are not. But with the advent of the Web it 
can be highly automated and thereby fast and 
inexpensive (Adam and G V Reddy). 

 
Malayalam corpus was created from online 

sources like newspapers, blogs and other sites, 
which is then used to extract data. Manual verifi-
cation of the sites content is done to ensure that it 
contains good-enough-quality textual content. 
For domain coverage contents is manually pre-
pared. 25GB of raw corpus is collected for ex-
tracting optimal text which covers the phonetic 
variations in the language. The collected corpus 
as such cannot be used for optimal text selection. 
The raw data contains junk characters, foreign 
words (frequent occurring of English words in 
Malayalam script) etc.  

 
The optimal text selected for speech applica-

tion like ASR and TTS, must be able to well 
represent the language. Optimal text (OT) must 
cover all phonemic variations occurring in the 
language. OT is the minimum text which covers 
the all/maximum possible units (variations) in 
the language.  

 
Frequent occurrences of English words give 

higher rank for sentences containing more num-
ber of English words.  This reduces the text with 
native content. If we have to select sentence with 
Malayalam words, these English words must not 
add to the unit count. Manually marking of these 
words is practically not possible.  Post verifica-
tion and cleaning of English words from OT is 
tedious and sometimes requires additional text 
selection.  

 
Automatic language identification can be 

used in the text selection to improve the quality 
of OT.  

4 Malayalam pronunciation and Letter 
to sound(LTS) rules  

Malayalam is a phonetic language having a 
direct correspondence between symbols and 
sounds (Prabhodhachandran, 1997).  The pro-
nunciation lexicon generation is easy for phonet-
ic languages when compared with English. But 
there exist few exceptions, in case of Malayalam. 

114



Accurate pronunciation can be generated only by 
properly handling these exceptions. Pronuncia-
tion is one of the factors that determine the quali-
ty of TTS.  

 
A detailed analysis on speech and text corpus 

is carried to identify the LTS rules for Malaya-
lam. The identified rules are then verified and 
validated by language experts.  

 
The Malayalam LTS rules can be catego-

rized as below. 
 
• Phonetic  – direct correspondence be-

tween text and sounds 
e.g.:  

  തിരുവnപുരം     തി രു വ n പു രം 
 tiruvananthapuram ti ru va na ntha pu ram 
 

• Pronunciation different from orthogra-
phy  
 
e.g.: നനയുക ന (ന) യു ക 
“nanayuka n a n@ a y u k a” (n 
represent dental and n@ represent the 
alveolar) 

 
Dental and alveolar sounds for NA and 
its gemination  

 
Influence of y in gemination of kk 

 
Retroflex plosive and its allophone 
 
Lexicons having multiple pronunciations 
– homonym/homophones 
 
   “ennaal”  e nn aa l 
“nn” can be alveolar gemination or den-
tal gemination. The occurrence of such 
cases is very less in Malayalam.  

 
• Pronunciation by usage ( Speaker  spe-

cific pronunciation)  
 

utവം  u t വം  
“utsavam” “u t s a v a m”  

 -Actual pronunciation 
u സവം  u സ വം 
“utsavam” “u l s a v a m”  

 - by usage  
ദയ  ദ യ 
“daya” “d a y a”  

– Actual pronunciation 
ദയ  െദ യ 

“daya” “d e y a”   – by usage 

 
• Foreign word pronunciation ( frequent 

usage of English words )  
 

For generating proper pronunciation foreign 
words must be identified and separate rules or 
pronunciation lexicon must be applied for gene-
rating proper pronunciation. The influence or 
dominance of English has reached to an extent 
that the contents from few sources even contains 
more than 25% of foreign words.  
 

For handling English pronunciation 3 addi-
tional phones are required.   

 
“a” sound as in “bank”  (ബാ ്) 
“ph” sound as in “fan” (ഫാന്  ) 
“s” sound as in “zoo” (സൂ) 

 
In TTS application a standard pronunciation 

is used at synthesis time. Users can add user spe-
cific pronunciation dictionary to generate pro-
nunciation in their own preference. In ASR, mul-
tiple pronunciation lexicons will be stored and 
pronunciation variations can be handled.  

 
For generating accurate pronunciation, lan-

guage identification is done and specific rules 
must be applied to handle the phone variations.  

5 Pronunciation lexicon generation for 
Malayalam 

Pronunciation lexicon for Malayalam is gen-
erated using LTS rules and exception list for 
handling the above listed cases.  

 
Exception patterns for dental and alveolar NA 

gemination and allophonic variation of KK is 
extracted from corpus, and added to exception 
list. Pronunciation is generated based on these 
exception patterns.  Other exceptions like pro-
nunciation of nouns etc. are also included in this 
exception list.  

5.1 Handling of English words pronuncia-
tion (English script) 

For handling English word in latin script, en-
coding is checked to identify the language. Pro-
nunciation is generated using a standard dictio-
nary look up. CMU dictionary with 100K words 
is taken as the reference for English pronuncia-
tion.  

 

115



A pattern based replacement is done to modi-
fy the pronunciation as Indian English (of native 
Malayalam speaker) pronunciation.  

5.2 Handling of English word pronuncia-
tion (Native script) 

The input text contains frequent occurrence of 
English words. Encoding based language identi-
fication is not applicable since both are in the 
same script.  

All languages have a finite set of phonemic 
units on which the words are building and there 
are constraints on the way in which these pho-
nemes can be arranged to form syllables. These 
constraints are called as phonotactics or phoneme 
sequence constraint. Phonotactics is language 
dependent.  

 
In the process of recognition with respect to 

Spoken Languages it is observed that human are 
the best identifier of a language. However during 
automatic recognition we have to consider sever-
al factors like with respect to language identifica-
tion one language differs from another language 
in one or more of the following: (M.A.Zissman, 
Navratil J, Mutusamy, Schultz, Mak). 

 
• Phonology: Phone sets would be differ-

ent for each of the languages 
 
• Morphology: The word roots and the 

lexicons may be different for different 
category of    languages 

 
• Syntax: The sentence patterns with re-

spect to grammar are different 
 
• Prosody: Duration, pitch, and stress pat-

terns vary from language to language 
 

In this paper an attempt has been made to 
identify language using the phonology since 
we require word level identification. We use 
language specific phonotactics information to 
identify words that belong to native language.  

5.3 Pattern based approach 
Pattern based approach is a string matching 

method to classify words. A detailed analysis of 
corpus is done to extract 1200 patterns that do 
not occur in Malayalam.  Pattern search is done 
on the input text and words with matching pat-
terns were classified as English. Patterns that are 
common / noun patterns are not considered in the 

list. Only 70-75% of words are covered in this 
approach.  

 

5.4 Naive Bayes classifier using character 
n-gram approach 

Naive Bayes classifier begins by calculating 
the prior probability of each label, which is de-
termined by checking the frequency of each label 
in the training set. The contribution from each 
feature is then combined with this prior probabil-
ity, to arrive at a likelihood estimate for each la-
bel. The label whose likelihood estimate is the 
highest is then assigned to the input value. 

 
Naive Bayes classifier with character n-gram 

as feature is used for categorizing MLN and 
MLE. In this approach two categories of texts are 
collected, one only with native c words (MLN) 
and the other with nonnative (MLE). From these 
texts n-gram model profile for MLN and MLE is 
generated. These profiles hold n-gram models up 
to order 3 and their individual frequencies. Gen-
eration of n-gram is shown in figure 2.  
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
Figure 2. Generation of n-gram frequency profile 
for each word in the source 

 
N-gram for Malayalam word മലയാളം 

1-gram: മ ല യ ◌ാ ള ◌ം 
  _ma la y aa lxa m_ 

2-gram: _മ മല ലയ യാ ◌ാള ളം ◌ം_ 
      _ma mala lay yaa aalxa lxam m_ 
3-gram: _മല മലയ ലയാ യാള ◌ാളം ളം_ 
     _ma malay layaa yaalx aalxam  lxam_   
 
As n increases expressiveness of the model 

increases but ability to estimate accurate parame-
ters from sparse data decreases, which is impor-
tant in categorizing nonnative Malayalam words, 
so n-gram up to 3 servers the job. 

 
 N-gram decomposes every string into sub-

strings, hence any errors that are present is li-

Malaya-
lam native 

text 

N-gram 
frequency 

profile 
(MLN) 

N-gram 
Generate 

N-gram 
frequency 

profile 
(MLE) 

Malayalam 
non-native 

text 

N-gram 
Generate 

116



mited to few n-grams (n-gram based text catego-
rization, William B. Cavnar and John M. Tren-
kle).  

 

5.4.1 Formulation of Naive Bayes 

Given a word and the classes (CMLN CMLE) to 
which it may belong. Naïve Bayes classifier eva-
luates the posterior probability for which the 
word belongs to particular class. It then assigns 
the word to class with highest probability val-
ues(Jing Bai and Jian-Yun Nie. Using Language 
Model for Text Classification). 

|  

              MAP is Maximum a posteriori probability 
 
          argmax |  
 

             argmax p w|c p c  
 
             argmax p x , x , . . , x |c p c  

                x represents feature      
 
By Naive Bayes conditional independence assumption 
 
p x , x , . . , x |c p x |c p x |c
                                                         . . p x |c                                               

 

 c argmax p c ∏ p x |c  
 
5.4.2 Applying Naive with n-gram frequen-

cy as feature 
 

1. Generate character based n-gram profiles 
for each category as discussed above 
 

2. From training corpus extract vocabulary 
of model 
 

3. Calculate  terms 
a. For each  in C do 

i.  := count of all words that 
belong to class Cj  

 
| |

 
 

4. Calculate |  
b. For each  

|
 

  | |
    

  (Add 1 smoothing where  1) 
 

5. Return  where  

∏
∈∈

=
positionsi

jij
Cc

NB cxPcPc )|()(argmax
j

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Categorization using Naïve Bayes 
 

6 Experiment and results 
We selected 200 sentences with 2000 unique 

words was taken as the input for verification of 
pattern based and Naive Bayes based classifica-
tion. First we performed the words categorization 
based on the pattern list (for English words).391 
words were identified and 97 were mis-
classified. We then used the Naive Bayes clas-
sifier to classify the words. The result is given in 
Table 1.0 

 
 
Language identi-
fication 

#Identified 
English word 

#Miss  
classified 

Pattern based 391 97 
Naïve Bayes 782 47 

 
Table 1.0 Category identified and misclassi-

fied 
 
 

We also tested with random input collected 
from online sources. Naive Bayes with n-gram 
showed better word identification, than pattern. 
An average of 90% of word coverage was given 
by n-gram based language identification.  
 

7 Conclusion 

In this paper we brief about the effort for im-
proving the accuracy of pronunciation lexicon 
for Malayalam.  This method can be used to im-
prove the quality of corpus, and speech applica-
tions like TTS and ASR. In text corpus selection, 
APLG using Naive Bayes classifier is used to 
identify foreign words in native script. This re-
duces the manual effort required for manual veri-
fication and cleaning of selected text corpus. For 

MAP 
Classifier 

<W, CMLE >   
or  

<W,CMLN > 

Profile MLE Profile MLN 

Word 

117



TTS the pronunciation of words can be made 
accurate using Naive Bayes classifier. Depending 
on the domain this will increase the quality of 
synthetic speech.  

In future we plan to improve the accuracy of 
Naive Bayes classifier by including the morphol-
ogy rules to identify the root words. Using dif-
ferent smoothing technique can also improve 
performance(Sami Virpioja, Tommi Vatanen, 
Jaakko J. Vayrynen. Language Identification of 
Short Text Segments with N-gram Mod-
els).Naive Bayes classifier has wide range of ap-
plications which includes text categorization, 
development of multi-lingual speech recognizer 
etc.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Figure 4: Implementation of APLG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Reference 
 
Adam, G V Reddy  Lexical Computing Ltd. IIIT Hy-
derabad, Masaryk University, IIIT Hyderabad United 
Kingdom, India, Czech Republic, India 
 
M.A. Zissman, 1996 Comparison of Four Approaches 
to Automatic Language Identification of Telephone 
speech, IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio 
Processing.  
 
Milla Nizar, 2010, Malayalam: Dative Subject Con-
structions in South-Dravidian Languages.  
 
Navratil. J, Sept. 2001 Spoken Language Recognition 
- A Step toward Multilinguality in Speech Processing, 
IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing.   
 
T. Sajini, K. G. Sulochana, R. Ravindra Kumar,  
Optimized Multi Unit Speech Database for High 
Quality FESTIVAL TTS 
 
Alan W. Black, Carolyn P. Rosé, Kishore Prahallad, 
Rohit Kumar, Rashmi Gangadharaiah, Sharath Rao,  
Building a Better Indian English Voice using More 
Data  
 
Prabodachandran, 1967, Malayalam structure (Aber-
crombie 1 pp 39-40) 
 
Sanghamitra Mohanty, April 2011 Phonotactic Model 
for Spoken Language Identification in Indian Lan-
guage Perspective, International Journal of Computer 
Applications (0975 8887) Volume 19 No.9 
 
Schultz.T, et al, 1999, Language Independent and 
Language Adaptive Large Vocabulary Speech Recog-
nition, Proc. Euro Speech, Hungary.  
 
Schultz. T and Kirchhoff. K, 2006, Multilingual 
Speech Processing, Academic Press  
 
Mak. B, et al, 2002, Multilingual Speech Recognition 
with Language Identification, Proc. ICSLP. 
 
William B. Cavnar and John M. Trenkle N-Gram-
Based Text Categorization.   
 
Jing Bai and Jian-Yun Nie, Using Language Model 
for Text Classification 
 
Jaakko J. Vayrynen, Sami Virpioja, Tommi Vatanen, 
Language Identification of Short Text Segments with 
N-gram Models 
 

Tokenize 

Input text 

CMU Dict Ngram Models

LTS Rules 

         <W, C> 

< W, C > 

Pronunciation 
Lexicon 

Phonetic variations

Y 

N

Pronunciation 
User choice 

N

Y 

118


