



















































Extracting Imperatives from Wikipedia Article for Deletion Discussions


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Argumentation Mining, pages 106–107,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Extracting Imperatives from Wikipedia Article for Deletion Discussions

Fiona Mao
Robert E. Mercer

Department of Computer Science
The University of Western Ontario

London, Ontario, Canada
fiona.wt.mao@gmail.com

mercer@csd.uwo.ca

Lu Xiao
Faculty of Information and Media Studies

Department of Computer Science
The University of Western Ontario

London, Ontario, Canada
lxiao24@uwo.ca

Abstract

Wikipedia contains millions of articles,
collaboratively produced. If an article
is controversial, an online “Article for
Deletion” (AfD) discussion is held to
determine whether the article should be
deleted. It is open to any user to participate
and make a comment or argue an opin-
ion. Some of these comments and argu-
ments can be counter-arguments, attacks
in Dung’s (1995) argumentation terminol-
ogy. Here, we consider the extraction of
one type of attack, the directive speech act
formed as an imperative.

1 Introduction

A large group of volunteers participate to make
Wikipedia one of the most successful collabora-
tive information repositories. To ensure the quality
of the encyclopedia, deletion of articles happens
continually. If an article is controversial, an on-
line discussion called “Article for Deletion” (AfD)
is held to determine whether the article should be
deleted. It is open to any user to participate in the
discussion and make a comment or argue an opin-
ion. Some of these comments and arguments can
be counter-arguments, attacks in Dung’s (1995) ar-
gumentation terminology. A common argumenta-
tive attack is a directive speech act suggesting a
potential disagreement and a possible way to rec-
tify the matter. Here, we consider the extraction of
this type of attack when formed as an imperative.

Researchers are becoming increasingly inter-
ested in studying the content of Wikipedia’s Ar-
ticles for Deletion (AfD) forum. Schneider et al.
(2013) investigated the difference in arguments
from novices and experienced users. Xiao and
Askin (2014) examined the types of rationales in
Wikipedia AfD discussions.

2 Speech Acts and Imperatives

A speech act is an utterance that has performative
function in communication (Austin, 1975). Of the
three types of speech acts, Searle (1976) subcate-
gorized the illocutionary act, the act of expressing
the speaker’s intention, into five sub-groups. We
are interested here in the Directives sub-group.

Often, a directive can be viewed as an attack
(Dung, 1995), albeit an indirect one, e.g., “Could
you provide the source to me?”. The user, to
whom this directive is made, undercuts (Pollock,
1992) the attack by responding with some sources.

Ervin-Tripp (1976) lists six types of directives
one being the imperative. Imperatives express a
command. Typically the predicate is an action
verb and the subject, often eliminated, is second-
person (you). As well, there can be words of po-
liteness and adverbial modifiers of the verb:

• Please do this sort of check in the future.
• Just avoid those sorts of comments and per-

haps strike the one above.

Cohortatives (first person plural imperatives) are
normally used in suggestions such as, “Let’s have
dinner together.” Some directive sentences from
AfD discussions are listed below:

• Add the information, and please give us some
information so we can judge these sources.

• Let’s avoid compounding the BLP issues
caused by the existence of this article, in vi-
olation of notability and blp policies, by hav-
ing it snow-deleted post-haste.

• You must first discuss the matter there, and
you need to be specific.

• Perhaps time would be better spent adding
more and improving the article rather than
just arguing here.

• Instead of complaining, how about finding
such content and improving the article?

106



Viewing the above examples, some users directly
suggest or command other users to do something
(the first one). Cohortatives include the user (the
second example). The third one is obviously com-
manding someone to discuss the matter first and
to be specific. The first three examples are imper-
atives. Some commands include politeness, as il-
lustrated by the last two examples. Since the form
of this kind of utterance varies, it is difficult to de-
fine a rule for recognizing it by computer. In this
paper, we only detect direct imperatives and leave
indirect imperative recognition for future work.

3 Detecting Imperatives

In English, a typical imperative is expressed by us-
ing the base form of a verb, normally without a
subject. To detect this kind of imperative, we need
to analyze the grammatical structure of sentences.

According to our observation, a typical imper-
ative contains a verb in base form without any
subject. Therefore, the basic rule for imperative
recognition is to find those sentences with a verb
(in its base form) as the root in the phrase struc-
ture and this particular verb has no subject child
in the dependency structure. Another form of im-
perative is like the sentence: ”You must first dis-
cuss the matter there, and you need to be specific”.
We have adapted a modal directive rule suggested
by Sinclair et al. (1975): We recognize the use of
a personal pronoun or noun (e.g., “you”, “we”,
or a username) followed by a modal verb (e.g.,
“should”, “must”, “need”) as an imperative. We
used keywords to detect this kind of imperative.

4 Evaluation

In this section, we evaluate the performance of our
methods to detect imperatives. Two human anno-
tators (undergraduate students at The University of
Western Ontario) extracted imperatives from our
data. Agreed upon imperatives became our gold
standard. Our system had Precision 0.8447, Re-
call 0.7337, and F-measure 0.7874 on this data.

Most false positives have an implicit subject “I”
(e.g., Agree with most of the rest of this.), a writ-
ing style found in this text genre. Missed impera-
tives (false negatives) resulted from parsing errors
by the parsing tool and sentences with the form
of subject + modal verb, but the subject is a noun
(person or organization) instead of a pronoun. Our
method keyed on pronouns.

5 Related Work

Marsi’s (1997) definition of imperative mood is
too restrictive for our purposes here. A use of
Argumentative Zoning to critique thesis abstracts
(Feltrim et al., 2006) gives no details regarding the
imperative sentence recognition techniques, and
the language of interest is Brazilian Portuguese.

Acknowledgments

This project is partially supported by the Discov-
ery program of The Natural Sciences and Engi-
neering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).

References
John Langshaw Austin. 1975. How To Do Things with

Words. Oxford University Press.

Phan Minh Dung. 1995. On the acceptability of ar-
guments and its fundamental role in nonmonotonic
reasoning, logic programming and n-person games.
Artificial Intelligence, 77(2):321–357.

Susan Ervin-Tripp. 1976. Is Sybil there? The structure
of some American English directives. Language in
Society, 5(01):25–66.

Valéria Feltrim, Simone Teufel, Maria das Graças V.
Nunes, and M. Aluı́sio, Sandra. 2006. Argumen-
tative zoning applied to critiquing novices’ scien-
tific abstracts. In James G. Shanahan, Yan Qu, and
Janyce Wiebe, editors, Computing Attitude and Af-
fect in Text: Theory and Applications, pages 233–
246. Springer Netherlands.

Erwin Marsi. 1997. A reusable syntactic generator for
Dutch. In Peter-Arno Coppen, Hans van Halteren,
and Lisanne Teunissen, editors, Computational Lin-
guistics in the Netherlands 1997: Selected papers
from the Eighth CLIN Meeting, pages 205–222. Am-
sterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi.

John L. Pollock. 1992. How to reason defeasibly. Ar-
tificial Intelligence, 57:1–42.

Jodi Schneider, Krystian Samp, Alexandre Passant, and
Stefan Decker. 2013. Arguments about deletion:
How experience improves the acceptability of argu-
ments in ad-hoc online task groups. In Proceedings
of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Co-
operative Work, pages 1069–1080. ACM.

John R Searle. 1976. A classification of illocutionary
acts. Language in Society, 5(01):1–23.

J.M.H. Sinclair and M. Coulthard. 1975. Towards an
analysis of discourse: The English used by teachers
and pupils. Oxford University Press.

Lu Xiao and Nicole Askin. 2014. What influences on-
line deliberation? A Wikipedia study. J. of the As-
sociation for Information Science and Technology.

107


