



















































Controlled Authoring In A Hybrid Russian-English Machine Translation System


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation (HyTra) @ EACL 2014, pages 15–20,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Controlled Authoring In A Hybrid Russian-English Machine 

Translation System 

 

 

Svetlana Sheremetyeva 

National Research South Ural State University / pr.Lenina 74, 454080 

Chelyabinsk, Russia 

LanA Consulting ApS/ Moellekrog 4, Vejby, 3210, Copenhagen, Denmark 

lanaconsult@mail.dk  

 

  

 

Abstract 

In this paper we describe the design and 

deployment of a controlled authoring module in 

REPAT, a hybrid Russian-English machine 

translation system for patent claims. Controlled 

authoring is an interactive procedure that is 

interwoven with hybrid parsing and simplifies the 

automatic stage of analysis. Implemented in a pre-

editing tool the controlled authoring module can be 

stand-alone and pipelined to any foreign MT 

system. Although applied to the Russian-English 

language pair in the patent domain, the approach 

described is not specific for the Russian language 

and can be applied for other languages, domains 

and types of machine translation application. 

1 Introduction 

MT systems have become an inherent part of 

translation activities in spite of general 

understanding that it is impossible to get high 

quality machine translation (MT) without human 

judgment (Koehn, 2009). In addition to lexical 

ambiguity, among the linguistic phenomena that 

lower translatability indicators (Underwood and 

Jongejan, 2001) is the syntactic complexity of a 

source text, of which the patent claim whose 

sentence can run for a page or so is an ultimate 

example. 

A wide range of activities can be found in the 

area of developing different techniques to “help” 

an MT engine cope with the ambiguity and 

complexity of the natural language. Recent work 

investigated the inclusion of interactive 

computer-human communication at each step of 

the translation process by, e.g., showing the user 

various “paths” among all translations of a 

sentence (Koehn, cf.), or keyboard-driving the 

user to select the best translation (Macklovitch, 

2006). One of the latest publications reports on 

Patent statistical machine translation (SMT) from 

English to French where the user drives the 

segmentation of the input text (Pouliquen et.al, 

2011). Another trend to cope with the source text 

complexity is to rewrite a source text into a 

controlled language (CL) to ensure that the MT 

input conforms to the desired vocabulary and 

grammar constraints. When a controlled 

language is introduced, the number of parses per 

sentence can be reduced dramatically compared 

to the case when a general lexicon and grammar 

are used to parse specialized domain texts. 

Controlled language software is developed 

with different levels of automation and normally 

involves interactive authoring (Nyberg et al., 

2003). The users (authors) have to be taught the 

CL guidelines in order to accurately use an 

appropriate lexicon and grammar during 

authoring. In line with these studies is the 

research on developing pre-editing rules, e.g., 

textual patterns that reformulate the source text 

in order to improve the source text translatability 

and MT output. Such rules implemented in a 

software formalism are applied for controlled 

language authoring (Bredenkamp et al. 2000; 

Rayner et al. 2012).  

This paper focuses on the design, deployment 

and utilization of a controlled language in the 

implementation of the hybrid REPAT 

environment for machine translation of patent 

15



claims from Russian into English. In selecting 

Russian as a source language we were motivated 

by two major considerations.  Firstly, Russia has 

a huge pool of patents which are unavailable for 

non-Russian speakers without turning to 

expensive translation services. The situation is of 

great disadvantage for international technical 

knowledge assimilation, dissemination, 

protection of inventor’s rights and patenting of 

new inventions. Secondly, in an attempt to find 

ways that could lower efforts in developing MT 

systems involving inflecting languages, for 

which statistical techniques normally fail 

(Sharoff, 2004), we were challenged to develop a 

hybrid technique for parsing morphologically 

rich languages on the example of such a highly 

inflecting language as Russian. 

In what follows we first give an overview of 

the   REPAT machine translation environment 

and then focuse on the components of the system 

which are responsible for controlled authoring of 

the source texts with complex syntactic structure, 

such as patent claims. These components raise 

the translatability of patent claims and, second, 

improve their readability in both source and 

target languages, which for patent claims is of 

great importance. It is well known that an 

extremely complex syntactic structure of the 

patent claim is a problematic issue for 

understanding (readability) even in a source 

language (Shinmori et al., 2003), let alone in 

translation.  

2 REPAT environment overview 

The REPAT system takes a Russian patent 

claim as input and produces translations at two 

major levels, the level of terminology (not just 

any chunks), and the text level. Full translation 

of a patent claim is output in two formats, - in the 

form of one sentence meeting all legal 

requirements to the claim text, and as a better 

readable set of simple sentences in the target 

language. In Figure 3 an example of the REPAT 

output is shown for a fragment of a Russian 

claim given below: 
 

Стеклоподъемник автомобиля содержащий 

электропривод и направляющую с ползуном, 

отличающися тем, что в ползуне выполнены два 

гнезда, образованные пластиной и выемками во 

вкладыше, в которых расположены параллельно 

друг другу две цилиндрические витые пружины 

для компенсации вытяжки каната...  

 

The system also improves the readability of a 

source claim by decomposing it into a set of 

simple sentences that can be useful for a 

posteditor to better understand the input and thus 

control the quality of claim translation. The 

REPAT translation environment includes hybrid 

modules for source language analysis, controlled 

authoring, terminology management, knowledge 

development and rule-based modules for transfer 

and target text generation. All modules work on 

controlled language which is built into the 

system. The overall architecture of the system is 

shown in Figure 1. The workflow includes these 

main steps: 

Source claim shallow analysis based on 

hybrid techniques. It serves two purposes : a) the 

on-the-fly translation of terminology; this can be 

used by a non-SL speaker for digest, and b) the 

preparation of a raw document for authoring in 

case a full claim translation is needed; the input 

is made interactive and the nominal and 

predicate terms are highlighted, the predicate 

terminology is linked to the knowledge base.  

Terminology update. The document is checked 

against the system bilingual lexicon and 

unknown words are flagged. If needed the 

lexicon can be updated. 

Authoring. The document is authored to 

conform the controlled lexicon and grammar. 

Unknown words are either avoided or flagged. 

The source claim syntactic structure is 

simplified. The simplification also serves the 

purpose of improving the readability of a source 

language claim.  

Document processing and translation. This 

includes document parsing into a formal content 

representation, generation of a source claim in a 

controlled language, crosslinguistic transfer and 

generation of the target text. The full translation 

is output in two controlled syntax formats, a) as 

one complex sentence meeting all legal 

requirements to the claim text, and d) as a better 

readable set of simple sentences that might meet 

the needs of the user in case the translation is 

needed to assimilate technical knowledge rather 

than to be included in a patent document. The 

simplified syntactic presentation of translation 

can be useful for further automatic claim 

processing, e.g., when translation into other 

languages is needed. 

 

 

16



  
 

Figure 1. An overall architecture of the hybrid REPAT system. 

3 Controlled language 

The system controlled language specifies 

constraints on the lexicon and constraints on the 

complexity of sentences. It draws heavily on the 

patent claim sublanguage on devices in 

automobile industry, and in addition to the 

universal phenomena affecting translatability 

(Underwood and Jongejan, cf.) it addresses the 

REPAT engine-specific constraints. 

Constraints of the REPAT controlled language 

are mainly coded in the corpus-based system 

lexicon, where ambiguous terms, that 

unavoidably emerge in any doimain are split in 

different lexemes, each having only one domain 

meaning. Where possible ambiguous lexemes are 

put in the lexicon as components of longer 

terms/phrases with one meaning. To 

disambiguate the residue of ambiguous terms we 

have created  a  method for disambiguation of 

lexical items that supports interactive 

disambiguation by the user through the system 

user interface.   

Grammar restrictions on the structure of 

sentences are set by an implicitly controlled 

grammar which is associated with a controlled 

set of predicate/argument patterns in the system 

lexicon rather than with syntactic sentence-level 

constraints. The patterns code domain-based 

information on the most frequent co-occurrences 

of predicates in finite forms with their case-roles, 

as well as their linear order in the claim text.  For 

example, the pattern (1 x 3 x 2) corresponds to 

such clam fragment as  

1:boards  x: are 3:rotatably x: mounted 2: on 

the pillars 

The controlled language restrictions are 

imposed on the source text semi-automatically. 

The system prompts the user to make correct 

authoring decisions by providing structural 

templates from the system knowledge base and 

by raising the users’ awareness about the 

linguistic phenomena that can increase the 

17



potential problems in machine translation. For 

example, the users are encouraged to repeat a 

preposition or a noun in conjoined constructions, 

limit the use of pronouns and conjunctions, put 

participles specifying a noun in postposition, etc.  

4 Analyzer and authoring engine 

Authoring engine is interwoven with the 

system hybrid analyzer. The analyzer performs 

two tasks in the REPAT system. It analyzers the 

input text into a formal internal representation 

and provides environment for authoring. In 

particular, the analyzer performs the following 

authoring-related steps: 

Segmentation and lexicalization. The input 

text is chunked into noun phrases (NPs) 

predicate phrases (VPs) and other types of 

lexical units. Every chunk is lexicalized by 

associating it with a known lexicon entry.  

The source NPs are chunked based on the 

dynamic knowledge automatically produced by a 

stand-alone hybrid extractor, the core of the 

REPAT shallow parsing component. It was 

ported to the Russian language following the 

methodology of NP extraction for English 

described in (Sheremetyeva 2009). The 

extraction methodology combines statistical 

techniques, heuristics and a shallow linguistic 

knowledge. The extractor does not rely on a 

preconstructed corpus, works on small texts, 

does not miss low frequency units and can 

reliably extract all NPs from an input text. The 

extraction results do not deteriorate when the 

extraction methodology is applied to inflecting 

languages (Russian in our case).  

The NPs are chunked by matching the 

extractor output (lists the source claim NPs in 

their text form) against the claim text. Here the 

language rich inflection properties turn to be an 

advantage: the NP chunking procedure proves to 

be very robust with practically no ambiguity. 

NPs excluded, the rest of the claim lexica is 

chunked by the lexicon look-up practically 

without (ambiguity) problems. The analyzer thus 

trigs highlighting of the nominal and verbal 

terminology, flags unknown words and provides 

means for lexical disambiguation. All lexicalized 

chunks are tagged with supertags coding sets of 

typed features as found in the morphological 

zones of the lexicon. 

Automatic and Interactive Disambiguation. 

Ambiguity of lexical units are resolved, either 

via a) automatic selection of the most likely 

meaning, using a set of disambiguation 

heuristics, or b) interactive clarification with the 

user. Syntactic ambiguity is to be resolved by 

human-computer interaction with strong 

computer support in the form of predicate 

templates to be filled with claim segments. 

Content representation. A formal internal 

representation of the source  claim content is 

built in the following two steps:  

Construction of the underspecified internal 

representations resulting from the authoring 

procedure of calling and filling predicate 

templates by the user. A predicate template is a 

visualization of a corresponding predicate case-

role pattern in the system lexicon. The main slot 

in the template corresponds to the predicate, 

while other slots represent case-roles. By 

supplying fillers into the slots of predicate 

templates the user in fact puts syntactic borders 

between the argument phrases and determines 

the dependency relations between the predicates 

and their arguments.  

Automatic completion of tagging and 

recursive chunking by the deep parser 

component that works over the set of the 

disambiguating features of the underspecified 

content representation. The final parse, a set of 

tagged predicate/argument structures, is then 

submitted into a) the source language generator 

that outputs a source claim in a more readable 

format of simple sentences, and b) to the transfer 

module and then to the target language generator, 

that outputs translations in two formats.  

5 Authoring Interface 

A screenshot of the REPAT authoring interface 

is shown in Figure 2. In the left pane it shows an 

interactive source claim with nominal and 

predicate terminology highlighted in different 

colours. Unknown words, if any, will be flagged. 

The user is encouraged not to use such words 

and remove the flag. In case the user considers 

them necessary, the flag stays (the terms are 

passed to the developer for lexicon update). The 

highlighted terminology improves the input 

readability and helps the user quicker and better 

understand the input content and structure. To 

simplify the input structure the user clicks on a 

predicate and gets a pop-up template whose slots 

are to be filled out with texts strings. Predicate 

templates are generated based on the case-role 

patterns in the system lexicon.  

 

18



 

Figure 2. A screenshot of the user interface showing the authoring set up for a fragment of the Russian 

claim given in Section 2. The source text  with visualized terms is shown in the left pane. In the 

middle is the template for the Russian predicate является (is).  The English translations for the 

terminology are shown in the bottom of the right pane.  

 

Figure 3. The two translation variants of the patent claim fragment given in Section 2. On the top the 

claim translation into English in the legal format of one nominal sentence is shown. In the middle the 

“better readable” claim translation in the form of simple sentences is displayed. In the bottom the 

authored Russian input text is given.  

19



The main slot of the template is automatically 

filled with a predicate in a finite form, not 

withstanding in which form the predicate was 

used in the text. Other predicate slots are 

referenced to particular case-roles whose 

semantic statuses are explained to the user by the 

questions next to the predicate slots. The user 

can either drag-and-drop appropriate segments 

from the interactive claim text or simply type the 

text in the slots. During the process of filling the 

template the system shows translations of the 

lexica used in the bottom of the right pane. In 

case a unit put in the slot is not found in the 

lexicon, it is flagged. The user is encouraged to 

either avoid using a problematic unit or 

substitute it with a synonym known to the 

system.  Once the template is filled, the system 

automatically generates a grammatically correct 

simple sentence in the source language and 

displays it for control. In addition to constraining 

the complexity of the sentence structure 

predicate templates also put certain constraints 

on the phrase level. As templates are meant for 

simple sentences only, coordination of verbal 

phrases (predicates) that may be ambiguous is 

avoided. Prepositions or particles attached to the 

verb are put to the main (predicate) template slot 

that resolves a possible attachment ambiguity.  

The authoring procedure completed, the 

underspecified content representation built by the 

analyzer “behind the scenes” is passed to the 

other modules of the REPAT for translation. The 

authored claim in the source language can also 

be saved and input in any foreign MT system.  

Conclusions 

We presented an authoring environment 

integrated in the hybrid PATMT system for 

translating patent claims. The efficiency of the 

system is conditioned by the controlled language 

framework. The controlled language data are 

created based on the domain-specific analysis of 

the patent corpus on devices in automobile 

industry. The constraints of the controlled 

language are embedded into the system 

knowledge base and included into a 

comprehensive, self-paced training material.  

The authoring environment is interwoven with 

hybrid analysis components specially developed 

for inflecting languages. Rich morphology turns 

out to be an advantage in our approach. A great 

variety of morphological forms significantly 

lowers ambiguity in source text chunking and 

lexicalization.  

The system is implemented in the programming 

language C++ for the Windows operational 

environment. 

References  

Bredenkamp, A., Crysmann, B., and Petrea, M. 2000. 

Looking for Errors: A Declarative Formalism for 

Resource-Adaptive Language Checking. 

Proceedings of LREC 2000. Athens, Greece. 

 Koehn Philipp. 2009. A process study of computer-

aided translation, Philipp Koehn, Machine 

Translation Journal, 2009, volume 23, number 4. 

Macklovitch, Elliott. 2006. TransType2: The last 

word. In proceedings of LREC06, Genoa, May.  

Nyberg E., T Mitamura, D. Svoboda, J. Ko, K. Baker, 

J. Micher 2003. An Integrated system for Source 

language Checking, Analysis and Terminology 

management. Proceedings of Machine 

Translation Summit IX, September. New-
Orleans.USA           

Pouliquen Bruno, Christophe Mazenc Aldo Iorio. 

2011. Tapta: A user-driven translation system for 

patent documents based on domain-aware 

Statistical Machine. Proceedings of the EAMT 

Conference.  Leuven, Belgium, May. 

Rayner, M., Bouillon, P., and Haddow, B. 2012. 

Using Source-Language Transformations to 

Address Register Mismatches in SMT. In 

Proceedings of the Conference of the 

Association for Machine Translation in the 

Americas (AMTA), October, San Diego, USA. 

Sharoff, S. 2004. What is at stake: a case study of 

Russian expressions starting with a preposition. In: 

Proceedings of the Second ACL Workshop on 

Multiword Expressions Integrating 

Processing. 

Sheremetyeva S. 2009    On Extracting Multiword NP 

Terminology for MT.  Proceedings of the 

Thirteen Conference of European Association 

of Machine Translation, Barcelona, Spain. May 
14-15 

Shinmori A., Okumura M., Marukawa Y. Iwayama 

M. 2003. Patent Claim Processing for Readability - 

Structure Analysis and Term Explanation, 

Workshop on Patent Corpus Processing. 

conjunction with ACL 2003, Sapporo. Japan, 
July. 

Underwood N.L. and Jongejan B. 2001. 

Translatability Checker: A Tool to Help Decide 

Whether to Use MT. Proceedings of MT Summit 

VIII, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. 

 

20


