


































Fusion of Multiple Semantic Networks and Human Association

Hitoshi Isahara
Toyohashi University of Technology

Toyohashi, Aichi, Japan
isahara@tut.jp

Kyoko Kanzaki
Toyohashi University of Technology

Toyohashi, Aichi, Japan
kanzaki@imc.tut.ac.jp

Eiko Yamamoto
Gifu Shotoku Gakuen University

Gifu, Japan
eiko@gifu.shotoku.ac.jp

Takayuki Kuribayashi
Toyohashi University of Technology

Toyohashi, Aichi, Japan.
kuribayashi@lang.cs.tut.ac.jp

Michinaga Otsuka
Toyohashi University of Technology

Toyohashi, Aichi, Japan
michinaga@lang.cs.tut.ac.jp

Abstract

We are trying to construct a conceptual system 
that accurately represents human thoughts by 
fusing of semantic networks. As semantic net-
works to fuse, we use the Japanese Wordnet 
which is a thesaurus made manually based on 
linguistic intuition and the knowledge acquired 
automatically from the actual text stored in the 
huge corpus. Such knowledge are represented 
as mutual relations of the concepts of words. In 
order to acquire such relations, we focus on the 
case relations in sentences and calculate inclu-
sive relations of co-occurrence by using Com-
plementary Similarity Measure. As an applica-
tion and verification of the conceptual system 
created, we try to simulate human associations 
by using the conceptual system. As an experi-
mental result, we found the obvious difference 
in generated association links between using 
the semantic network of Japanese Wordnet and 
using the fused semantic networks with Japa-
nese Wordnet and the acquired mutual relations.

1 Introduction

In systems that support human creativity and 
search, a dictionary data similar to human percep-
tion is required. Human do not think in only clas-
sification knowledge. It is insufficient for the sys-
tems which support human cognitive processes to 
utilize only those existing language resources
such as thesauri that summarize word senses and 
conceptual relationships of words. Because hu-
mans express their thoughts with words, it is valid 

to acquire knowledge from their actual utterances
and contexts reflecting their thoughts.

In this study, we are trying to construct a con-
ceptual system that accurately represents human 
thoughts by fusing of semantic networks. As se-
mantic networks to fuse, we use the following two 
kinds of knowledge structure. As the first one, we 
used the Japanese Wordnet (Isahara et al, 2008)
which is a thesaurus made manually based on lin-
guistic intuition. As the second one, we use the 
knowledge acquired automatically from the actual 
text stored in the huge corpus. Such knowledge 
are represented as mutual relations of the concepts 
of words. In order to acquire such relations, we 
focus on the case relations in sentences such as 
“case and statement,” “verb and object” and “sub-
ject and verb,” and calculate inclusive relations of 
co-occurrence by using Complementary Similar-
ity Measure (CSM) (Hagita and Sawaki, 1995; 
Yamamoto et al., 2005).

As an application and verification of the con-
ceptual system created, we try to simulate human 
associations by using the conceptual system. Con-
cretely, we first conduct an experiment on the as-
sociation with a stimulus word, and create the as-
sociation network based on the experimental re-
sult by using our conceptual system. Then, we vis-
ualize the structure of the created association net-
works and analyze them as networks. As an ex-
perimental result, we found the obvious difference 
in generated association links between using the 
semantic network of Japanese Wordnet and using 
the fused semantic networks with Japanese Word-
net and the acquired mutual relations.



2 Experimental Data

To realize our aim described above, we create new 
knowledge structure by combining the Wordnet 
which is manual made thesaurus with taxonomi-
cal information and the mutual relations between 
words which is extracted from actual text in a 
huge web corpus. In this section, we explain data 
for our experiment.

2.1 Japanese Wordnet
As for Wordnet, we use Japanese Wordnet version 
1.1, whose specifications are shown in Table 1.

Number of words 93,834
Number of senses 158,058
Number of synlinks 283,600
Number of synset 57,238
Number of gloss 135,692
Number of example sentence 48,276

Table 1. Specifications of Japanese Wordnet

2.2 CSM data

In this study, we utilize the knowledge based on 
human utterances to construct a semantic network 
as a representation of human thought. We use 
Complementary Similarity Measure (CSM) to ac-
quire such knowledge from the actual text. 

CSM is an asymmetry and noise-resistant 
measure. Values obtained by CSM indicate rela-
tions between words, such as Hypernym-Hypo-
nym. We named data obtained in these process 
“CSM data.” Comparing the Japanese Wordnet 
and the CSM data, we found a lot of words and 
word relations that retrieved from web corpus but 
that have not been stored in the Wordnet. There-
fore, we constructed new conceptual system based 
on the Japanese Wordnet that enriched by concep-
tual relationships with word pairs in CSM data.

2.3 Experimental data based on case rela-
tion

In our experiment, we use web corpus with 500 
million Japanese sentences (Kawahara and Kuro-
hashi, 2006). We analyze syntactically 500 mil-
lion sentences and extract pairs of words having 
co-occurrence relations in an actual sentence by 
focusing on case relation, namely modified/mod-
ifier relationship. Then, we calculate CSM value
for each pairs, after we reduce some noises in the 
extracted pairs by setting a threshold value.

To estimate inclusive relations between words, 
we applied the method based on the CSM, which 
estimates inclusive relations between two vectors

(Yamamoto et al., 2011). By using an appearance 
pattern as a feature vector for each word in treat-
ing linguistic resource such as a corpus or docu-
ment collection, we have reported being able to 
determine a relation between two words according 
to the inclusive relation estimated by the CSM 
value.

The Japanese language has case-marking parti-
cles that indicate the semantic relation between 
two words in a dependency relation. Then, using 
the syntactic analysis result of the web corpus, we 
collected words in case (dependency) relations. 

We considered the meaning of some case rela-
tions as follows.

Subject and Verb (SV)
The set of verbs that occur with certain kinds 
of nouns as their subject represents the behav-
ior of the noun. To extract this relation, we use 
case-marking particle <ga>. 
For example, if “dog” occurs with “eat” and 
“bear,” and “animal” occurs with “fly”, “eat”, 
and “bear”, then we considers that “dog is an 
animal” since the behavior of “dog” is a subset 
of (or included in) the behavior of “animal.”

Verb and Object (VO)
The set of verbs that occur with certain kinds 
of nouns as their object represents “how to 
treat.” To extract this relation, we use case-
marking particle <wo>. 
For example, as “criminal” often appears as an 
object of the verb “catch,” we can imagine that 
a criminal is a person who tend to be caught.

Noun and Sentence (NS)
For each noun N in a sentence S, we can regard 
that N co-occurs with S. In other words, nouns 
appearing in same sentence have a relationship 
each other. They tend to be together in one spe-
cific scene in a real world. In our experiment, 
we extracted such relations by gathering nouns 
in a sentence with case-marking particles <ga>, 
<no>, <wo>, and <de>.



SO-S means nouns in subject position classified by similarities of nouns in object position in a sen-
tence. SO-O is vice versa. 

Table 2. Statistics of extracted words and relations

Figure 1. Breakdown of links in Japanese Wordnet

Subject and Object (SO)
This co-occurrence relation is the combination 
of a subject and an object for same verb.
For example, in the sentence “a human eats a 
bread”, “human” and “bread” are extracted as 
a combination.

As described above, we calculate the similarity 
between two words based on the word co-occur-
rence by using CSM. To do this, we represent by 
a binary vector experimental data which extracted 
from corpora based on the case relation; the vector 
corresponds to the appearance pattern of a noun.

We apply the CSM for the calculation (Yamamoto 
et al. 2005). Parameters for calculating the CSM-
value correspond to the number of dimensions in 
each situation.

Table 2 shows the number of extracted words, 
the number of extracted words after the elimina-
tion by a threshold, its threshold (number of oc-
currence) and combination of words which has 
positive CSM value, for each case relation.

In this paper, we use NS data, because it could 
extract enough number of data with variety of 
CSM values.

NS SV VO SO-S SO-O
Number of extracted words 4,676,041 1,449,150 1,503,255 395,734 346,531

Threshold 10 2 3 2 2
Number  after elimination 246,717 176,511 114,336 31,531 32,703

Number of links with 
positive CSM value 19,279,4341,908,489,076718,477,95827,801,885 46,351,392



3 Comparison between Japanese Word-
net and CSM data

In this section, we compare Japanese Wordnet 
with relation between concepts and CSM data 
which consists of links between two words with 
its CSM value.

As shown in Table 1, there are 286,300 synlink 
entries in Japanese Wordnet. Among them, 
178,178 entries (63%) are taxonomical links such 
as hyponym and hypernym. Figure 1 shows the 
statistics of links in Japanese Wordnet.

As shown in Table 2, we extracted 19,279,434
links which have positive CSM value from our ex-
periments. We chose top 5% of these links by set-
ting a CSM value as a threshold (926,653 links). 
We use this extracted and eliminated CSM data, 
i.e. word links with CSM value, for comparison 
with Japanese Wordnet. The result of comparison 
are shown in Table 3. 

In Table 3, “Number of data” means that the 
number of links (or relations) extracted automati-
cally by our system. “Percentage for all CSM data” 
is the percentage of the data among all extracted 
and eliminated CSM data.

“No wordid” means that one or two words re-
lated to this link of CSM data are not stored in 
Japanese Wordnet. As shown in Table 3, about 
63% of data contain words which are not stored in 
Japanese Wordnet. It shows that CSM data which 
was extracted automatically from huge corpus are 
useful to improve the coverage of vocabulary
which appears in the real text.

"No synlink" means there is no relation be-
tween two synsets in Japanese Wordnet, which 
correspond to two words in each CSM data. 37% 
of CSM data are categorized into this class. This 
category means we can add new relations (links) 
into Japanese Wordnet based on the cooccurrency 
between words in the huge corpus.

“Same synset” means that two words in CSM 
data are treated as synonyms in the Japanese 
Wordnet. "Hypernym," "hyponym" and others, 
which are not shown in Table 2, means that two 

Relation Number of data
Percentage for 
all CSM data

No wordid 582555 62.8666
No synlink 341868 36.8928

Same synset 815 0.08795
Hypernym 578 0.06238
Hyponym 475 0.05126

Table 3. Comparison between Japanese Wordnet 
and CSM data

words are already stored in Japanese wordnet 
properly. We found 1,415 such relations by this 
experiments, i.e. Hypernym (578), Hyponym 
(475) and others (362).

4 Creation of New Knowledge System by 
Fusing Two Network Structure

In this section, we construct a conceptual system 
by fusing of semantic networks, i.e. Japanese 
Wordnet and set of word links extracted by CSM 
based method.

As CSM can extract many relations between 
words from the input data, i.e. huge corpus, we 
decided to set a threshold of CSM value to elimi-
nate the number of links to fuse. We add links af-
ter elimination to Japanese Wordnet. There are 
178,178 links stored in Japanese Wordnet as hy-
ponym or hypernym. Among them, relations be-
tween nouns are 151,700. As we could get 
151,604 relations with the threshold of 8200, we 
set the threshold 8200, and add these 151,604 re-
lations to Japanese Wordnet, which means that we 
enlarge twice in size of conceptual system.

5 Human Association

5.1 Experiments by Human Subject

In order to verify our new concept system, we 
conducted experiments about human association 
with human subjects.

If a concept structure resembles to human 
knowledge structure, connecting two concepts in 
the concept structure means simulating human as-
sociations from one concept to the other. Wordnet 
resembles taxonomical knowledge that human 
made, and CSM data (NS data) shows the 
knowledge of scenes which humans picture in 
mind. Combining these two different kinds of 
knowledge, we are trying to create human 
knowledge structure which resembles more than 
other existing knowledge systems.

Figure 2. Experiments by high school pupils



We presented test sheet with 11 stimulus nouns 
to 51 participants (31 university students and 20 
senior high school pupils), and asked them to 
write down what s/he associated by each stimulus 
words (Figure 2). 

If we can find shorter connections of links be-
tween a stimulus word and an associated word via 
our system than Japanese Wordnet, our system is 
closer to knowledge structure of humans than 
Wordnet, at least from the viewpoint of associa-
tions by humans.

We made network of conceptual links between 
a stimulus word and associated words for visibil-
ity purpose. 

For stimulus words, we use 11 nouns (music, 
curry, apple, soccer, scissors, communication, 
love, arm, pasta, school, vegetable), which were 
mostly selected by the following conditions;

Word stored in the Japanese Wordnet. 
Concrete object. 
Possibility of associations. 
General word, not too specific.

With 11 stimulus words and 20 high school par-
ticipants, we got a total of 1,456 words including 
690 different words, such as “music: jazz, disco 
and rock” and “curry: rice, carrot.”

5.2 Consideration to Simulate Associations

Figure 3 shows the association network using Pa-
jek (Pajek—Program for large network analysis) 
for stimulus word “腕 ude ‘arm’ ” by new concept 
system. Here association network means set of 
links between stimulus word and associated 
words. In Figure 3, only a stimulus word and as-
sociated words which are directly connected to a 

stimulus word or associated words are visualized 
in order to consider the relations between associ-
ated words.

There are “腕 ude ‘arm’ ” and “アーム aamu 
‘arm’ ” in the Left-hand side of the figure. As both 
“腕 ude ‘arm’ ” and “アーム aamu ‘arm’ ” are in 
the same synset of Japanese Wordnet, this associ-
ation, i.e. from “腕 ude ‘arm’ ” to “アーム aamu 
‘arm’ ”, is a kind of paraphrase. The associated 
words shown in the middle of the figure are words 
directly associated from a stimulus words, such as 
“筋肉 kinniku ‘muscle’ ”. There is “料理人 ryo-
rinin ‘cook’ ” which is different direction of asso-
ciation to other associated words. This association 
is caused by the polysemous feature of Japanese 
word “腕 ude ‘arm’ ”, i.e. physical arm and ability 
about a technique. The word in the right-hand side
of Figure 3, such as “タンパク質 tanpakushitsu 
‘protein’ ” can be thought as associations not di-
rectly from arm but via an associated word in the 
middle, e.g., 

“腕 ude ‘arm’ ” 
--- “筋肉 kinniku ‘muscle’ ” 

--- “タンパク質 tanpakushitsu ‘protein’ ”

“腕 ude ‘arm’ ” 
--- “体 karada ‘body’ ” 

--- “服 fuku ‘clothes’ ”

In order to make detailed discussion, we have 
to explore more about human association and net-
work structure we created, however, current sim-
ple network seems to reflect procedure of human 
associations to a certain degree.

Figure 3. Partial association network for “腕 ude ‘arm’ ”



6 Conclusion

In this study, we proposed and constructed a new 
conceptual system that by fusing of two different 
kinds of semantic networks. As semantic net-
works to fuse, we used the Japanese Wordnet 
which is a thesaurus made manually based on lin-
guistic intuition and the new type of semantic 
structure which comes from the knowledge based 
on human utterances that are mutual relations of 
the concepts acquired automatically from the ac-
tual text.

In order to verify our new concept system, we 
conducted experiments by human subjects. We 
discussed the possibility of humanlike associa-
tions with our system.

We will consider tuning values assigned to 
each link of network precisely based on real asso-
ciations conducted by humans by using simula-
tion technology and huge computer power.

References
Norihiro Hagita and Minako Sawaki, 1995. Robust 

recognition of degraded machine-printed characters 
using complementary similarity measure and error-
correction learning. Proceedings of SPIE – The In-
ternational Society for Optical Engineering, 
2442:236-244.

Hitoshi Isahara, Francis Bond, Kiyotaka Uchimoto, 
Masao Utiyama and Kyoko Kanzaki, 2008. Devel-
opment of Japanese WordNet, LREC2008, Marra-
kech.

Daisuke Kawahara and Sadao Kurohashi, 2006. A 
Fully-lexicalized Probabilistic Model for Japanese 
Syntactic and Case Structure Analysis, In Proceed-
ings of HLT-NAACL2006, 176-183.

Pajek—Program for large network analysis. Version 
2.05. Available from: 

    http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/pub/
networks/pajek/ 

Eiko Yamamoto, Kyoko Kanzaki and Hitoshi Isahara, 
2005. Extraction of hierarchies based on inclusion 
of co-occurring words with frequency information. 
Proceedings of IJCAI 2005, 1166-1172.

Eiko Yamamoto and Hitoshi Isahara, 2011. Creative 
Information Retrieval Using Thematically Related 
Words. Information Extraction from the Internet, 
Chapter 13, iConcept Press


