




































A VIEW of Russian: Visual Input Enhancement

and adaptive feedback

Robert Reynolds1, Eduard Schaf2, Detmar Meurers1,2

(1) University of Tromsø, Department of Language and Linguistics
(2) University of Tübingen, Department of Linguistics

robert.reynolds@uit.no, eduard.schaf@student.uni-tuebingen.de,

detmar.meurers@uni-tuebingen.de

ABSTRACT
We explore the challenges and opportunities which arise in developing automatic visual input
enhancement activities for Russian with a focus on target selection and adaptive feedback.
Russian, a language with a rich fusional morphology, has many syntactically relevant forms
that are not transparent to the language learner, which makes it a good candidate for visual
input enhancement (VIE). VIE essentially supports incidental focus on form by increasing the
salience of language forms to support noticing by the learner. The freely available VIEW system
(Meurers et al., 2010) was designed to automatically generate VIE activities from any web
content. We extend VIEW to Russian and discuss connected research issues regarding target
selection, ambiguity management, prompt generation, and distractor generation. We show
that the same information and techniques used for target selection can often be repurposed for
adaptive feedback. Authentic Text ICALL (ATICALL) systems incorporating only native-language
NLP, without the NLP analysis specific to learner language that is characteristic of Intelligent
Language Tutoring Systems (ILTS), thus can support some forms of adaptive feedback. ATICALL
and ILTS represent a spectrum of possibilities rather than two categorically distinct enterprises.

KEYWORDS: CALL, ICALL, ATICALL, input enhancement, noticing, consciousness raising, adap-
tive feedback, scaffolding, part-of-speech tagging, finite-state technology, Constraint Grammar,
Russian, stress, aspect, participles, case.

Robert Reynolds, Eduard Schaf and Detmar Meurers 2014. A VIEW of Russian: Visual Input Enhancement and adaptive

feedback. Proceedings of the third workshop on NLP for computer-assisted language learning. NEALT Proceedings Series 22

/ Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings 107: 98–112.

98



1 Introduction

Intelligent Computer-Assisted Language Learning (ICALL) has been characterized (Meurers,
2012) as consisting of two distinct areas, Intelligent Language Tutoring Systems (ILTS) and
Authentic Text ICALL (ATICALL). In the former, researchers have focused on the challenge of
analyzing learner language and providing adaptive feedback. In the latter, research employs
standard NLP tools developed for native language to identify and enhance authentic texts in the
target language. While this seems like a categorical difference in some respects, in this article
we want to show that it can be attractive to combine aspects of both approaches. We describe
how an ATICALL system can incorporate a feature typical of ILTS: adaptive feedback to learner
responses. The idea is explored using language activities for Russian, a language with a rich,
fusional morphology that is challenging for second language learners. We showcase four of
the Russian activities that we developed on top of the freely available VIEW platform (Meurers
et al., 2010).

Russian Morphological Analysis Most Russian grammar books focus primarily on morphol-
ogy, a serious challenge to most learners. Russian has a highly fusional morphology, with
nominal inflection for six cases, two numbers, and three genders. There are three noun de-
clension paradigms, each containing 12 forms. Adjectival modifiers have at least 24 forms.
Russian verbs represent a relatively extensive inflectional system, similar to other Indo-European
languages. A related difficulty is that Russian stress is phonemic, differentiating both lexical and
inflectional homographs. This causes difficulties for learners, since there is a complex system of
lexically specified stress placement, yet stress is almost never marked in the written language.

In order to build an ATICALL system for Russian, we need a fast, broad-coverage morphological
engine to both analyze and generate word forms. In addition to the usual demands of a general-
purpose morphological engine, we also need to generate stressed word forms. No open-source
state-of-the art tools we are aware of provide this functionality. Thus a Russian Finite-State
Transducer (FST) was developed (Reynolds, 2014) using the two-level formalism (Koskenniemi,
1983). The transducer was originally based on Zaliznjak (1977) (≈ 120 000 words), which
is the foundation for most Russian computational morphologies. Additional words, especially
proper nouns, are continually being added. Since Russian has systematic syncretism and
widespread homonymy, a constraint grammar (Karlsson et al., 1995) implemented in the freely
available CG3 system1 is used to disambiguate multiple readings.

Most state-of-the-art part of speech taggers for Russian are based on finite-state transducers,
including AOT/Dialing (Nozhov, 2003), and mystem (Segalovich, 2003). Finite-state methods
make it possible to provide efficient and robust computational analyses with wide empirical
coverage, while keeping a clear conceptual distinction between the linguistic system and its
usage. Finite-state methods also have several characteristics that make them especially well
suited for ICALL. A finite-state analysis keeps track of what it knows, which allows an ATICALL
system to focus only on targets that are clearly identifiable. Since finite-state tools provide an
actual linguistic model of the language being analyzed, it is possible to identify and increase
the salience of linguistic characteristics known to be relevant in language learning. A good
case in point is stress placement, which is lexical, yet requires syntactic disambiguation. The
finite state analysis provides effective access to subsets of data for certain grammar topics
(e.g., retrieve all words with a particular stress pattern), since this information is modeled
in the FST source files. Mistakes and errors in the system can be diagnosed and corrected.

1http://beta.visl.sdu.dk/cg3.html

99



This is especially important in ICALL, where low precision in the analysis leads to unreliable
output easily confusing and frustrating learners. And, importantly in the context of ATICALL
involving activities with distractors, a finite-state morphological analyzer can simply be reversed
to become a generator.

Visual Input Enhancement Researchers in second language acquisition agree that compre-
hensible input is necessary for language learning. The Noticing Hypothesis (Schmidt, 1990)
extends this claim to say that noticing of grammatical categories and relations also is required
for successful second language acquisition. Based on the Noticing Hypothesis and related work
on Consciousness Raising (Rutherford and Sharwood Smith, 1985) and Input Enhancement
(Sharwood Smith, 1993, p. 176), researchers have investigated Visual Input Enhancement (VIE)
to encourage learners to notice the grammatical forms in comprehensible input. VIE refers to
the graphical enhancement of written text to draw attention to targeted grammatical structures.
Various modes of enhancement have been suggested, such as font manipulation (e.g., bold,
italic, color), capitalization, and other notations (e.g., underlining, circling). Such textual
enhancements are intended to increase the likelihood that the learner will notice the target
grammatical form in its grammatical and functional context of use.

Visual Input Enhancement of the Web (VIEW) is an ATICALL system designed to automatically
generate learning activities from user-selected texts on the web. A description of the system
architecture can be found in Meurers et al. (2010). VIEW includes four activity types to guide
the learner from recognition via practice to production. The highlight activity adds color to
target wordforms. The click activity allows the learner to identify target wordforms in the
text. The multiple-choice activity provides controlled practice, allowing the learner to choose
the correct form from a multiple-choice list. The practice activity asks learners to type the
wordforms themselves. The activities can be accessed as a web application on a webpage or
through a toolbar provided as a Firefox web browser Add-on. Activities have previously been
developed for English, German, and Spanish. The open-source research prototype is available
at http://purl.org/icall/view.

The following issues were considered in developing the activities for Russian:

1. Learner needs: What are the needs of the learner?
2. Feasibility: Can the target construction be reliably identified using NLP?
3. Target selection: Which tokens of the target construction should be focused?
4. Prompt generation: What kind of prompt can sufficiently constrain the learner productions

for practice? (cf. Amaral and Meurers, 2011, sec. 3.1)
5. Generation of distractors for multiple-choice activities: What forms can or should serve

as distractors? How does Second Language Acquisition (SLA) research help us with this,
and how does the systematicity of the linguistic system allow us to generate distractors?

6. Feedback: What kind of feedback does the learner receive for (in)correct answers, under
a perspective conceiving of feedback as scaffolding guiding the learner in their Zone of
Proximal Development (Vygotsky, 1986)?

Related work Although research in Russian NLP for language learning has not been as
extensive as for English and some other languages, some significant inroads have been made.
One string of research is concerned with methods for identifying Russian texts at a suitable
reading level for language learners. Sharoff et al. (2008) use a Principle Component Analysis to
analyze the lexical and grammatical complexity of texts in a variety of languages, including

100



Russian. Similarly, Karpov et al. (2014) train a variety of machine-learning models on a small
corpus of texts categorized by CEFR level, with promising results.

Another set of studies has been dedicated to Russian Intelligent Tutoring Systems. The Boltun
project2 has as one of its goals to develop NLP resources for ICALL, especially for analyzing
learner language (Dickinson and Herring, 2008a,b; Dickinson, 2010). Another project, KLIOS,
is a Learning Management System being developed specifically for Russian foreign language
learning (Gorisev et al., 2013). KLIOS apparently makes use of the existing general-purpose
tagger pymorphy23 and parser ABBYY Compreno4, but not enough information is currently
available to draw meaningful comparisons of the activities and analyses to our work on the
Russian VIEW.

Goal and Structure of the Paper The goal of this article is to explore the ability of authentic
text ICALL systems to provide adaptive feedback to learners. In doing so, we also demonstrate
some features of the Russian VIEW system that we are currently developing, for which a
prototype can be found at http://purl.org/icall/rusVIEW. In section 2, we introduce
exercises for four separate target grammatical topics: Stress, Noun Declension, Aspect, and
Participles. For each topic, we discuss the pedagogical motivation for the exercises, as well
as relevant practical and theoretical issues that arose during development. Special attention
is given to factors involved in target selection since these factors become relevant in the
subsequent discussion. In section 3, we show how the same technology and strategies used
in target selection can be used to provide adaptive feedback. Section 4 summarizes the
contributions of the article and considers options for evaluating the approach.

2 Key topics for Russian learners

The following grammar topics are generally difficult for learners, relatively ubiquitous, and
they allow us to exemplify central issues in visual input enhancement and the computational
modeling it is built on. Section 2.1 introduces a basic example, highlighting the morpholog-
ical analysis in a noun declension activity. The discussion of target selection for this activity
illustrates the need to distinguish between grammatically and referentially determined mor-
phosyntactic properties. Section 2.2 discusses activities for word stress, where target selection
is primarily lexical, but is also concerned with managing the ambiguity that arises in rule-based
morphologies. Section 2.3 outlines verbal aspect activities, where target selection is complicated
by limitations in determining whether the learner should be able to deduce the aspect of each
token. Section 2.4 presents participles activities, which demonstrate a more complicated use of
wordform generation for providing prompts to guide learners’ responses in multiple-choice and
cloze activities.

2.1 Noun declension

The relatively extensive nominal inflection system is one of the first major hurdles for most
Russian learners. Learners whose L1 does not have similar noun declension frequently seem
to ignore inflectional endings. A visual input enhancement activity has the potential to boost
learning by raising awareness of those endings.

We developed activities targeting specific case distinctions known to be difficult, but in this

2http://cl.indiana.edu/~boltundevelopment
3https://pymorphy2.readthedocs.org
4http://www.abbyy.ru/isearch/compreno

101



article we focus on describing the multiple-choice activity developed for all cases, since that
activity makes it possible to illustrate both the underlying NLP and some points regarding target
selection. When learners select this activity for a web page, VIEW replaces some nouns in the
text with dropdown boxes containing the original noun in all of its case forms as options.

Target selection As a rule, each noun declension paradigm has 12 cells (six cases, singular
and plural), but some forms are syncretic. For example, prototypical masculine nouns have
ten unique forms, feminine and neuter nouns have nine, and the soft-consonant feminine
nouns have only seven unique forms. Although our constraint grammar is able to disambiguate
many syncretic forms, some ambiguity still remains in our analyses. One might expect that
ambiguity in the analysis would complicate target selection, but this is only true if the analysis
is ambiguous with regard to number. This is because a number ambiguity may be a referential
ambiguity that cannot be resolved by checking contextual clues, as illustrated in (1).

(1) He saw the (dancer/dancers).

Without additional context, such as a picture, this would be a confusing exercise given that
both dancer and dancers are grammatically correct. Given this potential difficulty, we do not
select tokens for which number is grammatically ambiguous.

Distractor generation After selecting targets that are unambiguously singular or plural,
generating distractors is very straightforward. Let us assume that a given target ковёр kovër
’rug’ results in the two morphological analyses in (2).

(2) a. ковёр+N+Msc+Inan+Sg+Nom
b. ковёр+N+Msc+Inan+Sg+Acc

To generate the distractors, we strip the case tag and generate all six cases from that base
by adding the tags (+Nom, +Acc, +Gen, +Loc, +Dat, +Ins). For the example at hand, this
generates the following forms: ковёр, ковёр, ковра, ковре, ковру, ковром. Because the
original token was singular, all of the generated wordforms are also singular.

The generated forms are combined with the original token, and a set of unique wordforms
is supplied to the learners as options in the multiple-choice activity. Currently, all six cases
are used as distractors every time, but insights from SLA and future research should make it
possible to identify those subsets of distractors most facilitating learning given a specific target.

2.2 Stress

Russian stress patterns are specified lexically and cannot be predicted reliably from stem shape.
Furthermore, many homographic forms of the same lemma have differential stress. This makes
mastering the correct pronunciation of some words a difficult task for learners.

Four different activities were developed for stress. Unlike most ‘highlight’ activities in VIEW,
the stress highlight activity does not make use of color, but simply adds a stress mark above
every known stressed vowel in the text. For the ‘click’ activity, every vowel in the text becomes
clickable: stressed vowels turn green and receive a stress mark; unstressed vowels turn red.
The ‘multiple-choice’ activity selects some targets and learners try to identify the correctly

102



stressed variant. The conventional use of the ‘practice’ activity is not well motivated for stress,
since the entire set of possible responses is already represented in the ‘multiple-choice’ activity.
Furthermore, typing stress marks is cumbersome for most users. Because of this, the ‘practice’
activity was replaced by an activity in which stressed vowels are highlighted when the cursor
hovers over the token.

Target selection The morphological analyzer cannot always determine the stress of a given
token. Sometimes this is because the lemma is not in the lexicon. Such tokens are never
targeted, since their stress is not certain. Other times, the morphological analyzer is unable
to completely disambiguate all of the readings of a given token. In such cases, the token
can still be targeted if the remaining morphological ambiguity is immaterial with regard to
stress. For example, the fact that the form stressed on the first syllable in (3-a) is ambiguous
between accusative or nominative is not relevant in our context; what matters is that it can be
distinguished from the genitive form in (3-b).

(3) a. гýбы
gúby
губа+N+Fem+Inan+Pl+Nom or +Acc

b. губы́
gubý
губа+N+Fem+Inan+Sg+Gen

Choosing targets for multiple-choice and practice activities is an interesting pedagogical issue,
since almost every multisyllabic token is a potential target. Although there are many high-
frequency words with difficult stress patterns, the overwhelming majority of Russian words have
fixed stress. This means that if the program randomly selects targets for the multiple-choice
and practice activities, many of the targets will not be pedagogically effective.

Since stress patterns in Russian are specified lexically, the solution to the target selection
problem is also lexical. We compiled a stress activity target list of lemmas that have shifting
stress based on our FST resource (Reynolds, 2014).5 We also target one other large class of
words: cognate words in L1 that have a different stress position in Russian. For example,
compare English rádiator and Russian radiátor. We also added proper nouns for which a single
standard stress position can be defined (e.g., Rossíja ‘Russia’, Ukraína ‘Ukraine’) to the stress
activity target list.6

Distractor generation Generating distractors for the multiple-choice stress activity is very
simple at this point. Since potential responses for a stress activity are a closed set, we provide
all possible stress positions as distractors. Ideally, distractors should mimic likely incorrect
responses that learners would make on a parallel cloze test. The distractors should represent the
kinds of mistakes that learners typically make, so one could tune the distractor set by logging
user interaction with the system, possibly also using distinct classes of learner models.

5For nouns, in addition to Zaliznjak’s stress indexes c, d, e, and f, we also include masculine nouns with index b (end
stressed), such as kón’ ~kon’á ‘stallion’. For adjectives, only short-form adjectives are targeted.

6Many proper names have differential pronunciation for different referents, especially surnames: Ivánov vs Ivanóv.
Such lemmas are not targeted.

103



2.3 Aspect

Most Russian verbs are either imperfective or perfective. For example, the English verb ‘to
say/tell’ corresponds to the two Russian verbs govorit’ (impf) and skazat’ (perf). Imperfective
verbs are generally used to express duration, process, or repetition. Perfective verbs are generally
used for unique events, and they typically imply completion. The use of one aspect or the other
is frequently dependent on context, as we discuss in more detail in a corpus study below.

Russian has a productive system of aspectual derivation, by which so-called aspectual pairs are
formed. Although some verb pairs have no derivational relation (like govorit’ / skazat’), many
verb pairs have one of the following two relations:7

(4) a. IMPF: simplex verb ; PERF: prefix + simplex verb
smotret ‘to watch.IMPF’ / po-smotret ‘to watch.PERF’

b. IMPF: (perfective stem) + suffix ; PERF: prefix + simplex verb
(ras-smatr)-ivat ‘to examine.IMPF’ / ras-smotret ‘to examine.PERF’

Verbal aspect is arguably the single most challenging grammar topic for learners of Russian.
The distinction between imperfective and perfective verbs is difficult for beginners to grasp, and
even very advanced learners struggle to master the finer points. A set of ATICALL activities on
aspect enables learners to focus on how aspect is used in context, which is crucial for Russian.

Target selection Since aspect in Russian is lexical, target selection also takes a lexical ap-
proach. First, not all verbs are paired with aspectual counterparts that have identical meanings.
Since distractors should be equivalent in every respect other than aspect, we select only verbs
that belong to an aspectual pair.8 The list of paired verbs is compiled from three sources: 1)
pairings such as (4-a) above are taken from the Exploring Emptiness database9, 2) pairings
such as (4-b) above are taken from Zaliznjak (1977), and 3) pairings without a derivational
relationship (of which there are few) are extracted from electronic dictionaries.

Choice of verbal aspect is generally a matter of construal, i.e., how the speaker is structuring the
discourse, and some verb tokens could be grammatically correct with either aspect. Consider
the English examples John saw Mary and John had seen Mary. Even though they are likely to be
used in different circumstances, both sentences are grammatically well-formed. Likewise, in
Russian there are cases that allow either aspect. Meurers et al. (2010) suggested that lexical
cues for English aspect and tense could be automatically identified by NLP. Indeed, many Russian
grammars also indicate contexts in which one aspect or the other is impossible, or at least very
unlikely. In order to identify contexts which constrain the expression of one aspect or the other,
Russian grammar books were consulted, resulting in the following lexical cues.

(5) Contexts in which perfective aspect is impossible/unlikely:

a. Infinitive complement of byt’ ‘to be’ (analytic future)
b. Infinitive complement of certain verbs (especially phrasal verbs, such as ‘begin’,

‘continue’, ‘finish’, etc.)
c. With certain adverbials denoting duration and repetition

7This is a simplistic sketch of Russian verbal aspect; for a proper discussion cf., e.g., Timberlake (2004).
8Although the notion of aspectual pairs has been shown to be somewhat problematic (Kuznetsova, 2013), this is the

most robust approach available to us, and we do not expect problematic cases to be common.
9http://emptyprefixes.uit.no

104



(6) Contexts in which imperfective aspect is impossible/unlikely:

a. Infinitive complement of certain verbs (e.g., ‘forget’ and ‘succeed’)
b. With certain adverbials denoting unexpectedness, immediacy, etc.

A corpus study was conducted to test the usefulness of these features in an ATICALL application.
The goal of the study was to determine the precision of the features, as well as their coverage,
or recall. Precision was calculated as the percentage of verbs found adjacent to the appropriate
lexical cues listed in (5) and (6) whose aspect was accurately predicted by that lexical cue.
Recall was calculated as the percentage of all verbs whose aspect is correctly predicted by an
adjacent lexical cue. From the perspective of ATICALL, precision tells us whether the student
ought to know which aspect is required, which is useful for target selection. Recall tells us
what percentage of verbs actually appear together with these lexical cues, and whose aspect is
correctly predicted by them.

The study included two corpora, each investigated separately. The Russian National Corpus10

(230 M tokens) is a tagged corpus with diverse genres. The annotation in the RNC frequently
contains ambiguities, but since the aspect of Russian verbs is rarely ambiguous and the aspect
of the contextual features is irrelevant, ambiguous readings do not significantly affect our
outcomes. Since the RNC does not include syntactic relations, we rely on collocation of these
lexical cues with verbs. SynTagRus11 (860 K tokens) is a morphologically disambiguated and
syntactically annotated dependency treebank of Russian. Because dependency relations are
defined, identifying adverbial relations and verbal complements is straightforward. The results
are given in Table 1.

RNC SynTagRus
Precision 0.95 0.98

Recall 0.03 0.02

Table 1: Results of the corpus study of lexical cues for aspect

The precision of these lexical cues is very high, meaning that when lexical cues are present, the
verb is of the predicted aspect. This is expected, since known counterexamples such as (7) are
uncommon. Given that Russian allows variable word order, it is surprising that collocation in
the RNC is nearly as reliable as dependency relations in this task. Apparently these words have
a very strong tendency to appear adjacent to one another.

(7) Настоящий
Nastojaščij
True

друг
drug
friend

всегда
vsegda
always

скажет
skažet
will-tell.PF

правду.
pravdu.
truth

‘A true friend will always tell the truth.’

Unfortunately the recall of the lexical cues is extremely low. It correctly predicted the aspect
of only one out of 50–60 verbs. Although future work is needed to explore these phenomena
more thoroughly, these results seem to indicate that verbal aspect in Russian is predominantly
determined suprasententially, with lexical cues playing only a very minor role.

10http://www.ruscorpora.ru/en/index.html
11http://www.ruscorpora.ru/search-syntax.html

105



For language learning, this result has several implications. First, it shows that learners can place
their confidence in lexical cues, but these cues will not get them very far. Yet in some Russian
textbooks, more space is dedicated to these lexical cues than to discourse considerations. This
means that some learners may not be getting enough instruction on strategies that help in the
majority of cases. Second, for the purposes of target selection, the Russian VIEW system can
rely on lexical cues of aspect with some confidence. If a token is adjacent to the appropriate
cues, then a learner should be expected to know the aspect of that token. However, since the
lexical cues are so sparse, the system cannot make an intelligent decision for the overwhelming
majority of verb tokens. One potential solution would be to implement machine-learning
approaches to predict the distribution of each aspect more accurately. However, even though
such models might make more accurate predictions, there is no guarantee that its output would
reflect what a human second language learner should be capable of distinguishing.

If it is true that structural rules cannot provide adequate coverage of aspectual usage, then this
implies that Russian verbal aspect is acquired through semantic bootstrapping. As learners are
exposed to verbs of both aspects, real-world knowledge and expectations form the foundation
upon which aspectual categories are built in their minds. If this is the case, it may not be
feasible for an ATICALL system to predict how or whether the learner can be expected to know
the aspect of a given target. The system can still provide a significant benefit to the learner by
facilitating focus-on-form exercises, albeit blindly.

These last points are based on the assumption that the distribution of verbal aspect in Russian
cannot be adequately accounted for with rules that are both pedagogically reasonable and
technologically implementable. Our ongoing research will attempt to clarify this situation, but
in the meantime, our system selects any paired verbs as targets, giving preference to forms that
appear adjacent to our lexical cues.

Distractor generation Distractors for the multiple-choice activity are generated by replacing
the lemma with its aspectual partner, and replacing the aspectual tag, as shown in (8-b).

(8) a. Original: читать+V+Impf+TV+Pst+Msc+Sg
b. Distractor: прочитать+V+Perf+TV+Pst+Msc+Sg

2.4 Participles

Russian has four kinds of adjectival participles, which are used both attributively and as
relativizers. Their formation, meaning, and usage are not usually introduced to learners until
more advanced levels. Although they are not used frequently in spoken Russian, participles
are very common in written Russian, especially in high registers, such as literature, official
documents, news, and technical writing. Many learners without parallel forms in their L1
struggle with Russian participles. All of these things make participles an excellent candidate for
ATICALL visual input enhancement.

Target selection The four participles are present active, present passive, past active, and
past passive. The passive participles are generally only formed from transitive verbs. Present
participles are only formed from imperfective verbs, and past participles are typically formed
from perfective verbs. The result of this is that not all verbs (or rather, verb pairs) can form
every kind of participle. In order to select only those verbs from which a full ‘paradigm’ of
distractors can be formed, we limit target selection to transitive verbs that are members of

106



aspectual pairs (as described in section 2.3). We also do not target participles that have a
possible lexicalized adjective reading, such as одетый odetyj ‘dressed’, or participles in the
short-form.

Prompt generation Multiple-choice and cloze activities require a prompt for students to know
which kind of participle is being elicited. One way to do this is to rephrase the participle using
the relative determiner который kotoryj ‘which’. For example, the present active participle
дремлющий dremljuščij ‘slumbering’ can be rephrased as который дремлет kotoryj dremlet
‘which/who slumbers’. Fortunately, it is possible to perform this rephrasing automatically, based
solely on the tags of the original token. This is demonstrated in (9) and (10), where (a) gives an
example of a participle in context, (b) gives the participle’s grammar tags assigned by the tagger,
and (c) provides the relative-rephrase and its readings. The bolded tags in (b) and (c) indicate
the tags that are extracted from the participle reading in order to generate the relative-rephrase.
The tags in (c) that are not bolded are the same for every participle of that category.

(9) Present Active

a. разлука
separation

есть
is

гроб,
tomb

заключающий
which-imprisons

в
in

себе
itself

половину
half

сердца
of-heart

‘separation is a tomb which imprisons half of one’s heart.’
b. заключающий: заключать+V+Impf+TV+PrsAct+Msc+Sg+Nom
c. который заключает ‘which imprisons’

который+Pron+Rel+Msc+Sg+Nom
заключать+V+Impf+TV+Prs+Sg3

(10) Past Passive

a. Рассеянное
which-was-scattered

молчание
silence

‘scattered silence’
b. рассеять+V+Perf+TV+PstPss+Neu+Sg+Nom
c. которое рассеяли ‘which (they) scattered’

который+Pron+Rel+Neu+Sg+Acc
рассеять+V+Perf+TV+Pst+MFN+Pl

The given relative-rephrasing of passive participle in (10) is a zero person construction
(неопределённо-личное предложение), in which there is no explicit subject, and the verb
shows third-person plural agreement. Although this rephrasing is not always the best possible
rewording of the passive, it is the alternative that works best in a wide variety of circumstances.

This method of prompt generation takes advantage of the systematicity of grammatical relations
in Russian. It works because all of the morphosyntactic information needed to form the
relative-rephrase is already present in the original participle’s morphosyntactic tags.

3 Feedback

In contrast to Intelligent Tutoring Systems, ATICALL systems such as VIEW and reading support
tools such as Glosser-RuG (Nerbonne et al., 1998), COMPASS (Breidt and Feldweg, 1997),

107



REAP12, or ALPHEIOS13 focus on the analysis of authentic native text. Where input enhancement
and reading support turns into exercise generation, such as the multiple-choice and cloze
activities of VIEW, the feedback currently provided by the system is very limited. If a response is
correct, then it turns green. If a response is incorrect, it turns red. VIEW does not attempt to
reveal why a response is correct or incorrect. How about providing more informative adaptive
feedback, whereby VIEW becomes more similar to an Intelligent Tutoring System?

In the following, we consider the degree to which the feedback that learners receive in an
ATICALL environment can be enhanced without developing new NLP tools for learner language
analysis. For the feedback methods listed below, enriched feedback can be provided using only
the information already used in the target selection and distractor generation processes. In
other words, the information used to select a given token is frequently the same information
that is needed to provide enriched feedback beyond a simple correct/incorrect indicator.

3.1 Noun declension feedback (multiple-choice activity)

Feedback for noun declension activities can be based on dependency relations established by
a native-language parser. For example, in the phrase On obyčno sidel rjadom s mamoj ‘He
usually sat next to (his) mother.INS’, the word mamoj is in the instrumental case because
it is the object of the preposition s. This fact is explicitly represented in a dependency tree,
since the preposition s directly dominates mamoj. The ATICALL system can consult the parse
tree to prepare relevant feedback. If a learner selects the wrong case for this target, then the
preposition s is highlighted to show the learner why it should be in instrumental. As in tutoring
systems, miniature lessons could be prepared for specific syntactic constructions to provide
related information. For example, with this preposition, the learner could be presented with
the following: “s can govern three different cases depending on its meanings: INS=‘with’,
GEN=‘(down) from’, and ACC=‘approximately’. (Use with ACC is rare.)”

This type of feedback is relevant, informative, and can easily be linked to specific syntactic
constructions. Effective adaptive feedback in such a multiple-choice activity thus does not
depend on learner-language NLP. The native-language NLP – both syntactic analyses and
distractor generation – is providing effective feedback capabilities, even if it is not equivalent to
what is possible with learner-language NLP.

3.2 Stress feedback (click and multiple-choice activities)

In the multiple-choice and practice activities for stress, targets are selected according to the
stress activity target list introduced in section 2.2, which is extracted from the FST source files
(Reynolds, 2014) partially based on Zaliznjak (1977). In his dictionary, every word is assigned a
code signifying which stress pattern it belongs to. We combined this information with frequency
data from the Russian National Corpus in order to select an exemplar for each stress type. Based
on this information, a tooltip can be displayed that shows the exemplar and its paradigm when
a learner gives an incorrect response. In this way, the learner is able to associate the targeted
token with a word that is hopefully more familiar. This type of feedback supports both top-down
and bottom-up learning, since it relies on an abstract connection to a concrete example.

12http://reap.cs.cmu.edu
13http://alpheios.net

108



3.3 Aspect feedback (multiple-choice activity)

As we discussed in section 2.3, determining why a given aspect is required in a given context
is rarely possible with current technology. However, some tokens do have a clear lexical cue,
which is used both to promote their selection as targets, and can also be used as corrective
feedback. For example, given the sentence On obyčno sidel rjadom s mamoj. ‘He usually sat.IMPF
next to (his) mother’, if the learner selects the perfective verb, then the adverb cue obyčno
can be highlighted to show the learner why perfective is not appropriate. As in the previous
case, the information needed to give enhanced feedback is the same information used in target
selection.

3.4 Participles feedback (multiple-choice activity)

Recall that the participle activities discussed above have a prompt provided in the form of a
kotoryj ‘which/who’ relative-rephrase of the participle. It was shown that the morphosyntactic
properties of the participle correspond directly to the morphosyntactic properties of the relative-
rephrase. These very same relations can be leveraged to provide feedback to the learner.

For example, let us say that the original token was a past active participle napisavšij ‘who
wrote’ with the relative-rephrase hint (kotoryj napisal). If the learner selects the present active
participle distractor pišuščij, they could be presented with feedback such as: “The word you
selected means kotoryj pišet. Pay attention to the tense of napisal.” This feedback is tailored to
the learner’s response, and encourages the learner to compare the functional meanings of the
relevant morphological forms. In this case, the strategy used for prompt generation facilitates
customized feedback.

Overall, the four examples sketched above show that the provision of specific types of adaptive
feedback is a meaningful and natural extension of an ATICALL system such as VIEW, using the
same NLP techniques employed in analysis, target selection and distractor generation. We are
currently working on extending the implemented Russian activities discussed in section 2 in
this direction.

4 Conclusions and Outlook

We reported practical and theoretical issues related to developing automatic visual input
enhancement for Russian, with a focus on including adaptive feedback in such an ATICALL
system. The selected topics demonstrate the challenges that a morphology-rich language brings
with it and how a rule-based morphological analysis can be used to tackle them. In addition to
providing the means for effective disambiguation, the finite state approach makes it possible to
generate wordforms for distractors, prompts (participles), and stressed wordforms. We also
characterized certain types of adaptive feedback, typically associated with intelligent language
tutoring systems, that can be added in an ATICALL environment using the same information that
is used for target selection and distractor generation. This refines the perspective distinguishing
two subdisciplines of ICALL (Meurers, 2012), while keeping a clear distinction on the processing
side between analyzing learner language and analyzing native language for learners.

In terms of future work, the crucial next step is to empirically evaluate the approach and the
specific parameterization (activities, enhancement methods, distractors, and feedback used)
in terms of learner uptake and, more generally, learning gains. While identifying a real-life
educational context in which the tool can be integrated meaningfully is a complex undertaking,
the computational approach presented in this article should readily support a controlled study

109



with different intervention groups and a standard pretest-posttest-delayed posttest design.
The foundational hypotheses upon which visual input enhancement is built have not been
empirically evaluated to a sufficient degree (Lee and Huang, 2008), so evaluating learner
outcomes is needed not only to establish the system’s effectiveness, but also to validate the
theories upon which it is based. As already suggested in Meurers et al. (2010), an ATICALL
platform such as VIEW should make it possible to push intervention studies to a level where
effects could be more readily established than in the very controlled but small laboratory
settings.14 This seems particularly relevant since there are many parameters that need to be
explored, e.g., which kind of visual input enhancement works for which kind of learners and for
which kind of linguistic targets presented in which contexts. We are also interested in exploring
which kind of distractors (and how many) are optimal for which activities or learner levels.
Finally, while it is beyond the current analysis we perform, we plan to investigate different ways
of measuring noticing through computer interaction behaviors, and test their correlation with
individual learner characteristics and learning outcomes.

On the computational side, we also plan to evaluate the performance of the NLP components
used in the approach in terms of precision, recall, and speed. Here it is important to evaluate
not only the general performance, but also its performance for the specific parts of speech and
morphological properties that are at issue in a given activity. For the activities discussed in this
article, this includes nouns for the noun declension activity, infinitive and indicative verbs for
the aspect activity, participles for the participles activity, and all parts of speech for the stress
activity. The performance should also be tested on different genres and reading levels, since
those distinctions will affect NLP performance. Ideally, the performance should be analyzed on
a corpus that is characteristic of the material that the learners or their teachers select as basis
for generating activities – which is only possible in an interdisciplinary approach including both
NLP research and real-life teaching and learning contexts.

In terms of making an ATICALL system useful in real-life, an important challenge arises from
the fact that many texts do not contain enough of the relevant sorts of targets or contextual
cues. This, for example, was apparent in the corpus study related to verbal aspect. The texts
a learner chooses for enhancement and activity generation thus should be filtered in a way
ensuring a sufficient number of targets in the texts. To address that need, we plan to further
develop language-aware search engines (Ott and Meurers, 2010) supporting the selection of
appropriate materials.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Elena Grishina and Andrej Zaliznjak for making the most recent version
of Zaliznjak’s grammar dictionary available electronically for academic purposes. We are
grateful to Laura Janda and the CLEAR research group at the University of Tromsø, as well as
two anonymous reviewers for their comments on our paper. All remaining faults are, of course,
our own. In terms of the context making our collaboration possible, we are indebted to Trond
Trosterud and Lene Antonsen at the Giellatekno research group at the University of Tromsø.

14In a similar vein, Presson et al. (2013) discuss the potential of experimental computer-assisted language learning
tools for SLA research.

110



References

Amaral, L. and Meurers, D. (2011). On using intelligent computer-assisted language learning
in real-life foreign language teaching and learning. ReCALL, 23(1):4–24.

Breidt, E. and Feldweg, H. (1997). Accessing foreign languages with COMPASS. Machine
Translation, 12(1–2):153–174. Special Issue on New Tools for Human Translators.

Dickinson, M. (2010). Generating learner-like morphological errors in Russian. In Proceedings
of the 23nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-10), Beijing.

Dickinson, M. and Herring, J. (2008a). Developing online ICALL exercises for Russian. In The
3rd Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications (BEA-3) at ACL’08,
pages 1–9, Columbus, OH.

Dickinson, M. and Herring, J. (2008b). Russian morphological processing for ICALL. In The
Fifth Midwest Computational Linguistics Colloquium (MCLC-5), East Lansing, MI.

Gorisev, S., Koynov, A., Kuzemchik, V., Lisinin, S., Mikhaleva, E., Mishunin, O., Savinov, A.,
Terekhin, D., Firstov, D., and Cherkashin, A. (2013). Интеллектуальный лингвопроцес-
сорный комплекс «КЛИОС» для обучения РКИ [Intelligent language-aware tutoring
system "KLIOS" for studying Russian as a foreign language]. Современные проблемы науки
и образования [Modern problems of science and education], 6.

Karlsson, F., Voutilainen, A., Heikkilä, J., and Anttila, A., editors (1995). Constraint Grammar:
A Language-Independent System for Parsing Unrestricted Text. Number 4 in Natural Language
Processing. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin and New York.

Karpov, N., Baranova, J., and Vitugin, F. (2014). Single-sentence readability prediction in
Russian. In Proceedings of Analysis of Images, Social Networks, and Texts conference (AIST).

Koskenniemi, K. (1983). Two-level morphology: A general computaitonal model for word-form
recognition and production. Technical report, University of Helsinki, Department of General
Linguistics.

Kuznetsova, J. (2013). Linguistic Profiles: Correlations between Form and Meaning. PhD thesis,
University of Tromsø. Doctoral Dissertation.

Lee, S.-K. and Huang, H.-T. (2008). Visual Input Enhancement and Grammar Learning: A
meta-analytic review. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 30:307–331.

Meurers, D. (2012). Natural language processing and language learning. In Chapelle, C. A.,
editor, Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics, pages 4193–4205. Wiley, Oxford.

Meurers, D., Ziai, R., Amaral, L., Boyd, A., Dimitrov, A., Metcalf, V., and Ott, N. (2010).
Enhancing authentic web pages for language learners. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on
Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications (BEA-5) at NAACL-HLT 2010, pages
10–18, Los Angeles.

Nerbonne, J., Dokter, D., and Smit, P. (1998). Morphological Processing and Computer-Assisted
Language Learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 11(5):543–559.

111



Nozhov, I. (2003). Морфологическая и синтаксическая обработка текста (модели и про-
граммы) [Morphological and Syntactic Text Processing (models and programs)] also published
as Реализация автоматической синтаксической сегментации русского предложения
[Realization of automatic syntactic segmentation of the Russian sentence]. PhD thesis, Russian
State University for the Humanities, Moscow.

Ott, N. and Meurers, D. (2010). Information retrieval for education: Making search engines
language aware. Themes in Science and Technology Education. Special issue on computer-aided
language analysis, teaching and learning: Approaches, perspectives and applications, 3(1–2):9–
30.

Presson, N., Davy, C., and MacWhinney, B. (2013). Experimentalized call for adult second
language learners. In Schwieter, J. W., editor, Innovative Research and Practices in Second
Language Acquisition and Bilingualism, pages 139—-164. John Benjamins.

Reynolds, R. (2014). A two-level finite-state transducer for Russian language-learning applica-
tions. https://victorio.uit.no/langtech/trunk/langs/rus/.

Rutherford, W. E. and Sharwood Smith, M. (1985). Consciousness-raising and universal
grammar. Applied Linguistics, 6(2):274–282.

Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics,
11:206–226.

Segalovich, I. (2003). A fast morphological algorithm with unknown word guessing induced
by a dictionary for a web search engine. In International Conference on Machine Learning;
Models, Technologies and Applications, pages 273–280.

Sharoff, S., Kopotev, M., Erjavec, T., Feldman, A., and Divjak, D. (2008). Designing and
evaluating a Russian tagset. In Proceedings of LREC, Marrakech.

Sharwood Smith, M. (1993). Input enhancement in instructed SLA: Theoretical bases. Studies
in Second Language Acquisition, 15:165–179.

Timberlake, A. (2004). A reference grammar of Russian. Cambridge University Press.

Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and Language. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Zaliznjak, A. A. (1977). Грамматический словарь русского языка: словоизменение:
около 100 000 слов [Grammatical dictionary of the Russian language: Inflection: approx 100
000 words]. Изд-во “Русский язык” .

112


