



















































Applying prosodic speech features in mental health care: An exploratory study in a life-review intervention for depression


Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality, pages 61–68,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Applying prosodic speech features in mental health care: 

An exploratory study in a life-review intervention for depression 
  

Sanne M.A. Lamers 

University of Twente 

Psychology, Health, & 

Technology 

the Netherlands 

s.m.a.lamers@ 

utwente.nl 

 

Khiet P. Truong 

University of Twente 

Human Media Interaction 

the Netherlands 

k.p.truong@ 

utwente.nl 

Bas Steunenberg 

UMC Utrecht 

the Netherlands 
 b.steunenberg@ 
umcutrecht.nl 

Franciska de Jong  

University of Twente 

Human Media Interaction 

the Netherlands 

f.m.g.dejong@ 

utwente.nl  

 

Gerben J. Westerhof 

University of Twente 

Psychology, Health, & Technology 

the Netherlands 
g.j.westerhof@ 

utwente.nl 

 

Abstract 

The present study aims to investigate the   

application of prosodic speech features in a 

psychological intervention based on life-

review. Several studies have shown that 

speech features can be used as indicators of 

depression severity, but these studies are 

mainly based on controlled speech recording 

tasks instead of natural conversations. The 

present exploratory study investigated speech 

features as indicators of depression in con-

versations of a therapeutic intervention. The 

changes in the prosodic speech features pitch, 

duration of pauses, and total duration of the 

participant’s speaking time were studied over 

four sessions of a life-review intervention for 

three older participants. The ecological valid-

ity of the dynamics observed for prosodic 

speech features could not be established in 

the present study. The changes in speech fea-

tures differed from what can be expected in 

an intervention that is effective in decreasing 

depression and were inconsistent with each 

other for each of the participants. We suggest 

future research to investigate changes within 

the intervention sessions, to relate the chang-

es in feature values to the topical content of 

the speech, and to relate the speech features 

directly to depression scores. 

1 Introduction 

Depression is a mood disorder that is mainly 

characterized by a sad mood or the loss of in 

terest and pleasure in nearly all activities in a 

period of at least two weeks (American Psychia- 

tric Association, 2000). Depression disorders are 

the leading cause of disability and contribute 

largely to the burden of disease in middle- and 

high-income countries worldwide (Üstun et al., 

2004). In 2012, more than 350 million people 

around the world suffered from depression symp-

toms (World Health Organization, 2012). To de-

crease the onset of depression disorders, early 

psychological interventions, i.e., psychological 

methods targeting behavioral change to reduce 

limitations or problems (Vingerhoets, Kop, & 

Soons, 2002), aiming at adults with depression 

symptoms or mild depression disorders are    

necessary. Meta-analytic findings show that psy-

chological interventions reduce the incidence of 

depression disorders by 22%, indicating that pre-

vention of new cases of depression disorders is 

indeed possible (Cuijpers et al., 2008).  

To evaluate the effectiveness of interventions 

for depression and changes during the interven-

tions, reliable and valid measures of depression 

severity are necessary. Depression severity is 

mostly measured by self-report questionnaires 

such as the Center for Epidemiologic Studies 

Depression scale (CES-D; Radloff, 1977), the 

Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D; 

Hamilton, 1960), and the Beck Depression In-

ventory (Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996). These 

self-report questionnaires often include items on 

mood and feelings. Moreover, questionnaire 

items may cover physical depression symptoms 

such as sleep disturbances, changes in weight 

61



and appetite, and loss in energy. However, in 

some target groups such as older adults these 

items can confound with health problems and 

physical diseases, which increase in old age. For 

these reasons, there is a need for valid and objec-

tive measures of depression severity. Not only to 

assess depression severity before and after thera-

py, but also to detect the dynamics during the 

therapy (Elliot, 2010). 

1.1 Computational linguistics, speech ana-
lysis, and mental health care 

It is commonly assumed  and confirmed in    

several studies that emotions and mood can in-

fluence the speaking behavior of a person and the 

characteristics of the sound in speech (Kuny & 

Stassen, 1993; Scherer, Johnstone, & Klasmeyer, 

2003). Already in 1954, Moses concluded that 

the voice and speech patterns of psychiatric pa-

tients differed from those of people without a 

psychiatric diagnosis. Clinicians observe the 

speech of depressed patients frequently as uni-

form, monotonous, slow, and with a low voice 

(Kuny & Stassen, 1993). A review by Sobin and 

Sackeim (1997) showed that depressed people 

differ from normal and other psychiatric groups 

on psychomotor symptoms such as speech. The 

speech of depressed patients is characterized by a 

longer pause duration, that is, an increased 

amount of time between speech utterances as 

well as by a reduced variability in mean vocal 

pitch.  

More recently these insights have led to      

collaborative and multidisciplinary work be-

tween researchers from the fields of computa-

tional linguistics and mental health care. With 

the growing availability of models and algo-

rithms for automated natural language processing 

that can be put to use in clinical scenarios, de-

pression can now increasingly be measured 

based on the characteristics of the language used 

by patients, such as the frequency of verbal ele-

ments in a narrative that express a certain mood 

or sentiment (Pennebaker & Chung, 2011), and  

acoustic speech features.  Because vocal acoustic 

features such as pause durations and pitch are 

biologically based, it has even been argued that 

they can serve as biomarkers of depression se-

verity (Mundt et al., 2012). As a consequence, 

speech features such as pitch and pause durations 

can be used to estimate the severity of a depres-

sion. 

To date, several studies investigated the validi-

ty of several speech features as indicators  of de-

pression. Indeed, the speech features pitch and 

speech loudness correlate significantly with 

global depression scores during recovery (Kuny 

& Stassen, 1993; Stassen, Kuny, & Hell, 1998). 

After recovery from depression, the speech pause 

time of depressed adults was no longer elongated 

(Hardy et al., 1984). These results indicate that  

prosodic speech features are valid measures of 

depression.  

However, these studies have the limitation that 

the speech analyses are based on the recording of 

controlled speech based on tasks such as count-

ing and reading out loud. Such speech recording 

tasks take place under ideal voice recording con-

ditions (Cannizzaro, Harel, Reilly, Chappell, & 

Snyder, 2004), while speech analysis is more 

difficult when conducted outside a controlled 

setting, because of so-called noisy channel     

effects (Janssen, Tacke, de Vries, van den Broek, 

Westerink, Haselager, & IJsselsteijn, 2013). 

Moreover, controlled speech tasks are cognitive-

ly less demanding than free speech tasks (Alpert 

et al., 2011). This evokes the question whether 
speech features are also ecological valid, i.e., 

whether they can be used as indicators of depres-

sion severity, when measured during natural 

conversations instead of during the recording of 

controlled speech tasks (Bronfenbrenner, 1977).  

A study on speech samples from video recor- 

dings of structured interviews revealed promis-

ing results: speaking rate and pitch variation, but 

not the percentage of pauses, showed a large cor-

relation with depression rating scores (Canni-

zaro, Harel, Reilly, Chappell, & Snyder, 2004). 

Additional studies on the ecological validity of 

using prosodic speech features as indicator for  

depression are necessary. 

1.2 Speech features as mood markers in a 
life-review intervention 

In the present study the speech of older adults 

will be measured in four sessions of a psycholo- 

gical intervention, combining knowledge in the 

fields of computational linguistics and psycho-

logical interventions in mental health care. Be-

cause psychological interventions of depression 

have shown to be effective (e.g., Cuijpers, van 

Straten, & Smit, 2006) and are broadly imple-

mented in mental health care, the measurement 

of speech features in psychological interventions 

is a promising application for the field of compu-

tational linguistics. For example, speech features 

can be used to provide direct feedback to both 

the therapist and patient on the severity and 

changes in severity of depression during the psy-

chological intervention. Clinicians do not have 

62



the ability to differentiate precisely the duration 

of for example the patient’s utterances and paus-

es (Alpert et al. 2001). There is also ample evi-

dence that text mining techniques based on the 

frequency of certain terms can be applied to nar-

ratives from patients in order to monitor changes 

in mood (Pennebaker & Chung, 2011), and a re-

cent study has shown that machines can better 

recognize certain emotions than lay people 

(Janssen et al., 2013), underlining once again the 

added value  of automated speech analysis. To 

pave the way for future applications that would 

enable the use of  speech features as a direct 

feedback mechanism, the first step is to gain 

more knowledge on the patterns in speech fea-

tures and on how changes in these features can 

be considered as meaningful signals of patterns 

in   psychological interventions.  

The psychological intervention in the present 

study is based on life-review: the structured re-

collection of autobiographical memories. De-

pressed people have difficulties in retrieving spe-

cific, positive memories. Their autobiographical 

memory is characterized by more negative and 

general memories (e.g., Williams et al., 2007), 

for example memories that reflect a period or 

recurrent event (e.g., the period of a marriage) 

rather than a specific event (e.g., the ceremony 

on the wedding day). The present life-review 

course targets the recollection of specific, posi-

tive memories in older adults with depression 

symptoms. In four weekly sessions, the inter-

viewer stimulates the recollection by asking 

questions on the depressed person’s childhood, 

adolescence, adulthood and life in general. An 

advantage of life-review in comparison to other 

therapies such as Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, 

is that it fits in with a natural activity of older 

adults to recollect memories and tell stories 

about their lives (Bluck & Levine, 1998). Life-

review has shown to be an effective method to 

decrease depression symptoms (Korte, Bohl-

meijer, Cappeliez, Smit, & Westerhof, 2012; 

Pinquart & Forstmeier, 2012) and is considered 

an evidence-based intervention for depression in 

older adults (Scogin, Welsh, Hanson, Stump, & 

Coates, 2005).  

Our study is one of the first to investigate pro-

sodic speech features during a psychological in-

tervention. The study is exploratory and aims to 

gain insight into the ecological validity of pro-

sodic speech features in a psychological life-

review intervention. The life-review intervention 

offers the opportunity to investigate the prosodic 

speech features over time. Life-review is highly 

suitable to investigate speech features during an 

intervention, since the speech from the recall of 

autobiographical memories provides strong pro-

sodic speech changes (Cohen, Hong, & Guevara, 

2010) and the expression of emotions charac-

terized by speech characteristics is stronger after 

open and meaning-questions as compared to 

closed and fact-questions (Truong, Westerhof, 

Lamers, & de Jong, under review). Our paper is a 

first step to gain insight into the methods that are 

necessary to evaluate the application of prosodic 

speech features in mental health care. In the pre-

sent study into the role of prosodic speech fea-

tures,  vocal pitch and pause duration will be in-

vestigated in three participants across all four 

weekly sessions. Because the life-review inter-

vention is effective in decreasing depression 

symptoms (Korte et al., 2011; Serrano, Latorre, 

Gatz, & Montanes, 2004), we expect that the 

prosodic features change accordingly. Therefore, 

we hypothesize (a) an increase in average vocal 

pitch, (b) an increase in the variation in vocal 

pitch, (c) a decrease in average pause duration, 

(d) a decrease in the ratio between the total pause 

time and total speech time (pause speech ratio), 

and (e) an increase in the ratio between the par-

ticipant’s speech and total duration of the session 

(speech total duration ratio) during the interven-

tion.  

2 Method 

In this section we will describe the methodology 

applied in the design of the psychological inter-

ventions during which the research data sets 

were generated, the procedure for selecting the 

participants and the corresponding data sets, the 

data preparations steps and the analyses per-

formed.  

2.1 Intervention ‘Precious memories’ 

The life-review intervention ‘Precious memories’ 

(Bohlmeijer, Serrano, Cuijpers, & Steunenberg, 

2007) targets the recollection of specific, positive 

memories. The intervention is developed for  

older adults with depression symptoms living in 

a nursing home. Each of the four weekly sessions 

focuses on a different theme: childhood, ado-

lescence, adulthood, and life in general. The ses-

sions are individual and guided by a trained in-

terviewer. The sessions take place at the partici-

pant’s home and last approximately 45 minutes. 

Each of the sessions is structured by fourteen 

main questions that stimulate the participant to 

recollect and tell specific positive memories 

63



about his or her life. The interviewers are in-

structed to ask for lively details about each of the 

positive memories of the participants, for        

example the colors, smells and people that were 

involved in the memory. Table 1 shows an ex-

ample question for each of the four sessions. 

 

Session  Example question 

1: Childhood Can you remember an 

event in which your father 

or mother did something 

when you were a child that 

made you very happy? 

2: Adolescence Do you remember a special 

moment of getting your 

first kiss or falling in love 

with someone? 

3: Adulthood What has been a very im-

portant positive experience 

in your life between the 

ages of 20 and 60? 

4: Life in general What is the largest gift you 

ever received in your life? 

Tabel 1. Example questions for the four sessions 

of the life-review intervention ‘Precious  

memories’ 

2.2 Procedure and participants 

Participants with depression symptoms were re-

cruited in nursing homes in the area of Amster-

dam, the Netherlands. Participation in the life-

review intervention was voluntary. Three partici-

pants were selected for whom audio recordings 

of the four sessions were available, which resul-

ted in a dataset of twelve life-review sessions. 

The three participants (below labeled as P1, P3 

and P5) were females with an age between 83 

and 90 years. The educational background varied 

from low to high and the marital status from 

married to never married. The participants signed 

an informed consent form for the use of the au-

dio-tapes  for scientific purposes.  

2.3 Data preparation and analysis 

All acoustic features were automatically extract-

ed with Praat (Boersma, 2001). Because the 

speech of both the interviewer and the partici-

pants were recorded on one mixed audio channel, 

some manual interventions had to be applied in 

order to determine the segments in which the 

participant is talking. First, for each session, the 

segments in which the participant is the main 

speaker were selected. These so-called ‘turns’ 

were then labeled in more detail; utterances pro-

duced by the interviewer were marked and dis-

carded in the speech analysis. For each turn, 

mean pitch, standard deviation pitch, pause dura-

tion, the ratio between total pause time and total 

speech time, and the ratio between total speech 

time and total duration of the session were ex-

tracted. Pause durations were automatically ex-

tracted by applying silence detection where the 

minimal silence duration was set at 500 ms. All 

features were normalized per speaker by trans-

forming the raw feature values to z-scores (mean 

and standard deviation were calculated over all 4 

sessions, z = ((x-m)/sd)). The ratio between total 

speech time and total duration time was not nor-

malized because this feature was calculated over 

a whole session instead of a turn. Subsequently, 

averages over all turns per session were taken in 

order to obtain one value per session. 

3 Results 

The results of the prosodic speech features over 

the four sessions of the life-review intervention 

are graphically presented separately for each fea-

ture, in the Figures 1 to 5. We hypothesized an 

increase in the average pitch during the interven-

tion. As shown in Figure 1, the patterns in ave-

rage pitch during the intervention differs across 

the three participants. Only in Participant 3, the 

pattern is in line with our expectations, showing 

an increase in the sessions 3 and 4. In both Par-

ticipant 1 and 5, there was a decrease in average 

pitch in the sessions 3 and 4. 

 

 
 

Figure 1. Average pitch of the participants 

(P1,P3,P5) during the four sessions. 

 

We expected the variation in pitch to increase 

during the intervention. Figure 2 shows the par-

ticipants’ patterns of the standard deviation of 

pitch during the intervention. The changes in 

standard deviation do not confirm our hypothe-

sis. Although the speech of Participant 3 shows 

64



an increase in session 4, the standard deviation is 

lower in session 4 than in session 1 of the inter-

vention. The standard deviation of Participant 5 

is relatively stable during the intervention. Par-

ticipant 1 mainly shows a large variation in pitch 

in session 2. 

 

 
 

Figure 2. Standard deviation in pitch of the par-

ticipants (P1,P3,P5) during the four sessions. 

 

It was hypothesized that the average pause du-

ration would decrease during the four sessions of 

the intervention. Figure 3 shows that the average 

pause duration was relatively stable over the first 

three sessions in all three participants. Only in 

Participant 1 the average pause duration de-

creased in session 4, in line with our expec-

tations.  

 

 
 

Figure 3. Pause duration of the participants 

(P1,P3,P5) during the four sessions. 

 

In agreement with our hypothesis on average 

pause duration, we also expected a decrease dur-

ing the intervention in the ratio between the total 

pause time and total speech time. Although there 

was a large decrease in the pause speech ratio of 

Participant 1 between the sessions 2 and 3, the 

ratio in session 4 was similar to the pause speech 

ratio in the first session (see Figure 4). In both 

Participant 2 and 3, the ratio was relatively stable 

in the sessions 1 to 3, but in session 4 the pause 

speech ratio showed an increase in Participant 3 

and a slight decrease in Participant 2. 

 

 
 

Figure 4. Pause speech ratio of the participants 

(P1,P3,P5) during the four sessions. 

 

Last, we investigated the ratio between the 

participant’s speech and total duration of the ses-

sion. We hypothesized an increase in the speech 

total duration ration during the intervention. Fig-

ure 5 shows the differences between the partici-

pants in the speech total duration ratio over the 

four sessions. The ratio is relatively stable, and 

high, in Participant 5. The ratio in both Partici-

pant 1 and 3 in general decreases during the in-

tervention, with a lower speech total duration 

ratio in session 4 as compared to session 1.  

 

 
 

Figure 5. Speech total duration ratio of the par-

ticipants (P1,P3,P5) during the four sessions. 

 

4 Conclusion 

The aim of the present study was to investigate 

the suitability of applying  an analysis of proso-

dic speech features in the speech recordings    

65



collected in psychological intervention based on 

life-review. Because several studies have shown 

that speech features can be used as indicators of 

depression severity (e.g., Kuny & Stassen, 1993; 

Stassen, Kuny, & Hell, 1998), the application of 

speech analyses in mental health care is promi- 

sing. However, the measurement of speech fea-

tures is often based on speech recording tasks 

and the ecological validity within psychological 

interventions is not yet established. The study is 

a first exploratory step to gain insight into the 

ecological validity of prosodic speech features in 

a psychological life-review intervention.  

We expected to measure a change during the 

intervention in the prosodic speech features that 

could be  related to depression symptoms, and 

hypothesized an increase in average pitch and 

pitch variation, a decrease in average pause dura-

tion, and an increase in the amount of speech by 

the participant during the intervention. However, 

we could not establish  the ecological validity of 

these speech indicators in the present study. In 

general, the patterns of the prosodic speech indi-

cators differ from our expectations. The dyna-

mics  in the speech indicators was different from 

what can be expected in an intervention that is 

effective in decreasing depression (Korte et al., 

2011; Serrano et al., 2004). Moreover, the speech 

indicators were inconsistent with each other for  

the participants in the pool. For example, Partici-

pant 3 showed an increase in pitch during the 

intervention, which indicates a decrease in de-

pression, and an increase in average pause dura-

tion and pause speech ratio, which indicates an 

increase in depression.  

Taken together, the findings from the present 

study indicate that the prosodic speech features 

that have been validated for controlled settings, 

are not directly applicable for the spontaneous 

type of conversation that is typical for a mental 

health care setting. More research is needed to 

establish the ecological validity of prosodic 

speech features such as pitch, pauses, and speech 

duration as indicators of depression severity. A 

few suggestions can be made. First, each of the 

four sessions in the life-review intervention in 

the present study focused on a different theme. 

Although we aimed to evaluate the development 

of the speech features during the intervention, the 

differences across the session may be the conse-

quence of differences in session theme. More-

over, not all parts of the session consisted of  

life-review, and participants were talking about a 

variety of subjects, for example about  their 

caregivers. The goal of the life-review interven-

tion is to stimulate the retrieval of specific posi-

tive memories. In a next step, we aim to select 

the parts in which the participant is recollecting 

such memories and to evaluate the patterns in 

prosodic speech features only for  these parts. 

Second, the prosodic speech indicators were 

averaged per session to provide a clear overview 

of the changes over the four sessions. However, 

changes can also occur within the session. For 

example, vocal pitch may increase during the 

session, which would indicate a decrease in de-

pression symptoms. Furthermore, within each 

session, the interaction between the interviewer 

and participant may play a role. For instance, 

when the interviewer speaks with a higher pitch 

and more variation in pitch, the participant may 

unconsciously take over some of this speaking 

behavior. We suggest future studies to investi-

gate not only the average session, but to include 

changes during the session the interviewer’s 

speech features. 

Third, the present research was conducted in 

line with the assumption that life-review is effec-

tive as an intervention for mood disorder, as is 

shown in several studies (Korte et al., 2011; Ser-

rano et al., 2004). However, we due to lack of 

data on depression severity we do not know 

whether the life-review intervention was fully 

effective for the participants in the present study. 

To validate the patterns prosodic speech features 

as a reliable indicator for depressions that can be 

used in mental health care, it is necessary to 

demonstrate  that  the dynamics in speech fea-

tures can be related directly to changes in depres-

sion scores. As argued in earlier studies, in order 

to  conclude that speech features correlate signi-

ficantly with global depression scores during re-

covery (Kuny & Stassen, 1993; Stassen, Kuny, & 

Hell, 1998), these correlations need to be inves-

tigated in psychological interventions.  

In sum, the study  of how prosodic speech fea-

tures such as pitch and pauses relate to the kind 

of spoken narratives that play a role in mental 

health care settings is a promising field. How-

ever, the ecological validity of prosodic speech 

features could not be established in the present 

study. More research based on  larger data sam-

ples the establishment of a direct relation to de-

pression scores is  necessary before the tech-

niques from the field of computational linguistics 

can be applied as a basis for the collection of in-

dicators that can be used  in psychological inter-

ventions in a meaningful and effective way. 

 

66



References 

Alpert, M., Pouget, E. R., & Silva, R. R. (2001). Re-

flections of depression in acoustic measures of the 

patient’s speech. Journal of Affective Disorders, 

66, 59-69. 

 

American Psychiatric Association (2000). Diagnostic 

and statistical manual of mental disorders (4
th

 ed., 

text rev.). Washington, DC: Author.  

 

Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). 

Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory-II. San 

Antoinio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 

 

Bluck, S., & Levine, L. J. (1998). Reminiscence as 

autobiographical memory: A catalyst for reminis-

cence theory development. Ageing and Society, 

18, 185-208. 

 

Boersma, P. (2001). Praat, a sysem for doing pho- 

netics by computer. Glot International, 5(9/10), 

341-345. 

 

Bohlmeijer, E. T., Serrano, J., Cuijpers, P., & Steu-

nenberg, B. (2007). Dierbare herinneringen. Pro-

tocol voor life-review bij ouderen met depressieve 

klachten in verzorgings- en verpleeghuizen [Pre-

cious memories. Protocol for life-review in older 

people with depressive symptoms in nursing 

homes]. 

 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1977). Toward an experimental 

ecology of human development. American Psy-

chologist, 32, 513-531. 

Cannizzaro, M., Harel, B., Reilly, N., Chappell, P., & 

Snyder, P. J. (2004). Voice acoustical measure-

ment of the severity of major depression. Brain 

and Cognition, 56, 30-35. 

 

Chien, J.-T., & Chueh, C-H. (2010). Joint acoustic 

and language modeling for speech recognition. 

Speech Communication, 52, 223-235. 

 

Cohen, A. S., Hong, S. L., & Guevara, A. (2010). 

Understanding emotional expression using prosod-

ic analysis of natural speech: refining the method-

ology. Journal of Behavioral Therapy & Experi-

mental Psychiatry, 41, 150-157. 

 

Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., Smit, F. (2006). Psycho-

logical treatment of late-life depression: A meta-

analysis of randomized controlled trials. Interna-

tional Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21, 1139-

1149. 

 

Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., Smit, F., Mihalopoulos, 

C., & Beekman, M. D. (2008). Preventing the on-

set of depressive disorders: a meta-analytic review 

of psychological interventions. American Journal 

of Psychiatry, 165, 1272-1280. 

 

Elliot, R. (2010). Psychotherapy change process re-

search: Realizing the promise. Psychotherapy Re-

search, 20, 123-135. 

 

Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. 

Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, & Psychia-

try, 23, 56-62. 

 

Hardy, P., Jouvant, R., & Widlöcher, D. (1984). 

Speech pause time and the retardation rating scale 

for depresstion (ERD): towards a reciprocal vali-

dation. Journal of Affective Disorders, 6, 123-127. 

 

Janssen, J. H., Tacke, P., de Vries, J. J. G., van den 

Broek, E. L., Westerink, J. H. D. M., Haselager, 

P., & IJsselsteijn, W. A. (2013). Machines outper-

form laypersons in recognizing emotions elicited 

by autobiographical recollection. Human-

Computer Interaction, 28, 479-517. 

 

Koolagudi, S. G., & Sreenivasa, K. S. (2012). Emo-

tion recognition from speech: a review. Interna-

tional Journal of Speech Technology, 15, 99-117. 

 

Korte, J., Bohlmeijer, E. T., Cappeliez, P., Smit, F., & 

Westerhof G. J. (2012). Life-review therapy for 

older adults with moderate depressive sympto-

matology: A pragmatic randomized controlled tri-

al. Psychological Medicine, 42, 1163-1172.  

 

Kuny, S., & Stassen, H. H. (1993). Speaking behavior 

and voice sound characteristics in depressive pa-

tients during recovery. Journal of Psychiatric Re-

search, 27, 289-307. 

 

Moses, J. P. (1954). The voice of neurosis. Oxford, 

UK: Grune and Stratton. 

 

Mundt, J. C., Vogel, A. P., Feltner, D. E., & Lender-

king, W. R. (2012). Vocal acoustic biomarkers of 

depression severity and treatment response. Bio-

logical Psychiatry, 72, 580-587. 

 

Pennebaker, J. W. and Chung, C. K. 

(2011). Expressive Writing and its Links to Men-

tal and Physical Health. In H. S. Friedman 

(Ed.), Oxford Handbook of Health Psycholo-

gy. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 417-

437. 

 

Pinquart, M., & Forstmeier, S. (2012). Effects of rem-

iniscence interventions on psychosocial outcomes: 

A meta-analysis. Aging & Mental Health, 16, 514-

558. 

 

Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D Scale: A Self-

Report Depression Scale for Research in the Gen-

eral Population. Applied Psychological Measure-

ment, 1, 385-401. 

67



 

Scherer, K. R., Johnstone, T., & Klasmeyer, G. 

(2003). Vocal expression of emotion. In R. J. Da-

vidson, K. R. Scherer, & H. Goldsmith (Eds.), 

Handbook of the Affective Sciences (pp. 433–456). 

New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

 

Scogin, F., Welsh, D., Hanson, A., Stump, J., & 

Coates, A. (2005). Evidence-based psychothera-

pies for depression in older adults. Clinical Psy-

chology: Science and Practice, 12, 222-237. 
 

Serrano, J., Latorre, J., Gatz, M., & Montanes, J. 

(2004). Life review therapy using autobiograph-

ical retrieval practice for older adults with depres-

sive symptomatology. Psychology & Aging, 19, 

272-277. 

 

Sobin, C., & Alpert, M. (1999). Emotion in speech: 

the acoustic attributes of fear, anger, sadness, and 

joy. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28, 

347-365. 

 

Sobin, C., & Sackeim, H. A. (1997). Psychomotor 

symptoms of depression. American Journal of 

Psychiatry, 154, 4-17. 

 

Stassen, H. H., Kuny, S., & Hell, D. (1998). The 

speech analysis approach to determining onset of 

improvement under antidepressants. European 

Neuropsychopharmacology, 8, 303-310. 

 

Truong, K., Westerhof, G. J., Lamers, S. M. A., & de 

Jong, F. (under review). Towards modeling ex-

pressed emotions in oral history interviews: using 

verbal and non-verbal signals to track personal 

narratives. Literary and Linguistic Computing. 

 

Üstün, T. B., Ayuso-Mateos, J. L., Chatterji, S., 

Mathers, C., & Murray, C. J. L. (2004). Global 

burden of depressive disorders in the year 2000. 

British Journal of Psychiatry, 184, 386-392. 

 

Vervedis, D., & Kotropoulos, C. (2006). Emotional 

speech recognition: Resources, features, and 

methods. Speech Communication, 48, 1162-1181. 

 

Vingerhoets, A. J. J. M., Kop, P. F. M., & Soons, P. 

H. G. M. (2002). Psychologie in de gezondheids-

zorg: een praktijkoriëntatie [Psychology in health 

care: a practical orientation]. Houten, the Nether-

lands: Bohn Stafleu van Loghum. 

 

Williams, J. M., Barnhofer, T., Crane, C., Herman, D, 

Raes, F., Watkins, E., & Dalgleish, T. (2007). Au-

tobiographical memory specificity and emotional 

disorder. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 122-148. 

 

World Health Organization. (2012). Depression Fact 

Sheet. Retrieved at March, 5, 2014:  

www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs369/en/ 

 

68


