



















































Using Conceptual Spaces to Model Domain Knowledge in Data-to-Text Systems


Proceedings of the 8th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 11–15,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19-21 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Using Conceptual Spaces to Model Domain Knowledge
in Data-to-Text Systems

Hadi Banaee and Amy Loutfi
Center for Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems

Örebro University
Örebro, Sweden

{hadi.banaee, amy.loutfi}@oru.se

Abstract

This position paper introduces the utility
of the conceptual spaces theory to concep-
tualise the acquired knowledge in data-to-
text systems. A use case of the proposed
method is presented for text generation
systems dealing with sensor data. Mod-
elling information in a conceptual space
exploits a spatial representation of domain
knowledge in order to perceive unexpected
observations. This ongoing work aims
to apply conceptual spaces in NLG for
grounding numeric information into the
symbolic representation and confronting
the important step of acquiring adequate
knowledge in data-to-text systems.

1 Introduction

Knowledge acquisition (KA) is important for
building natural language generation (NLG) sys-
tems. Two KA techniques including corpus-based
KA and structured expert-oriented KA have been
previously studied for NLG systems in (Reiter
et al., 2003) to improve the quality of acquired
knowledge. Both techniques use rule-based ap-
proaches in order to enrich the similarities be-
tween generated texts and natural human-written
texts. An important class of NLG frameworks
which use a rule-based approach is data-to-text
systems where a linguistic summarisation of nu-
meric data is produced. The main architecture of
data-to-text systems has been introduced by Reiter
(2007) which includes the following stages: signal
analysis, data interpretation, document planning,
microplanning and realisation. Domain knowl-
edge for these systems is formalised as a taxon-
omy or an ontology of information. In a data-to-
text architecture, all the stages are using the pro-
vided taxonomy. In particular, the signal analysis
stage extracts the information that is determined

in taxonomies such as simple patterns, events, and
trends. Also, the data interpretation stage abstracts
information into the symbolic messages using the
defined taxonomies.

Most recent data-to-text frameworks have been
developed using Reiter’s architecture with the ad-
dition of providing the taxonomies or ontologies
corresponding to the domain knowledge. For in-
stance, the work on summarising the gas turbine
time series (Yu et al., 2007) has used expert knowl-
edge to provide a taxonomy of the primitive pat-
terns (i.e. spikes, steps, oscillations). Similarly,
the systems related to the Babytalk project (Portet
et al., 2009; Gatt et al., 2009; Hunter et al.,
2012) have stored medically known observation
(e.g. bradycardia) in local ontologies. In order to
avoid generating ambiguous messages, these sys-
tems simplify the stored information in the tax-
onomies by using only the primitive changes in-
teresting for the end users. The core of such sys-
tems is still based on this fact - that the content of
the generated text is dependent on the richness of
the domain knowledge in the provided taxonomies
which are usually bounded by expert rules. This
organised domain knowledge is usually an inflexi-
ble input to the framework which restricts the out-
put of the stages in data-to-text architecture. For
instance, the taxonomy in (Yu et al., 2007) does
not allow the system to represent unexpected ob-
servations (e.g. wave or burst) out of the prede-
fined domain knowledge. Likewise, in the medical
domain, an unknown physiological pattern will be
ignored if it does not have a corresponding entity
in the provided ontology by expert. This limitation
in data-to-text systems reveals the necessity of re-
organising domain knowledge in order to span un-
seen information across the data.

This position paper introduces a new approach,
inspired by the conceptual spaces theory, to model
information into a set of concepts that can be used
by data-to-text systems. The conceptual spaces

11



theory creates a spatial model of concepts that rep-
resents knowledge or information. This theory
presents a promising alternative to modelling the
domain knowledge in taxonomies or ontologies,
particularly when a data-driven analysis is to be
captured in natural language. This paper outlines
the notion of conceptual spaces and illustrates how
it can be used in a use case. Section 2 reviews
the theory of conceptual spaces and its notions.
Section 3 presents the approach for applying the
conceptual spaces in NLG frameworks. In Section
4, a simple application of the proposed method is
shown. Finally, we address the challenges and out-
line our plans for future work.

2 On the Theory of Conceptual Spaces

The idea of conceptual spaces has been developed
by Gärdenfors (2000) as a framework to repre-
sent knowledge at the conceptual level. A concep-
tual space is formed in geometrical or topological
structures as a set of quality dimensions describ-
ing the attributes of information to be represented.
For instance, a conceptual space might comprise
dimensions such as width, weight, or saltiness. A
domain is represented to be a set of interdepen-
dent dimensions which cannot logically be sepa-
rated in a perceptual space. A typical example of
a domain is ‘colour’ which can be defined through
multi dimensions like hue, saturation, and bright-
ness. Properties are the convex regions in a sin-
gle domain describing the particular attributes of
the domain. As an example, ‘green’ is a property
corresponding to a region in the colour domain
(Fig. 1, right). In natural language, properties are
mostly associated with adjectives in a particular
domain. A conceptual space contains a member-
ship distance measure for each property within the
domains which represents the regions occupied by
the property and allows to depict the notion of sim-
ilarity (Rickard et al., 2007).

Concepts are formed as regions in a conceptual
space. In particular, a concept is represented as a
set of related properties which might cover multi-
ple domains together with information how these
domains are correlated. For instance, the concept
of ‘apple’ can be represented as regions in colour,
size and taste domains (Fig. 1). The representation
of concepts in space contains an assignment of
weights to the domains or dimensions, in order to
distinguish between similar concepts (Gärdenfors,
2004). In natural languages, concepts often cor-

Colour 
Domain

Taste

Size

hue

saturation

brightness

red

white

black

green
medium

sweet-sour

gr
ee
n

Figure 1: A typical example of a conceptual space to rep-
resent ‘apple’ concept.

respond to nouns or describe verbs when time is
involved as a dimension (Rickard et al., 2007).
The most representative instance of a concept is its
prototypical member which is represented as an n-
dimensional point in the concepts region. The con-
ceptual space can be geometrically divided (e.g.
using Voronoi tessellation (Gärdenfors, 2004)) to
a set of categories corresponding to the prototypi-
cal members. Objects (such as instances, entities,
or observations) in a conceptual space are identi-
fied in the concept regions which characterised as
vectors of quality values. For example, a particular
instance of ‘apple’ is depicted in Fig. 1 as a vec-
tor of properties <green, medium, sweet–sour>.
An object contains a property depending on the
nearness of its point to the defined region of the
property. This notion leads to have a similarity
measure within a domain to identify the proper-
ties of objects. Similarity is an essential notion in
any conceptual space framework which is defined
on individual domains. The geometrical represen-
tation of conceptual spaces provides the ability of
using distance measures, which is missed in purely
symbolic representations, to consider the similar-
ity of concepts and instances.

3 Proposed Approach: Conceptual
Spaces for Data-to-Text Systems

This section describes the usage of conceptual
spaces for modelling numeric knowledge as con-
cepts into a spatial representation. The proposed
approach shows how to use conceptual space the-
ory to reorganise the predefined taxonomies into
a set of concepts in order to represent unexpected
patterns. The idea consists of two phases, con-
structing a conceptual space corresponding to the
taxonomy, and enhancing the regions in the space
based on new observations. The general steps of
the proposed approach are described as follows:

12



Step 1: Build the required taxonomy of ob-
servations and patterns in the same way as tradi-
tional data-to-text systems in order to provide a set
of primitive information requirements using the
expert-oriented, domain, or corpus-based knowl-
edge. Primitive entities from these taxonomy will
be the n-dimensional vectors of concepts in con-
ceptual space.

Step 2: Initialise a conceptual space and de-
termine its components, including quality dimen-
sions, domains, and concepts corresponding to the
domain knowledge and the context of data. Us-
ing similarity measures on the determined dimen-
sions, the model is able to define the geometrical
distance between each pair of vectors and iden-
tify the nearest concept for any point in space. By
defining the applicable domains and dimensions,
the conceptual space is able to characterise a vast
range of interesting concepts, which may not be
similar to the provided entities.

Step 3: Specify the ontological instances gath-
ered in step one as concepts regions. This step
grounds the primitive observations to a set of pro-
totypical members as n-dimensional vectors in the
created conceptual space. Also the space would
be classified into a set of categories presenting the
properties of the prototypical members. The main
contribution of this approach is based on the fact -
that by providing the semantic information as geo-
metrical vectors, the model is spanned to concep-
tualise the information categories which enables
calculating the similarities between knowledge en-
tities like new (non-primitive) extracted patterns as
new vectors in the space. However, a new entity
could be 1) close to an existing prototypical mem-
ber and placed in its geometrical category, or 2) an
anomalous point and placed as a new prototype in
the space.

Step 4: Rearrange the conceptual categories
corresponding to the prototypical members by
adding new instances to the model as new vec-
tor points. The symbolic properties of prototyp-
ical members in space are used to describe novel
properties of unknown entities. When a new ob-
servation appears in space as a vector, it leads to
reorganise the boundaries of concepts regions re-
lated to the new inserted member. The expanded
space will provide more descriptive regions for un-
considered entities. It is notable that the provided
domains and dimensions enables the conceptual
space to grow with new entities which are event

~~~~~
~~~~
~~~~

~~~~~
~~~~~

~~~~
~~~~
~~~~

Ontological 
Patterns 

Conceptual Space

Data Interpretation

Microplanning and 
Realisation

Document Planning

Input Data

Text

Signal analysis

Figure 2: The conceptual space in data-to-text architecture
as an alternative for ontological patterns.

sans association with existing categories.
Different stages of data-to-text architecture can

be connected to the built conceptual space instead
of their relations to the ontology. Specifically, pat-
tern discovery in the signal analysis stage does not
need to be limited to rules and domain constraints.

Data-to-text approaches which use ontologies
for signal processing are able to apply probabilis-
tic or fuzzy processes to map the patterns of data
into the “most likely” concepts in ontology. How-
ever, one advantage of the proposed approach is
that enables the system to represent new concepts
that are non-relatively deviant cases, as well as
covering intermediate patterns. So, any extracted
information from data can be formalised in the
conceptual space and then be characterised in a
symbolic representation. Another advantage of
this model is that the conceptual space assists the
system to enrich the quality of represented mes-
sages in the final text with considering unseen, but
interesting information for the end users. Fig. 2
depicts the conceptual space in relation with the
stages of the data-to-text architecture.

4 Use Case: From Data Streams to
Conceptual Representation

Knowledge extraction in data streams exploits the
most informative observations (e.g. patterns and
events) through the data (Rajaraman et al., 2011).
In most of data-to-text systems, much attention
has been given to the sensor data as the best indica-
tor of data streams (e.g. weather sensor channels,
gas turbine time series, and physiological data in
body area networks). A robust text generation sys-
tem for sensor data needs to provide a comprehen-
sive information structure in order to summarise
numeric measurements. Here, we explain how the
proposed approach can apply to model the defined
taxonomies in sensor data applications, particu-
larly for gas turbine time series (Yu et al., 2007)

13



and neonatal intensive care data (Gatt et al., 2009).
The main challenge here is the definition of con-
cepts and quality dimensions from non-sensible
observations in time series data. However, a pre-
liminary model is introduced as follows:

Based on the acquired knowledge in both sys-
tems, the patterns are categorised to 1) primi-
tive disturbance shapes: spikes, steps, and oscil-
lations, or 2) partial trends: rise, fall, and vary-
ing. These observations are associated with a set
of attributes and descriptions for their magnitude,
direction and/or speed (e.g. downward, upward,
or rapidly, normally, etc.). A typical demonstra-
tion of taxonomies/ontologies in traditional data-
to-text systems dealing with sensor data has been
shown in Fig. 3-a. Our method exploits these
structures to build an applicable conceptual space
related to the acquired knowledge. It is worth not-
ing that building the components of the concep-
tual spaces for different sensor data in other con-
texts would differ. To cover the observations in
time series, two domains are defined: shape and
trend domains. For the shape domain, the rules be-
hind the definition of primitive events lead to de-
termine quality dimensions. For instance, ‘spike’
is defined as “small time interval with almost same
start and end, but big difference between max and
min values”. So, the spike concept can be char-
acterised in the shape domain by quality dimen-
sions: time interval (∆t), start-end range (∆se),
and min-max range (∆mm). The prototypical
member of spike concept can be represented as
a vector of properties: v1:<short ∆t, small ∆se,
big ∆mm>. Same dimensions can describe the
steps and oscillations, shown in Fig. 3-b (top). For
the trend domain, finding descriptive dimensions
and properties is dependent on the selected fea-
tures in the trend detection process (Banaee et al.,
2013). Here, the provided quality dimensions for
the trend domain include: trend orientation (α),
and trend duration (∆d). As an example, ‘sud-
den rise’ concept can be represented as a region
in the trend domain with a prototypical member
vector v2:<positive sharp α, short ∆d>, shown in
Fig. 3-b (bottom). The complex concepts can be
spanned to multi domains with their properties re-
gions. For instance, ‘rapid upward spike’ pattern
is definable as a region in space, spanned in both
shape and trend domains, which its representative
vector has five property values in all dimensions
like: v3:<v1, v2>.

se

t

Spike

Step

Oscillationmm

big
small

lon
g

sho
rt

Shape 
Domain

sh
or

t

to
o 

lo
ng

sharp

gra
dua

l

steady

lo
ng

Sudden rise

Slow decay<steady, long>  →  ‘Normal decrease’

d

: [-90. +90] 

Trend 
Domain

Rising
sudden rise
gradual rise
… 

Decay
slow decay
...

… 

big

small

(a) Taxonomy and Ontology of Patterns

(b) Conceptual Space (Shape and Trend domains)

Spike
Step Oscillation

downward upward

sharp steady

Figure 3: A conceptual space proposed for modelling do-
main knowledge in sensor data. a) Taxonomy and ontology
of patterns, b) Shape domain and trend domain.

This modelling has an effect on signal analysing
in that any unseen event and trend can be extracted
and represented by finding the nearest prototypical
instances in the corresponding vector space. Fig.
3-b (bottom) depicts an example of two points rep-
resented ‘sudden rise’ and ‘slow decay’ trends in
the space. The location of a new instance in space,
e.g. <steady, long> is computable by calculating
geometrical distances of their properties, and con-
sequently the corresponding descriptive symbols
can be inferred as ‘normal decrease’.

This use case focuses on event-based observa-
tions based on the shapes and trends of patterns in
sensor data. Other contexts may be interested to
represent other observations like repetitive rules,
motifs and unexpected trends which need partic-
ular studies on how to model these issues in con-
ceptual spaces and capture their properties.

14



5 Discussion and Conclusion

This position paper has presented the notion of
conceptual spaces as an alternative approach to
modelling domain knowledge in data-to-text sys-
tems. The next obvious steps are to use conceptual
spaces in a NLG framework and experimentally
validate their suitability for capturing data-driven
events, patterns, etc. This paper has attempted to
motivate the use of conceptual spaces in order to
cope with information which cannot be accurately
modelled by experts. Still, however, some remain-
ing challenges are to be addressed. One challenge
is determining a comprehensive set of domains
and quality dimensions representing the acquired
knowledge in a conceptual space. Another chal-
lenge is grounding concepts to linguistic descrip-
tion in order to provide a thorough symbolic de-
scription of quantitative vectors in the space. A
further challenge is lexicalisation in modelling the
conceptual spaces, which is related to choosing ac-
curate words for the conceptual regions regarding
to the semantic similarities for properties of the
concepts, without using expert knowledge.

Acknowledgments

The authors of this work are partially supported by
SAAPHO project: Secure Active Aging: Partici-
pation and Health for the Old (AAL-2010-3-035).

References
Ehud Reiter, Somayajulu G. Sripada, and Roma

Robertson. 2003. Acquiring Correct Knowledge for
Natural Language Generation. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 18:491–516.

Ehud Reiter. 2007. An architecture for data-to-text
systems. ENLG’11: the Eleventh European Work-
shop on Natural Language Generation, 97–104.

Jin Yu, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter, and Chris Mellish.
2007. Choosing the content of textual summaries of
large time-series data sets. Natural Language Engi-
neering, 13(1):25–49.

François Portet, Ehud Reiter, Albert Gatt, Jim Hunter,
Somayajulu Sripada, Yvonne Freer, and Cindy
Sykes. 2009. Automatic generation of textual sum-
maries from neonatal intensive care data. Artificial
Intelligence, 173(7):789–816.

Albert Gatt, François Portet, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter,
Saad Mahamood, Wendy Moncur, and Somayajulu
Sripada. 2009. From data to text in the neonatal
intensive care unit: Using NLG technology for deci-
sion support and information management. AI Com-
munications, 22(3):153–186.

James Hunter, Yvonne Freer, Albert Gatt, Ehud Reiter,
Somayajulu Sripada, and Cindy Sykes. 2012. Au-
tomatic generation of natural language nursing shift
summaries in neonatal intensive care: BT-Nurse.
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 56(3):157–172.

Peter Gärdenfors. 2000. Conceptual Spaces: The Ge-
ometry of Thought. MIT Press.Cambridge, MA.

John T. Rickard, Janet Aisbett, and Greg Gibbon.
2007. Reformulation of the theory of conceptual
spaces. Information Sciences, 177(21):4539–4565

Peter Gärdenfors. 2004. Conceptual spaces as a frame-
work for knowledge representation. Mind and Mat-
ter, 2(2):9–27.

Anand Rajaraman, and Jeffrey D. Ullman 2011. Min-
ing of massive datasets. Cambridge University
Press.

H. Banaee, M. U. Ahmed, A. Loutfi 2013. A Frame-
work for Automatic Text Generation of Trends in
Physiological Time Series Data. SMC’13: IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Systems, Man, and Cy-
bernetics, 3876–3881.

15


