

















































gwc2014_submission_9_final_corrected


Modeling Prefix and Particle Verbs in GermaNet 

 
 

Christina Hoppermann 
Department of Linguistics 

University of Tübingen, Germany 
christina.hoppermann@uni-

tuebingen.de 

Erhard Hinrichs 
Department of Linguistics 

University of Tübingen, Germany 
erhard.hinrichs@uni-

tuebingen.de 
 

  
 

Abstract 

Verbal word formation processes involving 
prefixes and particles are highly productive in 
Germanic languages. The compositional se-
mantics of such prefix and particle verbs re-
quires an in-depth analysis of the interdepend-
ence of their constituent parts for adequately 
representing these types of complex verbs in 
lexical-semantic networks. The present paper 
introduces modeling principles that account 
for such language-specific phenomena in the 
German wordnet GermaNet (Hamp and Feld-
weg, 1997; Henrich and Hinrichs, 2010), con-
sidering the continuum between full semantic 
transparency and highly lexicalized meanings 
as well as the semantic contribution of the pre-
fix or particle to the meaning of the complex 
verb as a whole. 

1 Introduction 
This paper addresses the question how morpho-
logically complex words can be adequately mod-
eled in a wordnet and focuses on two classes of 
such verbs in German: (i) prefix verbs such as 
entladen ‘unload’ and zerstören ‘destroy’, and 
(ii) particle verbs such as übergehen ‘bypass 
someone’ and losfahren ‘start driving’. Both 
types of verbs consist of a word-initial element 
followed by a host constituent. In the case of pre-
fix verbs, the word-initial element is a bound 
morpheme such as ent- or zer-, while for particle 
verbs it is typically a free1 morpheme such as 
über or los, which can be separated from its host 

                                                
1 There are also occurrences of inseparable particles (e.g., 
umfáhren ‘bypass sth.’), which are always unstressed 
(Dewell, 2011) in contrast to separable particles (e.g., úm-
fahren ‘run into so.’).  

constituent depending on the clause type2 that the 
particle verb appears in. The host constituent of a 
prefix or particle verb can either be a simplex 
(or: base verb) as in the examples above or a 
nominal or adjectival base as in bedachen ‘put on 
a roof’ or erblassen ‘grow pale’.  

A systematic treatment of prefix and particle 
verbs in a wordnet setting is desirable and signif-
icant for at least the following reasons: 
 

1. The word formation processes involved 
in the two classes of verbs are highly 
productive for all Germanic languages. 

2. The host constituent of a prefix or parti-
cle verb can be derived from an adjec-
tival or nominal base. Therefore, an ade-
quate treatment of these verbs has to in-
clude suitable morphological and seman-
tic relations among the word classes in-
volved. What makes such an account 
particularly interesting in a wordnet set-
ting is the fact that nouns, verbs, and ad-
jectives are the very word classes mod-
eled in a wordnet. 

3. The lexical semantics of prefix and par-
ticle verbs crucially involves a continu-
um between full semantic transparency 
on the one hand and highly lexicalized 
meanings on the other hand. Verbs such 
as entladen ‘unload’ and losfahren ‘start 
driving’ are fully transparent: Their se-
mantics can be compositionally derived 
from the meanings of their parts, as the 
preverbs 3  ent- and los contribute the 
meanings of removal and initiation of the 
actions denoted by the simplex. By con-

                                                
2 Free particles are separated in verb-first and verb-second 
clauses. They are only inseparable as infinitives or in subor-
dinate clauses in clause-final position (Dewell, 2011). 
3 The term preverb is used as cover term for both prefixes 
and particles (Booij and Kemenade, 2003; Los et al., 2012). 



trast, zerstören ‘destroy’ and übergehen 
‘bypass someone’ are highly lexicalized, 
since their base verbs do not make a se-
mantically transparent contribution to the 
meaning of the expression as a whole in 
present-day language use.  

 
The continuum of semantic transparency and 

lexicalization is not restricted to the lexical se-
mantics of German prefix and particle verbs. It 
has also been observed with respect to other 
word formation processes such as nominal com-
pounding and is, thus, of wider interest. A case in 
point is the contrast between Hauswand ‘house 
wall’, which is compositionally derived from its 
parts, and Bahnhof ‘train station’, which accord-
ing to a simple composition of its constituent 
parts should denote a yard for trains, but which 
actually refers to a building.  

What lexicalized meanings of morphological-
ly complex words have in common is that the 
meaning of the complex word is not a hyponym 
of the meaning of its host or head constituent: 
zerstören ‘destroy’ is not a hyponym of stören 
‘disturb’ and Bahnhof ‘train station’ is not a hy-
ponym of its head constituent Hof ‘yard’. This 
finding also indicates that a simple account that 
establishes a hyponymic relation between a par-
ticle or prefix verb and its host constituent will 
not provide a satisfactory account of the phe-
nomena in question. 

In the remainder of this paper, we will argue 
that an adequate account of prefix and particle 
verbs has to be based on the following two main 
considerations: (i) the distinction between se-
mantic transparency and lexicalization, and (ii) 
the way in which the word-initial element con-
tributes to the meaning of the complex verb as a 
whole. These considerations will lay the founda-
tion for defining general principles of hypernym 
selection for modeling complex verbs in the 
German wordnet GermaNet (GN). 

2 Prefix and Particle Inventory 
The inventory of prefixes considered in the pre-
sent study includes all native (Los et al., 2012) 
inseparable prefixes in German: be-, ent-, er-, 
miss-, ver-, and zer- (Eisenberg, 1998; Fleischer 
and Barz, 1995; Mungan, 1986; Stiebels, 1996). 
Prefixes with a Latinate origin, such as de-, dis-, 
re-, or trans- (Fleischer and Barz, 1995), are not 
within the scope of this study. In contrast to the 
closed set of prefixes, the particle inventory is 
more extensive and comprises particles such as 

ab, an, auf, aus, bei, durch, ein, los, nach, über, 
um, unter, voll, vor, wider, wieder, and zu 
(Dewell, 2011; Eisenberg, 1998; Fleischer and 
Barz, 1995; Mungan, 1986; Stiebels, 1996). 
 The present analysis makes use of existing 
semantic classifications of preverbs (e.g., Augst, 
1998; Dewell, 2011; Donalies, 2005; Fleischer 
and Barz, 1995; Mungan, 1986; Stiebels, 1996) 
and develops them further in a wordnet setting. 
At the time of writing the paper, GermaNet con-
tains 94273 nouns, 12111 adjectives and 14333 
verbs, of which 3040 are prefix verbs and 5171 
are particle verbs. Out of the total number of pre-
fix verbs, the frequency distribution is as fol-
lows: ver- (45%), be- (25%), er- (14%), ent- 
(11%), zer- (4%), and miss- (1%).   

3 Modeling Complex Verbs in GN 
Although it seems natural that the host constitu-
ent of a complex verb could be used as its hyper-
nym, the subsequent analysis of the continuum 
between lexicalization and semantic transparency 
will demonstrate that this solution is not viable in 
all cases. Rather, the continuum requires a dis-
tinction between various classes, which differ in 
the selection and in the number of hypernyms. 

3.1 Lexicalization 
Highly lexicalized verbs are at one end of the 
continuum between full semantic transparency 
and highly lexicalized meanings. Both German 
prefix and particle verbs are subject to lexicaliza-
tion. As pointed out in section 1, it is not possible 
to assign lexicalized prefix and particle verbs as 
hyponyms to their host constituents, since the 
semantics of the host constituent is no longer part 
of the meaning of the complex verb. As a conse-
quence, this lack of semantic transparency re-
quires finding an appropriate hypernym that 
takes account of the meaning of the lexicalized 
verb as a whole. 
  For the majority of lexicalized complex verbs, 
the semantic contribution of the word-initial el-
ement is not apparent so that the hypernym selec-
tion is to be conducted in the same way as for 
simplex verbs (Vossen, 2002). This is the case 
for particle verbs such as aufnehmen ‘record’, 
which is modeled as hyponym of the synset 
aufzeichnen/mitschneiden ‘record’, as it cannot 
be linked to its base verb nehmen ‘take’. 

Nevertheless, there are cases in which seman-
tic classifications of the word-initial element can 
be used as indicator for choosing an appropriate 
hypernym. This mainly applies to lexicalized 



complex verbs such as zerstören ‘destroy’, for 
which the meaning of the prefix zer- expresses 
‘destroying or damaging something’ (Augst, 
1998; Fleischer and Barz, 1995; Mungan, 1986). 
Thus, the stand-alone transparent semantics ex-
pressed by zer- is used as indicator for finding an 
appropriate hypernym (“materielle Zustands-
veränderung” ‘material change of state’), as a 
relation to the contemporary meaning of the sim-
plex stören ‘disturb’ is not possible.  

Although there is no conceptual relation to the 
simplex, the information on the individual word-
internal components of the complex lexicalized 
verb is still available in GN in the form of a 
morpho-syntactic analysis, which separates the 
preverb from its simplex. 

3.2 Semantic Transparency 
In contrast to highly lexicalized verbs, semanti-
cally transparent complex verbs form the oppo-
site end of the continuum. What these transparent 
verbs have in common is that there is always ei-
ther a conceptual (i.e., hypernymic/hyponymic) 
or lexical (e.g., antonymic) relation to the respec-
tive base verb. However, there are two interrelat-
ed factors that vary along the continuum: (i) the 
degree of semantic transparency, and (ii) the se-
mantic contribution of the word-initial element to 
the complex verb as a whole. On the basis of the-
se two factors, three different classes can be dis-
tinguished and will be introduced below. 

Class 1: Full Transparency, Light Contribution  
The meaning of complex verbs within this class 
is fully transparent and is always represented by 
the respective simplex as the exclusive hyper-
nym. This can be ascribed to the interaction of 
the preverb with its base verb: The semantics of 
the complex verb can be compositionally derived 
from the meaning of its parts. Thus, the simplex 
keeps its original meaning while the semantic 
contribution of the preverb is light, fulfilling one 
of the following two core functions: (a.) indica-
tion of a direction or (b.) intensification of the 
meaning denoted by the simplex. 

a. Indicator of a Direction 
The majority of German particle verbs indicate a 
direction. Particles are typically free morphemes 
that are frequently used as adpositions or adverbs 
without being part of a complex verb (Los et al., 
2012). In combination with a verbal base, they 
usually retain the meanings they have in isolation 
(Brinton and Closs Traugott, 2005), such as path 
expressions (Dewell, 2011). Thereby, they only 

add further directional information to the sim-
plex, whose meaning remains highly transparent. 
As a consequence, the simplex always serves as 
the exclusive hypernym of the respective com-
plex verb. This applies, e.g., to the verb laden 
‘load’, which has, inter alia, the following direc-
tional hyponyms in GN: aufladen ‘load up’, ein-
laden ‘load into’, and umladen ‘reload’. These 
particle verbs all denote a specific direction by 
the particles auf (‘up’, i.e., upward movement), 
ein (‘into’, i.e., inward movement), and um (i.e., 
movement from one location to another), sharing 
the semantics of the corresponding adposition.  

b. Intensifier  
The second core function within class 1 refers to 
the use of word-initial elements as intensifiers of 
the meanings denoted by their host constituents. 
The word-initial element only has a light seman-
tic contribution so that the entire complex verb 
remains highly transparent and is thus assigned 
as hyponym to its simplex. This is, e.g., the case 
for verärgern ‘annoy’, which has a hyponymic 
relation to its simplex ärgern ‘tease’.  

Class 2: Full Transparency/High Contribution 
This class represents an exceptional case that is 
only valid for a limited number of complex verbs 
such as prefix verbs with miss- as negator of the 
meaning denoted by the simplex (Fleischer and 
Barz, 1995). Consequently, the simplex cannot 
function as hypernym, as shown below for the 
synset missgönnen/neiden ‘begrudge’. 

 

 
Figure 1. Conceptual and lexical relations. 

 

Instead, another hypernym is chosen that takes 
account of the semantics of the complex verb 
(i.e., the synset empfinden/fühlen ‘feel’). As for 
all transparent complex verbs, the relation to the 
simplex gönnen ‘not to begrudge’ is still present 
and is indicated by an antonymic relation.  
 The relation to the simplex can also be implic-
it, as some verbs with ent-, which refer to the 
inversion of an action denoted by the base 
(Fleischer and Barz, 1995), are antonyms of an-
other complex verb sharing the same simplex. 
This is the case for entladen ‘discharge’, whose 
antonym is the particle verb aufladen ‘charge’. 



Class 3: Low Transparency/High Contribution 
The third class displays the highest semantic 
contribution of the word-initial element while the 
meaning of the complex verb as a whole still re-
mains transparent. Accounting for this predomi-
nant semantics requires treating verbs within this 
class both as hyponyms of their base verbs and 
of an additional hypernym, which expresses the 
prevailing semantic contribution of the preverb. 
The two hypernyms thus jointly account for the 
semantic contributions of preverb and base verb 
and lead to a more precise definition of the verb 
classes in question (cf. Bosch et al., 2008). This 
is, for instance, the case for one of the meanings 
of the prefix ver- ‘make a mistake’ (Mungan, 
1986). This meaning is contained, e.g., in the 
reflexive prefix verbs represented in Figure 2 as 
a selection of hyponyms of both the artificial 
concept4 “falsch machen/Fehler machen” ‘make 
a mistake’ and of each corresponding base verb: 
sich versprechen ‘make a slip of the tongue’, 
sich verfahren ‘get lost while driving’, and sich 
verrechnen ‘miscalculate’. 
 

 
Figure 2. Selected verbs with two hypernyms.  

 

 Complex verbs in class 3 do not only include 
prefix but also particle verbs. Thus, the same ap-
proach can be applied to the verb aufschrauben 
‘unscrew’, which has the following two hyper-
nyms: its base verb schrauben ‘screw’ and the 
verb öffnen ‘open’.  

Another type of word-initial elements, which 
can be systematically modeled in class 3, repre-
sents preverbs indicating lexical aspect or Ak-
tionsart ‘manner of action’. On the one hand, this 
includes ingressive markers such as the prefix er- 
(e.g., erklingen ‘start to sound’) and the particle 
los (e.g., loslaufen ‘start running’). On the other 
hand, the prefix ver- (e.g., verglühen ‘burn out’) 
as well as some word formations with the parti-
cles auf and aus characterize egressive verbs 
                                                
4 In GermaNet, artificial concepts are not only used for fill-
ing lexical gaps. Similar to the verb classes defined by Lev-
in (1993), they also serve the purpose of classifying seman-
tically related concepts together by means of co-hyponymy. 

(e.g., aufessen ‘eat up’, auslesen ‘finish read-
ing’), which express the termination or accom-
plishment (Vendler, 1957) of an action or state 
denoted by the base verb (Donalies, 2005; 
Stiebels, 1996; Helbig and Buscha, 1987). Both 
types of Aktionsart markers are modeled as hy-
ponyms of two verb forms: of their respective 
simplex as well as of a verb denoting the particu-
lar aspectual meaning. 

3.3 Principles of Hypernym Selection 
The decision tree in Figure 3 summarizes the 
principles of hypernym selection, which specify 
the number of hypernyms to be chosen (i.e., one 
versus two), the synsets to be selected as hyper-
nyms (i.e., simplex or not), and the use of further 
relations. Following the decision tree from top to 
bottom, it first needs to be determined whether 
the complex verb has a verbal, nominal, or adjec-
tival base. If the base is verbal, the left branch of 
the tree needs to be passed through, deciding 
whether the complex verb is lexicalized or trans-
parent. While lexicalized verbs only have one 
hypernym that does not equal the simplex, trans-
parent verbs always have either a conceptual or 
(implicit) lexical relation to the simplex and are 
distinguished into three classes (cf. section 3.2).  

The topmost right branch of the decision tree 
considers verbs with a nominal or adjectival 
base. As there is consequently no verbal base 
that could be used as hypernym for the respective 
complex verb, another verb form is to be chosen 
that expresses the semantics of the complex verb 
as a whole. Thus, the semantic contribution of 
the word-initial element is of prime importance 
for selecting an adequate hypernym. For in-
stance, the meaning to equip sth. with a/an <base 
noun> is expressed by the prefixes be- and ver- 
as well as by the particle um. This can be repre-
sented by the synset versehen/ausrüsten/aus-
statten/ausstaffieren. The hyponyms for this syn-
set include the following entries, where the base 
noun is indicated in angle brackets: be<dach>en 
‘equip sth. with a <roof>’, ver<glas>en ‘enclose 
sth. with <glass>’, and um<mantel>n ‘surround 
with a <sheath>’. In order to account for the rela-
tion to the host constituent, a new derivational 
relation needs to be introduced that creates a 
connection to the base noun. This way, it is pos-
sible to tighten the wordnet by establishing rela-
tions that cross the line of word classes.  
 



Figure 3. Principles of hypernym selection. 
 

In the case of deadjectival verbs, the meaning 
to become/to make <base adjective> is often 
denoted by the preverb. An example provides the 
artificial concept “materielle Zustandsveränder-
ung“ ‘material change of state’, which is used as 
hypernym of deadjectival verbs such as verflü-
ssigen  ‘liquefy’, verdicken  ‘thicken’, or erwär-
men ‘warm up’. If applicable, the causative 
meaning expressed by these preverbs is explicitly 
modeled by the causes5 relation, which refers to 
the base adjective being the result of the process 
denoted by the complex verb (e.g., <erblassen> 
‘grow pale’ causes <blass> ‘pale’). 

4 Related Work 
The use of multiple hypernyms for representing 
the compositional semantics of complex verbs 
can be identified in the Dutch wordnet project 
(Vossen et al., 1999). As in GN, the Dutch com-
plex verb opendraaien ‘open by turning’ has two 
hypernyms (Vossen et al., 1999): its simplex 
draaien ‘turn’ and the verb openmaken ‘open’.  

In contrast, complex verbs in the Princeton 
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1999) only make use of one 
hypernym: The phrasal verb to blow sth. up is 
only a hyponym of the verb expand. The hyper-
nym of its German equivalent aufblasen express-
es the same semantics (i.e., vergrößern ‘ex-
pand’), but the particle verb additionally has the 
simplex blasen ‘blow’ as second hypernym.  
 Regarding the different kinds of relations used 
in wordnets, Šojat et al. (2012) discuss the inclu-
                                                
5 The use of the causes relation is not restricted to complex 
verbs with an adjectival base. It is generally used for denot-
ing resultative states for both simplex and complex verbs 
complying to the pattern <causative transitive verb> causes 
<resultative intransitive verb>, thereby signifying the 
causative-inchoative alternation (Levin, 1993), e.g., zer-
brechen ‘sb. breaks sth. to pieces’ causes zerbrechen ‘sth. 
breaks to pieces’ (Bohnemeyer, 2007). 

sion of morphosemantic relations in the Croatian 
WordNet (CroWN). These relations e.g. group 
the meanings of preverbs into the class location, 
which indicates the directions of movements 
(e.g., loc_bott_up for upward movement).  

Other wordnets dealing with (morpho-) se-
mantic or derivational relations include the 
Polish wordnet (Maziarz et al., 2012) and the 
Czech wordnet (Bosch et al., 2008). They make 
fine-granular distinctions between various rela-
tion types, such as inchoativity and derivationali-
ty, which have also been addressed in this paper.  

5 Conclusion 
The present paper has established criteria for 
modeling morphologically complex verbs in the 
lexical-semantic network GermaNet, focusing on 
German prefix and particle verbs and accounting 
for their compositional semantics. Two main fac-
tors have been identified that provide the basis 
for their representation: (i) the continuum be-
tween full semantic transparency and highly lex-
icalized meanings, and (ii) the semantic contribu-
tion of the word-initial element to the meaning of 
the complex verb as a whole.  

It has been demonstrated that a compositional 
analysis of the word-initial element and its host 
constituent enables a rule-based derivation of 
general modeling principles, which can systemat-
ically be applied in order to achieve a consistent 
depiction of complex verbs in the wordnet. 

Acknowledgments 
Financial support was provided by the German 
Research Foundation (DFG) as part of the Col-
laborative Research Center ‘Emergence of 
Meaning’ (SFB 833) and by the German Minis-
try of Education and Technology (BMBF) as part 
of the research grant CLARIN-D. 



References  
Gerhard Augst. 1998. Wortfamilienwörterbuch der 

deutschen Gegenwartssprache. Max Niemeyer 
Verlag, Tübingen.  

Jürgen Bohnemeyer. 2007. Morphological Transpar-
ency and the argument structure of verbs of cutting 
and breaking. Cognitive Linguistics, 18(2):153-
177. 

Geert Booij and Ans van Kemenade. 2003. Preverbs: 
An Introduction. In Geert Booij and Jaap van 
Marle, editors, Yearbook of Morphology 2003. 
Kluwer, Dordrecht, pages 1-12. 

Sonja Bosch, Christiane Fellbaum, and Karel Pala. 
2008. Enhancing WordNets with Morphological 
Relations: A Case Study from Czech, English and 
Zulu.  In Proceedings of the Fourth Global Word-
Net Conference 2008, Szeged, Hungary, pages 74-
90. 

Laurel J. Brinton and Elizabeth Closs Traugott. 2005. 
Lexicalization and Language Change. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 

Robert D. Dewell. 2011. The Meaning of Parti-
cle/Prefix Constructions in German. John Benja-
mins Publishing Company, Amsterdam/Phila-
delphia. 

Elke Donalies. 2005. Die Wortbildung des Deutschen: 
Ein Überblick. Gunter Narr Verlag, Tübingen. 

Peter Eisenberg. 1998. Grundriß der deutschen 
Grammatik: Das Wort. Metzler, Stuttgart/Weimar. 

Christiane Fellbaum. 1999. WordNet: An Electronic 
Lexical Database. MIT Press, Camebridge.  

Wolfgang Fleischer and Irmhild Barz. 1995. 
Wortbildung der deutschen Gegenwartssprache. 
Niemeyer, Tübingen. 

Birgit Hamp and Helmut Feldweg. 1997. GermaNet - 
a Lexical-Semantic Net for German. In Proceed-
ings of ACL workshop Automatic Information Ex-
traction and Building of Lexical Semantic Re-
sources for NLP Applications, Madrid. 

Gerhard Helbig and Joachim Buscha. 1987. Deutsche 
Grammatik: Ein Handbuch für den Auslän-
derunterricht. Verlag Enzyklopädie, Leipzig.  

Verena Henrich and Erhard Hinrichs. 2010. GernEdit 
– The GermaNet Editing Tool. In Proceedings of 
the Seventh International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2010), Valletta, 
Malta, pages 2228-2235. 

Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tions: A Preliminary Investigation. The University 
of Chicago Press, Chicago. 

Bettelou Los, Corrien Blom, Geert Booij, Marion 
Elenbaas, and Ans van Kemenade. 2012. Morpho-

syntactic Change: A Comparative Study of Parti-
cles and Prefixes. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 

Marek Maziarz, Maciej Piasecki, and Stan Szpako-
wicz. 2012. An Implementation of a System of 
Verb Relations in plWordNet 2.0. In Proceedings 
of the Sixth Global WordNet Conference 2012, 
Matsue, Japan, pages 181-188. 

Güler Mungan. 1986. Die semantische Interaktion 
zwischen dem präfigierenden Verbzusatz und dem 
Simplex bei deutschen Partikel- und Präfixverben. 
Peter Lang, Frankfurt am Main. 

Krešimir Šojat, Matea Srebačić, and Marko Tadić. 
2012. Derivational and Semantic Relations of Cro-
ation Verbs. Journal of Language Modelling, 
0(1):111-142. 

Barbara Stiebels. 1996. Lexikalische Argumente und 
Adjunkte: Zum semantischen Beitrag von verbalen 
Präfixen und Partikeln. Akademie Verlag, Berlin. 

Zeno Vendler. 1957. Verbs and Times. The Philo-
sophical Review, 66(2):143-160. 

Piek Vossen, Laura Bloksma, and Paul Boersma. 
1999. The Dutch WordNet. Version 2, Final, July 
12, 1999, University of Amsterdam. 

Piek Vossen. 2002. EuroWordNet: General Docu-
ment. Version 3, Final, July 1, 2002. 
http://hdl.handle.net/1871/11116.  


