



















































Quotations, Relevance and Time Depth: Medieval Arabic Literature in Grids and Networks


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature (CLfL) @ EACL 2014, pages 17–24,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Quotations, Relevance and Time Depth:
Medieval Arabic Literature in Grids and Networks

Petr Zemánek
Institute of Comparative Linguistics

Charles University, Prague
Czech Republic

petr.zemanek@ff.cuni.cz

Jiřı́ Milička
Institute of Comparative Linguistics

Charles University, Prague
Czech Republic

jiri@milicka.cz

Abstract
This contribution deals with the use of
quotations (repeated n-grams) in the works
of medieval Arabic literature. The analysis
is based on a 420 millions of words histor-
ical corpus of Arabic. Based on repeated
quotations from work to work, a network
is constructed and used for interpretation
of various aspects of Arabic literature.
Two short case studies are presented, con-
centrating on the centrality and relevance
of individual works, and the analysis of a
time depth and resulting impact of a given
work in various periods.

1 Quotations and Their Definition

The relevance of individual works in a given liter-
ature and the time depth of such relevance are of
interest for many reasons. There are many meth-
ods that can reveal such relevance.

The current contribution is based on quotation
extraction. Quotations, both covert and overt, both
from written and oral sources, belong to constitu-
tive features of medieval Arabic literature.

There are genres which heavily depend on es-
tablishing credible links among sources, espe-
cially the oral ones, where a trusty chain of
tradents is crucial for the claims that such chains
accompany. Other links may point to the impor-
tance of a given work (or its part) and may un-
cover previously unseen relations within a given
literature or a given genre/register, or reveal con-
nections among genres/registers within a given lit-
erature. As such, the results are interesting in a
wide research range, from linguists or literature
theorists to authors interested in the interactions
of various subsets of a given literature.

The research on quotations, their extraction and
detection is rich in the NLP, but the algorihms used
are based mainly on the quotation-marker recog-
nition, e.g. Pareti et al. (2013), Pouliquen et al.

(2007) and Fernandes et al. (2011), or on the meta-
data procesing (e.g. Shi et al. 2010), to name just a
few examples. It can be said that most of the con-
tributions focus on issues different from the one
described in this contribution and choose a differ-
ent approach.

Our understanding of quotations in this project
is limited to similar strings of words, i.e. the
quotations are very close to borrowings or rep-
etition of verbatim or almost verbatim passages.
Technically, it can be viewed as an n-gram that is
being repeated in at least two works. These re-
peated n-grams create links that exhibit some hier-
archy, e.g. on the chronological line. The only ap-
proach known to us that can be paralleled to ours is
the one described in Kolak and Schilit (2008) for
quotation mining within the Google Books corpus
with algorithm searching for verbatim quotations
only.

In a different context and without direct inspira-
tion we developed an algorithm that is tolerant to
a certain degree of lexical and morphological vari-
ation and word order variability. The reason for
this tolerance is both the type of the Arabic lan-
guage (flective morphology and free word order),
but also the fact that the quotations in medieval
Arabic literature tend not to be very strict. Despite
of the fact that the matching is not so rigorous, we
assume that the length of n-grams we use drasti-
cally decreases possibilities of random matches.

The frequency of such n-gram repetition in var-
ious literary works can point to several aspects,
however, in this contribution we will limit our-
selves to interpreting such links in a rather cau-
tious and not too far-reaching manner, mainly as
pointers to the fact that the writer of the book
where the quotations appear was also a reader of
the book from which the quotations stem and that
he was to a certain degree influenced by it.

This does not necessarily mean that the lineage
of quotations is complete in our picture, for we

17



have to admit that there could be some author —
member of the lineage — who is not involved in
our corpus. In our graph, however, edges point to
the first instance of a given n-gram in our data.

2 The Data, Its Organization and
Extraction

It is obvious that for the type of the task mentioned
in the previous chapter, there is a need of an appro-
priate data set.

2.1 Historical Corpus of Arabic

All the data in this contribution come from a his-
torical corpus of Arabic (CLAUDIA — Corpus
LinguæArabicæUniversalis DIAchronicus). This
corpus covers all the main phases of the Arabic
writings, from the 7th century to mid 20th century
C.E. It contains ca. 2 thousand works and ca. 420
million words. The individual works are present in
their entirety, i.e. each file contains a full text of a
given literary work, based on edited manuscripts.
All the main registers (genres) that appeared in the
history of Arabic literature are represented in the
corpus.

All the texts in the corpus are raw, without ad-
ditional annotation. The files contain only a basic
annotation of parts to be excluded from analyses
(introductions, editorial forewords, etc.). This is
of importance for the algorithms development, as
the ambiguity of a text written down in Arabic let-
ters is rather high (cf. e.g. Beesley 2001, Buck-
walter 2004 or Smrž 2007 passim). On the other
hand, it is certainly clear that the ambiguity sig-
nificantly decreases when the n-gram information
(i.e. context) is introduced.

As such, the corpus can be viewed as a network-
like representation of Arabic literature. Each work
is assigned several attributes, such as authorship,
position on the time line, genre characteristics, etc.
As several of the attributes can be viewed from
several angles, it should be made clear that the
genre characteristics currently used correspond to
rather traditional terms used in Arabic and Islamic
studies. Currently, the attributes assigned to the in-
dividual works are based on extra-corpus informa-
tion and all of them were assigned manually from
standard sources.

A short remark on the character of Arabic lit-
erature is appropriate. One should bear in mind
that the approach to literature as consisting only of
belles-lettres is relatively new, and for Arabic lit-

erature can be applied at the soonest at the end of
the 19th century. All the previous phases must be
seen as containing very different genres, includ-
ing science, philosophy, popular reading and po-
etry as well as a huge bulk of writings connected
with Islam, thus representing rather the concept of
“Schrifttum” as expressed in the canonical com-
pendia on Arabic literature, such as Brockelmann
(last edition 1996). This is also reflected in cur-
rent contribution, as many of our examples are
connected with Islamic literature covering all the
aspects of the study of religion. This includes the-
ology, Islamic law, history, evaluation of sources,
tradition, etc. Further information can be found
e.g. in Kuiper 2010.

2.2 The Grid and the Network

The construction of a grid from a corpus consists
basically in defining some constitutive units that
serve as nodes. There are several possibilities of
constituting such units, but some obvious solu-
tions might not work very well. At first glance, it is
advisable to find as small a unit as possible, while
still retaining its meaningfulness; we decided to
identify such units with individual works, or titles,
with possible further division: Arabic literature is
full of several-volume sets, and as our analyses
showed, it may be sometimes useful to treat them
as multi-part units, where individual parts can be
treated as individual nodes (e.g., in some of our
analyses it appeared that only a second volume of
a three-volume set was significant). Treating such
parts as individual nodes reveals similar cases in-
stantly and can prevent overlooking important fea-
tures during the analysis.

The nodes should allow reasonable links lead-
ing from one node to another. These links are
crucial for any possible interpretation, as they
show various types of relations between individ-
ual nodes. These nodes can be again grouped to-
gether, to show relations among different types of
grouped information (i.e. links between titles or
their parts, among authors, centuries, genres, etc.).

The nodes as such create the basis for the con-
struction of both the grid and the network. As
pointed out, currently the main axes used for
grid and network construction are the authorship,
chronological line, and the register information.
The links among individual nodes are interpreted
as relational links, or edges, in a network. These
links also reflect quantitative data (currently, the

18



number of quotations normalized to the lengths of
the documents). The grid currently consists of the
chronological line and the line of the works (doc-
uments). Above this grid, a network consisting of
edges connecting the works is constructed. The
grid in our approach corresponds to a firm frame
where some basic attributes are used. The net-
work then consists of the relations that go across
the grid and reveal new connections between indi-
vidual units.

A terminological remark is appropriate here.
The network constructed above the grid corre-
sponds to a great deal to what is called a weighted
graph (the width of edges reflects the frequency
of links). The term directed graph could also be
used, however, in our current conception of the
network, the links are not really oriented, as the di-
rection of links pointing to contemporary authors
is sometimes not clearly determinable, contrary to
authors with greater time gap.1 That is why we
call these links edges and not arcs, and possibly,
the graph could be called a semi-directed graph.

Kolak and Schilit (2008) observe that the stan-
dard plagiarism detection algorithms are use-
less for unmarked quotation mining and sug-
gest straightforward and efficient algorithm for re-
peated passage extraction. The algorithm is suit-
able for modern English texts, since quotations are
more or less verbatim and the word order is stable.
But it is insufficient for medieval Arabic texts as
the quotations are usually not really strict and the
word order in Arabic is variable. We decided that
our algorithm must be a) word order insensitive;
b) tolerant to certain degree of variability in the
content of quotations, so that the algorithm allows
some variation introduced by the copyist, and re-
flects possibilities of change due to the fact that
Arabic is a flective language.

2.3 Quotations extraction: technical
description

The basic operation in the process is the quotations
extraction. The procedure itself could be used in
plagiarism detection, however, such labels do not
make sense in case of medieval literature with dif-
ferent scales of values.

The quotation extraction process consists of
four phases:

1Our time reference is based on the date of death of re-
spective authors, and thus can be considered as “raw”. Data
on the publication of a respective book are often not available
for more distant periods.

1. The corpus is prepared for analysis. Numer-
als and junk characters are removed from the
corpus, as well as all other types of noise. Re-
verse index of all word types in the corpus is
constructed (in case of texts written in Ara-
bic script, a special treatment of diacritical
signs and the aliph-grapheme and its variants
is necessary).

2. All repeating n-grams greater than 7 tokens
are logged (the algorithm is tolerant to the
word order variability and to the variability
of types up to 10 %) 2 : Tokens of every
n-gram in the text are sorted according to
their frequency in the whole corpus (for ev-
ery n in some reasonable range, in our case
n ∈< 7; 200 >).

(a) The positions of round(0.1n) + 1 least
frequent tokens3 are looked up in the re-
verse index.

(b) The neighbourhoods of the positions are
tested for being quotations of the length
of n tokens.

(c) Quotations are merged so that quota-
tions larger than n tokens are detected
as well.

3. For each pair of texts i, j the following index
Ξ(i,j) is calculated (N is the number of to-
kens in a text, M is the number of tokens that
are part of quotations of the text j in the text i,
K is the set of all pairs of texts in the corpus;
h is the parameter that determines number of
edges visible in the graph, for details see be-
low):

2The minimal length of the quotation and the percentage
of word types variability should have been determined on an
empirical basis, maximizing recall and precision. The prob-
lem is that the decision whether the repeating text passage
is a quotation or not is not a binary one. Kolak and Schilit
(2008) note the problem and let their subjects evaluate results
of their algorithm on a 1–5 scale. As we did not manage to do
vast and proper evaluation of the outputs of our algorithm us-
ing various minimal lengths of the quotations and degrees of
variability, we relied on our subjective experience. The mini-
mal length was set so that it exceeds length of the most com-
mon Arabic phrases and Islamic eulogies and the percentage
of variable words was set to cover some famous examples of
formulaicity in Arabic literature

It needs to be said that some minor changes of the param-
eters do not influence the results excessively, at least for the
case studies we present here.

3The reason being the 10% tolerance.

19



Ξi,j = log2
h

Mi,j
NiNj∑

(k,l)∈K
Mk,l
NkNl

It should be noted that the formula given
above is inspired by the Mutual Information
but it has no interpretation within the theory
of information. It was constructed only to
transform the number of quoted tokens into
some index that could be graphically repre-
sented in some reasonable way convenient to
the human mind.

4. The edges representing links with Ξ lower
than a certain threshold are omitted. The
threshold is set to 0.5 according to the limits
of the programs producing graphic represen-
tation of the graph (the width of the line rep-
resenting the edge is associated directly with
the index Ξ). The index is normalized by the
parameter h so that the user can set density
of the graph, i.e. manipulate the index on
an ad hoc basis with consideration for suit-
able number of edges and their ideal average
width. E.g., the number of word tokens in-
volved in autoquotations in Qur’an is 13 956
and the overall number of tokens is 80 047.

MQur′an,Qur′an
NQur′anNQur′an

=
13 956
80 0472

= 0.00000218

For our corpus, the average value is
0.000025, setting h < 16.23 then means
that the Qur’anic autoquotation link will not
be represented in the graph. Setting h =
0.346574 means that an average link gets
Ξ = 0.5. Setting h = 2 means that an av-
erage link gets Ξ = 1.

The relation is exported to the .dot format
and the graph is generated by popular appli-
cations GraphViz and GVEdit.4

The resulting database is stored in a binary for-
mat, but the graphical user interface allows the re-
searchers to export graphs in accordance to their
concepts. The features of the graphs can be
changed by manipulating the h parameter and
some other options. The appearance of the nodes
can be freely adjusted as well.

More detailed information on the overall techni-
cal process is available directly from the authors.

4http://www.graphviz.org

3 The Analysis and Interpretation

The results are currently stored in a database and
are available for further analyses. It is clear that
results from a corpus of 420 million words offer
many ways of interpretation.

The usage of the extracted data is to a certain de-
gree limited in nature. It is mainly suitable for dis-
cussion of relations among individual nodes (doc-
uments, titles) or their groups. However, further
processing of the data will enable a wider palette
of possibilities. Currently, and also due to the lim-
itations of this paper, only a few examples will be
given.

3.1 Central Nodes and Relevance
The centrality of a given document may point to
its relevance for its surroundings. If the relations
that were found by our algorithms are interpreted
merely as showing influence of predecessors on
the author and his influence on his successors, then
the number of links to and from an author and his
particular book shows the relevance of that book.

In graph theory, there is no general agreement
on how centrality should be defined. We expand
the large number of indices of the degree centrality
with our own index that is based on the same idea
as the Ξ index (J is the set of all texts):

CD(i) =
∑
j∈J

Mi,j
NiNj

The measurement of this rather primitive and
straightforward index results in table 1. The table
also contains the plain number of edges at h = 10
(marked as edg.):

As the pointers to the subject of the respective
works show, it was not only Islamic subjects that
found their way to the most cited works in Arabic
literature — historical literature as well as educa-
tive literature obviously played an important role
in the medieval Arabic civilization.

It is interesting that az-Zayla‘i’s node comprises
only the second volume of his three-volume Nasab
ar-Raya (Erection of the Flag) — the other vol-
umes exhibit either no edges or very few (0–1 and
1–0 respectively and the quotations point to his
2nd volume). Another interesting fact is that az-
Zayla‘i is rather less-known today — a short ref-
erence can be found in Lane 2005: 150 (fn. 2 and
3). This is also confirmed by the situation today.
An Internet search for this author (including Ara-
bic sources) yields only a short paragraph on his

20



Degree Cited Citing Cited Citing
CD CD CD edg. edg.

1 0.0958 0.0278 0.0681 70 12
2 0.08257 0.0789 0.0036 23 5
3 0.07763 0.0001 0.0775 0 2
4 0.07277 0.0597 0.0130 155 0
5 0.04562 0.0038 0.0418 35 13

Table 1: Texts sorted according to the degree cen-
trality (first five texts). Authors with their works
and genre:
1 = az-Zayla‘i — Nasab ar-Raya, vol. 2 (Islam)
2 = Abu Nu‘aym al-Isbahani — Axbar Isbahan
(history)
3 = Abu Nu‘aym al-Isbahani — Tarix Isbahan
(history)
4 = an-Nasa’i — Sunna (Islam)
5 = al-Yafi’i — Mir’at al-Jinan (educative li-
terature — adab).

birth (small village in Somalia, no date) and death
(Cairo 1360).

Ibn Xaldun (d. 1382) is a very well-known fig-
ure today, respected for his History. Today, es-
pecially his Introduction (Muqaddima) is appreci-
ated as an insightful methodological propedeutics.
In Figure 2, his relevance in the Middle Ages is
measured: it comprises 4 volumes: Introduction
and History vols. 1–3. The graph shows (apart
from numerous autoquotations) that his 3rd vol-
ume is the central one, where most of incoming
and outgoing links can be found. On the other
hand, his Muqaddima, which is praised today for
its originality, remains isolated (our data do not
cover the second half of the 20th century, where
this appreciation could be found).

3.2 Time Depth

As our network combines a grid with chronolog-
ical axis, it is rather easy to follow the distribu-
tion of links connected to a given node not only
the relevance to other nodes, but also in time. As
relevance of a given work is mostly judged from
our current point of view (i.e. from what is con-
sidered important in the 21st century), an unbiased
analysis may give interesting results showing both
inspirational sources of a given work and its influ-
ence on other authors; it can also show the limits
of such influence.

Figure 1 concentrates on the figure of az-Zayla‘i
(d. 1360), who obviously played an important role

in transmitting the knowledge (or discussion, at
least) between different periods (cf. 3.1). The sec-
ond volume of his Nasab ar-Raya is a clear center
of the network.

The dating of the numerous sources that he used
while writing his book starts ca. from the 10th cen-
tury and to a great deal almost ignores 11th and
12th centuries. There is a thick web of links to
his contemporaries, and his direct influence is very
strong on the authors of the following century, but
slowly wanes with the passage of time — although
there are some attestations of his influence in the
16th and 17th centuries, they are getting less and
less numerous. In the 20th century there are only
two authors at whom we found some reflection of
az-Zayla‘i ’s work.

From the point of view of the 21st century, az-
Zayla‘i is a marginal figure, both for the Western
and Arabic civilizations. On the other hand, as our
data show, his importance was crucial for the dis-
cussion on Islamic themes for several centuries,
which is, apart from the data given above, con-
firmed also by frequent quotations of his name and
writings in the titles starting from the 15th century
on.5

It is appropriate to repeat here that such conclu-
sions can be viewed as mere signals, as we can-
not exclude that there is some title occurring in the
quotations lineage but missing in our data.

It should also be stressed that these conclusions
reflect only verbatim quotations and are not based
on the contents of these works. In other words, the
relations do not represent an immediate reflection
of the spread of ideas of a given author but rather
show the usage of a given work in various periods
of the evolution of Arabic literature.

4 Future Work

It is clear that there are many ways in which we
can continue in our project. In the near future, we
plan to work on the following topics:

• experimenting with various lengths of the
shortest quotation and the degree of allowed
variability, maximizing recall and precision.

5The title of the book is attested in other writings in our
dataset in the 15–17th centuries only; the name of the author
appears abundantly in the 15th century (ca 1050x), 16th cen-
tury (ca 560x), 17th century (ca 500x). The 18th century gives
only 45 occurrences, later on his name can be found only in
specialized Islamic treatises.

21



• enriching the palette of nodes’ attributes to
enable a broader scope of analyses based both
on external sources and inner textual proper-
ties of given texts;

• comparison of the complexity of the graphs
of various subcorpora organized according to
different criteria;

• comparison of various indices of centrality;

• detailed interpretation of edges;

• comparison with other corpora and

• network of autoquotations within one text.

Acknowledgments

The research reflected in this article has been sup-
ported by the GAČR (Czech Science Foundation),
project no. 13-28220S.

We would also like to thank to the anonymous
reviewers for their inspiring comments.

References
Kenneth R. Beesley. 2001. Finite-State Morphologi-

cal Analysis and Generation of Arabic at Xerox Re-
search: Status and Plans in 2001. ACL Workshop on
Arabic Language Processing: Status and Perspec-
tive. Toulouse, France: 1–8.

Carl Brockelmann. 1996. Geschichte der Arabischen
Literatur, (4 Volume Set). Brill, Leiden (1st edition:
1923).

Tim Buckwalter. 2004. Issues in Arabic Orthography
and Morphology Analysis. The Workshop on Com-
putational Approaches to Arabic Script-based Lan-
guages, COLING. Geneva: 31–34.

William Paulo Ducca Fernandes, Eduardo Motta and
Ruy Luiz Milidiú. 2011. Quotation Extraction for
Portuguese. Proceedings of the 8th Brazilian Sym-
posium in Information and Human Language Tech-
nology. Cuiabá: 204–208.

Okan Kolak and Bill N. Schilit. 2008. Generating
Links by Mining Quotations. HT ’08: Proceedings
of the nineteenth ACM conference on Hypertext and
hypermedia. New York: 117–126.

Kathleen Kuiper. 2010. Islamic Art, Literature and
Culture. Rosen Publishing Group.

Andrew J. Lane. 2005. A Traditional Mu’tazilite
Qur’an Commentary: The Kashshaf of Jar Allah al-
Zamakhsari (d.538/1144). Brill, Leiden.

Silvia Pareti, Tim O’Keefe, Ioannis Konstas, James R.
Curran and Irena Koprinska. 2013. Automatically
Detecting and Attributing Indirect Quotations. Pro-
ceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing. Seattle: 989–
999.

Bruno Pouliquen, Ralf Steinberger and Clive Best.
2007. Automatic Detection Of Quotations in Mul-
tilingual News. Proceedings of Recent Advances in
Natural Language Processing 2007. Borovets.

Xiaolin Shi, Jure Leskovec and Daniel A. McFarland.
2010. Citing for High Impact. Proceedings of the
10th annual joint conference on Digital libraries.
New York: 49–58.

Otakar Smrž. 2007. Functional Arabic Morphology.
Formal System and Implementation. Doctoral The-
sis, Charles University, Prague.

22



Figure 1: Case study: Zayla‘i’s Nasab ar-Raya 3 in its context. Parameter h = 2. Cut out.

23



Figure 2: Case study: the network around the Ibn Xaldun’s works. Parameter h = 1.6667.

24


