










































Instructions for ACL-2010 Proceedings


News about the Romanian Wordnet 

 

 

Verginica Barbu Mititelu 

RACAI 

13, Calea 13 Septembrie 

Bucharest 050711, Romania 

vergi@racai.ro 

Ștefan Daniel Dumitrescu 

RACAI 

13, Calea 13 Septembrie  

Bucharest 050711, Romania 

sdumitrescu@racai.ro 

Dan Tufiș 

RACAI 

 13, Calea 13 Septembrie 

Bucharest 050711, Romania 

tufis@racai.ro 

 

  

 

Abstract 

There are more than 60 wordnets world-

wide; the Romanian wordnet is among 

those that are maintained and further de-

veloped. Begun within the BalkaNet pro-

ject and further enriched in various (ap-

plication oriented) projects, it was used in 

word sense disambiguation, machine 

translation and question answering with 

promising results. We present here the 

latest qualitative and quantitative im-

provements of our lexical resource, spe-

cial attention being paid to derivational 

relations, the latest statistics, as well as 

the development of an Application Pro-

gramming Interface, meant to facilitate 

work with the wordnet, both for its fur-

ther development purposes and for its use 

in applications. In the context of creating 

a common European research infrastruc-

ture network, our wordnet is licensed 

through META-SHARE, being freely 

available for scientific purposes. 

1 Introduction 

The development of the Romanian wordnet 

(RoWN henceforth) started within BalkaNet pro-

ject
1
. Afterwards, it has been developed and 

maintained within several projects by the Natural 

Language Processing (NLP) group of the Roma-

nian Academy Research Institute for Artificial 

Intelligence (RACAI): ROTEL
2
, STAR

3
, SIR-

                                                 
1
 http://www.dblab.upatras.gr/balkanet 

2
 http://www.ai.ici.ro/rotel_eng/index. 
htm 
3 http://www.racai.ro/star 

RESDEC
4
, ACCURAT

5
, METANET4U

6
, the 

Romanian Academy research plan. 

Within BalkaNet a core of 18000 synsets was 

created. They were aligned to the Princeton 

WordNet (PWN) versions available throughout 

time, respectively version 2.0 at the end of the 

project. Among those synsets there were more 

than 400 that lexicalize concepts specific to the 

Balkan area. These were implemented in all six 

languages of the project (Bulgarian, Czech, 

Greek, Romanian, Serbian, Turkish) and were 

linked to hypernym synsets, already existing in 

PWN, so they were not left dangling in the net-

work. 

RoWN contains words belonging both to the 

general vocabulary and to various domains of 

activity. Throughout time, we aimed at a com-

plete coverage of the basic common sets from 

EuroWordNet
7
, of the 1984 corpus

8
, of the 

newspaper articles corpus NAACL2003
9
, of the 

Acquis Communautaire corpus and the Eurovoc 

thesaurus
10

, of VerbNet 3.1
11

, and as much as 

possible from the ROWikipedia lexical stock. 

Two basic development principles have al-

ways been followed: the Hierarchy Preservation 

                                                 
4 http://www2.racai.ro/sir-resdec 
5 http://www.accurat-project.eu/, 
http://valhalla.racai.ro/accurat/index.p

hp?page=despre 
6 http://www.racai.ro/metanet4u-racai 
7
 http://www.illc.uva.nl/EuroWordNet 

8
 http://nl.ijs.si/ME/Vault/CD/docs/1984. 
html 
9
 http://ws.racai.ro:9191/repository/ 
browse/the-naacl-2003-english-romanian-

corpus/da86dc2efb6811e2a8ad00237df3e3588 

6f019db7a16437f801cba30dd6ab209 
10

 http://optima.jrc.it/Acquis/JRC-
Acquis.3.0/doc/README_Acquis-

Communautaire-corpus_JRC.html 
11

 http://verbs.colorado.edu/~mpalmer 
/projects/verbnet.html 



Principle (HPP) (according to which the hierar-

chical structure of the concepts in a wordnet is 

the same irrespective of the natural language for 

which the wordnet is developed) and the Con-

ceptual Density Principle (which ensures that 

once a concept is selected to be implemented, all 

its ancestors up to the unique beginners are also 

selected, thus preventing the existence of dan-

gling nodes) (Tufiş et al., 2004). The former 

principle was the assumption behind our devel-

opment methodology, namely the expand meth-

od. The latter ensured the lack of dangling nodes 

in the nouns and verbs hierarchies. As a conse-

quence of the way we chose to create our lan-

guage resource, the lexical density has never 

been our preoccupation, thus there are many 

words that do not occur in as many synsets as 

how many meanings they have. Nevertheless, we 

do not exclude such an objective from our further 

developments. 

At present, RoWN is aligned to PWN version 

3.0. Details about the way we performed the 

alignment from PWN 2.0 to PWN 3.0 and about 

the way we solved the encountered problems (the 

n:1 or 1:n matches between synsets in the two 

versions) are presented in Tufiş et al. (2013). 

RoWN is licensed through META-SHARE
12

 

(). It is free for academic research, but restricted 

for commercial use. 

In this paper we present the latest qualitative 

and quantitative improvements of our lexical re-

source, the latest statistics (Section 3), special 

attention being paid to derivational relations 

(Section 4), as well as the development of an 

Application Programming Interface, meant to 

facilitate work with the wordnet, both for its fur-

ther development purposes and for its use in ap-

plications (Section 5). Our intentions for further 

development are included in the Conclusions 

section. Before proceeding, we enumerate the 

applications in which our team used RoWN and 

which, throughout time, influenced our decisions 

about the concepts to be further implemented in 

the network. 

2 Uses of RoWN 

Ion and Tufiş (2009) and Ion and Ştefănescu 

(2011) describe word sense disambiguation 

(WSD) methods that make use of wordnets: the 

former is set in a multilingual environment and 

the WSD is done with the help of aligned word-

                                                 
12

 http://ws.racai.ro:9191/repository/ 
browse/18 

nets. The latter is set in a monolingual environ-

ment and the WSD is done with the help of the 

lexical chains established between the co-

occurring words in the text, chains whose length 

is calculated in the wordnet. The assumption is 

that the shorter the lexical chain, the more simi-

lar the words. The length of the lexical chain de-

pends on the number of relations marked in the 

network. The results in the multilingual envi-

ronment are reported as better than those in the 

monolingual one. 

For a Question Answering (QA) system, 

RoWN was used for expanding the query intro-

duced by the user (Ion et al., 2008) with words 

semantically related (i.e., synonyms, hypo- and 

hyperonyms) to the ones it contained. Moreover, 

RoWN was also used in the last phase, that of 

ranking the found results by calculating the se-

mantic distance, again as a lexical chain, be-

tween the words introduced by the user and those 

occurring in the text. It was noticed that the rela-

tions with the greatest contribution at calculating 

the score are hyponymy and derivational rela-

tions. 

Aligned wordnets are valuable sources of 

cross-language equivalents, especially multi-

word terms, in machine translation. 

3 Latest Quantitative Developments 

Lately our efforts of implementing new synsets 

aimed at a complete coverage of VerbNet 3.1, 

with the prospect of creating a syntactic parser 

for Romanian. 

The up-to-date statistics about RoWN are pre-

sented in Table 1 and 2 below. In the former, 

PoS stands for part of speech, S for synset, L for 

literal, UL for unique literals and NL for nonlex-

icalized synsets. Obeying the HPP stated above 

implies the transfer of the hierarchies from PWN 

into RoWN. The lack of perfect equivalences 

among languages is widely known; nevertheless, 

we chose to disregard it. Moreover, there are lex-

ical gaps in all languages. We call them nonlexi-

calized concepts and represent them as empty 

synsets. For example, for the PWN verbal synset 

{zip_up:1} (gloss: close with a zipper) there is 

no literal in the corresponding Romanian synset. 

However, such synsets do not lack relations: the 

corresponding ones from PWN are transferred 

into RoWN. 

 

 

 

 



PoS S L UL NL 

Nouns 41063 56532 52009 1839 

Verbs 10397 16484 14210 759 

Adjective 4822 8203 7407 79 

Adverbs 3066 4019 3248 110 

TOTAL 59348 85238 75656 2787 

 
Table 1: Statistics about synsets and literals in RoWN. 

 

Relation Number 

hypo/hyperonymy 48316 

instance_hypo/hyperonymy 3889 

antonym 4131 

similar_to 4838 

verb_group 1530 

member_holonym 2047 

part_holonym 5573 

substance_holonym 410 

also_see 1333 

attribute 958 

cause 196 

entailment 371 

 
Table 2. Semantic relations in RoWN. 

 

It is worth noticing that antonymy, which is a 

lexical relation in PWN, is represented as a se-

mantic one in RoWN. The conceptual opposition 

between the synsets is more useful in various 

applications than the mere antonymy between 

two literals. 

With the exception of attribute relation, all the 

others enumerated in Table 2 link synsets with 

literals of the same part of speech. A path be-

tween two words of a different part of speech, 

about which any speaker would say they are re-

lated, although not impossible to find, would be 

too long, thus providing wrong information 

about the similarity between those words. 

4 Derivational Relations 

Using RoWN in applications, as presented 

above, showed unnatural lexical chains, such as 

one of the possible chains between inventator 

―inventor‖ and inventa ―to invent‖: 

 

inventator(1.1) instance_hyponym 

James_Watt(x) 

James_Watt(x) instance_hypernym inginer(1.1)  

inginer(1.1) hyponym inginer_software(1)  

inginer_software(1) domain_member_TOPIC 

ştiinţa_calculatoarelor(x) 

ştiinţa_calculatoarelor(x) domain_TOPIC pro-

grama(3) 

programa(3) hyponym crea_mental(1) 

crea_mental(1) hypernym inventa(1) 

 

The strangeness of this example results from the 

intricate path from inventator to inventa, un-

common for whatever speaker of Romanian: in-

ventator – James Watt – inginer ―engineer‖ – 

inginer software ―software engineer‖ – pro-

grama ―to program‖ – crea mental ―to create by 

mental act‖ – inventa. 

Faced with a number of such cases, we decid-

ed to implement derivational relations into our 

wordnet.  

This type of relations exists in other wordnets 

as well: the Turkish WordNet (Bilgin et al., 

2004), PWN (Fellbaum et al., 2007), the Czech 

WordNet (Pala and Hlaváčková, 2007), the 

Polish WordNet (Piasecki et al., 2012), the Esto-

nian one (Kahusk, et al., 2010). Given the lan-

guage-specific character of such relations, each 

team undertook their own strategy for finding the 

relations in their wordnet. However, there are 

teams that transferred the derivational relations 

in PWN and then validated them: this is the case 

for the Bulgarian WordNet (Koeva, 2008), the 

Serbian (Koeva et al., 2008) and the Finnish one 

(Lindén and Niemi, 2013). 

Whereas most of the undertakings above 

aimed at expanding the network with new 

synsets derivationally linked with the literals al-

ready in the wordnet, we were interested in add-

ing such relations between literals that are in the 

synsets. No extension was intended, at least for 

the moment. 

We discuss below some theoretical aspects of 

derivational relations and the significance of 

their representation in a wordnet and then present 

the methodology we adopted for identifying and 

annotating them in RoWN. 

4.1 Pre-requisites 

Derivation is one means of creating new words 

in a language from existing morphemes, i.e. the 

smallest units of a language that have their own 

meaning. It ensures both formal and semantic 

relatedness between the root and the derived 

word: the formal relatedness is ensured by the 

fact that the root and the derived word contain 

(almost) the same string of letters that represent 

the root, while the semantic relatedness is en-

sured by the compositionality of meaning of the 

derived word: its meaning is a sum of the mean-

ing of the root and the meaning of the affix(es). 

Thus, the Romanian words alerga ―run‖ and 

alergător ―runner‖ are derivationally related: the 



latter is obtained from the former by adding the 

suffix -ător (after removing -a, the infinitive suf-

fix) and it means ―the one who runs‖. However, 

derivational relations cannot be established for 

all meanings of these words: when considered 

with their proper meaning, they are related, but 

when alerga is considered with its figurative 

meaning ―to try hard to get something‖, it does 

not establish a derivational relation with 

alergător, as it has not developed any related 

figurative meaning. 

In the derivation process only one affix of a 

type is added. So, a prefix and a suffix can be 

added to a root in the same derivation step, but 

never two suffixes or/and two prefixes. If a word 

contains more than two affixes of the same type, 

then they were attached in different steps in the 

derivation. 

4.2 Identifying derivational relations be-
tween literals in RoWN 

Having available a list of (492) Romanian affixes 

and the list of (31872) simple literals in RoWN, 

we searched for pairs of literals (literal1 and lit-

eral2) such that literal1 +/- affix(es) = literal2. The 

―+‖ version covers progressive derivation, while 

the ―-‖ version covers backformation. We al-

lowed for at most 2 affixes, but of different 

types, as discussed above. The results are pre-

sented in Table 3: 

 

Derivation 

type 

Number of 

derived 

words 

Percent 

Prefixation 2862 17.43 

Suffixation 13556 82.57 

TOTAL 16418  
 

Table 3. Derivational relations between simple literals 

in RoWN. 

 

The percents are reasonable: it is a well-

known fact that prefixation is weakly productive 

in Romanian, unlike suffixation. 

We subjected the found pairs to an automatic 

and then a manual validation. For the former, we 

enriched the list of affixes with information 

about the part of speech of the words to which 

they can attach and of the words they help create. 

The list is available at www.racai.ro/~vergi un-

der Research. For example, the suffix -a can be 

attached to nouns or to adjectives to create verbs: 

-a n>v a>v 

Examples include: buton (―button‖) + -a > buto-

na (―to channel-surf‖), scurt (―short‖) + -a > 

scurta (―to shorten‖). 

Afterwards we proceeded to a manual valida-

tion of the whole number of pairs. The results are 

presented in Table 4: for each type of derivation 

(DT) (prefixation P or suffixation S), from the 

found pairs (column 2) we present the number of 

those passing the automatic validation (AV) in 

column 3 and then of those that passed the man-

ual validation (MV) in column 4; the last column 

presents the percent of manually validated pairs 

for each derivation type. 

 

DT Found AV MV % 

P 2862 2621 1990 69.53 

S 13556 8345 8452 62.35 

TOTAL 16418 10966 10442  

 
Table 4. Validated pairs. 

 

Examples of pairs that passed the automatic 

validation but not the manual one include: prinde 

―to catch‖ – surprinde ―to surprise‖, abate ―to 

deviate‖ – abator ―slaughter house‖.  

4.3 Sense level annotation 

Having already established that derivational rela-

tions need to be marked at the word sense level, 

not for all senses of the words in a pair, the next 

necessary step is to calculate the Cartesian prod-

uct of the sets of synsets in which the members 

of the validated pairs occur. Thus, for the 10442 

pairs of literals resulted after manual validation, 

we calculated the Cartesian product for each pair, 

obtaining a total of 101729 pairs of synsets. They 

display formal relatedness and, in order to mark 

a derivational relation for them, it is also neces-

sary to subject them to a semantic evaluation. A 

linguist goes through them and whenever seman-

tic similarity is noticed, the pair is labeled with 

one of the 57 semantic labels we established: 16 

for prefixed words (together, subsumption, oppo-

sition, mero, eliminate, iterative, through, repeat, 

imply, similitude, instead, aug, before, anti, out, 

back) and 41 for suffixed ones (subsumption, 

member_holo, member_mero, substance_holo, 

substance_mero, ingredient_holo, holonym, part, 

agent, result, location, of_origin, job, state, peri-

od, undergoer, instrument, sound, cause, contain-

er, vehicle, body_part, material, destination, gen-

der, wife, dim, aug, object_made_by, subject_to, 

by_means_of, clothes, event, abstract, colour, 

tax, make_become, make_acquire, manner, si-

militude, related). 



The most frequently attached semantic labels 

are: for prefixed words: opposition (neesenţial 

―unessential‖ – essential ―essential‖) (792), sub-

sumption (subclasă ―subclass‖ – clasă ―class‖) 

(363), repeat (reaprinde ―reignite‖ – aprinde 

―ignite‖) (305); for suffixed words: related 

(călduros ―warm‖ – căldură ―warmth‖) (1294), 

event (împărtăşanie ―communion‖ – împărtăşi 

―commune‖) (699), abstract (cerinţă ―require-

ment‖ – cere ―require‖) (490), manner (pri-

mejdios ―dangerous‖ - primejdie ―danger‖) 

(436), agent (linguşitor ―adulator‖ – linguşi ―ad-

ulate‖) (394). At the end of the article, in the An-

nex, containing Table7 and Table 8, we present 

the semantic labels and their frequencies for pre-

fixed and, respectively, suffixed words, accom-

panied by examples. 

4.4 Statistics about derivational relations 

Going through 55849 such pairs of synsets, we 

obtained the results in Table 5. 

 

 Prefixed Suffixed TOTAL 

Pairs 

subject to 

validation 30132 25717 55849 

Validated 

pairs 3145 13916 17061 

Percent 10.43 89.64 30.55 

 
Table 5. Semantically annotated pairs. 

 

The aim of marking these derivational rela-

tions was to increase the number of links be-

tween synsets, especially between synsets of dif-

ferent parts of speech. For the validated pairs we 

included in Table 6 statistics about the deriva-

tional relations involving words of the same and 

of different part of speech. It is obvious that, on 

the whole, adding derivational relations to a 

wordnet increases the number of cross-part of 

speech (PoS) relations. 

 

 Same PoS % Cross PoS % 

Prefixed 97 3 

Suffixed 15 85 

TOTAL 38 62 

 
Table 6. Distribution of derivational relation on PoS. 

 

5 RoWordNetLib 

We have built an Application Programming In-

terface (API) for RoWN, called RoWordNetLib, 

meant as a tool to aid quick implementations of 

RoWN into both research-oriented and industry 

applications. When designing it, we envisaged a 

tool that should be easy to use, easy to extend 

and that would offer a sufficiently large array of 

functionalities. The chosen programming lan-

guage is Java. 

The main functionalities that RoWordNetLib 

provides are: 

 Input/Output for working with XML-
based RoWN files; 

 Methods for working with the semantic 
network itself (RoWordNet objects con-

taining RoWN); 

 Set operations for working with multiple 
RoWordNet objects (reunion, intersection, 

complement, difference, merge, etc.); 

 Basic Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) 
algorithms; 

 Similarity Metrics (both distance-based 
and semantic). 

The API’s uses can be classified as (1) internal – 

it helps to facilitate the continuous work of en-

riching RoWN and (2) external – to quicken the 

development of Romanian-enabled smart appli-

cations. By providing set operations like differ-

ence, intersection or reunion on RoWordNet ob-

jects, more people can work in parallel on 

RoWN and then easily join their versions into a 

single wordnet, thus easing its development. Ex-

ternally, wordnets are successfully used to per-

form word sense disambiguation, information 

retrieval, information extraction, machine trans-

lation, automatic text classification and summa-

rization.  

RoWordNetLib is structured into several 

packages, each with its assigned functionality. 

The main packages are: 'data', 'io', 'op' and 'wsd'. 

The 'data' package contains the data structures 

RoWordNetLib uses internally. Its structure is 

simple, following the way the data is naturally 

structured in a wordnet: a RoWordNet object 

contains an array of Synset objects which are 

indexed by the synset ID for retrieval speed. 

Each Synset object contains a number of primi-

tive types as well as an array of Literal objects 

and an array of Relation objects. A Literal object 

contains a word and an associated sense. A Rela-

tion object contains a relation (string) that points 

to a target synset (defined as an ID), as well as 

optionally having a source and target literal for 



cases where the relation is not between synsets 

but between two synsets’ particular literals. 

The 'io' package provides input and output 

functions. The most important I/O function is 

reading and writing RoWordNet objects in their 

native XML format. 

The 'op' package provides different operation-

al tools: (1) set operation methods for joining, 

intersecting, complementing, etc., multiple 

RoWordNet objects; (2) through the BFWalk 

class, the ability to perform a breadth-first walk 

through the RoWN semantic network; (3) a 

number of distance-based and semantic similari-

ty measures (Resnik, 1995) for measuring the 

closeness of concepts (lexicalized by literals in 

synsets). 

The 'wsd' package implements two Word 

Sense Disambiguation algorithms: Lesk (1986) 

and an adapted version of Lesk. They are used to 

obtain information content values for synsets in 

RoWN given an arbitrary Romanian text as the 

input corpus, which is further used to enable the 

semantic similarity measures. 

6 Conclusions and Further Work  

RoWN is a valuable resource for the Romanian 

language and the NLP group of RACAI uses it in 

most of their applications. We presented here our 

latest qualitative and quantitative achievements.  

Further enrichment of RoWN is a constant 

preoccupation of our team. It follows all the time 

the other interests of the group. For instance, the 

last set of implemented synsets was made up of 

verbs exclusively, given our present interest to 

cover VerbNet 3.1, with the prospect of creating 

a parser for Romanian.  

Increasing the density of relations between 

synsets in order to make RoWN more effective 

in applications was obtained by adding deriva-

tional relations. Although they are relations be-

tween literals, the semantic labels we attached to 

them can be viewed as a link between the synsets 

to which the respective literals belong. After fin-

ishing the semantic annotation of the derivative 

pairs, we could try to expand the network with 

automatically derived words. For Romanian an 

experiment of automatically deriving words is 

reported by Petic (2011), who used very produc-

tive and reliable affixes. With the list of affixes 

and their combination possibilities (available at 

www.racai.ro/~vergi under Research) that we 

have created, we can dare test new cases of au-

tomatic derivation for Romanian. 

Reference 

Orhan Bilgin, Özlem Çetinoglu, and Kemal Oflazer. 

2004. Morphosemantic relations in and across 

wordnets: A study based on Turkish. P. Sojka, K. 

Pala, P. Smrz, C. Fellbaum, P. Vossen (Eds.), Pro-

ceedings of GWC. 

Christiane Fellbaum, Anne Osherson, and Peter E. 

Clark. 2007. Putting Semantics into WordNet's 

―Morphosemantic‖ Links. Proceedings of the 

3rd Language and Technology Conference. 

Radu Ion and Dan Ştefănescu. 2011. Unsupervised 

Word Sense Disambiguation with Lexical Chains 

and Graph-Based Context Formalization. Zygmunt 

Vetulani (ed.): LTC 2009, Lecture Notes in Artifi-
cial Intelligence, 6562/2011: 435—443. 

Radu Ion and Dan Tufiş. 2009. Multilingual versus 

Monolingual Word Sense Disambiguation. Inter-

national Journal of Speech Technology; 12 (2-
3):113-124. 

Radu Ion, Dan Ştefănescu, Alexandru Ceauşu, and 

Dan Tufiş. 2008. RACAI’s QA System at the Ro-

manian-Romanian Multiple Language Question 

Answering (QA@CLEF2008) Main Task. Carol 

Peters et al. (eds.) Working Notes for the CLEF 

2008 Workshop: 10. 

Neeme Kahusk, Kadri Kerner, and Kadri Vider. 2010. 

Enriching Estonian WordNet with Derivations and 

Semantic Relations. Proceeding of the 2010 

conference on Human Language Technologies 

– The Baltic Perspective:195-200. 

Svetla Koeva. 2008. Derivational and Morphoseman-

tic Relations in Bulgarian Wordnet. Intelligent In-

formation Systems; XVI:359-369. 

Svetla Koeva, Cvetana Krstev, and Duško Vitas. 

2008. Morpho-semantic Relations in Wordnet – A 

Case Study for two Slavic Languages. Proceed-

ings of the Fourth Global WordNet Confer-

ence:239-254. 

Michael Lesk. 1986. Automatic sense disambiguation 

using machine readable dictionaries: How to tell a 

pine cone from an ice cream cone. 5th 

SIGDOC:24-26. 

Krister Lindén and Jyrki Niemi. 2013. Is it possible to 

create a very large wordnet in 100 days? An evalu-

ation. Language Resources and Evaluation, 
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10579

-013-9245-0. 

Karel Pala and Dana Hlaváčková, D. 2007. Deriva-

tional relations in Czech Wordnet. Proceedings of 

the Workshop on Balto-Slavonic Natural Lan-

guage Processing: 75-81. 



Mircea Petic. 2011. Generative mechanisms of Ro-

manian derivational morphology. Memoirs of the 

Scientific Section of the Romanian Academy. 
Series IV, Tome XXXIV:21-30. 

Maciej Piasecki, Radoslaw Ramocki, and Marek Ma-

ziarz. 2012. Recognition of Polish Derivational Re-

lations Based on Supervised Learning Scheme. 

Proceedings of LREC 2012: 916-922. 

Philip Resnik. 1995. Using information content to 

evaluate semantic similarity in a taxonomy. 14th 

International Joint Conference on Artificial 

Intelligence. 

Dan Tufiș, Dan Cristea, and Sofia Stamou. 2004. Bal-

kaNet: Aims, Methods, Results and Perspectives. 

A General Overview. Romanian Journal on In-

formation Science and Technology; 7:9-34.  

Dan Tufiş, Verginica Barbu Mititelu, Dan Ştefănescu, 

Radu Ion. 2013. The Romanian Wordnet in a Nut-

shell. Language Resources and Evaluation, 
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10579

-013-9230-7. 

 

Annex 

 

Label Occur-

rences 

Example 

BACK 2 reflux ―low tide‖ – 

flux ―high tide‖ 

TOGETHER 29 întreţese ―interweave‖ 

– ţese ―weave‖ 

AUG 5 supraabundenţă 

―overabundance‖ – 

abundenţă ―abun-

dance‖ 

OUT 1 epidermal ―epidermis‖ 

– derma ―dermis‖ 

SIMILITUDE 61 reţine ―withhold‖ – 

tine ―hold‖ 

IMPLY 26 desconsidera ―discon-

sider‖ – considera 

―consider‖ 

THROUGH 5 răzbate ―get through‖ 

– bate ―beat‖ 

MERO 17 suprafaţă ―surface‖ – 

faţă ―face‖ 

BEFORE 14 preambalare ―prepack-

ing‖ – ambalare 

―packing‖ 

OPPOSITION 792 neesenţial ―unessen-

tial‖ – esenţial ―essen-

tial‖ 

REPEAT 305 reaprinde ―reignite‖ – 

aprinde ―ignite‖ 

SUBSUMPTION 363 subclasă ―subclass‖ – 

clasă ―class‖ 

ANTI 10 anticolinesterază ―an-

ticholinesterase‖ – 

colinesterază ―cholin-

esterase‖ 

INSTEAD 6 vicepreşedinte 

―vicepresident‖ – 

preşedinte ―president‖ 

ITERATIVE 2 răsfoi ―thumb 

through‖ – foaie 

―leaf‖ 

ELIMINATE 9 deşela ―override‖ – 

şale ―loin‖ 

 

Tabel 7. Semantic labels for prefixed words and their 

frequency in RoWN. 

 

Label Occur-

rences 

Example 

RELATED 1294 călduros ―warm‖ 

– căldură 

―warmth‖ 

SOUND 163 bufneală ―plunk‖ 

– bufni ―to plunk‖ 

STATE 284 îndoială ―doubt‖ 

– îndoi ―to doubt‖ 

DESTINATION 5 patentant ―patent-

ee‖ – patenta ―to 

patent‖ 

AUG 1 grăsan ―big fat 

person‖ – gras 

―fat‖ 

SIMILITUDE 115 încărcătură ―load-

ing‖ – încărcare 

―loading‖ 

PERIOD 43 bătrâneţe ―old 

age‖ – bătrân 

―old‖ 

JOB 179 semănător ―sow-

er‖ – semăna 

―sow‖ 

PART 12 optime ―eighth‖ – 

opt ―eight‖ 

MEMBER_MERO 17 orăşean ―town 

dweller‖ – oraş 



―town‖ 

BY_MEANS_OF 104 oprelişte ―ob-

structor‖ – opri 

―obstruct‖ 

CAUSE 19 umezeală ―damp-

ness‖ – umezi ―to 

damp‖ 

MEMBER_HOLO 37 soldăţime ―sol-

diery‖ – soldat 

―soldier‖ 

RESULT 227 tencuială ―plaster-

ing‖ – tencui 

―plaster‖ 

SUBJECT_TO 19 chinui ―to an-

guish‖ – chin 

―anguish‖ 

ABSTRACT 490 cerinţă ―require-

ment‖ – cere ―re-

quire‖ 

SUBSUMPTION 42 căpetenie ―head-

man‖ – cap 

―head‖ 

OF_ORIGIN 29 sătean ―villager‖ 

– sat ―village‖ 

EVENT 699 împărtăşanie 

―communion‖ – 

împărtăşi ―to 

commune‖ 

INSTRUMENT 84 ondulator ―crimp-

er‖ – ondula ―to 

crimp‖ 

INGREDI-

ENT_HOLO 

1 sticlărie ―glass 

work‖ – sticlă 

―glass‖ 

TIME 1 cătănie ―period of 

military service‖ 

– cătană ―ser-

viceman‖ 

MANNER 436 primejdios ―dan-

gerous‖ – pri-

mejdie ―danger‖ 

MAKE_ACQUIRE 110 îndigui ―to dam‖ 

– dig ―dam‖ 

CONTAINER 17 afişier ―board‖ – 

afiş ―poster‖ 

HOLONYM 26 pieptar ―vest‖ – 

piept ―breast of a 

garment‖ 

DIM 50 căsuţă ―little 

house‖ – casă 

―house‖ 

OBJECT_MADE_BY 50 chinezărie ―Chi-

nese work‖ – 

chinez ―Chinese‖ 

CLOTHES 1 pieptar ―vest‖ – 

piept ―breast‖ 

SUB-

STANCE_HOLO 

2 cerat ―waxy‖ – 

ceară ―wax‖ 

AGENT 394 linguşitor ―adula-

tor‖ – linguşi 

―adulate‖ 

LOCATION 87 cărămidărie 

―brickyard‖ – 

cărămidă ―brick‖ 

MATERIAL 4 îndulcitor ―sweet-

ener‖ – îndulci 

―sweeten‖ 

UNDERGOER 47 setos ―thirsty‖ – 

sete ―thirst‖ 

COLOUR 19 cenuşiu ―ashen‖ – 

cenuşă ―ash‖ 

GENDER 13 călugăriţă ―nun‖ – 

călugăr ―monk‖ 

SUB-

STANCE_MERO 

1 ricină ―ricin‖ – 

ricin ―castor oil 

plant‖ 

MAKE_BECOME 89 caricaturize ―to 

caricature‖ – cari-

catură ―carica-

ture‖ 

 

Tabel 8. Semantic labels for suffixed words and their 

frequency in RoWN. 


