



















































Graphical Modification of Text. An Approach To Dyslexic Users.


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies (SLPAT), pages 9–12,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, August 26 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

 Graphical Modification of Text. An Approach To Dyslexic Users. 

Tereza Pařilová
Faculty of Informatics
Masaryk University

Botanická 68a, Brno 602 00, Czech Republic
parilova@mail.muni.cz

Abstract

The  requirements  of  user  interface  for
dyslexics  have  not  been  yet  properly
explored.  Accessibility  to  any  kind  of
information  or  just  to  entertainment  web
pages  is  a  key  factor  to  equality  of  rights,
moreover  it  breaks  down  social  barriers.
Considering  that  study  materials  are
nowadays  very  much  accessible  through
internet,  by accommodating  web  content  to
anyhow  disabled  users  must  be  seen  as
natural  thing.  Dyslexia  is  considered  as  an
cognitive  impairment  arising  from  visual
similarity  of  letters,  therefore  we  focus  on
Czech  language  which  uses  special
characters.  The  aim  of  our  research  is  to
introduce an application that allows dyslexics
to  decode  text  easier  and  understand  it
properly.

1 Introduction

Unlike  for  blind  or  deaf  people,  it  is  quite
difficult  to identify requirements for users with
dyslexia,  as  they  are  very  individual.  The
dyslexics'  inability  to  decode  information  is
socially  restrictive  as  much  as  the  inability  of
visually  impaired  to  read  the  information
(Deibel,  2006). For more,  missing one sense is
balanced  by  higher  sensitivity  of  other  senses.
But dyslexics do not miss a sense. 

According  to  psycho-linguistic  studies
(Marshall and Newcombe, 1973; Friedman et al.,
2012), the words in text should not contain more
letters  (or  letters  close  to  each  other)  that  are
visually similar. It counts letters like b, p, d, o, q
etc.  Also,  dyslexics  find  very  hard  encoding
words that are too long for them. Such a word
should  be  broken  up  by  linguistic  or  visual
syllable, depending on the order of problematic

symbols. In Czech language it might be: nej-roz-
ší-ře-něj-ší  instead of nejrozšířenější (“the most
widely  used”,  by  linguistic  syllable,  too  long
word),  kap-oun instead of  ka-poun etc.  (“fish”,
visually). The finding, reported in Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences (Siok et al.,
2008) surprisingly shows that there is significant
difference in ability to decode words in different
languages.

2 Related Work

The  main  elements  causing  reading  inability
dwells  in  visual  attention  deficit  and  letter
concentration,  both  based  in  neural  cognition.
Research that was done with eye tracker shows
that  at  least  one  third  of  probands  have
difficulties  with  catching  text  with  eyes
(Bellocchi  et  al.,  2013).  The  same  results  are
indicated in independent study of Laboratory for
visual Learning at the Smithsonian Astrophysical
Observatory (Schneps et al., 2013).

    For  instance  mobile  application  American
Wordspeller  & Phonetic Dictionary helps users
to  check  their  writing  and  converts  phonetic
spelling into the proper one. Other software that
use text to speech conversion,  so that users do
not  have  to  deal  with  visual  matter,  are  Web
Reader and CapturaTalk.  In  past  year,  IDEAL,
the  e-book  reader  was  introduced  by  Rello
(2012). Anyway, this application is not a solution
for modifying  too long words or words with a
combination of wrong letters.  Moreover, Czech
language  is  too  complicated  to  get  by  with
IDEAL application. 

Most  of  the  applications  use  text  to  speech
conversion  approach  for  its  usefulness  and
simplicity.  However,  reading  should  not  be
avoided  by  dyslexics.  The  research  study9



conducted  by  experts  from  the  Institute  of
Education,  University  of  London  shows  that
reading strenghts attention,  brain cognition and
information  processing  over  time  (Battye  and
Rainsberry,  2013).  Therefore,  an  application
based on text modification is very much needed.

3 The Complexity of the Czech 
Language

Czech language belongs to West Slavic language
class. It is inflected language, characterized by a
complicated  system  of  declension  and
conjugation. According to the complexity and a
huge  vocabulary,  the  use  of  applications  for
instance  offering  synonyms  seems  not  usable.
The  declension  and  conjugation  that  affects
nouns  and  verbs  are  grammatical  tasks  that
makes  the  language  and  assistive  applications
most complicated. 

3.1  Declension
Czech speakers typically refer to the noun cases
by  number  and  learn  them  by  means  of  the
question   and  answer  (Šaur,  2004).  These
numbers  do  not  necessarily  correspond  to
numbered  cases  in  other  languages.  Nouns,
adjectives,  pronouns and numbers are declined,
there  are  seven  cases  over  a  number  of
declension models (Tab. 1).

3.2  Conjugation
Conjugation applies to verbs.  It  is  a  system of
grammatically-determined  modifications.  There
are  several  types  of  conjugation  with  more  or
less  complicated  rules.  A  brief  overview is  in
Tab. 2. 

Table 1. Declension of Czech nouns.
case question title

1 who/what? nominative

2 without whom/what? genitive

3 to whom/what? dative

4 We see whom/what? accusative

5 We address/call vocative

6 about whom/what? locative

7 with whom/what? instrumental

Table 2. Conjugation of Czech verbs.

Affection Types/Classes

Infinitive

Participles Past/Passive

Transgressive

Aspect Perfect/Imperfect

Tense Present/Past/Future

Imperative Singular/Plural

Conditionals Present/Past

Passive voice

Reflexive verbs

Negation

Verb Classes 1 – 5

Irregular Verbs

3.3  Phonetical and Grammatical Syllables
Czech language, as it was stated, is a quit hard
language  with  many  words  that  follow
declension  and  conjugation.  It  is  still  under
linguistic  concern  how  to  divide  syllables  in
Czech words. There are rules that often do not
follow natural feelings of those speaking Czech,
respectively  those  whose  Czech  is  a  mother
language  (Moravec-Robur,  1939).  Automatic
syllabication  is  therefore  still  not  flawless  and
there may be accidental errors that would make
dyslexics  even  more  confused.  Moreover,
phonological syllable does not omit proximity of
problematic letters that are hardly decodable. 

4 Methodology

4.1  Experimental Approach
We introduce  an  application  that  modifies  text
according  to  needs  of  Czech  language
environment.
Because  the  complexity  of  words  depends  on
individual  language,  we  have  to  find  out  the
pattern  that  makes  the  Czech  words  hard  to
decode.  We  prepare  sets  of  text,  one  that  is
original  and  contains  general,  non-scientific
words, one that divides the letters according to
linguistic syllables and the last one that divides
the letters in words according to visual syllables. 

10



Figure 1. The three texts read by dyslexics.

Each set has 3 texts which are similar in length.
To  avoid  subjectivity,  the  proband  cannot  be
tested with same text but we need the texts to be
similar  as  much  as  possible  (Fig.  1).  The
dyslexics read the three texts, not told what the
aim of the experiment is. We measure how fast
the dyslexic read each text while the text is read
loudly to avoid distorting elements like skipping
letters, returning etc. The text with phonological
(grammatical) syllables divides the letters only in
words they appear in. For exact measurement we
use  a  system  reacting  on  sound  so  while  the
dyslexic start  reading, the tool starts measuring
and stops when the last letter is read. 

4.2   Technical Approach
Among  observation,  we  need  a  tool  that  will
detect long words and visually similar letters in
the  words  (according  to  above  mentioned
pattern). For modifying the text we use syntactic
analyzer that looks for symbols given in a rule
that  was  set  according  to  general  text  reading
problems. For instance, a diagram using cyclical
algorithm  defines  the  way  to  detect  such
words/letters (Fig. 2). The tool will be built up
using state machine. 

   To  the  system  in  Figure  2,  if  NIS  is  for
example ≥ 2, the word is possibly hard to decode
and has to be broken up into syllables or visually
not similar groups of letters. For instance a word
“podobná” has more  than 2 problematic  letters
close  to  each  other  (there  are  5  problematic
letters  together  –  p+o+d+o+b)  so the letters  in
the word should be broken up at least after two
of such letters (po-do-bná), better after each of
the letter (p-o-d-o-bná), depending on preset rule
for  each  language.  The  same  way  we  detect
number of letters contained in a single word.  

Figure  2.  Cyclical  algorithm  for  detecting
problematic words. 

 The  only  need  is  to  determine  what  letters,
respectively  what  pair  or  triplet  of  letters  are
problematic  for  exact  language.  Once  the
observation  is  done,  the  application  we  design
can be used for any language. 

5 Scientific and Practical Impact

Based on previous work that was done in area of
dyslexic  users,  within  psychological,  linguistic
and  technical  studies,  we  strongly  believe  that
our solution fits best to dyslexics who are very
individual  users  to  work  with.  There  are  no
standards,  like  WCAG  2.0  for  general
accessibility that would make web designers and
ICT developers to follow such needs. First, they
would have to care about accommodating these
needs in every single webpage, ebook, ICT tool.
It  seems  impossible,  too  hard  and  time
consuming.  Second,  designers  and  developers
have  almost  none  of  experience  with  dyslexic
users  and  self-experience  is  more  than  needed
when building an assistive technology tool.

We believe that our research, proving explicit
problems that dyslexics deal with, will move the11



research in assistive technologies far more ahead.
Existing applications are helpful but do not fulfill
the needs as much as they could. We add value
to actual applications and make the gap between
society and people with special needs smaller.

6 Conclusion

The outcome of the application is necessary to
confront with a sufficient group of dyslexics. It is
generally  stated  that  up  to  one  twentieth  of
population  suffers  from  learning  and
concentration disabilities, although only some of
them are diagnosed (Rello et al., 2013). It would
be  unethical  to  stop  having  interests  in
problematic with dyslexia.

Our future work will be directed the way of
developing proposed tool, to make it usable in e-
books, study materials, and within daily routine
needs.

References
Claire Battye and Meghan Rainsberry, 2013. Reading

for  pleasure  puts  children  ahead  in  the  
classroom,  study  finds.  Institute  of  
Education, University of London. 

Guarang  Kanvind,  Luz  Rello  and  Ricardo  Baeza-
Yatez,  2012.  IDEAL:  a  Dyslexic-Friendly  
eBook  Reader.  Proceedings  of  the  14th  
international ACM SIGACCESS conference 
on Computers and accessibility. ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 205-206. 

John  C.  Marshall  and  Freda  Newcombe,  1973. 
Patterns  of  paralexia:  A  psycholinguistic  
approach.  Journal  of  Psycholinguistic  
Research.  Kluwer  Academic  Publishers-
Plenum Publishers, 2(3):175-199.  

Katherine  Deibel,  2006.  Understanding  and  
supporting  the  use  of  accommodating  

technologies by adult learners with reading 
disabilities. Accessibility  and  Computing,  
ACM SIGACCESS, 86: 32-35.

Luz  Rello,  Ricardo  Baeza-Yates,  Stefan  Bott  and  
Horacio Saggion,  2013.  Simplify or help?:  
text simplification strategies for people with 
dyslexia.  Proceedings  of  the  10th  
International Cross-Disciplinary Conference 
on  Web Accessibility ,  ACM New York,  
NY, (15).

Mattheew  H.  Schneps,  Jenny  M.  Thomson,  Chen  
Chen, Gerhard Sonnert and Marc Pomplun, 
2013.  E-Readers  Are  More  Effective  than  
Paper for Some with Dyslexia.  PLoS ONE  
8(9):e75634

Naama Friedmann, Michal Biran and Aviah Gvion,  
2012. Patterns of visual dyslexia. Journal of 
Neuropsychology, 6(1):1–30.

Stefon  Bellocchi,  Mathilde  Muneaux,  Mireille  
Bastien-Toniazzo  and  Sébastien  Ducrot,  
2013.  I can read it in your eyes: What eye  
movements  tell  us  about  visuo-attentional  
processes  in  developmental  dyslexia.  
Research  in  Developmental  Disabilities,  
34(1):452-460. 

Vladimír  Šaur,  2004.  Rules  of  Czech  spelling  
grammar  with  interpretation.  Otto  
Publishing, Prague. 

Wai T. Siok, Zhendong Niu, Zhen Jin,  Charles  A.  
Perfetti  and Li  H. Tan. 2008. A structural–
functional basis for dyslexia in the cortex of 
Chinese readers.  Massachusetts Institute of  
Technology,  Cambridge,  MA,  USA,  
105(14):5561–5566.

12


