



















































InterlinguaPlus Machine Translation Approach for Local Languages: Ekegusii  Swahili


Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on the Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages, pages 68–72,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, 26 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

 

InterlinguaPlus Machine Translation Approach for Under-Resourced 
Languages: Ekegusii & Swahili 

 
Edward O. Ombui1, 2, Peter W. Wagacha2 and Wanjiku Ng’ang’a2 

1 Computer Science Dept. Africa Nazarene University (Kenya) 
eombui@anu.ac.ke 

2 School of Computing and Informatics, University of Nairobi (Kenya) 
waiganjo@uonbi.ac.ke, wanjiku.nganga@uonbi.ac.ke 

 

Abstract 
This paper elucidates the InterlinguaPlus 
design and its application in bi-directional text 
translations between Ekegusii and Kiswahili 
languages unlike the traditional translation 
pairs, one-by-one. Therefore, any of the 
languages can be the source or target language. 
The first section is an overview of the project, 
which is followed by a brief review of 
Machine Translation. The next section 
discusses the implementation of the system 
using Carabao’s open machine translation 
framework and the results obtained. So far, the 
translation results have been plausible 
particularly for the resource-scarce local 
languages and clearly affirm morphological 
similarities inherent in Bantu languages. 
 
Keywords: Machine Translation, 
InterlinguaPlus, Ekegusii 
 

1. Introduction 
Development of language applications for 

local languages in Africa requires innovative 
approaches since many of these languages are 
resource scarce. By this we mean that electronic 
language resources such as digital corpora, 
electronic dictionaries, spell checkers, 
annotators, and parsers are hardly available. 
These languages are also predominately spoken 
rather than written. Moreover, they are generally 
used in environments where there are other 
competing languages like English and French 
which have been well documented over the years 
with properly defined grammars, unlike the local 
languages with poorly defined grammars and 
dictionaries. This has been a major setback in the 
development of technologies for African 
languages. The presence of diacritics in most of 
these languages has also contributed to the 
complexity involved in the development of 
language technology applications. (Ombui & 
Wagacha, 2007).     

Nevertheless, there is pioneering work with 
the South African languages, which includes the 
definition of proper language grammars and 
development of a national language policy 
framework to encourage the utilization of the 

indigenous languages as official languages 
(NLPF, 2003).   

In this paper, we consider two Bantu 
languages in Kenya namely Ekegusii and 
Swahili. There are approximately two million 
Ekegusii language speakers (KNBS, 2009). 
Swahili is widely spoken in East and Central 
Africa and is one of the official languages of the 
African Union with lots of printed resources.  

For the work that we are reporting, we have 
adopted the InterlinguaPlus approach using the 
Carabao open machine translation framework 
(Berman, 2012). In this approach, all similar 
meaning words, synonyms, from each language 
and across the languages existing in the system 
are stored under the same category and assigned 
an identical family number. These words are also 
tagged with numbered lexical information1. For 
example, Egetabu (a book) [1=N; 2=SG; 5=No]. 
Tag1 stands for the part of speech (1-POS), 
Noun, tag2 for number (2-No.), Singular, and 
tag5 indicates whether the noun is animate or 
inanimate etc. An amalgamation of the word’s 
family identification number and tag numbers 
form a unique ID for the word. In addition, a 
novel way of only storing the base forms of each 
word and having a different table containing 
affixes that inflect the word drastically reduces 
the lexical database size and development time in 
general. This approach is implemented through 
the manual encoding of the sequence rules for 
the two languages. 

Preliminary results are encouraging and 
clearly reveal similarities in the language 
structure of Ekegusii and Swahili. The advantage 
of this approach is that the translation is 
bidirectional and maintains the semantic 
approach to translation just as a human 
translator. In addition, it is suitable for rapid 
generation of domain specific translations for 
under-resourced languages. 

                                                
1 Grammatical, Stylistic and Semantic tags 

68



 

2. Machine Translation 
Over the history of MT, several techniques and 
approaches have continued to be developed 
despite previous discouraging reports (ALPAC, 
1966). The major approaches and methodologies 
include: Rule-based and Corpus-based, Direct 
translation and indirect translation (i.e. transfer-
based and Interlingua-based) (Hutchins, 1993 & 
Hutchins, 1994). With the introduction of 
Artificial Intelligence technology in MT, more 
recent approaches have been proposed including 
alignment template approach to Statistical MT 
(Och & Ney, 2004), Knowledge-based approach 
(Nirenburg et al., 1992),  Human in loop, and 
Hybrid methods (Groves & Way, 2006).  

One of the strengths of the InterlinguaPlus 
approach (Berman, 2012) is that it preserves 
semantic information of the lexicon. Therefore, 
translation is primarily based on semantic 
equivalents between the lexicons of these 
languages.  
As a result, the traditional language pair-based 
translation is replaced by bidirectional 
translations between the languages existing in the 
system. Any language can be the source or a 
target language.  

Consequently, the lexical database size is 
drastically reduced and the task of building 
multiple dictionaries is concentrated in 
constructing just one Interlingua lexical database.  
This kind of approach is evidently advantageous 
when building machine translation applications 
for under-resourced African languages because it 
expedites the process of adding a new language 
with minimal effort especially when adding 
languages of similar grammatical makeup, which 
could reuse some of the existing grammar rules. 

3. Implementation 
Figure 1 below illustrates the translation process 
in the Ekegusii Machine Translation (EMT) 
system. The user inputs a sentence, which is 
parsed into its constituent tokens. These tokens 
are then matched and mapped to their equivalent 
target-language tokens using the Family and 
mapping Identification numbers respectively. In 
addition, the sequence2 e.g. 
Subject+Verb+Object is parsed into elements 
(lexical units) and authenticated against the 
elements of the analyzed sentence.  If it is valid, 
the elements are mapped according to the 
sequence and modified by the corresponding 
                                                
2 Set of elements, which refer to tokens that have specified 
features e.g. grammatical data, style, word-order, etc. 

sequence in the target language. Some of the 
features that can be modified include deleting or 
adding a new element. E.g. He ate a 
mango.[eng:SVO]. A+li+kula  Embe . Note that 
Swahili and generally the local African 
languages do not have determiners. Therefore, 
when translating from Eng-Swa, the English 
determiner is dropped. However, it is added if 
the translation is vice-versa. This is made 
possible by assigning a locally unique identity 
number, preserved across languages in the 
database, to each lexical unit of a sequence. The 
sequence manager in the system uses these 
identity numbers to appropriately handle lexical 
holes and the source/target of each 
transformation. 
 

 
 

Figure1: EMT’s MR-PDF 
 
Subject (S1); Verb (V1); Object (O1); Determinant 
(det); delimiter (del). 
 

The above process, MR-PDF3, is an acronym 
for the five translation stages (explained below) 
with the last two stages shifted at the beginning 
so as to give it an easy-to-remember name. We 
will use example 1, English to Ekegusii SVO 
phrase to elucidate the process. 
Example 1 
He ate a mango. 
 
Stage 1: Parsing 
The sentence is analyzed syntactically according 
to its constituent structures i.e. tokens including 
syntax delimiters like question marks, 
exclamation marks etc. 
He + ate + a + mango. 
Ss1:[He] Sv1:[ate] Det:[a] So1:[Mango] del:[.] 

It is worth noting that at this stage, the parts 
of speech have not yet been identified. 
Stage 2: Source Language Dictionary Lookup 
Each token from stage 1 is looked up in the 
respective source language dictionary to check 
whether it exists in that language. In case it is not 

                                                
3 Mapping (M), Rules (R), Parsing (P), Dictionary look-up 
(D), Family word-match (F). 

69



 

found, the word is left untagged and passed-on as 
it is to the next stages up to the output.  
 
Stage 3: Family word-match 
Every morpheme is examined considering all 
possible combination of affixes to it and each 
configuration stored. These are then aligned with 
the corresponding target language dictionary 
entities.  
[He]= [Ere]  
[ate]= [ariete] Past form of eat=karia  
[a]= [a] yields the same token if an equivalent is 
not found in the target language. 
[Mango]= [Riembe] Singular, noun. 

All other delimiters, e.g. question marks (?), 
comas (,) are presented as they appeared in the 
source string. From the above example, all 
possible modifiers of the verb “to eat” are 
generated i.e. eat, ate, eaten, eats, eating, and 
matched with the corresponding verb in Ekegusii 
dictionary i.e. Karia, ariete, nkoria, etc.  

The tricky part of it is that one may not 
always have an equivalent number of modified 
verbs in the target or source dictionaries. To 
resolve this ambiguity, the program picks the 
modified verb with the best match in the target 
language dictionary i.e. in terms of matching 
lexical or style information e.g. the type of tense, 
number, animation, gender etc.  

If we refer to the same example above, the 
following is examined as shown in Table 1and 
Table 2. 
 
Language Morpheme Part Of  

Speech 
“Modified 
Morphemes” 

English Eat Verb Ate; eaten; 
eating, eats, 
etc. 

Ekegusii Ria Verb Karia, ariete, 
nkoriare, 
etc. 

Table 1: Lexical information 
 
“Modified 
Morphemes” 

Tense Number 

Ate  Past Singular or 
Plural 

Eating  Present 
continuous  

Singular or 
plural 

Mbariete Past Plural 
Ariete Past Singular 

Table 2: Style information 
 
Language: English  
Ate [tense-past; number-any] 

It is apparent that both dictionaries are used to 
provide grammatical information, semantic data 
and potential equivalents in the target language 
during this stage. 
 
Stage 4: Mapping 
At the mapping stage, the Source text is 
validated against all existing sequences trees in 
the language. Only the most complete and 
detailed tree is picked. From example 1 above, 
the most appropriate sequence tree will be as 
follows and illustrated in figure 2.  
 
He ate a mango    Ri-embe a-rie-te 
[PN] + [V] + [Det] + [N] [N] + [V]  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
        
 

Figure 2: Sequence tree 
 

The elements in the source sequence will map 
exactly into the [N] + [V] sequence. At this point 
all the redundant guesses are eliminated and 
disambiguation occurs. There are more 
comparisons and checks - like subject and style 
checks, etc.  
 
Stage 5: Apply Rules. 
The elements in the source sequence are 
modified by the corresponding sequence in the 
target language. The affixes are attached, or 
some new elements added or others completely 
deleted. Each element’s unique identity is used to 
map the source sequence to the equivalent target 
sequence identities. Remember that Ekegusii 
does not have determiners and therefore it is 
dropped. 

From the example above, the noun is then 
modified by adding the singular prefix- ri, (noun 
class 13) while the verb is modified by 
concatenating the subject- a (singular pronoun) 
to the verb- rie and finally adding the suffix- te 
(Past tense). The final sentence then becomes as 
shown below 
Riembe ariete -> ri-embe a-rie-te   

In case it is converted to plural, the noun 
prefix will change to- ama (noun class 6) and the 
pronoun to- ba while maintaining the past tense 
suffix- te  

S 

Verb 
rie 

Noun 
embe 

70



 

Amaembe bariete -> Ama-embe ba-rie-te 
Finally, the sentence word order is rearranged 

according to the best fitting sequence tree in the 
target language sequence table. 

4. Results 
The results gotten so far are plausible. The word 
order is correct as per the programmed sequence 
rules for each language e.g. English: This is a 
book; Ekegusii. Eke n’egetabu; Kiswahili: Hiki 
ni kitabu. In addition, the bidirectional 
functionality is often more than 50% accurate on 
the wider domains and about 90% accurate on 
specific domains, in our case the obituary’s 
domain. This evaluation is based on phrase level. 
Besides, once a phrase text has been translated, it 
can also be used as the source text and the 
translator will yield the exact translation as the 
initial source text. This therefore makes a strong 
case for the high intelligibility of the system. 

The idea of storing only the word base forms 
and having a separate table for the affixes has 
drastically reduced the lexical database size as 
well as the building time. It was also noted that 
there is need for careful configuration of the rule 
units4 for the affixes and lexicon otherwise the 
translation will be inaccurate. If we are to use the 
example above, the canonical5 form will be as 
follows:  English: FID-144 Book [POS: N; 
Number: SG; Animation: No]. However, for 
Ekegusii, there is need for additional rules units 
to indicate the noun class6 because the nouns 
inflection is dependent on the noun class, 
otherwise the machine translator might 
concatenate the wrong prefix. Therefore, the 
English example above will be matched as 
follows. Ekegusii: FID-144 tabu [POS: N; 
Animation: No, EkeNC7: 8/9].   

Consequently, the translator compares the 
rule units of the word with the rule units of the 
modifiers8 in the affixes table and picks the most 
matching affix,  in this case the prefix “ege” 
[POS: N; Number: SG; Animation: No, 
EkeNC9:8/9], ensuing n  accurate translated word 
“egetabu”. On the contrary, if the Ekegusii rule 
units were not added or wrongly configured, the 
translation will be bizarre e.g. “Omotabu” which 
is an invalid Ekegusii name. In fact, the prefix 

                                                
4 A tag bearing any piece of grammatical data: part of 
speech, number contrast, gender, conjugation pattern, etc. 
5 Base form of the word before any inflection 
6 There are about 17 Ekegusii noun classes 
7 Ekegusii Noun Class 
8 In this case, Prefixes 
9 Ekegusii Noun Class 

“omo” [EkeNC: 1] is often reserved for singular 
human10 nouns.  

The results obtained also expound the 
diversity of Ekegusii language linguistic rules11 
as compared to English. Most Indo-European 
languages, specifically English, espouse the 
SVO12 sentence structure rule. However, in 
Ekegusii both SVO and VOS rules are valid 
sentence structure rules. For example, English: 
Mum ate mangoes [SVO]. Ekegusii: 1.Omog’ina 
nariete amaembe [SVO]. 2. Nariete amaembe 
Omong’ina [VOS]. Interestingly, the Ekegusii 
sequence and grammar rules that were copied 
and pasted to Swahili with minimal alteration 
resulted in almost precise translations between 
the two languages. This inevitably affirms the 
similarity in the language structure of the two 
languages and the ease in defining, constructing 
and translating between local languages as 
compared to/or from English. 

The project demonstrations made so far to 
peers and students have generated a lot of 
enthusiasm in African languages research and 
given a good indication of the reception of 
technology in a familiar language platform. 

5. Conclusion 
The InterlinguaPlus approach is good 
particularly for under-resourced languages in 
terms of generating rapid translations that give a 
good gist of the meaning in the second language. 
Although it takes some time to write the 
grammar rules for a new language at the 
beginning, it however takes a relatively shorter 
time when adding languages of similar 
grammatical makeup. Therefore, the approach is 
very feasible especially when considering under-
resourced languages which may not be afforded 
the appropriate finances and sufficient political 
will to have technological resources built for 
them. 

The lexical database building methodology, 
whereby words and their grammatical data are 
stored in respective families and assigned a 
unique identification, provides an excellent way 
of reducing the chances of ambiguity that may 
exist in the phonetic disparities inherent in these 
local languages.   

The InterlinguaPlus approach employed in the 
Carabao Open MT framework forms a good 
foundation to scale existing language resources 

                                                
10 Professions, etc. 
11 Sequence and grammar rules 
12 Subject, Verb, Object 

71



 

to many other under-resourced languages using 
minimal effort i.e. the number of rules written for 
a language and consequently the time taken to 
develop a new language. 

6. References 
Automatic Language Processing Advisory Committee 

(ALPAC). 1966. Languages and Machines: 
Computers in Translation and Linguistics. 
National Academy of Sciences, National Research 
Council, 1966. (Publication 1416).  

 
Declan Groves, and Andy Way. 2006. Hybrid Data-

Driven Model of MT. 
ttp://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/showciting?cid=5495125 
(Retrieved March 15, 2014) 

 
Declan Groves. Bringing Humans into the Loop: 

Localization with Machine Translation at Traslán  
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/versions?doi=
10.1.1.210.2867 (Retrieved March 15, 2014) 

 
Edward Ombui, and Peter Wagacha. 2007. Machine 

Translation for Kenyan Local Languages. In 
Proceedings of COSCIT conference. Nairobi, 
Kenya. 

 
Franz J. Och, and Hermann Ney. 2004. The 

Alignment Template Approach to Statistical 
Machine Translation. 
http://acl.ldc.upenn.edu/J/J04/J04-4002.pdf 
(Retrieved January 25, 2014) 

 

John W. Hutchins. 1993. Latest Developments in 
Machine Translation Technology: Beginning a 
New Era in MT Research. MT Summit (1993), pp. 
11-34. 

 
John W. Hutchins. 1994. Research Methods and 

System Designs in Machine Translation: A Ten-
Year Review, 1984-1994. http://www.mt-
archive.info/BCS-1994-Hutchins.pdf (Retrieved 
August 1, 2013) 

 
Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS, 2009). 

Ethnic Affiliation 
http://www.knbs.or.ke/censusethnic.php. 
(Retrieved September 6, 2013) 

 
National Language Policy Framework. 2003. 

Retrieved from the Department of Arts and 
Culture website of South Africa.  
https://www.dac.gov.za/sites/default/files/LPD_La
nguage%20Policy%20Framework_English_0.pdf  

 
Sergei Nirenburg, Jaime Carbonell, Masaru Tomita, 

and Kenneth Goodman. 1992. Machine 
Translation: A Knowledge-Based Approach. 
http://acl.ldc.upenn.edu/J/J93/J93-1013.pdf 
(Retrieved November 22, 2013) 

 
Vadim Berman. 2012. Inside Carabao: Language 

Translation Software for XXI Century. Retrieved 
from the LinguaSys website  
http://www.linguasys.com/web_production/PDFs/
InsideCarabaoWhitePaper.pdf.  

 

72


