



















































Estimating Time to Event from Tweets Using Temporal Expressions


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Language Analysis for Social Media (LASM) @ EACL 2014, pages 8–16,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Estimating Time to Event from Tweets Using Temporal Expressions

Ali Hürriyetoǧlu, Nelleke Oostdijk, and Antal van den Bosch
Centre for Language Studies

Radboud University Nijmegen
P.O. Box 9103, NL-6500 HD Nijmegen, The Netherlands

{a.hurriyetoglu,n.oostdijk,a.vandenbosch}@let.ru.nl

Abstract

Given a stream of Twitter messages about
an event, we investigate the predictive
power of temporal expressions in the mes-
sages to estimate the time to event (TTE).
From labeled training data we learn av-
erage TTE estimates of temporal expres-
sions and combinations thereof, and de-
fine basic rules to compute the time to
event from temporal expressions, so that
when they occur in a tweet that mentions
an event we can generate a prediction. We
show in a case study on soccer matches
that our estimations are off by about eight
hours on average in terms of mean abso-
lute error.

1 Introduction

Textual information streams such as those pro-
duced by news media and by social media reflect
what is happening in the real world. These streams
often contain explicit pointers to future events that
may interest or concern a potentially large amount
of people. Besides media-specific markers such as
event-specific hashtags in messages on Twitter1,
these messages may contain explicit markers of
place and time that help the receivers of the mes-
sage disambiguate and pinpoint the event on the
map and calendar.

The automated analysis of streaming text mes-
sages can play a role in catching these important
events. Part of this analysis may be the identifi-
cation of the future start time of the event, so that
the event can be placed on the calendar and appro-
priate action may be taken by the receiver of the
message, such as ordering tickets, planning a se-
curity operation, or starting a journalistic investi-
gation. The automated identification of the time to
event (TTE) should be as accurate and come early

1http://twitter.com

as possible. In this paper we explore a hybrid rule-
based and data-driven method that exploits the ex-
plicit mentioning of temporal expressions to arrive
at accurate and early TTE estimations.

The idea of publishing future calendars with po-
tentially interesting events gathered (semi-) auto-
matically for subscribers, possibly with personal-
ization features and the option to harvest both so-
cial media and the general news, has been imple-
mented already and is available through services
such as Zapaday2, Daybees3, and Songkick4. To
our knowledge, based on the public interfaces of
these platforms, these services perform directed
crawls of (structured) information sources, and
identify exact date and time references in posts on
these sources. They also manually curate event in-
formation, or collect this through crowdsourcing.

In this study we do not use a rule-based tempo-
ral tagger such as the HeidelTime tagger (Strötgen
and Gertz, 2013), which searches for only a lim-
ited set of temporal expressions. Instead, we pro-
pose an approach that uses a large set of temporal
expressions, created by using seed terms and gen-
erative rules, and a training method that automati-
cally determines the TTE estimate to be associated
with each temporal expression sequence in a data-
driven way. Typically, rule-based systems do not
use the implicit information provided by adverbs
(‘more’ in ‘three more days’) and relations be-
tween non-subsequent elements, while machine-
learning-based systems do not make use of the
temporal logic inherent to temporal expressions;
they may identify ‘three more days’ as a temporal
expression but they lack the logical apparatus to
compute that this implies a TTE of about 3 × 24
hours. To make use of the best of both worlds
we propose a hybrid system which uses informa-
tion about the distribution of temporal expressions

2http://www.zapaday.com
3http://daybees.com/
4https://www.songkick.com/

8



as they are used in forward-looking social media
messages in a training set of known events, and
combines this estimation method with an exten-
sive set of regular expressions that capture a large
space of possible Dutch temporal expressions.

Thus, our proposed system analyzes social me-
dia text to find information about future events,
and estimates how long it will take before the
event takes place. The service offered by this sys-
tem will be useful only if it generates accurate es-
timations of the time to event. Preferably, these
accurate predictions should come as early as pos-
sible. Moreover, the system should be able, in
the long run, to freely detect relevant future events
that are not yet on any schedule we know in any
language represented on social media. For now,
in this paper we focus on estimating the start-
ing time of scheduled events, and use past and
known events for a controlled experiment involv-
ing Dutch twitter messages.

For our experiment we collected tweets refer-
ring to scheduled Dutch premier league soccer
matches. This type of event generally triggers
many anticipatory discussions on social media
containing many temporal expressions. Given a
held-out soccer match not used during training,
our system predicts the time to the event based on
individual tweets captured in a range from eight
days before the event to the event time itself. Each
estimation is based on the temporal expressions
which occur in a particular twitter message. The
mean absolute error of the predictions for each of
the 60 soccer matches in our data set is off by
about eight hours. The results are generated in a
leave-one-out cross-validation setup5.

This paper starts with describing the relation of
our work to earlier research in Section 2. Section 3
describes the overall experimental setup, including
a description of the data, the temporal expressions
that were used, our two baselines, and the evalua-
tion method used. Next, in Section 4 the results are
presented. The results are analyzed and discussed
in Section 5. We conclude with a summary of our
main findings and make suggestions for the direc-
tion future research may take (Section 6).

5Tweet ID’s, per tweet estimations, occurred time ex-
pressions and rules can be found at http://www.ru.nl/
lst/resources/

2 Related Work

Future-reference analysis in textual data has been
studied from different angles. In the realm of
information retrieval the task is more commonly
defined as seeking future temporal references in
large document collections such as the Web by
means of time queries (Baeza Yates, 2005). Var-
ious studies have used temporal expression ele-
ments as features in an automatic setting to im-
prove the relevance estimation of a web docu-
ment (Dias et al., 2011; Jatowt and Au Yeung,
2011). Information relevant to event times has
been the focus of studies such as those by Becker
et al. (2012) and Kawai et al. (2010).

Our research is aimed at estimating the time to
event of an upcoming event as precisely as possi-
ble. Radinsky et al. (2012) approach this problem
by learning from causality pairs in texts from long-
ranging news articles. Noro et al. (2006) describe
a machine-learning-based system for the identifi-
cation of the time period in which an event will
happen, such as in the morning or at night.

Some case studies are focused on detecting
events as early as possible as their unfolding is
fast. The study by Sakaki et al. (2010) describes a
system which analyzes the flow of tweets in time
and place mentioning an earthquake, to predict the
unfolding quake pattern which may in turn provide
just-in-time alerts to people residing in the loca-
tions that are likely to be struck shortly. Zielinski
et al. (2012) developed an early warning system
to detect natural disasters in a multilingual fash-
ion and thereby support crisis management. The
quick throughput of news in the Twitter network
is the catalyst in these studies focusing on natu-
ral disasters. In our study, we rather rely on the
slower build-up of clues in messages in days be-
fore an event, at a granularity level of hours.

Ritter et al. (2012) aim to create a calendar of
events based on explicit date mentions and words
typical of the event. They train on annotated open
domain event mentions and use a rule-based tem-
poral tagger. We aim to offer a more generic so-
lution that makes use of a wider range of tempo-
ral expressions, including indirect and implicit ex-
pressions.

Weerkamp and De Rijke (2012) study this type
of more generic patterns of anticipation in tweets,
but focus on personal future activities, while we
aim to predict as early as possible the time to
event of events that affect and interest many users.

9



Our estimations do not target time periods such as
mornings or evenings but on the number of hours
remaining to the event.

TTE estimation of soccer matches has been the
topic of several studies. Kunneman and Van den
Bosch (2012) show that machine learning meth-
ods can differentiate between tweets posted be-
fore, during, and after a soccer match. Estimat-
ing the time to event of future matches from tweet
streams has been studied by Hürriyetoglu et al.
(2013), using local regression over word time se-
ries. In a related study, Tops et al. (2013) use sup-
port vector machines to classify the time to event
in automatically discretized categories. At best
these studies are about a day off in their predic-
tions. Both studies investigate the use of temporal
expressions, but fail to leverage the utility of this
information source, most likely because they use
limited sets of less than 20 regular expressions. In
this study we scale up the number of temporal ex-
pressions.

3 Experimental Set-Up

We carried out a controlled case study in which we
focused on Dutch premier league soccer matches
as a type of scheduled event. These types of games
have the advantage that they occur frequently,
have a distinctive hashtag by convention, and often
generate thousands to several tens of thousands of
tweets per match.

Below we first describe the collection and com-
position of our data sets (Subsection 3.1) and the
temporal expressions which were used to base our
predictions upon (Subsection 3.2). Then, in Sub-
section 3.3, we describe our baselines and evalua-
tion method.

3.1 Data Sets

We harvested tweets from twiqs.nl6, a database
of Dutch tweets collected from December 2010
onwards. We selected the six best performing
teams of the Dutch premier league in 2011 and
20127, and queried all matches in which these
teams played against each other in the calendar
years 2011 and 2012. The collection procedure re-
sulted in 269,999 tweets referring to 60 individual
matches. The number of tweets per event ranges
from 321 to 35,464, with a median of 2,723 tweets.

6http://twiqs.nl
7Ajax, Feyenoord, PSV, FC Twente, AZ Alkmaar, and FC

Utrecht.

Afterwards, we restricted the data to tweets sent
within eight days before the match8 and elimi-
nated all retweets. This reduced the number of
tweets in our final data set to 138,141 tweets.

In this experiment we are working on the as-
sumption that the presence of a hashtag can be
used as proxy for the topic addressed in a tweet.
Inspecting a sample of tweets referring to recent
soccer games not part of our data set, we devel-
oped the hypothesis that the position of the hash-
tag may have an effect as regards the topicality of
the tweet. Hashtags that occur in final position (i.e.
they are tweet-final or are only followed by one
or more other hashtags) are typically metatags and
therefore possibly more reliable as topic identifiers
than tweet non-final hashtags which behave more
like common content words in context. In order
to be able to investigate the possible effect that the
position of the hashtag might have, we split our
data in the following two subsets:

FIN – comprising tweets in which the hashtag
occurs in final position (as defined above);
84,533 tweets.

NFI – comprising tweets in which the hashtag oc-
curs in non-final position; 53,608 tweets.

Each tweet in our data set has a time stamp of
the moment (in seconds) it was posted. Moreover,
for each soccer match we know exactly when it
took place. This information is used to calculate
for each tweet the actual time that remains to the
start of the event and the absolute error in estimat-
ing the time to event.

3.2 Temporal Expressions
In the context of this paper temporal expressions
are considered to be words or phrases which point
to the point in time, the duration, or the frequency
of an event. These may be exact, approximate, or
even right out vague. Although in our current ex-
periment we restrict ourselves to an eight-day pe-
riod prior to an event, we chose to create a gross
list of all possible temporal expressions we could
think of, so that we would not run the risk of over-
looking any items and the list can be used on fu-
ture occasions even when the experimental set-
ting is different. Thus the list also includes tem-
poral expressions that refer to points in time out-
side the time span under investigation here, such

8An analysis of the tweet distribution shows that the eight-
day window captures about 98% of the tweets in the larger
data set from which it was derived.

10



as gisteren ‘yesterday’ or over een maand ‘in a
month from now’, and items indicating duration
or frequency such as steeds ‘continuously’/‘time
and again’. No attempt has been made to distin-
guish between items as regards time reference (fu-
ture time, past time) as many items can be used in
both fashions (compare for example vanmiddag in
vanmiddag ga ik naar de wedstrijd ‘this afternoon
I’m going to the match’ vs ik ben vanmiddag naar
de wedstrijd geweest ‘I went to the match this af-
ternoon’.

The list is quite comprehensive. Among the
items included are single words, e.g. adverbs
such as nu ‘now’, zometeen ‘immediately’, straks
‘later on’, vanavond ‘this evening’, nouns such as
zondagmiddag ‘Sunday afternoon’, and conjunc-
tions such as voordat ‘before’), but also word com-
binations and phrases such as komende woensdag
‘next Wednesday. Temporal expressions of the lat-
ter type were obtained by means of a set of 615
seed terms and 70 rules, which generated a total of
around 53,000 temporal expressions. In addition,
there are a couple of hundred thousand temporal
expressions relating the number of minutes, hours,
days, or time of day;9 they include items contain-
ing up to 9 words in a single temporal expression.
Notwithstanding the impressive number of items
included, the list is bound to be incomplete.

We included prepositional phrases rather than
single prepositions so as to avoid generating too
much noise. Many prepositions have several uses:
they can be used to express time, but also for
example location. Compare voor in voor drie
uur ‘before three o’clock’ and voor het stadion
‘in front of the stadium’. Moreover, prepositions
are easily confused with parts of separable verbs
which in Dutch are abundant.

Various items on the list are inherently ambigu-
ous and only in one of their senses can be con-
sidered temporal expressions. Examples are week
‘week’ but also ‘weak’ and dag ‘day’ but also
‘goodbye’. For items like these, we found that
the different senses could fairly easily be distin-
guished whenever the item was immediately pre-
ceded by an adjective such as komende and vol-
gende (both meaning ‘next’). For a few highly
frequent items this proved impossible. These are
words like zo which can be either a temporal ad-
verb (‘in a minute’; cf. zometeen) or an intensi-
fying adverb (‘so’), dan ‘then’ or ‘than’, and nog

9For examples see Table 1 and Section 3.3.

‘yet’ or ‘another’. As we have presently no way
of distinguishing between the different senses and
these items have at best an extremely vague tem-
poral sense so that they cannot be expected to con-
tribute to estimating the time to event, we deciced
to discard these.10

In order to capture event targeted expressions,
we treated domain terms such as wedstrijd ‘soc-
cer match’ as parts of temporal expressions in case
they co-occur with a temporal expression.

For the items on the list no provisions were
made for handling any kind of spelling variation,
with the single exception of a small group of
words (including ’s morgens ‘in the morning’, ’s
middags ‘in the afternoon’ and ’s avonds ‘in the
evening’) which use in their standard spelling the
archaic ’s and abbreviations. As many authors
of tweets tend to spell these words as smorgens,
smiddags and savonds we decided to include these
forms as well.

The items on the list that were obtained through
generation include temporal expressions such as
over 3 dagen ‘in 2 days’, nog 5 minuten ‘another
5 minutes’, but also fixed temporal expressions
such as clock times.11 The rules handle frequently
observed variations in their notation, for example
drie uur ‘three o’clock’ may be written in full or
as 3:00, 3:00 uur, 3 u, 15.00, etc.

Table 1 shows example temporal expression es-
timates and applicable rules. The median estima-
tions are mostly lower than the mean estimations.
The distribution of the time to event (TTE) for
a single temporal expression often appears to be
skewed towards lower values. The final column
of the table displays the applicable rules. The first
six rules subtract the time the tweet was posted
(TT) from an average marker point, heuristically
determined, such as ‘today 20.00’ (i.e. 8 pm) for
vanavond ‘tonight’. The second and third rules
from below state a TTE directly, again heuristi-
cally set – over 2 uur ‘in 2 hours’ is directly trans-
lated to a TTE of 2.

3.3 Evaluation and Baselines

Our approach to TTE estimation makes use of
all temporal expressions in our temporal expres-
sion list that are found to occur in the tweets. A

10Note that nog does occur on the list as part of various
multiword expressions. Examples are nog twee dagen ‘an-
other two days’ and nog 10 min ‘10 more minutes’.

11Dates are presently not covered by our rules but will be
added in future.

11



Temporal Expression Gloss Mean TTE Median TTE Rule
vandaag today 5.63 3.09 today 15:00 - TT h
vanavond tonight 8.40 4.78 today 20:00 - TT h
morgen tomorrow 20.35 18.54 tomorrow 15:00 - TT h
zondag Sunday 72.99 67.85 Sunday 15:00 - TT h
vandaag 12.30 today 12.20 2.90 2.75 today 12:30 - TT h
om 16.30 at 16.30 1.28 1.36 today 16:30 - TT h
over 2 uur in 2 hours 6.78 1.97 2 h
nog minder dan 1 u within 1 h 21.43 0.88 1 h
in het weekend during the weekend 90.58 91.70 No Rule

Table 1: Examples of temporal expressions and their mean and median TTE estimation from training
data. The final column lists the applicable rule, if any. Rules make use of the time of posting (Tweet
Time, TT).

match may be for a single item in the list (e.g.
zondag ‘Sunday’) or any combination of items
(e.g. zondagmiddag, om 14.30 uur, ‘Sunday af-
ternoon’, ‘at 2.30 pm’). There can be other words
in between these expressions. We consider the
longest match, from left to right, in case we en-
counter any overlap.

The experiment adopts a leave-one-out cross-
validation setup. Each iteration uses all tweets
from 59 events as training data. All tweets from
the single held-out event are used as test set.

In the FIN data set there are 42,396 tweets with
at least one temporal expression, in the NFI data
set this is the case for 27,610 tweets. The number
of tweets per event ranges from 66 to 7,152 (me-
dian: 402.5; mean 706.6) for the FIN data set and
from 41 to 3,936 (median 258; mean 460.1) for the
NFI data set.

We calculate the TTE estimations for every
tweet that contains at least one of the temporal ex-
pression or a combination in the test set. The esti-
mations for the test set are obtained as follows:

1. For each match (a single temporal expression
or a combination of temporal expressions)
the mean or median value for TTE is used
that was learned from the training set;

2. Temporal expressions that denote an exact
amount of time are interpreted by means of
rules that we henceforth refer to as Exact
rules. This applies for example to tempo-
ral expressions answering to patterns such as
over N {minuut | minuten | kwartier | uur |
uren | dag | dagen | week} ‘in N {minute |
minutes | quarter of an hour | hour | hours |
day | days |week}’. Here the TTE is assumed

to be the same as the N minutes, days or
whatever is mentioned. The rules take prece-
dence over the mean estimates learned from
the training set;

3. A second set of rules, referred to as the Dy-
namic rules, is used to calculate the TTE dy-
namically, using the temporal expression and
the tweet’s time stamp. These rules apply
to instances such as zondagmiddag om 3 uur
‘Sunday afternoon at 3 p.m.’. Here we as-
sume that this is a future time reference on the
basis of the fact that the tweets were posted
prior to the event. With temporal expressions
that are underspecified in that they do not pro-
vide a specific point in time (hour), we pos-
tulate a particular time of day. For exam-
ple, vandaag ‘today’ is understood as ‘today
at 3 p.m., vanavond ‘this evening’ as ’this
evening at 8 p.m. and morgenochtend ‘to-
morrow morning’ as ‘tomorrow morning at
10 a.m.’. Again, as was the case with the first
set of rules, these rules take precedence over
the mean or median estimates learned from
the training data.

The results for the estimated TTE are evaluated
in terms of the absolute error, i.e. the absolute dif-
ference in hours between the estimated TTE and
the actual remaining time to the event.

We established two naive baselines: the mean
and median TTE measured over all tweets of FIN
and NFI datasets. These baselines reflect a best
guess when no information is available other than
tweet count and TTE of each tweet. The mean
TTE is 22.82 hours, and the median TTE is 3.63
hours before an event. The low values of the

12



baselines, especially the low median, reveal the
skewedness of the data: most tweets referring to
a soccer event are posted in the hours before the
event.

4 Results

Table 2 lists the overall mean absolute error (in
number of hours) for the different variants. The
results are reported separately for each of the two
data sets (FIN and NFI) and for both sets aggre-
gated (FIN+NFI). For each of these three variants,
the table lists the mean absolute error when only
the basic data-driven TTE estimations are used
(‘Basic’), when the Exact rules are added (‘+Ex.’),
when the Dynamic rules are added (‘+Dyn’), and
when both types of rules are added. The coverage
of the combination (i.e. the number of tweets that
match the expressions and the rules) is listed in the
bottom row of the table.

A number of observations can be made. First,
all training methods perform substantially better
than the two baselines in all conditions. Second,
the TTE training method using the median as esti-
mation produces estimations that are about 1 hour
more accurate than the mean-based estimations.

Third, adding Dynamic rules has a larger pos-
itive effect on prediction error than adding Ex-
act rules. The bottom row in the table indicates
that the rules do not increase the coverage of the
method substantially. When taken together and
added to the basic TTE estimation, the Dynamic
and Exact rules do improve over the Basic estima-
tion by two to three hours.

Finally, although the differences are small, Ta-
ble 2 reveals that training on hashtag-final tweets
(FIN) produces slightly better overall results (7.62
hours off at best) than training on hashtag-non-
final tweets (8.50 hours off) or the combination
(7.99 hours off), despite the fact that the training
set is smaller than that of the combination.

In the remainder of this section we report on
systems that use all expressions and Exact and Dy-
namic rules.

Whereas Table 2 displays the overall mean ab-
solute errors of the different variants, Figure 1 dis-
plays the results in terms of mean absolute error at
different points in time before the event, averaged
over periods of one hour, for the two baselines and
the FIN+NFI variant with the two training meth-
ods (i.e. taking the mean versus the median of the
observed TTEs for a particular temporal expres-

sion). In contrast to Table 2, in which only a mild
difference could be observed between the median
and mean variants of training, the figure shows a
substantial difference. The estimations of the me-
dian training variant are considerably more accu-
rate than the mean variant up to 24 hours before
the event, after which the mean variant scores bet-
ter. By virtue of the fact that the data is skewed
(most tweets are posted within a few hours before
the event) the two methods attain a similar overall
mean absolute error, but it is clear that the median
variant produces considerably more accurate pre-
dictions when the event is still more than a day
away.

While Figure 1 provides insight into the ef-
fect of median versus mean-based training with
the combined FIN+NFI dataset, we do not know
whether training on either of the two subsets is
advantageous at different points in time. Table 3
shows the mean absolute error of systems trained
with the median variant on the two subsets of
tweets, FIN and NFI, as well as the combination
FIN+NFI, split into nine time ranges. Interest-
ingly, the combination does not produce the lowest
errors close to the event. However, when the event
is 24 hours away or more, both the FIN and NFI
systems generate increasingly large errors, while
the FIN+NFI system continues to make quite ac-
curate predictions, remaining under 10 hours off
even for the longest TTEs, confirming what we al-
ready observed in Figure 1.

TTE range (h) FIN NFI FIN+NFI
0 2.58 3.07 8.51
1–4 2.38 2.64 8.71
5–8 3.02 3.08 8.94
9–12 5.20 5.47 6.57
13–24 5.63 5.54 6.09
25–48 13.14 15.59 5.81
49–96 17.20 20.72 6.93
97–144 30.38 41.18 6.97
> 144 55.45 70.08 9.41

Table 3: Mean Absolute Error for the FIN, NFI,
and FIN+NFI systems in different TTE ranges.

5 Analysis

One of the results observed in Table 2 was the
relatively limited role of Exact rules, which were
intended to deal with exact temporal expressions
such as nog 5 minuten ‘5 more minutes’ and over

13



System FIN NFI FIN+NFI
Basic +Ex. +Dyn. +Both Basic +Ex. +Dyn. +Both Basic +Ex. +Dyn. +Both

Baseline Median 21.09 21.07 21.16 21.14 18.67 18.72 18.79 18.84 20.20 20.20 20.27 20.27
Baseline Mean 27.29 27.29 27.31 27.31 25.49 25.50 25.53 25.55 26.61 26.60 26.63 26.62
Training Median 10.38 10.28 7.68 7.62 11.09 11.04 8.65 8.50 10.61 10.54 8.03 7.99
Training Mean 11.62 11.12 8.73 8.29 12.43 11.99 9.53 9.16 11.95 11.50 9.16 8.76
Coverage 31,221 31,723 32.240 32,740 18,848 19,176 19,734 20,061 52,186 52,919 53,887 54,617

Table 2: Overall Mean Absolute Error for each method: difference in hours between the estimated time
to event and the actual time to event, computed separately for the FIN and NFI subsets, and for the
combination. For all variants a count of the number of matches is listed in the bottom row.

een uur ‘in one hour’. This can be explained by
the fact that as long as the temporal expression is
related to the event we are targeting, the point in
time is denoted exactly by the temporal expression
and the estimation obtained from the training data
(the ‘Basic’ performance) will already be accurate,
leaving no room for the rules to improve on this.
The rules that deal with dynamic temporal expres-
sions, on the other hand, have quite some impact.

As was explained in Section 3.2 our list of tem-
poral expressions was a gross list, including items
that were unlikely to occur in our present data. In
all we observed 770 of the 53,000 items listed,
955 clock time rule matches, and 764 time ex-
pressions which contain number of days, hours,
minutes etc. The temporal expressions observed
most frequently in our data are:12 vandaag ‘today’
(10,037), zondag ‘Sunday’ (6,840), vanavond
‘tonight’ (5167), straks ‘later on’ (5,108), van-
middag ‘this afternoon’ (4,331), matchday ‘match
day’ (2,803), volgende week ‘next week’ (1,480)
and zometeen ‘in a minute’ (1,405).

Given the skewed distribution of tweets over the
eight days prior to the event, it is not surprising to
find that nearly all of the most frequent items refer
to points in time within close range of the event.
Apart from nu ‘now’, all of these are somewhat
vague about the exact point in time. There are,
however, numerous items such as om 12:30 uur
‘at half past one’ and over ongeveer 45 minuten
‘in about 45 minutes’) which are very specific and
therefore tend to appear with middle to low fre-
quencies.13 And while it is possible to state an
exact point in time even when the event is in the
more distant future, we find that there is a clear

12The observed frequencies can be found between brack-
ets.

13While an expression such as om 12:30 uur has a fre-
quency of 116, nog maar 8 uur en 35 minuten ‘only 8 hours
and 35 minutes from now’ has a frequency of 1.

tendency to use underspecified temporal expres-
sions as the event is still some time away. Thus,
rather than volgende week zondag om 14.30 uur
‘next week Sunday at 2.30 p.m.’ just volgende
week is used, which makes it harder to estimate
the time to event.

Closer inspection of some of the temporal
expressions which yielded large absolute errors
suggests that these may be items that refer to
subevents rather than the main event (i.e. the
match) we are targeting. Examples are eerst ‘first’,
daarna ‘then’, vervolgens ‘next’, and voordat ‘be-
fore’.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

We have presented a method for the estimation of
the TTE from single tweets referring to a future
event. In a case study with Dutch soccer matches,
we showed that estimations can be as accurate as
about eight hours off, averaged over a time win-
dow of eight days. There is some variance in
the 60 events on which we tested in a leave-one-
out validation setup: errors ranged between 4 and
13 hours, plus one exceptionally badly predicted
event with a 34-hour error.

The best system is able to stay within 10 hours
of prediction error in the full eight-day window.
This best system uses a large set of hand-designed
temporal expressions that in a training phase have
each been linked to a median TTE with which
they occur in a training set. Together with these
data-driven TTE estimates, the system uses a set
of rules that match on exact and indirect time ref-
erences. In a comparative experiment we showed
that this combination worked better than only hav-
ing the data-driven estimations.

We then tested whether it was more profitable
to train on tweets that had the event hashtag at the
end, as this is presumed to be more likely a meta-

14



Figure 1: Curves showing the absolute error (in hours) in estimating the time to event over an 8-day
period (-192 to 0 hours) prior to the event. The two baselines are compared to the TTE estimation
methods using the mean and median variant.

tag, and thus a more reliable clue that the tweet
is about the event than when the hashtag is not
in final position. Indeed we find that the overall
predictions are more accurate, but only in the fi-
nal hours before the event (when most tweets are
posted). 24 hours and earlier before the event it
turns out to be better to train both on hashtag-final
and hashtag-non-final tweets.

Finally, we observed that the two variants of
our method of estimating TTEs for single tempo-
ral expressions, taking the mean or the median,
leads to dramatically different results, especially
when the event is still a few days away—when
an accurate time to event is actually desirable.
The median-based estimations, which are gener-
ally smaller than the mean-based estimations, lead
to a system that largely stays under 10 hours of
error.

Our study has a number of logical extensions
into future research. First, our method is not
bound to a single type of event, although we tested
it in a controlled setting. With experiments on
tweet streams related to different types of events
the general applicability of the method could be
tested: can we use the trained TTE estimations

from our current study, or would we need to re-
train per event type?

Second, we hardcoded a limited number of fre-
quent spelling variations, where it would be a
more generic solution to rely on a more system-
atic spelling normalization preprocessing step.

Third, so far we did not focus on determining
the relevance of temporal expressions in case there
are several time expressions in a single message;
we treated all occurred temporal expressions as
equally contributing to the estimation. Identifying
which temporal expressions are relevant in a sin-
gle message is studied by Kanhabua et al. (2012).

Finally, our method is limited to temporal ex-
pressions. For estimating the time to event on
the basis of tweets that do not contain tempo-
ral expressions, we could benefit from term-based
approaches that consider any word or word n-
gram as potentially predictive (Hürriyetoglu et al.,
2013).

Acknowledgment

This research was supported by the Dutch na-
tional programme COMMIT as part of the Infiniti
project.

15



References
Ricardo Baeza Yates. 2005. Searching the future. In

In ACM SIGIR Workshop on Mathematical/Formal
Methods for Information Retrieval (MF/IR 2005).

Hila Becker, Dan Iter, Mor Naaman, and Luis Gravano.
2012. Identifying content for planned events across
social media sites. In Proceedings of the fifth ACM
International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining, WSDM ’12, pages 533–542, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

Gaël Dias, Ricardo Campos, and Alı́pio Jorge. 2011.
Future retrieval: What does the future talk about? In
In Proceedings SIGIR2011 Workshop on Enriching
Information Retrieval (ENIR2011).

Ali Hürriyetoglu, Florian Kunneman, and Antal
van den Bosch. 2013. Estimating the time between
twitter messages and future events. In DIR, pages
20–23.

Adam Jatowt and Ching-man Au Yeung. 2011. Ex-
tracting collective expectations about the future from
large text collections. In Proceedings of the 20th
ACM International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, CIKM ’11, pages 1259–
1264, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Nattiya Kanhabua, Sara Romano, and Avaré Stewart.
2012. Identifying relevant temporal expressions for
real-world events. In Proceedings of The SIGIR
2012 Workshop on Time-aware Information Access,
Portland, OR.

Hideki Kawai, Adam Jatowt, Katsumi Tanaka, Kazuo
Kunieda, and Keiji Yamada. 2010. Chronoseeker:
Search engine for future and past events. In Pro-
ceedings of the 4th International Conference on
Uniquitous Information Management and Commu-
nication, ICUIMC ’10, pages 25:1–25:10, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Florian A Kunneman and Antal van den Bosch. 2012.
Leveraging unscheduled event prediction through
mining scheduled event tweets. BNAIC 2012 The
24th Benelux Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
page 147.

Taichi Noro, Takashi Inui, Hiroya Takamura, and Man-
abu Okumura. 2006. Time period identification of
events in text. In Proceedings of the 21st Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics and
the 44th annual meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, ACL-44, pages 1153–1160,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Kira Radinsky, Sagie Davidovich, and Shaul
Markovitch. 2012. Learning causality for
news events prediction. In Proceedings of the
21st International Conference on World Wide Web,
WWW ’12, pages 909–918, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.

Alan Ritter, Oren Etzioni Mausam, and Sam Clark.
2012. Open domain event extraction from twitter.
In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD Inter-
national Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data mining, KDD ’12, pages 1104–1112, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Takeshi Sakaki, Makoto Okazaki, and Yutaka Matsuo.
2010. Earthquake shakes twitter users: Real-time
event detection by social sensors. In Proceedings
of the 19th International Conference on World Wide
Web, pages 851–860. ACM.

Jannik Strötgen and Michael Gertz. 2013. Multilin-
gual and Cross-domain Temporal Tagging. Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, 47(2):269–298,
Jun.

Hannah Tops, Antal van den Bosch, and Florian Kun-
neman. 2013. Predicting time-to-event from twitter
messages. BNAIC 2013 The 24th Benelux Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, pages 207–2014.

Wouter Weerkamp and Maarten De Rijke. 2012. Ac-
tivity prediction: A twitter-based exploration. In
Proceedings of the SIGIR 2012 Workshop on Time-
aware Information Access, TAIA-2012, August.

Andrea Zielinski, Ulrich Bügel, L. Middleton, S. E.
Middleton, L. Tokarchuk, K. Watson, and F. Chaves.
2012. Multilingual analysis of twitter news in sup-
port of mass emergency events. In A. Abbasi and
N. Giesen, editors, EGU General Assembly Confer-
ence Abstracts, volume 14 of EGU General Assem-
bly Conference Abstracts, pages 8085+, April.

16


