



















































TBI-Doc: Generating Patient  Clinician Reports from Brain Imaging Data


Proceedings of the 8th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 143–146,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19-21 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

TBI-Doc: Generating Patient & Clinician Reports from Brain Imaging
Data

Pamela Jordan1, Nancy L. Green2, Christopher Thomas3, Susan Holm1
Learning Research & Development Center, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA1

Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina Greensboro, Greensboro, NC2

Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA3

pjordan@pitt.edu, nlgreen@uncg.edu, clt29@pitt.edu,
susan.holm@gmail.com

Abstract

The TBI-Doc prototype demonstrates the
feasibility of automatically producing
draft case reports for a new brain imaging
technology, High Definition Fiber Track-
ing (HDFT). Here we describe the ontol-
ogy for the HDFT domain, the system ar-
chitecture and our goals for future research
and development.

1 Introduction

The goal of TBI-Doc is to automatically produce
a draft of a traumatic brain injury (TBI) case re-
port similar to existing expert-authored reports
that interpret the results of a High Definition Fiber
tracking (HDFT) procedure (Shin et al., 2012).
HDFT is a new, revolutionary technology for ren-
dering detailed images of the brain and is expected
to have significant implications for TBI patients’
prognosis and treatment. The typical patient for
whom HDFT is indicated has suffered multiple
impacts to the head over an extended period of
time. Although these patients suffer significant
symptoms, in most cases current imaging tools
(e.g. MRI and CT) are unable to pinpoint the lo-
cations of the injuries, much less any evidence of
TBI. Fortunately, HDFT is providing a wealth of
details for the patient and clinician about the TBI.
Unfortunately, the 25 page, expert-generated re-
port takes up to 10 hours of effort to produce once
the HDFT procedure is completed: part of the time
is analysis and part is report writing.

Accordingly, TBI-Doc’s success will be mea-
sured in terms of reducing the amount of human
time involved in creating the final report presented
to the patient and clinicians. In this paper we de-
scribe the TBI-Doc prototype which demonstrates
the feasibility of the system. The main contribu-
tion at this stage of development and the focus of
this paper is the ontology necessary for generating

the reports and the system architecture. We con-
clude with our goals for future research and devel-
opment.

2 The HDFT Results and
Expert-Authored Case Reports

Currently HDFT produces data on 13 brain tracts.
One such tract, which we focused on for the
TBI-Doc prototype, is the superior longitudinal
fasciculus (SLF) which connects regions of the
frontal lobe with the parietal and temporal lobes
(Fernandez-Miranda et al., 2012). The brain re-
gions that a tract connects and the areas of the tract
that appear abnormal suggest the brain functions
that may be impacted (Shin et al., 2012).

To identify abnormalities, the imaging process
mathematically compares the volume of the pa-
tient’s right and left hemisphere for a particu-
lar tract (Shin et al., 2012) and looks for unex-
pected asymmetries.1 The volume is also com-
pared against the HDFT data of a population of
individuals who have not suffered any TBI. Fi-
nally, the analyst also uses his/her knowledge of
the anatomy of a healthy brain to identify abnor-
malities and can further characterize the density,
distribution and connectivity of the fibers of the
tract by visually examining a representation of it,
as shown within Figure 1 for the fronto-occiptal
fasciculus tract. As part of the reporting, the an-
alyst describes the above comparisons, marks up
the visual representations of the tract that illustrate
his/her observations and includes graphs that rep-
resent the volume comparisons.

Because HDFT is new, currently, there are rel-
atively few ideal expert-generated case reports
upon which to model TBI-Doc’s reports. When
we began the development of TBI-Doc, an ana-
lyst had written 29 case reports but only 2-3 of
these reports were considered model final reports.

1Some tracts normally are expected to have some asym-
metries between hemispheres.

143



Figure 1: Tract Report Excerpt: shows HDFT im-
ages of fibers representing the FOF Tract

The content and format of the final case report is
continuing to evolve as the primary physician and
nurse on the HDFT team provide feedback on the
type of report they believe will be most benefi-
cial. As of yet, there has been no feedback from
patients or other types of treating clinicians (e.g.
speech therapists, physical therapists, etc.) on the
content and format that they find most helpful.

For the prototype we focused on modeling the
tract section of one of the case reports but used
the remaining reports for determining the ontol-
ogy. An excerpt of the SLF tract section of that
model case report is shown in Figure 2.

3 The TBI-Doc System Design

Given the existing analyst workflow, we designed
the TBI-Doc system process (see Figure 3) as fol-
lows; after interpreting and manually annotating
HDFT images of tracts, and creating and annotat-

Figure 2: Expert Observation being Modeled

ing data graphics that show quantitative HDFT re-
sults, the analyst uses TBI-Doc’s graphical user in-
terface (GUI) to provide his qualitative evaluation
of the HDFT results and preferences for tailoring
the report. Using the analyst’s specifications pro-
vided through the TBI-Doc GUI and the annotated
tract images and data graphics, TBI-Doc automat-
ically produces a first draft of the case report. The
draft is then manually reviewed and edited by the
analyst before delivery. The case report is deliv-
ered to the clients as a file that can be printed on
paper and viewed on a tablet.

The architecture of TBI-Doc (shown by the re-
mainder of Figure 3) follows the standard NLG
pipeline (Reiter et al., 2000) and is similar to the
architecture of the healthcare-related systems de-
scribed in (Green et al., 2011; Hunter et al., 2012;
Scott et al., 2013). The TBI-Doc GUI represents
the TBI-Doc ontology and its columns (an excerpt
is shown in Table 1) cue the analyst to enter his/her
qualitative judgments about the data for a tract
at the region level, which is the lowest judgment
level as it describes the endpoints of subsections of
a tract, bundles between regions, hemisphere level
and overall. The ontology was derived by analyz-
ing existing reports to understand what is being de-
scribed across all of the reports and by interview-
ing HDFT team members. The ontology identi-
fies states (e.g. measures), relations (e.g. similar

Figure 3: The TBI-Doc Process

144



Table 1: Example Input for SLF Tract Assessment

Tract SPARSE
Assessment

Tract hemi- Area Area Second Measure Evaluation Kind of
sphere Type Name End Point Comparison

SLF left OverallTract tract density very sparse healthy
SLF left BundleBtwnRegions DLPFC pTemporal density sparse right
SLF left BundleBtwnRegions DLPFC pTemporal connectivity reduced right
SLF left SpecificRegion DLPFC connectivity little right
SLF left SpecificRegion pTemporal connectivity little right
SLF left SpecificRegion DLPFC density sparse right
SLF left SpecificRegion pTemporal density sparse right
SLF left BundleBtwnRegions DLPFC pParietal connectivity little right
SLF left BundleBtwnRegions DLPFC pParietal density sparse right
SLF right OverallTract tract density normal healthy
SLF right OverallTract tract density some sparse healthy

to), and entities (e.g. tract(s), regions(s), connec-
tion(s), measurements such as density) relevant to
the HDFT reporting domain.

When the qualitative judgment entries or up-
dates are complete, the analyst requests that a re-
port be generated. The TBI-Doc Document Plan-
ner (logic implemented in Java) selects appro-
priate content from the database using the TBI-
Doc Data Interface and adds messages constructed
from that content as leaves of the Document Plan.
For the parts of the report that are not dependent
on values in the database, the Document Planner
also adds English (canned) text as leaves of the
Document Plan. The Document Planner is a set of
rules for what content to select and how to order
that content. For example, an abbreviated excerpt
of the content selection rules follow.

GENERATETRACTSECTION(tract, patientId)
GETTRACTSTATUS(tract,patientId)
If status=reduced then

GETTRACTFUNCTION(tract)
GENTRACTOBSERVATION(tract,patientId)

GENTRACTOBSERVATION(tract, patientId)
If Evaluation=reduced & TractOverall then

GENTRACTSUMMARYSENTENCE
ElsIf hemi not both & AreaType=OverallTract then

GENHEMISPHERESUMMARYSENTENCE
regions=

GATHERREGIONS(SpecificRegion,BundleBtwnRegions)
orderedRegions=ORDERREGIONS(regions)
For region in orderedRegions do

GENSENTENCE(region)

While there is often just a single sentence for a
tract or hemisphere summary, region descriptions
are generally multi-sentential. Currently the or-
derRegions function is designed as a default set
of guidelines for ordering the region descriptions.
The output of the Document Plan is then a series
of predicates that represent the content to be real-

ized. Some content, such as getTractFunction, is
static and does not pass through the pipeline to the
Microplanner.

The TBI-Doc Microplanner transforms the
predicates output from the Document Plan into
SimpleNLG sentence specifications (in Java) via
a set of mapping rules. The Microplanner selects
mapping rules based on the predicates to be real-
ized and any context variables that are available.
The mapping rules indicate what syntactic struc-
tures to create for a predicate and where to attach
them in the sentence being built. Currently, for
this demonstration prototype we have not yet ad-
dressed lexical realization and sentence aggrega-
tion. In the final step of the pipeline, SimpleNLG
(Gatt and Reiter, 2009) renders the sentence spec-
ifications as English sentences. Once the pipeline
is complete, the TBI-Doc Formatter combines all
the sentences from SimpleNLG and the canned
text into an HTML document which can then be
displayed by a browser and edited via an XML ed-
itor.

Rather than implementing each of the above
steps one-by-one to cover all possible cases, each
step was implemented to focus on replicating the
observation section of one case report. This al-
lowed us to perform an end-to-end demonstration
of the feasibility of this design. Thus many of
the rules described above are incomplete for al-
ternative pathways. TBI-Doc can currently gen-
erate from input data an observation section such
as the one shown below. The judgments entered
on behalf of the analyst for this demonstration
are shown in Table 1 and represent what was ex-
pressed in the expert-written observations section
in Figure 2:

145



Observations Left SLF is particularly sparse
throughout the tract. The left tract from the
DLPFC to the pTemporal region when com-
pared to the right has a sparse density and a re-
duced connectivity. In particular little connectiv-
ity and sparse density are observed in the DLPFC
and pTemporal regions as well as between the
DLPFC and pParietal regions on the left. Overall
the right tract appears similar to a healthy tract
but still appears somewhat sparse.

4 Future Work

The current TBI-Doc is a demonstration of the fea-
sibility of generating case reports and the main
contribution of the work thus far has been to de-
fine an ontology for the HDFT domain. However,
because HDFT is a new technology that is continu-
ing to be improved rapidly and the reporting goals
are still evolving, the ontology is not yet complete.
Because the ontology drives the rest of the system,
it follows that the rest of the system components
still need more development.

For the demonstration we focused on reporting
on one of the 13 existing types of brain tracts.
While we anticipate that the ontology will gener-
alize well to the other tract types, each tract type
may introduce some extensions to the ontology. In
addition the HDFT developers anticipate provid-
ing data on additional tract types over time.

Since knowledge acquisition is still ongoing,
the Document Planner logic is still very shallow.
As a result, the demonstration version of TBI-
Doc is currently limited to reacting to descriptor
changes and does not yet alter the document struc-
ture or intelligently alter content selection. The
Microplanner currently does some context check-
ing to select the appropriate set of transforma-
tion rules to apply but this will need expansion
as the Document Planner becomes more complete.
More specifically, the sentence structure needs to
vary depending on the choices made by the Doc-
ument Planner. In addition, lexical selection in
which internal abbreviations are mapped to user
preferred forms needs more work (e.g. depending
on user preferences, DLPFC could map to dorso-
lateral prefrontal cortex and pParietal to posterior
Parietal).

Our longer term interest is to explore ways
to appropriately adapt the reports for different
clients. A patient for whom the HDFT results indi-
cate cognitive processing issues may find a differ-
ent style of report and reading level more suitable
than a supporting family member or a treating clin-
ician. Different treating clinicians may prefer re-

ports with different content selected. For example,
a speech therapist may prefer a report that focuses
on the injuries that relate to a patient’s speech and
language goals, while a sleep specialist may prefer
a different focus.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by US Army Com-
bat Casualty Care Research Program contracts
CDMRP PT110773 (W81XH-12-2-0140) & US
Army 12342013 (W81XWH-12-2-0319). We
thank Walter Schneider, Kevin Jarbo, Lauren Wa-
gener, Will Bird & the HDFT team for their exper-
tise and for involving us in their research.

References
Juan C Fernandez-Miranda, Sudhir Pathak, Johnathan

Engh, Kevin Jarbo, Timothy Verstynen, Fang-Cheng
Yeh, Yibao Wang, Arlan Mintz, Fernando Boada,
Walter Schneider, et al. 2012. High-definition fiber
tractography of the human brain: neuroanatomical
validation and neurosurgical applications. Neuro-
surgery, 71(2):430–453.

Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. Simplenlg: A re-
alisation engine for practical applications. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation, pages 90–93. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Nancy Green, Rachael Dwight, Kanyama Navoraphan,
and Brian Stadler. 2011. Natural language genera-
tion of biomedical argumentation for lay audiences.
Argument & Computation, 2(1):23–50.

James Hunter, Yvonne Freer, Albert Gatt, Ehud Reiter,
Somayajulu Sripada, and Cindy Sykes. 2012. Au-
tomatic generation of natural language nursing shift
summaries in neonatal intensive care: Bt-nurse. Ar-
tificial intelligence in medicine, 56(3):157–172.

Ehud Reiter, Robert Dale, and Zhiwei Feng. 2000.
Building natural language generation systems, vol-
ume 33. MIT Press.

Donia Scott, Catalina Hallett, and Rachel Fetti-
place. 2013. Data-to-text summarisation of pa-
tient records: Using computer-generated summaries
to access patient histories. Patient education and
counseling, 92(2):153–159.

Samuel S Shin, Timothy Verstynen, Sudhir Pathak,
Kevin Jarbo, Allison J Hricik, Megan Maserati,
Sue R Beers, Ava M Puccio, Fernando E Boada,
David O Okonkwo, and Walter Schneider. 2012.
High-definition fiber tracking for assessment of neu-
rological deficit in a case of traumatic brain injury:
finding, visualizing, and interpreting small sites of
damage: Case report. Journal of neurosurgery,
116(5):1062–1069.

146


