



















































Seeking Informativeness in Literature Based Discovery


Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2014), pages 112–117,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26-27 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Seeking Informativeness in Literature Based Discovery

Judita Preiss
University of Sheffield, Department of Computer Science

Regent Court, 211 Portobello
Sheffield S1 4DP, United Kingdom
j.preiss@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract

The continuously increasing number of
publications within the biomedical domain
has fuelled the creation of literature based
discovery (LBD) systems which identify
unconnected pieces of knowledge appear-
ing in separate literatures which can be
combined to make new discoveries. With-
out filtering, the amount of hidden knowl-
edge found is vast due to noise, making it
impractical for a researcher to examine, or
clinically evaluate, the potential discover-
ies. We present a number of filtering tech-
niques, including two which exploit the
LBD system itself rather than being based
on a statistical or manual examination of
document collections, and we demonstrate
usefulness via replication of known dis-
coveries.

1 Introduction and background

The number of publications in the biomedical do-
main has been observed to increase at a great rate,
making it impossible for one person to read all,
and thus potentially leaving knowledge hidden:
for example, Swanson (1986) found one publica-
tion mentioning a connection between Raynaud’s
Disease and blood viscosity while another pointed
out the effect of fish oil on blood viscosity, but
there was no publication making the connection
between fish oil and Raynaud’s Disease. Auto-
mated approaches to knowledge discovery often
set up the problem as outlined by Swanson; A be-
ing the source term (in this case Raynaud’s Dis-
ease), with a possible target term, C, being speci-
fied (fish oil) and any connections between them
form the linking, B, terms. If C is not speci-
fied, all possible hidden links from A are explored
and discovery is classified as open. If both A and
C terms are supplied, the discovery is closed and
only any linking, B, terms are being sought.

Independent of how a connection between an A
term and a B is defined (whether this is based on A
and B co-occurring in the same title, in the same
sentence or the same document, or some other
relation), an obvious difficulty is the amount of
data generated by a technique along these lines:
with no filtering, a great number of connections
will be made through terms such as clinical study
or patient, and, if not also linked through other
terms, these should be discarded. A number of
approaches to term reduction have been explored.

Swanson and Smalheiser (1999)’s knowledge
discovery system, Arrowsmith,1 contains an in-
creasing, currently 9,500 term (Swanson et al.,
2006), stoplist, created semi-automatically.2 Such
a stoplist is unlikely to be complete – the list
has grown from 5,000 (Swanson and Smalheiser,
1997) to 9,500 words (Swanson et al., 2006) and
is likely to keep increasing. Over fitting is po-
tentially an issue, in this case the list generated
has been criticized for being tuned for the original
Raynaud–fish oil discovery (Weeber et al., 2001).
A word based stoplist also does not take into ac-
count the potential ambiguity of terms: one sense
may be highly frequent and uninformative, guar-
anteeing it an appearance in the stoplist, while an-
other sense may be rare but highly informative.

Instead of using words directly, it is possible to
employ a (much smaller) controlled vocabulary:
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), consisting of
22,500 codes, are (mostly) manually assigned to
each document indexed in Medline – even though
multiple MeSH codes for a document are allowed,
restricting to this set greatly reduces dimensional-
ity. For example, Srinivasan (2004) uses MeSH
based topic profiles to connect A to topics C via
the most likely MeSH terms.

1Available at http://arrowsmith.psych.uic.
edu/arrowsmith_uic/index.html

2Note that only 365 words of this stoplist are publicly
available.

112



Keeping entire vocabularies is possible if topics
are limited, for example, Fleuren et al (2011) ex-
tract statistics regarding gene co-occurrence, and
restricts their hidden knowledge generation to bi-
ological mechanisms related to them.

Another difficulty in using word vocabularies is
the necessary identification of multiwords, Wee-
ber at al. (2001) avoid previously tried n-gram
techniques (e.g. (Gordon and Lindsay, 1996)) by
switching knowledge discovery to UMLS Concept
Unique Identifiers (CUIs). Using MetaMap (Rind-
flesch and Aronson, 1994) to assign CUIs to texts
discards non content words (CUIs only exist for
concepts), resolves ambiguity and deals with mul-
tiwords in one, thus reducing the number of terms
considered in later stages. Weeber et al. also ex-
ploit the broad subject categories that UMLS as-
signs to each CUI, which allow the authors to per-
form domain specific filtering to reduce dimen-
sionality. This they do on a per search basis, tun-
ing the filtering to the replication experiments pre-
sented.

Dimensionality reduction can also be performed
at the relation level. Swanson’s (1997) original
work deemed two terms connected if they both
appeared in the title of an abstract – titles were
thought to be the most informative, and descrip-
tive, part of each article. As the number of ab-
stracts explored during the knowledge discovery
process increased, and connections were extended
to whole abstracts (rather than titles only), the
amount of hidden knowledge generated increased
dramatically and with it did the need for term and
connection filtering.

Hristovski et al (2006) argue for filtering within
the relation definition – co-occurrence does not
provide any basis for a relation between two
terms, no underlying semantic reason, and thus, as
well as leading to many spurious links, it yields
no justification for a hidden connection that is
found. They extract subject-relation-object triples,
with relations such as treats or affects forming
their UMLS concept relations, leading to a much
smaller number of (more accurate) relations to de-
rive hidden knowledge from.

While re-ranking (placing the most ‘useful’
links at the top of the list) the resulting hidden
knowledge is clearly valuable, removing terms
from consideration prior to identifying hidden
knowledge will reduce the computational load
as well as avoid noisy hidden knowledge being

produced and possibly accidentally being highly
ranked.

We explore a number of filtering approaches in-
cluding two novel techniques which can be inte-
grated into any method designed using the Swan-
son framework, and we compare these against
previously explored filtering methods. Section 2
outlines our knowledge discovery approach, Sec-
tion 3 presents a number of filtering approaches
with Section 4 discussing results based on repli-
cation of existing knowledge and Section 5 draws
our conclusions.

2 Knowledge discovery system

There are two main components which define
an LBD system created following the Swanson
framework: the terms and the relations. Based on
arguments presented in Section 1, our system em-
ploys UMLS CUIs as produced by SemRep (Rind-
flesch and Fiszman, 2003), a natural language pro-
cessing system which identifies semantic relations
in biomedical text.3

SemRep extracts relation triples from text by
running a set of rules over the output of an under-
specified parser. The rules, such as the mapping
of treatment to TREATS, map syntactic indicators
to predicates in the Semantic Network. Further re-
strictions are imposed regarding the permissibility
of arguments, the viability of the given proposi-
tions, and other syntactic constraints, resulting in
relations such as

• Epoprostenol TREATS Raynaud Phenomenon

• blood rheology DIAGNOSES Raynaud Disease

Each triple is also output with the corresponding
CUIs.

All 29 non negative relations were extracted
(such as AFFECTS, ASSOCIATED WITH, INTER-
ACTS WITH, . . . ), while negative relations (such
as NEG AFFECTS, NEG ASSOCIATED WITH,
NEG INTERACTS WITH, . . . ) were dropped. The
extracted relations form the connections between
CUIs: i.e., the set of linking CUIs B is created
by following all SemRep links from the CUI A,
which lead to C through another SemRep relation.

3In this work, the SemRep annotated Medline data,
database semmedVER24 (processed up to November 2013)
run over 23,319,737 citations to yield 68,000,470 predica-
tions, was downloaded from http://skr3.nlm.nih.
gov and used throughout.

113



3 Filtering approaches

While employing CUIs (rather than words) elimi-
nates non content words (thus immediately reduc-
ing noise), it does not eliminate CUIs correspond-
ing to patient, week, statement . . . We present, and
in Section 4 evaluate (individually and in combi-
nation), four filtering approaches of which two are,
to our knowledge, completely novel.

3.1 Synonyms
While not a filtering method under the usual def-
inition, the identification of synonym CUIs and
collapsing thereof results in the reduction of the
number of CUIs being used (i.e. the technique fil-
ters out some CUIs).

A manual examination of the documents con-
taining CUI C0034734, Raynaud Disease, re-
vealed that some of the expected connections were
missing and were linked to CUI C0034735, Ray-
naud Phenomenon, instead. The resulting hid-
den knowledge is greatly affected by the particu-
lar CUI chosen as the source term A, yet in this
case, the two CUIs are synonymous. The MR-
REL related concepts file within UMLS contains
pairs of CUIs within related relationships, includ-
ing the SY (source asserted synonymy) relation-
ship4, and CUIs C0034734 and C0034735 appear
in the SY relationship in this list. Identifying con-
cepts within the SY relationship has the following
advantages:

• Merging such synonyms into classes will al-
low the retrieval of more hidden knowledge if
the multiple synonymous CUIs correspond to
the start point, A (as in the case of Raynaud
Disease).

• There will be potentially more hidden knowl-
edge created if a multiclass CUI is a linking
term (as A connected to C0034734 and C
connected to C0034735 would not have been
found to be connected if these were the only
potential overlap).

• Synonymous hidden knowledge (and linking
terms) will merge, reducing the amount of
knowledge (and terms) to manually explore.

Merging synonyms into single CUI classes re-
duces the 561,155 CUIs present in UMLS to
540,440 CUI classes.5

4Due to the version of SemRep files used, UMLS 2013AA
is employed throughout.

5Note that other MRREL related relationships were ex-

3.2 Semantic types
The UMLS Semantic Network consists of 133 se-
mantic types, a type of subject category, which is
assigned to each CUI. Many of these categories
are clearly unhelpful for knowledge discovery (for
example, geographic area or language), and 70
semantic types are manually selected for removal
(by examining the basic information about the re-
lation, as well as the structure of the network and
the CUIs assigned each semantic type). This re-
moves a further 121,284 CUIs.

3.3 Discarding common linking terms
In some cases, a given CUI is clearly too general
to be a useful linking term, but its semantic type
contains more specific CUIs which should not be
removed. Restricting semantic type filtering based
on the depth within the hierarchy is also not a vi-
able option, as UMLS is composed of different
hierarchies, each with a different level of granu-
larity and establishing an overall threshold would
likely include general terms for some while dis-
carding crucial terms for others. Therefore another
approach is needed for these CUIs.

Along the lines of Swanson et al (2006), a sto-
plist can be built to contain such terms, without
over-training for a particular discovery and with-
out the need for manual intervention: we hypoth-
esize that any CUIs which are linking terms more
often than others can effectively form a stoplist.

The creation of this stoplist can be performed
iteratively:

1. Start with an empty stoplist set S.

2. Create hidden knowledge based on SemRep
connections between CUIs, removing any
connections to CUIs in set S (the hidden
knowledge is acquired from Medline articles
published between 1865 and 2000).

3. Randomly select 10,000 hidden knowledge
pairs, identify their linking CUIs, and add
any linking CUIs appearing in more than
threshold of pairs to S (the value of thresh-
old needs to be empirically determined).

4. If Step 3 increased the size of S, return to
Step 2.

Note that since the training set is not designed for
any particular discovery, this should not result in
an over trained stoplist.

plored, but completing cycles lead to multiple extremely large
equivalence classes.

114



3.4 Breaking high frequency connections

The creation of a stoplist will always suffer from
omissions and inclusions of CUIs that should not
be filtered out in every instance. The last approach
is based on a slightly different underlying idea: in-
stead of finding frequently appearing terms, this
approach bases its decisions on the number of
terms a given term is connected to.

Two CUIs A and B are deemed connected if a
(non negative) SemRep relation exists which links
them. If A corresponds to a term such as study
or patient, it is expected to be connected to a large
number of CUIs. We hypothesize that terms which
are so highly connected are likely to be relatively
general terms, and so uninformative linking terms.

This gives rise to the following filtering options:

1. Break (discard) all connections to CUI A
when the C(A) > threshold.

2. Discard the connection between CUIs A and
B when min(C(A), C(B)) > threshold.

(Where C(A) represents the number of CUIs
linked to A, and the threshold needs to be empiri-
cally determined.)

Method 1 effectively forms a stoplist of highly
connected CUIs, but method 2 is different: only
connections satisfying the condition are broken
while A remains under consideration. This allows
filtering method 2 to leave a frequently connected
term to be a linking term for a rare term (unlike
method 1, which would discard such a term).

4 Results

Swanson’s original discoveries (Swanson, 1986;
Swanson, 1988) were verified through clinical tri-
als and evaluation of LBD systems often involves
replication of these discoveries (Gordon and Lind-
say, 1996; Weeber et al., 2001). From literature,
we identify seven separate discoveries to replicate
(presented with the labels used in Table 1):

RD: Raynaud disease and fish oil (Swanson,
1986).

Arg: Somatomedin C and arginine (Swanson,
1990).

Mg: Migraine disorders and magnesium (Hu et
al., 2006).

ND: Magnesium deficiency and neurologic dis-
ease (Smalheiser and Swanson, 1994).

INN: Alzheimer’s and indomethacin (Smalheiser
and Swanson, 1996a).

estrogen: Alzheimer’s disease and estrogen
(Smalheiser and Swanson, 1996b).

Ca2+iPLA2: Schizophrenia and Calcium-
Independent Phospholipase A2 (Smalheiser
and Swanson, 1997).

The same subset of Medline as in each origi-
nal discovery is employed for replication, and
any abstracts containing a direct link between the
two terms are removed (note that including these
would not have affected the original discoveries as
these only used titles) – thus any connections be-
tween A and C are necessarily hidden and require
at least one linking term.

The Raynaud-fish oil and migraine-magnesium
connections are the most commonly replicated
discoveries, while the remaining discoveries are
rarely explored. For CUI based investigations, this
is likely due to the difficulty of selecting a repre-
sentative CUI for the sought concepts. The sec-
ond concept in the Schizophrenia and Calcium-
Independent Phospholipase A2 connection is par-
ticularly tricky: UMLS suggests CUI C1418624
(PLA2G6 gene) as the most likely match, followed
by CUI C2830173 (Calcium-Independent Phos-
pholipase A2) as the second most likely. How-
ever, neither CUI is found in any relations in the
given date range by SemRep. Closer examina-
tion reveals that the Ca2+iPLA2 connections in
the 1960-1997 Medline range are between CUI
C0538273 (PLA2G6 protein, human). Not only
does this highlight the difficulty of the replication
task, it further motivates the need for a ‘synonym’
(or related concept) list.

The number of linking terms found between
each pair of sought terms is presented in Table 1
(zero linking terms means the connection was not
found) for a subset of the filtering results. ST rep-
resents semantic type filtering, HF the breaking of
high frequency connections (a min subscript de-
noting the version which takes into account con-
nectivity of both CUIs), together with the thresh-
old value, and LT elimination of common linking
terms, again with the relevant threshold value.

While the Raynaud-fish oil connection appears
to be consistently produced by the system, Table 2
reveals the value of filtering: with no filtering, the
two linking terms are pure noise and the connec-
tion should not be made. Employing UMLS syn-

115



RD Arg Mg ND INN estrogen Ca2+iPLA2
No filtering 2 235 78 98 370 500 7
Synonyms (Sy) 6 173 58 65 296 415 16
Sy & LT-200 3 145 48 56 265 0 16
Sy & HF-2900 6 149 56 52 243 0 14
Sy & HFmin-900 6 73 22 27 82 164 9
Sy & HFmin-400 6 25 5 8 25 65 8
Sy & ST 4 130 47 43 234 331 13
Sy & ST & LT-200 3 108 41 38 207 0 13
Sy & ST & HF-2500 4 120 47 38 205 0 13
Sy & ST & HFmin-900 6 73 22 27 82 164 9
Sy & ST & HFmin-400 4 28 6 12 30 73 6

Table 1: Number of hidden links found during replication

onyms adds genuine linking terms,6 and restrict-
ing by semantic types drops the remaining general
terms. Discarding common linking terms finds an-
timicrobial susceptibility to be a frequently used
linking term, and it is also dropped. A great ad-
vantage of the technique can be seen when con-
nections are made through hundreds of terms –
in this case, higher thresholds (and thus more ag-
gressive filtering) can be employed to reduce the
number of linking terms to the most promising set.
Should these not be sufficient, the threshold can
be increased to produce more linking terms and as
such, the burden on the user in checking a large
number of linking terms when a hidden connec-
tion is suspected can be greatly reduced, without
sacrificing connections should more be needed.

Term NF Sy Sy ST LT-200
acetylsalicyclic acid × X X X
antimicrobial susceptibility × X X ×
blood viscosity × X X X
brain infarction × X X X
patient X X × ×
volunteer helper X X × ×

Table 2: Linking term analysis for RD

For example, common linking term filtering re-
moves the term estrogen from consideration as
therapeutic estrogen is a commonly used linking
term, making the estrogen-AD link impossible to
find. Linking term frequencies (on a 10,000 pair
sample) exceeding values from 50 to 200 (in incre-
ments of 50) were tested resulting in the removal

6Note that the merging of synonyms is achieved with-
out the need to back off to general classes (e.g. (Srinivasan,
2004)), which have been observed to lead to connections
based on “aboutness” rather than producing genuine hidden
knowledge (Beresi et al., 2008).

of between 1,902 and 227 CUIs. Therapeutic es-
trogen appears in all the lists. Similarly, the CUI
is dropped when high frequency connections are
broken using the first technique, which is based on
stoplists. This highlights the value of the second
high frequency connection technique, which only
discards particular connections (rather than CUIs)
and therapeutic estrogen CUI remains a search-
able CUI.

As shown, the system replicates most of the
previously published discoveries with its main as-
set being noise reduction: the number of linking
terms for a suspected connection (closed discov-
ery) can be greatly reduced to remove spurious
connections, with backoffs available to yield more
connections should more be required. For novel
applications (i.e. open discovery), the technique
greatly reduces the amount of hidden knowledge
generated from a source term A. For example, the
amount of hidden knowledge generated from so-
matomedin C drops from 82,601 CUIs when no
filtering is performed, to 3,005 CUIs with syn-
onym, semantic type and breaking connections
with frequency more than 200, which represents
a great reduction for a user who is likely looking
for a particular type of C term.

5 Conclusions and future work

We present and demonstrate the effectiveness of a
number of filtering methods, including two novel
techniques based on any LBD system built accord-
ing to the Swanson framework – one approach
based on stoplist methods, but requiring no man-
ual intervention except for a user’s selection of a
threshold, and the second based on removing con-
nections when these are deemed to be likely to

116



contribute mainly noise. A great advantage of the
second approach is shown to be the fact that terms
are not directly discarded, as with a stoplist, and
thus a fairly common term can remain a source
term when required.

While the method is evaluated by replicating
known discoveries, we suggest that the noise re-
duction performed is ultimately leading to a much
more user friendly LBD system, and plan to inves-
tigate other evaluation approaches, such as times-
licing (Yetisgen-Yildiz and Pratt, 2009), as part of
future work.

Acknowledgements

Judita Preiss was supported by the EPSRC grant
EP/J008427/1: Language Processing for Litera-
ture Based Discovery in Medicine.

References
Ulises Cervino Beresi, Mark Baillie, and Ian Ruthven.

2008. Towards the evaluation of literature based dis-
covery. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Novel
Evaluation Methodologies (at ECIR 2008), pages 5–
13.

Wilco W. M. Fleuren, Stefan Verhoeven, Raoul Frijters,
Bart Heupers, Jan Polman, René van Schaik, Jacob
de Vlieg, and Wynand Alkema. 2011. Copub up-
date: Copub 5.0 a text mining system to answer bio-
logical questions. Nuclear Acids Research, 39 (Web
Server issue). doi:10.1093/nar/gkr310.

Michael D. Gordon and Robert K. Lindsay. 1996. To-
ward discovery support systems: a replication, re-
examination, and extension of Swanson’s work on
literature-based discovery of a connection between
Raynaud’s and fish oil. Journal of the American So-
ciety for Information Science, 47(2):116–128.

Thomas C. Rindflesch Hristovski D, Friedman C and
Peterlin B. 2006. Exploiting semantic relations
for literature-based discovery. In Proceedings of the
2006 AMIA Annual Symposium, pages 349–353.

Xiaohua Hu, Xiaodan Zhang, Illhoi Yoo, and Yanquing
Zang. 2006. A semantic approach for mining hid-
den links from complementary and non-interactive
biomedical literature. In SDM.

Thomas C. Rindflesch and Alan R. Aronson. 1994.
Ambiguity resolution while mapping free text to
the UMLS Metathesaurus. In J. G. Ozbolt, edi-
tor, Proceedings of the Eigheeth Annual Symposium
on Computer Appplications in Medical Care, pages
240–244.

Thomas C. Rindflesch and Marcelo Fiszman. 2003.
The interaction of domain knowledge and linguis-
tic structure in natural language processing: inter-

preting hypernymic propositions in biomedical text.
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 36(6):462–477.

Neil R. Smalheiser and Don R. Swanson. 1994. As-
sessing a gap in the biomedical literature: Mag-
nesium deficiency and neurologic disease. Neuro-
science Research Communications, 15(1):1–9.

Neil R. Smalheiser and Don R. Swanson. 1996a. In-
domethacin and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology,
46:583.

Neil R. Smalheiser and Don R. Swanson. 1996b. Link-
ing estrogen to Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology,
47:809–810.

Neil R. Smalheiser and Don R. Swanson. 1997.
Calcium-independent phospholipase a2 and
schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 55(8):752–
753.

Padmini Srinivasan. 2004. Text mining generating
hypotheses from medline. Journal of the Ameri-
can Society for Information Science and Technology,
55(5):396–413.

Don R. Swanson and Neil R. Smalheiser. 1997. An
interactive system for finding complementary litera-
tures: A stimulus to scientific discovery. Artificial
Intelligence, 91:183–203.

Don R. Swanson and Neil R. Smalheiser. 1999. Link
analysis of MEDLINE titles as an aid to scientific
discovery: Using Arrowsmith as an aid to scientific
discovery. Library Trends, 48:48–59.

Don R. Swanson, Neil R. Smalheiser, and Vetle I.
Torvik. 2006. Ranking indirect connnections in
literature-based discovery: The role of medical sub-
ject headings. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 57(11):1427–
1439.

Don R. Swanson. 1986. Fish oil, Raynaud’s syndrome,
and undiscovered public knowledge. Perspectives in
Biology and Medicine, 30:7–18.

Don R. Swanson. 1988. Migraine and magnesium – 11
neglected connections. Perpectives in Biology and
Medicine, 31(4):526–557.

Don R. Swanson. 1990. Somatomedin c and arginine:
Implicit connections between mutually isolated lit-
eratures. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine,
33(2):157–186.

Marc Weeber, Rein Vos, Henny Klein, and Lolkje T. W.
de Jong-van den Berg. 2001. Using concepts in
literature-based discovery: Simulating Swanson’s
Reynaud – fish oil and migraine – magnesium dis-
coveries. Journal of the American Society for Infor-
mation Science and Technology, 52(7):548–557.

M. Yetisgen-Yildiz and W. Pratt. 2009. A new eval-
uation methodology for literature-based discovery.
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 42(4):633–643.

117


