









































Enriching Serbian WordNet and Electronic Dictionaries with Terms from
the Culinary Domain

Staša Vujičić Stanković
Faculty of Mathematics
University of Belgrade

Serbia
stasa@matf.bg.ac.rs

Cvetana Krstev
Faculty of Philology

University of Belgrade
Serbia

cvetana@matf.bg.ac.rs

Duško Vitas
Faculty of Mathematics
University of Belgrade

Serbia
vitas@matf.bg.ac.rs

Abstract

In this paper we present three lexical re-
sources for Serbian that are crucial for the
development of applications in the culi-
nary domain based on natural language
processing. The first two of them —
Serbian WordNet and morphological e-
dictionaries — have already been in devel-
opment for some time, while the third one
– a corpus of culinary recipes -– has been
developed specifically for this purpose. In
this paper, we present how we use each of
these resources to correct and enlarge the
other two. We use various automatic pro-
cedures, but manually check all the results.

1 Introduction and Motivation

In recent years, linguistic processing of culinary
content has become increasingly popular. One of
the main reasons for this is the emergence of a
large amount of content related to the culinary do-
main on the Internet. Culinary linguistics (Ger-
hardt et al., 2013) emerged from the fact that both
food and language are present in everyday life.
From the perspective of natural language process-
ing, in addition to knowledge representation, culi-
nary linguistics comprises different types of rea-
soning. Providing these types of processing for the
Serbian written texts was the motivation for our re-
search.

WordNet (WN) has been recognized as one of
the most important resources for the development
of natural language processing applications (infor-
mation extraction, information retrieval, question
answering applications etc.). Accordingly, enrich-
ing and enhancing WN using different lexical re-
sources, and vice versa, has become one of the
central tasks (Agirre et al., 2000; Agirre et al.,
2001; Nimb et al., 2013). Nowadays, with the in-
creasing popularity of the Semantic Web to which

WN is closely associated, a lot is being done on
enhancing its expressiveness by introducing new
relations between concepts (Ruiz-Casado et al.,
2007) or new categories (Montoyo et al., 2001).

For the development of any kind of natural lan-
guage processing application for Serbian written
texts from the culinary domain, it was essential
to enrich both the Serbian WordNet (SWN) and
electronic dictionaries with the appropriate terms
from the domain. There were similar efforts taken
for other languages where authors addressed the
problem of enriching WN related to some specific
domains (Vintar and Fišer, 2011; Navigli and Ve-
lardi, 2002), but the suggested approaches were
different from the one proposed in this paper. Ad-
ditionally, to the best of our knowledge there is
no research dealing with these problems related to
Serbian WordNet, although some research related
to culinary domain were proposed in (Milićević,
2013), but for different purposes.

Our motivation for WN and electronic dictio-
naries domain-specific enrichment was to provide
a basis for the development of language resources
and more complex natural language processing
applications in the culinary domain. Language
resources of particular interest for this specific
domain are recipe, food, meal and other ontolo-
gies. Related applications should provide extrac-
tion of the relevant concepts, attributes and rela-
tions from the recipe corpus in order to overcome
standard querying by keywords, and provide ad-
vanced search, based on criteria and queries.

The goal of our (informal) culinary project is
to develop application where user could query
recipes in Serbian; for example, by number of
calories according to some diet, even though this
information is not explicitly stated in the recipes
themselves, but in specially developed ontology.
Other search criteria could be related to some spe-
cial condition of the user health and nutritional in-
formation related to the food contained in recipes,



in which case it is necessary to include food nutri-
tional information or substitutions in ontologies,
etc.

To that end, our first task was to enhance and
upgrade the existing lexical resources for Serbian
– SWN and morphological electronic dictionaries,
and to build a corpus that we can use for terminol-
ogy extraction. The organization of this paper is
as follows: The details of the corpus of culinary
recipes in Serbian that we created for the purposes
of this research are presented in Section 2. In Sec-
tion 3 and Section 4 we provide an overview of the
current versions of the SWN and electronic dictio-
naries for Serbian, respectively, with special em-
phases on the terms related to the culinary domain,
as well as, on the newly introduced concepts and
domain-specific semantic markers. WN and elec-
tronic dictionaries enrichment process and the re-
sults obtained are presented in Section 5. Finally,
some conclusions and thoughts on future work are
given in Section 6.

2 Details of the Culinary Text Corpus

For the purpose of harvesting domain-specific ter-
minology, we created corpus of Serbian writ-
ten culinary recipes in the Latin script. Due to
the growing amount of culinary content, such as
recipes, various tips and descriptions, the corpus
was formed from web texts.

There are numerous free programs for down-
loading text from web pages, that give satisfactory
results — like BootCaT.1 But besides the text that
is displayed to users, we were interested in main-
taining the original structure of web pages, as well.
Therefore, for the purposes of our research, we de-
cided to develop programs adjusted to particular
web pages, their content and also the meta-data
that could be used in our ongoing work. These in-
dividually tailored programs were implemented in
the Java programming language that provides sup-
port for text processing using regular expressions.

The texts have been collected from several lead-
ing national websites from the culinary domain
like Recepti2, Kuhinjica3 etc. The created text cor-
pus contains approximately 14,000 recipes, which
consist of approximately 1,600.000 simple word
forms. However, since much of the culinary con-
tent on the Web is user-generated we discovered

1http://www.bootcat.sslmit.unibo.it
2http://www.recepti.com
3http://www.kuhinjica.rs

that we could not use everything that was collected
for our purpose. Namely, when using the Latin
script users sometimes tend to ignore diacritics
which renders the produced texts unusable for lin-
guistic processing. Such omissions cannot be cor-
rected automatically, because they increase the ho-
mography of forms – e.g. vece itself can represent
a word of the language (colloquial for WC), but we
may also presume that it is missing one of two pos-
sible diacritics: veće ‘bigger’ or veče ‘evening’.
Therefore, we discarded all recipes that did not
contain any Serbian-specific letters with diacritics.
Since the resulting corpus still contained quite a
number of errors, due to careless typing, we cor-
rected some of the frequently occurring ones, like
the use of the digraph dj instead of the letter d̄,
and the digraph dz instead of dž. As we did not
want to introduce new errors by applying simple
find/replace, we corrected only unknown words
that became known Serbian words after correction
(according to Serbian e-dictionaries, see Section
4).

3 Serbian WordNet

The production of the SWN was initiated together
with the Bulgarian, Greek, Romanian, and Turk-
ish versions by the BalkaNet project. The struc-
ture of all these WNs corresponded to the struc-
ture established by the EuroWordNet project and
they were all linked to the Princeton WordNet
(PWN), through the so-called Interlingual Index
(version 2.1 at the end of the project). Besides, all
BalkaNet WNs were developed following the ex-
pand model (Fellbaum, 2010), which means that
synsets from the PWN were translated into tar-
get languages, and the relations between synsets
were transferred as well (a hypernym/hyponym as
a rule, other if applicable). At the end of the Balka-
Net project, the SWN had 7,000 synsets, covering
basic concept sets 1 and 2, and most of the con-
cepts from the subset 3 (Tufis et al., 2004).

After the end of the BalkaNet project, the de-
velopment of the SWN continued, but at a much
slower pace, since there was no project to sup-
port it. The development mostly relied on volun-
teer work of its chief editor and numerous Masters
and PhD students who followed the same expand
model in their work. Due to such circumstances,
the choice of the synsets to be transferred was not
concept-dependent, but rather domain-dependent,
because chief editor wanted to make the most of



the specific knowledge and interests of her volun-
teers. As a result, the Serbian WordNet was en-
larged to almost 20,000 synsets.

Before the beginning of the (informal) culinary
project, concepts belonging to the culinary domain
were not given special attention. However, 393
such concepts were already present in the SWN,
99 of which belong to basic concept sets and 91 to
Balkan- or Serbian-specific concepts.

4 Electronic Dictionaries for Serbian

The development of Serbian e-dictionaries follows
the methodology and format known as DELA pre-
sented for French in (Courtois et al., 1990). The
role of electronic dictionaries, covering both sim-
ple words and multi-word units (MWUs), and dic-
tionary finite-state transducers (FSTs), is text tag-
ging as part of various natural language appli-
cations. Each such e-dictionary of forms con-
sists of a list of entries supplied with their lem-
mas, morphosyntactic, semantic, and other infor-
mation. The forms are, as a rule, automatically
generated from the dictionaries of lemmas con-
taining the information that enables the production
of forms. The system of Serbian e-dictionaries
covers both general lexica and proper names and
all inflected forms are generated from 130,500
simple forms and 10,500 MWU lemmas (Krstev,
2008). Approximately 28.5% of these lemmas
represent proper names: personal, geopolitical, or-
ganizational, etc.

Most of the word forms in the Serbian morpho-
logical e-dictionaries are supplied not only with
the values of the grammatical categories, but also
with the additional markers that are inherited from
the lemmas from which they are generated. These
markers can be grammatical (the marker +MG for
the natural masculine gender, as opposed to the
grammatical gender, e.g. in muškarčina ‘macho’),
derivational (+Pos for possessive adjectives, e.g.
bikov ‘belonging to a bull, taurine’), dialectic (+Ek
for the Ekavian pronunciation, e.g. devojka ‘girl’),
domain specifying (+Math for mathematics, e.g.
mnogougao ‘polygon’), and semantic (+Hum for
humans, e.g. drug ‘friend’). Some of the se-
mantic markers are redundant, e.g. the marker
+Top (for geographic names) is superfluous if the
marker +Gr (for settlements) is present. However,
we keep them all for processing purposes – if a ge-
ographic name is needed, we do not have to list all
their types.

Some of these markers were systematically
added to the dictionary entries to which they ap-
ply, while others were conceived later and added
systematically only to the entries included in the
dictionaries at some later stage. The latter was
the case for words from the culinary domain. Be-
fore starting the enrichment process, there were
218 simple word entries with the semantic marker
+Food, and 217 multi-word entries. All entries
with the +Food marker should also have been as-
signed the +Conc marker (for concrete object, as
a more general category), but this was not the case
either: 32 simple entries and 20 multi-word entries
were missing it. Naturally, at this moment we still
do not know how many entries in e-dictionaries
are missing the +Food marker, because supplying
as many entries as possible with it is one of the
goals of our project.

4.1 Domain Specific Semantic Markers for
Serbian Electronic Dictionaries

The concepts and the terminology specific to the
culinary domain required introduction of a new
domain marker and more refined semantic mark-
ers. Table 1 provides an overview of the newly
proposed semantic markers, that could be used in-
dividually or in combination. Naturally, the do-
main marker +Culinary is assigned to all the lem-
mas from the culinary domain. All other markers
are used in combination with the +Conc marker,
except the +MesApp marker for approximate mea-
sures often used in cooking, like prstohvat ‘an
amount between fingers, a pinch’. Similarly, the
+Food marker is assigned with all other mark-
ers except +MesApp and +Uten, that is asigned
to utensils used in food preparation and serving.
The +Erg marker is assigned to the names of man-
created items that have the status of trademarks.
It can be assigned to both food tabasko ‘Tabasco’
and utensils teflon ‘Teflon’. It goes without saying
that in the culinary domain these names are used
loosely and because of that often with the lower-
case initial in Serbian. Namely, if recipe states
that campari ‘Campari’ should be used, it is un-
derstood that if not available, it can be replaced
by some similar liqueur. The marker +Erg is used
outside the culinary domain, as well, e.g. rols-rojs
‘Rolls Royce’.

In addition to these semantic markers that are
already added to the Serbian e-dictionary, in fur-
ther research, we intend to address the terminol-



ogy related to food condition, food taste, as well
as the way of food preparation, for which we have
dedicated new semantic markers – +Cond, +Taste,
and +WoP, respectively, that are related mainly to
adjectives and verbs. At this point, they are not
included in the dictionary (except for some newly
added entities), and their systematic adding would
be an objective of our future work.

Semantic
marker Description

+Culinary culinary domain
+Food food (e.g. senf ‘mustard’)
+Alim aliment (e.g. mleko ‘milk
+Prod product (e.g. sirće ‘vinegar’)
+Meal meal (e.g. doručak ‘breakfast’)
+Course course (e.g. puding ‘pudding’)
+Uten utensil (e.g. šolja ‘cup’)
+Erg ergonym (e.g. rokfor ‘Roquefort’)

+MesApp
approximate measures
(e.g. kašičica ‘spoonful’)

+Taste taste (e.g. slatkokiseo ‘sweet-sour’)

+WoP
way of preparation (e.g. dinstati
‘to stew’; dinstanje ‘stewing’)

+Cond condition (e.g. bajat ‘stale’)

Table 1: The overview of newly proposed seman-
tic markers.

5 Enrichment Process

The process of enriching both the Serbian Word-
Net and Serbian e-dictionaries proceeded in sev-
eral steps:

1. Manual translation of as many synsets from
the culinary domain as possible belonging to
the PWN.

2. Inspection of unknown words resulting from
the application of Serbian e-dictionaries to
the corpus of recipes in search of new entries.

3. (Semi-)automatic production of new sim-
ple word and multi-word entries for e-
dictionaries with all applicable markers, de-
rived from the synsets, in the SWN, belong-
ing to the culinary domain.

4. (Semi-)automatic addition of all missing
markers in e-dictionaries, based on the
synsets in the SWN belonging to the culinary
domain.

5. (Semi-)automatic addition of new culinary
and/or Serbian-specific concepts to the SWN
and manual correction.

Steps one and two were performed by three grad-
uate Library and Information Science students
well-educated in the field of information search.
Their role in step one was to investigate specific
branches in the PWN and transfer into the SWN
all concepts recognized in Serbian. The branches
of interest were ‘food, nutrient’ related to ali-
ments, products, drinks, meals and courses, and
‘kitchen utensil’ and ‘tableware’ related to uten-
sils. The role was not very precise, but students
took their job seriously and translated everything
for which they could find evidence. As a result, the
SWN now has all concepts related to fruits, as the
PWN, although hardly anybody in Serbia has ever
heard of some of them (e.g. durian ‘durian’ and
žabotikana ‘jaboticana’), let alone tasted them.
The same principle could not always be applied
-– for instance, quite a number of fish species rep-
resented in the PWN are completely unknown in
Serbia (e.g. scup, sailfish, sucker, etc.). It should
be stressed that the students supplied a definition
for each introduced sysnet, which is in line with
the strategy applied for the development of the
SWN from the beginning – practically all its sys-
nets have a definition. Everything produced by the
students was double checked by chief SWN editor.

Step two was equally imprecise. The students’
task was to recognize, in the long list of unknown
words in the corpus of recipes comprising of 9,100
word forms, all those for which they knew the
meaning without further consultation. All chosen
entries were assigned the appropriate markers, as
well as, codes for inflectional paradigms, which
was done manually for simple words and automat-
ically for MWUs.

Step three consisted of two tasks. First, we pro-
duced new candidates for e-dictionaries of sim-
ple and MWUs automatically by inspecting the
synsets belonging to the already mentioned hi-
erarchies, choosing those that were not in e-
dictionaries already. These new candidates were
all supplied with the appropriate markers which
were derived from the position of a synset in a
hierarchy. For instance, the new candidate fondi
‘fondue’ belongs to the hierarchy {dish:2}, {nu-
triment:1,. . . }, {food:1, nutrient:1}, {substance:1,
matter:1}, and therefore the suggested markers for
it were +Conc, +Food, +Course (and +Culinary, as



a domain marker). The second task consisted of
manual checking of all new candidates and their
markers. A good number of candidates were re-
jected for several reasons. There were duplicates
(a literal belonging to several synsets, e.g. brizle
is connected to {neck sweetbread:1, throat sweet-
bread:1} and to {sweetbread:1, sweetbreads:1})
for which there should be only one entry in the
e-dictionaries. There were literals irrelevant to
e-dictionaries, because they were of a descrip-
tive nature and not really lexicalized (e.g. grožd̄e
sa glatkom kožom corresponding to {fox grape:1,
slip-skin grape:1}. In a few cases, a literal from
the chosen hierarchies did not actually belong to
the culinary domain (e.g. Poslednja večera corre-
sponding to {Last Supper:1, Lord’s Supper:2} that
belongs to the branch {food:1, nutrient:1}). The
markers themselves have also to be checked and if
necessary corrected. For instance, pomfrit ‘french
fries’ has as a hypernym {vegetable:1}, and thus it
obtained the marker +Alim; however, we believed
that +Prod was more appropriate.

The fourth step was performed in a similar way
as the previous one, except that we considered now
only the entries already in e-dictionaries missing
some or all appropriate markers. The produced list
of enhanced entries had also to be considered care-
fully in order not to add markers to wrong entries.
For instance, suggested new markers for the entry
baba ‘baba’ were +Conc, +Food, +Course, while
the entry already in the dictionary corresponded
to baba ‘grandmother’. Similarly, the entry luk
‘bow’ obtained markers +Food+Conc+Alim in-
tended only for the entry luk ‘onion’.

In step five, we used new entries for e-
dictionaries, produced in step two, to create new
synsets in the SWN. These entries include ei-
ther the concepts specific to Serbia, like afusali,
a type of grapes very popular in Serbia, or too spe-
cific concepts that were missing in the PWN, like
friteza ‘deep fryer’. Since they were already as-
signed semantic markers, we used them to find the
right place for the appropriate synsets. In the case
of MWUs, we could do even more, because many
of them contained as a unit a literal from a hyper-
nym synset: vatrostalna činija ‘fireproof bowl’ i
zdenka sir ‘zdenka cheese, a popular cheese’ are a
kind of a bowl and a kind of cheese, respectively,
and they could be pushed further down the hierar-
chy. The position of every newly added synset was
checked manually and corrected if necessary.

At the end of this phase we obtained the follow-
ing results:

• The SWN was enlarged by translating 1,404
synsets from the culinary domain from the
PWN to the SWN, to contain a total of 1,797
such synsets;

• Serbian e-dictionaries of simple words were
enlarged by 636 entries, 246 of which were
obtained from the SWN and 390 from the
culinary corpus.

• Serbian e-dictionaries of MWU were en-
larged by 612 simple entries, 514 of which
were obtained from the SWN and 98 from the
culinary corpus.

• The full set of the appropriate markers was
assigned to 735 simple word and 125 multi-
word entries.

• 450 specific concepts from the culinary do-
main were added to the SWN.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

We have completed the first phase of enrichment
of the SWN and Serbian e-dictionaries. The next
phase will consist of the following steps:

1. (Semi-)automatic detection in the corpus of
all words belonging to the culinary domain
and e-dictionaries that are still not assigned
all applicable markers and manual marker se-
lection and assignment.

2. (Semi-)automatic detection in the corpus of
other MWU terms belonging to the culinary
domain.

3. Extension of our approach to other PoS
synsets and dictionary enties.

In order to complete this phase, we will rely on
various local grammars, some of which were al-
ready developed for Serbian for different purposes
(Krstev et al., 2011).

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the following PhD students
at the Faculty of Philology, University of Belgrade
for their help in enhancing the SWN with synsets
from the culinary domain: Biljana Ðord̄ević, Je-
lena Andonovska and Katarina Stanišić. This re-
search was conducted through the project 178006,
financed by the Serbian Ministry of Science.



References
Eneko Agirre, Olatz Ansa, Eduard Hovy, and David

Martínez. 2000. Enriching very large ontologies
using the WWW. arXiv preprint cs/0010026.

Eneko Agirre, Olatz Ansa, Eduard Hovy, and David
Martinez. 2001. Enriching WordNet concepts with
topic signatures. arXiv preprint cs/0109031.

Blandine Courtois, Max Silberztein Ladl, et al. 1990.
Dictionnaires électroniques du français. Langue
française, 87(1):3–4.

Christiane Fellbaum. 2010. WordNet. Springer.

Cornelia Gerhardt, Maximiliane Frobenius, and Su-
sanne Ley. 2013. Culinary Linguistics: The chef’s
special, volume 10. John Benjamins Publishing.

Cvetana Krstev, Duško Vitas, and Aleksandra Trtovac.
2011. Orwells 1984 — the Case of Serbian Revis-
ited. In Proc. of 5th Language & Technology Con-
ference, pages 25–27.

Cvetana Krstev. 2008. Processing of Serbian – Au-
tomata, Texts and Electronic Dictionaries. Faculty
of Philology, University of Belgrade.

Maja Milićević. 2013. Genre-based Boot-
CaT corpora for morphologically rich languages.
BOTWU - BootCaTters of the world unite! A
workkshop on the BootCaT toolkit, Forli, 24 June
2013. http://botwu.sslmit.unibo.it/
download/milicevic.pdf.

Andrés Montoyo, Manuel Palomar, and German Rigau.
2001. WordNet Enrichment with Classification Sys-
tems. In Proc. of WN and Other LRs: Applications,
Extensions and Customisations Workshop.(NAACL-
01) The 2nd Meeting of the North American Chapter
of the ACL, pages 101–106.

Roberto Navigli and Paola Velardi. 2002. Automatic
Adaptation of WordNet to Domains. In 3rd Inter-
national Conference LREC, Las Palmas, Canary Is-
lands, 29-31 May 2002, pages 1023–1027.

Sanni Nimb, Bolette S Pedersen, Anna Braasch, Nico-
lai H Sørensen, and Thomas Troelsgård. 2013. En-
riching a wordnet from a thesaurus. Lexical Seman-
tic Resources for NLP, page 36.

Maria Ruiz-Casado, Enrique Alfonseca, and Pablo
Castells. 2007. Automatising the Learning of
Lexical Patterns: an Application to the Enrichment
of WordNet by Extracting Semantic Relationships
from Wikipedia. Data & Knowledge Engineering,
61(3):484–499.

Dan Tufis, Dan Cristea, and Sofia Stamou. 2004.
BalkaNet: Aims, Methods, Results and Perspec-
tives. A General Overview. Romanian Journal of
Information science and technology, 7(1-2):9–43.

Špela Vintar and Darja Fišer. 2011. Enriching Slovene
WordNet with domain-specific terms. Translation:
Computation, Corpora, Cognition, 1(1):29–44.


