



















































Verbal Valency Frame Detection and Selection in Czech and English


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation, pages 6–11,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 22-27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Verbal Valency Frame Detection and Selection in Czech and English

Ondřej Dušek, Jan Hajič and Zdeňka Urešová
Charles University in Prague

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics

Malostranské náměstí 25, 11800 Prague 1, Czech Republic
{odusek,hajic,uresova}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

We present a supervised learning method
for verbal valency frame detection and se-
lection, i.e., a specific kind of word sense
disambiguation for verbs based on subcat-
egorization information, which amounts
to detecting mentions of events in text.
We use the rich dependency annotation
present in the Prague Dependency Tree-
banks for Czech and English, taking ad-
vantage of several analysis tools (taggers,
parsers) developed on these datasets pre-
viously. The frame selection is based on
manually created lexicons accompanying
these treebanks, namely on PDT-Vallex for
Czech and EngVallex for English. The re-
sults show that verbal predicate detection
is easier for Czech, but in the subsequent
frame selection task, better results have
been achieved for English.

1 Introduction

Valency frames are a detailed semantic and syn-
tactic description of individual predicate senses.1

As such, they represent different event types. We
present a system for automatic detection and se-
lection of verbal valency frames in Czech and En-
glish, which corresponds to detecting and disam-
biguating mentions of events in text. This is an im-
portant step toward event instance identification,
which should help greatly in linking the mentions
of a single event. We took advantage of the fact
that the Prague family of dependency treebanks
contains comparable valency frame annotation for
Czech and English (cf. Section 2). Thus the fea-
ture templates used in frame selection are the same

1Valency can be observed for verbs, nouns, adjectives and
in certain theories, also for other parts of speech; however,
we focus on verbal valency only, as it is most common and
sufficiently described in theory and annotated in treebanks.

and the features initially considered differ only in
their instantiation (cf. Section 3).

While somewhat similar to the CoNLL 2009
Shared Task (Hajič et al., 2009) in the predicate
detection part, our task differs from the semantic
role labeling task in that the whole frame has to
be detected, not only individual arguments, and is
therefore more difficult not only in terms of scor-
ing, but also in the selection part: several verbal
frames might share the same syntactic features,
making them virtually indistinguishable unless se-
mantics is taken into account, combined with a de-
tailed grammatical and morphological context.

2 Valency in the tectogrammatical
description

The annotation scheme of the Prague Dependency
Treebank (Bejček et al., 2012, PDT) and the
Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank (Ha-
jič et al., 2012, PCEDT) is based on the formal
framework of the Functional Generative Descrip-
tion (Sgall, 1967; Sgall et al., 1986, FGD), de-
veloped within the Prague School of Linguistics.
The FGD is dependency-oriented with a “strati-
ficational” (layered) approach to a systematic de-
scription of a language. The notion of valency in
the FGD is one of the core concepts operating on
the layer of linguistic meaning (tectogrammatical
layer, t-layer).

2.1 Valency frames

The FGD uses syntactic as well as semantic crite-
ria to identify verbal complements. It is assumed
that all semantic verbs – and, potentially, nouns,
adjectives, and adverbs – have subcategorization
requirements, which can be specified in the va-
lency frame.

Verbal valency modifications are specified
along two axes: The first axis concerns the (gen-
eral) opposition between inner participants (argu-
ments) and free modifications (adjuncts). This dis-

6



tinction is based on criteria relating to:

(a) the possibility of the same type of comple-
ment appearing multiple times with the same
verb (arguments cannot), and

(b) the possibility of the occurrence of the given
complements (in principle) with any verb
(typical for adjuncts).

The other axis relates to the distinction between
(semantically) obligatory and optional comple-
ments of the word, which again is based on cer-
tain operational criteria expressed as the dialogue
test (Panevová, 1974). Five arguments are distin-
guished: Actor (ACT), Patient (PAT), Addressee
(ADDR), Origin (ORIG), and Effect (EFF). The
set of free modifications is much larger than that of
arguments; about 50 types of adjuncts are distin-
guished based on semantic criteria. Their set can
be divided into several subclasses: temporal (e.g.,
TWHEN, TSIN), local (e.g., LOC, DIR3), causal
(such as CAUS, CRIT), and other free modifica-
tions (e.g., MANN for general Manner, ACMP for
Accompaniment, EXT for Extent etc.).

All arguments (obligatory or optional) and
obligatory adjuncts are considered to be part of the
valency frame.

2.2 Tectogrammatical annotation
The PDT is a project for FGD-based manual an-
notation of Czech texts, started in 1996 at the In-
stitute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles
University in Prague. It serves two main purposes:
1. to test and validate the FGD linguistic theory,
2. to apply and test machine learning methods for

part-of-speech and morphological tagging, de-
pendency parsing, semantic role labeling, coref-
erence resolution, discourse annotation, natural
language generation, machine translation and
other natural language processing tasks.

The language data in the PDT are non-abbreviated
articles from Czech newspapers and journals.

The PCEDT contains English sentences from
the Wall Street Journal section of the Penn Tree-
bank (Marcus et al., 1993, PTB-WSJ) and their
Czech translations, all annotated using the same
theoretical framework as the PDT.

The annotation of the PDT and the PCEDT is
very rich in linguistic information. Following the
stratificational approach of the FGD, the texts are
annotated at different but interlinked layers. There
are four such layers, two linear and two structured:

• the word layer (w-layer) – tokenized but other-
wise unanalyzed original text,

• the morphological layer (m-layer) with parts-
of-speech, morphology and lemmatization,

• analytical layer (a-layer) – surface dependency
syntax trees,

• tectogrammatical layer (t-layer) – “deep syn-
tax” trees according to the FGD theory.
While the PDT has all the layers annotated man-

ually, the PCEDT English annotation on the a-
layer has been created by automatic conversion
from the original Penn Treebank, including the
usual head assignment; morphology and the tec-
togrammatical layer are annotated manually, even
if not as richly as for Czech.2

Valency is a core ingredient on the t-layer. Since
valency frames guide, i.a., the labeling of argu-
ments, valency lexicons with sense-distinguished
entries for both languages have been created to en-
sure consistent annotation.

2.3 Valency Lexicons for Czech and English
in the FGD Framework

PDT-Vallex (Hajič et al., 2003; Urešová, 2011) is a
valency lexicon of Czech verbs, nouns, and adjec-
tives, created in a bottom-up way during the an-
notation of the PDT. This approach made it pos-
sible to confront the pre-existing valency theory
with the real usage of the language.

Each entry in the lexicon contains a head-
word, according to which the valency frames are
grouped, indexed, and sorted. Each valency frame
includes the frame’s “valency” (number of argu-
ments, or frame members) and the following in-
formation for each argument:
• its label (see Section 2.1),
• its (semantic) obligatoriness according to Pane-

vová (1974)’s dialogue test,
• its required surface form (or several alternative

forms) typically using morphological, lexical
and syntactic constraints.

Most valency frames are further accompanied by a
note or an example which explains their meaning
and usage. The version of PDT-Vallex used here
contains 9,191 valency frames for 5,510 verbs.

EngVallex (Cinková, 2006) is a valency lex-
icon of English verbs based on the FGD frame-
work, created by an automatic conversion from

2Attributes such as tense are annotated automatically, and
most advanced information such as topic and focus annota-
tion is not present.

7



PropBank frame files (Palmer et al., 2005) and by
subsequent manual refinement.3 EngVallex was
used for the tectogrammatical annotation of the
English part of the PCEDT. Currently, it contains
7,699 valency frames for 4,337 verbs.

3 Automatic frame selection

Building on the modules for Czech and English
automatic tectogrammatical annotation used in the
TectoMT translation engine (Žabokrtský et al.,
2008) and the CzEng 1.0 corpus (Bojar et al.,
2012),4 we have implemented a system for au-
tomatic valency frame selection within the Treex
NLP Framework (Popel and Žabokrtský, 2010).

The frame selection system is based on logistic
regression from the LibLINEAR package (Fan et
al., 2008). We use separate classification models
for each verbal lemma showing multiple valency
frames in the training data. Due to identical anno-
tation schemata in both languages, our models use
nearly the same feature set,5 consisting of:

• the surface word form of the lexical verb and all
its auxiliaries,

• their morphological attributes, such as part-of-
speech and grammatical categories,

• formemes – compact symbolic morphosyn-
tactic labels (e.g., v:fin for a finite verb,
v:because+fin for a finite verb governed
by a subordinating conjunction, v:in+ger for
a gerund governed by a preposition),6

• syntactic labels given by the dependency parser,
• all of the above properties found in the topolog-

ical and syntactic neighborhood of the verbal
node on the t-layer (parent, children, siblings,
nodes adjacent in the word order).

We experimented with various classifier settings
(regularization type and cost C, termination crite-
rion E) and feature selection techniques (these in-
volve adding a subset of features according to a
metric against the target class).7

3This process resulted in the interlinkage of both lexicons,
with additional links to VerbNet (Schuler, 2005) where avail-
able. Due to the refinement, the mapping is often not 1:1.

4Note that annotation used in TectoMT and CzEng does
not contain all attributes found in corpora manually annotated
on the tectogrammatical layer. Valency frame IDs are an ex-
ample of an attribute that is missing from the automatic an-
notation of CzEng 1.0.

5The only differences are due to the differences of part-
of-speech tagsets used.

6See (Dušek et al., 2012; Rosa et al., 2012) for a detailed
description of formemes.

7The metrics used include the Anova F-score, minimum

4 Experiments

We evaluated the system described in Section 3
on PDT 2.5 for Czech and on the English part
of PCEDT 2.0 for English. From PCEDT 2.0,
whose division follows the PTB-WSJ, we used
Sections 02-21 as training data, Section 24 as
development data, and Section 23 as evaluation
data. Since the system is intended to be used in
a fully automatic annotation scenario, we use au-
tomatically parsed sentences with projected gold-
standard valency frames to train the classifiers.

The results of our system in the best setting
for both languages are given in Table 1.8 The
unlabeled figures measure the ability of the sys-
tem to detect that a valency frame should be filled
for a given node. The labeled figures show the
overall system performance, including selecting
the correct frame. The frame selection accuracy
value shows only the percentage of frames se-
lected correctly, disregarding misplaced frames.
The accuracy for ambiguous verbs further disre-
gards frames of lemmas where only one frame is
possible. Here we include a comparison of our
trained classifier with a baseline that always se-
lects the most frequent frame seen in the training
data.9 Our results using the classifier for both lan-
guages have been confirmed by pairwise bootstrap
resampling (Koehn, 2004) to be significantly bet-
ter than the baseline at 99% level.

We can see that the system is more successful
in Czech in determining whether a valency frame
should be filled for a given node. This is most
probably given by the fact that the most Czech
verbs are easily recognizable by their morphologi-
cal endings, whereas English verbs are more prone
to be misrepresented as nouns or adjectives.

The English system is better at selecting the cor-
rect valency frame. This is probably caused by
a more fine-grained word sense resolution in the
Czech valency lexicon, where more figurative uses
and idioms are included. For example, over 16%

Redundancy-Maximum Relevance (mRMR) (Peng et al.,
2005), ReliefF (Kononenko, 1994), mutual information (MI),
symmetric uncertainty (Witten and Frank, 2005, p. 291f.),
and an average of the ranks given by mRMR and MI.

8The best setting for Czech uses L1-regularization and
10% best features according to Anova, with other parame-
ters tuned on the development set for each lemma. The best
setting for English uses L2-regularization with best feature
subsets tuned on the development set and fixed parameters
C = 0.1, E = 0.01.

9All other parts of the system, up to the identification of
the frame to be filled in, are identical with the baseline.

8



Czech English
Unlabeled precision 99.09 96.03
Unlabeled recall 94.81 93.07
Unlabeled F-1 96.90 94.53
Labeled precision 78.38 81.58
Labeled recall 74.99 79.06
Labeled F-1 76.65 80.30
Frame selection accuracy 79.10 84.95

Ambiguous verbs
baseline 66.68 68.44
classifier 72.41 80.03

Table 1: Experimental results

of errors in the Czech evaluation data were caused
just by idioms or light verb constructions not be-
ing recognized by our system. In Czech, addi-
tional 15% of errors occurred for verbs where two
or more valency frames share the same number of
arguments and their labels, but these verb senses
are considered different (because they have differ-
ent meaning), compared to only 9% in English.

5 Related Work

As mentioned previously, the task of detecting and
selecting valency frames overlaps with semantic
role labeling (Hajič et al., 2009). However, there
are substantial differences: we have focused only
on verbs (as opposed to all words with some se-
mantic relation marked in the data), and evaluated
on the exact frame assigned to the occurrence of
the verb in the treebank. On the other hand, we
are also evaluating predicate identification as in
Surdeanu et al. (2008), which Hajič et al. (2009)
do not. Tagging and parsing have been automatic,
but not performed jointly with the frame selec-
tion task. This also explains that while the best
results reported for the CoNLL 2009 Shared task
(Björkelund et al., 2009) are 85.41% labeled F-1
for Czech and 85.63% for English, they are not
comparable due to several reasons, the main be-
ing that SRL evaluates each argument separately,
while for a frame to be counted as correct in our
task, the whole frame (by means of the refer-
ence ID) must be selected correctly, which is sub-
stantially harder (if only for verbs). Moreover,
we have used the latest version of the PDT (the
PDT 2.5), and EngVallex-annotated verbs in the
PCEDT, while the English CoNLL 2009 Shared
Task is PropBank-based.10

10Please recall that EngVallex is a manually refined Prop-
Bank with different labeling scheme and generally m : n

Selecting valency frames is also very similar to
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD), see e.g. (Ed-
monds and Cotton, 2001; Chen and Palmer, 2005).
The WSD however does not consider subcatego-
rization/valency information explicitly.

Previous works on the PDT include a rule-based
tool of Honetschläger (2003) and experiments by
Semecký (2007) using machine learning. Both of
them, unlike our work, used gold-standard anno-
tation with just the frame ID removed.

6 Conclusions

We have presented a method of detecting mentions
of events in the form of verbal valency frame se-
lection for Czech and English. This method is
based on logistic regression with morphological
and syntactic features, trained on treebanks with
a comparable annotation scheme. We believe that
these results are first for this task on the granu-
larity of the lexicons (PDT-Vallex for Czech and
EngVallex for English), and they seem to be en-
couraging given that the most frequent verbs like
to be and to have have tens of possible frames,
heavily weighing down the resulting scores.

We plan to extend this work to use additional
features and lexical clustering, as well as to see
if the distinctions in the lexicons are justified, i.e.
if humans can effectively distinguish them in the
first place, similar to the work of Cinková et al.
(2012). A natural extension is to combine this
work with argument labeling to match or improve
on the “perfect proposition” score of Surdeanu et
al. (2008) while still keeping the sense distinctions
on top of it. We could also compare this to other
languages for which similar valency lexicons ex-
ist, such as SALSA for German (Burchardt et al.,
2006) or Chinese PropBank (Xue, 2008).

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Grant No.
GPP406/13/03351P of the Grant Agency of the
Czech Republic, the project LH12093 of the Min-
istry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech
Republic and the Charles University SVV project
260 104. It has been using language resources
developed, stored, and distributed by the LIN-
DAT/CLARIN project of the Ministry of Edu-
cation, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic
(project LM2010013).

mapping between PropBank and EngVallex frames.

9



References
E. Bejček, J. Panevová, J. Popelka, P. Straňák,

M. Ševčíková, J. Štěpánek, and Z. Žabokrtský.
2012. Prague Dependency Treebank 2.5 – a revis-
ited version of PDT 2.0. In Proceedings of COLING
2012: Technical Papers, Mumbai.

A. Björkelund, L. Hafdell, and P. Nugues. 2009. Mul-
tilingual semantic role labeling. In Proceedings of
the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning (CoNLL 2009): Shared
Task, pages 43–48, Boulder, Colorado, United
States, June.

O. Bojar, Z. Žabokrtský, O. Dušek, P. Galuščáková,
M. Majliš, D. Mareček, J. Maršík, M. Novák,
M. Popel, and A. Tamchyna. 2012. The joy of paral-
lelism with CzEng 1.0. In LREC, page 3921–3928,
Istanbul.

A. Burchardt, K. Erk, A. Frank, A. Kowalski, S. Padó,
and M. Pinkal. 2006. The SALSA corpus: a
German corpus resource for lexical semantics. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2006).

J. Chen and M. Palmer. 2005. Towards robust high
performance word sense disambiguation of English
verbs using rich linguistic features. In Natural Lan-
guage Processing–IJCNLP 2005, pages 933–944.
Springer.

S. Cinková, M. Holub, and V. Kríž. 2012. Manag-
ing uncertainty in semantic tagging. In Proceed-
ings of the 13th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 840–850. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

S. Cinková. 2006. From PropBank to EngValLex:
adapting the PropBank-Lexicon to the valency the-
ory of the functional generative description. In
Proceedings of the fifth International conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006),
Genova, Italy.

O. Dušek, Z. Žabokrtský, M. Popel, M. Majliš,
M. Novák, and D. Mareček. 2012. Formemes
in English-Czech deep syntactic MT. In Proceed-
ings of the Seventh Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, page 267–274.

P. Edmonds and S. Cotton. 2001. Senseval-2:
Overview. In The Proceedings of the Second Inter-
national Workshop on Evaluating Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation Systems, SENSEVAL ’01, pages 1–5,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

R. E Fan, K. W Chang, C. J Hsieh, X. R Wang, and
C. J Lin. 2008. LIBLINEAR: a library for large lin-
ear classification. The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 9:1871–1874.

J. Hajič, M. Ciaramita, R. Johansson, D. Kawahara,
M. A. Martí, L. Màrquez, A. Meyers, J. Nivre,
S. Padó, J. Štěpánek, P. Straňák, M. Surdeanu,
N. Xue, and Y. Zhang. 2009. The CoNLL-2009
shared task: Syntactic and semantic dependencies in
multiple languages. In Proceedings of the 13th Con-
ference on Computational Natural Language Learn-
ing (CoNLL-2009), June 4-5, Boulder, Colorado,
USA.

J. Hajič, E. Hajičová, J. Panevová, P. Sgall, O. Bo-
jar, S. Cinková, E. Fučíková, M. Mikulová, P. Pajas,
J. Popelka, J. Semecký, J. Šindlerová, J. Štěpánek,
J. Toman, Z. Urešová, and Z. Žabokrtský. 2012.
Announcing Prague Czech-English Dependency
Treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of LREC, pages 3153–
3160, Istanbul.

J. Hajič, J. Panevová, Z. Urešová, A. Bémová,
V. Kolářová, and P. Pajas. 2003. PDT-VALLEX:
creating a large-coverage valency lexicon for tree-
bank annotation. In Proceedings of The Second
Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories,
volume 9, page 57–68.

V. Honetschläger. 2003. Using a Czech valency lexi-
con for annotation support. In Text, Speech and Di-
alogue, pages 120–125. Springer.

P. Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests for ma-
chine translation evaluation. In Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 388–395.

I. Kononenko. 1994. Estimating attributes: Analysis
and extensions of RELIEF. In Machine Learning:
ECML-94, page 171–182.

M. P. Marcus, M. A. Marcinkiewicz, and B. Santorini.
1993. Building a large annotated corpus of En-
glish: The Penn Treebank. Computational linguis-
tics, 19(2):330.

M. Palmer, D. Gildea, and P. Kingsbury. 2005. The
proposition bank: An annotated corpus of semantic
roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–106.

J. Panevová. 1974. On verbal frames in functional
generative description. Prague Bulletin of Mathe-
matical Linguistics, 22:3–40.

H. Peng, F. Long, and C. Ding. 2005. Feature selec-
tion based on mutual information: criteria of max-
dependency, max-relevance, and min-redundancy.
IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence, page 1226–1238.

M. Popel and Z. Žabokrtský. 2010. TectoMT: modu-
lar NLP framework. Advances in Natural Language
Processing, pages 293–304.

R. Rosa, D. Mareček, and O. Dušek. 2012. DEPFIX:
a system for automatic correction of Czech MT out-
puts. In Proceedings of the Seventh Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation, page 362–368. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

10



K. K. Schuler. 2005. VerbNet: A Broad-Coverage,
Comprehensive Verb Lexicon. Ph.D. thesis, Univ. of
Pennsylvania.

J. Semecký. 2007. Verb valency frames disambigua-
tion. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguis-
tics, (88):31–52.

P. Sgall, E. Hajičová, and J. Panevová. 1986. The
meaning of the sentence in its semantic and prag-
matic aspects. D. Reidel, Dordrecht.

P. Sgall. 1967. Generativní popis jazyka a česká dekli-
nace. Academia, Praha.

M. Surdeanu, R. Johansson, A. Meyers, L. Màrquez,
and J. Nivre. 2008. The CoNLL 2008 shared
task on joint parsing of syntactic and semantic de-
pendencies. In CoNLL 2008: Proceedings of the
Twelfth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 159–177, Manchester, Eng-
land, August. Coling 2008 Organizing Committee.

Z. Urešová. 2011. Valenční slovník Pražského závis-
lostního korpusu (PDT-Vallex). Studies in Compu-
tational and Theoretical Linguistics. Ústav formální
a aplikované lingvistiky, Praha, Czechia, ISBN 978-
80-904571-1-9, 375 pp.

I. H. Witten and E. Frank. 2005. Data Mining: Practi-
cal machine learning tools and techniques. Morgan
Kaufmann Pub, 2nd edition.

N. Xue. 2008. Labeling Chinese predicates with se-
mantic roles. Computational linguistics, 34(2):225–
255.

Z. Žabokrtský, J. Ptáček, and P. Pajas. 2008. Tec-
toMT: highly modular MT system with tectogram-
matics used as transfer layer. In Proceedings of the
Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
page 167–170. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

11


