



















































Self-disclosure topic model for Twitter conversations


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Social Dynamics and Personal Attributes in Social Media, pages 42–49,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, 27 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Self-disclosure topic model for Twitter conversations

JinYeong Bak
Department of Computer Science

KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea

jy.bak@kaist.ac.kr

Chin-Yew Lin
Microsoft Research Asia

Beijing 100080, P.R. China
cyl@microsoft.com

Alice Oh
Department of Computer Science

KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea

alice.oh@kaist.edu

Abstract

Self-disclosure, the act of revealing one-
self to others, is an important social be-
havior that contributes positively to inti-
macy and social support from others. It
is a natural behavior, and social scien-
tists have carried out numerous quantita-
tive analyses of it through manual tagging
and survey questionnaires. Recently, the
flood of data from online social networks
(OSN) offers a practical way to observe
and analyze self-disclosure behavior at an
unprecedented scale. The challenge with
such analysis is that OSN data come with
no annotations, and it would be impos-
sible to manually annotate the data for a
quantitative analysis of self-disclosure. As
a solution, we propose a semi-supervised
machine learning approach, using a vari-
ant of latent Dirichlet allocation for au-
tomatically classifying self-disclosure in a
massive dataset of Twitter conversations.
For measuring the accuracy of our model,
we manually annotate a small subset of
our dataset, and we show that our model
shows significantly higher accuracy and
F-measure than various other methods.
With the results our model, we uncover
a positive and significant relationship be-
tween self-disclosure and online conversa-
tion frequency over time.

1 Introduction

Self-disclosure is an important and pervasive so-
cial behavior. People disclose personal informa-
tion about themselves to improve and maintain
relationships (Jourard, 1971; Joinson and Paine,
2007). For example, when two people meet for
the first time, they disclose their names and in-
terests. One positive outcome of self-disclosure

is social support from others (Wills, 1985; Der-
lega et al., 1993), shown also in online social net-
works (OSN) such as Twitter (Kim et al., 2012).
Receiving social support would then lead the user
to be more active on OSN (Steinfield et al., 2008;
Trepte and Reinecke, 2013). In this paper, we seek
to understand this important social behavior using
a large-scale Twitter conversation data, automati-
cally classifying the level of self-disclosure using
machine learning and correlating the patterns with
subsequent OSN usage.

Twitter conversation data, explained in more de-
tail in section 4.1, enable a significantly larger
scale study of naturally-occurring self-disclosure
behavior, compared to traditional social science
studies. One challenge of such large scale study,
though, remains in the lack of labeled ground-
truth data of self-disclosure level. That is,
naturally-occurring Twitter conversations do not
come tagged with the level of self-disclosure in
each conversation. To overcome that challenge,
we propose a semi-supervised machine learning
approach using probabilistic topic modeling. Our
self-disclosure topic model (SDTM) assumes that
self-disclosure behavior can be modeled using a
combination of simple linguistic features (e.g.,
pronouns) with automatically discovered seman-
tic themes (i.e., topics). For instance, an utterance
“I am finally through with this disastrous relation-
ship” uses a first-person pronoun and contains a
topic about personal relationships.

In comparison with various other models,
SDTM shows the highest accuracy, and the result-
ing self-disclosure patterns of the users are cor-
related significantly with their future OSN usage.
Our contributions to the research community in-
clude the following:

• We present a topic model that explicitly in-
cludes the level of self-disclosure in a conver-
sation using linguistic features and the latent
semantic topics (Sec. 3).

42



• We collect a large dataset of Twitter conver-
sations over three years and annotate a small
subset with self-disclosure level (Sec. 4).

• We compare the classification accuracy of
SDTM with other models and show that it
performs the best (Sec. 5).

• We correlate the self-disclosure patterns of
users and their subsequent OSN usage to
show that there is a positive and significant
relationship (Sec. 6).

2 Background

In this section, we review literature on the relevant
aspects of self-disclosure.

Self-disclosure (SD) level: To quantitatively
analyze self-disclosure, researchers categorize
self-disclosure language into three levels: G (gen-
eral) for no disclosure, M for medium disclosure,
and H for high disclosure (Vondracek and Von-
dracek, 1971; Barak and Gluck-Ofri, 2007). Ut-
terances that contain general (non-sensitive) infor-
mation about the self or someone close (e.g., a
family member) are categorized as M. Examples
are personal events, past history, or future plans.
Utterances about age, occupation and hobbies are
also included. Utterances that contain sensitive in-
formation about the self or someone close are cat-
egorized as H. Sensitive information includes per-
sonal characteristics, problematic behaviors, phys-
ical appearance and wishful ideas. Generally,
these are thoughts and information that one would
generally keep as secrets to himself. All other
utterances, those that do not contain information
about the self or someone close are categorized
as G. Examples include gossip about celebrities or
factual discourse about current events.

Classifying self-disclosure level: Prior work
on quantitatively analyzing self-disclosure has re-
lied on user surveys (Trepte and Reinecke, 2013;
Ledbetter et al., 2011) or human annotation (Barak
and Gluck-Ofri, 2007). These methods consume
much time and effort, so they are not suitable for
large-scale studies. In prior work closest to ours,
Bak et al. (2012) showed that a topic model can
be used to identify self-disclosure, but that work
applies a two-step process in which a basic topic
model is first applied to find the topics, and then
the topics are post-processed for binary classifica-
tion of self-disclosure. We improve upon this work
by applying a single unified model of topics and

𝑤

𝑧

𝜋

𝑟

𝛼𝛾

CT
N

𝑦

ω

𝜆

𝑥

𝜃𝑙
3

𝛽𝑙

𝜙𝑙
𝐾𝑙 3

Figure 1: Graphical model of SDTM

self-disclosure for high accuracy in classifying the
three levels of self-disclosure.

Self-disclosure and online social network:
According to social psychology, when someone
discloses about himself, he will receive social sup-
port from those around him (Wills, 1985; Derlega
et al., 1993), and this pattern of self-disclosure
and social support was verified for Twitter con-
versation data (Kim et al., 2012). Social support
is a major motivation for active usage of social
networks services (SNS), and there are findings
that show self-disclosure on SNS has a positive
longitudinal effect on future SNS use (Trepte and
Reinecke, 2013; Ledbetter et al., 2011). While
these previous studies focused on small, qualita-
tive studies, we conduct a large-scale, machine
learning driven study to approach the question of
self-disclosure behavior and SNS use.

3 Self-Disclosure Topic Model

This section describes our model, the self-
disclosure topic model (SDTM), for classifying
self-disclosure level and discovering topics for
each self-disclosure level.

3.1 Model

We make two important assumptions based on our
observations of the data. First, first-person pro-
nouns (I, my, me) are good indicators for medium
level of self-disclosure. For example, phrases such
as ‘I live’ or ‘My age is’ occur in utterances that re-
veal personal information. Second, there are top-
ics that occur much more frequently at a particular
SD level. For instance, topics such as physical
appearance and mental health occur frequently at
level H, whereas topics such as birthday and hob-
bies occur frequently at level M.

Figure 1 illustrates the graphical model of
SDTM and how these assumptions are embodied

43



Notation Description
G; M ; H {general; medium; high} SD level
C; T ; N Number of conversations; tweets;

words
KG;KM ;KH Number of topics for {G; M; H}
c; ct Conversation; tweet in conversation c
yct SD level of tweet ct, G or M/H
rct SD level of tweet ct, M or H
zct Topic of tweet ct
wctn n

th word in tweet ct
λ Learned Maximum entropy parame-

ters
xct First-person pronouns features
ωct Distribution over SD level of tweet ct
πc SD level proportion of conversation c
θGc ;θ

M
c ;θ

H
c Topic proportion of {G; M; H} in con-

versation c
φG;φM ;φH Word distribution of {G; M; H}
α; γ Dirichlet prior for θ; π
βG,βM ;βH Dirichlet prior for φG;φM ;φH

ncl Number of tweets assigned SD level l
in conversation c

nlck Number of tweets assigned SD level l
and topic k in conversation c

nlkv Number of instances of word v as-
signed SD level l and topic k

mctkv Number of instances of word v as-
signed topic k in tweet ct

Table 1: Summary of notations used in SDTM.

in it. The first assumption about the first-person
pronouns is implemented by the observed variable
xct and the parameters λ from a maximum en-
tropy classifier for G vs. M/H level. The second
assumption is implemented by the three separate
word-topic probability vectors for the three lev-
els of SD: φl which has a Bayesian informative
prior βl where l ∈ {G,M,H}, the three levels
of self-disclosure. Table 1 lists the notations used
in the model and the generative process, Figure 2
describes the generative process.

3.2 Classifying G vs M/H levels

Classifying the SD level for each tweet is done in
two parts, and the first part classifies G vs. M/H
levels with first-person pronouns (I, my, me). In
the graphical model, y is the latent variable that
represents this classification, and ω is the distri-
bution over y. x is the observation of the first-
person pronoun in the tweets, andλ are the param-
eters learned from the maximum entropy classifier.
With the annotated Twitter conversation dataset
(described in Section 4.2), we experimented with
several classifiers (Decision tree, Naive Bayes)
and chose the maximum entropy classifier because
it performed the best, similar to other joint topic
models (Zhao et al., 2010; Mukherjee et al., 2013).

1. For each level l ∈ {G, M, H}:
For each topic k ∈ {1, . . . ,Kl}:

Draw φlk ∼ Dir(βl)
2. For each conversation c ∈ {1, . . . , C}:

(a) Draw θGc ∼ Dir(α)
(b) Draw θMc ∼ Dir(α)
(c) Draw θHc ∼ Dir(α)
(d) Draw πc ∼ Dir(γ)
(e) For each message t ∈ {1, . . . , T}:

i. Observe first-person pronouns features xct
ii. Draw ωct ∼MaxEnt(xct,λ)
iii. Draw yct ∼ Bernoulli(ωct)
iv. If yct = 0 which is G level:

A. Draw zct ∼Mult(θGc )
B. For each word n ∈ {1, . . . , N}:

Draw word wctn ∼Mult(φGzct)
Else which can be M or H level:
A. Draw rct ∼Mult(πc)
B. Draw zct ∼Mult(θrctc )
C. For each word n ∈ {1, . . . , N}:

Draw word wctn ∼Mult(φrctzct)

Figure 2: Generative process of SDTM.

3.3 Classifying M vs H levels

The second part of the classification, the M and the
H level, is driven by informative priors with seed
words and seed trigrams.

Utterances with M level include two types:
1) information related with past events and fu-
ture plans, and 2) general information about self
(Barak and Gluck-Ofri, 2007). For the former, we
add as seed trigrams ‘I have been’ and ‘I will’.
For the latter, we use seven types of information
generally accepted to be personally identifiable in-
formation (McCallister, 2010), as listed in the left
column of Table 2. To find the appropriate tri-
grams for those, we take Twitter conversation data
(described in Section 4.1) and look for trigrams
that begin with ‘I’ and ‘my’ and occur more than
200 times. We then check each one to see whether
it is related with any of the seven types listed in
the table. As a result, we find 57 seed trigrams for
M level. Table 2 shows several examples.

Type Trigram
Name My name is, My last name
Birthday My birthday is, My birthday party
Location I live in, I lived in, I live on
Contact My email address, My phone number
Occupation My job is, My new job
Education My high school, My college is
Family My dad is, My mom is, My family is

Table 2: Example seed trigrams for identifying M
level of SD. There are 51 of these used in SDTM.

Utterances with H level express secretive wishes
or sensitive information that exposes self or some-
one close (Barak and Gluck-Ofri, 2007). These are

44



Category Keywords
physical
appearance

acne, hair, overweight, stomach, chest,
hand, scar, thighs, chubby, head, skinny

mental/physical
condition

addicted, bulimia, doctor, illness, alco-
holic, disease, drugs, pills, anorexic

Table 3: Example words for identifying H level of
SD. Categories are hand-labeled.

generally keep as secrests. With this intuition, we
crawled 26,523 secret posts from Six Billion Se-
crets 1 site where users post secrets anonymously.

To extract seed words that might express secre-
tive personal information, we compute mutual in-
formation (Manning et al., 2008) with the secret
posts and 24,610 randomly selected tweets. We
select 1,000 words with high mutual information
and filter out stop words. Table 3 shows some of
these words. To extract seed trigrams of secretive
wishes, we again look for trigrams that start with
‘I’ or ‘my’, occur more than 200 times, and select
trigrams of wishful thinking, such as ‘I want to’,
and ‘I wish I’. In total, there are 88 seed words
and 8 seed trigrams for H.

3.4 Inference
For posterior inference of SDTM, we use col-
lapsed Gibbs sampling which integrates out la-
tent random variables ω,π,θ, and φ. Then we
only need to compute y, r and z for each tweet.
We compute full conditional distribution p(yct =
j′, rct = l′, zct = k′|y−ct, r−ct, z−ct,w,x) for
tweet ct as follows:

p(yct = 0, zct = k′|y−ct, r−ct, z−ct,w,x)
∝ exp(λ0 · xct)∑1

j=0 exp(λj · xct)
g(c, t, l′, k′)

p(yct = 1, rct = l′, zct = k′|y−ct, r−ct, z−ct,w,x)
∝ exp(λ1 · xct)∑1

j=0 exp(λj · xct)
(γl′ + n

(−ct)
cl′ ) g(c, t, l

′, k′)

where z−ct, r−ct,y−ct are z, r,y without tweet
ct, mctk′(·) is the marginalized sum over word v of
mctk′v and the function g(c, t, l′, k′) as follows:

g(c, t, l′, k′) =
Γ(
∑V

v=1 β
l′
v + n

l′−(ct)
k′v )

Γ(
∑V

v=1 β
l′
v + n

l′−(ct)
k′v +mctk′(·))(

αk′ + n
l′(−ct)
ck′∑K

k=1 αk + n
l′
ck

)
V∏

v=1

Γ(βl
′

v + n
l′−(ct)
k′v +mctk′v)

Γ(βl′v + n
l′−(ct)
k′v )

1http://www.sixbillionsecrets.com

4 Data Collection and Annotation

To answer our research questions, we need a
large longitudinal dataset of conversations such
that we can analyze the relationship between self-
disclosure behavior and conversation frequency
over time. We chose to crawl Twitter because it
offers a practical and large source of conversations
(Ritter et al., 2010). Others have also analyzed
Twitter conversations for natural language and so-
cial media research (Boyd et al., 2010; Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2011), but we collect con-
versations from the same set of dyads over several
months for a unique longitudinal dataset.

4.1 Collecting Twitter conversations

We define a Twitter conversation as a chain of
tweets where two users are consecutively replying
to each other’s tweets using the Twitter reply but-
ton. We identify dyads of English-tweeting users
with at least twenty conversations and collect their
tweets. We use an open source tool for detect-
ing English tweets 2, and to protect users’ privacy,
we replace Twitter userid, usernames and url in
tweets with random strings. This dataset consists
of 101,686 users, 61,451 dyads, 1,956,993 conver-
sations and 17,178,638 tweets which were posted
between August 2007 to July 2013.

4.2 Annotating self-disclosure level

To measure the accuracy of our model, we ran-
domly sample 101 conversations, each with ten
or fewer tweets, and ask three judges, fluent in
English, to annotate each tweet with the level of
self-disclosure. Judges first read and discussed
the definitions and examples of self-disclosure
level shown in (Barak and Gluck-Ofri, 2007), then
they worked separately on a Web-based platform.
Inter-rater agreement using Fleiss kappa (Fleiss,
1971) is 0.67.

5 Classification of Self-Disclosure Level

This section describes experiments and results of
SDTM as well as several other methods for classi-
fication of self-disclosure level.

We first start with the annotated dataset in sec-
tion 4.2 in which each tweet is annotated with SD
level. We then aggregate all of the tweets of a
conversation, and we compute the proportions of
tweets in each SD level. When the proportion of

2https://github.com/shuyo/ldig

45



tweets at M or H level is equal to or greater than 0.2,
we take the level of the larger proportion and as-
sign that level to the conversation. When the pro-
portions of tweets at M or H level are both less than
0.2, we assign G to the SD level.

We compare SDTM with the following methods
for classifying tweets for SD level:

• LDA (Blei et al., 2003): A Bayesian topic
model. Each conversation is treated as a doc-
ument. Used in previous work (Bak et al.,
2012).

• MedLDA (Zhu et al., 2012): A super-
vised topic model for document classifica-
tion. Each conversation is treated as a doc-
ument and response variable can be mapped
to a SD level.

• LIWC (Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010):
Word counts of particular categories. Used
in previous work (Houghton and Joinson,
2012).

• Seed words and trigrams (SEED): Occur-
rence of seed words and trigrams which are
described in section 3.3.

• ASUM (Jo and Oh, 2011): A joint model of
sentiment and topic using seed words. Each
sentiment can be mapped to a SD level. Used
in previous work (Bak et al., 2012).

• First-person pronouns (FirstP): Occurrence
of first-person pronouns which are described
in section 3.2. To identify first-person pro-
nouns, we tagged parts of speech in each
tweet with the Twitter POS tagger (Owoputi
et al., 2013).

SEED, LIWC, LDA and FirstP cannot be used
directly for classification, so we use Maximum en-
tropy model with outputs of each of those models
as features. We run MedLDA, ASUM and SDTM
20 times each and compute the average accuracies
and F-measure for each level. We set 40 topics
for LDA, MedLDA and ASUM, 60; 40; 40 top-
ics for SDTM KG,KM and KH respectively, and
set α = γ = 0.1. To incorporate the seed words
and trigrams into ASUM and SDTM, we initial-
ize βG,βM and βH differently. We assign a high
value of 2.0 for each seed word and trigram for
that level, and a low value of 10−6 for each word
that is a seed word for another level, and a default

Method Acc G F1 M F1 H F1 Avg F1
LDA 49.2 0.000 0.650 0.050 0.233
MedLDA 43.3 0.406 0.516 0.093 0.338
LIWC 49.2 0.341 0.607 0.180 0.376
SEED 52.0 0.412 0.600 0.178 0.397
ASUM 56.6 0.320 0.704 0.375 0.466
FirstP 63.2 0.630 0.689 0.095 0.472
SDTM 64.5 0.611 0.706 0.431 0.583

Table 4: SD level classification accuracies and F-
measures using annotated data. Acc is accuracy,
and G F1 is F-measure for classifying the G level.
Avg F1 is the average value of G F1, M F1 and H
F1. SDTM outperforms all other methods com-
pared. The difference between SDTM and FirstP
is statistically significant (p-value < 0.05 for ac-
curacy, < 0.0001 for Avg F1).

value of 0.01 for all other words. This approach
is same as other topic model works (Jo and Oh,
2011; Kim et al., 2013).

As Table 4 shows, SDTM performs better than
other methods by accuracy and F-measure. LDA
and MedLDA generally show the lowest perfor-
mance, which is not surprising given these mod-
els are quite general and not tuned specifically
for this type of semi-supervised classification task.
LIWC and SEED perform better than LDA, but
these have quite low F-measure for G and H lev-
els. ASUM shows better performance for classi-
fying H level than others, but not for classifying
the G level. FirstP shows good F-measure for the
G level, but the H level F-measure is quite low,
even lower than SEED. Finally, SDTM has sim-
ilar performance in G and M level with FirstP, but
it performs better in H level than others. Classi-
fying the H level well is important because as we
will discuss later, the H level has the strongest rela-
tionship with longitudinal OSN usage (see Section
6.2), so SDTM is overall the best model for clas-
sifying self-disclosure levels.

6 Self-Disclosure and Conversation
Frequency

In this section, we investigate whether there is a
relationship between self-disclosure and conversa-
tion frequency over time. (Trepte and Reinecke,
2013) showed that frequent or high-level of self-
disclosure in online social networks (OSN) con-
tributes positively to OSN usage, and vice versa.
They showed this through an online survey with

46



Facebook and StudiVZ users. With SDTM, we
can automatically classify self-disclosure level of
a large number of conversations, so we investi-
gate whether there is a similar relationship be-
tween self-disclosure in conversations and subse-
quent frequency of conversations with the same
partner on Twitter. More specifically, we ask the
following two questions:

1. If a dyad displays high SD level in their con-
versations at a particular time period, would
they have more frequent conversations subse-
quently?

2. If a dyad shows high conversation frequency
at a particular time period, would they dis-
play higher SD in their subsequent conver-
sations?

6.1 Experiment Setup

We first run SDTM with all of our Twitter con-
versation data with 150; 120; 120 topics for
SDTM KG,KM and KH respectively. The
hyper-parameters are the same as in section 5. To
handle a large dataset, we employ a distributed al-
gorithm (Newman et al., 2009).

Table 5 shows some of the topics that were
prominent in each SD level by KL-divergence. As
expected, G level includes general topics such as
food, celebrity, soccer and IT devices, M level in-
cludes personal communication and birthday, and
finally, H level includes sickness and profanity.

For comparing conversation frequencies over
time, we divided the conversations into two sets
for each dyad. For the initial period, we include
conversations from the dyad’s first conversation to
60 days later. And for the subsequent period,
we include conversations during the subsequent 30
days.

We compute proportions of conversation for
each SD level for each dyad in the initial and
subsequent periods. Also, we define a new mea-
surement, SD level score for a dyad in the period,
which is a weighted sum of each conversation with
SD levels mapped to 1, 2, and 3, for the levels G,
M, and H, respectively.

6.2 Does self-disclosure lead to more frequent
conversations?

We investigate the effect of the level self-
disclosure on long-term use of OSN. We run lin-
ear regression with the intial SD level score as

1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0

Initial SD level

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

#
 C

o
n
v
e
rs

a
ct

io
n
 c

h
a
n
g
e
s 

p
ro

p
o
rt

io
n
 o

v
e
r 

ti
m

e

Figure 3: Relationship between initial SD level
and conversation frequency changes over time.
The solid line is the linear regression line, and the
coefficient is 0.118 with p < 0.001, which shows
a significant positive relationship.

G level M level H level
Coeff (β) 0.094 0.419 0.464
p-value 0.1042 < 0.0001 < 0.0001

Table 6: Relationship between initial SD level
proportions and changes in conversation fre-
quency. For M and H levels, there is significant
positive relationship (p < 0.0001), but for the G
level, there is not (p > 0.1).

the independent variable, and the rate of change
in conversation frequency between initial period
and subsequent period as the dependent variable.

The result of regression is that the independent
variable’s coefficient is 0.118 with a low p-value
(p < 0.001). Figure 3 shows the scatter plot with
the regression line, and we can see that the slope
of regression line is positive.

We also investigate the importance of each SD
level for changes in conversation frequency. We
run linear regression with initial proportions of
each SD level as the independent variable, and
the same dependent variable as above. As ta-
ble 6 shows, there is no significant relationship
between the initial proportion of the G level and
the changes in conversation frequency (p > 0.1).
But for the M and H levels, the initial proportions
show positive and significant relationships with
the subsequent changes to the conversation fre-
quency (p < 0.0001). These results show that M
and H levels are correlated with changes to the fre-
quency of conversation.

47



G level M level H level
101 184 176 36 104 82 113 33 19

chocolate obama league send twitter going ass better lips
butter he’s win email follow party bitch sick kisses
good romney game i’ll tumblr weekend fuck feel love
cake vote season sent tweet day yo throat smiles

peanut right team dm following night shit cold softly
milk president cup address account dinner fucking hope hand
sugar people city know fb birthday lmao pain eyes
cream good arsenal check followers tomorrow shut good neck

Table 5: High ranked topics in each level by comparing KL-divergence with other level’s topics

0 20 40 60 80 100

Initial conversation frequency

1.80

1.85

1.90

1.95

2.00

2.05

S
u
b
se

q
u
e
n
t 

S
D

 l
e
v
e
l

Figure 4: Relationship between initial conversa-
tion frequency and subsequent SD level. The
solid line is the linear regression line, and the co-
efficient is 0.0016 with p < 0.0001, which shows
a significant positive relationship.

6.3 Does high frequency of conversation lead
to more self-disclosure?

Now we investigate whether the initial conversa-
tion frequency is correlated with the SD level in
the subsequent period. We run linear regression
with the initial conversation frequency as the inde-
pendent variable, and SD level in the subsequent
period as the dependent variable.

The regression coefficient is 0.0016 with low p-
value (p < 0.0001). Figure 4 shows the scatter
plot. We can see that the slope of the regression
line is positive. This result supports previous re-
sults in social psychology (Leung, 2002) that fre-
quency of instant chat program ICQ and session
time were correlated to depth of SD in message.

7 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we have presented the self-disclosure
topic model (SDTM) for discovering topics and

classifying SD levels from Twitter conversation
data. We devised a set of effective seed words and
trigrams, mined from a dataset of secrets. We also
annotated Twitter conversations to make a ground-
truth dataset for SD level. With annotated data, we
showed that SDTM outperforms previous methods
in classification accuracy and F-measure.

We also analyzed the relationship between SD
level and conversation frequency over time. We
found that there is a positive correlation between
initial SD level and subsequent conversation fre-
quency. Also, dyads show higher level of SD if
they initially display high conversation frequency.
These results support previous results in social
psychology research with more robust results from
a large-scale dataset, and show importance of
looking at SD behavior in OSN.

There are several future directions for this re-
search. First, we can improve our modeling for
higher accuracy and better interpretability. For
instance, SDTM only considers first-person pro-
nouns and topics. Naturally, there are patterns
that can be identified by humans but not captured
by pronouns and topics. Second, the number of
topics for each level is varied, and so we can
explore nonparametric topic models (Teh et al.,
2006) which infer the number of topics from the
data. Third, we can look at the relationship be-
tween self-disclosure behavior and general online
social network usage beyond conversations.

Acknowledgments

We thank the anonymous reviewers for helpful
comments. Alice Oh was supported by the IT
R&D Program of MSIP/KEIT. [10041313, UX-
oriented Mobile SW Platform]

48



References
JinYeong Bak, Suin Kim, and Alice Oh. 2012. Self-

disclosure and relationship strength in twitter con-
versations. In Proceedings of ACL.

Azy Barak and Orit Gluck-Ofri. 2007. Degree and
reciprocity of self-disclosure in online forums. Cy-
berPsychology & Behavior, 10(3):407–417.

David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 3:993–1022.

Danah Boyd, Scott Golder, and Gilad Lotan. 2010.
Tweet, tweet, retweet: Conversational aspects of
retweeting on twitter. In Proceedings of HICSS.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Michael Gamon,
and Susan Dumais. 2011. Mark my words!: Lin-
guistic style accommodation in social media. In
Proceedings of WWW.

Valerian J. Derlega, Sandra Metts, Sandra Petronio,
and Stephen T. Margulis. 1993. Self-Disclosure,
volume 5 of SAGE Series on Close Relationships.
SAGE Publications, Inc.

Joseph L Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale
agreement among many raters. Psychological bul-
letin, 76(5):378.

David J Houghton and Adam N Joinson. 2012.
Linguistic markers of secrets and sensitive self-
disclosure in twitter. In Proceedings of HICSS.

Yohan Jo and Alice H Oh. 2011. Aspect and senti-
ment unification model for online review analysis.
In Proceedings of WSDM.

Adam N Joinson and Carina B Paine. 2007. Self-
disclosure, privacy and the internet. The Oxford
handbook of Internet psychology, pages 237–252.

Sidney M Jourard. 1971. Self-disclosure: An experi-
mental analysis of the transparent self.

Suin Kim, JinYeong Bak, and Alice Haeyun Oh. 2012.
Do you feel what i feel? social aspects of emotions
in twitter conversations. In Proceedings of ICWSM.

Suin Kim, Jianwen Zhang, Zheng Chen, Alice Oh, and
Shixia Liu. 2013. A hierarchical aspect-sentiment
model for online reviews. In Proceedings of AAAI.

Andrew M Ledbetter, Joseph P Mazer, Jocelyn M DeG-
root, Kevin R Meyer, Yuping Mao, and Brian Swaf-
ford. 2011. Attitudes toward online social con-
nection and self-disclosure as predictors of facebook
communication and relational closeness. Communi-
cation Research, 38(1):27–53.

Louis Leung. 2002. Loneliness, self-disclosure, and
icq (” i seek you”) use. CyberPsychology & Behav-
ior, 5(3):241–251.

Christopher D Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and
Hinrich Schütze. 2008. Introduction to information
retrieval, volume 1. Cambridge University Press
Cambridge.

Erika McCallister. 2010. Guide to protecting the confi-
dentiality of personally identifiable information. DI-
ANE Publishing.

Arjun Mukherjee, Vivek Venkataraman, Bing Liu, and
Sharon Meraz. 2013. Public dialogue: Analysis of
tolerance in online discussions. In Proceedings of
ACL.

David Newman, Arthur Asuncion, Padhraic Smyth,
and Max Welling. 2009. Distributed algorithms
for topic models. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 10:1801–1828.

Olutobi Owoputi, Brendan OConnor, Chris Dyer,
Kevin Gimpel, Nathan Schneider, and Noah A
Smith. 2013. Improved part-of-speech tagging for
online conversational text with word clusters. In
Proceedings of HLT-NAACL.

Alan Ritter, Colin Cherry, and Bill Dolan. 2010. Unsu-
pervised modeling of twitter conversations. In Pro-
ceedings of HLT-NAACL.

Charles Steinfield, Nicole B Ellison, and Cliff Lampe.
2008. Social capital, self-esteem, and use of on-
line social network sites: A longitudinal analy-
sis. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology,
29(6):434–445.

Yla R Tausczik and James W Pennebaker. 2010. The
psychological meaning of words: Liwc and comput-
erized text analysis methods. Journal of Language
and Social Psychology.

Yee Whye Teh, Michael I Jordan, Matthew J Beal, and
David M Blei. 2006. Hierarchical dirichlet pro-
cesses. Journal of the american statistical associ-
ation, 101(476).

Sabine Trepte and Leonard Reinecke. 2013. The re-
ciprocal effects of social network site use and the
disposition for self-disclosure: A longitudinal study.
Computers in Human Behavior, 29(3):1102 – 1112.

Sarah I Vondracek and Fred W Vondracek. 1971. The
manipulation and measurement of self-disclosure in
preadolescents. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly of Behav-
ior and Development, 17(1):51–58.

Thomas Ashby Wills. 1985. Supportive functions
of interpersonal relationships. Social support and
health, xvii:61–82.

Wayne Xin Zhao, Jing Jiang, Hongfei Yan, and Xiaom-
ing Li. 2010. Jointly modeling aspects and opin-
ions with a maxent-lda hybrid. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.

Jun Zhu, Amr Ahmed, and Eric P Xing. 2012. Medlda:
maximum margin supervised topic models. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 13:2237–2278.

49


