



















































Text simplification using synchronous dependency grammars: Generalising automatically harvested rules


Proceedings of the 8th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 16–25,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19-21 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Text simplification using synchronous dependency grammars:
Generalising automatically harvested rules

M.A. Angrosh
Computing Science

University of Aberdeen, UK
angroshmandya@abdn.ac.uk

Advaith Siddharthan
Computing Science

University of Aberdeen, UK
advaith@abdn.ac.uk

Abstract

We present an approach to text simplifi-
cation based on synchronous dependency
grammars. Our main contributions in this
work are (a) a study of how automatically
derived lexical simplification rules can be
generalised to enable their application in
new contexts without introducing errors,
and (b) an evaluation of our hybrid sys-
tem that combines a large set of automat-
ically acquired rules with a small set of
hand-crafted rules for common syntactic
simplification. Our evaluation shows sig-
nificant improvements over the state of the
art, with scores comparable to human sim-
plifications.

1 Introduction

Text simplification is the process of reducing the
linguistic complexity of a text, while still retain-
ing the original information content and mean-
ing. Text Simplification is often thought of as
consisting of two components - syntactic simpli-
fication and lexical simplification. While syntac-
tic simplification aims at reducing the grammatical
complexity of a sentence, lexical simplification fo-
cuses on replacing difficult words or short phrases
by simpler variants.

Traditionally, entirely different approaches have
been used for lexical (Devlin and Tait, 1998; Bi-
ran et al., 2011; Yatskar et al., 2010; Specia et
al., 2012) and syntactic simplification (Canning,
2002; Chandrasekar et al., 1996; Siddharthan,
2011; De Belder and Moens, 2010; Candido Jr
et al., 2009). Recent years have seen the applica-
tion of machine translation inspired approaches to
text simplification. These approaches learn from
aligned English and Simplified English sentences
extracted from the Simple English Wikipedia
(SEW) corpus (simple.wikipedia.org). However,
even these approaches (Woodsend and Lapata,

2011; Wubben et al., 2012; Coster and Kauchak,
2011; Zhu et al., 2010) struggle to elegantly model
the range of lexical and syntactic simplification
operations observed in the monolingual simplifi-
cation task within one framework, often differen-
tiating between operation at leaf nodes of parse
trees (lexical) and internal tree nodes (syntactic).
The key issue is the modelling of context for appli-
cation of lexical rules. While syntactic rules (for
splitting conjoined clauses, or disembedding rela-
tive clauses) are typically not context dependent,
words are typically polysemous and can only be
replaced by others in appropriate contexts.

Our main contribution in this paper is to present
a unified framework for representing rules for syn-
tactic and lexical simplification (including para-
phrase involving multiple words), and study for
the first time how the definition of context affects
system performance. A second contribution is to
provide a substantial human evaluation (63 sen-
tences and 70 participants) to evaluate contempo-
rary text simplification systems against manually
simplified output.

2 Related work

Text simplification systems are characterised by
the level of linguistic knowledge they encode, and
by whether their simplification rules are hand-
crafted or automatically acquired from a corpus.

In recent times, the availability of a corpus of
aligned English Wikipedia (EW) and Simple En-
glish Wikipedia (SEW) sentences has lead to the
application of various “monolingual translation”
approaches to text simplification. Phrase Based
Machine Translation (PBMT) systems (Specia,
2010; Coster and Kauchak, 2011; Wubben et al.,
2012) use the least linguistic knowledge (only
word sequences), and as such are ill equipped to
handle simplifications that require morphological
changes, syntactic reordering or sentence splitting.

Zhu et al. (2010) in contrast present an ap-
proach based on syntax-based SMT (Yamada and

16



Knight, 2001). Their translation model encodes
probabilities for four specific rewrite operations
on the parse trees of the input sentences: substitu-
tion, reordering, splitting, and deletion. Woodsend
and Lapata (2011) propose quasi-synchronous tree
substitution grammars (QTSG) for a similarly
wide range of simplification operations as well as
lexical substitution. Narayan and Gardent (2014)
combine PMBT for local paraphrase with a syn-
tactic splitting component based on a deep seman-
tic representation. None of these systems model
morphological information, which means some
simplification operations such as voice conversion
cannot be handled correctly.

Against this limitation, hand-crafted systems
have an advantage here, as they tend to encode the
maximum linguistic information. We have previ-
ously described systems (Siddharthan, 2010; Sid-
dharthan, 2011) that can perform voice conversion
accurately and use transformation rules that en-
code morphological changes as well as deletions,
re-orderings, substitutions and sentence splitting.
On the other hand, such hand-crafted systems are
limited in scope to syntactic simplificatio as there
are too many lexico-syntactic and lexical simplifi-
cations to enumerate by hand. We have also previ-
ously described how to construct a hybrid system
that combines automatically derived lexical rules
with hand-crafted syntactic rules within a single
framework (Siddharthan and Mandya, 2014). We
extend that work here by describing how such au-
tomatically learnt rules can be generalised.

3 Simplification using synchronous
dependency grammars

We follow the architecture proposed in Ding and
Palmer (2005) for Synchronous Dependency In-
sertion Grammars, reproduced in Fig. 1.

In this paper, we focus on the decomposition of
a dependency parse into Elementary Trees (ETs),
and the learning of rules to transduce a source
ET to a target ET. We use the datasets of Coster
and Kauchak (2011) and Woodsend and Lapata

Input Sentence −→ Dependency Parse −→ Source ETs
↓

ET Transfer

↓
Output Sentences ←− Generation ←− Target ETs

Figure 1: System Architecture

storm
advmod

intensive
advmod

most

storm
advmod

strongest

Figure 2: Transduction of Elementary Trees (ETs)

(2011) for learning rules. These datasets consist
of ∼140K aligned simplified and original sentence
pairs obtained from Simple English Wikipedia and
English Wikipedia. The rules are acquired in the
format required by the RegenT text simplification
system (Siddharthan, 2011), which is used to im-
plement the simplification. This requires depen-
dency parses from the Stanford Parser (De Marn-
effe et al., 2006), and generates output sentences
from dependency parses using the generation-light
approach described in (Siddharthan, 2011).

3.1 Acquiring rules from aligned sentences

To acquire a synchronous grammar from depen-
dency parses of aligned English and simple En-
glish sentences, we just need to identify the dif-
ferences. For example, consider two aligned sen-
tences from the aligned corpus described in Wood-
send and Lapata (2011):

1. (a) It was the second most intensive storm on the
planet in 1989.

(b) It was the second strongest storm on the planet in
1989.

An automatic comparison of the dependency
parses for the two sentences (using the Stanford
Parser) reveals that there are two typed dependen-
cies that occur only in the parse of the first sen-
tence, and one that occur only in the parse of the
second sentence. Thus, to convert the first sen-
tence into the second, we need to delete two de-
pendencies and introduce one other. From this ex-
ample, we extract the following rule:

RULE 1: MOST_INTENSIVE2STRONGEST

1. DELETE

(a) advmod(?X0[intensive], ?X1[most])
(b) advmod(?X2[storm], ?X0[intensive])

2. INSERT

(a) advmod(?X2, ?X3[strongest])

The rule contains variables (?Xn), which can be
forced to match certain words in square brackets.

17



Such deletion and insertion operations are cen-
tral to text simplification, but a few other oper-
ations are also needed to avoid broken depen-
dency links in the Target ETs. These are enu-
merated in (Siddharthan, 2011) and will not be re-
produced here for shortage of space. By collect-
ing such rules, we can produce a meta-grammar
that can translate dependency parses in one lan-
guage (English) into the other (simplified En-
glish). The rule above will translate “most in-
tensive” to “strongest”, in the immediate lexical
context of “storm”. For ease of presentation, we
present the ET Transfer component as transforma-
tion rules, but this rule can also be presented as a
transduction of elementary trees (Fig. 2).

3.2 Generalising rules

It is clear that the rule shown above will only be
applied if three different words (“storm”, “most”
and “intensive”) occur in the exact syntax speci-
fied on the left hand side of Figure 2. The rule
is correct, but of limited use, for “most intensive”
can be simplified to “strongest” only when it mod-
ifies the word “storm”.

The modelling of lexical context is a partic-
ular weak point in previous work; for instance,
Woodsend and Lapata (2011), in their quasi-
synchronous tree substitution grammar, remove all
lexical context for lexical simplification rules, to
facilitate their application in new contexts. Simi-
larly, phrase-based machine translation can default
to lexical simplification using word level align-
ments if longer substrings from the input text are
not found in the alignment table. However, as
words can have different senses, lexical substitu-
tion without a lexical context model is error prone.

Our goals here are to enumerate methods to
generalise rules, and to evaluate performance on
unseen sentences. All the methods described are
automated, and do not require manual effort.

Generalising from multiple instances: A sin-
gle rule can be created from multiple instances in
the training data. For example, if the modifier “ex-
tensive” has been simplified to “big” in the con-
text of a variety of words in the ?X0 position, this
can be represented succinctly as “?X0[networks,
avalanches, blizzard, controversy]”. Note that this
list provides valid lexical contexts for application
of the rule. If the word is seen in sufficient con-
texts, we make it universal by removing the list.
Rule 2 below states that any of the words in “[ex-

tensive, large, massive, sizable, major, powerful,
giant]” can be replaced by “big” in any lexical
context ?X0, provided the syntactic context is an
amod relation. To de-lexicalise context in this
manner, each lexical substitution needs to have
been observed in 10 different contexts. While not
foolproof, this ensures that lexical context is re-
moved only for common simplifications, which
are more likely to be independent of context.

RULE 2: *2BIG

1. DELETE
(a) amod(?X0, ?X1[extensive, large, massive, siz-

able, major, powerful, giant])

2. INSERT
(a) amod(?X0, ?X2[big])

Reducing context size: Often, single lexical
changes result in multiple relations in the INSERT
and DELETE lists. Rule 3 shows a rule where the
verb “amend” has been simplified to “change”, in
a context where the direct object is “Constitution”
and there is an infinitive modifier relation to “pro-
posals”, using the auxiliary “to”.

RULE 3: AMEND2CHANGE

1. DELETE
(a) aux(?X0[amend], ?X1[to])
(b) infmod(?X2[proposals], ?X0[amend])
(c) dobj(?X0[amend], ?X3[Constitution])

2. INSERT
(a) aux(?X4[change], ?X1)
(b) infmod(?X2, ?X4)
(c) dobj(?X4, ?X3)

3. MOVE
(a) ?X0 ?X4

Rule 3 also shows the MOVE command created
to move any other relations (edges) involving the
node ?X0 to the newly created node ?X4. The
MOVE list is automatically created when a vari-
able (?X0) is present in the DELETE list but not
in the INSERT list and ensures correct rule appli-
cation in new contexts where there might be addi-
tional modifiers connected to the deleted word.

Rule 3 clearly encodes too much context. In
such cases, we reduce the context by creating three
rules, each with a reduced context of one relation
(aux, infmod or dobj); for example:

RULE 3A: AMEND2CHANGE3

1. DELETE: dobj(?X0[amend], ?X1[Constitution])

2. INSERT: dobj(?X2[change], ?X1)

3. MOVE: ?X0 ?X2

18



In this paper, we generate rules with each pos-
sible lexical context, but one could filter out rela-
tions such as aux that provide a lexical context of a
closed class word. The generalised Rule 3A makes
clear the need for the MOVE operation, which is
implemented in RegenT by rewriting ?X0 as ?X2
in the entire dependency parse after rule applica-
tion. We will omit the MOVE command where it
is not required to save space.

Extracting elementary trees: It is possible for
the DELETE and INSERT lists to contain mul-
tiple simplification rules; i.e., multiple transduc-
tions over ETs (connected graphs). We need to en-
sure that each extracted rule contains a connected
graph in the DELETE list. Where this is not the
case, we split the rule into multiple rules. An ex-
ample follows where three independent simplifi-
cations have been performed on a sentence:

4. (a) As a general rule , with an increase in elevation
comes a decrease in temperature and an increase
in precipitation .

(b) As a normal rule , with an increase in height
comes a decrease in temperature and an increase
in rain .

The original extracted rule contains three rela-
tions with no variable in common:

RULE 4: INDEPENDENTELEMENTARYTREES

1. DELETE

(a) amod(?X0[rule], ?X1[general])
(b) prep_in(?X2[comes], ?X3[elevation])
(c) prep_in(?X4[increase], ?X5[precipitation])

2. INSERT

(a) amod(?X0, ?X6[normal])
(b) prep_in(?X2, ?X7[height])
(c) prep_in(?X4, ?X8[rain])

Relations with no variables in common belong
to separate ETs, so we create three new rules:

RULE 4A

DELETE: amod(?X0[rule], ?X1[general])

INSERT: amod(?X0, ?X6[normal])

RULE 4B

DELETE: prep_in(?X2[comes], ?X3[elevation])

INSERT: prep_in(?X2, ?X7[height])

RULE 4C

DELETE: prep_in(?X4[increase], ?X5[precipitation])

INSERT: prep_in(?X4, ?X8[rain])

Removing lexical context from longer rules:
While preserving lexical context is important to
avoid meaning change in new contexts due to pol-
ysemy (this claim is evaluated in §3.5), it is unnec-
essary for longer rules involving more than one re-
lation, as these tend to encode longer paraphrases
with more standardised meanings. We thus re-
move the lexical context for rules involving multi-
ple relations in the DELETE list1.

3.3 Overview of extracted ruleset

In addition to the generalisation steps described
above, we also automatically filtered out rules
that were undesired for various reasons. As we
use manually written rules in RegenT for com-
mon syntactic simplification (as described in Sid-
dharthan (2011)), we filter out rules that involve
dependency relations for passive voice, relative
clauses, apposition, coordination and subordina-
tion. We also filter out rules with relations that are
error-prone, based on a manual inspection. These
involved single lexical changes involving the fol-
lowing dependencies: det and num (rules that
change one determiner to another, or one number
to another) and poss and pobj that mostly appeared
in rules due to errorful parses. We also automat-
ically filtered out errorful rules using the training
set as follows: we applied the rules to the source
sentence from which they were derived, and fil-
tered out rules that did not generate the target sen-
tence accurately. Finally, we restricted the number
of relations in either the DELETE or INSERT list
to a maximum of three, as longer rules were never
being applied.

Tab. 1 shows how the filters and generalisation
influence the number of rules derived involving 1–
5 relations in each of the DELETE and INSERT
lists. In addition, we also extract rules where the
DELETE list is longer than the INSERT list; i.e.,
simplification that result in sentence shortening
(e.g., Rule 1 in Section 3.1).

Tab. 2 provides details of the final number of fil-
tered and generalised rules for different lengths of
the DELETE and INSERT lists. The ruleset shown
in Tab. 2 will henceforth be referred to as WIKI.

3.4 Generalising context with WordNet

To generalise the context of lexical simplification
rules further, we now consider the use of WordNet

1Lexical context is defined as lexical specifications on
variables occurring in both the DELETE and INSERT lists;
i.e., words that are unchanged by the simplification.

19



DELETE INSERT IS FS GS
1 1 1111 593 4250
2 2 1051 357 171
3 3 1108 178 52
4 4 831 - -
5 5 628 - -

Table 1: Number of extracted rules where the IN-
SERT and DELETE lists contain 1–5 relations (IS:
initial set; FS: filtered set; GS: generalised set)

in expanding lexical context. The idea is that the
lexical specification of context variables in rules
can be expanded by identifying related words in
WordNet. We propose to use Lin’s similarity mea-
sure (Lin, 1998), an information content based
similarity measure for our experiments as infor-
mation content based measures are observed to
perform better in deriving similar terms, in com-
parison to other methods (Budanitsky and Hirst,
2006). Lin’s formula is based on Resnik’s. Let
IC(c) = −log p(c) be the information content of
a concept (synset) in WordNet, where p(c) is the
likelihood of seeing the concept (or any of its hy-
ponyms) in a corpus. Resnik defines the similar-
ity of two concepts c1 and c2 as simres(c1, c2) =
maxc∈S(c1,c2)IC(c), the IC of the most specific
class c that subsumes both c1 and c2. Lin’s for-
mula normalises this by the IC of each class:

simlin(c1, c2) =
2.simres(c1, c2)

IC(c1) + IC(c2)

Our next goal is to explore how the definition
of lexical context impacts on a text simplification
system.

3.5 Evaluation

To evaluate our work, we used the text simplifi-
cation tool RegenT (Siddharthan, 2011) to apply
different versions of the acquired rule sets to a test
dataset. For example, consider the following rule
shown in 6(a). This is the original rule extracted
from the training data (cf. Tab. 2).

RULE 6(A): RULE-WIKI

1. DELETE

(a) nsubjpass(??X0[adapted], ??X1[limbs])

2. INSERT

(a) nsubjpass(??X0, ??X2[legs])

This rule is transformed to a no-context rule in
6(b), where words such as “adapted” that occur in

DELETE / INSERT 1 2 3 4 5
1 Relation 4250
2 Relations 110 171
3 Relations 91 165 52
4 Relations 49 71 209 -
5 Relations 24 44 80 - -

Table 2: Details of rules derived with different
length in DELETE and INSERT relations

both the DELETE and INSERT lists are removed
entirely from the rule:

RULE 6(B): NO-CONTEXT

1. DELETE

(a) nsubjpass(??X0, ??X1[limbs])

2. INSERT

(a) nsubjpass(??X0, ??X2[legs])

Finally the rule in 6(c), expands the context
word “adapted” using WordNet classes with Lin’s
similarity greater than 0.1.

RULE 6(C): RULE-WITH-WORDNET0.1-CONTEXT

1. DELETE

(a) nsubjpass(??X0[accommodated,adapted,adjusted,
altered,assimilated,changed,complied,
conformed,fited,followed,geared,heeded,
listened,minded,moved,obeyed,oriented,
pitched,tailored,varied],??X1[limbs])

2. INSERT

(a) nsubjpass(??X0, ??X2[legs])

Evaluation of generalisability of rules: We
expanded the context of rules derived from
Wikipedia using various thresholds such as 0.1,
0.4 and 0.8 for Lin similarity measure and eval-
uated how many simplification operations were
performed on the first 11,000 sentences from the
dataset of Coster and Kauchak (2011). The details
of rules applied on the test dataset, using differ-
ent thresholds along with the Wiki-context and no-
context rules are provided in Tab. 3. As seen, there
is an increase in the application of rules with the
decrease in threshold for Lin similarity measure.
Removing the lexical context entirely results in an
even larger increase in rule application. Next, we
evaluate the correctness of rule application.

Evaluation of correctness of rule application:
To test the correctness of the rule applications with

20



Rule Version Rules % Change
Wikicontext 7610

WordNet context (0.8) 7870 3.41
WordNetcontext (0.4) 8488 11.85
WordNetcontext (0.1) 10715 40.80

Nocontext 31589 315.09

Table 3: Application of different versions of rules
on test dataset (% change is the increase in the
application of rules between Wiki-context and the
corresponding version)

different rule sets, we performed a human evalua-
tion to gauge how fluent and simple the simpli-
fied sentences were, and to what extent they pre-
served the meaning of the original. We compared
three versions in this experiment: the original rule-
set, the context expanded using SimLin >= 0.1
(40% increase in rule applications) and with no
lexicalised context (315% increase in rule applica-
tions). The goal is to identify a level of generalisa-
tion that increases rule application in new contexts
without introducing more errors.

We used the first 11,000 sentences from the
dataset of Coster and Kauchak (2011), the same
dataset used for rule acquisition. We extracted at
random 30 sentences where a simplification had
been performed using the original ruleset. This
gives an upper bound on the performance of the
original Wikipedia-context ruleset, as these are all
sentences from which the rules have been derived.

We then selected a further 30 sentences where
a simplification had been performed using the
WordNet-context (Lin=0.1), but not with the origi-
nal ruleset. These are new applications of the gen-
eralised ruleset on sentences that it hasn’t directly
learnt rules from. Similarly, we selected a fur-
ther 30 sentences where a simplification had been
performed using the no-context ruleset, but not
the Wikipedia-context or WordNet-context rule-
sets. Thus each set of 30 sentences contains new
applications of the ruleset, as the lexical context is
expanded, or abandoned completely.

This process gave us a total of 90 sentences to
evaluate. We recruited participants through Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk. Participants were filtered to
be in the US and have an approval rating of 80%.
These raters were shown 30 examples, each con-
taining an original Wikipedia sentence followed
by one of the simplified versions (WI, WN or NC).
Order of presentation was random. For each such
pair, raters were asked to rate each simplified ver-
sion for fluency, simplicity and the extent to which

it preserved the meaning of the original. The ex-
periment provided 917 ratings for 90 sentences in-
volving 28 raters. We used a Likert scale of 1–5,
where 1 is totally unusable output, and 5 is the out-
put that is perfectly usable.

The mean values and the standard deviation
for fluency, simplicity and meaning preservation
for sentences simplified using WordNet (Lin=0.1),
Wiki and no context is shown in Tab. 4. As seen,
the difference between the mean values for all
three criteria of fluency, simplicity and meaning
preservation between WordNet and Wiki version
is very small as compared to simplified sentences
with no-context rules. An analysis of variance
(ANOVA) test was conducted to measure the ef-
fect of fluency, simplicity and meaning preserva-
tion for versions of simplified text.

Fluency: A one-way ANOVA conducted to
evaluate fluency for versions of simplified text
showed a highly significant effect of version (WN,
WC, and NC) on the fluency score (F=51.54,
p=2x10-16). A Tukey’s pairwise comparison test
(Tukey’s HSD, overall alpha level = 0.05) indi-
cated significant difference between WI and NC
and between WN and NC at p = 0.01. However,
the difference between WN and WI was not sig-
nificant at p = 0.01.

Simplicity: The ANOVA conducted to evaluate
simplicity for different versions also showed a sig-
nificant effect of version on the simplicity score
(F=76.7, p=2x10-16). A Tukey’s pairwise compar-
ison test (Tukey’s HSD, overall alpha level = 0.05)
indicated significant difference between WN and
NC and WI and NC (p < 0.01). However, the dif-
ference between WN and WI was not significant
at p = 0.01.

Meaning Preservation: The ANOVA conducted
to evaluate meaning preservation for versions of
simplified text also showed a highly significant ef-
fect of version on the meaning preservation score
(F=17.22, p=4.55x10-08). A Tukey’s pairwise
comparison test (Tukey’s HSD, overall alpha level
= 0.05) indicated significant difference between
WN and NC and WI and NC (p < 0.01). How-
ever, the difference between WN and WI was not
significant at p = 0.01.

This study suggests that there is no significant
effect on accuracy of expanding the lexical con-
text using WordNet (Lin=0.1), even though this
results in an increase in rule application of 40%.
The study also confirms that there is a sharp and

21



Rater FLUENCY SIMPLICITY MEANING
WN WI NC WN WI NC WN WI NC

Mean 3.28 3.59 2.49 3.68 3.51 2.47 2.52 2.72 2.17
SD 1.38 1.31 1.44 1.32 1.28 1.34 1.12 1.11 1.27

Median 4 4 2 3 4 2 3 3 2

Table 4: Results of human evaluation of different versions of simplified text (WN: WordNet-context
(Lin=0.1); WI: Wikipedia-context; NC: No-context)

significant drop in accuracy from removing lexical
context altogether (the approach used by Wubben
et al. (2012), for example). Next, we perform an
evaluation of our hybrid text simplification sys-
tem, that augments the existing RegenT system
(Siddharthan, 2011), with its hand-written rules
for syntactic simplification, with the automatically
acquired lexicalised rules(the Lin=0.1 ruleset).

4 Hybrid text simplification system

The RegenT text simplification toolkit (Sid-
dharthan, 2011) is distributed with a small hand
crafted grammar for common syntactic simplifica-
tions: 26 hand-crafted rules for apposition, rela-
tive clauses, and combinations of the two; a fur-
ther 85 rules handle subordination and coordina-
tion (these are greater in number because they are
lexicalised on the conjunction); 11 further rules
cover voice conversion from passive to active; 38
rules for light verbs and various cleft construc-
tions; 99 rules to handle common verbose con-
structions described in the old GNU diction utility;
14 rules to standardise quotations.

The RegenT system does not have a decoder or
a planner. It also does not address discourse issues
such as those described in Siddharthan (2003a),
though it includes a component that improves
relative clause attachment based on Siddharthan
(2003b). It applies the simplification rules exhaus-
tively to the dependency parse; i.e., every rule for
which the DELETE list is matched is applied iter-
atively (see Siddharthan (2011) for details).

We have created a hybrid text simplification
system by integrating our automatically acquired
rules (lexical context extended using WordNet for
single change rules, and lexical context removed
for longer rules) with the existing RegenT system
as described above. This is sensible, as the ex-
isting manually written rules for syntactic simpli-
fication are more reliable than automatically ex-
tracted ones: They model morphological change,
allowing for a linguistically accurate treatment
of syntactic phenomenon such as voice change.
The current work addresses a major limitation

of hand-crafted text simplification systems—such
systems restrict themselves to syntactic simplifi-
cation, even though vocabulary plays a central role
in reading comprehension. We hope that the meth-
ods described here can extend a hand-crafted sys-
tem to create a hybrid text simplification system
that is accurate as well as wide coverage. We next
present a large scale manual evaluation of this hy-
brid system.

4.1 Evaluation

We performed a manual evaluation of how fluent
and simple the text produced by our simplifica-
tion system is, and the extent to which it preserves
meaning.

Our system (henceforth, HYBRID) is compared
to QTSG, the system by Woodsend and Lapata
(2011) that learns a quasi-synchronous tree substi-
tution grammar. This is the best performing sys-
tem in the literature with a similar scope to ours in
terms of the syntactic and lexical operations per-
formed 2. Further the two systems are trained on
the same data. QTSG relies entirely on an auto-
matically acquired grammar of 1431 rules. Our
automatically extracted grammar has 5466 lex-
icalised rules to augment the existing manually
written syntactic rules in RegenT.

We also compare the two systems to the manual
gold standard SEW, and against the original EW
sentences.

Data: We use the evaluation set previously used
by several others (Woodsend and Lapata, 2011;
Wubben et al., 2012; Zhu et al., 2010). This
consists of 100 sentences from English Wikipedia
(EW), aligned with Simple English Wikipedia
(SEW) sentences. These 100 sentences have been
excluded from our training data for rule acquisi-
tion, as is standard. Following the protocol of
Wubben et al. (2012), we used all the sentences
from the evaluation set for which both QTSG and

2The PBMT system of Wubben et al. (2012) reports better
results than QTSG, but is not directly comparable because
it does not perform sentence splitting, and also trains on a
different corpus of news headlines.

22



Rater FLUENCY SIMPLICITY MEANING
EW SEW QTSG HYB EW SEW QTSG HYB EW SEW QTSG HYB

Mean 3.99 4.06 1.97 3.52 3.43 3.58 2.33 3.73 - 4.03 2.23 3.40
SD 0.94 1.00 1.24 1.24 1.07 1.22 1.26 1.30 - 1.02 1.23 1.18

Median 4 4 1 4 3 4 2 4 - 4 2 3

Table 5: Results of human evaluation of different simplified texts (EW: English Wikipedia; SEW: Simple
English Wikipedia; QTSG: Woodsend and Lapata (2011) system; HYB: Our hybrid system)

HYBRID had performed at least one simplification
(as selecting sentences where no simplification is
performed by one system is likely to boost its flu-
ency and meaning preservation ratings). This gave
us a test set of 62 sentences from the original 100.

Method: We recruited participants on Amazon
Mechanical Turk, filtered to live in the US and
have an approval rating of 80%. These partici-
pants were shown examples containing the orig-
inal Wikipedia sentence, followed by QTSG, HY-
BRID and SEW in a randomised manner. For each
such set, they were asked to rate each simplified
version for fluency, simplicity and the extent to
which it preserved the meaning of the original.
Additionally, participants were also asked to rate
the fluency and simplicity of the original EW sen-
tence. We used a Likert scale of 1–5, where 1 is
totally unusable output, and 5 is output that is per-
fectly usable. The experiment resulted in obtain-
ing a total of 3669 ratings for 62 sentences involv-
ing 76 raters.

Results: The results are shown in Tab. 5. As
seen, our HYBRID system outperforms QTSG
in all three metrics and is indeed comparable to
the SEW version when one looks at the median
scores. Interestingly, our system performs better
than SEW with respect to simplicity, suggesting
that the hybrid system is indeed capable of a wide
range of simplification operations. The ANOVA
tests carried out to measure significant differences
between versions is presented below.

Fluency: A one-way ANOVA was conducted
to evaluate fluency for versions of simplified
text showed a highly significant effect of ver-
sion (EW, SEW, QTSG, HYBRID) on the flu-
ency score (F=695.2, p<10-16). A Tukey’s pair-
wise comparison test (Tukey’s HSD, overall al-
pha level = 0.05) indicated significant differences
between QTSG-EW; HYBRID-EW; HYBRID-
QTSG; SEW-QTSG; SEW-HYBRID at p = 0.01.

Simplicity: A one-way ANOVA conducted to
evaluate fluency for versions of simplified text
showed a highly significant effect of version

(EW, SEW, QTSG, HYBRID) on the simplic-
ity score (F=29.9, p<10-16). A Tukey’s pair-
wise comparison test (Tukey’s HSD, overall al-
pha level = 0.05) indicated significant differences
between QTSG-EW; HYBRID-EW; HYBRID-
QTSG; SEW-QTSG; all at p<0.01.

Meaning Preservation: A one-way ANOVA
conducted to evaluate meaning preservation for
versions of simplified text showed a highly sig-
nificant effect of version (EW, SEW, QTSG,
HYBRID) on the meaning preservation score
(F=578.1, p=2x10-16). A Tukey’s pairwise com-
parison test (Tukey’s HSD, overall alpha level
= 0.05) indicated significant differences between
QTSG-SEW; HYBRID-SEW; and HYBRID-
QTSG all at p<0.01.

5 Conclusion

We have described a hybrid system that performs
text simplification using synchronous dependency
grammars. The grammar formalism is intuitive
enough to write rules by hand, and a syntactic rule
set is distributed with the RegenT system. The
contributions of this paper are to demonstrate that
the same framework can be used to acquire lex-
icalised rules from a corpus, and that the resul-
tant system generates simplified sentences that are
comparable to those written by humans.

We have documented how a grammar can be
extracted from a corpus, filtered and generalised.
Our studies confirm the benefits of generalising
rules in this manner. The resultant system that
combines this grammar with the existing manual
grammar for syntactic simplification has outper-
formed the best comparable contemporary system
in a large evaluation. Indeed our system performs
at a level comparable to the manual gold standard
in a substantial evaluation involving 76 partici-
pants, suggesting that text simplification systems
are reaching maturity for real application.

Acknowledgements

This research is supported by an award made by
the EPSRC; award reference: EP/J018805/1.

23



References

Or Biran, Samuel Brody, and Noemie Elhadad. 2011.
Putting it simply: a context-aware approach to lex-
ical simplification. In Proceedings of the 49th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
496–501, Portland, Oregon, USA, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Alexander Budanitsky and Graeme Hirst. 2006. Eval-
uating wordnet-based measures of lexical semantic
relatedness. Computational Linguistics, 32(1):13–
47.

Arnaldo Candido Jr, Erick Maziero, Caroline Gasperin,
Thiago AS Pardo, Lucia Specia, and Sandra M
Aluisio. 2009. Supporting the adaptation of texts
for poor literacy readers: a text simplification ed-
itor for brazilian portuguese. In Proceedings of
the Fourth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP
for Building Educational Applications, pages 34–42.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yvonne Canning. 2002. Syntactic simplification of
Text. Ph.D. thesis, University of Sunderland, UK.

Raman Chandrasekar, Christine Doran, and Banga-
lore Srinivas. 1996. Motivations and methods for
text simplification. In Proceedings of the 16th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING ’96), pages 1041–1044, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

William Coster and David Kauchak. 2011. Learning to
simplify sentences using wikipedia. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Monolingual Text-To-Text Gen-
eration, pages 1–9. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Jan De Belder and Marie-Francine Moens. 2010.
Text simplification for children. In Prroceedings of
the SIGIR workshop on accessible search systems,
pages 19–26.

M.C. De Marneffe, B. MacCartney, and C.D. Manning.
2006. Generating typed dependency parses from
phrase structure parses. In Proceedings of LREC,
volume 6, pages 449–454. Citeseer.

Siobhan Devlin and John Tait. 1998. The use of a psy-
cholinguistic database in the simplification of text
for aphasic readers. In J. Nerbonne, editor, Linguis-
tic Databases, pages 161–173. CSLI Publications,
Stanford, California.

Yuan Ding and Martha Palmer. 2005. Machine trans-
lation using probabilistic synchronous dependency
insertion grammars. In Proceedings of the 43rd An-
nual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 541–548. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Dekang Lin. 1998. An information-theoretic defini-
tion of similarity. In ICML, volume 98, pages 296–
304.

Shashi Narayan and Claire Gardent. 2014. Hybrid
simplification using deep semantics and machine
translation. In Proc. of the 52nd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics.

Advaith Siddharthan and Angrosh Mandya. 2014. Hy-
brid text simplification using synchronous depen-
dency grammars with hand-written and automati-
cally harvested rules. In Proceedings of the 14th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 722–731,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Advaith Siddharthan. 2003a. Preserving discourse
structure when simplifying text. In Proceedings of
the European Natural Language Generation Work-
shop (ENLG), 11th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (EACL’03), pages 103–110, Budapest, Hun-
gary.

Advaith Siddharthan. 2003b. Resolving pronouns ro-
bustly: Plumbing the depths of shallowness. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Computational Treat-
ments of Anaphora, 11th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL’03), pages 7–14, Budapest, Hun-
gary.

Advaith Siddharthan. 2010. Complex lexico-syntactic
reformulation of sentences using typed dependency
representations. In Proc. of the 6th International
Natural Language Generation Conference (INLG
2010), pages 125–133. Dublin, Ireland.

Advaith Siddharthan. 2011. Text simplification using
typed dependencies: a comparison of the robustness
of different generation strategies. In Proceedings of
the 13th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, pages 2–11. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Lucia Specia, Sujay Kumar Jauhar, and Rada Mihalcea.
2012. Semeval-2012 task 1: English lexical sim-
plification. In Proceedings of the First Joint Con-
ference on Lexical and Computational Semantics-
Volume 1: Proceedings of the main conference and
the shared task, and Volume 2: Proceedings of the
Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion, pages 347–355. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Lucia Specia. 2010. Translating from complex to
simplified sentences. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Computational Processing of the Por-
tuguese Language, pages 30–39. Springer.

Kristian Woodsend and Mirella Lapata. 2011. Learn-
ing to simplify sentences with quasi-synchronous
grammar and integer programming. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 409–420. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

24



Sander Wubben, Antal van den Bosch, and Emiel
Krahmer. 2012. Sentence simplification by mono-
lingual machine translation. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Long Papers-Volume 1, pages
1015–1024. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Kenji Yamada and Kevin Knight. 2001. A syntax-
based statistical translation model. In Proceedings
of the 39th Annual Meeting on Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 523–530. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Mark Yatskar, Bo Pang, Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-
Mizil, and Lillian Lee. 2010. For the sake of sim-
plicity: Unsupervised extraction of lexical simplifi-
cations from wikipedia. In Human Language Tech-
nologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 365–368. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Zhemin Zhu, Delphine Bernhard, and Iryna Gurevych.
2010. A monolingual tree-based translation model
for sentence simplification. In Proceedings of the
23rd international conference on computational lin-
guistics, pages 1353–1361. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

25


