


















































Onto.PT: recent developments of a large public domain
Portuguese wordnet

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira
CISUC, University of Coimbra

Portugal
hroliv@dei.uc.pt

Paulo Gomes
CISUC, University of Coimbra

Portugal
pgomes@dei.uc.pt

Abstract

This document describes the current state
of Onto.PT, a new large wordnet for
Portuguese, freely available, and created
automatically after exploiting and inte-
grating existing lexical resources in a
wordnet structure. Besides an overview
on Onto.PT, its creation and evaluation,
we enumerate the developments of ver-
sion 0.6. Moreover, we provide a quanti-
tative view on this version, its comparison
to other Portuguese wordnets, in terms of
contents and size, as well as some details
about its global coverage and availability.

1 Introduction

Onto.PT is a new wordnet-like resource for Por-
tuguese. It is under development since 2009 in the
Center for Informatics and Systems of the Uni-
versity of Coimbra, after we realised the limita-
tions of existing Portuguese wordnets and related
resources. Onto.PT was one of the main contribu-
tions of Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira’s PhD (Gonçalo
Oliveira, 2013), concluded on May 2013, under
the supervision of Paulo Gomes. Since then,
several developments were made and a new ver-
sion (v0.6) was released.

Likewise Princeton WordNet (PWN, Fellbaum
(1998)), Onto.PT is freely available but, in oppo-
sition to the previous resource and most wordnets,
it is created automatically, after the exploitation of
existing public lexical resources. While the latter
fact led to a resource which may not be 100% reli-
able, it also enabled the development of a larger re-
source and with a wider coverage, as compared to
other Portuguese wordnets. This makes Onto.PT a
viable alternative for several natural language pro-
cessing tasks. Having this in mind, in order to ease
the integration of Onto.PT with other applications,
this resource is available as a standard model for

knowledge representation, namely the Resource
Description Framework (RDF, Miller and Manola
(2004)).

In the rest of this document, we give a brief
overview on the creation of Onto.PT, where sev-
eral lexical resources for Portuguese are exploited
and integrated in a wordnet-like structure, across
four automatic steps that combine different infor-
mation extraction techniques. We then highlight
the developments that lead to version 0.6. After
that, we describe the contents of Onto.PT, com-
pare it with other wordnets for Portuguese, and
provide some details on its availability and global
coverage. The latter reports the results of find-
ing suitable matches between Onto.PT synsets and
the so-called “core” wordnet concepts. We con-
clude with additional information on the utility of
Onto.PT and leave ideas for future work.

2 Creation

The creation of Onto.PT follows ECO, an auto-
matic approach for creating wordnets, described
briefly in this section, and more extensively else-
where (Gonçalo Oliveira and Gomes, 2013a).
Also in this section, we enumerate the resources
integrated in the current version of Onto.PT and
how they were exploited. The section ends with a
brief reference to the evaluation of Onto.PT.

2.1 The ECO approach

Originally, ECO consisted of three main steps, that
combine different information extraction tech-
niques, namely:

1. Extraction: exploitation of regularities in
textual sources to extract instances of se-
mantic relations, connecting plain words –
e.g. [vı́rus causation-of doença] ([virus causation-of disease])

2. Synset discovery:



(a) Computation of graph-based similari-
ties between the extracted synonymy
instances and available synsets, as those
in existing thesauri, if available. When
there is enough confidence, the syn-
onymy instances are added to suitable
synsets – e.g. [comutar synonym-of mutuar]
+ {trocar, permutar, mutuar} →
{trocar, permutar, mutuar, comutar} ([inter-
change synonym-of exchange] + {change, swap, exchange}

→ {change, swap, exchange, interchange})

(b) Cluster discovery on the remaining
synonymy instances and inclusion
of the identified clusters as new
synsets – e.g. [tiritante synonym-of trémulo]
∧ [trémulo synonym-of convulso] ∧
[convulso synonym-of tiritante] →
{tiritante,trémulo,convulso} ([shivering synonym-
of trembling] ∧ [trembling synonym-of shaking] ∧ [shak-

ing synonym-of shivering] →{shivering,trembling,shaking})

3. Ontologisation: Computation of graph-
based similarity measures to inte-
grate the rest of the relations, by as-
signing each argument to a suitable
synset – e.g. [iluminar purpose-of vela] →
{iluminar, candear} purpose-of {vela, tocha, lume}
([illuminate purpose-of candle] → {illuminate, light up} purpose-of

{candle, torch, fire})

Recently, a fourth step was added to ECO:

4. Definition assignment: selection of
suitable dictionary definitions for the
discovered synsets. Definitions might
work as glosses, also common in wordnets –
e.g. {multidão, massa}: grande quantidade de pessoas
({crowd, mass}: great amount of people)

2.2 Integrated resources
The current version of Onto.PT includes lexical-
semantic information acquired from six public do-
main lexical resources of Portuguese, namely:

• The relation instances of
PAPEL (Gonçalo Oliveira et al., 2009),
a lexical-semantic network extracted au-
tomatically from a proprietary Portuguese
dictionary. Those are represented by
{<arg1> RELATION-TYPE <arg2>} with words
as arguments, and a rich set of relation
types that include, for instance, synonymy,
hypernymy, several types of meronymy,
causation, purpose-of and property-of.

• The definitions and relations instances, ex-
tracted from Dicionário Aberto (DA, Simões
et al. (2012)) and from the Portuguese Wik-
tionary (Wikt.PT)1, both open dictionaries;

• The antonymy instances and synsets of
TeP (Maziero et al., 2008), an electronic the-
saurus, created manually by experts;

• The synsets of OpenThesaurus.PT (OT.PT)2,
another electronic thesaurus, smaller than
TeP, and created collaboratively;

• More recently, the synsets of
OpenWordNet.PT (OWN.PT, de Paiva
et al. (2012)), a Portuguese wordnet obtained
after the translation of part of PWN.

In the first step of ECO, DA and Wikt.PT are ex-
ploited using the grammars developed during the
creation of PAPEL, which are distributed freely3.
The extracted relation instances are merged with
those from PAPEL’s network thus originating a
larger lexical-semantic network where words are
connected by semantic relations.

Then, the synonymy instances extracted from
the dictionaries, as well as those of OT.PT, are as-
signed to suitable synsets, according to their simi-
larity. Clusters are discovered in a synonymy net-
work established by the unassigned synonymy in-
stances, and added as new synsets.

After that, the arguments of the non-synonymy
relations are assigned to the discovered synsets,
thus becoming synset relations. Antonymy rela-
tions from TeP are also added in this step. Finally,
when possible, the synsets have assigned suitable
definitions from DA and Wikt.PT (see more in
Gonçalo Oliveira and Gomes (2013b)).

2.3 Evaluation
Besides occasional evaluations of each step of
ECO, which guided us in the selection of the
appropriate parameters, a previous version of
Onto.PT (v0.3.5) was the target of an extensive
manual evaluation where synsets and synset rela-
tions were evaluated by two human judges4. We
estimated that about 81% to 85% of the synsets
were correct. More precisely, for the synsets with

1See http://pt.wiktionary.org
2See http://openthesaurus.caixamagica.

pt/
3See http://www.linguateca.pt/PAPEL
4See additional details in section 8.3 of Hugo Gonçalo

Oliveira’s PhD thesis (Gonçalo Oliveira, 2013)

http://pt.wiktionary.org
http://openthesaurus.caixamagica.pt/
http://openthesaurus.caixamagica.pt/
http://www.linguateca.pt/PAPEL


more than one word, 73.9% were classified as cor-
rect and 7.5% as incorrect by both judges. For
the remaining 18.6% synsets, there was no agree-
ment. As for the relations, considering only cor-
rect synsets, hypernymy relations were estimated
to be about 79% accurate, with a κ agreement of
0.47. A set containing relations of the other types
got between 88% and 92% accuracy, depending on
the judge, with a κ agreement of 0.48.

The accuracy of the definition assignment step
was estimated to be between 79-80% for Onto.PT
v0.4.1, with 0.62 κ agreement. This number
should be similar in Onto.PT v0.6, because no big
changes were made.

3 Developments of Onto.PT v.0.6

The most recent version of Onto.PT was released
after some progress regarding, namely: improve-
ments in the creation process, integration of the
OWN.PT synsets, removal of redundant hyper-
nymy instances, and the availability of synset def-
initions. This also lead to improvements on the
resource evaluation.

3.1 Procedural improvements

Onto.PT v0.6 was created after several improve-
ments on the previous versions, including:

• The refinement of some extraction patterns,
after exploring the results of previous evalua-
tions;

• Increasing the synonymy attachment thresh-
old to improve synset accuracy.

3.2 Integration of OpenWordNet.PT

For the first time, in the creation of Onto.PT, we
took advantage of OWN.PT and integrated part of
its contents. More precisely, TeP and OWN.PT
were merged before synset discovery, in order
to create a single synset resource. For this pur-
pose, synsets with high word intersections are
clustered – e.g. {praia, beira-mar, borda, litoral, riba-
mar} + {praia, beira-mar, litoral, costa} → {praia, beira-
mar, borda, litoral, ribamar, costa} ({beach, seaside, seaboard,
seashore} + {beach, seaside, coast} → {beach, seaside, seaboard, seashore,

coast})

3.3 Removal of redundant hypernymy

In order to move towards a better-formed tax-
onomic tree, redundant hypernymy relation
instances in Onto.PT were removed. These

instances are those that may be inferred by
transitivity – e.g. {animal} hypernym-of {porco, suı́no}
∧ {animal} hypernym-of {mamı́fero, mastozoário} ∧
{mamı́fero, mastozoário} hypernym-of {porco, suı́no}
({animal} hypernym-of {pig, swine} ∧ {animal} hypernym-of {mammal,

mammalian} ∧ {mamı́fero, mammalian} hypernym-of {pig, swine})

3.4 Synset definitions

Although the first experiments on assigning defi-
nitions to the synsets of Onto.PT were done with
version 0.4.1 of the resource, definitions were only
made available together with the resource in ver-
sion 0.6. We recall that these definitions might
work as glosses.

3.5 New evaluation results

Given that a similar extensive evaluation ef-
fort required much time, we reused the classi-
fied synsets and synset relation instances from
Onto.PT v0.3.55 to speculate on the current quality
of Onto.PT. Depending on the judge, the new eval-
uation led respectively to synset accuracy between
89-93%, hypernymy accuracy between 79-100%,
and accuracy of other relations between 93-96%.

These results should, nevertheless, be analysed
more carefully in the future. While a substan-
tial amount of incorrect contents were removed or
corrected, a lower, but still substantial, number of
contents that were previously classified as correct
were also removed.

4 Contents and Availability

This section presents a quantitative view on the
contents of Onto.PT v0.6, including the covered
relations types, a comparison to other Portuguese
wordnets, and its global coverage. Details about
the availability of Onto.PT are provided in the end
of this section.

4.1 Quantitative view

Onto.PT v0.6 contains almost 169k unique lexi-
cal items, organised in about 117k synsets, which
are connected by almost 174k relation instances.
Table 1 shows the distribution of covered lexi-
cal items, according to their part-of-speech (POS),
and included synsets according both to their POS
and number of words (size).

Table 2 shows the set of covered semantic re-
lations, richer than in typical wordnets, as well as
their quantities. In fact, these are relation types

5Datasets available at http://ontopt.dei.uc.pt

http://ontopt.dei.uc.pt


POS Lexical SynsetsItems size = 1 size > 1 Total
Nouns 97,531 44,495 23,378 67,873
Verbs 32,958 20,723 5,728 26,451

Adjectives 34,392 10,909 9,851 20,760
Adverbs 3,995 1,283 1,083 2,366

Total 168,876 77,410 40,040 117,450

Table 1: Onto.PT v0.6 synsets.

originally defined during the creation of PAPEL,
after the analysis of frequent patterns in dictio-
nary definitions. In this set, for each relation
type, there are different subtypes, depending on
the POS of the accepted arguments. For instance,
[x purpose-of y] has the following subtypes:

• noun(x) fazSeCom noun(y)
→ x is performed or obtained with y

• noun(x) fazSeComAlgoComPropriedade adj(y)
→ x is performed or obtained with something that is y

• verb(x) finalidadeDe noun(y)
→ x is an action performed with y

• verb(x) finalidadeDeAlgoComPropriedade adj(y)
→ x is an action performed with something that is y

Different types of meronymy are also cov-
ered, namely part-of, member-of, contained-in and
material-of. Moreover, for each relation subtype,
there is an inverse type (e.g. [x causadorDe y] →
[y resultadoDe x]), except for antonymy, which
is a symmetric relation. If we consider the in-
verse subtypes, Onto.PT has about 341k relation
instances.

4.2 Comparison with Portuguese wordnets
Though it is commonly referred that there is
not a wordnet for Portuguese, this is not com-
pletely true. The problem is that all wordnet
projects targeting Portuguese have strong limita-
tions. To our knowledge, besides Onto.PT, there
are other four resources – Wordnet.PT (WN.PT,
Marrafa et al. (2011)), Wordnet.Br (WN.Br, Dias-
da-Silva (2006)), MultiWordNet.PT (MWN.PT)6

and OpenWordnet.PT (OWN.PT, de Paiva et al.
(2012)) – listed in Table 3, together with some in-
formation on their creation and availability.

¿From those, besides Onto.PT, only OWN.PT is
freely available7. The synsets of WN.Br are free,

6See http://mwnpt.di.fc.ul.pt/
7OWN.PT is available from https://github.com/

arademaker/wordnet-br and distributed in two main
RDF files, one with the synsets and their PWN match, and
another with PWN, including relations, glosses and other in-
heritable properties.

Resource Availability Creation
WN.PT web interface manual

no download
WN.Br free synsets man. (synsets)

from PWN (relations)
MWN.PT paid license man. translation (synsets)

from PWN (relations)
OWN-PT free man. translation (synsets)

from PWN (relations)
Onto.PT free automatic

Table 3: Portuguese WNs: availability & creation

with the name of TeP (Maziero et al., 2008), but
the relations, inherited from PWN given manual
synset correspondences, are not. MWN.PT is not
free but it is available upon a paid license. How-
ever, this resource only covers nouns, while all the
others cover verbs, adjectives and adverbs as well.

All but WN.PT and Onto.PT follow a trans-
lation approach, one of the most popular alter-
natives to the creation of non-English wordnets,
where PWN is translated to a target language (de
Melo and Weikum, 2008). This approach is fol-
lowed at different levels by WN.Br, MWN.PT
and OWN.PT. In WN.Br, the synsets were created
specifically for Portuguese and manual correspon-
dences to PWN were defined afterwards. On the
other hand, the synsets of MWN.PT and OWN.PT
are, as far as possible, the direct translation of a
set of key PWN synsets. But a problem arises
for this kind of approaches. Different languages
represent different socio-cultural realities, they do
not cover exactly the same part of the lexicon and,
even where they seem to be common, several con-
cepts are lexicalised differently (Hirst, 2004). This
explains the existence of “lexical gaps” in some
MWN.PT synsets. We thus believe that, whether
created manually, semi-automatically or automati-
cally, a wordnet should be developed from scratch
for its target language. Only after that, it should be
devised to align part of the synsets to wordnets of
other languages, but having in mind that some rich
meanings might be lost in the translation process.

Table 4 presents the same wordnets regarding
their size, in terms of covered lexical items, in-
cluded synsets, semantic relations and the pres-
ence of glosses written in Portuguese. Regarding
the last property, the wordnets relying on trans-
lation do not contain glosses in Portuguese, even
though the English glosses can potentially be in-
herited from PWN and translated. WN.PT has
contained Portuguese glosses for a long time. And
since the last version of Onto.PT, part of its synsets

http://mwnpt.di.fc.ul.pt/
https://github.com/arademaker/wordnet-br
https://github.com/arademaker/wordnet-br


Relation Args Given name Instances
Hypernymy n, n hiperonimoDe 79,425

Part n, n parteDe 3,782
n, adj parteDeAlgoComPropriedade 4,922
adj, n propriedadeDeAlgoParteDe 101

Member n, n membroDe 5,957
n, adj membroDeAlgoComPropriedade 111
adj, n propriedadeDeAlgoMembroDe 922

Contained n, n contidoEm 365
n, adj contidoEmAlgoComPropriedade 272

Material n, n materialDe 879
Causation n, n causadorDe 1,396

n, adj causadorDeAlgoComPropriedade 30
adj, n propriedadeDeAlgoQueCausa 667
v, n accaoQueCausa 8,168
n, v causadorDaAccao 84

Producer n, n produtorDe 1,662
n, adj produtorDeAlgoComPropriedade 80
adj, n propriedadeDeAlgoProdutorDe 463

Purpose n, n fazSeCom 6,787
n, adj fazSeComAlgoComPropriedade 77
v, n finalidadeDe 8,507

v, adj finalidadeDeAlgoComPropriedade 338
Location n, n localOrigemDe 1,458
Quality n, n temQualidade 977

adj, n devidoAQualidade 1,118
State n, n temEstado 334

adj, n devidoAEstado 197
Property adj, n dizSeSobre 9,769

adj, v dizSeDoQue 24,131
Manner adv, n maneiraPorMeioDe 1,976

adv, adj maneiraComPropriedade 1,675
Manner adv, n maneiraSem 231
without adv, v maneiraSemAccao 20

Antonymy n, n antonimoNDe 2,300
adv, adv antonimoAdvDe 127
adj, adj antonimoAdjDe 2,475

v, v antonimoVDe 1,844
Total 173,627

Table 2: Onto.PT v0.6 relations and their quantities

also contain glosses, automatically selected from
dictionaries (see section 2).

The numbers on the size of the Portuguese
wordnets are put side-by-side to those of PWN,
to show that they are substantially smaller, except
for Onto.PT. Despite being the second youngest
Portuguese wordnet (OWN.PT is the youngest),
Onto.PT has a size comparable to PWN, and it
covers a richer set of semantic relations. We
should recall that Onto.PT integrates several pub-
lic resources for Portuguese, including the synsets
of WN.Br (TeP) and of OWN.PT, so it was ex-
pected to be larger than those two.

Although size is probably not the most impor-
tant property of a wordnet, these numbers show
the benefits of an automatic creation. Besides typ-
ically larger resources, automatic approaches pro-
vide a faster creation, an easier maintenance, and
a higher growth potential, in a trade-off on the vir-

Resource Lexical Synsets Relations Glosses
items (in PT)

WN.PT 11k 13k 40k Yes
WN.Br 44k 20k N/A No

MWN.PT 16k 17k 69k No
OWN.PT 48k 39k 83k No
Onto.PT 169k 117k 341k Yes (40%)
PWN 3.0 155k 118k 285k Yes (EN)

Table 4: Portuguese WNs: contents

tual 100% reliability. Therefore, in the case of Por-
tuguese, selecting the most adequate(s) wordnet(s)
to use in some project should consider, among oth-
ers, the language coverage needs, the tolerance to
errors and the available budget.

4.3 Global coverage

The Global WordNet Association provides sev-
eral lists of key concepts that should be present in
wordnets. One of them, contains a reduced set of



164 Core Base Concepts which can be seen as the
most important in the wordnets of four languages8.
They are divided into 98 abstract and 66 concrete
concepts, and are represented as PWN 1.5 synsets.

We used this set to speculate on the global cov-
erage of Onto.PT v0.6. For this purpose, we
made manual rough matches between the 164 base
concepts and suitable Onto.PT synsets. We con-
cluded that Onto.PT roughly covers most of the
concepts in the list, more precisely 95 abstract and
66 concrete synsets (98%). The three uncovered
concepts are the following: {change magnitude,
change size}, {spacing, spatial arrangement} and
{visual property}. As one can see, they denote
abstract generic classes which are sometimes cre-
ated artificially, in order to work as the hypernym
of a set of more specific concepts. We should add
that the global coverage increased since Onto.PT
v0.3.5, where 93% base concepts were covered.
The integration of OWN.PT had a positive impact
on this improvement.

Looking at the other Portuguese wordnets, we
can say that, given that WN.PT was created in
EuroWordNet’s framework, it should cover all the
164 concepts. Moreover, the website of MWN.PT
refers that it covers all these concepts. However,
MWN.PT only contains nouns, while 35 of the ab-
stract concepts are verbs. So, this information is
probably incorrect.

4.4 Availability

Onto.PT and related resources are freely available
from http://ontopt.dei.uc.pt. There,
the resource can be downloaded as a RDF model,
and in two different notations, RDF/XML and the
more compact N3. This model is based on the
WordNet RDF/OWL basic representation (van As-
sem et al., 2006) that was adapted for Portuguese
and to include our broader relation set. Moreover,
Onto.PT may be browsed through an online inter-
face, OntoBusca, very similar to the PWN search
interface and available from the previous website.

5 Concluding remarks

We believe that Onto.PT is a valuable add to the
Portuguese wordnets and an important contribu-
tion to Portuguese NLP, that may be useful in a
broad range of tasks. So far, previous versions
of Onto.PT were used in query expansion and we

8Available from http://w.globalwordnet.org/
gwa/ewn_to_bc/corebcs.html

have shown that it can be used for word sense dis-
ambiguation9. And we have some preliminary re-
sults of exploiting Onto.PT and OWN.PT for an-
swering open domain cloze question automatically
– the results show that, due to its larger size, more
questions are answered correctly using Onto.PT.

We should add that Portuguese was recently
added to range of languages covered by the mul-
tilingual knowledge base BabelNet (Navigli and
Ponzetto, 2012). This resource integrates PWN
with Wikipedia and some open wordnets, in a very
large ontology. Therefore, from this moment, Ba-
belNet should also be seen as one more alterna-
tive to Portuguese wordnets. Or, perhaps, as a
complement, because, despite its large size (9M
synsets in all languages), BabelNet integrates both
lexical and world knowledge and the Portuguese
Wikipedia (about 800k articles) is still small when
compared, for instance, to the English (about
4.3M) and the German (about 1.63M).

We recall that Onto.PT is created automatically
and is not a static resource, but an ongoing project.
Therefore, improvements are expected in the fu-
ture. Among other ideas, we are devising the con-
version of Onto.PT to specific representations for
lexical ontologies (e.g. Lemon, Buitelaar et al.
(2009)), we are considering to assign confidence
values to its contents and to exploit the World
Wide Web for more synset definitions, and we
are studying approaches for aligning it to PWN,
given that the Onto.PT synsets are not static. We
are also devising the integration of the relations of
OWN.PT. In fact, with ECO, we can likewise in-
tegrate knowledge from additional sources includ-
ing, for instance, Wikipedia, but keeping in mind
that most information in Wikipedia is out of the
scope of classic wordnets.

For more information on ECO and on Onto.PT,
please refer to Hugo’s PhD thesis (Gonçalo
Oliveira, 2013) or to our article in the Lan-
guage and Resources Evaluation Journal (Gonçalo
Oliveira and Gomes, 2013a).

Acknowledgements

The development of Onto.PT v0.6 has been sup-
ported by the iCIS project (CENTRO-07-ST24-
FEDER-002003), co-financed by QREN, in the
scope of the Mais Centro Program and European
Union’s FEDER.

9See section 8.4 of Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira’s PhD the-
sis (Gonçalo Oliveira, 2013)

http://ontopt.dei.uc.pt
http://w.globalwordnet.org/gwa/ewn_to_bc/corebcs.html
http://w.globalwordnet.org/gwa/ewn_to_bc/corebcs.html


References
Paul Buitelaar, Philipp Cimiano, Peter Haase, and

Michael Sintek. 2009. Towards linguistically
grounded ontologies. In Proceedings of the 6th Eu-
ropean Semantic Web Conference on The Semantic
Web: Research and Applications, ESWC 2009, Her-
aklion, Crete, Greece. Springer. Pages 111–125.

Gerard de Melo and Gerhard Weikum. 2008. On the
utility of automatically generated wordnets. In Pro-
ceedings of 4th Global WordNet Conference, GWC
2008, Szeged, Hungary. University of Szeged. Pages
147–161.

Valeria de Paiva, Alexandre Rademaker, and Gerard
de Melo. 2012. OpenWordNet-PT: An open brazil-
ian wordnet for reasoning. In Proceedings of the
24th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, COLING (Demo Paper).

Bento C. Dias-da-Silva. 2006. Wordnet.Br: An ex-
ercise of human language technology research. In
Proceedings of the 3rd International WordNet Con-
ference, GWC 2006, South Jeju Island, Korea, Jan-
uary. Pages 301–303.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database (Language, Speech, and
Communication). The MIT Press.

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira and Paulo Gomes. 2013a.
ECO and Onto.PT: A flexible approach for creating
a Portuguese wordnet automatically. Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, to be published.

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira and Paulo Gomes. 2013b. On
the automatic enrichment of a Portuguese wordnet
with dictionary definitions. In Advances in Artifi-
cial Intelligence, Local Proceedings of the 16th Por-
tuguese Conference on Artificial Intelligence, EPIA
2013, Angra do Heroı́smo, Azores, Portugal. AP-
PIA. Pages 486–497.

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira, Diana Santos, and Paulo
Gomes. 2009. Relations extracted from a por-
tuguese dictionary: results and first evaluation. In
Proceedings of 14th Portuguese Conference on Ar-
tificial Intelligence, EPIA 2009. APPIA, October.
Pages 541–552.

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira. 2013. Onto.PT: Towards
the Automatic Construction of a Lexical Ontology
for Portuguese. Ph.D. thesis, University of Coim-
bra. http://eden.dei.uc.pt/˜hroliv/pubs/
GoncaloOliveira_PhdThesis2012.pdf.

Graeme Hirst. 2004. Ontology and the lexicon. In
Steffen Staab and Rudi Studer, editors, Handbook
on Ontologies, International Handbooks on Informa-
tion Systems. Springer. Pages 209–230.

Palmira Marrafa, Raquel Amaro, and Sara Mendes.
2011. WordNet.PT Global – extending WordNet.PT
to Portuguese varieties. In Proceedings of the 1st

Workshop on Algorithms and Resources for Mod-
elling of Dialects and Language Varieties, Edin-
burgh, Scotland, July. ACL Press. Pages 70–74.

Erick G. Maziero, Thiago A. S. Pardo, Ariani Di Fe-
lippo, and Bento C. Dias-da-Silva. 2008. A Base de
Dados Lexical e a Interface Web do TeP 2.0 - The-
saurus Eletrônico para o Português do Brasil. In VI
Workshop em Tecnologia da Informação e da Lin-
guagem Humana (TIL), pages 390–392.

Eric Miller and Frank Manola. 2004. RDF primer.
Published: W3C Recommendation.

Roberto Navigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2012.
BabelNet: The automatic construction, evaluation
and application of a wide-coverage multilingual se-
mantic network. Artificial Intelligence, 193:217–
250, December.

Alberto Simões, Álvaro Iriarte Sanromán, and José Jo
ao Almeida. 2012. Dicionário-Aberto: A source
of resources for the Portuguese language process-
ing. In Proceedings of Computational Processing of
the Portuguese Language, 10th International Con-
ference (PROPOR 2012), Coimbra Portugal, vol-
ume 7243 of LNCS. Springer, April. Pages 121–127.

Mark van Assem, Aldo Gangemi, and Guus Schreiber.
2006. RDF/OWL representation of WordNet. W3c
working draft, World Wide Web Consortium, June.

http://eden.dei.uc.pt/~hroliv/pubs/GoncaloOliveira_PhdThesis2012.pdf
http://eden.dei.uc.pt/~hroliv/pubs/GoncaloOliveira_PhdThesis2012.pdf

	Introduction
	Creation
	The ECO approach
	Integrated resources
	Evaluation

	Developments of Onto.PT v.0.6
	Procedural improvements
	Integration of OpenWordNet.PT
	Removal of redundant hypernymy
	Synset definitions
	New evaluation results

	Contents and Availability
	Quantitative view
	Comparison with Portuguese wordnets
	Global coverage
	Availability

	Concluding remarks

