



















































Small Languages, Big Data: Multilingual Computational Tools and Techniques for the Lexicography of Endangered Languages


Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on the Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages, pages 15–23,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, 26 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Small Languages, Big Data: Multilingual Computational Tools and 
Techniques for the Lexicography of Endangered Languages 

 
 

Martin Benjamin 
École Polytechnique Fédérale de 

Lausanne 
Lausanne, Switzerland 

martin.benjamin@epfl.ch 

 
 
 
 

Paula Radetzky 
Kamusi Project International 

Geneva, Switzerland 
paula@kamusi.org 

 
  

 

Abstract 

The Kamusi Project, a multilingual 
online dictionary website, has as one of 
its goals to document the lexicons of en-
dangered and less-resourced languages 
(LRLs). Kamusi.org provides a unified 
platform and repository for this kind of 
data that is both simple to use and free to 
researchers and the public. Since Kamusi 
has a separate entry for each homophone 
or polyseme, it can be used to produce 
sophisticated multilingual dictionaries. 
We have recently been confronting issues 
inherent in contact language-based lexi-
cography, especially the elicitation of 
culturally-specific semantic terms, which 
cannot be obtained through fieldwork 
purely reliant on a contact language. To 
address this, we have designed a system 
of “balloons.” Based on a variety of fac-
tors, balloons raise the likelihood of re-
vealing terms and fields that have partic-
ular relevance within a culture, rather 
than perpetuating linguistic bias toward 
the concerns and artifacts of more power-
ful groups. Kamusi has also developed a 
smartphone application which can be 
used for crowdsourcing contributions and 
validation.  It will also be invaluable in 
gathering oral data from speakers of en-
dangered languages for the production of 
monolingual talking dictionaries. The 
first of these projects is planned for the 
Arrernte language in central Australia. 

1 Introduction 
The Kamusi Project is a multilingual online 

dictionary and language-resource website at 
www.kamusi.org, whose primary purpose is to 
provide a unified platform designed for docu-
menting the lexicons of the world’s languages. 
The main goal of this effort is a set of monolin-
gual written and audio dictionaries for both large 
languages and less-resourced ones (LRLs), con-
nected together at the concept level to produce 
viable bilingual dictionaries between each lan-
guage in the system, as well as bedrock linguistic 
data that can be used in advanced machine appli-
cations. Linguistic data is contributed by indi-
vidual researchers and also via crowdsourcing. 
As a massively multilingual dictionary project, 
Kamusi has been wrestling with the conceptual 
challenge of how to elicit terms in a way that 
minimizes cultural bias but results in lexicons 
that can be linked between languages. At the 
same time, we have been developing tools that 
will enable citizen lexicography without neces-
sarily involving a field researcher. Such tools 
need to be highly systematic in order to yield 
usable and trustworthy dictionaries. 

In this paper, we first provide an overview of 
Kamusi (§2); describe “balloons,” our system for 
overcoming the problems of using a contact lan-
guage to elicit endangered language lexicons 
(§3); introduce our smartphone application, de-
signed to gather oral data from non-literate 
speakers and both oral and written data from lit-
erate speakers (§4); and, finally, discuss our ef-
forts to produce monolingual talking dictionaries, 

15



the first of which involves the Arrernte language 
(Pama-Nyungan; central Australia) (§5).1 

2 Kamusi as a Platform for Endangered 
Language Lexicography 

Several technological resources provide good 
data-gathering solutions for individual lexico-
graphic projects, including Max Planck’s LEX-
US;2 TLex;3 WeSay;4 and SIL’s triad of Lexique 
Pro, Toolbox, and FLEx.5 Yet each of these solu-
tions leaves gaps for the individual projects mak-
ing use of them, and none is suitable for devel-
opment of sophisticated multilingual dictionaries 
as envisioned by Kamusi. The learning curve can 
be steep, particularly the initial effort to set up an 
effective structure for a language. Each project 
must reinvent the entire process of bilingual 
translation, choosing which contact language 
terms to treat, working out anew how to refer-
ence different senses, and coping with or ignor-
ing non-equivalence between languages. The 
comparison between two languages in different 
projects is impractical or impossible, even if the 
two dictionaries share one of their languages. For 
example, using Lexique Pro to find terms in 
Bakwé and cross-border Bambara (both Niger-
Congo; Côte d’Ivoire) that correspond to English 
light ‘illumination’ is a Herculean research task. 
One must visit the multiple entries glossed as 
‘light’ in each dictionary, then compare the 
Bakwé with Bambara words to try to discern 
which definition or term matches with which.6 
The dissemination of data becomes an exercise 
in reinventing multiple wheels: creating a web-
site and finding hosting or using the limited ser-
vices of Lexique Pro, publicizing the data’s 
availability, finding a publisher who is interested 
in a language without a market. More extensive 
ambitions, such as mobile applications or ongo-
ing expansion of the lexicon, are unlikely to be 
addressed for underfunded LRLs. 

The Kamusi Project speaks to each of these 
gaps. Anyone who is able to purchase an airline 
ticket online has the technical skills to use the 

                                                
1 Our app, described in §4, will be demonstrated at the pre-
sent meeting, the ComputEL Workshop of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, June 2014. 
2 http://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/lexus/release-notes/ 
3 http://tshwanedje.com/tshwanelex/ 
4 http://wesay.palaso.org 
5 http://www-01.sil.org/computing/catalog/show_software_ 
catalog.asp?by=cat&name=Data+Management 
6 http://www.bambara.org/lexique/index-english/main.htm; 
http://bakwe.org/e107_files/LexiquePro/bakwe_lexicon/ind
ex-english/main.htm 

editing system, although some concepts (such as 
the difference between a definition, a translation, 
and a definition translation) must be mastered 
with the aid of tutorials.7 Setting up a language 
involves a few hours of back-and-forth with 
Kamusi staff to configure the parts of speech and 
the fields for inflections and attributes that vary 
from language to language. The editing system 
handles all of the data fields that have been iden-
tified for the thirty-odd languages currently con-
figured for the system, with the possibility of 
adding more data categories if necessary. Lexi-
con development can proceed via elicitation from 
an English priority list (§3 below), or directly 
from deeper lexical research. There is little am-
biguity about translation senses; each English 
sense of light (homophones and polysemes) is its 
own entry with a clear definition, as is each 
German Licht, each Mandarin or Urdu homo-
phone and polyseme, and so on. Equivalence 
between languages is shown by labeling transla-
tions as either parallel, similar, or an explanation 
in language B of a term in language A (or vice 
versa). When a concept in language A is linked 
to a term in language B, the links from language 
B to other languages are carefully tracked, along 
with the degree of separation; in this way, were a 
Bambara term and a Bakwé term both linked to a 
particular English sense of light, they would in-
herently be shown as second degree links to each 
other, with the possibility to validate or reject the 
computer pairing. Each piece of data is published 
immediately upon validation, so there is no need 
for the lexicographer to spend time setting up a 
website, find hosting and pay for it indefinitely, 
update files, manage a server, attempt search en-
gine optimization, etc. Each language will share 
access to new tools and resources as they are 
rolled out on Kamusi.org, such as custom print-
ing, integration with social media, and mobile 
apps and other improved methods for collecting 
linguistic data from community members (§3-§5 
below). 

3 Balloons: Addressing Problems of 
Contact Language-Based Elicitation 

It is a trope in the field-linguistics world that 
LRLs, especially those that are spoken by small-

                                                
7 Rather than suffer through a dry description of the editing 
process, registered users are invited to click “Edit this en-
try” on any entry where they see opportunities for im-
provement at http://kamusi.org, or add new terms or senses 
through the form at http://kamusi.org/node/add/dictionary-
term. 

16



er linguistic minorities, pose special challenges 
for efforts at documentation. These include scar-
city of speakers and researchers, remoteness of 
field sites, lack of funding, and academic evalua-
tion systems in the humanities and social scienc-
es which reward only certain kinds of investiga-
tion—to the exclusion of, notably, lexicographic 
research, linguistic resource- and website-
building, and any sort of research product that is 
the result of a significant number of participants 
or community-based input.8 

Due to the scarcity of speakers and researchers 
(and especially native-speaker researchers) of 
endangered languages, the process of lexico-
graphic documentation for such languages al-
most always begins with elicitation of terms 
from a major contact language—English, Span-
ish, Thai, Swahili, etc.—with or without a tool 
such as a word list.9 Definitions or, more often, 
translation equivalents are then recorded in the 
major contact language as well. It is rare to find 
dictionaries with own-language definitions for 
endangered or small minority languages.10 

There are, however, several problems that are 
inherent in using a major contact language as the 
starting point for eliciting LRL lexical items. 
One problem is that it inhibits the discovery of 
terms and entire semantic fields which exist in 
the field language but not in the contact lan-
guage. In a sense, this is akin to an archaeologist 
using a metal detector—the technology will re-
veal iron objects, but ceramic artifacts will re-
main hidden. Another issue is the cultural impe-
rialism of an approach that privileges the 
concepts and categories that are important to po-
litically-, religiously-, and economically-
dominant sociolinguistic groups. (For a discus-
sion of these and other issues relating to contact 
language-based elicitation, see Calvet (1974), 
Raison-Jourde (1977), Fabian (1983), Geeraerts 
et al. (1994), Errington (2001), Anderson (2003), 

                                                
8 Although the hard sciences (including computer science) 
value collaborative resource-building, the traditional role of 
the lone-wolf researcher persists as a powerful image 
among linguists (see Crippen and Robinson (2013) and also 
the rest of the ink spilled against this ideal in the journal 
Language Documentation and Conservation). 
9 An exception to the wordlist method is the Dictionary 
Development Process (DDP, http://www-01.sil.org/com 
puting/ddp/) developed by Ron Moe at SIL, which steps 
away from wordlists to focus on semantic domains. 
10 Some exceptions are monolingual dictionaries of K’ichee’ 
[Quiché] (Mayan; Guatemala) (Ajpacajá Túm, 2001) and 
Yiddish (Joffe & Marq, 1961-1980). The latter was aban-
doned after the publication of four volumes, all devoted to 
the letter alef. 

Enfield (2003), Bowern (2010), Mosel (2011), 
and Clynes (2012), among others.) Below, we 
describe how Kamusi is using a device we call 
“balloons,” so that contributors can avoid these 
pitfalls and expedite the production of a diction-
ary with terms derived as much as possible from 
the local lexicon. 

Our springboard into lexicographic elicitation 
is a prioritized list of English concepts that com-
bines corpus results together with other term sets 
with particular foci, such as the Comparative 
African Word List11 and the basic Special Eng-
lish vocabulary list of the Voice of America.12 
Our master list has some drawbacks, however 
(Benjamin, 2013). As a starting point for endan-
gered languages, many highly-ranked terms are 
indisputably useful: wind, bird, dry. Other terms, 
however, do not exist in these languages, nor do 
their speakers have much need of referencing 
them: baseball, subway, century. The advantages 
of a cross-cutting, English-biased concept list 
certainly outweigh a haphazard butterfly-
collection approach, but rigid adherence to such 
a list would foist irrelevant terms on a language 
documentation team while simultaneously caus-
ing them to miss many concepts of local im-
portance. 

To rectify the weaknesses of the English-
centric approach, we have designed a system of 
“balloons” to prioritize terms more relevant to a 
particular language. The simplest balloons attach 
to the overall number of languages in which a 
particular concept has been submitted.13 In addi-
tion, balloons provide lift in one language for 
terms deemed important by contributors in other 
languages related in some manner—for instance, 
balloons can attach based on geography, lan-
guage tree proximity, shared cultural spheres, or 
other aspects of affinity. When contributors are 
fed a list of lexical items to elicit, balloons levi-
tate certain terms to higher positions on the list, 
based on a variety of factors selected by the lan-
guage moderator or individual contributor. A 
team working on a river language of Cameroon, 
for example, could set balloons to raise terms 
that have been treated by other Cameroonian 

                                                
11 https://www.eva.mpg.de/lingua/tools-at-lingboard/pdf/ 
Snider_silewp2006-005.pdf 
12 http://www.manythings.org/voa/words.htm 
13 Features are under development at the time of writing that 
are expected to be completed for showcasing at ComputEL 
in June 2014. However, software delivery schedules are 
notoriously slippery, particularly in a non-profit environ-
ment, so features such as balloons for related cultural char-
acteristics may remain temporarily promissory. 

17



languages, by related Bantu languages, or by 
other groups with a fishing economy.  

Central to the mechanism of balloons is that 
contributors always have the option of skipping 
on the priority list terms that they do not know or 
do not deem important. For example, they could 
provide a term equivalent to English plant as a 
living organism but skip the homophonous plant 
referring to an industrial processing facility. The 
vegetal sense of plant would then float upward as 
more languages validate its importance, while 
the industrial sense would linger in the depths. 

Languages do not enter Kamusi only when a 
contributor adds terms by working through a pri-
ority list; terms from other languages can be-
come incorporated via the merging of existing 
lexical data sets. A team from one language 
could use balloons to find concepts that exist in 
related languages already in Kamusi, such as 
terms glossed with explanatory translations. For 
example, if the Bakwé data set is merged into 
Kamusi, -srüpö ‘rolled up dead leaves or cloth, 
used to cushion the carrying of loads on the head 
or shoulder’ would become available to Bambara 
and other languages of the region, and the con-
cept would rise in importance as participants 
around Africa recognized the item and provided 
their equivalent term. Kamusi’s system of bal-
loons, then, ensures that the concept base availa-
ble to a given language will include many items 
and semantic fields that would not otherwise 
come to light. 

While development of the balloons system 
will still be a work in progress at the time of the 
workshop for which this paper is a contribution, 
and the task of choosing categories for balloons 
and the amount of lift they provide will involve 
ongoing adjustments in response to testing with 
field lexicographers, we nevertheless want to 
highlight it as a method for overcoming certain 
aspects of bias in the selection of vocabulary in a 
multilingual dictionary. In particular, it is pro-
posed that this method will tend to float concepts 
that are most universal, while also encouraging 
the development of vocabularies that have spe-
cial cultural relevance. We acknowledge, how-
ever, that this approach will not elicit concepts 
that are unique to a culture and are therefore not 
represented in either the English priority list or 
the lists that we incorporate from other sources; 
for a fine-grained investigation of local concepts, 
there can be no replacement for researcher-
directed field study. Kamusi.org has other estab-
lished tools for adding such indigenous terms, as 

many as lexicographers can catch in their nets.14 
One of these tools is our smartphone application, 
discussed in the following section. 

4 The Smartphone App: Rapid Elicita-
tion and Validation from the Crowd 

The Kamusi Project began as an online bilingual 
dictionary between English and Swahili. The 
experience of building a resource for Swahili led 
to an expansion of the system to other languages, 
with the technical capacity to document the full 
lexical scope of any language. One of Kamusi’s 
objectives is to move beyond lists of translations 
between languages by creating monolingual dic-
tionaries with own-language written and/or spo-
ken definitions for each lexical item. In conjunc-
tion with this, we have developed a range of 
tools designed to support online collection of 
sophisticated data.15 

The Big Data ambitions of this project rely on 
numerous inputs of very small data, most of 
which must come directly from a language’s 
speakers (including through fieldwork), rather 
than from digitized data sets.16 For reasons dis-
cussed in Benjamin and Radetzky (2014), relying 
only on experts using Kamusi’s advanced online 
tools will not be a successful strategy for the ex-
pedited production of lexicons for many LRLs. 
Instead, much data collection will occur through 
crowdsourcing, using validation procedures to 

                                                
14 The only caveat is that a translation link must be provided 
to English or another contact language in order for the new 
term to be understandable by people who do not speak the 
source language, which may necessitate the additional task 
of creating a new entry on the contact language side. 
15 There do exist online projects for baseline documentation, 
but not actual lexicography, of the vocabularies of endan-
gered languages, such as LEGO (http://lego.linguistlist.org) 
and PanLex (http://panlex.org), with whom we work collab-
oratively. To date, these are involved in linking wordlists 
and are rarely involved in collecting new or rich data. In 
their disclaimer at http://lego.linguistlist.org/disclaimer, 
LEGO states, “[W]e are primarily interested in allowing 
existing lexical data to be included in our datanet and pro-
moting standards to allow others to construct comparable 
datanets.... [W]e have converted a number of legacy re-
sources..., but we have not engaged in collecting new lexical 
data....” Regarding PanLex, Kamholz et al. (2014) write: 
“[P]rojects that are designed to be panlingual tend to have 
specific and limited objectives... PanLex, with its objective 
of documenting only the lemmatic forms of lexemes, is no 
exception.” 
16 Each entry is a container for dozens of fine-grained data 
elements, ranging from inflections to geo-tagged pronuncia-
tions to videos, multiplied by tens of thousands of terms in 
thousands of languages, with complex translational, seman-
tic, and ontological interconnections for every concept. 

18



ensure that the data is reliable prior to its being 
integrated into the system. 

In order to collect millions of pieces of lin-
guistic microdata, we have created a mobile 
smartphone application, the Kamusi Fidget 
Widget, that asks users specific, targeted ques-
tions about their language.17  This app gathers 
data for integration into the project’s online mul-
tilingual resources, and it is designed for partici-
pants who access networks through handheld 
devices—a major mode of connectivity for many 
oases of endangered languages. 

The Fidget Widget pilots a new approach to 
eliciting terms and definitions that accelerates 
data collection for LRLs and advances talking 
dictionaries into monolingually-useful reference 
resources, while also using Kamusi’s ballooning 
to address issues of cultural bias within lexico-
graphic data collection. Version 1.0 of the app 
loops through a circumscribed set of question 
types, beginning with questions geared toward 
the collection of individual terms. First, we pre-
sent terms and their definitions from the balloon-
modified English priority list (e.g., light ‘being 
low in weight’) and ask, “What word would you 
use in [your language]?” (Figure 1). 

 
 

Figure 1. Initial request for translation. 
                                                
17 All programming features discussed in this section are 
anticipated to be functional by June 2014. 

If the system is set to field-collection mode, the 
term will be accepted as is, without passing 
through crowd validation procedures; in this 
way, a field researcher can use the tool with one 
or more consultants to rapidly generate an initial 
term list. If the system is set to crowd mode, 
some participants will then be asked to rate the 
validity of terms submitted by other contributors 
(Figure 2). 

 
 

Figure 2. Rating of submitted term. 
 

Once a translation has passed the validation 
threshold, further contributors will be asked to 
provide an own-language definition (Figure 3, 
localized to Kirundi) or to rate definitions sub-
mitted by others.  

 

19



 
 

Figure 3. Localized request for own-language 
definition. 

 
This system is well-tailored for researcher-driven 
fieldwork or written languages with numerous 
speakers who have persistent smartphone net-
work access. 

In many cases, the people involved in preserv-
ing a language speak it but do not write it. The 
app’s 2.0 version is intended to extend the mo-
bile technology to languages that are not com-
monly written or do not have a critical mass of 
participants, or both.18 Although network access 
is currently necessary to use the system, an of-
fline version is anticipated when synchronization 
and funding issues are resolved. The principal 
new feature of version 2.0 will be the collection 
of structured audio data, including pronuncia-
tions, own-language definitions, and possible 
retellings of the definitions in a contact language. 
This is discussed in the following section. 

                                                
18 The existence of some sort of functional Unicode-
supported orthography and the involvement of at least one 
person who can bridge writing and orality are minimum 
conditions for participating in the system. Where orthogra-
phies are still in contention, Kamusi’s internal structure is 
programmed to support multiple writing systems. 

5 Monolingual Talking Dictionaries 
Talking (or audio) dictionaries are an important 
technology for preserving the sounds of particu-
lar languages and dialects. Traditionally, for 
LRLs, the sound files simply appear in associa-
tion with contact-language descriptions or trans-
lations of the terms.19 Other language preserva-
tion projects endeavor to record stories as told by 
speakers of endangered languages, with italk li-
brary (italklibrary.com) providing an excellent 
example for Australia. The Fidget Widget’s ver-
sion 2 approach to talking dictionaries combines 
the idea of codifying the sounds of a language 
and the practice of preserving narratives about 
what a culture’s concepts represent. 

The new version will proceed as follows. Af-
ter finishing version 1’s set of questions focused 
on the gathering of lexical terms, the app will 
request that each term be pronounced. The 
smartphone will provide a visual countdown and 
a beep. This process will yield data on a par with 
most (if not all) talking dictionaries for endan-
gered languages: as mentioned above, this con-
sists of the written lexical item, the contact-
language gloss, and a sound file of the term be-
ing pronounced in the indigenous language. The 
third step will ask the user to explain the concept 
in their language, with a timer to encourage brev-
ity. It will be necessary to tinker with the timing 
system to find a sweet spot that allows answers 
of good quality, minimizes stress, and does not 
cut speakers off mid-stride but still discourages 
rambling. The fourth step will ask the user for a 
similarly pithy explanation of the concept in a 
contact language that they know. In the Australi-
an case, where almost all participants also speak 
English, the contributors will also be asked to 
provide an English resume of their own-language 
definition, providing a gateway for people who 
are not already familiar with the language—
including many of their own youth. With these 
simple procedures that integrate the basic capaci-
ties of smartphones with the data design of 
Kamusi, talking dictionaries will become valua-
ble internal reference sources for their own 
communities, as well as repositories that enable 

                                                
19 See, for example, the Koasati Digital Dictionary (Koasati 
and English) (http://koasati.wm.edu); the Nganasan Multi-
media Dictionary (Nganasan and Russian) (http://www.spee 
ch.nw.ru/Nganasan/); and the Talking Dictionary of Ainu 
(Ainu and Japanese, with further translations of the Japa-
nese glosses into English) (http://lah.soas.ac.uk/projects/ 
ainu/). 

20



interested others to support the language’s con-
tinued existence and revitalization. 

Working with italk library, Kamusi’s design of 
the app’s version 2.0 is being developed for the 
Arrernte community as first users; a field trial 
with the initial one hundred terms from the 
Kamusi priority list is scheduled to be completed 
before late June 2014. The Arrernte are interest-
ed in preserving the specific terms of their lan-
guage as well as the way they are expressed in 
context, and they also want to revitalize the 
tongue’s use among its younger generations. The 
stories that italk library has been recording have 
proven enjoyable, but they do not provide a 
structure for accessing content in a way focused 
on reference or language learning. The mobile 
app will be used to term by term elicit pointillis-
tic accounts and working definitions, keyed to 
each term’s dictionary data container, that to-
gether paint a full picture of the language and 
culture. For example, Kamusi’s English defini-
tion of the adjective yellow is ‘being of the color 
of sunflowers or ripe lemons, between green and 
orange in the visible light spectrum’.20 A con-
tributor from the Australian group might say (in 
Arrernte or in English), “Yellow is, like, it’s the 
color that we see, it’s the color of the sun when 
it’s going down, before it turns orange like a 
cooling fire,” and such an unedited vignette 
would serve as the talking definition. 

In addition to own-language definitions, rec-
orded English definitions will make it possible to 
transcribe the meanings of each term with the aid 
of a wider crowd (who do not necessarily speak 
the endangered language); as text, transcriptions 
can be indexed and searched to provide access to 
the dictionary data through technological tools. 
Transcription of the own-language definitions is 
not planned in the near term, but it remains a de-
sirable possibility with time and resources, espe-
cially as a community activity. In the first itera-
tion, terms will be elicited via the mobile app 
from the English list (since little “ballooning” 
will be in effect for the first language from the 
Australian continent to enter the Kamusi sys-
tem), but it will also be possible to upload native 
concepts to the system and then use the app for 
gathering audio. 

Monolingual dictionaries have not generally 
been conceived of as practical for endangered 
languages, and sophisticated multilingual dic-
tionaries have long been deemed impossible 

                                                
20 http://kamusi.org/define?headword=yellow&to_language 
=366. 

(Zgusta, 1971: 210; Haensch, 1991; Landau, 
2001: 11). The tools and methods discussed in 
this article, however, make it possible to docu-
ment endangered languages effectively, both by 
(a) generating term lists rapidly and in associa-
tion with concepts from related languages, and 
(b) incorporating spoken definitions that encap-
sulate the essence of each idea. As mentioned 
above, the result will be a useful resource for the 
community, something that can be understood by 
the segment that does not read the contact lan-
guage and used by younger generations interest-
ed in revitalization. Additionally, the system 
produces bridges to many other languages, al-
lowing local knowledge to endure beyond the 
boundaries of shrinking linguistic communities. 

6 New Directions 
Kamusi.org has a long task list, with a goal of 
providing a full range of lexical resources for 
both people and machines. Some of these objec-
tives, such as detection of malicious users and 
validation procedures for crowdsourced data, are 
informatics challenges. Many other objectives 
are technical, and will apply across all lan-
guages—enhancements to the data model for 
bridging concepts that are expressed with differ-
ent parts of speech in different languages (e.g., 
where colors act as verbs), and a host of im-
provements to the editing system based on les-
sons learned during the multilingual pilot phase. 
A few are noteworthy in this concluding section 
because of their specific interest to endangered 
languages. 

Determining the boundary between a language 
and a dialect is frequently problematic. In the 
case of two tongues (Kinyarwanda and Kirundi) 
that are often considered dialects separated by a 
political border, Kamusi discovered in the pro-
cess of creating separate dictionaries that there 
are substantial differences between the two 
which had not previously been documented. 
However, it would be impractical to create full 
dictionaries of every dialect of a language when 
a large portion of their vocabularies are shared. 
We will therefore produce a system to geo-tag 
entries based on where a term is known to be in 
use. As the map becomes populated with zones 
of use, it will be possible to visualize where one 
dialect fades into the next, and where one lan-
guage territory ends and the next begins. Similar-
ly, programming is planned for geo-tagging the 
specific location where a participating speaker in 
a talking dictionary acquired their language (in-

21



cluding people contributing pronunciations for 
well-resourced languages). This will build an 
audio portrait of dialect, sociolinguistic, gender, 
and other variation. These mapping features, 
combined with expanded data collection, will 
enhance the possibilities for linguists to study 
language contact, spread, and historical change. 
Other improvements and new features, such as 
an app to upload photos of cultural items directly 
to a dictionary entry, or the expansion of audio 
features to the existing open-ended cultural notes 
field, will allow contributors to flesh out diction-
ary entries with relevant ethnographic infor-
mation that contextualizes a language within the 
lives of the people who speak it. 

In terms of innovations to the system itself, we 
see as a priority the development of offline input 
systems, both for contributors who want to use 
an interface like the one at www.kamusi.org, as 
well as those who wish to use the smartphone 
app when not connected to the internet. In fact, 
we did release offline software for the bilingual 
dictionary between English and Swahili, but the 
multilingual model added so many complexities 
that the program must be completely rewritten. 
Synchronization and the management of large 
data sets on small devices are major technical 
challenges, which can only be tackled with solid 
funding. Similarly, money permitting, we aim to 
code the system architecture to include a privacy 
system for linguistic groups who wish to docu-
ment but also restrict access to certain lexical 
items (e.g., taboo words) or even their entire lan-
guage. In addition, as we discussed in Benjamin 
and Radetzky (2014), we are committed to in-
corporating gamification, or games with a pur-
pose, into both mobile and web platforms (Cas-
tellote et al., 2013; Paraschakis, 2013; Hamari et 
al., 2014). This will propel the accumulation of 
data and its validation by the crowd, pushing the 
project along the path toward obtaining as much 
open data for as many languages as possible. 

Market forces will never support the creation 
of widely-available print dictionaries for most 
LRLs, and scholarly interest and available fund-
ing for online dictionaries will remain hit-or-
miss, even as languages fade away. The tools 
presented in this paper are offered as methods for 
rapidly and reliably developing lexicographic 
resources for the world’s endangered languages. 

References 
Pedro Florentino Ajpacajá Túm. 2001. K’ichee’ Chol-

tziij. Cholsamaj, Ciudad Guatemala, Guatemala. 

Earl Anderson. 2003. Folk-Taxonomies in Early Eng-
lish. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, Madi-
son, New Jersey. 

Martin Benjamin. 2013. http://kamusi.org/priority-list 

Martin Benjamin and Paula Radetzky. 2014. Multi-
lingual Lexicography with a Focus on Less-
Resourced Languages: Data Mining, Expert Input, 
Crowdsourcing, and Gamification. In Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Language Re-
sources (LREC ’14), Reykjavik. 

Claire Bowern. 2010. Fieldwork in contact situations. 
In Raymond Hickey, editor, The Handbook of 
Language Contact. Wiley-Blackwell, London, 
pages 340-357. 

Louis-Jean Calvet. 1974. Linguistique et Colonial-
isme: Petit Traité de Glottophagie. Payot, Paris. 

Jesús Castellote, Joaquín Huerta, Javier Pescador, and 
Michael Brown. 2013. Towns conquer: A gamified 
application to collect geographical names (vernacu-
lar names/toponyms). In Proceedings of the 15th 
AGILE International Conference on Geographic 
Information Science, Leuven. http://www.agile-
online.org/index.php/conference/proceedings/proce
edings-2013. 

Adrian Clynes. 2012. Dominant language transfer in 
minority language documentation projects: Some 
examples from Brunei. Language Documentation 
and Conservation, 6:253-267. 

James Crippen and Laura Robinson. 2013. In defense 
of the lone wolf: Collaboration in language docu-
mentation. Language Documentation and Conser-
vation, 7:123-135. 

Nick Enfield. 2003. Linguistic Epidemiology: Seman-
tics and Grammar of Language Contact in Main-
land Southeast Asia. RoutledgeCurzon, Oxon, UK. 

Joseph Errington. 2001. Colonial linguistics. Annual 
Review of Anthropology, 30:19-39. 

Dirk Geeraerts et al. 1994. The Structure of Lexical 
Variation: Meaning, Naming, and Context. Mouton 
de Gruyter, Berlin. 

Johanne Fabian. 1983. Missions and the colonization 
of African languages: Developments in the former 
Belgian Congo. Canadian Journal of African Stud-
ies/La Revue Canadienne des Études Africaines, 
17:165-187. 

Günther Haensch. 1991. Die Mehrsprachigen 
Wörterbücher und ihre Probleme. In Franz Joseph 
Hausmann et al., editors, Wörterbücher: Ein inter-
nationales Handbuch zur Lexikographie, vol. 3. 
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, pages 2909-2937. 

Juho Hamari, Jonna Koivisto, and Harri Sarsa. 2014. 
Does gamification work? – A literature review of 
empirical studies on gamification. In Proceedings 
of the 47th Annual Hawaii International Confer-

22



ence on System Sciences, pages 3025-3034, Waiko-
loa. 

Juda Joffe and Judl Marq, eds. 1961, 1966, 1971, 
1980. Groyser Verterbukh fun der Yidisher 
Shprakh, vols. 1-4. Yiddish Dictionary Committee, 
New York. 

David Kamholz, Jonathan Pool, and Susan Colowick. 
2014. PanLex: Building a resource for panlingual 
lexical translation. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources (LREC 
’14), Reykjavik. 

Sidney Landau. 2001. Dictionaries: The Art and Craft 
of Lexicography, 2nd ed. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge. 

Ulrike Mosel. 2011. Lexicography in endangered lan-
guage communities. In Peter Austin and Julia Sal-
labank, editors, The Cambridge Handbook of En-
dangered Languages. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, pages 337-353. 

Dimitris Paraschakis. 2013. Crowdsourcing cultural 
heritage metadata through social media gaming. 
Master’s thesis, Malmo University. 

Françoise Raison-Jourde. 1977. L’échange inégal de 
la langue: La pénétration des techniques linguis-
tiques dans une civilisation de l’oral (Imerina, dé-
but du XIXe siècle). Annales: Économies, Sociétés, 
Civilisations, 32:639-669. 

Ladislav Zgusta. 1971. Manual of Lexicography. 
Mouton, The Hague. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

23


