



















































Evaluation of a Substitution Method for Idiom Transformation in Statistical Machine Translation


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 38–42,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Evaluation of a Substitution Method for Idiom Transformation in
Statistical Machine Translation

Giancarlo D. Salton and Robert J. Ross and John D. Kelleher
Applied Intelligence Research Centre

School of Computing
Dublin Institute of Technology

Ireland
giancarlo.salton@mydit.ie {robert.ross,john.d.kelleher}@dit.ie

Abstract

We evaluate a substitution based technique
for improving Statistical Machine Transla-
tion performance on idiomatic multiword
expressions. The method operates by per-
forming substitution on the original idiom
with its literal meaning before translation,
with a second substitution step replac-
ing literal meanings with idioms follow-
ing translation. We detail our approach,
outline our implementation and provide
an evaluation of the method for the lan-
guage pair English/Brazilian-Portuguese.
Our results show improvements in trans-
lation accuracy on sentences containing
either morphosyntactically constrained or
unconstrained idioms. We discuss the con-
sequences of our results and outline poten-
tial extensions to this process.

1 Introduction

Idioms are a form of figurative multiword expres-
sions (MWE) that are ubiquitous in speech and
written text across a range of discourse types.
Idioms are often characterized in terms of their
having non-literal and non-compositional mean-
ing whilst occasionally sharing surface realiza-
tions with literal language uses (Garrao and Dias,
2001). For example the multiword expression s/he
took the biscuit can have both a figurative mean-
ing of being (pejoratively) remarkable, and a lit-
eral meaning of removing the cookie.

It is notable that idioms are a compact form
of language use which allow large fragments of
meaning with relatively complex social nuances
to be conveyed in a small number of words, i.e.,
idioms can be seen as a form of compacted regu-
larized language use. This is one reason why id-
iom use is challenging to second language learners
(see, e.g., Cieslicka(2006)).

Another difficulty for second language learners
in handling idioms is that idioms can vary in terms
of their morphosyntactic constraints or fixedness
(Fazly et al., 2008). On one hand some idiomatic
expressions such as popped the question are highly
fixed with syntactic and lexical variations consid-
ered unacceptable usage. On the other hand id-
ioms such as hold fire are less fixed with variations
such as hold one’s fire and held fire considered to
be acceptable instances of the idiom type.

For reasons such as those outlined above id-
ioms can be challenging to human speakers; but
they also pose a great challenge to a range of
Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications
(Sag et al., 2002). While idiomatic expressions,
and more generally multiword expressions, have
been widely studied in a number of NLP domains
(Acosta et al., 2011; Moreno-Ortiz et al., 2013),
their investigation in the context of machine trans-
lation has been more limited (Bouamor et al.,
2011; Salton et al., 2014).

The broad goal of our work is to advance ma-
chine translation by improving the processing of
idiomatic expressions. To that end, in this paper
we introduce and evaluate our initial approach to
the problem. We begin in the next section by giv-
ing a brief review of the problem of idiom pro-
cessing in a Statistical Machine Translation (SMT)
context. Following that we outline our substitu-
tion based solution to idiom processing in SMT.
We then outline a study that we have conducted to
evaluate our initial method. This is followed with
results and a brief discussion before we draw con-
clusions and outline future work.

2 Translation & Idiomatic Expressions

The current state-of-the-art in machine transla-
tion is phrase-based SMT (Collins et al., 2005).
Phrase-based SMT systems extend basic word-by-
word SMT by splitting the translation process into
3 steps: the input source sentence is segmented

38



into “phrases” or multiword units; these phrases
are then translated into the target language; and fi-
nally the translated phrases are reordered if needed
(Koehn, 2010). Although the term phrase-based
translation might imply the system works at the
semantic or grammatical phrasal level, it is worth
noting that the concept of a phrase in SMT is
simply a frequently occurring sequence of words.
Hence, standard SMT systems do not model id-
ioms explicitly (Bouamor et al., 2011).

Given the above, the question arises as to how
SMT systems can best be enhanced to account for
idiom usage and other similar multiword expres-
sions. One direct way is to use a translation dic-
tionary to insert the idiomatic MWE along with its
appropriate translation into the SMT model phrase
table along with an estimated probability. While
this approach is conceptually simple, a notable
drawback with such a method is that while the
MWEs may be translated correctly the word or-
der in the resulting translation is often incorrect
(Okuma et al., 2008).

An alternative approach to extending SMT to
handle idiomatic and other MWEs is to leave the
underlying SMT model alone and instead perform
intelligent pre- and post-processing of the transla-
tion material. Okuma et al. (2008) is an example
of this approach applied to a class of multi- and
single word expressions. Specifically, Okuma et
al. (2008) proposed a substitution based pre and
post processing approach that uses a dictionary of
surrogate words from the same word class to re-
place low frequency (or unseen) words in the sen-
tences before the translation with high frequency
words from the same word class. Then, follow-
ing the translation step, the surrogate words are
replaced with the original terms. Okuma et al.’s
direct focus was not on idioms but rather on place
names and personal names. For example, given
an English sentence containing the relatively in-
frequent place name Cardiff , Okuma et al.’s ap-
proach would: (1) replace this low frequency place
name with a high frequency surrogate place name,
e.g. New York; (2) translate the updated sentence;
and (3) replace the surrogate words with the cor-
rect translation of the original term.

The advantage of this approach is that the word
order of the resulting translation has a much higher
probability of being correct. While this method
was developed for replacing just one word (or a
highly fixed name) at a time and those words must

be of the same open-class category, we see the ba-
sic premise of pre- and post- substitution as also
applicable to idiom substitution.

3 Methodology

The hypothesis we base our approach on is that
the work-flow that a human translator would have
in translating an idiom can be reproduced in an al-
gorithmic fashion. Specifically, we are assuming a
work-flow whereby a human translator first iden-
tifies an idiomatic expression within a source sen-
tence, then ‘mentally’ replaces that idiom with its
literal meaning. Only after this step would a trans-
lator produce the target sentence deciding whether
or not to use an idiom on the result. For simplicity
we assumed that the human translator should use
an idiom in the target language if available. While
this work-flow is merely a proposed method, we
see it as plausible and have developed a compu-
tational method based on this work-flow and the
substitution technique employed by (Okuma et al.,
2008).

Our idiom translation method can be explained
briefly in terms of a reference architecture as de-
picted in Figure 1. Our method makes use of 3
dictionaries and 2 pieces of software. The first
dictionary contains entries for the source language
idioms and their literal meaning, and is called the
“Source Language Idioms Dictionary”. The sec-
ond dictionary meanwhile contains entries for the
target language idioms and their literal meaning,
and is called the “Target Language Idioms Dictio-
nary”. The third dictionary is a bilingual dictio-
nary containing entries for the idioms in the source
language pointing to their translated literal mean-
ing in the target language. This is the “Bilingual
Idiom Dictionary”.

The two pieces of software are used in the pre-
and post-processing steps. The first piece of soft-
ware analyzes the source sentences, consulting the
“Source Language Idioms Dictionary”, to iden-
tify and replace the source idioms with their lit-
eral meaning in the source language. During this
first step the partially rewritten source sentences
are marked with replacements. Following the sub-
sequent translation step the second piece of soft-
ware is applied for the post-processing step. The
software first looks into the marked sentences to
obtain the original idioms. Then, consulting the
“Bilingual Idiom Dictionary”, the software tries to
match a substring with the literal translated mean-

39



Figure 1: Reference Architecture for Substitution Based Idiom Translation Technique.

ing in the target translation. If the literal mean-
ing is identified, it then checks the “Target Lan-
guage Idioms Dictionary” for a corresponding id-
iom for the literal use in the target language. If
found, the literal wording in the target translation
is then replaced with an idiomatic phrase from the
target language. However if in the post-processing
step the original idiom substitution is not found, or
if there are no corresponding idioms in the target
language, then the post-processing software does
nothing.

4 Study Design

We have developed an initial implementa-
tion of our substitution approach to SMT
based idiom translation for the language pair
English/Brazillian-Portugese. To evaluate our
method we created test corpora where each sen-
tence contained an idiom, and compared the
BLEU scores (Papineni et al., 2002) of a baseline
SMT system when run on these test corpora with
the BLEU scores for the same SMT system when
we applied our pre and post processing steps. No
sentences with literal uses of the selected idiom
form were used in this experiment.

Consequently, three corpora were required for
this experiment in addition to the three idiomatic
resources introduced in the last section. The
first corpus was an initial large sentence-aligned
bilingual corpus that was used to build a SMT
model for the language pair English/Brazilian-
Portuguese. The second corpus was the first of two
test corpora. This corpus contained sentences with

“highly fixed” idioms and will be referred to as the
“High Fixed Corpus”. Finally a second test corpus
containing sentences with “low fixed” idioms, the
“Low Fixed Corpus”, was also constructed. In or-
der to make results comparable across test corpora
the length of sentences in each of the two test cor-
pora were kept between fifteen and twenty words.

To create the initial large corpus a series of
small corpora available on the internet were com-
piled into one larger corpus which was used to
train a SMT system. The resources used in this
step were Fapesp-v2 (Aziz and Specia, 2011), the
OpenSubtitles20131 corpus, the PHP Manual Cor-
pus2 and the KDE4 localizaton files (v.2)3. No
special tool was used to clean these corpora and
the files were compiled as is.

To create the “High Fixed Corpus” and “Low
Fixed Corpus” we built upon the previous work of
Fazly et al. (2008) who identified a dataset of 17
“highly fixed” English verb+noun idioms, and 11
“low fixed” English verb+noun idioms. Based on
these lists our two test corpora were built by ex-
tracting English sentences from the internet which
contained instances of each of the high and low
fixed idiom types. Each collected sentence was
manually translated into Brazilian-Portuguese, be-
fore each translations was manually checked and
corrected by a second translator. Ten sentences
were collected for each idiom type. This resulted
in a High Fixed corpus consisting of 170 sentences

1http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/OpenSubtitles2013.php
2http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/PHP.php
3http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/KDE4.php

40



containing idiomatic usages of those idioms, and
a Low-Fixed corpus consisting of 110 sentences
containing instances of low-fixed idioms.

As indicated three idiomatic resources were
also required for the study. These were: a dic-
tionary of English idioms and their literal mean-
ings; a dictionary of Brazilian-Portuguese idioms
and their literal meanings; and a bilingual dictio-
nary from English to Brazilian-Portuguese. The
English idioms dictionary contained entries for the
idioms pointing to their literal English meanings,
along with some morphological variations of those
idioms. The Brazilian-Portuguese idioms dictio-
nary similarly contained entries for the idioms
pointing to their literal meanings with some mor-
phological variations of those idioms. Finally, the
bilingual dictionary contained entries for the same
idioms along with morphological variations of the
English idioms dictionary but pointing to their lit-
eral translated meaning. The Oxford Dictionary of
English idioms and the Cambridge Idioms Dictio-
nary were used to collect the literal meanings of
the English idioms. Literal meanings were manu-
ally translated to Brazilian-Portuguese.

Following resource collection and construction
a SMT model for English/Brazilian-Portuguese
was trained using the Moses toolkit (Koehn et al.,
2007) using its baseline settings. The corpus used
for this training consisted of 17,288,109 pairs of
sentences (approximately 50% of the initial col-
lected corpus), with another 34,576 pairs of sen-
tences used for the “tuning” process. Following
this training and tuning process the baseline trans-
lation accuracy, or BLEU scores, were calculated
for the two test corpora, i.e., for the “High Fixed
Corpus”, and the “Low Fixed Corpus”.

Having calculated the baseline BLEU scores,
the substitution method was then applied to re-
translate each of the two test corpora. Specifi-
cally both the “High Fixed Corpus” and the “Low
Fixed Corpus” were passed through our extended
pipeline with new substitution based translations
constructed for each of the test corpora. BLEU
scores were then calculated for these two out-
put corpora that were built using the substitution
method.

5 Results and Discussion

Table 1 presents the results of the evaluation.
The BLEU scores presented in the table compare
the baseline SMT system against our proposed

method for handling English idiomatic MWE of
the verb+noun type.

Corpus Baseline Substitution
High Idiomatic 23.12 31.72
Low Idiomatic 24.55 26.07

Table 1: Experiment’s results.

Overall the results are positive. For both the
high and low idiomatic corpora we find that apply-
ing the pre- and post-processing substitution ap-
proach improves the BLEU score of the SMT sys-
tem. However, it is notable that the High-Fixed
idiomatic corpus showed a considerably larger in-
crease in BLEU score than was the case for the
Low-Fixedness idiomatic cases, i.e., a positive in-
crease of 8.6 versus 1.52. To investigate further
we applied a paired t-test to test for significance
in mean difference between baseline and substitu-
tion methods for both the high-fixed and low-fixed
test corpora. While the results for the “High Id-
iomatic Corpus” demonstrated a statistically sig-
nificant difference in BLEU scores (p � 0.05),
the difference between the baseline and substitu-
tion method was not statistically significant for the
case of the “Low Idiomatic Corpus” (p ≈ 0.7).
We believe the lack of improvement in the case
of low fixed idioms may be caused by a higher
morphosyntactic variation in the translations of the
low fixed idioms. This higher variation makes the
post-processing step of our approach (which re-
quires matching a substring in the translated sen-
tence) more difficult for low fixed idioms with the
result that our approach is less effective for these
idioms.

It is worth noting that the same SMT system
(without the substitution extension) achieved a
BLEU score of 62.28 on a corpus of sentences
from general language; and, achieved an average
BLEU score of 46.48 over a set of 5 corpora of
sentences that did not contain idioms and were
of simlar length to the idiomatic corpora used in
this study (15 to 20 words). Both these BLEU
scores are higher than the scores we report in Ta-
ble 1 for our substitution method. This indicates
that although our substitution approach does im-
prove BLEU scores when translating idioms there
is still a lot of work to be done to solve the prob-
lems posed by idioms to SMT.

41



6 Conclusion

Our results indicate that this substitution approach
does improve the performance of the system.
However, we are aware that this method is not the
entire solution for the MWE problem in SMT. The
effectiveness of the approach is dependent on the
fixedness of the idiom being translated.

This approach relies on several language re-
sources, including: idiomatic dictionaries in the
source and target languages and a bilingual dic-
tionary containing entries for the idioms in the
source language aligned with their translated lit-
eral meaning in the target language. In future
work we investigate techniques that we can use to
(semi)automatically address dictionary construc-
tion. We will also work on enabling the system
to distinguish between idiomatic vs. literal usages
of idioms.

Acknowledgments

Giancarlo D. Salton would like to thank CAPES
(“Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de
Nı́vel Superior”) for his Science Without Borders
scholarship, proc n. 9050-13-2. We would like
to thank Acassia Thabata de Souza Salton for her
corrections on the Brazilian-Portuguese transla-
tion of sentences containing idioms.

References
Otavio Costa Acosta, Aline Villavicencio, and Vi-

viane P. Moreira. 2011. Identification and Treat-
ment of Multiword Expressions applied to Informa-
tion Retrieval. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Multiword Expressions: from Parsing and Genera-
tion to the Real World (MWE 2011), pages 101–109.

Wilker Aziz and Lucia Specia. 2011. Fully automatic
compilation of a portuguese-english and portuguese-
spanish parallel corpus for statistical machine trans-
lation. In STIL 2011.

Dhouha Bouamor, Nasredine Semmar, and Pierre
Zweigenbaum. 2011. Improved Statistical Machine
Translation Using MultiWord Expressions. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Workshop on Using
Linguistic Information for Hybrid Machine Trans-
lation), pages 15–20.

Anna Cieślicka. 2006. Literal salience in on-line pro-
cessing of idiomatic expressions by second language
learners. 22(2):115–144.

Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Kučerová.
2005. Clause Restructuring for Statistical Machine
Translation. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual
Meeting of the ACL, pages 531–540.

Afsanesh Fazly, Paul Cook, and Suzanne Stevenson.
2008. Unsupervised Type and Token Identification
of Idiomatic Expressions. In Computational Lin-
guistics, volume 35, pages 61–103.

Milena U. Garrao and Maria C. P. Dias. 2001. Um
Estudo de Expressões Cristalizadas do Tipo V+Sn e
sua Inclusão em um Tradutor Automático Bilı́ngüe
(Português/Inglês). In Cadernos de Tradução, vol-
ume 2, pages 165–182.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation.
In 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Philipp Koehn. 2010. Statistical Machine Translation.
Cambridge University Press, New York. 2 Ed.

Antonio Moreno-Ortiz, Chantal Pérez-Hernández, and
M. Ángeles Del-Olmo. 2013. Managing Multiword
Expressions in a Lexicon-Based Sentiment Analysis
System for Spanish. In Proceedings of the 9th Work-
shop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2013), pages
1–10.

Hideo Okuma, Hirofumi Yamamoto, and Eiichiro
Sumita. 2008. Introducing Translation Dictionary
Into Phrase-based SMT. In IEICE - Transactions
on Information and Systems, number 7, pages 2051–
2057.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 311–318.

Ivan A. Sag, Thimothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword
Expressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In
Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Pro-
cessing: Third International Conference: CICLing-
2002, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume
2276, pages 1–15.

Giancarlo D. Salton, Robert J. Ross, and John D.
Kelleher. 2014. An Empirical Study of the Im-
pact of Idioms on Phrase Based Statistical Machine
Translation of English to Brazilian-Portuguese. In
Third Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Transla-
tion (HyTra) at 14th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

42


