



















































Chinese-to-Spanish rule-based machine translation system


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation (HyTra) @ EACL 2014, pages 82–86,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Chinese-to-Spanish rule-based machine translation system

Jordi Centelles1 and Marta R. Costa-jussà2
1Centre de Tecnologies i Aplicacions del llenguatge i la Parla (TALP),

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona
2Centro de Investigación en Computación (CIC), Instituto Politécnico Nacional (IPN), Mexico

1jordi.centelles.sabater@alu-etsetb.upc.edu,2marta@nlp.cic.ipn.mx

Abstract

This paper describes the first freely avail-
able Chinese-to-Spanish rule-based ma-
chine translation system. The system has
been built using the Apertium technology
and combining manual and statistical tech-
niques. Evaluation in different test sets
shows a high coverage between 82-88%.

1 Introduction

Chinese and Spanish are two of the most spoken
languages in the world and they are gaining inter-
est in the actual information society. In this sense,
machine translation (MT) between these two lan-
guages would be clearly of interest for companies,
tourists, students and politicians. Eventhough the
necessity is a fact, there are not many Chinese-
to-Spanish MT systems available in the Internet.
In addition, the translation quality is quite be-
hind the standards. Most of the approaches are
corpus-based and they seem to produce translation
through English pivoting to compensate the lack of
Chinese-Spanish parallel corpora.

When it comes to academic research, there have
been few works in these pair of languages which
mainly are reviewed in Costa-jussà et al (2012b)
and they also rely on the pivoting procedure.
The linguistic differences (mainly at the level of
morphology) between the two languages makes
the training of data-driven systems rather diffi-
cult. Actually, Chinese and Spanish are languages
with many linguistic differences, especially at the
level of morphology and semantics. Chinese is
an isolating language, which means that there is
a one-to-one correspondence between words and
morphemes. Whereas, Spanish is a fusional lan-
guage, which means that words and morphemes
are mixed together without clear limits. Regarding
semantics, Chinese is a language that has a mas-
sive number of homophonyms at the lexical level

(Zhang et al., 2006). Therefore, lexical semantic
disambiguation towards Spanish will be harder.

Given these challenges, we decided to build
a Chinese-to-Spanish rule-based machine transla-
tion (RBMT) system. These types of systems pro-
vide a translation based on linguistic knowledge
in contrast to the existing and popular corpus-
based approaches. The translation process is di-
vided in: analysis, transfer and generation. Anal-
ysis and generation cover mainly the morpholog-
ical and semantic variations of the languages, the
transfer phase is in charge of the grammatical as-
pects (Hutchins and Sommers, 1992). The main
advantages of RBMT are that they use linguistic
knowledge and the produced errors can be traced.

Among the different linguistic motivations to
build a Chinese-to-Spanish RBMT, we can list the
following: (1) the proposed system will coherently
manage the difference in morphology from Chi-
nese to Spanish; (2) and the RBMT approach is
able to exploit the use of linguistic tools which are
available separately for Chinese and Spanish.

The main drawback of a RBMT system is that
it requires a lot of human dedication and years of
development (Costa-Jussà et al., 2012a) and that
they exhibit weakness in lexical selection transfer,
which is quite relevant in this pair of languages.
However, in our case, we are using the Apertium
platform (Forcada et al., 2011) that eases the pro-
cess. In addition, when building the proposed
RBMT approach, we use automatic techniques to
feed the system from parallel corpus.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 reports a detailed description of the
Chinese-to-Spanish RBMT architecture including
the procedure of compiling monolingual and bilin-
gual dictionaries as well as the computation of
grammatical transfer rules. Section 3 reports an
evaluation of the system in terms of coverage. Fi-
nally, Section 4 discusses the results and it draws
the final conclusions.

82



Figure 1: Block diagram of a typical rule-based
machine translation system.

2 Rule-based machine translation
architecture

The general architecture of a RBMT translation
architecture has been defined in the literature in
works such as (Hutchins and Sommers, 1992) or
(Forcada et al., 2011), which is the open-source
toolbox that we are using in this paper. In this sec-
tion, we describe in detail how the system has been
developed following similar procedures as (Cortés
et al., 2012). Novelties in our work are that we
are aiming a really challenging language pair with
few bilingual speakers capable of developing the
resources required to compile the targeted system.

Human annotation counted with two bilin-
gual English-Spanish annotators and one trilingual
annotator Chinese-English-Spanish, who was in
charge of checking every step out.

2.1 System architecture

The system is based on the Apertium platform
(Forcada et al., 2011) which is a free/open-source
toolbox for shallow transfer machine translation.
As well as the platform, the linguistic data for the
MT systems are also available under the terms of
the GNU GPL.

The platform was originally designed for the
Romance languages of Spain, but it is moving
away from those initial objectives (see the list of
available languages in wiki.apertium.org. In prac-
tice, we use the architecture of the system, but,
differently, we are using statistical techniques to
complete our system.

Figure 1 shows the representative block dia-
gram modules of the RBMT system. In this first
description of the system, the only step that is not
addressed is the lexical transfer.

Development to date has consisted of: feeding

monolingual and bilingual dictionaries, to extend
coverage, with statistical methods and with hu-
man annotation; filtering and cleaning monolin-
gual and bilingual dictionaries to make them con-
sistent; and computing grammatical transfer rules.
Although the monolingual and bilingual dictionar-
ies require the same entries, the function of each
one is different. The monolingual dictionary con-
tains morphological information and the bilingual
dictionary contains the translation entry itself.

This first track of development has taken place
in over the course of five months, which con-
trasts with the long time required to develop clas-
sical RBMT systems. The key point here is that
our system has been developed using a hybrid ap-
proach and that, although the system is capable of
achieving state-of-the-art translations, it is still un-
der construction. The last version of the system is
available for download at the Apertium site1.

2.2 Bilingual dictionary

The bilingual dictionary was computed following
two methodologies or procedures.

The first one is manual by using the Yellow
Bridge resource2. This web is, as mentioned by
the authors, the premier guide to Chinese language
and culture for English speakers. They provide
comprehensive tools for learning the Chinese lan-
guage. Although there are many Chinese-related
websites, this one is well-organized and complete.
For Chinese, they provide a list of words classified
following grammatical categories, including: ad-
jectives, adverbs, conjunctions, interjections, mea-
sure words, nouns, numerals, onomatopoeia, par-
ticles, prefixes, prepositions, pronouns, question
words, suffixes, time words and different types of
verbs. For each category, each word has its corre-
sponding translation into English. Then, this dic-
tionary was used to feed the dictionary. But to
double-check the translations provided, each word
was translated using another on-line dictionary3

and Google Translate. This procedure allowed to
add several hundreds of numerals, conjunctions,
adverbs, pronouns, determinants, adjectives, 3,000
nouns and 2,000 verbs.

The second procedure is statistical-based. The
parallel corpus of the United Nations (UN)
(Rafalovitch and Dale, 2009) was aligned at the

1http://sourceforge.net/projects/
2http://www.yellowbridge.com/chinese/chinese-parts-of-

speech.php
3http://www.chinese-tools.com/

83



level of word by using the standard GIZA++ (Och
and Ney, 2003) software. Alignment was per-
formed from source to target and target to source.
Symmetrization was done using intersection be-
cause it provides the most reliable links. Then,
we extracted phrases of length one, which means
that we extracted translations from word-to-word.
This dictionary was manually filtered to eliminate
incorrect entries. This procedure allowed to add
around 3,500 words in the dictionaries. Our dic-
tionary has around 9,000 words.

2.3 Chinese monolingual dictionary

The Chinese monolingual dictionary was ex-
tracted from the source part of the bilingual dic-
tionary. Additionally, it was filtered with regular
expressions to avoid repeated entries.

Regarding the morphological analysis, Chinese
is an isolating language, which in brief means that
words (or symbols) cannot be segmented in sub-
morphemes. In this sense, no morphological anal-
ysis is required. However, the main challenge of
Chinese is that most of the time symbols appear
concatenated and sentences are not segmented into
words as it is most common in other languages.
Therefore, Chinese requires to be segmented. We
used the ZhSeg (Dyer, 2013) programmed in C++.
We evaluated the performance of this segmenter
in comparison to the Left to Right Longest Match
(LRLM), which is the parsing strategy used by
Apertium in analysis mode. This procedure read
tokens from left to right, matching the longest
sequence that is in the dictionary (like ”greedy”
matching of regular expressions). Both ZhSeg
and LRLM were compared using an in-house seg-
mented test set of 456 words as a reference. The
Word Error Rate (WER) measure for the ZhSeg
was 16.56% and 16.89% for LRLM. Given that
results were comparable, we decided to use the
Apertium LRLM strategy.

It is mandatory that the monolingual and the
bilingual dictionary are coherent, which means
that they have to have the same entries. Both
dictionaries were cleaned up with different regu-
lar expressions. Therefore, we have to ensure that
there are not situations like there is a word in the
monolingual dictionary, which is not in the bilin-
gual dictionary and the other way round. In order
to check out this, we used testvoc. As mentioned
in the Apertium documentation 4, a testvoc is liter-

4http://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/Testvoc

ally a test of vocabulary. At the most basic level, it
just expands the monolingual dictionary, and runs
each possibly analyzed lexical form through all the
translation stages to see that for each possible in-
put, a sensible translation in the target language is
generated. This tool was used to clean up dictio-
naries.

2.4 Spanish generation
This part of the translator was taken from the
repository of Apertium given that is has been de-
veloped during years. Some previous publications
that explain Spanish generation can by found in
(Armentano-Oller et al., 2006; Corbı́-Bellot et al.,
2005). Basically, it consists of the three modules
of Apertium: morphological generator that deliv-
ers a surface (inflected) form for each transferred
word. This is done using the generation dictio-
nary, which for each lemma and part-of-speech
tag is able to generate the final form. Then, the
post-generator that performs orthographic opera-
tions such as contractions (e.g. de el and del).

2.5 Transfer-rules
Grammatical transfer-rules were extracted follow-
ing a manual procedure, which consisted in per-
forming a translation of a source text and contrast-
ing the output translation, the source and the refer-
ence. From this observation, manual patterns were
extracted in order to design a rule that could cover
the necessary modifications to be done. Following
this procedure, there were 28 rules extracted in-
trasyntagms, which modify inside a syntagm, and
34 intersyntagms, which modify among different
sytnagms.

As follows we show an example of rule ex-
tracted intrasyntagm.

< rule comment = RULE : adj nom >
< pattern >
< pattern− itemn = adj/ >
< pattern− itemn = nom/ >

< /pattern >
< action >
< call−macron = f − concord2 >
< with− parampos = 2/ >
< with− parampos = 1/ >

< /call−macro >
< out >
< chunkname = j ncase = caseFirstWord >
< tags >
< tag >< lit− tagv = SN/ >< /tag >
< tag >< clip pos = 2side = tlpart = gen/ >< /tag >
< tag >< clip pos = 2side = tlpart = nbr/ >< /tag >
< tag >< lit− tagv = p3/ >< /tag >

< /tags >
< lu >
< clip pos = 2side = tlpart = whole/ >

< /lu >
< b pos = 1/ >
< lu >
< clip pos = 1side = tlpart = lem/ >

84



< clip pos = 1side = tlpart = a adj/ >
< clip pos = 1side = tlpart = gen/ >
< clip pos = 1side = tlpart = nbr/ >

< /lu >
< /chunk >

< /out >
< /action >

< /rule >

This rule reorders adjective + noun into noun
+ adjective. Moreover, this rule ensures that the
number and gender of the noun and the adjective
agree.

3 Evaluation framework

This section reports the evaluation framework we
have used to analyze the quality of the Chinese-to-
Spanish RBMT described.

Dataset Domain Words Coverage
Dev News 1,651 88.7
Test UN 35,914 83.8

In-house 10,361 82.8

Table 1: Coverage results.

We can evaluate the rule-based MT systems in
terms of coverage. We are using texts from dif-
ferent domains to perform the evaluation. Do-
mains include news (extracted from the web56)
for checking the evolution of the rule-based sys-
tem; a subcorpus of UN (Rafalovitch and Dale,
2009); and an in-house developed small corpus in
the transportation and hospitality domains. To do
the evaluation of coverage we do not need a ref-
erence of translation. Table 1 shows the coverage
results of our system.

This rule-based MT approach can be the base-
line system towards a hybrid architecture. Inspired
in previous promising works (España-Bonet et al.,
2011), we have identified some ways of building a
hybrid architecture given a rule-based MT system
and available parallel and monolingual corpus:

• Starting with the core of a rule-based system,
there is the necessity of extracting transfer-
rules from parallel corpus and offering a
translation probability to each one. This
would allow to building rule-based MT sys-
tems by a monolingual human linguist. At
the moment, rule-based MT systems have
to be developed by bilingual native linguists

5http://politics.people.com.cn/n/2013/0709/c1001-
22134594.html

6http://finance.people.com.cn/n/2013/0722/c1004-
22275982.html

or at least people who are proficient in the
source and target language.

• In order to help rule-based MT systems be
more fluent and natural, it would be nice to
integrate a language model in the generation
step. The language model could be n-gram-
based, syntax-based or trained on neural-
based. In each case, a different decoding
would be required to be integrated in the sys-
tem.

• Additional feature functions as the popular
lexical ones or others that introduce source
context information can be used together
with the above language model.

4 Conclusions and further work

This paper has described the construction of the
first Chinese-to-Spanish open-source RBMT sys-
tem;. Particularly, the human knowledge has been
used for providing exhaustive monolingual and
bilingual dictionaries as well as for defining gram-
matical transfer rules. The statistical knowledge
has complemented the creation of dictionaries.
Therefore, we have shown effective techniques of
building dictionaries using hybrid techniques. The
new RBMT system has shown a high coverage in
different domains.

As future work, the RBMT has to be improved
mainly with new dictionary entries and more com-
plex transfer rules. Both enhancements can be
done combining human and statistical knowledge.

5 Acknowledgements

This work has been partially supported by the
Google Summer of Code and the Seventh Frame-
work Program of the European Commission
through the International Outgoing Fellowship
Marie Curie Action (IMTraP-2011-29951). Au-
thors want to thank Apertium experts that believed
in this project and helped a lot during the devel-
opment, specially Francis Tyers, Vı́ctor Sánchez-
Cartagena, Filip Petkovsky, Gema Ramı́rez and
Mikel Forcada.

85



References
C. Armentano-Oller, R. C. Carrasco, A. M. Corb-

Bellot, M. L. Forcada, M. Ginestı́-Rosell, S. Ortiz-
Rojas, J. A. Pérez-Ortiz, G. Ramı́rez-Sánchez,
F. Sánchez-Martı́nez, and M. A. Scalco. 2006.
Open-source Portuguese-Spanish machine transla-
tion. In R. Vieira, P. Quaresma, M.d.G.V. Nunes,
N.J. Mamede, C. Oliveira, and M.C. Dias, edi-
tors, Computational Processing of the Portuguese
Language, Proc. of the 7th International Workshop
on Computational Processing of Written and Spo-
ken Portuguese, PROPOR, volume 3960 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 50–59. Springer-
Verlag, May.

A. M. Corbı́-Bellot, M. L. Forcada, S. Ortiz-Rojas,
J. A. Pérez-Ortiz, G. Ramı́rez-Sánchez, F. Sánchez-
Martı́nez, I. Alegria, A. Mayor, and K. Sarasola.
2005. An open-source shallow-transfer machine
translation engine for the romance languages of
spain. In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference of
the European Association for Machine Translation,
pages 79–86, May.

J. P. Martı́nez Cortés, J. O’Regan, and F. M. Tyers.
2012. Free/open source shallow-transfer based ma-
chine translation for spanish and aragonese. In
LREC, pages 2153–2157.

M. R. Costa-Jussà, M. Farrús, J. B. Mariño, and
J. A. R. Fonollosa. 2012a. Study and compari-
son of rule-based and statistical catalan-spanish ma-
chine translation systems. Computing and Informat-
ics, 31(2):245–270.

M. R. Costa-jussà, C. A. Henrı́quez Q, and R. E.
Banchs. 2012b. Evaluating indirect strategies for
Chinese-Spanish statistical machine translation. J.
Artif. Int. Res., 45(1):761–780.

C. Dyer. 2013. http://code.google.com/p/zhseg/.

C. España-Bonet, G. Labaka, A.̃ Dı́az de Ilarraza,
L. Màrquez, and K. Sarasola. 2011. Hybrid ma-
chine translation guided by a rule-based system. In
Proc of the 13th Machine Translation Summit, pages
554–561, Xiamen, China, sep.

M. L. Forcada, M. Ginestı́-Rosell, J. Nordfalk,
J. O’Regan, S. Ortiz-Rojas, J. A. Pérez-Ortiz,
F. Sánchez-Martı́nez, G. Ramı́rez-Sánchez, and
F. M. Tyers. 2011. Apertium: a free/open-source
platform for rule-based machine translation. Ma-
chine Translation, 25(2):127–144.

W. J. Hutchins and L. Sommers. 1992. An introduc-
tion to machine translation. Academic Press, 362.

F.J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A systematic comparison
of various statistical alignment models. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29(1):19–51, March.

A. Rafalovitch and R. Dale. 2009. United Nations
General Assembly Resolutions: A Six-Language
Parallel Corpus. In Proc. of the MT Summit XII,
pages 292–299, Ottawa.

Y. Zhang, N. Wu, and M. Yip. 2006. Lexical ambigu-
ity resolution in chinese sentence processing. Hand-
book of East Asian Psycholinguistics, 1:268–278.

86


