



















































Aikuma: A Mobile App for Collaborative Language Documentation


Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on the Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages, pages 1–5,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, 26 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Aikuma: A Mobile App for Collaborative Language Documentation

Steven Bird1,2, Florian R. Hanke1, Oliver Adams1, and Haejoong Lee2
1Dept of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne

2Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania

Abstract

Proliferating smartphones and mobile
software offer linguists a scalable, net-
worked recording device. This paper de-
scribes Aikuma, a mobile app that is de-
signed to put the key language documen-
tation tasks of recording, respeaking, and
translating in the hands of a speech com-
munity. After motivating the approach we
describe the system and briefly report on
its use in field tests.

1 Introduction

The core of a language documentation consists
of primary recordings along with transcriptions
and translations (Himmelmann, 1998; Woodbury,
2003). Many members of a linguistic community
may contribute to a language documentation, play-
ing roles that depend upon their linguistic com-
petencies. For instance, the best person to pro-
vide a text could be a monolingual elder, while the
best person to translate it could be a younger bilin-
gual speaker. Someone else again may be the best
choice for performing transcription work. What-
ever the workflow and degree of collaboration,
there is always the need to manage files and cre-
ate secondary materials, a data management prob-

Figure 1: Phrase-aligned bilingual audio

lem. The problem is amplified by the usual prob-
lems that attend linguistic fieldwork: limited hu-
man resources, limited communication, and lim-
ited bandwidth.

The problem is not to collect large quantities of
primary audio in the field using mobile devices (de
Vries et al., 2014). Rather, the problem is to en-
sure the long-term interpretability of the collected
recordings. At the most fundamental level, we
want to know what words were spoken, and what
they meant. Recordings made in the wild suf-
fer from the expected range of problems: far-field
recording, significant ambient noise, audience par-
ticipation, and so forth. We address these prob-
lems via the “respeaking” task (Woodbury, 2003).
Recordings made in an endangered language may
not be interpretable once the language falls out of
use. We address this problem via the “oral trans-
lation” task. The result is relatively clean source
audio recordings with phrase-aligned translations
(see Figure 1). NLP methods are applicable to
such data (Dredze et al., 2010), and we can hope
that ultimately, researchers working on archived
bilingual audio sources will be able to automati-
cally extract word-glossed interlinear text.

We describe Aikuma, an open source Android
app that supports recording along with respeaking

Figure 2: Adding a time-aligned translation

1



and oral translation, while capturing basic meta-
data. Aikuma supports local networking so that
a set of mobile phones can be synchronized, and
anyone can listen to and annotate the recordings
made by others. Key functionality is provided
via a text-less interface (Figure 2). Aikuma in-
troduces social media and networked collabora-
tion to village-based fieldwork, all on low-cost de-
vices, and this is a boon for scaling up the quan-
tity of documentary material that can be collected
and processed. Field trials in Papua New Guinea,
Brazil, and Nepal have demonstrated the effective-
ness of the approach (Bird et al., 2014).

2 Thought Experiment: The Future
Philologist

A typical language documentation project is
resource-bound. So much documentation could be
collected, yet the required human resources to pro-
cess it all adequately are often not available. For
instance, some have argued that it is not effective
to collect large quantities of primary recordings
because there is not the time to transcribe it.1

Estimates differ about the pace of language loss.
Yet it is uncontroversial that – for hundreds of lan-
guages – only the oldest living speakers are well-
versed in traditional folklore. While a given lan-
guage may survive for several more decades, the
opportunity to document significant genres may
pass much sooner. Ideally, a large quantity of these
nearly-extinct genres would be recorded and given
sufficient further treatment in the form of respeak-
ings and oral translations, in order to have archival
value. Accordingly, we would like to determine
what documentary materials would be of greatest
practical value to the linguist working in the fu-
ture, possibly ten to a hundred or more years in
future. Given the interest of classical philology in
ancient languages, we think of this researcher as
the “future philologist.”

Our starting point is texts, as the least processed
item of the so-called “Boasian trilogy.” A substan-
tial text corpus can serve as the basis for the prepa-
ration of grammars and dictionaries even once a
language is extinct, as we know from the cases of
the extinct languages of the Ancient Near East.

1E.g. Paul Newman’s 2013 seminar The Law of Un-
intended Consequences: How the Endangered Languages
Movement Undermines Field Linguistics as a Scientific
Enterprise, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
xziE08ozQok

Our primary resource is the native speaker com-
munity, both those living in the ancestral home-
land and the members of the diaspora. How
can we engage these communities in the tasks
of recording, respeaking, and oral interpretation,
in order to generate the substantial quantity of
archival documentation?

Respeaking involves listening to an original
recording and repeating what was heard carefully
and slowly, in a quiet recording environment It
gives archival value to recordings that were made
“in the wild” on low-quality devices, with back-
ground noise, and by people having no training in
linguistics. It provides much clearer audio content,
facilitating transcription. Bettinson (2013) has
shown that human transcribers, without knowl-
edge of the language under study, can generally
produce phonetic transcriptions from such record-
ings that are close enough to enable someone who
knows the language to understand what was said,
and which can be used as the basis for phonetic
analysis. This means we can postpone the tran-
scription task – by years or even decades – un-
til such time as the required linguistic expertise is
available to work with archived recordings.

By interpretation, we mean listening to a
recording and producing a spoken translation of
what was heard. Translation into another language
obviates the need for the usual resource-intensive
approaches to linguistic analysis that require syn-
tactic treebanks along with semantic annotations,
at the cost of a future decipherment effort (Xia and
Lewis, 2007; Abney and Bird, 2010).

3 Design Principles

Several considerations informed the design of
Aikuma. First, to facilitate use by monolingual
speakers, the primary recording functions need to
be text free.

Second, to facilitate collaboration and guard
against loss of phones, it needs to be possible
to continuously synchronise files between phones.
Once any information has been captured on a
phone, it is synchronized to the other phones on
the local network. All content from any phone is
available from any phone, and thus only a single
phone needs to make it back from village-based
work. After a recording is made, it needs to be
possible to listen to it on the other phones on the
local network. This makes it easy for people to
annotate each other’s recordings. This also en-

2



ables users to experience the dissemination of their
recordings, and to understand that a private activ-
ity of recording a narrative is tantamount to public
speaking. This is useful for establishing informed
consent in communities who have no previous ex-
perience of the Internet or digital archiving.

Third, to facilitate trouble-shooting and future
digital archaeology, the file format of phones
needs to be transparent. We have devised an
easily-interpretable directory hierarchy for record-
ings and users, which permits direct manipulation
of recordings. For instance, all the metadata and
recordings that involve a particular speaker could
be extracted from the hierarchy with a single file-
name pattern.

4 Aikuma

Thanks to proliferating smartphones, it is now rel-
atively easy and cheap for untrained people to col-
lect and share many sorts of recordings, for their
own benefit and also for the benefit of language
preservation efforts. These include oral histories,
oral literature, public speaking, and discussion of
popular culture. With inexpensive equipment and
minimal training, a few dozen motivated people
can create a hundred hours of recorded speech (ap-
prox 1M words) in a few weeks. However, adding
transcription and translation by a trained linguist
introduces a bottleneck: most languages will be
gone before linguists will get to them.

Aikuma puts this work in the hands of language

speakers. It collects recordings, respeakings, and
interpretations, and organizes them for later syn-
chronization with the cloud and archival storage.
People with limited formal education and no prior
experience using smartphones can readily use the
app to record their stories, or listen to other peo-
ple’s stories to respeak or interpret them. Literate
users can supply written transcriptions and trans-
lations. Items can be rated by the linguist and
language workers and highly rated items are dis-
played more prominently, and this may be used to
influence the documentary workflow. Recordings
are stored alongside a wealth of metadata, includ-
ing language, GPS coordinates, speaker, and off-
sets on time-aligned translations and comments.

4.1 Listing and saving recordings

When the app is first started, it shows a list of
available recordings, indicating whether they are
respeakings or translations (Figure 3(a)). These
recordings could have been made on this phone, or
synced to this phone from another, or downloaded
from an archive. The recording functionality is
accessed by pressing the red circle, and when the
user is finished, s/he is prompted to add metadata
to identify the person or people who were recorded
(Figure 3(b)) and the language(s) of the recording
(Figure 3(c)).

(a) Main list (b) Adding speaker metadata (c) Adding language metadata

Figure 3: Screens for listing and saving recordings

3



4.2 Playback and commentary

When a recording is selected, the user sees a dis-
play for the individual recording, with its name,
date, duration, and images of the participants,
cf. Figure 4.

Figure 4: Recording playback screen

The availability of commentaries is indicated by
user images beneath the timeline. Once an orig-
inal recording has commentaries, their locations
are displayed within the playback slider. Playback
interleaves the original recording with the spoken
commentary, cf Figure 5.

Figure 5: Commentary playback screen

4.3 Gesture vs voice activation

Aikuma provides two ways to control any record-
ing activity, using gesture or voice activation. In
the gesture-activated mode, playback is started,
paused, or stopped using on-screen buttons. For
commentary, the user presses and holds the play
button to listen to the source, and presses and holds
the record button to supply a commentary, cf Fig-
ure 2. Activity is suspended when neither button
is being pressed.

In the voice-activated mode, the user puts the
phone to his or her ear and playback begins au-
tomatically. Playback is paused when the user
lifts the phone away from the ear. When the user
speaks, playback stops and the speech is recorded
and aligned with the source recording.

4.4 File storage
The app supports importing of external audio files,
so that existing recordings can be put through the
respeaking and oral translation processes. Stor-
age uses a hierarchical file structure and plain text
metadata formats which can be easily accessed di-
rectly using command-line tools. Files are shared
using FTP. Transcripts are stored using the plain
text NIST HUB-4 transcription format and can be
exported in Elan format.

4.5 Transcription
Aikuma incorporates a webserver and clients can
connect using the phone’s WiFi, Bluetooth, or
USB interfaces. The app provides a browser-based
transcription tool that displays the waveform for
a recording along with the spoken annotations.
Users listen to the source recording along with any
available respeakings and oral translations, and
then segment the audio and enter his or her own
written transcription and translation. These are
saved to the phone’s storage and displayed on the
phone during audio playback.

5 Deployment

We have tested Aikuma in Papua New Guinea,
Brazil, and Nepal (Bird et al., 2014). We taught
members of remote indigenous communities to
record narratives and orally interpret them into a
language of wider communication. We collected
approximately 10 hours of audio, equivalent to
100k words. We found that the networking capa-
bility facilitated the contribution of multiple mem-
bers of the community who have a variety of lin-
guistic aptitudes. We demonstrated that the plat-
form is an effective way to engage remote indige-
nous speech communities in the task of building
phrase-aligned bilingual speech corpora. To sup-
port large scale deployment, we are adding sup-
port for workflow management, plus interfaces to
the Internet Archive and to SoundCloud for long
term preservation and social interaction.

Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge support from the Aus-
tralian Research Council, the National Science
Foundation, and the Swiss National Science Foun-
dation. We are also grateful to Isaac McAlister,
Katie Gelbart, and Lauren Gawne for field-testing
work. Aikuma development is hosted on GitHub.

4



References
Steven Abney and Steven Bird. 2010. The Human

Language Project: building a universal corpus of the
world’s languages. In Proceedings of the 48th Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 88–97. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Mat Bettinson. 2013. The effect of respeaking on tran-
scription accuracy. Honours Thesis, Dept of Lin-
guistics, University of Melbourne.

Steven Bird, Isaac McAlister, Katie Gelbart, and Lau-
ren Gawne. 2014. Collecting bilingual audio in re-
mote indigenous villages. under review.

Nic de Vries, Marelie Davel, Jaco Badenhorst, Willem
Basson, Febe de Wet, Etienne Barnard, and Alta
de Waal. 2014. A smartphone-based ASR data col-
lection tool for under-resourced languages. Speech
Communication, 56:119–131.

Mark Dredze, Aren Jansen, Glen Coppersmith, and
Ken Church. 2010. NLP on spoken documents
without ASR. In Proceedings of the 2010 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 460–470. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Florian R. Hanke and Steven Bird. 2013. Large-
scale text collection for unwritten languages. In Pro-
ceedings of the 6th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing, pages 1134–1138.
Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing.

Nikolaus P. Himmelmann. 1998. Documentary and
descriptive linguistics. Linguistics, 36:161–195.

Anthony C. Woodbury. 2003. Defining documentary
linguistics. In Peter Austin, editor, Language Docu-
mentation and Description, volume 1, pages 35–51.
London: SOAS.

Fei Xia and William D. Lewis. 2007. Multilingual
structural projection across interlinearized text. In
Proceedings of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
452–459. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

5


