



















































Twitter Users #CodeSwitch Hashtags! #MoltoImportante #wow


Proceedings of The First Workshop on Computational Approaches to Code Switching, pages 51–61,
October 25, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Twitter Users #CodeSwitch Hashtags! #MoltoImportante #wow #헐헐헐

David Jurgens, Stefan Dimitrov, Derek Ruths
School of Computer Science

McGill University
Montreal, Canada

jurgens@cs.mcgill.ca, stefan.dimitrov@mail.mcgill.ca,
druths@networkdynamics.org

Abstract

When code switching, individuals incor-
porate elements of multiple languages into
the same utterance. While code switching
has been studied extensively in formal and
spoken contexts, its behavior and preva-
lence remains unexamined in many newer
forms of electronic communication. The
present study examines code switching in
Twitter, focusing on instances where an
author writes a post in one language and
then includes a hashtag in a second lan-
guage. In the first experiment, we per-
form a large scale analysis on the lan-
guages used in millions of posts to show
that authors readily incorporate hashtags
from other languages, and in a manual
analysis of a subset the hashtags, reveal
prolific code switching, with code switch-
ing occurring for some hashtags in over
twenty languages. In the second experi-
ment, French and English posts from three
bilingual cities are analyzed for their code
switching frequency and its content.

1 Introduction

Online platforms enable individuals from a wide
variety of linguistic backgrounds to communi-
cate. When individuals share multiple languages
in common, their communication will occasion-
ally include linguistic elements from multiple lan-
guages (Nilep, 2006), a practice commonly re-
ferred to as code switching. Typically, during code
switching, the text or speech in a language retains
its syntactic and morphological constraints for that
language, rather than having text from both lan-
guages conform to one of the language’s grammat-
ical rules. This requirement enables code switch-
ing to be separated from borrowing, where foreign

words are integrated into a native language’s lexi-
con and morphology (Gumperz, 1982; Poplack et
al., 1988; Sankoff et al., 1990).

While work on code switching began with con-
versational analyses, recent work has examined
the phenomena in electronic communication, find-
ing similar evidence of code switching (Climent
et al., 2003; Lee, 2007; Paolillo, 2011). How-
ever, these investigations into code switching have
largely examined interpersonal communication or
settings where the number of participants is lim-
ited. In contrast, social media platforms such as
Twitter offer individuals the ability to write a text
that is decoupled from direct conversation but may
be read widely.

Twitter enables users to post messages with spe-
cial markers known as hashtags, which can serve
as a side channel to comment on the post itself
(Davidov et al., 2010). As a result, multilingual
authors have embraced using hashtags from lan-
guages other than the language of their post. Con-
sider the following real examples:

• Eating an apple for lunch while everyone
around me eats cheeseburgers and fries.
#yoquiero

• Jetzt gibt’s was vernünftiges zum es-
sen! #salad #turkey #lunch #healthy
#healthylifestyle #loveit

• Hasta mañana a todo mundo. Que tengan
linda noche. #MarketerosNocturnos #Mar-
ketingDigital #BlackVirs #SocialMedia

• 1% มันสำคัญมากนะ เพราะมันอาจเปลี่ยน-
จากD+ เป็น C และ B+เป็นA เกรดเฉลี่ยคง-
ดีกว่านี้อ่ะ #พลาด #เสียดาย #fail

Here, the first author posted in English with a
Spanish hashtag reflecting the author’s envious
disposition. In the second, the author comments
in German on sensible food, using multiple En-
glish hashtags to describe the meal and their atti-
tude. In the third and fourth, the authors comment

51



on sleep and school, respectively, and then each
use hashtags with similar meanings in both their
native language and English.

Hashtags provide authors with a communica-
tion medium that also has broader social utility
by embedding their post within global discussion
of other posts using the same hashtag (Letierce et
al., 2010) or by becoming a part of a virtual com-
munity (Gupta et al., 2010). These social motiva-
tions resemble those seen for why individuals may
code switch, such as to assimilate into a group or
make discussions easier (Urciuoli, 1995). Twit-
ter and other hashtag-supporting platforms such as
Instagram and Facebook offer a unique setting for
code switching hashtags for two reasons: (1) po-
tential readers are disconnected from the author,
who may not know of their language fluency, and
(2) text translation is built into the platform, which
enables readers to translate a post into their na-
tive language. As such, authors may be motivated
to include a hashtag of another language to in-
crease their potential audience size or to appear as
a member of a multilingual virtual community.

Despite the prevalence of non-English tweets,
which are approaching 50% of the total volume
(Liu et al., 2014), no study has examined the
prevalence of hashtag code switching. We pro-
pose an initial study of hashtag code switching in
Twitter focusing on three central questions: (1)
for which language pairs do authors write in the
first language and then incorporate a hashtag of
the second language, (2) when tweets include a
hashtag of a different language, which instances
signal code switching behavior, and (3) the degree
to which bilingual populations code switch hash-
tags. Here, we adopt a general definition of code
switching as instances where an individual estab-
lishes a linguistic context in one language and
then includes elements (such as words) from one
or more other languages different from the first.
Two experiments are performed to answer these
questions. In the first, we test general methods to
identify which languages adopt the same hashtags
and whether those shared hashtags are examples of
code switching. In the second, we focus on three
bilingual cities to examine hashtag code switching
behavior in French and English speakers.

Our study provides three main contributions.
First, we demonstrate that hashtag code switching
is widespread in Twitter. Second, we show that
Twitter as a platform includes multiple phenom-

ena that can be falsely interpreted as code switch-
ing and therefore must be accounted for in future
analyses. Third, in a study of French and English
tweets from three cities, we find that an increased
rate of bilinguality decreases the frequency of in-
cluding hashtags from another language but in-
creases the overall rate of code switching when
such hashtags are present. Furthermore, all data
for the experiments is made publicly available.

2 Related Work

Research on code switching is long standing, with
many theories proposed for the motivations be-
hind code switching and how the two languages
interact linguistically (Poplack and Sankoff, 1984;
Myers-Scotton, 1997; Auer, 1998). Most related
to the present work are those studies examining
code switching in online communications.

Climent et al. (2003) examined the use of Span-
ish and Catalan in newsgroups, finding it occurs
2.2% and 4.4% of the Catalan and Spanish con-
texts, respectively. Lee (2007) analyzed a cor-
pus of Cantonese and English emails and ICQ
instant messages and surveyed Hong Kong users
of each form of communication. She found that
the users preferred mixed-language communica-
tion, with no user indicating that they communi-
cated in only Cantonese. Furthermore, the shorter,
more informal ICQ messages were more likely to
be code switched (99.4%) than emails (41.3%).

Paolillo (2011) measured code switching
amongs English, Hindi, and Punjabi in both
IRC and Usenet forum posts, finding similar
to Climent et al. (2003) that the shorter, more
conversational IRC posts had higher rates of
code switching. Paolillo (2011) also note that
code switching rates differed between Hindi and
Punjabi speakers.

The present work differs significantly from
these three studies in two aspects. First, we as-
sess code switching across all language commu-
nities on Twitter, rather than examining individual
groups of bilingual speakers. Second, we focus
our analysis only on the code switching of a post’s
hashtag due to its unique role in microtext (Gupta
et al., 2010), which has yet to be examined in this
context.

3 Hashtag Use in Twitter

Hashtags provide general functionality on Twit-
ter and prior works have proposed that they serve

52



Name Description Examples

ANNOTATION Serves as an annotation about the author’s feelings or comments
on the content of a tweet.

#happy #fail #cute #joking
#YoloSwaggins

COMMUNITY A topical entity that links the tweet with an external community,
which is commonly topical but also includes ”team-like” groups

#music #friends #BecauseItIs-
TheCup #TeamEdward

NAMED
ENTITY

Refers to a specific entity that has a universally recognized
name.

#Glee #TeenChoiceAwards
#WorldCup2014

PLATFORM Refer to some feature or behavior specific to the Twitter plat-
form.

#followback #lasttweet #oomf

APPLICATION Generated by a third-party application, which automatically in-
cludes its hashtag in the message.

#AndroidGames #NowPlaying
#iPhone #Android

VOTING Created as a result of certain real-world phenomena asking in-
dividuals to tweet with specific hashtags as a way of voting.

#MtvHottest #iHeartAwards

ADVERTISING Promoting an item, good, or service, which can be sought out
by interested parties.

#forsale #porn

SPAM Used by adversarial parties to appear on trending lists and to
make spam accounts appear real.

#NanaLoveLingga #681team
#LORDJASONJEROME

Table 1: A taxonomy of hashtag according to their intended use.

a dual role as (1) bookmarking content with the
tag’s particular expression and (2) functioning as a
method for ad hoc community formation and dis-
cussion around a tag’s topic (Gupta et al., 2010;
Davidov et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2012). However,
the diverse user base of the Twitter platform has
given rise to additional roles for hashtags beyond
these two. For example, many popular hashtags
focus on promoting users to follow each other,1

such as #followback and #openfollow. Similarly,
contests are run on Twitter, which have individu-
als vote by posting using a specific hashtag, e.g.,
#MtvHottest.

Given hashtags’ flexible roles, some may be
used in multiple languages without being exam-
ples of code switching, such as the contest-based
or follower-promotion hashtags noted above.
Therefore, we first propose a taxonomy for clas-
sifying all types of hashtags according to their pri-
mary observed use in order to disentangle poten-
tial code switching behavior from Twitter-specific
behavior. To construct the taxonomy, two an-
notators independently reviewed several thousand
hashtags of different frequency to assess the dif-
ferences in how the tag was used in practice. Each
annotator then proposed their own taxonomy. The
final taxonomy was produced from a discussion of
differences, with both annotators initially propos-
ing highly similar taxonomies.2

1In Twitter, following denotes creating a directional social
relation from one account to another.

2We note that a small number of hashtags did not fit this
taxonomy due to their idiosyncratic use. These hashtags were
typically single-letter hashtags used when spelling out words,
e.g., “tonight is going to be #f #u #n,” or when the author has
mistakenly used punctuation, which is not included in Twit-

Table 1 shows the proposed taxonomy, contain-
ing eight broad types of hashtags. The first two
types of hashtags correspond to the main hash-
tag roles proposed in Yang et al. (2012). The
NAMED ENTITY tags also serve as method for
individuals to link their content with a specific
audience like the COMMUNITY type; however,
NAMED ENTITY tags were treated as a separate
group for the purposes of this study because the
entities typically have a common name which is
used in all languages and therefore would not be
translated; in contrast, COMMUNITY hashtags re-
fer to more general topics such as #soccer, which
may be translated, e.g., #futbol. Hashtags of the
five remaining types would likely not be observed
in instances of code switching, with such hash-
tags often being used for purposes other than inter-
personal communication.

4 Experiment 1: Popular Hashtags

Persistently popular hashtags reflect established
norms of communication on Twitter. We hypoth-
esize that these hashtags may be adopted by the
speakers of multiple languages for joining a global
discussion. Therefore, the first experiment ex-
amines the most-used hashtags over a five month
period to measure two aspects: (1) which lan-
guages adopt the hashtags of other languages and
(2) which hashtags used in multiple languages are
evidence of code switching.

ter’s definition of a hashtag, e.g., “#I’mAwesome,” which has
the hashtag #I rather than the full expression.

53



4.1 Experimental Setup
Data Hashtag frequencies were calculated from
981M tweets spanning March 2014 to July 2014.
Frequencies were calculated over this five month
period in order to focus on widely-used hashtags,
rather than bursty hashtags that are popular only
for a short time, such as those studied in Huang
et al. (2010) and Lin et al. (2013). For each hash-
tag, up to 10K non-retweet posts containing that
hashtag were retained, randomly sampling from
the time period studied when more than 10K were
observed. To enable a more reliable estimate of
the language distribution, we restrict our analysis
to only those hashtags with more than 1000 posts,
for a total number of 19.4M posts for 4624 hash-
tags, with an average of 4204 posts per hashtag.

Language Identification The languages of
tweets were identified using a two-step procedure.
First, message content was filtered to remove con-
tent such as usernames, URLs, emoji, and hash-
tags. Tweets with fewer than three remaining to-
kens were excluded (e.g., a message with only
hashtags). Second, the remaining content was
processed using langid.py (Lui and Baldwin,
2012), a state of the art language identification
program that supports the diversity of languages
found on Twitter.

Determining the language of a hashtag in a gen-
eral setting for all languages is difficult due to the
presence of acronyms, abbreviations, and slang.
Therefore, we adopt a heuristic where a hashtag’s
language is set as the language used by the major-
ity of its tweets. To quantify the accuracy of this
heuristic, two annotators inspected the tweets of
200 hashtags to identify the language of the hash-
tag and for the majority of the tweets. This anal-
ysis showed that the heuristic correctly identifies
the hashtag’s language in 96.5% of the instances.

4.2 Hashtag Sharing by Languages
The adoption of a hashtag by a second language
was measured by calculating the frequency with
which tweets using a hashtag with language l1
were labeled with language l2. The noisy nature
of microtext is known to make language identifi-
cation difficult (Bergsma et al., 2012; Goldszmidt
et al., 2013) and can create spurious instances
of second-language hashtag adoption. Therefore,
we impose a minimum frequency of hashtag use
where l2 is only said to use a hashtag of l1 if at
least 20 tweets using that hashtag were labeled

Hashtag # Langs. Primary
Lang.

Type

#lastfm 39 en APPLICATION
#WaliSupitKEPO 32 id SPAM
#RenggiTampan-
DanKece

32 id SPAM
#NP 32 en APPLICATION
#Np 32 en APPLICATION
#MTVHottest 31 en VOTING
#SidikLoveTini 30 id SPAM
#np 30 en APPLICATION
#GER 29 en NAMED ENTITY
#User Indonesia 29 id APPLICATION
#Soccer 29 en COMMUNITY
#RobotKepo 29 id APPLICATION
#KeePO 27 id APPLICATION
#NowPlaying 28 en APPLICATION
#Hot 28 en ADVERTISEMENT

Table 3: The hashtags associated with the most
number of languages having at least 20 tweets us-
ing that hashtag

with l2. To quantify the accuracy of our hashtag
adoption measure, two annotators inspected the
second-language tweets of 200 hashtags, sampled
from the data and representing 40 language pair
combinations; this analysis showed that with the
filtering the assertion that at least one author from
language l1 used a hashtag of language l2 was cor-
rect in 67% of the instances.

Table 2 shows the frequency with which au-
thors using the 15 most-commonly observed lan-
guages (shown as columns using their ISO 639-1
language codes) adopt a hashtag from another of
the most-common languages (shown as rows), re-
vealing widespread sharing of hashtags between
languages. English hashtags are the most fre-
quently used in other languages, likely due to it be-
ing the most common language in Twitter. How-
ever, other languages’ hashtags are also adopted,
with Spanish, Japanese, and Indonesian being the
most common after English.

Despite the strong evidence of using of a sin-
gle hashtag in multiple languages, the results in
Table 2 should not be interpreted as evidence of
code switching. Table 3 shows the 15 hashtags
used in the most number of languages. The ma-
jority of these hashtags are generated by either
(1) Twitter-based applications that automatically
write a tweet in a user’s native language and then
append a fixed English-language hashtag or (2)
spam-like accounts that use the same hashtag and
include random text snippets in various languages,
neither of which signal code switching behavior.

Furthermore, given the noise introduced by lan-
guage misidentification and spam behavior on the

54



Language of tweet
de ru ko pt en it fr zh es ar th ja id nl tr

de 2 1 4 15 6 9 4 9 1 4 6 1
ru 3 3 3 25 7 5 8 7 2 1 7 7 7 1
ko 4 2 13 3 6 5 10 3 10 11 4 2
pt 14 3 64 45 40 13 63 2 4 3 15 10
en 1705 532 155 1235 1735 2183 1171 2482 362 176 742 1097 1101 342
it 5 2 1 10 29 15 4 22 5 3 6 3 1
fr 38 2 3 36 87 49 28 67 8 1 12 19 29 6
zh 3 4 2 2 12 1 2 4 1 11 1 1
es 67 17 3 321 435 264 206 105 29 5 32 66 66 31
ar 6 2 38 4 9 6 7 8 5 1 2
th 3 7 1 24 5 4 8 8 2 6 4 1
ja 17 18 11 11 123 17 24 132 45 2 2 14 12 4
id 84 2 6 25 131 88 58 14 92 6 5 11 52 17
nl 13 1 3 17 6 11 2 9 1 1
tr 17 1 3 28 9 7 7 13 3 1 22 9

Table 2: The frequency with which a hashtag is used by multiple languages. Columns denote the lan-
guage in which the tweet is written; rows denote the hashtag’s language; and cell values report the
number of hashtags where the column’s language has used the hashtag in at least 20 tweets. Diagonal
same-language values are omitted for clarity.

Twitter platform, we view the initial results in Ta-
ble 2 an overestimate of hashtag adoption by lan-
guages other than the hashtag’s source language.
A further inspection of language classification er-
rors revealed four common factors: (1) the lack of
accents on characters,3 (2) the use of short words,
which appeared ambiguous to langid.py, (3)
the use of non-Latin characters for emoticons or
visual affect, and (4) proper names originating
from a language different from the tweet’s. Never-
theless, the observed trends do provide some guid-
ance as to which language pairs might share hash-
tags and also may code switch.

Among the hashtags in Table 3, two are legit-
imately used by authors in multiple languages:
#soccer and #GER, the latter corresponding to the
German soccer team. Both hashtags were popular
due to the World Cup, which occurred during the
time period studied. For both, authors included
these hashtags while taking part in a global con-
versation about the games and event. The hashtag
#soccer is a clear case of code switching, where
individuals are communicating their interests in
multiple languages, even when equivalent hash-
tags in the tweet’s language are actively being
used. Indeed, over half of the languages using
#football had at least one tweet containing both
#football and #futbol. The example of #GER high-
lights a boundary case of code switching. Here,
GER is an abbreviation for the country’s name,
making it a highly-recognized marker, rather than

3In particular, the lack of character accents caused signif-
icant difficulties in distinguish between Spanish and Catalan.

an example of a language change that results in
code switching; however, the country has differ-
ent names depending on the language used (e.g.,
Deutschland), which does point to an active choice
on an author’s part when selecting a particular
name and its abbreviation.

4.3 Analysis by Hashtag Type

In a second analysis, we focus specifically on
hashtags classified as COMMUNITY and ANNO-
TATION, which are more associated with inten-
tional communication actions and therefore more
likely to be used in instances of code switching.
Performing such an analysis at scale would re-
quire automated methods for classifying hashtags
by their use, which is beyond the scope of this ini-
tial investigation. Therefore, we performed a man-
ual analysis of the 100 most-common, 100 least-
common, and 100 median-frequency hashtags in
our dataset to assess the distribution of hashtag
types and cases of code switching among the
COMMUNITY and ANNOTATION hashtags. Two
annotators labeled each hashtag, achieving 64.6%
agreement on the type annotations; disagreements
were largely due to mistaken assignments rather
that disputed classifications.4 An adjudication step
resolved all disagreements. Additionally, eleven
hashtags were excluded from analysis due being
made of common words (e.g., #go, #be) which had

4In particular, mistakes were more common when analyz-
ing hashtags used in languages outside the annotators’ flu-
ency, which required a more careful assessment of why the
hashtag was being used.

55



 0

 10

 20

 30

 40

 50

advertisem
ent

annotation

application

com
m

unity

nam
ed entity

platform

spam
voting

F
re

q
u
e
n
c
y

Lowest Frequency
Median Frequency
Highest Frequency

Figure 1: Type distributions of the sets of 100
highest, median, and lowest frequency hashtags
used in our dataset

no meaningful interpretation for their use. Fol-
lowing, we describe the results of the analysis and
then highlight several types of hashtags.

Figure 1 shows the distribution of hashtag types
observed in the three samples. SPAM and AP-
PLICATION hashtags were most common among
highest frequency hashtags, whereas the low-
est frequency tags in the dataset were also ei-
ther SPAM or VOTING. Surprisingly, the me-
dian frequency hashtags had the majority of the
discussion-related hashtag types

Within the ANNOTATION and COMMUNITY
types, we selected thirteen hashtags each to man-
ually evaluate if code switching behavior was ob-
served. For each hashtag, two annotators reviewed
all associated tweets that were identified as using
a different language than that of the hashtag. An-
notators were instructed to consider the tweet an
instance of code switching only in cases where
(1) there was sufficient text to determine the mes-
sage’s actual language and (2) the message was an
act of communication (in contrast to spam-like or
nonsensical messages).

Code switching behavior was observed for
eleven of the ANNOTATION hashtags and twelve
of the COMMUNITY hashtags. Table 4 shows
those code switched hashtags and the languages
in which they were seen, highlighting the varying
frequency with which hashtags were used in multi-
ple languages. For example, the primarily Arabic
hashtag #Hadith was used in English and Dutch
tweets; similarity, all three Spanish hashtags were
used in English tweets.

Many hashtags are used primarily with lan-
guages that are associated with countries known

Hashtag Lang. Lang. of Code Switched Tweet
#Noticias es en
#Facts en id th fr es ru
#simple en id es fr ms tr tl sw zh ja ko
#bitch en ar cs de es fr id it ja ms nl pt ru

sv tl tr zh
#delicious en ca de es fr id it ja ko ms nl ru th

tr zh
#Design en ar de es fr ja kr pt th tl zh
#Felicidad es ca en
#SWAG en de es fr id it pl pt ru
#fresh en es fr id it ms nl sv
#BoludecesNO es en
#truth en ar bs bu es fr hi id ja it ms pa pt

ru tl zh
#Hadith ar nl en
#Quran ar fa ms id sw az it de en
#hadith ar fr en
#tech en de es nl ar el fr ro id it ja ms no

pl pt ru sq sv zh
#RemajaIndonesia jv ms
#class en ar tr es bg de fr pt he hr id it ja

lt lv ms nl ru sw tl uk zh
#animals en ar ca de es fr pt it ms ja mk pl pt

ro ru tl tr ur vi
#cine es ca de en fr ja pt ro ru
#sunday en es ar tr fr ca de el gl hu id it ja

ms ko pt nl nn no pl ro ru sl sv
th tl zh

#Energy en ru es de fr it pt tr
#change en ar nl es cs de el eu fr pt id it ja

ko jv lv ms nb no pl ro uk ru sv
ta th tl tr ur zh

#magic en nl fr ar ru ca cs de el it es hu id
ja jv ko lv ru ms nn pl pt ro sq
sv sw sl tl tr zh

Table 4: Code switched hashtags and the lan-
guages of the tweets in which they were seen
(ANNOTATION types top, COMMUNITY types bot-
tom).

to have bilingual speakers fluent in English. How-
ever, several hashtags were used in a variety of
diverse languages. For example, #truth was used
with languages such as Arabic, Bosnian, Bulgar-
ian Hindi, and Punjabi. The most widely code
switched hashtag was #magic. In English, the
hashtag is commonly used with content on magic
tricks; however, in other languages, the hashtag
often connotes surprise. For example, the Lat-
vian tweet “Es izmeklēju visu plauktu, nekur nav.
Mamma piejiet ne sekunde nepagāja, kad viņa
atrada. #magic” comments on having an item on
the shelf disappear when looking for it, only for it
to reappear like magic.

During annotation, we observed that authors
were highly productive in their code switching, us-
ing these hashtags to generate the types of emo-
tional and sarcastic messages typically seen in
same-language messages. For example, in the
Swedish tweet “Bussen luktar spya och öl. #fresh”
the author is sarcastically commenting on a bus

56



that smells of vomit and beer.

4.4 Discussion

The process of annotating code switching for
hashtags revealed four notable trends in author be-
havior that occurred with multiple hashtags. First,
authors fluent in non-Latin writing systems will
often use Latin-transliterated hashtags, which are
then adopted by authors of Latin-based systems.
For example, the hashtag #aikatsu describes a col-
lectible card game and anime and is heavily used
by both Japanese and English authors. Similar-
ity, the transliterated hashtags #Hadith and #Quran
are commonly associated with Arabic-language
tweets, which rarely include an Arabic-script ver-
sion of those hashtags even when the tweets in-
clude other hashtags in Arabic.

Second, when two or more languages share the
same written form of a word (i.e., homographs),
the resulting hashtags become conflated and ap-
pear as false examples of code switching. For ex-
ample, #Real was widely used in both English and
Spanish, but with two meanings: the English us-
ages denoting something existent (i.e., not fake)
and the Spanish usages referring to Real Madrid
FC, a soccer club. The hashtag #cine also posed
a challenge due to abbreviation. While many
Spanish-language tweets include #cine (cinema),
tweets in other languages include #cinema and its
abbreviated form #cine, which matches the Span-
ish term, creating false evidence of code switch-
ing.

Third, multilingual individuals may adopt a
common hashtag for reasons other than code
switching, which we highlight with two examples.
The hashtag #1DWelcomeToBrazil is used in a
large number of English and Portuguese tweets.
This hashtag is associated with the travel arrival
of the English-speaking band One Direction to
Brazil. Similarly, the #100happydays hashtag was
spawned from a movement where individuals de-
scribe positive aspects of their day. These global
phenomena increases the difficulty of automati-
cally identifying code switching instances.

Fourth, spam accounts will occasionally latch
onto a hashtag and use it in a variety of languages.
For example, the popular hashtag #1000ADAY is
used to attract new followers, which resulted in
adult content services also using the hashtag to
post spam advertisements. Surprisingly, nearly
a third of tweets for this hashtag are in Russian

and feature fully-grammatical text that appears to
be randomly sampled from other sources, such as
lists of proverbs. After examining multiple ac-
counts, we speculate that these messages are actu-
ally bot accounts who need to generate sufficient
number of messages to avoid Twitter’s spam fil-
ters. Work on detecting fake accounts has largely
been done in English (Benevenuto et al., 2010;
Grier et al., 2010; Ghosh et al., 2012) and so may
benefit from detecting this cross-lingual hashtag
use in accounts.

5 Experiment 2: Bilingual Cities

The second experiment measures the prevalence
of hashtag code switching in tweets from three
cities with different populations of English and
French speakers: Montreal, Canada, Quebec City,
Canada and Paris, France. All three cities are
known to contain bilingual speaker as well, who
have been shown to actively code switch (Heller,
1992). To test for differences in the code switch-
ing behavior of populations, each city is analyzed
according to the degree to which Anglophone
and Francophone speakers incorporate hashtags
of other languages into their tweets and whether
translations of the code switched hashtags are used
in the original language.

5.1 Experimental Setup

Data Tweets were gathered for each city by us-
ing the method of Jurgens (2013) to identify Twit-
ter users with a home location within each city’s
greater metropolitan area. Tweets were then ex-
tracted for these users over a three year sample of
10% of Twitter. This process yielded 4.4M tweets
for Montreal, 203K for Quebec City, and 58.1M
for Paris. For efficiency, we restricted the Paris
dataset to 5M tweets, randomly sampled across the
time period.

Language Identification The language of a
tweet was identified using a similar process as in
Experiment 1. Because this setting restricts the
analysis to only English and French, a different
method was used to determine the language of a
hashtag. Given a tweet in language l1, the text of
a hashtag is tested to see if it wholly occurs within
the dictionary for l1; if not, a greedy tokenization
algorithm is run to attempt to split a hashtag into
constituent words that are in the dictionary of l1. If
either the dictionary-lookup and tokenization steps

57



French hashtags on English tweets English hashtags on French tweets
Quebec City Montreal Paris Quebec City Montreal Paris
imfc imfc comprendraquipourra lasttweet gohabsgo bbl
rilive charte sachezle bbl fail teaminsomniaque
relev seriea nian mtvhottest ind teamportugal
ceta bel hollande gohabsgo mtvhottest ps
preorderproblemonitunes brasil2014 federer not not findugame
derpatrash touspourgagner tropa fail soccer adp
villequebec 2ne1 guillaumeradio 100factsaboutme wow lasttweet
tufnations ma vousetespaspret herbyvip podcast follow
ta lavoixtva bel foodies ukraine teamom
rougeetor passionforezria retouraupensionnat electionsqc2014 int thebest

Table 5: The ten most frequent hashtags occurring in French and English tweets

 0

 2

 4

 6

 8

 10

 12

 14

      Montreal       Quebec City Paris

P
e
rc

e
n
ta

g
e
 o

f 
tw

e
e
ts

Englist tweet with French hastag
French tweet with English hastag

Figure 2: Percentages of tweets with any hashtag
that include a hashtag from the other language

succeed, the hashtag is said to be in l1. Other-
wise, the tests are repeated with the second lan-
guage l2. If the hashtag cannot be recognized in
l1 or l2, it is assumed to be in the language of its
tweet. The aspell dictionaries were used to rec-
ognize words. Furthermore, after analyzing the er-
rors made due to missing words, dictionaries were
augmented to include common social media terms
in each language (e.g., “selfie”). A manual anal-
ysis of 100 hashtags each for French and English
showed that this language assignment method was
correct for 91% of the instances.

5.2 Results
Francophone authors were much more likely to
use English hashtags than Anglophone authors
were for French hashtags. For tweets in each lo-
cale and language, Figure 2 shows the percentage
containing a hashtag in the other language relative
to the total number in that city using a hashtag in
either language. Notably, Paris has a higher rate of
using English hashtags than both Canadian cities.
We speculate that this difference is due to the high
rate of bilingualism in Montreal and Quebec City;
because authors are fully fluent in both languages,

should Francophone authors need to express them-
selves with an English hashtag, they may write the
entire tweet in English, rather than code switch-
ing. In contrast, Parisian authors are less likely to
be fully fluent in English (though functional) and
therefore express themselves primarily in French
with English hashtags as desired. An analogous
trend may be seen for French hashtags in the En-
glish tweets from Montreal, which has a higher
population of primarily Anglophone speakers who
might be less willing to communicate entirely in
French but will still use French hashtags to con-
nect their content with the dominant language used
in the city.

For each language and city, Table 5 shows
the ten most popular hashtags incorporated into
tweets of the other language. Examining the most
popular English tags in French tweets shows a
clear distinction in the two populations; French
Parisian tweets include more universal English
hashtags or those generated by applications, which
are not generally instances of code switching. In
contrast, the Canadian cities include more AN-
NOTATION type hashtags, including the sarcasm-
marking #not, which are more indicative of code
switching behavior.

An established linguistic convention within a
population can also motivate authors to prefer
one language’s expression over another (Myers-
Scotton, 1997). To test whether a high-frequency
concept was equally expressed in French and En-
glish or whether one language’s expression was
preferred, we created pairs of equivalent English
and French hashtags expressing the same con-
cept (e.g., #happy/#heureux) by translating the
50 most-popular English hashtags used in French
tweets. Then, the tweets for each city were an-
alyzed to identify which languages were used in
expressing each concept as a hashtag. The results
in Figure 3 reveal that for nearly half of the hash-

58



 0

 10

 20

 30

 40

 50

M
ontreal

Q
uebec C

ity

Paris

H
a
s
h
ta

g
 c

o
u
n
t

English only
Both Languages

French Only

Figure 3: For 50 most-common concepts ex-
pressed in equivalent French and English transla-
tions, the frequency with which the hashtags for a
concept were seen in each language.

tags, equivalent French language versions are in
use; however, examining the relative frequencies
shows that in all cases, the English version is still
preferred, despite the presence of a large Franco-
phone population. For hashtags that were only
seen in English, many were of the COMMUNITY
type, e.g., #50factsaboutme, which may not have
an equivalent French-language version. However,
we observed that when both an English hashtag
and its French translation were attested, the use
of the English hashtag in French was most often
an instance of code switching. Hence, testing for
the presence hashtag translation pairs may serve as
a helpful heuristic for identifying hashtags whose
use signals code switching behavior.

6 Discussion

Typically, code switching is distinguished from
the related phenomena of borrowing by testing
whether the word is being fluently mixed into
the utterance instead of simply functioning as a
loan word (Poplack, 2001). Hashtags present a
unique challenge for distinguishing between the
two phenomena due their brief content and un-
structured usage: a hashtag may occur anywhere
in a tweet and its general content lacks grammat-
ical constraints. Examining the hashtags seen in
our study, we find evidence spanning both types
of uses. Common hashtags such as #win or #fail
are widely recognized outside of English and their
uses could easily be interpreted instances of bor-
rowing. However, the complexity of other hash-
tags gives the appearance that their uses go be-
yond that of borrowing, e.g., #goingbacktoschool

in “Nadie dijo que serı́a fácil, pero cómo cuesta
estudiar después de 4 años de no tener nada
académico cerquita #goingbacktoschool” where
the author is commenting on the difficulty of re-
turning for a degree. Still other posts include
multiple single-token hashtags from a second lan-
guage, e.g., the earlier example of “Jetzt gibt’s was
vernünftiges zum essen! #salad #turkey #lunch
#healthy #healthylifestyle #loveit.” Although indi-
vidually these hashtags may be widely recognized
and operate as interlingual markers, their com-
bined presence suggests an intentional language
shift on the part of the author that could be inter-
preted as code switching. Together, the examples
point to hashtag use by multiple languages as a
complex phenomena where shared hashtag enti-
ties exist on a graded scale from simple borrow-
ing to fully signaling code switching. Our study
is intended as a starting point for analyzing this
practice and all our data is made available to sup-
port future discussions on the roles these hashtags
play and how they facilitate communication both
within and across language communities.

7 Conclusion

The present work has provided an initial study of
code switching in Twitter focusing on instances
where an author produces a message in one lan-
guage and then includes a hashtag from a sec-
ond language. Our work provides three main con-
tributions. First, using state-of-the-art language
identification techniques, we show that hashtags
are widely shared across languages, though the
challenges of correctly classifying the language
of tweets limits our ability to quantify the exact
scale. Second, in a manual analysis of ANNOTA-
TION and COMMUNITY hashtags, we show that
authors readily code switch with these types of
hashtags, using them just as they would in single
language tweets (e.g., indicating sarcasm). Third,
in a case study of French and English tweets from
three Francophone cities with bilingual speakers,
we find that the cities with more bilingual speakers
tended to have fewer occurrences English hashtags
in French tweets, which we speculate is due to au-
thors being more likely to write such tweets en-
tirely in English, rather than code switch; however,
when English hashtags were observed in French
tweets from these more bilingual cities, they were
much more likely to be used in instances of code
switching. Data for all of the experiments is

59



available at http://www.networkdynamics.org/
datasets/.

Our work raises several avenues for future
work. First, we plan to examine how to improve
language identification in microtext in order to
gain a more accurate estimation of hashtag sharing
and code switching rates for languages. Second,
the Twitter platform enables measuring additional
factors that may influence an individual’s rate of
code switching; specifically, we plan to investigate
(1) a user’s historical tweets to estimate the degree
of bilinguality and (2) the impact of a user’s social
network with respect to homophily and language
use.

References
Peter Auer. 1998. Code-switching in conversation:

Language, interaction and identity. Routledge.

Fabrıcio Benevenuto, Gabriel Magno, Tiago Ro-
drigues, and Virgılio Almeida. 2010. Detect-
ing spammers on twitter. In Collaboration, elec-
tronic messaging, anti-abuse and spam conference
(CEAS), volume 6, page 12.

Shane Bergsma, Paul McNamee, Mossaab Bagdouri,
Clayton Fink, and Theresa Wilson. 2012. Language
identification for creating language-specific twitter
collections. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop
on Language in Social Media, pages 65–74. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

S. Climent, J. Moré, A. Oliver, M. Salvatierra,
I. Sànchez, M. Taulé, and L. Vallmanya. 2003.
Bilingual newsgroups in catalonia: A challenge for
machine translation. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 9(1).

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Semi-supervised recognition of sarcastic sentences
in twitter and amazon. In Proceedings of the Four-
teenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL), pages 107–116. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Saptarshi Ghosh, Bimal Viswanath, Farshad Kooti,
Naveen Kumar Sharma, Gautam Korlam, Fabri-
cio Benevenuto, Niloy Ganguly, and Krishna Phani
Gummadi. 2012. Understanding and combating
link farming in the twitter social network. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st international conference on
World Wide Web (WWW), pages 61–70. ACM.

Moises Goldszmidt, Marc Najork, and Stelios Papari-
zos. 2013. Boot-strapping language identifiers
for short colloquial postings. In Proceedings of
the European Conference on Machine Learning and
Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in
Databases (ECMLPKDD 2013). Springer Verlag,
September.

Chris Grier, Kurt Thomas, Vern Paxson, and Michael
Zhang. 2010. @ spam: the underground on 140
characters or less. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM
conference on Computer and communications secu-
rity (CCS), pages 27–37. ACM.

John Joseph Gumperz. 1982. Discourse strategies.
Cambridge University Press.

Manish Gupta, Rui Li, Zhijun Yin, and Jiawei Han.
2010. Survey on social tagging techniques. ACM
SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 12(1):58–72.

Monica Heller. 1992. The politics of codeswitch-
ing and language choice. Journal of Multilingual
& Multicultural Development, 13(1-2):123–142.

Jeff Huang, Katherine M Thornton, and Efthimis N
Efthimiadis. 2010. Conversational tagging in twit-
ter. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM conference on
Hypertext and hypermedia, pages 173–178. ACM.

David Jurgens. 2013. That’s what friends are for:
Inferring location in online social media platforms
based on social relationships. In Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media (ICWSM). AAAI.

Carmen K. M. Lee. 2007. Linguistic features of email
and icq instant messaging in hong kong. In Brenda
Danet and Susan C. Herring, editors, The Multilin-
gual Internet: Language, Culture, and Communica-
tion Online. Oxford University Press.

Julie Letierce, Alexandre Passant, John Breslin, and
Stefan Decker. 2010. Understanding how twitter
is used to spread scientific messages. In WebSci10:
Extending the Frontiers of Society On-Line.

Yu-Ru Lin, Drew Margolin, Brian Keegan, Andrea
Baronchelli, and David Lazer. 2013. # bigbirds
never die: Understanding social dynamics of emer-
gent hashtags. In Seventh International Conference
on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM). AAAI.

Yabing Liu, Chloe Kliman-Silver, and Alan Mislove.
2014. The tweets they are a-changin’: Evolution
of twitter users and behavior. In Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media (ICWSM). AAAI.

Marco Lui and Timothy Baldwin. 2012. langid. py:
An off-the-shelf language identification tool. In
Proceedings of the ACL 2012 System Demonstra-
tions, pages 25–30. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Carol Myers-Scotton. 1997. Duelling Languages:
Grammatical Structure in Codeswitching. Claren-
don Press.

Chad Nilep. 2006. Code switching in sociocultural lin-
guistics. Colorado Research in Linguistics, 19(1):1–
22.

60



John C. Paolillo. 2011. Conversational codeswitch-
ing on usenet and internet relay chat. Lan-
guage@Internet, 8.

Shana Poplack and David Sankoff. 1984. Borrowing:
the synchrony of integration. Linguistics, 22(1):99–
136.

Shana Poplack, David Sankoff, and Christopher Miller.
1988. The social correlates and linguistic processes
of lexical borrowing and assimilation. Linguistics,
26(1):47–104.

Shana Poplack. 2001. Code-switching (linguistic). In
International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behav-
ioral Sciences, pages 2062–2065. Elsevier Science
Ltd., 2nd edition.

David Sankoff, Shana Poplack, and Swathi Vanniara-
jan. 1990. The case of the nonce loan in tamil. Lan-
guage variation and change, 2(01):71–101.

Bonnie Urciuoli. 1995. Language and borders. An-
nual Review of Anthropology, 24:pp. 525–546.

Lei Yang, Tao Sun, Ming Zhang, and Qiaozhu Mei.
2012. We know what@ you# tag: does the dual
role affect hashtag adoption? In Proceedings of the
21st international conference on World Wide Web
(WWW), pages 261–270. ACM.

61


