



















































Overview of the 2014 NLP Unshared Task in PoliInformatics


Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Language Technologies and Computational Social Science, pages 5–7,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Overview of the 2014 NLP Unshared Task in PoliInformatics

Noah A. Smith∗ Claire Cardie† Anne L. Washington‡ John D. Wilkerson§
∗School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

†Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
‡School of Public Policy, George Mason University, Arlington, VA 22201, USA

§Department of Political Science, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
∗Corresponding author: nasmith@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

We describe a research activity carried
out during January–April 2014, seeking to
increase engagement between the natural
language processing research community
and social science scholars. In this activ-
ity, participants were offered a corpus of
text relevant to the 2007–8 financial cri-
sis and an open-ended prompt. Their re-
sponses took the form of a short paper
and an optional demonstration, to which a
panel of judges will respond with the goal
of identifying efforts with the greatest po-
tential for future interdisciplinary collabo-
ration.

1 Introduction

In recent years, numerous interdisciplinary re-
search meetings have sought to bring together
computer scientists with expertise in automated
text data analysis and scholars with substan-
tive interests that might make use of text data.
The latter group has included political scientists,
economists, and communications scholars. An
NSF Research Coordination Network grant to en-
courage research using open government data was
awarded to co-authors Washington and Wilker-
son in 2013. The network for Political Informat-
ics, or PoliInformatics, brought together a steering
committee from diverse research backgrounds that
convened in February 2013. At that meeting, a
substantive focus on the 2007–8 nancial crisis was
selected.

Drawing inspiration from the “shared task”
model that has been successful in the natural lan-
guage processing community, we designed a re-
search competition for computer scientists. In a
shared task, a gold-standard dataset is created in
advance of the competition, inputs and outputs are
defined by the organizers, typically creating a su-
pervised learning setup with held-out data used for

evaluation. Constraints on the resources that may
be used are typically set in place as well, to fo-
cus the energies of participants on a core prob-
lem, and the official evaluation scores are pub-
lished, usually as open-source software. Final sys-
tems (or system output) is submitted by a dead-
line and judged automatically against the gold-
standard. Participants report on their systems in
short papers, typically presented at a meeting as-
sociated with a conference or workshop.

With neither a clear definition of what the fi-
nal outcome might be, nor the resources to create
the necessary gold-standard data, we developed a
more open-ended competition. A text corpus was
collected and made available, and a prompt was
offered. Participants were given freedom in how
to respond; competition entries took the form of
short research papers and optional demonstrations
of the results of the projects. Rather than an ob-
jective score, a panel of judges organized by the
PoliInformatics steering committee offered public
reviews of the work, with an emphasis on poten-
tial for future interdisciplinary research efforts that
might stem from these preliminary projects.

2 Setup

The prompts offered to participants were:

Who was the financial crisis? We seek to un-
derstand the participants in the lawmaking and
regulatory processes that formed the government’s
response to the crisis: the individuals, indus-
tries, and professionals targeted by those poli-
cies; the agencies and organizations responsi-
ble for implementing them; and the lobbyists,
witnesses, advocates, and politicians who were
actively involved—and the connections among
them.

What was the financial crisis? We seek to un-
derstand the cause(s) of the crisis, proposals for
reform, advocates for those proposals, arguments

5



for and against, policies ultimately adopted by the
government, and the impact of those policies.

The set of datasets made available is listed in
Table 1. Several additional datasets were sug-
gested on the website,1 but were not part of the
official data.

3 Response

Forty teams initially registered to participate in the
unshared task; ten submitted papers. The teams
came from a variety of institutions spread across
six countries. Half of the teams included links to
online demonstrations or browsable system out-
put. At this writing, the papers are under review
by the panel of judges. We provide a very brief
summary of the contributions of each team.

3.1 Who was the financial crisis?

Bordea et al. (2014) inferred importance and hi-
erarchy of topics along with expertise mining to
find which participants in the discourse might be
experts (e.g., Paul Volcker and “proprietary trad-
ing”) based on FOMC, FCIC, and Congressional
hearing and report data.

Baerg et al. (2014) considered transcripts of the
FOMC, developing a method for scaling the pref-
erences of its members with respect to inflation
(hawks to doves); the method incorporates auto-
matic dimensionality reduction and expert topic
interpretation.

Zirn et al. (2014) also focused on the transcripts,
distinguishing between position-taking statements
and shorter “discussion elements” that express
agreement or disagreement rather than substance,
and used this analysis to quantify similarity among
FOMC members and take first steps toward extrac-
tion of sub-dialogues among them.

Bourreau and Poibeau (2014) focused on the
FCIC report and the two Congressional reports,
identifying named entities and then visualizing
correlations among mentions both statically (as
networks) and dynamically. Clark et al. (2014)
considered Congressional hearings, applying a
reasoning model that integrates analysis of social
roles and relationships with analysis of individ-
ual beliefs in hope of detecting opinion shifts and
signs of influence.

With an eye toward substantive hypotheses
about dependencies among banks’ access to

1https://sites.google.com/site/
unsharedtask2014

bailout funds relating to underlying social con-
nections, Morales et al. (2014) automatically ex-
tracted a social network from the corpus alongside
structured data in Freebase.

3.2 What was the financial crisis?

Miller and McCoy (2014) considered FOMC tran-
scripts, applying topic models for dimensionality
reduction and viewing topic proportions as time
series.

In a study of the TARP, Dodd-Frank, and the
health reform bills, Li et al. (2014) explored the
ideas expressed in those bills, applying models of
text reuse from bills introduced in the 110th and
111th Congresses.

Wang et al. (2014) implemented a query-
focused summarization system for FOMC and
FCIC meeting transcripts and Congressional hear-
ings, incorporating topic and expertise measures
into the score, and queried the corpus with candi-
date causes for the crisis, derived from Wikipedia
(e.g., “subprime lending” and “growth housing
bubble”).

Kleinnijenhuis et al. (2014) considered Con-
gressional hearings alongside news text from the
United States and the United Kingdom, carrying
out keyword analysis to compare and measure di-
rectional effects between the two, on different di-
mensions.

4 Conclusion

The unshared task was successful in attracting the
interest of forty participants working on ten teams.
A highly diverse range of activities ensued, each
of which is being reviewed at this writing by a
panel of judges. Reviews and final outcomes will
be posted at the https://sites.google.
com/site/unsharedtask2014 as soon as
they are available, and a presentation summariz-
ing the competition will be part of the ACL 2014
Workshop on Language Technologies and Com-
putational Social Science.

Acknowledgments

We thank the participants and judges for their time
and effort. This activity was supported in part by
NSF grants 1243917 and 1054319.

6



• Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC):
– Meeting transcripts are only made available five years after each meeting date. (The 2008 transcripts came available

around the time of the activity and were kindly made available by participant William Li.)
– Meeting minutes are available for all meetings to date.

• Federal Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC; an independent commission created by Congress to investigate the causes of
the crisis):

– Report
– Transcript of the first public hearing

• Congressional reports:
– Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs: “Wall Street and the financial crisis: anatomy

of a financial collapse”
– House Committee on Financial Services: “The stock market plunge: what happened and what is next?”

• Congressional bills:
– Troubled Assets Relief Program, 2008 (TARP)
– Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (2010)
– American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Stimulus)
– Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008
– Public Company Accounting Reform and Investor Protection Act of 2002 (Sarbanes-Oxley)
– Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999 (Gramm-Leach-Bliley)
– In addition to the above financial reform bills, the text of all versions of all Congressional bills introduced in the

110th and 111th Congresses

• Congressional hearings, segmented into turns:
– Monetary policy (26)
– TARP (12)
– Dodd-Frank (61)
– Other selected committee hearings relating to financial reform (15)

Table 1: Text datasets made available to unshared task participants. These can be downloaded at https://sites.google.
com/site/unsharedtask2014.

References
Nicole Rae Baerg, Will Lowe, Simone Ponzetto,

Heiner Stuckenschmidt, and Cäcilia Zirn. 2014. Es-
timating central bank preferences.

Georgeta Bordea, Kartik Asooja, Paul Buitelaar, and
Leona O’Brien. 2014. Gaining insights into the
global financial crisis using Saffron.

Pierre Bourreau and Thierry Poibeau. 2014. Map-
ping the economic crisis: Some preliminary inves-
tigations.

Micah Clark, Adam Dalton, Tomas By, Yorick Wilks,
Samira Shaikh, Ching-Sheng Lin, and Tomek Strza-
lkowski. 2014. Influence and belief in Congres-
sional hearings.

Jan Kleinnijenhuis, Wouter van Atteveldt, and Antske
Fokkens. 2014. Chicken or egg? the reciprocal in-
fluence of press and politics.

William P. Li, David Larochelle, and Andrew W. Lo.
2014. Estimating policy trajectories during the fi-
nancial crisis.

John E. Miller and Kathleen F. McCoy. 2014. Chang-
ing focus of the FOMC through the financial crisis.

Michelle Morales, David Brizan, Hussein Ghaly,
Thomas Hauner, Min Ma, and Andrew Rosenberg.

2014. Application of social network analysis in the
estimation of bank financial strength during the fi-
nancial crisis.

Lu Wang, Parvaz Mahdabi, Joonsuk Park, Dinesh Pu-
ranam, Bishan Yang, and Claire Cardie. 2014.
Cornell expert aided query-focused summarization
(CEAQS): A summarization framework to PoliIn-
formatics.

Cäcilia Zirn, Michael Schäfer, Simone Paolo Ponzetto,
and Michael Strube. 2014. Exploring structural fea-
tures for position analysis in political discussions.

7


