



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and J D Pawar. Proc. of the 11th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 76–81,
Goa, India. December 2014. c©2014 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Roles of Nominals in Construing Meaning at the Level of Discourse 

 
Soumya Sankar Ghosh Samir Karmakar 

School of Languages and Linguistics School of Languages and Linguistics 

Jadavpur University Jadavpur University 

Kolkata-32, India Kolkata-32, India 
soumyaghosh73@gmail.com samir.krmkr@gmail.com 

 

 

 

Abstract 

Construction of meaning at the level of dis-

course involves complex procedures. Explor-

ing this process reveals the hidden 

complexities of linguistic cognition. This pa-

per mainly tries to unpack one such complexi-

ty in this paper. It attempts to answer the way 

complex and often metaphorical usages are 

construed in language with a special reference 

to the language data drawn from Bangla em-

phasizing the way nominals behave in lan-

guage. In doing so, we have adopted a model 

proposed by Karmakar and Kasturirangan 

(2011) to explain the process of conceptual 

blending. We have also tried to push the 

boundary a little behind by incorporating few 

mathematical assumptions. 

1 Introduction 

As per the thesis of compositionality as is endorsed 

in the school of logical positivism, the meaning of 

a complex expression is the totality of its constitu-

ent parts and the way they are combined together 

into a structural whole. However, in contrary, it is 

often noticed that the meaning of whole is always 

more than the meaning of the totality of its consti-

tuents: This is primarily because of the reason that 

not all of the inferential tasks involved in meaning 

construction are realized explicitly in a communic-

ative event. Therefore, the major challenge to in-

terpret meaning construction at the level of 

discourse is to construct an account of implicit and 

explicit inferences and the way they are combined 

together into a coherent whole. In doing so, re-

searchers have primarily tried to concentrate on the 

semantic-pragmatic behavior of the verbs; however 

it is hardly possible to come up with a theoretical 

solution to the problem of meaning construction 

simply by overlooking the roles of other syntactic 

categories (Pustejovsky, 1995). 

 

1.1 Defining the research problem 

 

Because of being motivated by the compositionali-

ty principle, most of the approaches in logical posi-

tivism tradition reduce the problem of meaning 

construction into the mere problem of combinato-

riality under the assumption that semantic design is 

homomorphic to the syntactic design. Consider 

example (1): 

 

1. The boy enters the house  

 a.Syntactic Template:  

 [S[NP[art  ] [N  ]] [VP[V  ] [NP[art  ] [N   ]]]] 

 b. Semantic Template: 

  [EventGO([Thing   ], [PathTO([PlaceIN([Thing   ])])])] 

 

Establishing one-to-one correspondence between 

the two templates stated in (1a) and (1b) above 

seems to be the most pressing problem in this stage 

of research. In comparison to (1a), (1b) contains 

several conceptual components which are not ex-

plicitly realized in the syntactic level, for example 

(1a) lacks syntactic equivalences for the semantic 

constituents like PATH and PLACE. Why is it so? 

– One probable answer to this kind of mismatch 

comes from the fact that unlike syntax conceptual 

representation involves different types of meaning 

relations. In fact the conceptual structure 

represented in (1b) is actually the semantic repre-

sentation of „the boy went into the house‟ – the 

sentence which is entailed by (1). 

 

2. The boy enters the house  

 The boy goes into the house 

 

However, this is not the end of the story. In reali-

ty, the comprehension of (1) presupposes a whole 

76



 

lot of information without which (1) will hardly 

make any sense. The semantics of house, as per 

our statement, stands in some congruity with the 

semantics of verb enter in virtue of having a sense 

of enclosure. More explicitly, the semantics of en-

ter expects or presupposes a location which is en-

closed. 

 

These theoretical solutions are often considered 

as problematic primarily because of the reason that 

they have very little scope to incorporate various 

types of entailment and presupposition involved 

with a particular articulation. For example, (1) in-

volved following types of inferences: 

 

3.  a. A living being enters into the room. 

 b. A living being goes into an enclosed space. 

 c. The enclosed space has an entrance. 

 d. Entering-act ends inside the enclosed space. 

 e. etc. 

 

Syntactic and semantic representations of (1) fail 

to capture these detailing. Capturing these detailing 

seeks to develop a theoretical framework where 

linguistic expressions can control the inflow of 

common sense knowledge more efficiently. In 

doing so, one needs to put equal emphasis on all 

syntactic categories. Under this situation, present 

work seeks to model the functions of nominal at 

the level of discourse in construing meaning. To do 

so, we need to understand how nominal differs as 

well as resembles verb. 

  

1.1.1 The Nature of Nominals 

 

There are several remarkable differences between 

nominal and verbal predicates in the level of mean-

ing construction. Firstly, a close analysis of a text 

will demonstrate that the number of nominal predi-

cates is much larger than the number of verbs. For 

example in 1 we can see the number of nominals is 

two in contrast to the number of verbs which is 

one. Secondly, According to Geach (1962) and 

Gupta (1980) nominals are like intransitive verbs 

within the theoretical framework of predicate log-

ic. This can even be noticed in the semantic inter-

pretation 1, following Jackendoff‟s proposal 

(1995). The intransitive verb like behavior of no-

minals will become much clear in the following 

logical translation of 1: 

 

4. xyBOYxHOUSEyENTERxy 

 

From 4, it is possible to show that the nominals 

like boy, house etc. is behaving much like the one 

place predicates which can take single argument in 

contrast to the transitive predicate like enter. Final-

ly, compared with a verb predicate, a nominal pre-

dicate tends to have fewer explicit and more 

implicit arguments that are not explicitly stated in 

the current sentence but can be recovered in a larg-

er context (Gerber and Chai 2010). This claim is 

illustrated in 5. 

 

5. a. ENTER:   
[X]explicit-argument enters [Y]explicit-argument through [Z]implicit-argument 

b. BOY:  
[living_being, has_the_ability_of_moving, etc.]implicit-arguments 

c. HOUSE:  
[enclosed_space, has_entrance, etc.]implicit-argumnet 

 

More the number of implicit arguments more in-

formative the expression is. In fact, what amount 

of inferential task is involved in the unpacking of a 

particular utterance is largely determined by the 

fact how many implicit arguments the utterance 

has with it. 

 

2 Theoretical Framework 

 
Karmakar and Kasturirangan (2011) conceive a 

linguistic expression as a mental regulation con-

sisting of intending function (= If) and contending 

function (= Cf). The intending function basically 

invokes the relevant conceptual category. A con-

ceptual category indicates a systematic representa-

tion of interrelated knowledge systems (Laurence 

& Margolis, 1999; Aarts, 2006). For our study, a 

conceptual category is rather conceived as a cogni-

tive capacitance, which stores all possible perspec-

tives of a phenomenon (Merleau-Ponty, 

1945/2002; Millikan, 2004). By definition we can 

say that a cognitive capacitance is a category, 

which is useful in presupposing and entailing large 

numbers of facts associated with it, because on 

activation it illuminates a cluster of other catego-

ries with which it is associated (Givon, 2005). 

However, intending alone is not enough to lan-

guage a discourse, since linguistic communication 

is always context dependent. We need another 

cognitive function, whose role is to situate concep-

tual categories in that context (Zilberman, 

77



 

1938/1988; Langacker, 2008). We call this act of 

relativization contending. The function of a lin-

guistic expression, while contending, is to choose a 

particular perspective in a discourse context. For 

example if we consider the expression ‘rose’, we 

will see that the act of intending, associated with 

‘rose’ invokes the corresponding category which 

includes information about its structural aspects 

(like shape, size, constituencies etc.) and at the 

same time it also indicates the functional aspects 

(like symbol of love, friendship, peace etc.). From 

these two examples we can say that it is the com-

municative situation that will determine the selec-

tion of these structural and functional aspects. 

 

In addition to this, we also want to argue that 

meaning construction can at best be conceived as 

the composition of intending and contending func-

tions as is illustrated in 6 below with a provision 

for an intermediating domain essential for meaning 

transference: 

 

6. Cf  ○ If   =def  {(x, z): for some y, (x,y)If  & 
(y,z)Cf; where x Domain(If) & z Range(Cf)} 
 

What seems to be of most interesting is the fact 

that composition of two functions leading towards 

the emergence of a third meaning presupposes the 

provision for an intermediating value commonly 

shared by both functions for successful meaning 

transference. While observing the similar pheno-

menon, Goguen (2006) suggests that this type of 

shared underlying substrates are significant since 

they do allow the cognizer to predict what else is 

being inherited in due course of forming the com-

position. The provision for intermediating value in 

construing the underlying substrate constitutes that 

frame of reference with respect to which the com-

posed-meaning-space is interpreted.  

 

So having discussed about these functions, we 

can say that meanings of the expressions (here, it is 

nominals) are not always the prepared items stored 

in a context; rather it is a product that we built and 

rebuilt on each time. The meaning construing ca-

pacities  of  nominals, as Karmakar and Kasturi-

rangan (2010a,b) argues, in a discourse is 

determined by the way underlying domains of our 

cognition are grounded and situated by the respec-

tive functions associated with an expression – i.e. 

intending and contending. This way of grounding 

and situating is what we call the conceptual route 

that a cognizer follows - though intuitively - in or-

der to access the communicative intent. In fact, 

study of the conceptual route is an effort to explore 

the way conceptualization processes are structured. 

 

3 Text Analysis 

 

The claims that we have made till now, will further 

be justified through an analysis of a text. The fol-

lowing report is randomly selected from a Bengali 

news paper, Ananda Bazar Patrika, (dated 3rd Feb-

ruary 2014): 

 

7. 

     

a. joRa baunsar    

 double bouncer    

 Double bouncer. 

b. ete OboSSo bharotio krikeT dOl-er 

 in this however Indian cricket team-of 

 moto Sue pOReni bharotio Orthoniti 

 like lay down fall-past-neg Indian economics 

 tOtha deS-er dui prodhan Sear SuchOk 

 means country-of two main share index 

 However, like the Indian cricket team, Indian Economy – 

means two main share indices of the country – has not laid 

down. 

  

The close analysis of the text indicates two dif-

ferent conceptual routes: (1) the addresser’s pers-

pective and (2) the addressee’s perspective. From 

the beginning of this report it is quite clear that 

addressee, as addresser’s target, is not the eco-

nomic scholars rather the common people of this 

country. By using the nominal word „baunsar‟ 

(bouncer) the addresser is basically arresting read-

er‟s attention.  The conceptual category „baunsar‟ 

(bouncer) has an inbuilt orientation.  

 

With the incorporation of the words like baunsar 

(= bouncer), krikeT dOl (= cricket team) in the 

above mentioned narrative, the speaker establishes 

the domain knowledge of game (here, cricket) as 

the pretext for the better performance of Indian 

economy during a particular point of time. More 

importantly, picturing the better performance of 

Indian economy as against the poor performance of 

Indian Cricket team attributes a sense of promi-

nence to this story, in spite of the fact that domain 

knowledge of game shares very few information 

about the domain knowledge of economy. Howev-

er, superimposition of these two domains of know-

ledge switches on various connections which 

78



 

remain nascent in this articulation. One such net-

work of connections results into a kind of convolu-

tion (in a mathematical sense, if permitted), 

creating a third sense of „competition‟ which may 

or may not have any connections with either of the 

domains of knowledge as is mentioned above. 

 

 
 

Figure 1 

 

This convoluted sense of competition which is 

not apparent in 6, again, brings with it a baggage of 

information which definitely increases the richness 

of the information. The term convolution is used 

here in the following sense: 

 

8.  a. A convolution is an integral that expresses 

the amount of overlap of one function If as it is 

shifted over another function Cf. It, therefore, 

"blends" one function to another. A more for-

mal representation is given below: 

 

b. (CfIf)(D)   =def  ∫Cf(τ)If(D-τ)dτ, where τ is the 
time dependent variables and D is domain 

emerges due to the convolution 

 

Significance of 8 lies with the terms like „over-

lap‟ and „blends‟: In continuation of our discussion 

on 6, we can further argue that τ as the contingent 

element constitute the frame of reference with re-

spect to which the interpretation of newly evolved 

D is being done. More specifically, construction of 

D is dependent primarily on the integration of time 

dependent τ-contention and time independent in-

tention represented as (D – τ). 

 

Clearly, certain aspects of the background know-

ledge involved in increasing the richness of the 

information is taken care of by the semantics of the 

word which is time independent and some other 

aspect is taken care of by the time dependent 

pragmatics. Taken together these two aspects ex-

plains the meaning construction process of 6; or, in 

other word, determines the emergence of D. 

 

A time dependent construal, here in this case the 

performance of Indian Cricket Team, is often 

picked up by the speaker not only to make the in-

formation rich but also to convey the message 

more effectively and efficiently. The time depen-

dent aspect of D, then, should fall within the scope 

of contending; whereas the time independent as-

pect is taken care of by the intending function.  

 

4. Discussion 
 

The concept of blending, here, seems to be the 

most important one. Though in 7, we have shown 

blending of two major domains of knowledge, 

(namely the domain of cricket game and the do-

main of Indian economics,) a little attention will 

reveal the fact that the interpretation of 7 requires 

other instances of blending also. One such instance 

is dOl which corresponds with the concept of team, 

party etc. However, when it appears in the vicinity 

of cricket its intended sense is being coerced by the 

concept of cricket game. Similarly, cricket in isola-

tion may intend several things but in conjunction 

with dOl, it results into a particular sense. Same 

situation can also be noticed in case of sear „share‟ 

and suchOk „index‟. Therefore, what can at most 

be suggested that meaning in a discourse is a con-

sequence of both invoking the default schemes of 

our thoughts and also combined them into some 

integral domain which may further transformed 

into a newer integral domain depending on the fact 

if newer information is being brought into the dis-

cussion. However what needs to be emphasized is 

the fact that the emerged meaning coexist with the 

original meaning relations out of which the former 

one arises under the direct influence of the context. 

A similar claim is also made in Guhe et al. (2011).  

 

One way to deal with the formation of integral 

domain is to employ the concept of Cartesian 

product over a non-empty set of typed-concepts 

with restrictions. Under this assertion, then a 

blended type will be considered as the ordered 

pair. Lets unpack this assertion with a special ref-

erence a phrase share index whose Bangla corres-

pondence is sear suchOk. Concept of share is 

79



 

connected with several other concepts as is shown 

in the following diagram: 

 
 

Figure 2 

 

Same is also the case with the concept of index: 

 
 

Figure 3 

 

However, when they are combined together 

through the act of intending and contending, they 

results into a third domain of conceptual connec-

tions. Here, in this context, an indicative represen-

tation of share index is given in Figure 4.  

 
 

Figure 4 

But, how does this fit into the theoretical frame-

work which we have discussed above? – What re-

mains common to both share and index is a sense 

of measure, however with some difference: When 

index is directly connected with the sense of mea-

surement, share is indirectly connected to the sense 

of measuring. More specifically, share is con-

nected to the sense of measurement only in virtue 

of being connected with the concepts like portion, 

percentage etc. Under this situation, sense of mea-

surement is picked up as the τ-component to blend 

the conceptual spaces of share (= If(share)) and 

index (= If(index)) into the blended-space of share 

index (= D) where the sense of measurement is the 

dominant one. Picking up of τ-component to blend 

the conceptual spaces is what we have named as 

contending in our proposal. 

 

Within the broader theoretical scope, then, a 

concept (both, simple and the complex, like share, 

index, and share index) can be visualized as a 

integral domain consisting of (i) a non-empty set of 

concepts it is associated with, and (ii) two binary 

operations called intending and contending. 

 

5 Conclusion 
 

This paper deals with the way concepts are inte-

grated in a text. In dealing with this issue, we have 

concentrated on the nominals primarily. While de-

veloping our previous position on this issue, we 

have argued further that the issues in metaphorical 

meaning can be successfully explained with the 

help of some mathematical notions like convolu-

tion, integral domain etc. 

References  

Geach, P. 1962. Reference and Generality. Cornell Uni-

versity Press, Ithaca, NY. 

Gerber, M., and J. Chai. 2010. Beyond nombank: A 

study of implicit arguments for nominal predicates. 

In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the As-

sociation for Computational Linguistics, 1583–1592. 

Association for Computational Linguistics, Uppsala, 

Sweden. 

Givón, T. 2005. Context as other Minds: The Pragmat-

ics of Sociality, Cognition, and Communication. John 

Benjamins, Amsterdam. 

Goguen, J. 2006. Mathematical models of cognitive 

space and time. In D. Andler, Y. Ogawa, M. Okada, 

& S. Watanabe (Eds.), Reasoning and cognition: 

80



 

Proceedings of the interdisciplinary conference on 

reasoning and cognition, 125–128. Keio University 

Press, Japan. 

Guhe, M. et al. 2011. A computational account of con-

ceptual blending in basic mathematics. Cognitive 

System Research, 12: 249-265. 

Gupta, A. 1980. The logic of common nouns: an investi-

gation of quantified modal logic. Yale University 

Press, New Haven, CT. 

Jackendoff, R. 1995. Semantic Structure. MIT Press, 

Massachusetts. 

Karmakar, S. and R. Kasturirangan. 2011. Structural 

and Structuring: Issues in Designing an Expression. 

Jadavpur Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 21(1): 87-102.  

Karmakar, S. and R. Kasturirangan. 2010a. “Perspecti-

vizing Space in Bāŋlā Discourse.” In Proceedings of 

the 32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science 

Society (826-830). Cognitive Science Society, CSS. 

Austin, TX. 

Karmakar, S. and R. Kasturirangan. 2010b. “Cognitive 

processes underlying the meaning of complex predi-

cates and serial verbs from the perspective of indivi-

duating and ordering of situations in Bangla.” In 

Proceedings of the First International Conference on 

Intelligent Interactive Technologies and Multimedia, 

(81-87). ACMIIIT Allahabad Professional Chapter & 

North India ACM-SIGCHI, ACM. Allahabad, India. 

Langacker, R.W. 2008. Cognitive Grammar: A Basic 

Introduction. Oxford University Press, Oxford Ox-

ford:. 

Laurence, S. & Margolis, E. 1999. Concepts and Cogni-

tive Science, in E. Margolis & S. Laurence (eds.), 

Concepts: Core Readings (3-81), Cambridge, MA: 

MIT Press. 

M. Merleau-Ponty 1995/2002. Phenomenology of Per-

ception. New York: Routledge. 

R.G. Millikan. 2004. Varieties of Meaning, Massachus-

setts: The MIT Press.  

Pustejovsky, J. 1995. The Generative Lexicon. Cam-

bridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Zilberman, David B. 1988. The Birth of Meaning in 

Hindu Thought (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of 

Science), Dordrecht, Boston: D. Reidel Publishing 

Company. 

 

81


