



















































Keynote: Data Archeology: A theory informed approach to analyzing data traces of social interaction in large scale learning environments


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1–2,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Keynote: Data Archeology: A Theory Informed Approach to Analyz-

ing Data Traces of Social Interaction in Large Scale Learning Envi-

ronments  

 

 

Alyssa Friend Wise 

Faculty of Education  

Simon Fraser University  

250-13450 102 Avenue 

Surrey BC, Canada, V3T 0A3 

alyssa_wise@sfu.ca 

 

 

 

  

Abstract 

Data archeology is a theoretically-

informed approach to make sense of the 

digital artifacts left behind by a prior 

learning “civilization.” Critical elements 

include use of theoretical learning models 

to construct analytic metrics, attention to 

temporality as a means to reconstruct in-

dividual and collective trajectories, and 

consideration of the pedagogical and 

technological structures framing activity. 

Examples of the approach using discus-

sion forum trace data will be presented. 

1 Overview 

Data traces that learners leave in online systems 

offer the possibility to study learning activity, 

predict outcomes, and designed targeted inter-

ventions for support (Siemens & Long, 2011). 

However, such analysis often focus on rudimen-

tary learning processes (series of related actions 

engaged in as part of learning activities) without 

attention to the larger learning practices they 

make up (repertoires of processes organized 

around particular foci that have meaning recog-

nized within a particular context and social 

group) [Arastoopour et al., 2014]. This is an im-

portant concern for all learning analytics, but 

particularly problematic when the desired target 

of analytic claims is social interactions. 

Lockyer, Heathcote & Dawson (2013) concep-

tualize this issue through the relationship be-

tween learning analytics and learning design. 

That is, creation and interpretation of valid ana-

lytic measures needs to be grounded in the “the 

pedagogical and technical context in which the 

data [was] generated” (p. 1440). The practical 

implications of such are that the same analytic 

measures and patterns in these measures may be 

more or less useful, valid, and valued depending 

on the pedagogical goals of the activity at a par-

ticular point in time. For example, a discussion 

forum may be used in an online course course as 

a place for Q &A with experts (or relatively ex-

pert-peers) or for common interest groups to 

work through different ways the course material 

might apply to a particular situation or challenge. 

A social network analysis of discussion replies 

that produces a wheel-and-spoke structure may 

be appropriate (and desired) for the former situa-

tion, but problematic in the latter (Brooks, Greer 

& Gutwin, 2014). 

To address these issues I describe the notion 

of data archeology (Wise, 2013) as theoretically-

informed efforts to make sense of the digital arti-

facts left behind by a prior “civilization.” Critical 

aspects of taking a data archeology perspective 

include: (a) the use of theoretical models of 

learning to frame the construction and interpreta-

tion of analytic metrics; (b) attention to tempo-

rality (of data and analytic methods) as a means 

to reconstruct individual and collective trajecto-

ries of engagement and interaction; and (c) con-

sideration of the pedagogical and technological 

structures framing the activity that occurred. 

Such an approach supports the development of 

rich indicators that instructors and learners can 

recognize as meaningful reflections of their par-

ticular practices of teaching and learning.  

Examples of a data archeology approach to 

discussion forum traces will be presented 

grounding in the work of the E-Listening project 

(Wise et al., 2012; 2013; 2014a; 2014b), a re-

search effort connecting the comments learners 

make in online discussions with actions in at-

tending to the posts of others (invisible to other 

learners, but visible in the clickstream record).  

The conceptual categories of online listening 

1



depth, breadth, integration and recursiveness will 

be introduced and their suitability for different 

kinds of technological and pedagogical discus-

sion contexts discussed grounded in the frame-

work of the following questions: 

 What is the purpose of the educational 
activity taking place in the discussion fo-

rum? 

 How does the design of the activity ar-
ticulate with (support, inhibit) this pur-

pose? 

 What are expected (desired and undesir-
able) patterns of activity? 

 How can these best be represented / 
proxied by the data available? 

References 

Arastoopour, G. et al. 2014. Analytics for Learning 

and Becoming in Practice. Proceedings of the In-

ternational Conference of the Learning Sciences, 

2014, 1680-1683. 

Brooks, C., Greer, J. & Gutwin, C. 2014. The Data-

Assisted Approach to Building Intelligent Techno-

logy Enhanced Learning Environments.  In J. A. 

Larusson & B. White (Eds.) Learning Analytics: 

From Research To Practice (pp. 123-156). New 

York: Springer. 

Lockyer, L., Heathcote, E., & Dawson, S. 2013. In-

forming Pedagogical Action: Aligning Learning 

Analytics with Learning Design. American Behav-

ioral Scientist, 57(10): 1439-1459. 

Siemens, G., & Long, P. 2011. Penetrating the Fog: 

Analytics in Learning And Education. Educause 

Review, 46(5): 30-32. 

Wise, A. F. 2013. Moving Beyond (Mere) Narrative. 

(Invited Talk), In Cyberinfrastructure for Design-

Based Research Workshop, Madison, WI.  

Wise, A. F., Hausknecht, S. N. & Zhao, Y. 2014a. 

Attending to Others' Posts in Asynchronous Dis-

cussions: Learners' Online "Listening" and its Re-

lationship to Speaking. International Journal of 

Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 9(2): 

185-209. 

Wise, A. F., Perera, N., Hsiao, Y., Speer, J. & Mar-

bouti, F. 2012. Microanalytic Case Studies of Indi-

vidual Participation Patterns in an Asynchronous 

Online Discussion in an Undergraduate Blended 

Course. Internet and Higher Education, 15(2): 

108–117. 

Wise, A. F., Speer, J., Marbouti, F. & Hsiao, Y. 2013. 

Broadening the Notion Of Participation in Online 

Discussions: Examining Patterns in Learners' 

Online Listening Behaviors. Instructional Science. 

41(2): 323-343. 

Wise, A. F., Zhao, Y. & Hausknecht, S. N. 2014b. 

Learning Analytics for Online Discussions: Em-

bedded and Extracted Approaches. Journal of 

Learning Analytics, 1(2) : 48-71. 

2


