



















































Rule Based Morphological Analyzer of Kazakh Language


Proceedings of the 2014 Joint Meeting of SIGMORPHON and SIGFSM, pages 46–54,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 27 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Rule Based Morphological Analyzer of Kazakh Language 

 
Gulshat Kessikbayeva 

Hacettepe University, Department of 

Computer Engineering, 

Ankara,Turkey 
shatik2030@gmail.com 

Ilyas Cicekli 

Hacettepe University, Department of 

Computer Engineering, 

Ankara,Turkey 
ilyas@cs.hacettepe.edu.tr 

 

 
 

Abstract 
Having a morphological analyzer is a very 

critical issue especially for NLP related 

tasks on agglutinative languages. This paper 

presents a detailed computational analysis 

of Kazakh language which is an 

agglutinative language. With a detailed 

analysis of Kazakh language morphology, 

the formalization of rules over all 

morphotactics of Kazakh language is 

worked out and a rule-based morphological 

analyzer is developed for Kazakh language. 

The morphological analyzer is constructed 

using two-level morphology approach with 

Xerox finite state tools and some 

implementation details of rule-based 

morphological analyzer have been presented 

in this paper.   

 

1 Introduction 
 
Kazakh language is a Turkic language which 
belongs to Kipchak branch of Ural-Altaic 

language family and it is spoken approximately 

by 8 million people. It is the official language 

of Kazakhstan and it has also speakers in 

Russia, China, Mongolia, Iran, Turkey, 

Afghanistan and Germany.  It is closely related 

to other Turkic languages and there exists 

mutual intelligibility among them. Words in 

Kazakh language can be generated from root 

words recursively by adding proper suffixes. 

Thus, Kazakh language has agglutinative form 

and has vowel harmony property except for 

loan-words from other languages such as 

Russian, Persian and Arabic.  

Having a morphological analyzer for an 

agglutinative language is a starting point for 

Natural Language Processing (NLP) related 

researches. An analysis of inflectional affixes of 

Kazakh language is studied within the work of 

a Kazakh segmentation system (Altenbek and 

Wang, 2010). A finite state approach for 

Kazakh nominals is presented (Kairakbay and 

Zaurbekov, 2013) and it only gives specific 

alternation rules without generalized forms of 

alternations. Here we present all generalized 

forms of all alternation rules. Moreover, many 

studies and researches have been done upon on 

morphological analysis of Turkic languages 

(Altintas and Cicekli, 2001; Oflazer, 1994; 

Coltekin, 2010; Tantug et al., 2006; Orhun et al, 

2009). However there is no complete work 

which provides a detailed computational 

analysis of Kazakh language morphology and 

this paper tries to do that.     

The organization of the rest of the paper is 

as follows. Next section gives a brief 

comparison of Kazakh language and Turkish 

morphologies. Section 3 presents Kazakh vowel 

and consonant harmony rules. Then, nouns with 

their inflections are presented in Section 4. 

Section 4 also presents morphotactic rules for 

nouns, pronouns, adjectives, adverbs and 

numerals. The detailed morphological structure 

of verbs is introduced in Section 5. Results of 

the performed tests are presented together with 

their analysis in Section 6. At last, conclusion 

and future work are described in Section 7. 

 

2 Comparison of Closely Related 
Languages 

 

There are many studies and researches prior 

made on closely related languages by 

comparing them for many purposes related with 

NLP such as Turkish–Crimean Tatar (Altintas 

and Cicekli, 2001), Turkish–Azerbaijani 

(Hamzaoğlu, 1993), Turkish–Turkmen (Tantuğ 

et al., 2007), Turkish-Uygur (Orhun et al, 2009) 

and Tatar-Kazakh (Salimzyanov et al, 2013). A 

deep comparison of Kazakh and Turkish 

languages from computational view is another 

study which is in out of scope for this work. 

However, in this study, a brief grammatical 

comparison of these languages is given in order 

to give a better analysis of Kazakh language. 

46



Kazakh and Turkish languages have many 

common parts due to being in same language 

family. Possible differences are mostly 

morpheme based rather than deep grammar 

differences. Distinct morphemes can be added 

in order to get same meaning. There exist some 

differences in their alphabets, their vowel and 

consonant harmony rules, their possessive 

forms of nouns, and inflections of verbs as 

given in Table 1. There are extra 9 letters in 

Kazakh alphabet, and Kazakh alphabet also has 

4 additional letters for Russian loan words. 

Both Kazakh language and Turkish employ 

vowel harmony rules when morphemes are 

added. Vowel harmony is defined according to 

last morpheme containing back or front vowel. 

In Kazakh language, if the last morpheme 

contains a back vowel then the vowel of next 

coming suffix is a or ı. If the last morpheme 

contains one of front vowels then the vowel of 

next coming suffix is e or i. In Turkish, suffixes 

with vowels a, ı, u follow morphemes with 

vowels a, o, u, ı and suffixes with vowels e, i, ü 

follow morphemes with vowels e, i, ü, ö 

depending on being rounded and unrounded 

vowels. Consonant harmony rule related with 

voiceless letters is similar in both languages.  

  

 Turkish Kazakh 
Language 

Alphabet Latin 

29 letters 

( 8 Vowels, 

21 Consonant ) 

Cyril 

42 letters 

( 10 Vowels, 

25 Consonants, 

3 Compound 

Letters, 

4 Russian 

Loan Word 

Letters ) 

Vowel & 

Consonant 

Harmony 

Synharmonism 

according to 

back, front,  

unrounded and 

rounded 

vowels 

Synharmonism 

according to 

back and front 

vowels 

Possessive 

Forms of 

Nouns 

6 types of 

possessive 

agreements  

8 types of 

possessive 

agreements 

Case 

Forms of 

Nouns 

7 Case Forms 7 Case Forms  

Verbs Similar Tenses Similar Tenses 
 

Table 1. Comparison of Kazakh and Turkish. 

 

In Kazakh language there are 8 types of 

personal possessive agreement morphemes as 

given in Table 2. Kazakh language has two 

additional possessive agreements for second 

person.  

There are some identical tenses and moods 

of verbs in both language such as definite past 

tense, present tense, imperative mood, optative 

mood and conditional mood. They have nearly 

same morphemes for tenses. On the other hand 

there are some tenses of verbs which are 

identical according to meaning and usage, but 

different morphemes are used. Moreover, in 

Kazakh language there are some tenses such as 

goal oriented future and present tenses which 

do not exist in Turkish language.  

 
Possessive 

Pronoun 
Representation 

Examples for 

Eke, “father” 

None 

Possessive 
Pnon  Eke father 

My P1Sg 1 Eke-m 
my 

father 

Your P2Sg 2 Eke-N 
your 

father 

Your 

(Polite) 
P2PSg 2 

Eke-

Niz 

your 

father 

His/Her P3Sg 3 Eke-si 
his 

father 

Our P1Pl 1 
Eke-

miz 

our 

father 

Your Plural P2Pl 2 
Eke-

leriN 

your 

father 

Your Plural 

(Polite)  
P2PPl 2 

Eke-

leriNiz 

your 

father 

Their P3Pl 3 
Eke-

leri 

their 

father 
 

Table 2. Possessive Agreement of Nouns. 

 

3 Vowel and Consonant Harmony 
 
Kazakh is officially written in the Cyrillic 

alphabet. In its history, it was represented by 

Arabic, Latin and Cyrillic letters. Nowadays 

switching back to Latin alphabets in 20 years is 

planned by the Kazakh government. In the 

beginning stage of study, Latin transcription of 

Cyril version is used for convenience.  

 Two main issues of language such as 

morphotactics and alternations can be dealt 

with Xerox tools. First of all, morphotactic 

rules are represented by encoding a finite-state 

network. Then, a finite-state transducer for 

alternations is constructed. Then, the formed 

network and the transducer are composed into a 

47



single final network which cover all 

morphological aspects of the language such as 

morphemes, derivations, inflections, 

alternations and geminations (Beesley and 

Karttunen, 2003).  

Vowel harmony of Kazakh language obeys 

a rule such that vowels in each syllable should 

match according to being front or back vowel. 

It is called synharmonism and it is basic 

linguistic structure of nearly all Turkic 

languages (Demirci, 2006).  For example, a 

word qa-la-lar-dIN, “of cities” has a stem qa-

la, “city” and two syllables of containing back 

vowels according to the vowel harmony rule. 

Here –lar is an affix of Plural form and –dIN is 

an affix of Genitive case. However, as stated 

before, there are a lot of loan words from 

Persian and generally they do not obey vowel 

harmony rules. For example, a word mu-Ga-

lim, “teacher” has first two syllables have back 

vowels and the last one has a front vowel. So 

suffixes to be added are defined according to 

the last syllable. For example, a word muGalim-

der-diN, “of teachers” has suffixes with front 

vowels. On the other hand, there are 

morphemes with static front vowels which are 

independently from the type of last syllable can 

be added to all words such as Instrumental 

suffix –men. In this case, all suffixes added 

after that should contain front vowels.  

 
 

Name XFST   Type 1 Type 2 

Sonorous 

Consonant 
SCons l r y w m n N 

Voiced 

Consonant 
VCons z Z b v g d 

Voiceless 

Consonant 
VLCons p f q k t s S C x c 

Consonant Cons 
b p t c x d r z Z s S 

C G f q k g N l m n 

h w y v   

Vowel Vowel a e E i I O o u U j 

Front 

Vowel 
FVowel e E i O U j 

Back 

Vowel 
BVowel a I o u 

Table 3. Groups of Kazakh letters according to 

their sound. Upper case letters are used for non-

Latin letters. 

 

In order to construct a finite-state transducer 

for alternation rules, there are some capital 

letters such as A, J, H, B, P, C, D, Q, K, T are 

defined in intermediate level and they are 

invisible by user.  These representations are 

used for substitution such as A is for a and e 

and J is for I and i. So if suffix dA should be 

added according to morphotactic rules, it means 

suffixes da or de should be considered. In Table 

3, there are group of letters defined according to 

their sounds and these groups are used in 

alternation rules (Valyaeva, 2007).  

Consonant harmony rules are varied 

according to the last letter of a word with in 

morphotactic rules. As in Table 3, different 

patterns are presented in order to visualize the 

relation between common valid rules and to 

generalize morphotactic rules. Thus, in each 

case according to morphotactic rules there are 

proper alternation rules for morphemes.  

 

GROUP 1 
Ablative Case Locative case Dative Case 
dAn    dA     TA     
tAn  tA  TA  
nAn  3 ndA 3 nA 3 

  A 1/2 

GROUP 2 
Genitive Case Accusative Case Poss. Affix-2 
dJN    dJ     diki    
tJN   tJ   tiki  
nJN   3   nJ   niki  

  n 3  

GROUP 3 
Plural Form of 

Noun 
Negative Form A1Pl 

dAr  l   bA   bJz   
tAr  pA  pJz  
lAr  r y w mA   mJz   

GROUP 4 
Instrumental 

Case 

 

A1Sg 

ben    bJn  
pen    pJn  
men     3   mJn    

 

Table 4. Alternation rules according to groups 

of letters. 

 

All alternation rules for suffixes depend on 

the last letter of a morpheme with in 

morphotactic rules and Table 4 gives some 

groupings that can be made in order to set some 

generalized rules overall. Patterns of last letters 

of morphemes in Table 4 are matched with 

groups of letters presented in Table 3. In Table 

4, Locative case affix is –dA, if the last letter of 

a morpheme is one of Vowel, Sonorous 

48



Consonant or Voiced Consonant of Type 1 in 

Table 3. On the other hand, it is –tA, if the last 

letter is Voiceless Consonant or Voiced 

Consonant of Type 2. Here A is for a or e 

according to last syllable of containing Front or 

Back Vowel.  

In Table 4, boxes presented by numbers 

such as 1, 2 and 3 are used for personal 

possessive agreements in Table 2. For example, 

word Eke, “father” in Ablative case without a 

possessive agreement takes suffix –den, 

because the word Eke ends with vowel e. 

However, in third person possessive agreement 

it takes suffix –nen, because all words with 

third person possessive agreement in Ablative 

case always take suffix –nen even though the 

third person possessive agreement morpheme 

ends with vowel.  

According to those similarities in Table 4, 

there are some generalized rules which are valid 

in many cases in grammar including verbs and 

derivations. Some of these generalized rules 

derived from close patterns given in Table 4, 

are given in Table 5. For example, Rule 12 in 

Table 5 represents rules for Locative and Dative 

cases in Group 1 in Table 4.  In Table 4, 

Locative and Dative suffix rules are nearly 

identical and have same patterns which can be 

observed visually. Also, Accusative and 

Possessive Pronouns of Type 2 are same. 

 

 1 2 

1 Rule 11 
Ablative Case 

Rule 12 Locative, 

Dative cases  

2 Rule 21 
Genitive case 

Rule 22 

Accusative case, 

Poss. Affix-2 

3 Rule 31 
Plural Form of 

Noun 

Rule 32 

Negation, Personal 

Agreement of A1Pl 

4 Rule 41 
Instrumental 

case 

Rule 42  

Personal 

Agreement of A1Sg 
 

Table 5. Generalized Rules. 
 

In Dative case of GROUP 1 in Table 4, if 

the last letter is Back Vowel then T is replaced 

by G and T is replaced by g if the last letter is 

Front Vowel. Thus, a word bala, “child” 

becomes bala-Ga, “to child” and a word Eke, 

“father” will be Eke-ge, “to father”. If the last 

letter is Voiceless Consonant, T is replaced by q 

or k depending on whether the last syllable 

contains Back Vowel or Front Vowel. For 

example, a word kitap-qa, “to book” has the 

last letter of Voiceless Consonant and the last 

syllable contains Back Vowel, thus T is 

replaced by q. A word mektep-ke, “to school” 

has the last letter of Voiceless Consonant and 

the last syllable contains Front vowel, thus T is 

replaced by k.  

After detailed analysis of the language it 

can be seen that there are mainly common rules 

of alternations valid over all grammar. There 

are about 25 main alternation rules defined for 

all system together with generalized rules and 7 

exception rules for each case. All these rules are 

implemented with XFST tools (Beesley and 

Karttunen, 2003). For instance, some mainly 

used common rules are given below and they 

are called by capital letters defined only in 

intermediate level. As mentioned before they 

are invisible by user. Here 0 is for empty 

character.   

Rule H & Rule B: H is realized as 0 or J, B is 

realized as 0 or A. 

 [H->0,B->0||[Vowel]%+_[Cons]]     

[H->J,B->A]  

If the last letter of a morpheme is Vowel and 

the first letter of the following suffix is 

Consonant then H and B are realized as 0. 

Otherwise, they are realized as J and B. Some 

examples are: 

ana-Hm ana-m, “my mother” 

iS-Hm iS-JmRule JiSim, “my stomache” 

ege-Br ege-r, “will sharpen” 

bar-Br bar-Ar Rule Abar-ar, ”will go”  

Rule J & Rule A: J is realized as I or i and A is 

realized as y, a or e. 

[A->y||[Vowel]%+_] 

[A->a,J->I||[BVowel](Cons)*%+?*_] 

[A->e,J->i||[FVowel](Cons)*%+?*_] 

If the last letter of a morpheme is Vowel then A 

is realized as y, and if the last syllable of a 

morpheme contains Back Vowel then A and J 

are realized as a and I. Otherwise, if the last 

syllable of a morpheme contains Front Vowel 

then A and J are realized as e and i. Some 

examples are: 

bas-Hmbas-JmbasIm, “my head” 

dos-tArdos-tar, “friends” 

dEpter-lAr dEpter-ler, “copybooks” 

barma-AmInbarma-ymIn, “I will not go” 

Rule T (a part of Rule 12 in Table 5): T is 

realized as q, G, k or g. 

[T->q||[BVowel](?)[VLCons]%+_]                     

[T->k||[FVowel](?)[VLCons]%+_]     

[T->G||[BVowel](?)[0|SCons|VCons1]%+_]       

[T->g||[FVowel](?)[0|SCons|VCons1]%+_] 

49



This rule is a part of Rule 12 given in Table 5 

for Dative case. It is one of generalized rules 

which are valid in many cases such as 

derivation of nouns, adjectives and verbs. Some 

examples are: 

     bala-Ta bala-Ga, “to child” (Noun in Dative) 
Zaz-TI Zaz-GI, “of summer” (Adjective) 

ZUr-TeliZUr-geli, “since coming” (Verb) 

estit-Tiz estit-kiz, “make hear”(Causative 

Verb) 

 

4 Nouns 
  

Nouns in Kazakh Language take singular or 

plural (A3Sg, A3Pl) suffixes, Possessive 

suffixes, Case suffixes and Derivational 

suffixes. In addition, nouns can take Personal 

Agreement suffixes when they are derived into 

verbs. For example, kitap-tar-da-GI-lar-dIN  

which means “of those which is in books” has 

the following morphological analysis 

kitap+Noun+A3Pl+Pnon+Loc^DB+Noun+Zer

o+A3Pl+Pnon+Gen.  

Every nominal root at least has form of 

Noun+A3Sg+Pnon+Nom. Therefore, a root 

noun kitap which means “book” has the 

following morphological analysis 

kitap+Noun+A3Sg+Pnon+Nom. 

These inflections of noun are given in FST 

diagram in Figure 1.  

 
 

Figure 1. The FSA model of inflectional 

changes of a noun. 

 

It can be seen that nominal root can be in 

singular form by adding (+0) no suffix which is 

in fact third personal singular agreement 

(A3Sg) and by adding suffix (+PAr) in plural 

form which is in fact third personal plural 

agreement (A3Pl). Here P is an intermediate 

level representation letter for d, t or l in surface 

level. After, possessive affixes (+Pnon:0,  
+P1Sg:Hm, +P2Sg:HN, +P2PSg:HNJz, +P3Sg:sJ, 

+P1Pl:HmJz, +P2Pl:HN, +P2PPl:HNJz, +P3Pl:s) 

and case affixes (Nom, Dat, Abl, Loc, Acc, Gen, 

Ins) are added. Here H and J are intermediate 

letters. All morphotactic rules together with 

adjective, pronoun, adverb and numerals are 

given in Figure 2. It can be observed that every 

adjective can be derived to noun and nouns 

with relative affix can be derived to adjectives. 

There are other derivations which are produced 

by adding some specific suffixes between verbs 

and nouns, adjectives and adverbs, adjectives 

and nouns. In order to get rid of complex view 

those derivations are not explicitly shown in 

Figure 2. 

 

Figure 2. Morphotactic Rules for Nominal Roots. 

50



In our system, the root of a word is a 

starting point for morphemes defined in lexicon 

file, and other morphemes are added according 

to morphotactic rules. Thus, starting from a 
root the system checks for all possible 

following morphemes and if a word is matched 

it gives appropriate output and moves to next 

state. For example, a surface form of a word 

kitaptan, “from a book” will have intermediate 

form of “kitap+tan” after implemented 

alternation rules. First it will check and find a 

noun root from lexicon. Then after giving 

output as “kitap+Noun”, continues with next 

state which is Singular/Plural. At this state it 

will go on with 0 input giving output of +A3Sg 

for singular form of noun. Then, the next state 

will be Possessive Affix state to determine the 

personal possessive suffix. Here it is 0, thus 

epsilon transition which gives output as +Pnon. 

Now the output is “kitap+Noun+A3Sg+Pnon”. 

The next state is Case state in order to 

recognize the case of noun. Thus, for given 

input such as +tan, the output is determined as 

+Abl and this continues until the system 

reaches the final state or invalid state which is 

unacceptable state not returned to user. All 

possible morphemes are defined in the lexicon 

and all states are visualized in Figure 2.  

 

 

 
Figure 3. Tenses of Verbs in Kazakh 

Language. 

 

 

5 Verbs 
 
Verbs are terms which define actions and states. 

Mainly three tenses exist such as present, future 

and past as stated in Figure 3. Moreover, 

conditional, optative and imperative moods are 

also defined. However in detailed form there 

are thirteen tenses together with modals in 

Kazakh language. These tenses are worked out 

from many resources where presentation and 

naming have variance among each other 

according to their scholars (Tuymebayev, 1996; 

Mamanov, 2007;  Isaeva and Nurkina, 1996; 

Musaev, 2008). For example, according to 

Isaeva and Nurkina (1996) awIspalI keler Saq 

“Future Transitional Tense” denotes action in 

future and has same affix as Present Tense. 

However, Mamanov (2007) pointing out that 

awIspalI keler Saq, “Future Transitional Tense” 

denotes present action. Additionally, there are 

large amount of auxiliary verbs which define 

tenses and some modal verbs. However in cases 

that auxiliary verbs are not used verbs become 

as deverbial adverbs or participles which define 

verb or noun (Demirci, 2006). In Figure 4, 

morphotactic rules of verbs and modals are 

given. Derivations of verbs to nouns and 

adverbs with specific suffixes are shown with 

asterisk in Figure 4. 

Verbs can be in reflexive, passive, collective 

and causative forms. For instance, verb tara-w 

means “to comb”, tara-n-w in reflexive infinity 

form, tara-l-w in passive infinity form, tara-s-w 

in collective infinity and tara-tQJz-w and tara-

tTJr-w in causative infinity form. Here, Q, J 

and T are intermediate letters. However not all 

verbs can have all of these forms at the same 

time. 

Verbs in infinity form are generally formed 

with last letter w. For example: kelw which 

means “to come”. The system is performing 

over generalization on verbs which take 

auxiliary verb on appropriate tenses. Those 

verbs are analyzed as derived adverbs or 

incomplete verbs on that tense since every verb 

of sentence should have personal agreement at 

the end and personal agreement affix added to 

the verb itself after the suffix of tense or to the 

auxiliary verb. In constructed morphological 

analyzer, we make analysis of every single 

word and for that reason generalization of some 

rules are made by giving more than one result.

51



 

Figure 4. Morphotactic Rules of Verbs in Kazakh Language. 

For example, kel-geli tur-mIn means “I am 

planning to come”. Here tur is an auxiliary 

form which actually defines the tense of the 

verb and takes personal agreement affix mIn. 

Without an auxiliary verb, the word kel-geli 

means “since coming” and derived as an 

adverb. Thus compound verbs are examined 

separately. Some of tenses have different 

personal agreement endings and they are 

presented in Figure 4 

 

6 Tests and Analysis 
 

As mentioned before, the system is 

implemented using Xerox finite-state tools for 

NLP. Morphotactic rules and possible 

morphemes are defined in lexicon file and 

compiled with lexc tool. Alternation rules are 

defined in regex file and rule transducer is 

composed with lexicon file in one network with 

xfst tool. Loan words, proper names and 

technical terms are not included. System is 

working in two directions as in lexical and 

surface level. Due to the ambiguities in 

language there is no one-to-one mapping 

between surface and lexical forms of words and 

the system can produce more than one result.  

A large corpus of Kazakh words 

(Qazinform, 2010) not seen by the 

morphological analyzer before has been 

continually analyzed in order to enhance the 

system by adding new words to lexicon. There 

are approximately 1000 words randomly 

selected from web which exist in lexicon and 

analyzed with the system. The percentage of 

correctly analyzed words is approximately 

96%. Most of the errors are mainly the errors 

that occurred in the analysis of technical words 

which do not obey alternation rules of Kazakh 

Language. In Table 6, the w1.txt file has more 

technical words than w2.txt file. The results of 

the tests are given in Table 6. Errors due to 

Rules are exception errors which are not 

included in transducer yet. We hope in near 

future enhancing of the system will be 

performed by including all these rules. Also it 

can be seen in Table 6 that Kazakh words have 

2.1 morphologic parses on average. 

 

    
Files 

Total 

Words 

Correctly 

Analyzed 

Words 

Total Errors 

Rules Analyzer 

w1.txt 1000 962 30 8 

w2.txt 1010 978 26 6 
Morphologic Ambiguity is 2.1 

 
Table 6. Test Results. 

 

7 Conclusion 
 

Language is one of the main tools for 

communication. Thus its investigation provides 

52



better perspectives on all other aspects related 

with NLP. However, formalization and 

computational analysis of Kazakh language 

morphology is not widely worked out. In other 

words, there is a lack of tools for analysis of 

Kazakh language morphology from 

computational point of view. Moreover, 

grammar resources contain variances depending 

on scholars. For example, in some resources 

there are twelve tenses, whereas in others there 

are much less tenses of verbs. Naming of tenses 

can also vary from source to source. To 

summarize, building correctly working system 

of morphological analysis by combining all 

information is valuable for further researches 

on language.  

In this paper, a detailed morphological 

analysis of Kazakh language has been 

performed. Also, a formalization of rules over 

all morphotactics of Kazakh languages is 

worked out.  By combining all gained 

information, a morphological analyzer is 

constructed. For future work, enhancing of 

system by adding exception rules related with 

loan words and proper names should be 

performed. Having more stabilized system with 

lessened possible rule errors some internal 

details of character encoding will also be 

solved. Moreover, releasing the working system 

to users on the web and collecting feedbacks 

are intended. These feedbacks from users can 

help on improving the system capacity and 

lessen any possible errors. This is planned to be 

performed with using an open source 

environment which is alternative to Xerox 

XFST, namely Foma by Hulden (2009).  

 

 

Reference 

 
Altenbek G and Wang X. 2010. Kazakh 

Segmentation System of Inflectional 

Affixes. Proceedings of CIPS-SIGHAN 

Joint Conference on Chinese Language 

Processing (CLP2010), Beijing, China, 

p.183–190. 

 

Altintas K. and Cicekli I. 2001. A 

Morphological Analyser for Crimean Tatar. 

Proceedings of the 10th Turkish Symposium 

on Artificial Intelligence and Neural 

Networks (TAINN’2001), North Cyprus, 

p.180-189. 

 

Beesley R. K. and Karttunen L. 2003. Finite 

State Morphology. CSLI Publications, 

Stanford, CA, USA. 

 

Coltekin C. 2010. A Freely Available 

Morphological Analyzer for Turkish. 

Proceedings of the 7th International 

Conference on Language Resources and 

Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, Malta. 

 

Demirci K. 2006. Kazakh Verbal Structures 

and Descriptive Verbs. Dunwoody Press, 

Maryland, USA. 

 

Isaeva S, Nurkina G. 1996. Sopostavitelnaya 

tipologiya kazakhskogo i russkogo yazykov. 

Uchebnogo Posobie. Sanat publishers, 

Almaty, Kazakhstan. 

 

Hamzaoğlu I. 1993. Machine translation from 

Turkish to other Turkic languages and an 

implementation for the Azeri language. 

Master’s thesis, Bogazici University, 

Turkey. 

 

Hulden M. 2009. Foma: a finite-state compiler 

and library. Proceedings of the 12th 
Conference of the European Chapter of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics: 

Demonstrations Session. Association for 

Computational Linguistics, pp. 29–32. 

 

Kairakbay M. B. and Zaurbekov D. L. 2013. 

Finite State Approach to the Kazakh 

Nominal Paradigm. Proceedings of the 11
th
 

International Conference on Finite State 

Methods and Natural Language Processing 

(FSMNLP 2013), Scotland. 

 

Mamanov I.E. 1961. Kazahskij jazyk. 

Uchebnogo posobie gumanitarnogo tipa. 

Almaty, Kazakhstan. 

 

Mamanov I.E. 2007. Qazaq til biliminin 

maseleleri. Aris publishers, Almaty, 

Kazakhstan 

 

Mussayev M. K. 2008. The Kazakh Language. 

Vostochnaya literatura publishers, Moscow, 

Russia. 

 

Oflazer K. 1994. Two-level Description of 

Turkish Morphology. Literary and 

Linguistic Computing, 9(2):137-148. 
 

53



Orhun M., Tantuğ C., Adalı E., and Sönmez C. 

2009. Computational comparison of the 

Uyg-hur and Turkish Grammar. The 2nd 

IEEE International Conference on 

Computer Science and Information 

Technology, pp:338-342, Beijing, China. 

 

Qazinform. 2010. National news agency. 
http://www.inform.kz/qaz. 

 

Salimzyanov I, Washington J.  and  Tyers F, 

2013. A free/open-source Kazakh-Tatar 

machine translation system. Machine 

Translation Summit XIV, Nice, France. 

 

Tantug C., Adali E. and Oflazer K. 2006. 

Computer Analysis of the Turkmen 

Language Morphology. Lecture Notes in 

Computer Science, 4139:186-193. A. C.  
 

Tantug C., Adali E. and Oflazer K. 2007.  AMT 

system from Turkmen to Turkish 

employing finite state and statistical 

methods.  Proceedings of MT Summit XI. 

 

Tuymebayev Q. Zhanseyit 1996. Qazaq Tili: 

Grammatikaliq anaiqtagish. Almaty, 

Kazakhstan. 

 

Valyaeva T., 2014. Kazakhskii yazyk. 
http://www.kaz-tili.kz/.  

54


