



















































Anaphora Models and Reordering for Phrase-Based SMT


Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 122–129,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26–27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Anaphora Models and Reordering for Phrase-Based SMT

Christian Hardmeier Sara Stymne Jörg Tiedemann Aaron Smith Joakim Nivre
Uppsala University

Department of Linguistics and Philology
firstname.lastname@lingfil.uu.se

Abstract

We describe the Uppsala University sys-
tems for WMT14. We look at the integra-
tion of a model for translating pronomi-
nal anaphora and a syntactic dependency
projection model for English–French. Fur-
thermore, we investigate post-ordering and
tunable POS distortion models for English–
German.

1 Introduction

In this paper we describe the Uppsala University
systems for WMT14. We present three different
systems. Two of them are based on the document-
level decoder Docent (Hardmeier et al., 2012; Hard-
meier et al., 2013a). In our English–French sys-
tem we extend Docent to handle pronoun anaphora,
and in our English–German system we add part-
of-speech phrase-distortion models to Docent. For
German–English we also have a system based on
Moses (Koehn et al., 2007). Again the focus is
on word order, this time by using pre- and post-
reordering.

2 Document-Level Decoding

Traditional SMT decoders translate texts as bags
of sentences, assuming independence between sen-
tences. This assumption allows efficient algorithms
for exploring a large search space based on dy-
namic programming (Och et al., 2001). Because of
the dynamic programming assumptions it is hard to
directly include discourse-level and long-distance
features into a traditional SMT decoder.

In contrast to this very popular stack decoding
approach, our decoder Docent (Hardmeier et al.,
2012; Hardmeier et al., 2013a) implements a search
procedure based on local search. At any stage of
the search process, its search state consists of a
complete document translation, making it easy for
feature models to access the complete document

with its current translation at any point in time. The
search algorithm is a stochastic variant of standard
hill climbing. At each step, it generates a successor
of the current search state by randomly applying
one of a set of state changing operations to a ran-
dom location in the document, and accepts the new
state if it has a better score than the previous state.
The operations are to change the translation of a
phrase, to change the word order by swapping the
positions of two phrases or moving a sequence of
phrases, and to resegment phrases. The initial state
can either be initialized randomly, or be based on
an initial run from Moses. This setup is not limited
by dynamic programming constraints, and enables
the use of the full translated target document to
extract features.

3 English–French

Our English–French system is a phrase-based SMT
system with a combination of two decoders, Moses
(Koehn et al., 2007) and Docent (Hardmeier et al.,
2013a). The fundamental setup is loosely based
on the system submitted by Cho et al. (2013) to
the WMT 2013 shared task. Our phrase table is
trained on data taken from the News commentary,
Europarl, UN, Common crawl and 109 corpora.
The first three of these corpora were included in-
tegrally into the training set after filtering out sen-
tences of more than 80 words. The Common crawl
and 109 data sets were run through an additional
filtering step with an SVM classifier, closely fol-
lowing Mediani et al. (2011). The system includes
three language models, a regular 6-gram model
with modified Kneser-Ney smoothing (Chen and
Goodman, 1998) trained with KenLM (Heafield,
2011), a 4-gram bilingual language model (Niehues
et al., 2011) with Kneser-Ney smoothing trained
with KenLM and a 9-gram model over Brown clus-
ters (Brown et al., 1992) with Witten-Bell smooth-
ing (Witten and Bell, 1991) trained with SRILM
(Stolcke, 2002).

122



The latest version released in March is equipped with . . . It is sold at . . .

La dernière version lancée en mars est dotée de . . . • est vendue . . .

Figure 1: Pronominal Anaphora Model

Our baseline system achieved a cased BLEU
score of 33.2 points on the newstest2014 data set.
Since the anaphora model used in our submission
suffered from a serious bug, we do not discuss the
results of the primary submission in more detail.

3.1 Pronominal Anaphora Model

Our pronominal anaphora model is an adaptation
of the pronoun prediction model described by Hard-
meier et al. (2013b) to SMT. The model consists
of a neural network that discriminatively predicts
the translation of a source language pronoun from
a short list of possible target language pronouns us-
ing features from the context of the source language
pronouns and from the translations of possibly re-
mote antecedents. The objective of this model is to
handle situations like the one depicted in Figure 1,
where the correct choice of a target-language pro-
noun is subject to morphosyntactic agreement with
its antecedent. This problem consists of several
steps. To score a pronoun, the system must decide
if a pronoun is anaphoric and, if so, find potential
antecedents. Then, it can predict what pronouns
are likely to occur in the translation. Our pronoun
prediction model is trained on both tasks jointly,
including anaphora resolution as a set of latent vari-
ables. At test time, we split the network in two
parts. The anaphora resolution part is run sepa-
rately as a preprocessing step, whereas the pronoun
prediction part is integrated into the document-level
decoder with two additional feature models.

The features correspond to two copies of the neu-
ral network, one to handle the singular pronoun it
and one to handle the plural pronoun they. Each net-
work just predicts a binary distinction between two
cases, il and elle for the singular network and ils
and elles for the plural network. Unlike Hardmeier
et al. (2013b), we do not use an OTHER category to
capture cases that should not be translated with any
of these options. Instead, we treat all other cases in
the phrase table and activate the anaphora models
only if one of their target pronouns actually occurs
in the output.

To achieve this, we generate pronouns in two
steps. In the phrase table training corpus, we re-

place all pronouns that should be handled by the
classifier, i.e. instances of il and elle aligned to it
and instances of ils and elles aligned to they, with
special placeholders. At decoding time, if a place-
holder is encountered in a target language phrase,
the applicable pronouns are generated with equal
translation model probability, and the anaphora
model adds a score to discriminate between them.

To reduce the influence of the language model
on pronoun choice and give full control to the
anaphora model, our primary language model is
trained on text containing placeholders instead of
pronouns. Since all output pronouns can also be
generated without the interaction of the anaphora
model if they are not aligned to a source language
pronoun, we must make sure that the language
model sees training data for both placeholders and
actual pronouns. However, for the monolingual
training corpora we have no word alignments to
decide whether or not to replace a pronoun by a
placeholder. To get around this problem, we train a
6-gram placeholder language model on the target
language side of the Europarl and News commen-
tary corpora. Then, we use the Viterbi n-gram
model decoder of SRILM (Stolcke, 2002) to map
pronouns in the entire language model training set
to placeholders where appropriate. No substitu-
tions are made in the bilingual language model or
the Brown cluster language model.

3.2 Dependency Projection Model

Our English–French system also includes a depen-
dency projection model, which uses source-side
dependency structure to model target-side relations
between words. This model assigns a score to each
dependency arc in the source language by consider-
ing the target words aligned to the head and the de-
pendent. In Figure 2, for instance, there is an nsub-
jpass arc connecting dominated to production. The
head is aligned to the target word dominée, while
the dependent is aligned to the set {production,de}.
The score is computed by a neural network taking
as features the head and dependent words and their
part-of-speech tags in the source language, the tar-
get word sets aligned to the head and dependent,
the label of the dependency arc, the distance be-
tween the head and dependent word in the source
language as well as the shortest distance between
any pair of words in the aligned sets. The network
is a binary classifier trained to discriminate positive
examples extracted from human-made reference

123



Domestic meat production is dominated by chicken .

amod

nn

nsubjpass

auxpass prep pobj

punct

La production intérieure de viande est dominée par le poulet .

Figure 2: Dependency projection model

translations from negative examples extracted from
n-best lists generated by a baseline SMT system.

4 English–German

For English–German we have two systems, one
based on Moses, and one based on Docent. In both
cases we have focused on word order, particularly
for verbs and particles.

Both our systems are trained on the same data
made available by WMT. The Common crawl data
was filtered using the method of Stymne et al.
(2013). We use factored models with POS tags
as a second output factor for German. The possi-
bility to use language models for different factors
has been added to our Docent decoder. Language
models include an in-domain news language model,
an out-of-domain model trained on the target side
of the parallel training data and a POS language
model trained on tagged news data. The LMs are
trained in the same way as for English–French.
All systems are tuned using MERT (Och, 2003).
Phrase-tables are filtered using entropy-based prun-
ing (Johnson et al., 2007) as implemented in Moses.
All BLEU scores are given for uncased data.

4.1 Pre-Ordered Alignment and
Post-Ordered Translation

The use of syntactic reordering as a separate pre-
processing step has already a long tradition in sta-
tistical MT. Handcrafted rules (Collins et al., 2005;
Popović and Ney, 2006) or data-driven models (Xia
and McCord, 2004; Genzel, 2010; Rottmann and
Vogel, 2007; Niehues and Kolss, 2009) for pre-
ordering training data and system input have been
explored in numerous publications. For certain
language pairs, such as German and English, this
method can be very effective and often improves
the quality of standard SMT systems significantly.
Typically, the source language is reordered to better
match the syntax of the target language when trans-
lating between languages that exhibit consistent
word order differences, which are difficult to handle

by SMT systems with limited reordering capabil-
ities such as phrase-based models. Preordering is
often done on the entire training data as well to op-
timize translation models for the pre-ordered input.
Less common is the idea of post-ordering, which
refers to a separate step after translating source lan-
guage input to an intermediate target language with
corrupted (source-language like) word order (Na et
al., 2009; Sudoh et al., 2011).

In our experiments, we focus on the translation
from English to German. Post-ordering becomes
attractive for several reasons: One reason is the
common split of verb-particle constructions that
can lead to long distance dependencies in German
clauses. Phrase-based systems and n-gram lan-
guage models are not able to handle such relations
beyond a certain distance and it is desirable to keep
them as connected units in the phrase translation
tables. Another reason is the possible distance of
finite and infinitival verbs in German verb phrases
that can lead to the same problems described above
with verb-particle constructions. The auxiliary or
modal verb is placed at the second position but
the main verb appears at the end of the associated
verb phrase. The distances can be arbitrarily long
and long-range dependencies are quite frequent.
Similarly, negation particles and adverbials move
away from the inflected verb forms in certain con-
structions. For more details on specific phenomena
in German, we refer to (Collins et al., 2005; Go-
jun and Fraser, 2012). Pre-ordering, i.e. moving
English words into German word order does not
seem to be a good option as we loose the con-
nection between related items when moving par-
ticles and main verbs away from their associated
elements. Hence, we are interested in reordering
the target language German into English word or-
der which can be beneficial in two ways: (i) Re-
ordering the German part of the parallel training
data makes it possible to improve word alignment
(which tends to prefer monotonic mappings) and
subsequent phrase extraction which leads to better
translation models. (ii) We can explore a two-step
procedure in which we train a phrase-based SMT
model for translating English into German with
English word order first (which covers many long-
distance relations locally) and then apply a second
system that moves words into place according to
correct German syntax (which may involve long-
range distortion).

For simplicity, we base our experiments on hand-

124



crafted rules for some of the special cases discussed
above. For efficiency reasons, we define our rules
over POS tag patterns rather than on full syntac-
tic parse trees. We rely on TreeTagger and apply
rules to join verbs in discontinuous verb phrases
and to move verb-finals in subordinate clauses, to
move verb particles, adverbials and negation par-
ticles. Table 1 shows two examples of reordered
sentences together with the original sentences in
English and German. Our rules implement rough
heuristics to identify clause boundaries and word
positions. We do not properly evaluate these rules
but focus on the down-stream evaluation of the MT
system instead.

It is therefore dangerous to extrapolate from short-term trends.
Daher ist es gefährlich, aus kurzfristigen Trends Prognosen abzuleiten.
Daher ist gefährlich es, abzuleiten aus kurzfristigen Trends Prognosen.

The fall of Saddam ushers in the right circumstances.
Der Sturz von Saddam leitet solche richtigen Umstände ein.
Der Sturz von Saddam ein leitet solche richtigen Umstände.

Table 1: Two examples of pre-ordering outputs.
The first two lines are the original English and
German sentences and the third line shows the re-
ordered sentence.

We use three systems based on Moses to com-
pare the effect of reordering on alignment and trans-
lation. All systems are case-sensitive phrase-based
systems with lexicalized reordering trained on data
provided by WMT. Word alignment is performed
using fast align (Dyer et al., 2013). For tuning we
use newstest2011. Additionally, we also test paral-
lel data from OPUS (Tiedemann, 2012) filtered by
a method adopted from Mediani et al. (2011).

To contrast our baseline system, we trained a
phrase-based model on parallel data that has been
aligned on data pre-ordered using the reordering
rules for German, which has been restored to the
original word order after word alignment and be-
fore phrase extraction (similar to (Carpuat et al.,
2010; Stymne et al., 2010)). We expect that the
word alignment is improved by reducing crossings
and long-distance links. However, the translation
model as such has the same limitations as the base-
line system in terms of long-range distortions. The
final system is a two-step model in which we apply
translation and language models trained on pre-
ordered target language data to perform the first
step, which also includes a reordered POS language
model. The second step is also treated as a transla-
tion problem as in Sudoh et al. (2011), and in our

case we use a phrase-based model here with lexical-
ized reordering and a rather large distortion limit
of 12 words. Another possibility would be to apply
another rule set that reverts the misplaced words
to the grammatically correct positions. This, how-
ever, would require deeper syntactic information
about the target language to, for example, distin-
guish main from subordinate clauses. Instead, our
model is trained on parallel target language data
with the pre-ordered version as input and the orig-
inal version as output language. For this model,
both sides are tagged and a POS language model
is used again as one of the target language factors
in decoding. Table 2 shows the results in terms of
BLEU scores on the newstest sets from 2013 and
2014.

newstest2013 newstest2014
baseline 19.3 19.1
pre 19.4 19.3
post 18.6 18.7
baseline+OPUS 19.5 19.3
pre+OPUS 19.5 19.3
post+OPUS 19.7 18.8

Table 2: BLEU4 scores for English-German sys-
tems (w/o OPUS): Standard phrase-based (base-
line); phrase-based with pre-ordered parallel cor-
pus used for word alignment (pre); two-step phrase-
based with post-reordering (post)

The results show that pre-ordering has some ef-
fect on word alignment quality in terms of support-
ing better phrase extractions in subsequent steps.
Our experiments show a consistent but small im-
provement for models trained on data that have
been prepared in this way. In contrast, the two-step
procedure is more difficult to judge in terms of au-
tomatic metrics. On the 2013 newstest data we can
see another small improvement in the setup that
includes OPUS data but in most cases the BLEU
scores go down, even below the baseline. The
short-comings of the two-step procedure are ob-
vious. Separating translation and reordering in a
pipeline adds the risk of error propagation. Fur-
thermore, reducing the second step to single-best
translations is a strong limitation and using phrase-
based models for the final reordering procedure is
probably not the wisest decision. However, manual
inspections reveals that many interesting phenom-
ena can be handled even with this simplistic setup.

Table 3 illustrates this with a few selected out-
comes of our three systems. They show how verb-
particle constructions with long-range distortion

125



reference Schauspieler Orlando Bloom hat sich zur Trennung von seiner Frau , Topmodel Miranda Kerr , geäußert .
baseline Schauspieler Orlando Bloom hat die Trennung von seiner Frau , Supermodel Miranda Kerr .
pre-ordering Schauspieler Orlando Bloom hat angekündigt , die Trennung von seiner Frau , Supermodel Miranda Kerr .
post-ordering Schauspieler Orlando Bloom hat seine Trennung von seiner Frau angekündigt , Supermodel Miranda Kerr .
reference Er gab bei einer früheren Befragung den Kokainbesitz zu .
baseline Er gab den Besitz von Kokain in einer früheren Anhörung .
pre-ordering Er räumte den Besitz von Kokain in einer früheren Anhörung .
post-ordering Er räumte den Besitz von Kokain in einer früheren Anhörung ein .
reference Borussia Dortmund kündigte daraufhin harte Konsequenzen an .
baseline Borussia Dortmund kündigte an , es werde schwere Folgen .
pre-ordering Borussia Dortmund hat angekündigt , dass es schwerwiegende Konsequenzen .
post-ordering Borussia Dortmund kündigte an , dass es schwere Folgen geben werde .

Table 3: Selected translation examples from the newstest 2014 data; the human reference translation; the
baseline system, pre-ordering for word alignment and two-step translation with post-ordering.

such as “räumte ... ein” can be created and how
discontinuous verb phrases can be handled (“hat ...
angekündigt”) with the two-step procedure. The
model is also often better in producing verb finals
in subordinate clauses (see the final example with
“geben werde”). Note that many of these improve-
ments do not get any credit by metrics like BLEU.
For example the acceptable expression “räumte ein”
which is synonymous to “gab zu” obtains less credit
then the incomplete baseline translation. Interest-
ing is also to see the effect of pre-ordering when
used for alignment only in the second system. The
first example in Table 3, for example, includes a
correct main verb which is omitted in the baseline
translation, probably because it is not extracted as
a valid translation option.

4.2 Part-of-Speech Phrase-Distortion Models
Traditional SMT distortion models consist of two
parts. A distance-based distortion cost is based
on the position of the last word in a phrase, com-
pared to the first word in the next phrase, given the
source phrase order. A hard distortion limit blocks
translations where the distortion is too large. The
distortion limit serves to decrease the complexity
of the decoder, thus increasing its speed.

In the Docent decoder, the distortion limit is not
implemented as a hard limit, but as a feature, which
could be seen as a soft constraint. We showed in
previous work (Stymne et al., 2013) that it was
useful to relax the hard distortion limit by either
using a soft constraint, which could be tuned, or
removing the limit completely. In that work we
still used the standard parametrization of distortion,
based on the positions of the first and last words in
phrases.

Our Docent decoder, however, always provides
us with a full target translation that is step-wise im-
proved, which means that we can apply distortion

measures on the phrase-level without resorting to
heuristics, which, for instance, are needed in the
case of the lexicalized reordering models in Moses
(Koehn et al., 2005). Because of this it is possible
to use phrase-based distortion, where we calculate
distortion based on the order of phrases, not on the
order of some words. It is possible to parametrize
phrase-distortion in different ways. In this work we
use the phrase-distortion distance and a soft limit
on the distortion distance, to mimic the word-based
distortion. In our experiments we always set the
soft limit to a distance of four phrases. In addition
we use a measure based on how many crossings
a phrase order gives rise to. We thus have three
phrase-distortion features.

As captured by lexicalized reordering models,
different phrases have different tendencies to move.
To capture this to some extent, we also decided
to add part-of-speech (POS) classes to our mod-
els. POS has previously successfully been used
in pre-reordering approaches (Popović and Ney,
2006; Niehues and Kolss, 2009). The word types
that are most likely to move long distances in
English–German translation are verbs and parti-
cles. Based on this observation we split phrases
into two classes, phrases that only contains verbs
and particles, and all other phrases. For these two
groups we use separate phrase-distortion features,
thus having a total of six part-of-speech phrase-
distortion features. All of these features are soft,
and are optimized during tuning.

In our system we initialize Docent by running
Moses with a standard distortion model and lexi-
calized reordering, and then continuing the search
with Docent including our part-of-speech phrase-
distortion features. Tuning was done separately for
the two components, first for the Moses component,
and then for the Docent component initialized by

126



reference Laut Dmitrij Kislow von der Organisation ”Pravo na oryzhie” kann man eine Pistole vom Typ Makarow für 100 bis 300 Dollar kaufen.
baseline Laut Dmitry Kislov aus der Rechten zu Waffen, eine Makarov Gun-spiele erworben werden können für 100-300 Dollar.
POS+phrase Laut Dmitry Kislov von die Rechte an Waffen, eine Pistole Makarov für 100-300 Dollar erworben werden können.
reference Die Waffen gelangen über mehrere Kanäle auf den Schwarzmarkt.
baseline Der ”Schwarze” Markt der Waffen ist wieder aufgefüllt über mehrere Kanäle.
POS+phrase Der ”Schwarze” Markt der Waffen durch mehrere Kanäle wieder aufgefüllt ist.
reference Mehr Kameras könnten möglicherweise das Problem lösen...
baseline Möglicherweise könnte das Problem lösen, eine große Anzahl von Kameras...
POS+phrase Möglicherweise, eine große Anzahl von Kameras könnte das Problem lösen...

Table 4: Selected translation examples from the newstest2013 data; the human reference translation; the
baseline system (Moses with lexicalized reordering) and the system with a POS+phrase distortion model.

Moses with lexicalized reordering with its tuned
weights. We used newstest2009 for tuning. The
training data was lowercased for training and de-
coding, and recasing was performed using a sec-
ond Moses run trained on News data. As baselines
we present two Moses systems, without and with
lexicalized reordering, in addition to standard dis-
tortion features.

Table 5 shows results with our different distor-
tion models. Overall the differences are quite small.
The clearest difference is between the two Moses
baselines, where the lexicalized reordering model
leads to an improvement. With Docent, both the
word distortion and phrase distortion without POS
do not help to improve on Moses, with a small de-
crease in scores on one dataset. This is not very
surprising, since lexical distortion is currently not
supported by Docent, and the distortion models are
thus weaker than the ones implemented in Moses.
For our POS phrase distortion, however, we see a
small improvement compared to Moses, despite the
lack of lexicalized distortion. This shows that this
distortion model is actually useful, and can even
successfully replace lexicalized reordering. In fu-
ture work, we plan to combine this method with a
lexicalized reordering model, to see if the two mod-
els have complementary strengths. Our submitted
system uses the POS phrase-distortion model.

System Distortion newstest2013 newstest2014
Moses word 19.4 19.3
Moses word+LexReo 19.6 19.6
Docent word 19.5 19.6
Docent phrase 19.5 19.6
Docent POS+phrase 19.7 19.7

Table 5: BLEU4 scores for English–German sys-
tems with different distortion models.

If we inspect the translations, most of the differ-
ences between the Moses baseline and the system
with POS+phrase distortion are actually due to lex-
ical choice. Table 4 shows some examples where

there are word order differences. The result is quite
mixed with respect to the placement of verbs. In
the first example, both systems put the verbs to-
gether but in different positions, instead of splitting
them like the reference suggests. In the second
example, our system erroneously put the verbs at
the end, which would be fine if the sentence had
been a subordinate clause. In the third example,
the baseline system has the correct placement of
the auxiliary “könnte”, while our system is bet-
ter at placing the main verb “lösen”. In general,
this indicates that our system is able to support
long-distance distortion as it is needed in certain
cases but sometimes overuses this flexibility. A
better model would certainly need to incorporate
syntactic information to distinguish main from sub-
ordinate clauses. However, this would add a lot of
complexity to the model.

5 Conclusion

We have described the three Uppsala University
systems for WMT14. In the English–French sys-
tem we extend our document-level decoder Do-
cent (Hardmeier et al., 2013a) to handle pronoun
anaphora and introduced a dependency projection
model. In our two English–German system we
explore different methods for handling reordering,
based on Docent and Moses. In particular, we look
at post-ordering as a separate step and tunable POS
phrase distortion.

Acknowledgements

This work forms part of the Swedish strategic re-
search programme eSSENCE. We also acknowl-
edge the use of the Abel cluster, owned by the
University of Oslo and the Norwegian metacenter
for High Performance Computing (NOTUR) and
operated by the Department for Research Comput-
ing at USIT, under project nn9106k. Finally, we
would also like to thank Eva Pettersson, Ali Basirat,
and Eva Martinez for help with human evaluation.

127



References
Peter F. Brown, Peter V. deSouza, Robert L. Mer-

cer, Vincent J. Della Pietra, and Jenifer C. Lai.
1992. Class-based n-gram models of natural lan-
guage. Computational linguistics, 18(4):467–479.

Marine Carpuat, Yuval Marton, and Nizar Habash.
2010. Improving Arabic-to-English statistical ma-
chine translation by reordering post-verbal subjects
for alignment. In Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Con-
ference Short Papers, pages 178–183, Uppsala, Swe-
den.

Stanley F. Chen and Joshua Goodman. 1998. An
empirical study of smoothing techniques for lan-
guage modeling. Technical report, Computer Sci-
ence Group, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, USA.

Eunah Cho, Thanh-Le Ha, Mohammed Mediani, Jan
Niehues, Teresa Herrmann, Isabel Slawik, and Alex
Waibel. 2013. The Karlsruhe Institute of Technol-
ogy translation systems for the WMT 2013. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 104–108, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Kučerová.
2005. Clause restructuring for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meet-
ing of the ACL, pages 531–540, Ann Arbor, Michi-
gan, USA.

Chris Dyer, Victor Chahuneau, and Noah A. Smith.
2013. A simple, fast, and effective reparameteriza-
tion of IBM model 2. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the NAACL: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 644–648, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Dmitriy Genzel. 2010. Automatically learning source-
side reordering rules for large scale machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, pages 376–
384, Beijing, China.

Anita Gojun and Alexander Fraser. 2012. Determin-
ing the placement of German verbs in English–to–
German SMT. In Proceedings of the 13th Confer-
ence of the EACL, pages 726–735, Avignon, France.

Christian Hardmeier, Joakim Nivre, and Jörg Tiede-
mann. 2012. Document-wide decoding for phrase-
based statistical machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 1179–
1190, Jeju Island, Korea.

Christian Hardmeier, Sara Stymne, Jörg Tiedemann,
and Joakim Nivre. 2013a. Docent: A document-
level decoder for phrase-based statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meet-
ing of the ACL, Demonstration session, pages 193–
198, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Christian Hardmeier, Jörg Tiedemann, and Joakim
Nivre. 2013b. Latent anaphora resolution for cross-
lingual pronoun prediction. In Proceedings of the
2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 380–391, Seattle,
Washington, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Kenneth Heafield. 2011. KenLM: faster and smaller
language model queries. In Proceedings of the
Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 187–197, Edinburgh, Scotland. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Howard Johnson, Joel Martin, George Foster, and
Roland Kuhn. 2007. Improving translation qual-
ity by discarding most of the phrasetable. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, pages 967–
975, Prague, Czech Republic.

Philipp Koehn, Amittai Axelrod, Alexandra Birch
Mayne, Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and
David Talbot. 2005. Edinburgh system descrip-
tion for the 2005 IWSLT speech translation evalu-
ation. In Proceedings of the International Workshop
on Spoken Language Translation, Pittsburgh, Penn-
sylvania, USA.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL,
Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 177–180, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Mohammed Mediani, Eunah Cho, Jan Niehues, Teresa
Herrmann, and Alex Waibel. 2011. The
KIT English–French translation systems for IWSLT
2011. In Proceedings of the International Workshop
on Spoken Language Translation, pages 73–78, San
Francisco, California, USA.

Hwidong Na, Jin-Ji Li, Jungi Kim, and Jong-Hyeok
Lee. 2009. Improving fluency by reordering tar-
get constituents using MST parser in English-to-
Japanese phrase-based SMT. In Proceedings of
MT Summit XII, pages 276–283, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada.

Jan Niehues and Muntsin Kolss. 2009. A POS-based
model for long-range reorderings in SMT. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 206–214, Athens, Greece.

Jan Niehues, Teresa Herrmann, Stephan Vogel, and
Alex Waibel. 2011. Wider context by using bilin-
gual language models in machine translation. In
Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Ma-
chine Translation, pages 198–206, Edinburgh, Scot-
land. Association for Computational Linguistics.

128



Franz Josef Och, Nicola Ueffing, and Hermann Ney.
2001. An efficient A* search algorithm for Statisti-
cal Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the ACL
2001 Workshop on Data-Driven Machine Transla-
tion, pages 55–62, Toulouse, France.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
42nd Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 160–167,
Sapporo, Japan.

Maja Popović and Hermann Ney. 2006. POS-based re-
orderings for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’06), pages
1278–1283, Genoa, Italy.

Kay Rottmann and Stephan Vogel. 2007. Word re-
ordering in statistical machine translation with a
POS-based distortion model. In Proceedings of
the 11th International Conference on Theoretical
and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation,
pages 171–180, Skövde, Sweden.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM – an extensible
language modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the
Seventh International Conference on Spoken Lan-
guage Processing, pages 901–904, Denver, Col-
orado, USA.

Sara Stymne, Maria Holmqvist, and Lars Ahrenberg.
2010. Vs and OOVs: Two problems for translation
between German and English. In Proceedings of the
Joint Fifth Workshop on Statistical Machine Trans-
lation and MetricsMATR, pages 183–188, Uppsala,
Sweden.

Sara Stymne, Christian Hardmeier, Jörg Tiedemann,
and Joakim Nivre. 2013. Tunable distortion limits
and corpus cleaning for SMT. In Proceedings of the
Eighth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 225–231, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Katsuhito Sudoh, Xianchao Wu, Kevin Duh, Hajime
Tsukada, and Masaaki Nagata. 2011. Post-ordering
in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
MT Summit XIII, pages 316–323, Xiamen. China.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2012. Parallel data, tools and in-
terfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’12), pages 2214–2218, Istanbul,
Turkey.

Ian H. Witten and Timothy C. Bell. 1991. The zero-
frequency problem: Estimating the probabilities of
novel events in adaptive text compression. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 37(4):1085–
1094.

Fei Xia and Michael McCord. 2004. Improving
a statistical MT system with automatically learned
rewrite patterns. In Proceedings of the 20th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 508–514, Geneva, Switzerland.

129


