



















































A Case Study: NLG meeting Weather Industry Demand for Quality and Quantity of Textual Weather Forecasts


Proceedings of the 8th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 1–5,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19-21 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Case Study: NLG meeting Weather Industry Demand for Quality 

and Quantity of Textual Weather Forecasts 

Somayajulu G Sripada, Neil Burnett and 

Ross Turner 

Arria NLG Plc 

{yaji.sripada,neil.burnett, 

ross.turner}@arria.com 

 John Mastin and Dave Evans 

Met Office 

{john.mastin, 

dave.evans}@metoffice.gov.uk 

  

 

  

 

Abstract 

In the highly competitive weather indus-

try, demand for timely, accurate and per-

sonalized weather reports is always on 

the rise. In this paper we present a case 

study where Arria NLG and the UK na-

tional weather agency, the Met Office 

came together to test the hypothesis that 

NLG can meet the quality and quantity 

demands of a real-world use case. 

1 Introduction 

Modern weather reports present weather predic-

tion information using tables, graphs, maps, 

icons and text. Among these different modalities 

only text is currently manually produced, con-

suming significant human resources. Therefore 

releasing meteorologists’ time to add value else-

where in the production chain without sacrificing 

quality and consistency in weather reports is an 

important industry goal. In addition, in order to 

remain competitive, modern weather services 

need to provide weather reports for any geo-

location the end-user demands. As the quantity 

of required texts increases, manual production 

becomes humanly impossible. In this paper we 

describe a case study where data-to-text NLG 

techniques have been applied to a real-world use 

case involving the UK national weather service, 

the Met Office. In the UK, the Met Office pro-

vides daily weather reports for nearly 5000 loca-

tions which are available through its public web-

site. These reports contain a textual component 

that is not focused on the geo-location selected 

by the end-user, but instead describes the weath-

er conditions over a broader geographic region. 

This is done partly because the time taken to 

manually produce thousands of texts required 

would be in the order of weeks rather than 

minutes. In this case study a data-to-text NLG 

system was built to demonstrate that the site-

specific data could be enhanced with site-specific 

text for nearly 5000 locations. This system, run-

ning on a standard desktop, was tested to pro-

duce nearly 15000 texts (forecasts for 5000 loca-

tions for 3 days into the future) in less than a mi-

nute. After internally assessing the quality of 

machine-generated texts for nearly two years, the 

Met Office launched the system on their beta site 

(http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/public/weather/for

ecast-data2text/) in December 2013 for external 

assessment. A screenshot of the forecast for 

London Heathrow on 5th March 2014 is shown 

in Figure 1. In this figure, the machine-generated 

text is at the top of the table. Ongoing work has 

extended the processing capabilities of this sys-

tem to handle double the number of locations and 

an additional two forecast days. It has been 

found that the processing time scales linearly. 

2 Related Work 

Automatically producing textual weather fore-

casts has been the second favorite application for 

NLG, with 15 entries on Bateman and Zock’s list 

of NLG application domains (the domain of 

medicine comes on top with 19 entries) [Bate-

man and Zock, 2012]. NLG applications in the 

weather domain have a long history. FOG was an 

early landmark NLG system in the domain of 

weather reports [Goldberg et al, 1994]. Working 

as a module of the Forecast Production Assistant 

(FPA), FOG was operationally deployed at Envi-

ronment Canada to produce weather reports for 

the general public and also for marine users in 

both English and French. Using sampling and 

smoothing over space and time, FOG reduces 

raw data into a few significant events which are 

then organized and realized in textual form. 

MULTIMETEO is another industry deployed mul-

ti-lingual weather report generator [Coch 1998].  

The focus of MULTIMETEO is ‘interactive genera-

tion via knowledge administration’.

1



Figure 1. Screenshot of Text-Enhanced Five-day Weather Forecast for London Heathrow on 5 March 2014 

showing only part of the data table 

 

Expert forecasters post-edit texts (interactivity) 

in their native language and this knowledge is 

then reused (knowledge administration) for au-

tomatically generating texts in other languages. It 

is claimed that such interactive generation is bet-

ter than using machine translation for multi-

lingual outputs. SUMTIME-MOUSAM is yet anoth-

er significant weather report generator that was 

operationally deployed to generate forecasts in 

English for oil company staff supporting oil rig 

operations in the North Sea [Sripada et al, 

2003a]. Adapting techniques used for time series 

segmentation, this project developed a frame-

work for data summarization in the context of 

NLG [Sripada et al, 2003b]. This time series 

summarization framework was later extended to 

summarizing spatio-temporal data in the ROAD-

SAFE system [Turner et al, 2008]. ROADSAFE too 

was used in an industrial context to produce 

weather reports (including text in English and a 

table) for road maintenance in winter months. 

The NLG system reported in the current case 

study builds upon techniques employed by earli-

er systems, particularly SUMTIME-MOUSAM and 

ROADSAFE.  

The main dimension on which the applica-

tion described in this paper differs most from the 

work cited previously is the quantity of textual 

weather forecasts that are generated. Previous 

work has either focused on summarising forecast 

sites collectively (in the case of FOG and ROAD-

SAFE), been limited in the number of sites fore-

cast for (15 in the case of MULTIMETEO) or lim-

ited in geographic extent (SUMTIME-MOUSAM 

concentrated on oil rig operations in the North 

Sea). This aspect of the system, amongst others, 

posed a number of challenges discussed in Sec-

tion 3.      

3 System Description 

For reasons of commercial sensitivity, the system 

description in this section is presented at an ab-

stract level. At the architecture level, our system 

uses the Arria NLG Engine that follows the 

standard five stage data-to-text pipeline [Reiter, 

2007]. The system integrates application specific 

modules with the generic reusable modules from 

the underlying engine. Input to the system is 

made up of three components: 

 

1. Weather prediction data consisting of sev-
eral weather parameters such as tempera-

ture, wind speed and direction, precipita-

tion and visibility at three hourly intervals; 

2. Daily summary weather prediction data 
consisting of average daily and nightly 

values for several weather parameters as 

above; and 

3. Seasonal averages (lows, highs and mean) 
for temperature. 

 

Because the system is built on top of the Ar-

ria NLG Engine, input data is configurable 

and not tied to file formats. The system can be 

configured to work with new data files with 

equivalent weather parameters as well as dif-

ferent forecast periods. In other words, the 

system is portable in principle for other use 

cases where site-specific forecasts are required 

from similar input data.  

2



3.1 Expressing Falling Prediction Quality for 
Subsequent Forecast Days 

As stated above, the system can be configured to 

generate forecast texts for a number of days into 

the future. Because prediction accuracy reduces 

going into the future, the forecast text on day 1 

should be worded differently from subsequent 

days where the prediction is relatively more un-

certain. An example output text for day 1 is 

shown in Figure 2 while Figure 3 shows the day 

3 forecast. Note the use of ‘expected’ to denote 

the uncertainty around the timing of the tempera-

ture peak. 
 
Staying dry and predominantly clear with only a 

few cloudy intervals through the night. A mild 
night with temperatures of 6C. Light winds 
throughout. 

 

Figure 2. Example output text for day 1 

 
Cloudy through the day. Mainly clear into the 

night. Highest temperatures expected during the 
afternoon in the region of 12C with a low of 
around 6C during the night. Light to moderate 
winds throughout. 

 

Figure 3. Example output text for day 3 

3.2 Lack of Corpus for System Development 

A significant feature of the system development 

has been to work towards a target text specifica-

tion provided by experts rather than extract such 

a specification from corpus texts, as is generally 

the case with most NLG system development 

projects. This is because expert forecasters do 

not write the target texts regularly; therefore, 

there is no naturally occurring target corpus. 

However, because of the specialized nature of 

the weather sublanguage (Weatherese), which 

has been well studied in the NLG community 

[Goldberg et al, 1994, Reiter et al 2005, Reiter 

and Williams 2010], it was possible to supple-

ment text specifications obtained from experts. 

In addition, extensive quality assessment (details 

in section 3.4) helped us to refine the system 

output to the desired levels of quality. 

3.3 Achieving Output Quantity 

The main requirements of the case study have 

been 1) build a NLG capability that produces the 

quantity of texts required and 2) achieve this 

quantity without sacrificing the quality expected 

from the Met Office. As stated previously, the 

quantity requirement has been met by generating 

15,000 texts in less than a minute, without need 

for high end computing infrastructure or parallel-

ization. Figure 4 is a box plot showing character 

lengths of forecast texts for an arbitrary set of 

inputs. The median length is 177 characters. The 

outliers, with length 1.5 times the interquartile 

range (1.5 * 134 = 201 characters) above the up-

per quartile or below the lower quartile, relate to 

sites experiencing particularly varied weather 

conditions. Feedback on the appropriateness of 

the text lengths is discussed in Section 3.4. 

 
Figure 4. Boxplot of forecast character length 

 

 
Figure 5. System Processing Time 

 

   The system has recently been extended to gen-

erate 50,000 texts without loss of performance. 

This extension has doubled the number of sites 

processed to 10,000 and extended the forecast to 

5 days. It has also increased the geographic ex-

tent of the system from UK only to worldwide, 

discussed in Section 3.5. The plot in Figure 5 

shows the relationship between processing time 

3



and the addition of new forecast sites. The results 

were obtained over 10 trials using a MacBook 

Pro 2.5 GHz Intel Core i5, running OS X 10.8 

with 4GB of RAM.  

3.4 Achieving Output Quality 

Achieving the required text quality was driven 

by expert assessment of output texts that oc-

curred over a period of two years. This is be-

cause experts had to ensure that the system out-

put was assessed over the entire range of weather 

conditions related to seasonal variations over the 

course of a year. The following comment about 

the output quality made by a Met Office expert 

summarizes the internal feedback: 

 

"They were very, very good and I got lots of ver-

bal feedback to that affect from the audience af-

terwards. Looking back after the weekend, the 

forecasts proved to be correct too! I've been 

looking at them at other times and I think they're 

brilliant." 

 
After successfully assessing the output quality 

internally, the Met Office launched the system on 

the Invent part of their website to collect end-

user assessments. Invent is used by the Met Of-

fice to test new technology before introducing 

the technology into their workflows. With the 

help of a short questionnaire
1
 that collects as-

sessment of those end-users that use weather in-

formation for decision-making, quality assess-

ment is ongoing. The questionnaire had three 

questions related to quality assessment shown in 

Figures 6-8. In the rest of the section we describe 

the results of this questionnaire based on 35 re-

sponses received between 1st January 2014 and 

6th March 2014.  

The first question shown in Figure 6 relates to 

assessing the usefulness of textual content in 

helping the end-user understand a weather report 

better. Out of the 35 respondents, 34 (97%) an-

swered ‘yes’ and 1 (3%) answered ‘no’ for the 

question in Figure 6. The second question shown 

in Figure 7 relates to assessing if the text size is 

optimal for this use case. Here, out of the 35 re-

spondents, 26 (74%) felt the text is ‘about right’ 

size, 7 (20%) felt it is either ‘too short’ or ‘too 

long’ and 2 (6%) were ‘unsure’. The third ques-

tion shown in Figure 8 relates to finding out if 

the end-user might want a forecast that includes 

textual content. Here, 32 (91%) wanted textual 

content while 3 (9%) did not want it.  

                                                 
1
http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/invent/feedback 

The Met Office is currently evaluating the new 

capability based upon the feedback received and 

how it can be applied to meet the demands of 

users across their portfolio of products. 

Did you find the text on the weather forecast 
page helped you to understand the forecast bet-
ter? * 

Yes 

No 

Figure 6. Question about textual content help-

ing the end-user understand the forecast better 

How did you find the text used? * 

Too short 

About right 

Too long 

Unsure / don't know 

Figure 7. Question about length of the forecast 

text 

Would you recommend this feature? * 

Yes 

No 

Figure 8. Question about the end-user’s opin-

ion on textual content as part of a weather report 

 

The questionnaire also asked for free text 

comments. An example of one such comment is: 

 
"Succinct and clear text. Contains all the im-

portant features and is well presented. Saves us 

having to summarise the visual descriptions our-

selves (or rather helps to shape our conclusions 

about the 24 hour weather pattern)." 

    

   A big challenge during the development of 

such a system is providing quality assurance 

4



when generating such a large volume of texts. A 

number of automated checks had to be applied to 

the complete output during system testing as well 

as targeted sampling of input data to produce a 

representative sample of outputs for manual as-

sessment. 

3.5 Extending the Geographic Extent 

Extending the scope of the system from UK-only 

sites to handling worldwide locations brings sub-

tle challenges in addition to scaling the system, 

principally: 

 

1. handling time zone changes; and 
2. adapting to different climates. 

 

In the case of point 1 above, time descriptions 

can become ambiguous where the sunrise and 

sunset time vary across geographies. Such times 

need to be carefully observed to avoid generating 

words such as “sunny” after dark. For point 2, 

general terminologies relating to description of 

temperatures cannot be universally applied 

across locations. For example, the meaning of 

terms such as “cool” differs at locations within 

the tropics versus locations north (or south) of 45 

degrees of latitude. 

4 Conclusion 

We have presented a case study describing an 

application of NLG technology deployed at the 

Met Office. The system has been developed to 

meet the text production requirements for thou-

sands of forecast locations that could not have 

been sustainable with human resources. The 

software can write a detailed five-day weather 

forecast for 10,000 locations worldwide in under 

two minutes. It would take a weather forecaster 

months to create the equivalent quantity of out-

put.  

In meeting the requirements of this particular 

use case a number of challenges have had to be 

met. Principally, these challenges have been fo-

cused upon processing speed and output text 

quality. While we have managed to achieve the 

required processing performance relatively 

quickly without the need for large amounts of 

computing resources or high-end computing in-

frastructure, ensuring the necessary output quali-

ty has been a longer process due to the high op-

erating standards required and the high resource 

cost of quality assurance when delivering texts at 

such scale.    

This application of NLG technology to site-

specific weather forecasting has potential for a 

number of enhancements to the type of weather 

services that may be provided in the future, most 

notably the opportunity for very geographically 

localized textual forecasts that can be updated 

immediately as the underlying numerical weather 

prediction data is produced.   

References 

E. Goldberg, N. Driedger, and R. Kittredge. 

Using Natural-Language Processing to Produce 

Weather Forecasts. 

IEEE Expert, 9(2):45--53, 1994. 

J. Coch. Interactive generation and knowledge admin-

istration in MultiMeteo.  

In Proceedings of the Ninth International Work-

shop on Natural Language Generation, pages 300--

303, Niagara-on-the-lake, Ontario, Canada, 1998. 

software demonstration. 

Bateman J and Zock M, (2012) Bateman/Zock list of 

NLG systems, http://www.nlg-wiki.org/systems/. 

S. Sripada, E. Reiter, and I. Davy, (2003a) 

‘SumTime-Mousam: Configurable Marine Weather 

Forecast Generator’, Expert Update, 6(3), pp 4-10, 

(2003)  

S. Sripada, E. Reiter, J. Hunter and J. Yu (2003b). 

Generating English Summaries of Time Series Da-

ta using the Gricean Maxims. In Proceedings of 

KDD 2003, pp 187-196. 

E. Reiter, S. Sripada, J. Hunter, J. Yu and Ian Davy 

(2005). Choosing Words in Computer-Generated 

Weather Forecasts. Artificial Intelligence. 167(1-

2):137-169 

E. Reiter (2007). An architecture for data-to-text sys-

tems, In ENLG 07, pp97-104. 

Reiter, Ehud and Williams, Sandra (2010). Generating 

texts in different styles. In: Argamon, Shlomo; 

Burns, Kevin and Dubnov, Shlomo eds. The Struc-

ture of Style: Algorithmic Approaches to Manner 

and Meaning. Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 59–78 

E. Reiter, S. Sripada, J. Hunter, J. Yu, and Ian Da-

vy(2005). Choosing words in computer-generated 

weather forecasts. Artificial Intelligence. 167(1-

2):137-169 (2005) 

R. Turner, S. Sripada, E. Reiter, & I. Davy  

(2008). Using spatial reference frames to generate 

grounded textual summaries of geo-referenced da-

ta. Proceedings of the INLG 2008, Salt Fork, Ohio. 

5


