



















































Sentence Alignment of Historical Classics based on Mode Prediction and Term Translation Pairs


Proceedings of the Third CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference on Chinese Language Processing, pages 85–89,
Wuhan, China, 20-21 October 2014

Sentence Alignment of Historical Classics based on 

Mode Prediction and Term Translation Pairs 

 
 

Chao Che Xiaojun Zheng 
Key Laboratory of Advanced Design and Intelligent Computing 

(Dalian University) , Ministry of Education, 
Dalian, 116622, P. R. China 

chechao101@163.com, zhengxiaojun@gmail.com 
 

  
 

Abstract 

Parallel corpora are essential resources for 
the construction of bilingual term dictionary 
of historical classics. To obtain large-scale 
parallel corpora, this paper proposes a sen-
tence alignment method based on mode pre-
diction and term translation pairs. On one 
hand, the method rebuilds the sentence 
alignment process according to characteris-
tics of the translation of historical classics, 
and adds mode prediction into the sentence 
alignment. On the other hand, due to the lack 
of bilingual ancient Chinese dictionary, the 
method exploits the term translation pairs ex-
tracted from manually aligned sentence pairs 
to perform alignment. The method first pre-
dicts the alignment mode probability accord-
ing to the character number, punctuation 
number and some characters of Chinese sen-
tence, then performs sentence alignment us-
ing length alignment probability, term align-
ment probability and mode probability. Be-
sides, the method selects anchor sentence 
pairs based on sentence length and predicted 
mode to prevent the spread of alignment er-
rors. The experiment on ”Shi Ji” demon-
strates that mode prediction and term transla-
tion pair both enhance the performance of 
sentence alignment obviously. 

1 Introduction 
Translating the classics into English and intro-
ducing them to the world is an important way to 
spread Chinese culture. Because of the dynamic 
nature of historical development and huge differ-
ences between Chinese and Western languages, 
the translation of classics is very difficult. Bilin-
gual term dictionary is very helpful for transla-

tion of historical classics. The term dictionary 
can be built by extracting term translation pairs 
from bilingual parallel corpora. Aiming at ob-
taining large-scale parallel corpora, we study the 
sentence alignment of historical classics. Cur-
rently the bilingual sentence alignment methods 
are mainly divided into following four types: (1) 
the method based on length(Gale and Church, 
1993; Lu et al., 2003), which performs sentence 
alignment using the sentence length relation; (2) 
the method based on dictionary(Yu et al., 2010), 
which performs sentence alignment using the 
lexicon translation in bilingual dictionary; (3)the 
hybrid method(Moore, 2002; Chen and Lin, 2009; 
Tian et al., 2009), which makes use of many 
kinds of information including sentence length to 
improve the accuracy of alignment; (4) the 
method base on mode classification(Fattah et al., 
2007); which regards sentence alignment as a 
mode classification problem and exploits classi-
fier to align sentences.  

Due to the various meanings of historical clas-
sics, the ratio of the sentence length between his-
torical classics and its English translation is not 
uniform. Thus alignment method using sentence 
length alone does not have good performance. 
Owing to lack of ancient Chinese bilingual dic-
tionary, we exploit the term translation pairs ex-
tracted from the sentence pairs aligned manually 
to do sentence alignment. Since the translator 
needs to explain the hiding meaning of historical 
classics when translating classics into English, 
the sentence alignment modes of classics are al-
most all “one-to-many”. The sentence alignment 
of historical classics can be considered as finding 
corresponding English translation for every Chi-
nese sentence. According to the above character-
istics of historical classics, this paper proposed a 
sentence alignment method based on mode pre-

85



diction and term translation pairs. The method 
first predicts the alignment mode probability 
based on the features of Chinese sentence, then 
run sentence alignment using sentence length and 
term translation pairs. 

2 The Mathematical Model of Sentence 
Alignment Method 

2.1 Sentence Alignment Probability 

Given a Chinese text block 1 2{ , , , }mC c c c Λ  
and the English translation 1 2, , , nE e e e Λ , 
where ic  denotes a Chinese sentence and je  is a 
English sentence. Sentence alignment aims at 
finding the alignment Â  with the maximum 
alignment probability among all alignments A, 
which can be denoted as following formula. 

 
Pr( , | ( , ))ˆ arg max

Pr( ( , ))M A

c e M c e
A

M c e

 


 
 
 
*  (1) 

Wherein: ,c e  is a pair of sentences, which 
is also called sentence bead. And e is the transla-
tion of c. ( , )M c e  indicates the alignment mode. 
According to the sentence number in ,c e  , 
the alignment mode can be classified as: (1:0), 
(0:1), (1:1), (1:2), (2:1), (1:3), (3:1) etc. Due to 
the rich meaning of historical classics, every sen-
tence of classics usually corresponds to more 
than one English sentence. On the contrary, there 
is hardly any English sentence corresponds to 
more than one Chinese sentence. Only 4 sentence 
pairs are aligned in “many-to-one” mode in the 
corpus containing 1233 pair of sentences. Since 
the alignment modes of most historical classics 
sentences are “one-to-many”, sentence align-
ment can be regarded as finding the correspond-
ing English sentences 1j je e e  Λ for each Chi-
nese sentence ic  in 1 2{ , , , }mC c c c Λ . Given a 
Chinese sentence, formula (1) is turned into:  

 
Pr( | ( , ), )ˆ arg max
*Pr( ( , ) | )M A

e M c e c
A

M c e c
 

  
 

  (2) 

Wherein: Pr( ( , ) | )M c e c  is the mode proba-
bility, which denotes the probability that the 
alignment mode is ( , )M c e  given the sentence 
c . Pr( | ( , ), )e M c e c  indicates the probability 
that sentence c align e given ( , )M c e and c. 
Pr( | ( , ), )e M c e c  is the linear combination of 
length alignment probability and term alignment 
probability, and is defined as following: 

 1

2

Pr( | ( , ), ) Pr ( | ( , ), )

Pr ( | ( , ), )
len

term

e M c e c e M c e c

e M c e c







                          
 (3) 

Wherein: Pr ( | ( , ), )len e M c e c  is the length 
alignment probability and Pr ( | ( , ), )term e M c e c  
denotes the term alignment probability. 1 , 2  
are the weight parameters and 1 2 1   . 

2.2 The Length Alignment Probability 
Since c  is known, we can have the following 
formula not strictly. 

 

Pr ( | ( , ), )
Pr ( , | ( , ))
Pr( ( , ) | ( , ))

len

len

c e

e M c e c

c e M c e

L L M c e

  



  (4) 

Wherein: ,c eL L  is the length of sentence c 
and e, respectively. Owing to the lack of mature 
ancient Chinese word segmentation algorithm, 
we take the character number as the length of 
Chinese sentence and take the word number as 
the length of English sentence. The punctuation 
in Chinese and English sentence is all taken into 
account. ( , )c eL L  indicates the length evalua-
tion function, which obeys standard normal dis-
tribution, and is defined as follows. 

 
2

( , ) e c pc e
c

L L c
L L

L s








  (5) 

Wherein: parameter pc  indicates the number 
of English words generated by one Chinese char-
acter in average, which can be obtained by calcu-
lating the length ratio between the paragraph Pe 
of English sentence e and the paragraph Pc of 
Chinese sentence c. The calculation formula is 
shown as formula (6). 2s is the normalized factor 
guaranteeing ( , )c eL L  obey standard normal 
distribution, which can be obtained by calculat-
ing variance on bilingual corpus. It can be calcu-
lated as formula (7).  

  e

c

e
e P

p
c

c P

L
c

L








  (6) 

 2 e c p

c

L L c
s D

L

 
   

 


 (7) 

Based on the 3  principle of normal distribu-
tion, 99% values of ( , )c eL L distribute in the 
range of [-3, 3]. To ensure the length probability 

86



is less than 1 and incremental, length probability 
is defined as following:  

 

2

Pr ( | ( , ), )
Pr( ( , ) | ( , ))

( , )
1 1

3 3

len

c e

e c pc e

c

e M c e c

L L M c e

L L cL L

L s








   

γ

γ

 (8) 

2.3 Term Alignment Probability 
The "terms" in historical classics refer to the of-
ficial title, posthumous, person name, location 
name and other titles. The terms appear frequent-
ly in historical classics. If a term occurs in a Chi-
nese sentence, then its translation should occurs 
in the corresponding position of English sentence. 
Given that a pair of terms ( , )c et t occur in the 
sentence pair ( , )c e , the alignment function is 
defined as:  

 
, 1,2,

( )( )( , ) min j ei cc e i j
c e

pos tpos tA t t
L L

 


 (9) 

Wherein: ( )i cpos t and ( )j epos t denote the 
positions where terms ct and et  appear in the 
sentence. If no term pair appears in the sentence 
pair, the term alignment probability is 0. If n pair 
of terms 1 1( , ), , ( , )c e cn ent t t t  occur in the sen-
tence pair, the term alignment probability can 
defined as:  

 
min

Pr ( | ( , ), )

1 ( , ) ( ( , ) 0.5)
term

cj ej ci ei
i j

e M c e c

A t t A t t


    (10) 

Wherein: min ( , )cj ejA t t is the minimum value 
of all the alignment functions. ( , )cj ejt t indicates 
the term pair when the alignment function is 
minimal. 

2.4 Alignment Mode Probability 
The historical classics are translated from Chi-
nese to English. When translator sees a Chinese 
sentence, he almost determines how many Eng-
lish sentences should be used to translate the 
Chines sentence. Thus, the calculation of align-
ment mode probability can be considered as a 
classification problem of mode. We input a Chi-
nese sentence to the classifier, and the classifier 
outputs the alignment probability. We take naïve 
Bayesian as the classifier, which is run by WE-
KA1. We employ the character number, punctua-
                                                 
1 http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka 

tion number of Chinese sentence and the charac-
ters selected by feature selection function to pre-
dict the mode probability. We choose Infor-
mation Gain (IG) as the feature function, which 
measures the number of bits of information ob-
tained for category prediction by knowing the 
presence or absence of a character in a sentence. 

3 The Framework of the Sentence 
Alignment Method 

3.1 The steps of the sentence alignment 
method 

Given a Chinese document cD  of historical clas-
sics and its English translation eD , the sentence 
alignment is performed in the following steps. 

(1) Divide the Chinese document into different 

paragraphs by paragraph mark, 

1 2{ , , , }c ID C C C Λ . The English document is 
also divided into different paragraphs, 

1 2{ , , , }e ID E E E Λ . 
(2) Search anchor sentence pairs in in the par-

agraph pair ( , )i iC E . If anchors can be found, sep-
arate the Chinese and English paragraph into dif-

ferent text blocks, otherwise, regard the paragraph 

as a text block. 

(3) Align the sentences in text blocks 

1 2, , , mc c cΛ  and 1 2, , , ne e eΛ . For Chinese sen-
tence ic , calculate the probabilities of different 
alignment modes by formula (3). Select the English 

sentences j j ke e Λ  of the maximal alignment 
probability as its translation. Then find correspond-

ing sentences for Chinese sentence 1ic   from Eng-
lish sentence 1j ke   . Repeat the alignment until all 
the sentences in the text block are aligned. 

(4) Align all the text blocks in paragraph pair 

( , )i iC E . If 1i I  , 1i i  , goto step (2), 
otherwise, the sentence alignment is finished. 

3.2 The selection of anchor sentence pairs 
We make use of anchor sentence pairs to prevent 
the spread of alignment errors, which often occur 
in the alignment method utilizing the length in-
formation. To select anchor sentence pair, we 
first determines Chinese anchor sentence, then 

87



find English anchor sentence according to Chi-
nese anchor sentence. To ensure the anchor sen-
tences is correct, Chinese anchor sentence must 
satisfy the following four conditions: (1) The 
anchor sentence is not the first sentence or the 
last sentence of the paragraph; (2) The alignment 
modes of the two sentences around the anchor 
sentence should be predicted as (1:1); (3) The 
length of anchor sentence should be less than the 
length threshold lTh ; (4) Two sentences around 
anchor sentence should have iTh  more charac-
ters than anchor sentence. Condition (1) is de-
fined because the anchor sentence has no func-
tion in alignment when it is first or last sentence. 
Conditions (2), (3) and (4) guarantee that corre-
sponding sentence of anchor Chinese sentence 
has the smallest length in surrounding sentences. 
After the Chinese anchor sentence is determined, 
the English sentence of highest alignment proba-
bility is selected as English anchor. To enhance 
the computation efficiency, we do not search 
English anchor sentences in all sentences of the 
English paragraph. Instead, we find the anchor 
sentence in a window whose size is wind and 
whose center is at position epos . Position epos  is 
the corresponding position of Chinese anchor 
sentence, calculated as formula (12).  

 
( )
( )e c

count Epos pos
count C

   (11) 

 
3,if count(E)<=12
5,if count(E)>12

window  


  (12) 

Wherein: count( ) denotes the sentence count 
of the paragraph *. 

4 Experiment 
4.1 Experimental setup 
The bilingual corpora used in the experiment are 
composed of Shi Ji and its corresponding English 
translations drawn from Records of the Grand 
Historian, which is well-recognized authoritative 
translation by famous sinologist Burton Watson. 
We extract 1233 sentence pairs as test corpora 
from 7 hereditary houses, which are The Heredi-
tary House of King Yuan of Ch'u, The Hereditary 
Houses of Ching and Yen, The Hereditary House 
of King Tao-hui of Ch'I, The Hereditary House 
of Prime Minister Hsiao, etc. We aligned manu-
ally 4144 sentence pairs to construct the parallel 
corpora as training corpora from five consecutive 
basic annals, which are Basic Annals of Qin, 
Basic Annals of the First Emperor of the Qin, 

Basic Annals of Hsiang Yü, Basic Annals of Em-
peror Kao-tsu and Basic Annals of Empress Lü. 
We extract 641 term translation pairs from the 
training corpora to calculate term alignment 
probability. The parameters of the proposed 
method are set as following: weigh parameters 

1 0.55,  2 0.45  , length threshold 12lTh  , 
interval threshold 5iTh  . 

Since we find corresponding translation for 
Chinese sentence one by one, almost all the sen-
tences can be aligned, the precision and recall of 
our method is nearly the same. We only employ 
precision p to test the method, which is as fol-
lows.  

 100%correct
align

P NN   (13) 

  Wherein: correctN  denotes the number of correct 
sentence pairs acquired by the proposed method, 

alignN  is the number of all the sentences acquired 
by the proposed method. 

4.2 Experimental results and analysis 
The method only using sentence length is em-
ployed as baseline method. To test the effect of 
mode prediction and anchors, we compare the 
performance the method not using mode predic-
tion, the method not using anchors with the pro-
posed method. The precision comparison of four 
methods is shown in table 1. 

 
Method Precision 
Baseline 60.5% 
Not using anchors 72.2% 
Not using mode prediction 86.8% 
The proposed method 92.5% 

Table 1: The precision comparison of four methods 
 

Table 1 shows that both the method not using 
mode prediction and the method not using an-
chor sentence pair, which all employ term align-
ment probability, outperform significantly base-
line method. This confirms the effectiveness of 
term alignment probability. It can be also seen 
from table 1 that the use of the anchors signifi-
cantly increases the precision about 20%. The 
experimental results demonstrate that the anchors 
can effectively prevent the error spread of the 
alignment method based on sentence length. The 
result also confirms the anchor sentence pairs we 
obtained are correct.  

In table 1, we can see that the mode prediction 
increases precision by 6%. In the conventional 
method, all the aligned sentences whether long or 

88



short have the same mode probability. It is un-
reasonable since long sentences prefer “one-to-
many” mode and short sentences tend to be “one-
to-one” mode. The proposed method extracts the 
mode probability for the sentence with different 
features based on the training corpora, and em-
ploy different alignment probability according to 
features of the aligned sentence, so the precision 
of the proposed method is higher. However, 
since the model probability prediction is not very 
accurate, sometimes wrong mode probability 
leads to alignment errors. This is why the role of 
model prediction is not as significant as we ex-
pect.  

5 Conclusion 
To construct bilingual term dictionary of histori-
cal classics, this paper proposes a sentence 
alignment method based on mode prediction and 
term translation pairs. The method first obtains 
the mode alignment probability according to the 
features of Chinese sentence, then performs sen-
tence alignment using length probability and 
term alignment probability. Furthermore, the 
method find anchor sentence pairs to prevent the 
spread of alignment errors. The sentence align-
ment experiment on “Shi Ji” confirms the effec-
tiveness of the proposed method. In the future, 
we can further improve classification accuracy of 
model predictions and apply the sentence align-
ment in the term translation extraction of histori-
cal classics. 

Acknowledgments 
This work is funded the National Science Foun-
dation of China (61402068, 61304206). 

Reference 
Chen, Xiang and Hong-fei Lin. 2009. Sentence 

Alignment of Bilingual Biomedical Abstract 
Based on Anchor Information. Journal Of Chinese 
Information Processing, 23(1): 58-62. 

Fattah, Mohamed Abdel, David B. Bracewell, et al. 
2007. Sentence alignment using P-NNT and GMM. 
Computer Speech and Language, 21: 594–608. 

Gale, William A. and Kenneth W. Church. 1993. A 
program for aligning sentences in bilingual 
corpora. Computational Linguistics, 19(1): 75- 
102. 

Lu, Xue-qiang, Qing-yin Li, et al. 2003. Sub-Sentence 
Alignment of Chinese-English Law Literature 
Based on Stat istical Approach. Journal of 
Northeastern University, 24(1): 23-26. 

Moore, Robert C. 2002. Fast and Accurate Sentence 
Alignment of Bilingual Corpora. In AMTA, 

Springer. 
Tian, Shengwei, Turgun Ibrahim, et al. 2009. Chinese-

Uighur sentence alignment based on hybrid 
strategy with mistake spread suppression. In 
International Conference on Environmental 
Science and Information Application Technology 
Wuhan, China, IEEE. 

Yu, Xin, Jian Wu, et al. 2010. Dictionary-based 
Chinese-Tibetan sentence alignment. In 
International Conference on Intelligent Computing 
and Integrated Systems (ICISS), Guilin, China. 

 

89


