


















































Some Structural Tests for Wordnets, with Results

Ahti Lohk
Tallinn University of Technology

Akadeemia tee 15a
Tallinn, Estonia

ahti.lohk@ttu.ee

Heili Orav
University of Tartu

Liivi 2
Tartu, Estonia

heili.orav@ut.ee

Leo Võhandu
Tallinn University of Technology

Akadeemia tee 15a
Tallinn, Estonia

leo.vohandu@ttu.ee

Abstract
This paper proposes some test-patterns
(viewed as sub-structures) to evaluate the
hierarchical structure of wordnets. By observ-
ing hierarchical structure, both top-down and
bottom-up experiments are carried out on four
wordnets: Princeton WordNet (version 3.1),
Cornetto (version 2.0), the Polish Wordnet
(version 2.0) and the Estonian Wordnet
(version 67). The top-down approach is used
to find small hierarchies, which are defined
as having up to three levels of subordinates
starting from unique beginners (rootsynsets).
The bottom-up perspective is looking at the
links that appear due to polysemy, and yet
these are not. These redundant links form
”asymmetric ring topology”, and should be
eliminated. Finally, an additional particu-
lar feature of large closed subsets will be
introduced. Addressed views provide an
opportunity to evaluate and/or improve the
structure of wordnet hierarchies. This paper
also provides an overview of the current status
of these four wordnets from the according to
our proposed test patterns.

1 Introduction

No linguist doubts the importance of wordnets.
There are currently about 60 different wordnets
worldwide. There are different views on the
amount of information that is put into the system
of synsets. But Miller and Fellbaum’s primary
goal, to create a large hypernym/hyponym rela-
tional style synset system is the same everywhere.
Groups of specialists are involved in every imple-
mentation of wordnet for a given language. Every
specialist has her/his subjective view about the re-
lational connections between synsets.

It is important that every team has a strong be-
lief in the high quality of the system they have cre-
ated.

The theory and practice of building and check-
ing computer chips with many millions of ele-
ments has proven that one has to build an indepen-
dent test system to check designer created connec-
tions. As wordnets are similarly complex systems,
we aim to build such a test system for wordnets.

The task of tests is to create lists of different
types of inconsistencies which any Wordnet has
at the given moment. Structural inconsistencies
do not always translate to a wordnet error. The
last word in checking wordnet lists always belongs
to a lexicographer. What is truly crucial is that
such lists are comprehensive. Tests must check all
structurally weak areas of a given wordnet at any
given moment.

After a lexicographer has made needed correc-
tions, there follows a repetition of the same test.
Such an iterative process has only one goal – to
come to a clear understanding of all the weak
places a given test can find.

Every created test has a different power. Some
tests point with 100% probability to an error made
by a lexicographer, although the error rate is usu-
ally below 100%. Such tests also have an impor-
tant lexicographic value, as a long list of inconsis-
tencies usually points to a complicated linguistic
problem lacking a unique solution.

In this article we study only hyper-
nym/hyponym relations.

2 Background of the wordnets

2.1 Princeton WordNet (PrWN)

Wordnets (Fellbaum, 1998) have emerged as one
of the basic standard lexical resources in the
language technology field. Princeton WordNet
(PrWN) and most other wordnets are structured
into synsets. A synset is usually described as cap-
turing a lexicalised concept. Synsets are linked by
conceptual relations with names borrowed from
linguistic work on lexical semantics, such as hy-
pernymy, holonymy, meronymy and so on.

More than 60 languages followed suit for build-
ing wordnets for their vernacular and very dif-
ferent compilation strategies have been applied.
Some teams have decided to translate PrWN and
adjust the result of that translation. Some word-



net developers have chosen an opposite route, such
as expanding from the most frequent words or
from top concepts as it has seen in ontological ap-
proaches.

The following is a brief introductory description
of three databases from the Fenno-Ugric language
family, and the Germanic and Slavic branches of
the Indo-European language family.

2.2 Cornetto

The goal of Cornetto1 was to build a lexical se-
mantic database for Dutch, following the structure
and content of Wordnet and FrameNet. Cornetto
comprises information from two electronic dictio-
naries: the Referentie Bestand Nederlands, which
contains FrameNet-like structures, and the Dutch
wordnet (DWN) which utilises typical wordnet
structures. DWN has a similar structure as the
English WordNet although the top-level hierar-
chy was developed from an ontological framework
and more horizontal relations are defined. The
database has 70,371 synsets and 119,108 lexical
units.

2.3 Polish Wordnet (plWN)

Work on PolNet began in 2005 (Derwojedowa,
2008), and its thesaurus is currently composed of
nearly 116,000 synonym sets. The plWN develop-
ment was organised in an incremental way, start-
ing with general and frequently used vocabulary.
The most frequent words from a reference corpus
of the Polish language were selected.

2.4 Estonian Wordnet (EstWN)

The Estonian Wordnet began as part of the Eu-
roWordNet project (Vossen, 1998), and was built
by translating base concepts from English to al-
low monolingual extension. Words (literals) to be
included were selected on frequency basis from
corpora. Extensions have been compiled manu-
ally from Estonian monolingual dictionaries and
other monolingual resources. After the start sev-
eral methods have been used, for example domain-
specific, i.e there have been dealt with semantic
fields like architecture, transportation etc, there are
some endeavors to add derivatives automatically
and the results have been used of sense disam-
biguation process. Version 67 of EstWN consists
of 60,434 synsets, including 82,515 words.

1http://www2.let.vu.nl/oz/cltl/
cornetto/index.html

3 Related works

The most similar research to our paper has been
done by Tom Richens, who has studied the anoma-
lies in the WordNet verb hierarchies (Richens,
2008). Under the notion of topological anoma-
lies, he notes three types of sub-structures in the
hierarachical structure of WordNet that should be
checked: “cycles”, “rings” (these in turn are clas-
sified into “asymmetric ring topology” and “sym-
metric ring topology”) and “dual inheritance”. He
emphasizes that if “dual ineritance” (which also
includes “asymmetric ring topology” and “sym-
metric ring topology”) appears, it merits investi-
gation.

In his paper, Richens refers to the work of Pavel
Smrž (Smrž, 2004) and Yang Liu (Liu, 2004).
Smrž proposes twenty-seven tests for quality con-
trol in wordnet development. In most cases these
tests are dealing with editing errors like “empty
ID, POS, SYNONYM, SENSE (XML validation)”
or “duplicate literals in one synset”, but some of
them are errors of hierarchical structure, like “cy-
cles”, “dangling uplinks”, “structural difference
from PWN and other wordnets”, “multi-parent re-
lations”.

Lin proves and refers to two kind of hyper-
nymy faults in WordNet (about version 2.0): rings
and isolators, and asserts that “In the future, some
amendments should be made to solve these issues
during the evolution of WordNet” (Liu, 2004).

Research about quality and evaluation of Word-
Net are made also by Aron N. Kaplan et al.
(Kaplan, 2001), Philippe Martin (Martin, 2003),
Raghuvar Nadig (Nadig, 2008) and Tomáš Čapek
(Čapek, 2012).

4 Top-down view, small hierarchies

A top-down view of the structure will begin walk-
ing through the unique beginner separating all hi-
erarchical structures (see Fig. 2), which end af-
ter the root of the concept on three next levels.
This view can be useful for detecting small hier-
archies that have somehow remained unconnected
to a higher hierarchy. A large number of small hi-
erarchies points to a lack of feedback (see Table
1).

PrWN was originally constructed with 25
unique beginners (rootsynset). These rootsynsets
were later connected to a single unique beginner
labeled ”entity” (Miller, 2007). From Table 1, it
can be seen that in the PrWN there are only 11

http://www2.let.vu.nl/oz/cltl/cornetto/index.html
http://www2.let.vu.nl/oz/cltl/cornetto/index.html


Table 1: Number of rootsynsets and number of
hierarchies that have only up to three additional
levels of subordinates. (Numbers in brackets are
about parts of speech as it is shown in every Word-
Net database.)

noun root synsets with one additional level of hi-
erarchy, which is probably either due to human er-
ror, or unfinished work.

According to Table 1, Cornetto has only two
noun and two verb hierarchies. That shows that
every added synset is located directly into a large
hierarchy. (Rootsynsets for the nouns are iets:2
and niets:1, translated as ”something” and ”noth-
ing”.)

The much smaller number of Estonian Word-
net’s rootsynsets (169) is due to the fact that the
team has gradually started to take into account
the specific nature of the information obtained by
structural tests. For example, in version 65, the
number of rootsynsets was 303. Most of the de-
crease in rootsynsets is due to the fall of noun root-
sysets has been reduced from 248 to 129.

It may be wise to take advantage of the low
number of verb root concepts of EstWN to im-
prove other wordnets’ verb hierarchies. This is
certainly the case when the number of root con-
cepts is too big.

The number of small hierarchies can be reduced
considerably trying to locate them in the bigger
hierarchy. This approach is a particular issue in

the noun and verb trees.

Figure 1: Small hierarchies. Rootsynsets with one
additional level.

5 Bottom-up view, asymmetric ring
topology

In this view, we are moving from lower level
synsets to higher ones starting from synsets with
many parents and separating substructures where
such synsets are related to other synset directly
and indirectly (see Fig. 2). The resulting subset
is also referred to as a asymmetric ring topology
(Richens, 2008) (see Table 2). This sub-structure
may occur if lexicographers have created a new,
more precise link to another synset, forgot to re-
move the previous relation. In this case one synset
is connected to hypernym-synsets twice - directly
and indirectly through other hypernym-synset (see
Fig. 2)

6 The Largest Closed Subset (LGS)

LGS in hierarchical structures has been regarded
as a coherent bipartite graph (Lohk, 2013).



Table 2: Synsets with many parents and asymmet-
ric ring topology numerically

Figure 2: Asymmetric ring topology seen in Cor-
netto

In many cases LGS seems to be like particular
feature of the hierarchical structure that links dif-
ferent hierarchical structures started from unique
beginners. It is remarkable that in many cases the
upper base of the bipartite graph consists of root-
synsets (see Table 3). Authors think that this con-
flict arises because the concepts of the root level
are put to the same level with non-roots.

In Figure 3 an artificially constructed hierachi-
cal structure with one unique beginner (root node)
has been shown. Closed subsets are highlighted by
rectangles. Our interest is to find only the biggest
ones, this is possible when a closed subsynset has
at least two parents (represented with thick lines).

According to Figure 3 and Table 3 lower nodes
in a closed subset are related to the first number in
the second column of the table and upper nodes in
a closed subset are related to the second number
also in the second column of the table.

In the case of PrWN, every upper base synset
in the bipartite graph belongs to the synset ”en-
tity;” in the case of Cornetto, to ”iets:2” (in eng:
”something”); and in the case of EstWN into
”olev” (in eng: essive). Cornetto has one more
large closed subset, related to verbs. As can be
see in Table 1, the overall number of verb hi-

Figure 3: Artifically constructed tree of the Word-
Net with closed subsets

Table 3: The largest closed subsets

erarchy is two and second big closed subset of
Cornetto (in Table 3) connects these two (root
synsets {afspelen:1, gebeuren:1, ..} and {zijn:7,
uitmaken:2, vormen:5}).

While PrWN is obviously the most studied (see
WordNet bibliography2) and Cornetto has a com-
mercial version3, it can be assumed that their hier-
archical structure has received more attention (see
Table 3, the number of rootsynsets in closed subset
is in the case of PrWN and Cornetto 0).

Earlier tests with the Slovenian Wordnet (ver-
sion 3.0) showed that a very large closed set may
not be typical for all wordnets. It turned out that
the largest closed subset size in this case was only
248 x 3.

LGS and closed subsets with many hypeonyms
may be generally useful if the hypernyms in the
upper base of closed sets are separated and their
levels of concept are evaluated. Additionally, LGS
seems to indicate the correctness (or uncorrect-
ness) of the hierarchical structure, although this

2http://lit.csci.unt.edu/˜wordnet/
3http://tst-centrale.org/nl/producten/

lexica/cornetto/7-56

http://lit.csci.unt.edu/~wordnet/
http://tst-centrale.org/nl/producten/lexica/cornetto/7-56
http://tst-centrale.org/nl/producten/lexica/cornetto/7-56


claim has not been definitively verified.

7 Discussion and Conclusion

The most difficult issue for wordnet compilers
with regard to noun hierarchical relationships is to
find the top hypernyms. The same also occurs in
regard to finding the top concepts for the most fre-
quent verbs, both transitive and intransitive. As
for adjectives, the situation is even more unclear,
as wordnets for various languages deal with ad-
jectives differently. In some wordnets, adjectives
are hierarchical (as seen in Table 1: Cornetto, Es-
tWN), but in PWN, adjectives have different types
of” semantic connections.

One analyses only the short hierarchies in all
wordnet variants, (root level plus up to 3 lower
levels) one comes to the realisation that new add-
ons for wordnets have created a situation in which
missing feedback has lost the information required
to correctly connect synsets.

All wordnets studied here show that the expan-
sion process requires strong and effective feed-
back.

As is made clear by Table 1, in the top-down
perspective, three of the four wordnets studied
here require either verb or noun hierarchy correc-
tion. However, as Cornetto has only two hier-
archies for nouns and verbs, it has somehow ex-
cluded small hierarchies. This shows that Cornet-
tos team is using different tools or/and ways for
add-ons.

References

Magdalena Derwojedowa, Maciej Piasecki, Stanislaw
Szpakowicz, Magdalena Zawislawska and Bartosz
Broda. 2008. Words, Concepts and Relations in
the Construction of Polish WordNet In Proceedings
of the Fourth Global WordNet Conference - GWC
2008. pp: 162–177.

Tomáš Čapek. 2012. SENEQA – System for Qual-
ity Testing of Wordnet Data. Proceedings of 6th
International Global Wordnet Conference. Matsue,
Japan, 9-13 January 2012. pp: 400-404.

Christiane D. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet An Electronic
Lexical Database Cambridge, Massachusetts, Lon-
don, England: The MIT Press

Aaron N. Kaplan and Lenhart K. Schubert. 2001.
Measuring and improving the quality of world
knowledge extracted from WordNet. University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY.

Yang Liu, Jiangsheng Yu, Zhengshan Wen and Shiwen
Yu. 2004. Two Kinds of Hypernymy Faults in Word-
Net: the Cases of Ring and Isolator. Proceedings
of the Second Global WordNet Conference. Brno,
Czech Republic, 20-23 January 2004. pp: 347-351.

Ahti Lohk, Ottokar Tilk and Leo Võhandu . 2013.
How to Create Order in Large Closed Subsets of
WordNet-type Dictionaries Estonian Papers in Ap-
plied Linguistics 9 pp: 149–160.

Philippe Martin. 2003. Correction and extension of
WordNet 1.7 Conceptual Structures for Knowledge
Creation and Communication: Springer. pp: 160–
173.

George A. Miller. and Christiane D. Fellbaum. 2007.
WordNet then and now Lang Resources & Evalua-
tion, Volume 41, Issue 2. pp: 209–214.

Nadig Raghuvar, Ramanand J and Bhattacharyya Push-
pak. 2008. Automatic Evaluation of Wordnet Syn-
onyms and Hypernyms Proceedings of ICON-2008:
6th International Conference of Natural Language
Processing.

Tom Richens. 2008. Anomalies in the wordnet verb hi-
erarchy Proceedings of the 22nd Inter-national Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics: COLING-
ACL 2008. pp: 729–736.

Piek Vossen. 1998. EuroWordNet: A Multilingual
Database with Lexical Semantic Networks Dor-
drecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Pavel Smrž. 2004. Quality Control for Wordnet Devel-
opment. Proceedings of the Second Global WordNet
Conference. Brno, Czech Republic, 20-23 January
2004. pp: 206-212.


	Introduction
	Background of the wordnets
	Princeton WordNet (PrWN)
	Cornetto
	Polish Wordnet (plWN)
	Estonian Wordnet (EstWN)

	Related works
	Top-down view, small hierarchies
	Bottom-up view, asymmetric ring topology
	The Largest Closed Subset (LGS)
	Discussion and Conclusion

