



















































A Semi-Automated Method of Network Text Analysis Applied to 150 Original Screenplays


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Social Dynamics and Personal Attributes in Social Media, pages 68–76,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, 27 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Semi-Automated Method of Network Text Analysis Applied to 150 

Original Screenplays 

Starling David Hunter III 

Carnegie Mellon University 

Tepper School of Business 

starling@andrew.cmu.edu 

 

 

Abstract 

In this paper I apply a novel method of network 

text analysis to a sample of 150 original 

screenplays. That sample is divided evenly be-

tween unproduced, original screenplays (n = 

75) and those that were nominated for Best 

Original Screenplay by either the Academy of 

Motion Picture Arts & Sciences or by major 

film critics associations (n = 75). As predicted, 

I find that the text networks derived from un-

produced screenplays are significantly less 

complex, i.e. they contain fewer concepts 

(nodes) and statements (links). Unexpectedly, I 

find that those same networks are more cohe-

sive, i.e. they  exhibit higher density and core-

ness. 

1 Introduction 

Diesner & Carley (2005, p. 83) employ the term 

network text analysis (NTA) to describe a wide 

variety of “computer supported solutions” that 

enable analysts to “extract networks of concepts” 

from texts and to discern the “meaning” repre-

sented or encoded therein. The key underlying 

assumption of such methods or solutions, they 

assert, is that the “language and knowledge” em-

bodied in a text may be “modeled” as a network 

“of words and the relations between them ” (ibid, 

emphasis added).  A second important assump-

tion is that the position of concepts within a text 

network provides insight into the meaning or 

prominent themes of the text as a whole.  

Broadly considered, creating networks from 

texts has two basic steps: (1) the assignment of 

words and phrases to conceptual categories and 

(2) the assignment of links to pairs of those cate-

gories. Approaches to NTA differ with regard to 

how these steps are performed, as well as to the 

level of automation or computer support, the lin-

guistic unit of analysis (e.g. noun or verbs), and 

the degree and basis of concept generalization.  
In the social sciences, several studies in the last 

two decades have linked the structural properties 

of text networks to measures of individual, 

group/team, and organizational performance 

(Nadkarni & Narayaran, 2005). The quantitative 

empirical literature on this topic can be divided 

into two groups or streams—educational psy-

chology (EP) and managerial and organizational 

cognition (MOC). The former typically links 

structural properties of text networks abstracted 

from documents like exams and case analyses to 

academic performance and learning outcomes. 

The latter abstracts text networks from reports 

generated by firm’s managers, e.g. letters to 

shareholders and 10-K filings, and links those 

properties directly or indirectly to firm perfor-

mance.   

Across both streams, the structural properties 

of networks that have been examined fall into 

three broad categories—measures of complexity 

or size, measures of cohesion or connectedness, 

and measures of centrality or concentration. An-

other point of consensus concerns the underlying 

relationships from which the text networks are 

constructed. Most of the quantitative and empiri-

cal studies have relied upon logical relationships 

among concepts in documents for that purpose. 

These relationships include, but are not limited 

to, dependence, chronology, similarity, function-

ality, causality, and composition (Popping, 2003, 

pp. 94-5). The second and less commonly used 

type of relationship involves the co-occurrence 

of concepts within a user-defined window (e.g. 

Carley, 1997). Notably, grammatical and lexical 

relationships have received no attention in the 

empirical literature. However, Hunter (in press) 

recently described a “novel”, semi-automated 

method of network text analysis whereby multi-

morphemic compounds (e.g. abbreviations, acro-

nyms, blend words, clipped words, and com-

pound words) in a text are linked via shared ety-

mological roots. He applied that method to sam-

ple of seven recent winners of the Academy 

Award for Best Original Screenplay and found 

that the most centrally-positioned words in five 

of the seven networks corresponded very closely 

to the themes contained in the films’ synopses 

68



found on Wikipedia, IMDb and Rotten Toma-

toes. 

This study represents the first application of 

Hunter’s method to a sample of screenplays of 

sufficient size to permit multivariate statistical 

analysis. The specific aim of the study is to ex-

amine the relationship between text networks’ 

properties and performance outcomes. To that 

end, I herein develop and test two falsifiable hy-

potheses concerning that relationship on a sam-

ple of 150 contemporary screenplays—half win-

ners and nominees of major awards and the other 

half unproduced screenplays obtained from two 

online screenplay portals. Consistent with the 

prior literature I find that the more favorably rat-

ed screenplays—i.e. the award winners and nom-

inees—have significantly larger text networks 

than the unproduced ones. Unexpectedly, I find 

that text networks of these screenplays exhibit 

significantly lower cohesiveness, i.e. lower den-

sity and coreness.  

The remainder of this paper is organized as 

follows. In section 2, Theory & Hypotheses, I 

summarize the relevant social science literature 

on text network properties and performance and 

formulate two hypotheses concerning that rela-

tionship. In the third section, Data & Methods, I 

describe the data set and the method for con-

structing the text networks for each screenplay in 

the sample. In the fourth section, Results & Dis-

cussion, I report the level of statistical support 

found for each hypothesis and discuss the impli-

cation of the results for current and future re-

search in this area. 

2 Theory & Hypotheses 

Figure 1, below, is adapted from Carley (1997) 

and it is typical of many network representations 

of texts. The network itself was constructed from 

the following two sentences:  “Organizations use 

information systems to handle data. Information 

is processed by organizations who are interested 

in locating behavioral trends.”  

Several things about the network are note-

worthy. First, observe that there are seven con-

cepts depicted as nodes in the network, each of 

which appears only once. They are “organiza-

tions”, “information systems”, “process”, “in-

formation”, “interested”, “locating”, and 

“trends.”  Second, see that there are also seven 

statements, i.e. pairs of concepts: (1) “infor-

mation systems” and “process”  (2) “information 

systems” and “organizations” (3) “process”  and 

‘information” (4) “process” and “organizations” 

(5) “interested”  and “organizations” (6) “inter-

ested” and “locating” and (7) “locating” and 

“trends.” Third, note that the map itself is com-

prised of the network formed by all seven state-

ments. Typically, the analyst must read some or 

all of the statements in a map in order to extract 

the meaning of the text as a whole. In this regard, 

it is then notable that the seven concepts are im-

plicated in varying numbers of statements. Spe-

cifically, the concepts labeled “organization” and 

“process” are found in three statements while all 

other concepts are found in either two or one. 

 

Figure1: A Simple Text Network 

(adapted from Carley, 1997) 

 
In the social science literature, the most 

widely-investigated structural property of text 

networks are the number of concepts and the 

number of links between pairs of concepts. For 

example, Calori, Johnson & Sarnin (1994) stud-

ied the moderating effects of “environmental 

complexity”, i.e. the scope of the organization as 

measured by the number of distinct businesses 

and geographic segments,  on the relationship 

between  the “cognitive complexity of the chief 

executive” and firm performance. One of their 

measures of cognitive complexity  was the num-

ber of concepts abstracted from interviews with 

each CEO about their firm’s environment. They 

hypothesized that cognitive maps of CEOs of 

more diverse firms had more “comprehensive”, 

i.e. larger, cognitive maps than CEOs of more 

focused firms.  This hypothesis was NOT sup-

ported. However, they also hypothesized that 

cognitive maps of CEOs in firms with greater 

international geographic scope would contain 

more concepts. This hypothesis was supported. 

Nadkarni (2003, p. 336) employed the term 

“comprehensiveness” to refer to the “number of 

concepts in a mental model.” In a study of stu-

dents exposed to three different instructional 

methods, he hypothesized and found (1) signifi-

cant differences in the comprehensiveness of the 

69



mental models of students of student across 

methods and (2) greater comprehensiveness in 

said models among students with low-learning 

maturity who were exposed to a “hybrid” method 

of instruction, i.e. a mix of lecture-discussion and 

experiential learning.  

Nadkarni & Narayaran (2005) examined the 

relationship of two measures of “complexity”—

the number of concepts and the number of state-

ments—on learning outcomes. Specifically, they 

reported a positive relationship between the 

number of concepts and links found in “text-

based causal maps” abstracted from students’ 

written case analyses and their course grades. 

Carley (1997) compared the mental models 

of eight project teams, each with 4-6 members, 

enrolled in an information systems project course 

at a private university. Each team was required to 

“analyze a client’s need and then design and 

build an information system to meet that need 

within one semester.” Five of these teams were 

eventually deemed successful and three were not. 

At three points during the semester, each team 

was required to provide responses to two open-

ended questions—“What is an information sys-

tem?” and “What leads to information system 

success or failure?” Their answers were coded 

and used as data. On average, the “cognitive 

maps” of the members of successful groups had 

significantly more concepts and more statements 

(links) compared to maps by members of non-

successful groups. In light of the aforementioned 

studies, the first hypothesis (H1) is that network 

complexity, measured as the number of concepts 

and/or links, is positively related to performance. 

As a class, measures of network cohesion in-

dicate the degree to which the nodes in a network 

are connected to one another. Common measures 

of cohesion include, but are not limited to, densi-

ty, fragmentation, connectedness, average path 

distance, and diameter (Borgatti, Everett, and 

Freeman, 2002). But while many such measures 

exist, very few empirical studies have directly 

examined the linkage between the cohesion in 

text networks and measures of performance. One 

such study is Nadkarni & Narayaran’s (2005) 

aforementioned analysis of text-based causal 

maps abstracted from business case studies. They 

hypothesized and found network density—

measured as the ratio of the number of links to 

the number of possible links—to be positively 

related to three measures of academic perfor-

mance—test grades, case analysis grades, and 

class participation scores.  

A second such study is Bodin’s (2012) inves-

tigation of “university physics student’s epistem-

ic framing when solving and visualizing a  phys-

ics problem using a particle-spring model sys-

tem” (p. 1). In that study, concept networks were 

developed from two sets of interview transcripts 

where students described the task and (physics) 

problem they were about to solve, as well as their 

planned strategies for solving the problem. An 

analysis of networks drawn prior to and right 

after completion of the assignment revealed a 

24% increase in the number of concepts, a 71% 

increase in the number of links, and 12% in-

crease in network density. While all of these 

quantities were in the predicted direction, no sta-

tistical significance was indicated. Still, the exist-

ing empirical evidence suggests network density 

is positively related to performance.  And be-

cause various network cohesion measures are 

closely related conceptually—and can be strong-

ly correlated, as well (Borgatti, Everett, 

&Johnson, 2014)—then it is more appropriate to 

phrase the second hypothesis (H2) in more gen-

eral terms, i.e. that  network cohesion is positive-

ly related to performance. 

3 Methods & Data  

As indicated in the preceding section, the empiri-

cal literature has been focused on two kinds of 

texts—student assignments and firm reporting—

and two kinds of performance—grades and fi-

nancial performance. But there is nothing inher-

ent in these network text analytic methods that 

limits investigation to the texts mentioned above. 

Nor has any of the research reviewed indicated 

otherwise. That said, a number of specific ration-

ales motivated the selection of screenplays, in 

general, and original screenplays in particular. 

First, screenplays are highly structured texts, 

both logically and temporally, with the three-act 

structure in screenwriting being a prime example 

(Field, 1998). Second, there exists a large, wide-

ly-read, and broadly-disseminated body of 

knowledge concerning the theory and best prac-

tice of screenwriting (e.g. Snyder, 2005; McKee, 

2010; Field, 2007). Third, screenplays are care-

fully evaluated by many interested parties on 

numerous dimensions, not the least of which are 

commercial success and artistic merit (Simonton, 

2005; Pardoe & Simonton 2008). Finally, the 

performance of their authors is discrete and quite 

unambiguous: more than 15,000 screenplays are 

registered in the US each year with the Writer’s 

Guild of America but fewer than 700 get “green-

70



lighted” and are subsequently produced (Eliash-

berg, Elberse, & Enders, 2006). Further, those 

screenplays that do get “green-lighted” either 

garner awards or critical acclaim or they do not 

(Simonton, 2004, 2005).  

Somewhat surprisingly, textual analyses of 

screenplays are relatively rare when compared to 

analyses of other literary forms such as novels, 

plays, and poetry. The only studies of which I am 

aware that links textual variables of screenplays 

to performance are those by  Elishaberg, Hui, & 

Zhang (2007, 2014) whose kernel-based ap-

proach to the study of 300 movies released be-

tween 1995 and 2010 significantly predicted Re-

turn on investment, i.e. box office revenues as a 

percentage of budget. The present study repre-

sents the first attempt to link textual measures of 

screenplays to a non-financial-related perfor-

mance measure.  

Screenplays contained in the sample were ob-

tained from a variety of sources. The oldest and 

most prestigious awards in American cinema are 

the Academy Awards, aka the “Oscars” (Os-

borne, 1989) and several studies have been done 

explaining their artistic and commercial im-

portance (e.g., Krauss, Nan, Simon, et al, 2008; 

Lee, 2009; Simonton, 2004). Academy Award 

nominated and winning screenplays are routinely 

studied by aspiring screenwriters (New York 

Film Academy, 2014) and widely available 

online either for free (Simply Scripts, 2014) or 

purchase (Script Fly, 2014). Winners and nomi-

nees of other awards are often available online, 

as are the screenplays of films which garner no 

particular artistic acclaim. There are, as well,  

numerous online forums, websites, and blogs 

devoted to their discussion and analysis. Moreo-

ver, the screenplays for award-nominated, award-

winning, and critically-acclaimed films are usu-

ally made available by their producers or studios 

during the award season, but not all of them re-

main so. In this study, the “produced” or high-

performing sample of screenplays are of two 

kinds. The first consists of nominees and winners 

of the Academy Award for Best Original Screen-

play. Five screenplays are nominated each year 

making for a potential sample of 40 screenplays. 

However, two screenplays by Woody Allen—

Blue Jasmine and Midnight in Paris—were not 

available. Another five nominees whose films 

were all or partially in foreign-languages were 

also excluded—Pan’s Labyrinth (Spanish), 

Amour (French), A Separation (Farsi), Babel 

(Arabic, English, Spanish, and Japanese), and 

Letters from Iwo Jima (Japanese). Thus there 

were 32 remaining Academy Award nominated 

screenplays for films released in the years 2006-

2013.  

Another fifty-two (52) screenplays were nom-

inated in the years 2006-13 for Best Original 

Screenplay by the 32 regional members of the 

American Film Critics Association, e.g. the New 

York, Washington D.C., and San Francisco Film 

Critics Circles. Several of these were not com-

mercially or otherwise available. These include 

Upstream Color, The Tree of Life, Frances Ha, 

World’s End, Sound of My Voice, United 93, and 

Stranger than Fiction.  Toy Story 3 was excluded 

because, while an original screenplay, it was part 

of a film franchise. The South African film Black 

Book was excluded, as well, because it was not in 

English. The remaining 43 screenplays were ob-

tained. Thus there was a total of 75 screenplays 

contained in the produced and thus “high-

performing” category. 

Another 75 unproduced screenplays were 

randomly selected from two online screenplay 

databases—Simply Scripts and Trigger Street 

Labs. The former hosts pages within its site titled 

“Unproduced Scripts” where screenwriters are 

invited to upload their screenplays. Trigger Street 

Labs is a portal maintained by actor Kevin Spac-

ey’s Trigger Street Productions. It allows writers 

to post original short stories, short films, and 

screenplays. Thirty-eight (38) screenplays posted 

between January 1, 2006 and December 31
st
, 

2013 and between 100 and 140 pages were ran-

domly selected from both sites. One was then 

selected at random and eliminated, making the 

total number of unproduced screenplays seventy-

five (75). 

Diesner (2012) outlines four steps for the cre-

ation of a text network—(1) Selection (2) Ab-

straction (3) Relation and (4) Extraction. The 

first step involves identification of those words 

that will be subjected to subsequent analysis and 

the elimination of those that will not. Following 

Hunter (in press), this stage involved retention of 

all multi-morphemic compounds comprised of 

two or more free (unbound) morphemes. These 

included, but were not limited to, closed and hy-

phenated compound words, clipped words, blend 

words or portmanteau, and all acronyms, anacro-

nyms, abbreviations, and initialisms.  

Also included were selected instances of con-

version, certain prefixes and suffixes, plus se-

lected multi-word compounds and infixes,  Ex-

amples are shown in Table 1 below. And though 

it may seem otherwise, this is no random group-

ing. Rather, they comprise a well-defined, inter-

71



related set that is extensively-studied in the field 

of morphology.  Specifically, they all belong to 

the branch of morphology known as word-

formation, the study of creation of new or “nov-

el” words principally through changes in their 

form (Wisniewski, 2007). 

Because no existing text mining software se-

lects these groups words from a text, the process 

for identifying them was only semi-automated 

with the help of  a software program called Au-

tomap 3.0.10 (Carley, 2001-2013). 

 

Table 1: Examples of 12 Types of Novel 

Words in the Sample 

 
Type Examples 

Compounding >Closed 

Compounds 

briefcase, cowboy, 

deadline,  handcuffs, 
inmate 

Compounding >Copula-

tive compounds 

attorney-client,  

actor/model 

Compounding > Open 
Compounds 

post office, fire alarm 

Compounding >Hyphen-
ated Compounds 

open-minded, panic-
stricken, tree-lined 

Compounding > Multi-

word Compounds 

Over-the-top, jack-in-

the-box, sister-in-law  

Derivation > Affixation> 

Prefix 

understand, overdrive, 

overhand, underhanded 

Derivation > Affixation> 

Suffix 

awesome, hardware, 

software, clockwise 

Derivation > Affixation> 

Infix 

Unbloodybelievable,  

fanbloomingtastic 

Derivation > non-
Affixation> Abbreviations, 

Acronyms 

DMV, MTV, FBI, 
VCR, Yuppie, radar, 

scuba, laser 

Derivation> non-

Affixation> Blend Words 

medevac, motel, guess-

timate, camcorder, 

helipad 

Derivation> non-

Affixation> Clipped Words 

Internet, hi-fi, email, 

slo-mo, vid-com 

Derivation> non-

Affixation> Conversion 

eyeball; photoshop 

 

The process was as follows. First the screen-

play was converted to a text file and uploaded to 

Automap. After removing single letters, extra 

spaces, and spurious characters, two routines 

were run within Automap—Identify Possible Ac-

ronyms and Concept List. The former routine 

identified and extracted all words that were capi-

talized. Several of these turned out to acronyms 

or abbreviations. The latter routine used was 

Concept List (Per Text) which generated a list of 

all unique words for each text. Excluded from 

consideration were all proper nouns (Green 

Zone, Hollywood), place and organization names 

(South Pole, Scotland Yard, Burger King), prod-

uct names (Land Rover), holidays (New Year’s 

Eve, Christmas Eve), as well as any other word 

or phrase connoting a specific person, place, or 

thing through capitalization. Also eliminated 

were all instances of screenplay and film jargon, 

e.g. ECU (extreme close-up), off-screen, VO 

(voice-over) and POV (point of view), as well as 

multi-word exclamations and interjections such 

as good night, goodbye, OMG (oh my God), etc. 

The second of the four steps of constructing a 

text network involves abstraction of the selected 

multi-morphemic compounds to higher-order 

concepts. In this study, each of the free (un-

bound) morphemes in each compound was as-

signed to its etymological root, typically the In-

do-European, Latin, or Greek (Watkins, 2011). 

By definition, from every etymological root 

descends or originates at least one word, other-

wise it is not a root. That relationship is genitive, 

i.e. a relational case typically expressing source, 

possession, or partition. It is hierarchical and di-

rected—from the root (parent) to word (descend-

ent). Thus, in the third step of network construc-

tion, two or more etymological roots were linked 

or related when words (free morphemes) de-

scending from them co-occurred within the same 

word, as the following examples demonstrates. 

Consider a text that contains the following 

nine words: the closed compound words man-

power, sunlight, southwestern, and gentlemen; 

the open compounds vesper rose, and native 

tongue; the hyphenated compound solar-

powered self-possessed; and the proper noun 

Secretary General.  As shown in Table 2, below, 

these words are all multi-morphemic compounds, 

each element of which descends from two differ-

ent etymological roots. 

 

Table 2: Selected Indo-European Roots and 

their Derivatives (Watkins, 2011) 

Roots (definition) Selected Derivatives 

wes-pero- (evening) West, Visigoth, vesper 

wrod- (rose) rose, julep, rhodium 

dnghu- (tongue) tongue, language,   linguist 

leuk- (light, brightness) light, lux, illumination, 

lunar, luster, illustrate, lucid, 

man-1 (man) man, mannequin, mensch 

poti (powerful; lord) possess, power, possible, 
potent, and pasha 

saewel (the sun) sun, south, solar, solstice 

gene- (to give birth) gender, general, gene, geni-

us, engine, genuine, gentle, 
pregnant, nation,  native. 

s(w)e- (self) self, suicide, secede, secret, 

secure, sever, sure, sober, 
sole, idiom, and idiot. 

 

72



Figure 2: A Text Network Based on Etymological Relationships among Selected Multi-

morphemic Compounds Contained in Table 1 

 

 
Recall that a statement in NTA is comprised 

of two concepts and the relationship that links 

them. In Figure 2, above, each of these words 

appears on the link between the two etymological 

roots—the concepts—that co-occur within the 

word. Put another way, the relationship is the co-

occurrence of two different etymological roots in 

the same multi-morphemic compound or multi-

word expression—co-occurrence in what is es-

sentially a window of one word. For example, 

the etymological roots gene- (to give birth; be-

get)  and man-1 (man) are linked by their co-

occurrence in the compound word gentleman. 

Taken together, that word and those two roots 

comprise a statement.  And as shown below, it is 

possible to construct an entire map or network 

from these interconnected statements. Specifical-

ly, that network is comprised of eight concepts—

namely, the Indo-European roots dnghu-, gene-, 

man1, s(w)e-, poti-, saewel-, leuk, wrod- and 

wes-pero—and the nine multi-morphemic com-

pounds—native tongue, gentleman, Secretary 

General, self-possessed, manpower, solar power, 

sunlight, vesper rose, and southwestern. 

A similar approach was used to constructing 

text networks for each of the 150 screenplays in 

the sample. Specifically, after matching all of the 

above classes of multi-morphemic compounds to 

their corresponding etymological roots, all pairs 

of roots for each screenplay were converted into 

a symmetrical matrix which was then uploaded 

into version 6.487 of the UCINet software pro-

gram (Borgatti, Everett, and Freeman, 2002). 

Text networks were then generated using version 

2.118 of the NetDraw software program embed-

ded in UCINet. Figure 3, below, is depicted main 

component of the text network for the screenplay 

of Zero Dark Thirty. which was nominated for 

Best Original Screenplay in 2012. The main 

component is the largest group of mutually-

reachable nodes in a network. Note that the node 

labels are etymological roots, typically Indo-

European (Watkins, 2011) In the case of words 

with non-Indo-European roots, the base form of 

the component of the multi-morphemic com-

pound is used. 

The fourth stage involves the extraction of 

meaning from the completed text network. But 

since the investigation of meaning is not a part of 

this analysis, it is excluded from further consid-

eration. See Hunter (in press) for a detailed dis-

cussion and examples. Table 3, below, summa-

rizes some basic statistics and network metrics 

for the 150 screenplays in the sample. 

 

 

Table 3 Summary Statistics (n =150) 

Variable Mean Range 

Words (000’s) 20.9 9.3 - 36.2 

Genre = Comedy Only 0.17 0 - 1 

Concepts/Nodes 176 84 - 320 

Statements/Pairs of Nodes 173 72 - 337 

Density 1.2% 0.66 - 2.50% 

Core-Periphery 1.7% 0.40 - 3.10% 

Normalized Degree 0.32 0.14 - 1.06 

Network Centralization 1.7% 0.83 - 4.43% 

73



4 Results & Discussion 

Recall that the first hypothesis (H1) proposed 

that network complexity was positively related to 

performance. Following the prior literature, 

complexity was measured as both the number of 

concepts in a network, i.e. the number of unique 

etymological roots, and as the number of state-

ments, i.e. the number of pairs of concepts.. Be-

cause these values were very highly correlated ( 

 = 0.98, p < 0.0001) their respective z-scores 

were averaged to obtain a single value for com-

plexity. Table 4a, below, presents the results of a 

multinomial regression of screenplay genre, 

word count, and network complexity on screen-

play type. The positive coefficients on complexi-

ty indicate that, as predicted, text networks of 

screenplays of winners and nominees of Acade-

my Awards (= 0.574, p < 0.0001) and critics’ 

awards ( = 0.359, p < 0.01) have significantly 

greater complexity than text networks of unpro-

duced screenplays. The Nagelkerke, Cox & 

Snell, and McFadden pseudo-R2 values were 

30.6%, 26.7%, and 15.0%, respectively. Thus, 

H1 is strongly supported. 

 

Table 4a: Multinomial Regression of Genre, 

Word Count, and Network Complexity on 

Type of Screenplay 

 

Category Variable Estimate 

Critic’s  

Awards 

Genre = Comedy -3.775 

SQRT(Words/1000) -0.114 

Complexity 0.359** 

   

Academy  

Awards 

Genre = Comedy -0.315* 

SQRT(Words/1000) 0.011 

Complexity 0.574**** 

 

The second hypothesis (H2) predicted that 

network cohesion would be positively related to 

performance. In this study cohesion was meas-

ured by density and coreness (the degree to 

which the network is characterized by a tightly 

interconnected core and a much less tightly con-

nected periphery). 

Because these two values were highly corre-

lated ( = 0.55, p < 0.001), the z-scores for each 

measure were averaged to obtain a single value 

for cohesion. Table 4b presents the results of a 

multinomial regression of screenplay genre, 

word count, and network cohesion on screenplay 

type. The negative and significant value of the 

coefficients indicates that cohesion is negatively 

associated with performance, the exact opposite 

of what was predicted.  

Specifically, cohesion of text networks derived 

from screenplays in the Academy ( = -0.870, p 

< 0.0001) and critics award ( = -0.413, p < 

0.001) categories is significantly lower than that 

for unproduced screenplays. That means they 

typically have both lower density and/or a less 

core-periphery type structure. The Nagelkerke, 

Cox & Snell, and McFadden pseudo-R
2
 values 

were 36.8%, 32.1%, and 18.7%, respectively.  

Taken together, the results suggest that text 

networks derived from original screenplays se-

lected by the Academy and by film critics have 

very different structural properties than text net-

works derived from unproduced screenplays. In 

short, the former are larger, yet held together by 

proportionately fewer linkages.  

 

Table 4b: Multinomial Regression of Genre, 

Word Count, and Network Cohesion on 

Type of Screenplay 

 

Category Variable 

Critic’s  

Awards 

Genre = Comedy -3.809 

SQRT(Words/1000) -0.139 

Cohesion -0.413*** 

 
  

Academy  

Awards 

Comedy -0.395** 

SQRT(Words/1000) -0.078 

Cohesion -0.870**** 

 

The reason for this disparity may well have to 

do with the size of the networks under examina-

tion. In both the educational psychology and the 

managerial and organizational cognition litera-

tures, the typical size of the networks is about 1/6 

that of those examined here. Recall that as a net-

work grows, the number of possible connections 

grows exponentially. As such, density becomes 

smaller at an exponential rate. In this study, the 

text networks derived from both sets of screen-

plays had concept to statement ratios of close to 

unity. Thus, given that the award winners and 

nominees had much larger text networks, it fol-

lows logically that those networks were also 

much less dense.  

 

74



Figure 3: Main Component of the Text Network of Zero Dark Thirty 

 

 
 

In closing, it is important to recognize three 

important limitations of the current study. Firstly, 

the sample size is relatively small—only half the 

size of that found in the only other study of 

screenplays that includes textual analysis, i.e.  

Eliashberg, Hui, & Zhang (2014). The sample is 

also not ideally constructed. Rather than compar-

ing award winners to unproduced screenplays, a 

better sample would include entries from a 

screenplay competition and the study design 

would attempt to select finalists and winners 

from that sample. Winners of top competitions 

are very frequently optioned and eventually pro-

duced. Alternatively, another approach would be 

to increase sample size  and to include screen-

plays which garnered no critical or artistic 

awards. Even though many such screenplays can 

be located, finding a representative sample of 

them is difficult because they are not uniformly 

available. Still, if that hurdle can be overcome, 

the sample could be used to study box-office 

revenues, potentially improving upon the current 

understanding of screenplays’ contribution to a 

film’s financial success. 

A third limitation of this study concerns the 

labor-intensive nature of the coding. At present, 

the process outlined above is only semi-

automated. Unless and until advanced computa-

tional methods of text analysis can be developed 

and applied, sample sizes will remain small and 

the coding prone to human error. 

Finally, recall that the fourth stage of network 

text analysis involves the extraction of meaning 

from the network itself. Typically, this involves a 

study of the most central nodes (concepts), as 

well as the statements (links) associated with 

them. For example, in the case of Zero Dark 

Thirty the most influential node or concept, as 

measured by network constraint, is the Indo-

European root wegh- which means “way” and 

from which descends such words as way and 

weight. One of the multi-morphemic compounds 

associated with that concept in the Figure 3, 

above, is “hijacker” which is a clipped word, the 

full form being “highwayjacker” (Online Etymo-

logical Dictionary, 2014). Other multi-

morphemic compounds associated with highly 

influential nodes in the network include SEAL, 

CIA, WMD, QRF (Quick Reaction Force), and 

NSA. As noted by Hunter (in press), other 

award-winning and critically-acclaimed screen-

plays exhibit the same pattern, i.e. words associ-

ated with influential nodes are also closely relat-

ed to key themes of the story. Anecdotally, the 

unproduced screenplays give less evidence of 

this tendency. Future research might examine 

whether this difference is systematic. To that 

end, all data involved in this study—the text of 

all 150 screenplays and all of the network cod-

ing—will be made freely available to interested 

and qualified researchers upon request. 

 

 

 

75



References 

Bodin, M. (2012). Mapping university students’ epis-

temic framing of computational physics using net-

work analysis. Physical Review Special Topics-

Physics Education Research, 8(1), 1-14. 

 

Borgatti, S. P., Everett, M. G., & Freeman, L. C. 

(2002). Ucinet for Windows: Software for social net-

work analysis. 

 

Calori, R., Johnson, G., & Sarnin, P. (1994). CEOs' 

cognitive maps and the scope of the organiza-

tion. Strategic Management Journal, 15(6), 437-457. 

 

Carley, K. M. (1997). Extracting team mental models 

through textual analysis.Journal of Organizational 

Behavior, 18(1), 533-558. 

 

Carley, K.M. (2001-13), Automap 3.0.10. Center for 

Computational Analysis of Social and Organizational 

Systems (CASOS), Institute for Software Research 

International (ISRI), School of Computer Science, 

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.  

Diesner, Jana, (2012). Uncovering and Managing the 

Impact of Methodological Choices for the Computa-

tional Construction of Socio-Technical Networks 

from Texts. Dissertations. Paper 194. 

Eliashberg, Jehoshua, Anita Elberse, and Mark AAM 

Leenders (2006). The motion picture industry: Critical 

issues in practice, current research, and new research 

directions. Marketing Science 25(6), 638-661. 

 
Eliashberg, J., Hui, S. K., & Zhang, Z. J. (2007). From 

story line to box office: A new approach for green-

lighting movie scripts. Management Science, 53(6), 

881-893. 

 

Eliashberg, J., Hui, S. K., & Zhang, Z. J. (2014, forth-

coming). Assessing Box Office Performance Using 

Movie Scripts: A Kernel-based Approach. IEEE 

Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering.   

 

Field, S. (2007). Screenplay: The foundations of 

screenwriting. Random House LLC. 

 

Hunter, S. (2014, forthcoming). A Novel Method of 

Network Text Analysis. Open Journal of Modern Lin-

guistics. 

Krauss, J., Nann, S., Simon, D., Gloor, P. A., & 

Fischbach, K. (2008). Predicting Movie Success and 

Academy Awards through Sentiment and Social Net-

work Analysis. Proceedings of the 16
th

 European 

Conference on Information Systems, 2026-2037. 

Lee, F. L. (2009). Cultural discount of cinematic 

achievement: the academy awards and US movies’ 

East Asian box office. Journal of Cultural Economics, 

33(4), 239-263. 

McKee, R. (2010). Story: Substance, Structure, Style 

and the Principles of Screenwriting, Harper Collins, 

New York.  

Nadkarni, S. (2003). Instructional methods and mental 

models of students: An empirical investiga-

tion. Academy of Management Learning & Educa-

tion, 2(4), 335-351. 

 

Nadkarni, S., & Narayanan, V. K. (2005). Validity of 

the structural properties of text-based causal maps: An 

empirical assessment. Organizational Research Meth-

ods, 8(1), 9-40. 

 

Nadkarni, S., & Narayanan, V. K. (2007). Strategic 

schemas, strategic flexibility, and firm performance: 

the moderating role of industry clockspeed. Strategic 

management journal, 28(3), 243-270. 

 

New York Film Academy: Bachelor of Fine Arts in 

Screenwriting. (2014). Retrieved from 

http://www.nyfa.edu/bfa/screenwriting.php 

 

Osborne, R., & Davis, B. (1989). 60 years of the Os-

car: the official history of the Academy Awards. New 

York: Abbeville Press. 

 

Pardoe, I., & Simonton, D. K. (2008). Applying dis-

crete choice models to predict Academy Award win-

ners. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A 

(Statistics in Society), 171(2), 375-394. 

 

Popping, R. (2003). Knowledge graphs and network 

text analysis. Social Science Information 42(1):91-

106. 

 

Script Fly. (2014). Retrieved from http://scriptfly.com 

 

Simply Scripts. (2014). Retrieved from 

http://simplyscripts.com 

 

Simonton, D. K. (2004). Film awards as indicators of 

cinematic creativity and achievement: A quantitative 

comparison of the Oscars and six alternatives. Crea-

tivity Research Journal, 16(2-3), 163-172. 

 

Simonton, D. K. (2005). Film as art versus film as 

business: Differential correlates of screenplay charac-

teristics. Empirical Studies of the Arts, 23(2), 93-117. 

 

Snyder, B. (2005). Save the Cat. Michael Wiese Pro-

ductions. 

 

Watkins, C. (2011), The American Heritage Diction-

ary of Indo-European Roots, 3
rd

 Edition, Houghton 

Mifflin Harcourt, Boston MA. 

Wisniewski, K. (2007). Word formation.  

http://www.tlumaczenia-

angielski.info/linguistics/word-formation.htm 

76


