



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and J D Pawar. Proc. of the 11th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 295–304,
Goa, India. December 2014. c©2014 NLP Association of India (NLPAI) 

Handling Plurality in Bengali Noun Phrases 

 

 
Biswanath Barik Sudeshna Sarkar 

Innovation Lab Kolkata Department of Computer Science & Engineering 

Tata Consultancy Services Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur 

1B, Ecospace, Rajarhat, Kolkata – 700156 Kharagpur, India -721302 
biswanath.barik@tcs.com shudeshna@gmail.com 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

Plurality of a Bengali Noun Phrase (NP) is not 

always determined by the plurality of its gov-

erning member (or the head). It is often seen 

that an NP is plural but the plurality is indicat-

ed through qualifiers or other means whereas 

the head noun has the singular form. In such 

scenarios, the plurality of the NP is deter-

mined by analyzing its non-head members or 

from other components (or context) of the 

sentence. Classification of Bengali NPs with 

respect to plurality is important for many ap-

plications including Machine Translation 

(MT) from Bengali to other language (say 

Hindi).  The plurality of NPs in other lan-

guages like Hindi and English is always indi-

cated by plurality of head irrespective of the 

plurality of the qualifiers. In this paper, we 

have investigated different sources from 

where the plurality information of head noun 

(or NP) can be collected and proposed an ap-

proach to automatically classify Bengali NPs 

by analyzing the identified sources. 

1 Introduction 

Identification of grammatical properties (or fea-

tures) of different syntactic units of a sentence is a 

major task of Natural Language Understanding 

(NLU). Text processing tasks like context-sensitive 

spell checking, Named Entity Recognition (NER), 

Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD), parsing etc., 

which require detail grammatical description of the 

context, spend a considerable amount of pro-

cessing time to identify such syntactico-semantic 

properties of the input sentence. Rule-based MT, 

on the other hand, not only explores such gram-

matical properties through multi-level analyses of a 

source language input sentence to decode the 

meaning, but also try to map them correctly to the 

target language so that a grammatically correct 

target sentence is generated. Therefore, identifica-

tion of different grammatical properties of interest 

is a prerequisite for many text processing jobs and 

associated applications.  

Unfortunately, the essential grammatical proper-

ties of different components of the sentence are not 

always directly expressed in a language. Some of 

them are hidden in the context or are missing. The 

hidden features can be identified by analyzing the 

context. For example, the gender of an anaphoric 

personal pronoun can be determined, in general, by 

the gender of the referring noun. In some lan-

guages (e. g., Hindi), the gender of such pronouns 

can be traced by analyzing the verb group (VG) as 

the inflection of the VG is based on the gender of 

the subject.  

The problem of identifying hidden grammatical 

features becomes difficult if the context is very 

short or is syntactically ambiguous. In such a case, 

the most logical interpretation of the context has to 

be identified which requires domain knowledge 

and pragmatic interpretation of the context.  

During the syntactic analysis of Bengali sen-

tences (for developing a rule-based Bengali to 

Hindi Machine Translation or BHMT), we observe 

some mismatches on grammatical features between 

Bengali and Hindi constituents. Bengali and Hindi 

have strong agreements within/among constituents 

on some grammatical features like person and 

case. In Bengali, these features are identifiable by 

analyzing the corresponding surface words (nouns 

and verbs) and, therefore, are also available for 

target (Hindi) sentence generation. However, some 

295



 

other features like number and gender which play 

an important role in Hindi sentence generation or 

agreement are either hidden in some cases or are 

missing in Bengali side. For example, the gender 

feature is usually missing in Bengali – neither the 

verb takes gender inflection not it can be traced 

from the morphological analysis of the subject 

noun phrase. The number or plurality information, 

on the other hand, is sometimes hidden in the con-

text. Such missing/hidden features in source Ben-

gali sentences have to be determined correctly so 

that they are used in correct target (Hindi) sentence 

generation which improves the translation accura-

cy of Bengali-Hindi MT. Figure 1 shows that the 

Google’s Bengali-Hindi translation system fails to 

handle plurality issue statistically and thus produc-

es incorrect translation.   
 

Figure 1: Incorrect Bengali-Hindi Translation due to plurality 

 
 
In this work, we discuss how to determine the 

plurality, an implicit morphological feature of 

Bengali Noun Phrases (NPs). In general, the head 

nouns of NPs hold the plurality and the NPs are 

accordingly classified as singular or plural. How-

ever, we have observed that the head nouns of 

Bengali NPs do not always take plural inflections. 

In such cases, the plurality of the NP is determined 

from the contextual information of the sentence. 

The automatic text processing and allied applica-

tions like Machine Translation thus require a com-

putational approach to automatically identify the 

plurality of Bengali NPs. Sufficient resources like 

domain knowledge and infrastructures for analyz-

ing large or inter-sentence context are required to 

handle such issues exhaustively. Using limited 

available resources, we propose a rule-based ap-

proach to classify Bengali NPs as singular or plu-

ral by analyzing different sources of plurality and 

have achieved an accuracy of 73.12%. 

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 de-

scribes the differences in plurality expression in 

Bengali and Hindi NPs. Section 3 illustrates a 

comparison on plural inflection of Bengali and 

Hindi lexical classes and shows how Bengali to 

Hindi machine translation is affected due to im-

proper classification of Bengali NPs on plurality. 

Section 4 investigates different sources of plurality 

in Bengali sentences. Section 5 describes our ap-

proach in three steps to classify NPs by determin-

ing the number of the head noun (or equivalent). In 

the first step, the input sentence is analyzed at dif-

ferent syntactic level and produces some structural 

representation of the sentence which helps to iden-

tify different phrases and their heads, qualifiers of 

the heads and other necessary information. In the 

second step, the quantifiers are classified as singu-

lar or plural (as quantifiers are the major source 

for determining the number of head noun) and, in 

the last step, the NPs are classified based on the 

plurality of the quantifiers. Some syntactic patterns 

are also identified which helps to identify the plu-

rality of NPs. Section 6 shows experimental result 

of our approach on 1000 sentences chosen random-

ly from ILMT Bengali corpus1. Section 7 catego-

rizes the misclassification errors and justifies why 

proposed approach fails to classify them properly. 

Section 8 summarizes our work and concludes 

with future scope of improvements. 

2 Related Work 

The difference in plurality expressions in Bengali 

and Hindi NPs is an example of grammatical di-

vergences between Bengali and Hindi. Some 

works are found in literature which address such 

divergence phenomena in specific language pairs.  

(Dave et al., 2001) addresses the divergence issues 

between English and Hindi from the perspective of 

computational linguistics which includes various 

aspects of syntactic and lexico-semantic diver-

gences. Also, a considerable amount of work is 

done by the linguistic community on this issue in 

Indian and Western languages (Bholanath, 1987; 

Gopinathan, 1993). (Das, 2013) discussed different 

type of divergences observed in English to Bengali 

machine translation.  
                                                           
1 ILMT Bengali corpus is created as a resource for Bengali-

Hindi MT system under consortium project ILMT Phase I. 

296



 

In Bengali, a considerable amount of work is 

done on different morpho-syntactic analyses like 

morphological analysis/synthesis (Dasgupta et al., 

2004; Bhattacharya et al., 2005), Part-of-Speech 

(POS) tagging (Dandapat, 2009), chunking 

(Avinesh et al., 2007; Dandapat, 2007), parsing 

(Ghosh et al., 2009) etc.  

The plurality issue in different foreign languages 

like Chinese (Bošković et al., 2012), Turkish (Wal-

ter, 2014) are studied and NP classification on plu-

rality is also reported in (Li, 1999; Dryer, 2005). In 

Bengali, some work (Chacón. 2011; Biswas, 2012) 

are reported on the linguistic analysis of plurality.     

3 Plurality in Bengali and Hindi NPs  

Morphologically, nouns (NNs) and pronouns 

(PRPs) in Bengali, Hindi and English take null (ø) 

suffix for singular number. The plurality is indi-

cated by the plural inflection or suffix attachment 

with the noun or pronoun. Generally, the plurality 

of the NP is determined by the plurality of the head 

noun as the head is the main (or dominating) 

member of the NP. However, unlike Hindi and 

English, the plurality of Bengali NP is not always 

determined by the plurality of the head. Instead, 

other non-head members of the NP like qualifiers, 

reduplicative adjectives etc. indicate the plurality 

of the NP. Examples (1a) and (1b) illustrate the 

divergences of plurality in Bengali, Hindi and Eng-

lish NPs.  Bengali, Hindi and English examples are 

denoted by B: and H: and E:, respectively.  

 
   (1a)  B: (সুন্দর/JJ   ছেলেগুলেো/NN) NP মোলে      ছেেো করলে ৷ 

                  beautiful   boys                ground-in   are playing 
                 

          H: (स ुंदर/JJ लड़के/NN)NP  मैदान   में   खेल  रह े हैं ৷ 

                  beautiful   boys              ground  in    are playing 
 
     E: (Beautiful/JJ boys/NN)NP are playing in the ground 
    
   (1b)  B: আজলক (পোাঁ চজন/QF ছেলে/NN) NP সু্কলে     এলসলে  ৷  

                today   five-cl        boy        school-to      came 
 

          H: आज  (पाुंच/QF लड़के/NN)NP  स्कूल   में  आये हैं ৷  

               today  five   boys       school to   came 
 
          E:   (Five/ QF boys/NN)NP came to school today. 
 

Example (1a) shows that the plurality of NP is kept 

in the head noun in Bengali, Hindi and English 

sentences. However, in example (1b), the head 

noun of Bengali NP does not hold plurality and it 

is indicated by its quantifier. On the other hand, the 

head of corresponding Hindi and English NP hold 

the plurality information although the plural quan-

tifier is present in the NP.  

In summary, it can be said that the plurality in-

formation is present in the head of a plural Hindi or 

English NP irrespective of the plurality of the de-

pendents whereas, in Bengali, the head contains 

the plurality if the other non-head members of a 

plural NP has no plurality indicator.  

4 Number Issues in Bengali-Hindi MT  

In Bengali, the nouns and pronominal entities take 

inflection on number. In some cases, the quantifi-

ers also take plural inflection like “গুলেো (/gulo/)”, 

“গুলি (/guli/)” etc. or classifiers like “জন (/jan/)” to 
indicate plurality.  The verb forms are not inflected 

on plurality. Therefore, analyzing verb forms, it is 

not possible to identify the plurality of the subject 

(or object) NPs. The other grammatical classes like 

post-positions, adjectival and adverbial qualifiers 

etc. do not take plurality inflections. Therefore, the 

sources of plurality in lexical level are limited to 

nouns, pronouns or quantifiers.  However, in Hin-

di, if the NP is plural, the plurality information is 

available in the head, its dependents and the verb 

group agreeing the subject NP. Table1 shows some 

representative Hindi and Bengali singular and plu-

ral word-forms taken from different lexical classes 

where all the plural forms are different than singu-

lar forms in Hindi but are not different in Bengali. 

Examples (3a) and (3b) show that the plurality 

differences in lexical level cause higher difference 

in sentence level. It is observed from the examples 

that a small difference in Bengali sentences B1 and 

B2 (i.e., the noun “ছেলে  /chhele/” is singular in B1 

and is plural in B2) there has a significant differ-

ence in corresponding Hindi sentences H1 and H2 

due to strong number agreements among/within 

constituents. 

 

(3a)   B1:  ওই      ছেলেটি       সু্কলে             পড়লে   ৷ 

                      that      boy-cl    school-in     studying 
              
            E:    ‘That boy is studying in the school.’ 
 

            H1:   वो लड़का स्कूल में पढ़  रहा    ह ै৷ 

297



 

(3b)  B2:  ওই     ছেলেগুলে     সু্কলে              পড়লে     ৷ 

                       that       boys       school-in      studying  
 
            E:  ‘Those boys are studying in the school.’ 
 

            H2:  वो  लड़के  स्कूल में पढ़  रह े    हैं ৷ 
 
Table 1: Lexical Categories with Plural Inflection 

 

Lexical Classes 

 

Inflections with Number 

Singular Plural 

Noun (Hindi) लड़का (boy) लड़के (boys) 

क सी (chair) क ससयााँ (chairs) 

Noun (Bengali) ছেলি (boy) ছেলিগুলিো (boys) 

ছেয়োর (chair) ছেয়োরগুলিো (chair)  

Pronoun (Hindi) मै (I) हम (we) 
तू (You) तूम (you) 

Pronoun (Bengali)  আলি (I) আিরো (we) 
তুলি (You) ছতোিরো (you) 

Adjective (Hindi) काला (black) काले (black) 
Adjective (Bengali) কোলিো (black) 

Post-Position(Hindi) का ( 's) के ('s) 

PostPosition(Bengali)  এর ( 's) ছের ( 's) 

Verb (Hindi) 
हाँ (be) हैं (be) 
था (was) थे (were) 

Verb (Bengali) হই (be) 

লেলি (was) 
 

Therefore, identifying the correct plurality of 

each Bengali NP helps in Hindi side agreement 

among the NP members (head and associated de-

pendents) as well as the inter-constituents agree-

ments like subject-verb, object-verb etc. during the 

translation from Bengali to Hindi.  

5 Plurality Indicators in Bengali NPs 

We have discussed in section 2 that the plurality of 

Bengali NP is not always indicated by the plurality 

of the head. Plurality can be collected from other 

sources of the sentence. In this section we investi-

gate different sources (or contextual patterns) from 

where the plurality information can be collected in 

Bengali. 

5.1 Existence of Quantifiers in NPs 

The quantifiers are the major plurality indicators in 

Bengali noun phrases. NPs containing plural quan-

tifiers are plural.  

The quantifiers may appear at different distances 

from the quantifying nouns. With the increasing 

distance between a quantifier and a noun, it be-

comes difficult to relate them without having deep 

syntactic processing (parsing) of input sentence. 

To address this issue, we have divided quantifier-

noun distance into three categories as described 

below and try to solve them separately with availa-

ble resources and infrastructures. 

 

Quantifiers in Short Range (SR) - quantifier ap-

pears just before the head noun (4a).  

 

   (4a)  (লকেু/QC ওষুধ/NN) NP  

             some   medicine 

            ‘some medicines’ 

 

Quantifier in Medium Range (MR) - other noun 

modifiers (but not modifying phrases) occur in be-

tween the quantifier and the head (4b). 

 

   (4b)  (কলেকটো/QC  ভোলেো/JJ  ভোলেো/JJ   কথো/NN) NP 

                few              good       good        word        

    ‘few good words’ 

 

Quantifier in Long Range (LR) – other modifying 

phrases exists in between quantifier and its noun 

appear (4c).  

 

   (4c)  (কলেকজন/QC (আলিবোসী সম্প্রিোেভুক্ত) JJP, (অলি সোধোরণ 

মোলনর,) JJP অস্থোেী/JJ কমমচোরী/NN) NP  

               some   tribal community-belongs-to, very general 

quality, temporary worker 

‘Some temporary workers, belonging to tribal 

community and of very general quality’ 

5.2 Quantifiers outside NPs  

In some typical cases, it is observed that the nu-

meral classifiers are positioned after the head to 

show strong definiteness (Simpson, 2011) as 

shown in (5a) and (5b). 

 
   (5a)  বের/NN পোাঁ লচক/QC পলর ছস আবোর লিলর এলেো ৷ 

              year      five           after he again returned back 

298



 

           ‘He again retuned back after five years’ 
 

   (5b) রোজো নোটলকর প্রথম সংস্করলণ গোন/NN লেে ছমোট বোইশটি/QC ৷ 

 King drama-gen first edition-in song was total 

twenty-two 

‘There were a total of twenty-two songs in the 

first edition of the drama “Raja”’ 

 

The major issue in handling such constructions 

is to dealing with the ambiguity. If a quantifier oc-

curs in between two nouns, then the quantifier may 

be associated with the previous or the following 

noun. This causes semantic ambiguity as illustrated 

in 5(c). 

 

   (5c)  িোর ছেলে/NN দুলটো/QC সু্কলে/NN পলড় ৷   

              his   boy        two      school-in   reads 
 

          (I)                                      (II) 
            পলড়                                            পলড় 

 

ছেলে_pl       সু্কলে_sg                  ছেলে_sg      সু্কলে_pl 

 

িোর      দুলটো_pl                     িোর      দুলটো_pl 

 

‘His two children                ‘His child reads in  

read in school,                     two schools’ 

 

In (I), the noun “ছেলে (/chhele/)” is plural (pl) as 

it is quantified by the following plural quantifier 

“দুলটো (/duto/)” and the other noun “সু্কলে (/skule/)” is 

singular (sg) whereas in (II) it is reverse as the 

quantifier modifying the followed noun. 

5.3 Plurality Collected from other Nouns 

In some constructions, the plural nouns with (op-

tional) modifiers are connected through coordinat-

ing conjunctions to form a larger NP unit. In such 

constructions, none but the last noun contains the 

plurality information of the NP.  

 
 (6) (রোজননলিক/JJ ছনিো/NN ,/CC মন্ত্রী/NN ও/CC আমেোলির/NN) 

NP চোলপ েুলনর ছকসটো চোপো পলড় ছগে ৷ 
 
            political     leader      minister and bureaucrats 

pressure-due-to murder-gen case-cl suppresses-was  
 
‘The murder case was suppressed due to the pressure 

from political leaders, ministers and the bureaucrats’ 

In example (6), the plural NP consists of three 

nouns “ছনিো (/netA/)”, “মন্ত্রী (/mantrI/)” and “আমেো 
(/AmalA/)” whereas the plural inflection is visible 

in the last noun. Plurality of others can be collected 

from the last noun. 

5.4 Reduplication & Compounding  

Plurality of the phrase may be determined from the 

reduplication of the head noun (7a) or its modifiers 

(7b) and compounding (7c).  

 

   (7a)  (পলে/NN   পলে/NN) NP   অবলরোধ  

                road-in     road-in       obstruction  

             ‘obstructions in the roads’ 

 

    (7b) (ছেোট/JJ    ছেোট/JJ    নেী/NN) NP 

                small    small      river 

             ‘small rivers’ 

 

   (7c)  (ভোলিো-িন্দ/JJ   কেো/NN) NP  

                 good-bad     word 

               ‘good-bad words’ 

5.5 NP with Elliptic Phenomena 

In some typical Bengali constructions (8), the noun 

is implicit and the inflection of the noun is attached 

with its modifiers. This phenomenon is an example 

of ellipses. In this type of construction, the result-

ing quantifier semantically behaves like a plural 

pronoun if the quantifier is plural.  
 

   (8)  এই     লসলনমোটি     অলনলকই       ছিলেলন    ৷ 

            This   film-cl      many-people seen-not 

         ‘Many people did not seen this film’ 

5.6 Spatio-Temporal Patterns (PAT)  

Spatio-temporal entities (also referred as Nouns 

denoting Space and Time or NST) along with 

compatible post-position (PSP) holds the plurality 

of the noun without having any inflection.  

 

   (9)   বেলরর  পর    বের ধলর           কোজটো       েিলে   ৷ 

             year-of    after-year        work-cl    is-in-porgress  

         ‘The working is in progress for many years’ 

 

In example (9), instead of taking the plural suffix, 

the temporal noun “বের (/bachhar/)” replicate itself 

299



 

with PSPs “পর (/par/)” and “ধলর (/dhare/)”. In this 

type of patterns, the NST is plural. 

6  NP Classification Approach 

In this section, we will discuss how to identify the 

plurality of Bengali noun phrases. The NP classifi-

cation process consists of three steps. In the first 

step we will analyze the input Bengali sentence 

and identify different phrases and necessary 

grammatical (morphological, syntactic) properties 

associated with the sentence. As we mentioned in 

section 4 that quantifiers are the major indicators 

of plurality, we will classify the quantifiers as sin-

gular or plural in the next step. Finally, we will 

classify NPs by applying some predefined rules on 

analyzed structure of the sentence. The following 

sub-sections elaborate the steps. 
 

6.1 Syntactic Analysis of Input Sentence 
 

To solve the plurality issue exhaustively, a de-

tailed, multi-level syntactic analysis of input sen-

tence is required which spans from word level to 

sentence level. Also, in some ambiguous cases, the 

analyzed structure needs to be represented in dis-

course or pragmatic level. In this experiment, we 

limit the analysis phase in the following steps due 

to resource constraints. 

 

Morphological Analysis: Input sentences are to-

kenized and each word-token is analyzed morpho-

logically with a rule-based Bengali Morphological 

Analyzer (MA) developed at IIT Kharagpur. MA 

produces all possible analyses of input word. 

Words having plural suffixes are identified as plu-

ral nouns in this step. 

 

Part-of-Speech (POS) Tagging: A CRF based 

Bengali POS tagger is trained on ILMT POS 

tagged corpus and used to identify the grammatical 

functionalities of each word in the sentence.  
 

Chunking: Local dependencies among consecu-

tive words are identified using CRF-based chunk-

ing model trained on ILMT corpus with further 

post-processing (Chatterji et al., 2012).  

 

Morphological Pruning: As a word-token may 

have more than one morphological interpretation, 

morphological analyses having context incompati-

bility are pruned out using the method specified in 

(Barik et al., 2014).  

 

Head of the Chunk Identification: Chunking 

segments the sentence based on local dependencies 

and classify each segment. The head of each chunk 

is identified using a rule-based approach.  

 

Dependency Parsing: To identify long range 

modifiers or modifying phrases, we have used a 

rule-based Bengali (partial) parser which is devel-

oped according to (Bharti et al., 2009). 

 

6.2 Classification of Quantifiers 
 

Quantifiers are the important sources of plurality. 

The plurality of the quantifier implies the plurality 

of its quantifying NP. Therefore, each quantifier 

has to be classified correctly. 

The quantifiers are identified in the input sen-

tence during POS tagging. The quantifiers are cat-

egorized as follows: 

 

Numerals: Non-negative, integer quantifiers 

greater than one with (optional) classifiers like 

১৮৫৭-জন (1857-cl), ২৫-টো (25-cl) are plural quantifiers. 

 

Cardinal Number: Cardinal numbers without 

having decimal indicator like পোাঁ চ (five), িশ (ten), পোাঁ চশ 

(five hundreds) etc. are plural. 

 

Ordinal Number:  Ordinal quantifiers like প্রথম 

(first), চিুথম (fourth), একোিশ (eleventh) are not plural. 
 

Indefinite Quantifier: For the case of indefinite 

quantifiers, classifiers play an important role for 

their plurality. Classifiers are used in Bengali to 

combine NPs with numerals and quantifiers 

(Biswas, 2012). For example, the indefinite quanti-

fier “অলনক (/anek/)” with classifier “জন (/jan/)” is 
plural but with classifiers like “টো (/tA/)” or “েোনো 

(/khana/)” is not plural. 

Another observation is that some indefinite 

quantifiers take regular plural suffixes like “গুলেো 

(/gulo/)”, “গুলি (/guli/)” etc. and, thus, are plural. 

Quantifiers do not take the associative plurals 

(Chacón, 2011) like “রো (/ra/)” as they are special 

markers for animate nouns (Moravcšik et al., 

2013).  

300



 

Table 2: Plurality of Quantifiers w.r.t Classifiers 

 
 ø টো/টি েোনো/েোলন জন গুলেো/গুলে 

লকেু Y × NA Y NA 

অলনক Y × × Y Y 

বহু  Y NA NA Y NA 

কি/যি/এি  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Y × × Y Y 

সমস্ত Y × NA Y NA 

সব Y × NA × Y 

কিক Y × NA Y Y 

 

To determine the plurality of classifier attached 

indefinite quantifiers, we have prepared a quantifi-

er set (Q) and a classifier set (C) and examined the 

plurality of each member of Q X C. Some examples 

are shown in Table 2. Here, “Y” and “×” denote 

that attachments are valid where the quantifiers are 

plural for the first case and not for the second. 

“NA” refers to invalid classifier attachment.  

 

6.3 Rules for Classify NPs 
 

With syntactic analysis of the input sentence, some 

information of each word-token (or different 

grammatical units) are found. Each quantifier in 

the sentence is identified and classified. Other in-

formation like measuring units for mass nouns, 

nouns denoting space or time etc. are listed. There-

fore, if any NP is plural, the information is explic-

itly available in the analyzed structure of the 

sentence. We have developed sixteen rules to look 

for the plurality information within chunk mem-

bers or context. Once the plurality is determined by 

matching a rule, the plurality information is copied 

to the head of the chunk so that plurality of the 

chunk is explicitly identified and it becomes avail-

able for grammatical functionalities like agree-

ments. Some of the rules are explained below.  

Rules are denotes by ‘R’. 
 
Case I: Existence of measuring units like “লমটোর" 

(meter), “পোউন্ড" (pound) or “ছভোল্ট" (volt) in NP de-

notes mass noun and, thus, NP is not plural.  
 
Case II: NP having numerals attachment with tem-

poral nouns like “১৬ নলভম্বর” (16 November) or 

“১৭৯৯ সোলে” (in 1799 year) are not plural. 

 

Case III: NPs having plural quantifiers are plural.  

(10)  এেোলন (পোাঁ চজন/QC_pl ছেোলকর/NN_sg)NP থোকোর বযবস্থো 

আলে ৷ 

            here     five-cl    people-gen    accommodating-for 

arrangement has 

        ‘Here, there is an arrangement for accommodat-

ing five people’ 

 

R: (QC_pl (.*?) NN_sg) NP => (QC_pl (.*?) NN_pl) NP 

 

Case IV: If a NP consists of multiple quantifiers 

connected with coordinating conjunctions and the 

rightmost quantifier is plural then the NP is plural. 
 

   (11)  (এক/QC_sg, দুই/QC_pl বো পোাঁ চ/QC_pl মোস/NN_sg) NP 

বোলিও ছস আসলি পোলর৷ 

               one, two or five month after-also he come can 

          ‘He can also come after one, two or five years’ 

 

R:  (QC* QC_pl NN_sg) NP => (QC* QC_pl NN_pl) NP 

 

Case V: Reduplications of temporal nouns with 

certain patterns (i.e., combination of temporal 

nouns with specific post-position(s)) are consid-

ered as plural nouns. If the pattern matches with 

the rule, the corresponding pattern is modified.  

 

   (12) (বেলরর/NN পর/PSP) NP (বের/NN ধলর/PSP) NP এই রীলি 

চলে আসলে ৷ 

           year-of    after-year      this     ritual      continued-over 

          ‘This ritual is continued over years’ 
 

R:  (NNPSP%পর)NP (NN PSP%ধলর)NP 

       =>  (NN_pl PSP%ধলর)NP  

 

Case VI:  Reduplication of temporal nouns with no 

post-position attachments are not plural. 

 
   (13)  (বের/NN) NP (বের/NN) NP  দূগমপূজো হে ৷ 

               year                year             Durgapuja-celebration is 

‘Durgapuja is celebrated every year’ 

    

Case VII:  Reduplication of animate (‘a’) and in-

animate (‘i’) nouns (identified during morphologi-

cal analysis) without having post-position 

attachments are plural. 

 
   (14)  (গোলে/NN) NP (গোলে/NN) NP িুে িুলটলে ৷ 

              tree-on            tree-on          flower blossomed 

301



 

‘Flowers have blossomed on the trees’ 

  

R: (NN_sg && case='এ' && type= 'a' or 'i') NP (NN_sg && 

case='এ' && type= 'a' or 'i') NP => (NN_pl && case='এ' && 

type= 'a' or 'i') NP  

 

Case VIII: NPs having pronouns (PRPs) with re-

duplications are plurals.  
 

   (15)  (যোহো/PRP) NP (যোহো/PRP) NP  বলে      মন     লিলে    শুন ৷ 

               what               what            saying    carefully   listen 

‘Listen carefully to what I am saying’ 

 

R: (X%PRP_sg) NP (X%PRP_sg) NP =>   (X%PRP_pl) NP 

 

Case IX: NPs having adjectival reduplications are 

plural.  

 
   (16)  এই    পুকুলর      (বড়/JJ বড়/JJ মোে) NP আলে ৷  

             this   pond-in  big  big      fish        have 

           'Big fishes are there in this pond' 

    

R:((.*) X/JJ X/JJ (.*) NN_sg)NP=>((.*) X/JJ (.*) NN_pl) NP  

7 Evaluation 

To evaluate our rule-based NP classification meth-

od, we choose 1000 sentences randomly from 

ILMT corpus as test data. The sentences are ana-

lyzed by different steps as specified in section 5.1. 

The analyzed structures are manually examined 

and the errors are removed.  The 1000 test sentenc-

es thus are annotated and are considered as ground 

truth (or gold standard data). 

In the test 1000 sentences, we found 5817 noun 

chunk (NP) and a total of 5109 nouns which in-

cludes both singular (3572), plural (1271) and ver-

bal nouns (39). Among these singular nouns 

identified by morphological analysis, 227 are actu-

ally plural which are detected and marked during 

manual annotation. The Bengali Morphological 

Analyzer (MA) fails to analyze them as plural be-

cause no plural suffix is attached with these nouns 

and MA does not consider the context to determine 

the number of any noun. As a result, 227 NP 

chunks are misclassified as singular NPs and they 

are marked in the test data.  

 

 

 

Table 3: NP Classification Results 
Target Plurals 

NPs  S
R

 

M
R

 

L
R

 

P
A

T
 

S
E

M
 

M
IS

C
 

T
o

ta
l 

Ground Truth 141 29 23 17 6 11 227 

Identified  157 33 7 15 0 0 212 

Correctly Identified 129 19 4 15 0 0 167 

 

Table 3 shows the distribution NPs having plu-

rality kept in non-head members in ground truth, 

identified by our approach and correctly identified 

in different type of plurality sources.  

From Table 3, we observe that quantifiers as 

plurality sources in short range (SR) is solved in 

most of the cases. The fixed pattern-based (PAT) 

number acquisition correctly captures all such pat-

terns and classified NPs accordingly. However, 

plurality determinations of NPs based on the plu-

rality of the quantifiers located in medium (MR) 

and long range (LR) are solved partially. Plurality 

determination of NPs where short or no contextual 

information is available or the context is ambigu-

ous enough (SEM) is not worked.  A details sum-

mary of the results on 1000 test sentences is given 

below. 

 
 Total NPs      Nouns by MA       After NP Classification 

 

   5817       Sg    Pl   Verbal Total   Sg -> Pl    Correct 

 
  GT       3572   1271  39     5109        -              227 
 
  Test      3587  1271  39     5109       212           167 
 

The confusion matrix of the result is given below.   
 

 TRUE FALSE 

Singular 3572 15 

Plural 167 55 

 

The overall accuracy is 73.12%.   

8 Errors Analysis of Our Method 

8.1 NP Misclassification in Local Level 
 

Classification of NPs on quantifier-noun number 

agreement depends on the type of the head noun. 

Some nouns are singular always and NPs with such 

302



 

nouns are also singular. However, with the pres-

ence of plural quantifiers, such singular NPs are 

misclassified as plurals. For example, the specified 

NP in (17) is singular along with the the singular 

noun “পৃলথবী (/prithibI/)”.  The quantifier “সমস্ত 

(/samasta/)” has two aspects – one is quantitative 

which means ‘all’ and it is plural. The other aspect 

is qualitative which means ‘whole’. In this exam-

ple, the quantifier is realized as plural which is in-

correct.    
 

   (17) িোজমহে  (সমস্ত/QC পৃলথবীর/NN_pl)NP িশমকলির আকৃষ্ট 

কলর।  

         Tajmahal   for-all        earth-gen   visitors attracts 
‘Tajmahal attracts the visitors of the entire world’ 

 

To handle this issue, deeper semantic representa-

tion of the context is needed. 
 

8.2 Error due to Chunk Level Ambiguity 
 

Quantifier followed by two nouns may quantify 

either one and, thus, resulting dependency ambigu-

ity as described below.  

 
    (18)  পোাঁ চ/QC ছেলের/NN বোবো /NN 

              five      boy-gen   father 

    Case1                         Case2 
    বোবো/NN_sg      বোবো/NN_pl 

 

 ছেলের/NN_pl      পোাঁ চ/QC_pl        ছেলের/NN_sg 

                                    ‘five fathers having children’ 
 পোাঁ চ/QC_pl       

   ‘Father of five children’ 
 

In case1, the noun “ছেলের (/chhelera/)” is plural 

due to the plural quantifier “পোাঁ চ (/panch/)” whereas 

in case2, the noun “বোবো (/bAbA/)” is plural.  

 

8.3 Long Range Agreement Problems 
 

With the unavailability of good accuracy deep par-

ser in Bengali, the (partial) parser is used to identi-

fy long range dependencies which fails to identify 

some of the relations of long range and causes 

misclassification of NPs on numbers.  

 

 

   (19)  িশটো/QC সুন্দর সুন্দর নক্সো করো নরম কোপলড়র তিলর আসন/NN 

ছিলেলে নলন্দিো বেে - "এেোলন আপনোরো বসুন"।  

        ten-cl beautiful beautiful designed soft cotton made 
seat pointing-to Nandita said – “here you-pl sit down” 

 

‘Pointing to ten, beautifully designed, soft, cotton- 

made seats, Nandita said “please sit down here”. 

 

Example (19) is an ambiguous sentence because 

the quantifier “িশটো(ten)” may attached with either 

“কোপড় (cloth)” or  “আসন(seat)”. But in this case by 

using pragmatics we see that since the sentence 

addresses a plural number of people are asked to 

sit, the plurality should be attached with “কোপড় 

(cloth)”.  
  
8.4 Unavailability of Contextual Information 

 

Some cases are found where the given context is 

not sufficient to determine the plurality of the NP.  

 
   (20)  জোেগোটো (ছেলেলি/NN_sg) NP ভলিম  হলে ছগলে । 
     place-cl boy-with   filled-up 
       ‘The place is filled up with the boys’ 

 

The NP with noun “ছেলেলি (/chhelete/)” is plural 

in (20). However, with available contextual infor-

mation, our approach fails to identify it as plural.  

9 Conclusion and Future Work  

In this work, we showed that Bengali NPs cannot 

be classified on plurality based on the plurality of 

the head nouns. Also, we showed that the plurality 

issue in Bengali NPs should be resolved correct as 

it causes errors in different text processing applica-

tions (specifically Machine Translation from Ben-

gali to other language like Hindi or English). 

Different sources and indicators of plurality are 

studied in this work and noticed that the quantifiers 

are the major sources of plurality indicator in Ben-

gali. The quantifiers have been classified on plural-

ity and a rule-based approach is proposed to 

examine noun phrases as singular or plural.  

In error analysis phase, we have noticed that 

some NPs are not classified properly due to the 

unavailability of sufficient resources. With correct 

parsing information, domain knowledge and the 

facilities for analyzing large context in discourse or 

pragmatic level, the error rate of our approach can 

be reduced which is our future scope of work.  

303



 

Acknowledgments 

This work is financially supported by MCIT, Govt. 

of India through the consortium project “Indian 

Language to Indian language Machine Translation 

(IL-ILMT) Systems Phase II” vide order no. 

11(1)/2010-HCC(TDIL) dated 27/12/2010. The 

problem addressed here is explored as a part of 

performance issues in Bengali-Hindi Machine 

Translation system. The work is done at the De-

partment of Computer Science & Engineering, IIT 

Kharagpur during the MS course of the first au-

thor.  

References  

Akshar Bharati, Mridul Gupta, Vineet Yadav, Karthik 

Gali and Dipti Misra Sharma. 2009. Simple Parser 

for Indian languages in a Dependency Framework, 

In Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation 

Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP, Singapore, pp. 162-165  

 

A. Simpson, H. L. Soh and H. Nomoko. 2011. Bare 

classifiers and definiteness: A cross-linguistic inves-

tigation, Studies in Languages 35.1, John Benjamins 

Publishing Company, 168-194. 
 
Biswanath Barik and Sudeshna Sarkar. 2014. Pattern 

based Pruning of Morphological Alternatives of 

Bengali Wordforms, In Proceedings of International 

Conference on Advances in Computing, Communi-

cations and Informatics (ICACCI), New Delhi. 
 
D. A. Chacón. 2011. Bangla and company: the distribu-

tion of associative plurals in Bangla, Japanese, and 

Mandarin Chinese, Handout in Formal Approaches 

to South Asian Languages (FASAL I), University of 

Massachussets, Amherst 
 
Aniruddha Ghosh, Pinaki Bhaskar,Amitava Das and 

Sivaji Bandyopadhyay, Dependency Parser for Ben-

gali: the JU System at ICON 2009, Kharagpur, India. 

Sandipan Dandapat, Part of Speech Tagging and 

Chunking with Maximum Entropy Model, In Proceed-

ings of IJCAI Workshop on Shallow Parsing for 

South Asian Languages (SPSAL-2007) 

Sandipan Dandapat. 2009. Part-of-Speech Tagging for 

Bengali, MS Thesis submitted at IIT Kharagpur 

Niladri Sekhar Dash. 2013. Linguistic Divergences in 

English to Bengali Translation, International Journal 

of English Linguistics; Vol. 3, No. 1  
 
Edith Moravcšik and Michael Daniel. 2014. The Asso-

ciative Plural, The World Atlas of language Struc-

tures Online, http://wals.info/chapter/36, accessed in 

July 2014   
 
Omkar N. Koul. 2008. Modern Hindi Grammar, VA, 

Dunwoody Press. 
 
Priyanka Biswas. 2012. Plurality in Classifier Lan-

guage: Two Types of Plural in Bangla, In Proceed-

ings of GLOW in Asia IX, Japan 
 
Shachi Dave, Jignashu Parikh and Pushpak 

Bhattacharyya. "Interlingua-based English–Hindi 

Machine Translation and Language Divergence." 

Machine Translation 16.4 (2001): 251-304 

 

S. Gopinathan and S. Kandaswamy (eds): 1993, 

Anauvaad kI samasyaae [Problems of Translation], 

Lokbharti Prakashan, New Delhi, India. 

 

Tiwari Bholanath and Naresh Kumar: 1987, Problems 

    of translation from various foreign languages, Prab-

hat Prakashan, New Delhi, India 
 
S. Dasgupta and M. Khan. 2004. Morphological paring 

of Bangla words using PC-KIMMO, Proceedings of 

the 7th International Conference on Computer and 

Information Technology (ICCIT2004, Dhaka, Bang-

ladesh) 

S. Bhattacharya, M. Choudhury, S. Sarkar and A. Basu. 

2005. Inflectional morphology synthesis for Bengali 

noun, pronoun and verb systems. In Proc. of the Na-

tional Conference on Computer Processing of Bangla 

(NCCPB 05), Dhaka, Bangladesh 

Sanjay Chatterji, Nabanita Datta, Arnab Dhar, Biswa-

nath Barik, Sudeshna Sarkar, Anupam Basu. 2012. 

Repairing Bengali Verb Chunks for Improved Benga-

li to Hindi Machine Translation, In Proceedings of 

the 10th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, 

Mumbai, pages 65–74  

Avinesh. PVS, Karthik G. 2007. Part-Of-Speech Tag-

ging and Chunking using Conditional Random Fields 

and Transformation Based Learning, In Proceedings 

of IJCAI Workshop on Shallow Parsing for South 

Asian Languages (SPSAL-2007) 

Ž. Bošković and I. T. C. Hsieh, 2012, On word order, 

binding relations, and plurality within Chinese NPs. 

In Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium 

on Chinese Languages and Linguistics (pp. 19-47). 

Walter, M. J. (2014). Morphosyntax and semantic type 

of noun phrases in Turkish 

Y. H. A. Li, 1999, Plurality in a classifier language. 

Journal of East Asian Linguistics, 8(1), 75-99 

Dryer, Matthew S. 2005. "33. Coding of Nominal Plu-

rality."  

304


