



















































Automatic Conversion of Dialectal Tamil Text to Standard Written Tamil Text using FSTs


Proceedings of the 2014 Joint Meeting of SIGMORPHON and SIGFSM, pages 37–45,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 27 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automatic Conversion of Dialectal Tamil Text to Standard Written 

Tamil Text using FSTs 

 

Marimuthu K 

AU-KBC Research Centre, 

MIT Campus of Anna University, 

Chrompet, Chennai, India. 

marimuthuk@live.com 

Sobha Lalitha Devi 

AU-KBC Research Centre, 

MIT Campus of Anna University, 

Chrompet, Chennai, India. 

sobha@au-kbc.org 

 

  

 

Abstract 

We present an efficient method to auto-

matically transform spoken language text 

to standard written language text for var-

ious dialects of Tamil. Our work is novel 

in that it explicitly addresses the problem 

and need for processing dialectal and 

spoken language Tamil. Written language 

equivalents for dialectal and spoken lan-

guage forms are obtained using Finite 

State Transducers (FSTs) where spoken 

language suffixes are replaced with ap-

propriate written language suffixes. Ag-

glutination and compounding in the re-

sultant text is handled using Conditional 

Random Fields (CRFs) based word 

boundary identifier. The essential Sandhi 

corrections are carried out using a heuris-

tic Sandhi Corrector which normalizes 

the segmented words to simpler sensible 

words. During experimental evaluations 

dialectal spoken to written transformer 

(DSWT) achieved an encouraging accu-

racy of over 85% in transformation task 

and also improved the translation quality 

of Tamil-English machine translation 

system by 40%. It must be noted that 

there is no published computational work 

on processing Tamil dialects. Ours is the 

first attempt to study various dialects of 

Tamil in a computational point of view. 

Thus, the nature of the work reported 

here is pioneering. 

1 Introduction 

With the advent of Web 2.0 applications, the fo-

cus of communication through the Internet has 

shifted from publisher oriented activities to user 

oriented activities such as blogging, social media 

chats, and discussions in online forums. Given 

the unmediated nature of these services, users 

conveniently share the contents in their native 

languages in a more natural and informal way. 

This has resulted in bringing together the con-

tents of various languages. More often these con-

tents are informal, colloquial, and dialectal in 

nature. The dialect is defined as a variety of a 

language that is distinguished from other varie-

ties of the same language by features of phonol-

ogy, grammar, and vocabulary and by its use by 

a group of speakers who are set off from others 

geographically or socially. The dialectal varia-

tion refers to changes in a language due to vari-

ous influences such as geographic, social, educa-

tional, individual and group factors. The dialects 

vary primarily based on geographical locations. 

They also vary based on social class, caste, 

community, gender, etc. which differ phonologi-

cally, morphologically, and syntactically (Ha-

bash and Rambow, 2006). Here we study spoken 

and dialectal Tamil language and aim to auto-

matically transform them to standard written lan-

guage. 

Tamil language has more than 70 million 

speakers worldwide and is spoken mainly in 

southern India, Sri Lanka, Singapore, and Ma-

laysia. It has 15 known dialects
1
 which vary 

mainly based on geographic location and reli-

gious community of the people. The dialects 

used in southern Tamil Nadu are different from 

the dialects prevalent in western and other parts 

of Tamil Nadu. Sri Lankan Tamil is relatively 

conservative and still retains the older features of 

Tamil
2
. So its dialect differs considerably from 

the dialects spoken elsewhere. Tamil dialect is 

also dependent on religious community. The var-

                                                 
1
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Tamil_dialects 

2
 www.lmp.ucla.edu 

37



iation of dialects based on caste is studied and 

described by A.K. Ramanujan (1968) where he 

observed that Tamil Brahmins speak a very dis-

tinct form of Tamil known as Brahmin Tamil 

(BT) which varies greatly from the dialects used 

in other religious communities. While perform-

ing a preliminary corpus study on Tamil dialects, 

we found that textual contents in personal blogs, 

social media sites, chat forums, and comments, 

comprise mostly dialectal and spoken language 

words similar to what one can hear and use in 

day-to-day communication. This practice is 

common because the authors intend to establish a 

comfortable communication and enhance intima-

cy with their audiences. This activity produces 

informal, colloquial and dialectal textual data. 

These dialectal and spoken language usages will 

not conform to the standard spellings of Literary 

Tamil (LT). This causes problems in many text 

based Natural Language Processing (NLP) sys-

tems as they generally work on the assumption 

that the input is in standard written language. To 

overcome this problem, these dialectal and spo-

ken language forms need to be converted to 

Standard Written language Text (SWT) before 

doing any computational work with them. 

Computational processing of dialectal and 

spoken language Tamil is challenging since the 

language has motley of dialects and the usage in 

one dialect varies from other dialects from very 

minimal to greater extents. It is also very likely 

that multiple spoken-forms of a given word with-

in a dialect which we call as „variants‟ may cor-

respond to single canonical written-form word 

and a spoken-form word may map to more than 

one canonical written-form. These situations ex-

ist in all Tamil dialects. In addition, it is very 

likely to encounter conflicts with the spoken and 

written-forms of one dialect with other dialects 

and vice versa. Most importantly, the dialects are 

used mainly in spoken communication and when 

they are written by users, they do not conform to 

standard spoken-form spellings and sometimes 

inconsistent spellings are used even for a single 

written-form of a word. In other words Schiff-

man (1988) noted that every usage of a given 

spoken-form can be considered as Standard Spo-

ken Tamil (SST) unless it has wrong spellings to 

become nonsensical. 

Few researchers have attempted to transform 

the dialects and spoken-forms of languages to 

standard written languages. Habash and Rambow 

(2006) developed MAGEAD, a morphological 

analyzer and generator for Arabic dialects where 

the authors made use of root+pattern+features 

representation for the transformation of Arabic 

dialects to Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) and 

performed morphological analysis. In the case of 

Tamil language, Umamaheswari et al. (2011) 

proposed a technique based on pattern mapping 

and spelling variation rules for transforming col-

loquial words to written-language words. The 

reported work considered only a handful of rules 

for the most common spoken forms. So this ap-

proach will fail when dialectal variants of words 

are encountered because it is more likely that the 

spelling variation rules of the spoken language 

vary from the rules of dialectal usages. This limi-

tation hinders the possibility of the system to 

generalize. Alternatively, performing a simple 

list based mapping between spoken and written 

form words is also inefficient and unattainable. 

Spoken language words exhibit fairly regular 

pattern of suffixations and inflections within a 

given paradigm (Schiffman, 1999). So we pro-

pose a novel method based on Finite State 

Transducers for effectively transforming dialec-

tal and spoken Tamil to standard written Tamil. 

We make use of the regularity of suffixations and 

model them as FSTs. These FSTs are used to 

perform transformation which produces words in 

standard literary Tamil. 

Our experimental results show that DSWT 

achieves high precision and recall values. In ad-

dition, it improves the translation quality of ma-

chine translation systems when unknown words 

occur mainly due to colloquialism. This im-

provement gradually increases as the unknown 

word rate increases due to colloquial and dialec-

tal nature of words. 

Broadly, DSWT can be used in a variety of 

NLP applications such as Morphological Analy-

sis, Rule-based and Statistical Machine Transla-

tion (SMT), Information Retrieval (IR), Named-

Entity Recognition (NER), and Text-To-Speech 

(TTS). In general, it can be used in any NLP sys-

tem where there is a need to retrieve written lan-

guage words from dialectal and spoken language 

Tamil words. 

The paper is further organized as follows: In 

section 2, the challenges in processing Tamil di-

alects are explained. Section 3 explains the cor-

pus collection and study. Section 4 explains the 

peculiarities seen in spoken and dialectal Tamil. 

Section 5 introduces the system architecture of 

DSWT. Section 6 describes conducted Experi-

mental evaluations and the results. Section 7 dis-

cusses about the results and the paper concludes 

with a conclusion section. 

38



2 Challenges in Processing Tamil Di-
alects 

Tamil, a member of Dravidian language family, 

is highly inflectional and agglutinative in nature. 

The phenomenon of agglutination becomes much 

pronounced in dialects and spoken-form com-

munication where much of the phonemes of suf-

fixes get truncated and form agglutinated words 

which usually have two or more simpler words in 

them. A comprehensive study on the Grammar 

of Spoken Tamil for various syntactic categories 

is presented in Schiffman (1979) and Schiffman 

(1999). Various dialects are generally used in 

spoken discourse and while writing them people 

use inconsistent spellings for a given spoken lan-

guage word. The spelling usages primarily de-

pend on educational qualification of the authors. 

Sometimes, the authors intentionally use certain 

types of spelling to express satire and humor. 

Due to this spelling and dialectal variation 

many-to-one mapping happens where all the va-

riants correspond to single canonical written 

form. This is illustrated with the dialectal and 

spelling variants of the verb “paarkkiReen” (see) 

in Fig 1. 

 

Figure 1. many-to-one mapping 

 

For the words that belong to the above case, 

there is no hard rule that a particular pattern of 

spelling will be used and referred to while the 

text is written by people. In addition to this map-

ping, one-to-many mapping is also possible 

where a single spoken form maps to multiple 

canonical written forms. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2. one-to-many mapping 

 

In the case of one-to-many mapping, multiple 

written language words will be obtained. Choos-

ing a correct written language word over other 

words is dependent on the context where the di-

alectal spoken language word occurs. In some 

cases, the sentence may be terminated by punc-

tuations such as question marks which can be 

made use of to select an appropriate written lan-

guage word. To achieve correct selection of a 

word, an extensive study has to be conducted and 

is not the focus of this paper. In the current work 

we are interested in obtaining as many possible 

mappings as possible. Many-to-one mapping 

occurs mainly due to dialectal and spelling varia-

tions of spoken-forms whereas one-to-many 

mapping happens because a single spoken-form 

may convey different meanings in different con-

texts. Dialectal spoken forms of many-to-one and 

one-to-many mappings are more prevalent than 

one-to-one mapping where a dialectal spoken 

form maps to exactly one written form word. 

3 Data Collection and Corpus Study 

The dialectal spoken form of a language is pri-

marily used for colloquial and informal commu-

nication among native speakers. They are also 

commonly seen in personal blogs, social media 

chats and comments, discussion forums etc. Giv-

en this informal nature of the language usage, 

such a variety is not used in formal print and 

broadcasting media as they mainly use standard 

literary Tamil. 

In our preliminary study, we found that textual 

contents in personal blogs, tweets, and chats 

have significantly large number of dialectal and 

spoken language words than those are found in 

other standard online resources such as news 

publishers, entertainment media websites etc. 

Since we focus on processing various Tamil 

dialects and their spoken language variants, we 

have collected publicly available data from the 

above mentioned online resources for this work. 

The collected data belongs to authors from 

various geographic locations where different 

Tamil dialects exist. The textual contents in the 

selected resources mainly contain movie reviews, 

narratives, travel experiences, fables, poems, and 

sometimes an informal discourse, all in a casual 

and colloquial manner. Further, we were able to 

collect variants of spoken forms which vary with 

respect to person, social status, location, com-

munity, gender, age, qualification etc. 

 

 

 

enga 

engee 

(where) 

 

engaL 

(ours) 

39



Though Tamil language has 15 dialects, in this 

work, we focused only on 5 dialects namely, 

Central Tamil dialect, Madurai Tamil, Tirunelve-

li Tamil, Brahmin Tamil, Kongu Tamil and 

common spoken language forms. In Table 1, we 

present the corpus distribution with respect to the 

dialects and the number of dialectal and spoken 

language words. 

 
Name of the Tamil 

Dialect 

No. of  Dialectal 

words 

Central Tamil dialect 584 

Madurai Tamil 864 

Tirunelveli Tamil 2074 

Brahmin Tamil 2286 

Kongu Tamil 910 

Common Spoken Forms 5810 

Table 1. Corpus distribution among dialects 

 

We performed an in-depth study on the collected 

data and found some peculiarities which exist in 

some dialects. Some of the observed peculiarities 

are described in Section 4. 

4 Tamil Dialects and their Peculiarities 

Some dialectal words have totally different 

meaning in SST and in other dialects or in stan-

dard literary Tamil. For instance, consider the 

following dialectal sentence (Tirunelveli Tamil) 

 

ela,    inga   vaala. 

Hey   here   come 

„Hey come here!‟ 

 

The words “ela” and “vaala” convey different 

meanings in different contexts and dialects. In 

SST they denote “leaf” and “tail” respectively 

while in Tirunelveli Tamil dialect they convey 

the meaning “hey” and “come” respectively. 

Though these ambiguities are resolved when 

the context is considered, they make the trans-

formation task challenging since this is a word-

level task and no context information is taken 

into account during transformation. 

The example in table 2, illustrates spelling 

based variants where the variants map to single 

canonical written form. We observed that the 

most common form of spoken-language usage is 

the use and representation of “enRu” (ADV) as 

four variants which are shown in Table 2. 

 

 

 
Spoken form 

Variants 

Written form 

Equivalent 

[Noun/Pronoun/Verb] 

+ “nu” 

[Noun/Pronoun/Verb] + 

“enRu” 

[Noun/Pronoun/Verb] 

+ “nnu” 

[Noun/Pronoun/Verb] + 

“enRu” 

[Noun/Pronoun/Verb] 

+ “unu” 

[Noun/Pronoun/Verb] + 

“enRu” 

[Noun/Pronoun/Verb] 

+ “unnu” 

[Noun/Pronoun/Verb] + 

“enRu” 

Table 2. Spoken variants and written language 

 

The dialectal variants of the verb “vanthaarkaL” 

(they came) is illustrated in table 3. 

 
Dialectal variants Written form Equivalent 

[Verb] + “aaka”  [Verb] + “aarkaL”  

[Verb] + “aangka” [Verb] + “aarkaL”  

Table 3. Dialectal variants & written language 

 

It can be observed from Table 3 that the di-

alectal suffixes vary from each other but they all 

map to same written form suffix. Despite the di-

alectal variation, they all convey the same mean-

ing. But they vary syntactically. The “aaka” suf-

fix functions as adverbial marker in standard lite-

rary Tamil whereas it acts as person, number, 

gender (PNG) marker in Madurai Tamil dialect. 

5 System Architecture 

In this section we describe our system architec-

ture which is depicted in Figure 3. Our dialectal 

spoken to written transformer (DSWT) has three 

main components namely, Transformation En-

gine, CRF word boundary identifier and heuristic 

Sandhi corrector. 

 Transformation Engine contains FSTs 
for the dialectal and spoken language 

to standard written language transfor-

mation. The resultant words may be 

agglutinated and is decomposed with 

the help of  CRF boundary identifier. 

 CRF Word Boundary Identifier mod-
ule identifies the word boundaries in 

agglutinated words and splits them in-

to a set of constituent simpler words. 

 Heuristic Sandhi Corrector module 
makes necessary spelling changes to 

the segmented constituent words and 

standardizes them to canonical and 

meaningful simpler words. 

40



 

Figure 3. System Architecture 

 

5.1 Transformation Engine 

The function of Transformation engine is to 

transform dialectal and spoken language words 

into standardized literary Tamil words, similar to 

the official form of Tamil that is used in gov-

ernment publications such as official memoran-

dums, news and print media, and formal political 

speeches. 

Modeling FSTs for Transformation 

Given the regular pattern of inflections within a 

paradigm, we use paradigm based approach for 

the variation modeling. Specifically, the dialectal 

usages, spoken language forms and their variants 

are modeled as “root+spoken-language-suffix” 

where it will get transformed into “root+written-

language-suffix” after transformation. We had 

used AT&T's FSM library
3
 for generating FSTs. 

The FST shown in Fig. 4 shows the state transi-

tions for some spoken language words. 

 

 

Figure 4. Sample FST 

 

It can be observed from Figure 4 that spoken 

and dialectal words are processed in right to left 

fashion. This way of processing is adopted since 

                                                 
3
 http://www2.research.att.com/~fsmtools/fsm/ 

the number of unique suffixation is few when 

compared to the number of root words. This will 

make the suffix matching faster and hence 

achieves quick transformation. This makes FSTs 

as an efficient tool for dialectal or variation mod-

eling. 

 

Algorithm for Transformation 

The algorithm that is used to transform dialectal 

and spoken language text is given below. 

 

1: for each dialectal/spoken-language word 

2:   check possible suffixations in FST 

3:      for each suffixation 

4:        if  FST accepts & generates written  

               language equivalents for all suffixes 

5:          return (root + written-language-suffix) 

6:       else 

7:         return dialectal/spoken-language-word 

8: for each agglutinated & compound word 

9:     do CRF word boundary identification 

10:       for each constituent word (CW) 

11:           do Sandhi Correction 

12:              return simple constituent words 

 

5.2 Decomposition of Agglutinated and 
Compound Words using CRF 

Since Tamil is a morphologically rich language, 

the phenomenon of agglutination and compound-

ing in standard written language Tamil is high 

and very common. It is also present in dialectal 

and spoken language Tamil. This poses a number 

of challenges to the development of NLP sys-

tems. To solve these challenges, we segment the 

agglutinated and compound words into simpler 

constituent words. This decomposition is 

achieved using two components namely  

41



  
Agglutinated word  or 

Compound Word 

Boundary Identification  

and Word Segmentation 

Sandhi Correction Functions 

No Change Insertion Deletion Substitution 

nampuvathillaiyenRu 

(will not be believing) 

nampuvath 

illai 

yenRu 

 

illai 

nampuvathu  

 

enRu 

 

muththokuppukaLutaya 

(comprising of three 

volumes) 

muth 

thokuppukaL 

utaya 

 

thokuppukaL 

utaya 

  muu 

Table 4. Boundary identification and Sandhi Correction 

Table 4 clearly manifests the boundary of a constituent word within a compound or an agglutinated 

word which may contain one or more word-boundaries. It is observed that for “n” constituent words in 

a compound or an agglutinated word, there exists exactly (n-1) shared word-boundaries where (n>0). 

 

CRF word boundary identifier and Heuristic 

Sandhi Corrector. We have developed the word 

boundary identifier for boundary identification 

and segmentation as described in Marimuthu et 

al. (2013) and heuristic rule based Sandhi correc-

tor for making spelling changes to the segmented 

words. 

 

CRF Word-Boundary Identifier 
CRF based word-boundary identifier marks the 

boundaries of simpler constituent words in ag-

glutinated and compound words and segments 

them. CRFs are a discriminative probabilistic 

framework for labeling and segmenting sequen-

tial data. They are undirected graphical models 

trained to maximize a conditional probability 

(Lafferty et al., 2001). 

Generally word-boundary identification is stu-

died extensively for languages such as Chinese 

and Japanese but the necessity for Indian lan-

guages was not considered until recently. Al-

though there is no standard definition of word-

boundary in Chinese, Peng et al. (2004) describe 

a robust approach for Chinese word segmenta-

tion using linear-chain CRFs where the flexibili-

ty of CRFs to support arbitrary overlapping fea-

tures with long-range dependencies and multiple 

levels of granularity are utilized by integrating 

the rich domain knowledge in the form of mul-

tiple lexicons of characters and words into the 

framework for accurate word segmentation. 

In case of Japanese, though the word bounda-

ries are not clear, Kudo et al. (2004) used CRFs 

for Japanese morphological analysis where they 

show how CRFs can be applied to situations 

where word-boundary ambiguity exists. 

Marimuthu et al. (2013) worked on word 

boundary identification and segmentation in Ta-

mil where they model the boundary identification 

as a sequence labeling task [i.e. a tagging task]. 

The absence of word-boundary ambiguity in 

Tamil language favors the boundary identifica-

tion task and predominantly eliminates the need 

for providing further knowledge to CRFs such as 

multiple lexicons as in the case of Chinese word 

segmentation. Hence we have used word level 

features alone for training the CRFs. 

 

Sandhi Correction using Word-level Contex-

tual Rules 

Word-level contextual rules are the spelling 

rules in which each constituent word of an agglu-

tinated or compound word is dependent either on 

the previous or the next or both constituent 

words to give a correct meaning. 

After boundary identification, suppose an ag-

glutinated or a compound word is split into three 

constituent words, Sandhi correction for the first 

constituent word is dependent only on the second 

constituent word while the second word's Sandhi 

correction depends on both first and third consti-

tuent word whereas the third constituent word's 

Sandhi correction depends on second constituent 

word alone. 

Sandhi correction is performed using these 

rules to make necessary spelling changes to the 

boundary-segmented words in order to normalize 

them to sensible simpler words. It is accom-

plished using three tasks namely insertion, dele-

tion, and substitution as described in Marimuthu 

et al. (2013). 

For instance, after boundary identification the 

word “nampuvathillaiyenRu” (will not be believ-

ing) will be boundary marked and Sandhi cor-

rected as shown in the Table 4 above. 

 

Advantages of Word boundary Identification 

Morphological Analysis of simpler words is 

much easier than analyzing agglutinated and 

compound words.  

42



 

 

 

Tamil Dialects No. of dialectal words Precision (%) Recall (%) F-Measure (%) 

Central Tamil dialect 584 88.0 89.3 88.6 

Madurai Tamil 864 85.2 87.5 85.3 

Tirunelveli Tamil 2074 83.4 88.6 85.9 

Brahmin Tamil 2286 87.3 89.5 88.4 

Kongu Tamil 910 89.1 90.4 89.7 

Common Spoken Forms 5810 86.0 88.3 87.1 

Table 5. Direct Evaluation Results 

 

So the word-boundary identifier eases the task of 

morphological analyzer in identifying the indi-

vidual morphemes. In addition, it nullifies the 

unknown words category if it occurs due to ag-

glutination and compounding. As a result, it im-

proves the recall of the morphological analyzer 

and any advanced NLP system. For example, 

with Tamil, SMT models usually perform better 

when the compound words are broken into their 

components. This 'segmentation' gives the word 

alignment greater resolution when matching the 

groupings between the two languages. 

6 Experimental Evaluation 

Here we perform evaluation of the performance 

of DSWT with test corpus of 12528 words. We 

perform two types of evaluations: direct and indi-

rect evaluation. 

In direct evaluation, we evaluate the system 

using gold standard. In indirect evaluation the 

system is evaluated using machine translation 

application. The aim in indirect evaluation is to 

understand the effect of dialectal and spoken lan-

guage transformation in machine translation. 

 

6.1 Direct Evaluation 
We evaluate DSWT performance using the 

standard evaluation metrics: Precision, Recall, 

and F-measure. Precision and Recall values are 

calculated separately for each dialect using a 

gold standard.  They are calculated using the cas-

es described below: 

 

A: The dialectal or spoken language transforma-

tion yields one or many correct standard written 

language words. 

B: The dialectal or spoken language transforma-

tion yields at least one correct standard written 

language word. 

C: The dialectal or spoken language transforma-

tion yields no output. 

D: Number of dialectal or spoken language 

words given as input. 

Precision is then calculated as: A/(D-C) 

Recall is calculated as: (A+B)/D 
F-Measure is the harmonic mean of Precision 

and Recall. 

The obtained results for the considered 5 Tamil 

dialects and common spoken language forms are 

summarized in Table 5 above. 

6.2 Indirect Evaluation 

For indirect evaluation, we had used DSWT with 

Google Translate (GT) to measure the influence 

of DSWT in Tamil-English machine translation, 

and evaluated the improvement. 

Our test data had 100 Tamil sentences which 

are of dialectal and colloquial in nature. At first, 

we used GT to translate these sentences to Eng-

lish. This is Output1. Then we used our DSWT 

to transform the dialectal sentences into standard 

written Tamil. After this, the standard sentences 

were translated to English using GT. This cor-

responds to Output2. 

We then performed subjective evaluations of 

Output1 and Output2 with the help of three na-

tive Tamil speakers whose second language is 

English. The three evaluation scores for each 

sentence in Output1 and Output2 are averaged. 

The obtained scores are shown in Table 6. 

 
Subjective Evaluation 

Scores before  dialectal 

Transformation 

Subjective Evaluation 

Scores after dialectal 

Transformation 

No. of 

sentences 

Achieved 

Scores 

No. of 

Sentences 

Achieved 

Scores 

20 0 4 0 

70 1 14 1 

8 2 28 2 

2 3 30 3 

0 4 24 4 

Table 6. Subjective evaluation results 

 

We used a scoring scale of  0-4 where 

0  no translation happened. 

 

 

43



Before performing Dialectal Transformation Task After performing Dialectal Transformation Task 

Dialectal Spoken Tamil Google Translate results Standardized Written Tamil Google Translate results 

. 

(otanee  vanthuru) 

vanturu otane. (✘) . 
(utanee  vanthuvitu) 

Come immediately. (✔) 

. 

(otanee  vanthurula) 
vanturula otane. (✘) . 

(utanee  vanthuvitu) 
Come immediately. (✔) 

. 

(avanga  vanthaanga) 

she had come. (?) . 
(avarkaL  vanthaarkaL) 

They came. (✔) 

. 

(avuka vanthaaka) 
avuka to come. (✘) . 

(avarkaL  vanthaarkaL) 
They came. (✔) 

Table 7. Tamil-English Google Translate results before and after dialectal text transformation 

Sentences marked as (✘) are incorrectly translated into English and those that are marked as (?) may 

be partially correct. The sentences that are marked as (✔) are the correct English translations. 
 

1  lexical translation of few words happen     

        and no meaning can be inferred from the  

        translation output. 

2  complete lexical translations happen and  

        some meaning can be inferred from the  

        translation output. 

3  meaning can be inferred from translation 

        output but contains some grammatical 

        errors. 

4  complete meaning is understandable with  

        very minor errors. 

 

It can be observed from the results in Table 6 

that GT failed to translate dialectal and spoken 

language sentences. But the failure got mitigated 

after transformation causing dramatic improve-

ment in translation quality. The following Table 

illustrates few examples where the translation 

quality has improved after transforming dialectal 

spoken language. 

It must be noted from Table 7 that after the 

transformation of dialectal spoken language, all 

the sentences were able to achieve their English 

equivalents during machine translation. This 

suggests that almost all word categories in Tamil 

can achieve improved translations if the words 

are given as standard simple written language 

words. This experiment emphasizes the impor-

tance of feeding the machine translation systems 

with standard written language text to achieve 

quality translations and better results. 

7 Results and Discussion 

We observe that the achieved accuracy is higher 

for Kongu Tamil dialect when compared to other 

dialects. This is because words in this dialect are 

rarely polysemous in nature. But the number of 

polysemous words is high in the case of Madurai 

and Tirunelveli Tamil dialect and this resulted in 

low accuracy of transformation. 

While performing transformation, the possible 

causes for ending up with unknown words may 

be due to the absence of suffix patterns in FSTs, 

errors in input words, uncommonly transliterated 

words, and English acronyms. The standard writ-

ten language words convey a particular meaning 

in standard literary Tamil and completely differ-

ent meaning in dialectal usages. For instance, 

consider the verb “vanthaaka”. In standard lite-

rary Tamil, this is used in the imperative sense 

“should come” while in Tirunelveli Tamil dialect 

it is used in the sense “somebody came”. 

8 Conclusion and Future Work 

We have presented a dialectal and spoken lan-

guage to standard written language transformer 

for Tamil language and evaluated its perfor-

mance directly using standard evaluation metrics 

and indirectly using Google Translate for Tamil 

to English machine translation. The achieved 

results are encouraging. 

There is no readily available corpus for 

processing dialectal and spoken Tamil texts and 

we have collected the dialectal and spoken lan-

guage corpus for developmental and evaluation 

tasks. This corpus can be made use of for devel-

oping other NLP applications. 

In case of one-to-many mapping, multiple 

written language forms will be emitted as out-

puts. Hence, determining which written-form of 

word to be adopted over other resultant written-

forms has to be done based on the meaning of the 

whole sentence in which the spoken-language 

word occurs. This will be the focus of our future 

direction of the work. 

 

44



References 

A. K. Ramanujan. 1968. Spoken and Written Tamil, 

the verb. University of Chicago. Pages 74. 

Fuchun Peng, Fangfang Feng and Andrew McCallum. 

2004.Chinese Segmentation and New Word Detec-

tion using Conditional Random Fields, Computer 

Science Department Faculty Publication Series. 

Paper 92. University of Massachusetts – Amherst. 

Harold F. Schiffman. 1979. A Grammar of Spoken 

Tamil, Christian Literature Society, Madras, India. 

Pp. i-viii, 1-104. 

Harold F. Schiffman. 1988. Standardization or res-

tandardization: The case for “Standard” Spoken 

Tamil, Language in Society, Cambridge University 

Press, United States of America. Pages 359-385. 

Harold F. Schiffman. 1999. A Reference Grammar of 

Spoken Tamil, Cambridge University Press, Pp. i-

xxii,1-232. 

J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, and F. Pereira. 2001. Con-

ditional Random Fields: Probabilistic Models for 

Segmenting and Labeling Sequence Data. In Pro-

ceedings of the 18th International Conference on 

Machine Learning, pages 282–289. 

Marimuthu K., Amudha K., Bakiyavathi T. and Sobha 

Lalitha Devi. 2013. Word Boundary Identifier as a 

Catalyzer and Performance Booster for Tamil 

Morphological Analyzer, in proceedings of 6
th

 

Language and Technology Conference, Human 

Language Technologies as a challenge for Com-

puter Science and Linguistics, Poznan, Poland. 

Milton Singer and Bernard S. Cohn. 2007. The Struc-

ture of Variation: A Study in Caste Dialects, Struc-

ture and Change in Indian Society, University of 

Chicago, Chapter 19, pages 461-470. 

Nizar Habash and Owen Rambow. 2006. MAGEAD: 

A Morphological Analyzer and Generator for the 

Arabic Dialects, In proceedings of the 21
st
 Interna-

tional Conference on Computational Linguistics 

and 44
th

 Annual Meeting of the ACL, Sydney, Aus-

tralia. Pages 681-688 

Sajib Dasgupta and Vincent Ng. 2007. Unsupervised 

Word Segmentation for Bangla, In proceedings of 

the Fifth International Conference on Natural Lan-

guage Processing(ICON), Hyderabad, India. 

Taku Kudo, Kaoru Yamamoto and Yuji Matsumoto. 

2004. Applying Conditional Random Fields to Jap-

anese Morphological Analysis, In proceedings of 

Empirical Methods on Natural Language 

Processing, Barcelona, Spain. 

Umamaheswari E, Karthika Ranganathan, Geetha TV, 

Ranjani Parthasarathi, and Madhan Karky. 2011. 

Enhancement of Morphological Analyzer with 

compound, numeral and colloquial word handler, 

Proceedings of ICON-2011: 9
th

 International Con-

ference on Natural Language Processing, Macmil-

lan Publishers, India. 

 

 

45


