



















































Improving Peer Feedback Prediction: The Sentence Level is Right


Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications , pages 99–108,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Improving Peer Feedback Prediction: The Sentence Level is Right

Huy V. Nguyen
Department of Computer Science

University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
hvn3@pitt.edu

Diane J. Litman
Department of Computer Science & LRDC

University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260

litman@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract

Recent research aims to automatically pre-
dict whether peer feedback is of high qual-
ity, e.g. suggests solutions to identified
problems. While prior studies have fo-
cused on peer review of papers, simi-
lar issues arise when reviewing diagrams
and other artifacts. In addition, previous
studies have not carefully examined how
the level of prediction granularity impacts
both accuracy and educational utility. In
this paper we develop models for predict-
ing the quality of peer feedback regard-
ing argument diagrams. We propose to
perform prediction at the sentence level,
even though the educational task is to la-
bel feedback at a multi-sentential com-
ment level. We first introduce a corpus
annotated at a sentence level granularity,
then build comment prediction models us-
ing this corpus. Our results show that ag-
gregating sentence prediction outputs to
label comments not only outperforms ap-
proaches that directly train on comment
annotations, but also provides useful infor-
mation for enhancing peer review systems
with new functionality.

1 Introduction

Peer review systems are increasingly being used
to facilitate the teaching and assessment of student
writing. Peer feedback can complement and even
be as useful as teacher feedback; students can also
benefit by producing peer feedback. Past research
has shown that feedback implementation is sig-
nificantly correlated to the presence of desirable
feedback features such as the description of so-
lutions to problems (Nelson and Schunn, 2009).
Since it would be very time-consuming for in-
structors to identify feedback of low quality post-
hoc, recent research has used natural language

processing (NLP) to automatically predict whether
peer feedback contains useful content for guiding
student revision (Cho, 2008; Ramachandran and
Gehringer, 2011; Xiong et al., 2012). Such real-
time predictions have in turn been used to enhance
existing online peer-review systems, e.g. by trig-
gering tutoring that is designed to improve feed-
back quality (Nguyen et al., June 2014).

While most prior research of peer review qual-
ity has focused on feedback regarding papers, sim-
ilar issues arise when reviewing other types of ar-
tifacts such as program code, graphical diagrams,
etc. (Nguyen and Litman, July 2013). In addi-
tion, previous studies have not carefully examined
how the level of prediction granularity (e.g. multi-
sentential review comments versus sentences) im-
pacts both the accuracy and the educational utility
of the predictive models. For example, while the
tutoring intervention of (Nguyen et al., June 2014)
highlighted low versus high quality feedback com-
ments, such a prediction granularity could not sup-
port the highlighting of specific text spans that also
might have been instructionally useful.

In this paper, we first address the problem of
predicting feedback type (i.e. problem, solution,
non-criticism) in peer reviews of student argument
diagrams. In problem feedback, the reviewer de-
scribes what is wrong or needs to be improved in
the diagram. In solution feedback, the reviewer
provides a way to fix a problem or to improve the
diagram quality. Feedback is non-criticism when
it is neither a problem nor a solution (e.g. when it
provides only positive feedback or summarizes).
Examples are shown in Figure 1.1

The second goal of our research is to design our
prediction framework so that it can support real-
time tutoring about feedback quality. We hypoth-

1Our peer review corpus comes from a system that uses
an end-comment feedback approach as shown in Figure 1.
While it is possible to instead directly annotate a reviewed
artifact, this has been shown to encourage feedback on low-
level issues, and is not good for more global feedback.

99



#3. Are the relevance, validity, and reason fields in the supportive arcs complete and 
convincing? If not, indicate where the argument for relevance or validity is missing or 
unclear. Suggest ways to make the validity or relevance argument more convincing or 
sensible. 

Not all of these field are filled out, which makes it hard to get a clear idea of how legit 
these studies are. Also, some are unclear. An example is 24-supports where the reason 
is a question. I think there should be a substantial reason there instead of a question 
to convince me why it is relevant. 

#5. Is at least one credible opposing Finding, Study, or Theory connected to each 
Hypothesis? If there is no opposition, suggest a spot for a potential counterargument. 
If there is opposition, is it credible? If the opposition is not credible, explain why. 

There is a good piece of credible opposition, though it is hard to tell from the diagram 
what the study exactly did. 

#1. Are any parts of the diagram hard to understand because they are unclear? If so, 
describe any particularly confusing parts of the diagram and suggest ways to increase 
clarity. 

The argument diagram was easy to follow. I was able to effortlessly go through the 
diagram and connect each part. 

Your comments need to suggest solution. 

For every comment below, if you point out a problem make sure that 
you provide a solution to fix that problem. 

Your comments which are highlighted in GREEN already have solutions 
provided, while the RED comments mention only problem. Examples 
of problem and solution text are formatted in ITALIC and BOLD. 

I’ve revised my 
comments. 
Please check 
again. 

Could you show 
me some 
examples of 
problem and 
solution 
comments? 

My comments 
don’t have the 
issue that you 
describe. Please 
submit 
comments. 

Figure 1: A mock-up interface of a peer review system where the prediction of feedback type triggers
a system tutoring intervention. Left: three sample feedback comments including a non-criticism (top),
a solution (middle), and a problem (bottom). Right-top: a system tutoring intervention to teach the
student reviewer to provide a solution whenever a problem is mentioned. Right-bottom: possible student
responses to the system’s tutoring.

esize that using a student’s own high-quality re-
views during tutoring, and identifying the explicit
text that makes the review high quality, will help
students learn how to improve their lower quality
reviews. To facilitate this goal, we develop pre-
diction models that work at the sentence level of
granularity.

Figure 1 presents a mock-up of our envisioned
peer review interface. To tutor the student about
solutions (figure right), the system uses live ex-
amples taken from the student’s current review
(figure left). Color is used to display the feed-
back type predictions: here a non-criticism is dis-
played in black, while the criticisms that are pos-
itive and negative examples of solution are dis-
played in green and red, respectively. In addition,
to help the student focus on the important aspect of
the (green) positive example, the sentence that ac-
tually specifies the solution is highlighted in bold.

This paper presents our first results towards re-
alizing this vision. The contributions of our work
are two-fold. First, we develop a sentence-level
model for predicting feedback type in a diagram
review corpus. While our peer review system
works at the level of feedback comments (text of
each box in Figure 1), we find it is more accu-
rate to annotate and predict at finer-grained gran-
ularity levels, then use these predictions to infer
the comment’s feedback type. By introducing a

small overhead to annotate peer feedback, we cre-
ated a phrase level-annotated corpus of argument
diagram reviews. Our experimental results show
that our learned prediction models using labeled
sentences outperform models trained and tested
at comment level. In addition, our models out-
perform models previously developed for paper
rather than diagram feedback, and also show po-
tential generality by avoiding the use of domain-
specific features. Second, we demonstrate that
our sentence-level prediction can be used to sup-
port visualizations useful for tutoring. Particular
sentences that are predicted to express the com-
ment’s feedback type are highlighted for instruc-
tional purposes (e.g. the bold highlighting in Fig-
ure 1).

2 Related work

In instructional science, research has been con-
ducted to understand what makes peer feedback
helpful. At the secondary school level, Gielen et
al. (2010) found that the presence of justification
in feedback significantly improved students’ writ-
ing performance. At the university level, Nelson
and Schunn (2009) found that feedback on papers
was more likely to be implemented when the feed-
back contained solutions or pinpointed problem
locations. Lippman et al. (2012) found that similar
feedback properties led to greater implementation

100



of feedback on diagrams as well.
Building on such findings, researchers have be-

gun to develop automated methods to identify
helpful feedback. Cho (2008) was the first to
take a machine learning approach. Peer feedback,
i.e. comments, were manually segmented into
idea units2 and human-coded for various features
including problem detection, solution suggestion,
praise, criticism, and summary. Feedback was
then labeled as helpful or not-helpful based on the
presence of such features. The study showed that
feedback could be classified regarding helpfulness
with up to 67% accuracy using simple NLP tech-
niques including ngrams and part-of-speech. Our
work is different from (Cho, 2008) in that we focus
on predicting particular feedback types (i.e. solu-
tion and problem) rather than helpfulness in gen-
eral. Also, as the raw feedback to peer-review sys-
tems is typically at the comment-level, and being
aware that idea-units are difficult to automatically
segment, we instead predict at the sentence-level
to make model deployment more practical.

Our work is more similar to (Xiong and Litman,
2010; Xiong et al., June 2010; Xiong et al., 2012),
in which NLP and machine learning were used to
automatically predict whether peer reviews of stu-
dent papers contained specific desirable feedback
features. Xiong and Litman used NLP-based fea-
tures including paper ngrams, predefined keyword
lists, and dependency parses to predict feedback
type. For feedback of type criticism, they also
developed models to further predict problem lo-
calization and solution. Following (Cho, 2008),
Xiong and Litman evaluated their models on peer
review data that had been manually segmented
into idea units. As noted above, the difficulty of
automatically segmenting raw comments into idea
units makes deployment of such models less prac-
tical than our sentence-level approach. Also like
Cho (2008), while their models predicted a label
for each idea unit, the relevant text that led to the
prediction was not identified. We will address this
limitation by introducing a more fine-grained an-
notated corpus.

Regarding peer reviews of student argument
diagrams rather than papers, Nguyen and Lit-
man (July 2013) developed a rule-based algorithm
for predicting feedback that contained localization
text (e.g. “Hypothesis 4”). Their approach was to

2Cf. (Cho, 2008) “a self-contained message on a single
piece of strength or weakness found in peer writing.”

first identify common words between a peer com-
ment and its diagram, then classify phrases con-
taining these words into different localization pat-
terns. Although we similarly focus on diagram
rather than paper feedback, our work addresses a
different prediction task (namely, predicting feed-
back type rather than localization). We also use
statistical machine learning rather than a rule-
based approach, in conjunction with more general
linguistic features, to allow us to ultimately use
our models for papers as well as diagrams with
minimal modification or training.

Outside of peer review, research has been per-
formed recently to mine wishes and suggestions
in product reviews and political discussion. Gold-
berg et al. (2009) analyzed the WISH3 corpus and
built wish detectors based on simple word cues
and templates. Focusing on product reviews only,
Ramanand et al. (2010) created two corpora of
suggestion wishes (wishes for a change in an exist-
ing product or service) and purchasing wishes (ex-
plicit expressions of a desire to purchase a prod-
uct), and developed rules for identifying wish sen-
tences from non-wish ones. Both (Goldberg et al.,
2009; Ramanand et al., 2010) created rules manu-
ally by examining the data. Although we hypoth-
esize that wishes are related to solutions in peer
review, our educational data makes direct applica-
tion of product-motivated rules difficult. We thus
currently use statistical machine learning for our
initial research, but plan to explore incorporating
expression rules to enhance our model.

Sub-sentence annotation has gained much inter-
est in sentiment analysis and opinion mining. One
notable work is (Wilson et al., 2005) in which the
author addressed the problem that the contextual
polarity (i.e. positive, negative, or neutral) of the
phrase in which a word appears may be different
from the word’s prior polarity. We will also use a
phrase-level annotation, as described below.

3 Argument diagram review corpus

Diagramming software tools such as LASAD
(Scheuer et al., 2010) are increasingly being
used to teach student argumentation skills through
graphical representations. Graphical argument en-
vironments typically allow students to create di-
agrams in which boxes represent statements and
links represent argumentative or rhetorical rela-
tions. This helps students focus on abstract argu-

3http://www.timessquarenyc.org/nye/nye interactive.html

101



Figure 2: Part of a student argument diagram.

ment schemes before learning how to write argu-
mentative essays. To further help students create
good argument diagrams, it has recently been sug-
gested that receiving and providing feedback on
argument diagrams might yield useful pedagogi-
cal benefits (Falakmassir et al., July 2013), anal-
ogously to improving writing via peer review of
papers.

Our corpus consists of a subset of comments
from diagram reviews collected from nine separate
sections of an undergraduate psychology course.
Student argument diagrams were created using an
instructor-defined diagram ontology. The diagram
ontology defines five different types of nodes:
Current study, Hypothesis, Theory, Finding, and
Study (for reference). The ontology also defines
four different types of arcs that connect nodes:
Supports, Opposes, Part-of, and Undecided. Fig-
ure 2 shows part of a student argument diagram
that includes two studies, each of which supports
a finding which in turn supports or opposes a hy-
pothesis. In the course that generated our corpus,
students first created graphical argument diagrams
using LASAD to justify given hypotheses. Student
argument diagrams were then distributed, using
the SWoRD (Cho and Schunn, 2007) web-based
peer-review system, to other students in the class
for reviewing. Student authors potentially revised
their argument diagrams based on peer feedback,
then used the diagrams to write the introduction
of associated papers. Diagram reviews consist of
multiple written feedback comments in response

<IU> <Pr>Not all of these field are filled out,
which makes it hard to get a clear idea of how
legit these studies are.</Pr> </IU> <IU>
<Pr>Also, some are unclear. An example is 24-
supports where the reason is a question.</Pr>
<Sl>I think there should be a substantial
reason there instead of a question to convince
me why it is relevant.</Sl> </IU>

Table 1: Example of an annotated comment.
Markers<IU>: idea unit,<Sl>: solution,<Pr>:
problem. Problem text is italic and solution text is
bold for illustration purpose.

to rubric prompts, i.e. review dimensions. Student
reviewers were required to provide at least one but
no more than three comments for each of five re-
view dimensions. Figure 1 shows three sample
peer comments for three review dimensions (i.e.
dimensions 1, 3 and 5).

Following prior work on peer review analy-
sis (Lippman et al., 2012; Nguyen and Litman,
July 2013), the first author composed a coding
manual for peer reviews of argument diagrams.
An annotator first segments each comment into
idea units (defined as contiguous feedback re-
ferring to a single topic). Note that idea-unit
segmentation is necessary to make coding reli-
able. We however do not exploit idea unit in-
formation for our current prediction tasks. Then
the annotator codes each idea unit for different
features among which solution and problem are

102



Label Number of comments
Solution 178
Problem 194
Combined 135
Non-criticism 524
Total 1031

Table 2: Comment label distribution.

the two labels used in this study. These la-
bels are then used to assign a feedback type
(i.e. solution, problem, combined, and
non-criticism) to the comment as a whole.
The comment is labeled Solution if at least
one of its idea units presents a solution but no
problem unit is explicitly present. If no solution
idea is found, the comment is labeled Problem
if at least one of its idea units presents a prob-
lem. The comment is labeled Combined if
it has both solution and problem idea units, or
Non-criticism if it does not have solution or
problem. Non-criticism units can be praise,
summary or text that does not express any idea,
e.g. “Yes, it is.” Table 1 shows an example anno-
tated feedback comment that consists of two idea
units. The first idea unit is about empty fields, and
the second is about reason is a question. Based on
the annotations shown, the comment as a whole
has the label Combined.

We had one undergraduate psychology major
annotate the 1031 comments in our corpus, yield-
ing the label distribution shown in Table 2. The
first author also annotated 244 randomly selected
comments, solely to evaluate inter-coder agree-
ment. The obtained agreement of comment labels
was high, with accuracy 0.81 and kappa 0.74.

In addition to comment labeling, the annotator
also highlighted4 text spans that explain the labels.
The marked text span must either express solution
or problem information but cannot express both.
Therefore we require the annotator to highlight at
the phrase (i.e. sub-sentence) level, and that each
marked text must be completely within an idea
unit. Generally speaking this requirement does
not increase cognitive workload because annota-
tors already have to read the comment and notice
any solution or problem mentioned before label-
ing.

4Highlighting was made possible using macros in Mi-
crosoft Word. Annotators select the text of interest, then click
a button corresponding to the relevant label, e.g. problem.

Label Sentence
Problem Not all of these field are filled out,

which makes it hard to get a clear
idea of how legit these studies are.

Problem Also, some are unclear.
Problem An example is 24-supports where

the reason is a question.
Solution I think there should be a substantial

reason there instead of a question
to convince me why it is relevant.

Table 3: Examples of labeled sentences extracted
from the annotated comment.

Category Number of sentences
Solution 389
Problem 458
Non-criticism 1061
Total 1908

Table 4: Sentence label distribution.

Although we asked the annotator to mark text
spans which convey problem or solution informa-
tion, we did not ask the annotator to break each
text span into sentences. The first reason is that
the problem or solution text might only be part
of a sentence and highlighting only the informa-
tive part will give us more valuable data. Second,
sentence segmentation can be performed automat-
ically with high accuracy. After the corpus was
annotated, we ran a sentence segmentation proce-
dure using NLTK5 to create a labeled corpus at
the sentence level as follows. Each comment is
broken into three possible parts: solution includ-
ing all solution text marked in the comment, prob-
lem including all problem text, and other for non-
criticism text. Each part is then segmented into
sentences and each sentence is assigned the label
of the part to which it belongs. It may happen
that the segmented text is a phrase rather than a
complete sentence. We consider such phrases as
reduced sentential-like text, and we use the term
sentence(s) to cover such sub-sentence forms, as
well. Labeled sentences of the comment in Table 1
are shown in Table 3. After discarding empty sen-
tences and those of length 1 (all of those are in the
non-criticism category), there are 1908 sentences
remaining, distributed as shown in Table 4.

5www.nltk.org

103



4 Experimental setup

Sections 6 and 7 report the results of two different
experiments involving the prediction of feedback
types at the comment level. While each experi-
ment differs in the exact classes to be predicted,
both compare the predictive utility of the same two
different model-building approaches:

• Trained using comments (CTRAIN): our
baseline6 approach learns comment predic-
tion models using labeled feedback com-
ments for training.

• Trained using sentences (STRAIN): our pro-
posed approach learns sentence prediction
models using labeled sentences, then aggre-
gates sentence prediction outputs to create
comment labels. For example, the aggrega-
tion used for the experiment in Section 6 is as
follows: if at least one sentence is predicted
as Solution/Problem then the comment is as-
signed Solution/Problem.

We hypothesize that the proposed approach will
yield better predictive performance than the base-
line because the former takes advantage of cleaner
and more discriminative training data.

To make the features of the two approaches
comparable, we use the same set of generic lin-
guistic features:

• Ngrams to capture word cues: word un-
igrams, POS/word bigrams, POS/word tri-
grams, word and POS pairs, punctuation,
word count.

• Dependency parse to capture structure cues.

We skip domain and course-specific features (e.g.
review dimensions, diagram keywords like hy-
pothesis) in order to make the learned model more
applicable to different diagram review data. In-
stead, we search for diagram keywords in com-
ments and replace them with the string “KEY-
WORD”. The keyword list can be extracted au-
tomatically from LASAD’s diagram ontology.
Adding metadata features such as comment and
sentence ordering did not seem to improve perfor-
mance so we do not include such features in the
experiments below.

6The use of comment-level annotations for training and
testing is similar to (Nguyen and Litman, July 2013).

Following (Xiong et al., 2012), we learn predic-
tion models using logistic regression. However, in
our work both feature extraction and model learn-
ing are performed using the LightSide7 toolkit. As
our data is collected from nine separate sections
of the same course, to better evaluate the models,
we perform cross-section evaluation in which for
each fold we train the model using data from 8
sections and test on the remaining section. Re-
ported results are averaged over 9-fold cross vali-
dations. Four metrics are used to evaluate predic-
tion performance. Accuracy (Acc.) and Kappa (κ)
are used as standard performance measurements.
Since our annotated corpus has imbalanced data
which makes the learned models bias to the ma-
jority classes, we also report the Precision (Prec.)
and Recall (Recl.) of predicting the minor classes.

5 Sentence prediction performance

We first evaluate models for predicting binary ver-
sions of the sentence labels from Table 4 (e.g. so-
lution or not), as this output will be aggregated in
our proposed STRAIN approach. The results of
using sentence training (STr) and sentence testing
(STe) are shown in the STR/STE row of Table 5.
For comparison, the first row of the table shows
the performance of a majority baseline approach
(MAJOR), which assigns all sentences the label of
the relevant major class in each prediction task.
To confirm that a sentence-level annotated corpus
is necessary to train sentence prediction models,
a third approach that uses labeled comment data
for training (CTr) but sentences for testing (STe)
is included in the CTR/STE row. As we can see,
STR/STE models outperform those of CTR/STE
and MAJOR for all 4 metrics8. The comment ver-
sus sentence training yields significant differences
for predicting Problem and Criticism sentences.

6 Three feedback type prediction tasks

In this experiment we evaluate our hypothesis that
STRAIN outperforms CTRAIN by comparing per-
formance on three feedback type prediction tasks
at the comment level (derived from Table 2):

• Problem v. Non-problem. The Problem class
includes problem and combined comments.

7http://ankara.lti.cs.cmu.edu/side/download.html
8Note that κ in general, and precision and recall of minor

classes, are not applicable when evaluating MAJOR.

104



Solution Problem Criticism
Model Acc. κ Prec. Recl. Acc. κ Prec. Recl. Acc. κ Prec. Recl.
MAJOR 0.80 - - - 0.76 - - - 0.56 - - -
CTR/STE 0.87 0.57 0.70 0.62 0.75 0.22 0.48 0.29 0.75 0.48 0.76 0.63
STR/STE 0.88 0.61 0.76 0.63 0.81 0.44 0.62 0.51 0.80 0.59 0.79 0.74

Table 5: Prediction performance of three tasks at the sentence level. Comparing STR/STE to CTR/STE:
Italic means higher with p < 0.05, Bold means higher with p < 0.01.

• Solution v. Non-solution. The Solution class
includes solution and combined comments.

• Criticism v. Non-criticism. The Criticism
class includes problem, solution and com-
bined comments.

The two approaches are also compared to majority
baselines (MAJOR) and a hybrid approach (HY-
BRD) that trains models using labeled sentence
data but tests on labeled comments.

As shown in Table 6, both MAJOR and HYBRD
perform much worse than CTRAIN and STRAIN.
We note that while HYBRD gives comparably high
precision, its kappa and recall do not match those
of CTRAIN and STRAIN. Comparing CTRAIN
and STRAIN, the results confirm our hypothesis
that STRAIN outperforms CTRAIN. The major ad-
vantage of STRAIN is that it only needs one cor-
rectly predicted sentence to yield the correct com-
ment label. This is particularly beneficial for pre-
dicting problem comments, where the improve-
ment is significant for 3 of 4 metrics.

As our evaluation is cross-section, folds do not
have identical label distributions. Therefore we
look at prediction performance for each of the nine
individual sections. We find that the sentence level
approach yields higher performance on all four
metrics in six sections when predicting both So-
lution and Problem task, but only two sections for
Criticism. For the Criticism task – where it is not
necessary to exclusively differentiate between So-
lution and Problem, training prediction models us-
ing labeled sentences does not yield higher perfor-
mance than the traditional approach.

Roughly comparing predicting at the sentence
level (Table 5) versus the comment level (Table 6),
we note that the sentence level tasks are more dif-
ficult (e.g. lower absolute kappas) despite an in-
tuition that the labeled sentence corpus is cleaner
and more discriminative compared to the labeled
comment corpus. The observed performance dis-
parity shows the necessity of developing better

sentence prediction models, which we leave to fu-
ture work.

7 A case study experiment

To the best of our knowledge, (Xiong et al.,
June 2010; Xiong et al., 2012) contain the only
published models developed for predicting feed-
back types. A comment-level solution prediction
model has since been deployed in their peer re-
view software to evaluate student reviewer com-
ments in classroom settings, using the following 3-
way classification algorithm9. Each student com-
ment is classified as either a criticism (i.e. presents
problem/solution information) or a non-criticism.
The non-criticism comment is labeled NULL. The
criticism comment is labeled SOLUTION if it con-
tains solution information, and labeled PROBLEM
otherwise.

To evaluate our proposed STRAIN approach in
their practically-motivated setting, we follow the
description above to relabel peer feedback com-
ments in our corpus to new labels: NULL, PROB-
LEM, and SOLUTION. We also asked the authors
of (Xiong et al., 2012) for access to their current
model and we were able to run their model on our
feedback comment data. While it is not appro-
priate to directly compare model performance as
Xiong et al. were working with paper (not dia-
gram) review data, we report their model output,
named PAPER, to provide a reference baseline. We
expect the PAPER model to work on our diagram
review data to some extent, particularly due to its
predefined seed words for solution and problem
cues. Our CTRAIN baseline, in contrast, trains
models regarding the new label set using relabeled
diagram comment data, with the same features and
learning algorithm from the prior sections. The
majority baseline, MAJOR, assigns all comments
the major class label (which is now NULL).

Regarding our STRAIN sentence level ap-

9Personal communication.

105



Solution Problem Criticism
Model Acc. κ Prec. Recl. Acc. κ Prec. Recl. Acc. κ Prec. Recl.
MAJOR 0.70 - - - 0.68 - - - 0.51 - - -
HYBRD 0.82 0.52 0.87 0.48 0.75 0.36 0.68 0.41 0.78 0.56 0.84 0.68
CTRAIN 0.87 0.67 0.84 0.71 0.76 0.43 0.65 0.55 0.83 0.66 0.85 0.80
STRAIN 0.88 0.71 0.86 0.74 0.81 0.55 0.71 0.66 0.85 0.70 0.84 0.85

Table 6: Prediction performance of three tasks at comment level. Comparing STRAIN to CTRAIN: Italic
means higher with p < 0.1, Bold means higher with p < 0.05.

1. For each sentence, label it SOLUTION if it is
predicted as Solution by the Solution model.
2. For a predicted Non-solution sentence, label
it NULL if it is predicted as Non-criticism by the
Criticism model.
3. For a predicted Criticism sentence, label it
PROBLEM if it is predicted as Problem by the
Problem model.
4. For a predicted Non-problem sentence, label
it SOLUTION

Table 7: Relabel procedure.

proach, we propose two aggregation procedures
to infer comment labels given sentence prediction
output. In the first procedure, RELABELFIRST, we
infer new sentence labels regarding NULL, PROB-
LEM, and SOLUTION using a series of condi-
tional statements. The order of statements is cho-
sen heuristically given the performance of indi-
vidual models (see Table 5) and is described in
Table 7. Given the sentences’ inferred labels,
the comment is labeled SOLUTION if it has at
least one SOLUTION sentence. Else, it is labeled
PROBLEM if at least one of its sentences is PROB-
LEM, and labeled NULL otherwise. Our second
aggregation procedure, called INFERFIRST, fol-
lows an opposite direction in which we infer com-
ment labels regarding Solution, Problem, and Crit-
icism before re-labeling the comment regarding
SOLUTION, PROBLEM, and NULL following the
order of conditional statements in the relabel pro-
cedure.

As shown in Table 8, the MAJOR and PAPER
models perform much worse than the other three
models. While the PAPER model has accuracy
close to that of the other models, its kappa is far
lower. Regarding the three models trained on di-
agram review data, the two sentence level models
outperform the CTRAIN model. Particularly, kap-

Model Acc. κ
MAJOR 0.51 -
PAPER 0.71 0.49
CTRAIN 0.76 0.60
RELABELFIRST 0.79 0.66
INFERFIRST 0.79 0.66

Table 8: Prediction performance of different ap-
proaches in a case study.

pas of the two sentence level models are either sig-
nificantly higher (for INFERFIRST) or marginally
higher (for RELABELFIRST) compared to kappa
of CTRAIN. To further investigate performance
disparity between models, we report in Table 9
precision and recall of different models for each
class. The PAPER model achieves high preci-
sion but low recall for SOLUTION and PROBLEM
classes. We reason that the model’s seed words
help its precision, but its ngram features, which
were trained using paper review data, cannot ad-
equately cover positive instances in our corpus.
The two sentence level models perform better for
the PROBLEM class than the other two models,
which is consistent with what is reported in Ta-
ble 6. Comparing the two sentence level models,
INFERFIRST better balances precision and recall
than RELABELFIRST.

8 The sentence level is right

The experimental results in the previous two sec-
tions have demonstrated that sentence prediction
output helps improve prediction performance at
the comment level. This supports our hypothesis
that sentence prediction is the right level for en-
hancing peer review systems to detect and respond
to multi-sentence review comments of low qual-
ity. In our labeled sentence corpus, each instance
either expresses a solution, a problem, or is a non-
criticism, so the data is cleaner and more discrim-

106



SOLUTION PROBLEM NULL
Model Prec. Recl. Prec. Recl. Prec. Recl.
MAJOR - - - - 0.51 1.00
PAPER 0.81 0.62 0.58 0.29 0.70 0.92
CTRAIN 0.84 0.75 0.55 0.41 0.78 0.90
RELABELFIRST 0.72 0.90 0.66 0.48 0.88 0.84
INFERFIRST 0.75 0.86 0.61 0.55 0.88 0.84

Table 9: Precision and recall of different models in a case study.

inative than the labeled comment corpus. This is
a nice property that helps reduce feature colloca-
tion across exclusive classes, Problem vs. Solution
for example, which is a danger of training on feed-
back comments due to Combined instances. More-
over, our annotated comment corpus has solution
and problem text marked at the sub-sentence level,
which is a valuable resource for learning solution
and problem patterns and linguistic cues.

Improving peer feedback prediction accuracy is
not the only reason we advocate for the sentence
level. We envision that the sentence level is the
necessary lower bound that a peer review system
needs to handle new advanced functionalities such
as envisioned in Figure 1. Being able to highlight
featured text in a peer comment is a useful visu-
alization function that should help peer reviewers
learn from live examples, and may also help stu-
dent authors quickly notice the important point of
the comment.

Sentence and phrase level annotation is made
easy with the availability of many text annota-
tion toolkits; BRAT10 (Stenetorp et al., 2012) is
an example. From our work, marking text spans
by selecting and clicking requires a minimal ad-
ditional effort from annotators and does not cause
more cognitive workload. Moreover, we hypoth-
esize that through highlighting the text, an anno-
tator has to reason about why she would choose a
label, which in turn makes the annotation process
more reliable. We plan to test whether annotation
performance does indeed improve in future work.

9 Conclusions and future work

In this paper we present a sentence-level anno-
tated corpus of argument diagram peer review
data, which we use to develop comment-level pre-
dictions of peer feedback types. Our work is the
first of its kind in building an automated feed-

10http://brat.nlplab.org/

back type assessment component for reviews of
argument diagrams rather than papers. We have
demonstrated that using sentence prediction out-
puts to label the corresponding comments outper-
forms the traditional approach that learns mod-
els using labeled comments. The improvement
of using sentence prediction outputs is more sig-
nificant for more difficult tasks, i.e. Problem vs.
Non-problem, in which textual expression varies
greatly from explicit to implicit. In a case study
mimicking a real application setting to experiment
with the proposed models, we achieved a simi-
lar verification of the utility of sentence models.
Given our imbalanced training data labels and our
avoidance of using domain-specific features, these
first results of our two experiments are promising.

In these first studies, our models were trained
using generic prediction procedures, e.g., using
basic linguistic features without feature selection
or tuning. Thus our next step is to analyze pre-
diction features for their predictiveness. We also
plan to incorporate human-engineered rules for so-
lution and problem text. We aim to improve per-
formance while keeping feature generality. An in-
teresting experiment we may conduct is to test our
learned models on paper review data to evaluate
performance and generality in an extreme setting.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by NFS Grant No.
1122504. We are grateful to our colleagues for
sharing the data. We thank Kevin Ashley, Wencan
Luo, Fan Zhang, other members of the Argument-
Peer and ITSPOKE groups as well as the anony-
mous reviewers for their valuable feedback.

References
Kwangsu Cho and Christian D. Schunn. 2007. Scaf-

folded writing and rewriting in the discipline: A
web-based reciprocal peer review system. Comput-
ers and Education, 48(3):409–426.

107



Kwangsu Cho. 2008. Machine classification of peer
comments in physics. In Proceedings 1st inter-
national conference on Educational Data Mining
(EDM), pages 192–196.

Mohammad Falakmassir, Kevin Ashley, and Christian
Schunn. July 2013. Using argument diagramming
to improve peer grading of writing assignments. In
Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Massive Open
Online Courses at 16th International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED), Mem-
phis, TN, pages 41–48.

Sarah Gielen, Elien Peeters, Filip Dochy, Patrick
Onghena, and Katrien Struyven. 2010. Improv-
ing the effectiveness of peer feedback for learning.
Learning and Instruction, 20(4):304–315.

Andrew B. Goldberg, Nathanael Fillmore, David An-
drzejewski, Zhiting Xu, Bryan Gibson, and Xiao-
jin Zhu. 2009. May all your wishes come true: A
study of wishes and how to recognize them. In Pro-
ceedings Human Language Technologies: The 2009
Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
NAACL-HTL, pages 263–271.

Jordan Lippman, Mike Elfenbein, Matthew Diabes,
Cori Luchau, Collin Lynch, Kevin Ashley, and Chris
Schunn. 2012. To revise or not to revise: What
influences undergrad authors to implement peer cri-
tiques of their argument diagrams? In International
Society for the Psychology of Science and Technol-
ogy 2012 Conference. Poster.

Melissa M. Nelson and Christian D. Schunn. 2009.
The nature of feedback: how different types of peer
feedback affect writing performance. Instructional
Science, 37(4):375–401.

Huy V. Nguyen and Diane J. Litman. July 2013. Iden-
tifying localization in peer reviews of argument di-
agrams. In Proceedings 16th International Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED),
Memphis, TN, pages 91–100.

Huy Nguyen, Wenting Xiong, and Diane Litman. June
2014. Classroom evaluation of a scaffolding inter-
vention for improving peer review localization. In
Proceedings 12th International Conference on Intel-
ligent Tutoring Systems (ITS), Honolulu, HI, pages
272–282.

Lakshmi Ramachandran and Edward F. Gehringer.
2011. Automated assessment of review quality us-
ing latent semantic analysis. In Proceedings 11th
IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learn-
ing Technologies (ICALT), pages 136–138.

J. Ramanand, Krishna Bhavsar, and Niranjan
Pedanekar. 2010. Wishful thinking: finding
suggestions and ‘buy’ wishes from product reviews.
In Proceedings the NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop
on Computational Approaches to Analysis and
Generation of Emotion in Text, pages 54–61.

Oliver Scheuer, Frank Loll, Niels Pinkwart, and
Bruce M. McLaren. 2010. Computer-supported ar-
gumentation: A review of the state of the art. In-
ternational Journal of Computer-Supported Collab-
orative Learning, 5(1):43–102.

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topic,
Tomoko Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi Tsu-
jii. 2012. Brat: a web-based tool for nlp-assisted
text annotation. In Proceedings the Demonstra-
tions at the 13th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 102–107.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-
level sentiment analysis. In Joint Human Language
Technology Conference and the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(HLT-EMNLP), pages 347–354.

Wenting Xiong and Diane Litman. 2010. Identify-
ing problem localization in peer-review feedback. In
Proceedings 10th International Conference on Intel-
ligent Tutoring System (ITS), Pittsburgh, PA. Poster.

Wenting Xiong, Diane Litman, and Christian Schunn.
2012. Natural language processing techniques for
researching and improving peer feedback. Journal
of Writing Research, 4(2):155–176.

Wenting Xiong, Diane Litman, and Christian Schunn.
June 2010. Assessing reviewer’s performance based
on mining problem localization in peer-review data.
In Proceedings 3rd International Conference on
Educational Data Mining (EDM), Pittsburgh, PA,
pages 211–220.

108


