



















































Indicators of Argument-conclusion Relationships. An Approach for Argumentation Mining in German Discourses


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Argumentation Mining, pages 104–105,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Indicators of Argument-conclusion Relationships.  

An Approach for Argumentation Mining in German Discourses 

 
Bianka Trevisan, Eva-Maria Jakobs 
Human-Computer Interaction Center 

RWTH Aachen University 
 {b.trevisan|e.m.jakobs} 

@tk.rwth-aachen.de 

 Eva Dickmeis, Thomas Niehr 
German Linguistics 

RWTH Aachen University 
 {e.dickmeis|t.niehr} 
@isk.rwth-aachen.de 

 
  

 
[In this paper we present a new methodological 
approach for the analysis of public discourses 
aiming at the semi-automated identification of 
arguments by combining methods from discourse 
analysis with methods from Natural Language 
Processing. Discourses evolve over long periods 
of time and, consequently, form a broad data-
base. Up to now, the analysis of discourses is 
hitherto performed primarily by hand, i.e., only 
small corpora or discourse fragments can be ana-
lyzed. Inevitably, this leads to lengthy and ex-
pensive annotation. Thus, there is a growing in-
terest to overcome these methodological chal-
lenges by the use of computer-based methods 
and tools for the semi-automated analysis.  

However, there are only few approaches 
known that focus on the analysis of discourses 
and the (semi-)automated identification of argu-
ments therein (e.g. Reed at al., 2008; Liakata et 
al., 2012; Ashley and Walker, 2013). Particular-
ly, approaches that can be explicitly used for the 
analysis of German-language discourses exist 
only in initial stages. Therefore, we suggest a 
fine-grained semi-automated approach based on 
multi-level annotation that focuses on linguistic 
means as indicators of arguments. The aim is to 
identify regularities, respectively, indicators in 
the linguistic surface of the discourse (e.g. recur-
ring lexical and typographical characteristics), 
which indicate the occurrence of certain argu-
ments (e.g. premise). In this paper, we focus on 
the identification of indicators of argument-
conclusion relationship: conclusive connectors or 
conclusiva, that are typically adverbs such as 
hence, consequently, therefore, thus, because 
(Govier, 2013; see example below): 

Die Campusbahn werde den Individualverkehr 
verdrängen, weil die Stadt eng bebaut sei. Schon 
in den 1970er Jahren sei deshalb das Aus für die 
Straßenbahn besiegelt worden.  

[The campus train will displace the individual 
traffic because the city is densely built. There-
fore, the end for the tram was sealed in the 
1970s.] 

As an application example, a small corpus 
consisting of 21 newspaper articles is analyzed. 
The corpus belongs to the interdisciplinary pro-
ject Future Mobility (FuMob), which is funded 
by the Excellent Initiative of the German federal 
and state governments. The methodological ap-
proach consists of three steps, which are per-
formed iteratively: (1) manual discourse-
linguistic argumentation analysis, (2) semi-
automatic Text Mining (PoS-tagging and linguis-
tic multi-level annotation), and (3) data merge.  

(1) Discourse-linguistic argumentation analy-
sis: First, the data is manually analyzed. Objec-
tives of the analysis are (i) identifying discourse-
relevant arguments, (ii) forming argument clas-
ses, and (iii) determining the significance of an 
argument in the discourse (Niehr 2004). To de-
termine the significance of an argument the use 
by various discourse participants is analyzed and 
quantified. The argument-use can be categorized 
as argumentative, positively cited, negatively 
cited or neutrally cited. In addition, to identify 
arguments and their use in public discourse, the 
analysis also aims to detect and characterize dis-
course participants who use similar arguments. 
For this purpose, the social role, gender or age of 
an argument’s author are determined on the basis 
of the information given in the text. This allows 
comparing the argumentation of different social 
groups in public discourses.  

(2) Text Mining: Parallel to the manual dis-
course analysis, the collected data is processed 
semi-automatically applying the methodology 
described in Trevisan (2014/in press). Thereby, 
post-processing is performed in four successive 
methodological steps. First, the data is tokenized 

104



by means of the TreeTagger tokenizer (Schmid 
1995). Second, the tokenized data is PoS-tagged 
using TreeTagger. Third, the automatically to-
kenized and tagged data is manually corrected. 
Fourth, the corpus is annotated semi-
automatically applying the multi-level annotation 
model depicted in Trevisan et al. (2014/in press); 
the annotation is performed using the tool Auto-
Annotator. Originally, the model was used for 
the enhancement of automatic Sentiment Analy-
sis in German blog comments. The annotation 
model consists of different annotation levels with 
various purposes and scopes (token vs. sequence 
of tokens) of annotation, e.g., the annotation of 
the morpho-syntactic function of a token vs. the 
annotation of the polarity (positive, negative, 
neutral) of a sentence or utterance. Thereby, the 
fact is taken into account that each token fulfills 
different grammatical functions, which are also 
relevant for the constitution of evaluative state-
ments and arguments. The basic idea is, that the 
interplay and combination of different annotated 
linguistic means constitutes or indicates an ar-
gument and its way of use.  

(3) Data merge: In a third step, the analysis 
results from (1) and (2) are merged. By the data 
merge, it appears, which linguistic means on 
which linguistic level interplays or often occurs 
with which kind of argument. The results of the 
data merge are evaluated regarding the enhance-
ment of automatic argumentation analysis. 

The results show that the argument-conclusion 
relationship is most often indicated by the con-
junction because followed by since, therefore 
and so. In detail, the results show that indicators 
for argument-conclusion relationship include not 
only causal conjunctions (e.g. because, since), 
but also concessive (e.g. although, despite) or 
conditional conjunctions (e.g. if ... then). There-
by, the conclusiva indicate either the argument 
(e.g. because, since, also) or the conclusions 
(e.g. hence, therefore, so). In the second case, 
they are still references to arguments that often 
occur immediately prior to the conclusion. Fur-
thermore, conclusiva occur predominantly as a 
single token. If they occur as a multi-token they 
have a reinforcing (e.g. just because) respective-
ly limiting or negating function (e.g. only be-
cause). 

The results raise the suspicion that the identi-
fied conclusiva are text type-specific phenome-
non as the analyzed corpus contains only articles 
from newspapers. However, we assume that 
some of the conclusiva may occur across differ-
ent text types (e.g. because, therefore) whereas 

other (e.g. for this reason, in the end) tends to be 
text type-specific indicators for argument-
conclusion relationships.  

Moreover, having a closer look at the text da-
ta, it is evident that conclusiva only bear evi-
dence of argument-conclusion relationships. 
They do not indicate where the argument or con-
clusion starts or ends or in which sequence (ar-
gument-conclusion vs. conclusion-argument) 
they occur. Regarding the semi-automated analy-
sis of arguments in discourses this constitutes a 
difficulty. One solution to approach this chal-
lenge might be to define the text window, which 
has to be considered left and right from the con-
clusiva. In this context, the work of Wellner and 
Pustejovsky (2007) has to be considered, too.  

Future work will focus on the enhancement of 
the methodological approach and its automation, 
which includes i.a. the implementation of ap-
proaches such as anaphora resolution or pattern 
recognition. Furthermore, the analysis must be 
extended to other corpora and text types. 

 
Kevin D. Ashley and Vern R. Walker. 2013. Toward 

Constructing Evidence-Based Legal Arguments 
Using Legal Decision Documents and Machine 
Learning. Proceedings of ICAIL, 176-180 

Trudy Govier. 2013. A practical study of argument. 
Wadsworth, Andover. 

Maria Liakata, Shyamasree Saha, Simon Dobnik, 
Colin Batchelor, and Dietrich Rebholz-
Schuhmann. 2012. Automatic recognition of con-
ceptualization zones in scientific articles and two 
life science applications. Bioinformatics, 
28(7):991–1000. 

Thomas Niehr. 2004. Der Streit um Migration in 
Deutschland, Österreich und der Schweiz. Eine 
vergleichende diskursgeschichtliche Untersuchung. 
Winter, Heidelberg. 

Chris Reed, Raquel Mochales Palau, Glenn Rowe, 
and Marie-Francine Moens. 2008. Language Re-
sources for Studying Argument. Proceedings of the 
6th Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation, 91–100. 

Helmut Schmid. 1995. Improvements in Part-of-
Speech Tagging with an Application to German. 
Proceedings of SIGDAT’95.  

Bianka Trevisan. 2014/in press. Bewerten in Blog-
kommentaren. Mehrebenenannotation sprachlichen 
Bewertens. Dissertation, RWTH Aachen Universi-
ty. 

Ben Wellner and James Pustejovsky. 2007. Automati-
cally Identifying the Arguments of Discourse Con-
nectives. Proceeding of: EMNLP-CoNLL, 92-101 

105


