



















































Documenting Endangered Languages with the WordsEye Linguistics Tool


Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on the Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages, pages 6–14,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA, 26 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Documenting Endangered Languages with the WordsEye Linguistics Tool
Morgan Ulinski∗

mulinski@cs.columbia.edu
Anusha Balakrishnan∗
ab3596@columbia.edu

Daniel Bauer∗
bauer@cs.columbia.edu

Bob Coyne∗
coyne@cs.columbia.edu

Julia Hirschberg∗
julia@cs.columbia.edu

Owen Rambow†
rambow@ccls.columbia.edu

∗Department of Computer Science †CCLS
Columbia University
New York, NY, USA

Abstract

In this paper, we describe how field lin-
guists can use the WordsEye Linguistics
Tool (WELT) to study endangered lan-
guages. WELT is a tool under devel-
opment for eliciting endangered language
data and formally documenting a lan-
guage, based on WordsEye (Coyne and
Sproat, 2001), a text-to-scene generation
tool that produces 3D scenes from text in-
put. First, a linguist uses WELT to create
elicitation materials and collect language
data. Next, he or she uses WELT to for-
mally document the language. Finally, the
formal models are used to create a text-
to-scene system that takes input in the en-
dangered language and generates a picture
representing its meaning.

1 Introduction

Although languages have appeared and disap-
peared throughout history, today languages are
facing extinction at an unprecedented pace. Over
40% of the estimated 7,000 languages in the world
are at risk of disappearing. When languages die,
we lose access to an invaluable resource for study-
ing the culture, history, and experience of people
who spoke them (Alliance for Linguistic Diversity,
2013). Efforts to document languages and develop
tools to support these efforts become even more
important with the increasing rate of extinction.
Bird (2009) emphasizes a particular need to make
use of computational linguistics during fieldwork.

To address this issue, we are developing the
WordsEye Linguistics Tool, WELT. In one mode
of operation, we provide field linguists with tools
for building elicitation sessions based on custom
3D scenes. In another, we provide a way to for-
mally document the endangered language. For-
mal hypotheses can be verified using a text-to-
scene system that takes input in the endangered

language, analyzes it based on the formal model,
and generates a picture representing the meaning.

WELT provides important advantages to field
linguists for elicitation over the current practice of
using a set of pre-fabricated static pictures. Using
WELT the linguist can create and modify scenes
in real time, based on informants’ responses, cre-
ating follow-up questions and scenes to support
them. Since the pictures WELT supports are 3D
scenes, the viewpoint can easily be changed, al-
lowing exploration of linguistic descriptions based
on different frames of reference, as for elicitations
of spatial descriptions. Finally, since scenes and
objects can easily be added in the field, the lin-
guist can customize the images used for elicitation
to be maximally relevant to the current informants.

Creating a text-to-scene system for an endan-
gered language with WELT also has advantages.
First, WELT allows documentation of the seman-
tics of a language in a formal way. Linguists can
customize the focus of their studies to be as deep
or shallow as they wish; however, we believe that a
major advantage of documenting a language with
WELT is that it enables studies that are much more
precise. The fact that a text-to-scene system is cre-
ated from this documentation will allow linguists
to test the theories they develop with native speak-
ers, making changes to grammars and semantics
in real time. The resulting text-to-scene system
can also be an important tool for language preser-
vation, spreading interest in the language among
younger generations of the community and re-
cruiting new speakers.

In this paper, we discuss the WELT toolkit and
its intended use, with examples from Arrernte and
Nahuatl. In Section 2 we discuss prior work on
field linguistics computational tools. In Section 3
we present an overview of the WELT system. We
describe using WELT for elicitation in Section 4
and describe the tools for language documentation
in Section 5. We conclude in Section 6.

6



2 Related Work

Computational tools for field linguistics fall into
two categories: tools for native speakers to use
directly, without substantial linguist intervention,
and tools for field linguists to use. Tools intended
for native speakers include the PAWS starter kit
(Black and Black, 2009), which uses the answers
to a series of guided questions to produce a draft
of a grammar. Similarly, Bird and Chiang (2012)
describe a simplified workflow and supporting MT
software that lets native speakers produce useable
documentation of their language on their own.

One of the most widely-used toolkits in the lat-
ter category is SIL FieldWorks (SIL FieldWorks,
2014), or specifically, FieldWorks Language Ex-
plorer (FLEx). FLEx includes tools for elicit-
ing and recording lexical information, dictionary
development, interlinearization of texts, analysis
of discourse features, and morphological analy-
sis. An important part of FLEx is its “linguist-
friendly” morphological parser (Black and Si-
mons, 2006), which uses an underlying model
of morphology familiar to linguists, is fully in-
tegrated into lexicon development and interlin-
ear text analysis, and produces a human-readable
grammar sketch as well as a machine-interpretable
parser. The morphological parser is constructed
“stealthily” in the background, and can help a lin-
guist by predicting glosses for interlinear texts.

Linguist’s Assistant (Beale, 2011) provides a
corpus of semantic representations for linguists to
use as a guide for elicitation. After eliciting the
language data, a linguist writes rules translating
these semantic representations into surface forms.
The result is a description of the language that can
be used to generate text from documents that have
been converted into the semantic representation.
Linguists are encouraged to collect their own elic-
itations and naturally occurring texts and translate
them into the semantic representation.

The LinGO Grammar Matrix (Bender et al.,
2002) facilitates formal modeling of syntax by
generating basic HPSG “starter grammars” for
languages from the answers to a typological ques-
tionnaire. Extending a grammar beyond the proto-
type, however, does require extensive knowledge
of HPSG, making this tool more feasibly used by
grammar engineers and computational linguists.
For semantics, the most common resource for for-
mal documentation across languages is FrameNet
(Filmore et al., 2003); FrameNets have been de-

veloped for many languages, including Spanish,
Japanese, and Portuguese. However, FrameNet is
also targeted toward computational linguists.

In general, we also lack tools for creating cus-
tom elicitation materials. With WELT, we hope to
fill some of the gaps in the range of available field
linguistics tools. WELT will enable the creation of
custom elicitation material and facilitate the man-
agement sessions with an informant. WELT will
also enable formal documentation of the semantics
of a language without knowledge of specific com-
putational formalisms. This is similar to the way
FLEx allows linguists to create a formal model of
morphology while also documenting the lexicon
of a language and glossing interlinear texts.

3 Overview of WELT Workflow

In this section, we briefly describe the workflow
for using WELT; a visual representation is pro-
vided in Figure 1. Since we are still in the early
stages of our project, this workflow has not been
tested in practice. The tools for scene creation and
elicitation are currently useable, although more
features will be added in the future. The tools for
modeling and documentation are still in develop-
ment; although some functionality has been imple-
mented, we are still testing it with toy grammars.

First, WELT will be used to prepare a set of 3D
scenes to be used to elicit targeted descriptions or
narratives. An important part of this phase will be
the cultural adaptation of the graphical semantics
used in WordsEye, so that scenes will be relevant
to the native speakers a linguist works with. We
will discuss cultural adaptation in more detail in
Section 4.1. Next, the linguist will work with an
informant to generate language data based on pre-
pared 3D scenes. This can be a dynamic process;
as new questions come up, a linguist can easily
modify existing scenes or create new ones. WELT
also automatically syncs recorded audio with open
scenes and provides an interface for the linguist to
write notes, textual descriptions, and glosses. We
will discuss creating scenes and eliciting data with
WELT in Section 4.2. After the elicitation session,
the linguist can use WELT to review the data col-
lected, listen to the audio recorded for each scene,
and revise notes and glosses. The linguist can then
create additional scenes to elicit more data or be-
gin the formal documentation of the language.

Creating a text-to-scene system with WELT re-
quires formal models of the morphology, syntax,

7



Define	  Lexicon	  

Cultural	  
Adapta4on	  of	  

VigNet	  
Create	  Scenes	   Collect	  Data	  

from	  informant	  
Clean-­‐up	  notes/

glosses	  

Modify	  &	  add	  vigneBes	  

Define	  syntax	  to	  seman4cs	  rules	  

Define	  Morphology	  

Define	  Syntax	  
L2	  

Lexicon	  
L2	  Syntax-­‐

Seman4cs	  rules	  VigNet	  Resources 

Output	  &	  
Collabora4on	   Prepare	  L2	  scenes	  

Verify	  with	  
informant	  

XLE	   FieldWorks	  Tools WELT	  

Figure 1: WELT workflow

and semantics of a language. Since the focus
of WELT is on semantics, the formalisms used
to model morphology and syntax may vary. We
are using FieldWorks to document Nahuatl mor-
phology, XFST (Beesley and Karttunen, 2003) to
model Arrernte morphology, and XLE (Crouch et
al., 2011) to model syntax in the LFG formal-
ism (Kaplan and Bresnan, 1982). We will provide
tools to export WELT descriptions and glosses
into FLEx format and to export the lexicon cre-
ated during documentation into FLEx and XLE.
WELT will provide user interfaces for modeling
the syntax-semantics interface, lexical semantics,
and graphical semantics of a language. We will
discuss these in more detail in Section 5.3.

Once models of morphology, syntax, and se-
mantics are in place (note that these can be work-
ing models, and need not be complete), WELT
puts the components together into a text-to-scene
system that takes input in the endangered language
and uses the formal models to generate pictures.
This system can be used to verify theories with in-
formants and revise grammars. As new questions
arise, WELT can also continue to be used to create
elicitation materials and collect linguistic data.

Finally, we will create a website for WELT so
linguists can share resources such as modified ver-
sions of VigNet, 3D scenes, language data col-
lected, and formal grammars. This will allow
comparison of analyses across languages, as well
as facilitate the documentation of other languages
that are similar linguistically or spoken by cul-

turally similar communities. In addition, sharing
the resulting text-to-scene systems with a wider
audience can generate interest in endangered lan-
guages and, if shared with endangered-language-
speaking communities, encourage younger mem-
bers of the community to use the language.

4 Elicitation with WELT

WELT organizes elicitation sessions around a set
of 3D scenes, which are created by inputting En-
glish text into WordsEye. Scenes can be imported
and exported between sessions, so that useful
scenes can be reused and data compared. WELT
also provides tools for recording audio (which is
automatically synced with open scenes), textual
descriptions, glosses, and notes during a session.
Screenshots are included in Figure 2.

4.1 Cultural Adaptation of VigNet
To interpret input text, WordsEye uses VigNet
(Coyne et al., 2011), a lexical resource based on
FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998). As in FrameNet,
lexical items are grouped in frames according to
shared semantic structure. A frame contains a set
of frame elements (semantic roles). FrameNet de-
fines the mapping between syntax and semantics
for a lexical item with valence patterns that map
syntactic functions to frame elements.

VigNet extends FrameNet in order to capture
“graphical semantics”, a set of graphical con-
straints representing the position, orientation, size,
color, texture, and poses of objects in the scene,

8



Figure 2: Screenshots of WELT elicitation interfaces

which is used to construct and render a 3D
scene. Graphical semantics are added to frames by
adding primitive graphical (typically, spatial) rela-
tions between frame element fillers. VigNet distin-
guishes between meanings of words that are dis-
tinguished graphically. For example, the specific
objects (e.g., implements) and spatial relations in
the graphical semantics for cook depend on the
object being cooked and on the culture in which
it is being cooked (cooking turkey in Baltimore
vs. cooking an egg in Alice Springs), even though
at an abstract level cook an egg in Alice Springs
and cook a turkey in Baltimore are perfectly com-
positional semantically. Frames augmented with
graphical semantics are called vignettes.

Vignette Tailoring: Without digressing into a dis-
cussion on linguistic relativity, we assume that
large parts of VigNet are language- and culture-
independent. The low-level graphical relations
used to express graphical semantics are based on
physics and human anatomy and do not depend on
language. However, the graphical semantics for a
vignette may be culture-specific, and some new vi-
gnettes will need to be added for a culture. In the
U.S., for example, the sentence The woman boiled
the water might invoke a scene with a pot of wa-
ter on a stove in a kitchen. Among the Arrernte

people, it would instead invoke a woman sitting
on the ground in front of a kettle on a campfire.
Figure 3 shows an illustration from the Eastern
and Central Arrernte Picture Dictionary (Broad,
2008) of the sentence Ipmenhe-ipmenhele kwatye
urinpe-ilemele iteme, “My grandmother is boiling
the water.” The lexical semantics for the English
verb boil and the Arrente verb urinpe-ileme are
the same, the relation APPLY-HEAT.BOIL. How-
ever, the vignettes map to different, culture-typical
graphical semantics. The vignettes for our exam-
ple are shown in Figure 4.

Figure 3: Illustration from Broad (2008).

To handle cultural differences like these, a lin-
guist will use WELT to extend VigNet with new

9



Figure 4: Vignettes for the woman boils the water.
The high-level semantics of APPLY-HEAT.BOIL
are decomposed into sets of objects and primitive
graphical relations that depend on cultural context.

graphical semantics for existing vignettes that
need to be modified, and new vignettes for scenar-
ios not already covered. We will create interfaces
so that VigNet can easily be adapted.
Custom WordsEye Objects: Another way to
adapt WordsEye to a culture or region is to add rel-
evant 3D objects to the database. WordsEye also
supports 2D-cutout images, which is an easy way
to add new material without 3D modeling. We
have created a corpus of 2D and 3D models for
WordsEye that are specifically relevant to aborig-
inal speakers of Arrernte, including native Aus-
tralian plants and animals and culturally relevant
objects and gestures. Many of the pictures we cre-
ated are based on images from IAD Press, used
with permission, which we enhanced and cropped
in PhotoShop. Some scenes that use these images
are included in Figure 5. Currently, each new ob-
ject has to be manually incorporated into Words-
Eye, but we will create tools to allow WELT users
to easily add pictures and objects.

New objects will also need to be incorporated
into the semantic ontology. VigNet’s ontology
consists of semantic concepts that are linked to-
gether with ISA relations. The ontology supports
multiple inheritance, allowing a given concept to
be a sub-type of more than one concept. For exam-
ple, a PRINCESS.N is a subtype of both FEMALE.N
and ARISTOCRAT.N, and a BLACK-WIDOW.N is a
subtype of SPIDER.N and POISONOUS-ENTITY.N.
Concepts are often linked to corresponding lexi-
cal items. If a lexical item has more than one
word sense, the different word senses would be
represented by different concepts. In addition, ev-
ery graphical object in VigNet is represented by

a unique concept. For example, a particular 3D
model of a dog would be a linked to the general
DOG.N concept by the ISA relation. The semantic
concepts in VigNet include the graphical objects
available in WordsEye as well as concepts tied to
related lexical items. While WordsEye might only
have a handful of graphical objects for dogs, Vi-
gNet will have concepts representing all common
types of dogs, even if there is no graphical object
associated with them. We will provide interfaces
both for adding new objects and for modifying the
semantic concepts in VigNet to reflect the differ-
ing lexical semantics of a new language.

4.2 Preparing Scenes and Eliciting Data

The next step in the workflow is the preparation
of scenes and elicitation of descriptions. To test
creating elicitation materials with WELT, we built
a set of scenes based on the Max Planck topolog-
ical relations picture series (Bowerman and Ped-
erson, 1992). In creating these, we used a feature
of WordsEye that allows highlighting specific ob-
jects (or parts of objects) in a scene. We used these
scenes to elicit descriptions from a native Nahuatl
speaker; some examples are included in Figure 6.

(a) in tapametì tìatsakwa se kali
the fence/wall around the house

(b) in tsopelik katsekotok tìatsintìa in tìapetS
the candy sticking under the table

Figure 6: Nahuatl examples elicited with WELT

One topic we will explore with WELT is the re-
lationship in Arrernte between case and semantic
interpretation of a sentence. It is possible to signif-
icantly alter a sentence’s meaning by changing the
case on an argument. For example, the sentences
in (1) from Wilkins (1989) show that adding dative

10



Figure 5: WordsEye scenes using custom 2D gum tree and dingo from our corpus

case to the direct object of the sentence changes
the meaning from shooting and hitting the kanga-
roo to shooting at the kangaroo and not hitting it.
Wilkins calls this the “dative of attempt.”

(1) a. re aherre tyerre-ke
he kangaroo shot-pc
He shot the kangaroo.

b. re aherre-ke tyerre-ke
he kangaroo-DAT shot-pc
He shot at the kangaroo (but missed).

In order to see how this example generalizes,
we will create pairs of pictures, one in which the
object of the sentence is acted upon, and one in
which the object fails to be acted upon. Figure 7
shows a pair of scenes contrasting an Australian
football player scoring a goal with a player aiming
at the goal but missing the shot. Sentences (2) and
(3) are two ways of saying “score a goal” in Ar-
rernte; we want to see if a native Arrernte speaker
would use goal-ke in place of goal in this context.

(2) artwe le goal arrerne-me
man ERG goal put-NP
The man kicks a goal.

(3) artwe le goal kick-eme-ile-ke
man ERG goal kick-VF-TV-PST
The man kicked a goal.

5 Modeling a Language with WELT

WELT includes tools for documenting the seman-
tics of the language. It also uses this documenta-
tion to automatically generate a text-to-scene sys-
tem for the language. Because WELT is centered
around the idea of 3D scenes, the formal docu-
mentation will tend to focus on the parts of the se-
mantics that can be represented graphically. Note
that this can include figurative concepts as well,
although the visual representation of these may be
culture-specific. However, linguists do not need

to be limited by the graphical output; WELT can
be used to document other aspects of semantics as
well, but linguists will not be able to verify these
theories using the text-to-scene system.

To explain the necessary documentation, we
briefly describe the underlying architecture of
WordsEye, and how we are adapting it to sup-
port text-to-scene systems for other languages.
The WordsEye system parses each input sentence
into a labeled syntactic dependency structure, then
converts it into a lexical-semantic structure using
lexical valence patterns and other lexical and se-
mantic information. The resulting set of seman-
tic relations is converted to a “graphical seman-
tics”, the knowledge needed to generate graphical
scenes from language.

To produce a text-to-scene system for a new lan-
guage, WELT must replace the English linguistic
processing modules with models for the new lan-
guage. The WELT processing pipeline is illus-
trated in Figure 8, with stages of the pipeline on
top and required resources below. In this section,
we will discuss creating the lexicon, morphologi-
cal and syntactic parsers, and syntax-to-semantics
rules. The vignettes and 3D objects will largely
have been done during cultural adaptation of Vi-
gNet; additional modifications needed to handle
the semantics can be defined using the same tools.

5.1 The Lexicon

The lexicon in WELT is a list of word forms
mapped to semantic concepts. The process of
building the lexicon begins during elicitation.
WELT’s elicitation interface includes an option to
display each object in the scene individually be-
fore progressing to the full scene. When an object
is labeled and glossed in this way, the word and
the semantic concept represented by the 3D ob-
ject are immediately added to the lexicon. Word
forms glossed in scene descriptions will also be
added to the lexicon, but will need to be mapped
to semantic concepts later. WELT will provide

11



Figure 7: WordsEye scenes to elicit the “dative of attempt.”

Morph	  
Lexical	  

Seman1cs	  
Graphical	  
Seman1cs	   Scene	  

Input	  
Text	  

Processing	  Pipeline	  

VigNet	  

Vigne<es	   2D/3D	  objects	  Lexicon	  

Syntax	  

Morphological	  
Analyzer	  

Syntac1c	  
Parser	  

Syntax-­‐Seman1cs	  
Rules	  

Figure 8: WELT architecture

tools for completing the lexicon by modifying
the automatically-added items, adding new lexical
items, and mapping each lexical item to a seman-
tic concept in VigNet. Figure 9(a) shows a partial
mapping of the nouns in our Arrernte lexicon.

WELT includes a visual interface for search-
ing VigNet’s ontology for semantic concepts and
browsing through the hierarchy to select a partic-
ular category. Figure 9(b) shows a portion of the
ontology that results from searching for cup. Here,
we have decided to map panikane to CUP.N. Se-
mantic categories are displayed one level at a time,
so initially only the concepts directly above and
below the search term are shown. From there, it is
simple to click on relevant concepts and navigate
the graph to find an appropriate semantic category.
To facilitate the modeling of morphology and syn-
tax, WELT will also export the lexicon into for-
mats compatible with FieldWorks and XLE, so the
list of word forms can be used as a starting point.

5.2 Morphology and Syntax

As mentioned earlier, the focus of our work on
WELT is on modeling the interface between syn-
tax, lexical semantics, and graphical semantics.
Therefore, although WELT requires models of
morphology and syntax to generate a text-to-scene
system, we are relying on third-party tools to build
those models. For morphology, a very good tool
already exists in FLEx, which allows the creation

Lexical VigNet
Item Concept
artwe PERSON.N

panikane CUP.N
angepe CROW.N

akngwelye DOG.N
tipwele TABLE.N

(a) (b)

Figure 9: (a) Arrernte lexical items mapped to Vi-
gNet concepts; (b) part of the VigNet ontology

of a morphological parser without knowledge of
any particular grammatical formalism. For syn-
tax, we are using XLE for our own work while
researching other options that would be more ac-
cessible to non-computational linguists. It is im-
portant to note, though, that the modeling done in
WELT does not require a perfect syntactic parser.
In fact, one can vastly over-generate syntax and
still accurately model semantics. Therefore, the
syntactic grammars provided as models do not
need to be complex. However, the question of syn-
tax is still an open area of research in our project.

5.3 Semantics

To use the WordsEye architecture, the system
needs to be able to map between the formal syntax
of the endangered language and a representation of
semantics compatible with VigNet. To accomplish

12



Figure 10: Creating syntax-semantics rules in WELT

this, WELT includes an interface for the linguist to
specify a set of rules that map from syntax to (lex-
ical) semantics. Since we are modeling Arrernte
syntax with LFG, the rules currently take syntactic
f-structures as input, but the system could easily be
modified to accommodate other formalisms. The
left-hand side of a rule consists of a set of con-
ditions on the f-structure elements and the right-
hand side is the desired semantic structure. Rules
are specified by defining a tree structure for the
left-hand (syntax) side and a DAG for the right-
hand (semantics) side.

As an example, we will construct a rule to
process sentence (2) from Section 4.2, artwe le
goal arrerneme. For this sentence, our Arrernte
grammar produces the f-structure in Figure 11.
We create a rule that selects for predicate ar-
rerne with object goal and any subject. Figure
10 shows the construction of this rule in WELT.
Note that var-1 on the left-hand side becomes
VIGNET(var-1) on the right-hand side; this in-
dicates that the lexical item found in the input is
mapped into a semantic concept using the lexicon.

Figure 11: F-structure for sentence 2, Section 4.2.

The rule shown in Figure 10 is a very sim-
ple example. Nodes on the left-hand side of
the rule can also contain boolean logic, if we
wanted to allow the subject to be [(artwe ‘man’ OR
arhele ‘woman’) AND NOT ampe ‘child’]. Rules
need not specify lexical items directly but may
refer to more general semantic categories. For
example, our rule could require a particular se-
mantic category for VIGNET(var-1), such as
ANIMATE-BEING.N. These categories are chosen
through the same ontology browser used to cre-
ate the lexicon. Finally, to ensure that our sen-

tence can be converted into graphics, we need
to make sure that a vignette definition exists for
CAUSE MOTION.KICK so that the lexical seman-
tics on the right-hand side of our rule can be aug-
mented with graphical semantics; the vignette def-
inition is given in Figure 12. The WordsEye sys-
tem will use the graphical constraints in the vi-
gnette to build a scene and render it in 3D.

Figure 12: Vignette definition for
CAUSE MOTION.KICK

6 Summary

We have described a novel tool under develop-
ment for linguists working with endangered lan-
guages. It will provide a new way to elicit data
from informants, an interface for formally docu-
menting the lexical semantics of a language, and
allow the creation of a text-to-scene system for any
language. In this paper, we have focused specifi-
cally on the workflow that a linguist would fol-
low while studying an endangered language with
WELT. WELT will provide useful tools for field
linguistics and language documentation, from cre-
ating elicitation materials, to eliciting data, to for-
mally documenting a language. In addition, the
text-to-scene system that results from document-
ing an endangered language with WELT will be
valuable for language preservation, generating in-
terest in the wider world, as well as encouraging
younger members of endangered language com-
munities to use the language.

Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported by
the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
1160700.

13



References
Alliance for Linguistic Diversity. 2013. The En-

dangered Languages Project. http://www.
endangeredlanguages.com.

C. Baker, J. Fillmore, and J. Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley
FrameNet project. In 36th Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics and 17th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING-ACL’98), pages 86–90, Montréal.

Stephen Beale. 2011. Using Linguist’s Assistant for
Language Description and Translation. In IJCNLP
2011 System Demonstrations, pages 5–8.

Kenneth R. Beesley and Lauri Karttunen. 2003. Finite-
State Morphology Homepage. http://www.
fsmbook.com.

E. Bender, D. Flickinger, and S. Oepen. 2002. The
Grammar Matrix. In J. Carroll, N. Oostdijk, and
R. Sutcliffe, editors, Workshop on Grammar En-
gineering and Evaluation at the 19th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 8–
14, Taipei, Taiwan.

S. Bird and D. Chiang. 2012. Machine translation for
language preservation. In COLING 2012: Posters,
pages 125–134, Mumbai, December.

S. Bird. 2009. Natural language processing and
linguistic fieldwork. Computational Linguistics,
35(3):469–474.

Cheryl A Black and H Andrew Black. 2009. PAWS:
Parser and Writer for Syntax. In SIL Forum for Lan-
guage Fieldwork 2009-002.

H.A. Black and G.F. Simons. 2006. The SIL Field-
Works Language Explorer approach to morphologi-
cal parsing. In Computational Linguistics for Less-
studied Languages: Texas Linguistics Society 10,
Austin, TX, November.

M. Bowerman and E. Pederson. 1992. Topological re-
lations picture series. In S. Levinson, editor, Space
stimuli kit 1.2, page 51, Nijmegen. Max Planck In-
stitute for Psycholinguistics.

N. Broad. 2008. Eastern and Central Arrernte Picture
Dictionary. IAD Press.

B. Coyne and R. Sproat. 2001. WordsEye: An au-
tomatic text-to-scene conversion system. In SIG-
GRAPH.

B. Coyne, D. Bauer, and O. Rambow. 2011. Vignet:
Grounding language in graphics using frame seman-
tics. In ACL Workshop on Relational Models of Se-
mantics (RELMS), Portland, OR.

D. Crouch, M. Dalrymple, R. Kaplan, T. King,
J. Maxwell, and P. Newman. 2011. XLE Doc-
umentation. http://www2.parc.com/isl/
groups/nltt/xle/doc/xle_toc.html.

C. Filmore, C. Johnson, and M. Petruck. 2003. Back-
ground to FrameNet. In International Journal of
Lexicography, pages 235–250.

R.M. Kaplan and J.W. Bresnan. 1982. Lexical-
functional grammar: A formal system for grammat-
ical representation. In J.W. Bresnan, editor, The
Mental Representation of Grammatical Relations.
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., December.

SIL FieldWorks. 2014. SIL FieldWorks. http://
fieldworks.sil.org.

D. Wilkins. 1989. Mparntwe Arrernte (Aranda): Stud-
ies in the structure and semantics of grammar. Ph.D.
thesis, Australian National University.

14


