








































What implementation and translation teach us: the case of semantic
similarity measures in wordnets

Marten Postma
Utrecht University

Utrecht, Netherlands.
martenp@gmail.com

Piek Vossen
VU University Amsterdam
Amsterdam, Netherlands
piek.vossen@vu.nl

Abstract

Wordnet::Similarity is an important instru-
ment used for many applications. It has
been available for a while as a toolkit for
English and it has been frequently tested
on English gold standards. In this pa-
per, we describe how we constructed a
Dutch gold standard that matches the En-
glish gold standard as closely as possi-
ble. We also re-implemented the Word-
Net::Similarity package to be able to deal
with any wordnet that is specified in
Wordnet-LMF format independent of the
language. This opens up the possibility
to compare the similarity measures across
wordnets and across languages. It also
provides a new way of comparing wordnet
structures across languages through one of
its core aspects: the synonymy and hy-
ponymy structure. In this paper, we report
on the comparison between Dutch and En-
glish wordnets and gold standards. This
comparison shows that the gold standards,
and therefore the intuitions of English and
Dutch native speakers, appear to be highly
compatible. We also show that our pack-
age generates similar results for English
as reported earlier and good results for
Dutch. To the contrary of what we ex-
pected, some measures even perform bet-
ter in Dutch than English.

1 Introduction

Various methods have been proposed in the past
for measuring similarity between words using
Princeton WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). Some of
these methods (path (Rada et al., 1989), lch (Lea-
cock and Chodorow, 1998), wup (Wu and Palmer,
1994), res (Resnik, 1995), lin (Lin, 1998), jcn
(Jiang and Conrath, 1997), among others) were

implemented in the WordNet::Similarity package
(Pedersen et al., 2004). WordNet::Similarity 1 has
become an important instrument for measuring
similarity between any set of words in a language
but also for testing the performance of wordnet as
a database of synonymy and semantic relations.
The toolkit was used to evaluate the different mea-
sures against a gold standard of English words cre-
ated by Rubenstein and Goodenough (1965) and
Miller and Charles (1991). The evaluation re-
sults tell us something about the capacity of Word-
Net to mimic human judgements of similarity but
also about the different methods in relation to each
other.

Unfortunately, WordNet::Similarity only works
for the Princeton WordNet released in its pro-
prietary format and not wordnets in other lan-
guages in other formats, such as Wordnet-LMF
(Vossen, Soria and Monachini, 2013). Further-
more, no gold standard exists for Dutch, the lan-
guage that we study. In this paper, we describe
a re-implementation of the WordNet::Similarity
toolkit that can read any wordnet in Wordnet-LMF
format to apply the 6 wordnet similarity algo-
rithms. This toolkit makes it possible to carry
out similarity measures across different wordnets
within the same language and across different lan-
guages. This is especially useful if the wordnets
were created independently using their own se-
mantic hierarchy. We also created a gold standard
in Dutch that is comparable with the gold stan-
dard in English. We tried to recreate the process
through which the English gold standard was cre-
ated as much as possible. Since it was not clear
what instructions were given exactly to the human
scorers, we decided to create a number of addi-
tional gold standards that are more explicit about
the difference between relatedness, similarity and
the assumed meaning of the words to be com-

1see http://wn-similarity.sourceforge.
net/



pared. In total 6 different gold standards have been
created. Using these gold standards, we first show
that the 6 Dutch gold standards are very similar
and that the English and Dutch gold standards are
highly compatible. Secondly, we demonstrate that
the performance of the Dutch wordnet is higher
than the reported performance for English. There
are also some differences in the results which can
be explained to some well-known differences in
the hierarchical organization of the Dutch and En-
glish wordnets.

The paper is structured as follows. In the next
section, we describe related work. Section 3 ex-
plains how we created the Dutch gold standard
and section 4 the WordnetTools implementation of
the similarity functions. In section 5, we report
the results using the Dutch wordnet Cornetto 2.1
(Vossen et al., 2013).

2 Related work

The notion of similarity is central to WordNet
through the relations synonymy and hyponymy.
Synsets group words that can be exchanged in con-
texts and thus have more or less the same denota-
tional domain. Hyponymy groups these synsets
according to a shared semantic aspect and thus
defines another type of similarity. Words that do
not share a synonymy relation and synsets that do
not share a hyponymy relation are not necessar-
ily disjoint but the things they can refer to are less
likely to be considered similar. Words and synsets
that have other relations than synonymy and hy-
ponymy respectively, e.g. part-whole or causal re-
lations, are most likely not similar but strongly
related. This difference is dubbed the ‘tennis-
phenomenon’ in Fellbaum (1998) : where tennis
ball, player, racket and game are closely related
but all very different things. Since WordNet dom-
inantly consists of synonymy and hyponymy rela-
tions, it more naturally reflects similarity than re-
latedness.

Since the first release of WordNet, researchers
have tried to use it to simulate similarity. Ex-
cept for the lesk (Lesk, 1986), vector (Patwardhan
and Pedersen, 2006), and vector pairs (Patward-
han and Pedersen, 2006) algorithms, these mea-
sures are all based on synonymy and hyponymy.

Another approach to measure similarity across
different languages is described by Joubarne and
Inkpen (2011). The aim of their paper is to show
that it might be possible to use the scores from the

English gold standards in other languages, hence
making it unnecessary to create gold standards
with human-assigned judgements in every single
language. In order to show this, they used an ex-
isting gold standard for German, which is a trans-
lation of the gold standard by Rubenstein & Good-
enough with human-assigned scores. For French,
they used an existing French translation of the
English gold standard by Rubenstein & Goode-
nough, and asked French native speakers to rate
the similarity of meaning for each word pair in
the dataset. Moreover, they used two measures of
similarity to also rate the similarity of meaning of
the translation of the original dataset, which are
Point-wise mutual information and second order
co-occurence Point-wise mutual information for
which the Google n-gram corpus was used. They
then compared the output from the similarity mea-
sures to the language specific gold standards and
to the original scores collected by Rubenstein &
Goodenough. The difference between these cor-
relations was relatively small, which is why they
claim that it is possible to use the original scores
from the English gold standard in other languages.

Besides Joubarne and Inkpen (2011), other
studies have made an effort to translate the origi-
nal datasets by Rubenstein & Goodenough and by
Miller & Charles. Hassan and Mihalcea (2009)
translated these datasets into Spanish, Arabic, and
Romanian. For Spanish, native speakers, who
were highly proficient in English, were asked to
translate the datasets. They were asked not to use
multi-word expressions. They were asked to take
into account the relatedness within a word pair for
disambiguation. In addition, they were allowed
to use so-called replacement words to overcome
slang or if words were culturally dependent. They
then asked 5 participants to rate the Spanish word
pairs. A sixth person evaluated the translation. Be-
cause of the fact that the Pearson correlation with
the original datasets was 0.86, only one translator
translated the datasets into Arabic and Romanian.
Finally, Gurevych (2005) translated the datasets
into German. However, no instructions, as to how
it was done, were provided.

3 Dutch gold standard

We would like to see whether the similarity intu-
itions of Dutch speakers are the same as the En-
glish speakers. We also want to known if the
Dutch wordnet Cornetto, which was built inde-



pendently of the English WordNet, would perform
in the same way as the English WordNet using
the same similarity measures and against a com-
parable gold standard. For that, we need to cre-
ate a Dutch gold standard. We opted to trans-
late the gold standards by Rubenstein & Goode-
nough (65 word pairs) and by Miller & Charles (30
word pairs). Because the words used by Miller &
Charles are a subset of the words used by Ruben-
stein & Goodenough, and because words are used
more than once in both experiments, there are only
49 unique words used in both experiments. In ad-
dition, Miller & Charles made one change to the
dataset by Rubenstein & Goodenough. Whenever
Rubenstein & Goodenough used the word cord,
Miller & Charles uses the word chord.

Inspired by Hassan and Mihalcea (2009), the
following general procedure is followed in the
translation of the 49 words: 2

1. The first step is to disambiguate the En-
glish word forms. The English experiments
present a word form and not a specific con-
cept the word refers to. The results from hu-
man judgement provide a good indication as
to which concept in WordNet is meant.

2. Following the results in 1, a Dutch translation
is chosen for each word.

3. In addition, it is checked whether the relative
frequency of the Dutch and English words are
in the same class of relative frequency. This
is done in order to make sure that there are no
outliers. A translation is an outlier when its
relative frequency deviates significantly from
the original word.

We will now discuss each step of the general
procedure in more detail. The first step consists of
disambiguating the 49 English words. For exam-
ple, WordNet lists two senses for the word asylum:

1. ‘a shelter from danger or hardship’

2. ‘a hospital for mentally incompetent or un-
balanced person’

2We made an effort to compare the polysemy of the En-
glish word and its translation. However, English words in
WordNet tend to have many more meanings than words in
Cornetto. In addition, Dutch words often only refer to one
specific part-of-speech, whereas English words often have
noun and verb meanings. Because of these differences, we
decided not to use this means of comparison in our transla-
tion procedure.

In the results of Miller & Charles and Rubenstein
& Goodenough, we observe that the correlation
with madhouse is very high. Hence, the second
sense as listed in WordNet is chosen for asylum.
The same procedure is applied to all other words.

The next step is to translate all English words
into Dutch. One of the difficulties we encoun-
tered was the case in which two synonyms were
used in English, but no two contemporary Dutch
synonyms were available. When we encountered
such a problem, we opted to replace the English
synonyms with two Dutch synonyms that were
closely related to the English synonyms. For ex-
ample, due to the fact that there is only one com-
mon Dutch word haan “male chicken” for the En-
glish synonyms cock and rooster, we opted to re-
place these two words by kip “female chicken” and
hen “female chicken”, the two Dutch words for fe-
male chickens.

In addition, the relative frequencies of the En-
glish word and its translation were checked. In or-
der to calculate relative frequencies of the English
words, the English sense-tagged corpus SemCor
(Miller et al., 1993) was used. For Dutch, such
a resource was not available. We are aware of
the fact that the Dutch sense-tagged corpus Dutch-
SemCor (Vossen et al., 2012) exists. However,
an effort was made to provide an equal number
of examples for each meaning in this corpus. Al-
though this is very useful for WSD-experiments,
this makes this corpus less useful for Information
Content calculations. Therefore the frequencies
of the lemmas in the Dutch corpus called SoNaR
(Oostdijk et al., 2008) were used. It was checked
whether or not the English word and its Dutch
counterpart were located in the same class of rel-
ative frequency. A word is placed in the category
high if its relative frequency is higher than 0.05%,
middle if its relative frequency is between 0.015%
and 0.05% and low if its relative frequency is
lower than 0.015%. If two words are located in the
same relative frequency class, the pair receives the
value True, else False. If no frequency data was
available for a word, the value of the pair was set
to True. Eight word pairs received the value False.
Since this step was performed to remove outliers,
we claim this to be acceptable.

The Dutch translation was then used to repro-
duce the English experiments by Miller & Charles
and Rubenstein & Goodenough. Since the instruc-
tions concerning Similarity of meaning are un-



clear in the original experiments, we reproduced
each experiment with three different kinds of in-
structions, which are stressing similarity aspects,
stressing relatedness aspects, and no instructions.
These instructions were explained to the partici-
pants by an example of each value that could be
assigned to a word pair and a general description.
The WordSimilarity-353 Test Collection (Finkel-
stein et al., 2002) was used to obtain example word
pairs for each value that could be assigned to a
word pair. This dataset contains two sets of En-
glish word pairs with similarity scores assigned
by humans. The first set of this collection con-
tains 153 word pairs, with their scores, from 0 to
10, assigned by 13 subjects. In addition, partici-
pants were asked to rate the word pairs on similar-
ity. From this set, examples were chosen stressing
similarity aspects. The second set contains 200
word pairs, with human-assigned scores, from 0
to 10, by 16 subjects. In this case, participants
were asked to rate the word pairs based on re-
latedness. From this set, examples were chosen
stressing relatedness aspects. Each word pair that
was chosen to serve as an example word pair was
translated into Dutch. For stressing similarity, par-
ticipants were asked to indicate to what degree
two words could replace each other. For exam-
ple, if two words were interchangeable, they were
told to assign the highest value. They were in-
structed to assign a lower value to a word pair
like aardappelmesje ‘potato peeler’ & mes ‘knife’,
because mes ‘knife’ can be used instead of aar-
dappelmesje ‘potato peeler’, but not the other way
around. For stressing relatedness aspects, partici-
pants were asked to focus on how likely it is that
words occur in the same situation. For example,
it is very likely that computer ‘computer’ & inter-
net ‘internet’ occur in the same situation together,
whereas this is less likely the case for komkom-
mer ‘cucumber’ & professor ‘professor’. Finally
for the no instructions case, the interpretation was
left to the participant, except that we indicated that
synonyms resulted in the highest score. Combin-
ing the two English experiments with the three dif-
ferent kinds of instructions thus yielded six dif-
ferent sets. For convenience, we will use abbre-
viations to refer to the six experiments. The ab-
breviation Mc will be used for the translation of
the dataset by Miller & Charles. Rg will be used
for the translation of the dataset by Rubenstein
& Goodenough. In addition, the three kinds of

instructions will be abbreviated in the following
way: No for no instruction, Sim for similarity, and
Rel for relatedness. By combining the abbrevia-
tions, we can refer to each of the six experiments.
For example, McSim means that the translation of
the dataset by Miller & Charles is meant with the
instruction similarity. Pupils from five Dutch high
schools participated. The pupils’s age ranged from
16 to 18 years. Their level of education was one
the two highest levels of Dutch secondary educa-
tion, called HAVO and VWO. Numbers of partic-
ipants per experiment were: 40 for McNo, 40 for
McRel, 52 for McSim, 26 for RgNo, 42 for RgSim,
and 40 for RgRel. The difference between the re-
sults of the different instructions turned out to be
neither significant, nor systematic. We thus as-
sume that the instructions have not been effective
to override the basic intuition of the participants.

4 WordnetTools

WordnetTools is a reimplementation of the Word-
Net::Similarity package in Java1.6 that can read
any wordnet in WordNet-LMF format to apply the
major similarity functions: Path, Jiang & Conrath,
Leacock & Chodorow, Lin, Resnik, Wu & Palmer
(see above). The similarity functions can be tuned
using various parameters:

–lmf-file Path to the wordnet file in LMF format. A few other formats are also
supported.

–pos (optional) part-of-speech filter, values: n, v, a.

–relations (optional) file with relations used for the hierarchy, if not se-
lected a standard set of relations is used: hypernym, has hypernym,
has hyperonym, near synonym, eng derivative, xpos near synonym,
xpos near hyperonym, xpos near hypernym.

–input File with pairs to be compared on single lines, separated with back-
ward slash.

–pairs The type of input values: “words” or “synsets” or “word-synsets pairs”

–method leacock-chodorow, resnik, path, wu-palmer, jiang-conrath, lin or
all.

–depth Optional: a fixed value for average depth can be given.

–subsumers Path to a file with subsumer frequencies, required for resnik, lin,
jiang-conrath or all.

–separator Token for separating input and output fields, default is TAB.

The above options can be used to configure
the experiments and the way similarity is calcu-
lated. The graph through which words and synsets
are compared can be restricted by selecting the
part-of-speech or specifying a certain set of re-
lations. The internal data structure treats the re-
sult as a graph without further distinguishing the
type of relations. It is for example possible to



accept strict hypernym relations and looser re-
lations such as near synonym, xpos hyperonym
and xpos near synonym relations for all parts of
speech. The toolkit will then build a graph in
which synsets are connected through any of these
relations.3 Against such a graph, words such
as transport as a verb and transportation and
transport as nouns will get scores similar to co-
hyponyms. The more relations are included, such
as role and causal relations, the more the graph
will measure relatedness instead of similarity. For
the purpose of this paper, we configured the set-
tings so that graph is most similar to the hierar-
chical structure of the English WordNet. We thus
only used the has hypernym and has hyperonym
relations.

The toolkit can handle tangled structure as a re-
sult of e.g. multiple hypernyms. In case of mul-
tiple hypernyms, all possible paths are calculated
and given back as the set of paths through the
graph. Similarly, if a word has multiple senses, we
generate all possible paths for each sense. When
comparing two words, we compare all paths of
one word with all paths of another word and cal-
culate the similarity score to the specified metrics
using each pair of paths. In the end, we keep the
paths with the best result. Note that for measures
that use information content this is not always the
shortest path.

In addition to the similarity API, the toolkit
also provides a number of auxiliary func-
tions, for example to determine the average
or maximum depth for a wordnet per part-of-
speech. WordnetTools is freely available under
the GPLv3 license and can be downloaded from:
http://wordpress.let.vupr.nl/software/wordnettools/.
The package includes the Dutch and English gold
standards, as well as the English WordNet in
Wordnet-LMF format and the English SemCor
frequencies in the proper import format. It also
includes the results of the Dutch and English
evaluation. The Cornetto wordnet is not included
since it is restricted by license. A free research
license can be obtained from the Dutch centre
for language technology (TST-centrale4). How-
ever, we will release an open-source version of
the Dutch wordnet, which will be included in

3If bi-directional relations are used in the wordnet, only
one of these should be chosen. If not, the path-construction
can be terminated by direct circularity of the bi-directional
relations.

4see http://tst-centrale.org/

the package when released. Also the SoNaR
word frequencies can be obtained from the
TST-centrale. The SoNaR word frequencies have
been converted to the hypernym frequencies as
described by Resnik, by averaging frequencies
over the senses of a word and transferring these
to the hypernyms (and further up the hierarchy).
These derived hypernym frequencies are also
included in the package.

5 Results

Three evaluations have been run to compare the
similarity measures across wordnets and across
languages. We start by comparing the Dutch to the
English gold standards, followed by an evaluation
of the comparison between the Dutch gold stan-
dards and the similarity measures. Finally, we try
to replicate the English experiment by Pedersen
(2010) using English Wordnet-LMF and Wordnet-
Tools. 5

5.1 The Dutch gold standard with the
English gold standard

The first evaluation that we carried out is the com-
parison between the English gold standards and
their Dutch translations. Since we have an equiva-
lence relation between most of the words, we can
compare the rankings of the Dutch and English na-
tive speakers. In the evaluation, we left out the
word pairs in which a word had not been directly
translated, which was the case for word pairs like
cock and rooster. Table 1 presents the evaluation:

Dutch Gold standard Spearman ρ
original dataset

McNo 0.88
McSim 0.86
McRel 0.89
RgNo 0.93
RgSim 0.93
RgRel 0.93

Table 1: Evaluation of the comparison between
the English gold standards and their Dutch trans-
lations.

5A github has been created to make it possible to
replicate the results in this section. The url to this
github is https://github.com/MartenPostma/
PostmaVossenGWC2014



The results show that the English and Dutch intu-
itions concerning Similarity of meaning are very
similar. The range of the Spearman ρ correlation
is between 0.86 and 0.93. It also shows that there
is little difference across the different Dutch gold
standards. The gold standard with similarity in-
structions (Sim) performs a bit lower on the Miller
& Charles set but this difference disappears on the
Rubenstein & Goodenough set.

5.2 Comparing Cornetto with the Dutch gold
standard

The second evaluation consists of comparing the
Dutch gold standards to the output of the similar-
ity measures as calculated in Cornetto using the
WordNetTools. We used the following settings to
run WordNetTools:6

–lmf-file Path to Cornetto in LMF format

–pos no pos-filter was used

–relations has hypernym, has hyperonym,

–input path to Dutch gold standards

–pairs “words”

–method all.

–depth 15

–subsumers path to subsumers from the SoNaR word-frequencies

Table 2 presents the results for the different
measures on the Dutch gold standard.

SM McNo McRel McSim RgNo RgRel RgSim
path 0.840 0.796 0.856 0.783 0.720 0.777
lch 0.840 0.796 0.856 0.783 0.720 0.777
wup 0.806 0.766 0.831 0.770 0.704 0.769
res 0.765 0.737 0.785 0.720 0.669 0.719
jcn 0.852 0.797 0.891 0.525 0.488 0.512
lin 0.838 0.779 0.880 0.531 0.495 0.520

Table 2: The Spearman ρ is shown by comparing
all six similarity measures to all six gold standards.

In general, the results show that all six seman-
tic similarity measures correlate well with the gold
standards. Jcn correlates best with the translation
of the Miller & Charles’ gold standards, whereas
this is true for path and lch for the Rubenstein &
Goodenough’ gold standards. Finally, there is a
significant difference between the performance of
the measures lin and jcn when compared to the

6The depth parameter is set to 15, which is mainly rele-
vant for the measure lch, which requires the maximum depth
of the taxonomy in which the synsets are located. In the case
for nouns in Cornetto, this value is 15. For more information,
we refer to section 6.

Miller & Charles’ gold standards or the Ruben-
stein & Goodenough’ gold standards. The gold
standards are however too small to derive any con-
clusions from these differences. Larger more rep-
resentative experiments are needed for that.

5.3 Replication English with Wordnet-LMF
and WordnetToolkit

The final evaluation consists of comparing the
WordNet::Similarity package to the Wordnet-
Tools. This is mainly done to verify if the im-
plementations of the semantic similarity measures
are compatible across the packages, i.e. can
we reproduce the results of WordNet::Similarity
with the original WordNet database with Word-
netTools with the WordnetLMF version of the En-
glish WordNet. In order to do this, we compare
the correlations that Pedersen (2010) reports when
calculating the correlations between the original
gold standards and the scores from the six simi-
larity measures using WordNet::Similarity to the
same procedure but using the WordNetTools to
compute the similarity scores.

We used the following settings for WordNet-
Tools:7

–lmf-file Path to WordNet in LMF format

–pos no pos-filter was used

–relations has hypernym, has hyperonym,

–input path to English gold standards

–pairs “words”

–method all.

–depth 19

–subsumers path to subsumers using SemCor

Table 3 presents the results. The second and
third column present the correlation as reported by
Pedersen and by our package, respectively, for the
gold standard by Miller & Charles, followed by
the difference between the two correlations. The
other columns presents the same scores for the
gold standard by Rubenstein & Goodenough.

SM McPed McWT diff RgPed RgWT diff
path 0.68 0.72 -0.04 0.69 0.78 -0.09
lch 0.71 0.72 -0.01 0.70 0.78 -0.08

wup 0.74 0.74 0.00 0.69 0.78 -0.09
res 0.74 0.75 -0.01 0.69 0.76 -0.07
jcn 0.72 0.65 0.07 0.51 0.56 -0.05
lin 0.73 0.67 0.06 0.58 0.60 -0.02

Table 3: Comparison of the results by Pedersen
(2010) and the replication of these results using
Wordnet-LMF and the WordnetToolkit

7The depth parameter is set to 19, For more information,
we refer to section 6.



The results show that for both gold standards,
we approach the correlations that are reported by
Pedersen (2010), but that there are probably still
differences in the implementation of the measures
that lead to different output values.

6 Discussion

Three main points stand out in the results. Firstly,
the correlations between the English and Dutch
gold standards are very high. Given the fact that
this was also the case for the Spanish and English
intuitions, as discussed by Hassan and Mihalcea
(2009), it might be the case the people with differ-
ent mother tongues have a shared sense of similar-
ity of meaning. It should be noted that all speakers
from the different languages share a similar West-
ern background. Secondly, the results for Dutch
are generally higher than for English. We have no
clear explanation for this difference. We know that
the Dutch hypernym structure for nouns is more
shallow than the English hierarchy. Evidence for
this claim can be found in table 4, which shows the
noun synset depth distribution for both Cornetto
and Princeton WordNet:

Cornetto Princeton WordNet
D NoS P NoS P
0 833 1,26% 1 0,00%
1 8 0,01% 59 0,06%
2 2138 3,23% 3286 3,45%
3 2748 4,16% 3943 4,14%
4 7476 11,31% 3222 3,38%
5 15896 24,04% 3186 3,34%
6 15304 23,15% 5951 6,24%
7 8902 13,46% 10474 10,99%
8 4441 6,72% 18071 18,96%
9 2603 3,94% 16049 16,84%
10 2211 3,34% 12313 12,92%
11 1858 2,81% 7984 8,38%
12 1228 1,86% 4714 4,95%
13 406 0,61% 2634 2,76%
14 66 0,10% 1511 1,59%
15 3 0,00% 917 0,96%
16 0 0,00% 468 0,49%
17 0 0,00% 345 0,36%
18 0 0,00% 165 0,17%
19 0 0,00% 30 0,03%

Total 66121 100% 95323 100%

Table 4: Synset frequency and percentage of total
number of synsets is shown for every depth value
in Cornetto as well as WordNet. D abbreviates
‘depth’, NoS ‘number of synsets’ and P ’percent-
age of total number of synsets’.

Table 4 shows that the most frequent depth in
Cornetto is 5, whereas this is 8 for Princeton

WordNet. In addition, if we calculate the aver-
age noun depth in both lexical semantic databases
based on the numbers in table 4, we observe that
the average noun synset depth in Cornetto is 6.03
and 8.38 for Princeton WordNet. A flatter hiearchy
may lead to a more rough but more uniform mea-
sure across different parts of the hiearchy. Nev-
erthless, it does not explain the higher correlation
with human intuitions. We also know that the
Dutch wordnet has more multiple hypernyms. Ta-
ble 5 provides evidence for this claim:

Cornetto Princeton WordNet
H NoS P NoS P
0 833 1,26% 1 0,00%
1 62847 95,05% 93078 97,64%
2 2330 3,52% 2165 2,27%
3 98 0,15% 63 0,07%
4 11 0,02% 12 0,01%
5 2 0,00% 3 0,00%
6 0 0,00% 1 0,00%

Total 66121 100% 95323 100%

Table 5: Synset frequency and percentage of total
number of synsets is shown for every number of
hypernyms value in Cornetto as well as WordNet.
H abbreviates ‘number of hypernyms’, NoS ‘num-
ber of synsets’ and P ’percentage of total number
of synsets’.

Table 5 shows that Cornetto contains rela-
tively more synsets with multiple hypernyms than
Princeton WordNet. Multiple hypernyms may
lead to more options to connect synsets that can
be classified according to different perspectives,
e.g. being both a mammal and a pet. Neverthe-
less, more research is needed to find a direct ex-
planation. If these multiple hypernyms occur at
the higher levels, which is often the case, they ap-
ply to large proportions of the synsets. Besides
this difference, we also observe similar patterns
in the correlations. In both cases, we see a sig-
nificant drop in the performance of the Informa-
tion Content-based measures jcn and lin. This
drop in performance emphasizes the strength and
weakness of these measures. Their strength is
found in the fact that if the Information Content
of the words is available, the correlation with hu-
man judgement can be high. However, if the In-
formation Content is not available, which is more
often the case for the larger Rubenstein & Goode-
nough’ gold standards, the correlation drops sig-



nificantly. We do not observe this drop for the
measure res, because this measure uses the Infor-
mation Content of the least common subsumer,
which is more robust than the measures jcn and
lin, which are based on the Information Content
of the words themselves. Finally, the differences
between the scores from the WordNet::Similarity
package and the WordNetTools show that we did
not reproduce the results exactly. This in itself is
not surprising, given the fact that Fokkens et al.
(2013) showed that even replicating the results that
Pedersen (2010) reports can be challenging. They
showed that even if the main properties are kept
stable, such as software and versions of software,
variations in minor properties can lead to com-
pletely different outcomes. In addition, the re-
production learned us an interesting fact about the
occassional inability of corpus statistics to distin-
guish between synsets. In order to use Informa-
tion Content, cumulative synset frequencies are
used. This creates the possibilty that a hyponym
and its hypernym can have the same cumulative
frequency. During our experiments, the similarity
score was calculated between the synsets ‘cush-
ion#n#3’ and ‘pillow#n#1’, where ‘pillow#n#1’ is
a hyponym of ‘cushion#n#3’. Neverthless, the cu-
mulative frequency for both synsets is the same,
which is 9. When the similarity score between
these synsets was calculated for the Information
Content measures, they are represented as syn-
onyms according to these measures, which is in
fact not the case in WordNet.

7 Conclusion

In this paper we described the results of re-
implementing the similarity measures in a toolkit
that can handle a wordnet in any language in
Wordnet-LMF and the creation of a Dutch gold
standard for similarity experiments similar to the
English experiments. The toolkit can be tuned to
handle any type of relation and thus can be used
for various similarity and relatedness experiments,
possibly adapted to the way the specific wordnet
was built. We used these options to achieve a com-
patible structure to the English WordNet. We also
created different variants of the Dutch gold stan-
dard to measure possible differences of interpreta-
tions of the task by the native speakers. We have
shown that the Dutch gold standard is highly com-
patible to the English but that the Dutch wordnet
performs better than the English WordNet to the

same task. In the future, we will extend the toolkit
to perform more operations and we will try to ex-
tend the experiment to other languages. We also
want to experiment with different graphs to see
the impact on the task. These graphs could reflect
different degrees of relatedness depending on the
relations that are selected. Such relations could
also be derived from distributional properties of
words and inserted into the graph, where they can
be combined with wordnet relations or used sepa-
ratedly.

Acknowledgements

The authors wish to thank prof dr. Jan Odijk for
his help in setting up the Dutch semantic simi-
larity experiments. Moreover, we would like to
thank the members of the Computational Lexicol-
ogy and Terminology Web (CLTL) @ VU Uni-
versity Amsterdam for their feedback. Finally, we
would like to thank the participants, which were:
Katelijn van Knippenberg and her students from
the high school ’t Atrium in Amersfoort, Channah
van ’t Wout and her students from the high school
’t Hooghe Landt in Amersfoort, Paul Vleer and his
students from the high school Maurick College in
Vught, Renny van der Sleen and her students from
the high school RSG Trompmeesters in Steenwi-
jkerland, and Ina van der Wekken and her stu-
dents from the high school Jacob-Roelandslyceum
in Boxtel.

References
Christiane Fellbaum, editor (1998). WordNet: An Elec-

tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, USA.

Lev Finkelstein, Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Yossi Matias,
Ehud Rivlin, Zach Solan, Gadi Wolfman and Eyran
Ruppin (2002). Placing search in context: The con-
cept revisited. In: Proceedings of the 10th interna-
tional conference on World Wide Web, pages 406–
414.

Antske Fokkens, Marieke van Erp, Marten Postma,
Ted Pedersen, Piek Vossen, and Nuno Freire (2013).
Offspring from Reproduction Problems: What Repli-
cation Failure Teaches Us. In: Proceedings of the
51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Iryna Gurevych (2005). Using the structure of a con-
ceptual network in computing semantic relatedness.
In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing, Jeju Is-
land, South Korea, pages 767–778.



Samer Hassan and Rada Mihalcea (2009). Cross-
lingual semantic relatedness using encyclopedic
knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing: Volume 3, Singapore, pages 1192–1201.

Jay J. Jiang and David W. Conrath (1997). Semantic
similarity based on corpus statistics and lexical tax-
onomy. In: Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Research in Computational Linguistics
(ROCLING X), pages 19–33.

Colette Joubarne and Diana Inkpen (2011). Compar-
ison of semantic similarity for different languages
using the Google n-gram corpus and second- order
co-occurrence measures, Proceedings of the 24th
Canadian conference on Advances in artificial intel-
ligence, Canadian AI’11,isbn 978-3-642-21042-6
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pages 216–22.

Claudia Leacock and Martin Chodorow (1998). Com-
bining local context and WordNet similarity for word
sense identification. In Fellbaum, C., editor, Word-
Net: An electronic lexical database, MIT Press,
pages 265–283.

Michael Lesk (1986). Automatic sense disambigua-
tion using machine readable dictionaries: how to
tell a pine cone from an ice cream cone. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 5th annual international conference
on Systems documentation, ACM, 1986.

Dekang Lin (1998). An information-theoretic defini-
tion of similarity. In: Proceedings of the 15th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, Madi-
son, USA, pages 296–304.

George A. Miller and Walter G. Charles (1991). Con-
textual correlates of semantic similarity. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 6(1):1–28.

George A. Miller, Claudia Leacock, Randee Tengi, and
Ross T. Bunker (1993). A semantic concordance.
In: Proceedings of the workshop on Human Lan-
guage Technology, pages 303–308.

Nelleke Oostdijk, Martin Reynaert, Paola Monach-
esi, Gert-Jan Van Noord, Roeland Ordelman, In-
eke Schuurman, and Vincent Vandeghinste (2008).
From D-Coi to SoNaR: a reference corpus for Dutch.
In: LREC.

Siddharth Patwardhan and Ted Pedersen (2006). Us-
ing WordNet-based context vectors to estimate the
semantic relatedness of concepts. In: Proceed-
ings of the EACL 2006 Workshop Making Sense of
Sense-Bringing Computational Linguistics and Psy-
cholinguistics Together, Trento, Italy, pages 1–8.

Ted Pedersen, Siddharth Patwardhan, and Jason Miche-
lizzi (2004). WordNet::Similarity: measuring the
relatedness of concepts. In: Demonstration Papers
at HLT-NAACL 2004, Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 38–41.

Ted Pedersen (2010). Information content mea-
sures of semantic similarity perform better with-
out sense-tagged text. In: Proceedings of the 11th
Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (NAACL-HLT 2010), Los Angeles, USA, pages
329–332.

Roy Rada, Hafedh Mili, Ellen Bicknell, and Maria
Blettner (1989). Development and application of a
metric on semantic nets. IEEE Transaction on Sys-
tems, Man, and Cybernetics, 19(1):17–30.

Philip Resnik (1995). Using information content to
evaluate semantic similarity in a taxonomy. In:
Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), Montreal,
Canada, pages 448–453.

Herbert Rubenstein and John B. Goodenough (1965).
Contextual correlates of synonymy. Communica-
tions of the ACM, 8(10):627–633.

Piek Vossen, Attila Görög, Rubén Izquierdo, Antal van
den Bosch. (2012) DutchSemCor: Targeting the
ideal sense-tagged corpus. LREC, 584–589.

Piek Vossen, Claudia Soria, and Monica Monachini
(2013). Wordnet-LMF: a standard representation
for multilingual wordnets G. Francopoulo (ed.)
LMF: Lexical Markup Framework, theory and prac-
tice, Hermes / Lavoisier / ISTE

Piek Vossen , Isa Maks, Roxane Segers, Hennie Van
der Vliet, Marie-Francine Moens, Katja Hofmann,
Erik Tjong Kim Sang, and Maarten De Rijke (2013).
Cornetto: a lexical semantic database for Dutch,
P. Spyns and J. Odijk (eds): Essential Speech
and Language Technology for Dutch, Results by the
STEVIN-programme, Publ. Springer series Theory
and Applications of Natural Language Processing,
ISBN 978-3-642-30909-0.

Zhibiao Wu and Martha Palmer (1994). Verbs seman-
tics and lexical selection. In: Proceedings of the
32nd annual meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 133–138.


