



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and J D Pawar. Proc. of the 11th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 11–19,
Goa, India. December 2014. c©2014 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Tackling Close Cousins: Experiences In Developing Statistical Ma-

chine Translation Systems For Marathi And Hindi 

 

Raj Dabre 

CFILT 

IIT Bombay 

prajdabre 

@gmail.com 

Jyotesh Choudhari 

CFILT 

IIT Bombay 
jyoteshrc 

@gmail.com 

Pushpak Bhattacharyya 

CFILT 

IIT Bombay 
pushpakbh 

@gmail.com 

 

  

Abstract 

In this paper we present our experiences 

in building Statistical Machine Transla-

tion (SMT) systems for the Indian Lan-

guage pair Marathi and Hindi, which are 

close cousins. We briefly point out the 

similarities and differences between the 

two languages, stressing on the phenom-

enon of Krudantas (Verb Groups) transla-

tion, which is something Rule based sys-

tems are not able to do well. Marathi, be-

ing a language with agglutinative suffix-

es, poses a challenge due to lack of cov-

erage of all word forms in the corpus; to 

remedy which, we explored Factored 

SMT, that incorporate linguistic analyses 

in a variety of ways. We evaluate our 

systems and through error analyses, show 

that even with small size corpora we can 

get substantial improvement of approxi-

mately 10-15% in translation quality, 

over the baseline, just by incorporating 

morphological analysis. We also indirect-

ly evaluate our SMT systems by analys-

ing and reporting the improvement in the 

quality of translations of a Marathi to 

Hindi Rule Based system (Sampark) by 

injecting SMT translations of Krudantas. 

We believe that our work will help re-

searchers working with limited corpora 

on similar morphologically rich language 

pairs and relatable phenomena to develop 

quality MT systems. 

1 Introduction 

Marathi 1  and Hindi 2  are Indian languages 

ranking fourth and first 3  with respect to the 

                                                 
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marathi_language 
2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hindi 
3 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eighth_Schedule_to_the_Constitution 

number of speakers. Marathi has close to 72 mil-

lion speakers whereas Hindi has close to 400 

million speakers. Both Marathi and Hindi belong 

to the family of ‘Indo-European languages’ i.e. 

both have originated from Sanskrit and thus have 

some phonological, morphological and syntactic 

features in common. 

1.1 Comparison of Marathi and Hindi 

Marathi uses agglutinative, inflectional and 

analytic forms. It displays abundant amount of 

both derivational (wherein attachment of suffixes 

to a word form changes its grammatical catego-

ry) and inflectional morphology. Hindi shares 

these properties of Marathi except that it is not 

agglutinative in nature. Both languages follow 

the S-O-V word order.  Both languages have da-

tive verbs. In both languages, when the agent in 

the sentence is in nominative case, the verb 

agrees with it in person, number and gender; 

however, when it is not in nominative case, the 

verb does not agree with it. These languages dif-

fer most in the participial and reported speech 

constructions. 

1.2 Agglutination, Participials and Report-
ed Speech constructions 

The major factor in translating from Marathi 

(Mr) to Hindi (Hi) is handling the transfer of ag-

glutinative morphemes. In the reverse case it is 

the generation of appropriate agglutinative mor-

phological forms. Consider the translation of the 

Marathi word “माझ्याबरोबरच्यानेही” {majhya-
barobar-chya-ne-hii} {the one with me also 

(nominative)} which is “मेरे साथ वाले ने भी”, a 
whole phrase in Hindi. Marathi suffixes become 

Hindi post positions. Typically, in languages that 

have agglutinative suffixes there are millions to 

billions of possible surface forms and when all 

surface forms are not present in the parallel cor-

pora, translation suffers from data sparsity. Also, 
11



the translation of morphemes does not merely 

involve independent dictionary substitution but 

require looking at neighboring morphemes. 

An important aspect of our work involved 

handling of participial forms known as Kru-

dantas and Akhyatas (Bhosale et al, 2011; Bapat 

et al. 2010) which are derivatives of verbs. Con-

sider: “मी धावल्यानंतर असलेला व्यायाम करत 
आहे” {mi dhava-lya-nantar asa-le-la vyayam ka-
ra-ta aahe} {I am doing the exercises that come 

after running} in which “धावल्यानंतर” and 
“असलेला” (both nominal forms and are 2 consec-
utive Krudantas) and “करत आहे” (Verb group 
indicating tense, aspect and mood of action) are 

participial constructions. The last auxiliary verb 

in the verb group, “आहे” dictates the tense of the 
sentence; present in this case. 

Consider the translation of “धावल्याने” {dhava-
lya-ne} {by running (nominative)}, a Krudanta 

in nominal form, which in Hindi is “भागने से” 
{bhaagne se} or “भागने की वजह से” {bhaagne ki 
wajah se}. When the suffixes are to be translated, 

“ल्या” {lya} is translated as {ने} {ne} and “ने” 
{ne} is translated as से {se}. Note that “ने” {ne} 
is also used as a nominative case marker and will 

be translated as “ने” {ne} in the case of the Kru-
danta “धावणाऱ्याने” {dhava-narya-ne} {the run-
ner (nominative)} which in Hindi is दौड़ने वाले ने 
{daudne wale ne}. “ल्या” {lya} also has an alter-
nate translation as “हुए” {hue} {became (dead for 
e.g.)} in the case of “मेलेल्याला” {melelyala} {the 
dead person (accusative)} which in Hindi is: “मरे 
हुए को” {mare hue ko}. This is sufficient to indi-
cate that translating a verb group by using rules 

and bilingual dictionaries is a difficult and an 

involved process. 

 A construction of reported speech contains 

two sentences a sentential complement and a ma-

trix sentence. Hindi, typically, positions the sen-

tential complement (underlined) after the matrix 

sentence but Marathi can place this either before 

or after. The sentence “He says that he comes 

home at 8” is written in Hindi as: “वह कहता है 
की वह आठ बज ेघर आता है” {vaha kahta hai ki 
vaha aath baje ghar aata hai} but in Marathi as 
“तो घरी आठ वाजता येतो असे तो म्हणतो” {to 
ghari aath vaj-ta ye-to ase to mhana-to} or “तो 
म्हणतो की तो आठ वाजता घरी येतो” {to mhana-to 
ki to aath vaj-ta ghari ye-to}. Due to Krudantas a 

Marathi sentence can have many possible Hindi 

equivalents. 

All these examples serve to indicate that trans-

lation between Marathi and Hindi, inspite of their 

closeness, is quite challenging. Due to space 

constraints we do not elaborate further but those 

interested may look at the books of M.K. Damle 

(1970) and Dhongde et al. (2009). We now de-

scribe the various experiments conducted and 

SMT systems developed. 

1.3 Related Work 

Nair et al. (2013) developed a basic phrase 

based SMT system and compared it against a 

Rule based system, Sampark, for Marathi to 

Hindi translation. Their work lacked any kind of 

linguistic processing leading to only simple sen-

tences being translated well. Bapat et al. (2011) 

had explored the impact of handling Krudanta 

forms via morphological analysis during transla-

tion in Sampark by using rules. We obtained the 

Sampark system and its source code so that we 

could convert it into a Hybrid system, by SMT 

phrase translation injection, to get an indirect 

evaluation of the quality of our SMT systems. 

Dabre et al. (2012) had worked on improving the 

coverage and quality for their Marathi morpho-

logical analyzer which we exploit in the devel-

opment of our SMT systems. The remainder of 

the paper is dedicated to the experiments con-

ducted and evaluation. 

2 SMT Systems and Experiments 

We first describe the corpora used and then the 

SMT systems. The evaluation is in the following 

Corpora #Lines #words 

ILCI–Health–Marathi-Hindi 25000 

Mr-85681 

Hi -43102 

ILCI–Tourism– Marathi-Hindi 25000 

DIT–Health – Marathi-Hindi 20000 

DIT–Tourism– Marathi-Hindi 20000 

Wiki+News Web- Marathi 1968907 896430 

Wiki+News Web-Hindi 1538429 558206 

Table 1: Corpora details 
12



section. 

2.1 Corpora details 

Table 1 below describes the sources and sizes 

of the corpora which come from 2 major projects 

namely ILCI (Indian Languages Corpora Initia-

tive) and DIT (Department of Information Tech-

nology). We also crawled the web for monolin-

gual corpora which we used for language model-

ling. 

The crawl of Wikipedia (Wiki) by itself pro-

vided around 500000-600000 monolingual sen-

tences. There are many Marathi and Hindi news 

websites amongst which we crawled only the 

prominent ones for our corpora. It must be noted 

that the parallel corpus, which is undergoing re-

visions, was not of high quality and contains du-

plicate sentence pairs. 

2.2 Training and Technical details 

In order to perform training we used IBM 

models (Brown et al., 1993) implementation in 

GIZA++ for alignment and Moses (Koehn et al., 

2007, 2003) for phrase table extraction and de-

coding. In order to obtain factors for Marathi we 

used the Morphological analyzer and Part of 

speech tagger developed under the ILMT (Indian 

Language Machine Translation) project. For 

Hindi we used a freely available tool4 that does 

Morphological analysis and POS tagging simul-

taneously. All non-factored systems took around 

15-20 minutes of training time whereas inclusion 

of factors increased the time to around 30-50 

minutes. 

We tried to tune our systems but often saw 

that the resulting translations were of poorer 

quality and thus the evaluations presented later 

are on our non-tuned systems. All phrase tables 

were binarized and provided as services using 

the Moses webserver daemon.  

2.3 Marathi-Hindi Systems 

Below are details of the development of the 

various systems for Marathi to Hindi translation. 

For each system we describe the processing 

steps, if any, of the corpora and give assumptions 

and reasons for doing so. We also indicate the 

pros and cons of performing these steps, most of 

which will be indicated by examples in the eval-

uation section. For factored systems we mention 

factors as <Factor-1 | Factor-2 | … | Factor-n>, 

decoding steps as <Source Factor combinations 

 Target Factor Combinations> and generation 

                                                 
4 http://sivareddy.in/downloads 

steps as <Target Factors  Target Surface 

Form>. 

2.3.1 Baseline system 

We trained a basic phrase based system using 

the full parallel corpus for training and the Hindi 

monolingual corpus for language modeling. This 

did not have substantial coverage of all word 

forms for Marathi and motivated us to utilize the 

Marathi morphological analyzer. 

2.3.2 Suffix Split system 

We performed morphological splitting on the 

Marathi corpus and replaced the surface word 

with its root form followed by suffixes with 

spaces in between. The original source sentence 

to target sentence length ratio was quite low 

(Marathi having lesser words per sentence due to 

agglutination) which was observed to become 

almost equal to 1 after morphological splitting. 

Keeping the words in the root form led to the 

loss of gender (G), number (N) and person (P) in 

many cases. Also in case of tense determining, 

auxiliary verb forms of “असणे” {asne} {to be} 
the root word form loses the tense information. 

Despite this, the morphological splitting resulted 

in a massive increase in translation quality (see 

Evaluation section). Words that were not trans-

lated in their agglutinative form get properly 

translated due to reduction in data sparsity. 

2.3.3 Factored system – Suffixes as factors 

As an initial experiment into factored models 

we processed the Marathi side of the corpus to 

have 4 factors: <Surface Form | Root Word | 

Suffixes | POS Tag>. The agglutinative suffixes 

for a word were grouped (separated by an under-

score) and treated as a single factor. Not all suf-

fix combinations exist in a small corpus and this 

grouping does not lower data sparsity much. The 

Hindi side is also processed to have 7 factors: < 

Surface Form | Root Word | Gender | Number 

| Person | POS Tag | Case>. Here Case means 

direct or oblique to indicate whether an inflection 

exists or not.  

Initially we tried training a simple model in 

which our decoding step was: <Marathi Factors 

 Hindi Factors> which is followed by a gen-

eration step: <Hindi Factors  Hindi Surface 

Word>. But this ended up being the same as the 

baseline system. Since both root words and suf-

fixes in Marathi map to words in Hindi we speci-

fied 2 additional decoding steps: <Root Word + 

POS  Root Word + POS + Gender + Num-13



ber + Person + Case> and <Suffix  Root 

Word + POS + Gender + Number + Person + 

Case>. The previous step we kept as a back-off. 

We assumed that the aligner would map Marathi 

root words and suffixes to Hindi root words and 

postpositions respectively. Since existence of 

suffixes are indicative of inflection in Marathi. 

We did not consider GNP and case information 

as factors. But on investigation of the phrase ta-

bles we saw that the phrase pairs recorded were 

of poor quality. The decoder effectively disre-

garded the new decoding steps and hence we re-

frained from pursuing this way of treating suffix-

es as factors. 

2.3.4 Factored system – Suffixes separated 
from root 

We realized that separating the suffixes from 

the roots was the best approach and thus aug-

mented the Marathi corpus with GNP and case 

information. We first separated the suffixes from 

the root words by spaces and then added factors 

to the root word. The factored representation was 

<Root Word | Gender | Number | Person | 

POS Tag | Case>.  The split suffixes were repre-

sented as <Suffix | Gender | Number | Person | 

PSP | Case>. The GNP’s were copied over from 

the root word they were attached to and the POS 

was kept as PSP (postposition). The case was 

kept as ‘d’ (direct) if it was the last suffix and ‘o’ 

(oblique) otherwise. For verbs that indicated the 

tense (which don’t have many morphological 

variations) of the sentence we kept them in their 

surface form. Finally we used our large monolin-

gual corpora to train a generation model which 

would combine all factors on the Hindi side to 

generate the surface form.  

2.3.5 Hybridized Rule based System (Sam-
park) – Injecting SMT into an RBMT 

system 

The architecture of Sampark is given in Nair 

et al. (2013) and Bhosale et al. (2011). It is a 

transfer based rule based MT system and works 

in 3 phases: Analysis, Lexical transfer, Genera-

tion. The analysis phases generate the morpho-

logical analyses which our SMT systems can use. 

The original lexical transfer algorithm performed 

lookup in dictionaries to get root word and suffix 

translations. We modified the lexical transfer 

algorithm such that the verb groups would be 

translated by our best SMT system (2.3.2 in this 

case) by making translation requests to a Moses 

server daemon via a system call. This helped im-

prove Verb Group translation quality (see Evalu-

ation). The flow of translation is: 

 
Figure 1: Modified Sampark 

2.4 Hindi-Marathi Systems 

The translation systems for Hindi to Marathi 

are given below. The terminology used is the 

same as before.  

2.4.1 Baseline System 

As before, we trained a baseline system by us-

ing the Marathi monolingual corpus for the lan-

guage model. An interesting observation was that 

the quality of translation from Hindi to Marathi 

was better than the quality of translation in the 

reverse direction on the same corpus which fur-

thers the belief that translation is not a bidirec-

tional phenomenon. 

2.4.2 Factored System 

The factored corpus used in section 2.3.3 was 

reused for training this system. The decoding 

steps involved: <Hindi lemma to Marathi 

Lemma> and <Hindi POS Tag + Suffix  

Marathi POS Tag + suffix>. An additional 

back-off decoding step was: <Hindi Surface 

Word  Marathi Lemma + POS Tag + Suf-

fix>. Thereafter the generation step combines the 

Marathi factors to the surface form. However the 

quality of translations was not much better than 

the baseline system and upon investigation we 

observed that the decoder effectively used the 

back-off translation step. Once again we were 

faced with the same situation as in section 2.3.3. 

We realized that SMT should only take care of 

morpheme transfer as in sections 2.3.2 and 2.3.4. 

This led to the system below. 

2.4.3 Marathi Suffix splitting + Generation 

We used the processed corpus mentioned in 

section 2.3.2 with the modification in section 

2.3.4, namely, keeping the tense determining 

verbs in their surface form. It is quite evident that 

there would be a loss of GNP but our objective at 

that time was to achieve morphological genera-

tion correctly. The resultant phrase based system 

translates a Hindi sentence into a suffix split Ma-

rathi sentence. We then wrote a simple module 14



which would combine the morphemes into a sur-

face form. With this in mind we turned to our 

Marathi monolingual corpus, morphologically 

analyzed it and generated a HashMap which con-

tained morphemes and surface forms as key val-

ue pairs. One such entry would be: “घर समोर” 
{ghar samor}  “घरासमोर” {gharaa-samor} {in 
front of the house}. Since the monolingual cor-

pus was quite large (89.6 k unique words) we 

assumed that all commonly used morphological 

forms would be contained in it. The suffix com-

bination method used is: 

1.  Consider that the morphemes of the translat-
ed sentence are in an array “split_morph”. 

Let the hashmap containing morphemes to 

surface word mapping be called “mor-

pheme_to_word_map” 

2. For index = 1 to length(split_morph): 
a. Check the longest sequence of morphemes 

from current position which is present as a 

key in morpheme_to_word_map. 

a.  Retrieve the surface form for this mor-
pheme sequence. 

b. If no longest sequence can be found from 
current position then continue from next 

position. 

It will be seen later that this method is quite 

naïve and quite drastically lowers the quality of 

translations. 

3 Evaluation and Results 

3.1 Evaluation methodology 

 We considered BLEU (Papineni et al.,2002) 

as the standard evaluation criteria which morpho-

logically rich and free word order languages like 

Marathi and Hindi are not best evaluated by and 

hence we also performed Adequacy (meaning 

transfer) and Fluency (grammatical correctness) 

analysis as mentioned in Bhosale et al. (2011). A 

total of 100 sentences were translated and scores 

were calculated. A number of these were survival 

sentences. For adequacy (Ad) and fluency (Fl) 

the sentences were given scores from 1 to 5 (5 

for best). Sentences of score 3 and above are 

considered acceptable. Si is (#sentences with 

score i). 

 

Adequacy / Fluency = 100 * (S5 + 0.8 * S4 + 0.6 

* S3) / (#Total sentences) 
 

This gives the percentage of total sentences that 

the user understands and has acceptable gram-

mar. 

3.2 Results 

Table 2 below gives the scores for the various 

systems. The best results are highlighted. In case 

of Marathi to Hindi translation the suffix split 

systems perform the best. For Hindi-Marathi the 

baseline and factored system do reasonably well. 

The suffix split + generation system was the 

worst. 

In order to check the improvement of Krudan-

ta (Verb Group) translation by SMT injection 

into the RBMT system (Sampark) we construct-

ed a set of 52 sentences (some of which were 

present in the above set of 100 sentences) which 

contained a variety of Krudanta types. Since 

Krudantas can have multiple translations (see 

Section 1.2) BLEU is not reliable and hence we 

evaluated them using Adequacy and Fluency on-

ly (Table 3). It was observed that there was a 

substantial increment in translation quality of 

Sampark especially due to high quality Krudanta 

translations. 

 

System BLEU Adequacy Fluency 

Marathi-Hindi (Baseline) 24.46 44.6 55.8 

Marathi-Hindi  (Suffix split) 29.68 63.2 59.4 

Marathi-Hindi  (Suffix as factor) 18.42 47.0 47.6 

Marathi-Hindi  (Suffix split + factored) 30.35 61.8 66.0 

Hindi-Marathi (Baseline) 23.93 77.0 74.4 

Hindi-Marathi  (Factored) 20.06 72.6 72.2 

Hindi-Marathi  (Suffix split + Marathi generation) 8.4 45.0 37.8 

Table 2: Improvement in translation quality by SMT injection 

System Adequacy Fluency 

Hindi-Marathi (Sampark) 46.0 40.0 

Hindi-Marathi (Hybrid Sampark – SMT injection) 61.0 62.0 

Table 3: Results of Evaluation 

15



3.3 Example translations and Analysis 

Consider the following examples of transla-

tions which serve to indicate that the scores 

above are indeed valid. 

3.3.1 Marathi to Hindi (SMT systems only) 

 Input: राजयांतील शहरालंगत बेकायदा 
बांधकामाचंा प्रश्न गभंीर होत चालला आहे .  
{rajyan-til shahran-lagat bekayda 

baandhkaaman-cha prashna gambhir hot 

challa ahe} 

Meaning: The situation of illegal con-

structions near the cities in the states is 

becoming severe. 

 Expected translation: राजयों में/के शहरों 
के पास अवधै/बेकायदा ननमााणों की समस्या 
गभंीर होती जा रही है ।  
{rajya mein/ke shaharon ke paas 

avaidh/bekayda nirman ki samasya gam-

bhir hoti jaa rahi hai} 

 Baseline translation: राजय में शहरांलगत 
बेकायदा बांधकामांचा समस्या गभंीर होती जा 
रही हैं ।  
{rajya mein shaharan-lagat bekayda 

baandhkaaman-cha samasya gambhir hoti 

jaa rahi hai} 

 Suffix split translation: राजय के शहर से 
सटे बेकायदा ननमााण की समस्या गभंीर होती 
जा रही है ।  
{rajya ke shahar se sate bekayda nirman ki 

samasya gambhir hoti jaa rahi hai} 

 Suffix as factor translation: शहरांलगत 
बेकायदा राजयों के ननमााण का मसला गभंीर 
होती जा रही हैं ।  
{shaharan-lagat bekayda rajyon ke nirman 

ka masla gambhir hoti jaa rahi hai} 

 Suffix split + factored translation: 

राजयों के शहरों से बेकायदा ननमााण की 
समस्या गभंीर होती जा रहा है ।  
{rajyon ke shaharon ke bekayda nirman ki 

samasya gambhir hoti jaa rahi hai} 

 RBMT system Sampark (Non Hybrid 

version): राजयों के शहरों के पास गरैकाननूी 
बनावटों की समस्या गभंीर गजुरत ेगया है ।  
{rajyon ke shaharon ke paas gairkanuni 

banavaton ki samasya gambhir gujarte ga-

ya hai} 

 RBMT system Sampark (Hybrid ver-

sion): राजयों के शहरों के पास गरैकाननूी 
बनावटों की समस्या गभंीर होता जा रहा है ।  
{rajyon ke shaharon ke paas gairkanuni 

banavaton ki samasya gambhir hota jaa 

raha hai} 

 

Analysis: As expected, the baseline transla-

tion is quite bad because words like “शहरांलगत” 
{adjoining cities} and “बांधकामांचा” {of construc-
tions} are not translated. But the suffix split 

translation is almost correct except that it does 

not generate the plural forms “राजयों” {states}, 
“शहरों” {cities} and “ननमााणों” {constructions}. 
This was due to the loss of GNP information due 

to root forms. Here “राजयातील” {in/of the state} 
has 2 translations of its suffix “तील” which can 
be “में” {in} (generated by baseline) के {of} (gen-
erated by suffix split). Also “शहरांलगत” which 
was translated as “शहर से सटे” (by suffix split sys-
tem) which means “clinging to the city” is also 

acceptable but not as natural sounding as “शहरों के 
पास” {near the cities}. The factored system 
which had the suffix as a factor, fared rather 

poorly; as we had anticipated. But the suffix split 

factored system gave a near about perfect trans-

lation except for the plural form “ननमााणों”. It on-
ly missed a word “सटे” {clinging}. Also one 
must note that the verb group “होत चालला आहे” 
{is becoming} is perfectly translated in all cases. 

In general, however, the suffix split systems gave 

better translations than others. 

Comparing these to the RBMT systems trans-

lations, one must note that both the Hybrid and 

Non-Hybrid versions of Sampark do well in han-

dling GNP inflections since all the morphologi-

cal information is retained. Moreover it can be 

seen that the translations of nouns and their suf-

fixes, “शहरांलगत” as “शहरों के पास”, are much 
more natural than those of the SMT systems. 16



However, the translation of the verb group “होत 
चालला आहे” is translated as “गुजरत ेगया है” which 
is incorrect in the non-hybrid version. This is 

because sense of “होत” in this sentence is that of 
“happening” or “becoming”, but “गुजरते” is a 
translation of another sense of that word which is 

indicative of “passage of time”. “होत” whose root 
word is “होणे” is an extremely polysemous word 
having more than 10 senses. RBMT systems typ-

ically make mistakes in translating the proper 

sense of the word unless they have very high 

quality WSD (word sense disambiguation) mod-

ules which in the case of Sampark are not that 

good when disambiguating verbs. The hybrid 

version gives a near about perfect translation of 

“होत चालला आहे” as “होता जा रहा है” (masculine 
inflection) instead of “होती जा रही है” (feminine 
inflecion). This is because the inflection of the 

verb group depends on the gender of the word 

“समस्या”. But when performing SMT injection, 
only the phrase “होत चालला आहे” is translated and 
without the context “प्रश्न” the SMT system is 
unable to perform gender agreement thereby af-

fecting the fluency of the translation. 

3.3.2 Hindi to Marathi 

 Input: राजयों के शहरों के पास बेकायदा 
ननमााणों की समस्या गभंीर होती जा रही है ।  
{rajyon ke shaharon ke paas bekayda nir-

manno ki samasya gambhir hoti jaa rahi 

hai} 

 Baseline translation: राजयाच्या शहराला 
लागनू असलेल्या बेकायदा ननमााणों समस्या 
गभंीर होत चालली आहे. 
 {rajya-chya shahara-la laga-un aslelya 

bekayda nirmanon samasya gambhir hoat 

chala-li ahe} 

 Factored translation: राजयातील 
शहरांमध्ये जवळ बेकायदा ननमााणों समस्या 
गभंीर होत चालली आहे.  
{rajya-til shaharan-madhye javal bekayda 

nirmanon samasya gambhir hoat chala-li 

ahe} 

 Suffix Split Translation: राजय च्या शहर 
च्या जवळ बेकायदा ननमााणों ची समस्या 
गभंीर हो त आहे.  
{rajya chya shahar chya javal bekayda 

nirmanon chi samasya gambhir ho ta ahe} 

 Marathi Generation: राजयांच्या 
शहराच्या जवळ बेकायदा ननमााणों ची समस्या 
गभंीर होत आहे.  
{rajyan-chya shahara-chya javal bekayda 

nirmanon chi samasya gambhir hoat ahe} 

Analysis: “ननमााणों” {constructions} was not 
translated by any of the systems. The factored 

system managed to handle some inflections. In 

the suffix split translation the Marathi mor-

phemes were translated properly and the required 

surface forms were generated. The suffix split + 

generation system dropped the word “चालली” 
{going} which is acceptable. In this case the 

baseline translation was better than the others. 

3.4 Discussion 

It is quite evident that translation from Marathi 

to Hindi is rather easier than the reverse which 

involves morphological generation. Although the 

suffix split + factored Marathi-Hindi system did 

pretty well on the overall test sentences, it suf-

fered from factor data sparsity (Tamchyna et al. 

2013) and missed on generating proper inflected 

forms. This prevented it from outperforming the 

non-factored suffix split system by a large mar-

gin. More study is needed, on properly utilizing 

factors, to get high quality translation. 

The impact of SMT injection into the RBMT 

system Sampark is quite interesting from the 

point of view of translating Krudantas. It is clear 

that SMT manages to capture the structure of 

verb group translations along with translating 

proper senses of the verbs. The lexical transfer 

algorithm of the non-hybrid Sampark would 

translate the words in the verb group inde-

pendently, only relying on the word sense indi-

cated by the WSD module. Since SMT works at 

the phrasal level the translations are better. An-

other interesting observation is that short dis-

tance agreements are very good for SMT and 

Sampark. The lack of a dependency parser leads 

to problems in long distance agreements. At the 

current moment, the injection is very naïve and 

further study into performing intelligent injection 17



needs to be done. In general, Sampark translates 

non-verbal class words better than the SMT sys-

tems do.  

The case of Hindi-Marathi is the major chal-

lenge. The performance of the suffix split + gen-

eration method was very disappointing. But upon 

doing analysis we saw that the Hindi to Marathi 

morphemes translations were quite correct in 

many cases. There were some things wrong with 

our generation methodology. Firstly, on studying 

the morphemes to surface from mapping table 

we saw that there were many erroneous entries 

due to unknown lexicon words incorrectly mor-

phologically analyzed. Secondly, sometimes suf-

fix morphemes and root word morphemes are 

similar and get incorrectly joined to other words. 

This along with our decision to do longest mor-

pheme sequence matching resulted in incorrect 

(over) generation.  

“क्यों जा रहा हैं?” {kyo jaa raha hai} {why are 
you going} is translated as “काजा त आहे?” in-
stead of “का जात आहे?” {kaa jaa-ta ahe}. The 
morpheme translation is “का जा त आहे?” which 
is correct. Here “काजा” is a village in India, not 
in the morph lexicon and incorrectly split as “का 
जा” and recorded in the mapping table leading to 
poor translation. The naïve algorithm resembles 

the morpheme concatenation method in Durgar 

et al. (2006). A proper morphological generator 

needs to be used. 

4 Conclusion and Future work 

We have presented our work and experiences 

in developing SMT systems for Marathi and 

Hindi. We have described the corpora used and 

the details of training the systems in necessary 

detail. We also have evaluated the systems and 

given analyses of sample translations. The Mara-

thi to Hindi translation by SMT is more or less at 

a high quality owing to suffix splitting of Mara-

thi whose morphemes map to appropriate 

words/post positions in Hindi. Further study into 

proper utilization of factors will be undertaken to 

improve quality. The improvement of the transla-

tion quality of the RBMT system, Sampark, by 

performing SMT injection of Krudanta transla-

tions is another testimony to the qualitative per-

formance of the SMT systems. The reverse trans-

lation direction is rather difficult due to morpho-

logical generation for Marathi. Our current 

method is quite weak and relying on lookup is 

clearly not good. Currently we are working on 

developing a good morphological generator by 

reverse engineering the analyzer of Dabre et al. 

(2012). Their morphology grammar rules will be 

used. Indian Languages are all close cousins and 

Dravidian languages are similar to Marathi in 

respect to morphology. Our experiences should 

be applicable in the development of high quality 

SMT systems for these languages thereby ensur-

ing effective sharing of knowledge written in any 

Indian language. 

Reference 

Sreelekha Nair, Raj Dabre, Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 

2013. Comparison of SMT and RBMT: The re-

quirement of Hybridization for Marathi – Hindi 

MT. ICON 2013, New Delhi, December, 2013. 

Ganesh Bhosale,   Subodh  Kembhavi, Archana Am-

berkar, Supriya Mhatre, Lata Popale and Pushpak 

Bhattacharyya. 2011. Processing of Participle 

(Krudanta) in Marathi. ICON 2011, Chennai, De-

cember, 2011. 

M.K. Damale. 1970. Shastriya Marathii Vyaakarana. 

Deshmukh and Company, Pune, India. 

Dhongde and Wali. 2009. Marathi. John Benjamins 

Publishing Company, Amsterdam, Netherlands. 

Peter E Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra. Vincent J. 

Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The 

Mathematics of Statistical Machine Translation: 

Parameter Estimationn. Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics. 

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris 

Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Ber-

toldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Mo-

ran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Al-

exandra Constantin, Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: 

Open Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine 

Translation, Annual Meeting of the Association 

for Computational Linguistics (ACL), demonstra-

tion session, Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. 

Raj Dabre, Archana Amberkar and Pushpak 

Bhattacharyya. 2012. Morphological Analyzer 

forAffix Stacking Languages: A Case Study of Ma-

rathi, COLING 2012. 

Mugdha Bapat, Harshada Gune and Pushpak 

Bhattacharyya. 2010. A Paradigm-Based Finite 

State Morphological Analyzer for Marathi. Pro-

ceedings of the 1st Workshop on South and South-

east Asian Natural Language Processing 

(WSSANLP), pages 26–34, the 23rd International 

Conference on Computational Linguistics (COL-

ING), Beijing, August 2010 

Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och and Daniel Marcu. 

2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. Asso-

ciation for Computational Linguistics 2003. 18



Philipp Koehn and Hieu Hoang. 2007. Factored 

translation models. In Proceedings of the 2007 

Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 

Language Processing and Computational Natural 

Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages 

868-876, Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. As-

sociation for Computational Linguistics. 

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward and 

Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a Method for Auto-

matic Evaluation of Machine Translation, Pro-

ceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Asso-

ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 

Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 311-318. 

İlknur Durgar El-Kahlout and Kemal Oflazer. 2006. 

Initial explorations in English to Turkish statistical 

machine translation. In Proceedings of the Work-

shop on Statistical Machine Translation (StatMT 

'06). Association for Computational Linguistics, 

Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 7-14. 

Aleš Tamchyna and Ondřej Bojar. 2013. No free 

lunch in factored phrase-based machine transla-

tion. In Proceedings of the 14th international con-

ference on Computational Linguistics and Intelli-

gent Text Processing - Volume 2 (CICLing'13), 

Alexander Gelbukh (Ed.), Vol. 2. Springer-Verlag, 

Berlin, Heidelberg, 210-223. DOI=10.1007/978-3-

642-37256-8_18 

19


