









































Embedding NomLex-BR nominalizations into OpenWordnet-PT

Livy Maria Real Coelho
Univ. Federal do Paraná

Curitiba, Brazil
livyreal@gmail.com

Alexandre Rademaker
IBM Research Brazil and EMAp/FGV

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
alexrad@br.ibm.com

Valeria de Paiva
Nuance Communications

Sunnyvale, CA, USA
valeria.depaiva@gmail.com

Gerard de Melo
IIIS, Tsinghua University

Beijing, China
gdm@demelo.org

Abstract

This paper presents NomLex-BR, a lexical resource
describing Brazilian Portuguese nominalizations,
and its integration with OpenWordnet-PT. We first
describe the original English NOMLEX lexical re-
source and how we used it to bootstrap a Portuguese
version. Subsequently, we describe how this lexi-
con can be embedded into OpenWordnet-PT, which
facilitates its use and helps spot-checking both the
bigger integrated resource and the original lexicon.
Lastly, we outline some of the other, more substan-
tial work that we plan to engage for the project of
using linguistic insights for knowledge representa-
tion in Portuguese.

1 Introduction

To help investigate the semantics of deverbal nom-
inalizations, and its implications for Natural Lan-
guage Processing applications such as electronic
ontologies, question answering, or information re-
trieval, it is useful to have a lexicon of such nom-
inalizations. Our aim, in this paper, is to describe
the production and distribution of an open-source,
fully available RDF-packaged lexicon of deverbal
nominalizations in Brazilian Portuguese, as well
as a (still in progress) semantically annotated cor-
pus of examples of these deverbal nouns. More
generally we are interested in producing lexical
resources for Portuguese that allow us to reason
about the semantics of sentences in natural lan-
guage.

We focus on nominalizations in this work, for
several reasons. Deverbal nouns, or nominaliza-
tions, can pose serious challenges for knowledge-
representation systems. A sentence like “Alexan-
der destroyed the city in 332 BC” can easily be
parsed and its semantic arguments, such as the
agent of destruction (Alexander), the thing de-
stroyed (the city), and the time (332 BC), are

readily obtained for a proposed logical represen-
tation of the sentence. By contrast, a sentence like
“Alexander’s destruction of the city happened in
332 BC” is typically much harder to deal with.
It describes the same event of destruction, with
the same semantic arguments, but these are much
harder to obtain automatically by syntactically
parsing the sentence, for most parsers.

Nominalizations have been studied for more
than four decades (Chomsky, 1970; Grimshaw,
1990; Alexiadou, 2001). While most of these
works describe nominalizations’ behavior through
a syntactic or morphological point of view, re-
cently, the study of nominalizations has focused
also on semantic and ontological phenomena
(Hamm and Kamp, 2009; Real and Retoré, 2013).
With regard to lexical studies, deverbal nouns
are particularly well-studied in English, with the
NOMLEX project (Macleod et al., 1998) provid-
ing a well-established, open access baseline for
corresponding results in other languages. Our
work on NomLex-BR builds up from previous
work on nominalizations in English (Gurevich et
al., 2006). This previous work extended the cover-
age of NOMLEX’s English norminalizations, via
the use of Xerox PARC’s state-of-the-art NLP sys-
tem XLE (Maxwell and Kaplan, 1996) and some
simple, but effective heuristics, and compared it to
NOMLEX-PLUS (Meyers et al., 2004), the state-
of-the-art in 2004. Our work here is an attempt at
building the basic blocks underlying that work on
nominalizations, for Portuguese. Our assumption
was that the work done for English can be suitably
adapted and re-used for Portuguese, if we keep the
language comparisons in place. Additionally, we
hoped to learn and adapt from the French expe-
rience with nominalizations, described in the No-



mage project (Balvet et al., 2011).
The original version of NOMLEX is a small re-

source of only around a thousand nominalizations,
which seemed ideal to be used as a basis for our
project. The original NOMLEX was constructed
starting out with nominalizations with the suffixes
-ion, -ment and -er, taking samples of the most
frequent words in a list of nouns from a combina-
tion of the Brown Corpus and the Wall Street Jour-
nal (about 1 million words of each). Words with
these kinds of suffixes tend to be erudite words
and these tend to work similarly in different (but
related) languages. This was the original working
hypothesis, which seems confirmed, to some de-
gree, by our prototype.

To construct our lexicon, we first translated the
easiest nominalizations into Portuguese, such as
construction/ construção and writer/escritor, in
order to keep, to the extent possible, the “same”
lexical items from NOMLEX into NomLex-BR.
Our methodology provided for a fast and reli-
able creation of a lexical resource for Portuguese,
which hereafter can work as a basis to discuss the
behavior of nominalizations in general. In En-
glish, for example, many of the nominalizations
with eventive readings cannot be pluralized, con-
fusion and abandonment, e.g., lack plurals. This
does not occur in Brazilian Portuguese with con-
fusão/confusões and abandono/abandonos. Using
a lexical resource that covers the same range of
words as a previously existing English one, in-
sightful comparisons, as the inter-language rela-
tion of the nominalizer morphemes and the syn-
tactic behavior of those nominals, can be observed
more easily.

However, for comparative studies a simply text
file is not very easy to use. We thus finally embed-
ded NomLex-BR into a lexical-semantic resource
called OpenWordnet-PT (de Paiva et al., 2012a),
greatly facilitating search and experiments.

2 NomLex-BR

The original NOMLEX is a lexicon of English
nominalizations developed at New York Univer-
sity over many years. It relates the arguments of
a nominalization to the predicate argument struc-
ture of its associated verb, without requiring ex-
actly the same structure for the nominal and the
verbal lexical items. It also records details of the
syntactic realization of the arguments, including
prepositions associated with the arguments.

Unfortunately, lexical resources for languages
other than English are notoriously difficult to
come by. We are involved with the creation of
a Portuguese WordNet freely available for down-
load and modification by anyone OpenWordnet-
PT (de Paiva et al., 2012b). To follow the tradi-
tional pipeline for natural language understanding
systems, e.g. the one described by the Bridge sys-
tem of PARC (Bobrow et al., 2007), we need a
collection of lexical resources as well as (much as
possible) off-the-shelf systems. Ideally we would
want to have a broad coverage, deep processing
LFG grammar of Portuguese and while we are pur-
suing leads in this direction (de Alencar, 2013),
this may take a while, as hand-crafted large cov-
erage grammars are very labor-intensive. In the
meantime, it seemed sensible to construct some
of the resources that we are most familiar with,
and a small version of NOMLEX for Portuguese,
NomLex-BR, seemed to be an ideal starting point.

Our Portuguese version keeps the original struc-
tures of the English version of NOMLEX, but
apart from the translated nominal and verb, adds
an extra field to capture usage examples in Por-
tuguese.

Our initial pass of translating word pairs in
NOMLEX by two linguists was enough to yield
direct translations of around 90% of the origi-
nal resource. This high rate of correspondence
resulted not only from the words in NOMLEX
being somewhat erudite, but also from the fact
that the inter-language relations established by
the nominalizer morphemes are quite straight-
forward. For example, adjournment/adiamento,
beneficiary/beneficiário, corrosion/ corrosão.

The NomLex-BR lexicon has more than a thou-
sand entries, mostly nominalizations formed by -
ção, -mento and -or, as these are the correspond-
ing suffixes to the ones adopted by the NOMLEX
project. One next goal is to introduce nominal-
izations formed by -ura, considering the descrip-
tion proposed by (Real, 2008). We also aim to
add nominalizations formed by the suffix -ada.
These seem to require more analysis as -ada pro-
duces nominals from verbs (cutucada) and from
nouns (pedrada) and the semantics of these nom-
inalizations is far from obvious, as discussed by
(de Medeiros, 2008).



3 Evaluation of NomLex-BR

We considered several ways of evaluating our re-
source and different criteria to do so. Since it is
hand-constructed, via two experts, its accuracy is
high enough for the nominal-verb pairs that it cov-
ers. The main challenge is its coverage and repre-
sentativeness of the nominalizations in place. This
was addressed by increasing the coverage and by
checking the representativeness using a small cor-
pus of biographical data. As we are working with
a corpus of biographies of Brazilian historical fig-
ures (DHBB) (Abreu et al., 2010), we listed the
most frequent nouns in the texts of this corpus and
marked them as being nominals or not. This re-
vealed a lack of agentive nominals in our inititial
resource that was then corrected.

A second kind of evaluation and extension we
performed was comparing our resource with No-
mage (Balvet et al., 2011), a similar project for
the French lexicon. The Nomage corpus covers
736 nominals and 679 verbal lexemes extracted
from the French Treebank (Abeille et al., 2003).
Its nominalizations, annotated syntactically and
semantically, are formed by the suffixes -ade, -
age, -ance/ence, -ee, -ion, -ment and -ure. The
Nomage project and ours share a similar goal,
to study the inheritance of semantic and aspec-
tual features from the verbal bases, but the No-
mage lexicon was produced combining two differ-
ent methodologies – “one based on transformation
tests applied on real-life sentences by naive anno-
tators, the other based on forged sentences applied
by linguistically trained annotators” (Balvet et al.,
2011, p. 04). We compared all of Nomage’s en-
tries with NomLex-BR. It turned out that many of
the nominalizations in Nomage had to be added
to NomLex-BR, somewhat contrary to our expec-
tations that NOMLEX and NOMAGE had a big
intersection.

In the future, we would like to com-
pare the structural descriptions on each
nominalization/verb pair (for example
construction/construção) to check in which
way the linguistic relations established by nom-
inalizations with their verb bases are the same
in English and in Portuguese. This kind of
evaluation requires further annotation to describe
the kinds of nominalizations in Portuguese. These
are interesting problems on their own and we
hope to report interesting results as the project
progresses.

4 Embedding NomLex-BR into
OpenWordnet-PT

Finally, we integrated NomLex-BR into
OpenWordnet-PT, a version of WordNet for
Brazilian Portuguese. Its main characteristics are
its open-source license, its direct correspondence
with Princeton WordNet, and, given its origins
in the Universal WordNet(de Melo and Weikum,
2009), both a high recall and a high precision for
the more salient words in the language.

Our choice of encoding OpenWordnet-PT in
RDF makes the merging of these resources very
straightforward. The details of this encoding are
described elsewhere in great detail (Rademaker
et al., 2014). In order to incorporate NomLex-
BR into this encoding, we extended the RDF-
based vocabulary to additionally describe rele-
vant parts of the NOMLEX syntax (Macleod et
al., 1999). Figure 1 presents a subgraph for
the nominalization entry promover/promoção and
its connection to OpenWordnet-PT. Note that the
link between NomLex-BR and OpenWordnet-PT
is achieved through the properties noun and
verb. Both properties have as domain an instance
of Nominalization and as co-domain an in-
stance of WordSense (from the OpenWordnet-
PT vocabulary).

This embedding of NomLex-BR into the open
version of a Portuguese wordnet was helpful
in multiple respects. First, it solved some
minor problems with handling diacriticals, as
OpenWordnet-PT has a consistent treatment of
these. Secondly by checking how the nominal-
izations from NomLex-BR were related to the
corresponding verbs in the wordnet version, we
realized that some synsets were missing in the
OpenWordnet-PT. These are in the process of be-
ing added manually. Finally, by re-checking the
original English NOMLEX connections, we hope
to spot-check the consistency of OpenWordnet-
PT with respect to other specific phenomena, for
example, the phenomenon of diminutivization of
nominals.

5 Preliminary Conclusions

This lexicon of deverbals is just a first step for
our lexical resources. It would be useful to in-
clude nominalizations of adjectives and of other
nouns, which also need a common concept map-
ping for knowledge representation. Examples here
would be the nominals “selvageria” or “bruxaria”



Figure 1: Entry promover/promoção

from the adjective “selvagem” (wild) and the noun
“bruxa” (witch). Another future plan is to produce
capture verb semantics and in particular verb al-
ternations, as covered by VerbNet (Kipper et al.,
2006) for English. Again, there is hope that some
of the original Levin classes used for the construc-
tion of VerbNet are also valid for Portuguese.

In summary, we believe that the creation of lin-
guistic resources requires openness of programs
and of code. The only way to keep alive any
resource is to make sure that people can mod-
ify it for their own purposes. If one wants the
enterprise of automatic language understanding
to flourish, especially in languages with fewer
resources, one must make sure that the lexi-
cal resources we develop are freely available,
freely modifiable and easy to use. Making our
small lexicon NomLex-BR part of OpenWordnet-
PT and having it downloadable, freely available
from http://github.com/arademaker/
wordnet-br/ and easy to consult, we hope to
make it more interesting for researchers interested
in nominalizations in Portuguese.

We also wish to develop other resources
for Portuguese along these same lines and we
hope to work both from small hand-crafted lex-
ica and from big machine learned ones (like
OpenWordnet-PT and FreeLing-PT) to try to ob-
tain better quality resources. Keeping these re-
sources usable and as much as possible theory-
neutral is our challange.

References
Anne Abeille, Lionel Clément, and Francois Tou-

ssenel. 2003. Building a treebank for french. In
Anne Abeille, editor, Treebanks, Building and Us-
ing Parsed Corpora, pages 165–187. Kluwer, Dor-
drecht.

Alzira Alves Abreu, Fernando Lattman-Weltman, and
Christiane Jalles de Paula, editors. 2010. Di-
cionário Histórico-Biográfico Brasileiro pos-1930.
CPDOC/FGV, 3 edition. http://cpdoc.fgv.
br/acervo/dhbb.

Artemis Alexiadou. 2001. Functional structure in
nominals. Nominalization and ergativity. John Ben-
jamins.

Antonio Balvet, Lucie Barque, Marie-Hélène Con-
dette, Pauline Haas, Richard Huyghe, RafaelMarı́n,
and Aurélie Merlo. 2011. Nomage: an electronic
lexicon of french deverbal nouns based on a seman-
tically annotated corpus. In Proceedings of the First
International Workshop on Lexical Resources, pages
8–15, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Daniel G. Bobrow, Bob Cheslow, Cleo Condoravdi,
Lauri Karttunen, Tracy H. King, Rowan Nairn, Va-
leria de Paiva, Charlotte Price, and Annie Zae-
nen. 2007. PARC’s bridge and question answering
system. In Proceedings of Grammar Engineering
Across Frameworks, pages 26–45.

Noam Chomsky. 1970. Remarks on nominalization.
In Readings in English transformational grammar.
Blaisdell.

Leonel Figueiredo de Alencar. 2013. Brgram: uma
gramática computacional de um fragmento do por-
tuguês brasileiro no formalismo da lfg. In Proceed-



ings of the 9th Brazilian Symposium in Informa-
tion and Human Language Technology, Sociedade
Brasileira de Computação, pages 183–188, Fort-
aleza, CE, Brazil.

Alessandro Boechat de Medeiros. 2008. Tracos
Morfossintáticos e Subespecificacão Morfológica
na Gramática do Português: Um Estudo das For-
mas Participiais. Ph.D. thesis, UFRJ.

Gerard de Melo and Gerhard Weikum. 2009. To-
wards a universal wordnet by learning from com-
bined evidence. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement (CIKM 2009), pages 513–522, New York,
NY, USA. ACM. http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/1645953.1646020.

Valeria de Paiva, Alexandre Rademaker, and de Ger-
ard Melo. 2012a. OpenWordNet-PT: An open
brazilian wordnet for reasoning. In Proceed-
ings of the 24th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 353–360. See at
http://www.coling2012-iitb.org (Demo Paper). Pub-
lished also as Techreport http://hdl.handle.
net/10438/10274.

Valeria de Paiva, Alexandre Rademaker, and Gerard
de Melo. 2012b. Openwordnet-pt: an openbrazil-
ian wordnet for reasoning. Technical report, FGV -
EMAp.

Jane Grimshaw. 1990. Argument structure. The MIT
Press.

Olga Gurevich, Richard Crouch, Tracy Holloway King,
and Valeria de Paiva. 2006. Deverbal nouns in
knowledge representation. In Proceedings of the
19th International Florida AI Research Society Con-
ference (FLAIRS’06), pages 670–675, Melbourne
Beach, FL, May. AAAI Press.

Fritz Hamm and Hans Kamp. 2009. Ontology and
inference: The case of german ung–nominals. Dis-
ambiguation and Reambiguation, 6:1–67.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and
Martha Palmer. 2006. Extending verbnet with novel
verb classes. In Proceedings of Fifth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2006), pages 1027–1032, Genoa, Italy, June.

Catherine Macleod, Ralph Grishman, Adam Meyers,
Leslie Barret, and Ruth Reeves. 1998. Nomlex: A
lexicon of nominalizations. In Proceedings of Eu-
ralex 1998, pages 187–193, Liege, Belgium.

Catherine Macleod, Ralph Grishman, Adam Meyers,
Leslie Barret, and Ruth Reeves, 1999. Manual of
NOMLEX: The Regularized Version.

John Maxwell and Ron Kaplan. 1996. An efficient
parser for LFG. In Proceedings of the First LFG
Conference, CSLI Publications.

Adam Meyers, Ruth Reeves, Catherine Macleod,
Rachel Szekeley, Veronkia Zielinska, and Brian
Young. 2004. The cross-breeding of dictionaries.
In Proceedings of LREC-2004, Lisbon, Portugal.

Alexandre Rademaker, Valeria de Paiva, Gerard
de Melo, Livy Real, and Maira Gatti. 2014.
OpenWordNet-PT: A project report. In Proceedings
of the 7th Global WordNet Conference, Tartu, Esto-
nia, jan. to appear.

Livy Real and Christian Retoré. 2013. A genera-
tive montagovian lexicon for polysemous deverbal
nouns. In Handbook of the 4th World Congress and
School on Universal Logic.

Livy Real. 2008. Uma análise do sufixo -ura com base
na morfologia categorial. Revista InterteXto, 1.


