



















































Mining Themes and Interests in the Asperger's and Autism Community


Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality, pages 97–106,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Mining Themes and Interests in the Asperger’s and Autism Community

Yangfeng Ji, Hwajung Hong, Rosa Arriaga, Agata Rozga, Gregory Abowd, Jacob Eisenstein
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology

{jiyfeng,hwajung,arriaga,agata,abowd,jacobe}@gatech.edu

Abstract

Discussion forums offer a new source of
insight for the experiences and challenges
faced by individuals affected by mental
disorders. Language technology can help
domain experts gather insight from these
forums, by aggregating themes and user
behaviors across thousands of conversa-
tions. We present a novel model for web
forums, which captures both thematic con-
tent as well as user-specific interests. Ap-
plying this model to the Aspies Central fo-
rum (which covers issues related to As-
perger’s syndrome and autism spectrum
disorder), we identify several topics of
concern to individuals who report being on
the autism spectrum. We perform the eval-
uation on the data collected from Aspies
Central forum, including 1,939 threads,
29,947 posts and 972 users. Quantita-
tive evaluations demonstrate that the top-
ics extracted by this model are substan-
tially more than those obtained by Latent
Dirichlet Allocation and the Author-Topic
Model. Qualitative analysis by subject-
matter experts suggests intriguing direc-
tions for future investigation.

1 Introduction

Online forums can offer new insights on men-
tal disorders, by leveraging the experiences of af-
fected individuals — in their own words. Such
insights can potentially help mental health profes-
sionals and caregivers. Below is an example dia-
logue from the Aspies Central forum,1 where indi-
viduals who report being on the autism spectrum
(and their families and friends) exchange advice
and discuss their experiences:

1http://www.aspiescentral.com

• User A: Do you feel paranoid at work?
. . . What are some situations in which you
think you have been unfairly treated?
• User B: Actually I am going through some-

thing like that now, and it is very difficult to
keep it under control. . .
• User A: Yes, yes that is it. Exactly . . . I think

it might be an Aspie trait to do that, I mean
over think everything and take it too literally?
• User B: It probably is an Aspie trait. I’ve

been told too that I am too hard on myself.

Aspies Central, like other related forums, has
thousands of such exchanges. However, aggregat-
ing insight from this wealth of information poses
obvious challenges. Manual analysis is extremely
time-consuming and labor-intensive, thus limiting
the scope of data that can be considered. In addi-
tion, manual coding systems raise validity ques-
tions, because they can tacitly impose the pre-
existing views of the experimenter on all sub-
sequent analysis. There is therefore a need for
computational tools that support large-scale ex-
ploratory textual analysis of such forums.

In this paper, we present a tool for automati-
cally mining web forums to explore textual themes
and user interests. Our system is based on Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA; Blei et al, 2003), but is
customized for this setting in two key ways:

• By modeling sparsely-varying topics, we can
easily recover key terms of interest, while
retaining robustness to large vocabulary and
small counts (Eisenstein et al., 2011).

• By modeling author preference by topic, we
can quickly identify topics of interest for each
user, and simultaneously recover topics that
better distinguish the perspectives of each au-
thor.

The key technical challenge in this work lies in
bringing together several disparate modalities into

97



a single modeling framework: text, authorship,
and thread structure. We present a joint Bayesian
graphical model that unifies these facets, discov-
ering both an underlying set of topical themes,
and the relationship of these themes to authors.
We derive a variational inference algorithm for
this model, and apply the resulting software on a
dataset gathered from Aspies Central.

The topics and insights produced by our system
are evaluated both quantitatively and qualitatively.
In a blind comparison with LDA and the author-
topic model (Steyvers et al., 2004), both subject-
matter experts and lay users find the topics gener-
ated by our system to be substantially more coher-
ent and relevant. A subsequent qualitative analysis
aligns these topics with existing theory about the
autism spectrum, and suggests new potential in-
sights and avenues for future investigation.

2 Aspies Central Forum

Aspies Central (AC) is an online forum for indi-
viduals on the autism spectrum, and has publicly
accessible discussion boards. Members of the site
do not necessarily have to have an official diag-
nosis of autism or a related condition. Neurotyp-
ical individuals (people not on the autism spec-
trum) are also allowed to participate in the fo-
rum. The forum includes more than 19 discussion
boards with subjects ranging from general discus-
sions about the autism spectrum to private discus-
sions about personal concerns. As of March 2014,
AC hosts 5,393 threads, 89,211 individual posts,
and 3,278 members.

AC consists of fifteen public discussion boards
and four private discussion boards that require
membership. We collected data only from
publicly-accessible discussion boards. In addition,
we excluded discussion boards that were website-
specific (announcement-and-introduce-yourself),
those mainly used by family and friends of in-
dividuals on the spectrum (friends-and-family) or
researchers (autism-news-and-research), and one
for amusement (forum-games). Thus, we focused
on ten discussion boards (aspergers-syndrome-
Autism-and-HFA, PDD-NOS-social-anxiety-and-
others, obsessions-and-interests, friendships-and-
social-skills, education-and-employment, love-
relationships-and-dating, autism-spectrum-help-
and-support, off-topic-discussion, entertainment-
discussion, computers-technology-discussion), in
which AC users discuss their everyday expe-

α θd

zdpn

wdpn

m

ηk

ad

Ω

bi

yik ρN
P

D

K

AK

Figure 1: Plate diagram. Shaded notes represent observed
variables, clear nodes represent latent variables, arrows in-

dicate probabilistic dependencies, and plates indicate repeti-

tion.

riences, concerns, and challenges. Using the
python library Beautiful Soup, we collected 1,939
threads (29,947 individual posts) from the discus-
sion board archives over a time period from June
1, 2010 to July 27, 2013. For a given post, we
extracted associated metadata such as the author
identifier and posting timestamps.

3 Model Specification

Our goal is to develop a model that captures the
preeminent themes and user behaviors from traces
of user behaviors in online forums. The model
should unite textual content with authorship and
thread structure, by connecting these observed
variables through a set of latent variables rep-
resenting conceptual topics and user preferences.
In this section, we present the statistical specifi-
cation of just such a model, using the machinery
of Bayesian graphical models. Specifically, the
model descibes a stochastic process by which the
observed variables are emitted from prior proba-
bility distributions shaped by the latent variables.
By performing Bayesian statistical inference in
this model, we can recover a probability distribu-
tion around the latent variables of interest.

We now describe the components of the model
that generate each set of observed variables. The
model is shown as a plate diagram in Figure 1, and
the notation is summarized in Table 1.

3.1 Generating the text

The part of the model which produces the text it-
self is similar to standard latent Dirichlet alloca-
tion (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003). We assume a set
of K latent topics, which are distributions over
each word in a finite vocabulary. These topics are

98



Symbol Description
D number of threads
Pd number of posts in thread d
Np number of word tokens in post p
α parameter of topic distribution of threads
θd the multinomial distribution of topics specific to the thread d
zdpn the topic associated with the nth token in post p of thread d
wdpn the nth token in post p of thread d
ad authorship distribution for question post and answer posts in

thread d respectively
yik the topic-preference indicator of author i on topic k
bi the Gaussian distribution of author i’s selection bias
ηk topic k in log linear space
m background topic
Ω topic weights matrix
σ2λ variance of feature weights
σ2b variance of selection bias
ρ prior probability of authors’ preference on any topic

Table 1: Mathematical notations

shared among all D threads in the collection, but
each thread has its own distribution over the top-
ics.

We make use of the SAGE parametrization for
generative models of text (Eisenstein et al., 2011).
SAGE uses adaptive sparsity to induce topics that
deviate from a background word distribution in
only a few key words, without requiring a regular-
ization parameter. The background distribution is
written m, and the deviation for topic k is written
ηk, so that Pr(w = v|ηk,m) ∝ exp (mv + ηkv).

Each word tokenwdpn (the nth word in post p of
thread d) is generated from the probability distri-
bution associated with a single topic, indexed by
the latent variable zdpn ∈ {1 . . .K}. This latent
variable is drawn from a prior θd, which is the
probability distribution over topics associated with
all posts in thread d.

3.2 Generating the author

We have metadata indicating the author of each
post, and we assume that users are more likely
to participate in threads that relate to their topic-
specific preference. In addition, some people may
be more or less likely to participate overall. We
extend the LDA generative model to incorporate
each of these intuitions.

For each author i, we define a latent preference
vector yi, where yik ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether
the author i prefers to answer questions about
topic k. We place a Bernoulli prior on each yik, so
that yik ∼ Bern(ρ), where Bern(y; ρ) = ρy(1 −
ρ)(1−y). Induction of y is one of the key infer-
ence tasks for the model, since this captures topic-
specific preference.

It is also a fact that some individuals will partic-
ipate in a conversation regardless of whether they
have anything useful to add. To model this gen-

eral tendency, we add an “bias” variable bi ∈ R.
When bi is negative, this means that author i will
be reluctant to participate even when she does have
relevant interests.

Finally, various topics may require different lev-
els of preference; some may capture only general
knowledge that many individuals are able to pro-
vide, while others may be more obscure. We in-
troduce a diagonal topic-weight matrix Ω, where
Ωkk = ωk ≥ 0 is the importance of preference for
topic k. We can easily generalize the model by in-
cluding non-zero off-diagonal elements, but leave
this for future work.

The generative distribution for the observed au-
thor variable is a log-linear function of y and b:

Pr(adi = 1|θd,y,Ω, b) = exp(θ
T
dΩyi + bi)∑A

j=1 exp(θ
T
dΩyj + bj)

(1)
This distribution is multinomial over authors; each
author’s probability of responding to a thread de-
pends on the topics in the thread (θd), the author’s
preference on those topics (yi), the importance of
preference for each topic (Ω), and the bias parame-
ter bi. We exponentiate and then normalize, yield-
ing a multinomial distribution.

The authorship distribution in Equation (1)
refers to a probability of user i authoring a single
response post in thread d (we will handle question
posts next). Let us construct a binary vector a(r)d ,
where it is 1 if author i has authored any response
posts in thread d, and zero otherwise. The proba-
bility distribution for this vector can be written

P (a
(r)
d |θd,y,Ω, b) ∝
A∏
i=1

(
exp(θTdΩyi + bi)∑A
j=1 exp(θ

T
dΩyj + bj)

)a(r)
di (2)

One of the goals of this model is to distinguish
frequent responders (i.e., potential experts) from
individuals who post questions in a given topic.
Therefore, we make the probability of author i ini-
tiating thread d depend on the value 1 − yki for
each topic k. We write the binary vector a(q)d ,
where a(q)di = 1 if author i has written the ques-
tion post, and zero otherwise. Note that there can
only be one question post, so a(q)d is an indicator
vector. Its probability is written as

p(a
(q)
d |θd,y,Ω, b) ∝

A∏
i=1

(
exp(θTdΩ(1− yi) + bi)∑A
j=1 exp(θ

T
dΩ(1− yj) + bj)

)a(q)
di (3)

99



We can put these pieces together for a complete
distribution over authorship for thread d:

P (ad, |θd,y,Ω, b) ∝
A∏
i=1

(
exp(θTdΩyi + bi)∑A
j=1 exp(θ

T
dΩyj + bj)

)a(r)
di

·
A∏
i=1

(
exp(θTdΩ(1− yi) + bi)∑A
j=1 exp(θ

T
dΩ(1− yj) + bj)

)a(q)
di

(4)

where ad = {a(q)d ,a(r)d }. The probability
p(ad|θd,y,Ω, b) combines the authorship distri-
bution of authors from question post and answer
posts in thread d. The identity of the original ques-
tion poster does not appear in the answer vector,
since further posts are taken to be refinements of
the original question.

This model is similar in spirit to super-
vised latent Dirichlet allocation (sLDA) (Blei and
McAuliffe, 2007). However, there are two key dif-
ferences. First, sLDA uses point estimation to ob-
tain a weight for each topic. In contrast, we per-
form Bayesian inference on the author-topic pref-
erence y. Second, sLDA generates the metadata
from the dot-product of the weights and z̄, while
we use θ directly. The sLDA paper argues that
there is a risk of overfitting, where some of the top-
ics serve only to explain the metadata and never
generate any of the text. This problem does not
arise in our experiments.

3.3 Formal generative story
We are now ready to formally define the generative
process of our model:

1. For each topic k
(a) Set the word probabilities βk =

exp(m+ηk)∑
i exp(mi+ηki)

2. For each author i
(a) Draw the selection bias bi ∼ N (0, σ2b )
(b) For each topic k

i. Draw the author-topic preference
level yik ∼ Bern(ρ)

3. For each thread d
(a) Draw topic proportions θd ∼ Dir(α)
(b) Draw the author vector ad from Equa-

tion (4)
(c) For each post p

i. For each word in this post
A. Draw topic assignment zdpn ∼

Mult(θd)

B. Draw word
wdpn ∼ Mult(βzdpn)

4 Inference and estimation

The purpose of inference and estimation is to re-
cover probability distributions and point estimates
for the quantities of interest: the content of the
topics, the assignment of topics to threads, au-
thor preferences for each topic, etc. While recent
progress in probabilistic programming has im-
proved capabilities for automating inference and
estimation directly from the model specification,2

here we develop a custom algorithm, based on
variational mean field (Wainwright and Jordan,
2008). Specifically, we approximate the distribu-
tion over topic proportions, topic indicators, and
author-topic preference P (θ, z,y|w,a,x) with a
mean field approximation

q(θ,z,y|γ, φ, ψ) =
A∏
i=1

K∏
k=1

q(yik|ψik)

D∏
d=1

Pd∏
p=1

Np,d∏
n=1

q(zdpn|φdpn)
D∏
d=1

q(θd|γd)
(5)

where Pd is the number of posts in thread d, K
is the number of topics, and Np is the number of
word tokens in post Pd. The variational parame-
ters of q(·) are γ, φ, ψ. We will write 〈·〉 to indicate
an expectation under the distribution q(θ, z,y).

We employ point estimates for the variables
b (author selection bias), λ (topic-time feature
weights), η (topic-word log-probability devia-
tions), and diagonal elements of Ω (topic weights).
The estimation of η follows the procedure defined
in SAGE (Eisenstein et al., 2011); we explain the
estimation of the remaining parameters below.

Given the variational distribution in Equation
(5), the inference on our topic model can be for-
mulated as constrained optimization of this bound.

min L(γ, φ, ψ; b,λ,Ω)
s.t.γdk ≥ 0 ∀d, k
φdpn ≥ 0,

∑
k

φdpnk = 1 ∀d, p, n

0 ≤ ψik ≤ 1 ∀i, k
ωk ≥ 0 ∀k

(6)

The constraints are due to the parametric form
of the variational approximation: q(θd|γd) is
Dirichlet, and requires non-negative parameters;

2see http://probabilistic-programming.
org/

100



q(zdpn|φdpn) is multinomial, and requires that
φdpn lie on the K − 1 simplex; q(yik|ψik) is
Bernoulli and requires that ψik be between 0 and
1. In addition, as a topic weight, ωk should also be
non-negative.

Algorithm 1 One pass of the variational inference
algorithm for our model.

for d = 1, . . . , D do
while not converged do

for p = 1, . . . , Pd do
for n = 1, . . . , Np,d do

Update φdpnk using Equation (7) for each k =
1, . . . ,K

end for
end for
Update γdk by optimizing Equation (6) with Equa-
tion (10) for each k = 1, . . . ,K

end while
end for
for i = 1, . . . , A do

Update ψik by optimizing Equation (6) with Equa-
tion (13) for each k = 1, . . . ,K
Update b̂i by optimizing Equation (6) with Equa-
tion (14)

end for
for k = 1, . . . ,K do

Update ωk with Equation (15)
end for

4.1 Word-topic indicators
With the variational distribution in Equation (5),
the inference on φdpn for a given token n in post p
of thread d is same as in LDA. For the nth token
in post p of thread d,

φdpnk ∝ βkwdpn exp(〈log θdk〉) (7)
where β is defined in the generative story and
〈log θdk〉 is the expectation of log θdk under the
distribution q(θdk|γd),

〈log θdk〉 = Ψ(γdk)−Ψ(
K∑
k=1

γdk) (8)

where Ψ(·) is the Digamma function, the first
derivative of the log-gamma function.

For the other variational parameters γ and ψ, we
can not obtain a closed form solution. As the con-
straints on these parameters are all convex with re-
spect to each component, we employed a projected
quasi-Newton algorithm proposed in (Schmidt et
al., 2009) to optimize L in Equation (6). One pass
of the variational inference procedure is summa-
rized in Algorithm 1.Since every step in this algo-
rithm will not decrease the variational bound, the
overall algorithm is guaranteed to converge.

4.2 Document-topic distribution
The inference for document-topic proportions is
different from LDA, due to the generation of the
author vector ad, which depends on θd. For a
given thread d, the part of the bound associated
with the variational parameter γd is

Lγd = 〈log p(θd|αd)〉+ 〈log p(ad|θd,y,Ω, b)〉

+

Pd∑
p=1

Np,d∑
n=1

〈log p(zdpn|θd)〉 − 〈q(θd|γd)〉
(9)

and the derivative of Lγd with respect to γdk is

dLγd
dγdk

= Ψ′(γdk)(αdk +
Pd∑
p=1

Np,d∑
n=1

φdpnk − γdk)

−Ψ′(
K∑
k=1

γdk)

K∑
k=1

(αdk +

Pd∑
p=1

Np,d∑
n=1

φdpnk − γdk)

+
d

dγdk
〈log p(ad|θd,y,Ω, b)〉 ,

(10)

where Ψ′(·) is the trigramma function. The first
two lines of Equation (10) are identical to LDA’s
variational inference, which obtains a closed-form
solution by setting γdk = αdk +

∑
p,n φdpnk. The

additional term for generating the authorship vec-
tor ad eliminates this closed-form solution and
forces us to turn to gradient-based optimization.

The expectation on the log probability of the
authorship involves the expectation on the log
partition function, which we approximate using
Jensen’s inequality. We then derive the gradient,

∂

∂γdk
〈log p(ad|θd,y,Ω, b)〉

≈ ωk
(

A∑
i=1

a
(r)
di ψik −A(r)d

A∑
i=1

ψik
〈
a
(r)
di |θd,y

〉)

− ωk
(

A∑
i=1

a
(q)
di ψik −

A∑
i=1

ψik
〈
a
(q)
di |θd,y

〉)
(11)

The convenience variable A(r)d counts the number
of distinct response authors in thread d; recall that
there can be only one question author. The nota-
tion〈

a
(r)
di |θd,y

〉
=

exp(
〈
θT
〉

Ω 〈yi〉+ bi)∑
j exp(

〈
θT
〉

Ω 〈yj〉+ bj)
,

represents the generative probability of a(r)di = 1
under the current variational distributions q(θd)
and q(yi). The notation

〈
a

(q)
di |θd,y

〉
is analo-

gous, but represents the question post indicator
a

(q)
di .

101



4.3 Author-topic preference
The variational distribution over author-topic
preference is q(yik|ψik); as this distribution is
Bernoulli, 〈yik〉 = ψik, the parameter itself prox-
ies for the topic-specific author preference — how
much author i prefers to answer posts on topic k.

The part of the variational bound the relates to
the author preferences is

Lψ =
D∑
d=1

〈log p(ad|θd,y,Ω, b)〉

+

A∑
i=1

K∑
k=1

〈p(yik|ρ)〉 −
A∑
i=1

K∑
k=1

〈q(yik|ψik)〉
(12)

For author i on topic k, the derivative of
〈log p(ad|θd,y,Ω, b)〉 for document d with re-
spect to ψik is

d

dψik
〈logP (ad|θd,y,Ω, b)〉

≈ 〈θdk〉ωk
(
a
(r)
di −

〈
a
(r)
di |θd,y

〉
− a(q)di +

〈
a
(q)
di |θd,y

〉)
,

(13)
where 〈θdk〉 = γdk∑

k′ γdk′
. Thus, participating as a

respondent increases ψik to the extent that topic k
is involved in the thread; participating as the ques-
tioner decreases ψik by a corresponding amount.

4.4 Point estimates
We make point estimates of the following param-
eters: author selection bias bi and topic-specific
preference weights ωk. All updates are based
on maximum a posteriori estimation or maximum
likelihood estimation.

Selection bias For the selection bias bi of au-
thor i given a thread d, the objective function in
Equation (6) with the prior of bi ∼ N (0, σ2b ) is
minimized by a quasi-Newton algorithm with the
following derivative

∂

∂bi
〈logP (ad|θd,y,Ω, b)〉 ≈ a(r)d,i−〈
a
(r)
di |θd,y

〉
+ a

(q)
d,i −

〈
a
(q)
di |θd,y

〉 (14)
The zero-mean Gaussian prior shrinks bi towards
zero by subtracting bi/σ2b from this gradient. Note
that the gradient in Equation (14) is non-negative
whenever author i participates in thread d. This
means any post from this author, whether question
posts or answer posts, will have a positive contri-
bution of the author’s selection bias. This means
that any activity in the forum will elevate the se-
lection bias bi, but will not necessarily increase the
imputed preference level.

Topic weights The topic-specific preference
weight ωk is updated by considering the derivative
of variational bound with respect to ωk

∂L
∂ωk

=
D∑
d=1

∂

∂ωk
〈p(ad|θd,y,Ω, b)〉 (15)

where for a given document d,

∂

∂ωk
〈log p(ad|θd,y,Ω, b)〉 ≈ 〈θdk〉ωk·

A∑
i=1

ψik
(
a
(r)
i − a(q)i +

〈
a
(q)
di |θd,y

〉
−A(r)d

〈
a
(r)
di |θd,y

〉)
Thus, ωk will converge at a value where the ob-
served posting counts matches the expectations
under 〈log p(ad|θd,y,Ω, b)〉.
5 Quantitative Evaluation

To validate the topics identified by the model,
we performed a manual evaluation, combining the
opinions of both novices as well as subject matter
experts in Autism and Asberger’s Syndrome. The
purpose of the evaluation is to determine whether
the topics induced by the proposed model are more
coherent than topics from generic alternatives such
as LDA and the author-topic model, which are not
specifically designed for forums.

5.1 Experiment Setup
Preprocessing Preprocessing was minimal. We
tokenized texts using white space and removed
punctuations at the beginning/end of each token.
We removed words that appear less than five
times, resulting in a vocabulary of the 4903 most
frequently-used words.

Baseline Models We considered two baseline
models in the evaulation. The first baseline model
is latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA), which consid-
ers only the text and ignores the metadata (Blei
et al., 2003). The second baseline is the Author-
Topic (AT) model, which extends LDA by associ-
ating authors with topics (Rosen-Zvi et al., 2004;
Steyvers et al., 2004). Both baselines are im-
plemented in the Matlab Topic Modeling Tool-
box (Steyvers and Griffiths, 2005).

Parameter Settings For all three models, we set
K = 50. Our model includes the three tunable
parameters ρ, the Bernoulli prior on topic-specific
expertise; σ2b , the variance prior on use selection

102



bias; and α, the prior on document-topic distri-
bution. In the following experiments, we chose
ρ = 0.2, σ2b = 1.0, α = 1.0. LDA and AT share
two parameters, α, the symmetric Dirichlet prior
for document-topic distribution; β, the symmetric
Dirichlet prior for the topic-word distribution. In
both models, we set α = 3.0 and β = 0.01. All
parameters were selected in advance of the experi-
ments; further tuning of these paramters is left for
future work.

5.2 Topic Coherence Evaluation

To be useful, a topic model should produce topics
that human readers judge to be coherent. While
some automated metrics have been shown to co-
here with human coherence judgments (Newman
et al., 2010), it is possible that naive raters might
have different judgments from subject matter ex-
perts. For this reason, we focused on human eval-
uation, including both expert and novice opinions.
One rater, R1, is an author of the paper (HH) and
a Ph.D. student focusing on designing technology
to understand and support individuals with autism
spectrum disorder. The remaining three raters are
not authors of the paper and are not domain ex-
perts.

In the evaluation protocol, raters were presented
with batteries of fifteen topics, from which they
were asked to select the three most coherent. In
each of the ten batteries, there were five topics
from each model, permuted at random. Thus, af-
ter completing the task, all 150 topics — 50 topics
from each model — were rated. The user interface
of topic coherence evaluation is given in Figure 2,
including the specific prompt.

We note that this evaluation differs from the
“intrusion task” proposed by Chang et al. (2009),
in which raters are asked to guess which word
was randomly inserted into a topic. While the in-
trusion task protocol avoids relying on subjective
judgments of the meaning of “coherence,” it pre-
vents expert raters from expressing a preference
for topics that might be especially useful for anal-
ysis of autism spectrum disorder. Prior work has
also shown that the variance of these tasks is high,
making it difficult to distinguish between models.

Table 2 shows, for each rater, the percentage of
topics were chosen from each model as the most
coherent within each battery. On average, 80% of
the topics were chosen from our proposed model.
If all three models are equally good at discover-

Figure 2: The user interface of topic coherence
evaluation.

Rater

Model R1 R2 R3 R4 Average

Our model 70% 93% 80% 77% 80%
AT 17% 7% 13% 10% 12%
LDA 13% 0% 7% 13% 8%

Table 2: Percentage of the most coherent topics that are
selected from three different topic models: our model, the

Author-Topic Model (AT), and latent Dirichlet allocation

(LDA).

ing coherent topics, the average percentage across
three models should be roughly equal. Note that
the opinion of the expert rater R1 is generally sim-
ilar to the other three raters.

6 Analysis of Aspies Central Topics

In this section, we further use our model to ex-
plore more information about the Aspies Central
forum. We want to examine whether the autism-
related topics identified the model can support re-
searchers to gain qualitative understanding of the
needs and concerns of autism forum users. We are
also interested in understanding the users’ behav-
ioral patterns on autism-related topics. The anal-
ysis task has three components: first we will de-
scribe the interesting topics from the autism do-
main perpective. Then we will find out the pro-
portion of each topic, including autism related top-
ics. Finally, in order to understand the user activ-
ity patterns on these autism related topics we will
derive the topic-specific preference ranking of the
users from our model.

103



Index Proportion Top keywords Index Proportion Top keywords

1 1.7% dont im organization couldnt construction 2 2.6% yah supervisor behavior taboo phone
3 2.2% game watched games fallout played 4 3.5% volunteering esteem community art self
5 1.1% nobody smell boss fool smelling 6 3.2% firefox razor blades pc console
7 3.4% doesn’t it’s mandarin i’ve that’s 8 2.1% diagnosed facessenses visualize visual
9 1.7% obsessions bookscollecting library authors 10 2.6% ptsd central cure neurotypical we
11 1.2% stims mom nails lip shoes 12 1.8% classroom campus tag numbers exams
13 1.6% battery hawke charlie ive swing 14 1.9% divorce william women marryrates
15 0.1% chocolate pdd milk romance nose 16 5.8% kinda holland neccesarily employment bucks
17 0.6% eat burgers jokes memory foods 18 2.4% dryer martial dream wake schedule
19 3.7% depression beleive christianity buddhism becouse 20 1.4% grudges pairs glasses museum frames
21 0.4% alma star gods alien sun 22 2.6% facebook profiles befriend friendships friends
23 0.4% trilogy sci-fi cartoon iphone grandma 24 2.7% flapping stuffed toes curse animal
25 1.5% empathy smells compassion emotions emotional 26 1.7% males evolution females originally constructive
27 0.5% list dedicate lists humor song 28 4.6% nts aspies autie qc intuitive
29 2.7% captain i’m film anime that’s 30 3.6% homeless pic wild math laugh
31 3.3% shave exhausting during terrified products 32 5.6% you’re you your yourself hiring
33 4.6% dictionary asks there’re offend fog 34 1.5% grade ed school 7th diploma
35 1.0% cave blonde hair bald disney 36 1.9% diagnosis autism syndrome symptoms aspergers
37 1.3% song joanna newsom rap favorites 38 1.8% poetry asleep children ghosts lots
39 2.1% heat iron adhd chaos pills 40 3.6% bike zone rides zoning worrying
41 1.2% uk maths team teams op 42 0.8% book books read reading kindle
43 1.0% husband narcissist husband’s he hyper 44 1.1% songs guitar drums music synth
45 1.3% autism disorder spectrum disorders pervasive 46 0.7% dog noise dogs barking noisy
47 0.6% relationship women relationships sexual sexually 48 0.9% weed marijuana pot smoking fishing
49 0.9% him he his bernard je 50 2.0% her she she’s kyoko she’ll

Table 3: 50 topics identified by our model. The “proportion” columns show the topic proportions in the
dataset. Furthermore, 14 topics are highlighted as interesting topics for autism research.

Table 3 shows all 50 topics from our model. For
each topic, we show the top five words related to
this topic. We further identified fourteen topics
(highlighted with blue color), which are particu-
larly relevant to understand autism.

Among the identified topics, there are three
popular topics discussed in the Aspies Central fo-
rum: topic 4, topic 19 and topic 31. From the top
word list, we identified that topic 4 is composed
of keywords related to psychological (e.g., self-
esteem, art) and social (e.g., volunteering, com-
munity) well-being of the Aspies Central users.
Topic 19 includes discussion on mental health
issues (e.g., depression) and religious activities
(e.g., believe, christianity, buddhism) as coping
strategies. Topic 31 addresses a specific personal
hygiene issue — helping people with autism learn
to shave. This might be difficult for individuals
with sensory issues: for example, they may be
terrified by the sound and vibration generated by
the shaver. For example, topic 22 is about mak-
ing friends and maintaining friendship; topic 12 is
about educational issues ranging from seeking ed-
ucational resources to improving academic skills
and adjusting to college life.

In addition to identifying meaningful topics, an-
other capability of our model is to discover users’
topic preferences and expertise. Recall that, for
user i and topic k, our model estimates a author-
topic preference variable ψik. Each ψik ranges
from 0 to 1, indicating the probability of user i to

Topic User index

5 USER 1, USER 2, USER 3, USER 4, USER 5
8 USER 1, USER 2, USER 6, USER 5, USER 7
12 USER 1, USER 2, USER 4, USER 8, USER 3
19 USER 1, USER 2, USER 3, USER 4, USER 7
22 USER 1, USER 2, USER 3, USER 9, USER 7
31 USER 1, USER 3, USER 2, USER 6, USER 10
36 USER 1, USER 2, USER 4, USER 3, USER 11
45 USER 1, USER 3, USER 4, USER 12, USER 13
47 USER 2, USER 14, USER 15, USER 16 , USER 6
48 USER 5, USER 4, USER 6, USER 9, USER 2

Table 4: The ranking of user preference on some interest-
ing topics (we replace user IDs with user indices to avoid

any privacy-related issue). USER 1 is the moderator of this

forum. In total, our model identifies 16 user with high topic-

specific preference from 10 interesting topics. For the other

4 interesting topics, there is no user with significantly high

preference.

answer a question on topic k. As we set the prior
probability of author-topic preference to be 0.2,
we show topic-author pairs for which ψik > 0.2
in Table 4.

The dominance of USER 1 in these topics is ex-
plained by the fact that this user is the moderator
of the forum. Besides, we also find some other
users participating in most of the interesting top-
ics, such as USER 2 and USER 3. On the other
hand, users like USER 14 and USER 15 only show
up in few topics. This observation is supported by
their activities on discussion boards. Searching on
the Aspies Certral forum, we found most answer
posts of user USER 15 are from the board “love-

104



relationships-and-dating”.

7 Related Work

Social media has become an important source of
health information (Choudhury et al., 2014). For
example, Twitter has been used both for mining
both public health information (Paul and Dredze,
2011) and for estimating individual health sta-
tus (Sokolova et al., 2013; Teodoro and Naaman,
2013). Domain-specific online communities, such
Aspies Central, have their own advantages, tar-
geting specific issues and featuring more close-
knit and long-term relationships among mem-
bers (Newton et al., 2009).

Previous studies on mining health information
show that technical models and tools from com-
putational linguistics are helpful for both under-
standing contents and providing informative fea-
tures. Sokolova and Bobicev (2011) use sentiment
analysis to analyze opinions expressed in health-
related Web messages; Hong et al. (2012) focus
on lexical differences to automatically distinguish
schizophrenic patients from healthy individuals.

Topic models have previously been used to
mine health information: Resnik et al. (2013) use
LDA to improve the prediction for neuroticism
and depression on college students, while Paul and
Dredze (2013) customize their factorial LDA to
model the joint effect of drug, aspect, and route
of administration. Most relevantly for the current
paper, Nguyen et al. (2013) use LDA to discover
autism-related topics, using a dataset of 10,000
posts from ten different autism commnities. How-
ever, their focus was on automated classification of
communities as autism-related or not, rather than
on analysis and on providing support for qualita-
tive autism researchers. The applicability of the
model developed in our paper towards classifica-
tion tasks is a potential direction for future re-
search.

In general, topic models capture latent themes
in document collections, characterizing each doc-
ument in the collection as a mixture of topics (Blei
et al., 2003). A natural extension of topic mod-
els is to infer the relationships between topics and
metadata such as authorship or time. A relatively
simple approach is to represent authors as an ag-
gregation of the topics in all documents they have
written (Wagner et al., 2012). More sophisticated
topic models, such as Author-Topic (AT) model
(Rosen-Zvi et al., 2004; Steyvers et al., 2004) as-

sume that each document is generated by a mix-
ture of its authors’ topic distributions. Our model
can be viewed as one further extension of topic
models by incorporating more metadata informa-
tion (authorship, thread structure) in online fo-
rums.

8 Conclusion

This paper describes how topic models can offer
insights on the issues and challenges faced by in-
dividuals on the autism spectrum. In particular,
we demonstrate that by unifying textual content
with authorship and thread structure metadata, we
can obtain more coherent topics and better under-
stand user activity patterns. This coherence is val-
idated by manual annotations from both experts
and non-experts. Thus, we believe that our model
provides a promising mechanism to capture be-
havioral and psychological attributes relating to
the special populations affected by their cognitive
disabilities, some of which may signal needs and
concerns about their mental health and social well-
being.

We hope that this paper encourages future ap-
plications of topic modeling to help psychologists
understand the autism spectrum and other psycho-
logical disorders — and we hope to obtain further
validation of our model through its utility in such
qualitative research. Other directions for future
work include replication of our results across mul-
tiple forums, and applications to other conditions
such as depression and attention deficit hyperac-
tivity disorder (ADHD).

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by a Google Faculty
Award to the last author. We thank the three re-
viewers for their detailed and helpful suggestions
to improve the paper.

References
David M. Blei and Jon D. McAuliffe. 2007. Super-

vised Topic Models. In NIPS.

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. the Journal of ma-
chine Learning research, 3:993–1022.

Jonathan Chang, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber, Sean Gerrish,
Chong Wang, and David M. Blei. 2009. Reading
Tea Leaves: How Humans Interpret Topic Models.
In Yoshua Bengio, Dale Schuurmans, John D. Laf-
ferty, Christopher K. I. Williams, and Aron Culotta,

105



editors, NIPS, pages 288–296. Curran Associates,
Inc.

Munmun De Choudhury, Meredith Ringel Morris, and
Ryen W. White. 2014. Seeking and Sharing Health
Information Online: Comparing Search Engines and
Social Media. In Procedings of CHI.

Jacob Eisenstein, Amr Ahmed, and Eric P. Xing. 2011.
Sparse Additive Generative Models of Text. In
ICML.

Kai Hong, Christian G. Kohler, Mary E. March, Am-
ber A. Parker, and Ani Nenkova. 2012. Lexi-
cal Differences in Autobiographical Narratives from
Schizophrenic Patients and Healthy Controls. In
Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
37–47. Association for Computational Linguistics,
July.

David Newman, Jey Han Lau, Karl Grieser, and Tim-
othy Baldwin. 2010. Automatic evaluation of
topic coherence. In Human Language Technologies:
The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 100–108. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

A. Taylor Newton, Adam D.I. Kramer, and Daniel N.
McIntosh. 2009. Autism online: a comparison
of word usage in bloggers with and without autism
spectrum disorders. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems, pages 463–466. ACM.

Thin Nguyen, Dinh Phung, and Svetha Venkatesh.
2013. Analysis of psycholinguistic processes and
topics in online autism communities. In Multimedia
and Expo (ICME), 2013 IEEE International Confer-
ence on, pages 1–6. IEEE.

Michael J. Paul and Mark Dredze. 2011. You Are
What You Tweet: Analyzing Twitter for Public
Health. In ICWSM.

Michael J. Paul and Mark Dredze. 2013. Drug Ex-
traction from the Web: Summarizing Drug Expe-
riences with Multi-Dimensional Topic Models. In
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 168–178, Atlanta, Georgia, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Philip Resnik, Anderson Garron, and Rebecca Resnik.
2013. Using Topic Modeling to Improve Prediction
of Neuroticism and Depression in College Students.
In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing.

Michal Rosen-Zvi, Thomas Griffiths, Mark Steyvers,
and Padhraic Smyth. 2004. The Author-Topic
Model for Authors and Documents. In UAI.

Mark Schmidt, Ewout van den Berg, Michael P. Fried-
lander, and Kevin Muphy. 2009. Optimizing Costly
Functions with Simple Constraints: A Limited-
Memory Projected Quasi-Netton Algorithm. In AIS-
TATS.

Marina Sokolova and Victoria Bobicev. 2011. Sen-
timents and Opinions in Health-related Web mes-
sages. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence Recent Advances in Natural Language Pro-
cessing 2011, pages 132–139, Hissar, Bulgaria,
September. RANLP 2011 Organising Committee.

Marina Sokolova, Stan Matwin, Yasser Jafer, and
David Schramm. 2013. How Joe and Jane Tweet
about Their Health: Mining for Personal Health In-
formation on Twitter. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference Recent Advances in Natu-
ral Language Processing RANLP 2013, pages 626–
632, Hissar, Bulgaria, September. INCOMA Ltd.
Shoumen, BULGARIA.

Mark Steyvers and Thomas Griffiths. 2005. Matlab
Topic Modeling Toolbox 1.4.

Mark Steyvers, Padhraic Smyth, and Thomas Griffiths.
2004. Probabilistic Author-Topic Models for Infor-
mation Discovery. In KDD.

Rannie Teodoro and Mor Naaman. 2013. Fitter with
Twitter: Understanding Personal Health and Fitness
Activity in Social Media. In Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media.

Claudia Wagner, Vera Liao, Peter Pirolli, Les Nel-
son, and Markus Strohmaier. 2012. It’s not in
their tweets: Modeling topical expertise of Twitter
users. In ASE/IEEE International Conference on So-
cial Computing.

Martin J. Wainwright and Michael I. Jordan. 2008.
Graphical models, exponential families, and varia-
tional inference. Foundations and Trends in Ma-
chine Learning, 1(1-2):1–305.

106


