



















































Issues in Translating Verb-Particle Constructions from German to English


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 124–131,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Issues in Translating Verb-Particle Constructions from German to English

Nina Schottmüller
Uppsala University

Department of Linguistics and Philology
nschottmueller@gmail.com

Joakim Nivre
Uppsala University

Department of Linguistics and Philology
joakim.nivre@lingfil.uu.se

Abstract

In this paper, we investigate difficulties
in translating verb-particle constructions
from German to English. We analyse the
structure of German VPCs and compare
them to VPCs in English. In order to find
out if and to what degree the presence of
VPCs causes problems for statistical ma-
chine translation systems, we collected a
set of 59 verb pairs, each consisting of a
German VPC and a synonymous simplex
verb. With this data, we constructed a
test suite of 236 sentences where the sim-
plex verb and VPC are completely substi-
tutable. We then translated this dataset to
English using Google Translate and Bing
Translator. Through an analysis of the re-
sulting translations we are able to show
that the quality decreases when translat-
ing sentences that contain VPCs instead
of simplex verbs. The test suite is made
freely available to the community.

1 Introduction

In this paper, we analyse and discuss German
verb-particle constructions (VPCs). VPCs are
a type of multiword expressions (MWEs) which
are defined by Sag et al. (2002) to be “idiosyn-
cratic interpretations that cross word bounderies
(or spaces)”. Kim and Baldwin (2010) extend
this explanation in their definition of MWEs be-
ing “lexical items consisting of multiple simplex
words that display lexical, syntactic, semantic
and/or statistical idiosyncrasies”.

VPCs are made up of a base verb and a par-
ticle. In contrast to English, where the particle is
always separated from the verb, German VPCs are
separable, meaning that the particle can either be
attached as a prefix to the verb or stand separate
from it, depending on factors such as tense and

voice, along with whether the VPC is found in a
main clause or subordinate clause.

The fact that German VPCs are separable
means that word order differences between the
source and target language can occur in statisti-
cal machine translation (SMT). It has been shown
that the translation quality of translation systems
can suffer from such differences in word order
(Holmqvist et al., 2012). Since VPCs make up for
a significant amount of verbs in English, as well
as in German, they are a likely source for transla-
tion errors. This makes it essential to analyse any
issues with VPCs that occur while translating, in
order to be able to develop possible improvements.

In our approach, we investigate if the presence
of VPCs causes translation errors. We do this by
creating and utilising a dataset of 236 sentences,
using a collection of 59 German verb pairs, each
consisting of a VPC and a synonymous simplex
verb, a test suite that is made freely available. We
discuss the English translation results generated
by the popular translation systems Google Trans-
late and Bing Translator and show that the pres-
ence of VPCs can harm translation quality.

We begin this paper by stating important related
work in the fields related to VPCs in Section 2 and
continue with a detailed analysis of VPCs in Ger-
man in Section 3. In Section 4, we describe how
the data used for evaluation was compiled, and in
Section 5, we give further details on the evalua-
tion in terms of metrics and systems tested. Sec-
tion 6 gives an overview of the results, as well as
their discussion, where we present possible rea-
sons why VPCs performed worse in the experi-
ments, which finally leads to our conclusions in
Section 7. An appendix lists all the verb pairs used
to construct the test suite.

2 Related Work

A lot of research has been done on the identifica-
tion, classification, and extraction of VPCs, with

124



the majority of work done on English. For exam-
ple, Villavicencio (2005) presents a study about
the availability of VPCs in lexical resources and
proposes an approach to use semantic classifica-
tion to identify as many VPC candidates as possi-
ble. She then validates these candidates using the
retrieved results from online search engines.

Many linguistic studies analyse VPCs in Ger-
man, or English, respectively, mostly discussing
the grammar theory that underlies the composi-
tionality of MWEs in general or presenting more
particular studies such as theories and experiments
about language acquisition. An example would be
the work of Behrens (1998), in which she con-
trasts how German, English and Dutch children
acquire complex verbs when they learn to speak,
focusing on the differences in the acquisition of
VPCs and prefix verbs. In another article in this
field by Müller (2002), the author focuses on non-
transparent readings of German VPCs and de-
scribes the phenomenon of how particles can be
fronted.

Furthermore, there has been some research
dealing with VPCs in machine translation as well.
In a study by Chatterjee and Balyan (2011), sev-
eral rule-based solutions are proposed for how
to translate English VPCs to Hindi, using their
surrounding entities. Another paper in this field
by Collins et al. (2005) presents an approach to
clause restructuring for statistical machine trans-
lation from German to English in which one step
consists of moving the particle of a particle verb
directly in front of the verb. Moreover, even
though their work does not directly target VPCs,
Holmqvist et al. (2012) present a method for im-
proving word alignment quality by reordering the
source text according to the target word order,
where they also mention that their approach is sup-
posed to help with different word order caused by
finite verbs in German, similar to the phenomenon
of differing word order caused by VPCs.

3 German Verb-Particle Constructions

VPCs in German are made up of a base verb and
a particle. In contrast to English, German VPCs
are separable, meaning that they can occur sepa-
rated, but do not necessarily have to. This applies
only for main clauses, as VPCs can never be sep-
arated in German subordinate clauses. Depending
on the conjugation of the verb, the particle can a)
be attached to the front of the verb as prefix, ei-

ther directly or with an additional morpheme, or
b) be completely separated from the verb. The
particle is directly prefixed to the verb if it is an
infinitive construction, for example within an ac-
tive voice present tense sentence using an auxil-
iary (e.g., muss herausnehmen). It is also attached
directly to the conjugated base verb when using
a past participle form to indicate passive voice or
perfect tense (e.g., herausgenommen), or if a mor-
pheme is inserted to build an infinitive construc-
tion using zu (e.g., herauszunehmen). The parti-
cle is separated from the verb root in finite main
clauses where the particle verb is the main verb
of the sentence (e.g., nimmt heraus). The fol-
lowing examples serve to illustrate the aforemen-
tioned three forms of the non-separated case and
the one separated case.

Attached:
Du musst das herausnehmen.
You have to take this out.

Attached+perfect:
Ich habe es herausgenommen.
I have taken it out.

Attached+zu:
Es ist nicht erlaubt, das herauszunehmen.
It is not allowed to take that out.

Separated:
Ich nehme es heraus.
I take it out.

Just like simplex verbs, VPCs can be transitive
or intransitive. For the separated case, a transi-
tive VPC’s base verb and particle are always split
and the object has to be positioned between them,
despite the generally freer word order of German.
For the non-separated case, the object is found be-
tween the finite verb (normally an auxiliary) and
the VPC.

Separated transitive:
Sie nahm die Klamotten heraus.
*Sie nahm heraus die Klamotten.
She took [out] the clothes [out].

Non-separated transitive:
Sie will die Klamotten herausnehmen.
*Sie will herausnehmen die Klamotten.
She wants to take [out] the clothes [out].

Similar to English, a three-fold classification can
be applied to German VPCs. Depending on their

125



formation, they can either be classified as a) com-
positional, e.g., herausnehmen (to take out), b) id-
iomatic, e.g., ablehnen (to turn down, literally: to
lean down), or c) aspectual, e.g., aufessen (to eat
up), as proposed in Villavicencio (2005) and Dehé
(2002).

Compositional:
Sie nahm die Klamotten heraus.
She took out the clothes.

Idiomatic:
Er lehnt das Jobangebot ab.
He turns down the job offer.

Aspectual:
Sie aß den Kuchen auf.
She ate up the cake.

There is another group of verbs in German which
look similar to VPCs. Inseparable prefix verbs
consist of a derivational prefix and a verb root. In
some cases, these prefixes and verb particles can
look the same and can only be distinguished in
spoken language. For instance, the infinitive verb
umfahren can have the following translations, de-
pending on which syllable is stressed.

VPC:
umfahren
to knock down sth./so. (in traffic)

Inseparable prefix verb:
umfahren
to drive around sth./so.

As mentioned before, there is a clear difference
between these two seemingly identical verbs in
spoken German. In written German, however, the
plain infinitive forms of the respective verbs are
the same. In most cases, context and use of finite
verb forms reveal the correct meaning.

VPC:
Sie fuhr den Mann um.
She knocked down the man (with her car).

Inseparable prefix verb:
Sie umfuhr das Hindernis.
She drove around the obstacle.

For reasons of similarity, VPCs and inseparable
prefix verbs are sometimes grouped together un-
der the term prefix verbs, in which case VPCs are
then called separable prefix verbs. However, since

Simplex VPC Total
Finite sentence 59 59 118
Auxiliary sentence 59 59 118
Total 118 118 236

Table 1: Types and number of sentences in the test
suite.

the behaviour of inseparable prefix verbs is like
that of normal verbs, they will not be treated dif-
ferently throughout this paper and will only serve
as comparison to VPCs in the same way that any
other inseparable verbs do.

4 Test Suite

In order to find out how translation quality is in-
fluenced by the presence of VPCs, we are in need
of a suitable dataset to evaluate the translation re-
sults of sentences containing both particle verbs
and synonymous simplex verbs. Since it seems
that there is no suitable dataset available for this
purpose, we decided to compile one ourselves.

With the help of several online dictionary re-
sources, we first collected a list of candidate
VPCs, based on their particle, so that as many dif-
ferent particles as possible were present in the ini-
tial set of verbs, while making sure that each par-
ticle was only sampled a handful of times. We
then checked each of the VPCs for suitable sim-
plex verb synonyms, finally resulting in a set of 59
verb pairs, each consisting of a simplex verb and a
synonymous German VPC (see Appendix A for a
full list). We allowed the two verbs of a verb pair
to be partially synonymous as long as both their
subcategorization frame and meaning was identi-
cal for some cases.

For each verb pair, we constructed two German
sentences in which the verbs were syntactically
and semantically interchangeable. The first sen-
tence for each pair had to be a finite construction,
where the respective simplex or particle verb was
the main verb, containing a direct object or any
kind of adverb to ensure that the particle of the
particle verb is properly separated from the verb
root. For the second sentence, an auxiliary with
the infinitive form of the respective verb was used
to enforce the non-separated case, where the parti-
cle is attached to the front of the verb.

Using both verbs of each verb pair, this resulted
in a test suite consisting of a total of 236 sentences
(see Table 1 for an overview). The following ex-

126



ample serves to illustrate the approach for the verb
pair kultivieren - anbauen (to grow).

Finite:
Viele Bauern in dieser Gegend kultivieren
Raps. (simplex)
Viele Bauern in dieser Gegend bauen Raps
an. (VPC)
Many farmers in this area grow rapeseed.

Auxiliary:
Kann man Steinpilze kultivieren? (simplex)
Kann man Steinpilze anbauen? (VPC)
Can you grow porcini mushrooms?

The sentences were partly taken from online texts,
or constructed by a native speaker. They were
set to be at most 12 words long and the position
of the simplex verb and VPC had to be in the
main clause to ensure comparability by avoiding
too complex constructions. Furthermore, the sen-
tences could be declarative, imperative, or inter-
rogative, as long as they conformed to the require-
ments stated above. The full test suite of 236 sen-
tences is made freely available to the community.1

5 Evaluation

Two popular SMT systems, namely Google Trans-
late2 and Bing Translator,3 were utilised to per-
form German to English translation on the test
suite. The translation results were then manually
evaluated under the following criteria:

• Translation of the sentence: The translation
of the whole sentence was judged to be ei-
ther correct or incorrect. Translations were
judged to be incorrect if they contained any
kind of error, for instance grammatical mis-
takes (e.g., tense), misspellings (e.g., wrong
use of capitalisation), or translation errors
(e.g., inappropriate word choices).

• Translation of the verb: The translation of
the verb in each sentence was judged to be
correct or incorrect, depending on whether or
not the translated verb was appropriate in the
context of the sentence. It was also judged to
be incorrect if for instance only the base verb
was translated and the particle was ignored,
or if the translation did not contain a verb.

1http://stp.lingfil.uu.se/∼ninas/testsuite.txt
2http://www.translate.google.com
3http://www.bing.com/translator

• Translation of the base verb: Furthermore,
the translation of the base verb was judged
to be either correct or incorrect in order to
show if the particle of an incorrectly trans-
lated VPC was ignored, or if the verb was
translated incorrectly for any other reason.
For VPCs, this was judged to be correct if
either the VPC, or at least the base verb was
translated correctly. For simplex verbs, the
judgement for the translation of the verb and
the translation of the base verb was always
judged the same, since they do not contain
separable particles.

The evaluation was carried out by a native speaker
of German and was validated by a second German
native speaker, both proficient in English.

6 Results and Discussion

The results of the evaluation can be seen in Table
2. In this table, we merged the results for Google
and Bing to present the key results clearly. For
a more detailed overview of the results, includ-
ing the individual scores for both Google Translate
and Bing Translator, see Table 3.

In the total results, we can see that on average
48.3% of the 236 sentences were translated cor-
rectly, while a correct target translation for the
sentence’s main verb was found in 81.1% of all
cases. Moreover, 92.2% of the base verb transla-
tions were judged to be correct.

By looking at the results for VPCs and simplex
verbs separately, we are able to break down the to-
tal figures and compare them. The first thing to
note is that only 43.2% of the sentences contain-
ing VPCs were translated correctly, while the sys-
tems managed to successfully translate 53.4% of
the simplex verb sentences, showing a difference
of around 10% absolute. The results for the verb
transitions in these sentences differ even further
with 71.6% of all VPC translations being judged
to be correct and 90.7% of the simplex translations
judged to be acceptable, revealing a difference of
around 20% absolute.

Another interesting result is the translation of
the base verb, where a correct translation was
found in 93.6% of the cases for VPCs, meaning
that in 22.0% of the sentences the systems made a
mistake with a particle verb, but got the meaning
of the base verb right. This indicates that the usu-
ally different meaning of the base verb can be mis-
leading when translating a sentence that contains

127



Sentence (%) Verb (%) Base V. (%)
VPC 102 (43.2%) 169 (71.6%) 221 (93.6%)
Finite 47 (39.8%) 80 (67.8%) 114 (96.6%)
Infinitive 55 (46.6%) 89 (75.4%) 107 (90.7%)
Simplex 126 (53.4%) 214 (90.7%) 214 (90.7%)
Finite 59 (50.0%) 103 (87.3%) 103 (87.3%)
Infinitive 67 (56.8%) 111 (94.1%) 111 (94.1%)
Total 228 (48.3%) 381 (81.1%) 435 (92.2%)

Table 2: Translation results for the test suite summed over both Google Translate and Bing Translator;
absolute numbers with percentages in brackets. Sentence = correctly translated sentences, Verb = cor-
rectly translated verbs, Base V. = correctly translated base verbs, Simplex = sentences containing simplex
verbs, VPC = sentences containing VPCs, Finite = sentences where the target verb is finite, Infinitive =
sentences where the target verb is in the infinitive.

a VPC, causing a too literal translation. Interest-
ingly, many of the cases where the resulting En-
glish translation was too literal are sentences that
contain idiomatic VPCs rather than compositional
or aspectual ones, such as vorführen (to demon-
strate, literally: to lead ahead/before).

In general, the sentences that contained finite
verb forms achieved worse results than the ones
containing infinitives. However, the differences
are only around 7% and seem to be constant be-
tween VPC and simplex verb sentences. Taking
into account that the sentences of each sentence
pair should not differ too much in terms of com-
plexity, this could be a hint that finite verb forms
are harder to translate than auxiliary constructions,
but no definite conclusions can be drawn from
these results.

Looking at the individual results for Google and
Bing, however, we can see that Bing’s results show
only a small difference between finite and infini-
tive verbs, whereas the scores for Google vary
much more. Even though the overall results are
still rather worse than Google’s, Bing Translator
gets a slightly better result on both finite sim-
plex verbs and VPCs, which could mean that the
system is better when it comes to identifying the
separated particle that belongs to a particle verb.
Google Translate, on the other hand, gets a notice-
ably low score on finite VPC translations, namely
59.3% compared to 86.4% for finite simplex verbs,
or to Bing’s result of 76.3%, which clearly shows
that separated VPCs are a possible cause for trans-
lation error.

The following examples serve to illustrate the
different kinds of problems that were encountered
during translation.

Ich lege manchmal Gurken ein.

Google: Sometimes I put a cucumber.
Bing: I sometimes put a cucumber.

A correct translation for einlegen would be to
pickle or to preserve. Here, both Google Trans-
late and Bing Translator seem to have used only
the base verb legen (to put, to lay) for translation
and completely ignored its particle.

Ich pflanze Chilis an.

Google: I plant to Chilis.
Bing: I plant chilies.

Here, Google Translate translated the base verb of
the VPC anpflanzen to plant, which corresponds
to the translation of pflanzen. The VPC’s particle
was apparently interpreted as the preposition to.
Furthermore, Google encountered problems trans-
lating Chilis, as this word should not be written
with a capital letter in English and the commonly
used plural form would be chillies, chilies, or chili
peppers. Bing Translator managed to translate
the noun correctly, but simply ignored the parti-
cle and only translated the base verb, providing a
much better translation than Google, even though
to grow would have been a more accurate choice
of word.

Der Lehrer führt das Vorgehen an einem
Beispiel vor.

Google: The teacher leads the procedure be-
fore an example.
Bing: The teacher introduces the approach
with an example.

128



Google Bing
Sentence (%) Verb (%) Base V. (%) Sentence (%) Verb(%) Base V. (%)

VPC 56 (47.5%) 83 (70.3%) 112 (94.9%) 46 (39.0%) 86 (72.9%) 109 (92.4%)
Finite 24 (40.7%) 35 (59.3%) 57 (96.6%) 23 (39.0%) 45 (76.3%) 57 (96.6%)
Infinitive 32 (54.2%) 48 (81.4%) 55 (93.2%) 23 (39.0%) 41 (69.5%) 52 (88.1%)
Simplex 63 (53.4%) 108 (91.5%) 108 (91.5%) 63 (53.4%) 106 (89.8%) 106 (89.8%)
Finite 28 (47.5%) 51 (86.4%) 51 (86.4%) 32 (54.2%) 54 (91.5%) 54 (91.5%)
Infinitive 35 (59.3%) 57 (96.6%) 57 (96.6%) 31 (52.5%) 52 (88.1%) 52 (88.1%)
Total 119 (50.4%) 191 (80.9%) 220 (93.2%) 109 (46.2%) 192 (81.4%) 215 (91.1%)

Table 3: Separate results for Google Translate and Bing Translator; absolute numbers with percentages in
brackets. Sentence = correctly translated sentences, Verb = correctly translated verbs, Base V. = correctly
translated base verbs, Simplex = sentences containing simplex verbs, VPC = sentences containing VPCs,
Finite = sentences where the target verb is finite, Infinitive = sentences where the target verb is in the
infinitive.

This example shows another too literal transla-
tion of the idiomatic VPC vorführen (to show, to
demonstrate). Google’s translation system trans-
lated the base verb führen as to lead and the sep-
arated particle vor as the preposition before. Bing
managed to translate vorführen to to introduce
which could be correct in a certain context. How-
ever, in other cases this would be an inaccurate
or even incorrect translation, for example if that
teacher demonstrated the approach for the second
time. It might be that Bing drew a connection to
the similar VPC einführen which would be a suit-
able translation for to introduce.

Er macht schon wieder blau.

Google: He’s already blue.
Bing: He is again blue.

In this case, the particle of the VPC blaumachen
(to play truant, to throw a sickie) was translated
as if it were the adjective blau (blue). Since He
makes blue again is not a valid English sentence,
the language model of the translation system prob-
ably took a less probable translation of machen (to
do, to make) and translated it to the third person
singular form of to be.

These results imply that both translation sys-
tems rely too much on translating the base verb
that underlies a VPC, as well as its particle sep-
arately instead of resolving their connection first.
While this would still be a working approach for
compositional constructions such as wegrennen
(to run away), this procedure causes the transla-
tions of idiomatic VPCs like einlegen (to pickle)
to be incorrect.

7 Conclusions

This paper presented an analysis of how VPCs af-
fect translation quality in SMT. We illustrated the
similarities and differences between English and
German VPCs. In order to investigate how these
differences influence the quality of SMT systems,
we collected a set of 59 verb pairs, each consist-
ing of a German VPC and a simplex verb that are
synonyms. Then, we constructed a test suite of
118 sentences in which the simplex verb and VPC
are completely substitutable and analysed the re-
sulting English translations in Google Translate
and Bing Translator. The results showed that es-
pecially separated VPCs can affect the translation
quality of SMT systems and cause different kinds
of mistakes, such as too literal translations of id-
iomatic expressions or the omittance of particles.
The test suite that was created in the process of this
study is made accessible online, thus providing a
valuable resource for future research in this field.

This study focused on the identification and
analysis of issues in translating texts that contain
VPCs. Therefore, practical solutions to tackle
these problems were not in the scope of this
project, but would certainly be an interesting topic
for future work. For instance, the work of Collins
et al. (2005) and Holmqvist et al. (2012) could be
used as a foundation for future research on how to
avoid literal translations of VPCs by doing some
kind of reordering first, to avoid errors caused by
the translations system not being able to identify
the base verb and the particle to be connected.

Furthermore, the sentences used in this work
were rather simple and certainly did not cover all
the possible issues that can be caused by VPCs,

129



since the data was created manually by one per-
son. Therefore, it would be desirable to compile
a more realistic dataset to be able to analyse the
phenomenon of VPCs more thoroughly, as well as
employing additional people to ensure the quality
of both, the dataset and the evaluation.

Moreover, it would be important to see the influ-
ence of other grammatical alternations of VPCs as
well, as we only covered auxiliary infinitive con-
structions and finite forms in this study. Another
interesting aspect to analyse in more detail would
be if some of the errors are specifically related to
only one class of VPCs, e.g., if idiomatic VPCs
perform worse than compositional and aspectual
ones. However, this would again require a revised
dataset, where the proportion of each of the three
verb classes is about the same to ensure compara-
bility. In this study, the proportion of VPCs that
exhibited an at least slightly idiomatic meaning
was higher than for the other two verb classes.

Finally, it would be interesting to see if the
results also apply to other language pairs where
VPCs can be found, as well as to change the trans-
lation direction and investigate if it is an even
greater challenge to translate English VPCs into
German, considering that it is presumably harder
to predict the correct position of verb and particle.

References
Heike Behrens. How difficult are complex verbs? Ev-

idence from German, Dutch and English. Linguis-
tics, 36(4):679–712, 1998.

Niladri Chatterjee and Renu Balyan. Context Res-
olution of Verb Particle Constructions for English
to Hindi Translation. In Helena Hong Gao and
Minghui Dong, editors, PACLIC, pages 140–149.
Digital Enhancement of Cognitive Development,
Waseda University, 2011.

Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Kucerov.
Clause restructuring for statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on
Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL’05,
pages 531–540, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2005. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Nicole Dehé. Particle Verbs in English: Syntax, Infor-
mation Structure, and Intonation. John Benjamins
Publishing Co, 2002.

Maria Holmqvist, Sara Stymne, Lars Ahrenberg, and
Magnus Merkel. Alignment-based reordering for
SMT. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair),
Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Mehmet Uur
Doan, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk,

and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the
Eight International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, LREC’12, Istanbul, Turkey,
2012. European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Su Nam Kim and Timothy Baldwin. How to Pick out
Token Instances of English Verb-Particle Construc-
tions. Language Resources and Evaluation, 44(1-
2):97–113, 2010.

Stefan Müller. Syntax or morphology: German parti-
cle verbs revisited. In Nicole Dehé, Ray Jackendoff,
Andrew McIntyre, and Silke Urban, editors, Verb-
Particle Explorations, volume 1 of Interface Explo-
rations, pages 119–139. Mouton de Gruyter, 2002.

Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. Multiword Expres-
sions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In Proceedings
of the Third International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing,
CICLing’02, pages 1–15, 2002.

Aline Villavicencio. The availability of verb-particle
constructions in lexical resources: How much
is enough? Computer Speech & Language,
19(4):415–432, 2005.

Appendix A. Verb Pairs

antworten - zurückschreiben; bedecken - ab-
decken; befestigen - anbringen; beginnen -
anfangen; begutachten - anschauen; beruhi-
gen - abregen; bewilligen - zulassen; bitten -
einladen; demonstrieren - vorführen; dulden -
zulassen; emigrieren - auswandern; entkommen
- weglaufen; entkräften - auslaugen; entscheiden
- festlegen; erlauben - zulassen; erschießen -
abknallen; erwähnen - anführen; existieren -
vorkommen; explodieren - hochgehen; fehlen
- fernbleiben; entlassen - rauswerfen; fliehen -
wegrennen; imitieren - nachahmen; immigrieren
- einwandern; inhalieren - einatmen; kapitulieren
- aufgeben; kentern - umkippen; konservieren
- einlegen; kultivieren - anbauen; lehren -
beibringen; öffnen - aufmachen; produzieren
- herstellen; scheitern - schiefgehen; schließen
- ableiten; schwänzen - blaumachen; sinken -
abnehmen; sinken - untergehen; spendieren -
ausgeben; starten - abheben; sterben - abkratzen;
stürzen - hinfallen; subtrahieren - abziehen;
tagen - zusammenkommen; testen - ausprobieren;
überfahren - umfahren; übergeben - aushändigen;
übermitteln - durchgeben; unterscheiden - au-
seinanderhalten; verfallen - ablaufen; verjagen
- fortjagen; vermelden - mitteilen; verreisen -
wegfahren; verschenken - weggeben; verschieben

130



- aufschieben; verstehen - einsehen; wachsen
- zunehmen; wenden - umdrehen; zerlegen -
auseinandernehmen; züchten - anpflanzen.

URL to test suite:
http://stp.lingfil.uu.se/∼ninas/testsuite.txt

131


