










































Instructions for ACL-2013 Proceedings


Coping with Derivation in the Bulgarian Wordnet 

 

Tsvetana Dimitrova 

Institute for Bulgarian Language 

Bulgarian Academy of Sciences 

cvetana@dcl.bas.bg 

Ekaterina Tarpomanova 

Faculty of Slavic Studies 

Sofia University 

katja@dcl.bas.bg 

 

 

Borislav Rizov 

Institute for Bulgarian Language 

Bulgarian Academy of Sciences 

boby@dcl.bas.bg 

 

  

Abstract 

The paper motivates a strategy for identification 

and annotation of derivational relations in the Bul-

garian wordnet that aims at coping with the com-

plex morphology of the language in an elegant 

way. Our method involves transfer of the Princeton 

WordNet (morpho)semantic relations into the Bul-

garian wordnet, at the level of the synset, and fur-

ther detection of derivational relations between 

literals in Bulgarian. Derivational relations have 

been annotated to reflect the complexity of Bulgar-

ian morphology. Introduced literal relations im-

prove the consistency and employability of the 

wordnet. 

1 Introduction 

Bulgarian is a language with rich derivational 
morphology but derivational relations in the 
Bulgarian wordnet (BulNet) have been 
marked so far only at the level of the synset 
(Koeva, 2008). This paper outlines our strate-
gy for representing the derivational relations 
at the level of the literal. We advocate for an 
approach with a twofold aim – to reflect the 
language specificity and to keep the overall 
structure of the Princeton WordNet (PWN) 
while modifying the representation of deriva-
tional and morphosemantic information (Fell-
baum et al., 2009). We focus on noun-verb 
pairs (for encoding of other derivational pat-
terns, cf. Koeva, 2008; Stoyanova et al., 
2013). The derivational relations are to be fur-
ther exploited for a prediction of (mor-
pho)semantic relations between synsets that 
are not part of BulNet yet (hence, they are not 
found in PWN as they have no morphological 
realisation in English). As morphosemantic 

relations in PWN are transferred into BulNet, 
we have used them to find prospective deriva-
tionally related pairs and derivational models 
in Bulgarian. Thus, the introduction of deriva-
tional relations improves connectivity in 
BulNet by explicitly linking morphological 
and semantic information through encoding 
links between literals in synsets connected via 
(morpho)semantic relations. 

While encoding this information on differ-
ent levels to reflect different phenomena, we 
enrich BulNet with information about deriva-
tional patterns that can be used in NLP tasks 
such as information retrieval and question an-
swering (cf. Hathout and Tanguy, 2002; Li-
gozat et al., 2012). 

In the next section, we briefly present the 
Bulgarian wordnet with some remarks on the 
specific conventions adopted for its develop-
ment. Section 3 discusses other attempts at 
encoding derivational relations in wordnets of 
languages with rich morphology. The com-
plexity of Bulgarian derivational morphology 
is outlined in Section 4. In Section 5, we 
brush on the first step of our method for au-
tomatic identification and annotation of deri-
vational relations. Section 6 presents the set of 
conventions followed in the annotation of der-
ivational relations that have been specified, 
along with the manual validation and correc-
tion of the results of the method applied (as 
introduced in Section 5). In Section 7, we out-
line directions for future work. 

2 Bulgarian Wordnet – an Overview 
 

The Bulgarian wordnet was launched as part of 

the BalkaNet project that aimed at creating a 

multilingual lexical database of wordnets for 

mailto:cvetana@dcl.bas.bg
mailto:katja@dcl.bas.bg
mailto:boby@dcl.bas.bg


Bulgarian, Greek, Romanian, Serbian, Turkish, 

and Czech (Stamou et al., 2002). BulNet aims to 

preserve the original structure of the Princeton 

WordNet and EuroWordNet (Vossen, 2004). 

Non-lexicalized synsets from PWN are kept in 

the overall structure and marked with the label 

no lexicalization. Language-specific concepts are 

included in the appropriate place of the lexical 

hierarchy.  

Currently, BulNet comprises over 50,000 

synsets. Unlike PWN which contains only open-

class words, BulNet is enriched with function 

words (in synsets) added for the development of 

the Bulgarian Sense-Annotated Corpus, where 

every word is linked to a corresponding sense 

(synset) (Koeva et al., 2011). Words in BulNet 

are distributed into nine parts-of-speech: noun, 

verb, adjective, adverb, pronoun, preposition, 

conjunction, particle, and interjection – see the 

numbers in Table 1. 

 

 

Part-of-speech Count 

Nouns 33,825 

Verbs 6,199 

Adjectives 

Adverbs 

8,114 

1,395 

Pronouns 94 

Prepositions 423 

Conjunctions 108 

Particles 57 

Interjections 11 

Total 50,226 

 

Table 1: Parts-of-speech distribution in 

BulNet 

 

 

The main part of the relations in BulNet are 

semantic: also_see, causes, holo_member, ho-

lo_part, holo_portion, hypernym, near_antonym, 

similar_to, subevent, verb_group. The list of se-

mantic relations is based on the PWN lexical and 

conceptual relations (Koeva et al., 2004). BulNet 

encodes several morphosemantic – be_in_state, 

bg_derivative, and morphological (derivational) 

relations – derived, participle. Be_in_state is a 

relation between an adjective and a noun consid-

ered as state of the respective adjective: 

{амбициозност:1, амбиция:1}
1
  – {ambition:2, 

ambitiousness:1} is a state of {амбициозен:1} – 

{ambitious:1}. Bg_derivative links a verb and a 

                                                 
1
 Curly brackets mark a synset, and square brackets mark a 

literal. 

noun derived from it that are semantically relat-

ed, as in: {дирижирам:1} – {conduct:3} and 

{диригент:1, музикален ръководител:1} – 

{conductor:2, music director:1, director:1}. The 

relation bg_derivative is transferred from PWN. 

Derived is a relation between a noun and an ad-

jective derived from it, as in {каменен:1} 'made 

of, characteristic of or related to stone' derived 

from {камък:1} – {stone:4}. Participle is a rela-

tion between a verb and its participle – 

{пулверизиран:1} – {spray-dried:1} is a partici-

ple of {пулверизирам:1} – {spray-dry:1}. 

3 Previous Work 

Derivational relations in the Princeton WordNet 

3.0 have been extracted through automatic iden-

tification of base-derived and semantically relat-

ed noun-verb pairs (Fellbaum et al., 2009). A set 

of semantic relations across a number of mor-

phologically derived noun-verb classes was de-

termined, and morphological relations were add-

ed. The identified morphosemantic links connect 

word pairs where one of the literals is derived 

from another. They are marked as related both 

derivationally (relations derived/derivative) and 

semantically (relations event, state, result, agent, 

undergoer, property, instrument, location, 

means, uses, destination, material, body part, 

vehicle). Derivational pairs are available in a 

morphosemantic database through: 
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/word

net/download/standoff/. 

Other approaches involve automatic or semi-

automatic adding of new synsets to wordnet by 

automatically deriving new words from already 

existing ones and adding morphological rela-

tions. Attempts at annotation of derivational rela-

tions are mostly made for wordnets of languages 

with rich morphology such as Romanian, Turk-

ish, Estonian, and Slavic languages. Some ap-

proaches involve semi-automatic and automatic 

identification of derived word forms and pairs. 

The morphological analyser Ajka used for the 

Czech wordnet, works with a list of stems from 

which word forms are generated. A set of words 

is defined by identifying prefix, suffix, and a 

morphological tag, and a derivational rule is ap-

plied using a substitution of morphemes (affix-

es), with manual modification (deleting and cor-

recting) of the generated word forms (Pala and 

Hlaváčková, 2007). The analyser Derywator is 

used for semi-automated expansion of the Polish 

wordnet through a combination of prefix and 

suffix modules in two transducers trained to 

http://wordnet.princeton.edu/wordnet/download/standoff/
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/wordnet/download/standoff/


work in the opposite direction on pairs already 

described in the wordnet and extended with au-

tomated construction of mappings representing 

internal stem alternations (Piasecki et al. 2012). 

For adding morphosemantic relations to the Ro-

manian wordnet, simple literals were extracted 

(Mititelu, 2012). A list of prefixes and a list of 

suffixes were used to form combinations, and 

resulting forms are matched against a list of liter-

als in the wordnet. Estonian wordnet was also 

enriched with synsets that are automatically gen-

erated using derivational suffixes (Kahusk et al., 

2010). 

Wordnets of other languages use language-

specific labels and relations. Czech and Turkish 

wordnets adopt a set of labels that is different 

from the PWN ones. The Czech wordnet uses 

labels referring to part-of-speech: deriv-na, 

deriv-dvrb, deriv-an, deriv-pos, deriv-pas, deriv-

aad, deriv-an, deriv-g, deriv-ag, deriv-dem (Pala 

and Hlaváčková, 2007). Labels in the Turkish 

wordnet are more general such as become, ac-

quire, be-in-state, something-with, someone-

with, someone-from, someone-without, some-

thing-without, pertains-to, with, reciprocal, 

causes, is-caused-by, cat-of, manner (Bilgin et 

al., 2004). The work on the Croatian wordnet 

(Katunar and Šojat, 2011) plans to follow the 

morphosemantic field model (Raffaelli and 

Kerovec, 2008).  

Previous attempts at adding derivational rela-

tions to BulNet are outlined in (Koeva, 2008), 

(Koeva et al., 2008) and (Stoyanova et al., 2013). 

The derivational relations in PWN are transferred 

into and aligned to BulNet. They are marked at 

the level of the synset with bg_derivative rela-

tion, or in snote when the transferred relation 

does not hold. Koeva (2008) proposes an ap-

proach for enlargement of BulNet that involves 

splitting verb synsets that contain both perfective 

and imperfective verbs.  

The approach outlined in our paper involves 

automatic detection of candidate pairs and manu-

al validation following language-specific con-

ventions without straining too far from PWN. 

Morphosemantic relations hold among semanti-

cally related words sharing a stem with a close 

meaning. Semantic labels have been specified 

following PWN. After automatic detection of 

candidate pairs using the PWN morphosemantic 

database, we assign derivational relations to the 

identified literals. Next section gives a brief 

overview of some features of Bulgarian mor-

phology to motivate our decisions for the annota-

tion conventions adopted. 

4 Bulgarian Derivational Morphology 

Due to historical and cultural factors, Bulgarian 

language has preserved many Slavic features and 

acquired others that are common for the Balkan 

Sprachbund. Bulgarian is the only Slavic lan-

guage with analytic nominal system, compen-

sated by complex verb forms marked for aspect, 

mood, tense, voice, and evidentiality. Bulgarian 

derivational morphology combines inherited and 

borrowed word formants and shows great diver-

sity of patterns.  

4.1  Derivation Means 

As in other Indo-European languages, there are 

two main morphological processes for formation 

of new words in Bulgarian – affixation and com-

position. Affixation consists in adding affixes to 

the root or the stem. Root is the central mor-

pheme of a word that carries the main part of its 

semantic content, while stem is the root plus all 

derivational affixes, e.g., in discounted the root is 

-count- and the stem is discount-. Composition is 

defined as word formation by linking two or 

more stems. In Bulgarian, stems are often at-

tached to each other by a linking morpheme – 

interfix, as in вод-О-пад 'waterfall'. 

A relatively rare word formation means is 

paradigmatic derivation – a term used to denote a 

derivation where the derivative keeps the same 

stem, but differs from the source word by its par-

adigm (Radeva, 1991: 51), as in работя 'to 

work' – работа 'work'. Paradigmatic derivation 

may occur in different directions: noun-to-noun, 

noun-to-verb, verb-to-noun, adjective-to-verb, 

etc. Inflection markers and/or thematic vowels 

may be added, removed, or replaced, as in: 

десет 'ten' – десети 'tenth'; ниже 'to string' – 

низ 'a string’; тъга 'a grief' – тъжи 'to grieve'. 

In this paper, we will use the term conversion to 

designate such instances of zero-suffixation. 

4.2 Derivation Formants 

Suffixation is the most productive derivational 

process in Bulgarian, and the most complicated 

one. Suffixes are polysemic, i.e., one suffix usu-

ally has more than one meaning. For instance, 

the suffix -ник is used to form nouns for agent 

(проповядвам ‘preach’ – проповедник ‘preach-

er’), instrument (подема ‘lift up’ – подемник 

‘gig’), location (багаж ‘luggage’ – багажник 

‘luggage-carrier’), etc. The same meaning may 

be expressed by different suffixes such as the 

agentive -ач, -ар, -ец, -ник, -тел, -ко, -льо, -

ент/-ант, -атор, -джия/-чия, etc.  



In terms of origin, suffixes are domestic or 

borrowed from different languages – Turkish (-

джия), Latin, directly or more often through in-

termediate language (-ция), Russian (-чик), Eng-

lish (-инг), etc. Some of the borrowed suffixes 

become productive and may be attached to do-

mestic stems or even to stems borrowed from 

other languages, as the Turkish -джия/-чия in 

таксиджия 'taxi driver' and интересчия 'some-

one who is looking after his own interests'. 

New words are formed by attaching one or 

more suffixes to the root or the stem. Suffixes 

may be added to the stem by agglutination to 

form a derivation chain, as in: меля 'to mill'; 

мелница 'a mill', where the suffix for location -

ниц- is added to the verb stem; мелничар 'miller', 

with the suffix for agent -ар added to the noun 

stem; мелничарски 'characteristic or belonging 

to a miller', with the suffix for property -ск-. 

Apart from agglutination, suffixation involves 

diachronic changes in the root or the stem, de-

composition of the morphological structure, fu-

sion between suffixes, between the suffix and the 

stem or between the suffix and the inflection, so 

that morpheme boundaries may become unclear. 

We will illustrate this process by two examples. 

1) There are two possible analyses of the 

morpheme structure of imperfective verbs 

formed with the imperfectivating suffix -ва-, 

such as гребвам ‘to scoop’: греб-ва-м (root – 

imperfectivating suffix – inflection marker), or 

греб-в-а-м (root – imperfectivating suffix – the-

matic vowel – inflection marker). Both interpre-

tations are possible (Ganeva, 2010: 135). 

2) The words летища 'airports' and сънища 

'dreams' seem to have the same derivational 

model. In fact, they have different morpheme 

structure: лет-ищ-а (root – suffix for location – 

inflection marker for plural) and сън-ища (root – 

inflection marker for plural). The paradigm of 

the second word is formed by analogy and was 

subjected to stem decomposition. 

Unlike suffixes, prefixes do not cause any 

changes in the stem. Derivatives formed by pre-

fixation do not change their part-of-speech. Pre-

fixation is a typical means for verbal derivation 

that involves change of verbal aspect, namely 

perfectivation: пиша 'to write-impf
2
' – на-пиша 

'to write-pf'. Polyprefixation is characteristic for 

Bulgarian, where every prefix modifies the se-

                                                 
2
 The following abbreviations are used in the paper: ‘impf’ - 

imperfective verb; ‘pf’ - perfective verb; ‘impf. t.’ - imper-

fectivum tantum; pf. t. - perfectivum tantum; ‘f,’ - feminine; 

‘m’ - masculine; ‘n’ - neuter; 1p, 2p, 3p - first, second and 

third person, respectively; sg - singular; pl – plural. 

mantics of the word: пиша 'to write' - пре-пиша 

'to copy out' - до-пре-пиша 'to copy out the rest'. 

Both a prefix and a suffix can be attached to a 

stem to form a derivative, as in вод-а 'water' – 

под-вод-ен 'under-water'. 

 

4.3  Phonetic Alternations 

 

Derivation in Bulgarian is sometimes accompa-

nied by phonetic changes that impede automatic 

detection of derivatives. Phonetic alternations are 

inherited from Old Bulgarian, and some of them 

are regular and still functional in Modern Bulgar-

ian. Ablaut is a vowel alternation in the root that 

reflects word class or grammatical category, as 

in: из-бИр-а-м 'to choose' – verb, imperfective; 

из-бЕр-а 'to choose' – verb, perfective; из-бр-ан 

'chosen' – participle; из-бOр – noun. Umlaut is a 

vowel alternation ['a]/[e] depending on the stress 

and the vowel in the next syllable. It can express 

number, as in: бЯл 'white-m,sg', бЯл-а 'white-

f,sg', бЯл-о 'white-n,sg' vs. бЕл-и 'white-pl'. 

Consonant alternations are due to historical pala-

talization and other phonetic laws. Some typical 

consonant alternations are: k (к)/ts (ц)/tch (ч) – 

човеK 'man', човеЧе 'man-vocative', човеЦи 

'men'; t (т)/sht (щ) – свеТя 'shine', свеЩ 

'candle'; d (д)/zhd (жд) – ограДа 'enclosure', 

ограЖДам 'enclose'.  

Some of the phonetic alternations have a 

grammatical value, but they are not considered 

derivational means.  

4.4  Derivation vs. Inflection 

In Bulgarian, inflection marks verbs for person, 

number, tense, voice, and mood, and nominal 

word classes – for gender and person (and case 

for pronouns). Inflection markers usually stand at 

the end of the word, after the derivational suf-

fix(es), with the exception of some old word 

forms where an inflection may appear within the 

word (т-О-ва 'this-n,sg'), and before the definite 

article in nominal word forms (жен-И-те 'the 

women'). In our work, inflection markers are not 

taken into account as they affect only word forms 

and have grammatical meaning, in contrast to 

derivational affixes. Still, there are several 

grammatical suffixes in Bulgarian that have a 

contradictory interpretation. 

Thematic vowels in Bulgarian are inherited 

from Proto-Slavic, and were further subjected to 

complex diachronic modifications. In Modern 

Bulgarian, thematic vowels are considered classi-

ficatory suffixes showing a verb conjugation 

and/or tense. Unlike derivational suffixes, they 



do not have any semantic content, but are in-

volved in the derivation of verbs from nouns or 

adjectives, e.g., мъка 'pain' – мъчИш 'to tor-

ment-2p,sg'3, червен 'red' – червенEе 'to redden-

3p,sg'. Bulgarian linguistic literature defines this 

mode of derivation as paradigmatic (see Section 

4.1.). 

Verbal aspect in Bulgarian has two opposed 

interpretations: 1) aspectual pairs are grammati-

cal forms of the same word; or 2) they are sepa-

rate words as they show difference in meaning, 

verb frame, inflection type, and usage (Koeva, 

2008: 363). We follow the second interpretation, 

i.e., to define aspect suffixes as derivational.  

Participles are not explicitly classified for 

part-of-speech. As non-finite verb forms, they 

are traditionally considered a part of the verb 

paradigm, but their morphological formants are 

defined as derivational and not inflectional suf-

fixes, as in ходи-Л 'walked' where -л is a deriva-

tion suffix for aorist active participle with a zero 

inflection for masculine (for details on the 

grammar of the contemporary Bulgarian literary 

language, cf. Gramatika na savremenniya balgar-

ski knizhoven ezik. T. 2 Morfologiya., 1982). 

 

5 Automatic Identification of Deriva-

tional Relations in BulNet 

For automatic detection of derivational relations 

in BulNet, we employ the applicable information 

encoded in PWN. The method applied does not 

require any additional language resources, such 

as dictionaries or lists of affixes. The first step is 

to query for pairs of synsets linked via a mor-

phosemantic relation in PWN. If a given pair of 

synsets has a corresponding pair in BulNet, we 

search for a pair of literals in the corresponding 

synsets with similar representation, and add a 

derivational relation to the literals found. 

Two literals are similar if at least one of the 

following conditions holds: 

1. One of the literals is included into the other, 

i.e., is substring of it. They are similar by inclu-

sion. 

2. The two literals in a pair have a long enough 

common prefix (as a string of symbols in the be-

ginning of the word form). Its length has to be at 

least half the length of the shorter literal. There-

fore, they are defined as similar by prefix. 

3. The two literals have a Levenshtein dis-

tance smaller than a given value. The value is 

                                                 
3 Thematic vowels are not visible in 1p, sg, present tense of 

verbs, so examples are in 2p and 3p. 

calculated as the minimum number of: the length 

of the first literal, the length of the second literal; 

the absolute value of difference of the lengths of 

the two literals + a constant tolerance (2). 

After calculating the similarity, we identify 

the differences between the words (literals) de-

fined as relations: prefix, suffix, and conversion. 

If the literals match, the pair receives the relation 

conversion. If the two literals in the pair have the 

same beginning (defined as a string of symbols 

in the beginning of the word), the relation prefix 

cannot be attached. If the two literals have the 

same ending, the label suffix is excluded. If a 

relation of the type prefix, suffix, and conversion 

is not found, we compare the lengths of the 

common strings at the beginning and at the end. 

If the beginning is greater, we assign a suffix re-

lation. A prefix relation is assigned if the ending 

is greater.  

After the automatic assignment of derivation-

al relations, manual validation was performed on 

all pairs found and annotation conventions were 

adopted in order to assure uniform and consistent 

approach to the morphological patterns in Bul-

garian. We introduced two additional derivation-

al relations – deriv (unspecified derivation) and 

noun_suffix/verb_suffix (substitution) to reflect 

specific processes and patterns (see section 6). 

Derivational relations were automatically as-

signed to literals denoting both members of the 

aspectual verb pairs, e.g., [премахване:3] 'dis-

posal' received without_suffix relation to both 

[премахвам:3] ‘to dispose-impf’ and 

[премахна:3] ‘to dispose-pf’. However, the di-

rect derivational relation links it only to the im-

perfective verb (премахва-м > премахва-не), so 

we remove the automatically assigned relation to 

the perfective verb. In the next section, we dis-

cuss the annotation conventions adopted. 

 

6 Conventions for Annotation of Deri-

vational Relations in BulNet 

 

Literals pertaining to different synsets are deriva-

tionally linked via three asymmetrical (suf-

fix/without_suffix, prefix/without_prefix, 

noun_suffix/verb_suffix) and two symmetrical 

(conversion, deriv) derivational relations at-

tached to the literals. Synsets which contain these 

literals are linked via (morpho)semantic relations 

transferred from PWN. Numbers about the anno-

tated literals are given in Table 2. 

 



Derivational relation Count 

suffix/without_suffix 2,352 

noun_suffix/verb_suffix 296 

prefix/without_prefix 241 

conversion 177 

deriv 21 

 

Table 2: Number of literals with a derivational 

relation assigned 

 

Literals in BulNet can be linked via more than 

one derivational relations reflecting different pat-

terns. Our aim is to find and represent the highly 

productive derivational patterns in order to trace 

other words that exhibit them and can be linked 

through respective (morpho)semantic relations 

(and assigned semantic labels). The noun literals 

are derivationally linked to one of the verb liter-

als in a synset that contains both members of an 

aspect verb pair. If two literals in a synset are 

linked via a direct derivational relation, we do 

not assign an indirect one (although it may be a 

member of the corresponding synset). For in-

stance, the noun [връщане:6] ‘return’ is linked 

to the verb [връщам се:1] ‘to return’, and the 

noun with the prefix за- – [завръщане:3] ‘re-

turn’ is linked to the verb [завръщам се:1] ‘to 

return’ (respective literals are members of the 

same synsets – a noun and a verb one, respec-

tively). However, there may be not a direct link, 

and we may link the two literals via an indirect 

derivational relation – we can observe further 

which pattern is more productive. The labels of 

derivational relations assigned do not reflect the 

real direction of the derivation. In the subsec-

tions, we will discuss the types of derivational 

relations assigned to verb-noun pairs. 

6.1 Suffixation: suffix/without suffix 

The derivational relation suffix/without_suffix is 

asymmetrical and marks suffixation (when a suf-

fix or a combination of suffixes are used to gen-

erate new words) and suffix removal, respective-

ly, as in [плувам:1] 'to swim' / [плуване:1] 

'swimming' where the deverbal noun suffix -не is 

attached to the stem of the verb плува- (-м is the 

inflection marker for 1p, sg, present form of the 

verb). 

In BulNet, verbs are classified as imperfec-

tive, perfective, bi-aspectual, imperfectivа tan-

tum, and perfectiva tantum (Koeva, 2008). 

Though verbs in aspect pairs are members of one 

synset, they express difference in meaning, and 

form different derivatives
4
. Deverbal nouns with 

suffix -не are derived from the imperfective stem 

and usually denote a process. Nouns ending in -

не are derivationally linked to the literals of im-

perfective verbs. Deverbal nouns formed with 

the suffix -ние are derived from the aorist stem, 

usually denote a result of an action, and can be 

derivationally linked to perfective or imperfec-

tive verbs. The synset {миграция:1, 

мигриране:1, преселване:1, преселение:1} – 

{migration:1} 'the movement of persons from 

one country or locality to another' is linked as 

event to the synset {преселвам се:2, преселя 

се:2, мигрирам:1, разселвам се:1} – {mi-

grate:1, transmigrate:1} 'move from one country 

or region to another and settle there'. Literals are 

derivationally linked as follows: 

 

{преселвам се:2, преселя се:2, мигрирам:1, 

разселвам се:1} 

has_event: {миграция:1, мигриране:1, пре-

селване:1, преселение:1} 

[преселвам се:2] 

 lnote: impf. 

 suffix: [преселване:1] 

[преселя се:2] 

 lnote: pf. 

 suffix: [преселение:1] 

[мигрирам:1] 

 lnote: impf. and pf. 

 suffix: [мигриране:1] 

 noun_suffix: [миграция:1] 

 

A -ние noun can be derivationally linked to 

imperfectiva tantum verbs, such as:  

[тълкувам:2] – [interpret:3] 'give an interpreta-

tion or explanation to' and [тълкувание:1] and 

[тълкуване:2] (belonging to the same synset) – 

[interpretation:3] 'a mental representation of the 

meaning or significance of something'. 

In Bulgarian, participles can have both verbal 

interpretation (as in passive voice) and nominal 

one. If a participle is substantivised, i.e., is a 

member of a noun synset, and this synset is 

linked via a (morpho)semantic relation to a verb 

synset, the participle may receive a derivational 

relation. Разлято and разляно 'spilled' are both 

passive participles of the verb разлея 'to spill'. 

Thus, {разлято:1, разляно:1} – {spill:1} 'liquid 

that is spilled' is an event of {разливам:1, 

                                                 
4
 The aspect pairs are introduced in one and the same synset 

(the aspect is mentioned in an lnote) to keep the symmetry 

with PWN. However, as this representation is not sufficient, 

they are to be split into separate synsets subordinate to the 

same immediate hypernym (Koeva, 2008: 363). 



разлея:1, изливам:4, излея:4, разсипвам:4, 

разсипя:4, изсипвам:1, изсипя:1} – {spill:7, 

slop:2, splatter:2} 'cause or allow (a liquid sub-

stance) to run or flow from a container' that have 

the following derivational relations: 

 

[разлея:1] 

 lnote: pf. 

 suffix: [разляно:1] 

 suffix: [разлято:1] 

 

The -не and -ние patterns are among the most 

productive. Most -не and -ние nouns in BulNet 

are members of synsets linked to the verbs via an 

event (morpho)semantic relation (1,207 of the 

synsets with -не nouns, and 448 with -ние 

nouns). 57 of the synsets containing -ние nouns 

and 43 of the -не nouns are linked to the verbs 

via result semantic relation. The state relation 

connects 42 of the synsets with -не nouns and 67 

of the synsets of -ние nouns. 

In order to find productive derivational pat-

terns in Bulgarian, we mark derivational rela-

tions on literals that are indirectly related to the 

derivative (derived by another member of the 

chain) and show a pattern containing more than 

one suffix. The noun [ковачница:1] 'forge' is 

linked as location and via suffix to [кова:2] 'to 

forge' although ковачница is derived via ковач 

'blacksmith' (PWN shows no derivational or 

(morpho)semantic relation between [forge:5] and 

[blacksmith:1]). The semantic relation between 

кова and ковачница is derivationally motivated 

– forge is a location where a blacksmith forges. 

The derivation path (verb + suffix for agent + 

suffix for location) may be applied to find other 

pairs with similar morphosemantic relation, as in 

тъка ‘to weave’ – тъкач ‘weaver’ – 

тъкачница ‘weaving workshop’. 

6.2 Substitution: noun_suffix/verb_suffix 

The relation noun_suffix/verb_suffix is asymmet-

rical and marks a suffix on both members of the 

pair, as in [акомпанирам:1] 'to accompany' and 

[акомпанимент:1] 'accompaniment' – the suffix 

on the verb is -ира- and the noun suffix is            

-(и)мент. The derivation process involves two 

operations – removing a verb suffix and adding a 

noun suffix to form a noun and vice versa. 

A literal can have several derivatives pertain-

ing to the same or different synsets, as in 

[епилирам:1] – [epilate:1] 'remove body hair' 

linked via suffix relation to [епилиране:1] – [epi-

lation:1], and via noun_suffix relation to 

[епилaция:1] – both are event members of the 

synset {епилиране:1, епилация:1, 

депилиране:1, депилация:1, обезкосмяване:1} 

– {epilation:1, depilation:1} 'the act of removing 

hair (as from an animal skin)'; and via 

noun_suffix relation to material [епилатор:1] – 

[epilator:1] of the synset {депилатор:1, 

депилатоар:1, епилатор:1} – {depilatory:2, 

depilator:1, epilator:1} 'a cosmetic for tempo-

rary removal of undesired hair'. 

6.3 Prefixation: prefix/without_prefix 

Another asymmetrical relation marks prefixation 

and prefix removal. In Bulgarian, prefixation 

does not change the part-of-speech, so adding or 

removing a prefix in noun-verb pairs is always 

accompanied by attachment of a thematic vowel 

to form a verb and its removal to form a noun, 

e.g., [завинтя:1] ‘to screw’ without_prefix 

[винт:1] ‘screw’. As thematic vowels do not 

have any semantic content, their attachment or 

removal is not explicitly annotated. 

The relation prefix/without_prefix can be 

combined with suffix/without_suffix or 

noun_suffix/verb_suffix when the suffix has a 

lexical content as in въоръжа 'to arm' vs. 

оръжие 'armament' where the verb is derived via 

prefixation (prefix въ-) and the noun is derived 

via suffixation (suffix -ие). Thus, the synset 

{въоръжа:1, въоръжавам:1} – {arm:2} is re-

lated via the (morpho)semantic relation uses with 

the synset {оръжие:1, въоръжение:1} – {ar-

mament:2}, and the the literal [оръжие:1] is der-

ivationally related to [въоръжа:1] via the rela-

tions prefix and without_suffix. 

 

{оръжие:1, въоръжение:1} 

is_used_to: {въоръжа:1, въоръжавам:1} 

[оръжие:1] 

 prefix: [въоръжа:1] 

 without_suffix: [въоръжа:1] 

 

Derivationally related verb-noun pairs via pre-

fixation are much rarer – 241 instances (2,352 of 

suffixation). 

6.4 Conversion 

The symmetrical relation conversion (marked on 

both literals of the pair) annotates zero-

suffixation, as in [викам:1] 'to cry' and [вик:1] 'a 

cry' – the thematic vowel -а- and the inflectional 

suffix for 1p, sg, present tense -м are removed 

and no derivational suffix is added to generate 

the noun. The reverse process of adding a the-

matic vowel and an inflection marker to form a 

verb, is also marked as conversion, e.g., 



[посреднича:1] ‘to mediate’ is derived by con-

version from [посредник:1] ‘mediator’. 

Derivational relations may link literals of the 

same synset to literal from different synsets: 

 

{тъжа:1, тъгувам:2, жаля:1} – {sorrow:1, 

grieve:1}  'feel grief' 

has_state: {тъга:1, печал:2, униние:1} – 

{sorrow:5, sadness:3, sorrowfulness:2}  'the 

state of being sad' 

has_event: {жал:1, мъка:3, печал:1} – {sor-

row:3}  'an emotion of great sadness associated 

with loss or bereavement' 

[тъжа:1] 

 lnote: impf. t. 

 conversion: [тъга:1] 

[жаля:1] 

 lnote: impf. t. 

 conversion: [жал:1]  

6.5 Not Otherwise Specified: deriv 

The symmetrical relation deriv (derivative) 

marks both members of the pair if a derivational 

pattern is unclear, as in [помогна:1] 'to help-pf' / 

[помагам:1] 'to help-impf' and [помощ:1] 'help' 

– historically, помощ is a deverbal noun but the 

derivation is not transparent in modern Bulgari-

an. 

We do not expect literals with a deriv relation 

to show evidence for any productive pattern. 

7 Conclusion and Future Work 

In this paper, we presented the first results of an 

approach for introduction of derivational rela-

tions into the Bulgarian wordnet. We discussed 

the specifics of the Bulgarian morphology to 

support the conventions adopted for annotation 

of derivational patterns in Bulgarian. We identi-

fied (automatically) and annotated (through au-

tomatic identification and assignment of deriva-

tional labels with manual validation and modifi-

cation afterwards) a set of noun-verb pairs in the 

Bulgarian wordnet.  

The work on annotation allows for an obser-

vation on derivational patterns that can be used 

to improve the process of automatic identifica-

tion and assignment of relations (derivational and 

(morpho)semantic ones). For instance, the nouns 

with suffix -(а/и)ция denote: event (312 instanc-

es), result (46), means (28), state (17), undergoer 

(17), uses (16), agent (5). 

The annotation will allow us to enrich the 

Bulgarian wordnet with new relations. In addi-

tion, we can easily identify synsets that have not 

been created yet. 

In the next stages of the experiment, we plan 

to rerun the automatic identification of deriva-

tional relations exploiting the newly specified 

relations/conventions. We can automatically de-

tect derivational pairs using the patterns identi-

fied and link them with semantic relations. Au-

tomatic assignment of (morpho)semantic rela-

tions is also a potential direction to be exploited. 

 

Acknowledgments 
 

The present paper was prepared within the pro-

ject Integrating New Practices and Knowledge in 

Undergraduate and Graduate Courses in Compu-

tational Linguistics (BG051PO001-3.3.06-0022) 

implemented with the financial support of the 

Human Resources Development Operational 

Programme 2007-2013 co-financed by the Euro-

pean Social Fund of the European Union. The 

authors take full responsibility for the content of 

the present paper and under no conditions can the 

conclusions made in it be considered an official 

position of the European Union or the Ministry 

of Education, Youth and Science of the Republic 

of Bulgaria. 

References  

Orhan Bilgin, Özlem Çetinoğlu, and Kemal Oflazer. 

2004. Morphosemantic Relations In and Across 

Wordnets – A Study Based on Turkish. In Pro-

ceedings of the Second Global Wordnet Confer-

ence, pages 60–66. 

Christine Fellbaum, Anne Osherson, and Peter E. 

Clark. 2009. Putting Semantics into WordNet’s 

”Morphosemantic” Links. In Proceedings of the 

Third Language and Technology Conference, 

Poznan, Poland. Reprinted in: Responding to In-

formation Society Challenges: New Advances in 

Human Language Technologies, Springer Lecture 

Notes in Informatics, vol. 5603, pages 350–358. 

Gergana Ganeva. 2010. Кam istoriyata na sufiksite za 

imperfektivacija v balgarskite dialekti. / On the 

History of the Imperfectivating Suffixes in Bulgar-

ian Dialects. Eslavística Complutense 10. Madrid, 

pages 135–145. 

Gramatika na savremenniya balagrski knizhoven ezik. 

T. 2 Morfologiya. Sofia: Izdatelstvo na Bala-

garskata akademiya na naukite. 1982. / Grammar 

of Contemporary Bulgarian Literary Language. 

Vol. 2, Morphology. Sofia: Bulgarian Academy of 

Sciences Publishing House. 1982. 

Nabil Hathout and Ludovic Tanguy. 2002. Webaffix: 

Discovering Morphological Links on the WWW. 



In Proceedings of the Third International Confer-

ence on Language Resources and Evaluation. Las 

Palmas de Gran Canaria, Espagne, pages 1799–

1804. 

Neeme Kahusk, Kadri Kerner, and Kadri Vider. 2010. 

Enriching Estonian Wordnet with Derivations and 

Semantic Relations. In Human Language Tech-

nologies – the Baltic Perspective. Proceedings of 

the Fourth International Conference Baltic HLT 

2010. IOS Press, pages 195–200. 

Daniela Katunar and Krešimir Šojat. 2011 Mor-

phosemantic fields in the building of the Croatian 

WordNet: the verbs of movement. In Space in 

Time and Language. Frankfurt am Main, Berlin, 

Bern, Bruxelles, New York, Oxford, Wien: Peter 

Lang GmbH, pages 79–89. 

Svetla Koeva, Tinko Tinchev, and Stoyan Mihov. 

2004. Bulgarian Wordnet – Structure and Valida-

tion. Romanian Journal of Information Science 

and Technology, Vol. 7, No. 1-2, pages 61–78. 

Svetla Koeva. 2008. Derivational and Morphoseman-

tic Relations in Bulgarian Wordnet. Intelligent In-

formation Systems, XVI, Warsaw, Academic Pub-

lishing House, pages 359–389. 

Svetla Koeva, Cvetana Krstev, and Duško Vitas. 

2008. Morpho-Semantic Relations in Wordnet - a 

Case Study for Two Slavic Languages. In Pro-

ceedings of the Fourth Global WordNet Confer-

ence, Szeged, pages 239–254. 

Svetla Koeva, Svetlozara Leseva, Borislav Rizov, 

Ekaterina Tarpomanova, Tsvetana Dimitrova, 

Hristina Kukova, and Maria Todorova. 2011. De-

sign and Development of the Bulgarian Sense-

Annotated Corpus. In Las tecnologías de la infor-

mación y las comunicaciones: Presente y futuro 

en el análisis de córpora. Actas del III Congreso 

Internacional de Lingüística de Corpus. Valencia: 

Universitat Politècnica de València, pages 143–

150. 

Anne-Laure Ligozat, Birgitte Grau, and Delphine 

Tribout. 2012. Morphological Resources for Pre-

cise Information Retrieval. In Text, Speech and 

Dialogue. Proceedings of the 15th International 

Conference, TSD 2012, Brno, Czech Republic, 

September 3-7, 2012. Lecture Notes in Computer 

Science, Volume 7499, pages 689–696. 

Verginica Barbu Mititelu. 2012. Adding Morpho-

Semantic Relations to the Romanian Wordnet. In 

Proceedings of the Eight International Conference 

on Language Resources and Evaluation 

(LREC’12), pages 2596–2601. 

Karel Pala and Dana Hlaváčková. 2007. Derivational 

relations in Czech Wordnet. In Proceedings of the 

Workshop on Balto-Slavonic Natural Language 

Processing, pages 75–81. 

Macieji Piasecki, Radosław Ramocki, and Marek Ma-

ziarz. 2012. Recognition of Polish Derivational 

Relations Based on Supervised Learning Scheme. 

In Proceedings of the Eight International Confer-

ence on Language Resources and Evaluation 

(LREC'12), Istanbul, European Language Re-

sources Association (ELRA), pages 916–922. 

Vasilka Radeva. 1991. Sloobrazuvaneto v balgarskiya 

knizhoven ezik. Sofia: Universitetsko izdatelstvo 

Sv. Kliment Ohridski. / Word Formation in Bul-

garian Language. Sofia: Sofia University Press. 

Ida Raffaelli and Barbara Kerovec. 2008. Mor-

phosemantic fields in the analysis of Croatian vo-

cabulary. Jezikoslovlje 9.1–2: 141–169. 

Sofia Stamou, Kemal Oflazer, Karel Pala, Dimitris 

Christoudoulakis, Dan Cristea, Dan Tufis, Svetla 

Koeva, George Totkov, Dominique Dutoit, and 

Maria Grigoriadou. 2002. BALKANET: A Multi-

lingual Semantic Network for the Balkan Lan-

guages. In Proceedings of the International Word-

net Conference, Mysore, India, pages 21–25. 

Ivelina Stoyanova, Svetla Koeva, and Svetlozara 

Leseva. 2013. Wordnet-based Cross-Language 

Identification of Semantic Relations. In Proceed-

ings of the 4th Biennial International Workshop 

on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, So-

fia, Bulgaria, 8-9 August 2013, pages 119–128. 

Piek Vossen. 2004. EuroWordNet: A Multilingual 

Database of Autonomous and Language-Specific 

Wordnets Connected via an Inter-Lingual Index. 

International Journal of Lexicography, 17(1): 

161– 173. 


