



















































Generating Valence Shifted Turkish Sentences


Proceedings of the 8th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 128–132,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19-21 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating Valence Shifted Turkish Sentences

Seniz Demir
TUBITAK-BILGEM

Gebze, Kocaeli, TURKEY
seniz.demir@tubitak.gov.tr

Abstract

Valence shifting is the task of rewrit-
ing a text towards more/less positively or
negatively slanted versions. This paper
presents a rule-based approach to produc-
ing Turkish sentences with varying senti-
ment. The approach utilizes semantic rela-
tions in the Turkish and English WordNets
to determine word polarities and involves
the use of lexical substitution and adver-
bial rules to alter the sentiment of a text in
the intended direction. In a user study, the
effectiveness of the generation approach is
evaluated on real product reviews.

1 Introduction

Language can express a content in a number of
different ways with varying emotion. Emotions
might equip sentences with connotations and have
a powerful effect on the disposition of the hearer in
a subtle way. Moreover, emotions induced through
words play an important role in written and verbal
communication. Sentence valence specifies the
degree of emotion present in a sentence and indi-
cates how positive or negative the sentence is. The
literature has shown that the sentiment characteris-
tics of a sentence are correlated with the valence of
words the sentence contains (Guerini et al., 2008).

Valence shifting is the task of altering a text to-
wards more/less positively or negatively slanted
versions while keeping much of its semantic
meaning (Gardiner and Dras, 2012). This rela-
tively new problem has many practical uses in lan-
guage based applications such as persuasive sys-
tems which are designed to influence users’ behav-
iors. Slanting of texts can be achieved in a num-
ber of ways, the most popular of which is the lexi-
cal substitution of semantically related words with
varying valences (Whitehead and Cavedon, 2010).
To our knowledge, this work is the first to examine

the correlation between word polarities and sen-
tence valences in Turkish and to address the prob-
lem of valence shifting in Turkish sentences. Our
methodology for determining word polarities ex-
plores the semantic relations of words within and
between the Turkish and English WordNets. To
alter the sentiment carried by a sentence in the in-
tended direction, our approach utilizes word polar-
ities and a number of hand constructed rules based
on the insights gained from user studies. Two
strategies, namely lexical substitution and the use
of intensifiers/downtoners, are used to slant Turk-
ish texts. An evaluation study shows the effective-
ness of our approach in generating valence shifted
Turkish sentences.

2 Word Polarity

Word polarity (valence) stands for the semantic
orientation of a word and is one of positive, neg-
ative or neutral. Previous research has shown that
it is very common to retrieve word valences from
existing polarity lexicons. To our best knowledge,
there is only one available Turkish word polarity
lexicon (Tr L) which is built in a semi-automated
manner by traversing a multilingual word relat-
edness graph with a random walk model (Özsert
and Özgür, 2013). The lexicon consists of 1398
positive (e.g., “övgü#n” (praise#n)) and 1414 neg-
ative (e.g., “anormal#a” (abnormal#a)) word en-
tries. Although all word entries are given along
with their PoS (i.e., one of noun, verb, or adjec-
tive), the lexicon neither contains word senses nor
the strength of polarities.

There are a number of available English polar-
ity lexicons. The General Inquirer lexicon (GI L)
annotates word entries with syntactic, semantic,
and pragmatic information including its sense and
PoS (Stone et al., 1966). In the MPQA Polarity
lexicon (MPQA L), word entries are annotated
with PoS, polarity, and the strength of polarity
(i.e., strong or weak) but no sense information is

128



Polarity Agreement with Tr L GI L MPQA L SWN L En L
Positive polarity match 646 468 423 950
Negative polarity match 761 775 742 1339
No Turkish polarity & Positive English polarity 326 376 750 1177
No Turkish polarity & Negative English polarity 373 577 1019 1390

Table 1: The agreement of word polarities.

given (MPQA, 2014). The SentiWordNet lexi-
con (SWN L), along with PoS and sense informa-
tion, annotates word entries with three sentiment
scores from positivity, negativity, and objectivity
perspectives (Esuli and Sebastiani, 2006)1.

Due to the limitations of the Turkish lexicon
(e.g., no adverbs exist in the lexicon), we explored
ways of expanding the scope of the lexicon by tak-
ing advantage of the semantic relations between
words. As described in the rest of this section,
we also examined how additional polarity infor-
mation can be retrieved from English polarity lex-
icons and applied to Turkish.

2.1 Bilingual WordNet Graph

The Turkish WordNet is fully compatible with but
not as comprehensive as some other WordNets
such as EuroWordNet. We represent the Turk-
ish WordNet as a directed graph where each ver-
tex corresponds to a word tagged with the sense
and PoS information (e.g., mekan#1,n2). The ver-
tices corresponding to the words that share a re-
lation are connected with a directed edge and the
edge is labeled with the kind of this relation (e.g.,
“synonym” or “antonym”). A monolingual graph
consisting of 20343 vertices and 60164 edges is
built from the Turkish WordNet. Following the
same representation scheme, a monolingual graph
is built from the English WordNet 2.0 which con-
tains 177308 vertices and 786932 edges.

The Turkish and English monolingual graphs
are integrated into a big bilingual graph with the
use of the InterLingual Index (ILI) where words
having the same meaning are connected. ILI facil-
itates the mapping of concepts and similar synsets
between compatible WordNets. This integration
enabled us to explore the agreement of word polar-
ities between the Turkish polarity lexicon and each
of the three English polarity lexicons. The first and
the second rows in Table 1 show the number of
cases where a Turkish-English word pair with the
same ILI share a positive or a negative polarity re-

1Here, we classify a word as positive/negative if its posi-
tivity/negativity score is greater than or equal to 0.5.

2The noun mekan (location) is of the first sense.

spectively. The third and the fourth rows represent
the cases where a Turkish word does not have a
polarity in the Turkish lexicon whereas its English
correspondent has a positive or a negative polarity
in the English lexicon respectively. For instance,
the word “bitmek bilmemek#a” does not have a
polarity in Tr L whereas its English correspondent
“endless#a” has a negative polarity in MPQA L.

We examined whether individual agreements
between the Turkish lexicon and each English lex-
icon can be improved by merging all English lex-
icons into a single polarity lexicon (En L). Dur-
ing this merge, words that have different polarities
in individual lexicons are omitted and the words
from MPQA L are considered as of the first sense.
The final En L lexicon consists of 9044 positive
and 13890 negative words with PoS and sense in-
formation. As shown in the fourth column of Ta-
ble 1, this merge improves the agreement between
the Turkish and English polarity lexicons.

2.2 Detecting Word Polarity

A two-step approach is developed for determin-
ing the polarities of Turkish words. Once given a
sentence, this approach first identifies prior word
polarities by utilizing the information contained in
polarity lexicons and then applies a set of polarity
alteration rules to the sentence for finalizing polar-
ity assignments.

To determine the polarity of a word, the pres-
ence of the word and its synonyms is first explored
in the Turkish polarity lexicon. If neither the word
nor any of its synonyms exists in the Tr L lexi-
con, English words that have the same ILI with the
Turkish word are explored in the English polarity
lexicon En L3. If the word polarity is still not de-
termined, the polarity of Turkish words that share
the antonym relation with the word is explored in
Tr L and the reverse of the retrieved word polarity
(if any) is taken. If the use of antonym relation in
Tr L does not return a polarity, the antonym rela-
tion is explored in the En L lexicon for the English
correspondents of the Turkish word.

3This enables us to benefit from English polarities shown
in the third and the fourth rows of Table 1.

129



We hand constructed a number of polarity al-
teration rules that are specific to Turkish. These
rules, once applied to a sentence, might alter the
lexicon-based prior polarity of words. For exam-
ple, the adjective “mutsuz (unhappy)” with nega-
tive polarity according to the Tr L lexicon should
be treated as positive in the sentence “Ahmet mut-
suz bir çocuk değil. (Ahmet is not an unhappy
child.)” since it is followed by the negative “değil
(it is not)”. One of our polarity alteration rules re-
verses the polarity of all words that immediately
precede the negative “değil” in a sentence4.

3 Sentence Valence

Our goal is to alter the sentiment of a Turkish sen-
tence while preserving its content. This requires
a means of assessing the sentiment change in
the slanted versions of a sentence and beforehand
computing their sentence valences. Literature has
proposed different methods to calculate sentence
valence using word polarities such as summing va-
lence scores of all words in a sentence (Inkpen et
al., 2004) or using the valence score of a present
word with a strong valence. We first examined
whether computing sentence valence by summing
word polarities, a commonly used approach in En-
glish, is applicable to Turkish.

We conducted a formal experiment with 24 par-
ticipants, all of which are Turkish native speak-
ers. The participants were presented with 20
sentences and asked to classify each sentence as
positive, negative, or neutral based on its con-
tent. The sentences, originally published in aca-
demic proses or newspapers, were manually se-
lected from the Turkish National Corpus (Aksan
et al., 2012). A strong attention was paid to se-
lect sentences that contain at least one word within
the Tr L lexicon. The valences of these sen-
tences were computed by summing the word po-
larities as determined by our polarity detection ap-
proach5. Unfortunately, this straightforward ap-
proach failed to classify sentences as participants
did in 13 sentences. The classifications of our
approach and the participants in these cases are;
positive-neutral in 6 sentences, negative-neutral in

4Evaluating the reliability of our polarity detection ap-
proach and how well the polarity assignments coincide with
human judgements is in our future work.

5The word polarity is +1 and -1 for positive and negative
words respectively. A sentence is considered as positive if the
sentence valence score>0 and as negative if the sentence va-
lence score<0. In each sentence, less than half of the content
words are annotated with a polarity.

3 sentences, neutral-negative in 2 sentences, and
positive-negative in the remaining 2 sentences.
For example, our approach classified the sentence
“Bir simulasyon modelinin amacı bir problemi
çözmek ya da çözümüne katkıda bulunmaktır.
(The purpose of a simulation model is to solve a
problem or to contribute to its solution.)” with a
valence of +1 as positive, whereas the participants
classified it as neutral.

One reason for the divergence in classifications
might be the fact that our approach considers all
words in the Turkish lexicon as having the same
strength and of the first sense although senses are
not given in the lexicon. Since this study revealed
that sentence valences determined in this fashion
do not correspond with valences as assigned by
humans, we argue that slanting of texts cannot be
assessed by considering only sentence valences.

4 Generating Valence Shifted Sentences

To explore how Turkish speakers alter the senti-
ment characteristics of sentences, we conducted an
experiment with 19 participants where they were
presented with 20 sentences and asked to gener-
ate slanted versions of these texts toward a more
positive or more negative direction. The sentences
along with their sentiments (i.e., positive or nega-
tive) were selected from a database of movie and
product reviews. The analysis of this experiment
provided a number of insights into Turkish valence
shifting, the three main of which are: i) slanted
versions of texts are produced via three kinds of
sentential changes (lexical substitution, paraphras-
ing, and adverbial changes that behave as inten-
sifiers/downtoners), ii) adverbs of certainty, prob-
ability, and quantity are often used in adverbial
changes, and iii) the sentence sentiment, intended
shift direction, and sentence constituents deter-
mine the kind of sentential change and where in
the sentence it occurs. In this work, we limit our-
selves to exploring how valence shifted Turkish
sentences can be generated by lexical substitution
and adverbial changes6.

Lexical substitution of semantically related
words with different polarity strengths is a pop-
ular approach in English. Since the Turkish polar-
ity lexicon does not provide polarity strengths and
our polarity detection approach assigns the same
polarity to all synonym words, substituting a word

6Generating slanted versions of Turkish texts by para-
phrasing their content is left for future work.

130



with its synonym of the same strength to slant a
text is not applicable in our case. We rather substi-
tute words with other words that share either the
“similar to” or “also see” relation if any of the 6
lexical substitution rules that we constructed is ap-
plicable. Below are two representative rules:

• If the intended shift is to increase the sen-
tence valence, then substitute a word having
a reverse polarity with the sentence sentiment
with a word that has the same polarity with
the sentence.

• If the intended shift is to decrease the sen-
tence valence, then substitute a word having
the same polarity with the sentence sentiment
with a word of the same polarity once the po-
larity strength of the English correspondent
of the substituted word is lower than that of
the replaced word according to MPQA L.

To capture adverbial changes, we constructed
10 rules whose applicability depends on sentence
constituents. We classified all certainty, probabil-
ity, and quantity adverbs as intensifiers or down-
toners. These adverbs are either inserted, deleted,
or substituted once an adverbial rule is applied to
a sentence. In the current setting, the selection of
which adverb will be used among all other pos-
sibilities is determined by a language model and
the adverbial rules that apply to adjectives have a
precedence over those that apply to verbs. Two
representative rules are shown below:

• If the sentence contains only one adjective
which has the same polarity with the sentence
sentiment and the intended shift is to increase
the sentence valence, then insert an intensifier
in front of the adjective.

• If the denominative verb of the sentence is
derived from an adjective which has the same
polarity with the sentence sentiment and the
intended shift is to increase the sentence va-
lence, then insert an intensifier in front of the
verb.

Our approach follows a straightforward strategy
for shifting sentence valences. Once a sentence
and the shift direction are given, the lexical substi-
tution rules are applied in an order until a slanted
version of the sentence is produced in the intended
direction. If these rules do not succeed in slanting
the sentence, then the adverbial rules are applied
to the sentence.

To evaluate the effectiveness of our valence
shifting approach, we conducted an experiment
with 15 Turkish native speakers. The participants
were presented with 21 sentence pairs, where one
sentence is an original product review and the
other sentence is its slanted version as produced by
our valence shifting approach. In total, 9 adverbial
and 3 lexical substitution rules were used for gen-
erating valence shifted sentences. We asked par-
ticipants to specify which sentence in a pair has
a higher valence according to the given sentence
sentiment. Our results demonstrated that all par-
ticipants agreed that our approach achieved the in-
tended shift in 3 sentence pairs and the majority of
them agreed on that in 8 of the remaining 18 sen-
tence pairs. This evaluation study also revealed
that the adverbial rules have a higher accuracy in
shifting the sentence valence as compared to that
of lexical substitution rules. Among the tested ad-
verbial rules, the one, which modifies the adjective
of the sentence subject if the polarity of the adjec-
tive contrasts with the sentence sentiment, did not
achieve the intended valence shift. Moreover, the
performance of the lexical substitution rules was
observed to be higher in cases where the “simi-
lar to” relation is utilized than the cases where the
“also see” relation is used. Since this initial study
left many questions unexplored regarding the ap-
plicability and accuracy of all rules that we con-
structed, a more comprehensive study is necessary
to better predict their performances.

5 Conclusion

This paper has presented our initial explorations
on Turkish sentence valence and our methodology
for generating valence shifted sentences in accor-
dance with these explorations. To our knowledge,
our work is the first to address the problem of va-
lence shifting in Turkish by considering word po-
larities. We have presented our approach for pro-
ducing slanted versions of sentences by substitut-
ing words with the use of WordNet relations and
taking advantage of Turkish intensifiers and down-
toners. We constructed a set of rules for specifying
how and when words can be substituted or inten-
sifiers/downtoners can be used to shift the valence
of a sentence in the intended direction. In the fu-
ture, we will address the task of learning polar-
ity strengths of Turkish words and the learning of
paraphrase patterns from a big collection of texts
to improve the performance of our approach.

131



References
Yesim Aksan, Mustafa Aksan, Ahmet Koltuksuz, Taner

Sezer, Umit Mersinli, Umut Ufuk, Hakan Yilmazer,
Ozlem Kurtoglu, Gulsum Atasoy, Seda Oz, and Ipek
Yildiz. 2012. Construction of the turkish national
corpus (tnc). In Proceedings of the Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference (LREC), pages
3223–3227.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2006. Senti-
wordnet: A publicly available lexical resource for
opinion mining. In Proceedings of the Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference (LREC), pages
417–422.

Mary Gardiner and Mak Dras. 2012. Valence shifting:
Is it a valid task? In Proceedings of the Australian
Language Technology Association Workshop, pages
42–51.

Marco Guerini, Carlo Strapparava, and Oliviero Stock.
2008. Valentino: A tool for valence shifting
of natural language text. In Proceedings of the
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC), pages 243–246.

Diana Zaiu Inkpen, Olga Feiguina, and Graeme Hirst.
2004. Generating more-positive or more-negative
text. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium
on Exploring Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories
and Applications.

MPQA. 2014. Mpqa opinion corpus,
http://mpqa.cs.pitt.edu/.

Cüneyd Murad Özsert and Arzucan Özgür. 2013.
Word polarity detection using a multilingual ap-
proach. In Proceedings of the CicLing Conference,
pages 75–82.

Philip Stone, Dexter Dunphy, Marshall Smith, and
Daniel Ogilvie. 1966. General Inquirer: A Com-
puter Approach to Content Analysis. MIT Press.

Simon Whitehead and Lawrence Cavedon. 2010. Gen-
erating shifting sentiment for a conversational agent.
In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop
on Computational Approaches to Analysis and Gen-
eration of Emotion in Text (CAAGET), pages 89–97.

132


