



















































Who Evoked that Frame? Some Thoughts on Context Effects and Event Types


Proceedings of Frame Semantics in NLP: A Workshop in Honor of Chuck Fillmore (1929–2014), pages 34–37,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Who evoked that frame? Some thoughts on context effects and event types
Katrin Erk

Department of Linguistics
The University of Texas at Austin

Austin, Texas 78712
katrin.erk@mail.utexas.edu

In memoriam Charles Fillmore, 1929-2014

Abstract

Lexical substitution is an annotation task
in which annotators provide one-word
paraphrases (lexical substitutes) for indi-
vidual target words in a sentence context.
Lexical substitution yields a fine-grained
characterization of word meaning that can
be done by non-expert annotators. We dis-
cuss results of a recent lexical substitution
annotation effort, where we found strong
contextual modulation effects: Many sub-
stitutes were not synonyms, hyponyms or
hypernyms of the targets, but were highly
specific to the situation at hand. This data
provides some food for thought for frame-
semantic analysis.

1 Introduction

Fillmore (1985) introduces the term “semantics of
understanding”, or U-semantics. In contrast to the
semantics of truth (T-semantics), the goal of U-
semantics is to “uncover the nature of the relation-
ship between linguistic texts and the interpreter’s
full understanding of the texts in their contexts”. A
central concept of the semantics of understanding
is that of the interpretive frames that are necessary
for understanding a sentence. Frames are the “co-
herent schematizations of experience” underlying
the words in a given sentence.

This idea of a semantics of understanding, or
a frame semantics, has been made concrete in
FrameNet (Fillmore et al., 2003), a large lexical
database that lists frames for English words and
constructions. At this point, it comprises more
than 1,100 frames covering more than 12,000 lex-
ical units (LUs), which are pairs of a term and its
frame. Researchers working on other languages
have adopted the FrameNet idea. Among oth-
ers, there are now FrameNet resources for Span-
ish (Subirats and Petruck, 2003), Japanese (Ohara

et al., 2004), Italian (Tonelli and Pianta, 2008;
Lenci et al., 2010), as well as frame-semantic an-
notation for German (Erk et al., 2003).

The definition of frames proceeds in a corpus-
based fashion, driven by the data (Ellsworth et al.,
2004). We stand in this tradition by reporting on a
recent annotation effort (Kremer et al., 2014) that
collected lexical substitutes for content words in
part of the MASC corpus (Ide et al., 2008). If we
view substitute sets as indications of the relevant
frame, then this data can give us interesting indi-
cators on perceived frames in a naturally occurring
text.

2 Lexical substitution

The Lexical Substitution task was first introduced
in the context of SemEval 2007 (McCarthy and
Navigli, 2009). For this dataset, annotators are
asked to provide substitutes for a selected word
(the target word) in its sentence context – at least
one substitute, but possible more, and ideally a
single word, though all the datasets contain some
multi-word substitutes. Multiple annotators pro-
vide substitutes for each target word occurrence.
Table 1 shows some examples.

By now, several lexical substitution datasets ex-
ist. Some are “lexical sample” datasets, that is,
only occurrences of some selected lemmas are an-
notated (McCarthy and Navigli, 2009; Biemann,
2013), and some are “all-words”, providing sub-
stitutes for all content words in the given sen-
tences (Sinha and Mihalcea, 2014; Kremer et al.,
2014). In addition, there is a cross-lingual lex-
ical substitution dataset (McCarthy et al., 2013),
where annotators provided Spanish substitutes for
English target words in English sentence context.

Lexical substitution is a method for character-
izing word meaning in context that has several at-
tractive properties. Lexical substitution makes it
possible to describe word meaning without hav-
ing to rely on any particular dictionary. In addi-

34



relation verb noun
syn 12.5 7.7

direct-hyper 9.3 7.6
trans-hyper 2.8 4.7
direct-hypo 11.6 8.0
trans-hypo 3.7 3.8

wn-other 60.7 66.5

not-in-wn 0.9 2.2

Table 2: Analysis of lexical substitution data: Re-
lation of the substitute to the target, in percentages
by part of speech (from Kremer et al. (2014))

tion, providing substitutes is a task that seems to
be well doable by untrained annotators: Both Bie-
mann (2013) and our recent annotation (Kremer et
al., 2014) used crowdsourcing to collect the sub-
stitutes.1

3 Analyzing lexical substitutes

In a recent lexical substitution annotation ef-
fort (Kremer et al., 2014), we collected lexical
substitution annotation for all nouns, verbs, and
adjectives in a mixed news and fiction corpus, us-
ing untrained annotators via crowdsourcing. The
data came from MASC, a freely available part of
the American National Corpus that has already
been annotated for a number of linguistic phenom-
ena (Ide et al., 2008). All in all, more than 15,000
target tokens were annotated.

After the annotation, we performed a number of
analyses in order to better understand the nature
of lexical substitutes, by linking substitutes to in-
formation on WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). Among
other things, we analyzed the relation between tar-
gets and substitutes: Did substitutes tend to be
synonyms, hypernyms, or hyponyms or the tar-
gets? To classify substitutes, the shortest route
from any synset of the target to any synset of
the substitute was used. The results are shown
in Table 2, for substitutes that are synonyms
(syn), hypernyms (direct-hyper, trans-hyper) and
hyponyms (direct-hypo, trans-hypo) of the target.
The “wn-other” line shows the percentage for sub-
stitutes that are in WordNet but not a synonym,
hypo- or hypernym of the target, and “not-in-wn”

1The third example in Table 1 shows that errors do hap-
pen: The substitute “accusation” is not appropriate there.
Analyses indicate that such errors are rare, though.

are substitutes not covered by WordNet. For sub-
stitutes that are synonyms, hypernyms, and hy-
ponyms, we see percentages between 8% and 15%
for both verbs and nouns. We also see that there
are few substitutes that are not in WordNet, only
1-2%. Strikingly, 60-66% of all substitutes are in
WordNet, but are “wn-other”: neither synonyms
nor (transitive) hyponyms or hypernyms of the tar-
get. Some of these items can be viewed as missing
links in the taxonomy. For example, in the second
sentence of Table 2, two of the “wn-other” sub-
stitutes of keep are own and possess. But while
own and possess are not linked to keep in Word-
Net, the FrameNet frame RETAINING, which has
keep as a lexical unit, inherits from POSSESSION,
which has both own and possess as lexical units.
But this does not apply to all the “wn-other” sub-
stitutes. Some are better explained as effects of
contextual modulation, fine-grained meaning dis-
tinctions that the sentence context brings about. In
the first example in Table 1, there is the possibility
that the speaker could be laughing at the other per-
son, and the shoulder-clapping clarifies that this
possibility does not correspond to the facts. In
the second example in the table, the words pos-
sess, enshrine and stage are more specific than the
substitutes that are in WordNet, and maybe more
appropriate too. In the third example, the word
charge has the meaning of dependent, but the situ-
ation that the sentence describes suggests that the
dependents in questions may be something like
underlings or prisoners.

When we look at this data from a frame-
semantic analysis point of view, the first question
that arises is: How specific should the frames be
that are listed in FrameNet? For the second ex-
ample, would we want a very specific “person as
precious jewel” frame to be associated with the
lexical unit “keep”? From a U-semantics point of
view, one could argue that we would in fact want
to have this frame, after all: It describes a rec-
ognizable abstract situation that is important for
the understanding of this sentence. But it does not
seem that all “wn-other” cases need to correspond
to particular frames of the target word. For ex-
ample, in the first sentence on Table 1, it does not
seem that clarify should be an actual frame involv-
ing the word show.

From a computational linguistics point of view,
a fine-grained analysis would be necessary in or-
der to correctly predict lexical substitutes like

35



sentence substitutes
I clapped her shoulder to show I was not laughing at her. demonstrate, express, establish, indicate, prove,

convey, imply, display, disclose, clarify
My fear is that she would live, and I would learn that I had lost her long
before Emil Malaquez translated her into a thing that can be kept, ad-
mired, and loved.

preserve, retain, hold, fix, store, own, possess,
enshrine, stage

The distinctive whuffle of pleasure rippled through the betas on the
bridge, and Rakal let loose a small growl, as if to caution his charges
against false hope.

dependent, command, accusation, private, com-
panion, follower, subordinate, prisoner, team-
mate, ward, junior, underling, enemy, group,
crew, squad, troop, team, kid

Table 1: Example from lexical substitution data: Target words underlined, and WordNet-unrelated sub-
stitutes shown in italics.

this – but on the other hand, experience with
word sense disambiguation has shown that fine-
grained senses are hard to assign with good accu-
racy (Palmer et al., 2007).

Another question that this data poses is: What
are the items that evoke a frame? That is, what
words or phrases in a sentence are responsible that
a particular frame becomes important for under-
standing the sentence? In FrameNet it is a sin-
gle lemma, multi-word expression or construction
that evokes a frame. But one way of looking at
the contextual modulation effects in the lexical
substitution data is to say that multiple terms or
constructions in the context “conspire” to make
a frame relevant. In the second sentence of Ta-
ble 1, we can point to multiple factors that lead
to substitutes like possess and enshrine. There is
fact that the THEME of keep is thing, along with
the fact that the same thing is being admired and
loved, and maybe also the fact that some woman
had been translated to said thing. This thought is
reminiscent of McRae and colleagues, who study
general event knowledge and argue that it is not
just verbs that introduce the events, but also argu-
ments (McRae et al., 2005) and combinations of
verbs and their arguments (Bicknell et al., 2010).

References
K. Bicknell, J. Elman, M. Hare, K. McRae, and M. Ku-

tas. 2010. Effects of event knowledge in process-
ing verbal arguments. Journal of Memory and Lan-
guage, 63(4):489–505.

C. Biemann. 2013. Creating a system for lexical sub-
stitutions from scratch using crowdsourcing. Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, 47(1):97–122.

M. Ellsworth, K. Erk, P. Kingsbury, and S. Padó. 2004.
PropBank, SALSA and FrameNet: How design de-
termines product. In Proceedings of the LREC
Workshop on Building Lexical Resources From Se-
mantically Annotated Corpora, Lisbon, Portugal.

K. Erk, A. Kowalski, S. Padó, and M. Pinkal. 2003.
Towards a resource for lexical semantics: A large
German corpus with extensive semantic annotation.
In Proceedings of ACL, Sapporo, Japan.

C. Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An electronic
lexical database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

C. J. Fillmore, C. Johnson, and M. Petruck. 2003.
Background to framenet. International Journal of
Lexicography, 16(3):235–250.

C. J. Fillmore. 1985. Frames and the semantics of
understanding. Quaderni di Semantica, 6:222–254.

N. Ide, C.F. Baker, C. Fellbaum, C. Fillmore, and
R. Passonneau. 2008. MASC: The manually anno-
tated sub-corpus of American English. In Proceed-
ings of LREC, pages 2455–2461, Marrakech, Mo-
rocco.

G. Kremer, K. Erk, S. Padó, and S. Thater. 2014. What
substitutes tell us - analysis of an ”all-words” lexical
substitution corpus. In Proceedings of EACL.

A. Lenci, M. Johnson, and G. Lapesa. 2010. Building
an italian framenet through semi-automatic corpus
analysis. In Proceedings of LREC, La Valletta.

D. McCarthy and R. Navigli. 2009. The English lexi-
cal substitution task. Language Resources and Eval-
uation, 43(2):139–159.

D. McCarthy, R. Sinha, and R. Mihalcea. 2013. The
cross-lingual lexical substitution task. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 47(3):607–638.

K. McRae, M. Hare, J. L. Elman, and T. Ferretti. 2005.
A basis for generating expectancies for verbs from
nouns. Memory & Cognition, 33(7):1174–1184.

K. Ohara, S. Fujii, T. Ohori, R. Suzuki, H. Saito, and
S. Ishizaki. 2004. The Japanese FrameNet project:
An introduction. In Proceedings of the LREC Work-
shop on Building Lexical Resources from Semanti-
cally Annotated Corpora, Lisbon, Portugal.

M. Palmer, H. Trang Dang, and C. Fellbaum. 2007.
Making fine-grained and coarse-grained sense dis-
tinctions, both manually and automatically. Natural
Language Engineering, 13:137–163.

36



R. Sinha and R. Mihalcea. 2014. Explorations in lexi-
cal sample and all-words lexical substitution. Natu-
ral Language Engineering, 20(1):99–129.

C. Subirats and M.R.L. Petruck. 2003. Surprise! Span-
ish FrameNet! In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Frame Semantics, XVII. International Congress of
Linguists, Prague, Czech Republic.

S. Tonelli and E. Pianta. 2008. Frame information
transfer from english to italian. In Proceedings of
LREC, Marrakech, Morocco.

37


