



















































Text Analysis of Aberdeen Burgh Records 1530-1531


Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities (LaTeCH) @ EACL 2014, pages 95–99,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Text Analysis of Aberdeen Burgh Records 1530-1531

Adam Wyner1, Jackson Armstrong2, Andrew Mackillop2, and Philip Astley3
1University of Aberdeen, Department of Computing Science, Aberdeen, Scotland

azwyner@abdn.ac.uk
2University of Aberdeen, Department of History, Aberdeen, Scotland

{j.armstrong,a.mackillop}@abdn.ac.uk
3Aberdeen City and Aberdeenshire Archives, Aberdeen, Scotland

PAstley@aberdeencity.gov.uk

Abstract

The paper outlines a text analytic project
in progress on a corpus of entries in the
historical burgh and council registers from
Aberdeen, Scotland. Some preliminary
output of the analysis is described. The
registers run in a near-unbroken sequence
form 1398 to the present day; the early
volumes are a UNESCO UK listed cul-
tural artefact. The study focusses on a set
of transcribed pages from 1530-1531 orig-
inally hand written in a mixture of Latin
and Middle Scots. We apply a text an-
alytic tool to the corpus, providing deep
semantic annotation and making the text
amenable to linking to web-resources.

1 Introduction

The council registers of Aberdeen, Scotland are
the earliest and most complete body of town (or
burgh) council records in Scotland, running nearly
continuously from 1398 to the present; they are
hand written in Latin and (largely) Middle Scots.
Few cities in the United Kingdom or in Western
Europe rival Aberdeen’s burgh registers in histor-
ical depth and completeness. In July 2013, UN-
ESCO UK recognised the register volumes from
1398 to 1509 as being of outstanding historical
importance to the UK. The registers offer a de-
tailed legal view into one of Scotland’s principal
burghs , casting light on administrative, legal, and
commercial activities as well as daily life. The
registers include the elections of office bearers,
property transfers, regulations of trade and prices,
references to crimes and subsequent punishment,
matters of public health, credit and debt, cargoes
of foreign vessels, tax and rental of burgh lands,
and woods and fishings. Thus the entries present
the burgh’s relationships with the countryside and
countries around the North Sea.

To make this historical resource available to a
wider audience, the National Records of Scotland
and Aberdeen City and Aberdeenshire Archives
collaborated to image the volumes digitally up
to 1511 and made them (temporarily) available
on the internet.1 However, the images of scribal
records are inaccessible to all but a few scholars.
To address this, a pilot project at the University
of Aberdeens Research Institute of Irish and Scot-
tish Studies (RIISS) has transcribed 100 pages of
the records from the period 1530-1531, translated
the Latin and Middle Scots, and provided a web-
accessible database application; the application al-
lows users to query the database for locations and
names of individuals, returning the textual por-
tions that contain the names and locations.2 How-
ever, the pilot project does not make use of text
analytic or Semantic Web technologies to facili-
tate understanding of and access to the records.

In this paper, we outline a funded text analytic
project in progress on this corpus of 100 pages and
provide some preliminary output. The project A
Text Analytic Approach to Rural and Urban Le-
gal Histories has been funded by the dot.rural Re-
source Partnership at the University of Aberdeen.3

We outline the project objectives, present the text
analytic tool, provide some sample results, relate
our work to other projects, and sketch future work.
The paper and project contribute to the application
of language technologies for cultural heritage and
the humanities. We discuss deep semantic annota-
tion of the documents as well as plans to address
linguistic variation and linking of the annotated
material to other digital, web-based resources.

1http://www.scotlandsplaces.gov.
uk/digital-volumes/burgh-records/
aberdeen-burgh-registers/

2http://www.abdn.ac.uk/riiss/
Aberdeen-Burgh-Records-Project/
connecting-projecting.shtml

3http://www.dotrural.ac.uk

95



2 Objectives

The project engages legal historians, council
archivists, and computational linguists. For legal
historians, the burgh registries are an opportunity
to study source materials concerned with the law
and community concerning questions as:
• What legal roles in jurisdictions do individu-

als perform?

• What are the social and legal networks?
• How do social and legal concepts evolve?
• What does the historical record say about re-

source management and conflict?

While traditional historical methodology applied
to archival material has served well enough, it is
costly, slow, and does not allow analysis of the vol-
ume and complexity of information. In particular,
some of the questions above are relational, e.g. re-
lations of individuals in legal roles, which are dif-
ficult to track across a large corpus. With text an-
alytic support, legal historians can query a corpus
and receive data either in context or extracted.

For council archivists, the agenda is to increase
public access to archival materials for tourism,
curriculum development, business, and research.
This can be done, we believe, by making the
rich content of the archives accessible by trans-
lation, semantic search, or link to the content of
the archival materials or other web-accessible re-
sources such as dictionaries, maps, DBPedia en-
tries, other council archival material, and so on.

For computational linguists, the objective is to
annotate, enrich, and link the burgh records in or-
der to support semantic querying, extraction, and
reuse. One challenge is to find or develop the
range of necessary text analytic components to do
so. For non-standardised historical languages, e.g.
Middle Scots, the issues are orthographical vari-
ation, lack of electronic lexicons, and so on. A
more substantive challenge is to develop the ap-
propriate set of semantic annotations, tailored to
the historical, legal context and the goals of his-
torical legal analysis.

3 Text Analysis

To identify, query, and extract the textual elements
from the source material with respect to semantic
annotations, we use the GATE framework (Cun-
ningham et al., 2002), which we briefly describe.
We then discuss our approach to analysis, the rep-
resentation of textual elements using GATE, the

annotations we introduce to the text, and then pro-
vide the results of sample queries.

3.1 Components of a Tool

GATE is a framework for language engineering
applications, which supports efficient and robust
text processing (Cunningham et al., 2002); it is
highly scalable and has been applied in many large
text processing projects; it is an open source desk-
top application written in Java that provides a user
interface for professional linguists and text engi-
neers to bring together a wide variety of natu-
ral language processing tools and apply them to
a set of documents. The tools are formed into a
pipeline of natural language processors. Our ap-
proach to GATE tool development follows (Wyner
and Peters, 2011), which is: bottom-up, rule-
based, unweighted, modular, iterative, incremen-
tal, among others. Once a GATE pipeline has been
applied, we can view the annotations either in situ
or queried using GATE’s ANNIC (ANNotations
In Context) corpus indexing and querying tool.

For our purposes, we emphasise the role of
gazetteers and JAPE rules, which form the bot-
tom level of the analysis. A gazetteer is a list of
words that are associated with a central concept
as provided by an analyst. In the lookup phase
of processing the text, textual passages in the cor-
pus are matched with terms on the lists, then as-
signed an annotation, e.g. a token term burgi is
annotated with LegalBody, for it is one of the le-
gal bodies reported in the text. Similarly, tokens
such as common council, curia, guild court, and
others are all annotated LegalBody. The gazetteer
thus annotates related terms (e.g. burgi and guild
court) with the same annotation; in this way, anno-
tations serve as conceptual covers for tokens. We
have gazetteers that provide a range of semantic
concepts for named entities as well as:
• LegalBody - burgi, common council, ...
• LegalConcept - gude faith, ...
• LegalRole - Archbishop, Bailie, ...
• Offence - barganyng, tulyheing, etc
• Office - alderman, burgess, preposito, ...
• RegisterEntry - Bailie Court, Ordinance, ...
• MiddleScot - The, said, day, bailyeis, ...

Alternative spellings of a word would be repre-
sented as different tokens in the gazetteer. The se-
lection and content of the gazetteer lists is prelim-
inary and will be the object of significant research

96



over the course of the project. However, they are
sufficient to facilitate exercise of the tool.

JAPE rules are transductions that take annota-
tions and regular expressions as input (based on
the gazetteers) and produce annotations as output.
The annotations produced by JAPE rules are visi-
ble as highlighted text and are easily searchable in
ANNIC. Querying for an annotation, we retrieve
all the terms with the annotation. The annotations
can also be used in JAPE rules to create higher
level annotations, though we have not developed
these at this point.

3.2 Output and Queries

Once the corpus is annotated, we can view the
annotations in situ. In Figure 1, we have a
passage that has been highlighted with the indi-
cated (checked) annotation types (differentiated
by colour in the orginal). In this figure, we see
where the annotations appear and in relation to
other annotations within a particular textual pas-
sage. Observations at this point can be used to
analyse the text further.

Alternatively, we can use the ANNIC tool to
index and query a database of annotated text.
Searching in the corpus for single annotations re-
turns all those strings that are annotated with the
search annotation along with their context and
source document. Complex queries can also be
formed. A query and a sample result appear in
Figure 2, where the query finds all sequences of
annotated text where the first string is annotated
with Name, followed by zero to five other To-
kens, followed by a string with an Office anno-
tation. The search returned four candidate struc-
tures. The extract identifies a relation between
an individual and their office. Similar relational

queries can be made about other aspects of the
text. With the query language, we can search for
any number of the annotations in the corpus in any
order; the tool allows incremental refinement of
searches, allowing for a highly interactive way to
examine the semantic content of the texts. Thus,
a range of semantic patterns can be identified that
would otherwise be very hard to detect or extract.
Such an approach can ground multi-disciplinary
investigations of historical societies in large-scale
textual sources of information, providing inter-
pretable material on topics such as elites and social
practice, relations between social classes and land,
urban and rural development, and natural resource
management. The text analysis also makes appli-
cable a range of social web-mining approaches on
historical text.

4 Related Work

Our work is closely related to other projects that
have applied text analytic methods to mine infor-
mation from the cultural heritage objects, broadly
Digital Humanties. Most recently, there has
been an extensive n-gram study of Scottish le-
gal records. This takes a very different, though
nonetheless relevant approach to the study of these
records ngrams (Kopaczyk, 2013). Several recent
projects in the UK and Ireland have applied such
tools in limited ways to historical legal documents,
e.g. 1641 Depositions (Sweetnam and Fennell,
2012), which analysed verbal patterns in the text
4; The Old Bailey, which was largely manually an-
notated though some elements were automatically
annotated 5; and Trading Consequences, a text an-

4http://1641.tcd.ie
5http://www.oldbaileyonline.org

Figure 1: Highlighting Annotations in the Text

97



Figure 2: Searching for Relations in the Corpus

alytic study of British Empire records 6. There are
ongoing Semantic Web projects in the Humanities,
e.g. the Curios Project 7, the CULTURA Project
8, projects at King’s College London Centre for
Digital Humanities 9.

5 Future Plans

Over the course of the project, we will develop
and refine a useful set of annotations that reveal
important information this is distributed over this
corpus. Asides from the main categories previ-
ously discussed, there will be annotations to indi-
cate orthographic variants, translations, and links
to external material amongst other annotations to
be developed. Legal historical questions will be
posed with respect to the contents of the text, then
the text will be queried using the annotations in
complex patterns. In this way, the questions of le-
gal historians are grounded in and tested against
the textual substance. Another objective is to link
the annotated material to other relevant material
that is external to the corpus. For instance, loca-
tions could be associated with maps, names could
be associated with DBPedia entries, words could
be linked to Scottish and Latin dictionaries, and so
on. This would not only further enrich the contents
of the corpus, but also enrich these other materials

6http://tradingconsequences.blogs.
edina.ac.uk/

7http://www.dotrural.ac.uk/curios/
8www.cultura-strep.eu
9http://www.kcl.ac.uk/artshums/depts/

ddh/index.aspx

by linking to the corpus. Similarly, these texts can
be tied to other legal historical projects, focussing
on the period c.1400 c.1800, that will inter-relate
the council register source material with cognate
collections held in Aberdeen (at the Aberdeen City
and Aberdeenshire Archives, and at the Univer-
sity of Aberdeens Special Collections Centre, and
elsewhere), in Scotland (in other local archives
and in the National Records of Scotland), in the
United Kingdom, or the European Union. This
will foster both a comparative understanding of
the city and its regions position regionally, nation-
ally, and internationally, and over time.

Beyond the project, we look forward to enlarge
the council register corpus and extend the text
analysis. It would then be very attractive to cre-
ate a web-based, interactive interface with which
to interrogate the council register in complex and
novel ways, not just by querying the text with se-
mantic annotations, but also by following links
to maps, recordings, images, related words, and
so on. For example, the content could be linked
to time series maps, showing development of so-
cial, legal, and political relationships over time
and space.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful for support from RIISS,
dot.rural, and the Aberdeen Council. We particu-
larly thank Dr. Edda Frankot for her work on the
pilot project at RIISS that produced the transcribed
materials for this project.

98



References
Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, Kalina

Bontcheva, and Valentin Tablan. 2002. GATE:
A framework and graphical development envi-
ronment for robust NLP tools and applications.
In Proceedings of the 40th Anniversary Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL’02), pages 168–175.

Joanna Kopaczyk. 2013. The Legal Language of Scot-
tish Burghs. Oxford University Press.

Mark S. Sweetnam and Barbara A. Fennell. 2012.
Natural language processing and early-modern dirty
data: applying IBM languageware to the 1641
depositions. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
27(1):39–54.

Adam Wyner and Wim Peters. 2011. On rule ex-
traction from regulations. In Katie Atkinson, editor,
Legal Knowledge and Information Systems - JURIX
2011: The Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference, pages
113–122. IOS Press.

99


