



















































A Graph-Based Analysis of Medical Queries of a Swedish Health Care Portal


Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (Louhi) @ EACL 2014, pages 2–10,
Gothenburg, Sweden, April 26-30 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Graph-Based Analysis of Medical Queries
of a Swedish Health Care Portal

Farnaz Moradi1, Ann-Marie Eklund2, Dimitrios Kokkinakis2,
Tomas Olovsson1, Philippas Tsigas1

1Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
2Språkbanken, Department of Swedish Language, University of Gothenburg, Sweden

{moradi,tomasol,tsigas}@chalmers.se1
{ann-marie.eklund,dimitrios.kokkinakis}@gu.se2

Abstract

Today web portals play an increasingly
important role in health care allowing in-
formation seekers to learn about diseases
and treatments, and to administrate their
care. Therefore, it is important that the
portals are able to support this process
as well as possible. In this paper, we
study the search logs of a public Swedish
health portal to address the questions if
health information seeking differs from
other types of Internet search and if there
is a potential for utilizing network analy-
sis methods in combination with semantic
annotation to gain insights into search be-
haviors. Using a semantic-based method
and a graph-based analysis of word co-
occurrences in queries, we show there is
an overlap among the results indicating a
potential role of these types of methods to
gain insights and facilitate improved infor-
mation search. In addition we show that
samples, windows of a month, of search
logs may be sufficient to obtain similar re-
sults as using larger windows. We also
show that medical queries share the same
structural properties found for other types
of information searches, thereby indicat-
ing an ability to re-use existing analysis
methods for this type of search data.

1 Introduction

Query logs which are obtained from search en-
gines contain a wealth of information about the
language used in the logs and the behavior of
users. Searching for health and medical related
information is quite common, and therefore anal-
ysis of query logs of medical websites can give us
insight into the language being used and the infor-
mation needs of the users in the medical domain.

In this study, we analyze 36 months of query
logs from a Swedish health care portal, which pro-
vides health, disease, and medical information.
On one hand, we perform a semantic enhancement
on the queries to allow analysis of the language
and the vocabulary which has been used in the
queries. On the other hand, we perform a graph-
based analysis of the queries, where a word co-
occurrence graph is generated from the queries.
In a word co-occurrence graph each node corre-
sponds to a word and an edge exists between two
words if they have co-occurred in the same query.

Our study reveals that a word co-occurrence
graph generated from medical query logs has the
same structural and temporal properties, i.e., small
world properties and power law degree distribu-
tion, which has been observed for other types of
networks generated from query logs and differ-
ent types of real-world networks such as word
association graphs. Therefore, the existing algo-
rithms and data mining techniques can be applied
directly for analysis of word co-occurrence graphs
obtained from health search.

One of the widely studied structural properties
of real-world networks is the communities in these
networks. In this study, we apply a state-of-the-art
local community detection algorithm on the word
co-occurrence graph. A community detection al-
gorithm can uncover a graph community which
is a group of words that have co-occurred mostly
with each other but not with the rest of the words in
the network. The community detection algorithm
used in this study is based on random walks on the
graph and can find overlapping communities.

The communities of words, identified from the
graph, are then compared with the communities
of words obtained from a semantic analysis of the
queries. In semantic enhancement, if a word or
term in a query exists in medical oriented seman-
tic resources, it is assigned a label. The words
and terms which have co-occurred with these la-

2



bels are used to create a semantic community. We
have compared the obtained semantic communi-
ties with the graph communities using a well-
known similarity measure and observed that the
communities identified from these two different
approaches overlap. Moreover, we observed that
the graph communities can cover the vast major-
ity of the words in the queries while the semantic
communities do not cover many words. Therefore,
the graph-based analysis can be used to improve
and complement the semantic analysis.

Furthermore, we study the effect of the time
window lengths for analysis of log queries. Our
goal is to investigate whether short snapshots of
log queries also can be useful for this type of anal-
ysis, and how the increase in the size of the log
files over time can affect the results.

The reminder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. In Section 2 we review the related work.
Section 3 presents the Swedish log corpus used for
this study. Section 4 describes the semantic en-
hancement on the query logs. In Section 5 we de-
scribe the graph analysis methods. Section 6 sum-
marizes our experimental results. Finally, Sec-
tion 7 concludes our work.

2 Related Work

In this paper, we study the co-occurrence of words
in medical queries and perform both a semantic
and graph analysis to identify and compare the
communities of related words. In this section, we
briefly present a number of related works which
deal with analysis of query logs.

Query logs have been previously studied for
identifying clusters of similar queries. In (Wen
et al., 2001) a method was described for cluster-
ing similar queries using different notions of query
distance, such as string matching of keywords.
In (Baeza-Yates et al., 2004) clicked Web page in-
formation (terms in URLs) was used in order to
create term-weight vector models for queries, and
cosine similarity was used to calculate the similar-
ity of two queries based on their vector represen-
tations.

Several previous works have also dealt with
graph analysis of query logs. In (Baeza-Yates,
2007) several graph-based relations were de-
scribed among queries based on different sources
of information, such as words in the text of the
query, clicked URL terms, clicks and session in-
formation. In (Herdagdelen et al., 2009) vec-

tor space models were compared, by embedding
them in graphs, and graph random walk mod-
els in order to determine similarity between con-
cepts, and showed that some random walk mod-
els can achieve results as good as or even better
than the vector models. In (Gaillard and Gaume,
2011), it was shown that drawing clusters of syn-
onyms in which pairs of nodes have a strong con-
fluence is a strong indication of aiding two syn-
onymy graphs accommodate each others’ conflict-
ing edges. Their work was a step for defining
a similarity measure between graphs that is not
based on edge-to-edge disagreement but rather on
structural agreement.

3 Material - a Swedish Log Corpus

The Stockholm Health Care Guide, http://
www.vardguiden.se/, is the official health
information web site of the County of Stockholm,
sponsored by the Stockholm County Council and
used mostly by people living in the Stockholm
area and provides information on diseases, health
and health care. In January 2013 the Stockholm
County Council reported that vardguiden.se had
two million visitors per month. As of Novem-
ber 2013, vardguiden.se and another similar por-
tal, 1177.se (which was a common web site for
Swedish regions and counties, and the official na-
tional telephone number for health information
and advice), are merged into one called 1177
Vårdguiden, sharing the same interface and search
engine. The corpus data used in this study con-
sists of the search queries for the period Octo-
ber 2010 to the end of September 2013. The
data is provided by vardguiden.se, through an
agreement with the company Euroling AB which
provides indexing and searching functionality to
vardguiden.se. We obtained 67 million queries in
total, where 27 million are unique before any kind
of normalization, and 2.2 million after case fold-
ing. Figure1 shows an example of a query log.

Information acquisition from query logs can be
useful for several purposes and potential types of
users, such as terminologists, infodemiologists,
epidemiologists, medical data and web analysts,
specialists in NLP technologies such as informa-
tion retrieval and text mining, as well as, public
officials in health and safety organizations. Anal-
ysis of web query logs can provide useful infor-
mation regarding when and how users seek infor-
mation for topics covered by the site (Bar-Ilan et

3



Q   929C0C14C209C3399CAE7AEC6DB92251   1377986505    symptom brist folsyra hidden:meta:region:00     =    13    1    -N    -     sv      =

Q   2E6CD9E0071057E4BEDC0E52B0B0BDAC   1377986578    folsyra hidden:meta:region:00 =    36    1    -N    -     sv    =          

Q   527049C35E3810C45B22461C4CCB2C23    1377986649    kroppens anatomi hidden:meta:region:01    =    25    1    -N    -    sv    =        

Q   F86B6B133154FD247C1525BAF169B387    1377986685    stroke hidden:meta:region:00    =    320    1    -N    -     sv    =        

Q   17CCB738766C545BFE3899C71A22DE3B    1377986807    diabetes typ 2 vad beror på hidden:meta:region:12 =     61    1    -N    -    sv    =

Figure 1: Example queries. A query consist of (Q)uery, session ID, time stamp, search query, metadata,
number of links returned, the batch ID of the visited link, (N)o spelling suggestions, Swedish search.

al., 2009). Such information can be used both for
a general understanding of public health aware-
ness and the information seeking patterns of users,
and for optimizing search indexing, query comple-
tion and presentation of results for improved pub-
lic health information. For an overview of some
common applications and methods for log analy-
sis see (Oliner et al., 2011).

Deeper mining into queries can reveal more im-
portant information about search engine users and
their language use and also new information from
the search requests; cf. (Medelyan, 2004). The ba-
sis for Search Analytics is made of different kinds
of logs of search terms and presented and chosen
results by web site users (Mat-Hassan and Levene,
2005). At a syntactic level queries may contain
e.g., synonyms and hyponyms, and to be able to
study patterns of search behavior at a more ab-
stract level, we map the syntactic terms to seman-
tic concepts. To our knowledge this is the first of
its kind resource for Swedish and as such it can
be used as a test bed for experimental work in un-
derstanding the breadth and depth of usage pat-
terns, the properties of the resource and the chal-
lenges involved in working with such type of data.
The only study we are aware of using Swedish log
data, in the context of health-related information,
is described by (Hulth et al., 2009). In their study,
three million search logs from vardguiden.se (June
05 to June 07) were used for the purpose of in-
fluenza surveillance in Sweden, and seven symp-
toms, roughly corresponding to cough, sore throat,
shortness of breath, coryza (head cold), fever,
headache, myalgia (muscle pain) were studied.

4 Semantic Enhancement

Description of various corpus analytics that en-
ables us to gain insights into the language used
in the logs; e.g., terminology and general vocab-
ulary provide, to a certain degree, an indication
of the search strategies applied by the users of
the web site service from where the logs are ob-
tained. Findings can serve as background work

that, e.g., can be incorporated in search engines or
other web-based applications to personalize search
results, provide specific site recommendations and
suggest more precise search terms, e.g., by the
automatic identification of laymen/novices or do-
main experts. The logs have been automatically
annotated with two medically-oriented semantic
resources (Kokkinakis, 2011) and a named en-
tity recognizer (Kokkinakis, 2004). The seman-
tic resources are the Systematized Nomenclature
of Medicine - Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) and
the National Repository for Medicinal Products
(NPL, http://www.lakemedelsverket.
se/)1. We perceive all these resources as highly
complementary for our task since the Swedish
SNOMED CT does not contain drug names and of
course none of the two contain information about
named entities.

4.1 SNOMED CT and NPL

SNOMED CT provides a common language that
enables consistency in capturing, storing, retriev-
ing, sharing and aggregating health data across
specialties and sites of care. SNOMED CT pro-
vides codes and concept definitions for most clin-
ical areas. SNOMED CT concepts are orga-
nized into 18 top-level hierarchies, such as Body
Structure and Clinical Finding, each subdivided
into several sub-hierarchies and contains around
280,000 terms. More detailed information about
SNOMED CT can be found at the International
Health Terminology Standards Development Or-
ganisation’s web site, IHTSDO, at: http://
www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/.

The NPL is the official Swedish product reg-
istry for drugs and contains 11,250 entries. Ev-
ery product in the registry contains metadata about

1Named entities have not been used for this study. How-
ever, we intend to use them in future studies. Neverthe-
less, the named entity annotation includes the ontological
categories location, organization, person, time, and measure
entities. Such entities can capture a wide range of entities
searched by in such logs such as addresses to health care cen-
ters and various health care organizations.

4



its substance(s), names, dosages, producers and
classifications, like prescription and Anatomical
Therapeutic Chemical codes (ATC). For instance,
for the question “missbruk st göranssjukhus”
(“abuse st göran hospital”) from the query “Q \t
C7ED234574EE24 \t 1326104437 \t missbruk st
göranssjukhus meta:category:PageType;Article \t
= \t 0 \t ...” (here “\t” signals a tab separation), we
add three new tab-delimited columns (named en-
tity label, SNOMED-CT, NPL or N/A if no match
can be made) to each query. In this case, the three
added columns for this particular query will get
the labels “FUNCT-ENT”, “finding–32709003–
missbruk” and “N/A” (no annotation), where the
first stands for a FUNCTional-ENTity, the second
for a finding category with concept-id “32709003”
and “missbruk” as the recommended term.

4.2 Semantic Communities

We use the semantic labels obtained from the se-
mantic enhancement to group words into commu-
nities. Communities can be used for getting in-
sight into the language and the related words be-
ing used for medical search. The words which are
matched with the same semantic label are clearly
relevant to each other as they belong to the same
semantic hierarchy. For each semantic label, we
create a set of all the words in the queries which
received this label. In other words, the words in
queries that co-occurred with the same label are
assumed to belong to the same community.

We have generated such communities only from
SNOMED CT and NPL labels and refer to them
as semantic communities in the rest of the paper.
As an example, the community {borrelia, serolo-
giska, blodprover, test, serologisk, testning} was
obtained from the queries which received the label
“qualifier value–27377004–serologisk”.

5 Graph Analysis

Query log data can be modeled using different
types of graphs (Baeza-Yates, 2007). In this study,
we have generated a word co-occurrence graph,
in which each node corresponds to a word and
two nodes are connected with an edge if they
have appeared in the same query. The generated
graph is undirected and unweighted and has no
multiedges. To generate the graph we have used
the words as they appeared in the logs, i.e., we
did not replace words with their synonyms, cor-
rect misspellings, or translate non-Swedish words

10^{0}

10^{1}

10^{2}

10^{3}

10^{4}

10^{5}

10^{6}

10^{0} 10^{1} 10^{2} 10^{3} 10^{4} 10^{5}

C
o

u
n

t

Degree

Figure 2: The degree distribution of the co-
occurrence graph.

to Swedish. For example, “eye”, “öga”, “ögat”,
“ögon”, and “ögonen” appear as five different
nodes in the graph but mean the same thing.

The graph G(V, E) generated from the queries
which contained two or more words has |V | =
265,785 nodes and |E| = 1,555,149 edges. The
words in one-word queries which did not co-occur
with any other words could not be considered for
the graph analysis. The generated graph consists
of 6,688 connected components. A connected
component is a group of nodes where a path exists
between any pair of them. The largest connected
component of the graph, also known as giant con-
nected component (GCC), contains around 95% of
the nodes in the graph.

It was shown in (Ferrer i Cancho and Solé,
2001), that a graph generated from the co-
occurrence of words in sentences in human lan-
guages, exhibit two structural properties that other
types of complex networks have, i.e, the graph is a
small world network and it has a power-law degree
distribution (Barabási and Albert, 1999). Later
studies on different types of word graphs have also
been shown to follow the above properties. In this
paper, we also show that a word co-occurrence
graph generated from medical queries exhibits the
same structural properties.

In small world networks, there is a short path
connecting any pair of nodes in the GCC of
the network. This property can be examined
by calculating the effective diameter of the net-
work (Leskovec et al., 2007). Small word net-
works also are highly clustered and therefore have
a high clustering coefficient value. The effective
diameter of our co-occurrence graph is 4.88, and
it has an average clustering coefficient of 0.34.
These values confirm that our word co-occurrence
graph is a small world network.

5



Table 1: Structural properties of the word co-occurrence graph over time.

Time window |V | |E| |VGCC | clustering coeff. effective diameter
1 month 16,045 52,403 14,877 0.29 5.47
3 months 30,681 168,045 29,220 0.30 5.42
6 months 48,229 298,331 46,435 0.31 5.38

12 months 69,380 414,643 67,245 0.32 4.97
36 months 265,785 1,555,149 251,597 0.34 4.88

The degree distribution of the co-occurrence
graph is shown in Figure 2. It can be seen that
the degree distribution follows a power law distri-
bution. This observation is similar to the observa-
tions presented by (Baeza-Yates and Tiberi, 2007)
that almost all the measures of a graph generated
from query log files follow power laws. There-
fore, the user behavior in medical search does
not seem different from general search behavior.
In addition to networks of word relations, power
law degree distributions have also been observed
in social, information, and interaction networks
where there are many nodes with low degrees and
a few nodes with very high degrees (Clauset et al.,
2009). The word with the highest degree in our
graph is “barn” (child/children) which has 17,086
edges. Some other high-degree nodes are “sjuk-
dom” (disease), “behandling” (treatment), “ont”
(pain), “gravid” (pregnant), and “feber” (fever).

We have also looked into how the struc-
tural properties of the word co-occurrence graph
change over time as the graph increases in size
with an increasing number of queries. Table 1
summarizes the results. It can be seen that similar
to many other networks, the diameter of the graph
shrinks when more nodes become connected and
its average clustering coefficient does not change
much as the graph becomes larger.

Overall, the structural properties of the word co-
occurrence graph are similar to many other real-
world networks. Although it was shown in (Yang
et al., 2011) that the queries and information needs
of medical practitioners in accessing electronic
health records are different from users of general
search engines, our analysis reveals that there are
similarities between information seeking of gen-
eral users on health data and on general data.
Therefore, the algorithms introduced for analy-
sis of such networks can be directly deployed for
analysis of word co-occurrence graphs.

5.1 Graph Community Detection

One of the widely studied structural properties of
real-world networks is their community structure.

A community, also known as a cluster, is defined
as a group of nodes in a graph which have dense
connections to each other, but have few connec-
tions to the rest of the nodes in the network. There
have been numerous studies on the community
structure of social and information networks and a
variety of algorithms have been proposed for iden-
tifying the communities in these networks. A thor-
ough overview of different types of community
detection algorithms can be found in (Fortunato,
2010; Xie et al., 2013).

Community detection algorithms can be divided
into global and local algorithms. The global al-
gorithms require a global knowledge of the entire
structure of the network to be able to find its com-
munities. Therefore, these types of algorithms do
not scale well for log analysis since query logs
are usually very large and are continuously grow-
ing. The local algorithms, on the other hand,
only require a partial knowledge of the network
and therefore can identify network communities
in parallel. However, the identified communities
might not cover all the nodes in a network.

Moreover, community detection algorithms can
be divided into overlapping and non-overlapping
algorithms. Traditional partitioning and clustering
algorithms typically divide the nodes in a network
into disjoint communities. But in many real net-
works, a node can actually belong to more than
one community. For example, in a social net-
work, a user can belong to a community of fam-
ily members, a community of friends, and a com-
munity of colleagues. In a co-occurrence graph,
a symptom can co-occur with different types of
diseases. Therefore, a community detection algo-
rithm which can identify overlapping communities
is more suitable for analysis of the graphs gener-
ated from search queries.

For the analysis of log queries, we have used a
local overlapping community detection algorithm.
This algorithm is a random walk-based algorithm
which uses an approximation of a personalized
PageRank (Andersen and Lang, 2006; Andersen

6



et al., 2006) and is shown to perform well in de-
tecting real communities in social and interaction
networks (Yang and Leskovec, 2012). The algo-
rithm starts from a seed node and expands the seed
into a community until a scoring function is op-
timized. One of the widely used functions for
community detection is conductance. The con-
ductance of a community C in a graph G(V, E)
is defined as φ(C) = m(C)min(vol(C),vol(V \C)) , where
m(C) is the number of inter-cluster edges and
vol(C) =

∑
v∈C deg(v) is the volume of a com-

munity and corresponds to the sum of the degree
of all the nodes in the community. The lower the
conductance of a community, the better quality the
community has. The complexity of this algorithm
is independent of the size of the network and only
depends on the size of the target communities.

6 Experimental Results

In this section we present our experimental results
and discuss the possible applications for graph-
based analysis of medical data.

6.1 Semantic and Graph Analysis

From the semantic enhancement, we have gener-
ated 16,427 unique semantic communities which
cover less than 11% of the nodes in the network.
This means that, the majority of the queries in
the network did not contain words that match the
medical concepts provided by of SNOMED CT
and NPL. This observation suggests that a seman-
tic enhancement of queries on its own is not ade-
quate for understanding the relations between all
the words used in medical search.

For the graph analysis, we have used the lo-
cal overlapping community detection algorithm
of (Yang and Leskovec, 2012) to identify the com-
munities from the co-occurrence graph generated
from the complete query logs. The algorithm iden-
tified 107,765 unique communities in the GCC of
the graph with average conductance 0.74. This
shows that the communities are not well separated
from each other and that there are many edges be-
tween distinct communities. Moreover, the identi-
fied communities cover 93% of the nodes in the
network which means that the graph analysis is
more suitable for the study of the relations be-
tween the words than the semantic analysis.

The semantic communities and the graph com-
munities are both dependent on the co-occurrence
of words in queries, but identify communities dif-

ferently. The semantic method places the nodes
which belong to the same semantic hierarchy to-
gether with the words that co-occurred with them
in the same community. However, the graph-based
method places the words based on the structure of
the generated network in the communities.

We have compared and calculated the similarity
between the graph communities and the semantic
communities using the jaccard index which is de-
fined as JI(C, S) = |C∩S||C∪S| . The jaccard index
shows the normalized size of the overlap between
a graph community C and a semantic community
S. Similarity functions, including Jaccard, have
been used before for measuring the distance of two
different queries. In this study we use similarity to
assess the similarity of communities of words ob-
tained from the two distinct methods.

We have compared each semantic community
with all the graph communities and show the sim-
ilarity distribution in Figure 3. It can be seen that
the majority of the communities partially over-
lap. As an example, from the word “tandsjuk-
dom” (dental disease) as the seed, we identi-
fied the graph community {tandsjukdom, licken,
munhåleproblem, rubev, emalj, tändernaamelin,
hypopla, permanentatänder, lixhen, hypoplazy,
hipoplasy, hypoplazi, bortnött, hipoplazy}. From
the semantic enhancement, “tandsjukdom” and
“tandsjukdomar” both have received semantic la-
bel “disorder–234947003–tandsjukdom”. From
the queries which received this label we have
generated the semantic community {tandsjukdom,
emalj, olika, vanligaste, tandsjukdomar, licken,
plack, ovanliga}. The similarity of these commu-
nities is low, i.e., 0.16, however, they both contain
the words which are clearly relevant to teeth and
dental diseases.

As another example, “osteoklast” and “osteok-
laster” both receive the semantic label “cell–
27770000–osteoklast”. From the graph analysis,
we have found {osteoklaster, osteoblster, osteo-
cyter, osteoblaster} as a community with “osteok-
laster” as the seed. We have also obtained the
semantic community {osteoblaster, osteoklast, os-
teoporos, osteocyter, benskörhet, osteoklaster, os-
teoblster}. In this example, the graph community
is a subset of the semantic community, and their
similarity is 0.57. The above examples suggest
that a graph-based analysis of medical queries can
be used to complement the semantic analysis.

7



0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

Jaccard Similarity

C
o

u
n

t

(a) one month

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Jaccard Similarity

C
o

u
n

t

(b) 6 months

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

Jaccard Similarity

C
o

u
n

t

(c) 12 months

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

Jaccard Similarity

C
o

u
n

t

(d) 36 months

Figure 3: The distributions of jaccard similarity of semantic-based and graph-based communities.

6.2 Frequent Co-Occurrence Analysis

In the query logs, we observed that there are many
misspellings, meaningless words, etc. In order to
clear the dataset, it is common in different studies
of log files, to filter out queries which appeared
less frequently. By removing such queries, we can
dramatically reduce the number of such words.

In this study, we have generated another graph
from the words which co-occurred frequently in
different queries. We have only considered words
that co-occurred five times or more, and the graph
contains 32,449 nodes and 217,320 edges, with
average clustering coefficient of 0.29 and effective
diameter of 5.66.

In the GCC of this graph we found 22,890 graph
communities with average conductance of 0.65
and coverage of 95%. Moreover, we have also
used the words which co-occurred at least five
times to generate the semantic communities. The
similarity of these communities with graph com-
munities using jaccard similarity was 0.16 in av-
erage which is slightly lower than when no filter-
ing was used. Overall, our observations suggest
that filtering can be used to reduce the noise in the
datasets and allow us to perform a faster analysis
on a smaller graph.

6.3 Time Window Analysis

Another property which we have empirically stud-
ied in this paper is the effect of time window
length during which the queries are analyzed. We
have observed that, in average, more than 31%

of the nodes and 12% of the edges have re-
appeared in each month compared to their pre-
vious month. This suggests that the search con-
tent changes over time perhaps depending on the
changes in the monthly or seasonal information re-
quirements of the users. It also means that over
time the size of the word co-occurrence graph in-
creases (see Table 1), and since in each month new
co-occurrences shape, the graph becomes more
and more connected. Therefore, when the time
window is long, the analysis requires more time
and the identified communities do not have good
conductance. When the time window is short, the
small size of the graph speeds up the analysis but
might affect the analysis result. In this section we
investigate the effect of time window length on our
analysis.

We started by setting the time window length to
one month. From the queries which were observed
during each month, we generated a co-occurrence
graph and identified the graph communities and
the semantic communities. As presented in Sec-
tion 5, the structural properties of a graph gen-
erated from one month are quite similar to that
of the complete graph. We have also observed
that the average conductance of the communities
identified by the community detection algorithm is
around 0.5 which is lower than when the complete
graph was used. This means that the communities
in the graphs generated from one month of queries
have better quality since they have fewer connec-
tions to the rest of the graph.

8



We observed that the similarities between
graph communities and semantic communities are
higher when a one-month window is used (in av-
erage 0.26). By increasing the length of the time
window from one to three, six, twelve, and thirty-
six months, we observed a reduction in the simi-
larities (in average 0.23, 0.22, 0.21, and 0.19, re-
spectively). The similarity distributions are shown
in Figure 3. It seems that with more queries
over time, more words get connected and it be-
comes more difficult to identify good communi-
ties. Therefore, using short time windows can im-
prove the quality of the analysis. Moreover, anal-
ysis of different time windows can also shed light
on how the word relations and user requirements
are affected by the months or seasons of the year.

6.4 Discussion

Our empirical analysis of a large-scale query log
of medical related search presented in this paper
can be used to improve our knowledge of the ter-
minology and general vocabulary, as well as the
search strategies of the users. In addition to pro-
viding a background for language analysis, a po-
tential application for community detection could
be to provide better spelling suggestions to users.
We have observed that there are communities with
very low conductance which contain a number of
words which seem to correspond to guessing at-
tempts to find a correct spelling, e.g., {shoulder,
froozen, frosen, cholder, sholder, fingers, frozen,
scholder, shulder, schoulder, shoulders}. The low
conductance of the community means that the
community is very isolated and has very few edges
outside it and therefore it can easily be cut from the
graph. Therefore, the community detection can be
used for identifying such cases.

Another potential application of our graph anal-
ysis method is to provide recommendations and
suggest more precise search terms based on the
words that appear in the same community as the
keywords entered by the users. For example, since
the communities can overlap, each word can be-
long to more than one graph community or se-
mantic community. We observed that in average,
in the complete graph (generated from 36 months
of logs), each word belongs to 3.8 unique graph
communities and 3.6 semantic communities. It
means that a word which can be related to mul-
tiple groups of words or have different meanings,
can belong to several communities. This knowl-

edge can potentially be used to provide sugges-
tions to the users and help them to select the in-
tended meaning and therefore reducing the ambi-
guity in the searched queries.

Overall, in this paper, we have presented
a promising approach for analysis of medical
queries using co-occurrence graphs. As a future
work, the following improvements could be of in-
terest for complementing our empirical study:

• Representing different variations of the
words with only a single node in the graph,
e.g., “öga” for “ögat”, and “ögon”.

• Filtering out the non-medical related words
such as person and location entities from
the queries based on the semantic enhance-
ment with name entities from NER. Overall,
more than 136,000 queries contained a per-
son name entity, and around 127,000 con-
tained a place entity.

• Filtering out high frequency words/terms
which do not have medical significance, e.g.,
“olika” (different).

7 Conclusions

Our analysis of a large-scale medical query log
corpus is the first step towards understanding the
language and the word relations in health/medical
related queries. We have performed a semantic
enhancement of queries based on medically re-
lated semantic resources to find the communities
of words which have co-occurred with a semantic
label. We have also performed a graph-based anal-
ysis of the word co-occurrences and have shown
that since a word co-occurrence graph has similar
structural properties to many types of real-world
networks, existing algorithms for network analysis
can be deployed for our study. We then have used
a random walk-based community detection algo-
rithm in order to identify communities of words
in our graph. Our empirical results show that the
communities identified from the semantic analysis
and the graph analysis overlap, however the graph-
based analysis can identify many more commu-
nities and achieves much higher coverage of the
words in the queries. Therefore, the graph-based
analysis can be used in order to improve and com-
plement the semantic analysis. Our experiments
also show that short time window lengths for anal-
ysis of query logs, such as a month, would suffice
for graph-based analysis of medical queries.

9



8 Acknowledgments

We are thankful to Adam Blomberg, CTO, Eurol-
ing AB for providing the log data. We are also
thankful for the support by the Centre for Lan-
guage Technology (http://clt.gu.se).

References

Reid Andersen and Kevin Lang. 2006. Communities
from seed sets. In Proceedings of the 15th interna-
tional conference on World Wide Web - WWW ’06,
page 223. ACM Press.

Reid Andersen, Fan Chung, and Kevin Lang. 2006.
Local Graph Partitioning using PageRank Vectors.
In 2006 47th Annual IEEE Symposium on Founda-
tions of Computer Science (FOCS’06), pages 475–
486. IEEE.

Ricardo Baeza-Yates and Alessandro Tiberi. 2007.
Extracting semantic relations from query logs. Pro-
ceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data min-
ing - KDD ’07, page 76.

Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Carlos Hurtado, and Marcelo
Mendoza. 2004. Query Clustering for Boosting
Web Page Ranking. In Advances in Web Intelli-
gence, volume 3034, pages 164–175. Springer.

Ricardo Baeza-Yates. 2007. Graphs from Search En-
gine Queries. In Theory and Practice of Computer
Science, volume 4362, pages 1–8. Springer.

Judit Bar-Ilan, Zheng Zhu, and Mark Levene. 2009.
Topic-specific analysis of search queries. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2009 workshop on Web Search Click
Data - WSCD ’09, pages 35–42. ACM Press.

A.L. Barabási and R. Albert. 1999. Emer-
gence of Scaling in Random Networks. Science,
286(5439):509.

Aaron Clauset, Cosma Rohilla Shalizi, and M. E. J.
Newman. 2009. Power-Law Distributions in Em-
pirical Data. SIAM Review, 51(4):661–703, Novem-
ber.

R Ferrer i Cancho and R V Solé. 2001. The small
world of human language. Proceedings. Biologi-
cal sciences / The Royal Society, 268(1482):2261–5,
November.

Santo Fortunato. 2010. Community detection in
graphs. Physics Reports, 486(3-5):75–174, Febru-
ary.

Benoı̂t Gaillard and Bruno Gaume. 2011. Invariants
and Variability of Synonymy Networks : Self Me-
diated Agreement by Confluence. In Proceedings
of the TextGraphs-6 Workshop (Graph-based Algo-
rithms for Natural Language Processing), pages 15–
23.

Amaç Herdagdelen, Katrin Erk, and Marco Baroni.
2009. Measuring semantic relatedness with vector
space models and random walks. In In Proceedings
of the TextGraphs-4 (Graph-based Methods for Nat-
ural Language Processing), pages 50–53.

Anette Hulth, Gustaf Rydevik, and Annika Linde.
2009. Web queries as a source for syndromic
surveillance. PloS one, 4(2):e4378, January.

Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2004. Reducing the Effect
of Name Explosion. In In Proceedings of the
LREC Workshop: Beyond Named Entity Recog-
nition, Semantic Labelling for NLP tasks. Fourth
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC), pages 1–6.

Dimitrios Kokkinakis. 2011. What is the Cover-
age of SNOMED CTon Scientific Medical Corpora?
MIE: XXIII International Conference of the Euro-
pean Federation for Medical Informatics. Studies in
Health Technology and Informatics, 169:814 – 818.

Jure Leskovec, Jon Kleinberg, and Christos Faloutsos.
2007. Graph Evolution: Densification and Shrink-
ing Diameters. ACM Transactions on Knowledge
Discovery from Data, 1(1):2–es, March.

Mazlita Mat-Hassan and Mark Levene. 2005. Asso-
ciating search and navigation behavior through log
analysis. Journal of the American Society for In-
formation Science and Technology, 56(9):913–934,
July.

Olena Medelyan. 2004. Why Not Use Query Logs
As Corpora? In Proceedings of the Ninth ESSLLI
Student Session, pages 1–10.

Adam Oliner, U C Berkeley, and Archana Ganapathi.
2011. Advances and Challenges in Log Analysis
Logs contain a wealth of information for help in
managing systems . Queue - Log Analysis, pages
1–11.

Ji-rong Wen, Jian-yun Nie, and Hong-Jiang Zhang.
2001. Clustering user queries of a search engine. In
Proceedings of the tenth international conference on
World Wide Web - WWW ’01, pages 162–168. ACM
Press.

Jierui Xie, S Kelley, and BK Szymanski. 2013. Over-
lapping community detection in networks: the state
of the art and comparative study. ACM Computing
Surveys, 45(4).

Jaewon Yang and Jure Leskovec. 2012. Defining and
evaluating network communities based on ground-
truth. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pages 1–8.

Lei Yang, Qiaozhu Mei, Kai Zheng, and David a
Hanauer. 2011. Query log analysis of an electronic
health record search engine. AMIA ... Annual Sym-
posium proceedings / AMIA Symposium. AMIA Sym-
posium, 2011:915–24, January.

10


