



















































Annotating Patterns of Reasoning about Medical Theories of Causation in Vaccine Cases: Toward a Type System for Arguments


Proceedings of the First Workshop on Argumentation Mining, pages 1–10,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 26, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating Patterns of Reasoning about Medical Theories of Causa-
tion in Vaccine Cases: Toward a Type System for Arguments 

 
 

Vern R. Walker 
Director, 

Research Laboratory for 
Law, Logic & Technology 

Maurice A. Deane School of 
Law at Hofstra University 

Hempstead, New York, USA 
Vern.R.Walker@ 
Hofstra.edu 

Karina Vazirova 
Protocols Coordinator, 

Research Laboratory for 
Law, Logic & Technology 

Maurice A. Deane School of 
Law at Hofstra University 

Hempstead, New York, USA 
 

Cass Sanford 
Researcher, 

Research Laboratory for 
Law, Logic & Technology 

Maurice A. Deane School of 
Law at Hofstra University 

Hempstead, New York, USA 
 

 
  

 

Abstract 

Automated argumentation mining re-
quires an adequate type system or anno-
tation scheme for classifying the patterns 
of argument that succeed or fail in a cor-
pus of legal documents. Moreover, there 
must be a reliable and accurate method 
for classifying the arguments found in 
natural language legal documents. With-
out an adequate and operational type sys-
tem, we are unlikely to reach consensus 
on argument corpora that can function as 
a gold standard. This paper reports the 
preliminary results of research to anno-
tate a sample of representative judicial 
decisions for the reasoning of the fact-
finder. The decisions report whether the 
evidence adduced by the petitioner ade-
quately supports the claim that a medical 
theory causally links some type of vac-
cine with various types of injuries or ad-
verse medical conditions. This paper 
summarizes and discusses some patterns 
of reasoning that we are finding, using 
examples from the corpus. The pattern 
types and examples presented here 
demonstrate the difficulty of developing 
a type or annotation system for character-
izing the logically important patterns of 
reasoning. 

1 Introduction 
This paper reports the preliminary results of re-
search by the Research Laboratory for Law, Log-
ic & Technology (LLT Lab) on a corpus of judi-
cial decisions that we have annotated for patterns 
of argumentation. We first describe the sample of 
judicial decisions, and report the frequency of 
argument types using a coarse typology based on 
logical connectives. We then discuss three addi-
tional approaches to a finer-grained typology, 
based on types of inference, types of evidence, 
and types of evidentiary discrepancies. We con-
clude by discussing our working hypotheses for 
developing a type system for arguments, as well 
as discussing prior related work. 

2 The Sample of Vaccine-Injury Com-
pensation Decisions 

The research in this paper is based on a sample 
of 10 judicial decisions in the United States, in 
which the petitioner was seeking compensation, 
under the National Vaccine Injury Compensation 
Program (NVICP), for injuries allegedly caused 
by a covered vaccine (Ashley and Walker 2013; 
Walker 2009; Walker et al. 2011, 2013). The 
sample is part of the Vaccine/Injury Project Cor-
pus (V/IP Corpus), which comprises every deci-
sion filed during a 2-year period (a total of 35 
decision texts, typically 15 to 40 pages each) that 
applied a 3-prong test of causation, enunciated 
by a federal court in Althen (2005). These deci-
sions are authored by special masters attached to 
the Court of Federal Claims, who function as 
factfinders in contested cases. According to the 

1



Althen test, in order to prevail the petitioner must 
establish three propositions, each by a prepon-
derance of the evidence: (1) that a “medical theo-
ry causally connects” the type of vaccine with 
the type of injury; (2) that there was a “logical 
sequence of cause and effect” between the par-
ticular vaccination and the particular injury; and 
(3) that a “proximate temporal relationship” ex-
isted between the vaccination and the injury. 
Proving these causation conditions generally re-
quires integrating expert, scientific evidence with 
non-expert evidence, and reconciling scientific 
standards of proof with non-scientific (legal or 
common-sense) standards of proof. In 5 of the 
decisions, the petitioner succeeded in proving all 
three Althen conditions and ultimately won the 
case (Cusati, Roper, Casey, Werderitsh, and 
Stewart), while in the remaining 5 cases the peti-
tioner lost on the Althen first condition and the 
government won the case (Meyers, Sawyer, 
Wolfe, Thomas, and Walton). 

This paper examines patterns of argument and 
reasoning found in the factfinding portions of 
these vaccine-compensation cases. And we have 
examined primarily the patterns of reasoning 
provided by the factfinder in support of the find-
ings of fact. There are several reasons for taking 
this approach. First, focusing on the reported 
findings and reasoning of the factfinder also pro-
vides information about which arguments were 
successful (persuasive) and which were not. Se-
cond, in writing a decision, the factfinder is more 
likely to report her own reasoning with more care 
and detail than she might use in relating the ar-
gument of a witness or party. Third, in probably 
many situations, the reasoning reported by a fact-
finder was in fact also an argument made origi-
nally by a party, which was then adopted by the 
factfinder. Fourth, in most decisions it is easier to 
identify and count all of the reported findings 
and reasons of the factfinder, because they are 
often gathered together in a “Discussion” section 
of the decision; by contrast, counting the total 
number of arguments of the parties is more diffi-
cult. 

Moreover, we have limited ourselves in this 
paper primarily to patterns that address the first 
of these Althen conditions: that is, whether there 
was at the time of the litigation a medical theory 
that causally linked the type of vaccine involved 
with the type of injury alleged. We have selected 
this issue for this paper because it involves an 
issue and style of proof that is general in nature, 
and less dependent upon the plausibility of par-
ticular facts that are peculiar to the specific case. 

Indeed, proving that “the vaccine can cause this 
type of injury, at least sometimes” is likely to 
exhibit patterns of reasoning common in many 
domains, both inside and outside of law. 

In general, we expect both the arguments by 
the parties or witnesses and the reasoning given 
by the factfinder for a finding of fact to exhibit 
the same “argument patterns.” That is, we expect 
the same types of patterns to occur, whether a 
party puts forth an argument for the factfinder to 
adopt, or the factfinder reports certain reasoning 
as being persuasive. As a matter of terminology, 
the term “argument” is typically applied to the 
argumentative reasoning of a party, whether or 
not it proves to be persuasive to the factfinder, 
and the term “reasoning” is often reserved for the 
supporting reasoning provided by the legal deci-
sion maker. However, from the perspective of 
exhibiting reasoning patterns, we consider “ar-
guments” and “reasoning” to be equivalent – the 
only difference being attribution (the agent using 
the pattern, or to whom the pattern is attributed). 

3 The Frequency of Arguments in the 
Sample Cases 

In order to provide quality assurance in identi-
fying the structure of the factfinder’s reasoning, 
our methodology integrated analyses by three 
annotators in three steps. First, a student re-
searcher trained in the LLT Lab’s logic modeling 
protocols annotated a legal decision for elements 
of the factfinder’s reasoning. Second, another 
student (who was usually more experienced than 
the first student) then reviewed those annota-
tions, and the two researchers reached a consen-
sus on any discrepancies. Third, Lab Director 
Walker performed an independent analysis, and 
he and the two student researchers discussed and 
documented any annotation issues, and decided 
on the final annotations. The resulting “logic 
model” of the reasoning for a single case inte-
grates numerous units of reasoning into a single 
logical structure, with each unit consisting of one 
conclusion and one or more immediately sup-
porting reasons (premises). 

Walker et al. (2011, pp. 296-300) provide de-
tails on the default-logic framework and on the 
logical connectives used in the LLT Lab’s logic 
models to connect the supporting reasons (prem-
ises) to the conclusion. Because evidentiary 
propositions (both conclusions and premises) 
have plausibility-values based on a seven-valued 
scale (from “highly plausible” through “undecid-
ed” to “highly implausible”), the logical connec-

2



tives must operate on a many-valued scale. The 
four logical connectives we use in our logic 
models are: 

• “MIN” assigns to the conclusion the 
lowest plausibility-value possessed by 
any of its supporting premises (MIN 
functions like a conjunctive AND); 

• “MAX” assigns to the conclusion the 
highest plausibility-value possessed by 
any of its supporting premises (MAX 
functions like a disjunctive OR); 

• “EVIDENCE FACTORS” merely lists 
relevant reasons or premises, but does 
not provide a computable formula for 
producing a plausibility-value for the 
conclusion as a function of the values of 
the premises; and 

• “REBUT” assigns to the conclusion a 
degree of implausibility inverse to the 
degree of plausibility of the rebutting 
(defeating) premise, when (but only 
when) the rebutting premise is plausible 
to some degree (for example, if the re-
butting premise is “highly plausible,” 
then the conclusion is “highly implausi-
ble”; but if the rebutting premise is only 

“slightly plausible,” then the conclusion 
is only “slightly implausible”). 

Using the kind of logical connective employed 
as a coarse typology, we can classify the argu-
ments found within the factfinding. Table 1 
summarizes the results of the argument frequen-
cies within the LLT Lab’s logic models for the 
10 decisions in the sample, under Althen Prong 1 
only, by type of connective. A single argument is 
defined as a single conclusion supported by an 
immediate level of reasoning – that is, a single 
conclusion supported by one or more premises or 
reasons. Where a single conclusion rests on both 
prima facie supporting premises and a defeater, 
we classified that argument by the connective 
occurring in the prima facie line of reasoning. In 
Table 1, for example, the reasoning of the fact-
finder under Althen Prong 1 in the Roper deci-
sion consisted of 7 arguments containing the EV-
IDENCE FACTORS connective, 2 arguments 
connected by MIN, and 1 argument connected by 
REBUT. The numeral “1” in square brackets in 
the REBUT column of Table 1 indicates that 
there was a second REBUT connective in the 
decision, but it occurred as a defeater attached to 
some other prima facie line of reasoning. 
 

 
Name of Case 
(Filing Date) 

Prong-1 Finding EVIDENCE 
FACTOR 

Args 

MIN Args MAX Args REBUT 
Args 

Cusati (9/22/05) For petitioner 5    
Roper (12/9/05) For petitioner 7 2  1 [1] 
Casey (12/12/05) For petitioner  4 1  
Werderitsh (5/26/06) For petitioner 2   3 [1] 
Stewart (3/19/07) For petitioner 5    
Meyers (5/22/06) For government 5   [1] 
Sawyer (6/22/06) For government 10 1  [1] 
Wolfe (11/9/06) For government 5   [1] 
Thomas (1/23/07) For government 3   1 
Walton (4/30/07) For government 14 1  1 [3] 
 
Table 1. Frequency of Arguments in Ten-Case Sample under Althen Prong 1, by Type of Connective 

 
An examination of the results in Table 1 

shows one reason why we regard this classifica-
tion of arguments by logical connective as 
providing only a high-level or coarse typology, 
but not an adequately informative or useful ty-
pology. By far the most common form of argu-
ment stated is simply a conclusion, supported by 
a list of relevant considerations (the arguments 
containing simply the EVIDENCE FACTORS 
connective). In these arguments, no other struc-

ture is expressly indicated, beyond a listing of 
supporting reasons. Nearly 79% of the arguments 
(56 out of 71) contained no internal truth-
functional structure, but were merely lists of 
supporting information considered by the fact-
finder to be relevant to drawing that conclusion. 
This provides motivation for developing a more 
informative typology for arguments or reasoning 
patterns, beyond the connectives normally used 
in propositional logic. 

3



However, we express a word of caution about 
maintaining descriptive accuracy in annotation. 
We have considered it critical to annotate pat-
terns of reasoning in a way that accurately repre-
sents the reported reasoning of the factfinder. If 
there exists no semantic cue indicating a more 
structured form than merely a list of supporting 
reasons, then we believe that accurate annotation 
would represent the list form of the original doc-
ument. It might be possible to interpret a list as a 
more structured line of reasoning, but the data 
themselves (as contrasted with the interpretation 
of those data) should not be contaminated with 
information not already expressed in the original 
source. Thus, we believe that it should always be 
possible to distinguish between annotations that 
are strictly faithful to the text in representing the 
author’s stated meaning, and annotations that add 
the interpretations of commentators. The kind of 
type system we are discussing in this paper is the 
former kind, with which we can accurately cap-
ture the meaning of the author of the text. 

4 Patterns by Types of Inference 
This section discusses the possible approach of 
identifying patterns of argumentation or reason-
ing that exhibit some type of inference from 
premises to conclusion (beyond the propositional 
connectives discussed in Section 3). This ap-
proach would draw upon inference methods stud-
ied in fields other than law, such as deductive 
logic, probability or statistics, science or medi-
cine. We discuss some of these types of infer-
ence that we find in the vaccine cases. 

4.1 Deductive Reasoning 
Occasionally reasoning is deductive in form – 
that is, if the premises are true then the conclu-
sion must be true as well, and the sole avenue for 
undermining the argument is attacking the truth 
of the premises (Copi and Cohen 1998, p. 25). In 
such patterns, the supporting reasons are not 
merely a list, but rather a list of jointly sufficient 
reasons for drawing the inference as a necessary 
conclusion. For example, in Casey (p. 26), the 
conclusion that the varicella vaccine can nega-
tively affect the nervous system was supported 
by a conjunction of two causal relations: that the 
vaccine can cause a direct viral infection, and 
that a direct viral infection can negatively affect 
the nervous system. 

Deductive patterns of reasoning, however, 
would have premises connected to the conclusion 
by the propositional connective MIN, because 

the conclusion would be true (or plausible) 
whenever all of the premises are true (plausible). 
At most, therefore, 8 of the 71 arguments found 
in the 10 sample cases would be deductive in 
form. We find that it is extremely rare for the 
factfinders in the vaccine cases to explicitly lay 
out reasoning in a deductively valid format. 

4.2 Probabilistic or Statistical Reasoning 
Reasoning that is probabilistic or statistical in 
form could be sub-divided into many types – 
e.g., reasoning based on premises that are explic-
itly regarded as merely probable, or reasoning 
proceeding from a premise that most (or some 
percentage of) members of one class are mem-
bers of another class. For example, in Sawyer (p. 
10), the petitioner’s expert relied on the generali-
zation that “it would be reasonable for someone 
with [the petitioner’s] condition to have some 
days that are less painful than others, but it 
should generally be a constant pain.” And in 
Walton (p. 33), when the petitioner’s expert ar-
gued that the MMR vaccine can cause myocardi-
tis, the government’s expert rebutted that if it 
were possible, then “we would have seen it by 
now because millions of doses of the vaccine 
have been given and this has not been reported.” 

4.3 Scientific or Medical Reasoning 
While deductive and probabilistic inferences do 
not rely upon methods developed within any par-
ticular discipline, legal factfinders are often per-
suaded by inference methods familiar from sci-
ence or medicine. For example, in Walton (p. 
35), an expert for the petitioner and an expert for 
the government agreed that “an acute reaction 
from a vaccine-caused myocarditis would be ex-
pected to manifest within days to two weeks of 
infection.” Yet the petitioner’s “symptoms oc-
curred well over three weeks after her vaccina-
tion.” The special master found that “[p]erhaps 
the most significant problem” with the petition-
er’s theory of causation was “the lack of tem-
poral connection between the MMR vaccination 
and evidence of a cardiac illness.” 

Scientific, medical and other expert witnesses 
sometimes reach a conclusion by balancing vari-
ous factors and arriving at a considered profes-
sional judgment, and this process itself might be 
persuasive to the legal factfinder. For example, 
the opinions of two medical experts that the spe-
cial master found credible in Stewart (pp. 36, 38) 
were supported by lists of reasons. An expert’s 
scientific argument may be presented in a way 
that lends itself to a legal and logical structure, 

4



providing an expert judgment in weighing the 
same evidence that the Special Master can rely 
on in reaching a conclusion. 

Sometimes the appeal to scientific reasoning is 
mediated by evidence that scientists themselves 
have already reached a conclusion on the issue. 
In Meyers (p. 10), the special master noted that 
the “scientific community has rejected [the ex-
pert’s] theories as detailed in his articles because 
the human studies that have been conducted do 
not support his conclusions and his analytical 
methods do not comport with the Daubert re-
quirement of reliability.” Daubert was a decision 
by the U.S. Supreme Court discussing factors 
relevant to assessing the evidentiary reliability of 
a scientific expert opinion in court. 

5 Patterns by Types of Evidence 
This section discusses another approach to classi-
fying patterns of argument and reasoning, one 
that is based upon the type of evidence in one or 
more of the premises. The form of reasoning or 
inference that relies on that evidence to arrive at 
a conclusion can be varied (as discussed in Sec-
tion 4). 

This section illustrates some of the types of 
evidence we find recurring in vaccine cases. 

5.1 Legal Precedent as Basis 
One of the most common patterns of legal rea-
soning involves the citation of prior legal deci-
sions as precedents. Precedent-based reasoning 
occurs when judges or factfinders utilize prior 
cases as providing a binding rule or applicable 
principle, or as providing guidance by analogy to 
explain or justify an outcome in the undecided 
matter before them (Cross et al., 2010, pp. 490-
512; Levi 1949, pp. 8-27). 

In vaccine decisions, the special masters have 
utilized precedent-based reasoning in various 
ways. In Wolfe (pp. 9-11), for example, the peti-
tioner’s expert based his theory of causation 
solely on the temporal relationship between the 
vaccination and the onset of the injury, together 
with a lack of alternative theories of causation. 
The special master found that argument to fall 
short of the established burden, citing the Federal 
Circuit’s decision in Grant (p. 1148) for the 
proposition that mere temporal relationship and 
lack of alternative causes is not enough to  create 
a prima facie case. In Werderitsh (p. 44), the 
government challenged the petitioner’s prima 
facie case by pointing to “the failure of valid ep-
idemiologic studies to show a relationship” and 

“the absence of the knowledge of the appropriate 
biologic mechanisms responsible.” The special 
master countered that “[l]egally, the absence of 
epidemiologic support for linking hepatitis B 
vaccine and MS, and the lack of identification of 
the specific biologic mechanism at work if hepa-
titis B vaccine causes MS do not prevent peti-
tioner from satisfying her burden of proof,” cit-
ing the Federal Circuit’s decision in Knudsen. 

5.2 Legal Policy as Basis 
Sometimes an important basis for the reasoning 
is not merely a precedent, but an authoritatively 
established legal policy that is considered opera-
tive. For example, in Casey (p. 26), the special 
master decided that the petitioner “provided suf-
ficient proof of a medical theory of causation,” 
and explained in part that “[i]t is precisely be-
cause individuals experience adverse reactions to 
safe vaccines on rare occasions that Congress 
created the Vaccine Program.” It is possible, for 
example, that a weaker statistical inference (Sec-
tion 4.2) might combine with a policy objective 
to produce a persuasive argument. 

5.3 Medical or Scientific Studies as Basis 
In vaccine decisions, it is often the case that ar-
guments are based upon medical or scientific 
studies, either published in medical or scientific 
journals or reported in medical treatises.  For 
example, in Stewart (pp. 38-39), the special mas-
ter relied in part on medical literature reporting a 
connection between the hepatitis A virus and 
cerebellar ataxia, in finding for the petitioner in a 
case involving hepatitis A vaccine and the same 
adverse medical condition. On the other hand, in 
Meyers (pp. 12-14), the special master refused to 
credit an expert opinion that was based on arti-
cles and reports that failed to address the relevant 
vaccine or injuries in the case. And in Werderitsh 
(p. 43), the special master was not persuaded by 
an article whose authors admitted that their study 
was small and its statistical power was reduced. 

5.4 Case Reports as Basis 
A case report is a descriptive study of a single 
patient’s experience (Cetrulo 2013). Such anec-
dotal evidence is extremely weak evidence of 
causation, due to the lack of a control group for 
testing comparisons (Kaye et al., 2014). Howev-
er, despite their obvious statistical shortcomings, 
case reports have been utilized by special masers 
in their reasoning.  In Roper (pp. 5-9), the special 
master explicitly addressed the inability of case 
reports to provide “scientific certainty” by noting 

5



that the petitioner’s burden is subject to a much 
lower “more probable than not” standard, and 
that accumulated circumstantial evidence of 
probability can become sufficient to prove causa-
tion. In Stewart (p. 36), the special master found 
the case report filed by the government to be rel-
evant for showing a plausible medical theory. 
And in Werderitsh (p. 46), the special master was 
convinced of causation in large part by the ex-
pert’s analogy with another vaccine case, and by 
the similarity of the timing pattern of the relevant 
symptoms in the two cases. 

5.5 Fact Testimony as Basis 
We mention here reliance upon the fact testimo-
ny of a lay witness as an evidentiary basis, alt-
hough this is less common when the issue is the 
existence of a medical theory. 

6 Patterns Based on Evidentiary Dis-
crepancies 

This section discusses a third approach to classi-
fying patterns of argumentation and reasoning, 
one that is based on the insight that in law, per-
haps more than in other domains involving fact-
finding, cases are often decided primarily by re-
solving inconsistencies or discrepancies in the 
evidence. When the parties or their expert wit-
nesses agree on a proposition, then the legal fact-
finder generally accepts that proposition as un-
contested fact, for purposes of the litigation. For 
example, in Cusati (pp. 11-14), the opposing par-
ties’ experts agreed on the fact that the MMR 
vaccine causes fever, and, in turn, that fever 
causes seizures. The special master utilized that 
consensus as part of the basis for concluding that 
the petitioner had met the prima facie standard 
with respect to causation. Similarly, in Casey (p. 
26), all experts agreed that the temporal sequence 
of petitioner’s symptoms was appropriate. The 
special master deemed that consensus entirely 
determinative as to the third condition of Althen 
and did not even engage in further temporal 
analysis. 

6.1 Credibility of Source: Expert vs. Expert 
When opposing expert witnesses disagree on 
some proposition or issue within their expertise, 
then one approach of the decision maker is to 
weigh the credibility of the experts, either indi-
vidually or in comparison. For example, in Saw-
yer (pp. 16-20), the special master found the ex-
pert to be so unreliable that this ultimately be-
came the main basis for the decision: “This is a 

case of unreliable expert testimony.” The special 
master devoted 4½ pages of his single-spaced 
decision to detailing his supporting reasoning. In 
Stewart (pp. 41-42), the special master looked to 
the lack of credibility of the government’s expert 
in reaching a finding for the petitioner. The ex-
pert was found to be “less than candid or credi-
ble” due to an insistence on an assumption that 
was directly contradicted by medical records, 
and his failure to take videotape evidence suffi-
ciently into account. And in Walton (p. 35), the 
special master discussed why she “found Dr. 
Charash [the petitioner’s expert] to be far less 
persuasive than Dr. Glezen or Dr. Brinker [ex-
perts for the government].” 

6.2 Credibility of Source: Inadequate Ex-
planation 

Sometimes the credibility of a source is predicat-
ed upon that source’s taking irrelevant factors 
into account, or failing to take relevant factors 
into account. In Walton (p. 35), for example, the 
petitioner’s expert “relied upon assertions of fact 
not supported by contemporaneous medical rec-
ords, failed to address the significance of nega-
tive cardiac testing, relied upon a temporal rela-
tionship between vaccination and onset of symp-
toms not established by the evidence, failed to 
demonstrate any support for his theories in re-
search, and failed to address the contrary re-
search evidence submitted by respondent’s ex-
perts.” 

7 Discussion: Developing a Type System 
for Arguments 

Our objective is to develop a type system for ar-
gument patterns using high-level categories such 
as those illustrated in Sections 4-6, and develop-
ing sub-types based on lower-level categories. 
The features of sub-categories that are important 
are those that help to identify arguments that 
were successful or unsuccessful in the vaccine 
cases. For example, under the category of medi-
cal or scientific studies as basis (see Section 5.3 
above), a sub-category might be studies that re-
port negative results (no evidence of a statistical-
ly significant causal relationship), and important 
features might include sample size and statistical 
power (see Werderitsh, p. 43). In developing a 
type system, we have formulated several work-
ing hypotheses from the approaches and exam-
ples discussed above. 

First, it might be difficult to construct a well-
defined taxonomy for types of argument patterns 

6



in a specific legal domain. That is, it might not 
be feasible to devise a classification system un-
der which every argument instance would fit in 
one and only one category, even in principle. An 
argument instance might well fit under multiple 
categories. Moreover, this theoretical point is 
quite separate from the difficulty of devising a 
methodology for reliably and accurately placing 
each argument instance into the correct category. 

As a result, it might be more realistic to devel-
op a list of significant categories and features of 
arguments, and to score a profile for any particu-
lar argument instance on those categories and 
features. For example, an argument instance 
might involve a combination of attacking the 
credibility of a source through inadequate expla-
nation (Section 6.2), by relying on a scientific 
study (Section 5.3) while employing probabilistic 
reasoning (Seciton 4.2). Then, instead of an iden-
tity relation (two arguments being “the same 
type”), a fuzzier relation of similarity might be 
useful, computed as a function of the profile 
scores of two argument instances. 

Second, we cannot exclude the possibility that 
the optimal list of argument categories and fea-
tures might be in part a function of the task to be 
performed, and some a priori list might not be 
optimal for all uses. This is an empirical question 
that remains to be answered. 

Third, if it proves to be the case that the opti-
mal list of argument categories and features is 
both a function of the task to be performed and 
widely variant from domain area to domain area, 
then the most promising approach might be ma-
chine learning on training texts that have been 
only lightly parsed in standard ways. That is, a 
coarser-grained semantic markup (e.g., sentences 
or clauses tagged merely as “evidence” and 
“finding,” or “premise” and “conclusion”) might 
be less costly to achieve, might have higher in-
ter-annotator reliability, and might be entirely 
adequate for machine learning. In order to test 
this hypothesis, however, we still need to devel-
op an adequate annotation scheme and a gold 
standard corpus of argument patterns. 

Finally, once an adequate annotation scheme 
is developed, we will face the challenge of out-
come evaluation. Argument patterns may differ 
in weight with respect to the overall conclusion 
and ultimate outcome of the case.  For example, 
in the context of vaccine decisions, a finding that 
petitioner’s expert was entirely unreliable may 
singlehandedly support dismissal of the entire 
claim (see Sawyer, pp. 16-20). In addition, it is 
far from clear whether case reports alone can 

support a medical theory connecting the vaccine 
to the injury (see Roper, pp. 5-9; Stewart, p. 36). 
Thus, comparative research and assignment of 
weights to argument patterns may be useful. 

In addition to keeping these working hypothe-
ses in mind, when deciding upon the tentative 
adoption of any annotation scheme or type sys-
tem, we give consideration to: (1) the cost (in 
terms of both resources and risk of error) of 
manually applying the scheme to the number of 
legal documents needed to allow machine train-
ing and testing; (2) the feasibility of successfully 
automating the detection and annotation of new 
texts using the scheme; (3) the adequacy of the 
scheme as a means of performing various tasks, 
such as generating new arguments in new cases, 
or predicting ultimate case outcomes; and (4) the 
interoperability of the scheme with existing on-
tologies and datasets. Although many researchers 
have tested systems for automatically annotating 
legal texts (see references discussed in Section 
8), we believe that critical work remains to be 
done on empirically developing an annotation 
scheme that is adequate for representing natural 
language arguments in legal texts, for the pur-
pose of assisting in the generation of new argu-
ments in new cases. 

8 Prior Related Work 
Our strategic approach is both empirical and log-
ical in nature. Our approach is empirical because 
we consider it crucial to use a corpus of diverse 
and linguistically rich legal decisions to gain in-
sights into actual argument patterns. We also 
take the typical approach of logic in looking for 
patterns of successful and unsuccessful argument 
at a “local” level, in the relationships among 
premises and conclusions (the distinction be-
tween “local” and “global” is due to Mochales 
and Moens, 2011, pp. 3-8). Local argument pat-
terns (which frequently occur within a single 
paragraph) are distinguished from the global ar-
gument pattern that supports the ultimate deci-
sion on a claim (often the conclusion of an entire 
decision) (id.). We briefly mention here recent 
research bearing on our work. 

Mochales and Moens (2011, pp. 5-6; 2008, pp. 
12-14) annotated a corpus of 47 judicial deci-
sions from the European Court of Human Rights 
using a system of argumentation schemes devel-
oped by Walton (1996; Walton et al., 2008). 
They focused on “The Law” sections of the judi-
cial opinions, which discuss the arguments of the 
parties and the court’s reasons supporting its de-

7



cision. Thus, their focal point within the judicial 
decisions is similar to that in our study of the 
vaccine cases (factfinder reasoning) and their 
attention to the local argument patterns is similar 
to ours. One major difference might be that the 
reasoning in our judicial decisions usually rests 
heavily upon scientific and medical evidence, 
including expert opinions. 

Saravanan and Ravindran (2010, pp. 47-53, 
65-66) manually annotated sentences in a corpus 
of 200 decisions (approximately 16,000 sentenc-
es) from Indian courts using a “rhetorical” anno-
tation scheme containing 7 categories: “identify-
ing the case,” “establishing facts of the case,” 
“arguing the case,” “history of the case,” “argu-
ments (analysis),” “ratio decidendi (ratio of the 
decision),” and “final decision (disposal).” It is 
unclear how many of these rhetorical categories 
will play a role in defining useful local argument 
patterns in U.S. cases. 

Ashley and Brüninghaus (2009, pp. 132-43; 
Brüninghaus and Ashley 2005, pp. 65-67) inves-
tigated 146 cases involving trade secret misap-
propriation. “Squibs” of these cases (manually 
prepared textual descriptions of the case facts) 
contained sentences that were manually annotat-
ed with respect to being positive instances of 26 
factors (a positive instance was a sentence “from 
which it could be reasonably inferred” that the 
factor “applied in the case”). A “factor” is a cat-
egory of facts that helps to predict the case out-
come for either the plaintiff or the defendant – 
for example, Factor F4 represents the fact pattern 
in which the defendant entered into a non-
disclosure agreement with the plaintiff, and F4 
favors an ultimate decision for the plaintiff. 
Chorley and Bench-Capon (2005) supplemented 
these factors with “values,” in the context of 
building a “theory.” Wyner and Peters (2010) 
selected 39 of these cases and a limited number 
of base factors, and developed semantically sali-
ent terms and synonyms for these factors. Even 
assuming that case squibs retain the linguistic 
richness of the original documents and contain a 
sufficient number of negative instances (sentenc-
es that are irrelevant to argumentation), the goal 
of annotating sentences for factors is to predict 
the ultimate outcome in domain cases, and such 
factors may or may not be relevant to local ar-
gument patterns within the case. 

Biagioli et al. (2005), using a dataset of para-
graphs selected from Italian legislative texts, 
classified the paragraphs into eleven types of 
legislative “provision” (e.g., definition, obliga-
tion, prohibition, permission). Each type of pro-

vision takes various arguments – for example, 
the provision type “obligation” takes as argu-
ments the “addressee,” the “action,” and a “third-
party.” Such types of provisions might well ap-
pear in local argument patterns, which apply le-
gal rules to evidence in a particular case. 

Wyner et al. (2013, p. 167) annotated intellec-
tual property appellate cases using 32 annota-
tions, which were selected as being “those used 
in practice in the analysis of cases in law 
schools.” Annotation types ranged from “Judge 
Name” to “Legal Facts” (“the legally relevant 
facts of the case that are used in arguing the is-
sues”). While some of these annotation types 
might be relevant to local argument patterns, 
others probably are not. 

 

9 Conclusion 
We have reported the preliminary results of our 
efforts to develop an adequate type system or 
annotation scheme for marking up successful and 
unsuccessful patterns of argument in U.S. judi-
cial decisions. We are working from a corpus of 
vaccine-injury compensation cases that report 
factfinding about causation, based on both scien-
tific and non-scientific evidence and reasoning. 
We have summarized and illustrated the patterns 
of reasoning we are finding, and have discussed 
our strategy for future research. What seems 
clear is that the task of developing an adequate 
type or annotation system is both difficult and 
important. Without an adequate and operational 
type system, we are unlikely to reach consensus 
on argument corpora that can function as a gold 
standard, or to make robust and useful progress 
on automating the annotation of judicial deci-
sions for argumentation. 

References 
Althen v. Secretary of Health and Human Services, 

418 F.3d 1274 (Fed.Cir. 2005). 

Ashley Kevin D., and Stefanie Brüninghaus. 2009. 
Automatically classifying texts and predicting out-
comes. Artificial Intelligence and Law 17:125-165. 

Ashley, Kevin D., and Vern R. Walker. 2013. From 
Information Retrieval (IR) to Argument Retrieval 
(AR) for Legal Cases: Report on a Baseline Study. 
Proceedings of the 26th International Conference 
on Legal Knowledge and Information Systems 
(JURIX 2013) (Kevin D. Ashley, ed.): 29-38. 

Biagioli, C., E. Francesconi, A. Passerini, S. Mon-
temagni, and C. Soria. 2005. Automatic semantics 
extraction in law documents. Proceedings of tenth 

8



international conference on artificial intelligence 
and law (ICAIL-05): 133-40. ACM: New York. 

Brüninghaus, Stefanie, and Kevin D. Ashley. 2005. 
Generating Legal Arguments and Predictions from 
Case Texts. Proceedings of tenth international 
conference on artificial intelligence and law 
(ICAIL-05): 65-74. ACM: New York. 

Casey v. Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
No. 97-612V (Office of Special Masters, United 
States Court of Federal Claims, December 12, 
2005). 

Cetrulo, Lawrence G. 2013. Case Reports. Toxic Torts 
Litigation Guide 1: §5:33. Westlaw, Thomson Reu-
ters. 

Chorley, Alison, and Trevor Bench-Capon. 2005. An 
empirical investigation of reasoning with legal cas-
es through theory construction and application. Ar-
tificial Intelligence and Law 13:323-371. 

Copi, Irving M., and Carl Cohen. 1998. Introduction 
to Logic (Tenth Edition). Prentice Hall, Upper 
Saddle River, New Jersey. 

Cross, Frank B., James F. Spriggs II, Timothy R. 
Johnson, and Paul J. Wahlbeck. 2010. Citations in 
the U.S. Supreme Court: An Empirical Study of 
Their Use and Significance. University of Illinois 
Law Review 2010: 489-575. 

Cusati v. Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
No. 99-0492V (Office of Special Masters, United 
States Court of Federal Claims, September 22, 
2005). 

Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 
U.S. 579 (1993). 

Grant v. Secretary of the Department of Health and 
Human Services, 956 F.2d 1144 (Fed. Cir. 1992). 

Kaye, David H., David E. Bernstein, and Jennifer L. 
Mnookin. 2014. Types of Causal Studies. The New 
Wigmore: A Treatise on Evidence: Expert Evi-
dence §12.5.1. CCH Incorporated, Aspen Publish-
ers. 

Knudsen v. Secretary of the Department of Health and 
Human Services, 35 F.3d 543 (Fed. Cir. 1994). 

Levi, Edward H. 1949. An Introduction to Legal Rea-
soning. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 
Illinois. 

Meyers v. Secretary of the Department of Health and 
Human Services, No. 04-1771V (Office of Special 
Masters, United States Court of Federal Claims, 
May 22, 2006). 

Mochales, Raquel, and Marie-Francine Moens. 2008. 
Study on the Structure of Argumentation in Case 
Law. Legal Knowledge and Information Systems 
(Jurix 2008) (E. Francesconi, G. Sartor, D. 
Tiscornia, eds.): 11-20. IOS Press. 

Mochales, Raquel, and Marie-Francine Moens. 2011. 
Argumentation mining. Artificial Intelligence and 
Law 19:1-22. 

Roper v. Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
No. 00-407V (Office of Special Masters, United 
States Court of Federal Claims, December 9, 
2005). 

Saravanan, M., and B. Ravindran. 2010. Identification 
of Rhetorical Roles for Segmentation and Summa-
rization of a Legal Judgment. Artificial Intelligence 
and Law 18: 45-76. 

Sawyer v. Secretary of the Department of Health and 
Human Services, No. 03-2524V (Office of Special 
Masters, United States Court of Federal Claims, 
June 22, 2006). 

Stewart v. Secretary of the Department of Health and 
Human Services, No. 06-287V (Office of Special 
Masters, United States Court of Federal Claims, 
March 19, 2007). 

Thomas v. Secretary of the Department of Health and 
Human Services, No. 01-645V (Office of Special 
Masters, United States Court of Federal Claims, 
January 23, 2007). 

Walker, Vern R. 1996. Preponderance, Probability 
and Warranted Factfinding. Brooklyn Law Review 
62: 1075-1136. 

Walker, Vern R. 2003. Epistemic and Non-epistemic 
Aspects of the Factfinding Process in Law. Ameri-
can Philosophical Association Newsletter on Law 
and Philosophy 3(1): 132-136. 

Walker, Vern R. 2007. A default-logic paradigm for 
legal fact-finding. Jurimetrics 47: 193-243. 

Walker, Vern R. 2009. Designing factfinding for 
cross-border healthcare. Opinio Juris in Compara-
tione 3, paper n. 1, 1-40. 

Walker, Vern R., Nathaniel Carie, Courtney C. 
DeWitt, and Eric Lesh. 2011. A framework for the 
extraction and modeling of fact-finding reasoning 
from legal decisions: lessons from the Vac-
cine/Injury Project Corpus. Artificial Intelligence 
and Law 19:291-331. 

Walker, Vern R., Chan Hee Park, Philip H. Hwang, 
Arthur John, Evgeny I. Krasnov and Keith Lang-
lais. 2013. A process approach to inferences of 
causation: empirical research from vaccine cases in 
the USA. Law, Probability and Risk 12(3-4): 189-
205. 

Walton v. Secretary of the Department of Health and 
Human Services, No. 04-503V (Office of Special 
Masters, United States Court of Federal Claims, 
April 30, 2007). 

9



Walton, Douglas N. 1996. Argumentation Schemes 
for Presumptive Reasoning. Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Publishers, Mahwah, New Jersey. 

Walton, Douglas, Chris Reed, and Fabrizio Macagno. 
2008. Argumentation Schemes. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Werderitsh v. Secretary of the Department of Health 
and Human Services, No. 99-319V (Office of Spe-
cial Masters, United States Court of Federal 
Claims, May 26, 2006). 

Wolfe v. Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
No. 05-0878V (Office of Special Masters, United 
States Court of Federal Claims, November 9, 
2006). 

Wyner, Adam, and Wim Peters. 2010. Lexical Se-
mantics and Expert Legal Knowledge towards the 
Identification of Legal Case Factors. Legal 
Knowledge and Information Systems (Jurix 2010) 
(Radboud G.F. Winkels, ed.): 127-36. IOS Press. 

Wyner, Adam, Wim Peters, and Daniel Katz. 2013. A 
Case Study on Legal Case Annotation. Proceed-
ings of the 26th International Conference on Legal 
Knowledge and Information Systems (JURIX 2013) 
(Kevin D. Ashley, ed.): 165-74. 

10


