



















































Black-box integration of heterogeneous bilingual resources into an interactive translation system


Workshop on Humans and Computer-assisted Translation, pages 57–65,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26 April 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Black-box integration of heterogeneous bilingual resources into an
interactive translation system

Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz
japerez@dlsi.ua.es

Daniel Torregrosa
dtr5@alu.ua.es

Departament de Llenguatges i Sistemes Informàtics
Universitat d’Alacant, Spain

Mikel L. Forcada
mlf@dlsi.ua.es

Abstract

The objective of interactive translation
prediction (ITP) is to assist human trans-
lators in the translation of texts by making
context-based computer-generated sug-
gestions as they type. Most of the ITP
systems in literature are strongly coupled
with a statistical machine translation sys-
tem that is conveniently adapted to provide
the suggestions. In this paper, however,
we propose a resource-agnostic approach
in which the suggestions are obtained from
any bilingual resource (a machine transla-
tion system, a translation memory, a bilin-
gual dictionary, etc.) that provides target-
language equivalents for source-language
segments. These bilingual resources are
considered to be black boxes and do not
need to be adapted to the peculiarities of
the ITP system. Our evaluation shows
that savings of up to 85% can be theoreti-
cally achieved in the number of keystrokes
when using our novel approach. Prelim-
inary user trials indicate that these bene-
fits can be partly transferred to real-world
computer-assisted translation interfaces.

1 Introduction

Translation technologies are frequently used to
assist human translators. Common approaches
consider machine translation (MT) (Hutchins and
Somers, 1992) or translation memories (Somers,
2003) to be systems that produce a first (and usu-
ally incorrect) prototype of the translation which
is then edited by the human translator in order
to produce a target-language text that is adequate
for publishing. In both situations, the suggestion
may be considered as a source of inspiration by
the human translators, who will assemble the final
translation by on some occasions accepting and re-

arranging parts of the proposal, or on others in-
troducing their own words when an appropriate
equivalent is not included or is not found in the
suggestion. The whole process may be viewed as a
negotiation between the wordings that form in the
translator’s mind and wordings that already appear
in the suggestion. In both approaches the sugges-
tion is generated once, usually before starting to
manually translate every new sentence.

The approach introduced in this paper, however,
follows a different path, which is strongly con-
nected to the field of interactive translation pre-
diction1 (ITP), a research field which explores a
kind of computer-assisted translation framework
whose aim is to interactively provide users with
suggestions at every step during the translation
process.2 Most works in the field of ITP have fo-
cused on statistical MT systems as the only source
of translations considered to obtain the sugges-
tions, but our study aims to determine how bilin-
gual resources of any kind can be accommodated
into an interoperable ITP. To obtain the sugges-
tions, the source-language sentence to be trans-
lated is split up into many different (and possi-
bly overlapping) word segments of up to a given
length, and a translation for each segment is ob-
tained by using a bilingual resource which is able
to deliver one or more target-language equivalents
for a particular source-language segment. These
equivalents will be the source of the proposals
which will be offered to the human translator dur-
ing the translation process. In principle, the nature
of these bilingual resources is not restricted: in

1The name interactive translation prediction has recently
been proposed (Alabau et al., 2013) for this research field,
which has historically been referred to as target-text medi-
ated interactive MT (Foster et al., 1997) or simply interactive
MT (Barrachina et al., 2009). Despite the traditional term, we
consider the recent one to be more suitable for our approach
since it is not exclusively based on MT.

2The interaction can be compared to that of word comple-
tion mechanisms in input text boxes and word processors.

57



this paper we shall explore the use of an MT sys-
tem, but they may also consist of translation mem-
ories, dictionaries, catalogues of bilingual phrases,
or a combination of heterogeneous resources. As
stated above, MT or translation memories cannot
usually deliver appropriate translations at the sen-
tence level, but their proposals usually contain ac-
ceptable segments that do not cover the whole sen-
tence but which can be accepted by the user to as-
semble a good translation, thus saving keystrokes,
mouse actions3 and, possibly, time.

The remainder of the paper is organised as fol-
lows. After reviewing the state-of-the-art in ITP
in Section 2, we outline the main differences be-
tween our proposal and those found in literature in
Section 3. Our method for generating translation
suggestions from bilingual resources is formally
presented in Section 4. We then introduce in Sec-
tion 5 our experimental set-up and show the results
of two evaluations: one that is fully automatic and
another consisting of a user trial involving human
evaluators. Finally, we discuss the results and pro-
pose future lines of research in Section 6.

2 Related work

The systems which have most significantly con-
tributed to the field of ITP are those built in the
pioneering TransType project (Foster et al., 1997;
Langlais et al., 2000), and its continuation, the
TransType2 project (Macklovitch, 2006). These
systems observe the current partial translation al-
ready typed by the user and, by exploiting an
embedded statistical MT engine, propose one or
more completions that are compatible with the
sentence prefix entered by the user. Various mod-
els were considered for the underlying MT system,
including alignment templates, phrase-based mod-
els, and stochastic finite-state transducers (Bar-
rachina et al., 2009). The proposals offered may
range from one or several words, to a comple-
tion of the remainder of the target sentence. An
automatic best-scenario evaluation with training
and evaluation corpora belonging to the same do-
main (Barrachina et al., 2009) showed that it might
theoretically be possible to use only 20–25% of
the keystrokes in comparison with the unassisted
translation for English–Spanish translation (both
directions) and around 45% for English–French
and English–German. The results of the user tri-

3In the case of touch devices, other means of interaction
(such as gestures) may exist.

als (Macklovitch, 2006) showed gains in produc-
tivity (measured in number of words translated per
hour) of around 15–20%, but despite this, the hu-
man translators were not satisfied with the system,
principally because they had to correct the same
errors in the proposals over and over again (the
models in the underlying statistical MT system re-
mained unchanged during the translation process).

A number of projects continued the research
where TransType2 had left off. Caitra (Koehn,
2009) is an ITP tool which uses both the phrase
table and the decoder of a statistical MT sys-
tem to generate suggestions; although individ-
ual results vary, translators are generally fastest
with post-editing and obtain the highest trans-
lation performance when combining post-editing
and ITP in the same interface (Koehn and Haddow,
2009). Researchers at the Universitat Politècnica
de València have also made significant improve-
ments to the TransType2 system such as online
learning techniques with which to adaptively gen-
erate better proposals from user feedback (Ortiz-
Martı́nez et al., 2011), phrase-table smoothing to
cope with segments in the partially typed transla-
tion which cannot be generated with the phrases
collected during training (Ortiz-Martı́nez, 2011),
or multimodal interfaces (Alabau et al., 2010).
The objective of the CASMACAT project (Alabau
et al., 2013), which is under active development,
is to develop new types of assistance along all
these lines. Finally, commercial translation mem-
ory systems have also recently started to introduce
ITP as one of their basic features (see, for exam-
ple, SDL Trados AutoSuggest4).

3 Innovative nature of our proposal

Common to most of the approaches discussed
above is the fact that the underlying translation en-
gine needs to be a glass-box resource, that is, a
resource whose behaviour is modified to meet the
ITP system needs. The approaches rely on a statis-
tical MT (Koehn, 2010) system which is adapted
to provide the list of n-best completions for the
remainder of the sentence, given the current sen-
tence prefix already introduced by the user; in or-
der to meet the resulting time constraints, the de-
coder of the statistical MT system cannot be exe-
cuted after each keystroke and techniques to com-
pute the search graph once and then reuse it have
been proposed (Bender et al., 2005). However, it

4http://www.translationzone.com/

58



Figure 1: Screenshot of the web interface of our
ITP tool showing a translation in progress with
some suggestions being offered. The top text box
contains the source sentence, whereas users type
the translation into the bottom box.

may occur that an ITP system has access to bilin-
gual resources which cannot produce a comple-
tion for the rest of the target-language sentence
from a given sentence prefix, but are able to sup-
ply the translation of a particular source-language
segment. This may be owing to either intrinsic
reasons inherent to the type of resource being used
(for example, a bilingual dictionary can only trans-
late single words or short multi-word units) or ex-
trinsic reasons (for example, an MT system avail-
able through a third-party web service cannot be
instructed to continue a partial translation).

We propose a black-box treatment of the bilin-
gual resources in contrast to the glass-box ap-
proaches found in literature. Unlike them, ac-
cess to the inner details of the translation system
is not necessary; this maintains coupling between
the ITP tool and the underlying system to a mini-
mum and provides the opportunity to incorporate
additional sources of bilingual information beyond
purposely-designed statistical MT systems. More-
over, suggestions are computed once at the start
and not after each keystroke, which results in a
more effective interaction with the user in execu-
tion environments with limited resources.

In this paper, we shall focus on a black-box MT
system (Forcada et al., 2011), but we have also be-
gun to explore the integration of other bilingual re-
sources (such as translation memories, dictionar-
ies, catalogues of bilingual phrases, or even a com-
bination of heterogeneous resources). Our system
has a web interface similar to that in the projects
discussed in Section 2: users freely type the trans-
lation of the source sentence, and are offered sug-

gestions on the fly in a drop-down list with items
based on the current prefix, although this prefix
will correspond to the first characters of the word
currently being typed and not to the part of the
target sentence already entered; users may accept
these suggestions (using cursor keys, the mouse
or specific hot keys) or ignore them and continue
typing. A screenshot of the interface is shown in
Figure 1. Despite the cognitive load inherent to
any predictive interface, the interface is easy and
intuitive to use, even for inexperienced users.

4 Method

Our method starts by splitting the source-language
sentence S up into all the (possibly overlapping)
segments of length l ∈ [1, L], where L is the max-
imum source segment length measured in words.
The resulting segments are then translated by
means of a bilingual resource (or combinations
thereof). The set of potential proposals PS for
sentence S is made up of pairs comprising the
translation of each segment and the position in the
input sentence of the first word of the correspond-
ing source-language segment. See Table 1 for an
example of the set PS obtained in an English to
Spanish translation task when using L = 3. We
shall represent the i-th suggestion as pi, its target-
language segment as t(pi) and its corresponding
source-language word position as σ(pi). Suitable
values for L will depend on the bilingual resource:
on the one hand, we expect higher values of L
to be useful for high-quality MT systems, such
as those translating between closely related lan-
guages, since adequate translations may stretch to
a relatively large number of words; on the other
hand, L should be kept small for resources such
as dictionaries or low-quality MT systems whose
translations quickly deteriorate as the length of the
input segment increases.

Let PSC (ŵ, j) be the subset of P
S including the

compatible suggestions which can be offered to
the user after typing ŵ as the prefix of the j-th
word in the translated sentence T . The elements
of PSC (ŵ, j) are determined by considering only
those suggestions in PS that have the already-
typed word prefix as their own prefix:

PSC (ŵ, j) = {pi ∈ PS : ŵ ∈ Prefix(t(pi))}
For example, in the case of the translation of the

English sentence in Table 1, if the user types an
M, the set of compatible suggestions PSC (“M”, 1)

59



Start position Source segment Suggestion
1 My (Mi,1)
1 My tailor (Mi sastre,1)
1 My tailor is (Mi sastre es,1)
2 tailor (sastre,2)
2 tailor is (sastre es,2)
2 tailor is healthy (sastre está sano,2)
3 is (es,3)
3 is healthy (está sano,3)
4 healthy (sano,4)

Table 1: Source-language segments and potential
suggestions PS when translating the sentence S =
“My tailor is healthy” into Spanish with L = 3.

will contain the suggestions with target-language
segments Mi, Mi sastre and Mi sastre es, since
they are the only proposals in PS starting with
an M. The size of PSC is dependent on the value
of L, but compatible proposals may also origi-
nate from translations of source segments start-
ing at different positions in the input sentence (for
example, the set PSC after the user types an s in
the same translation will contain proposals starting
with sastre and sano). More elaborated strategies
are consequently necessary to further reduce the
number of proposals, since we do not expect users
to tolerate lists with more than a few suggestions.
In 4.1 we propose the use of a ranking strategy to
sort the elements of PSC in such a way that it is pos-
sible to predict which of them are most suitable to
be offered to the user. However, we first elaborate
on the issue of compatible suggestions originating
from different source positions.

The number of source positions that generate
compatible suggestions also depends on the spe-
cific word prefix; for example, when users type
the letter d when translating a long sentence into
Spanish, they will probably obtain a significant
number of suggestions starting with de5 originat-
ing from segments located in different source po-
sitions. We measured the number of different po-
sitions that provide compatible suggestions when
the first characters of the current word are typed
during an automatic evaluation of our system (see
Section 5); for instance, when translating from En-
glish to Spanish, the average is 1.46 after typing b,
whereas it is 4.73 after typing d. Figure 2 shows
the average number of different positions for all
the letters as users type longer prefixes. Obviously,
only suggestions originating from the part of the
source sentence currently being translated may be

5The preposition de is notably frequent in Spanish texts.

 1

 1.5

 2

 2.5

 3

 3.5

 4

 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10

A
v
e

ra
g

e
 n

u
m

b
e

r 
o

f 
d

if
fe

re
n

t 
s
o

u
rc

e
 p

o
s
it
io

n
s

Word prefix length

ca−es

en−es

Figure 2: Average number, for all the letters in
the alphabet, of different source positions in the
source sentence providing compatible suggestions
versus length in characters of the typed prefix of
the current target word. A system with L = 4,
M = ∞ and no deletion of selected suggestions
(see Section 4) was used to obtain the points in
this graph. Data is shown for the English–Spanish
(en-es) and Catalan–Spanish (es-ca) corpora used
in the automatic experiments (see Section 5).

useful, but this position is difficult to determine
unambiguously. The degree of success that can be
achieved in this task will be explored in greater
depth in future work (see Section 6); a simple ap-
proximation is presented in the following section.

4.1 Ranking suggestions

In the absence of a strategy with which to rank
the suggestions in PSC (ŵ, j) which we are cur-
rently working on, in this paper we explore a naı̈ve
distance-based approach which is based solely on
the position j: suggestions pi whose source posi-
tion σ(pi) is closer6 to j are prioritised. For ex-
ample, in the case of the translation in Table 1, if
the user types Mi s, suggestions starting with sas-
tre will be ranked before those starting with sano.
This linearity assumption can be seen as a rough
attempt to determine the part of the input sentence
that is currently being translated; more sophisti-
cated approaches will be considered in future work
(see Section 6). However, notice that according to
Figure 2, the average number of different source
positions of the compatible segments quickly be-
comes closer to 1 when the length of the word
prefix is greater than 2; it is therefore expected
that the role played by the distance-based ranker
will soon decrease as the user continues typing the

6Ties are broken at random.

60



 0

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

0 1 2 3-4 5-7 8-10 11-20    21-300

P
e

rc
e

n
ta

g
e

 o
f 

s
u

g
g

e
s
ti
o

n
s

Source-target distance

Figure 3: Distribution of the absolute differences
(measured in words) between source position of
accepted suggestions versus position in the target
sentence in which they were selected for the case
of Spanish–English translation. L = 4, M = ∞
and no deletion of selected suggestions (see Sec-
tion 4) was used to obtain this graph.

current word (although the position of a valid sug-
gestion is far from j, it will probably be the only
compatible proposal, and will consequently be se-
lected to be offered).

Translation between closely related languages
is often monotonic and most reorderings are local;
our distance-based ranking is therefore expected
to produce good results for this kind of language
pairs. Nevertheless, we cannot in principle ex-
pect this ranker to work reasonably well on un-
related languages with different overall grammat-
ical structures (e.g., when translating a language
with a verb–subject–object order into another one
with a subject–verb–object typology). The graph
in Figure 3 represents the distribution of the dis-
tances between the source positions of all the
accepted suggestions in our automatic Spanish–
English evaluation (see Section 5) versus the po-
sition in the target sentence of the word for which
they were selected. The Pearson correlation coef-
ficient between both positions is very high (0.93),
which supports the idea that our naı̈ve distance-
based ranking may work reasonably well for the
languages used in our experiments.7

Let M be the maximum number of sugges-
tions that will eventually be offered to the human
translator; the ordered list of suggestions offered
to the user PSO(ŵ, j) is made up of a subset of
the elements in PSC (ŵ, j) and restricted so that

7Although not shown here, similar results are obtained for
the Catalan–Spanish pair.

|PSO(ŵ, j)| ≤ M . Note that for the interface to
be friendly, the value of M should be kept small
and, as a result of this, it could easily occur that all
the suggestions offered are obtained starting at the
same source position (that closest to the current
target position) although better suggestions from
different positions exist. In order to mitigate the
impact of this, in this paper we propose to restrict
the number of proposals originating from a par-
ticular source position to two (the longest and the
shortest, in this order, which are compatible with
the typed word prefix) as long as different compat-
ible suggestions originating from a different posi-
tion exist. The longest is offered in the hope that
it will be correct and will contribute towards sav-
ing a lot of keystrokes; however, since the qual-
ity of machine translations usually degrades with
the length of the input segment (see Figure 4), the
shortest is also offered. This must, however, be
researched in more depth.

4.2 Deleting dispensable suggestions

Suggestions that have been accepted by the user
should not be proposed again. In this work, a
selected suggestion pi will be removed from PS

if no other suggestion pj with the same target-
language text t(pi) and different source position
σ(pj) exists in PS . In this case, those suggestions
obtained from the source position σ(pi) are also
removed from PS . Deleting dispensable sugges-
tions allows other useful suggestions to be selected
by the ranker in order to be offered.

5 Experimental setup and results

A fully automatic evaluation and a user trial in-
volving human evaluators were conducted. As
previously stated in Section 3, the only bilingual
resource considered in this paper is an MT system;
in particular, the Spanish to Catalan and English to
Spanish rule-based MT systems in the free/open-
source platform Apertium8 (Forcada et al., 2011).

5.1 Evaluation metrics

The performance of our system has been measured
by using two metrics: keystroke ratio (KSR) and
acceptable suggestion ratio (ASR). On the one
hand, the KSR is the ratio between the number
of keystrokes and the length of the translated sen-

8Revision 44632 of the Apertium repository at http://svn.
code.sf.net/p/apertium/svn/trunk/ was used for the engine and
linguistic data in these experiments.

61



tence (Langlais et al., 2000). A lower KSR repre-
sents a greater saving in keystrokes. In our exper-
iments, selecting a suggestion has the same cost
as pressing one key. On the other hand, the ASR
measures the percentage of times that at least one
of the suggestions in a non-empty PSO is selected.
If users frequently receive suggestion lists contain-
ing no acceptable proposals, they will stop con-
sulting the list and translate without assistance; it
is therefore important to measure the number of
times the user is needlessly bothered.

5.2 Automatic evaluation
In order to determine optimal values for the dif-
ferent parameters of our system and to obtain an
idea of the best results attainable, a number of au-
tomatic tests were conducted. The approach fol-
lowed is identical to that described by Langlais et
al. (2000), in which a parallel corpus with pairs
of sentences was used, each pair consisting of a
sentence S in the source language and a reference
translation T in the target language. In the context
of our automatic evaluation, S is used as the input
sentence to be translated and T is considered as the
target output sentence a user is supposed to have in
mind and stick to while typing. The longest sug-
gestion in PSO which concatenated to the already
typed text results in a new prefix of T is always
used. If PSO contains no suggestions at a particular
point, then the system continues typing according
to T . As the algorithm proceeds in a left-to-right
longest-match greedy fashion, there is no guaran-
tee that the best possible results will be obtained,
but they will be a good approximation.9 For exam-
ple, for T = Mi coche está averiado, partial output
translation Mi c, and PSO(“c”, 2) = {coche, coche
es, coche está roto}, our automatic evaluation sys-
tem will proceed as follows: it will first discard
coche está roto, because Mi coche está roto is not
a prefix of T ; it will then discard coche es, be-
cause although Mi coche es is a prefix of T , it is
not a prefix when a blank is added after it; finally,
it will select coche, because Mi coche followed by
a blank is a prefix of T and no longer suggestion
that also satisfies these conditions exists.

Two different corpora were used for the au-
tomatic evaluation: for English–Spanish (en-es),
a combination of sentences from all the editions
of DGT-TM (Steinberger et al., 2012) released

9Note that real users could also decide to select sugges-
tions with small errors and fix them, but neither this nor other
behaviours are considered in our automatic evaluation.

 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

 1  2  3  4  5  6  7

K
S

R
/A

S
R

l

ca-es KSR

en-es KSR

ca-es ASR

en-es ASR

Figure 4: Automatically evaluated KSR versus
exact length of the segments l. Longer sugges-
tions are much more useful for Spanish–Catalan
(closely related languages) than for English–
Spanish: the KSR for l = 7 is still a little better
than that for l = 1 for Catalan–Spanish, but no-
ticeably worse for English–Spanish. ASR quickly
degrades as l increases.

in 2004–2011 (15 250 sentences; 163 196 words
in English; 190 448 in Spanish) was used; for
Catalan–Spanish (ca-es), a collection of news
items from El Periódico de Catalunya10 (15 000
sentences; 307 095 words in Catalan; 294 488 in
Spanish) was used.

5.3 Results of the automatic evaluation

The objective of the automatic evaluation was to
estimate the influence of the language pair and the
parameters L and M .11

Maximum length of segments. We first tested
to what extent each different segment length l con-
tributes separately to the KSR. Note that l cor-
responds in this case to the exact length of the
source segments and not to the longest one (as rep-
resented by L). M = ∞ is used in all the ex-
periments in this section. Figure 4 shows that the
KSR becomes worse for greater values of l, which
can be explained by the fact that longer machine
translations often contain more errors than shorter
ones. In the case of Catalan–Spanish, the worst
KSR value is for l = 1 since adequate suggestions
will usually consist of few characters and selecting
them will barely contribute to keystroke reduction.

10http://www.elperiodico.cat/ca/
1195% confidence intervals of the average values presented

in this section were calculated using the Student’s t-test. The
size of the evaluation corpora signifies that the resulting con-
fidence intervals are so small that they would have been im-
perceptible on the graphs and have therefore been omitted.

62



 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

 1  2  3  4  5  6  7

K
S

R
/A

S
R

L

ca-es KSR

en-es KSR

ca-es ASR

en-es ASR

Figure 5: Automatically evaluated KSR/ASR ver-
sus maximum length of the segments L. As L in-
creases, the KSR improves, but the ASR is nega-
tively affected.

Combining different segment lengths up to length
L provides better values of KSR than using only
a fixed value l = L (compare Figures 4 and 5).
Figure 5 shows an estimation of the best results
our method could attain if all the compatible sug-
gestions in PSC were included in P

S
O : values be-

tween 0.3 and 0.4 for the Catalan–Spanish KSR
and between 0.7 and 0.8 for the English–Spanish
KSR. The notable difference may be explained
by the fact that Apertium performance is much
better (Forcada et al., 2011) for Catalan–Spanish
(word error rates of around 15%) than for English–
Spanish (word error rates of around 70%).

Maximum number of suggestions offered. We
evaluated the influence of the maximum size M
of the list of suggestions offered to the user and,
hence, the impact of the distance-based ranker.
L = 4 was used, as this value provides good re-
sults for both language pairs (see Figure 5). As
expected (see Figure 6), the distance-based rank-
ing strategy works remarkably well (values for
KSR and ASR from M = 4 are similar to those
obtained with M = ∞) for closely related lan-
guages (Catalan–Spanish), in which translations
are usually monotonic and reorderings seldom oc-
cur. However, the empirical results also show (see
again Figure 6) that it also works well for language
pairs (English–Spanish) in which long-distance re-
orderings exist, at least when compared to the re-
sults without ranking (M =∞).

5.4 Human evaluation

A preliminary evaluation of a real use of our sys-
tem involving 8 human non-professional trans-

 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

∞ 1  2  3  4  5

K
S

R
/A

S
R

M

ca-es KSR

en-es KSR

ca-es ASR

en-es ASR

Figure 6: Automatically evaluated KSR/ASR ver-
sus maximum number M of suggestions offered.
Although the results with M = 1 (only one sug-
gestion offered) are considerably worse, for higher
values of M they quickly approach the results ob-
tained when no ranker was used and all the com-
patible suggestions were offered (M =∞).

lators (volunteer computer science students) was
also conducted. All the users were Spanish na-
tive speakers who understood Catalan, but with no
experience with ITP systems. As the results of the
automatic evaluation show that the performance of
the Apertium English–Spanish MT system nega-
tively affects our ITP system (see Section 5), we
decided to focus on the Catalan–Spanish scenario.
A set of 10 sentences in Catalan were randomly
extracted from the same corpus used in the auto-
matic evaluation. The test was designed to take
around 20 minutes. The evaluators were allowed
to practise with a couple of sentences before start-
ing the trial. After completing the test, they were
surveyed about the usefulness of the system. Our
ITP system was used with L = M = 4.

5.5 Results of the human evaluation

The users were divided into two groups: users
1–4 translated sentences 1–5 assisted by our ITP
tool and sentences 6–10 with no assistance, while
users 5–8 translated sentences 1–5 with no assis-
tance and sentences 6–10 assisted by the tool. The
KSR and translation times for each user are shown
in Table 2. This table also includes KSR′, which
is the value of KSR obtained by running our au-
tomatic evaluator (see Section 5.2) using the sen-
tences entered by each user as the reference trans-
lations T ; this can be considered as an approxi-
mation to the best result achievable with the ITP
tool. All users attained KSRs that were notice-

63



User Sentences 1–5 Sentences 6–10
KSR Time KSR′ KSR Time KSR′

#1 0.49 136 0.22 1.11 137 0.23
#2 0.64 144 0.15 1.21 86 0.22
#3 0.63 209 0.22 1.09 112 0.21
#4 0.37 189 0.22 1.22 199 0.18
#5 1.10 145 0.28 0.37 102 0.15
#6 1.24 150 0.27 0.51 154 0.17
#7 1.15 178 0.30 0.64 147 0.17
#8 1.18 118 0.39 0.58 93 0.15

Table 2: KSR, translation times (seconds) and
KSR′ (see main text) for each of the users in the
evaluation. Values in bold correspond to the trans-
lations with assistance from our ITP system.

ably lower than 1 for the assisted translations and
slightly higher than 1 when translating without the
ITP system; the former, however, are often worse
than the KSR values obtained in the automatic
evaluation which are around 0.4 for L = M = 4
(see Figure 6). Moreover, the values for KSR′

show that even better values for KSR could the-
oretically be attained for these sentences; note,
however, that the reference translations in this case
were precisely generated by accepting suggestions
generated by Apertium.

The users were surveyed to evaluate the follow-
ing statements in the range from 1 (complete dis-
agreement) to 5 (complete agreement): the inter-
face is easy to use; I would use a tool like this in
future translations; I have found the suggestions
useful; and the tool has allowed me to translate
faster. The median of the responses to the first two
questions was 5, whereas the median for the two
last questions was 4.5. It was evident that the eval-
uators perceived that the ITP system had helped
them to translate faster, although the time values
in Table 2 seem to suggest the opposite. Finally,
note that this was a small-scale human evaluation
and that sounder results will have to be collected
under different conditions by increasing the num-
ber of users, sentences and languages in the test.

6 Discussion and future work

The automatic evaluation of our ITP system has
provided an estimation of its potential for human
translators. Note, however, that this evaluation
strategy is based on a greedy algorithm which may
not adequately reproduce the way in which a hu-
man translator might usually perform the task. Ac-
cording to the best results of our automatic exper-
iments, when a maximum of M = 4 suggestions

are offered and the system selects the longest one
that matches the reference translation, 25–65%
keystrokes could be saved depending on the lan-
guage pair. Moreover, 30–55% of the times that
a list of suggestions is offered, at least one of the
suggestions matches the target sentence.

Our preliminary human tests can be used to dis-
cern how well our system could perform, but a
more extensive evaluation is needed to explore the
influence of parameters, different kinds of users,
heterogeneous bilingual resources, new language
pairs, particular domains, different interfaces, etc.
in greater depth. A comparison with similar tools
in literature will also be carried out.

We plan to improve the ranking strategy shown
in Section 4.1 by automatically detecting the part
of the input sentence being translated at each mo-
ment so that segments that originate in those posi-
tions are prioritised. We intend to achieve this by
combining word alignment and distortion models.
The former will be used to determine the align-
ments between the last words introduced by the
user and the words in the input sentence;12 the lat-
ter will predict which source words will be trans-
lated next, partly by using information from the
alignment model.

The ITP system presented in this paper is im-
plemented in Java, except for the web interface,
which is written in HTML and JavaScript. The
Java code, however, has been designed in such a
way that it can be compiled into JavaScript with
the help of the Google Web Toolkit framework;13

and the same code can therefore be executed either
on the browser in JavaScript when human transla-
tors interact with the tool, or locally in Java when
performing the automatic evaluation. The entire
code of the application is available14 under a free
software license (GNU Affero General Public Li-
cense, version 3); this ensures the reproducibility
of the experiments and allows our ITP system to
be integrated into professional translation tools.

Acknowledgments. This work has been partly
funded by the Spanish Ministerio de Economı́a y
Competitividad through project TIN 2012-32615.

12On-the-fly, light alignment models have been proposed
which do not require parallel corpora and are based on the
translation of all the possible segments of the sentence with
the help of black-box bilingual resources (Esplà-Gomis et al.,
2012); these models would fit nicely into our ITP method.

13http://www.gwtproject.org/
14https://github.com/jaspock/forecat

64



References
Vicent Alabau, Daniel Ortiz-Martı́nez, Alberto San-

chis, and Francisco Casacuberta. 2010. Multimodal
interactive machine translation. In ICMI-MLMI ’10:
Proceedings of the 2010 International Conference
on Multimodal Interfaces.

Vicent Alabau, Ragnar Bonk, Christian Buck, Michael
Carl, Francisco Casacuberta, Mercedes Garcı́a-
Martı́nez, Jesús González-Rubio, Philipp Koehn,
Luis A. Leiva, Bartolomé Mesa-Lao, Daniel Or-
tiz, Herve Saint-Amand, Germán Sanchis-Trilles,
and Chara Tsoukala. 2013. CASMACAT: An
open source workbench for advanced computer
aided translation. Prague Bull. Math. Linguistics,
100:101–112.

Sergio Barrachina, Oliver Bender, Francisco Casacu-
berta, Jorge Civera, Elsa Cubel, Shahram Khadivi,
Antonio Lagarda, Hermann Ney, Jesús Tomás, En-
rique Vidal, and Juan-Miguel Vilar. 2009. Sta-
tistical approaches to computer-assisted translation.
Computational Linguistics, 35(1):3–28.

Oliver Bender, David Vilar, Richard Zens, and Her-
mann Ney. 2005. Comparison of generation strate-
gies for interactive machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of EAMT 2005 (10th Annual Conference of
the European Association for Machine Translation,
pages 30–40.

Miquel Esplà-Gomis, Felipe Sánchez-Martı́nez, and
Mikel L. Forcada. 2012. Using external sources of
bilingual information for on-the-fly word alignment.
Technical report, Departament de Llenguatges i Sis-
temes Informàtics, Universitat d’Alacant.

Mikel L Forcada, Mireia Ginestı́-Rosell, Jacob Nord-
falk, Jim O’Regan, Sergio Ortiz-Rojas, Juan An-
tonio Pérez-Ortiz, Felipe Sánchez-Martı́nez, Gema
Ramı́rez-Sánchez, and Francis M Tyers. 2011.
Apertium: a free/open-source platform for rule-
based machine translation. Machine Translation,
25(2):127–144.

George F. Foster, Pierre Isabelle, and Pierre Plam-
ondon. 1997. Target-text mediated interactive
machine translation. Machine Translation, 12(1-
2):175–194.

W. John Hutchins and Harold L. Somers. 1992. An in-
troduction to machine translation. Academic Press.

Philipp Koehn and Barry Haddow. 2009. Interactive
assistance to human translators using statistical ma-
chine translation methods. MT Summit XII.

Philipp Koehn. 2009. A web-based interactive com-
puter aided translation tool. In Proceedings of the
ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Software Demonstrations, pages
17–20.

Philipp Koehn. 2010. Statistical Machine Translation.
Cambridge University Press.

Philippe Langlais, Sébastien Sauvé, George Foster, El-
liott Macklovitch, and Guy Lapalme. 2000. Eval-
uation of TransType, a computer-aided translation
typing system: a comparison of a theoretical-and a
user-oriented evaluation procedures. In Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC),
page 8.

Elliott Macklovitch. 2006. TransType2: The last
word. In Proceedings of the 5th International Con-
ference on Languages Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 06), pages 167–172.

Daniel Ortiz-Martı́nez, Luis A. Leiva, Vicent Alabau,
Ismael Garcı́a-Varea, and Francisco Casacuberta.
2011. An interactive machine translation system
with online learning. In Proceedings of the ACL-
HLT 2011 System Demonstrations, pages 68–73.

Daniel Ortiz-Martı́nez. 2011. Advances in Fully-
Automatic and Interactive Phrase-Based Statisti-
cal Machine Translation. Ph.D. thesis, Universitat
Politècnica de València.

Harold L. Somers. 2003. Computers and Translation:
A Translator’s Guide. Benjamins translation library.
John Benjamins Publishing Company.

Ralf Steinberger, Andreas Eisele, Szymon Klocek,
Spyridon Pilos, and Patrick Schlüter. 2012. DGT-
TM: a freely available Translation Memory in 22
languages. In Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference, pages 454–459.

65


