



















































Extracting MWEs from Italian corpora: A case study for refining the POS-pattern methodology


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 57–61,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Extracting MWEs from Italian corpora:
A case study for refining the POS-pattern methodology

Malvina Nissim
FICLIT

University of Bologna
malvina.nissim@unibo.it

Sara Castagnoli
LILEC

University of Bologna
s.castagnoli@unibo.it

Francesca Masini
LILEC

University of Bologna
francesca.masini@unibo.it

Abstract

An established method for MWE extrac-
tion is the combined use of previously iden-
tified POS-patterns and association mea-
sures. However, the selection of such POS-
patterns is rarely debated. Focusing on Ital-
ian MWEs containing at least one adjec-
tive, we set out to explore how candidate
POS-patterns listed in relevant literature
and lexicographic sources compare with
POS sequences exhibited by statistically
significant n-grams including an adjective
position extracted from a large corpus of
Italian. All literature-derived patterns are
found—and new meaningful candidate pat-
terns emerge—among the top-ranking tri-
grams for three association measures. We
conclude that a final solid set to be used for
MWE extraction will have to be further re-
fined through a combination of association
measures as well as manual inspection.

1 Introduction

The CombiNet project1 has the goal of building
an online resource for Word Combinations in Ital-
ian, including MWEs of various degrees of fixed-
ness (such as phrasal lexemes, collocations and
usual combinations) as well as distributional pro-
files of Italian lexemes. Within this project, the
present paper aims at investigating ways to refine
a well-known methodology for MWE-extraction,
namely the combined use of previously identified
POS-patterns and association measures (Evert and
Krenn, 2005). While POS-patterns are widely used
to extract MWEs from corpora in order to constrain
the array of possible outputs (Krenn and Evert,
2001; Wermter and Hahn, 2006, e.g.), the way in
which POS-patterns are created in the first place is
much less addressed. This step is however crucial,

1https://sites.google.com/site/enwcin/home

especially considering that the list of patterns is
necessarily language-specific. The goal of this pa-
per is to propose a method to optimize – in terms of
both recall and precision – the list of POS patterns
to be used for the subsequent extraction of potential
MWEs. In order to do this, we compare predeter-
mined patterns, which would be normally used as
a first-pass sieve for potential MWEs, with pat-
terns exhibited by statistically significant n-grams
extracted from data.

2 Methodology

In this pilot study, we focus on MWEs containing
at least one adjective, and we limit the extraction
to trigrams (Section 2.1). We make use of the
following sets of data: (a) a list of frequently used
Italian adjectives; (b) a list of previously identified
POS-patterns containing at least one adjective.2

The adjectival lemmas were taken from the
Senso Comune dictionary,3 which contains 2,010
fundamental lemmas of the Italian lexicon, 211 of
which are adjectives (e.g. bello “beautiful”, brutto
“ugly”, ricco “rich”). These adjectives are used to
constrain the extraction procedure, and we refer to
this set as {SC}.

The list of predetermined POS-patterns for
MWEs involving one adjective was obtained by
merging the following information: (a) patterns
of word combinations included in existing com-
binatory dictionaries for Italian (Piunno et al.,
2013), see Table 1a; (b) additional combinatory
types mentioned in the relevant theoretical litera-
ture (Voghera, 2004; Masini, 2012), summarised
in Table 1b; and (c) a few more patterns based on
our own intuition, i.e. identified by elaborating on
the previous two lists (Table 2). This joint collec-
tion contains a total of 19 patterns, most of which
are bigrams (11), and fewer are trigrams (8). Note

2For information on POS tags see Appendix.
3http://www.sensocomune.it/

57



that trigrams (put together in Table 2) come for the
most part from our intuition, indicating that these
patterns are rather neglected in the literature and
in combinatory dictionaries of Italian, which tend
to focus on bigrams. For this reason, and because
longer sequences are intrinsically more idiosyn-
cratic, we concentrate on trigrams for this pilot
experiment, although in the discussion we take into
account bigrams, too (Section 3).

Table 1: Italian POS-patterns with ADJ(s)
POS-pattern Example Translation

(a) from lexicographic sources
ADJ ADJ stanco morto dead tired
ADJ CONADJ vivo e vegeto live and kicking
ADJ NOUN prima classe first class
ADJ PRE pronto a ready to
ADV ADJ molto malato very ill
NOUN ADJ casa editrice publishing house
VER ADJ uscire pazzo to go crazy

(b) from relevant literature
ADJ PRO qual esso which/who
ADJi ADJi papale papale bluntly
ARTPRE ADJ alla francese French-style
PRE ADJ a caldo on the spot
PRE ADJNOUN di bassa lega vulgar/coarse
PRE NOUNADJ a senso unico one-way
PRO ADJ tal altro some other

2.1 Extracting the trigrams
From the corpus La Repubblica (Baroni et al.,
2004), which consists of 300M words of newswire
contemporary Italian, we extracted all trigrams fea-
turing at least one adjective, deriving this informa-
tion from the pre-existing POS tags in the corpus.
All trigrams were extracted as sequences of lem-
mas. We created three separate lists according to
the adjective’s position in the trigram (first, second,
or third). All instances containing any punctuation
item were discarded.

For each of the three sets, we kept only trigrams
occurring more than five times in the whole cor-
pus. As a further step, we selected those instances
featuring one of the 211 adjectives in {SC}, yield-
ing a total of 89,217 different trigrams featuring
an adjective as first member (191 adjectives from
{SC} occur in this position), 100,861 as second
(192 adjectives), and 114,672 as third (193).

2.2 Ranking the trigrams
We used the Text-NSP package (Banerjee and Ped-
ersen, 2003) to rank the trigrams in each of the

three sets according to three association measures
(AMs), namely the Poisson-Stirling measure (PS),
the log-likelihood ratio (LL) and pointwise mu-
tual information (PMI). However, on the basis of
preliminary inspection and observations in the liter-
ature on ranking Italian MWEs extracted from cor-
pora (Nissim and Zaninello, 2013), we discarded
PMI as not too accurate for this task. We also
considered raw frequencies, as they have proved
good indicators for collocations, on a par with AMs
(Krenn and Evert, 2001; Bannard, 2007).

The idea is to check which POS sequences are
exhibited by the highest instances in the rank, un-
der the rationale that such patterns might be good
representations of Italian MWEs containing adjec-
tives, and can be used for further extraction and
characterisation of the phenomenon (in dictionar-
ies and resources). Thus, we selected the top 10%
instances in each rank, extracted their POS patterns,
and ranked such patterns according to the number
of times they appeared. Tables 3–5 report the ten
most frequent patterns according to each measure,
when an adjective is found in first, second, and
third position, respectively.

3 Analysis and discussion

By comparing the ranked patterns in Tables 3–5
with the predetermined POS-patterns for trigrams
in Table 2, we draw the following observations.

We first consider patterns that are ranked high
for all measures. Some find a correspondence to
those in Table 2, implying that these are likely to
be solid, characteristic POS sequences to be used
in extraction (ADJ CONJ ADJ (for ADJ in first
position), ADJ PRE VER, PRE ADJ NOUN, and
VER PRE ADJ). Other found patterns, instead, are
not among the pre-identified ones, but are definitely
typical sequences, as the analysis of some of the
extracted trigrams shows. Among these: ADJ PRE
NOUN (ospite d’onore “special guest”), VER ART
ADJ (essere il solo “to be the only one”), NOUN
PRE ADJ (agente in borghese “plain-clothes po-
liceman”), ARTPRE ADJ NOUN (all’ultimo mo-
mento “at the last moment”). Envisaging an ex-
traction procedure based on POS sequences, such
structures should be included to improve recall.

Conversely, the PRE ART ADJ pattern exhibits
an incomplete sequence, and is therefore unsuitable
for MWE extraction. Since the inclusion of such
patterns would possibly affect precision, they need
to be filtered out on the grounds of grammatical

58



Table 2: Trigram POS-patterns containing ADJ(s)
POS-pattern Example Translation

from literature and resources
ADJ CON ADJ pura e semplice pure and simple
PRE ADJ NOUN a breve termine short-run
PRE NOUN ADJ in tempo reale (in) real-time

from our own intuition
ADJ PRE VER duro a morire die-hard
NOUN ADJ ADJ prodotto interno lordo gross national product
NOUN NOUN ADJ dipartimento affari sociali social affairs division
PRE ADJ VER per quieto vivere for the sake of quiet and peace
VER PRE ADJ dare per scontato to take for granted

Table 3: Top 10 POS patterns featuring an adjective as word1, extracted from the top 10% trigrams ranked
according to LL, PS, and raw frequency.

LL PS raw frequency
ADJ PRE VER ADJ NOUN PRE ADJ NOUN PRE
ADJ PRE ART ADJ NOUN ARTPRE ADJ NOUN ARTPRE
ADJ NOUN PRE ADJ NOUN ADJ ADJ ARTPRE NOUN
ADJ PRE NOUN ADJ ARTPRE NOUN ADJ PRE ART
ADJ NOUN ARTPRE ADJ PRE VER ADJ PRE VER
ADJ ARTPRE NOUN ADJ PRE NOUN ADJ NOUN ADJ
ADJ PRE DET ADJ CON ADJ ADJ PRE NOUN
ADJ CON ADJ ADJ NPR NPR ADJ CON ADJ
ADJ CHE CLI ADJ NOUN CON ADJ NOUN CON
ADJ DET NOUN ADJ PRE ART ADJ CON ART

constraints, or, ultimately, manual inspection.

Additionally, there are patterns that contain or
are portions of more relevant patterns for MWE-
hood. Some capture what are in fact bigrams (Ta-
ble 6), while others are portions of 4-grams or
possibly larger sequences, namely NOUN ADJ
PRE (NOUN), (NOUN) ADJ ARTPRE NOUN,
and NOUN ARTPRE ADJ (NOUN), where the
“missing” POS is given in brackets. Examples are:
concorso esterno in (omicidio) “external partici-
pation in (murder)”, (banca) nazionale del lavoro
“National (Bank) of Labour”, and paese del terzo
(mondo) “third world (country)”, respectively. Run-
ning a full-scale extraction procedure that accounts
for all n-grams should naturally take care of this.

Some of patterns from Table 2 are ranked high
only by some measures: PRE NOUN ADJ only
according to PS and raw frequency (Table 5), and
NOUN ADJ ADJ both for second and third po-
sition, but only by PS. Overall, with respect to
their ability to extract previously identified POS-
patterns, AMs perform similarly when the adjective

is the first member (Table 3), whereas PS seems
to be more indicative when the adjective is second
and third (Tables 4-5), together with raw frequency,
while LL seems to be generally performing the
worst. This point calls for a combination of AMs
(Pecina, 2008), but will require further work.

As for predetermined patterns that are not found
among the top ones, we observe that NOUN NOUN
ADJ is basically an adjective modifying a noun-
noun compound, and should be best treated as a
“complex bigram”. Similarly, the PRE ADJ VER
pattern can be seen as an extension of the ADJ VER
bigram, which is usually not considered (Table 1).
Investigating the combination of bigrams, trigrams
and n-grams with n>3 is left for future work.

4 Conclusion

In summary, basically all of the literature/intuition-
based patterns are retrieved from highly ranked
plain trigrams. However, top-ranking trigrams also
exhibit other POS sequences which should be in-
cluded in a set of patterns used for MWE extrac-

59



Table 4: Top 10 POS patterns featuring an adjective as word2, extracted from the top 10% trigrams ranked
according to LL, PS, and raw frequency.

LL PS raw frequency
ART ADJ NOUN ART ADJ NOUN ART ADJ NOUN
NOUN ADJ PRE ARTPRE ADJ NOUN ARTPRE ADJ NOUN
PRE ADJ NOUN PRE ADJ NOUN PRE ADJ NOUN
ARTPRE ADJ NOUN NOUN ADJ ARTPRE NOUN ADJ PRE
DET ADJ NOUN NOUN ADJ PRE NOUN ADJ ARTPRE
ART ADJ NPR NOUN ADJ CON NOUN ADJ CON
ART ADJ CON DET ADJ NOUN ADV ADJ PRE
ADV ADJ PRE VER ADJ NOUN DET ADJ NOUN
DET ADJ VER NOUN ADJ ADJ ADV ADJ ARTPRE
VER ADJ PRE ADV ADJ PRE ADV ADJ CON

Table 5: Top 10 POS patterns featuring an adjective as word3, extracted from the top 10% trigrams ranked
according to LL, PS, and raw frequency.

LL PS raw frequency
VER ART ADJ ART NOUN ADJ ART NOUN ADJ
PRE ART ADJ ARTPRE NOUN ADJ ARTPRE NOUN ADJ
NOUN PRE ADJ PRE NOUN ADJ VER ART ADJ
NOUN ARTPRE ADJ NOUN ARTPRE ADJ PRE ART ADJ
VER ARTPRE ADJ VER ART ADJ PRE NOUN ADJ
VER PRE ADJ NOUN PRE ADJ NOUN ARTPRE ADJ
NOUN ART ADJ PRE ART ADJ NOUN PRE ADJ
ADV ART ADJ NOUN ADV ADJ VER PRE ADJ
ADV ADV ADJ VER PRE ADJ NOUN ADV ADJ
ART DET ADJ NOUN ADJ ADJ VER ARTPRE ADJ

Table 6: Extracted trigram patterns that subsume a bigram pattern (boldfaced).
Pattern Example Translation
ADJ PRE ART degno di un worthy of a
ADJ NOUN PRE utile netto di net profit of
ADJ NOUN ARTPRE alto funzionario del senrior official of
ART ADJ NOUN il pubblico ministero the public prosecutor
NOUN ADJ PRE centro storico di historical centre of
ARTPRE ADJ NOUN della pubblica amministrazione of the public administration
DET ADJ NOUN altro duro colpo another hard blow
ADV ADJ PRE sempre pronto a always ready to

tion to improve recall. At the same time, several
patterns extracted with this technique are to be dis-
carded. Some are just irrelevant (e.g. ADJ CHE
CLI, nero che le “black that them”): in this respect,
combining various AMs or setting grammatical
constraints could help refine precision, but human
intervention also seems unavoidable. Others are
not meaningful trigrams as such, but may be mean-
ingful as parts of larger MWEs or because they
contain meaningful bigrams. Here, it would be in-

teresting to explore how to combine n-grams with
different n-values.

This pilot experiment shows that trigram ranking
is useful to extract new patterns that are not consid-
ered in the initial set. The latter can be therefore
expanded by following the proposed methodology,
as a preliminary step towards the actual extraction
of candidate MWEs from corpora. Clearly, the va-
lidity of the expanded POS-pattern set can only be
evaluated after the extraction step is completed.

60



Acknowledgments

This research was carried out within the PRIN
project 2010-2011 (n. 20105B3HE8 003) Word
Combinations in Italian: theoretical and descrip-
tive analysis, computational models, lexicographic
layout and creation of a dictionary, coordinated by
Raffaele Simone (Roma Tre University) and funded
by the Italian Ministry of Education, University and
Research (MIUR). We are grateful to the anony-
mous reviewers for their useful comments.

References
Satanjeev Banerjee and Ted Pedersen. 2003. The de-

sign, implementation, and use of the ngram statistics
package. In A. F. Gelbukh, editor, volume 2588 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 370–381.

Colin Bannard. 2007. A measure of syntactic flex-
ibility for automatically identifying multiword ex-
pressions in corpora. In Proc. of the Workshop on
A Broader Perspective on Multiword Expressions,
pages 1–8, Prague, ACL.

Marco Baroni, Silvia Bernardini, Federica Comastri,
Lorenzo Piccioni, Alessandra Volpi, Guy Aston, and
Marco Mazzoleni. 2004. Introducing the La Re-
pubblica Corpus: A Large, Annotated, TEI(XML)-
Compliant Corpus of Newspaper Italian. In Proc. of
LREC 2004, pages 1771–1774.

Stefan Evert and Brigitte Krenn. 2005. Using small
random samples for the manual evaluation of statis-
tical association measures. Computer Speech & Lan-
guage, 19(4):450–466. Special issue on Multiword
Expression.

Brigitte Krenn and Stefan Evert. 2001. Can we do bet-
ter than frequency? A case study on extracting PP-
verb collocations. In Proc. of the ACL-EACL Work-
shop on Collocations, pages 39–46, Toulouse.

Francesca Masini. 2012. Parole sintagmatiche in ita-
liano. Caissa, Roma.

Malvina Nissim and Andrea Zaninello. 2013. Mod-
eling the internal variability of multiword expres-
sions through a pattern-based method. ACM Trans.
Speech Lang. Process., 10(2):7:1–7:26.

Pavel Pecina. 2008. A Machine Learning Approach
to Multiword Expression Extraction. In Proceed-
ings of the LREC 2008 Workshop Towards a Shared
Task for Multiword Expressions, pages 54–57, Mar-
rakech, Morocco. European Language Resources
Association.

Valentina Piunno, Francesca Masini and Sara Castag-
noli. 2013. Studio comparativo dei dizionari com-
binatori dell’italiano e di altre lingue europee. Com-
biNet Technical Report. Roma Tre University and
University of Bologna.

Miriam Voghera. 2004. Polirematiche. In Grossmann,
Maria & Franz Rainer, editors, La formazione delle

parole in italiano, Tübingen, Max Niemeyer Verlag,
56-69.

Joachim Wermter and Udo Hahn. 2006. You can’t
beat frequency (unless you use linguistic knowl-
edge): A qualitative evaluation of association mea-
sures for collocation and term extraction. In Proc.
of COLING-ACL ’06, pages 785–792, USA.

Appendix

The tagset for all patterns extracted from
the corpus “La Repubblica” is accessible at
http://sslmit.unibo.it/˜baroni/
collocazioni/itwac.tagset.txt. In
the context of this experiment we collapsed all
fine-grained tags into the corresponding coarse-
grained tag (e.g. all verbal tags such as VER:fin or
VER:ppast were collapsed into VER). The POS
tags used in this paper are to be interpreted as in
the Table below.

Table 7: POS tags used in this paper.
abbreviation part of speech
ADJ adjective
ADV adverb
ART article
ARTPRE prepositional article
CHE any function of the word “che”

(adjective, conjunction, pronoun)
CLI clitic
DET determiner
NOUN noun
PRE preposition
VER verb

61


