



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and J D Pawar. Proc. of the 11th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 395–402,
Goa, India. December 2014. c©2014 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Significance of Paralinguistic Cues in the Synthesis of Mathematical
Equations

Venkatesh Potluri, SaiKrishna Rallabandi, Priyanka Srivastava, Kishore Prahallad
International Institute of Information Technology - Hyderabad
{venkatesh.potluri, saikrishna.rallabandi}@research.iiit.ac.in

{priyanka.srivastava, kishore}@iiit.ac.in

Abstract

Text to speech (TTS) systems hold
promise as an information access tool for
literate and illiterate including visually
challenged. Current TTS systems can con-
vert a typical text into a natural sounding
speech. However, auditory rendering of
mathematical content, specifically equa-
tion reading is not a trivial task. Mathe-
matical equations have to be read so that
appropriate bracketing such as parenthe-
ses, superscripts and subscripts are con-
veyed to the listener in an accurate way.
Earlier works have attempted to use pauses
as acoustic cues to indicate some of the
semantics associated with the mathemat-
ical symbols. In this paper, we first anal-
yse the acoustic cues which human-beings
employ while speaking the mathematical
content to (visually challenged) listeners
and then propose four techniques which
render the observed patterns in a text-to-
speech system. The evaluation considered
eight aspects such as listening effort, con-
tent familiarity, accentuation, intonation,
etc. Our objective metrics show that a
combination of the proposed techniques
could render the mathematical equations
using a TTS system as good as that of a
human-being.

1 Introduction

Mathematical equations comprise of different
types of visual cues to convey their semantic
meaning. Some of these visual cues are super-
scripts, subscripts, parentheses,etc. Despite ad-
vances in screen reading and text to speech tech-
nologies, the problem of speaking complex math
remains majorly unsolved. Speaking the equation
just as any other string of text, a line, or a sentence

will not suffice to effectively render mathematics
in speech. For instance, ex+1 − 1 denotes that the
value “e” should be multiplied “x+1” times before
subtracting 1 from it. However, when it is ren-
dered in speech like a general string, it is diffi-
cult to identify the portion of the equation in the
superscript and the remainder of it after the su-
perscript. To effectively resolve such ambiguities
and identify such demarcations in mathematical
content, information presented through visual cues
such as spatialisation must be mapped to their au-
ditory equivalent. Mathematics, in its visual form,
gives the reader a very high level granularity in
perceiving the equation. Mathematical equations,
when presented in audio must be able to match the
advantage in granularity provided in visual rep-
resentation of mathematics. The typical issues
in audio rendering of mathematical equations in-
clude quantification, superscripting and subscript-
ing, and fractions.

1.1 Quantification

Most of mathematical equations contain expres-
sions in parentheses. For instance, considering the
equation (A+B)∗ (C+D)+E, it may seem that
the equation can just be treated as a general string
of text while speaking. However, this will create a
confusion in the listener, as there are two ways of
expressing.

• “left parenthesis A plus B right parenthesis
times left parenthesis C plus D right paren-
thesis plus E”

• “A plus B times C plus D plus E”.

In the former case, the listener will have to keep
a track of all the parentheses when he or she lis-
tens to the equation. This becomes a hectic task
for bigger equations and also results in deviating
the listener’s attention from concentrating on the
actual contents of the equation. On the other hand,395



in the latter case, the listener gets an ambiguous
representation of the equation. The spoken form
of the equation should have additional information
to the equation to solve this ambiguity.

1.2 Superscript and subscript
Today’s screen readers and TTS engines do not
effectively convey the equations with superscript
and subscript content. They often do not speak
out the parts of the equation contained in the su-
perscript and subscript. They often speak out such
content continuously, with the rest of the equation.
For instance, let us say the expression isEX . With
the currently available technologies, the expres-
sion may be rendered as “EX”. This does not give
the listener the information that X is in the super-
script and the listener may understand the expres-
sion as E ∗ X . In expressions where there are at
least 2 variables that cause a phonetic sound when
spoken together, the general TTS may treat the ex-
pression as a complete word. consider the expres-
sionAB . The TTS may speak it as “ab”. In case of
numbers, say we have an expression 52

5
, the TTS

reads it as “five hundred twenty five” or “five two
five”. We come across the same issues while try-
ing to render subscript text. If a human speaks the
expression, he may not make such mistakes. The
challenge to the human speaker lies in effectively
conveying the spatial orientation of the different
parts of the equation. That is, the equation, pre-
sented in audio must give the listener a clear pic-
ture of what content is in the superscript and the
subscript. The listener must also be able to ob-
serve the end of the super script or subscript part
of a mathematical expression. The listener should
understand that any thing that he listens to after
the end is in the baseline or the general part of the
equation, unless specified. To overcome this chal-
lenge, the spoken form of an equation should pro-
vide the listener with different cues for superscript
and subscript content.

1.3 Fractions
Fractions, like the other mathematical concepts
discussed above can not be treated like a general
string of text. The key information that has to
be conveyed to the listener in addition to the
contents of the fraction is the beginning of the
fraction, the content of the fraction in numerator
and denominator and the end of the fraction. The
audio equivalent of the equation should effectively
be able to convey nested fractions in addition to

the regular fractions to the listener.

There have been several attempts to present
mathematical content through alternative modes
to vision. Efforts have been made to formulate
standards for presenting math through Braille and
speech. Nemeth Code(Nemeth et al., 1973) is
a special type of Braille used for math and sci-
ence notations. With Nemeth Code, one can ren-
der all mathematical and technical documents into
six-dot Braille. This code could also be used
to speak mathematical content. Dr T.V Raman
has developed an audio system for technical read-
ings (ASTER)(Raman, 1998). ASTER is a com-
puting system for producing audio renderings of
electronic documents. The present implementa-
tion works with documents written in the TEX
family of markup languages: TEX, LaTeX and
AMS-TEX. A more recent attempt has been made
by a company called design science. They de-
veloped an internet explorer plugin called Math-
Player that displays and speaks out mathemati-
cal content marked up in MathML(Soiffer, 2005).
There have been attempts to form a set of guide-
lines to effectively speak mathematics in audio.
The handbook for spoken mathematics (Chang et
al., 1983) gives an account of such an attempt.
An article on how to speak math also describes
the challenges in speaking mathematics to and by
a computer (Fateman, 1998). The ChromeVox
project (Raman et al., 2012) is a screen reader
built for Google Chrome browser and the Chrome
OS. It has basic support for mathematical expres-
sions encoded using the MathML language on web
pages. The expressions are verbally presented dur-
ing normal text navigation. The screen reader an-
nounces that the spoken text is a mathematical ex-
pression and it can further be explored. Navigation
support is based on the MathML tree.

Earlier works discussed so far, have not effec-
tively used paralinguistic cues and variations in the
equation. However, humans use a lot of cues when
reading out a mathematical equation which helps
in understanding the semantics of it. Usage of the
cues similar to the humans would result in more
effective rendering of the equations.

The objective of this paper is to analyse the way
these visual cues are presented in an auditory for-
mat by human speakers who are well acquainted
with speaking the mathematical content especially
to visually challenged individuals. A subjective396



and objective analysis is performed on the equa-
tions recorded by the speakers. Based on this anal-
ysis, we make an attempt to form specific rules
to map the visual cues to their auditory equiva-
lents to programatically and unambiguously ren-
der the mathematical content in audio using a text-
to-speech system.

Section 2 discusses the basis for the study. Sec-
tion 3 has the inferences drawn form the initial
listening tests . Section 4 discusses the proposed
ideas. Section 5 presents the analysis of the quali-
tative study performed.

2 Cues in spoken equations

Our study is based on the preposition that treat-
ing a mathematical expression as a regular English
sentence while speaking is not an effective way to
present mathematical content in an auditory form.
In order to test this observation, we asked a set
of 15 people to rate mathematical equations spo-
ken by a traditional TTS system. Then we con-
ducted the same experiment on spoken equations
(i.e., equations spoken by a human-being). The
details of the listening tests are as follows.

2.1 Procedure for the listening tests

Fig: Evaluation procedure

A set of 15 participants were made to listen
to the recorded equations. Each participant was
made to listen to the equations using headphones
and the responses were recorded. The listening
test was self paced and also the users were in-
formed that they were free to listen to the equation
any number of times till they felt comfortable that
they could recall the equation. Similarly, the same
participants were also made to listen to speech of
mathematical equations generated by a TTS sys-
tem. The participant will have to reproduce the
equation he/she listens to. In addition to repro-
ducing the equation, the participant will have to
evaluate the spoken equation based on eight other
parameters, i.e., perform objective analysis. We
arrived at these parameters partly by following the

Table 1: Evaluation of Spoken Math vs TTS

Parameter Spoken Synthesized
(Current TTS)

Listening Effort 2.5 4.4
Content Familiarity 2.7 2.7
Effectiveness of
additional cues 3.2 1.2
Accentuation 4.3 2.5
Intonation 4.26 1.6
Pauses 3.1 2.15
Number of repetitions
(Mode) 2 4
Mean Opinion Score 4.42 1.89

listening test procedures followed in the Blizzard
challenges (Hinterleitner et al., 2011) and our own
analysis.

2.2 Selection of the equations
Selection of suitable equations is a critical compo-
nent to analyse the auditory presentation of math-
ematical content. We hand picked a few equa-
tions which had variations in number of variables,
number of sub expressions and length of the equa-
tion. The equations can be found in appendix A.
Each of the equations is semantically unrelated,
that is, the equations have mathematical content
but the listener may not have come across the exact
same equation prior to listening to them from our
recordings . The reason behind choosing the equa-
tions in such a way is to ensure that the listener’s
prior knowledge does not influence the ability to
recall the equation. If the listener is able to re-
call the equation even before he or she listens to it
completely, the listener is benefitting from mem-
ory, not the spoken equation.

2.3 Parameters for objective analysis
On a scale of 1 to 5, the participants were asked
to evaluate the spoken equations on the following
parameters.

• Listening effort (1 = low, 5 = high)

• Intonation (1 = ineffective and 5 = very effec-
tive)

• Acceptance (1 = poor, 5 = good).

• Speech pauses ( 1= not noticeable and 5 =
very prominent)397



• Accentuation (1 = poor and 5 = very promi-
nent).

• Content familiarity (1 = totally new concept
and 5 = very familiar). Here 1 indicates that
the user is not acquainted to the terminology
used in the equation. In this case, the partic-
ipants’ response for that particular equation
can not be considered completely as he may
have entered a wrong response due to the lack
of domain knowledge, not due to the lack of
understanding of the audio.

• Effectiveness of additional cues such as
sounds, pitch and rate variations, change in
direction, etc. (1 = hardly noticeable and 5 =
very helpful).

• Number of repetitions of each equation.

3 Inferences from the listening tests

The results of this experiment, shown in the Ta-
ble 1 indicate that the equations are not intelligi-
ble enough if it is spoken as a plain text using a
text-to-speech system. The mean opinion scores
of spoken equations indicate a human-being use
several acoustic cues to manifest the semantics of
the mathematical symbols in audio mode. It was
noticed that the trained speakers brought certain
variations in their speech while speaking specific
aspects of the mathematical expression. The vari-
ations are noticed in pauses and pitch variations
(intonation). A careful analysis revealed that the
acoustic variations were introduced by the speak-
ers to unambiguously speak 1) quantification, 2)
superscripting and subscripting and 3) handling
fractions in mathematical equations.

Based on the feedback received from partici-
pants, we can infer that the use of these additional
cues can effectively and unambiguously present
mathematical content in audio. The question is
how to introduce such cues to synthesise a mathe-
matical equation using a text-to-speech system.

4 Proposed techniques

With the advent of languages like MathML, it is
possible to programatically identify different at-
tributes and visual cues of a mathematical expres-
sion. This possibility can in turn be leveraged to
make some modifications while generating speech
for mathematical content. We propose four tech-
niques that could enhance the way mathematical
content is rendered in audio.

Fig: Overall framework for the proposed techniques

An example depicting the workflow of the entire
algorithm is shown in the Figure 1. For the sake of
illustration, a simple expression , (X+Y )4−2 was
taken :

The Equation was first converted into the Math
Markup Language format. We chose “Presenta-
tion” Markup style to represent the equations. It
is then text processed to identify and segregate the
different terms occurring in the equation. The fol-
lowing terms have been segregated.

• Subscripts and superscripts

• Fractions

• Square root terms

• Overscripts and underscript

The MathML representation is processed to
convert it into natural language and the acoustic
cues such as pauses, intonation are incorporated to
generate a file in the SABLE1 markup language.
The SABLE file is input to the speech synthe-
sis system which generates the audio form of the
equation with specified pauses and intonation. We
have generated the audio files using the Festival
Speech Synthesis System(Black et al., 2002). Sec-
tions 4.1 through 4.4 discuss each of the four pro-
posed techniques.

4.1 Technique 1 : Rendering equations with
pauses and special sounds

In visual communication, icons and symbols are
used as indications for some types of information.
In the context of mathematical expressions,
the user can perceive the type of elements (

1SABLE is mark up language due to collaboration be-
tween Sun, AT&T, Bell Labs, Edinburgh and CMU to de-
vise a standard cross synthesizer standard mark up language.
The language is XML-based and allows users to add addition
controlling commands in text to affect the output. An imple-
mentation exists in Festival speech synthesis system.398



Figure 1: Example Synthesis using a simple ex-
pression

Expression

Conversion
to Math ML

Parsing

Paralinguistic
Cues

Text to
Speech

Pauses
Special
Sounds

3d Audio

Pauses and
Special
Sounds

(X + Y )4−2

(X + Y ) < msup > (4− 2)

superscript (4-2)

SABLE Markup file

superscripts, subscripts, etc ) by getting a glance
at the equation. A person has the advantage of
perceiving a lot of information of the equation
even before looking at the actual contents of the
equation. This technique attempts to present the
equation in a manner that a person gets a similar
advantage when he listens to it.

In this concept, we made use of special sounds
or ear cons while presenting the equations. How-
ever, replacing speech with sounds alone is not the
most effective way to tackle the problem of pre-
senting mathematic equations in audio. We made
use of paralinguistic cues including, but not lim-
ited to sounds.

The cues presented in this method include:

• Pauses to convey certain parts of an equation.
These pauses are mainly used to separate the
parts of mathematical expressions. Consider
(A+B)2 and (A+B2) + 1. It would sound
more natural and intuitive if the expressions

Table 2: Pitch and rate variations

Term Pitch variation Rate variation
Superscript 50 20
Subscript -50 -20
Fraction 25 -25
Underscript -60 -25
Overscript 60 25

are spoken as “the quantity A + B pause su-
perscript 2 ” and “the quantity A + B super-
script 2 pause + 1” .

• Sounds to indicate certain symbols and
mathematical operations. Sounds are used
to indicate superscripts, subscripts, roots, un-
der scripts, over scripts and under script-over
script combination.

We chose the sounds(such as the sound “ding”)
such that would be pleasant to the ear and that are
passively noticed by a listener so as not to distract
too much, at the same time, are loud enough not to
go unnoticed. The sounds show a transition from
high to low and low to high when there is a sub-
script and superscript respectively. Any other type
of sounds and their variations could also be ap-
plied in this technique.

4.2 Technique 2 : Rendering equations with
pitch and rate variations

Screen Reader users are familiar to pitch changes.
Generally, a high pitch is used to denote capitals
and a low pitch is used to denote tool tip messages.
On observing the human recorded equations ex-
plained in Section 2, we observed that speakers
tend to modulate the pitch as they read aloud
certain parts of a mathematical expression. It has
been observed that certain parts of a mathematical
expression are spoken at a faster rate to indicate
that it is a sub expression and to isolate it from the
rest of the expression.

In this technique, we use pitch and rate changes
to denote the presence of certain mathematical at-
tributes. The pitch and rate increase while speak-
ing out the superscript text and decrease while
speaking the subscript text. A similar method can
be employed to properly render fractions. The nu-
merator is spoken in a higher pitch and the denom-
inator is spoken in a lower pitch. Similarly, quan-
tities in a root are spoken at a faster rate. Table399



Table 3: Evaluation of the proposed techniques

Parameter Technique#1 Technique#2 Technique#3 Technique#4
Intonation Variation 2.3 4.7 4.32 4.68
Pitch Variation 1.4 4.43 4.82 4.36
Pauses 4.15 3.7 3.7 3.87
Listening Effort 3.5 2.3 2.64 2.47
Content Familiarity 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7
Effectiveness of additional cues 1.82 4.32 4.37 4.23
Accentuation 3.47 2.3 3.2 3.6
Number of repititions(Mode) 3 2 2 2
Mean Opinion Score 2.27 4.37 4.62 4.35

2 shows the pitch and rate variation(in percentage)
that are applied to the Mathematical equation. The
variation is with respect to the base pitch and rate
of the TTS.

4.3 Technique 3: Rendering equations with
audio spatialisation

In this technique, we made an attempt to draw a
closer analogy to the spatial positioning of various
variables and numbers of a mathematical equa-
tion. The listener can be given the illusion that the
superscript part of the math expression is spoken
from above his head and the rest at the usual level
using the Head Related Transfer Function (HRTF)
(Geronazzo et al., 2011). Table 4 shows the sets of
angles chosen for the different parts of the equa-
tion such as superscript, etc.

Table 4: Sets of HRTF angles for audio spatialisa-
tion

Term Elevation Angle Azimuth Angle
Superscript 90 30
Subscript -90 30
Fraction 270 45

Underscript -90 45
Overscript 90 30

We identify the portions of a mathematical ex-
pression that require modification in spatial orien-
tation of sound. Based on the attribute, we apply
the HRTF function with the required angles.

4.4 Technique 4 : Rendering equations with
pitch variations and special tones

In this technique, we render the equations in au-
dio by varying the pitch, adding pauses, empha-
sising the speech and adding sounds at required

parts of a mathematical expression. As explained
in 4.3, we can make pitch and rate manipulation
while rendering superscripts, subscripts, fractions,
under scripts and over scripts. In addition to the
variations in speech, we have also added sounds
to indicate the listener before hand that he must
expect one of the above mentioned variations ( su-
perscripts, subscripts, etc). The sounds used here
are the same as the ones mentioned in section 4.2.
The Pitch and rate variations that are introduced
are the same as the percentage values given in ta-
ble 2.

5 Analysis of the listening test

A system was built to render mathematical expres-
sions implementing each of the proposed ideas.
An experiment procedure similar to the one ex-
plained in Section 2 was followed. 30 participants
were made to participate in the experiment. The
table contains the normalised scores(1 to 5) cal-
culated over the responses for the equations. The
number of repetitions of the equation has the mode
value( most occurring value).

On analysing the experiment as described in
Section 2, it is observed that the participants are
able to understand the human spoken equations.
More over, it can be clearly understood that gen-
erating spoken forms of mathematical equations
without making any enhancements is not capable
of rendering math effectively. It can also be in-
ferred that making use of just a few paralinguis-
tic cues, sounds and pauses as explained in sec-
tion 4.1 will not suffice either. The pitch and rate
changes while rendering certain parts of the math-
ematical expressions have proven to be helpful to
the participants in comprehending the expression.
In the method described in section 4.3, the lis-400



tener has been able to draw an analogy to the print
form of mathematics. It has been observed that
the method explained in section 4.1 did not prove
to be helpful to the listeners. However, from the
table 3 and the values corresponding to the tech-
nique explained in section 4.4, it is evident that
use of cues (pauses and rate variations ) in addi-
tion to special sounds can be significantly effec-
tive in helping a listener.(see the demonstration of
the listening test on the webpage associated to this
paper: http://goo.gl/FLTIOv).

6 Conclusion

From the analysis and the proposed ideas, we can
say that there is a possibility to unambiguously
render mathematics in audio. With the increase
in voice driven interfaces and information access
through audio, rendering mathematical content in
audio could also help more effectively present
such content in these interfaces. Personal assis-
tance or any other voice driven UIs can more ef-
fectively render mathematical content to the lis-
tener. In addition to this, effectively rendering
mathematical content in audio can be of a great
advantage for people with print disabilities includ-
ing, but not limited to vision impairment, dyslexia
and cognitive impairment. With currently avail-
able assistive technology, understanding mathe-
matical content is very difficult and almost impos-
sible. the ideas explained in sections 4.1 to 4.3
improve the scenario of understanding mathemat-
ical content through a non visual input mode. as
explained in section 4.4, There is also a chance
that a combination of the proposed ideas are more
effective than each of the ideas alone.

Acknowledgements

We thank Prof Peri Bhaskararao for his contribu-
tions in our initial discussions related to this re-
search effort.

References
Alan W Black, Paul Taylor, Richard Caley, and Rob

Clark. 2002. The festival speech synthesis system.
University of Edinburgh, 1.

Larry A Chang, CM White, and L Abrahamson. 1983.
Handbook for spoken mathematics. Lawrence Liv-
ermore National Laboratory.

Richard Fateman. 1998. How can we speak math.
Journal of Symbolic Computation, 25(2).

Michele Geronazzo, Simone Spagnol, and Federico
Avanzini. 2011. A head-related transfer function
model for real-time customized 3-d sound rendering.
In Signal-Image Technology and Internet-Based Sys-
tems (SITIS), 2011 Seventh International Confer-
ence on, pages 174–179. IEEE.

Florian Hinterleitner, Georgina Neitzel, Sebastian
Möller, and Christoph Norrenbrock. 2011. An eval-
uation protocol for the subjective assessment of text-
to-speech in audiobook reading tasks. In Proceed-
ings of the Blizzard challenge workshop, Florence,
Italy. Citeseer.

Abraham Nemeth, National Braille Association, et al.
1973. The Nemeth Braille Code for mathematics
and science notation. American Print. House for the
Blind.

TV Raman, Charles L Chen, and Dominic Mazzoni.
2012. Rachel shearer, chaitanya gharpure, james
deboer, david tseng google inc 1600 amphitheatre
parkway.

TV Raman. 1998. Audio system for technical read-
ings. Springer.

Neil Soiffer. 2005. Mathplayer: web-based math ac-
cessibility. In Proceedings of the 7th international
ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and ac-
cessibility, pages 204–205. ACM.

A Equations recorded by Human voice

X + Y = z (1)

X + Y

K
= α (2)

(X+Y )P+Q = XP∗Q+Y P ∗Q−P+Q
Y
− P
Q−X

(3)

(P +X) ∗ (Q− Y )
(X + Y )K

=
P

X +K
−Q ∗ ( K

x

Y − P )
(4)

(X + Y )K = 3 ∗XK + 4 ∗Xy − 5Y K+X (5)

(X+Y )P+Q = XP∗Q+Y P ∗Q−P+Q
Y
− P
Q−X

(6)
401



(P +X) ∗ (Q− Y )
(X + Y )K

=
P

X +K
−Q ∗ ( K

x

Y − P )
(7)

X + Y

K
= α (8)

(X + Y )K = 3 ∗XK + 4 ∗Xy − 5Y K+X (9)

B Equations for testing the Systems

1+2+3−5+4+2+3 = (3+2)∗ (1+1) (10)

lim
x→+∞

3x2 + 7x3

x2 + 5x4
= 3. (11)

∂

∂x
x2y = 2xy (12)

∂u

∂t
= h2 − En+1 − 1 (13)

∫ R

0

2x dx

1 + x2
= log(1 +R2) (14)

∫ +∞

0
xne−x dx = n!. (15)

(P+Q)K+R = PK∗Q+QK∗P+RP∗Q∗K+P
Q ∗K + 1

R
(16)

(P+Q)∗(R+K) = (P+R)Q−(K+RQ)+ R+Q
K

(R+Q)K + 1
(17)

(P+Q)∗(R+K) = (P+R)Q−(K+RQ)+ R+Q
K

(R+Q)K + 1
(18)

XK1 +X
K
2

PX3 ∗ 5x4
+ EX = e

XK+1+XK+2
(X+Y ) (19)

P+Q
√
A+KP +AK+P =

(K + P )(K − P )
K ∗ (P +K)

(20)

∞∑

i=1

1

i2
+ 5i+ 3

√
i+ 1 =

π2 + 4π3 + π+i
√
9 ∗ π

6

(21)

(
X + Y

K
+1)3 =

3
√
X+

3
√
Y+(X∗Y )/3+X + Y

3 +K
+3

(22)

402


