



















































The International Corpus of Arabic: Compilation, Analysis and Evaluation


Proceedings of the EMNLP 2014 Workshop on Arabic Natural Langauge Processing (ANLP), pages 8–17,
October 25, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

The International Corpus of Arabic: Compilation, Analysis and 

Evaluation 

Sameh Alansary  
Bibliotheca Alexandrina, P.O. Box 138, 21526, El 

Shatby, Alexandria, Egypt. 

Department of Phonetics and Linguistics, Faculty 

of Arts, Alexandria University , El Shatby, Alexan-

dria, Egypt. 

Sameh.alansary@bibalex.org 

 

Magdy Nagi  
Bibliotheca Alexandrina, P.O. Box 138, 21526, El 

Shatby, Alexandria, Egypt. 

Computer and System Engineering Dept. Faculty 

of Engineering, Alexandria University, 

Alexandria Egypt. 

Magdy.nagi@bibalex.org 

Abstract 

This paper focuses on a project for building 

the first International Corpus of Arabic 

(ICA). It is planned to contain 100 million 

analyzed tokens with an interface which al-

lows users to interact with the corpus data in 

a number of ways [ICA website]. ICA is a 

representative corpus of Arabic that has been 

initiated in 2006, it is intended to cover the 

Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) language as 

being used all over the Arab world. ICA has 

been analyzed by Bibliotheca Alexandrina 

Morphological Analysis Enhancer (BAM-

AE). BAMAE is based on Buckwalter Arabic 

Morphological Analyzer (BAMA). Precision 

and Recall are the evaluation measures used 

to evaluate the BAMAE system. At this 

point, Precision measurement ranges from 

95%-92% while recall measurement was 

92%-89%. This depends on the number of 

qualifiers retrieved for every word. The per-

centages are expected to rise by implement-

ing the improvements while working on larg-

er amounts of data.  

1. Introduction 

Arabic is the largest member of the Semitic 

language family, most closely related to Arama-

ic, Hebrew, Ugaritic and Phoenician. Arabic is 

one of the six official languages of the United 

Nations1 and it is the main language of most of 

the Middle East countries. Arabic ranks fifth in 

the world's league table of languages, with an 

estimated 206 million native speakers, 24 million 

as 2nd language speakers to add up to total of 

233 million and World Almanac estimates the 

total speakers as 255 million. Arabic language is  

the official language in all Arab nations as 

Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Algeria. Moreover, it is 

also an official language in non-Arab countries 

as Israel, Chad and Eritrea. It is also spoken as a 

                                                 
1
http://www.un.org/en/aboutun/languages.shtml 

2nd language in other non-Arab countries as Ma-

li and Turkey
2
. 

The formal Arabic language, known as Clas-

sical Arabic is the language in which the Qur’an 

is written and is considered to be the base of the 

syntactic and grammatical norms of the Arabic 

language. However, today it is considered more 

of a written language than a spoken one. Modern 

Standard Arabic (MSA) is similar to Classical 

Arabic, but it is an easier form. It is understood 

across the Arab world and it is used by television 

presenters and politicians, it is the form used to 

teach Arabic as a foreign language. There are 

different MSA varieties as the rate of similarity 

between every Arab country version of MSA and 

Classical Arabic differs. This is one of the issues 

that this paper will present. 

Due to the fact that the need for Arabic cor-

pus is increasing as well as the fact that the trials 

to build an Arabic corpus in the last few years 

were not enough to consider that the Arabic lan-

guage has a real, representative and reliable cor-

pus, it was necessary to build such an Arabic 

corpus that is capable of supporting various lin-

guistic research in Arabic. Thus, ICA was in-

spired by the difficulties that encountered Arabic 

Language researches as a result of the lack of 

publicly available Arabic corpora. 

Bibliotheca Alexandrina (BA) has initiated a 

big project to build the “International Corpus of  

Arabic (ICA)”, a real trial to build a representa-

tive Arabic corpus as being used all over the Ar-

ab world to support research in Arabic. The In-

ternational Corpus of Arabic is planned to con-

tain 100 million words. The collection of sam-

ples is limited to written Modern Standard Ara-

bic, selected from a wide range of sources and 

designed to represent a wide cross-section of Ar-

abic; it is stimulating the first systematic investi-

                                                 
2
http://www.vistawide.com/languages/top_30_langua

ges.htm 

8



gation of the national varieties as being used all 

over the Arab world (Alansary, et al. 2007). 

There were some trials for building Arabic 

corpora. Some of them were annotated corpora 

and others were raw texts corpora. Annotated 

corpora trails as Penn Arabic Treebank (PATB). 

The LDC was sponsored to develop an Arabic 

POS and Treebank of only 1,000,000 words. 

This corpus doesn’t contain any branched genres 

except 600 stories from the ANNAHAR News 

Agency. The POS only annotated version of this 

ANNAHAR corpus was released in 20043
.
 The 

output from Buckwalter’s Arabic Morphological 

Analyzer is used as the starting point for the 

morphological annotation and POS tagging of 

Arabic newswire text (Maamouri M., 2004). 

Arabic Gigaword Corpus is an archive of news-

wire text data that depends on press only; it has 

been compiled from Arabic news sources by 

LDC
4
. The data coverage is limited, it was com-

piled from Egypt, Lebanon, Tunisia, Saudi Ara-

bia and from outside the Arab world such as 

England. NEMLAR Annotated Written Corpus 

consists of about only 500, 000 words of Arabic 

text from 13 different categories, aiming to 

achieve a well-balanced corpus that offers a rep-

resentation of the variety in syntactic, semantic 

and pragmatic features of modern Arabic lan-

guage
5
. The accuracy of the automatic analysis is 

around 95% (Atiyya M. et al, 2005). Its analysis 

features are limited, moreover its use is restrict-

ed; it is not accessible for commercial use6
.
 

KALIMAT is a free multipurpose Arabic corpus, 

consists of 18,167,183 annotated words repre-

senting 20,291 Arabic articles collected only 

from the Omani newspaper Alwatan. A morpho-

logical analysis process on the data collection 

using AL Khalil
7
 morphological analyser was 

conducted to reach an accuracy of 96% (El-Haj  

M., 2013). Prague Arabic Dependency Treebank 

(PADT) version 1.0 distribution comprises over 

113,500 tokens of data annotated analytically 

and provided with the disambiguating morpho-

logical information. In addition, the release in-

cludes complete annotations of MorphoTrees 

                                                 
3
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2005T20 

4
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2003T12 

5
http://catalog.elra.info/product_info.php?products_id

=873 
6
http://catalog.elra.info/product_info.php?products_id

=873 
7
 http://alkhalil-morpho-sys.soft112.com/  

resulting in more than 148,000 tokens, 49,000 of 

which have received the analytical processing
8
. 

The raw text corpora trails as (KACST) King 

Abdul-Aziz City for Science and Technology 

Corpus
9
 contains 732,780,509 words representing 

869,800 text files and 7,464,396 distinct words. It 

contains a lot of classical Arabic texts; however, 

it is neither analyzed nor well planned. Ara-

biCorpus
10

 is a corpus that was developed by 

Dilworth Parkinson. It is a large corpus that 

could be accessed, but it is not analyzed. Words 

can be searched for in Arabic or Latin script. The 

website provides detailed instructions on the 

search. It contains 173,600,000 words in five 

main categories or genres: Newspapers, Modern 

Literature, Nonfiction, Egyptian Colloquial, and 

Premodern. 

In what follows, Section 2 reviews the ICA 

data design, how it is compiled, discuss the copy-

rights issue and what is the current ICA statistics. 

Section 3 describes the analysis stage of ICA, the 

tool that is used in the analysis, why was it cho-

sen followed by ICA evaluation and a compari-

son with another morphological disambiguator. 

Section 4 gives a brief review on the ICA web-

site for the researchers to query its data. Conclu-

sions and suggestions for further work are given 

in section 5. 

2. ICA Design & Compilation Stage 
 

The ICA is similar to the International Corpus 

of English (ICE) in terms of concept rather than 

in design. They are similar in trying to include 

the varieties of the language; the Modern Stand-

ard Arabic (MSA) includes publications from 

every Arab country that uses Arabic as official 

language and it has been decided to include Ara-

bic publications from outside the Arab nations. 

However, they are different in terms of corpus 

design criteria and data compilation. For exam-

ple, on the one hand, Egyptian Modern Standard 

Arabic is the most widespread variety that is 

used to represent MSA in ICA corpus. On the 

other hand, in building ICE11
 
a fixed size from 

each variation was taken from any country that 

uses English as official language (one million 

words); however, balance in size does not always 

mean fixing a number of words for each varia-

tion as will be clarified in the next section.  

                                                 
8
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2004T23 

9http://www.kacstac.org.sa/Pages/default.aspx 

10http://arabicorpus.byu.edu/search.php 
11

http://ice-corpora.net/ICE/INDEX.HTM 

9



It is important to realize that the creation of 

ICA is a "cyclical" process, requiring constant 

reevaluation during the corpus compilation. Con-

sequently, we are willing to change our initial 

corpus design if there are any circumstances 

would arise that requires such changes. 

2.1 ICA Design 

ICA genre design relied on Dewey decimal 

classification of documents; however, this has 

been further classified to suit clear genre distinc-

tion rather than classifications for libraries. For 

example, Dewey decimal classification combines 

history and geography in one classification, 

while in ICA they are separated into two sub 

genres related to humanities genre. It has been 

designed to reflect a more or less real picture of 

how Arabic language exists in every field and in 

every country rather than relying on a theoretical 

image.  

ICA is designed to include 11 genres, namely; 

Strategic Sciences, Social Sciences, Sports, Reli-

gion, Literature, Humanities, Natural Sciences, 

Applied Sciences, Art, Biography and Miscella-

neous which are further classified into 24 sub-

genres, namely; Politics, Law, Economy, Sociol-

ogy, Islamic, Pros etc. Moreover, there are 4 sub-

sub-genres, namely; Novels, Short Stories, Child 

Stories and plays. As shown in Figure 1. 
 

 
“Figure 1: ICA Genres” 

Planning of ICA data collection is based on 

some criteria related to corpus design such as 

representativeness, diversity, balance and size 

that were taken into the consideration. In collect-

ing a corpus that represents the Arabic Language, 

the main focus was to cover the same genres 

from different sources and from all around the 

Arab nations. However, we decided to add Ara-

bic data that belongs to the Arabic language even 

if they had been published outside as al-Hayat 

magazine which is published in London12
.
 

Size criterion in the corpus design focuses on 

the number of words. However, issues of size are 

also related to the number of texts from different 

genres, the number of samples from each text, 

and the number of words in each sample. Such 

decisions were taken based on how common the 

genre or the source is. Balance in a corpus has 

not been addressed by having equal amounts of 

texts from different sources or genres. It has been 

addressed by the factual distribution of the lan-

guage real use. For example, Literature genre 

represents 12% and biography genre represents 

2% from the corpus data distribution. 

2.2 Text Compilation and Categorization 

The International Corpus of Arabic has been 

compiled manually, and that enabled the corpus 

compilers to select all and only the MSA data 

rather than the colloquial Arabic data. Also, the 

ICA text categorization has been done manually 

according to the topic of the text and the distinct 

semantic features for each genre. These features 

keep the ICA data categorization objective rather 

than being subjective; depending on the compiler 

intuition. Accordingly, ICA texts can be consid-

ered as a good training data for text categoriza-

tion system. ICA is planned to contain 100 mil-

lion words. However, currently it is still around 

80 million words.  

ICA data is composed of Modern Standard 

Arabic (MSA) written texts. There are different 

resources for compiling the data. It has been de-

cided to compile all available Arabic data written 

in MSA. ICA will be composed of four sources, 

namely; 1. Press source which is divided into 

three sub-sources, namely; (a) Newspapers, (b) 

Magazines which had been compiled from the 

official magazines along with newspapers that 

are written in MSA such as Al Ahram from 

Egypt, Addstour from Jordan, Al Hayat from 

Lebanon … etc. finally the publications that have 

a printed copy as well as  a soft electronic copy 

through world wide web such as 

(http://www.ahram.org.eg/), and (c) Electronic 

Press which had been compiled from magazines 

and newspapers that are written in MSA and 

have only soft electronic copy through world 

wide web. (2) Net articles which were compiled 

from forums and blogs that are also written in 

MSA. (3) Books which had been compiled from 

                                                 
12

http://alhayat.com/AboutWebsite 

10



all available books that are written in MSA and 

have a soft copy. (4) Academics which had been 

compiled from the scientific papers, researchers 

thesis, PhDs etc.. 

 
“Figure 2: ICA Sources” 

2.3 Metadata 

Each compiled text has its own text encoding. 

This coding process for the text file names will 

customize the search scope at which level of the 

corpus this file belongs. For example, the follow-

ing filename coding [AH10-A1.1.1_140207] can 

be clarified as shown in Table1:  
 

AH10 AH: Indicate the source of the text 

which is Ahram newspaper.   

10: This attached number that indi-

cates that this file is the 10th article 

in that newspaper with the same 

genre, subgenre and date. 

A1.1.1 Contains three pieces of infor-

mation: Newspaper source (A1), 

Strategic science "genre" (A1.1) 

and Politics "sub-genre" (A1.1.1). 

140207 Contains three pieces of issuing 

information: The day (14), the 

month (02) and the year (2007). 

“Table 1:  An example of filenames coding” 

ICA Metadata covers the needed information 

related to Corpus for each compiled text as data 

source providers, Text code name, Text size, 

Website, date of publishing, publisher (name and 

country), writer (name, gender, age, nationality 

and educational level) and Collection/Annotation 

Specifications. 

2.4 Copyrights 

One of the serious constraints on developing 

large corpora  and their widespread use is nation-

al and international copyright legalizations. Ac-

cording to copyright laws, it is necessary and 

sensible to protect the authors as well as the pub-

lishers rights of the texts that they had produced. 

ICA data Copy rights and publishing issues are 

in progress by Bibliotheca Alexandrina Legal 

Affairs. For that reason, the ICA data is not 

available to be downloaded but the researchers 

can search the ICA data via the ICA website13
.
 

2.5 ICA statistics 

Corpus analysis is both qualitative and quan-

titative. One of the advantages of corpora is that 

they can readily provide quantitative data which 

intuitions cannot provide reliably. The use of 

quantification in corpus linguistics typically goes 

well beyond simple counting. 

Table 2 shows some of the numbers of ICA 

data coverage. It must be noted that total number 

of “Tokens” refers to all word forms except 

numbers, foreign words and punctuations to re-

flect the real size of the used word forms before 

the analysis stage. Coverage interval starts from 

1993  up to 2014; however, there is a compila-

tion problems as result of the data availability 

since the size of the data was not equal through-

out the years. Balance is considered as an issue 

for the ICA current situation. It deals with the 

coverage of texts over the years rather than bal-

ance according to time span and that will remain 

as issue in the future.  

 

Statistics Total Number 

No. of texts 70,022 

No. of words 79,569,384 

No. of Tokens 76,199,414 

No. of unique words 1,272,766 

No. of ICA sources 4 

No. of sub sources 3 

No. of genres 11 

No. of sub genres 24 

No. of sub sub-genres 4 

No. of countries 20 

No. of covered years 22 

No. of writers 1021 

“Table 2 : Shows qualitative linguistic analysis 

for ICA statistics” 

 
 

                                                 
13

http://www.bibalex.org/ica/ar/ 

11



3. ICA Analysis stage 

The first stage of linguistic analysis of the In-

ternational corpus of Arabic is to analyze the 100 

million words morphologically.   

The stem-based approach “concatenative ap-

proach” has been adopted as the linguistic ap-

proach. There are many morphological analyzers 

for Arabic; some of them are available for re-

search and evaluation while the rest are proprie-

tary commercial applications. Buckwalter Arabic 

Morphological Analyzer (Buckwalter, 2004) is a 

well-known analyzer in the field`s literature and 

has even been considered as the “most respected 

lexical resource of its kind” (Hajič et al, 2005). It 

is used in LDC Arabic POS-tagger, Penn Arabic 

Dependency Treebank, and the Prague Arabic 

Dependency Treebank. It is designed to consist 

of a main database of word forms that interact 

with other concatenation databases. Every word 

form is entered separately, and the stem is used 

as the base form. The word is viewed as  to be 

composed of a basic unit that can be combined 

with morphemes governed by morph tactic rules. 

It makes use of three lexicons: a Prefixes lexi-

con, a Stem lexicon, and a Suffixes lexicon. 

Buckwalter Arabic Morphological Analyzer 

(BAMA) has been selected since it was the most 

suitable lexical resource to our approach. (Alan-

sary, et al. 2008). 

Although it has many advantages including 

its ability to provide a lot of information such as 

Lemma, Vocalization, Part of Speech (POS), 

Gloss, Prefix(s), Stem, Word class, Suffix(s), 

Number, Gender, Definiteness and Case or 

Mood, it does not always provide all the infor-

mation that the ICA requires, and in some cases, 

the provided analyses would need some modifi-

cation. Its results may give the right solution for 

the Arabic input word, provide more than one 

result that needs to be disambiguated to reach the 

best solution, provide many solutions but none of 

them is right, segment the input words wrongly 

without taking the segmentation rules in consid-

eration or provide no solutions. Consequently, 

solutions enhancement is needed in these situa-

tions. 

Number, gender and definiteness need to be 

modified according to their morphosyntactic 

properties. Some tags had been added to Buck-

walter’s analyzer lexicon, some lemmas, glossa-

ries had been modified and others had been add-

ed. In addition, new analysis and qualifiers had 

been added as root, stem pattern and name enti-

ties. (Alansary, et al. 2008) 

Due to all these modifications,  there are 

some clear differences between the tool adopted 

by ICA and BAMA 2.0 as: 

 There are 44,756 distinct lemmas in ICA lexi-
con while they are 40,654 in BAMA 2.0. 

 The root feature has been added to ICA lexi-
con representing 3,451 distinct roots, the pat-

tern feature has been added to ICA lexicon rep-

resenting 782 distinct stem patterns and they 

will be increased to cover all Arabic roots. 

 There are 191 distinct tags in ICA while they 
are 167 in BAMA 2.0. Table 3 shows some 

tags that have been added to ICA lexicon that 

are not found in BAMA: 

 

Tag Description 

NOUN(ADV_M) Adverb of Manner 

NOUN(ADV_T) Adverb of Time 

NOUN(ADV_P) Adverb of Place 

NOUN(VERBAL) Verbal noun 

NOUN_PROP(ADV_T) Proper nouns that 

refer to adverb of 

time 

NOUN(INTERJ) The vocative nouns 

“Table 3: Added Tags in ICA lexicon” 

 Table 4 shows some tags that are added to 
prefixes and suffixes: 

 

Sample of Added Prefixes and suffixes 

CV_SUBJ:2FP 

Prefixes 

CV_SUBJ:2FS 

CV_SUBJ:2MP 

CV_SUBJ:2MS 

wa/PREP 

la/PREP 

>a/INTERROG_PART 

hAt/NSUFF 

Suffixes 

NSUFF_SUBJ:2MS 

CVSUFF_SUBJ:2MD 

CVSUFF_SUBJ:2FP 

CVSUFF_DO:3FS 

CVSUFF_DO:3FS 

“Table 4: Sample of added prefixes and suffix-

es.” 

Moreover, new features have been added in 

number as well as in definiteness qualifiers as the 

plural broken (PL_BR) and the EDAFAH fea-

tures. 

These modifications and other new features 

were used in disambiguating two million words 

to be used as a training data extracted from the 

12



ICA corpus to represent a sample of Arabic texts. 

After disambiguating the training date, some lin-

guistic rules had been extracted, depending on 

the contexts, to help in the automatic disambigu-

ation process of Bibliotheca Alexandrina Mor-

phological Analysis Enhancer (BAMAE) as will 

be discusses in the next section.  

After solving the BAMA’s problems and dis-

ambiguating the data according to its context, the 

BAMA enhanced output along with the training 

data will be ready to be used in the next phase of 

analysis.  

In the ICA, There are 5 tag sets categories of 

the stem which are divided into 26 tag types: 

1. Verbal category: it contains 5 tag types; 
Command Verb, Imperfect Verb, Imperfect 

Passive Verb, Past Verb and Past Passive Verb.  

2. Nominal category: it contains 9 tag types; 
Adjective, Noun, Adverb of Manner, Adverb of 

Place, Adverb of Time, Verbal Noun, Proper 

Noun, Proper Noun (Adverb of Time) and 

Proper Noun (Interjection).  

3. Pronouns category: it contains 3 tag types; 
Demonstrative Pronoun, Pronoun and Relative 

Pronoun.  

4. Particles category: it contains 7 tags; Focus 
Particle, Future Particle, Interrogative Particle, 

Negative Particle, Particle, Verbal Particle and 

Exception Particle. 

5. Conjunctions category: it contains 2 tags; 
Conjunctions and Sub Conjunctions. 

In addition, there are 2 tags that are not divid-

ed into any types; Preposition and Interjection 

tags. 

Some words were found to have no solution 

for one of three reasons. First, some words are 

not analyzed altogether by BAMA; second, some 

words are analyzed, but none of the provided 

solutions is suitable to their contexts in the text; 

third, some words are wrongly segmented by 

BAMA. Consequently, 15,605 words have been 

analyzed manually in the same manner they 

would have been analyzed automatically.  

3.1 Bibliotheca Alexandrina Morphological 

Analysis Enhancer  (BAMAE) 

It is a system that has been built to morpho-

logically analyze and disambiguate the Arabic 

texts depending on BAMA’s enhanced output of 

the ICA.  It was preferred to use BAMA’s en-

hanced output of the ICA since it contains more 

information than any other system of BAMA’s  

output. This is the reason that made  the mem-

bers of the ICA team aim to build their own 

morphological disambiguator (BAMAE).  

In order to reach the best solution for the in-

put word, BAMAE preforms automatic disam-

biguation process carried on three levels that de-

pends primarily on the basic POS information 

(Prefix(s), Stem, Tag and Suffixes) that is ob-

tained from the enhanced BAMA’s output. 

(Alansary, 2012): 

 Word level which avoids or eliminates the 
impossible solutions that Buckwalter pro-

vides due to the wrong concatenations of 

prefix(s), stem and suffix(s). 

 Context level where some linguistic rules 
have been extracted from the training data to 

help in disambiguating words depending on 

their context. 

 Memory based level which is not applicable 
in all cases; it is only applicable when all the 

previous levels fail to decide the best solu-

tion for the Arabic input word.  

Figure 3 shows BAMAE architecture starting 

from the input text and the numerous solutions 

for each word in order to predict the best POS 

solution for each word. 

 

 

“Figure 3: BAMAE Architecture.” 

13



After selecting the best POS solution for each 

word, BAMAE detects the rest of information 

accordingly. It detects the lemmas, roots (de-

pending primarily on the lemmas), stem patterns 

(depending on stems, roots and lemmas), number 

(depending on basic POS and stem patterns), 

gender (depending also on basic POS, stem pat-

terns and sometimes depending on number), def-

initeness (depending on POS or their sequences), 

case (depending on definiteness and sequences of 

POS) and finally it detects the vocalization of 

each word. 

3.2 ICA Analysis Evaluation 

The testing data has been evaluated based on 

the rules extracted from the manually disambigu-

ated training data in order to determine the 

strengths and weaknesses of the enhancer mod-

ule in reaching the best solution. The testing data 

set will contain 1,000,000 representative words 

that were manually analyzed specially for the 

testing stage. Precision and Recall are the evalua-

tion measures used to evaluate the BAMAE sys-

tem. Precision is a measure of the ability of a 

system to present only relevant results. Recall is 

a measure of the ability of a system to present all 

relevant results. The evaluation has been con-

ducted on two levels; the first level includes the 

precision, recall and accuracy for each qualifier 

separately as shown in table 5. The second level 

includes the basic POS in addition to adding a 

new qualifier each time to investigative how it 

would affect the accuracy as shown in table 6. 

 

 
“Table 5: Precision, Recall and Accuracy for 

each qualifier”

 
“Table 6: Accuracy decreasing as a result of adding new qualifier each time to the main POS Tag” 

3.3 Comparing BAMAE with MADA 

MADA (Morphological Analysis and Disam-

biguation for Arabic) is selected to be compared 

with BAMAE since both of them uses Buckwal-

ter’s output analyses to help in disambiguating 

the Arabic texts. The primary purpose of MADA 

3.2 is to extract linguistic information as much as 

possible about each word in the text, from given 

raw Arabic text, in order to reduce or eliminate 

any ambiguity concerning the word. MADA 

does this by using ALMORGEANA
14

 (an Arabic 

lexeme-based morphology analyzer) to generate 

every possible interpretation of each input word. 

Then, MADA  applies a number of language 

models to determine which analysis is the most 

probable for each word, given the word’s con-

text. 

MADA makes use of up to 19 orthogonal fea-

tures to select, for each word, a proper analysis 

from a list of potential analyses that are provided 

                                                 
14

 

http://clipdemos.umiacs.umd.edu/ALMORGEANA/  

14



by the Buckwalter Arabic Morphological Ana-

lyzer (BAMA; Buckwalter 2004). The BAMA 

analysis that most closely matches the collection 

of weighted, predicted features, is chosen. The 

19 features include 14 morphological features 

that MADA predicts using 14 distinct Support 

Vector Machines (SVMs) trained on the PATB. 

In addition, MADA uses five features that cap-

ture information such as spelling variations and 

n-gram statistics. 

Since MADA selects a complete analysis 

from BAMA, all decisions regarding morpholog-

ical ambiguity, lexical ambiguity, tokenization, 

diacritization and POS tagging in any possible 

POS tag set are made in one fell swoop (Habash 

and Rambow, 2005; Habash and Rambow 2007; 

Roth et al, 2008). The choices are ranked in 

terms of their score. MADA has over 96% accu-

racy on basic morphological choice (including 

tokenization but excluding case, mood, and 

nunation) and on lemmatization. MADA has 

over 86% accuracy in predicting full diacritiza-

tion (including case and mood). Detailed com-

parative evaluations are provided in the follow-

ing publications: (Habash and Rambow, 2005; 

Habash and Rambow 2007; Roth et al, 2008). 

In order to compare between BAMAE and 

MADA, the selected text, to be run on both sys-

tems, was selected from the ICA training data to 

facilitate the comparing process. To make the 

comparing process more accurate, some justifica-

tions were needed in MADA to be compatible 

with BAMAE format. For example, in number 

qualifier the feature of singular (s) was handled 

to be (SG), in case qualifier the feature of nomi-

native (u) was handled to be (NOM), in tags 

qualifier the verbs were handled with relation to 

aspect and stem category. The comparing pro-

cess will be done in terms of some qualifiers; 

diacritization, tags, stems, number, gender and 

definiteness including Arabic words only as 

shown in Table 7: 

Qualifier BAMAE MADA 

Diacritization 89.61% 78.78% 

Tags 93.94% 85.28% 

Stems 96.97% 91.34% 

Number 96.10% 64.93% 

Gender 96.53% 66.67% 

Definiteness 96.53% 60.61% 

“Table 7: Comparing between MADA and 

BAMAE.” 
There are some notes that must be taken into consid-

eration: 

 The problems of detecting the diacritization in 
BAMAE are related to either predicting the 

case ending wrongly or predicting the whole 

solution wrongly.  

 The problems of detecting the diacritization in 
MADA are related to predicting the case end-

ing wrongly, predicting the whole solution 

wrongly, missing some diacritics in some 

words, or missing all diacritics in some words. 

 The problems of detecting the tags in MADA 
are related to either predicting the tags wrongly 

or the differences in some tags from those of 

BAMAE. For example the adverbs of time or 

place in BAMAE are assigned with ‘NOUN 

(ADV_T)’ or ‘NOUN (ADV_P)’ in BAMAE 

while they are assigned with ‘NOUN’, sub 

conjunction ‘SUB_CONJ’, and preposition 

‘PREP’. This happens as a result of using 

BAMA’s output without enhancing such tags. 

In addition the wrong concatenations of 

BAMA’s output cause problems in detecting 

some tags. 

 The problems of detecting stems in both 
BAMAE and MADA are related to predicting 

the solution wrongly. 

 The problem of detecting number, gender and 
definiteness in MADA are related to using 

BAMA’s output without regarding morphosyn-

tactic properties.  

 The comparison between cases in BAMAE 
and MADA can’t be done since MADA as-

signs case without regarding the diacritics of 

this case. For example, it assigns the accusative 

case ‘ACC’ for both ‘a/ACC’ and ‘i/ACC’ in 

BAMAE. 

 There are some qualifiers in BAMAE which 
are not found in MADA; Root and Stem Pat-

tern. The root qualifier has been assigned with 

accuracy 99.45% while the stem pattern quali-

fier has been assigned with accuracy 94.34%. 

 The lemma qualifier has been assigned in 
BAMAE with accuracy 96.54%, while it is 

does not existed in MADA. 
 

4. ICA Website15 

It is an interface that allows users to interact 

with the corpus data in a number of ways. The 

interface provides four options of searching the 

corpus content; namely, Exact Match Search, 

Lemma Based Search, Root Based Search and 

Stem Based Search. 

More search options are available; namely, 

Word Class and Sub Class, Stem Pattern, Num-

                                                 
15http://www.bibalex.org/ica/en/ 

15



ber, Definiteness, Gender, Country (Advanced 

search). Moreover, the scope of search may in-

clude the whole corpus, Source(s), Sub-

Source(s), Genre(s), Sub-Sub-Genre(s) or Sub-

Genre(s). 

Figure 4 presents an example of a query of 

the analyzed data that states: when the word 

 is searched for using a Lemma-Based ’وعد‘

search option, the system will highlight all possi-

ble lemmas that the word may have, since Arabic 

is orthographically ambiguous. In this example, 

the system will highlight several possible lem-

mas; ‘wa؟ada’ ‘to promise’, ‘wa؟d’ ‘Promise’ 

and ‘؟aada’ ‘return’. If the lemma ‘wa؟d’ ‘Prom-

ise’ is chosen the output search in this case will 

include all words that have this lemma such as 

-d’…etc. with all possi؟Promises’, ‘alwa‘ ’وعود‘

ble word forms together with concordance lines. 

 
“Figure 4: The lemma ‘wa؟d’ ‘Promise’ output 

search.” 

In the search output information about the 

number of search result, country, source, genre, 

sentence and context are also available. This is  

phase one of ICA website and more enhance-

ments are expected in later phases. The current 

phase of ICA application does not represent the 

final release as we are still receiving users com-

ments and reports till  all of them are implement-

ed. However, The official phase of ICA applica-

tion will give the opportunity for the researchers 

to save their query results.  

5. Conclusion 

The International Corpus of Arabic (ICA) is 

built, about 80 million words have been collect-

ed, covering all of the Arab world. About 2 mil-

lion words have been disambiguated manually as 

a training data. About 50 million words have 

been disambiguated using (BAMAE). The evalu-

ation has been done using precision and recall 

measurements for 1,000,000 words. At this point, 
Precision measurement ranges from 95%-92% while 

recall measurement was 92%-89%. The percentages 

are expected to rise by implementing the im-

provements while working on larger amounts of 

data. ICA website plays a role in overcoming the 

lack of Arabic resources. It is the 1
st
 online freely 

available easy access query on 100,000,000 

words which reflect the richness and variation of 

the ICA analyzed corpus to help the NLP com-

munity in specific and other researchers in gen-

eral. 

References 

Ahmed Abdelali, James Cowie&Hamdy S. Soliman. 

2005, Building a modern standard Arabic corpus. 

In Proceedings of workshop on computational 

modeling of lexical acquisition. The split meeting. 

Croatia, (25-28 July). 

CaminoR. Rizzo.  2010, Getting on with corpus com-

pilation: From theory to practice. In ESP World 

Journal, Issue 1 (27), Volume 9. 

Charles F. Meyer. 2002, English Corpus Linguistics: 

An Introduction, Cambridge University Press.  

Hajic J., Smrz O., Zemánek P., Šnaidauf J., &Beška 

E. (2004, September),  Prague Arabic Dependency 

Treebank: Development in Data and Tools. InProc. 

of the NEMLAR Intern. Conf. on Arabic Language 

Resources and Tools (pp. 110-117). 

Jan Hajic J., OtkarSmrz O., Petr Zemánek P., Jan 

Šnaidauf J., &Emanuel Beška E. 2004, (2004, Sep-

tember),  Prague Arabic Dependency Treebank: 

Development in Data and Tools. In Proceedings of 

the NEMLAR Intern. Conf. on Arabic Language 

Resources and Tools (pp. 110-117). (2004, Septem-

ber). 

Jan Hajic, OtakarSmrz, Tim Buckwalter ,& Hubert 

Jin. September. 2005,  Feature-based tagger of ap-

proximations of functional Arabic morphology. In 

Proceedings of the Workshop on Treebanks and 

Linguistic Theories (TLT), Barcelona, Spain. 

John Sinclair. 1991, Corpus, Concordance and Collo-

cation (Describing English Language). Oxford Uni-

versity Press. 

Mahmoud El-Haj & Rim Koulali. 2013, KALIMAT a 

Multipurpose Arabic Corpus. In Proceedings of the 

16



2
nd

 Workshop on Arabic Corpus Linguistics 

(WACL-2) . 

Mohamed Maamouri, Ann Bies, Tim Buckwalter 

&WegdanMekki. 2004, The Penn Arabic Treebank: 

Building a Large-Scale Annotated Arabic Corpus, 

In Proceedings of NEMLAR conference on Arabic 

language resources and tools (pp. 102-109). 

Muhammad Atiyya, Khalid Choukri& Mustafa 

Yaseen. (2005), Specifcations of the Arabic Written 

Corpus. NEMLAR Project. September 29
th

 2005.  

Nizar Habash , Owen Rambow, & Ryan Roth. 2009, 

MADA+ TOKAN: A Toolkit for Arabic Tokeniza-

tion, Diacritization, Morphological Disambigua-

tion, POS Tagging, Stemming and Lemmatization. 

In  Proceedings of the 2
nd

 International Conference 

on Arabic Language Resources and Tools 

(MEDAR), Cairo, Egypt.‏ 

Nizar Habash and Owen Rambow. 2005, Arabic To-

kenization, Part-Of-Speech Tagging and Morpho-

logical Disambiguation in One Fell Swoop. In Pro-

ceedings of ACL’05, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 

Petter Zemanek. 2001, CLARA (Corpus Linguae Ara-

bica): An Overview. In Proceedings of ACL/EACL 

Workshop on Arabic Language. 

Piotr Pęzik. 2010, New Ways to Language. Chapter 21 

(pp. 433-46), WydawnictwoUniwersytetuŁódzkie-

go. 

Ryan Roth, Owen Rambow, Nizar Habash, Mona Di-

ab, and Cynthia Rudin. 2008, Arabic Morphologi-

cal Tagging, Diacritization, and Lemmatization Us-

ing Lexeme Models and Feature Ranking. In Pro-

ceedings of ACL-08: HLT, Short Papers (Compan-

ion Volume), pages (117–120), Columbus, Ohio, 

USA, June 2008. 

Sameh Alansary, Magdy Nagi & Noha Adly. 2008, 

Towards Analysing the International Corpus of Ar-

abic (ICA): Progress of Morphological Stage. In 

Proceedings of 8th International Conference on 

Language Engineering, Egypt. 

Sameh Alansary. 2012, BAMAE: Buckwalter Arabic 

Morphological Analyser Enhancer. in Proceedings 

of 4
th

 international conference on Arabic language 

processing, Mohamed Vth University Souissi, Re-

bate, Morocco, May 2-3 2012. 

Sue Atkins S., Jeremy Clear J.& Nicholas Ostler N. 

(1992), Corpus Design Criteria, Literary and lin-

guistic computing, 7(1), 1-16. 

Tim Buckwalter. 2004,  Buckwalter Arabic Morpho-

logical Analyzer Version 2.0. Linguistic Data Con-

sortium (LDC) catalogue number LDC2004L02, 

ISBN 1-58563-324-0. 

WajdiZaghouani. 2014, Critical Survey of the Freely 

Available Arabic Corpora. In Proceedings of Work-

shop on Free/Open-Source Arabic Corpora and 

Corpora Processing Tools.‏ 

 

17


