



















































Latent User Models for Online River Information Tailoring


Proceedings of the 8th International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 133–137,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19-21 June 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Latent User Models for Online River Information Tailoring 

 
Xiwu Han1, Somayajulu Sripada1, Kit (CJA) Macleod2, and Antonio A. R. Ioris3 

Department of Computing Sciences, University of Aberdeen, UK1 
James Hutton Institute, Aberdeen; University of Exeter, Exeter, UK2	  

School of GeoSciences, University of Edinburgh, UK3 

{xiwuhan,yaji.sripada}@abdn.ac.uk  
kit.macleod@hutton.ac.uk 

a.ioris@ed.ac.uk

Abstract 

This paper explores Natural Language Genera-
tion techniques for online river information 
tailoring. To solve the problem of unknown 
users, we propose ‘latent models’, which relate 
typical visitors to river web pages, river data 
types, and river related activities. A hierarchy 
is used to integrate domain knowledge and la-
tent user knowledge, and serves as the search 
space for content selection, which triggers us-
er-oriented selection rules when they visit a 
page. Initial feedback received from user 
groups indicates that the latent models deserve 
further research efforts. 
 

1 Introduction 

Within recent decades, access to online river in-
formation has increased exponentially thanks to 
great progresses in data collection and storage 
technologies employed by hydrological organiza-
tions worldwide (Dixon, 2010). Local residents 
nearby rivers and those engaged in river related 
activities are now much better informed and 
more engaged with data providers than decades 
ago. However, organizations such as SEPA 
(Scottish Environment Protection Agency), CEH 
(Centre for Ecology and Hydrology), EA (Envi-
ronment Agency) in UK, and quite a few Cana-
dian and Australian ones are working to improve 
the presentation of river information further. 
Many of these data providers, who are mostly 
government agencies, provide descriptive texts 
along with archived data of flow, level, flood and 
temperature along with their graphs and/or ta-
bles. A typical example of linguistic description 
from the EA website is shown below: 

   The river level at Morwick is 0.65 me-
tres. This measurement was recorded at 
08:45 on 23/01/2013. The typical river 

level range for this location is between 
0.27 metres and 2.60 metres. The highest 
river level recorded at this location is 6.32 
metres and the river level reached 6.32 me-
tres on 07/09/2008.1 

   The above descriptive text could vary to some 
extent according to different river users. For in-
stance, it may provide information perceived as 
good news by farmers whilst other users e.g. ca-
noeists or paddlers may interpret the information 
as bad news for their activity. Such tailored in-
formation provision promotes communication 
efficiency between stakeholders and the relevant 
government offices (Macleod et al., 2012). We 
explored data-to-text techniques (Reiter, 2007) in 
promoting online river information provision. 
Our engagement activities with river stakehold-
ers showed that there could be great difficulties 
in specifying user groups for online river infor-
mation tailoring. First, the relations between do-
main knowledge and user knowledge are difficult 
to be acquired due to domain sensitive challeng-
es. Second, for online communication, the issue 
that users themselves sometimes are not sure 
about their tasks further hinders user modeling. 
This paper proposes an alternative approach of 
latent user models, instead of directly asking us-
ers to indicate what they are interested in. 

2 User Modeling Problem 

It has long been argued in NLG research that 
contents of generated texts should be oriented to 
users’ tasks and existing knowledge. User mod-
els are usually employed for the tailoring task. 
However, user models may not be easily ac-
quired. Reiter et al (2003a) claimed that no NLG 
system actually used detailed user models with 
non-trivial numbers of users. Most commercial 

                                                
1 http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/homeandleisure/ 
floods/riverlevels/120694.aspx?stationId=8143 

133



NLG systems would rather do with very limited 
user models, and examples are STOP (Reiter et 
al., 2003b), SUMTIME-MOUSAM (Sripada et 
al., 2002), and GIRL (Williams, 2002).  
   Recent research on user modeling falls into 
roughly three categories, i.e. explicit, implicit 
and hybrid approaches 2 . All approaches start 
with knowledge acquisition. Explicit models then 
define a finite number of user groups, and finally 
generate tailored texts for users to choose from, 
or choose to generate for a unique group at each 
time, e.g. (Molina, 2011 and 2012). Implicit 
models, e.g. (Mairesse and Walker, 2011), then 
construct a framework of human computer inter-
action to learn about the values of a finite set of 
features, and finally generate tailored texts ac-
cording to the intersection between domain 
knowledge and feature values. Hybrid models, 
e.g. (Bouayad-Agha et al, 2012) and (Dannels et 
al, 2012), specify both a finite set of user groups 
and a human computer interaction framework, 
and finally classify online users into defined 
groups for tailored generation. 

3 Latent User Models 
Online river information tailoring involves a 
website, such as SEPA’s, which provides map 
based (or text based) searchable river infor-
mation 3. The NLG task is to generate user-
oriented texts while users are navigating the 
website. Both explicit and implicit user models 
can be employed for online river information 
tailoring. A finite set of user groups could be 
defined according to river-related activities, such 
as flooding, fishing, canoeing, etc. along with a 
set of features such as level trends, temperature 
ranges, etc. Then an interactive navigation mech-
anism could ask a user to either choose a group 
or tailor his/her own parameters, and relevant 
texts can be generated thereafter.  
   Unfortunately, our engagement activities with 
stakeholders showed that it is almost impossible 
to define user models using mappings from river-
related activities to river data features. Further-
more, frequent users are reluctant to spend time 
on specifying their preferences before viewing 
the river information. For such an NLG task, the 
uncertainty comes not only from a large variety 
of river users and stakeholders, but also from the 
issue that users themselves sometimes are not 

                                                
2 Note the difference between NLG and HCI user models. 
The former tailor the output of NLG systems, while the later 
tailor the systems themselves. 
3 http://sepa.org.uk/water/river_levels/river_level_data.aspx 

sure of what data features are associated with 
making decisions about their activities. 
   Our efforts on dealing with NLG domain 
knowledge and user models brought about the 
idea of extending domain knowledge to statisti-
cally cover user knowledge, without explicitly 
defining user groups or implicitly modeling po-
tential users. We argue that non-trivial number of 
uncertain users can be dynamically and statisti-
cally modeled by integrating a module for web 
mining and Google analytics into the NLG pipe-
line system. We regard these statistically estab-
lished models as latent since they are hidden be-
neath the domain knowledge, and the latent vari-
able of typical users is linked to river data types 
and river related activities. 

 
Figure 1. Domain Knowledge with Latent Models 

   The domain knowledge and latent user models 
are constructed as a whole in a hierarchical struc-
ture, as in Figure 1. We technically maintain this 
hierarchy as an ontology based on existing ap-
proaches e.g. (Bontcheva, 2005; Bouayad-Agha 
et al, 2012). The general part of the main frame 
was extracted from hydrology or environment 
websites, such as SEPA, CEH and EA, with the 
view that these websites were deliberately estab-
lished hierarchically by manual work of domain 
experts in the fields of hydrology, ecology and/or 
geology. This part serves as the center of our 
domain knowledge, which starts with a root node 
and branches to river catchments, rivers, river 
stations and river data, while river data consists 
of water level, water flow, water temperature, 
etc. There are also some non-hierarchical rela-
tions embedded, namely the tributary relation 
between rivers, the upriver relation between river 
stations, and the relationship between certain 
river data and river related activities. In addition 

134



to the time series on the status of the rivers, other 
information is integrated offline. Then, the do-
main knowledge was extended to cover potential 
users’ knowledge and online visiting behaviors. 
The extended information, or the latent user 
models, as denoted in italic fonts in Figure 1, 
includes three parts, i.e. the webpage visiting 
frequency, the relevance degrees between certain 
river data and river related activities, and the 
ranking of popularities of river-related activities 
for each river station. 
   Our extension process includes three stages, 
i.e. web mining, Google analytics, and engage-
ment activities. At first, basic and rough infor-
mation about river stations was statistically gath-
ered by using free or trial version web mining 
tools, such as spiders and crawlers, and corpus 
analysis tools. For all combinations of elements 
respectively from each pair of columns in Table 
1, we simply count the tokens of co-occurrence 
within an empirical window of 10 words. For the 
co-occurring tokens between a given river station 
and related activities, the top five tokens were 
selected by filtering according to one threshold 
on co-occurrence frequencies and another 
threshold on frequency differences between ad-
jacent ranked types. For the co-occurring tokens 
between a given activity and river data type, rel-
evant tokens were chosen by only one threshold 
on the co-occurrence frequencies. Finally, the co-
occurring types of river stations and river data 
with high frequencies were used to fine-tune the 
previously acquired results, supposing that some 
river stations seldom or never provide some 
types of river data. 

River Stations Related Activities 
River Data 

Type 
Aberlour 
Aberuchill 
Aberuthven 
Abington 
Alford 
Allnabad 
Almondell 
Alness 
Ancrum 
Anie 
Apigill 
Arbroath 
… 

Farming 
Fishing 
Canoeing 
Swimming 
Kayaking 
Rowing 
Boating 
Research 
Education 
Hiking 
Cycling 
… 
… 

Level 
Flow 
Temperature 
Width 
Rainfall 
Wind 
Pollution 
Birds 
Animals 
Fishes 
… 
… 
 

Table 1. Basic Domain Knowledge for Extension 

    We further had the statistically acquired re-
sults complemented and modified by Google 
analytics data for river websites and engagement 
activities with domain experts and users. Google 

analytics provided us with webpage visiting fre-
quencies for each hydrological station, and con-
tributed to the ranking of river-related activity 
for a given station. Knowledge gathered from 
engagement activities, such as semi-structured 
interviews and focus groups, was mainly used to 
confirm the statistically gathered information 
during the first two stages (as well as refine our 
overall understanding of data demands, water-
related activities and perception of existing 
communication tools). For example, flood warn-
ing information was moved up in the ranks since 
over 5 million people in England and Wales live 
and work in properties that are at risk of flooding 
from rivers or the sea4 (Marsh and Hannaford, 
2007). Our present research is limited to rivers in 
Scotland, involving 107 river catchments, 233 
rivers, and 339 river stations. The webpage visit-
ing frequencies for these stations were gathered 
from Google analytics data for the website of 
SEPA5. The page visiting frequency for each riv-
er station is represented by a time series with 
yearly periodicity, and each period includes 12 
numeric elements calculated by dividing the 
number of monthly visiting times of the station 
by the total number of monthly visiting times of 
all river stations. 

4 NLG for Online Tailoring 
Our NLG pipeline system takes numeric data of 
a given river station as input, and outputs a tai-
lored description for that river station. The sys-
tem analyzes data of water level, flow, and tem-
perature as similar to time series analysis tasks 
presented in (Turner et al., 2006). Then, the ana-
lyzed patterns are interpreted into symbolic con-
ceptual representations, including vague expres-
sions, which might facilitate users’ understand-
ing (van Deemter, 2010). SEPA defines normal 
ranges for river levels and we use these defini-
tions in our computations to generate vague ex-
pressions. For content selection, we define five 
sets: S = {s1, s2, …} the set of stations; A = {a1, 
a2, …} the set of activities for a given station; D 
= {d1, d2, …}= {{d11, d12, …}, {d21, d22, …}, …} 
the set of river data sets for a given station; AD = 
{a1d1, a1d2, …, a2d1, …} where aidj refers to in-
formation from the interpretation of an activity ai 
under the condition of data dj; and SAD an over-
view on one station. For a river station, using the 
domain knowledge hierarchy, which embeds la-
                                                
4 http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/homeandleisure/ 
floods/default.aspx. 
5 http://www.sepa.org.uk. 

135



tent user models implicitly (Figure 1), we select 
A ∪ D ∪ AD ∪ SAD as the initial contents. 

 
Figure 2. Statistical Schemas 

   A schema-based approach was employed for 
document planning. Each schema at the high lev-
el is made up of three components: Introduction, 
Events and Summary. Each of these components 
has its own substructure as shown in examples in 
Figure 4. With the estimated probabilistic distri-
bution we generate schemas for a station based 
on its popular activities. We then tailor the text 
by randomly selecting from users’ favorite vo-
cabulary, which was acquired from online corpus 
for different river-related activities. Other words 
for structural purposes are dependent on certain 
schemas. Realization was performed using the 
simpleNLG library (Gatt and Reiter, 2009), and 
some generated examples are listed in Table 2. 

Schem
a (1) 

The Tyne at Nungate boasts its excellent salm-
on catches. Now with medium steady water 
level and comparatively low water temperature, 
many people want to fish some salmons in pools 
between the rapids or experience whitewater 
rafting within them, which makes the periphery 
of Nungate a hot spot. 

Schem
a (2) 

The periphery of Tyne at Nungate poses a hot 
spot now, where many people are fishing or 
canoeing while appreciating the medium steady 
water level and comparatively low water tem-
perature. No wonder Nungate can boast one of 
the best salmon catching places. 

Schem
a (3) 

The Tyne at Nungate boasts its excellent salm-
on catches. Many people may now fish or canoe 
there thanks to the medium steady water level 
and comparatively low water temperature, mak-
ing the periphery of Nungate a hot spot. 

Table 2. Some Tailored NLG Examples (Italic fonts 
denote the tailored lexical realization) 

5 Initial Feedback and Conclusion 
This research is still underway and a thorough 
evaluation is still pending. We have received 
valuable feedback from small user groups. Sup-
portive examples are: a. An overview about pop-
ular river stations can help users’ further explora-
tion of information to a significant extent; b. A 
general comprehension for a given river station 
can be more easily built up by simply reading the 
generated descriptions, than by solely reading the 
data and its related graphics; c. Along with the 
graphics, the generated descriptions can improve 
the communication efficiency by a large degree. 
Examples recommending further improve-
ment/focus include: a. Schemas filled in with 
acquired vocabulary sometimes endow the gen-
erated document a syntactically and/or semanti-
cally unexpected flavor; b. Established users de-
mand more linguistic varieties than new users. 
   Present feedback implicates that latent user 
models deserve further research. Our future ef-
forts will focus on a. extending the domain 
knowledge to cover all river stations, b. develop-
ing generic methodology for acquiring latent user 
models for other online NLG tasks (e.g. generat-
ing descriptions of Census data), and c. integrat-
ing an automatic update of latent models. 

Acknowledgement 
This research is supported by an award from the 
RCUK DE programme: EP/G066051/1. The au-
thors are also grateful to Dr. Rene van der Wal, 
Dr. Koen Arts, and the three anonymous review-
ers for improving the quality of this paper. 

136



References  
K. Bontcheva. 2005. Generating Tailored Textual 

Summaries from Ontologies. The Semantic Web: 
Research and Applications, Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, Vol. 3532, pages 531-545. Springer-
Verlag. 

N. Bouayad-Agha, G. Casamayor, Simon Mille, et al. 
2012.  From Ontology to NL: Generation of Multi-
lingual User-Oriented Environmental Reports. 
Natural Language Processing and Information 
Systems, Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. 
7337, pages 216-221. Springer-Verlag. 

Dana Dannells, Mariana Damova, Ramona Enache 
and Milen Chechev. 2012. Multilingual Online 
Generation from Semantic Web Ontologies. WWW 
2012 – European Projects Track, pages 239-242. 

H. Dixon. 2010. Managing national hydrometric data: 
from data to information. Global Change: Facing 
Risks and Threats to Water Resources. Walling-
ford, UK, IAHS Press, pages 451-458. 

A. Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. Simplenlg: A Realiza-
tion Engine for Practical Applications. Proceedings 
ENLG-2009, pages 90-93. 

K. Macleod, S. Sripada, A. Ioris, K. Arts and R. Van 
der Wal. 2012. Communicating River Level Data 
and Information to Stakeholders with Different In-
terests: the Participative Development of an Inter-
active Online Service. International Environmental 
Modeling and Software Society (iEMSs): Interna-
tional Congress on Environmental Modeling and 
Software Managing Resources of a Limited Planet, 
Sixth Biennial Meeting, Leipzig, Germany. R. 
Seppelt, A.A. Voinov, S. Lange, D. Bankamp 
(Eds.) pages 33-40. 

Francois Mairesse and Marilyn A. Walker. 2011. 
Controlling User Perceptions of Linguistic Style: 
Trainable Generation of Personality Traits. Compu-
tational Linguistics, Volume 37 Issue 3, September 
2011, pages 455-488. 

T. J. Marsh and J. Hannaford. 2007. The summer 
2007 floods in England and Wales – a hydrological 
appraisal. Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, UK. 

M. Molina. 2012. Simulating Data Journalism to 
Communicate Hydrological Information from Sen-
sor Networks. Proceedings of IBERAMIA, pages 
722-731. 

M. Molina, A. Stent, and E. Parodi. 2011. Generating 
Automated News to Explain the Meaning of Sen-
sor Data. In: Gama, J., Bradley, E., Hollmén, J. 
(eds.) IDA 2011. LNCS, vol. 7014, pages 282-293. 
Springer, Heidelberg. 

Ehud Reiter, Somayajulu Sripada, and Sandra Wil-
liams. 2003a. Acquiring and Using Limited User 
Models in NLG. In Proceedings of the 9th Europe-

an Workshop on Natural Language Generation, 
pages 13-14, Budapest, Hungary. 

Ehud Reiter, Roma Robertson, and Liesl Osman. 
2003b. Lessons from a failure: Generating tailored 
smoking cessation letters. Artificial Intelligence, 
144(1-2), pages 41-58.  

Ehud Reiter. 2007. An Architecture for Data-to-Text 
Systems. Proceedings of ENLG-2007, pages 97-
104.  

S. Sripada, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter, and Jin Yu. 
2002. Segmenting time series for weather fore- 
casting. Applications and Innovations in Intelli- 
gent Systems X, pages 105-118. Springer-Verlag. 

R. Turner, S. Sripada, E. Reiter and I. Davy. 2006. 
Generating Spatio-Temporal Descriptions in Pollen 
Forecasts. Proceedings of EACL06 poster session, 
pages 163-166. 

K. van Deemter. 2010. Vagueness Facilitates Search. 
Proceedings of the 2009 Amsterdam Colloquium, 
Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
(LNCS). FoLLI LNAI 6042. 

Sandra Williams. 2002. Natural language generation 
of discourse connectives for different reading lev-
els. In Proceedings of the 5th Annual CLUK Re-
search Colloquium, Leeds, UK. 

 

137


