



















































Point-of-View Mining and Cognitive Presence in MOOCs: A (Computational) Linguistics Perspective


Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 32–37,
October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Point-of-View Mining and Cognitive Presence in MOOCs:  

A (Computational) Linguistics Perspective  

 
Noureddine Elouazizi 

Science Center for Learning and Teaching, University of British Columbia 

Center for Teaching and Learning Technologies, University of British Columbia 

Department of Linguistics, Simon Fraser University 

Vancouver, British Columbia 

Email: noureddine.elouazizi@ubc.ca  

 

 

Abstract 
This paper explores the cognitive presence 

of the learners in MOOCs through using a 

(computational) linguistic analysis of the 

learners’ Point-of-View as an indicator for 

cognitive presence. The linguistic analysis 

of the written language as a medium of 

interaction by the students in the context of 

MOOCs shows hallmarks of cognitive 

disengagement and low cognitive presence 

by the learners. 

 

1. Introduction 
 

The popularity of Massive Open Online 

Courses (henceforth MOOCs) is expanding, 

and the perceived educational add-value of 

their scalability to the masses is growing. 

However, research shows that MOOCs do not 

generate enough opportunities for students’ 

interaction and retention (see: Kizilcec et al 

(2013), Yang et al (2013), Rosé et al (2014), 

Wen et al (2014b). The large scale linguistic 

data that is generated by discussion boards, 

blogs, and other written language-based 

interaction tools that are/can be part of the 

MOOC technology infrastructure provides an 

unprecedented opportunity to study the 

dynamics of students’ interaction, learning 

engagement, and ways in which critical 

valuable learning/teaching discourse is 

constructed around different  knowledge 

topics.  

 This paper presents an exploratory 

approach to examine students’ learning-based 

inquiry within the context of MOOCs through 

analyzing the linguistic aspects of Point-of-

View as an indicator of cognitive presence. 

This approach is theoretically grounded in 

linguistics (natural syntax) and educationally 

understood along the lines of the Community 

of Inquiry Framework (Garrison et al (2000), 

Garrison et al (2001), Swan et al (2009)).  

2. Background 
2.1. Point-of-View: a linguistics perspective  
I assume that the structure and the 

interpretation of Point-of-View as a linguistic 

construct is detected and interpreted through 

its compositional parts. The compositional 

parts of Point-of-View include notions such as: 

subjectivity, belief mitigation, evidentiality and 

epistemic mood (Speas and Tenny 2003, 

Elouazizi 2014). The notion of subjectivity 

refers to the way a speaker expresses 

knowledge gained through personal/internal 

experience-“ontological subjectivity” (Searle 

2004). The notion of (belief) mitigation is 

linguistically conveyed through the use of a 

specific set of epistemic parenthetical verbs 

such as: think, believe (Urmson (1952)).  

 In addition to the use of belief mitigation 

verbs, and subjectivity linguistic devices, a 

speaker’s point of view is also indicated by the 

degree of their use of evidential verbs that 

carry epistemic propositional attitudes, such 

as: I feel, I sense, I see. A subject/speaker uses 

evidentiality linguistic devices (verbs, adverbs) 

to evaluate the degree of certainty in a 

proposition by matching the source of the 

information and the target of the information 

(Speas 2008).  

 In addition to these linguistic devices, 

Point-of-View can also be conveyed through 

the use of a set of epistemic mood and 

discourse adverbs. This includes adverbs such 

as: frankly, presumably, supposedly, probably, 

luckily, realistically. These adverbs provide 

additional information about the propositional 

attitude of the speaker.  

 Taken jointly, the combination of these 

linguistic constructs constitutes a lexical 

structure (lexicon), with a latent syntax of 

Point-of-View, and which can lend itself to the 

techniques of text mining and computational 

linguistic analysis. 

 

32



2.2. Point-of-View: a learning perspective 
Defined in broad terms, learning events are the 

set of “activities” and “acts” that the learner 

engages in so as to ensure the acquisition, 

transfer and modification of knowledge, skills 

and beliefs (Skinner (1968), Piaget (1952), 

Gagné (1985), Mayer (1996)). These (learning) 

activities and acts could be internal (mental) 

or/and external (behaviours) and could include 

more than one cognitive modality for 

processing information. These modalities 

include: auditory modality, visual modality, 

haptic modality, and linguistic modality. Each 

of these cognitive modalities produces data 

(information) that can be studied to infer 

whether and how learning occurs. 

        My focus here is on the linguistic 

modality, and how it is used to interface the 

components of an educational/learning 

experience, as understood within the context of 

the Community of Inquiry model for learning 

(see: Garrison et al (2000) and Garrison et al 

(2001)). Perceived from the perspective of the 

Community of Inquiry (CoI) model, I propose 

that the analysis of Point-of-View is a way to 

examine the nature of the supporting discourse 

that is crucial in interfacing the social 

presence, the cognitive presence, and the 

teaching presence (as illustrated in the adapted 

Figure in 1). 

 
FIGURE 1: Community of Inquiry (CoI) model  

(Adapted from: Garrison et al 2000) 

 

One of the central aspects of CoI is “cognitive 

presence”. This refers to the “extent to which 

the participating learners in any particular 

configuration of a community of inquiry are 

able to construct meaning through sustained 

communication.” (Garrison et al, Swan et al 

(2009)). I explore the cognitive presence of the 

MOOC’s learners through the analysis of 

Point-of-View’s usage, clustering and 

dispersions in the written language-based 

interactions, generated by the learners in the 

context of MOOCs.  

 

3. Method 
3.1. Data sets: the corpus 
This paper uses two data sets of written 

language corpus. The first data set is from the 

blogs discussions of three MOOC courses, 

attended by 3000 learners, and English 

language was the language of interaction in 

these MOOCs. The second set of data comes 

from the discussion board of a large online 

university course, delivered to a large class of 

300 students, using English language. The 

written corpus data from the three MOOCs 

contains 724955 words, and the corpus data 

from the non-MOOC online course contains 

727205 words.  

 
Lexical & 

Referential density 
Three MOOCs  One online 

course 

Words in data set 724955 727205 

Lexical density: 

Lexemes per data set 

475064 381392 

Lexical density: 
Lexemes %  

61.17% 52.91% 

Reference density: 

1st  Person (speaker) 

2.32% 2.98% 

Reference density: 
2nd  Person (hearer) 

0.95% 0.16 

# of learners 3000 300 

 
          TABLE 1: lexical and referential density in the data sets 

 

The data in table 1 was generated from the 

MOOC and the non-MOOC corpus data, using 

the corpus tool Systemic coder (available at: 

http://www.wagsoft.com/CorpusTool).  

 
3.2. Point-of-View extraction: the approach 
One central non-trivial challenge with the 

computational extraction of the linguistic 

patterns from written text is the issue of 

classification and feature structures. The term 

classification is generally construed broadly to 

encompass the architecture and the structure of 

the systems and features used in extracting 

interpretative patterns such as opinions and 

sentiments from written text (Riloff and Wiebe 

(2003), Pang and Lee (2004)). There are 

different approaches to extraction to guide the 

computational process of automatically 

extracting patterns from text.  

       For example, the approach of polarity-

based classification encompasses regression 

and ranking of the lexical units. This approach 

is exploited in sentiment analysis and it 

 
 

33



assumes that the text is underlined by an 

opinion towards which an agent expresses a 

positive or negative feeling (see: Pang et al. 

(2002), Eguchi and Lavrenko (2006)).  

     Another approach is the gradability-based 

classification. In this approach the lexical units 

are not attributed a polar classification. Rather, 

the text is classified in terms of gradable terms. 

This approach is used in automatic extraction 

of subjectivity from the text (Wiebe et al. 

(2001), Wilson et al. (2005), Yu and 

Hatzivassiloglou (2003)).  

      I build on the insights of polarity-based 

and gradability-based approaches to automatic 

extraction and processing of text and propose 

the classification in Figure 2. 

 

point-of-view

SUBJECTIVITY
personal

impersonal

indefinite

MITIGATION

think

believe

suppose

guess

EVIDENTIALITY

see

hear

find

seem

EPISTEMIC-
MOOD

frankly

evidently

certainly

probably

supposedly

seemingly

clearly  
 
FIGURE 2: The classification features structure of 

Point-of-View 

                     

The classification and features structure in 

Figure 2 enables the extraction of a bundle of 

attitudes and belief as it uses a combination of 

parts of speech that encompass latent 

knowledge and interpretations, as exhibited in 

the syntax and the semantics of the constructs 

that compose Point-of-View. As such, Point-

of-View mining and automatic analysis is at 

the intersection of opinion mining and 

subjectivity mining. This approach (Point-of-

View mining) seeks to extract perspective-

related information such as opinion holders, 

belief mitigation, and propositional attitudes 

(for similar but not identical approaches, see: 

Kudo and Matsumoto (2004), Dave et al 

(2003), Riloff and Wiebe (2003), Song et al 

2007, El-Halees (2011)).  

 

 

4. Results and discussion 
 

Recall that the main goal of this paper is to 

explore the cognitive presence of the learners 

in MOOCs through their written language 

input, and using a linguistics analysis of the 

learners’ Point-of-View as an indicator for 

cognitive presence. I hypothesize that if the 

learners in MOOCs are cognitively 

disengaged, the frequency and usage of Point-

of-View components (as identified in Figure 2) 

would be low. Conversely, if the frequency 

and usage of Point-of-View components is 

higher, that would imply that the students in 

MOOCs are cognitively engaged and their 

cognitive presence is more asserted.  

 The Point-of-View usage data, as 

illustrated in FIGURE 3, shows that the use of 

belief mitigation devices (verbs such as: think, 

believe, guess and suppose) is equally low in 

all the three MOOCs.  

 

 
FIGURE 3: The usage of POV/cognitive presence 

in MOOCs 

 

However, in all the three MOOCs, subjectivity 

is attested with varying degrees. This indicates 

that the learners do express their stance in their 

blog discussions but without engaging in any 

epistemic interactions with other learners. This 

is the case because the uses of the mitigation 

construct, of the evidentiality construct, and of 

the epistemic mood construct by a speaker 

(learner) always requires predicating on, hence 

interacting with previously mentioned/stated 

proposition. The data in Figure 3 indicates that 

the learners did not modify the propositions 

that were put forward by other learners or 

convey changes in propositional attitudes, or 

mitigate beliefs, expressed in the text of the 

MOOCs blogs.  

 These observations are further supported 

by the dispersion and clustering analysis of the 

data, as illustrated in Figure 4.  

 

34



 
FIGURE 4: dispersion and clustering of 

POV/cognitive presence in MOOCs 

 

Assuming that “support discourse” within the 

context of the CoI framework is crucial in 

interfacing the cognitive presence, the social 

presence and the teaching presence of the 

learner within an educational experience (see 

FIGURE 1 above), the use of written language 

as a medium of interaction by the students in 

the context of MOOCs shows hallmarks of 

cognitive disengagement and low cognitive 

presence. That this is indeed the case is further 

indicated by the Point-of-View comparative 

data that illustrates the use of Point-of-View in 

the context of a MOOC versus its use in the 

context of a non-MOOC online course. 

 Consider the differences in the Point-of-

View usage, dispersion and clustering between 

the data set of a single MOOC ccourse and that 

of a non-MOOC online course, as illustrated 

by Figure 5 and Figure 6 below. The Point-of-

View usage comparative data illustrated in 

Figure 5 indicates that the cognitive presence 

and engagement of the learners in the non-

MOOC online course is significantly higher 

than in the MOOC courses. 

 

 
FIGURE 5: The usage of POV/cognitive presence in 

a MOOC vs. non-MOOC online course 

 
The learners in the non-MOOC online course 

produced linguistic structures that contain 

speech acts of expressing subjective views, of 

mitigating aforementioned propositions 

(beliefs) in the discourse and of providing 

evidence of a statement as indicated through 

the use of evidential adverbs. However, the 

language (linguistic structures) used by the 

learners in a single MOOC course shows 

higher level of subjective use than the non-

MOOC course but significantly lower usage of 

speech acts that express mitigation of beliefs or 

evidentiality.  

 Furthermore, the usage of the Point-of-

View in the non-MOOC online course shows 

that the learners expressed higher subjectivity, 

accompanied with higher rates of belief 

mitigation. This suggests that the learners in 

the non-MOOC online course were more 

cognitively engaged and they actively engaged 

in invoking the discourse structures that 

support the interfacing of cognitive presence, 

teaching presence and social presence. These 

observations are further supported by the 

Point-of-View dispersion and clustering data 

represented in Figure 6.   

 

 
FIGURE 6: dispersion and clustering of 

POV/cognitive presence in a MOOC vs. non-

MOOC online course 

 

All in all, the data above indicates that learners 

within the context of MOOCs exhibit less 

cognitive presence than their counter part 

learners in a non-MOOC online course. The 

linguistic structures used by the learners in the 

context of a MOOC course, at least on the 

basis of the data examined in this paper, 

indicate that they did not mitigate and attach 

evidential statements to as many propositions 

as in a non-MOOC course. For a speaker to 

mitigate a proposition, the speaker first needs 

to be aware of the proposition, the agent who 

proposed or enacted such a proposition before 

mitigating it. Hence, the more a speaker 

mitigates hers or the propositions of others, the 

35



more the speaker is engaged with the discourse 

constructed around different knowledge topics. 

 These findings square with and confirm 

observations established in other studies which 

analyze the learners’ engagement in MOOCs. 

For example, Wen et al. (2014a) and Wen et al 

(2014b), using a survival model, and drawing 

on linguistic data in discussion posts, show 

that learners’ engagement in MOOCs reduces 

drastically after week three in a MOOC course.  

 

 

5. Conclusion and future work 
 
This paper explored the use of a computational 

linguistic perspective to mine and exploit the 

latent knowledge in the Point-of-View 

construct to examine the cognitive presence 

and engagement of the students in the context 

of MOOC and non-MOOC courses. As the 

results show, the linguistic analysis of the 

written language as a medium of interaction by 

the learners in the context of MOOCs shows 

hallmarks of cognitive disengagement and low 

cognitive presence by the learners.  

 However, what emerges in the context of 

this exploratory paper is a partial 

representation of the learning-based discourse 

structure within MOOCs and is by no means 

conclusive of the way discourse structures are 

constructed around different knowledge topics 

within the context of a MOOC vs. a non-

MOOC online course. The empirical testing of 

the classification in Figure 2, from a text 

mining and automatic extraction perspective is 

yet to be validated on larger (fully) annotated 

MOOCs data sets, and using larger integrated 

lexicons that combine a Point-of-View latent 

knowledge lexicon and a MOOCs specific 

education experience lexicon. 

  

 

Acknowledgments 
I would like to thank Carolyn Penstein Rosé and 

George Siemens for sharing with me the MOOCs blog 

discussions data that I used as part of the data sets that 

this paper studies. 

 

 

6. References  
 

Dave, K., Lawrence, S., Pennock, D.M. 2003. 

Mining the peanut gallery: Opinion extraction 

and semantic classification of product reviews. 

In Proceedings of WWW, pages 519–528. 

 

Elouazizi, Noureddine. 2014. The formal syntax of 

point-of-view and belief mitigation. PhD 

Dissertation, SFU. 

 

El-Halees, A. 2011. Mining opinions in user-

generated contents to improve course evaluation. 

In Software Engineering and Computer Systems, 

pages 107-115. Springer. 

 

Eguchi, K and Lavrenko, V.2006. Sentiment 

retrieval using generative models. In 

Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical 

Methods in Natural Language Processing 

(EMNLP), pages 345–354. 

 

Gagné, R. M. 1985. The conditions of learning (4th 

ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 

 

Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T, & Archer, W. 2000. 

Critical inquiry in a text-based environment: 

Computer conferencing in higher education. The 

Internet and Higher Education 2: 87–105. 

 

Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. 2001. 

Critical thinking, cognitive presence and 

computer conferencing in distance education. 

American Journal of Distance Education, 15(1), 

7-23. 

 

Kizilcec, R. F., Piech, C. and Schneider, E. 2013. 

Deconstructing disengagement: analyzing 

learner subpopulations in massive open online 

courses. In Proceedings of the Third 

International Conference on Learning Analytics 

and Knowledge, pages 170-179.ACM. 

 

Kudo, T. and Matsumoto, Y. 2004. A boosting 

algorithm for classification of semi-structured 

text. In Proceedings of the Conference on 

Empirical Methods in Natural Language 

Processing (EMNLP). 

 

Mayer, R. E. 1996. Learners as information 

processors: Legacies and limitations of 

educational psychology’s second metaphor. 

Educational Psychologist, 31, 151–161. 

 

Pang,  B., Lee, L. and Vaithyanathan, S. 2002. 

Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using 

machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of 

the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 

Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 79–86. 

 

Pang, B. and Lee, L. 2004. A sentimental 

education: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity 

summarization based on minimum cuts. In 

Proceedings of the Association for 

Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 271–

278. 

 

36



Piaget, J.-P. 1952. The origins of intelligence in 

children. International Universities Press, New 

York.  

 

Rosé, C. P., Carlson, R., Yang, D., Wen, M., 

Resnick, L., Goldman, P. & Sherer, J. 2014. 

Social Factors that Contribute to Attrition in 

MOOCs. In Proceedings of the First ACM 

Conference on Learning @ Scale(poster). 

 

Swan, K., Garrison, D. R. & Richardson, J. C. 

2009. A constructivist approach to online 

learning: the Community of Inquiry framework. 

In Payne, C. R. (Ed.) Information Technology 

and Constructivism in Higher Education: 

Progressive Learning Frameworks. Hershey, 

PA: IGI Global, 43-57. 

 

Song, D., Lin, H. and Yang. Z. 2007. Opinion 

mining in e-learning system. In Network and 

Parallel Computing Workshop. IFIP 

International Conference , P.788-792. IEEE. 

 

Searle, J. 2003. Mind: a brief introduction. Oxford 

University Press. 

 

Speas, Peggy. (2008). On the Syntax and Semantics 

of Evidentials. Language and Linguistics 

Compass. Volume 2 Issue 5, pp. 940 – 965. 

 

Speas, Peggy, and Tenny, Carol. 2003. 

Configurational Properties of Point of View 

Roles. In DiSciullo, A. (ed.), Asymmetry in 

Grammar. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 315-

344. 

 

Urmson, J. O. 1952. Parenthetical verbs. Mind. 61. 

480-496. 

 

Wen, M., Yang, D., & Rosé, C. P. 2014a. 

Sentiment Analysis in MOOC Discussion 

Forums: What does it tell us? In Proceedings of 

Educational Data Mining. 

 

Wen, M., Yang, D., & Rosé, C. P. 2014b. 

Linguistic Reflections of Student Engagement in 

Massive Open Online Courses. In Proceedings 

of the International Conference on Weblogs and 

Social Media. 

 

Wiebe, J.M., Wilson, T and Bell, M. 2001. 

Identifying collocations for recognizing 

opinions. In Proceedings of the ACL/EACL 

Workshop on Collocation: Computational 

Extraction, Analysis, and Exploitation. 

 

Wiebe, J. and Wilson, T. 2002. Learning to 

disambiguate potentially subjective expressions. 

In Proceedings of the Conference on Natural 

Language Learning (CoNLL), pages 112–118. 

Wiebe., J., Theresa W. M.,  Bruce, R., Bell, M., and 

Martin, M. 2004. Learning subjective language. 

Computational Linguistics, 30(3):277–308. 

 

Wilson, T., Wiebe, J. Hoffmann, P. 2005. 

Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level 

sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Human 

Language Technology Conference and the 

Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 

Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 

347–354. 

 

Yang, D., Sinha, T., Adamson, D., & Rosé, C. P. 

2013. Turn on, Tune in, Drop out: Anticipating 

student dropouts in Massive Open Online 

Courses. In NIPS Data-Driven Education 

Workshop. 

 

Yu, H., Hatzivassiloglou, V. 2003. Towards 

answering opinion questions: Separating facts 

from opinions and identifying the polarity of 

opinion sentences. In Proceedings of the 

Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 

Language Processing (EMNLP). 

 

 

 

 

 

37


