












































 

Morphosyntactic discrepancies in representing the adjective equivalent in 

African WordNet with reference to Northern Sotho 

 

Mampaka Lydia Mojapelo 

University of South Africa 

Department of African Languages 

mojapml@unisa.ac.za 

 

Abstract 

 This paper aims to highlight morphosyntactic 

discrepancies encountered in representing the 

adjective equivalent in African WordNet, with 

reference to Northern Sotho. Northern Sotho is 

an agglutinating language with rich and 

productive morphology. The language also 

features a disjunctive orthographic system. The 

orthography determines the attachment 

selection of morphemes. The immediate issue, 

in this paper, is the absence of a one-to-one 

correspondence between the adjective in 

English and that in Northern Sotho. The 

meaning equivalent of the English adjective 

covers more than one morphosyntactic 

category in Northern Sotho. In addition, the 

categories’ structural diversity has a bearing on 

representation considerations. In some of these 

categories the stem suffices to represent the 

specific category unambiguously while in 

others there is a need to incorporate affixes 

with the stem. The challenge is to categorize 

semantic equivalents of the English adjective 

as such, while retaining their separate 

morphosyntactic tags in Northern Sotho, in 

harmony with the typology of the language. 

The present paper proposes morphologically 

feasible ways of representing this varied 

equivalent of the English adjective in Northern 

Sotho.  

1 Introduction 

African WordNet
1
 seeks to build WordNets for 

all indigenous official languages of South Africa, 

which will be linked to one another. Northern 

                                                           
1
 http://www.globalwordnet.org 

Sotho
2
 is one of the languages in African 

WordNet. So far in the project the work covers 

the verbs, nouns, and few adjectives. This 

presentation is based on the experiences with the 

adjective in the project so far. Like many 

languages African WordNet is expanded from 

the Princeton WordNet
3
. Being cognisant of 

dissimilar typologies of the source and target 

languages, as well as language-specific cultural 

and historical orientations, African WordNet is 

geared towards customisation to the African 

context. 

The aim of this paper is to highlight 

morphosyntactic discrepancies encountered with 

the Northern Sotho equivalent of the adjective in 

African WordNet. It also proposes 

morphologically feasible ways in which the 

equivalent can be represented.  Synsets are 

linked to one another through conceptual-

semantic and lexical relations. WordNet 

therefore links together not only lexical items 

but, more significantly, the senses that the lexical 

items represent. It may be possible for a sense to 

be lexicalised in both the source and the target 

language without necessarily carrying the same 

morphosyntactic tag. This presentation will not 

go into the broad theoretical issues attending 

adjectives; rather the focus will be on the 

meaning equivalent of the English adjective in 

Northern Sotho, which is the target language, 

given typological differences between the two 

languages and differences in morphological 

structures of the equivalents in the target 

                                                           
2 Northern Sotho (Sesotho sa Leboa) also known as Sepedi, 

one of the dialects, is a Niger-Congo Bantu language 

(Guthrie’s zone S30) 
3
 http://wordnet.princeton.edu 

mailto:mojapml@unisa.ac.za
http://www.globalwordnet.org/
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/


 

language. Each morphosyntactic category in 

Northen Sotho will be discussed separately and 

will conclude with a proposed representation in 

the database. 

2 Semantic function of the adjective  

English will be used as springboard here because 

it is the source language for the expand approach 

adopted for African WordNet. The semantic 

function of the English adjective, be it attributive 

or relational (Miller, 1978), is universal, namely 

to modify the noun. Morphologically, apart from 

the core adjectives which may also be 

morphologically affected through inflection, 

English adjectives include denominals and 

deverbals (Peters and Peters, 2000). Furthermore, 

there are also other different morphosyntactic 

constructions that are used in modifying the 

noun, such as the genitive and relative clause. 

For the purpose of this presentation and in 

context with African WordNet, the discussion 

will be confined to the English lexical entry with 

POS tag adjective, such as purple, murdered, 

cute and little and how they are rendered in the 

African WordNet.  

The immediate issue, first of all, is the 

absence of a one-to-one correspondence between 

the adjective in English and that in Northern 

Sotho (Poulos and Louwrens, 1994). Northern 

Sotho has a limited number of adjectival stems, 

which is by no means a reflection of the 

language’s capacity to produce qualifications for 

the noun. It is not always possible to use an 

adjective to convey a concept in Northern Sotho 

that is expressed by an English adjective. 

Traditional Northern Sotho grammars identify 

four morphosyntactic categories (the adjective, 

descriptive possessive [genitive], relative and 

enumerative) to perform this semantic function 

(Ziervogel et al., 1969; Poulos and Louwrens 

1994). Moreover, each of these equivalents of 

the English adjective assumes a different prefix 

depending on the class of the noun it modifies. 

Some of the stems are unambiguous without 

affixes and some need affixes to make sense or 

to identify them with the relevant functional 

category. The issue is that a lexicalised 

equivalent of the sense expressed by an English 

adjective cannot be ignored on the grounds that it 

is not an adjective, nor can it be categorized as 

an adjective while it is not. It remains a 

challenge, specifically in this word category, that 

the source and target language differ on 

structural level. The next sections explore the 

ways in which each of the morphosyntactic 

categories can be represented, given their 

dynamic structures.  

 

3 Northen Sotho equivalents of the 

English adjective adjective  

The English adjective can be rendered by an 

adjective, possessive, relative or enumerative 

in Northern Sotho. The next sections discuss 

three of these morphosyntactic categories, 

illustrating and substantiating proposed 

representation strategies.  

3.1 The adjective 

Some English concepts expressed by adjectives 

are also expressed by adjectives in Northern 

Sotho. The structure of a Northern Sotho 

adjective is sketched as follows:  

 

(Head 

noun) 

                    Adjective 

adjectival agreement adjectival 

stem 

Demonstrative  Adjectival 

prefix 

 

Figure 1: The structure of a Northern Sotho 

adjective 

The following example has a class 1 noun as 

head: 

Monna [yo motelele]   

CL1-man CL1-Dem CL1-Pref-tall 

/man that is tall/ 

‘A tall man’ 

The head noun is given consideration in 

the structure because it influences the 

morphological structure of the adjective as a 

whole. For example, both parts of the adjectival 

agreement (in bold italics) agree with the head 

noun and will therefore change every time a 



 

noun from a different class is being modified. 

For this reason only the basic adjectival stem is 

captured as equivalent of the English adjective. 

The following examples illustrate the point 

made: 

Monna [yo motelele]  

‘A tall man’ 

Monna [yo mošweu]  

‘A light-complexioned man’ 

Banna [ba bantši]  

‘Many men’ 

The adjectival stem -telele (tall/long), for 

example, can be used to qualify nouns from 

various classes, as illustrated below: 

Class 1: Monna [yo motelele]  

‘A tall man’ 

Class 3: Mohlare [wo motelele]  

‘A tall tree’ 

Class 5: Lephodisa [le letelele] 

 ‘A tall policeman’  

Class 6: Maphodisa [a matelele] 

 ‘Tall policemen’ 

Class 7: Setimela [se setelele] 

 ‘A long train’  

Class 9: Kota [ye telele] 

 ‘A tall/long pole’ 

For the reasons mentioned and illustrated 

above the Northern Sotho adjective stem -botse 

(beautiful/cute/precious/dinky/pretty) appears in 

African WordNet as illustrated in Figure 2 to 

Figure 4:  

 
Figure 2: Adjective beautiful:2: aesthetically pleasing 

 

 

 



 

 

Figure 3: Adjective cute:2,precious:3: obviously contrived to charm 

 

 

Figure 4: Adjective dinky:2 (British informal) pretty and neat 



 

 

 Figure 5: Adjective pretty:1 pleasing by delicacy or grace; not imposing 

Some English adjectives do not have 

adjective equivalents in Northern Sotho, but

the senses are represented by different 

morphosyntactic categories. 

3.2 Descriptive possessive/genitive 

The genitive or possessive construction in 

general serves two semantic functions. It can be 

used for direct possession or ownership, and for 

describing the feature or quality of the noun 

(Poulos and Louwrens, 1994). It is the latter that 

is under discussion here. The descriptive 

possessive or genitive construction may serve as 

the cognitive-semantic equivalent of the English 

adjective. The general genitive/possessive 

structure is as follows: 

 (Head 
noun) 

                                Genitive 

genitive agreement  Noun 

subject 

agreement  

genitive 

a 

 

Figure 6: The genitive/possessive construction 

The following example of a possessive 

construction has a class 1 noun as head: 

Monna [wa senatla] 

CL1-man CL1-Dem CL7-strong individual 

/man of strong individual/ 

‘A strong man’ 

The first issue with the genitive is that the 

agreement comprises two components which 

behave differently. The subject agreement 

component is dependent on the head noun while 

genitive a is invariant. Secondly, the complement 

is a noun phrase, which is just another noun 

without the genitive agreement. To encode it 

unambiguously we need to include the invariant 

part of the genitive agreement with the 

complement, which is the descriptive part 

serving as equivalent to the English adjective. 

First, the invariant part of the genitive agreement 

is applicable to every head noun and, secondly, it 

makes the complement noun phrase duly 

interpreted as a descriptive. The first part of the 

genitive agreement will thus be unreliable as 

illustrated below (in italics):  

Class 1: Monna [wa senatla]  

‘A strong man’ 



 

Class 5: Leho [la go tia]  

‘A strong wooden spoon’ 

Class 9: Kala [ya boleta]  

‘A soft branch’ 

Class 10: Dinku [tša bohlokwa]  

‘Important sheep’ 

The Northern Sotho descriptive 

possessive/ genitive as equivalent of the English 

adjective appears in African WordNet as follows: 

 

Figure 7: Adjective hairy:1 having or covered with hair 

3.3 The relative 

Traditional Northern Sotho grammars (and those 

of other Sotho languages) distinguish between 

the verbal and nominal relative (Poulos and 

Louwrens, 1994; Ziervogel, Lombard and 

Mokgokong, 1969). What is traditionally known 

as a nominal relative is called a ‘new attributive 

adjective’ by Creissels (2011) based on 

differentiation between word level and phrase 

level. The reason for this difference or overlap is 

that the Northern Sotho relative (both verbal and 

nominal) can also be a conceptual-semantic 

equivalent of the English adjective.  

The verbal relative is further divided into 

the direct and indirect forms. 

Verbal relative  

A class 5 noun serves as head in the following 

examples: 

Direct: Lephodisa  [le  le thuntšhago] 

CL5-policeman  CL5-Dem CL5-SM shoot-

SUFF-go 

/Policeman that shoots/  

Indirect: Lephodisa [le  ba le thuntšhago] 

CL5-policeman  CL5-Dem CL1-SM CL5-OC 

shoot-SUFF-go 

/Policeman that they shoot/ 

‘Policeman that is being shot’ 

For illustration we shall use only the direct 

relative clause, given that the same principles 

apply to the indirect relative. Figure 8 illustrates 

the structure of the direct verbal relative in 

Northern Sotho, as equivalent of the English 

adjective: 

 

 

 



 

 

(Head 

noun) 

          verbal relative 

Relative agreement  Verb 

stem 

Suffix 

go/ng 

Dem  subject 

agreement 

 

Figure 8: The structure of the direct relative 

Both parts of the relative agreement, 

namely the demonstrative (Dem) and the subject  

agreement depend on the head noun. Northern 

Sotho has two variant suffixes for the verbal 

relative, namely -go and -ng. The affixes -go 
and -ng on the verb stem indicate that its 

function is not to be a verb, but to qualify the 

noun. Both suffixes are equally recognised in 

Northern Sotho. Exclusion of variant parts of the 

verbal relative is not problematic because they 

are written disjunctively from the stem. 

Therefore only the verb stem, with the attached 

suffix, is recorded.  

The Northern Sotho verbal relative as 

equivalent of the English adjective appears in 

African WordNet as follows: 

 

Figure 9: Adjective murdered:1 killed unlawfully 

Nominal relative 

The structure of the nominal relative is as 

follows: 

 (Head 

noun) 

           Nominal relative 

Nominal relative 

agreement (resembles 

Dem) 

Noun 

 

Figure 10: The structure of the nominal relative 

 

A class 7 noun serves as head in the following 

example: 

Segotlane [se bohlale] 

CL7-toddler CL7-Dem CL14-cleverness 

/toddler that is clever/ 

‘clever toddler’ 

Semantically the nominal relative can link 

to the noun through cross-POS relations (Marrafa 



 

and Mandes, 2006) – and similarly, the verbal 

relative to the verb. 

4 Lexical semantic and 

morphosyntactic challenges to sort 

out along the way 

Concepts such as worse (232954-a) and worst 

(2309979-a) are not easy to represent without 

including that which is ‘worse or worst’, or an 

adverb. Selection restrictions also have a bearing 

on this point as ‘their meaning is determined … 

by the headnoun that they modify’ (Fellbaum, 

1998).  

Other strategies used in the language to 

extend or refine a qualifying concept include the 

diminutive affix and reduplication. For example, 

yo motelelenyana/yo moteleletšana (diminutive) 

and yo moteleletelele (reduplication), which 

normally serve for gradability of various 

adjectival concepts as is the case with English 

degrees of comparison. While it is generally not 

necessary to include degrees of comparison in 

the database, some English concepts are 

perceived as being at various points on a 

continuum, where reduplication and adverbs are 

employed to differentiate them from others. 

Other challenges attending these forms include 

the frequent case that the diminutive involves 

phonological processes; whereas in reduplication 

there is no limit to the number of times the 

adjectival stem can be repeated, and for 

reduplication involving monosyllabic stems the 

adjectival prefix has to interfere repeatedly, for 

example: 

Adjectival stem -so (black; dark):    

borokgo bjo boso (A pair of black 

trousers): borokgo bjo bosobosoboso (for 

intensity) 

5 Concluding remarks  

The lack of one-to-one correspondence between 

the adjective in English and in Northern Sotho 

results in the English adjective equivalent being 

represented by various morphosyntactic 

categories in Northern Sotho. Given their 

structural differences, these Northern Sotho 

equivalents require distinctive consideration in 

representing them in a manner that will be 

consistent with the language system.  The 

proposal is that while it is understandable that 

only stems be considered, invariant parts that are 

separate from the stem but that will help to 

disambiguate it be retained (for example, a in the 

descriptive possessive construction). The suffix 

go or ng of the verbal relative also marks it as 

different from the verb. The challenge with the 

representation in African WordNet is that while 

they are all meaning equivalents of the same 

English word category, they straddle a number of 

morphosyntactic categories in Northern Sotho, 

which nevertheless share a semantic function. 

While the nominal relative base is a noun, 

it selects nouns from classes 11 and 14 and is 

unlikely to be problematic. The enumerative has 

been left out of the discussion because their 

occurrence is not as wide as that of the categories 

discussed.  

References 

Denis Creissels. 2011. The ‘new adjectives’ of 

Tswana. Paper presented at the WC2010 

conference, Rome, 24-26 March 2010, revised 

April 2011. Viewed from http://reissels-

new_adjectives.pdf  

 

Christiane Fellbaum.1998. A semantic network of 

English: the mother of all wordnets. In Piek 

Vossen (ed.) EuroWordNet:A Multilingual 

Databse with Lexical Semantic Networks. 

Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 

pages 137-148. 

 

Palmira Marrafa and Sara Mendes. 2006. Modeling 

adjectives in computational relational lexica. 

Proceedings of the COLING/ALC Main 

Conference Poster Session, Sydney, July 

2006, pages 555-562.  

 

Katherine J. Miller. 1998. Modifiers in WordNet. In  

Christiane Fellbaum (ed.) WordNet: an 

electronic lexical database, The MIT Press, 

Cambridge, MA, pages 47-68.  

 

Ivonne Peters and Wim Peters. 2000. The Treatment 

of Adjectives in SIMPLE: Theoretical 

Observations, Proceedings of LREC 2000. 

 

George Poulos and Louis J. Louwrens. 1994. A 

linguistic analysis of Northern Sotho. Via 

Afrika, Pretoria. 

Dirk Ziervogel, Daniel P. Lombard and Pothinus C. 

Mokgokong. 1969. A Handbook of the 

Northern Sotho Language, Van Schaik, 

Pretoria.  

 

http://reissels-new_adjectives.pdf/
http://reissels-new_adjectives.pdf/

	btnOpenRubric: 


