









































Lexico-Semantic Annotation of Składnica Treebank
by means of PLWN Lexical Units

Elżbieta Hajnicz
Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences

ul. Ordona 21, 01-237 Warsaw, Poland
hajnicz@ipipan.waw.pl

Abstract

In this paper we present the principles
of lexico-semantic annotation of Skład-
nica Treebank using Polish WordNet lex-
ical units. We describe different means
of annotation, depending on the structure
of a sentence in Składnica on the one
hand and the availability of adequate lex-
ical unit in PLWN on the other. Apart
from “standard” annotation involving lex-
ical units with the same lemma as the to-
ken under annotation, multi-word units,
different verb lemmas including reflexive
marker się as well as synonyms and hy-
pernyms have also been involved. Some
tokens have obtained tags explaining why
they require no annotation. Additionally,
we discuss the assessment of the annota-
tion of whole sentences.

1 Introduction

It is widely acknowledged that linguistically anno-
tated corpora play a crucial role in NLP. There is
even a tendency towards their ever-deeper annota-
tion. In particular, semantically annotated corpora
become more and more popular, because they have
several applications in word sense disambiguation
(Agirre and Edmonds, 2006) or automatic con-
struction of lexical resources (McCarthy, 2001;
Schulte im Walde, 2006; Sirkayon and Kawtrakul,
2007). The important part of semantically an-
notated corpora are semantically annotated tree-
banks.

In this paper, the procedure of lexico-semantic
annotation of Składnica Treebank (cf. section 3.1),
the largest Polish treebank, is presented. Verbal,
nominal and adjectival tokens forming sentences
are annotated using Polish WordNet (PLWN,
cf. section 3.2) lexical units. Special attention is
paid to tokens for which a correct interpretation

was not found in the wordnet.
The annotation is performed using a dedicated

tool Semantikon (Hajnicz, 2013c). Each sentence
is annotated by two linguists, and conflicts are re-
solved by a master linguist.

The procedure of lexico-semantic annotation of
Składnica was preceded by tagging named entities
with corresponding PLWN-base semantic types
(Hajnicz, 2013b), by means of semi-automatic
transfer of information from the NE annotation
layer (Savary et al., 2010) of the National Corpus
of Polish (NKJP). Unlike with common words,
this information was linked to nonterminal nodes,
since named entities are very often multi-word
units. For NEs present in PLWN, corresponding
lexical units were used, other NEs were tagged by
means of synset identifiers corresponding to their
semantic types.

Section 2 presents related work on semantic an-
notation of text corpora. Section 3 contains the
description of resources used. The principles of
the actual annotation of tokens are discussed in
section 4, whereas the rules of the assessment of
whole sentences are presented in section 5.

2 Semantically annotated corpora

Semantic annotation of text corpora seems to be
the last phase in the process of corpus annotation,
less popular than morphosyntactic and (shallow or
deep) syntactic annotation. However, there exist
semantically annotated subcorpora for many lan-
guages, some of them wordnet-based. They are
usually substantially smaller than other types of
corpora.

The most famous semantically annotated cor-
pus is SemCor (Miller et al., 1993). It is a
subcorpus of the Brown Corpus (Francis and
Kucera, 1964) containing 250 000 words se-
mantically annotated using Princeton WordNet
(PWN) (Miller et al., 1990; Fellbaum, 1998;
Miller and Fellbaum, 2007, http://wordnet.



princeton.edu/) synset identifiers. The an-
notation includes proper names and collocations
(the ones present in PWN). A special tag is as-
signed for tokens with no available sense con-
sidered appropriate (supplemented with a corre-
sponding comment).

For Polish, lexico-semantic annotation was per-
formed for the sake of experiments in WSD, and
was limited to small sets of highly polysemic
words (Broda et al., 2009; Kobyliński, 2011;
Przepiórkowski et al., 2011), first of them using
PLWN lexical units.

Unlike other corpora, semantic annotation of
treebanks usually are not limited to lexico-
semantic annotation. Nevertheless, there exist
some lexico-semantically annotated treebanks. In
particular, a fragment of the Penn Treebank was
lexico-semantically tagged by means of PWN
senses (Palmer et al., 2000). The Portuguese Tree-
bank Floresta sintá(c)tica (Alfonso et al., 2002)
was annotated by means of a predefined hierarchy
of semantic tags called semantic prototypes (Bick,
2006).

An interesting example is the Italian Syntactic-
Semantic Treebank (Montemagni et al., 2003b;
Montemagni et al., 2003a), which lexico-semantic
annotation is based on ItalWordNet (IWN)
(Roventini et al., 2000) sense repository being a
part of EuroWordNet. When more than one IWN
sense applies to the context being tagged, un-
derspecification is allowed (expressed by disjunc-
tion/conjunction of senses). Special tags allow
marking the lack of a corresponding sense in IWN,
metaphoric or methonymic usage of words or ex-
pressions, diminutive and augmentative deriva-
tives, and idioms. Moreover, named entities are
tagged with their (rather coarse) semantic types.

3 Data resources

Presented work is based on two resources: the Pol-
ish Treebank Składnica and the Polish Wordnet
called Słowosieć (English acronym PLWN).

3.1 Składnica

Składnica (Świdziński and Woliński, 2010;
Woliński et al., 2011) is a bank of constituency
parse trees for Polish sentences taken from se-
lected paragraphs in the balanced manually-
annotated subcorpus of the Polish National Cor-
pus (NKJP). To attain consistency of the treebank,
a semi-automatic method was applied: trees were

generated by an automatic parser1 and then se-
lected and validated by human annotators. The
resulting version 0.5 of Składnica contains 8241
manually validated trees.

As a consequence of the method used, some
sentences do not have any correct parse tree as-
signed, if Świgra did not generate any tree for a
particular sentence or no generated tree has been
accepted as correct one.

Parse trees are encoded in XML, each parse be-
ing stored in a separate file. The parse tree of sen-
tence Taki był u nas zwyczaj od pokoleń. (‘There
was such a habit among us for generations.’) in
Składnica is shown in Fig. 1.

3.2 Polish wordnet—Słowosieć
In contrast to NKJP annotation, we decided to
annotate tokens with very fine-grained semantic
types represented by wordnet synsets. For this
goal, we used PLWN (Piasecki et al., 2009).

PLWN is a network of lexico-semantic rela-
tions, an electronic thesaurus with a structure
modelled on that of the Princeton WordNet and
those constructed in the EuroWordNet project.
Polish WordNet describes the meaning of a lexi-
cal unit comprising one or more words by placing
this unit in a network representing relations such
as synonymy, hypernymy, meronymy, etc.

A lexical unit (LU) is a string which has its mor-
phosyntactic characteristics and a meaning as a
whole. Therefore, it may be an idiom or even a
collocation, but not a productive syntactic struc-
ture (Derwojedowa et al., 2008). An LU is rep-
resented as a pair 〈lemma, meaning〉, the last be-
ing a natural number. Technically, any LU also
has its unique numeric identifier. Each lexical unit
belongs to a synset, which is a set of synonyms.
Synsets have their unique numeric identifiers as
well. A fragment of the table of triples 〈identifier,
lemma, meaning〉 is presented in Fig. 2.

Version 2.0 of PLWN is used for the semantic
annotation of tokens. It contains 106438 lemmas,
namely 17486 verb lemmas, 77662 noun lemmas
and 11290 adjective lemmas, 32199 of them (7234
verb, 20625 noun and 4340 adjective lemmas) be-
ing ambiguous. The number of lexical units is
160100 (31980 verb, 109967 noun and 18153 ad-
jective units). On the other hand, named entity an-
notation was performed by means of PLWN 1.6.

1Świgra parser (Woliński, 2005) based on the revised
version (Świdziński and Woliński, 2009) of metamorphosis
grammar GFJP (Świdziński, 1992).



Figure 1: Exemplary parse tree from Składnica

124 aparycja 1
136 apteka 1
139 arbiter 2
198 atrybut 3
199 atrybut 1
18382 atrybut 2
19474 arbiter 1

Figure 2: The fragment of the table of triples
〈identifier, lemma, meaning〉 of PLWN 1.6

3.2.1 Named entities in PLWN
Polish WordNet contains some number of named
entities, selected rather randomly. They are rep-
resented in the same way as common words, by
means of lexical units. LUs representing NEs are
grouped in synsets as well, since the same object
can be identified by means of several NEs (e.g., a
full name and its acronym). The only difference is
that they are connected by ‘type’ and ‘instance’
relations instead of ‘hypernym’ and ‘hyponym’.

The representation of NEs in PLWN is far from
satisfactory. Therefore, a table of names (a sort
of a gazetteer) has been created, in which a list of
semantic types represented by PLWN synset iden-
tifiers is assigned to every NE lemma. The order
of synsets in a list reflects their preference.

4 Principles of annotation

4.1 The scope of annotation

PLWN contains lexical units of three open parts
of speech: adjectives, nouns and verbs. There-
fore, only tokens belonging to these POS are anno-
tated. This concerns abbreviations and acronyms
as well2.

2Acronyms usually are named entities.

Unfortunately, it does not contain adverbs so
far, hence we have no possibility of annotating
them. This causes a kind of inconsistency in an-
notation, which we hope to correct in the future.

On the other hand, only sentences having parse
trees are annotated. The reason for this is that
corresponding LUs are assigned to terminal nodes
representing tokens being annotated. This feature
can limit applicability of the resulting resource in
WSD.

In the case of tokens being elements of multi-
words named entities, the human annotators were
free to decide whether they should be annotated.
The reason is that some NEs (mainly names of in-
stitutions) are compositional.

Semantic annotation is introduced into XML
structure of a parse tree as a new type child el-
ement of the element node: a terminal node
(element plwn_interpretation) for com-
mon words and a nonterminal node (element
named) for named entities. All LUs from
PLWN with the corresponding lemma (and POS)
are included, the correct ones having the at-
tribute chosen="true" (see Fig. 3 for the noun
pokolenie—generation). The attribute polysemy
is used to indicate whether the list of lemmas is
a singleton or not. Storing all LUs enables to
check what choices were accessible for human or
automatic annotators during the process of anno-
tation. The actual annotation is not ambiguous.

In PLWN, there are also units whose lemmas
differ only in letter case (lower- vs. uppercase).
If the attribute case_agreement has the value
true, only LUs with the lemma identical with
the token lemma are considered. Otherwise, the
chosen LU lemma differs from the token lemma



<plwn_interpretation sem_id="sem_5">
<plwn_units case_agreement="true"

polysemy="true">
<unit luid="sem_5-sv1"

chosen="true">
<lubase>pokolenie</lubase>
<lusense>1</lusense>
<luident>20791</luident>
<synset>2418</synset>

</unit>
<unit luid="sem_5-sv2">

<lubase>pokolenie</lubase>
<lusense>2</lusense>
<luident>5921</luident>
<synset>7789</synset>

</unit>
</plwn_units>

</plwn_interpretation>

Figure 3: XML representation of a polysemic
common word

in that aspect (and all corresponding LUs are in-
cluded).

Additionally, the root element is augmented
with three attributes, name-plwn_version,
sense-plwn_version, final-plwn_
version pointing out which version of PLWN
was used for a particular phase of semantic an-
notation. Certainly, it is possible that these three
parameters are equal, but since both resources are
under long-lasting intensive manual development,
this is highly unlikely. The procedure of updating
the annotation to the current version of resources
(Hajnicz, 2013a) has been elaborated (the third
attribute).

The Table 1 summarises the XML elements ant
their attributes used for lexico-semantic level of
annotation. The element plwn_units is used
for standard annotation, as in Fig. 3, the ele-
ment other_units is used for synonyms, hy-
pernyms, multi-element units etc., whereas the
element derived_units is used for gerunds
and participles (see Fig. 4). The attributes
type, relat, and chosen are optional; the
attributes deriv_type and deriv_dest ap-
pear in plwn_units only if the element
derived_units is present (see section 4.2.4).

4.2 Non-standard annotation

Apart from the standard annotation involving lexi-
cal units of the same lemma as a token itself, some
tokens are tagged in a special way, including:

• multi-word units,

• verb lemmas including reflexive marker się,

• synonyms and hypernyms.

For such annotations, the XML element
other_units instead of plwn_units is used,
having the attribute relat determining the type
of special annotation.

If LUs having the same lemma as a token under
annotation occur in PLWN, then the correspond-
ing plwn_units element appears in the corre-
sponding plwn_interpretation. However,
no of its units are provided with the attribute
chosen="true", as they were not adequate in-
terpretation of a token in a particular context. Note
also that the attribute case_agreement is not
considered forother_units, as the lemma of
LUs is different from the lemma of a token, hence
their case cannot be compared.

4.2.1 Multi-word units
PLWN contains a growing number of multi-word
units. In PLWN 2.0, 12% of units have multi-word
lemmas: (15% nouns LUs, 5% verb LUs and only
0.2% adjective LUs). There are two kinds of such
units:

• units specifying the meaning of the head of
lemma, e.g., szkoła podstawowa (‘primary
school’) is a school; such LUs are hyponyms
of units representing the head of their lem-
mas;

• units changing the meaning of the head of
lemma, e.g., centrum handlowe (‘shopping
centre’) is not a centre; such LUs are not con-
nected with any unit representing the head of
their lemmas.

In the first case, the annotation of tokens using the
single-word hypernym is correct, even though less
precise. In the second case, using a multi-word
expression is indispensable to obtain the correct
annotation. In any case, the attribute relat gets
the value multi-unit.

As in the standard case, multi-word LU anno-
tation is attached to individual tokens. The rea-
son for this is twofold. First, due to its structure,
Składnica may not contain a single node corre-
sponding to the relevant expression. For instance,
the expression szkoły podstawowej w Tychnowach
(‘primary school in Tychnowy’) from the sentence
Adam [...] chodzi do III klasy szkoły podstawowej
w Tychnowach (‘Adam attends the III class of the
primary school in Tychnowy’), is represented in
Składnica by a single node, having three child



Table 1: XML representation for lexico-semantic level of annotation

elements attribute values

plwn_interpretation sem_id identifier
type multi-element, grammatical, foreign, lack,

neologism, prep-element, wrong-lemma

plwn_units, derived_units, other_units polysemy true, false
plwn_units, derived_units case_agreement true, false

deriv_type ger, pact, ppas
plwn_units deriv_dest lemma
derived_units deriv_source lemma
other_units relat refl, multi-unit, synonym, hypernym

unit luid identifier
chosen true, match

nodes corresponding to szkoły (‘school’), podsta-
wowej (‘primary’) and w Tychnowach (‘in Tych-
nowy’), and no node corresponding to szkoły pod-
stawowej (‘primary school’). Secondly, there are
sentences in which only the heads of such ex-
pressions occur (e.g., Lubimy zaglądać do takich
dużych centrów—‘We like to visit such big [shop-
ping] centres’).

If a multi-word expression (present in PLWN)
is semantically compositional, its non-head ele-
ments are annotated in the standard way. Other-
wise, the element plwn_interpretation ob-
tains the attribute type="multi-element".

4.2.2 Verb lemmas with the reflexive marker
As in other Slavic languages, in Polish, the re-
flexive marker się can form an integral part of the
lemma of a verb3. In Polish, się is a separate ortho-
graphic word, not attached to a verb. Verbs with
and without się included in their lemma have dif-
ferent meaning and are represented by means of
separate LUs. For instance, zalecać means ‘to rec-
ommend, to order’, whereas zalecać się means ‘to
make advances (to somebody)’. 9% of LUs have
lemmas with the reflexive marker (23% of verbs,
6,5% of nouns: 23% of gerunds, as could be ex-
pected).

If a verb token is annotated in such a way, its an-
notation contains the attribute relat="refl".
It is considered separately from typical multi-word
expressions, since it is a linguistic feature com-
pletely different and independent from colloca-
tions. In particular, there are verbal multi-word ex-

3Some occurrences of się, namely impersonal, strictly re-
flexive and reciprocal, are not part of a verb lemma.

pressions in spite of the occurrence of the reflexive
marker (e.g., podać się do dymisji—‘to demit’).

4.2.3 Synonyms and hypernyms

It is almost impossible that there is a correspond-
ing lexical unit in PLWN for every token in Skład-
nica, since both words and their meanings exhibit
Zipfian distribution, the more so as PLWN is a re-
source under intensive development.

SemCorr and the Italian Syntactic-Semantic
Treebank apply special tags for such tokens. How-
ever, such a solution limits the information about
the missing senses to informal textual comments.
We decided to introduce annotation using syn-
onyms or hypernyms. Such annotation locates the
absent meaning of a word in a structure of PLWN
as precisely as possible. The attribute relat of
the corresponding other_units element gets
the value synonym or hypernym, respectively.

Hypernyms are used if synonyms of absent LUs
do not occur in PLWN. Usually, synonyms for ab-
sent noun units are proportionally easy to estab-
lish, but adjective units and verb units are approx-
imated by their hypernyms much more often.

The annotation by means of synonyms and hy-
pernyms is used for tokens lemmatised improp-
erly in Składnica (type="wrong-lemma"),
and for foreign-language words tagged mor-
phosyntactically as verbs, nouns or adjectives
(type="foreign").

This kind of annotation allows for finding a cor-
rect interpretation of tokens by means of newly-
added LUs during an update of lexico-semantic
annotation of Składnica to the new version of
PLWN (Hajnicz, 2013a).



A similar procedure is applied for spelling er-
rors (type="spelling"). The difference be-
tween spelling errors and improper lemmatisations
is that the latter are supposed to be corrected.

4.2.4 Gerunds and participles
Gerunds and participles are lemmatised to verb
lemmas in Składnica, hence they have obtained
a verb interpretation. Nevertheless, they occur
in sentences in nominal and adjectival positions,
hence it would be natural to interpret them as
nouns and adjectives, respectively.

PLWN 2.0 contains a lot of gerunds (27% of
noun units) and a considerably smaller amount
of participles (1.2% of adjective units). Each of
them is connected with the verb unit it is de-
rived from by means of inter-paradigmatic syn-
onymy. Therefore, they obtain double inter-
pretation, both by means of verbal and nomi-
nal/adjectival units (see Fig. 4 for the gerund
funkcjonowanie—functioning).

4.3 Tokens without semantic interpretation

The procedure of annotation assumes providing
as many verb, noun and adjective tokens with
lexico-semantic annotation as possible. However,
there are some exceptions to this rule. First, in-
dividual elements of named entities and multi-
words expression need not be interpreted, having
the attribute type equal to name-element or
multi-element, respectively. For the tokens
for which finding an interpretation (even by means
of a hypernym) fails, this attribute equals lack.

Next, tokens having a grammatical function in a
sentence only are not semantically interpreted and
tagged as grammatical. This concerns mainly
future forms of the verb być (to be) forming future
tense, e.g., Zarobki wszystkich nauczycieli będą
rosły co rok (‘Earnings of all teachers will grow
every year’), forms of the verb być (‘to be; will’)
and zostać (‘to become’) forming passive voice,
e.g., Maciej R. został już dyscyplinarnie zwolniony
(‘Maciej R. was already dismissed on grounds of
discipline’). Non-anaphoric occurrences of pro-
nouns are treated in the same way.

In Polish, there exist compound prepositions
composed of a simple pronoun and a noun, e.g.,
na temat (‘on the subject of’). Some of them
were represented in Składnica as standard PPs,
with their NP complement represented as a modi-
fier of the noun element of the whole preposition.
Such mistagged tokens have not been not seman-

tically interpreted, obtaining instead the attribute
type="prep-element".

5 Assessment of a sentence

In spite of lexico-semantic interpretation at the
level of single tokens, the assessment procedure
involves annotation of a whole sentence. There
are following assessment marks:

1. fully annotated sentence,

2. lack of corresponding lemma,

3. lack of corresponding LU,

4. occurrence of anaphora,

5. occurrence of ellipsis,

6. occurrence of metaphor,

7. occurrence of metonymy,

8. incorrect lemmatisation of a token,

9. incorrect sentence.

The first category requires that the annotation of
all autosemantic tokens in the sentence is correct
and final, the last one means that the sentence has
not been annotated at all. Other marks concern
particular problems and phenomena occurring in
the sentence, hence several such marks can be at-
tached to it, forming a list of assessments. In par-
ticular, the 3rd assessment means that there is no
lexical unit in PLWN corresponding to a particular
word meaning in context, whereas the 2nd assess-
ment means that the whole lemma was not consid-
ered in PLWN.

We decided to attach information about
metaphorical or metonymical usage to whole sen-
tences instead of tokens, contrary to the Italian
Syntactic-Semantic Treebank. The reason for
this is that, in our opinion, they are expressed
through the relations between the words rather
than through any particular words.

The assessments can be used for several pur-
poses. First, the user can search Składnica for sen-
tences having particular features (i.e, metaphori-
cal ones). Second, the information of lacking LUs
and whole lemmas can be used for PLWN devel-
opment and updating Składnica to new versions of
PLWN (Hajnicz, 2013a). Finally, such an infor-
mation can be used for WSD training and evaluat-
ing, and for determining selectional preferences of
predicates, we are particularly interested in.



<plwn_interpretation sem_id="sem_2">
<plwn_units case_agreement="true" polysemy="false"

deriv_type="ger" deriv_dest="funkcjonowanie">
<unit luid="sem_2-sv1" chosen="match">

<lubase>funkcjonować</lubase>
<lusense>1</lusense>
<luident>1824</luident>
<synset>54227</synset>

</unit>
</plwn_units>
<derived_units case_agreement="true" polysemy="false"

deriv_type="ger" deriv_source="funkcjonować">
<unit luid="der_2-sv1" chosen="true">

<lubase>funkcjonowanie</lubase>
<lusense>1</lusense>
<luident>126208</luident>
<synset>91200</synset>

</unit>
</derived_units>

</plwn_interpretation>

Figure 4: XML representation of a gerund semantic interpretation

6 Conclusions

In this paper, we have presented the principles
of lexico-semantic annotation of Składnica Tree-
bank by means of Polish WordNet lexical units.
We have devoted the most attention to issues con-
nected with PLWN usage.

The procedure of semantic annotation of Skład-
nica is not finished yet. The 8283 sentences in
Składnica contains 49264 nouns, verbs and adjec-
tives for annotation, and 17410 of them belonging
to 2785 (34%) sentences has been already anno-
tated. For 2072 tokens (12%), the LU appropriate
in the context has not been found in PLWN.

Applying annotation by means of (potential)
synonyms or hypernyms of units absent in PLWN
seems to be the main novelty of our approach, the
more so as PLWN is a resource still under in-
tensive development. Therefore, sentence assess-
ments allow for easily finding the set of sentences
containing tokens without a final interpretation,
whereas synonyms and hypernyms used for their
approximate annotation will facilitate their locali-
sation in the PLWN structure.

PLWN contains a rich set of lexical and
synset relations, including diminutive, augmen-
tative, feminine derivatives, etc. Such relations
could be used in the case of absence of the LU ap-
propriate for a token, in spite of synonyms and hy-
pernyms. However, this would further complicate
the process of annotation and, as a consequence,
increase the risk of errors during manual anno-
tation. Similarly, we resigned from using inter-
paradigmatic synonymy and hypernymy for anno-

tating derivatives belonging to different POS.
More details about the procedure and the results

of manual annotation could be found in (Hajnicz,
2013c).

Acknowledgements This research is supported
by the POIG.01.01.02-14-013/09 project which is
co-financed by the European Union under the Eu-
ropean Regional Development Fund.

References
Eneko Agirre and Philip Edmonds, editors. 2006.

Word Sense Disambiguation. Algorithms and Ap-
plications, volume 33 of Text, Speech and Lan-
guage Technology. Springer-Verlag, Dordrecht, the
Netherlands.

Susana Alfonso, Eckhard Bick, Renato Haber, and Di-
ana Santos. 2002. Floresta sintá(c)tica: a treebank
of portuguese. In Proceedings of the 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC-2002), pages 1698–1703, Las Pal-
mas, Spain.

Eckhard Bick. 2006. Noun sense tagging: Semantic
prototype annotation of a portuguese treebank. In
Jan Hajič and Joakim Nivre, editors, Proceedings of
the 5th Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic The-
ories, pages 127–138, Prague, Czech Republic.

Bartosz Broda, Maciej Piasecki, and Marek Maziarz.
2009. Evaluating LexCSD—a weakly-supervised
method on improved semantically annotated corpus
in a large scale experiment. In Mieczysław A.
Kłopotek, Małgorzata Marciniak, Agnieszka
Mykowiecka, Wojciech Penczek, and Sławomir T.
Wierzchoń, editors, Intelligent Information Sys-
tems, Challenging Problems in Science: Computer
Science, pages 63–76, Warsaw, Poland. Academic
Publishing House Exit.



Magdalena Derwojedowa, Maciej Piasecki, Stanisław
Szpakowicz, Magdalena Zawisławska, and Bartosz
Broda. 2008. Words, concepts and relations in the
construction of Polish WordNet. In Attila Tanacs,
Dora Csendes, Veronica Vincze, Christiane Fell-
baum, and Piek Vossen, editors, Proceedings of the
Global WordNet Conference, pages 162–177, Seged,
Hungary.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet — An
Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.

W. Nelson Francis and Henry Kucera. 1964, revised
and amplified 1979. Brown corpus manual. Inter-
net.

Elżbieta Hajnicz. 2013a. Actualising lexico-semantic
annotation of Składnica treebank to modified ver-
sions of source resources. in preparation.

Elżbieta Hajnicz. 2013b. Mapping named enti-
ties from NKJP corpus to Składnica treebank and
polish wordnet. In Mieczysław A. Kłopotek,
Jacek Koronacki, Małgorzata Marciniak, Agnieszka
Mykowiecka, and Sławomir T. Wierzchoń, editors,
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference
on Language Processing and Intelligent Information
Systems, volume 7912 of LNCS, pages 92–105, War-
saw, Poland. Springer-Verlag.

Elżbieta Hajnicz. 2013c. Procedure and results of the
lexico-semantic annotation of Składnica treebank.
in preparation.

Łukasz Kobyliński. 2011. Mining class association
rules for word sense disambiguation. In Pascal Bou-
vry, Mieczysław A. Kłopotek, Franck Leprevost,
Małgorzata Marciniak, Agnieszka Mykowiecka, and
Henryk Rybiński, editors, Proceedings of the Inter-
national Joint Conference on Security and Intelli-
gent Information Systems, volume 7053 of LNCS,
pages 307–317, Warsaw, Poland. Springer-Verlag.

2000. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2000), Athens, Greece.

Diana McCarthy. 2001. Lexical Acquisition at the
Syntax-Semantics Interface: Diathesis Alternations,
Subcategorization Frames and Selectional Prefer-
ences. PhD thesis, University of Sussex.

George A. Miller and Christiane Fellbaum. 2007.
WordNet then and now. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 41:209–214.

George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fell-
baum, Derek Gross, and Katherine J. Miller. 1990.
Introduction to wordnet: an on-line lexical database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 3(4):235–
244.

George A. Miller, Claudia Leacock, Randee Tengi, and
Ross Bunker. 1993. A semantic concordance. In
Proceedings of the ARPA Human Language Tech-
nology Workshop, pages 303–308, Plainsboro, NJ.

Simonetta Montemagni, Francesco Barsotti, Marco
Battista, Nicoletta Calzolari, Ornella Corazzari,

Alessandro Lenci, Vito Pirrelli, Antonio Zampolli,
Francesca Fanciulli, Maria Massetani, Remo Raf-
faelli, Roberto Basili, Maria Teresa Pazienza, Dario
Saracino, Fabio Zanzotto, Nadia Mana, Fabio Pi-
anesi, and Rodolfo Delmonte. 2003a. The
syntactic-semantic treebank of Italian. an overview.
Linguistica Computazionale, XVI–XVI:461–492.

Simonetta Montemagni, Francesco Barsotti, Marco
Battista, Nicoletta Calzolari, Ornella Corazzari,
Alessandro Lenci, Antonio Zampolli, Francesca
Fanciulli, Maria Massetani, Remo Raffaelli, Roberto
Basili, Maria Teresa Pazienza, Dario Saracino,
Fabio Zanzotto, Nadia Mana, Fabio Pianesi, and
Rodolfo Delmonte. 2003b. Building the Italian
syntactic-semantic treebank. In Anne Abeillé, edi-
tor, Treebanks: Building and Using Parsed Corpora,
Language and Speech, pages 189–210. Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers, Dordrecht, Holland.

Martha Palmer, Hoa Trang Dang, and Joseph Rosen-
zweig. 2000. Semantic tagging the Penn treebank.
In LREC (LRE, 2000), pages 699–704.

Maciej Piasecki, Stanisław Szpakowicz, and Bartosz
Broda. 2009. A Wordnet from the Ground Up.
Oficyna Wydawnicza Politechniki Wrocławskiej,
Wrocław, Poland.

Adam Przepiórkowski, Mirosław Bańko, Rafał L.
Górski, Barbara Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk, Marek
Łaziński, and Piotr Pęzik. 2011. National Corpus of
Polish. In Vetulani (Vetulani, 2011), pages 259–263.

Adriana Roventini, Antonietta Alonge, Nicoletta Cal-
zolari, Bernardo Magnini, and Francesca Bertagna.
2000. ItalWordNet: a large semantic database for
Italian. In LREC (LRE, 2000), pages 783–790.

Agata Savary, Jakub Waszczuk, and Adam
Przepiórkowski. 2010. Towards the annota-
tion of named entities in the National Corpus of
Polish. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2010), Valetta, Malta. ELRA.

Sabine Schulte im Walde. 2006. Experiments on
the automatic induction of German semantic verb
classes. Computational Linguistics, 32(2):159–194.

Chaloemphon Sirkayon and Asanee Kawtrakul. 2007.
Automatic lexico-semantic acquisition from syntac-
tic parsed tree by using clustering and combining
techniques. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Intelligent Systems and Smart Home
(WISH 2007), volume 4743 of LNCS, pages 203–
213. Springer-Verlag.

Marek Świdziński. 1992. Gramatyka formalna języka
polskiego. Rozprawy Uniwersytetu Warszawskiego.
Wydawnictwa Uniwersytetu Warszawskiego, War-
saw, Poland.

Marek Świdziński and Marcin Woliński. 2009. A
new formal definition of Polish nominal phrases. In
Małgorzata Marciniak and Agnieszka Mykowiecka,
editors, Aspects of Natural Language Processing,
volume 5070 of LNCS, pages 143–162. Springer-
Verlag.



Marek Świdziński and Marcin Woliński. 2010. To-
wards a bank of constituent parse trees for Polish.
In Petr Sojka, Aleš Horák, Ivan Kopeček, and Karel
Pala, editors, Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Text, Speech and Dialogue TSD 2010,
volume 6231 of LNAI, pages 197–204, Brno, Czech
Republic. Springer-Verlag.

Zygmunt Vetulani, editor. 2011. Proceedings of the
5th Language & Technology Conference, Poznań,
Poland.

Marcin Woliński, Katarzyna Głowińska, and Marek
Świdziński. 2011. A preliminary version of Skład-
nica — a treebank of Polish. In Vetulani (Vetulani,
2011), pages 299–303.

Marcin Woliński. 2005. An efficient implementation
of a large grammar of Polish. In Zygmunt Vetulani,
editor, Proceedings of the 2nd Language & Technol-
ogy Conference, pages 343—-347, Poznań, Poland.


