










































Instructions for ACL-2010 Proceedings


IndoWordnet Visualizer:  A Graphical User Interface for Browsing 

and Exploring Wordnets of Indian Languages 

Devendra Singh Chaplot       Sudha Bhingardive       Pushpak Bhattacharyya 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 

IIT Bombay, Powai, 

Mumbai, 400076. 
{chaplot,sudha,pb}@cse.iitb.ac.in 

 

  

 

Abstract 

In this paper, we are presenting a graphical 

user interface to browse and explore the In-

doWordnet lexical database for various Indi-

an languages. IndoWordnet visualizer ex-

tracts the related concepts for a given word 

and displays a sub graph containing those 

concepts. The interface is enhanced with dif-

ferent features in order to provide flexibility 

to the user. IndoWordnet visualizer is made 

publically available. Though it was initially 

constructed for making the wordnet valida-

tion process easier, it is proving to be very 

useful in analyzing various Natural Language 

Processing tasks, viz., Semantic relatedness, 

Word Sense Disambiguation, Information 

Retrieval, Textual Entailment, etc. 

1 Introduction 

IndoWordnet (Bhattacharyya, 2010) is a linked 

lexical knowledge base consisting of wordnets of 

various Indian languages, where each wordnet is 

composed of synsets and semantic relations. This 

resource is very useful for various NLP applica-

tions viz., Machine Translation, Word Sense Dis-

ambiguation, Sentimental Analysis, Information 

Retrieval, etc. But to use this knowledge in an 

effective way, a set of tools are required to que-

ry, retrieve and visualize information from this 

knowledge base. Data visualization is the study 

of the visual representation of data, meaning "in-

formation that has been abstracted in some 

schematic form, including attributes or variables 

for the units of information" (Friendly, 2008). 

The main goal of visualization is to organize in-

formation clearly and effectively through graph-

ical means. We have developed a user interface 

that provides a graphical representation of In-

doWordnet. Till date, no such tool was devel-

oped for visualizing the wordnet database for 

Indian languages. The visualizer we developed 

takes a word from a specific language as an input 

and displays the related concepts of that word 

depending upon its semantic and lexical relations 

with other words in the wordnet. 

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 

covers a related work.  Section 3 gives an over-

view of IndoWordnet. Section 4 describes In-

doWordnet visualizer. Section 5 gives implemen-

tation details. Conclusion and future work are 

covered in Section 6. 

2 Related Work 

There are many wordnet visualizers available for 

browsing and exploring wordnets to better un-

derstand the concepts and semantic relations be-

tween them. Some of them include BabelNet ex-

plorer (Navigli, 2013), AndreOrd (Johannsen and 

Pedersen, 2011), Visuwords1, Nodebox2, Word-

Ties (Pedersen et. al 2013), WordVis (Ver-

cruysse and Kuiper, 2011) etc. BabelNet explorer 

is designed for visualizing the lexical database 

BabelNet (Navigli and Ponzetto, 2012). It uses 

the tree layout for visualization which allows 

intuitive navigation. It covers English, Italian, 

Catalan, Spanish, German and French languages. 

AndreOrd is the wordnet browser developed for 

the Danish wordnet, DanNet. It uses the open 

source framework Ruby on Rails and the gra-

phing toolkit Protovis3. Visuwords is the online 

graphical dictionary designed for accessing 

Princeton WorNet (Fellbaum, 1998). It uses a 

force-directed graph layout for visualizing the 

synset structure. Nodebox visualizer provides the 

static layout. It does not use any color or shape 

encoding in the graph. WordTies is the wordnet 

visualizer designed for Nordic and Baltic word-

nets. It covers seven monolingual and four bilin-

gual wordnets. It has been made available via 

                                                 
1 http://www.visuwords.com/ 
2 http://nodebox.net/code/index.php/WordNet 
3 http://vis.stanford.edu/protovis/ 

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Friendly


META-SHARE4 through the META-NORD pro-

ject. 

3 Overview of IndoWordnet 

IndoWordnet is the most useful multilingual lex-

ical resource in Indian languages. Hindi wordnet 

is created manually using lexical knowledge 

from various dictionaries. Wordnets other than 

Hindi have been created by using expansion ap-

proach with Hindi as a pivot language. It in-

cludes 18 Indian languages 5  viz., Assamese, 

Bengali, Bodo, Gujarati, Kannada, Kashmiri, 

Nepali, Kashmiri, Konkani, Malayalam, Manipu-

ri, Marathi, Nepali, Odiya, Punjabi, Sanskrit, 

Tamil, Telugu, Urdu, etc. Expansion approach 

makes use of the fact that there are several ‘uni-

versal concepts’ which are independent of the 

language. If one language has synsets for univer-

sal concepts, then it makes sense to borrow this 

work for some other language. For such univer-

sal concepts, the semantic relations remain same 

across the languages. Hence one can directly bor-

row them for other languages. This principle is 

used in the creation of IndoWordnet.  All the se-

mantic relations for universal synsets are defined 

in Hindi and are borrowed by other languages.  

Expansion approach works very well for closely 

related languages like ‘Hindi and Marathi’. The 

current statistics of the IndoWordnet is shown in 

Table 1. 

 

Languages Synset count 

Assamese 14258 

Bodo 15785 

Bengali 36345 

Gujarati 35581 

Hindi 38283 

Kashmiri 29466 

Konkani 32370 

Kannada 14674 

Malayalam 12108 

Manipuri 16315 

Marathi 28055 

Nepali 11713 

Punjabi 32364 

                                                 
4 http://www.meta-share.org 
5  Wordnets for Indian languages are developed in In-

doWordNet project. Wordnets are available in following 

Indian languages: Assamese, Bodo, Bengali, English, Guja-

rati, Hindi, Kashmiri, Konkani, Kannada, Malayalam, Ma-

nipuri, Marathi, Nepali, Punjabi, Sanskrit, Tamil, Telugu 

and Urdu. These languages cover 3 different language fami-

lies, Indo Aryan, Sino-Tebetian and Dravidian. 
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/indowordnet 

Sanskrit 22912 

Tamil 20297 

Telugu 20057 

Urdu 31008 
 

Table 1: Current statistics of the IndoWordnet 

 

IndoWordnet stores various relations among 

words and synsets. These relations give an im-

portant knowledge about the language structure. 

These are categorized under two labels   viz., lex-

ical relations and semantic relations. 

3.1 Lexical Relations 

Lexical relations are present between the words. 

IndoWordnet contains different types of lexical 

relations listed below, 

 Gradation  (state, size, light, gender, 
temperature, color, time, quality, action, 

manner) (for all parts-of-speech) 

 Antonymy (action, amount, direction, 
gender, personality, place, quality, size, 

state, time, color, manner) (for all parts-of-

speech) 

 Compound (for nouns) 

 Conjunction(for verbs) 

3.2 Semantic Relations 

Semantic relations are present between the 

synsets. Different types of semantic relations are 

given below, 

 Hypernymy (for noun and verbs) 

 Holonymy ( nouns) 

 Meronymy (component object, member 
collection, feature, activity, place, area, 

face, state, portion, mass, resource, pro-

cess, position, area) 

 Troponymy (for verbs) 

 Similar Attribute (between noun and ad-
jective) 

 Function verb (between noun and verb) 

 Ability verb  (between noun and verb) 

 Capability verb (between noun and verb) 

 Also see 

 Adverb modifies verb (between adverb 
and verb) 

 Causative (for verb) 

http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/


 Entailment (for verb) 

 Near synset 

 Adjective modifies noun (between adjec-
tive and noun) 

IndoWordnet provides extra relations (Na-

rayan et. al., 2002) in comparison with Princeton 

wordnet, e.g., gradation, causative form, nominal 

and verbal compounds, conjunction etc. All these 

relations are covered in IndoWordnet Visualizer. 

User can see these relations and understand them 

better visually. All these relations are used while 

finding the related concepts of a given word. The 

need to make entirely different explorer for In-

doWordnet lies in its difference from other 

wordnets in terms of the structure and relations. 

The entirely different format makes it difficult to 

import other visualizers directly. Manually going 

through the wordnet relations takes very large 

time. Visualizer makes this process extremely 

efficient and intuitive. This motivated us to cre-

ate a new visualizer for IndoWordnet. Developed 

GUI is enriched with various facilities as ex-

plained in Section 4. 

4 IndoWordnet Visualizer 

IndoWordnet visualizer is designed for visualiz-

ing the IndoWordnet database. It is made publi-

cally available on IndoWordnet website6. Related 

concepts of a given input word are extracted at 

different levels and a sub graph is displayed on a 

screen. The user interface layout and its features 

are described below. 

4.1 User Interface Layout 

The interface of the visualizer consists of fol-

lowing I/O features. 

 

The input to the interface consists of: 

 Text-box for the word to browse and ex-
plore 

 Drop-box to select a language (Indian 
languages) 

 Drop-box to select visualization options  

 

The output of the interface consists of: 

 A graphical view of all related words 
and concepts in a respective language for a 

given input word. (Screenshot 2) 

                                                 
6 
http://www.cfilt.iitb.ac.in/indowordnet/ 

 Download option is provided for retriev-
ing related words and concepts which can 

act as a good context clue for a given input 

word. 

4.2 Features  

Interface is enhanced with the following fea-

tures, which provide flexibility to the user to 

visualize the wordnet database. 

 

 Nodes are automatically arranged on the 
screen according to physics and depending 

on the total number of nodes. The repul-

sion between the nodes and the link dis-

tance is optimally calculated so as to dis-

play all nodes clearly. Here, nodes are 

nothing but the concepts from IndoWord-

net. For a given input word, all related 

concepts are extracted from IndoWordnet 

and are displayed at appropriate positions 

on the screen. 

 The size of the node varies according to 
the number of its immediate neighbor. A 

node consisting large number of neighbors 

is bigger in size than a node with less 

number of neighbors.  This highlights 

more frequent words against less frequent 

ones.  

 When a user moves a mouse pointer over 
a particular node, it highlights all its im-

mediate neighbors along with that node. 

(Screenshot 6) 

 When a user moves a mouse pointer over 
a particular edge, it highlights the type of 

relation exist between the nodes. Different 

color encodings are used for displaying 

the lexical and semantic relations. 

(Screenshot 3) 

 User can click, drag, expand and fix 
nodes for better visibility. (Screenshot 4) 

 Zoom in and zoom out facilities are also 
provided. 

 When a user clicks on a node all its se-
mantic information is displayed on the 

screen. It includes synset id, synset words, 

gloss, and example sentence. 

 Download option is provided in order to 
get all the information displayed on a 

screen which is helpful for different NLP 

applications. 



4.3 Visualization Schemes  

In an interface, we provided two types of visual 

schemes.  

1. By the number of levels 

2. By the number of nodes 

      In the first scheme, for a given concept, relat-

ed concepts are extracted according to different 

levels e.g., immediate neighbors, neighbors of 

immediate neighbors and so on.  Sometimes due 

to large number of neighboring concepts user 

may face difficulty in visualization. For example, 

for the Hindi concept ‘मानवकृति’ (man-made) giv-
en below, the number of extracted related con-

cepts at different levels are shown in Table 2. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

As number of levels increases, number of 

nodes (related concepts) for the concept also in-

creases drastically. It is very difficult to render 

such kind of concepts on a screen. That’s why 

we provided a second visualization scheme in 

which user has been given a facility to choose 

number of nodes to be displayed on the screen 

(Screenshot 7). 

 
Level Number of related concepts 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

432   

2019 

5213 

11597 

16409 

18983 

 
Table 2: Number of related concepts for the word 

‘मानव कृति’ (manavakruti) (man-made) at different 
levels  

5 Implementation details 

The front-end of the IndoWordnet Visualizer 

uses Data Driven Documents (D3) JavaScript 

library, which allows us to present the data of 

nodes and edges from the back-end, graphically. 

This library allows us to define geometry for 

nodes and edges so as to automatically arrange 

them efficiently, while also allowing the user to 

click, drag and fix any node for better visibility. 

The library uses Scalable Vector Graphics 

(SVG), which allows us to zoom into the graph 

without pixelating the nodes, links or labels. The 

superiority of D3 lies in its support for dynamic 

behavior allowing user-friendly interaction and 

animation. 

6 Conclusion and Future Work 

We have presented the IndoWordnet visualizer 

which can be used for browsing and exploring 

IndoWordnet lexical database. It is enhanced 

with various functionalities in order to provide 

flexibility to the user. It is very useful for word-

net validation process. It can be used in various 

Natural Language Processing applications viz., 

Word Sense Disambiguation, Information Re-

trieval, Semantic Relatedness etc. IndoWordnet 

visualizer is under development and some more 

features are yet to be included like generating the 

minimum sub graph between two given con-

cepts. 

References  

Pushpak Bhattacharyya, 2010. “IndoWordnet”, Lexi-

cal Resources Engineering Conference (LREC 

2010), Malta. 

Christiane Fellbaum, 1998. “WordNet: An Electronic     

Database”, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 

Michael Friendly, 2008. "Milestones in the history of 

thematic cartography, statistical graphics, and data 

visualization", National Sciences and Engineering 

Research, Council of Canada. 

Anders Johannsen and Bolette Pedersen, 2011. “An-

dre ord” – a Wordnet Browser for the Danish 

Wordnet, DanNet, NODALIDA 2011 Conference 

Proceedings, pp. 295–298. 

Dipak Narayan, Debasri Chakrabarty, Prabhakar Pan-

de and Pushpak Bhattacharyya, 2002. “ An Experi-

ence in Building the IndoWordNet - a WordNet for 

Hindi”, International Conference on Global Word-

Net (GWC), Mysore, India. 

Roberto Navigli, 2013. “A Quick Tour of 

BabelNet1.1”, CICLing 2013, Part I, LNCS 7816, 

pp. 25–37. 

Hindi concept: 
 
Synset: 

मानव कृति, मानवकृति, मानव-कृति, मानव तनर्मिि 
वस्ि,ु मानव-कृि वस्ि,ु कृत्रिम वस्िु  (Human 
work,  man-made object, human - integrated 

object, artificial object) 
 

Gloss/example:  

मानव द्वारा बनाई या िैयार की हुई वस्िु   "यह 
मुगलकालीन मानव कृति है"  
(An object made or produced by man - 

  A masterpiece of Mughal’s era.) 

 

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Friendly
http://www.math.yorku.ca/SCS/Gallery/milestone/milestone.pdf
http://www.math.yorku.ca/SCS/Gallery/milestone/milestone.pdf
http://www.math.yorku.ca/SCS/Gallery/milestone/milestone.pdf
http://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~pb/papers/gwn-2002.ps
http://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~pb/papers/gwn-2002.ps
http://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~pb/papers/gwn-2002.ps
javascript:void(0)
javascript:void(0)
javascript:void(0)
javascript:void(0)
javascript:void(0)
javascript:void(0)


Roberto Navigli and Simone Ponzetto, 2012. 

“BabelNetXplorer: A Platform for Multilingual 

Lexical Knowledge Base Access”, France. 

Bolette Pedersen, Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, 

Neeme Kahusk, Krister Lindén, Jyrki Niemi, Ni-

klas Nisbeth, Lars Nygaard, Heili Orav, Eirikur 

Rögnvaldsson, Mitchel Seaton, Kadri Vider, Kaar-

lo Voionmaa, 2013. “Nordic and Baltic wordnets 

aligned and compared through WordTies”, Pro-

ceedings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Compu-

tational Linguistics (NODALIDA), 2013. 

Steven Vercruysse and Martin Kuiper, 2011. 

“WordVis: JavaScript and Animation to Visualize 

the WordNet Relational Dictionary” in Proceedings 

of the Third International Conference on Intelligent 

Human Computer Interaction (IHCI 2011), Prague, 

Czech Republic, August, 2011 

Screenshots 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Screenshot 1: For a given Hindi word ‘maata’ (mother), all its senses are displayed on a 

screen. User can see the graph of a particular sense by clicking on it. 



Screenshot 2: Graph for a Hindi word ‘maata’ (mother) with level 1 

All related concepts of ‘maata’ are displayed in a graph along with  

its semantic information on right side 

 

 

Screenshot 3: Graph for a Hindi word ‘maata’ (mother) with level 1 

When we move mouse pointer over the edge its relation is displayed. 

 



 

 

 

Screenshot 4: Graph for a Hindi word ‘pita’ (father) with level 1 

(In screenshot 2, if we expand node ‘pita’ then this graph is generated) 

 

Screenshot 5: Graph for a Hindi word ‘diwar’ (wall) with level 2 

 



 

Screenshot 6: Graph for a Hindi word ‘diwar’ (wall) with level 2. On mouse hover it high-

lights its synsets and only immediate neighbors (concepts) 

 

Screenshot 7: Graph for a Hindi word ‘diwar’ (wall) with 25 number of nodes on a screen. 

This is another type of visual display scheme, where user can specify how many number 

of nodes he/she wants to display on a screen 

 


