



















































Encoding MWEs in a conceptual lexicon


Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Multiword Expressions (MWE 2014), pages 43–47,
Gothenburg, Sweden, 26-27 April 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Encoding MWEs in a conceptual lexicon

Aggeliki Fotopoulou, Stella Markantonatou, Voula Giouli

Institute for Language and Speech Processing, R.C. “Athena’ 

{afotop;marks;voula}@ilsp.athena-innovation.gr

Abstract

The proposed  paper  reports  on  work  in  progress 
aimed at the development of a conceptual lexicon 
of  Modern  Greek  (MG)  and  the  encoding  of 
MWEs  in  it.  Morphosyntactic  and  semantic 
properties  of  these  expressions  were  specified 
formally and encoded in the lexicon. The resulting 
resource will be applicable for a number of NLP 
applications.

1 Introduction

 Substantial research  in  linguistics  has  been 
devoted  to  the  analysis  and  classification  of 
MWEs from different perspectives (Fraser, 1970; 
Chomsky,  1980;  M. Gross 1982,  1988;  Ruwet, 
1983;  der  Linden,  1992;  Nunberg et  al.,  1994; 
Howarth, 1996; Jackendoff, 1997; Moon, 1998; 
Fellbaum,  2007).  Moreover,  cognitive  and 
psycholinguistic  approaches  to  MWEs  (Lakoff, 
1993;  Gibbs,  1998;  Glucksberg,  1993; 
Diakogiorgi&Fotopoulou, 2012) have accounted 
for  their  interpretation.  Within  the  NLP 
community,  there  is  a  growing  interest  in  the 
identification  of  MWEs  and  their  robust 
treatment,  as  this  seems  to  improve  parsing 
accuracy  (Nivre  and  Nilsson,  2004;  Arun  and 
Keller, 2005). In this respect, the development of 
large-scale,  robust  language resources that  may 
be integrated in parsing systems is of paramount 
importance. Representation, however, of MWEs 
in lexica poses a number of challenges. 

2 Basic Notions

Typically,  fixed  MWEs  are  identified  and 
classified on the basis of  semantic,  lexical  and 
morphosyntactic criteria. (M. Gross, 1982, 1987; 
Lamiroy, 2003), namely:

• non-compositionality:  i.e.,  the meaning of 
the  expression  cannot  be  computed  from 
the  meanings of  its  constituents  and  the 
rules used to combine them. Nevertheless, 
according  to  (Nunberg  et  al,  1994), 

compositionality refers to the fact that the 
constituents  of  some  idioms  “carry 
identifiable  parts  of  the  idiomatic 
meaning”.  Variability has  been  further 
emphasised in (Hamblin and Gibbs 1999) 
and  (Nunberg  et  al.  1994):  fixed 
expressions  appear  in  a  continuum  of 
compositionality,  which  ranges  from 
expressions  that  are  very  analysable  to 
others  that  are  partially  analysable  or 
ultimately non-analysable.

• non-substitutability:  at  least  one  of  the 
expression  constituents  does  not  enter  in 
alternations at the paradigmatic axis 

• non-modifiability: MWEs are syntactically 
rigid structures, in that there are constraints 
concerning  modification,  transformations, 
etc. 

These  criteria,  however,  do  not  apply  in  all 
cases in a uniform way. The  variability attested 
brings about the notion ‘degree of fixedness’ (G. 
Gross 1996). The kind and degree of fixedness 
result in the classification of these expressions as 
fixed,  semi-fixed,  syntactically flexible or 
collocations (Sag et al, 2002). It is crucial for a 
satisfactory  MWEs  representation  in  a 
computational lexicon to provide an accurate and 
functional  formal  modelling  of  fixedness, 
variability and compositionality. 

In this paper, we will discuss the classification 
and encoding of compounds and fixed MWEs in 
a conceptually organised lexicon of MG. 

3 The conceptual lexicon 

The conceptually organised lexicon that is under 
development  (Markantonatou  &  Fotopoulou, 
2007)  capitalises  on two basic  notions:  (a)  the 
notion  of  lexical  fields,  along  with  (b)  the 
Saussurian notion of sign and its two inseparable 
facets,  namely,  the  SIGNIFIER and  the 
SIGNIFIED as the building blocks (main classes) 
of the underlying ontology.

43



In this sense, the intended language resource is 
a  linguistic  ontology  in  which  words  are 
instances in the  SIGNIFIER class. At this level, 
morphological,  syntactic  and  functional 
information about lemmas is encoded. Similarly, 
word meanings are instances in the  SIGNIFIED 
class.  Each instance in the  SIGNIFIER class is 
mapped onto a concept, the latter represented as 
an instance in the SIGNIFIED class.

The  Instances  of  the  class  SIGNIFIER are 
specified  for  (a)  features  pertaining  to  lexical 
semantic  relations  (i.e,  synonymy,  antonymy); 
(b)  lexical  relations  such  as  word  families, 
allomorphs,  syntactic  variants  etc.;  and  (c) 
morphosyntactic  properties  (PoS,  gender, 
declension,  argument  structure,  word  specific 
information  etc.).  Values  for  these features  are 
assigned to both single- and multi-word entries 
in the lexicon. MWEs are further coupled with 
rich  linguistic  information  pertaining  to  the 
lexical, syntactic and semantic levels.

4 Encoding MWEs in the lexicon

MWEs  are  encoded  as  instances  in  the 
SIGNIFIER class  of our ontology and are also 
mapped onto the corresponding concepts or word 
meanings (instances in the SIGNIFIED class).

In the remaining, we focus on the encoding of 
MWEs as instances in the SIGNIFIER class. We 
cater  for  sub-classes  corresponding  to 
grammatical  categories  (verb,  noun,  adjective, 
adverb,  preposition,  etc)  under  the  class 
SIGNIFIER in our schema. The class MWEs (as 
opposed to the class Simple Lexical Units) has 
been  defined  further  under  the  verb,  noun, 
adjective and adverb sub-classes.

Syntactic  configurations  pertaining  to  each 
class are also represented as distinct sub-classes 
hierarchically  organised  under  the  verb,  noun, 
adjective  and  adverb  classes.  Morphosyntactic 
properties, selectional preferences, and semantic 
interpretation  patterns  are  provided  for  each 
MWE depending on the grammatical category it 
pertains  to;  encoding  is  based  on  a  set  of 
parameters represented as feature-value pairs.

More  precisely,  a  typology  of  Greek  verbal 
MWEs has been defined in (Fotopoulou,  1993, 
Mini, 2009) (NP V NP1 NP2…) and of nominal 
MWEs in (Anastasiadis,  1986) (Adj  N,  NN…) 
on  the  basis  of  the  lexical  and  syntactic 
configurations involved. This typology has been 
mapped onto a hierarchy under classes  verb and 
noun).

In our approach, the main distinction between 
collocations and  fixed  MWEs is  made  explicit. 
The  degree  and  type  of  fixedness  are  then 
encoded  as  features.  Further  morphosyntactic 
information  is  also  encoded  depending  on  the 
grammatical  category  of  the  MWE  (i.e., 
declension  of  one  or  more  constituents, 
only_singular or  only_plural for nouns, etc.). In 
this way, information that may be useful for the 
automatic identification and interpretation of the 
MWEs may be retained. Moreover, the standard 
set  of  features  inherited  from  the  class 
SIGNIFIER  is  also  retained  (PoS,  Gender, 
Number, Tense, synonyms, antonyms, etc.).

4.1. The encoding schema

We have so far implemented an encoding schema 
for  nominal  and  verbal  MWEs.  We  aimed  at 
encoding rich linguistic knowledge in a formal 
way  that  would  be  exploitable  in  computer 
applications.  The  two  types  of  fixedness 
(collocations and fixed) are encoded as features: 
(a) Lexical_variance, and (b) Is_actually.

The feature  Lexical_variance1 has as possible 
values (yes or no). Collocations (assigned a yes 
value)  are  further  specified  with  respect  to 
alternative lemmas; these lemmas are encoded in 
the appropriate feature Variants. For instance, in 
example  (1)  the  two  alternative  lemmas  are 
καταστάσεις and περιστάσεις:

 
(1) έκτακτες   (καταστάσεις  /  περιστάσεις) 

(=emergency (situations / circumstances))

The feature  Is_actually (with possible values 
yes  or  no)  encodes  information  about  the 
interpretation  pattern:  a  value  yes signifies  a 
compositional  or  partially  compositional 
meaning; on the contrary,  a value  no denotes a 
non-compositional  interpretation  (fixed 
meaning).

Collocations  are  by  default  assigned feature 
values  corresponding  to  a  compositional 
meaning.  In  these  cases,  the  feature 
maintains_meaning further  specifies  the 
constituent(s)  that  contribute  to  the  non-fixed 
interpretation of the expression. For example, the 
meaning of the compound in (2) is retained from 
the  meaning  of  the  first  noun  ταξίδι (=trip), 
which,  in  turn,  is  the  value  assigned  to  the 
maintains_meaning feature:

1In  our  MWE  classification  scheme,  a  lexical  unit  is 
considered ‘fixed’ at the lemma level. This is because MG 
is a heavily inflected language.

44



(2) ταξίδι  αστραπή (trip  -  lightning  (=very 
sudden and short trip)

<maintains_meaning =  ταξίδι />

Finally,  the  feature  has_meta_meaning 
signifies  further  the  constituent(s)  –  if  any  – 
bearing a figurative meaning.  For example,  the 
compound  ταξίδι  αστραπή in  (2)  assumes  the 
figurative meaning of the second noun  αστραπή 
(=very sudden and short-term).

On  the  contrary,  verbal  and  nominal 
expressions  with  a  non-compositional  meaning 
are  assigned  a  negative  value (no) for  the 
Is_actually feature since their constituents do not 
contribute to a compositional meaning; therefore, 
the  features maintains_meaning  and 
has_meta_meaning  are  left  empty  as  non-
applicable. This is exemplified in (3) below; the 
constituents παιδική (=kids’) and χαρά (=joy) of 
the  expression  παιδική χαρά (=playground)  do 
not contribute to the overall interpretation:

(3) παιδική χαρά (=playground)

<maintains_meaning/>

<has_meta_meaning/>

This schema that applies to both nominal and 
verbal MWES, is presented in Table 1 below.

Slot Values

mwe_type Fixed;   collocation

Lexical_variance  Boolean (yes, no)

        Variants string 

Ιs_actually Boolean (yes, no)

  maintains_meaning String

 has_meta_meaning String

Table 1 The encoding schema for nouns & verbs

4.2. Nominal MWEs

Furthermore,  nominal  MWEs are also assigned 
values  for  features  that  are  specific  to  the 
nominal  MWEs.  Information  on  inflected 
constituents  -  if  any  –  is  provided  in  the 
declension feature; values for  only_singular and 
only_plural provide further morphological/usage 

information;  when  used  in  combination  with 
other  features  (i.e,  is_actually)  this  type  of 
information is  evidence  of  fixedness. Frequent 
co-occurrence patterns with verbs are provided in 
the  verb_combined feature;  finally,  alternative 
nominalised  forms  are  listed  as  values  of  the 
feature  nominalization. The schema is presented 
in the table below:

only singular Boolean (yes, no)

only plural: Boolean (yes, no)

N_declension Ν1, Ν2, Ν1_Ν2, Adj_N 

verb_combined string 

Nominalization string 

Table 2 The encoding schema for nouns

4.3. Verbal MWEs 

In the typology adopted for the verbal idiomatic 
expressions,  fixedness can  be  limited  to  only 
certain  constituents  of  the  sentence; a 
combination of fixed and non-fixed constituents 
in  Subject or  Object position  is  permitted.  For 
example,  in  sentences  (4)  and  (5)  below, 
fixedness relies on the relation among the verbs 
and the nouns that function as Objects (direct and 
indirect) and as Subject respectively:

(4) δίνω τόποNP-acc, Obj στην οργήPP 

to  give  way to  anger  (=to swallow one’s 
pride/anger) 

(5) ανάβουν τα λαμπάκια μουNP-nom, Subj
my lights are  switched on  (=to  become 
very angry)

Moreover,  the  typology  allows  for  a  restricted 
alternation of fixed elements of the expression. 
For  example,  in  the  MWE  in  (6),  the  two 
alternative lemmas are τάζω and υπόσχομαι:

(6) τάζω / υπόσχομαι   τον ουρανό με τ’ άστρα

to  undertake     to     offer   /    promise   the sky with 
the stars

This information is encoded in verbal MWEs, 
namely:  (a) the syntactic properties of the verb 
that occurs in the expression (valency); and (b) 

45



fixed and non-fixed arguments either in  Subject 
or  Object position.  Moreover,  selectional 
restrictions applied to the arguments (such as +/-
human) are also added.

The  encoding  schema  that  applies  to  verbal 
MWEs  specifically  is  presented  in  Table  3.  In 
this  schema,  N signifies  a  non-fixed  noun, 
whereas C denotes a fixed one; number 0 (in N0 
and C0) is used to represent a noun (either fixed 
or non-fixed in Subject position), and 1, 2, 3, etc. 
denote  complements  in  Object position  (or 
complements  of  prepositional  phrases).  Other 
features  provide  rich  linguistic  information 
regarding facets of the expression in terms of: (a) 
selectional restrictions (i.e., the features N0_type,  
N1_type,  etc., accept  as  values  the  semantic 
category in which a noun in  Subject  or  Object  
position respectively,  belongs  to),  (b)  syntactic 
alternations  (i.e.,  Poss_Ppv  encodes  the 
alternation  among  possessive and  personal 
pronoun),  grammatical  information  (i.e., 
Ppv_case  encodes  the  case  of  the  personal 
pronoun), etc.

Slot Value

N0_type hum, -hum, npc 

C0_variants string 

Poss=Ppv Boolean (yes or no)

Ppv_case gen, acc 

N1_type hum, -hum, npc (Nom de 
partie du corps/noun of 
the part of  body) 

N2_type hum, -hum, npc

N3_type hum, -hum, npc

C1_variants string 

C2_variants string 

C3_variants string 

Table 3. The encoding schema for verbs

Alternative  nouns  (in  Subject  or  Object 
position)  that  oftern  co-occur  with  the  verbal 
expression  are  also  provided  for  (C0_variant, 
C1_variant, etc).

5. Discussion

As it has been shown above, in our lexicon we 
have  opted  for  an  approach  to  MWE 
representation  that  builds  on  rich  linguistic 
knowledge. The linguistic classifications adopted 
deal  with  morphology,  syntax,  and  semantics 
interface  aspects.  Thus,  a  lexicon  –  grammar 
representation of MWEs has been constructed by 
encoding  key  morphosyntactic  and  semantic 
information.The  typology  of  verbal  MWEs 
shares  common  characteristics  with  similar 
efforts  for  other  languages  (i.e,  DuELME, 
Gregoire,  2010 Morphosyntactic  properties  and 
selectional  preferences  account  better  for  a 
number  of  phenomena,  inherent  in  the  Greek 
language,  as  for  example  word order  and gaps 
attested in running text.

More specifically, Greek is a language with a 
relatively  free  word  order,  and  idiomatic 
expressions  often  occur  in  texts  in  various 
configurations. The encoding of fixed and non-
fixed  constituents  provides,  therefore,  extra 
information for the identification of expressions 
in texts.  Moreover, the identification of MWEs 
as  collocations  entails  a  relatively  loose 
fixedness,  allowing,  thus,  for  gaps  and 
discontinuities as shown in (7):

(7) Το κόμμα έχει αριθμό υποψηφίων-ρεκόρ

The  political  party  has  a  number of 
candidates record (=many candidates)

6. Conclusions and Future work

We have  given  an  overview of  the  conceptual 
lexicon  currently  under  development  and  the 
treatment of MWEs in it. We have so far treated 
nominal  and  verbal  MWEs  (~1000  entries). 
Future  work  involves  the  population  of  the 
lexicon with new expressions also pertaining to 
the grammatical categories adjective and adverb 
and the definition of a fine-grained typology for 
the  latter.  Moreover,  a  more  granular 
representation  of  fixedness  will  be  attempted. 
Compatibility  of  the  resource  with  diverse 
syntactic  approaches  will  also  be  investigated. 
The  evaluation  of  the  final  resource  will  be 
performed  by  integrating  it  in  a  tool  that 
automatically recognizes MWEs in texts.

References

Αναστασιάδη-Συμεωνίδη Ά. (1986).  Η νεολογία στην  
Κοινή  Νεοελληνική.  Θεσσαλονίκη:  Αριστοτέλειο 
Πανεπιστήμιο  Θεσσαλονίκης  (Επιστημονική 
Επετηρίδα Φιλοσοφικής Σχολής).

46



Arun,  A.  and  F.  Keller.  2005.  Lexicalisation  in 
crosslinguistic  probablisitic  parsing:  The  case  of 
french. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting  
of  the Association for Computational  Linguistics, 
pp 306–313. Ann Arbor, MI

Chomsky, N. 1980.  Rules and Representations. New 
York: Columbia University Press.

Diakogiorgi,  K.  &  Fotopoulou,  A.  2012. 
Interpretation of Idiomatic Expressions by Greek 
Speaking Children: implications for the Linguistic 
and  Psycholinguistic  Research.  An 
interdisciplinary  approach.  Lingvisticae  
Investigationes, Volume  35:1.  1-27, John 
Benjamins, Paris, France

Fellbaum,  C.  2007.  Introduction.  Fellbaum, C.  (ed). 
Idioms and Collocations: Corpus-based Linguistic  
and Lexicographic Studies. London: Continuum, 1-

Fotopoulou, A. 1993. Une Classification des Phrases  
à Compléments Figés en Grec Moderne.  Doctoral 
Thesis, Universite Paris VIII.

Fraser,  B.  1970.  Idioms  within  a  Transformational 
Grammar. Foundations of language, 1, 22-42.

Fritzinger,  F.,  Weller,  M.,  and  Heid.  U.  2010.  A 
survey  of  idiomatic  preposition-noun-verb  tiples  on 
token level. In Proceedings of LREC-10.
Grégoire,  N.  2010.  DuELME:  a  Dutch  electronic 

lexicon  of  multiword  expressions;  Lang 
Resources & Evaluation (2010) 44:23–39

Gibbs  R.W.  1998.  The  Fight  over  Metaphor  in 
Thought and Language. In A.N. Katz, C. Cacciari, 
R.W.  Gibbs  &  M.  Turner  (eds.),  Figurative 
Language and Thought. OUP, 88-118.

Glucksberg, S. 1993. Idiom meanings and allusional 
context.  In  Idioms:  Processing,  structure,  and  
intepretation.  C.  Cacciari  and  P.  Tabossi  (eds.). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 201-225. 

Gross,  G.  1996.  Les  expressions figées  en français. 
Noms  composés  et  autres  locutions.  Paris/Gap: 
Ophrys.

Gross, M. 1982. Une classification des phrases figées 
du français. Revue Québécoise de Linguistique 11 
(2), 151-185.

Gross,  M.  1988a.  Les  limites  de  la  phrase  figée. 
Langage 90: 7-23

 Gross,  Maurice.  1988b.  Sur  les  phrases  figées 
complexes du français. Langue française 77: 4770.

Hamblin, J., and Gibbs, W. R. 1999. Why You Can’t 
Kick  the  Bucket  as  You  Slowly  Die:  Verbs  in 
Idiom Comprehension. Journal of Psycholinguistic  
Research. 28 (1): 25-39.

Howarth P.A. 1996. Phraseology in English academic 
writing. Lexicographica Series 75.  Tübingen: Max 
Niemeyer. Jackendoff R. 1997. The Architecture of  
the Language Faculty. MIT Press.

Lakoff  G.  1993.  The  Contemporary  Theory  of 
Metaphor.  In  A.  Ortony  (ed.), Metaphor  and 
Thought, 2nd  edition  Cambridge  University  Press, 
202-251.

Lamiroy,  B.  2003.  Les  notions  linguistiques  de 
figement  et  de  contrainte.  Lingvisticae 
Investigationes 26:1,  53-66, 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

van der Linden E-J. 1992. Incremental processing and 
the  hierarchical  lexicon.  Computational  
Linguistics, 18, 219-238

Markantonatou,  Stella  and  Fotopoulou,  Aggeliki. 
2007. The tool ”Ekfrasi". In Proceedings of the 8th  
International  Conference  on  Greek  Linguistics,  
The Lexicography Workshop. Ioannina, Greece.

Markantonatou,  S.,  Fotopoulou,  Α.,  Mini,  M.  & 
Alexopoulou, M. 2010. In search of the right word. 
In Proceedings of Cogalex-2: Cognitive Aspects of  
the  Lexicon,  2nd  SIGLEX  endorsed  Workshop. 
Beijing.

Mini, M. 2009. Linguistic and Psycholinguistic Study  
of Fixed Verbal Expressions with Fixed Subject in  
Modern  Greek:  A  Morphosyntactic  Analysis,  
Lexicosemantic  Gradation  and  Processing  by  
Elementary School Children. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation. University of Patras.

Moon,  R.  1998.  Fixed  Expressions  and  Idioms  in  
English: A Corpus-Based Approach. Oxford: OUP.

Nivre,  J.  and  Nilsson,  J.  2004.  Multiword  units  in 
syntactic parsing. Workshop on Methodologies and  
Evaluation  of  Multiword  Units  in  Real-World  
Applications.

Nunberg  ,G.,  Sag  I.,  Wasow,  T.  1994.  Idioms. 
Language 70, 491-538.

Ruwet,  N.  1983.  Du  Bon  Usage  des  Expressions 
Idiomatiques  dans  l'Argumentation  en  Syntaxe 
Générative.  Revue Québecoise de Linguistique  13 
(1): 9-145.

Sag,  I.A.,  Bond,  F.,  Copestake  A.,  Flickinger,  D. 
2001.  Multiword  Expressions.  LinGO  Working 
PaperNo.2001-01. 

Sag,  Ivan  A.,  T.Baldwin,  F.Bond,  A. Copestake and 
Dan Flickinger.2001.Multiword  Expressions:  A 
Pain in the Neck for  NLP. LinGO Working Paper 
No.  2001-03.  In  Alexander  Gelbukh,  ed.,  (2002) 
Proceedings of COLING-2002.

 

47


