



















































Annotating corpus data for a quantitative, constructional analysis of motion verbs in Modern Standard Arabic


Proceedings of the EMNLP 2014 Workshop on Arabic Natural Langauge Processing (ANLP), pages 28–38,
October 25, 2014, Doha, Qatar. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating corpus data for a quantitative, constructional analysis of 

motion verbs in Modern Standard Arabic 
 

 Dana Abdulrahim 

University of Bahrain 
darahim@uob.edu.bh 

 

 

  

Abstract 
This article proposes an annotation method of corpus 

data for the purposes of providing a constructionist 

account of lexical behavior. The lexical items in ques-

tion are seven verbs of motion in Modern Standard 

Arabic that pertain to the events of COME (atā, ǧā’a, 

ḥaḍara, and qadima) and GO (ḏahaba, maḍā, and 

rāḥa). The tag set selected for the annotation of the 

COME and GO data frames consists of morpho-

syntactic tags that characterize verb usage as well as 

semantic tags that aim to highlight the semantic com-

ponent of, for instance, adverbial and adpositional 

phrases that accompany the verb. I will briefly 

demonstrate the analytical potential of such data 

frame by discussing the various kinds of statistical 

tests such data frame is designed to undergo, as a 

means of better understanding lexical behavior in con-

text, and, eventually, arriving at a better understand-

ing of lexical and constructional choices made by 

native speakers of Arabic, as demonstrated in corpora. 

 

1 Introduction 
The core tenets of constructionist theories of 

language claim that the basic unit of linguistic 

organization is a construction. According to 

Croft and Cruse (2004:257), a construction “con-

sist[s] of pairings of form and meaning that are at 

least partially arbitrary”, where ‘meaning’ is re-

ferred to as the conventionalized function of a 

construction. This conventionalization of a con-

struction’s meaning/function includes not only 

the literal meaning of an utterance, but also the 

discourse situation of that utterance, as well as 

any pragmatic implication conveyed by that ut-

terance (Croft and Cruse, 2004).  

The concept of a ‘construction’ in cognitive 

approaches to grammar, therefore, relates to both 

the idiomatic portions of language, where the 

meaning of an utterance is not predictable from 

the component parts of which it consists (e.g. 

raining cats and dogs), as well as the co-

occurrence of any two (free or bound) mor-

phemes  that reflect general morphosyntactic 

structures and where the meaning of an utterance 

is fully predictable from its component parts (e.g. 

I need to sleep). Such view of grammar postu-

lates that “the interaction of syntax and lexicon is 

much wider and deeper than the associations of 

certain verbs with certain complements” (Bybee, 

2010:77), and that a considerable part of our lin-

guistic knowledge consists of conventionalized 

expressions, or constructions (Langacker, 1987).   

In light of these constructionist assump-

tions, therefore, the behavior of a lexical item is 

best understood in its context of use and not in 

isolation, an idea that stretches back decades (cf. 

Firth, 1957). This includes not only lexical collo-

cates, but also the entire morphosyntactic frame 

that hosts a lexical item. All these elements con-

tribute to the composed or conventionalized 

meaning/function expressed by a particular lin-

guistic item. In order to examine lexical behav-

ior, therefore, we need to move beyond single 

semantic, morphological, or syntactic properties 

of a lexical item and scrutinize the entire lexico-

syntactic frame in which it occurs. Increasingly, 

this is done through examination of corpus data. 

The availability of corpora facilitates and moti-

vates such highly contextualized analytical ap-

proach, since corpora provide a large amount of 

naturally occurring, contextualized uses (as op-

posed to the reliance on introspective and elicited 

data that may not reflect actual language usage at 

all). Moreover, corpora provide large amounts of 

linguistic data, which allows the researcher to 

conduct extensive quantitative analyses of the 

phenomenon in question.  

In Modern Standard Arabic, the existence of 

several verbs denoting the motion events COME 

(atā, ǧā’a, ḥaḍara, and qadima) and GO (ḏahaba, 

maḍā, and rāḥa) provides an excellent case study 

for a constructionist, corpus-based examination 

of the features that characterize the usage of sup-

posedly near-synonymous lexical items. In 

Abdulrahim (2013) I have argued that the four 

COME verbs – as well as the three GO verbs – can 

be interchangeably used in contexts where the 

event depicts a strictly deictic and physical mo-

tion event, as in (1) and (2). 

 

 

 

 

28



قدمت جدتي إلى المطار / حضرت / جاءت / أتت  (1)  
 

atā / ǧā’a / ḥaḍara / 

qadima.PERF.3SG.F 

grandmother.CL.1SG.GEN 

came my grandmother 

  
ALL ART=airport 

to the airport 

‘My grandmother came to the airport’ 
 

راح األب إلى مركز الشرطة \مضى  \ذهب  (2)  

  
ḏahaba / maḍā / 

rāḥa.PERF.3SG.M 

ART=father-NOM ALL 

went the father to 

  
station ART=police 

station the police 

 ‘The father went to the police station’ 

 

However, these verbs diverge greatly in 

their metaphorical and idiomatic uses, in addition 

to showing idiosyncratic patterns of lexico-

syntactic behavior. For instance, The sentence in 

(1) would not admit all four verbs when the as-

pect inflection on the verb is changed. To illus-

trate, in (3), if we hold all constructional features 

constant and change verb inflection from perfec-

tive to jussive, this results in a preference for atā 

and ḥaḍara by native speakers of Arabic over 

ǧā’a or qadima.  

 

؟تقدم جدتي إلى المطار / تحضر / ؟تجيء / لم تأت  (3)  

 
NEG atā / ǧā’a / ḥaḍara / qadima.JUSS.3SG.F 

did not come 

  
grandmother.CL.1SG.GEN ALL ART=airport 

my grandmother to the airport 

‘My grandmother did not come to the airport’ 

 

The above example stresses the need to in-

vestigate features of the lexico-syntactic con-

struction that each COME verb most typically as-

sociates with. For these purposes, I have adopted 

the methodological approach outlined in Gries 

(2006), Gries & Divjak (2009), and Gries & 

Otani (2010) for a constructionist description of 

the Behavioral Profile of a lexical item. I have 

also employed logistic regression – namely 

polytomous logistic regression, outlined in detail 

in Arppe (2008) – as a statistical method that 

models lexical or constructional choices as a 

function of a wide range of contextual features. 

The quantitative approach to lexical analysis 

presented in this paper involves constructing a 

data frame for every lexical item under study, in 

which numerous corpus concordance lines are 

individually marked-up for an extensive set of 

linguistic features (morphological, syntactic, and 

semantic). This includes, for examples, specific 

elements pertaining to verb morphology, phrase 

structure, as well as the different elements that 

co-occur with the verb in specific constructions. 

Such data frame can undergo numerous explora-

tory and multi-variate statistical tests as a means 

of zeroing in on the kinds of constructions asso-

ciated with the verbs in question.  

 

2 The corpus 
In order to construct the multi-variate data 

frame for the analysis of motion verbs in Arabic, 

I chose ArabiCorpus (arabicorpus.byu.edu) as 

the source for data. ArabiCorpus is a free online 

corpus developed by Dilworth Parkinson at 

Brigham Young University. As of October 2012, 

the corpus contains around 146,000,000 word 

tokens from different written and spoken genres. 

At the time of data collection (Fall 2010) the 

corpus contained around 69,000,000 word to-

kens. Additional MSA as well as pre-modern 

texts have been added to the corpus since the 

beginning of 2011. Texts included in 

ArabiCorpus almost exclusively belong to the 

written genre, save for a small sub-corpus of 

spoken Egyptian Arabic. The written genres cov-

ered in ArabiCorpus vary from newspaper writ-

ing, pre-modern writing, modern literature, to 

nonfiction. These genres are represented in the 

corpus in varying proportions with newspaper 

writing accounting for over 90% of the total size 

of the entire corpus. News articles included in 

this sub-section of ArabiCorpus cover issues 

from 1996 to 2010 and are extracted from peri-

odicals published in different parts of the Arab 

world (North Africa, Egypt, Arabian Gulf, the 

Levant, etc.). For this study, the MSA sub-

corpora that were queried for COME and GO uses 

are related to newspaper, modern literature, and 

nonfiction writing. As expected, most examples 

returned from corpus queries were in fact drawn 

from the newspaper genre.  

ArabiCorpus is not tagged for parts-of-

speech (POS) which makes the search for partic-

ular grammatical categories a daunting task. 

Nevertheless, it can be easily queried using regu-

lar expressions. This study targeted very specific 

inflected forms of the MSA verb: perfective, im-

perfective, jussive, subjunctive, and imperative; 

and excluded participial forms (e.g. active parti-

ciple) and nominal forms (e.g. verbal nouns). 

Relying on orthographic regular expressions, 

therefore, proved to be the most efficient method 

29



for querying these particular forms. What may 

complicate any search in an Arabic written cor-

pus is the lack of short vowels which are indicat-

ed by certain diacritics written over or under-

neath a letter. Naturally, it was necessary to filter 

corpus returns manually to eliminate any irrele-

vant forms that may have been returned in the 

corpus search. 

Despite the time-consuming nature of such 

corpus querying steps, ArabiCorpus proved to be 

a reliable and rich source for contextualized lan-

guage uses. Add to that the fact that even though 

the online interface of ArabiCorpus only displays 

10 words before and after the KWIC (key word 

in context), the researcher can still retrieve the 

entire text hosting that sentence. Therefore when 

the analysis or the annotation requires going be-

yond the 10 word window to examine the entire 

phrase structure, it is possible to retrieve such 

information from ArabiCorpus. Another added 

benefit of using the online interface of 

ArabiCorpus is the ease of downloading all re-

turned hits of a certain lexical item or construc-

tion to be viewed in a spreadsheet, which was a 

major step in the collection of data for this re-

search. 

 

3 COME and GO data frames 
In Abdulrahim (2013) I proposed a quantita-

tive (as well as a qualitative) analysis based on 

the construction of a data frame for each one of 

the seven verbs of motion. Each individual data 

frame is typically composed of a large number of 

corpus concordance lines (500 concordance 

lines) involving the KWIC (i.e. verb under inves-

tigation) in its natural context of use. Every con-

cordance line is thoroughly examined and tagged 

for a wide range of morphosyntactic and seman-

tic features. These constructional features include 

the syntactic structure that hosts the verb, the 

patterns of verbal inflections for every instance 

of verb use (e.g. subject number, person, and 

gender, as well as other morphosyntactic aspects 

of the Arabic verb), the semantic properties of 

other components of the construction (e.g. se-

mantic properties of the subject), as well as the 

inclusion or exclusion of phrases, lexical items, 

or clitics denoting a starting point of the event 

(SOURCE), a terminal point of the event (GOAL), 

etc.  

Such a heavily annotated dataset has the po-

tential of being explored statistically in multiple 

ways via simple frequency count methods as 

well as complex multi-variate statistical model-

ing. Such quantitative approach to analyzing 

corpus data aims to define the specific character-

istics of the constructions associated with the 

various meanings and functions of each MSA 

COME and GO verb involved in this study. In the 

following section I will elaborate on the selection 

of these contextual features for the annotation of 

COME and GO data frames. 

 

3.1 Selection of contextual features and the 
annotation of corpus data 

The first step for creating a multi-variate da-

ta frame is to generate a list of features or varia-

bles which are relevant to the motion event 

schemas in questions and which reflect the 

morphosyntax of Modern Standard Arabic. 

Along the lines of Gries’s study on the polysemy 

of the English verb run (2006), Gries and 

Divjak’s (2006) investigation of Russian verbs of 

TRY, as well as Gries and Otani’s (2010) analysis 

of the synonymy and polysemy of adjectives of 

size in English, I developed a large set of mor-

phological, syntactic, and semantic features that 

reflect the usage of MSA motion verbs.  

The variable set includes nominal variables 

(multiple levels) and binary variables (YES/NO 

values indicating absence or presence of feature). 

Table 1 shows the different categories of varia-

bles subsumed under morphological, syntactic, 

and semantic variables. In Appendix A, I provide 

examples and illustrations of the different anno-

tations of levels within semantic variables taken 

from the actual data frame.
 1
 

 
Morphological  

variables 

Levels  

TENSE PRESENT, PAST, FUTURE, 

IRREALIS (non-finite forms) 

ASPECT SIMPLE, HABITUAL, PROGRES-

SIVE, PERFECT, INCHOATIVE, 

NON-FIN (non-finite forms) 

MORPHOLOGICAL 

ASPECT AND MOOD 

OF THE VERB 

IMPERFECTIVE, PERFECTIVE, 

SUBJUNCTIVE, JUSSIVE, IMPER-

ATIVE 

SUBJECT PERSON 1
ST

, 2
ND

, 3
RD

  

SUBJECT NUMBER SINGULAR, DUAL, PLURAL 

SUBJECT GENDER FEMININE, MASCULINE, NIL (for 

1
st
 person inflections) 

                                                 
1 The data frame was, in fact, coded for more variables than 

the set laid out in Table 4, such as the different 

morphosyntactic realizations of GOAL, SOURCE, MANNER, 

etc., as well as certain recurring lexical elements (e.g. ad-

verbs, adverbial uses, and other lexical items). These addi-

tional variables did not form part of the quantitative analysis 

in Abdulrahim (2013). Nevertheless, they are  of some in-

terest and proved to be useful for a qualitative analysis of 

MSA motion verbs. 

30



 

Syntactic variables 

 

Levels  

TRANSITIVITY YES, NO 

INTERROGATIVE YES, NO 

NEGATIVE YES, NO 

PREPOSITIONAL 

PHRASE 

YES, NO 

LOCATIVE ADVERB 

PHRASE 

YES, NO 

ADVERBIAL PHRASE YES, NO 

SERIAL VERB CON-

STRUCTION 

YES, NO 

 

Semantic variables 

 

Levels  

SUBJECT CATEGORY ACTIVITY, ANIMAL, ATTRIB-

UTE, BODY, COGNITION, COM-

MUNICATION, CONTENT (of a 

document/speech), DEMON-

STRATIVE, DUMMY SUBJECT, 

EVENT, GROUP, HUMAN, LOCA-

TION, NOTION, OB-

JECT/ARTIFACT, SENSE, STATE, 

SUBSTANCE, TIME 

GOAL PHRASE YES, NO 

SOURCE PHRASE YES, NO 

MANNER PHRASE YES, NO 

SETTING PHRASE YES, NO 

PATH PHRASE YES, NO 

PURPOSIVE PHRASE YES, NO 

COMITATIVE PHRASE YES, NO 

TEMPORAL PHRASE YES, NO 

DEGREE PHRASE YES, NO 

 

Table 1. A selection of variables GO and COME 

corpus hits were coded for. 

 

As mentioned earlier, the primary motiva-

tion for this set of 23 linguistic features/tags has 

been the lexico-syntactic properties of deictic 

motion event schemas in MSA. For instance, a 

deictic motion event is likely to include a phrase 

specifying a GOAL and/or a SOURCE of the mo-

tion event. In addition, it may include  MANNER 

of motion and the inclusion of a COMITATIVE 

phrase (i.e. accompaniment by an ob-

ject/individual in the GO or COME event). Each 

verb usage was also coded for the semantic cate-

gory of the sentential subject or, conceptually 

speaking, the moving entity involved in the mo-

tion event. These categories include HUMAN, OB-

JECT or ARTIFACT, and also more abstract/non-

physical entities such as EVENT, COMMUNICA-

TION (e.g. a statement), COGNITION (e.g. an 

idea), etc. As for the morphosyntactic features 

selected for tagging motion verbs, these reflect 

the inflectional properties of the MSA verb 

(MORPHOLOGICAL ASPECT AND MOOD, NUMBER, 

PERSON, and GENDER) as well as TENSE and AS-

PECT. The variable labeled TRANSITIVITY, only 

pertains to certain uses of COME verbs in MSA 

where COME verbs can appear in transitive con-

structions in which the direct object is the GOAL 

of the motion event. 

Text genre was not considered a variable 

since, as I mentioned earlier, the majority of the 

annotated 3,500 corpus hits belong to the genre 

of newspaper writing. Results obtained from ex-

amining this data frame should, therefore, be 

considered as mostly reflective of the usage of 

COME and GO verbs in newspaper writing. Sen-

tence (4) is an example of a contextualized verb 

use annotated for the features listed above. 
 

بسرعة في مؤامراتهاوهي تمضي  (4)  
  

CONJ=PP maḍā.IMPF.3SG.F INST=speed 

and she goes quickly 

  
LOC conspiracies-CL.3SG.F.GEN 

in her conspiracies 

‘And it’s [i.e. Israel] quickly going ahead with its 

conspiracies’ 
 

VERB maḍā TENSE PRESENT 

ASPECT SIMPLE MORPH_ASP/ 

MOOD 

IMPERFEC-

TIVE 

SUBJ_NUM SINGULAR SUBJ_PER 3
RD 

SUBJ_GEN FEM SUBJ_CAT GROUP 

INTEROG NO NEGATION NO 

SVC NO PP YES 

LOC_ADV NO ADVERBIAL YES 

GOAL NO SOURCE NO 

MANNER YES SETTING YES 

PATH NO PURPOSIVE NO 

COMITATIVE NO TEMPORAL NO 

DEGREE NO   

 

4 Statistical analyses 
A wide range of statistical tests can be ap-

plied in order to explore the data frames de-

scribed above for various purposes.
2

 For in-

stance, we can simply run the COME and GO data 

frames through mono-variate exploratory tests 

such as chi-square tests as a means of zeroing in 

on the distribution of contextual elements per 

each GO and COME verb. This kind of analysis 

would constitute a first step towards identifying 

divergence in usage patterns associated with each 

MSA motion verb. This preliminary step further 

motivates and justifies the examination of inter-

action patterns among the contextual features, as 

                                                 
2 See Hastie, T., et al (2009), and Agresti (2002) – among 

others – for comprehensive discussions on statistical tests 

that can be applied to multi-variate data frames. 

31



well as the identification of clusters of features 

that are closely tied to certain verb uses. A multi-

variate analysis eventually facilitates the identifi-

cation of prototypical uses of each verb as well 

as the less prototypical uses. In the following I 

will briefly discuss three types of statistical 

methods that can be applied to the MSA COME 

and GO data frames: (i) chi-square test; (ii) clus-

ter analysis; and (iii) polytomous logistic regres-

sion analysis.
3
 

 

4.1 Chi-square tests 
The primary purpose of subjecting the 

COME and GO data frames to chi-square test of 

independence is to examine whether the distribu-

tion of the different levels of variables (tags) do 

not vary as a function of verb (null hypothesis), 

or, if they actually do vary as a function of verb 

(alternative hypothesis). For instance, if we ex-

amine the occurrence of a GOAL phrase per each 

GO verb, would the distribution of variables be 

the same or different across the  three verbs. To 

test this hypothesis –where we have an inde-

pendent variable (verb) and a dependent variable 

(GOAL) –we can run a chi-square test on variable 

distribution. Table 2 shows the observed fre-

quencies for the occurrence/absence of a GOAL 

phrase per each GO verb, while Table 3 shows 

the expected frequencies calculated by the com-

mand chisq.test()$expected in R (www.r-

project.org).  

 

VERB 
GOAL - YES 

OBS. FREQ. 

GOAL - NO 

OBS. FREQ. 

ḏahaba 298 202 

maḍā 32 468 

rāḥa 1 499 

 

Table 2. Observed values for the variable GOAL 

by GO verb. 

 

VERB 
GOAL - YES 

EXP. FREQ. 

GOAL - NO 

EXP. FREQ. 

ḏahaba 110.3333 389.6667 

maḍā 110.3333 389.6667 

rāḥa 110.3333 389.6667 

 

Table 3. Expected values for the variable GOAL 

by GO verb. 

 
  

                                                 
3 See Abdulrahim (2013) for further description of the prop-

erties and applications of these statistical analyses on the 

MSA COME and GO data frames. 

The calculated Pearson’s chi-square test for 

the distribution given in Table 4 proved to be 

quite significant: X
2
 = 277.1034, df = 6, p-value 

< 2.2e-16. This indicates that the distribution the 

variable GOAL for each GO verb deviates highly 

significantly from the expected distribution.  

We can also examine the cell-wise diver-

gences from a uniform distribution for this par-

ticular contingency table by conducting a stand-

ardized Pearson’s residual (discussed in Agresti 

2002: 81; Arppe, 2008: 83-84). These test statis-

tics can either be retrieved in R by using the 

command chisq.test()$std or by running the func-

tion chisq.posthoc(), which is part of  the statisti-

cal package {polytomous} developed by Antti 

Arppe (2012). Table 4 contains the calculated 

values, which indicate whether the observed co-

occurrence frequency reported in each individual 

cell is significantly more or less than expected.
4
 

The chisq.posthoc()function presents an easier 

way to interpret these figures, in that it assigns 

+/–/0 values for each cell, which can be inter-

preted as insignificant (0), significantly more 

than expected (+), or significantly less than ex-

pected (–). 

 
VERB GOAL - YES GOAL - NO 

ḏahaba 24.78665  

(+) 

-24.78665   

(–) 
maḍā -10.34611  

(–) 
10.34611  

(+) 

rāḥa -14.44053  

(–) 
14.44053  

(+) 

 

TABLE 4. Standardized Pearson’s residuals for 

the occurrence of GOAL by GO verb. 

 

As discussed earlier, these exploratory tests 

constitute a first attempt at understanding the 

distributional patterns of selected variables 

among the different verbs. Such mono-variate 

methods undoubtedly set the stage for the more 

complex multi-variate analyses that will follow 

and to which I turn next. 

 

4.2 Cluster analysis 
Clustering methods can help us examine the 

joint effect on the overall verbal behavior for 

each verb in the GO and COME verb set. One such 

method is referred to as hierarchical agglomera-

                                                 
4  Typically, the standardized Pearson’s residual value is 

significantly higher than what is expected when it is > 2.0, 

and significantly lower than expected when the value is < -

2.0 (Arppe, 2008). 

32



tive cluster analysis (explained more in detail in 

Gries, 2006; Diviaj and Gries, 2006; Gries and 

Otani, 2010, among others). Generally speaking, 

this clustering method groups together the lexical 

elements that are most similar to one another 

and, at the same time, the ones that are highly 

dissimilar to other elements in other clusters. 

Therefore, what we expect to see from this statis-

tical method is a clustering dendrogram that 

shows us which COME or GO verbs overlap in 

their usage as opposed to the ones with which 

they hardly share any characteristics. 

This method requires generating a table that 

lists relative frequencies (or proportions) of co-

occurrence values of dependent variables per 

independent variable (the GO and COME verbs 

under study). A similarity/dissimilarity matrix is 

first computed, followed by computing a cluster 

structure based on a specific amalgamation rule.
5
 

The resulting cluster structure can then be visual-

ly represented in a dendrogram. The calculations 

involved in the different stages of hierarchical 

agglomerative cluster analysis have been made 

easier to conduct using BP 1.01 script, a program 

written by Stefan Gries (2009) for R. This R-

based script uses a host of statistical methods 

required in the stages mentioned above. It initial-

ly generates a co-occurrence table of relative fre-

quencies of the different levels (IDTAG-LEVELs) 

within variables (IDTAGs).
6

 Table 5 shows a 

sample of such output table generated by BP 

1.01 for the distribution of TENSE by COME verb.  

 
IDTAG- 

LEVEL atā ḥaḍara ǧā'a qadima 

 

FUT 0.028 0.076 0 0.002 columns  

IRR 0.188 0.126 0.022 0.022 sum 

PAST 0.162 0.694 0.97 0.966 to 

PRES 0.622 0.104 0.008 0.01 1.0 

  

Table 5. Sample of a co-occurrence table gener-

ated by the BP 1.01 script for the variable 

(IDTAG) TENSE by COME verb. 

 

The BP 1.01 script returns a comprehensive 

table with similar values for all dependent by 

independent variable co-occurrences that have 

been fed into the script. This particular table can 

                                                 
5 An amalgamation rule is what determines whether or not 

two items are sufficiently similar in order to be linked or 

clustered together. 
6 The idea of an ID tag was introduced by Atkins (1987) in 

her work on danger, where she examined collocates, colli-

gations, POS, as well as other characteristics of the key 

word. An ID tag was therefore used to refer to the individual 

contextual features co-occurring with the keyword. 

be subjected to a number of tests including the 

hierarchical agglomerative cluster analysis. For 

this particular clustering technique I relied on the 

(dis)similarity metric ‘Canberra’, and ‘Ward’ as 

the amalgamation rule that computes a cluster 

structure.
7
 

The dendrogram in Figure 1 shows two ma-

jor divides between the four verbs that the hier-

archical agglomerative cluster analysis deemed 

significant. The first cluster (on the left) formed 

in this analysis appears to group the verbs atā 

and ǧā’a together, while the other cluster groups 

ḥaḍara and qadima together. Here, we find that 

the AU p-value (Approximately Unbiased) – 

which is a probability measure computed through 

multi-scale bootstrap resampling – for the cluster 

containing ḥaḍara and qadima is calculated to 

approximate 87%, while the AU p-value for the 

cluster of atā and ǧā’a is 82%. Again, this does 

not necessarily imply that ḥaḍara and qadima 

are highly similar, but that they are very dissimi-

lar from atā and ǧa’a in their usage. Indeed, sub-

sequent mutli-variate as well as qualitative anal-

yses showed that atā and ǧā’a shared more usage 

patterns than they did with the other COME verbs. 

 
Figure 1. Dendrogram based on the COME multi-

variate data frame.  

 

4.3 Polytomous logistic regression 
Another multi-variate analysis that can be 

applied to this kind of data frame for the purpose 

of examining patterns of variable interaction is 

logistic regression. Polytomous logistic regres-

sion analysis (explained in detail in Arppe, 

                                                 
7 For a detailed description of this clustering method see 

Gries (2009), pp 306-319. 

33



2008), in particular, applies advanced algorithms 

in order to determine the relative effects of mul-

tiple predictor variables (the tags/contextual fea-

tures) on the choice of more than two outcome 

variables (i.e. the four COME verbs and the three 

GO verbs). Generally speaking, logistic regres-

sion would estimate probabilities of the occur-

rence of each COME or GO verb given a particular 

context of use, and is therefore compatible with 

the view that linguistic choices are probabilistic 

rather than categorical (Bresnan, 2006; Arppe, 

2007, 2008, 2009; among others). In a nutshell, 

polytomous logistic regression estimates variable 

parameters which can be interpreted “naturally” 

as odds (Harrell 2001). In other words, it deter-

mines the extent to which the existence of a vari-

able (i.e. feature/tag) in the context increases (or 

decreases) the chances of a particular outcome  

(i.e. verb) to occur, with all the other explanatory 

variables being equal.  

To illustrate, we can conduct such analysis 

on the annotated COME data frame. The first step 

is to select a set of variables to include in the 

model. Note, however, that the binary and nomi-

nal variables listed in Table 1 need to be con-

verted into the form of logical variables in order 

to be included in the logistic regression model.
8
 

The selection of these variables relies, first of all, 

on a mono-variate analysis (such as the inspec-

tion of standardized Pearson’s residuals) as a 

means of figuring out which variables seem to 

have explanatory potential as opposed to those 

that do not. A second criterion for variable selec-

tion relies on inspecting pair-wise association 

patterns between variables. That is to say, we 

need to examine the extent to which certain vari-

ables have a high rate of co-occurrence, as a 

means of reducing collinearity in the regression 

model. The model listed in (5) includes 30 logi-

cal variables as the independent variables and the 

COME verb as a dependent variable. 

 

(5) VERB ~ TENSE.FUT + TENSE.PAST + 

TENSE.PRES + ASPECT.HAB + ASPECT.SIMPLE +    

MORPH_ASP.MOOD.SUBJN + TRANSITIVITY.YES + 

SUBJ_NUM.PL + SUBJ_PER.1ST +    SUBJ_PER.3
RD

 + 

SUBJ_GEN.FEM + SUBJ_CAT.ACTIVITY + 

                                                 
8
 Every level of variable is turned into an individual (logical) 

variable with the levels TRUE/FALSE indicating whether this 

variable has or has not been observed in the context of use. 

For instance, the variable TENSE has four levels: PRESNT / 

PAST / FUTURE / NIL. When turned into logical variables, we 

end up with four different variables (TENSE_PRESENT, 

TENSE_PAST, TENSE_FUTURE and TENSE_NIL), the presence or 

absence of which is indicated by TRUE or FALSE. 

SUBJ_CAT.COMMUNICATION +   

SUBJ_CAT.DEMONSTRATIVE + SUBJ_CAT.EVENT 

+ SUBJ_CAT.GROUP +  SUBJ_CAT.INDIVIDUAL + 

SUBJ_CAT.STATE + SUBJ_CAT.TIME + NEGA-

TION.YES + PP.YES + LOC_ADV.YES + ADVERBI-

AL.YES + GOAL.YES + SOURCE.YES +  MAN-

NER.YES + SETTING.YES + PURPOSIVE.YES + 

COMITATIVE.YES + TEMPORAL.YES  

 

The overall accuracy rate calculated for this 

model is 0.845. The accuracy measure (Menard, 

1995: 28-30; Arppe, 2008: 129-132) corresponds 

to the number of times the model assigned the 

highest probability estimate to the actually ob-

served verb in a given annotated context. We can 

also examine the individual accuracy rates per 

verb as a means of zeroing in on which particular 

verb(s) the model was more successful in pre-

dicting. We can now examine the probability 

estimates that the polytomous logistic regression 

analysis assigns to each of the COME verbs per 

annotated context (4 verbs * 2,000 sentences). 

These estimated probabilities range from very 

high values (approaching 1.00) to very low val-

ues (approaching 0.00) and any values in be-

tween, depending on the set of predictors (i.e. 

contextual features) present in a particular con-

text of use. We can illustrate with sentences (6) 

and (7) which are extracted from the original da-

ta frame. In (6) the verb received an almost cate-

gorical probability estimate, while in (7) the verb 

received a less categorical probability estimate. It 

is also possible to examine the set of contextual 

features that each sentences was tagged for and 

which were used as predictor variables in the 

logistic regression model 

 

(6) 
atā = 0.022 

ḥaḍara = 0.000 

ǧā’a = 0.978       

(observed) 
qadima = 0.000 

contextual features used (in 

the model): 

TENSE.PAST + ASPECT.SIMPLE 

+ SUBJ_PER.3
RD

 + 

SUBJ_CAT.DEM + 

LOC_ADV.YES + SETTING.YES 

 

ذلك خالل تصريحات أدلى بها الوزير خورشيدجاء   
ǧā’a.PERF.3SG.M DEM ADV 

came that during 

  
statements declare.PERF.3SG.M 

statements declared 

 
INST=CL.3SG.F ART=minister Khurshid 

by it the minister Khurshid 

 ‘This came during statements that the minister 

Khurshid made’ 

 

34



(7) 
atā = 0.199 

ḥaḍara = 0.137   
(observed) 

ǧā’a = 0.247 
qadima = 0.146 

contextual features used (in 

the model): 

TESNE.PAST + ASPECT.SIMPLE + 

SUBJ_PER.3
RD

 + 

SUBJ_CAT.HUMAN + PP.YES + 

LOC.ADV.YES + MANNER.YES + 

COMITATIVE.YES 

 

وقد حضر األب علي الفور ومعه عددا من زمالئه 

 األطباء
CONJ=DM ḥaḍara.PERF.3SG.M ART=father LOC 

and already came the father on 

  
ART=immediately CONJ=COM-CL.3SG.M number 

the immediately and with him number 

 
ABL colleagues-CL.3SG.M.GEN ART=doctors 

of his colleagues the doctors 

‘And the father came immediately with a number 

of his physician colleagues’ 

 

The sentence in (6) can be considered as a 

prototypical use of the verb ǧā’a. In (7), howev-

er, note that the verb which received the highest 

probability estimate was not the actually ob-

served verb in that context. Nevertheless, all four  

verbs were assigned more-or-less equal probabil-

ity estimates. This may indicate that this is one 

context of use in which the four COME verbs can 

be used interchangeably. Relying on my native 

speaker intuition, substituting the observed verb 

with the other COME verbs in (7) does not raise 

any red flags, especially since this particular con-

texts of use indicates physical motion of a HU-

MAN agent, as I discussed earlier in this paper. 

Of course, not all predictions made by the 

model were accurate. Among the sentences for 

which a single verb received a very high proba-

bility estimate, a number of instances in which 

the predicted verb was not the observed verb 

were found. Such sentences proved to be worthy 

of scrutiny due to the fact that some of these 

“mis-predictions” were associated with less typi-

cal uses of the verb that was actually observed in 

context. For instance, in (8), the verb qadima 

was the verb observed in context, yet the model 

chose ḥaḍara instead as the verb that was most 

fitting in that context.  

 

(8)  
atā = 0.022 

ḥaḍara = 0.962  

(predicted) 

ǧā’a = 0.005 

qadima = 0.011   

(observed) 

contextual features used (in 

the model): 

SUBJ_PER.3
RD

 + 

SUBJ_CAT.HUMAN + ADVERBI-

AL.YES + GOAL.YES + MAN-

NER.YES + TRANSITIVITY.YES 

  

وكان علي بن عبد هللا إذا قدم مكة حاجا أو معتمرا عطلت قريش 

 مجالسها
wa=kāna ʽali bin ʽabdillah iḏā 

CONJ=be.PERF.3SG.M Ali Bin Abdullah COND 

and was Ali Bin Abdullah if 

  
qadima makka-ta ḥāǧǧan aw 

qadima.PERF.3SG.M Mecca-ACC pilgrim CONJ 

he came Mecca pilgrim or  

 
muʽtamiran ʽaṭṭalat 

pilgrim suspend.PERF.3SG.F 

minor.pilgrim suspended 

 
qurayš maǧālisa-ha 

Quraysh meetings-CL.3SG.F 

Quraysh its meetings 

‘When Ali bin Abdullah used to come to Mecca 

on a pilgrimage Quraysh would suspend its 

meetings’ 

 

Interestingly, this particular usage of 

qadima in (8) can be found in a specific genre, 

that of historical narrative. While atā, ǧā’a, and 

ḥaḍara may all appear in transitive constructions 

in MSA, qadima normally does not. It is, howev-

er, used in transitive constructions to signal a 

shift in register, as in the example in (8). Since 

such pattern of use occurs less frequently than 

the general overall usage of qadima, the model 

assigns ḥaḍara instead as the most plausible verb 

choice for such context. Careful inspection of 

“mis-predictions” such as the above is, therefore, 

an important step to identify the less typical uses 

of verbs, as well as to decide whether the varia-

ble set chosen for the model has or has not been 

effective in accounting for verb usage. The prob-

ability estimates calculated for the GO data frame 

did not yield such satisfying results, and did not 

necessarily agree with my native speaker’s intui-

tion. In Abdulrahim (2013: 101) I attributed such 

findings to the set of variables that GO verbs 

were coded for in the data frame (which, more or 

less, resembled the variable set COME verbs were 

coded for). More specifically I suggested that the 

data frame should include more lexical or 

collocational variables.  

 

5 Conclusions 
The methodological approach to lexical 

analysis, described here, represents a departure 

from traditional, compartmentalized treatments 

of the Arabic verb.  In this paper, I have adopted 

a construction-based approach that considers var-

ious aspects of language (morphology, syntax, 

semantics, etc.) as equally responsible for defin-

35



ing the behavior of a linguistic item. The creation 

of a 500-row data frame per verb has allowed us 

to probe into the frequency and distribution facts 

regarding the usage of seven highly frequent mo-

tion verbs in MSA. Moreover, the annotation of 

each corpus return for a wide range of contextual 

and semantic features offered the possibility of 

foregrounding the most prototypical aspects of 

use for each verb, as well as highlighting shared 

patterns of usage among the near-synonymous 

verbs in a set. In this paper, I have argued that  

the value of constructing a data frame of this 

type lies in developing more sophisticated 

lexico-syntactic frames of linguistic items, in that 

it allows us to extract preferred profiles of the 

lexical or constructional items under study. 

Thankfully, there is a wide range of statisti-

cal tests that have made the examination of and 

search for lexico-syntactic patterns in large data 

frames easier and more manageable. These sta-

tistical tests vary from simple, mono-variate ex-

ploratory test to complex and multi-variate pre-

dictive models. Each one of the three statistical 

analyses discussed in this paper serves to high-

light a particular aspect of variable distribution 

and variable interaction and, thus, helps us un-

derstand the complexity of the relationship be-

tween the near-synonymous COME and GO verbs. 

Generally speaking, the application of such sta-

tistical tests to large, multi-variate data frames 

helps us examine the particular linguistic features 

that characterize lexical and constructional 

choices, which may have direct applications in 

natural language generation. In addition, the 

identification of prototypical and marginal uses 

of verbs – discussed particularly in 4.3 – can 

possibly contribute to developing readability as-

sessment of texts for learners of MSA.
9
   

Finally, lexicographic treatments of the 

highly frequent motion verbs discussed in this 

paper, as exhibited in bilingual and, mostly, 

monolingual dictionaries, range from almost ad-

equate to completely mis-representative descrip-

tions of the major and minor senses of these 

verbs (Abdulrahim, 2013). Many monolingual 

dictionaries follow a traditional and highly ideo-

logical system of lexical representation whereby 

archaic uses of a lexical item are foregrounded 

and little attention is paid to more contemporary 

uses. The quantitative (and qualitative) analysis 

of a data frame such as the ones described here 

                                                 
9 I would like to thank an anonymous reviewers of this pa-

per for pointing out these particular applications of the sta-

tistical methods discussed here. 

can help tease apart the different idiosyncratic 

uses for each of the seven motion verbs as well 

as identify the most and the least prototypical 

uses. One of the practical applications of such a 

data frame, therefore, is to create extensive, us-

age-based dictionary entries that are more repre-

sentative of contemporary language use and that 

would be useful for the native speaker of the lan-

guage, the language learner, and the language 

researcher.
10

 

 

Acknowledgments  
I would like to thank Professors Antti 

Arppe, John Newman, and Sally Rice at the Uni-

versity of Alberta for their constant guidance and 

feedback throughout the various stages of the 

creation of this data frame, the application of 

statistical tests, and the linguistic analysis. I 

would also like to thank the ANLP 2014 review-

ers of this paper for their encouraging feedback 

and insights.  

 

References 

Abdulrahim, Dana. 2013. A corpus study of basic 

motion events in Modern Standard Arabic. Un-

published doctoral dissertation. University of 

Alberta. Edmonton, Alberta. To be found on 

http://hdl.handle.net/10402/era.33921 

Abdulrahim, Dana. (submitted). Quantitative ap-

proaches to analyzing COME constructions in 

Modern Standard Arabic. To appear in A. Har-

die, A. T. McEnrey (eds.), Arabic Corpus Lin-

guistics.   

 Agresti, Alan. 2002. Categorical data analysis (2
nd

 

ed.). Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken.  

 Arppe, Antti. 2007. Multi-variate methods in corpus-

based lexicography: A study of synonymy in 

finnish. Proceedings from the Corpus Linguis-

tics Conference (CL2007), Birmingham, United 

Kingdom.  

                                                 
10

 See Abdulrahim for three samples of suggested usage-
based dictionary entries for the COME verb atā: (1) a corpus-

illustrated dictionary entry that elaborates on the existing 

(bilingual) dictionary entries of the verb by supplementing 

relevant corpus examples for each verb sub-sense or usage; 

(2) a minimalist sub-sense frequency-based dictionary entry 

that orders the verb entries according to the frequency of 

occurrence of the overall general usage (physical, metaphor-

ical, etc); and (3) a usage-based dictionary entry for atā that 

is directly based on the quantitative and qualitative analyses 

conducted in her study (2013: 243-249) 

36



Arppe, Antti. 2008. Univariate, bivariate and multi-

variate methods in corpus-based lexicography - 

a study of synonyms. (PhD, University of Hel-

sinki). Publications of the Department of Gen-

eral Linguistics, 44. 

Arppe, Antti. 2009. Linguistic choices vs. probabili-

ties - how much and what can linguistic theory 

explain? In: Featherston, Sam & Winkler, Su-

sanne (eds.) The Fruits of Empirical Linguistics 

1, pp 1-24. Berlin: de Gruyter. 

Atkins, Beryl. T. S. 1987. Semantic ID tags: Corpus 

evidence for dictionary senses. Proceedings of 

the Third Annual Conference of the UW Cen-

tre for the New Oxford English Dictionary, 

pp17–36. 

Bresnan, Joan. 2006. Is syntactic knowledge probabil-

istic? Experiments with the English dative alter-

nation. Pre-Proceedings of the International 

Conference on Linguistic Evidence, Tübingen, 

Germany. (pp. 2-4).  

Bybee, Joan. 2010. Language, usage and cognition. 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  

Croft, William. & Allan. D. Cruse. 2004. Cognitive 

linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University 

Press.  

Divjak, Dagmar. S., & Stefan T. Gries. 2006. Ways of 

trying in Russian: Clustering and comparing be-

havioral profiles. Corpus Linguistics and Lin-

guistic Theory, 2(1), 23-60.  

 Firth, John. R. 1957. A synopsis of linguistic theory, 

1930-1955. In J. R. Firth. 1968. Selected Papers 

of J. R. Firth 1952-1959 (pp. 168-205). London: 

Longman.  

Gries, Stefan Th. 2006. Corpus-based methods and 

cognitive semantics: The many meanings of to 

run. In S. Th. Gries, & A. Stefanowitsch (Eds.), 

Corpora in cognitive linguistics: Corpus-based 

approaches to syntax and lexis,pp 57-99. Ber-

lin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 

Gries, Stefan Th. 2009. Statistics for linguistics with 

R: A practical introduction. Berlin: De Gruyter 

Mouton.  

Gries, Stefan Th. & Dagmar S. Divjak. 2009. Behav-

ioral profiles: A corpus-based approach towards 

cognitive semantic analysis. In Vyvyan Evans, 

& S. S. Pourcel (Eds.), New directions in cogni-

tive linguistics, pp 57-75. Amster-

dam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.  

Gries, Stefan. Th. & Naoki Otani. 2010. Behavioral 

profiles: A corpus-based perspective on synon-

ymy and antonymy. ICAME Journal, 34, pp 

121-150  

 Harrell, Frank E. 2001. Regression modeling strate-

gies: With applications to linear models, logistic 

regression and survival analysis. New York: 

Springer-Verlag.  

Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, & Jerome Fried-

man. 2009. The elements of statistical learning: 

Data mining, inference, and prediction. New 

York: Springer. 

Langacker, Ronald. 1987. Foundations of cognitive 

grammar, vol. I: Theoretical prerequisites. 

Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.  

 Menard, Scott. 1995. Applied logistic regression 

analysis. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.  

Data sets and R scripts 

Abdulrahim, Dana. (forthcoming). Arabic come and 

go. A micro-corpus of 3500 occurrences of 

seven motion verbs in MSA (atā, ǧā’a, ḥaḍara, 

qadima, ḏahaba, maḍā, and rāḥa), annotated 

for a wide range of morphological, syntactic, 

and semantic variables 

Arppe, Antti. 2012. polytomous: Polytomous Logistic 

Regression for fixed and mixed effects. R pack-

age version 0.1.4. 

Gries, Stefan. Th. (2009). BehavioralProfiles 1.01. A 

program for R 2.7.1 and higher. 

 

Appendix A. Examples for annotation for 

semantic variables 
 

variable sample of annotation 

SUBJECT CATE-

GORY: 

 

ACTIVITY هجوم ‘attack’, عمليات ‘operations’, 

 ’voting‘ تصويت

ANIMAL جواد ‘horse’,  كلب ‘dog’ 

ATTRIBUTE كرم ‘generosity’, شهرة ‘fame’ 

BODY عيون ‘eyes’, قدم ‘foot’ 

COGNITION تفكير ‘thought’, خيال ‘imagination’ 

COMMUNICA-

TION 

 ’report‘ تقرير ,’question‘ سؤال

CONTENT (of a 

docu-

ment/speech) 

 ǧā’a.PERF.3SG.M LOC جاء في البيان

ART=statement ‘came in the 

statement…’,  

 ǧā’a.PERF.3SG.M جاء في الرسالة

LOC ART=letter ‘came in the 

statement…’, 

37



DEMONSTRA-

TIVE 

 ǧā’a.PERF.3SG.M LOC DEM جاء ذلك

‘that came…’, 

 ǧā’a.PERF.3SG.M LOC DEM جاء هذا

‘this came…’, etc. 

EVENT إجتماع ‘meeting’, ندوة ‘sympo-

sium’, قمة ‘summit’ 

GROUP (repre-

senting humans 

collectively) 

 ,’varsity‘ المنتخب ,’Japan‘ اليابان

 ’the government‘ الحكومة

HUMAN األوالد ‘the boys’, البابا   ‘the Pope’ 

LOCATION موقع ‘location’, المدن ‘the cities’ 

NOTION األذية ‘harm’, مصدر ‘source’ 

PHYSICAL OB-

JECT/ARTIFACT 

 ’wheat‘ القمح ,’grants‘ منح

SENSE صوت ‘voice/sound’ 

STATE الموت ‘the death’, مرحلة ‘phase’ 

SUBSTANCE حرائق ‘fires’, مطر ‘rain’ 

TIME  موسم‘season’, الغد ‘tomorrow’ 

GOAL PHRASE: 

YES 

 مساعداتنا تذهب إلى الشيشان

aid.CL.1PL.GEN 

ḏahaba.IMPF.3SG.F ALL 

ART=Chechnya 
‘Our aid goes to Chechnya’ 

SOURCE 

PHRASE: 

YES 

 الهجرات الجنوبية التي قدمت من الهند

ART=immigrations ART=southern 

RP qadima.PERF.3SG.F ABL 

ART=India 
‘The southern immigrations that 

came from India…’ 

MANNER 

PHRASE: 

YES 

 هذه الجهود لم تذهب هدرا

DEM ART=efforts NEG 

ḏahaba.JUSS.3SG.F vain.ADV 

‘These efforts weren’t in vain’ 

SETTING 

PHRASE: 

YES 

 بل تأتي في اطار مخطط شامل

CONJ atā.IMPF.3SG.F LOC frame 

plan comprehensive 
‘It, however, comes as part of a 

comprehensive plan’ 

PATH PHRASE: 

YES 

 خسارة أتت على رأسمال البنك

deficit atā.PERF.3SG.F LOC capi-

tal ART=bank 
‘A deficit that destroyed the 

bank’s capital’ 

PURPOSIVE 

PHRASE: 

YES 

 ذهبت لزيارته وسألته

ḏahaba.PERF.1SG 

PURP=visit.CL.3SG.M.ACC 

CONJ=ask.CL.3SG.M.ACC 

‘I went to visit him and asked 

him’ 

COMITATIVE 

PHRASE: 

YES 

 برنامجكم لم يأت بجديد

show.CL.3PL.M.GEN NEG 

atā.PERF.3SG.M COM=new 

‘Your show did not come up 

with anything new’ 

TEMPORAL 

PHRASE: 

YES 

 أذهب لتناول أيس كريم في أي وقت

ḏahaba.IMPF.1SG PURP=have.VN 

ice cream LOC any time 

‘I go to have ice cream at any 

time’ 

DEGREE 

PHRASE: 

YES  

 تأتي دائما عبر عمليات السطو المنتظم

atā.IMPF.3SG.F ADV LOC opera-

tions burglary ART=organized 

‘Comes always through opera-

tions of organized burglary’  

 

 

 

 

38


