



















































FrameNet: A Knowledge Base for Natural Language Processing


Proceedings of Frame Semantics in NLP: A Workshop in Honor of Chuck Fillmore (1929–2014), pages 1–5,
Baltimore, Maryland USA, June 27, 2014. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

FrameNet: A Knowledge Base for Natural Language Processing

Collin F. Baker
International Computer Science Institute

1947 Center St., Suite 600
Berkeley, California 94704 U.S.A.
collinb@icsi.berkeley.edu

Abstract

Prof. Charles J. Fillmore had a life-
long interest in lexical semantics, and
this culminated in the latter part of his
life in a major research project, the
FrameNet Project at the International
Computer Science Institute in Berke-
ley, California (http://framenet.
icsi.berkeley.edu). This paper re-
ports on the background of this ongoing
project, its connections to Fillmore’s other
research interests, and briefly outlines ap-
plications and current directions of growth
for FrameNet, including FrameNets in lan-
guages other than English.

1 Introduction

It was my honor to work closely with the late
Charles Fillmore as part of the FrameNet project
at the International Computer Science Institute
in Berkeley, California (http://framenet.
icsi.berkeley.edu) from 1997 until this
year. It was a blessing to be in contact with that
rare combination of a brilliant intellect, a compas-
sionate heart, and genuine humility. This article
will discuss where FrameNet fits in the develop-
ment of Fillmore’s major theoretical contributions
(case grammar, frame semantics and construction
grammar), how FrameNet can be used for NLP,
and where the project is headed.

2 From Case Grammar to Frame
Semantics to FrameNet

The beginnings of case grammar were con-
temporary with the development of what came
to be called the ”Standard Theory” of Gener-
ative Grammar (Chomsky, 1965), and related
”through friendship” to the simultaneous develop-
ment of Generative Semantics. Fillmore (1968)
showed that a limited number of case roles

could provide elegant explanations of quite var-
ied linguistic phenomena, such as the differ-
ences in morphological case marking between
nominative-accusative, nominative-ergative, and
active-inactive languages, and anaphoric pro-
cesses such as subject drop in Japanese. A year
later (Fillmore, 1969), after explaining that verbs
like rob and steal require three arguments, the cul-
prit, the loser, and the loot, he continues in the next
section to say

It seems to me, however, that this sort
of detail is unnecessary, and that what
we need are abstractions from these
specific role descriptions, abstractions
which will allow us to recognize that
certain elementary role notions recur in
many situations,. . . Thus we can iden-
tify the culprit of rob and the critic
of criticize with the more abstract role
of Agent. . . in general. . . the roles that
[predicates’] arguments play are taken
from an inventory of role types fixed by
grammatical theory.

But the search for the “correct” minimal set of
case roles proved to be difficult and contentious,
and it became apparent that some predicators, such
as replace and resemble, required roles which did
not fit into the usual categories. In fact, the orig-
inal case roles (a.k.a. semantic roles, thematic
roles, theta roles) were increasingly seen as gen-
eralizations over a much larger set of roles which
provide more detailed information about the par-
ticipants in a large variety of situations, described
as semantic frames (Fillmore, 1976; Fillmore,
1977b).

Thus, the formulation of Frame Semantics
should not be seen as a repudiation of the con-
cept of case roles expounded in Fillmore 1968, but
rather a recognition of the inadequacy of case roles
as a characterization of all the different types of

1



interactions of participants that can be linguisti-
cally significant in using language to describe sit-
uations:

. . . [A]s I have conceived them, the
repertory of cases is NOT identical to
the full set of notions that would be
needed to make an analysis of any state
or event. . . . [A] case frame need not
comprise a complete description of all
the relevant aspects of a situation, but
only a particular piece or section of a
situation. (Fillmore (1977a), emphasis
in the original)

The concept of frames became part of the aca-
demic zeitgeist of the 1960s and 70s. Roger Shank
was using the term script to talk about situa-
tions like eating in a restaurant (Schank and Abel-
son, 1977) and the term frame was being used in
a more-or-less similar sense by Marvin Minsky
(1974), and Eugene Charniak (1977).

FrameNet as an Implementation of Frame
Semantics

During the late 1980s and early 1990s, much of
Fillmore’s effort went into joint work with Paul
Kay, Catherine O’Connor, and others on the de-
velopment of Construction Grammar, especially
on linking constructions in which the semantic at-
tributes of various constituents were represented
by thematic roles such as Agent, Patient, Expe-
riencer, Stimulus, etc., (cf. Levin (1993)). But
semantic frames were always presupposed in Fill-
more’s discussion of Construction Grammar (e.g.
Kay and Fillmore (1999)), just as Construction
Grammar was always presupposed in discussions
of Frame Semantics. In fact, some of the inciden-
tal references to semantic frames in the literature
on construction grammar imply the existence of
very sophisticated frame semantics. At the same
time, Fillmore was becoming involved with the
lexicographer Sue Atkins, and increasingly think-
ing about what the dictionary would look like, if
freed from the limitations of publishing on paper
(Fillmore and Atkins, 1994) and based on corpus
data.

The FrameNet Project (Fillmore and Baker,
2010; Ruppenhofer et al., 2010a) at the Interna-
tional Computer Science Institute was launched
in 1997, as an effort to produce a lexicon of En-
glish that is both human- and machine-readable,

based on the theory of Frame Semantics and sup-
ported by annotating corpus examples of the lexi-
cal items. In part, FrameNet (FN) can be thought
of as the implementation of a theory that was al-
ready well-developed, but, like other annotation
projects, we have found that the process of anno-
tating actual text has also pushed the development
of the theory.

So what is a frame? Ruppenhofer et al. (2006)
define a frame as “a script-like conceptual struc-
ture that describes a particular type of situation,
object, or event along with its participants and
props.” Frames are generalizations over groups of
words which describe similar states of affairs and
which could be expected to share similar sets of
roles, and (to some extent) similar syntactic pat-
terns for them. In the terminology of Frame Se-
mantics, the roles are called frame elements (FEs),
and the words which evoke the frame are referred
to as lexical units (LUs). A lexical unit is thus a
Saussurian “sign”, an association between a form
and a meaning; the form is a lemma with a given
part of speech, the meaning is represented as a se-
mantic frame plus a short dictionary-style defini-
tion, which is intended to differentiate this lexi-
cal unit from others in the same frame. Each lex-
ical unit is equivalent to a word sense; if a lemma
has more than one sense, it will be linked to more
than one LU in more than one frame; e.g. the
lemma run.v (and all its word forms, run, ran, and
running) is linked to several frames (Self-motion,
Operating a system, etc.).

Some of this literature refers to two types of en-
tities, frames and scenes (Fillmore, 1977c). How-
ever, early in the process of defining the FN data
structure, it was recognized that more than two
levels of generality might be needed, so it was de-
cided to create only one type of data object, called
a frame, and to define relations between frames at
various levels of generality. Therefore, the term
scene is not used in FrameNet today, although
some frames which define complex events have
the term scenario as part of their names, such as
the Employer’s scenario, with subframes Hiring,
Employing and Firing.

In many cases, the framal distinctions proposed
by Fillmore in early work are directly reflected
in current FN frames, as in the pair of frames
Stinginess and Thriftiness, discussed in Fillmore
(1985). In other cases, the frame divisions in
FN differ from those originally proposed, as in

2



the division of the original Commerce frame into
three frames, Commerce, Commerce buy and
Commerce sell, which are connected by frame-
to-frame relations.

Because Frame Semantics began in the study of
verbs and valences, there was emphasis initially on
representing events, but the principle that a con-
ceptual gestalt can be evoked by any member of a
set of words also applies to relations, states, and
entities, and the evoking words can be nouns, ad-
jectives, adverbs, etc., as well as verbs. For ex-
ample, the Leadership frame contains both nouns
(leader, headmaster, maharaja), and verbs (lead,
command); FEs in the Leadership frame include
the LEADER and the GOVERNED, as in [LEADER
Kurt Helborg] is the CAPTAIN [GOVERNED of the
Reiksguard Knights].

3 Applications of FrameNet

Underlying other applications is the need for
middle-ware to carry out automatic semantic role
labeling (ASRL). Beginning with the work of
Gildea and Jurafsky (2000; 2002), many re-
searchers have built ASRL systems trained on the
FrameNet data (Erk and Padó, 2006; Johansson
and Nugues, 2007; Das et al., 2013), some of
which are freely available. Other groups have built
software to suggest new LUs for existing frames,
or even new frames (Green, 2004)

Typical end-user applications for FrameNet
include Question answering (Sinha, 2008) and
information extraction (Mohit and Narayanan,
2003), and using FrameNet data has enabled some
improvements on systems attempting the RTE
task (Burchardt, 2008). The FrameNet website
lists the intended uses for hundreds of users of
the FrameNet data, including sentiment analy-
sis, building dialog systems, improving machine
translation, teaching English as a second language,
etc. The FrameNet team have an active partner-
ship with Decisive Analytics Corporation, which
is using FN-based ASRL as for event recognition
and tracking for their govenment and commercial
clients.

4 Some Limitations and Extensions of
the FrameNet Model

FrameNet works almost entirely on edited text, so
directly applying the ASRL systems trained on
current FN data will probably give poor results
on, e.g. Twitter feeds or transcribed conversation.

FrameNet also works strictly within the sentence,
so there is no direct way to deal with text coher-
ence, although FrameNet annotation does indicate
when certain core FEs are missing from a sen-
tence, which typically indicates that that they are
realized elsewhere in the text. This feature can be
used to link arguments across sentences (Ruppen-
hofer et al., 2010b).

Technical terms and Proper Nouns:
FrameNet has taken as its mandate to cover the
“core” lexicon of English, words in common
use, whose definitions are established by their
usage. The number of senses per word is known
to increase with the frequency of occurrence
Zipf (19491965), so the most frequent words are
likely to be the most polysemous and therefore
both the most important and the most challenging
for NLP. In general, the FrameNet team have
assumed that technical vocabulary, whose defi-
nitions are established by domain experts, will
be handled in terminologies for each domain,
such as the Medical Subject Headings of the U.S.
National Library of Medicine (https://www.
nlm.nih.gov/mesh/meshhome.html)
and the Department of Defense Dictionary of
Military Terms (http://www.dtic.mil/
doctrine/dod_dictionary/). For similar
reasons, FrameNet does not annotate proper
nouns, also known in NLP as named entities.
FrameNet cannot and has no reason to compete
with the on-line resources for these domains,
such as Wikipedia, lists of male and female
personal names, and gazetteers. On the other
hand, Frame Semantic resources have been
produced in several specialized domains: Thomas
Schmidt created a Frame-Semantic analysis of
the language associated with soccer (in Ger-
man, English, and French) (Schmidt, 2008),
http://www.kictionary.com; and lexica
in the legal domain have been produced for Italian
(Venturi et al., 2009) and Brazilian Portuguese
(Bertoldi and Oliveira Chishman, 2012).

Negation and Conditionals:
FrameNet does not have representations for nega-
tion and conditional sentences. The words
never.adv and seldom.adv are LUs in the Fre-
quency frame, but there is no recognition of their
status as negatives. The general approach which
the FrameNet team has proposed would be to
treat negative expressions as parts of constructs li-

3



censed by constructions which have a “negation”
frame as their meaning pole, and license nega-
tive polarity items over some scope in the sen-
tence, but defining that scope is a notoriously dif-
ficult problem. We are just beginning to work a
mental spaces approach to the related problem of
conditional sentences, cf. Dancygier and Sweetser
(2005) and Sweetser (2006). FrameNet does not
include the word if , but does include both LUs and
annotation for a number of modal verbs and other
types of nouns and adjectives which can be used
to express conditionality, incuding the following:

Frame : LUs
Possibility : can, could, might, may
Capability : able.a, ability.n, can.v, poten-

tial.n/a, . . .
Likelihood: likely.a, might.v, may.v, must.v,

possible.a, . . .

5 Future directions: Expert curation vs.
rapid growth

After almost two decades of work at varying lev-
els of intensity, depending on funding, FrameNet
contains almost 1200 Semantic Frames, covering
almost 13,000 word senses (Lexical Units) , docu-
mented with almost 200,000 manual annotations.
This is bigger than a toy lexicon, but far fewer LUs
than WordNet or other lexicons derived automati-
cally from the web. By virtue of expert curation,
the FrameNet lexical database contains a wealth of
semantic knowledge that is unique. The database
is freely available from the FrameNet website.

One challenge we face now is finding a way to
greatly expand FrameNet in a more cost-effective
way while preserving the accuracy and richness
of the annotation. We have recently done some
small-scale experiments on crowd-sourcing vari-
ous parts of the process in partnership with col-
leagues at Google, and the preliminary results are
encouraging.

Another challenge comes as a result of the suc-
cess of Frame Semantics as an interlingua (Boas,
2009). There are now projects building FrameNet-
style lexical databases for many different lan-
guages; funded projects are creating FrameNets
for German, Spanish, Japanese, Swedish, Chinese,
French and Arabic; smaller efforts have created
Frame Semantics-based resources for many other
languages, including Italian, Korean, Polish, Bul-
garian, Russian, Slovenian, Hebrew, and Hindi.

Some are produced almost entirely via manual
annotation, while others are being created semi-
automatically. The good news is that the general
result seems to be that the frames devised for En-
glish can be used for the majority of LUs in each
of these language. The challenge is finding a way
to integrate the frame semantic work being done
around the world, to create a truly multi-lingual
FrameNet.

For more information on all these topics, please
visit
http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.

edu

References
Anderson Bertoldi and Rove Luiza Oliveira Chishman.

2012. Developing a frame-based lexicon for the
Brazilian legal language: The case of the criminal
process frame. In Monica Palmirani, Ugo Pagallo,
Pompeu Casanovas, and Giovanni Sartor, editors, AI
Approaches to the Complexity of Legal Systems, vol-
ume 7639 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 256–270. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Hans C. Boas, editor. 2009. Multilingual FrameNets
in Computational Lexicography: Methods and Ap-
plications. Mouton de Gruyter.

Aljoscha Burchardt. 2008. Modeling Textual Entail-
ment with Role-Semantic Information. Ph.D. thesis,
Universität des Saarlandes.

Eugene Charniak. 1977. Framed PAINTING: The rep-
resentation of a common sense knowledge fragment.
Cognitive Science, 1(4):235–264.

Noam Chomsky. 1965. Aspects of the Theory of Syn-
tax. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Barbara Dancygier and Eve Sweetser. 2005. Men-
tal spaces in grammar: conditional constructions.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK; New
York.

Dipanjan Das, Desai Chen, André F. T. Martins,
Nathan Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. 2013.
Frame-Semantic parsing. Computational Linguis-
tics, 40(1).

Katrin Erk and Sebastian Padó. 2006. Shalmaneser –
a flexible toolbox for semantic role assignment. In
Proceedings of the fifth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2006),
Genoa, Italy.

Charles J. Fillmore and B.T.S. Atkins. 1994. Starting
where the dictionaries stop: The challenge for com-
putational lexicography. In Antonio Zampolli and
Sue Atkins, editors, Computational Approaches to
the Lexicon. Oxford University Press.

4



Charles J. Fillmore and Collin F. Baker. 2010. A
frames approach to semantic analysis. In Bernd
Heine and Heiko Narrog, editors, Oxford Handbook
of Linguistic Analysis, pages 313–341. OUP.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1968. The case for case. In
E. Bach and R. Harms, editors, Universals in Lin-
guistic Theory. Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New
York.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1969. Toward a modern the-
ory of case. In David A Reibel and Sanford A.
Shane, editors, Modern Studies in English: Read-
ings in Transformational Grammar, pages 361–375.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1976. Frame semantics and
the nature of language. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences: Conference on the Origin and
Development of Language and Speech, 280(1):20–
32.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1977a. Frame semantics. pages
111–137.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1977b. The need for a frame se-
mantics in linguistics. In Hans Karlgren, editor, Sta-
tistical Methods in Linguistics. Scriptor.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1977c. Scenes-and-frames seman-
tics. In Antonio Zampolli, editor, Linguistic Struc-
tures Processing, number 59 in Fundamental Studies
in Computer Science. North Holland Publishing.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1985. Frames and the semantics of
understanding. Quaderni di Semantica, 6(2):222–
254.

Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2000. Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. In ACL 2000: Proceed-
ings of ACL 2000, Hong Kong.

Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(3):245–288.

Rebecca Green. 2004. Inducing Semantic Frames
from Lexical Resources. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Maryland, College Park.

Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2007. LTH:
Semantic structure extraction using nonprojective
dependency trees. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations
(SemEval-2007), pages 227–230, Prague, Czech Re-
public, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Paul Kay and Charles J. Fillmore. 1999. Grammati-
cal constructions and linguistic generalizations: The
what’s x doing y? construction. Language, 75:1–33.

Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alter-
nations: A Preliminary Investigation. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

Marvin Minsky. 1974. A framework for representing
knowledge. Memo 306, MIT-AI Laboratory, June.

Behrang Mohit and Srini Narayanan. 2003. Seman-
tic extraction with wide-coverage lexical resources.
In Marti Hearst and Mari Ostendorf, editors, HLT-
NAACL 2003: Short Papers, pages 64–66, Edmon-
ton, Alberta, Canada, May 27 - June 1. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R. L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson, and Jan Schef-
fczyk. 2006. FrameNet II: Extended Theory and
Practice. International Computer Science Institute,
Berkeley, California. Distributed with the FrameNet
data.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R. L.
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson, and Jan Schef-
fczyk. 2010a. FrameNet II: Extended Theory and
Practice. FrameNet Project, September.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Caroline Sporleder, Roser
Morante, Collin Baker, and Martha Palmer. 2010b.
Semeval-2010 task 10: Linking events and their
participants in discourse. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Semantic Evaluations: Recent
Achievements and Future Directions (SEW-2009),
pages 106–111, Boulder, Colorado, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Roger C. Schank and Robert P. Abelson. 1977. Scripts,
Plans, Goals and Understanding: an Inquiry into
Human Knowledge Structures. Lawrence Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ.

Thomas Schmidt. 2008. The Kicktionary: Combining
corpus linguistics and lexical semantics for a multi-
lingual football dictionary. In Eva Lavric, Gerhard
Pisek, Andrew Skinner, and Wolfgang Stadler, edi-
tors, The Linguistics of Football, number 38 in Lan-
guage in Performance, pages 11–23. Gunter Narr,
Tübingen.

Steve Sinha. 2008. Answering Questions about Com-
plex Events. Ph.D. thesis, EECS Department, Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley, Dec.

Eve Sweetser. 2006. Negative spaces: Levels of nega-
tion and kinds of spaces. In Stéphanie Bonnefille
and Sébastien Salbayre, editors, Proceedings of the
conference “Negation: Form, figure of speech, con-
ceptualization”, Tours. Groupe de recherches anglo-
américaines de l’Université de Tours, Publications
universitaires Fran cois Rabelais.

Giulia Venturi, Alessandro Lenci, Simonetta Monte-
magn, Eva Maria Vecchi, Maria Teresa Sagri, and
Daniela Tiscornia. 2009. Towards a FrameNet re-
source for the legal domain. In Proceedings of the
Third Workshop on Legal Ontologies and Artificial
Intelligence Techniques, Barcelona, Spain, June.

George Kingsley Zipf. 1949[1965]. Human behavior
and the principle of least effort: an introduction to
human ecology. Hafner Pub. Co., New York.

5


