



















































Conceptual Annotations Preserve Structure Across Translations: A French-English Case Study


Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Semantics-Driven Statistical Machine Translation, pages 11–22,
Beijing, China, July 30, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Conceptual Annotations Preserve Structure Across Translations:
A French-English Case Study

Elior Sulem
Institute of Computer Science

Hebrew University of Jerusalem
eliors@cs.huji.ac.il

Omri Abend
School of Informatics

University of Edinburgh
oabend@inf.ed.ac.uk

Ari Rappoport
Institute of Computer Science

Hebrew University of Jerusalem
arir@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Divergence of syntactic structures be-
tween languages constitutes a major chal-
lenge in using linguistic structure in Ma-
chine Translation (MT) systems. Here, we
examine the potential of semantic struc-
tures. While semantic annotation is ap-
pealing as a source of cross-linguistically
stable structures, little has been accom-
plished in demonstrating this stability
through a detailed corpus study. In this
paper, we experiment with the UCCA
conceptual-cognitive annotation scheme
in an English-French case study. First, we
show that UCCA can be used to annotate
French, through a systematic type-level
analysis of the major French grammatical
phenomena. Second, we annotate a par-
allel English-French corpus with UCCA,
and quantify the similarity of the struc-
tures on both sides. Results show a high
degree of stability across translations, sup-
porting the usage of semantic annotations
over syntactic ones in structure-aware MT
systems.

1 Introduction

Structural information, be it syntactic or semantic,
has the potential to address long-standing prob-
lems in Statistical Machine Translation (SMT),
such as phrase-level (rather than word-level) re-
ordering and discontiguous phrases. Structure-
aware models1 (Chiang, 2005; Liu et al., 2006; Mi
et al., 2008) aim to address these and other prob-
lems by taking into account the hierarchical struc-
ture of language. However, while structure-aware

1We use the term “structure-aware” rather than “syntax-
based” so to include any type of hierarchical structure.

models are effective at improving reordering at the
phrase level, they are limited in their ability to map
between arbitrarily divergent structures. Cross-
linguistic divergences therefore pose a difficult
problem for the integration of structural knowl-
edge into statistical models (Dorr, 1994; Ding and
Palmer, 2004; Zhang et al., 2008).

Consequently, an annotation scheme that as-
signs similar structures to translations has direct
applicative value for structure-aware MT systems.
Such structures can be used either as features in
phrase-based systems, yielding more robust de-
coding, or as a structural scheme which directs the
translation, replacing the PCFG trees often used
today. Using more stable schemes is likely to
result in simpler MT systems, avoiding structure
modifications like pseudo-nodes (Marcu et al.,
2006) or tree sequences (Zhang et al., 2008) used
in syntax-based systems to handle cross-linguistic
divergences.

Semantic annotation is an appealing avenue for
constructing cross-linguistically stable structures,
since a major goal of translation is to preserve
the meaning of a sentence. Cross-linguistically
stable schemes have further benefits for applica-
tions such as knowledge projection across lan-
guages (Kozhevnikov and Titov, 2013), the in-
duction of cross-lingual semantic relations (Lewis
and Steedman, 2013), or in translation studies
(Lembersky et al., 2013) (see Section 7.3). A
recent example of a semantic scheme aiming to
be cross-linguistically stable is AMR (Abstract
Meaning Representation) (Banarescu et al., 2013)
which uses elaborate hierarchical structures in or-
der to abstractly represent semantic information
and presents promising preliminary results for
SMT improvement (Jones et al., 2012). Never-
theless, the stability of semantic annotation across

11



translations is seldom addressed and has yet to be
adequately supported (see Section 2), a gap we ad-
dress in this paper using a detailed analysis of a
semantically annotated parallel corpus.

Universal Cognitive Conceptual Annotation
(UCCA) is a coarse-grained semantic annotation
scheme which builds on typological and cognitive
linguistic theory (Abend and Rappoport, 2013a;
Abend and Rappoport, 2013b). The scheme aims
to be applicable cross-linguistically, to abstract
away from specific syntactic forms and to directly
represent semantic distinctions. These properties
make UCCA an appealing source of structural an-
notation which is cross-linguistically stable. We
give an overview of UCCA in Section 3.

This paper focuses on the case study of English-
French, a well studied language pair in MT.
We demonstrate through this language pair both
UCCA’s portability, namely its ability to be ap-
plied to different languages, and its stability,
namely its ability to preserve structure across
translations. We conduct both type-level and
token-level experiments to support our claim.

To verify UCCA’s portability to French, we
first conduct a type-level analysis by systemati-
cally examining UCCA’s applicability over all ma-
jor grammatical phenomena in French. We find
that UCCA is fully applicable to French as ex-
emplified in the case of French-specific phenom-
ena like pronominal verbs (Section 4.1). Further
in the type-level, we apply UCCA to a published
inventory of structural divergences, and find that
UCCA abstracts away from almost all of them
(Section 4.2).

For a token-level analysis, we manually UCCA-
annotated a parallel French-English corpus of over
25K tokens, which we make publically available,
and compare the similarity between the UCCA
structures in the two languages to the correspond-
ing similarity between syntactic annotations. We
find that UCCA is considerably less divergent than
syntactic annotation (Section 6). We expect the
relative stability of UCCA compared to syntactic
schemes to be even greater in language pairs that
are more syntactically different than the relatively
similar English-French.

Finally, we analyze the semantic correspon-
dence between the annotations on both sides of
the parallel corpus (Section 7). We find remark-
ably high semantic correspondence between the
two languages. For instance, over 92% of the

Scenes (a similar notion to a “frame”; see Sec-
tion 3) in both languages have a correspondent in
the other. We analyze the non-corresponding units
in the two languages according to various param-
eters, and show that many of them are due to am-
biguity or semantic changes. These results offer a
better understanding of UCCA’s stability and sug-
gest paths for further improvements.

2 Related Work
We begin by discussing previous work that studied
the portability and stability of semantic schemes.
We then briefly survey the means in which seman-
tic information is integrated into MT systems.
Portability of semantic annotation. Several
works addressed the portability of semantic anno-
tation schemes, namely whether the same scheme,
often originally developed for English, can be ap-
plied to other languages.

Burchardt et al. (2009) addressed the applica-
tion of the English FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998)
to German. They found that about a third of the
verb senses identified in the German corpus were
not covered by FrameNet. Their analysis further
revealed that the English category set is not al-
ways sufficient, resulting in the introduction of
a new category for German. Van der Plas et al.
(2010) addressed the application of English Prop-
Bank (Palmer et al., 2005) to French, and found
that while the scheme can be applied to French,
the annotation requires proficiency in both lan-
guages. Samardzic et al. (2010a; 2010b) also
studied the portability of the English PropBank to
French, and found that the overwhelming major-
ity of the French verbal predicates in the corpus
correspond to a verb sense in the PropBank lex-
icon. The portability of PropBank was also ex-
amined in the case of English-Chinese through the
construction of annotated parallel corpora used in
the OntoNotes project (Weischedel et al., 2012).

Portability has also been studied in the context
of more elaborate hierarchical structures (Dorr et
al., 2010; Banarescu et al., 2013), often with the
intention of producing an inter-language – a rep-
resentation independent of any specific language,
which exhaustively accounts for the meaning of
the sentence. Dorr et al. (2010) studied portabil-
ity through the construction of a set of annotated
parallel corpora in six languages, as part of the
IAMTC project. Portability has also been inves-
tigated through the construction of annotated par-
allel treebanks such as the Prague Czech-English

12



Dependency Treebank2, enabling a subsequent va-
lency stability study (Urešová et al., 2015).

Stability of semantic annotation. Another line
of work focused on the stability of specific
schemes, i.e., their ability to preserve structure
across translations. Fung et al. (2006; 2007) stud-
ied the stability of semantic role annotation be-
tween arguments in English and Chinese. They
found that 83% of the alignable verbal arguments
in English have a role-compatible argument in
Chinese, but did not address arguments that have
no correspondent in the other language. This mo-
tivated the use of semantic roles in MT, but also
highlighted the existence of divergences between
the structures in the two languages.

Semantic role schemes used in MT are gener-
ally restricted to verbal predicates, excluding sev-
eral highly frequent constructions, such as copula
clauses and nominalizations, which can result in a
loss of stability. Furthermore, the fine-grained in-
formation such schemes provide as to the role of
the arguments can be difficult to port across lan-
guages. For further discussion, see (Abend and
Rappoport, 2013b) and (Birch et al., 2013).

Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) (Ba-
narescu et al., 2013) is a hierarchical semantic rep-
resentation scheme whose aim is to provide sim-
ple, readable semantic annotation that can be ap-
plied cross-linguistically and assist MT systems.
While UCCA is encoded over the text, AMR pro-
vides a structure for each sentence that is not triv-
ially alignable with the text (Flanigan et al., 2014).
Xue et al. (2014) studied the scheme’s portabil-
ity and stability when applied to English-Chinese
and English-Czech parallel corpora. They anno-
tated 100 Chinese and Czech sentences translated
from English, and examined the similarities and
differences of the AMRs across translations. In
the English-Czech comparison, 53% of the sen-
tences are reported to be structurally different in
a non-local way. They conclude that at this point
AMR is not stable enough to be used as an inter-
language, but should be used only either on the
target or on the source side.

Focusing on closer languages, namely English-
French, we employ both type-level and token-level
approaches for UCCA, including a comparison to
syntax and a qualitative analysis of divergences,
which are likely to generalize to some extent to
other semantic annotations. We report a prelimi-

2https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pcedt2.0/

nary study of the stability of AMR in our corpus.
Integrating semantics into MT systems.
Widely used in early MT (Uchida, 1987; Niren-
burg, 1989), the integration of semantics into
SMT systems is receiving much renewed interest
in recent years. The first line of research is the
integration of semantic features (often semantic
roles) in SMT systems. In the phrase-based SMT
models, they were mainly utilized for influencing
reordering (Wu and Fung, 2009; Xiong et al.,
2012; Feng et al., 2012). In syntax-based SMT
models, semantic roles were involved in assisting
reordering models (Li et al., 2013) and in transla-
tion rules (Zhai et al., 2012; Liu and Gildea, 2010;
Bazrafshan and Gildea, 2013).

The second line of research concerns the use
of an inter-language as an intermediary represen-
tation in SMT. Edelman and Solan (2009), rely-
ing on the cognitive model Revised Hierarchical
Model (RHM), tried to represent the network of
constructions that mediates between concepts and
the channels of linguistic input and output. Jones
et al. (2012) conducted preliminary experiments
on a geographical querying domain using AMR.

3 UCCA Annotation
UCCA is a a semantic annotation scheme, strongly
influenced by typological, notably Basic Lin-
guistic Theory (Dixon, 2010a; Dixon, 2010b;
Dixon, 2012), and cognitive linguistic theories
(Langacker, 2008). The scheme aims to provide
a coarse-grained, cross-linguistically applicable
representation by directly reflecting the major se-
mantic phenomena represented in the text and ab-
stracting away from specific syntactic forms. We
briefly introduce the UCCA formalism and main
categories. For a more elaborate presentation, as
well as evidence for the accessibility of UCCA
to annotators with no linguistic background, see
(Abend and Rappoport, 2013a; Abend and Rap-
poport, 2013b).

UCCA structures are directed acyclic graphs,
where the words in the text correspond to (a sub-
set of) their leaves. The nodes of the graphs,
called units, are either terminals or several ele-
ments jointly viewed as a single entity according
to some semantic or cognitive consideration. The
edges bear one or more categories, indicating the
role of the sub-unit in the relation that the parent
represents.

UCCA is built as a multi-layered scheme, where
each layer represents a different set of distinc-

13



tions. In this work we use the foundational
layer of UCCA, which mostly addresses predicate-
argument structures and linkage relations between
them.

UCCA views the text as a collection of Scenes
and relations between them. A Scene, the most ba-
sic notion of this layer, describes a movement, an
action or a state which is persistent in time. Every
Scene contains one main relation, or anchor (sim-
ilar to frame-evoking element in FrametNet), and
is labeled as a State (S) or a Process (P).

A Scene may contain one or more Participants
(A), which are interpreted in a broad sense, and
include locations, destinations and complement
clauses. Secondary relations in the Scene, such
as manner or temporal descriptions, are labeled
as Adverbials (D). For example, the sentence “He
slowly ran into the park” is annotated as follows:
“[He]A [slowly]D [ran]P [into the park]A”.

The definitions of the UCCA categories are not
dependent on POS distinctions. For instance, a
Scene’s main relation can be an adjective (“[He]A
[’s thin]S”) or a noun (“[John ’s]A [decision]P”).

4 Type-Level Analysis

In this section we focus on type-level analysis and
show both the portability of UCCA, examining the
annotation of the French grammatical phenomena
with UCCA, and its stability, assessing UCCA’s
influence on commonly studied structural diver-
gences.

4.1 Portability

We examine UCCA’s applicability to French by
systematically examining the major grammatical
phenomena in French, and verifying that UCCA
categories can be applied to them. To this pur-
pose, we use the same annotation guidelines and
category set previously applied to English, and ap-
ply it to the phenomena and examples described
in a French grammar book (Hawkins and Towell,
2001). Tense and agreement are not covered in the
UCCA foundational layer which we use, and are
therefore disregarded in this work.

We find that even for French-specific phenom-
ena, current UCCA categories permit their anno-
tation in the foundational layer without requiring
changes in the definitions or additional categories.
Due to space limitations, we only present here one
case of interest. The full analysis according to the
grammar book can be found in Sulem (2014) (Ap-

pendix 2) 3.
As an example, we consider reflexive pronouns,

representing the applicability of UCCA to French
phenomena that have no direct parallel in English.
In French, in addition to the counterparts of “him-
self” and “themselves” (“lui-même” and “eux-
mêmes”), reflexivity is also expressed through the
pronouns “se”, “me”, “te”, “nous” and “vous”,
which precede some verbs (termed “pronominal
verbs”). For instance, “lavé” is “washed”, while
“s’est lavé” is “washed himself”. We show that the
UCCA’s category definitions can be applied natu-
rally to this phenomenon.

A key guideline in UCCA is that the annotation
of a unit does not depend on its part of speech
but rather on its meaning and role in the context
it is situated in. We therefore distinguish between
three cases based on their semantics.

First, cases where the reflexive pronoun refers
to the same Participant as the subject. Here the
pronoun is annotated as an A: “[Jean]A [s’]A [est
lavé]P” (“Jean washed himself”).

Second, cases where the pronoun changes the
meaning of the verb in an unpredictable way, or
alternatively, where the verb may only appear in a
pronominal form. In these cases the formal means
of reflexivity is used, but is not associated with the
semantic phenomena of reflexivity. Semantically
then, the reflexive pronoun and the verb form one
unanalyzable unit, as in the following example: “Il
[s’ est aperçu]P qu’il était tard” (“He realized that
it was late”).

Third, cases where the pronoun changes the
meaning and the number of arguments of the verb
without creating semantic reflexivity. In these
cases the verb is the Center (C) of the Process,
while the reflexive pronoun serves as an Elab-
orator (E). For example: “Je [m’E appelleC]P
John” (“my name is John” where “appelle” means
“call”).

4.2 Stability

Overcoming cross-linguistic divergences (or
translation divergences) is one of the main chal-
lenges in machine translation. We briefly review
the main examples of translation divergences pre-
sented in (Dorr, 1994; Dorr et al., 2002; Dorr et
al., 2004), adapting the original English-Spanish
examples to English-French analogues. Then, for
each example, we present its annotation according

3www.cs.huji.ac.il/˜eliors/papers/
elior_sulem_thesis.pdf

14



to UCCA. The resulting annotations show that
UCCA abstracts away from almost all of these
divergences and exposes the semantic similarity,
demonstrating the stability of the scheme at the
type-level.

Categorical divergence: Translation of words
in one language into words that have different POS
tags in another language. For example, “to be
cold” – “avoir froid” (“to have cold”). In UCCA
the expression in both languages is annotated as a
State where the Center (similar to the notion of a
semantic head) is “cold” / “froid”.

Conflational divergence: Translation of two
or more words in one language into one word
in another language. For example: “to kick” –
“donner un coup de pied” (“give a kick”). In
UCCA, the expression describes a Process in the
two languages, and the French light verb “donner”
(“give”) is a Function (a unit which does not intro-
duce a relation or participant) inside the Process.

Structural4 divergence: Realization of verb
arguments in different syntactic configurations in
different languages. For example, “to enter the
house” – “entrer dans la maison” (“enter in the
house”). In UCCA there is a Participant in both
languages.

Thematic divergence: Realization of verb ar-
guments in syntactic configurations that reflect
different thematic to syntactic mapping orders.
For example, “I like this house” – “Cette maison
me plaı̂t” (“this house pleases to me”). In UCCA
there are two Participants in English as well as
two Participants in French (“cette maison” / “this
house” and “me” / “me”).

Promotional/Demotional divergence: Promo-
tion is the case where a modifier in the source lan-
guage is promoted to a main verb in the target lan-
guage (Dorr, 1990; Gola, 2012). Demotion is its
mirror image, where a main verb in the source lan-
guage becomes a modifier in the target language.

An example where an English adverb is pro-
moted to a main verb is the French: “John usu-
ally goes home” – “John a l’habitude de rentrer
à la maison” (“John has the habit to go home”).
In UCCA, both “usually” and “a l’habitude” (“has
the habit”) are annotated as Adverbials.

An example where an English verb is demoted
to an adverb is the French “to run in” – “entrer
en courant” (“enter running”). In UCCA, the En-

4Here the term “structural” refers specifically to syntax,
in contrast to the broader sense used elsewhere in the paper.

glish example contains a Process (“to run”) and
a Participant (“in”). The annotation in French is
somewhat different, where “entrer” (“enter”) is a
Process, while “en courant” (“running”) is an Ad-
verbial.

To summarize, aside from the case of demo-
tional divergence, the UCCA annotation (in its
foundational layer) abstracts away from canonical
examples for cross-linguistic divergences. With
demotional divergence, where UCCA annotation
is different across languages, we note that the di-
vergence does correspond to a semantic difference
of emphasis, that is, whether the entering action or
the running action is the main relation. We leave
it open whether this divergence should be consid-
ered a result of a true semantic difference between
the languages or a shortcoming of UCCA that fails
to capture the similarity between them.

5 Parallel French-English UCCA Corpus

The parallel corpus. The French-English cor-
pus used here is an extract from the book Twenty
Thousand Leagues Under the Sea (Vingt Mille
Lieues Sous les Mers), a classic science fiction
novel written in French by Jules Verne (1828–
1905) and first published in 1870. We use an on-
line version of the book and the English translation
by J.P. Walter (Verne, 1870; Verne, 1991). Each
of the two monolingual parts of the corpus contain
583 sentences which correspond to 12.5K tokens
in English and 13.1K tokens in French. The anno-
tated corpus is publically available5.

Initial alignment. We segment the parallel cor-
pus into 154 bilingual pairs of aligned passages.
Each passage in French corresponds to a single
passage in English. The passages correspond to
the paragraphs in the original texts except in a
few cases of long dialogues, where we split the
paragraphs into several passages. A sentence-level
alignment is not necessary in our analysis since
in UCCA, the text is viewed as a collection of
Scenes, where sentence boundaries play no signif-
icant role.
Manual annotation. The annotation was car-
ried out using UCCA’s web application. Both
French and English texts were annotated by the
same annotator (one of the authors of the paper),
according to UCCA annotation guidelines6. Re-

5www.cs.huji.ac.il/˜eliors
6Both the web-application and the guidelines are available

in homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/oabend/ucca/.

15



cent updates to the guidelines concerning the an-
notation of secondary verbs as Adverbials, are not
applied here. We expect these changes to further
improve the quality of the results (Section 7.3).
The annotation in English and French was carried
out separately in each of the languages, rather than
in parallel, thus permitting cases where the same
linguistic form in English and French is subject to
different interpretations, leading to different anno-
tations. This effect on the differences in UCCA
annotation in English and French is discussed in
Section 7.

6 Token-level Analysis

In order to demonstrate UCCA’s stability at a
token-level, we examine the number of UCCA
units of various types in both English and French
for each parallel passage in our annotated paral-
lel corpus. We compare these numbers to those
obtained through syntactic annotation. In light
of our type-level analysis (Section 4), we expect
these UCCA categories to be more stable cross-
linguistically than syntactic ones. The number
of Scenes is compared to the number of non-
auxiliary verbs, and the number of Participants
and Adverbials is compared to the number of noun
phrases (NPs), prepositional phrases (PPs) and ad-
verb phrases (ADVPs).

We note that English-French is a particularly
challenging candidate for this type of analysis
since the language pair is relatively structurally
similar (e.g., measured by word reordering (Birch,
2011)). Syntactic annotation is therefore a strong
baseline. We expect UCCA’s relative stability to
be even greater in more syntactically divergent
language pairs.

We are mainly interested not in the absolute
number of units/constituents of a certain type, but
more in the extent to which this number diverges
between languages. Minimal divergence in the
number of units/constituents of a certain type be-
tween the two languages is an indication of the
scheme’s stability.

We compute the similarity in the number of
units/constituents of each type in the two lan-
guages in the following manner. For each
language l ∈ {Fre,Eng} and for each
unit/constituent type t, we compute the number
of instances of that type n(t,l)i in each passage
i = 1, .., N . We thereby obtain for each (t, l) a
vector n(t,l) = {n(t,l)i }i. For each type t, the sim-

ilarity between n(t,F re) and n(t,Eng), which is an
indication of the stability of the scheme, is com-
puted using l1 and l2 norms of the difference be-
tween them.

We further compute an F-score as follows: pre-
cision and recall of the French vector against
the English one are defined respectively by
P = s/f and R = s/e when s =∑

i min(n
(t,Fre)
i , n

(t,Eng)
i ), f =

∑
i n

(t,F re)
i and

e =
∑

i n
(t,Eng)
i . The F-score F is the harmonic

mean of P and R. This measure provides an up-
per bound of the number of aligned units in the
two languages, looking at the category of the units
and their appearance in aligned passages. We note
that the measures described are more applicable
in this context than statistical correlation measures
(e.g., the Pearson correlation coefficient). This is
because a stable scheme is determined by the simi-
larity of the count vectors in absolute terms, rather
than their statistical correlation.
Experimental setup. For tagging, we use the
Stanford POS tagger package (Toutanova et al.,
2003). We compute the number of verbs in the
parallel corpus and compare them to the number
of Scenes. We exclude auxiliaries since such verbs
tend to differ considerably between languages. We
manually correct the tagging (by a single annota-
tor, highly proficient in both languages), and there-
fore expect these numbers to be comparable in
quality to a gold standard7.

The syntactic constituents we study are noun
phrases (NP), prepositional phrases (PP) and
adverb phrases (ADVP in English and AdP in
French). We used the Stanford parser’s pre-
trained models for English (englishPCFG, (Klein
and Manning, 2003)) and French (the frenchFac-
tored (Green et al., 2011)), with the same man-
ual tokenization taken from the UCCA annotation.
Six passages which contain very long sentences in
French and for which the parser was unable to pro-
duce a parse were omitted from this evaluation.
We note that we include in our analysis Scenes
marked as unanalyzable (For example: “Hello!”),
but exclude Scenes appearing as remote Partici-
pants, so to avoid double counting.

In order to correct for possible biases of the
parsers towards overprediction or underprediction
of certain syntactic constituents, we conduct the
following experiment. We manually count the

7The French tagger overestimated the number of verbs by
0.6%, while the English tagger overestimated it by 8.7%.

16



l1 l2 F Fr. Avg. En. Avg.
Scenes 124 14.97 0.96 9.25 9.49
Verbs 157 18.79 0.94 9.30 9.10

Participants (As) 273 31.13 0.95 17.68 18.27
NPs and PPs 952 102.74 0.89 26.64 32.33

NPs 847 88.89 0.87 18.78 24.20
PPs 299 32.05 0.87 7.86 8.13

Adverbials (Ds) 133 17.18 0.86 3.3 3.07
Adverb Phrases 342 40.0 0.15 0.24 2.49

As + Ds 334 37.18 0.95 20.99 21.34
NPs+PPs+ADVPs 1226 127.40 0.87 26.88 34.82

Table 1: Comparison of UCCA’s Scene, Participant and
Adverbial stability across the two languages with the stabil-
ity of verbs, NPs, PPs and ADVPs. l1 and l2 represent re-
spectively the l1 and l2 norms of the difference between the
French and English count vectors. The F-score F , resulting
from an upper bound on the number of aligned units in the
two languages, evaluates the similarity between these vectors.
The Scenes and the verbs are computed over the whole cor-
pus (154 passages), while the other categories are computed
on 148 passages (see text).

number of NPs, PPs and ADVPs in the first 10 pas-
sages in English and French, according to the orig-
inal guidelines of the English and French Tree-
banks (Bies et al., 1995; Abeillé et al., 2004). All
borderline cases are counted pessimistically, i.e.,
in the direction that maximizes the difference be-
tween the manual and automatic counts.

Results. Our results are given in Table 1. In
all cases the UCCA annotation is more stable
across annotations than the syntactic counterpart.
The relative similarity between the number of
PPs in the two languages, as reflected in the
relatively low vector distances of n(PP,Eng) and
n(PP,Fre), can be explained by the fact that the
presence of a preposition in French usually re-
quires a preposition in its English translation. PPs
are also less affected than NPs by nominaliza-
tions which often result in cross-linguistic syntac-
tic divergences8. Table 1 also presents the average
number of units/constituents of each type per pas-
sage, on the two right columns. The latter numbers
cannot be seen as a measure of stability, as an ex-
cessive number of units in one passage (relative to
the translation) may cancel out a deficient number
of units in another.

Concerning the correction term for the parsers’
biases, we find that in the first 10 passages, the
English parser overpredicted NPs by 12.2% and
underpredicted ADVPs by 3.8%. The same num-

8The low number of French adverb phrases is partially
due to the presence of some adverbial expressions that were
tagged as multi-word adverbs (MWADV). If we consider
MWADV as adverb phrases as well, the l1 value is 292 and
the l2 value is 33.05, which is still much higher than the dis-
tances for UCCA’s Adverbials (133 for l1 and 17.18 for l2).

ber of English PPs was obtained through manual
and automatic counting. In these passages the
French parser overpredicted NPs by 0.9% and PPs
by 11.4%. The average difference between the
results of the manual and automatic counting of
French adverb phrases was 0.5. The biases are in
an order of magnitude less than the relative differ-
ences in the l1 and l2 norms. Therefore, the stabil-
ity of UCCA relative to syntactic schemes is not a
result of the parsers’ biases.
7 Divergence Analysis and Discussion
The analysis in Section 6 provides a comparison
in terms of the number of units of specific types,
as opposed to corresponding numbers of syntac-
tic constituents. In this section we define a more
refined methodology (Section 7.1) for examining
not only the correspondence in the number of units
between the languages, but also the semantic cor-
respondence between units (Section 7.2 and 7.3).

7.1 Defining Divergences using UCCA
We define a correspondence between two UCCA
annotations to be a one-to-one mapping which
preserves UCCA’s categories and meaning. Con-
cretely, given a parallel corpus, a unit in one lan-
guage corresponds to a unit in the other language if
they have the same category and if the units have
the same meaning. More formally, we define a
sufficient subset of a unit u to be a subset of e that
contains its heads (the main relation in the case of
a Scene, or the Centers in the case of a non-Scene).
For example, “He ran” is a sufficient subset of the
Scene “He slowly ran” since it contains the main
relation “ran”. A unit e in English and a unit f
in French correspond to each other if they have
the same category and any of the three following
conditions hold: (1) e is a translation of f , (2) a
sufficient subset of e is a translation of f , or (3)
a sufficient subset of f is a translation of e. For
example, the English Scene “He slowly ran” cor-
responds to the French Scene “Il a couru” (“He
ran”) since condition (2) holds.

Given a UCCA category, some of the units of
that category are left unaligned between the two
sides of the parallel corpus, creating a UCCA di-
vergence. We classify UCCA divergences accord-
ing to their category, defining Scene, Participant
and Adverbial divergences. We distinguish be-
tween divergences in the English and French sides.

An example of a UCCA divergence from our
French-English corpus is: “of the ship victimized
by this new ramming” – “du navire victime de ce

17



Property Scene Div. Participant Div. Adverbial Div.
Eng. Fre. Eng. Fre. Eng. Fre.

Translation Study
1 Similar Translation Possible 65.18 58.33 50 35.29 70.83 50.0
2 Similar Source Possible 73.21 63.89 54.55 47.06 75.0 46.15
- None 18.75 31.94 38.64 47.06 16.67 42.31

Annotation Study
3 Conforming Analysis 41.96 54.16 72.72 73.53 25.0 53.85
4 Different Interpretation 10.71 1.39 25 23.53 8.33 7.69
– None 55.36 44.44 25 20.59 70.83 46.15

Semantic Effect of the Unaligned Unit
5 Additional Information 38.39 18.06 25.0 20.59 37.50 0.0
6 Tense Information 8.04 5.56 – – – –
7 Emphasis 19.64 8.33 31.82 26.47 41.67 3.85
– None 50.89 80.56 61.36 64.71 58.33 96.15

Table 2: Percentage of UCCA divergences according to their types (columns) that have certain properties (rows). All numbers
are percentages computed over all UCCA divergences of the given type. Note that the properties are not mutually exclusive
(see text). Participant and Adverbial divergences are only evaluated on passages with no Scene divergences.

nouvel abordage”. The French noun “victime” de-
scribes a result, while the corresponding English
“victimized” is an action. The unaligned Scene
is in English. It is therefore an English Scene
divergence. In the example “He slowly ran”/”Il
a couru” we saw above, there is no Scene diver-
gences but the English Adverbial “slowly” is un-
aligned, creating an English Adverbial divergence.

7.2 Number of UCCA Divergences
The analysis of Scene divergences is performed
manually over the entire set of passages. The anal-
ysis of Participant and Adverbial divergences is
restricted to passages with no Scene divergences,
i.e., with a perfect Scene to Scene correspondence
(57 passages of the total 154). This permits the
capture of lower level divergences which are not
just consequences of the divergences at the Scene
level.

We found a total of 112 English Scene diver-
gences and 72 French ones. This amounted to
92.3% of the English Scenes having a French cor-
respondent and 94.9% of the French Scenes hav-
ing an English correspondent. Only 25% of the
sentences (148 out of 583) contains any Scene di-
vergences.

Concerning Participant divergences, we found
that 694 out of 738 English Participants (94.0%)
have a correspondent in French. 694 of the 728
French Participants (95.3%) have a correspondent
in English. 100 out of the 124 English Adverbials
(80.6%) have a correspondent in French, and 100
out of the 126 Adverbials (79.4%) have a corre-
spondent in English. Thus, our results show low
rates of UCCA French-English divergences.

We also conduct a preliminary study into the
applicability of another semantic scheme, namely
AMR, to our domain. We annotate 10 sentence

pairs with AMR. Our analysis shows that AMR
conserves the main structures in most sentences (7
out of 10), and suggests that other semantic anno-
tations may also be structurally stable. However,
semantic roles, used in PropBank and AMR, are
often a source of divergences across the languages.

7.3 Properties of UCCA Divergences
In order to examine the causes and semantic types
of the different divergences, we manually classi-
fied each of them according to three groups of
properties, which are not mutually exclusive. The
results of the divergence analysis are presented in
Table 2.

Translation study: The properties in this group
investigate whether a given UCCA divergence can
be avoided using a different formulation closer to
the one used in the other language. This approach
evaluates the translator’s choices and creativity.
Properties #1 and #2 check whether different for-
mulations can be used in the source and target side
respectively, that would avoid the UCCA diver-
gence. Results show that many of the divergences
can be indeed ascribed to the specific translation
selected. For example, only less than a third of
the Scene divergences in each language could not
have been avoided through a different translation.
We thus speculate that in a more technical and less
literary corpus, the number of UCCA divergences
will be lower.

Annotation study: These properties study the
influence of the annotator’s preferences. Prop-
erty #3 (conforming analysis) covers cases where
UCCA allows another analysis which would have
avoided the divergence. While both annotations
are permitted, one of them is sometimes preferred,
to capture a nuance of meaning conveyed by one
language but not the other. Property #4 refers to

18



Replaced by Scene Div. Participant Div. Adverbial Div.
Eng. Fre. Eng. Fre. Eng. Fre.

Linker 6.25 1.39 – – 8.33 7.69
Ground 1.79 1.39 – – 4.17 3.85

Elaborator of Participant – – 0 2.94 4.17 19.23
Main Relation – – 20.45∗ 20.59∗ 25.0∗ 26.92∗

Parallel Scene – – 13.64 2.94 – –
Participant – – – – 4.17 11.54
Adverbial – – 6.82 2.94 – –

2 Participants – – 11.36 2.94 – –
2 Adverbials – – – – 4.17 0.0

None 91.96 98.21 47.73 67.65 50.0 30.77

Table 3: Analysis of divergences in terms of replacements by other UCCA categories. Columns correspond to divergence
types, while rows correspond to the category, as defined in Abend and Rappoport (2013b), of the replacing unit. All numbers
are given in percents. Percentage is taken over all UCCA divergences of the same type. ∗: In these cases, a Participant or an
Adverbial in one of the languages is included in the meaning of the main relation (Process or State) in the other language.

divergences resulting from different readings (am-
biguity) allowed by the text, where one meaning
was selected in one language and another in the
other. The results for this group (properties #3
and #4) reveal that most of the Scene and Ad-
verbial divergences could have been avoided had
a different annotation been selected. This sug-
gests that more restrictive annotation guidelines or
some post-annotation normalization can substan-
tially reduce the number of divergences.

Effect of the unaligned unit: Divergences are
often a result of a semantic or pragmatic difference
between the source text and its translation. Prop-
erty #5 addresses cases where additional informa-
tion is conveyed by the unaligned unit. Property
#6 is a sub-case of #5 that specifically addresses
tense information. Property #7 addresses cases
where the unaligned unit emphasizes some aspect
of meaning. The results show that many diver-
gences can be ascribed to a true semantic differ-
ence between the source and the translation.

Finally, in some cases, the UCCA divergences
simply replace one UCCA category with another
(Table 3). In these cases there are unaligned units
in the English and the French sides that roughly
correspond to one another semantically, but have
different UCCA categories. Cases of replacement
are common with Participant and Adverbial diver-
gences, but fairly rare in the case of Scene diver-
gences. In case of Adverbial divergences, many
of them result from including the meaning of an
Adverbial in one language in the meaning of the
main relation (Process or State) in the other lan-
guage. This can be seen as a generalization of
demotional/promotional divergences (Dorr, 1994)
discussed in Section 4.2. Annotating secondary
verbs (e.g., “begin” or “try”) as Adverbials instead
of being part of the main relation, as was done in
the latest version of UCCA’s guidelines, may con-

siderably reduce this kind of divergence.
To summarize, our study sheds light on the cir-

cumstances in which UCCA divergences arise and
suggests how many divergences can be avoided.
This study also contributes to the understanding
of the differences between original and translated
texts, which can improve MT (Lembersky et al.,
2013).

8 Conclusion
We showed that basic semantic structures can be
stably preserved across English-French transla-
tions. This means that semantic structures may be
more suitable to SMT systems than syntactic ones,
which exhibit well known divergence phenomena.
We used the UCCA scheme, but we expect these
advantages to generalize to other structured se-
mantic schemes. Future work will address the in-
tegration of UCCA into structure-based SMT ei-
ther by adding UCCA as features to phrase-based
and syntax-based systems, or by replacing exist-
ing syntactic structures with UCCA structures. We
also plan to investigate related tasks that would
benefit from UCCA’s stability like bilingual align-
ment and MT evaluation.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Roy Schwartz for help-
ful comments. This research was supported by the
Language, Logic and Cognition Center (LLCC)
at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem (for the
first author) and by the ERC Advanced Fellowship
249520 GRAMPLUS (for the second author).

References
Anne Abeillé, François Toussenel, and Martine

Chéradame, 2004. Corpus le Monde An-
notation en constituents Guide pour les cor-

19



recteurs. http://www.llf.cnrs.fr/Gens/
Abeille/guide-annot.pdf.

Omri Abend and Ari Rappoport. 2013a. UCCA: A
semantic-based grammatical annotation scheme. In
Proc. of IWCS-13, pages 1–12.

Omri Abend and Ari Rappoport. 2013b. Universal
Conceptual Cognitive Annotation (UCCA). In Proc.
of ACL-13, pages 228–238.

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley Framenet project. In Proc. of
ACL-COLING-98, pages 86–90.

Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina
Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneider. 2013. Abstract Meaning Representa-
tion for sembanking. In Proc. of Linguistic Annota-
tion Workshop and Interoperability with Discourse,
pages 178–186.

Mazrieh Bazrafshan and Daniel Gildea. 2013. Seman-
tic roles for string to tree machine translation. In
Proc. of ACL-13 (Short Paper), pages 419–423.

Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz, and Robert
MacIntyre, 1995. Bracketting Guidelines for Tree-
bank II Style Penn Treebank Project. Linguistic
Data Consortium.

Alexandra Birch, Barry Haddow, Ulrich Germann,
Maria Nadejde, Chrsitian Buck, and Philipp Koehn.
2013. The feasibility of HMEANT as a human MT
evaluation metric. In Proc. of the 8th Workshop on
SMT, ACL-13, pages 52–61.

Alexandra Birch. 2011. Reordering metrics for statis-
tical machine translation. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Edinburgh.

Aljoscha Burchardt, Katrin Erk, Anette Frank, An-
drea Kowalski, Sebastian Padó, and Manfred Pinkal.
2009. Using FrameNet for the semantic analysis
of German: Annotation, representation and automa-
tion. In Hans C. Boas (Herausgeber), editor, Multi-
lingual FrameNets in Computational Lexicography
- Methods and Applications, pages 209–244, New
York/Berlin. Mouton de Gruyter.

David Chiang. 2005. A hierarchical phrase-based
model for statistical machine translation. In Proc.
of ACL-05, pages 263–270.

Yuan Ding and Martha Palmer. 2004. Synchronous de-
pendency insertion grammars: a grammar formalism
for syntax based statistical MT. In Workshop on Re-
cent Advances in Dependency Grammars, COLING-
04.

Robert M.W. Dixon. 2010a. Basic Linguistic Theory:
Grammatical Topics, volume 2. Oxford University
Press.

Robert M.W. Dixon. 2010b. Basic Linguistic Theory:
Methodology, volume 1. Oxford University Press.

Robert M.W. Dixon. 2012. Basic Linguistic Theory:
Further Grammatical Topics, volume 3. Oxford
University Press.

Bonnie J. Dorr, Lisa Pearl, Rebecca Hwa, and Nizard
Habash. 2002. DUSTer: a method for unraveling
cross-language divergences for statistical word-level
alignment. In Proc.of AMTA-02, pages 31–43.

Bonnie J. Dorr, Eduard H. Hovy, and Lori S. Levin.
2004. Machine translation: interlingual methods. In
Encyclopedia of language and linguistics, 2nd edi-
tion. ms.939, Brown, Keith.

Bonnie Dorr, Rebecca Passonneau, David Farwell, Re-
becca Green, Nizar Habash, Stephen Helmreich, Ed-
ward Hovy, Lori Levin, Keith Miller, Teruko Mi-
tamura, Owen Rambow, and Advaith Siddharthan.
2010. Interlingual annotation of parallel text cor-
pora: A new framework for annotation and evalu-
ation. Natural Language Engineering, pages 197–
243.

Bonnie Dorr. 1990. Solving thematic divergences in
machine translation. In Proc. of ACL-90, pages 127–
134.

Bonnie J. Dorr. 1994. Machine translation diver-
gences: a formal description and proposed solution.
Computational linguistics, 20(4):597–635.

Shimon Edelman and Zach Solan. 2009. Ma-
chine translation using automatically inferred
construction-based correspondence and language
models. In Proc. of PACLIC-09, pages 654–661.

Minwei Feng, Wiwei Sun, and Hermann Ney. 2012.
Semantic cohesion model for phrase-based SMT.
Proc. of COLING-12, pages 867–878.

Jeffrey Flanigan, Sam Thomson, Jaime Carbonell,
Chris Dyer, and Noah A. Smith. 2014. A discrimi-
native graph-based parser for the Abstract Meaning
Representation. In Proc. of ACL-14, pages 1426–
1436.

Pascale Fung, Zhojun Wu, Yongsheng Yang, and Dekai
Wu. 2006. Learning of Chinese/English semantic
structure mapping. In Workshop on Spoken Lan-
guage Technology, IEEE/ACL-06, pages 230–233.

Pascale Fung, Zhaojun Wu, Yongsheng Yang, and
Dekai Wu. 2007. Learning bilingual semantic
frames: shallow semantic parsing vs. semantic role
projection. In Proc. of the 11th Conference on
Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine
Translation (TMI 2007), pages 75–84.

Francesca Gola. 2012. An analysis of translation
divergence patterns using PanLex translation pairs.
Master’s thesis, University of Washington.

Spence Green, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, John
Bauer, and Christopher D. Manning. 2011. Mul-
tiword expression identification with Tree Substitu-
tion Grammars: a parsing tour de force with French.
In Proc. of EMNLP-11, pages 725–735.

20



Roger Hawkins and Richard Towell. 2001. French
Grammar and Usage. McGraw-Hill, 2nd edition.

Bevan Jones, Jacob Andreas, Daniel Bauer,
Karl Moritz Hermann, and Kevin Knight. 2012.
Semantics-based machine translation with hy-
peredge replacement grammars. In Proc. of
COLING-12, pages 1359–1376.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Ac-
curate unlexicalized parsing. In Proc. of ACL-03,
pages 423–430.

Mikhail Kozhevnikov and Ivan Titov. 2013. Cross-
lingual transfer of semantic role labeling models. In
Proc. of ACL-13, pages 1190–1200.

Ronald W. Langacker. 2008. Cognitive Grammar: A
Basic Introduction. Oxford University Press, USA.

Gennadi Lembersky, Noam Ordan, and Shuly Wintner.
2013. Improving statistical machine translation by
adapting translation models to translationese. Com-
putational Linguistics, 39(4):999–1023.

Mike Lewis and Mark Steedman. 2013. Unsuper-
vised induction of cross-lingual semantic relations.
In Proc. of EMNLP-13, pages 681–692.

Junhui Li, Philip Resnik, and Hal Daumé III. 2013.
Modeling syntactic and semantic structures in hi-
erarchical phrase-based translation. In Proc. of
NAACL-HLT-13, pages 540–549.

Ding Liu and Daniel Gildea. 2010. Semantic role fea-
tures for machine translation. In Proc. of COLING-
10, pages 716–724.

Yang Liu, Qun Liu, and Shouxun Lin. 2006. Tree-
to-string alignment template for statistical machine
translation. In Proc. of COLING-ACL-06, pages
609–616.

Daniel Marcu, Wei Wang, Abdessamad Echihabi, and
Kevin Knight. 2006. SPMT: Statistical machine
translation with syntactified target language phrases.
In Proc. of EMNLP-06, pages 44–52.

Haitao Mi, Liang Huang, and Qun Liu. 2008. Forest-
based translation. In Proc. of ACL-08 HLT, pages
192–199.

Sergei Nirenburg. 1989. New developments in
knowledge-based machine translation. In Alatis
J.E., editor, Georgetown University Round Table on
Languages and Linguistics 1989: Language teach-
ing, testing, and technology: lessons from the past
with a view toward the future, pages 344–357.
Georgetown University Press.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The proposition bank: A annotated cor-
pus of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):149–159.

Tanja Samardžić, Lonneke van der Plas, Goljihan
Kashaeva, and Paola Merlo. 2010a. The scope
and the sources of variation in verbal predicates in
English and French. In Proc. of the 9th Interna-
tional Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic The-
ories, pages 199–211.

Tanja Samardžić, Lonneke van der Plas, Goljihan
Kashaeva, and Paola Merlo. 2010b. Variation in
verbal predicates in English and French. Generative
Grammar in Geneva, 6:109–135.

Elior Sulem. 2014. Integration of a cognitive anno-
tation into machine translation: Theoretical founda-
tions and bilingual corpus analysis. Master’s thesis,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher Manning,
and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part-of-
speech tagging with a cyclic dependency network.
In Proc. of HLT-NAACL-03, pages 252–259.

Hiroshi Uchida. 1987. ATLAS: Fujitsu machine
translation system. In Machine Translation Summit,
Japan.

Zdeňka Urešová, Ondřej Dušek, Eva Fučı́ková, Jan
Hajič, and Jana Šindlerová. 2015. Bilingual
English-Czech valency lexicon linked to a parallel
corpus. In Proc. of the 9th Linguistic Annotation
Workshop (The LAW IX), pages 124–128.

Lonneke van der Plas, Tanja Samardžić, and Paola
Merlo. 2010. Cross-lingual validity of PropBank
in the manual annotation of French. In Proc. of the
4th Linguistic Annotation Workshop (The LAW IV),
pages 113–117.

Jules Verne. 1870. Vingt Mille Lieues Sous les Mers.
J. Hetzel. http://fr.wikisource.org/
wiki/Vingt_mille_lieues_sous_les_
mers.

Jules Verne. 1991. Twenty Thousands Leagues Un-
der the Sea. Translated from the original French
by J.P. Walter. http://jv.gilead.org.il/
fpwalter.

Ralph Weischedel, Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw,
Jeff Kaufman, Michelle Franchini, Mohammed El-
Bachouti, Nianwen Xue, Martha Palmer, Jena D.
Hwang, Claire Bonial, Jinho Choi, Aous Mansouri,
Maha Foster, Abdel aati Hawwary, Mitchell Marcus,
Ann Taylor, Craig Greenberg, Eduard Hovy, Robert
Belvin, and Ann Houston. 2012. OntoNotes Re-
lease 5.0. Technical report, Linguistic Data Consor-
tium 2013T19.

Dekai Wu and Pascale Fung. 2009. Semantic roles for
SMT: a hybrid two-pass model. In Proc. of NAACL-
HLT-09 (Short Paper), pages 13–19.

Deyi Xiong, Min Zhang, and Haizhou Li. 2012. Mod-
eling the translation of predicate-argument structure
for SMT. In Proc. of ACL-12, pages 902–911.

21



Nianwen Xue, Ondřej Bojar, Jan Hajič, Martha Palmer,
Zdeňka Urešová, and Xiuhong Zhang. 2014. Not an
interlingua, but close: comparison of English AMRs
to Chinese and Czech. In Proc. of LREC-14, pages
1765–1772.

Feifei Zhai, Jiajun Zhang, Yu Zhou, and Chengquing
Zong. 2012. Machine translation by model-
ing predicate-argument structure transformation. In
Proc. of COLING-12, pages 3019–3036.

Min Zhang, Hongfei Jiang, Aiti Aw, Haizhou Li,
Chew Lim Tan, and Seng Li. 2008. A tree sequence
alignment-based tree-to-tree translation model. In
Proc. of ACL-08, pages 559–567.

22


