



















































Identifying Literary Texts with Bigrams


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 58–67,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identifying Literary Texts with Bigrams

Andreas van Cranenburgh*†
*Huygens ING

Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences
The Hague, The Netherlands

Andreas.van.Cranenburgh@huygens.knaw.nl

Corina Koolen†
†Institute for Logic, Language and Computation

University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands

C.W.Koolen@uva.nl

Abstract

We study perceptions of literariness in a set of
contemporary Dutch novels. Experiments with
machine learning models show that it is pos-
sible to automatically distinguish novels that
are seen as highly literary from those that are
seen as less literary, using surprisingly simple
textual features. The most discriminating fea-
tures of our classification model indicate that
genre might be a confounding factor, but a re-
gression model shows that we can also explain
variation between highly literary novels from
less literary ones within genre.

1 Introduction

The prose, plot, [the] characters, the se-
quence of the events, the thoughts that run
in Tony Websters mind, big revelation in
the end . . . They are all part of the big beau-
tiful ensemble that delivers an exception-
ally nice written novella. — (from a review
on Goodreads of Julian Barnes, A Sense of
an Ending)

However much debated the topic of literary quality
is, one thing we do know: we cannot readily pinpoint
what ‘literary’ means. Literary theory has insisted
for a number of years that it lies mostly outside of
the text itself (cf. Bourdieu, 1996), but this claim is
at odds with the intuitions of readers, of which the
quote above is a case in point. Publishers, critics, and
literary theorists all influence the opinions of readers,
but nevertheless, in explaining the sense of rapture

or awe they experience, they will choose textual el-
ements to refer to. In our project,1 we try to find
whether novels that are seen as literary have certain
textual characteristics in common, and if so, what
meaning we can assign to such commonalities. In
other words, we try to answer the following question:
are there particular textual conventions in literary
novels that contribute to readers judging them to be
literary?

In this paper, we show that there are indeed textual
characteristics that contribute to perceived literari-
ness. We use data from a large survey conducted in
the Netherlands in 2013, in which readers were asked
to rate novels that they had read on a scale of literari-
ness and of general quality (cf. section 2). We show
that using only simple bigram features (cf. section 3),
models based on Support Vector Machines can suc-
cessfully separate novels that are seen as highly liter-
ary from less literary ones (cf. section 4). This works
with both content and style related features of the text.
Interestingly, general quality proves harder to predict.
Interpretation of features shows that genre plays a
role in literariness (cf. section 5), but results from
regression models indicate that the textual features
also explain differences within genres.

2 Survey Data and Novels

During the summer of 2013, the Dutch reading pub-
lic was asked to give their opinion on 401 novels
published between 2007 and 2012 that were most
often sold or borrowed between 2009 and 2012. This
list was chosen to gather as many ratings as possible

1The Riddle of Literary Quality,
cf. http://literaryquality.huygens.knaw.nl

58



Original Translated

Thrillers 0 31
Literary thrillers 26 29
Literary fiction 27 33

Table 1: The number of books in each category. These
categories were assigned by the publishers.

(less popular novels might receive too few ratings for
empirical analysis), and to ensure that readers were
not influenced too much by common knowledge on
their canonisation (this is less likely for more recent
books). About 13,000 people participated in the sur-
vey. Participation was open to anyone. Participants
were asked, among other things, to select novels that
they had read and to rate them on two scales from
1–7: literariness (not very literary–very literary) and
general quality (bad–good). These two were distin-
guished because a book that is not literary can still
be considered to be a good book, because it is sus-
penseful or funny for instance; conversely, a novel
that is seen as literary can still be considered to be
bad (for instance if a reader does not find it engag-
ing), although we found no examples of this in our
results. No definition was given for either of the two
dimensions, in order not to influence the intuitive
judgments of participants. The notion of literariness
in this work is therefore a pretheoretical one, directly
reflecting the perceptions of the participants. In this
work we use the mean of the ratings of each book.

The dataset used in this paper contains a selec-
tion of 146 books from the 401 included in the sur-
vey; see Table 1 and 2. Both translated and original
(Dutch) novels are included. It contains three genres,
as indicated by the publisher: literary novels, literary
thrillers and thrillers. There are no Dutch thrillers
in the corpus. Note that these labels are ones that
the publishers have assigned to the novels. We will
not be using these labels in our experiments—save
for one where we interpret genre differences—we
base ourselves on reader judgements. In other words:
when we talk about highly literary texts, they (in the-
ory) could be part of any of these genres, as long as
readers judged them to be highly literary.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
literariness

0

10

20

30

40

50

Figure 1: A histogram of the mean literary ratings.

3 Experimental setup

Three aspects of a machine learning model can be
distinguished: the target of its predictions, the data
which predictions are based on, and the kind of model
and predictions it produces.

3.1 Machine Learning Tasks
We consider two tasks:

1. Literariness

2. Bad/good (general quality)

The target of the classification model is a binary
classification whether a book is within the 25 %
judged to be the most literary, or good. Figure 1
shows a histogram of the literary judgments. This
cutoff divides the two peaks in the histogram, while
ensuring that the number of literary novels is not too
small.

A more difficult task is to try to predict the average
rating for literariness of each book. This not only
involves the large differences between thrillers and
literary novels, but also smaller differences within
these genres.

3.2 Textual Features
The features used to train the classifier are based on
a bag-of-words model with relative frequencies. In-
stead of single words we use word bigrams. Bigrams
are occurrences of two consecutive words observed
in the texts. The bigrams are restricted to those that
occur in between 60 % and 90 % of texts used in the
model, to avoid the sparsity of rare bigrams on the
one hand, and the most frequent function bigrams on

59



Original Translated

literature Bernlef, Dis, Dorrestein, Durlacher,
Enquist, Galen, Giphart, Hart, Heijden,
Japin, Kluun, Koch, Kroonenberg,
Launspach, Moor, Mortier, Rosenboom,
Scholten, Siebelink, Verhulst, Winter.

Auel, Avallone, Baldacci, Binet, Blum, Cronin,
Donoghue, Evans, Fragoso, George, Gilbert,
Giordano, Harbach, Hill, Hodgkinson, Hosseini,
Irving, James, Krauss, Lewinsky, Mastras,
McCoy, Pick, Picoult, Rosnay, Ruiz Zafn,
Sansom, Yalom.

literary
thrillers

Appel, Dijkzeul, Janssen, Noort, Pauw,
Terlouw, Verhoef, Vermeer, Visser, Vlugt

Coben, Forbes, French, Gudenkauf, Hannah,
Haynes, Kepler, Koryta, Lackberg, Larsson,
Lckberg, Nesbo, Patterson, Robotham,
Rosenfeldt, Slaughter, Stevens, Trussoni,
Watson.

thrillers Baldacci, Clancy, Cussler, Forsyth, Gerritsen,
Hannah, Hoag, Lapidus, McFadyen, McNab,
Patterson, Roberts, Rose.

Table 2: Authors in the dataset

the other. No limit is placed on the total number of
bigram features. We consider two feature sets:

content bigrams: Content words contribute mean-
ing to a sentence and are thus topic related; they
consist of nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs.
Content bigrams are extracted from the original
tokenized text, without further preprocessing.

style bigrams: Style bigrams consist of function
words, punctuation, and part-of-speech tags of
content words (similar to Bergsma et al. 2012).
In contrast with content words, function words
determine the structure of sentences (determin-
ers, conjunctions, prepositions) or express re-
lationships (pronouns, demonstratives). Func-
tion words are identified by a selection of part-
of-speech tags and a stop word list. Function
words are represented with lemmas, e.g., auxil-
iary verbs appear in uninflected form. Lemmas
and part-of-speech tags were automatically as-
signed by the Alpino parser.2

3.3 Models

All machine learning experiments are performed with
scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011). The classi-
fier is a linear Support Vector Machine (SVM) with

2Cf. http://www.let.rug.nl/vannoord/alp/Alpino/

regularization tuned on the training set. The cross-
validation is 10-fold and stratified (each fold has a
distribution of the target class that is similar to that
of the whole data set).

For regression the same setup of texts and features
is used as for the classification experiments, but the
machine learning model is a linear Support Vector
Regression model.

4 Results

Before we train machine learning models, we con-
sider a dimensionality reduction of the data. Figure 2
shows a non-negative matrix factorization of the style
bigrams. In other words, this is a visualization of a
decomposition of the bigram counts, without taking
into account whether novels are literary or not (i.e.,
an unsupervised model). Notice that most of the non-
literary novels (red) cluster together in one corner,
while the literary books (blue) show more variation.
When content bigrams are used, a similar cluster of
non-literary books emerges, but interestingly, this
cluster only consists of translated works. With style
bigrams this does not occur.

This result seems to suggest that non-literary books
are easier to recognize than literary books, since the
literary novels show more variation. However, note
that this decomposition present just one way to sum-
marize and visualize the data. The classification

60



0.05
0.00

0.05
0.10

0.15
0.20

0.25
0.30

0.35

0.1
0.0

0.1
0.2

0.3
0.4

0.5

0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

rest
top 25% lit

Figure 2: Non-negative matrix factorization based on style bigrams (literary novels are the blue triangles).

Features Literary Bad/good

Content bigrams 90.4 63.7
Style bigrams 89.0 63.0

Table 3: Classification accuracy (percentage correct).

model, when trained specifically to recognize liter-
ary and non-literary texts, can still identify particular
discriminating features.

4.1 Classification
Table 3 shows the evaluation of the classification
models. The content bigrams perform better than the
style bigrams. The top-ranked bigram features of the
model for literary classification are shown in Table 5.

If we look only at the top 20 bigrams that are most
predictive of literary texts according to our model and
plot how often they occur in each genre as specified
by the publishers, we see that these bigrams occur
significantly more often in literary texts; cf. the plot
in Figure 4. This indicates that there are features
specific to literary texts, despite the variance among
literary texts shown in Figure 2.

When trained on the bad/good dimension, the clas-
sification accuracy is around 60 %, compared to
around 90 % for literariness, regardless of whether

Features Literary Bad/Good

Content bigrams 61.3 (0.65) 33.5 (0.49)
Style bigrams 57.0 (0.67) 22.2 (0.52)

Table 4: Evaluation of the regression models; R2 scores
(percentage of variation explained), root mean squared
error in parentheses (1–7).

the features are about content or style bigrams. This
means that the bad/good judgments are more difficult
to predict from these textual features. This is not due
to the variance in the survey responses themselves. If
literariness were a more clearly defined concept for
the survey participants than general quality, we would
expect there to be less consensus and thus more vari-
ance on the latter dimension. But this is not what
we find; in fact the mean of the standard deviations
of the bad/good responses is lower than for the liter-
ariness responses (1.08 vs. 1.33). Rather, it is likely
that the bad/good dimension depends on higher-level,
plot-related characteristics, or text-extrinsic social
factors.

4.2 Regression

The regression results cannot be evaluated with a
simple ‘percentage correct’ accuracy metric, because

61



1 2 3 4 5 6 7
actual reader judgments

1

2

3

4

5

6

7
pr

ed
ic

te
d 

re
ad

er
 ju

dg
m

en
ts

r2_score = 0.61

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
actual reader judgments

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

pr
ed

ic
te

d 
re

ad
er

 ju
dg

m
en

ts

r2_score = 0.57

Figure 3: Regression results for predicting literary judgments with content bigrams (left) and style bigrams (right).

0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30

literary, Dutch

literary thriller, Dutch

literary, translated

literary thriller, translated

thriller, translated

Figure 4: A barplot of the number of occurrences of the
top 20 most important literary features (cf. Table 5) across
the genres given by the publisher (error bars show 95 %
confidence interval).

it is not feasible to predict a continuous variable ex-
actly. Instead we report the coefficient of determi-
nation (R2). This metric captures the percentage of
variation in the data that the model explains by con-
trasting the errors of the model predictions with those
of the null model which always predicts the mean of
the data. R2 can be contrasted with the root mean
squared error, also known as the standard error of the
estimate, or the norm of residuals, which measures
how close the predictions are to the target on average.
In contrast with R2, this metric has the same scale as
the original data, and lower values are better.

3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5
actual reader judgments

3.5

4.0

4.5

5.0

5.5

6.0

6.5
pr

ed
ic

te
d 

re
ad

er
 ju

dg
m

en
ts

genre
literary thrillers
literature
thrillers

Figure 5: Regression results for predicting literary judg-
ments with content bigrams, with data points distinguished
by the publisher-assigned genre.

The regression scores are shown in Table 4. Pre-
dicting the bad/good scores is again more difficult.
The regression results for literariness predictions are
visualized in Figure 3. Each data point represents a
single book. The x-axes show the literariness ratings
from survey participants, while the y-axes show the
predictions from the model. The diagonal line shows

62



what the perfect prediction would be, and the further
the data points (novels) are from this line, the greater
the error. On the sides of the graphs the histograms
show the distribution of the literariness scores. No-
tice that the model based on content bigrams mirrors
the bimodal nature of the literariness ratings, while
the histogram of predicted literariness scores based
on style bigrams shows only a single peak.

Figure 5 shows the same regression results with
the publisher-assigned genres highlighted. The graph
shows that predicting the literariness of thrillers is
more difficult than predicting the literariness of the
more literary rated novels. Most thrillers have ratings
between 3.4 and 4.3, while the model predicts a wider
range of ratings between 3.3 and 5.0; i.e., the model
predicts more variation than actually occurs. For the
literary novels both the predicted and actual judg-
ments show a wide range between 4.5 and 6.5. The
actual judgments of the literary novels are about 0.5
points higher than the predictions. However, there
are novels at both ends of this range for which the
ratings are well predicted. Judging by the dispersion
of actual and predicted ratings of the literary nov-
els compared to the thrillers, the model accounts for
more of the variance within the ratings of literary
novels.

It should be noted that while in theory 100 % is
the perfect score, the practical ceiling is much lower
due to the fact that the model is trying to predict
an average rating—and because part of the variation
in literariness will only be explainable with richer
features, text-extrinsic sociological influences, or ran-
dom variation.

5 Interpretation

As the experiments show, there are textual elements
that allow a machine learning model to distinguish
between works that are perceived as highly literary as
opposed to less literary ones—at least for this dataset
and survey. We now take a closer look at the features
and predictions of the literary classification task to
interpret its success.

5.1 Content

When we look at the forty bigrams that perform best
and worst for the literary novels (cf. Table 5), we can
identify a few tendencies.

The book, a book, a letter, and to write are also
part of the most important features, as well as the
bar, a cigarette, and the store. This suggests a cer-
tain pre-digital situatedness, as well as a reflection on
the writing process. Interestingly enough, in contrast
to the book and letter that are most discriminating,
negative indicators contain words related to modern
technology: mobile phone and the computer. Inspec-
tion of the novels shows that the literary novels are
not necessarily set in the pre-digital age, but that they
have fewer markers of recent technology. This might
be tied to the adage in literary writing that good writ-
ing should be ‘timeless’—which in practice means
that at the very least a novel should not be too obvi-
ous in relating its settings to the current day. It could
also show a hint of nostalgia, perhaps connected to a
romantic image of the writer.

In the negative features, we find another time-
related tendency. The first is indications of time—
little after, and in Dutch ‘tot nu’ and ‘nu toe’, which
are part of the phrase ‘tot nu toe’ (so far or up until
now), minutes after and ten minutes; another indi-
cator that awareness of time, albeit in a different
sense, is not part of the ‘literary’ discourse. Indica-
tors of location are the building, the garage/car park,
and the location, showing a different type of setting
than the one described above. We also see indica-
tors of homicide: the murder, and the investigation.
Some markers of colloquial speech are also found in
the negative markers: for god’s sake and thank you,
which aligns with a finding of Jautze et al (2013),
where indicators of colloquial language were found
in low-brow literature.

It is possible to argue, that genre is a more im-
portant factor in this classification than literary style.
However, we state that this is not particular to this
research, and in fact unavoidable. The discussion
of how tight genre and literariness are connected,
has been held for a long time in literary theory and
will probably continue for years to come. Although
it is not impossible for so called ‘genre novels’ to
gain literary status (cf. Margaret Atwood’s scifi(-like)
work for instance—although she objects to such a
classification; Hoby 2013), it is the case that certain
topics and genres are considered to be less literary
than others. The fact that the literary novels are ap-
parently not recognised by proxy, but on an internal
coherence (cf. section 4), does make an interesting

63



weight literary features, content weight non-literary features, content

12.1 de oorlog the war -6.1 de moeder the mother
8.1 het bos the forest -5.1 keek op looked up
8.1 de winter the winter -4.9 mijn hoofd my head
6.6 de dokter the doctor -4.9 haar moeder her mother
5.8 zo veel so much -4.7 mijn ogen my eyes
4.8 nog altijd yet still -4.7 ze keek she looked
4.5 de meisjes the girls -4.5 mobiele telefoon mobile telephone
4.3 zijn vader his father -4.2 de moord the murder
4.0 mijn dochter my daughter -4.0 even later a while later
3.9 het boek the book -3.8 nu toe (until) now
3.8 de trein the train -3.5 zag ze she saw
3.7 hij hem he him -3.4 ik voel I feel
3.7 naar mij at me -3.3 mijn man my husband
3.5 zegt dat says that -3.2 tot haar to her
3.5 het land the land -3.2 het gebouw the building
3.5 een sigaret a cigarette -3.2 liep naar walked to
3.4 haar vader her father -3.1 we weten we know
3.4 een boek a book -3.1 enige wat only thing
3.2 de winkel the shop -3.1 en dus and so
3.1 elke keer each time -3.0 in godsnaam in god’s name

weight literary features, style weight non-literary features, style

21.8 ! WW ! VERB , -13.8 nu toe until now
20.5 u , you (FORMAL) , -13.4 en dus and so
18.0 haar haar her her -13.4 achter me behind me
16.5 SPEC : NAME : -13.2 terwijl ik while I
15.4 worden ik become I -13.1 tot nu until now

Table 5: The top 20 most important content features and top 5 most important style features of literary (left), and
non-literary texts (right), respectively.

case for the literary novel to be a genre on its own.
Computational research into genre differences has
proven that there are certain markers that allow for a
computer to make an automated distinction between
them, but it also shows that interpretation is often
complex (Moretti, 2005; Allison et al., 2011; Jautze
et al., 2013). Topic modelling might give some more
insight into our findings.

5.2 Style
A stronger case against genre determining the classifi-
cation is the success of the function words in the task.
Function words are not directly related to themes
or topics, but reflect writing style in a more general
sense. Still, the results do not rule out the existence
of particular conventions of writing style in genres,

but in this case the distinction between literariness
and genre becomes more subtle. Function words are
hard to interpret manually, but we do see in the top 20
(Table 5 shows the top 5) that the most discriminat-
ing features of less literary texts contain more ques-
tion marks (and thus questions), and more numerals
(‘TW’)—which can possibly be linked to the discrim-
inative qualities of time-indications in the content
words. Some features in the less-literary set appear
to show more colloquial language again, such as ik
mezelf (‘I myself’), door naar (‘through/on to’; an
example can be found in the sentence ‘Heleen liep
door naar de keuken.’, which translates to ‘Heleen
walked on to the kitchen’, a sound grammatical con-
struction in Dutch, but perhaps not a very aesthet-

64



ically pleasing one). A future close reading of the
original texts will give more information on this intu-
ition.

In future work, more kinds of features should be
applied to the classification of literature to get more
insight. Many aspects could be studied, such as read-
ability, syntax, semantics, discourse relations, and
topic coherence. Given a larger data set, the factors
genre and translation/original can be controlled for.

The general question which needs to be answered
is whether a literary interpretation of a computational
model is even possible. The material to work with
(the features), consist of concise sets of words or
even part-of-speech tags, which are not easy to in-
terpret manually; and they paint only a small part of
the picture. The workings of the machine learning
model remain largely hidden to the interpreter. This
is an instance of the more general problem of the
interpretability of results in computational humani-
ties (Bod, 2013). In the specific case of literature, we
can observe that readers of literature follow a similar
pattern: literature can be recognized and appreciated,
but it is hard to explain what makes texts literary, let
alone to compose a highly literary work.

5.3 Good and bad predictions
In Figure 5, we can see both outliers and novels that
are well predicted by the regression model. Here we
discuss a few and suggest why the model does or
does not account for their perceived literariness.

Emma Donoghue - Room A literary novel that is
rated as highly literary (5.5), but with a lower
prediction (3.8). This may be because this novel
is written from the perspective of a child, with a
correspondingly limited vocabulary.

Elizabeth Gilbert - Eat, Pray Love A novel with a
low literariness rating (3.5), but a high predic-
tion (5.2) by the model. This novel may be rated
lower due to the perception that it is a novel for
women, dealing with new age themes, giving it
a more specific audience than the other novels
in the dataset.

Charles Lewinsky - Melnitz A novel that is both
rated (5.7) and predicted (5.7) as highly literary.
This novel chronicles the history of a Jewish
family including the events of the second world

war. This subject, and the plain writing style
makes it stand out from the other novels.

Erwin Mortier - While the Gods Were Sleeping
The most highly rated (6.6) literary novel in
the dataset, with a high prediction (5.7). A
striking feature of this novel is that it consists
of short paragraphs and short, often single
line sentences. It features a lot of metaphors,
analogies, and generally a poetic writing style.
This novel also deals with war, but the writing
style contrasts with Lewinsky, which may
explain why the model’s prediction is not as
close for this novel.

6 Related Work

Previous work on classification of literature has fo-
cused on authorship attribution (e.g., Hoover, 2003;
van Cranenburgh, 2012) and popularity (Ashok et al.,
2013). The model of Ashok et al. (2013) classifies
novels from Project Gutenberg as being successful
or not using stylometric features, where success is
based on their download counts. Since many of the
most downloaded novels are classics, their results
indirectly relate to literariness. However, in our data
set all texts are among the most popular books in
a fixed time span (cf. section 2), whereas the less
successful novels in their data set differ much more
in popularity from the successful novels. To the best
of our knowledge, our work is the first to directly
predict the literariness of texts in a computational
model.

There is also work on the classification of the qual-
ity of non-fiction texts. Bergsma et al. (2012) work
on scientific articles with a similar approach to ours,
but including syntactic features in addition to bag-of-
words features. Louis and Nenkova (2013) present re-
sults on science journalism by modelling what makes
articles interesting and well-written.

Salganik et al. (2006) present an experimental
study on the popularity of music. They created an
artificial “music market” to study the relationship be-
tween quality and success of music, with or without
social influence as a factor. They found that social
influence increases the unpredictability of popularity
in relation to quality. A similar effect likely plays a
role in the reader judgments of the survey.

65



7 Conclusion

Our experiments have shown that literary novels
share significant commonalities, as evidenced by the
performance of machine learning models. It is still
a challenge to understand what these literary com-
monalities consist of, since a large number of word
features interact in our models. General quality is
harder to predict than literariness.

Features related to genre (e.g., the war in literary
novels and the homicide in thrillers) indicate that
genre is a possible confounding factor in the classifi-
cation, but we find evidence against the notion that
the results are solely due to genre. One aspect that
stood out in our analysis of content features, which
is not necessarily restricted to genre (or which might
indicate that the literary novel is a genre in and of
itself), is that setting of space and time rank high
among the discriminating features. This might be
indicative of a ‘timeless quality’ that is expected of
highly literary works (where words as book and letter
are discriminative)—as opposed to more contempo-
rary settings in less literary novels (computer and
mobile phone). Further study is needed to get more
insight into these themes and to what extent these are
related to genre differences or a literary writing style.

The good performance of style features shows the
importance of writing style and indicates that the clas-
sification is not purely based on topics and themes.
Although genres may also have particular writing
styles and thus associated style features, the fact that
good results are obtained with two complementary
feature sets suggests that the relation between liter-
ariness and text features is robust.

Finally, the regression on content and function
words shows that the model accounts for more than
just genre distinctions. The predictions within genres
are good enough to show that it is possible to distin-
guish highly literary works from less literary works.
This is a result that merits further investigation.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Karina van Dalen-Oskam, Rens
Bod, and Kim Jautze for commenting on drafts, and
to the anonymous reviewers for useful feedback. This
work is part of The Riddle of Literary Quality, a
project supported by the Royal Netherlands Academy
of Arts and Sciences through the Computational Hu-

manities Program.

References

Sarah Danielle Allison, Ryan Heuser, Matthew Lee
Jockers, Franco Moretti, and Michael Witmore.
2011. Quantitative formalism: an experiment.
Stanford Literary Lab pamphlet. http://litlab.
stanford.edu/LiteraryLabPamphlet1.pdf.

Vikas Ashok, Song Feng, and Yejin Choi. 2013.
Success with style: Using writing style to pre-
dict the success of novels. In Proceedings of
EMNLP, pages 1753–1764. http://aclweb.
org/anthology/D13-1181.

Shane Bergsma, Matt Post, and David Yarowsky.
2012. Stylometric analysis of scientific articles.
In Proceedings of NAACL, pages 327–337. http:
//aclweb.org/anthology/N12-1033.

Rens Bod. 2013. Who’s afraid of patterns?: The
particular versus the universal and the meaning of
humanities 3.0. BMGN – Low Countries Histori-
cal Review, 128(4). http://www.bmgn-lchr.nl/
index.php/bmgn/article/view/9351/9785.

Pierre Bourdieu. 1996. The rules of art: Genesis and
structure of the literary field. Stanford University
Press.

Hermione Hoby. 2013. Margaret Atwood: inter-
view. The Telegraph, Aug 18. http://www.
telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/10246937/
Margaret-Atwood-interview.html.

David L. Hoover. 2003. Frequent collocations and
authorial style. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
18(3):261–286. http://llc.oxfordjournals.
org/content/18/3/261.abstract.

Kim Jautze, Corina Koolen, Andreas van Cranen-
burgh, and Hayco de Jong. 2013. From high heels
to weed attics: a syntactic investigation of chick
lit and literature. In Proc. of workshop Compu-
tational Linguistics for Literature, pages 72–81.
http://aclweb.org/anthology/W13-1410.

Annie Louis and Ani Nenkova. 2013. What makes
writing great? first experiments on article qual-
ity prediction in the science journalism domain.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 1:341–352. http://aclweb.org/
anthology/Q13-1028.

66



Franco Moretti. 2005. Graphs, maps, trees: abstract
models for a literary history. Verso.

Fabian Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort,
V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel,
P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Van-
derplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher,
M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-learn:
Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.

Matthew J. Salganik, Peter Sheridan Dodds, and Dun-
can J. Watts. 2006. Experimental study of inequal-
ity and unpredictability in an artificial cultural mar-
ket. Science, 311(5762):854–856.

Andreas van Cranenburgh. 2012. Literary authorship
attribution with phrase-structure fragments. In Pro-
ceedings of CLFL, pages 59–63. Revised version:
http://andreasvc.github.io/clfl2012.pdf.

67


