



















































Converting an English-Swedish Parallel Treebank to Universal Dependencies


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 10–19,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

Converting an English-Swedish Parallel Treebank to Universal
Dependencies

Lars Ahrenberg
Linköping University

Department of Computer and Information Science
lars.ahrenberg@liu.se

Abstract

The paper reports experiences of automat-
ically converting the dependency analy-
sis of the LinES English-Swedish parallel
treebank to universal dependencies (UD).
The most tangible result is a version of
the treebank that actually employs the re-
lations and parts-of-speech categories re-
quired by UD, and no other. It is also
more complete in that punctuation marks
have received dependencies, which is not
the case in the original version. We discuss
our method in the light of problems that
arise from the desire to keep the syntactic
analyses of a parallel treebank internally
consistent, while available monolingual
UD treebanks for English and Swedish di-
verge somewhat in their use of UD annota-
tions. Finally, we compare the output from
the conversion program with the existing
UD treebanks.

1 Introduction

Universal Dependency Annotation (UD) is an ini-
tiative taken to increase returns for investments in
multilingual language technology (McDonald et
al., 2013). The idea is that a common set of de-
pendency relations, and a common set of defini-
tions and guidelines for their application, will bet-
ter support the development of a common cross-
lingual infrastructure for the building of language
technology tools such as parsers and translation
systems.

UD actually comprises more than just depen-
dency relations. To be compatible and possible
to merge in a common collection, the resources
for a language should use the same principles of
tokenization, and common inventories of part-of-
speech tags and morphological features. UD ad-
vocates a conservative approach to tokenization,

which treats punctuation marks and some clitics
as separate tokens, but treats all spaces as token
separators. Thus, multiword expressions are not
recognized as such until the dependency layer.

For parts-of-speech a tag set comprising 17 dif-
ferent tags only is recommended with a basis in
the twelve categories proposed by (Petrov et al.,
2012). For an overview, see Table 2 in section 3.

LinES (Ahrenberg, 2007) is a parallel treebank
currently comprising seven sub-corpora (see Ta-
ble 1). Future plans for LinES include a substan-
tial increase in the amount of data included. This
would also entail that new contents would not, as
a rule, be manually reviewed. Harmonizing its
markup with that of other treebanks would make
it possible to develop more accurate taggers and
parsers for it, and thus increase its usefulness as a
resource. Conversely, the monolingual treebanks
can be used to augment other treebanks for En-
glish or Swedish as training data for parsers and
taggers.

Source Segments EN tkns SE tkns
Access help 595 10451 8898
Auster 788 13512 13337
Bellow 604 10310 9964
Conrad 622 13063 12092
Europarl 594 9334 8715
Gordimer 756 15181 15778
Rowlings 605 10299 10635
Total 4564 82150 79419

Table 1: LinES corpora before conversion.

The primary aim of this work is the creation of a
UD-compatible version of LinES, LinES-UD. As
far as possible this should happen through auto-
matic conversion. The hypothesis is that LinES
markup is sufficient to support automatic conver-
sion to universal dependencies for both languages
by the same process.

10



The paper is organised as follows. The next
section reports related work. Section 3 presents
the primary differences between the design of the
LinES treebank and the UD framework. In section
4 we describe our approach to develop the con-
version program, and in section 5 we present and
discuss the results. Section 6, finally, states the
conclusions.

2 Related work

Universal Dependencies is a project involving sev-
eral research groups around the world with a com-
mon interest in treebank development, multilin-
gual parsing and cross-lingual learning (Univer-
sal dependencies, 2015). The annotation scheme
for dependency relations has its roots in univer-
sal Stanford dependencies (de Marneffe and Man-
ning, 2008; de Marneffe et al., 2014) and the
project also embraces a slightly extended version
of the Google universal tag set for parts-of-speech
(Petrov et al., 2012). At the time of writing tree-
banks using UD are available for download from
the LINDAT/CLARIN Repository Home for 18
different languages (Agić et al., 2015).

The first release of UD treebanks included six
languages. Two of these, the ones for English
and Swedish, were created by automatic conver-
sion (McDonald et al., 2013). The English tree-
bank used the Stanford parser (v1.6.8) on the WSJ
section of the Penn treebank for this purpose.
The Swedish Talbanken treebank was converted
by a set of deterministic rules, and the outcome
is claimed to have a high precision “due to the
fine-grained label set used in the Swedish Tree-
bank” (p. 93). The treebanks are divided into
three sections for the purposes of parser develop-
ment, a training part, a development part, and a test
part. We refer to them in the sequel as the English
UD Treebank (EUD) and the Swedish UD Tree-
bank (SUD), respectively, using suffixes 1.0 and
1.1 to differentiate the versions. They have been
used extensively in the current project for compar-
isons. In the most recent release (1.1) some cor-
rections have been made to both treebanks. As far
as the syntactic annotation is concerned, the cor-
rections affect less than 1% of the tokens in EUD,
and about 4% of the tokens in SUD. Most of the
development work on LinES-UD was made with
the previous versions as targets, but the compar-
isons reported in section 5 refers to the versions
1.1.

Several other UD treebanks have been devel-
oped as a result of automatic conversion, e.g. for
Italian (Bosco et al., 2013), Russian (Lipenkova
and Souček, 2014), and Finnish (Pyysalo et al.,
2015). The process used here for LinES is quite
similar to these works with the special twist that
here two parallel treebanks are converted simul-
taneously. Thus, the approach is rule-based, al-
though the rules are not available in an external
rule format, but implemented as conditions and ac-
tions in a Perl script. Also, unlike these works no
new language-specific UD-scheme is developed as
part of this work, as such schemes exist for English
and Swedish already.

3 Differences in design

The original LinES design has several differences
from the UD treebanks. The differences pertain-
ing to parts of speech are fairly small, while differ-
ences in sentence segmentation, tokenization and
dependency analysis are larger.

We first observe that parallel treebanks are often
created for different purposes than mono-lingual
treebanks. UD treebanks have parser development
as a primary goal, while the most important pur-
pose of the LinES treebank is as a resource for
studying the strategies of human translators and
for testing properties that are sometimes claimed
to be typical for translated texts. One way to de-
scribe the relation between a translation and its
source text is by trying to quantify the amount of
structural changes, or shifts, that have been per-
formed. Such a task is obviously helped by using
the same annotation scheme for both languages
and the demands on consistency in application of
the categories are high. A measure of structural
change should reflect real differences; if they in-
stead are introduced by alternative schemes of to-
kenization or by the use of different categories or
definitions, the value of the measure is reduced.

Some of the differences in the available English
and Swedish UD treebanks will be detailed in sec-
tion 4. Here we only note that they pose prob-
lems for a developer of parallel English-Swedish
treebanks. As just said, in a parallel treebank
we would like to see parallel constructions be
annotated in the same way for both languages,
but if they are not annotated this way in the
(usually much larger) available monolingual tree-
banks, the increase in parsing consistency that we
expect from training the parser on a union of UD-

11



treebanks, will not be as large as it could be.

3.1 Sentence segmentation

The largest syntactic unit in LinES is a translation
unit. This means that it should correspond under
translation to a similar unit in the other language.
When the translator has chosen to translate one
English sentence by two Swedish sentences, or
two English sentences by one Swedish sentence,
LinES treats the two sentences as a single sen-
tential unit sharing a single root token. From the
monolingual perspective there are two sentences,
each with its own root, but from the bilingual
perspective there is a single unit and a single
root. The two sentences can be analysed as either
being coordinated or one being subordinated to
the other; in the first case one token that would be
taken as the root from the monolingual perspective
is assigned a conjoining relation to the other root,
while in the second case the dependency would be
adverbial. An example of a 1-2 alignment is given
below, where the root verb of the second Swedish
sentence, skedde corresponding to ’was’ is seen
as conjoined to the root verb of the first sentence,
varit, corresponding to ’been’.

EN: As Olivia said, it ought to have been a
sad-feeling place but it wasn’t; there was instead
a renewal: ...
SE: Det borde, som Olivia brukade säga, ha varit
ett dystert ställe men var det inte. Tvärtom skedde
en förnyelse: ...1

We note also that some punctuation marks such
as the colon or the semi-colon are sometimes
treated as sentence delimiters and sometimes not,
even in monolingual treebanks. For example, in
the English UD corpus the colon sometimes occur
in mid-sentence and at other times at the end of
sentences.

3.2 Tokenization

LinES treats a number of fixed multiword expres-
sions from closed parts-of-speech categories as
single tokens. English examples are mostly com-
plex prepositions and adverbs such as because of,
after all, instead of, in spite of while Swedish also
has multiword determiners such as den här (this)

1The source text is ’A Guest of Honor’ by Nadine
Gordimer, translation into Swedish by Magnus K:son Lind-
berg.

and den där (that). Although they are not very nu-
merous, some 10% of all sentences would contain
a multiword token. As the tokenization principles
for UD favours a strict adherence to spaces as sep-
arators, instead signalling multiword expressions
in the dependency annotation, the conversion to
UD must retokenize the data.

The treatment of clitics in LinES are largely the
same as in UD with one exception, the English s-
genitive. This is treated as a separate token in the
English UD treebank, but in LinES it is taken as a
morpheme, both for English and Swedish. While
arguments can be given to treat the s-genitive as
a phrasal clitic also in Swedish, it is usually not
done, because it is harder to detect in Swedish than
in English.

In LinES hyphens are regarded as token-internal
characters. This is not the case in English UD,
where many hyphens are treated as separate to-
kens.

3.3 Parts of speech

The inventory of parts-of-speech in LinES com-
prises 23 categories. Many of them correspond
more or less directly to those used in UD, but
there are a few differences. See Table 2 for an
alignment of LinES part-of-speech labels to UD
labels. The most problematic difference is that
LinES makes a differentiation between verbs and
participles, whereas UD distributes participles on
the categories VERB, ADJ and NOUN. For the
current conversion program we have chosen a sim-
ple mapping that does not consider all possible
variation to determine what it should be converted
to. When used as an attribute it is interpreted as an
adjective, but in all other cases it is categorized as
a verb.

Auxiliaries, including forms of the verbs be and
its Swedish counterpart vara, are another issue. In
LinES there is no distinct part-of-speech for aux-
iliaries; instead the distinction between auxiliaries
and ordinary verbs is made on the basis of whether
they participate in a verbal chain or not.

A third issue is the distinction between deter-
miners and pronouns. In LinES a word is clas-
sified as a determiner only when it introduces a
noun phrase. In UD, however, the distinction is
not made in the same way. Rather than identifying
the individual words that need re-categorization,
we have kept the distinctions as in LinES.

12



POS EUD SUD LinES
ADJ Yes Yes A, PCP
ADP Yes Yes PREP, POSP
ADV Yes Yes ADV
AUX Yes No V
CONJ Yes Yes CC, CCI
DET Yes Yes DET, A, PRON
INTJ Yes Yes IJ
NOUN Yes Yes N, PCP
NUM Yes Yes NUM, ORD
PART Yes Yes ADV, INFM
PRON Yes Yes PRON, POSS
PROPN Yes Yes PN
PUNCT Yes Yes FE, FI, FP
SCONJ Yes Yes CS
SYM Yes No SYM
VERB Yes Yes V, PCP
X Yes Yes No

Table 2: UD Part-of-speech tags, their application
in EUD and SUD and their counterparts in LinES.

3.4 Dependency relations

The set of dependency relations in UD currently
includes 40 relations; the exact number seem to
change every now and then. For example, (de
Marneffe et al., 2014) lists 42.

LinES uses 24 dependency relations which are
largely based on those used in FDG or Functional
Dependency Grammar (Tapanainen and Järvinen,
1997), but with some additions required by LinES
corpora and some amendments. As in UD the
dependencies largely favour content words to be
governors, but not to the same extent. In LinES
prepositions are heads, not just case markers, and
in constructions with a copula + predicative, the
copula is taken to be the head rather than the head
of the predicative. For conversion to UD, then,
these relations must be reversed, not just rela-
belled, which in turn may cause structural changes
of other kinds. A reversal implies that dependents
of the previous governor must be reanalyzed and a
decision be made whether they should keep with
the previous governor or become dependents of
the new governor. For instance, in LinES anno-
tation a copula can have both a subject dependent
and adverbial dependents, while in UD all of these
dependencies should be transferred to the predica-
tive head.

One reversal may also affect the outcome of an-
other reversal as when the object of the preposi-

Kim wanted to talk about how stupid I was

pcomp
sc

copcase

LinES

UD

Figure 1: A reversal of governance affecting an-
other. LinES relations above the sentence and UD
relations below.

tion is a clause with a copula, as in Kim wanted
to talk about how stupid I was. Here, the map-
ping introduces a direct dependency between two
tokens that previously only were indirectly related
(see Figure 1).

UD largely employs different dependency rela-
tions for different parts of speech, whereas LinES
prefers to treat dependency relations as orthog-
onal to parts-of-speech. For example, in LinES
there is a single subject dependency which applies
to nominals as well as clauses or verb phrases,
and a single object dependency applying to nom-
inal as well as clausal dependents. In UD, on
the other hand, nominal dependents are consis-
tently assigned different relations than clausal de-
pendendants, whether they are in a subject, com-
plement, or modifier position. Similarly, modifiers
are analysed differently as nominal (nmod), ad-
jectival (amod), adverbial (advmod) or numerical
(nummod).

LinES shares with UD the assumption that
the first conjunct of a coordinated constructions
should be the head. In UD all other conjuncts
are then taken to be dependents of this first one,
whereas in LinES they are (as in FDG) chained
so that the next one in the chain is taken to be a
dependent of the previous one rather than the first
one. Chains of auxiliaries are treated similarly; the
first one in a chain of auxiliaries becomes a depen-
dent of the next one, rather than on the main verb,
i.e., the head of the last auxiliary, as is the case in
UD. Also in agreement with FDG, the subject is
a dependent of the first (finite) auxiliary in LinES
whereas it is a dependent of the main verb in UD.

LinES provides no dependency information for
punctuation marks. The part-of-speech informa-
tion is however more specific than the single cate-
gory PUNCT used by UD.

LinES dependency graphs are strictly projec-
tive. There are special relations signalling that the
dependency should actually not be with the head

13



assigned, but with some other token, usually a (di-
rect or indirect) dependent of the assigned head.
There is one relation for fronted elements, one
for postposed elements and one for noun-phrase-
internal relations. The situation in UD is not quite
clear; on the one hand there seem to be a desire to
avoid non-projective relations as the relation ’dis-
located’ seems to relate a fronted or postposed el-
ement to the head of the clause. The relation ’rem-
nant’ as used by (de Marneffe et al., 2014) to han-
dle ellipsis, is clearly non-projective, though.

The structural differences provide more or less
of a challenge to conversion. Luckily, not all dif-
ferences involve changes to the dependency struc-
ture. Many relations are apparently the same ex-
cept possibly for the label. In other cases, and un-
like the situation with subjects and objects, LinES
actually has more specific relations than UD. For
example, in LinES a difference is made between
prepositions that introduce an adjunct and those
introducing a complement (i.e., oblique objects),
which is not made in UD. In the same vein, LinES
separates adverbial modifiers of verbs from those
modifying adjectives, and adjectival modifiers ap-
pearing before and after a head noun. For these
cases conversion basically means relabelling.

4 Method

The descriptions and examples provided on (Uni-
versal dependencies, 2015) have been used to
learn the intended meaning and use of the re-
lations. Both English and Swedish pages have
been consulted. Although this information is in-
dicative rather than complete, and leaves a lot
to the reader’s interpretation, we decided that it
would be sufficient for a first version of a con-
version program. In addition we used the English
and Swedish UD treebanks, EUD and SUD, made
available by the UD consortium as references for
comparing the output of our conversion program.

As we noted above it is important that the two
halves of a parallel treebank are internally consis-
tent in their annotation. Now, while both EUD and
SUD are UD-conformant, there are differences in
how they have applied UD. Thus, it was not pos-
sible to make LinES-UD internally consistent and
at the same time make its English half consistent
with EUD and its Swedish half consistent with
SUD. In each case where there is a difference, we
had to make a decision which one to follow.

Some of the differences between EUD and SUD

are listed in Table 3. First we note that EUD em-
ploys a few more dependency labels than SUD.
The following labels used in EUD are not found in
SUD1.1: conj:preconj, det:predet, goeswith, list,
nmod:npmod, nmod:tmod, remnant, and reparan-
dum. On the other hand, SUD has one label,
nmod:agent, not used in EUD. We decided to use
the dependency labels found in SUD, including
nmod:agent, as LinES has a special relation for
agents in passive clauses.

Aspect EUD SUD
No. of pos tags 17 15
No. of dep. labels 45 38
Hyphens can be tokens Yes No
Negation as PART Yes No
’s as own token Yes No
subj/dobj determiners Yes No

Table 3: Major differences relating to application
of UD in the English and Swedish UD treebanks.

As for parts-of-speech we used the 17 cate-
gories found in EUD, although symbols (SYM)
and unassigned (X) are quite rare in the corpus.
For each language a small set of auxiliary verbs
are assigned the category AUX. We also followed
EUD in classifying the negation as PART(icle) and
possessives as PRON(ouns) for both languages.
However, in other aspects LinES UD is closer to
SUD: hyphens are not separate tokens and deter-
miners can not be subjects or objects. In the case
of genitive -s, we decided to follow EUD for En-
glish, making it a separate token, but SUD for
Swedish where it is taken to be a morpheme. This
actually contradicts our desire to be internally con-
sistent, but was made nevertheless.

4.1 Development phases

The conversion program has been developed it-
eratively in three phases. The goal of the first
phase was to create UD-conformant annotations
for all dependencies appearing in the LinES data.
A first version was developed for one of the seven
sub-corpora, and when the result appeared to be
fairly complete, it was tested on the other six.
The output was checked for remaining LinES-
annotations. When this happened, the cause was
quite often an annotation error in the LinES input
file, which could be corrected. At other times de-
faults were introduced.

In the second phase the full LinES treebank was

14



used. To check for progress frequency statistics
were collected on part-of-speech tags, dependency
labels and their associations. Agreement with the
EUD and SUD was checked by counting triplets of
dependency label, dependent part-of-speech and
head part-of-speech. A surprising observation was
the large number of labels assigned to any given
part-of-speech pair. As an example, see Table 4,
where frequencies for dependency relations relat-
ing an adjective to a head noun are given. At
least 18 dependency relations have instances for
this pair in either EUD1.0 or LinES-UD. Where
frequencies are low one can suspect that we are
actually dealing with errors, either in the source
data or in the conversion process.

Dependency EUD1.0 LinES-UD
Frequency Frequency

amod 3198 3334
acl:relcl 31 0
conj 22 37
nmod 18 34
acl 9 108
case 8 1
appos 5 10
nsubj 5 2
compound 3 0
nmod:npmod 3 0
parataxis 3 0
advmod 2 6
det 1 214
advcl 1 2
nmod:poss 1 0
nummod 1 0
root 0 1
compound:prt 0 1

Table 4: Distribution of dependencies involving an
ADJ(ective) as dependent and a NOUN as head in
the English UD Treebank and the English half of
Lines-UD after conversion. A subset of EUD1.0,
selected so as to produce the same total number of
dependencies as LinES-UD, was compared with
the output of the conversion program.

When differences were striking, the reason was
investigated by looking at a sample of instances,
and a decision was made whether to change the
program in some respect, or leaving it in that stage,
usually for the reason that internal consistency be-
tween the English and Swedish parts of LinES
were judged to be more important than agree-

ment with the UD treebanks. The most striking
difference in Table 4 concerns the relation det,
where LinES-UD have 214 instances and EUD
1. This is explained by the fact that a number of
common words that can be termed adjectival pro-
nouns, such as another, many, other, same, such
are treated differently in the two treebanks, either
at the part-of-speech classification (e.g. another
is DET in EUD, ADJ in LinES) or at the depen-
dency classification: adjectives are regularly anal-
ysed as amod in EUD, while they can have a det-
dependency in LinES.

Another difference is the number of ’acl:relcl’-
relations for the pair ADJ - NOUN which is non-
existing in the output from the conversion pro-
gram. This turned out to be a miss in the program:
relative clauses without relative pronouns or com-
plementizers were not recognized.

When frequency statistics seemed to be fairly
reasonable a manual review (by the author) was
performed on 50 English and 50 Swedish seg-
ments. The results, all around 90%, are shown in
Table 5. Apart from a rough quantitative measure
of accuracy the review revealed several types of
recurring errors in the output, necessitating a third
phase of improving the conversion program.

4.2 The conversion program

The program takes three arguments: source and
target files in XML-format and their associated
alignment file. It returns monolingual files in
conllu-format and a new alignment file.

Structure is as a rule handled before labels. The
first structural change concerns tokenization. All
multiword tokens in LinES have been split into
their parts and the word alignment files have been
updated accordingly. At the same time, the new
tokens are assigned a new part-of-speech (from
a specially designed word list) and an appropri-
ate dependency relation, usually ’mwe’ except for
some multiword proper names, where ’name’ is
used. The new tokenization requires a renum-
bering of the tokens of the treebank, and conse-
quently, a renumbering of the links. The total in-
crease in number of tokens is about 0.9%.

Before the changes in the dependency structure
are tackled, the part-of-speech mapping is per-
formed. This is motivated by the fact that tag-
ging usually precedes parsing and that it involves
no loss of information, as all information pertain-
ing to parts-of-speech or morphosyntactic features

15



Corpus Tokens UAS LAS
LinES-UD SE 891 0.93 0.90
LinES-UD EN 959 0.91 0.88

Table 5: Accuracy (unlabelled and labelled) of the
generated annotations for a small random sample
of output from the conversion program.

in LinES-corpora can still be accessed by the pro-
gram. Most of the mapping is just relabelling,
either one-to-one or many-to-one, but, as noted
above, the category PCP (for participle) is mapped
onto three UD tags using contextual information
and the verbs are divided on the two categories
AUX and VERB depending on whether they are
part of a verbal chain or not.

The final step deals with the dependency tree. A
new tree is generated from the existing one on the
basis of rules that refer to dependency labels, local
structure and properties of the two tokens related
in the dependency. The more complex structural
changes, i.e., reversals and swaps (head changes),
are handled first. The given sentence is read three
times, first to look for structural changes, then to
handle relabellings, and finally to handle punctua-
tion marks.

(Bosco et al., 2013) makes a distinction between
1:1 and 1:n dependency mappings; both of these
types are handled as relabellings. The difference
is that 1:n mappings, such as the splitting up the
LinES object relation on the various correspond-
ing UD dependencies (dobj, iobj, ccomp, xcomp),
require inspection of the available morphosyntac-
tic information and local properties of the tree to
be performed correctly. In the final pass punctu-
ation marks are assigned the relation ’punct’ and
a head. The UD recommendations have been fol-
lowed as far as possible, but it is generally quite
problematic to identify a proper head, especially
for many of the internal punctuation marks that
some authors of novels like to employ.

5 Results and evaluation

The conversion program has been applied to the
full corpus and as a result a UD-version of the par-
allel treebank now exists. In fact, several versions
have been generated, as the program is still being
worked upon. Here we report on stable properties
of the output.

The output has been checked for completeness
and for the occurrence of dependency relations not

Type of change EN SE
Relabelling 57891 54781
Reversal 9113 9511
Swap 5718 6726
Combination 61 84
Addition 10026 8662
Total 82809 79764

Table 6: Structural mappings and their frequencies
in the conversions to LinES-UD. A change of gov-
ernor is a Reversal if the new governor was pre-
viously a direct dependent, a Swap if it was not,
and a Combination if it involves two reversals, as
in Figure 1. Additions apply only to punctuation
marks.

belonging to UD. Although a few tokens, usually
less than ten for each language, do not receive any
dependency relation or a non-UD label, we can
claim that the conversion program is successful in
producing a parallel UD treebank. Such errors can
be detected and fixed in a manual review.

Frequencies of structural mappings of different
types are summarized in Table 6. The number
of structural changes (reversals or swaps) is quite
high, around 20% for both languages, a bit less for
English and a bit higher for Swedish.

While the output is formally in agreement with
UD relations and part-of-speech categories, there
is no guarantee that they have been applied in
agreement with their intended definitions. To
check for this frequency statistics have been com-
puted for parts-of-speech and dependency labels,
and for dependency triplets.

Table 7 shows total number of instances for
the most common dependencies for English and
Swedish. We have omitted some, such as list,
goeswith, and compound, that are used only for
one language or have a low frequency for one lan-
guage. For most relations the numbers are quite
similar, but there are also exceptions. As the four
underlying corpora are different, and we don’t
have a gold standard for either of them, we cannot
determine with any certainty whether the differ-
ences are due to text properties, language-specific
interpretations of the UD labels, or conversion er-
rors.

More detail can be had by looking at frequen-
cies for dependency triplets. Space is not sufficient
to discuss all variation in this data, but we will look
at a few pertinent cases. First, we can observe (as

16



Dependency EUD1.1 EN LinES-UD SUD1.1 SE LinES-UD
All 82809 82809 79764 79764
punct 10028 10025 8663 8662
case 7638 8157 8448 8284
nmod 6965 7537 7853 7824
det 6282 8028 5680 5145
nsubj 5864 7215 6234 6992
dobj 3762 3797 3535 4230
amod 3750 3620 3715 3503
mark 3063 2707 2571 3631
advmod 2923 4692 5165 5969
conj 2633 3276 3439 3603
aux 2627 2492 1996 1934
cc 2372 2529 2831 2981
cop 1456 1250 1294 1246
advcl 1352 1335 1478 1015
nmod:poss 1279 1535 1424 1562
ccomp 1126 549 436 560
xcomp 1104 1183 876 1204
nummod 1122 296 1172 225
appos 754 564 424 572
acl:relcl 708 253 1095 853
acl 707 1598 571 966
auxpass 650 642 39 167
nsubjpass 561 70 1121 354
mwe 207 382 1562 343

Table 7: Absolute frequencies for the most common dependency relations in each treebank. For both
EUD and SUD subsets have been used that are of the same size in terms of number of tokens as the
LinES treebank. Bold face is used for relations where differences are noteworthy.

in Figure 4) that the association between depen-
dency labels and pairs of parts-of-speech is n-to-m
with sometimes very high values on n and m. For
instance, looking at all four treebanks there are no
less than 93 pairs of part-of-speech with at least
one instance of nmod. Similarly, there are 62 pairs
with at least one instance of nsubj. Of course, of-
ten only a few pairs contribute to the vast majority
of the instances, but there is almost always a long
tail of other pairs.

Some differences can be explained with refer-
ence to the texts which are taken from different
genres. EUD has newspaper (Wall Street Jour-
nal) prose, SUD ’professional prose’, while LinES
has a great share of literary prose. To illustrate,
both EUD and SUD have more than three times as
many numerals as the LinES corpus, which largely
explains the frequency differences relating to num-
mod. Conversely, LinES SE has ten times as many
occurrences of the pronoun han, ’he’ than SUD.

The det-relation is more frequent in LinES-
UD EN than in EUD1.1 for the reasons explained
above, namely that it is used for many common
words categorized as ADJ, where EUD uses amod.
Thus, EUD has more instances of amod-relations
in spite of having a lower relative frequency of ad-
jectives.

LinES EN has more nsubj instances than EUD.
This is largely explained by the frequencies of
third person singular pronouns as subjects, espe-
cially the pronouns he and she which are used to
refer to the characters of the narrative. Together
they account for more than 1000 instances of the
difference. And to this can be added the pronouns
tagged as PRON in LinES but as DET in EUD.

On the Swedish side, SUD has many more in-
stances of NOUN as subject, while the Swedish
LinES-UD again has more pronouns. 23.8% of all
tokens in SUD are nouns, while the correspond-
ing figure for Swedish LinES-UD is 17.4%. Con-

17



versely, SUD has only 6.2% pronouns, whereas
Swedish LinES-UD has 11.1%.

The higher frequency of advmod in English
LinES is partly explained by the higher relative
frequency of adverbs, 5.5% as compared to 4.1%.
In a corpus of 82000 tokens this is a difference
of 1200 instances. The number of adverbs in the
Swedish translations is even greater, 7.4%.

The difference in frequencies for ccomp in the
English treebanks could also be explained by the
differences in genres. However, while some verbs
that take clausal complements, such as announce
don’t occur in LinES, there are no large differ-
ences in frequencies for common verbs taking
clausal complements such as say, think, or know.
Browsing the LinES file for occurrences of these
words, no errors are detected, so the tentative con-
clusion is that they are used differently.

The conversion program identifies fewer rela-
tive clauses than it should, judging from the dif-
ferences in frequency for the relations acl and
acl:relcl. In particular it misses some that are not
introduced by a relative pronoun or subjunction.

The very low figures for nsubjpass is partly
due to the rules creating this dependency, which
are too restrictive, for example missing instances
where an auxiliary appears between the subject
and the passive form. Another contributing factor
is the Swedish word som, ’that’, ’who’, which in-
troduces relative clauses. In SUD it is categorized
as a PRON(oun) and assigned a core dependency,
whereas in LinES it is categorized as a subjunction
carrying the mark-dependency. Other words that
are analyzed as mark much more often in Swedish
LinES than in SUD1.1 are när, ’when’, då, ’when,
as’ and medan, ’while’.

SUD1.1 has many more instances of the mwe-
relation than the other treebanks. While EUD and
LinES-UD EN agree on mwe:s, SUD1.1 employs
mwe for many word sequences that LinES regards
as compositional, such as när det gäller, ’as re-
gards’, mer än, ’more than’, i samband med, ’in
connection with’.

While the most common dependency triplets
such as <amod, ADJ, NOUN> and <nsubj,
NOUN, VERB> appear in the same numbers,
there are thus other triplets occurring in one tree-
bank that don’t occur at all in the other treebank
of the same language. This indicates (i) that a
parser trained on one of them might not perform
very well on the sentences of the other, and (ii)

that merging the treebanks may not be so helpful
either. To test these hypotheses we trained Malt
parsers on the two Swedish treebanks and tested
various models. The LinES data was randomly di-
vided into distinct sets for training, development
and test and parsing models were then developed
on the training data for both treebanks as well as
for the merged treebank. As both Swedish tree-
banks are small with many tokens occurring in
only one of them, the nouns, proper names, verbs
and adjectives were de-lexified into combinations
of part-of-speech tags and (LinES) morphological
tags. The best results, obtained with the standard
settings and finegrained de-lexification are shown
in Table 8. No combo model from the merged tree-
bank was able to improve performance on both test
sets.

Model Test data UAS LAS
LinES LinES 0.751 0.701
Combo LinES 0.739 0.687
SUD1.0 SUD1.0 0.738 0.697
Combo SUD1.0 0.739 0.696

Table 8: Parsing results.

6 Conclusions

We have shown that the information in the LinES
parallel treebank is sufficient to produce a tree-
bank by automatic means, which, with a minimum
of manual effort, is formally compliant with the
UD inventory of dependency labels and part-of-
speech categories, and its principles for tokeniza-
tion. The program generates English and Swedish
data, as well as the new alignment, in one go.

The current version is relatively stable, but there
is still room for improvements. Even so, a manual
review process will increase the quality of the an-
notation substantially. The conversion programme
will facilitate the review process, however, as we
can see from the comparisons with the EUD and
SUD treebanks, where the problems seem to re-
side.

We have also shown that EUD and SUD, while
UD-compatible, do not treat all phenomena in the
same way. Thus, it is likely that future UD tree-
banks, whether developments of EUD and SUD,
or created from other sources, will be more con-
sistent with one another. In such a future scenario,
LinES-UD is likely to follow suit and, rather than
having to manually review the data once more,

18



tweaking an automatic conversion program to the
new developments will be more efficient.

We have pointed out that a parallell treebank
developed for the study of human translation
must be internally consistent to a maximal degree.
Presently, this can only be achieved to the expense
of deviating in many aspects from the available
UD treebanks, some of which have been detailed
in section 4. A possibility, of course is to main-
tain two versions of the data. As part of the paral-
lel treebank, the two halves are maximally consis-
tent with each other, but they both have alternative
versions where the segmentation and annotation is
more similar to the existing monolingual UD tree-
banks for each language.

References
Lars Ahrenberg 2007. LinES: An English-Swedish

Parallel Treebank. Proceedings of the 16th Nordic
Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODAL-
IDA, 2007).

Cristina Bosco, Simonetta Magni, Maria Simi 2013.
Converting Italian treebanks: Towards an Italian
Stanford dependency treebank 7th Linguistic An-
notation Workshop and Interoperability with Dis-
course.

Janna Lipenkova and Milan Souček 2014. Converting
Russian Dependency Treebank to Stanford Typed
Dependencies Representation. Proceedings of the
14th Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. pages 143-
147.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning 2008 The Stanford typed dependencies rep-
resentation. Workshop on Cross-framework and
Cross-domain Parser Evaluation.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Na-
talia Silveira, Katri Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Joakim
Nivre, and Christopher D. Manning 2014 Universal
Stanford Dependencies: A cross-linguistic typology
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14).

Ryan McDonald, Joakim Nivre, Yvonne Quimbach-
Brundage, Yoav Goldberg, Dipanjan Das, Kuzman
Ganchev, Keith Hall, Slav Petrov, Hao Zhang, Os-
car Täckström, Claudia Bedini, Núria Bertomeu
Castelló, and Jungmee Lee. 2013. Universal De-
pendency Annotation for Multilingual Parsing. Pro-
ceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the ACL,
Sofia, Bulgaria, August 4-9 2013, pages 92-97.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012.
A universal part-of-speech tagset. Proceedings of

the Eight International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, LREC’12, Istanbul, Turkey,
May 23-25 2012.

Sampo Pyysalo, Jenna Kanerva, Anna Missilä,
Veronika Laippala, and Filip Ginter 2015. Univer-
sal Dependencies for Finnish. Proceedings of the
20th Nordic Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, Vilnius, Lithuania, May 12-13, 2015.

Pasi Tapanainen and Timo Järvinen 1997. A non-
projective dependency parser. Proceedings of the
fifth conference on Applied Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 64-71.

Agić, Željko and Aranzabe, Maria Jesus and Atutxa,
Aitziber and Bosco, Cristina and Choi, Jinho and
de Marneffe, Marie-Catherine and Dozat, Timo-
thy and Farkas, Richárd and Foster, Jennifer and
Ginter, Filip and Goenaga, Iakes and Gojenola,
Koldo and Goldberg, Yoav and Hajič, Jan and
Johannsen, Anders Trærup and Kanerva, Jenna
and Kuokkala, Juha and Laippala, Veronika and
Lenci, Alessandro and Lindén, Krister and Ljubešić,
Nikola and Lynn, Teresa and Manning, Christo-
pher and Martı́nez, Héctor Alonso and McDon-
ald, Ryan and Missilä, Anna and Montemagni,
Simonetta and Nivre, Joakim and Nurmi, Hanna
and Osenova, Petya and Petrov, Slav and Piitu-
lainen, Jussi and Plank, Barbara and Prokopidis,
Prokopis and Pyysalo, Sampo and Seeker, Wolf-
gang and Seraji, Mojgan and Silveira, Natalia and
Simi, Maria and Simov, Kiril and Smith, Aaron
and Tsarfaty, Reut and Vincze, Veronika and Ze-
man, Daniel Universal Dependencies 1.1. 2015.
https://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/repository/xmlui/
handle/11234/LRT-1478

Universal Dependencies Universal
Dependencies home page. 2015.
http://universaldependencies.github.io/docs/

19


