



















































***INVITED TALK*** WikiTrans: Swedish-Danish Machine Translation in a Constraint Grammar Framework


Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Language Technology for Closely Related Languages, Varieties and Dialects, page 34,
Hissar, Bulgaria, September 10, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

WikiTrans: Swedish-Danish Machine Translation
in a Constraint Grammar Framework

(invited talk)

Eckhard Bick
Institute of Language and Communication

University of Southern Denmark
eckhard.bick@mail.dk

1 Abstract

This talk presents an MT system for the au-
tomatic generation of Danish Wikipedia articles
from Swedish originals. The translated Wikipedia
(WikiTrans) is indexed for both title and content,
and integrated with original Danish articles where
they exist. Newly added or modified articles in
the Swedish Wikipedia are monitored and handled
on a daily basis. The translation approach (Gram-
Trans) uses a grammar-based machine translation
system with a deep, structural source-language
analysis. Morphosyntactic disambiguation and
lexical transfer rules exploit Constraint Grammar
tags and dependency links to access contextual in-
formation, such as syntactic argument function,
semantic type and quantifiers. Out-of-vocabulary
words are handled by derivational and compound
analysis with a combined coverage of 99.3%, as
well as systematic morpho-phonemic translitera-
tions for the remaining cases. Reflecting the sim-
ilarities between Swedish and Danish, the system
achieved high BLEU scores (0.65-0.8 depending
on references), and outperformed standard STMT
and RBMT competitors by a large margin.

2 Biography

Dr. Eckhard Bick is a computational linguist and
project leader for the VISL lab at the University of
Southern Denmark, where he works as a language
technology researcher at the Department of Lan-
guage and Communication (ISK). Over the years
he has designed and developed grammars, cor-
pora, lexical resources and applicational tools for
a large number of languages, including most of the
Romance and Germanic languages. Eckhard Bick
is a leading expert in the field of Constraint Gram-
mar, with a current focus on semantic annotation
and machine translation. Eckhard Bick has pub-
lished extensively on various aspects of computa-
tional linguistics and participated in a large num-
ber of international research projects.

34


