



















































Answer Selection in Arabic Community Question Answering: A Feature-Rich Approach


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Arabic Natural Language Processing, pages 183–190,
Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

Answer Selection in Arabic Community Question Answering:
A Feature-Rich Approach

Yonatan Belinkov
MIT Computer Science and

Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

belinkov@csail.mit.edu

Alberto Barrón-Cedeño and Hamdy Mubarak
Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU

Doha, Qatar
{albarron, hmubarak}@qf.org.qa

Abstract

The task of answer selection in community ques-
tion answering consists of identifying pertinent
answers from a pool of user-generated comments
related to a question. The recent SemEval-2015
introduced a shared task on community ques-
tion answering, providing a corpus and evalua-
tion scheme. In this paper we address the prob-
lem of answer selection in Arabic. Our proposed
model includes a manifold of features including
lexical and semantic similarities, vector represen-
tations, and rankings. We investigate the contribu-
tion of each set of features in a supervised setting.
We show that employing a feature combination by
means of a linear support vector machine achieves
a better performance than that of the competition
winner (F1 of 79.25 compared to 78.55).

1 Introduction

Community Question Answering (cQA) platforms
have become an important resource of punctual in-
formation for users on the Web. A person posts a
question on a specific topic and other users post
their answers with little, if not null, restrictions.
The liberty to post questions and answers at will is
one of the ingredients that make this kind of fora
attractive and allows questions to be answered in
a very short time. Nevertheless, this same anar-
chy could cause a question to receive as many an-
swers as to make manual inspection difficult while
a given comment might not even address the ques-
tion (e.g., because the topic gets diverted, or the
user aims to make fun of the topic).

Our task is defined as follows. Given a ques-
tion q and its set of derived comments C, iden-
tify whether each c ∈ C represents a DIRECT ,
RELATED , or IRRELEVANT answer to q. In or-
der to do that, we take advantage of the framework
provided by the SemEval-2015 Task 3 on “An-
swer Selection in Community Question Answer-

ing” (Nakov et al., 2015) and focus on the Arabic
language. Our approach is treating each question–
comment as an instance in a supervised learn-
ing scenario. We build a support vector machine
(SVM) classifier that is using different kinds of
features, including vector representations, similar-
ity measures, and rankings. Our extensive feature
set allows us to achieve better results than those of
the winner of the competition: 79.25 F1 compared
to 78.55, obtained by Nicosia et al. (2015).

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 describes the experimental framework
—composed of the Fatwa corpus and the evalua-
tion metrics— and overviews the different models
proposed at competition time. Section 3 describes
our model. Experiments and results are discussed
in Section 4. Related work is discussed in Section
5. We summarize our contributions in Section 6,
and include an error analysis in Appendix A.

2 Overview of SemEval-2015 Task 3

Task overview The SemEval-2015 Task 3 on
“Answer Selection in Community Question An-
swering” (Nakov et al., 2015) proposed two tasks
in which, given a user-generated question–answer
pair, a system would identify the level of perti-
nence of the answer. The task was proposed in En-
glish and Arabic. In the case of English, the topic
of the corpus was daily life in Qatar. In the case of
Arabic, the topic was Islam. Whereas the English
task attracted twelve participants, only four teams
accepted the challenge of the Arabic one.

The evaluation framework is composed of a cor-
pus and a set of evaluation measures.1 The corpus
for the Arabic task is called Fatwa, as this is the
name of the community question answering plat-
form from which the questions were extracted.2

Questions (Fatwas) about Islam are posted by reg-
1Both resources are publicly available at http://alt.

qcri.org/semeval2015/task3/.
2http://fatwa.islamweb.net

183



q ـقروتضورقذخأتـةكلمملابةكرشيفابساحملمعأ
ددستضرقلاةميقذخأتوداوملاهذهيفرجاتتالىهو

كلذكو،كلذىلعةرمتسميهو،ىرخألااهتانويدماهب

.؟كلذنميبيصنوهامف،مهسألالاجميفلمعت

A person working for a company that has
bonds and trades stocks is asking for an
opinion.

c1 طباوضلابطبضنااذإقروتلانأىلإـالوأـكهبننف
مهسألايفةبراضملاكلذكو[...]هيفجرحالف،ةيعرشلا

[...]

DIRECT answer addressing both bonds
and stocks issues.

c2 ةبراضملامكحيفىواتفةدعانلتقبسدقف[...]
يفةبراضملاةيعرشلطرتشيهنأانيباهيفو،مهسألاب

[...]نيرمأققحتمهسألا

RELATED answer addressing only the
trading of stocks.

c3 دصقيالوقروتلاعيبىمسيعيبلانمعونلااذه[...]
اهئارونمدصقينكلوةعلسلابعافتنالاهبحاصهنم

[...]نيقيرفىلإهزاوجيفءاملعلامسقنادقو،لاملا

RELATED answer addressing only the
buying and selling of bonds.

c4 اهسفنتباطامالإهتجوزلامنمذخأينأجوزøسيلف
[...]اهلاميفهلقحالو،هب

IRRELEVANT answer discussing whether
a husband is allowed to take money from
his wife.

c5 امىلعهوقلطيلسانلاهثدحأظفلةيرسلاةداعلاظفلف
:هانعمةغلءانمتسالاو،ءانمتسالابءاملعلادنعىمسي

نايبةقباسةبوجأيفمدقتدقو[...]ينملاجورخبلط

هرارضأوءانمتسالامكح

IRRELEVANT answer discussing mastur-
bation habits.

Figure 1: Example of a question (QID 132600) and its answers from the Fatwa corpus. Key terms appear
in bold italics. Note that the direct answer has a high overlap with the question’s key terms, the related
answers have a lower overlap, and the irrelevant answers have no such overlap.

Train Dev. Test
Questions 1,300 200 200
Answers 6,500 1,000 1,001
DIRECT 1,300 200 215
RELATED 1,469 222 222
IRRELEVANT 3,731 578 564

Tokens 355,891 50,800 49,297
Word types 36,567 10,179 9,724
Stem types 15,824 6,689 6,529

Table 1: Statistics of the Fatwa corpus

ular users to Fatwa and answered by knowledge-
able scholars. That is, a DIRECT answer exists for
each question. In order to pose a challenging task,
Nakov et al. (2015) linked more comments to each
question. There are two other kinds of answers:
RELATED are those associated to other questions
in the forum which have been identified as related
to the current question; IRRELEVANT comments
were randomly picked from the rest of the collec-
tion. Each question in the final corpus has five an-
swers. Figure 1 shows an example question and its
answers, illustrating some of the challenges of this
task. Table 1 includes some statistics on the Fatwa
corpus.

The second part of the framework consists
of the evaluation metrics. The official scores
are macro-averaged F1 and accuracy. Macro-
averaging gives the same importance to the
three classes even if there are two times more
IRRELEVANT instances than instances in any
other class. The intuition behind this metric is
that showing IRRELEVANT instances to a user in
a real scenario is not as important as showing her
DIRECT ones.

Participating systems As aforementioned, four
research teams approached this task at the compe-
tition. As the rules allowed to submit one primary
and two contrastive submissions to encourage ex-
perimentation, a total of eleven approaches were
submitted. In what follows, we describe all the ap-
proaches without distinguishing between primary
and contrastive. Interestingly, all the approaches
from each group appear grouped in the task rank-
ing, so we review them in decreasing order of per-
formance.

The best out of the three systems designed by
Nicosia et al., (2015) used a variety of similarity
features —including cosine, Jaccard coefficient,
and containment— on word [1, 2]-grams. Addi-

184



tionally, the word [1,2]-grams themselves were
considered as features. They applied a logistic re-
gressor to rank the comments and label the top an-
swer as DIRECT , the next one as RELATED and
the remaining as IRRELEVANT . Their second
system used the same lexical similarity, n-grams
features, and learning model, but this time on
a binary setting: DIRECT vs. NO-DIRECT .
The prediction confidence produced by the clas-
sifier was used as a score to rank the comments
and assign labels accordingly: DIRECT for the
top ranked, RELATED for the second ranked, and
IRRELEVANT for the rest. Their third approach is
rule-based: a tailored similarity measure in which
more weight is given to matching 2-grams than to
1-grams and a label assignment which depends on
the relative similarity to the most similar comment
in the thread. The output of this rule-based sys-
tem was also used as a set of extra features in their
top-performing approach.

Belinkov et al., (2015)’s best submission was
very similar to the one of Nicosia et al., (2015): a
ranking approach based on confidence values ob-
tained by an SVM ranker (Joachims, 2006). Their
second approach consisted of a multi-class linear
SVM classifier relying on three feature families:
(i) lexical similarities between q and c (similar to
those applied by the previous team); (ii) word vec-
tor representations of q and c; and (iii) a ranking
score for c produced by the SVM ranker.

The two best approaches of Hou et al., (2015)
used features representing different similarities
between q and c, lengths of words and sen-
tences, and the number of named-entities in c,
among others. In this case [1,2,3]-grams were
also considered as features, but with two dif-
ferences with respect to the other participants:
only the most frequent n-grams were used and
a translated version to English was also in-
cluded. They explored two strategies using SVMs
in their top performing submissions: (i) a hi-
erarchical setting, first discriminating between
IRRELEVANT and NON-IRRELEVANT and then
between DIRECT and RELATED ; and (ii) a multi-
class classification setting. Their third approach
was based on an ensemble of classifiers.

Finally, Mohamed et al., (2015) applied a de-
cision tree whose output is composed of lexical
and enriched representations of q and c: the terms
in the texts are expanded on the basis of a set of
Quranic ontologies. The authors do not report the

Gigaword KSUCCA
Tokens 1.2B 50M
Word types 1M 400K
Lemma types 120K 40K

Table 2: Statistics of raw Arabic corpora used for
creating word vectors.

differences among their three submissions.

We participated in the submissions of the top-
performing models (Belinkov et al., 2015; Nicosia
et al., 2015). As described below, here we explore
effective combinations of the features applied in
both approaches, as well as an improved feature
design.

3 Model

We train a simple support vector machine (SVM)
linear classifier (Joachims, 1999) on pairs of ques-
tions and comments. We opt for this alternative
because it allowed us to get the best performance
during the SemEval task (cf. Section 2); our previ-
ous experiments with more sophisticated kernels
did not show any improvement. Each question q
and comment c is assigned a feature vector. Some
features are unique to either q or c, while oth-
ers capture the relationship between the two. Our
features can be broadly divided into fours groups:
vector representations, similarity measures, statis-
tical ranking, and rule-based ranking. We describe
each kind in turn.

3.1 Vectors
Our motivation for using word vectors for this task
is that they convey a soft representation of word
meanings. In contrast to similarity measures that
are based on words, using word vectors has the
potential to bridge over lack of lexical overlap be-
tween questions and answers.

We start by creating word vectors from a
large corpus of raw Arabic text. We use
Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013b; Mikolov
et al., 2013a) with default settings for creating
100-dimensional vectors. We experimented with
the Arabic Gigaword (Linguistic Data Consor-
tium, 2011), containing newswire text, and with
the King Saud University Corpus of Classical
Arabic (KSUCCA), containing classical Arabic
text (Alrabiah et al., 2013). Table 2 provides some
statistics for these corpora. We were initially ex-
pecting KSUCCA to produce better results, be-

185



cause its language should be more similar to the
religious texts in the Fatwa corpus. However, in
practice we found vectors trained on the Arabic
Gigaword to perform better, possibly thanks to its
larger coverage, so we report only results with the
Gigaword corpus below.

We noticed in preliminary experiments that
many errors are due to lack of overlap in vo-
cabulary between answers and questions (cf. Sec-
tion 4.1). In some cases, this overlap stems
from the rich morphology of Arabic forms,
and can be avoided by lemmatizing. There-
fore, we also lemmatize the Arabic corpus using
MADAMIRA (Pasha et al., 2014) before creating
word vectors. We notice that lemma vectors tend
to give small improvements experimentally.

For each question and answer, we average all
lemma vectors excluding stopwords. This simple
bag-of-words approach ignores word order, but is
quite effective at capturing question and answer
content. We calculate an average vector for each
answer, and concatenate the average question and
answer vectors. The resulting concatenated vec-
tors form the features for our classifier. Note that
we do not calculate vector similarities (e.g. cosine
similarity), letting the classifier have access to all
vector dimensions instead.

3.2 Similarity
This set of features measures the similar-
ity sim(q, c) between a question and a com-
ment, assuming that high similarity signals a
DIRECT answer.

We compute the similarity between word
n-gram representations (n = [1, . . . , 4]) of q and c,
using different lexical similarity measures: greedy
string tiling (Wise, 1996), longest common sub-
sequences (Allison and Dix, 1986), Jaccard coef-
ficient (Jaccard, 1901), word containment (Lyon
et al., 2001), and cosine similarity. The pre-
processing in this case consists only of stopword
removal. Additionally, we further compute cosine
similarity on lemmas and part-of-speech tags, both
including and excluding stopwords.

3.3 Statistical Ranking
The features described so far apply to each com-
ment independently without considering other
comments in the same thread. To include such
global information, we take advantage of our pre-
vious work (Belinkov et al., 2015) and formu-
late the problem as a ranking scenario: com-

ments are ordered such that better comments have
a higher ranking. Concretely, DIRECT answers
are ranked first, RELATED answers second, and
IRRELEVANT answers third. We then train an
SVM ranker (Joachims, 2002), and add its scores
as additional features. We also scale ranking fea-
tures to [0, 1] and map scores into 10 bins in the
[0, 1] range, with each bin assigned a binary fea-
ture. If a score falls into a certain bin, its matching
binary feature fires.

We found such ranking scores to be a valu-
able addition in our experiments. To understand
why, we note that they are able to neatly sepa-
rate the different labels, with the following av-
erage scores: DIRECT 14.5, RELATED 12.3, and
IRRELEVANT 10.5.

3.4 Rule-based Ranking
In addition to the machine learning approaches,
we adapted our rule-based model, which ranked
2nd in the competition (Nicosia et al., 2015). The
basic idea is to rank the comments according to
their similarity and label the top ones as DIRECT .

In this case our preprocessing consists of stem-
ming, performed with QATARA (Darwish et al.,
2014), and again stopword removal. In our imple-
mentation, the score of a comment is computed as

score(c) =
1
|q|

∑
t∈q∩c

α · ω(t) + pos(t)

where ω(t) = 1 if t is a 1-gram, 4 if it is a 2-gram,
and pos(t) represents the relative position of t in
the question and is estimated as the length of q
minus the position of t in q. That is, we give sig-
nificantly more relevance to 2-grams and to those
matching n-grams at the beginning of the ques-
tion. We compute this score twice: once consid-
ering the subject and once considering the body of
the question, and sum them together to get the fi-
nal score. In the first case, α = 1.1; in the second
case, α = 1.

We map the scores of comments c1, . . . , c5 ∈
C into the range [0, 1] such that the best ranked
comment gets a score of 1.0, and assign a label to
comment c as follows:

class(c) =


DIRECT if 0.8 ≤ score(c)
RELATED if 0.2 ≤ score(c) < 0.8
IRREL otherwise

All the parameters and thresholds in this rule-
based approach were manually tuned on the train-
ing data.

186



Development Test
P R F1 A P R F1 A

Vectors 80.44 78.13 78.67 83.60 71.22 70.92 70.99 76.32
Similarity 70.53 67.03 68.41 76.20 64.91 64.16 64.51 71.63
Ranking rules 87.88 85.99 86.73 90.10 77.88 77.44 77.61 82.42
Vecs + Sim 79.74 78.27 78.62 83.20 71.10 70.77 70.85 76.22
Vecs + Rank-rules 89.75 87.77 88.49 91.20 79.59 78.94 79.25 83.42
Sim + Rank-rules 88.05 86.16 86.89 90.20 78.37 77.89 78.10 82.72
Vecs + Sim + Rank-rules 89.58 87.62 88.32 91.10 79.40 78.88 79.13 83.32
#Vecs + Sim + Rank-rules 90.06 88.45 89.17 91.50 80.17 77.82 78.87 82.92
QCRI 78.55 83.02
VectorSLU 70.99 76.32
HITSZ-ICRC 67.70 74.53
al-bayan 67.65 74.53

Table 3: Results on the development and test sets. Top-performing (primary) submissions at competition
time are included for comparison.

4 Experiments and Results

The aim of our experiments is to explore each
set of features both isolated and combined. Thus
we isolate rule-based features from similarity fea-
tures and from vector-based features. In our
experiments we combined vector-based and sta-
tistical ranking features, following our previous
work (Belinkov et al., 2015). Note that the rule-
based ranking system (Section 3.4) does not pro-
duce any features. Instead, we binarize its out-
put to produce the features to be combined with
the rest. We train and tune all the models on the
training and development sets and perform a final
evaluation on the test set. This experimental de-
sign mimics the competition setting, making the
figures directly comparable.

Table 3 shows the results. It is worth noting that
the performance of the different feature sets is al-
ready competitive with respect to the top models
at competition time. On the development set, we
found it useful to run an SVM ranker on the en-
tire set of features and convert its ranking to pre-
dictions as follows: the top scoring comment is
DIRECT , next best is RELATED , and all others
are IRRELEVANT . This heuristic (marked with
”#” in the table) produced the best results on the
development set, but was not as successful on the
test set. Instead, we observe that the best perform-
ing system is obtained by combining vectors and
rule-based ranking, achieving 79.25 F1 and out-
performing the best result from the SemEval 2015
task.

4.1 Error Analysis

We analyzed a sample of errors made by a pre-
liminary version of our system. We focused
on the case of RELATED answers predicted as
IRRELEVANT , as this was the largest source of
errors. See Appendix A for examples of common
errors. The analysis indicates the following trends:

• Under-specification: RELATED answers tend
to have a smaller vocabulary overlap with the
question, compared to DIRECT answers (c.f.
Figure 1).

• Over-specification: RELATED answers
sometimes contain multiple other terms that
are not directly related to the question.

• Non-trivial overlap: occasionally, questions
and answers may be related through syn-
onyms or through lemmas rather than surface
forms.

These observations shed some light on the con-
tribution of our different features. In cases of
under- or over-specification, text similarity fea-
tures help the classifier determine the correct an-
swer. Cases of non-trivial overlap require other
solutions. We use lemmatization and stemming
to collapse different surface forms. Finally, our
vector-based features can capture synonyms be-
tween question and answer, thanks to their prop-
erty of similar words having similar vectors.

187



5 Related Work

The SemEval 2015 Task 3 was the first to include
an answer selection in community question an-
swering task as far as we know. Previously, the
importance of cQA to the Arab world has been
recognized by Darwish and Magdy (2013), who
mention two such forums: Google Ejabat, akin to
Yahoo! Answers; and the Fatwa corpus. The au-
thors identify several research problems for cQA,
two of which resemble the answer selection task:
their (3) ranking questions and answers; and (4)
classifying answers.

Other efforts have been conducted on the analy-
sis and exploitation of non-Arabic cQA data. Nam
et al. (2009) analyzed a Korean cQA forum and
identified interesting patterns of participation. For
instance, users asking for questions do not answer
to others’ and vice versa, and they tend to ”special-
ize” on a number of categories rather than partici-
pate all across the forum. The recognition of their
peers (by means of a scoring schema) motivates
the top users to more and better responses to ques-
tions. Whether these patterns remain in other fora
represents an interesting problem for future re-
search. Bian et al. (2008) aimed at ranking factoid
answers to questions in Yahoo! Answers to iden-
tify the most appealing ones in terms of relevance
to the topic and quality. In addition to text-based
features (e.g., similarity between question and an-
swer), they took advantage of user-interaction in-
formation including the number of answers previ-
ously posted by the user and the number of ques-
tions that they ”resolved”, determined by the ques-
tion poster.

Non-community Arabic question answering has
received a little more attention. The Question An-
swering for Machine Reading (QA4MRE) task in-
cluded Arabic data sets in both its 2012 and 2013
editions (Peñas et al., 2012; Sutcliffe et al., 2013),
although only the 2012 instantiation attracted par-
ticipating teams for the Arabic task. This task
focused on answering multiple choice questions
by retrieving relevant passages. Participating sys-
tems used mostly information retrieval methods
and question classification. For more details on
this and other Arabic question answering efforts
we refer to (Darwish and Magdy, 2013; Ezzeldin
and Shaheen, 2012).

6 Summary

In this work we tackled the problem of answer se-
lection in a community question answering Ara-
bic forum, consisting of religious questions and
answers. We explored a wide range of features
in a supervised setting and achieved state-of-the-
art performance on the SemEval 2015 Task 3.
We demonstrated that using features of different
kinds, along with raw Arabic corpora and exist-
ing preprocessing tools, is important for address-
ing the challenges of this task.

To conclude, we note some drawbacks of the
Fatwa corpus: it was created by artificially re-
trieving answers that are not originally linked
to the answer. This makes the detection of
IRRELEVANT answers quite trivial, as observed
by Nakov et al. (2015). In addition, there is little
sense in using contextual information from differ-
ent answers to the same question when some of
them are retrieved randomly. We believe that fu-
ture endeavors should focus on more natural com-
munity question answering forums in Arabic, for
example Google Ejabat.

Acknowledgments

This research is developed by the Arabic Lan-
guage Technologies (ALT) group at Qatar Com-
puting Research Institute (QCRI), Hamad bin
Khalifa University, within the Qatar Foundation in
collaboration with MIT. It is part of the Interactive
sYstems for Answer Search (Iyas) project.

References
Lloyd Allison and Trevor Dix. 1986. A bit-string

longest-common-subsequence algorithm. Inf. Pro-
cess. Lett., 23(6):305–310, December.

Maha Alrabiah, AbdulMalik Al-Salman, and Eric
Atwell. 2013. The design and construction of the 50
million words KSUCCA King Saud University Cor-
pus of Classical Arabic. In Proceedings of WACL-2.

Yonatan Belinkov, Mitra Mohtarami, Scott Cyphers,
and James Glass. 2015. VectorSLU: A continuous
word vector approach to answer selection in com-
munity question answering systems. In Proceedings
of the 9th International Workshop on Semantic Eval-
uation, SemEval ’15, Denver, Colorado, USA.

Jiang Bian, Yandong Liu, Eugene Agichtein, and
Hongyuan Zha. 2008. Finding the Right Facts in
the Crowd: Factoid Question Answering over So-
cial Media. In Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’08, pages
467–476, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

188



Kareem Darwish and Walid Magdy. 2013. Arabic in-
formation retrieval. Foundations and Trends R© in
Information Retrieval, 7(4):239–342.

Kareem Darwish, Ahmed Abdelali, and Hamdy
Mubarak. 2014. Using Stem-Templates to Im-
prove Arabic POS and Gender/Number Tagging. In
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2014). European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Ahmed Ezzeldin and Mohamed Shaheen. 2012. A
survey of Arabic question answering: Challenges,
tasks, approaches, tools, and future trends. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Arabic Conference on
Information Technology (ACIT).

Yongshuai Hou, Cong Tan, Xiaolong Wang, Yaoyun
Zhang, Jun Xu, and Qingcai Chen. 2015. HITSZ-
ICRC: Exploiting classification approach for answer
selection in community question answering. In Pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluation, SemEval ’15, Denver, Colorado,
USA.

Paul Jaccard. 1901. Étude comparative de la distribu-
tion florale dans une portion des Alpes et des Jura.
Bulletin del la Société Vaudoise des Sciences Na-
turelles, 37:547–579.

Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making Large-scale Sup-
port Vector Machine Learning Practical. In Bern-
hard Schölkopf, Christopher J. C. Burges, and
Alexander J. Smola, editors, Advances in Kernel
Methods, pages 169–184. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, USA.

Thorsten Joachims. 2002. Optimizing search en-
gines using clickthrough data. In Proceedings of the
Eighth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’02,
pages 133–142, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Thorsten Joachims. 2006. Training linear svms in lin-
ear time. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, KDD ’06, pages 217–226, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Linguistic Data Consortium. 2011. Arabic Giga-
word Fifth Edition. https://catalog.ldc.
upenn.edu/LDC2011T11.

Caroline Lyon, James Malcolm, and Bob Dickerson.
2001. Detecting short passages of similar text in
large document collections. In Proceedings of the
2001 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, EMNLP ’01, pages 118–125,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013a. Distributed Repre-
sentations of Words and Phrases and their Compo-
sitionality. In C.J.C. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling,

Z. Ghahramani, and K.Q. Weinberger, editors, Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems
26, pages 3111–3119. Curran Associates, Inc.

Tomas Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig.
2013b. Linguistic Regularities in Continuous Space
Word Representations. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT ’13, pages
746–751, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Reham Mohamed, Maha Ragab, Heba Abdelnasser,
Nagwa M. El-Makky, and Marwan Torki. 2015.
Al-Bayan: A knowledge-based system for Arabic
answer selection. In Proceedings of the 9th In-
ternational Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, Se-
mEval ’15, Denver, Colorado, USA.

Preslav Nakov, Lluı́s Màrquez, Walid Magdy, Alessan-
dro Moschitti, Jim Glass, and Bilal Randeree. 2015.
Semeval-2015 task 3: Answer selection in com-
munity question answering. In Proceedings of the
9th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation
(SemEval 2015), pages 269–281, Denver, Colorado,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kevin K. Nam, Ackerman Mark S. , and Lada A.
Adamic. 2009. Questions in, Knowledge iN?: A
study of Navers question answering community. In
Proceedings of the SIG CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, Boston, MA.

Massimo Nicosia, Simone Filice, Alberto
Barrón-Cedeño, Iman Saleh, Hamdy Mubarak,
Wei Gao, Preslav Nakov, Giovanni Da San Martino,
Alessandro Moschitti, Kareem Darwish, Lluı́s
Màrquez, Shafiq Joty, and Walid Magdy. 2015.
QCRI: Answer selection for community question
answering - experiments for Arabic and English.
In Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval ’15, Denver,
Colorado, USA.

Arfath Pasha, Mohamed Al-Badrashiny, Mona Diab,
Ahmed El Kholy, Ramy Eskander, Nizar Habash,
Manoj Pooleery, Owen Rambow, and Ryan Roth.
2014. MADAMIRA: A Fast, Comprehensive Tool
for Morphological Analysis and Disambiguation of
Arabic. In Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’14), pages 1094–1101, Reykjavik, Iceland.

Anselmo Peñas, Eduard Hovy, Pamela Forner, Álvaro
Rodrigo, Richard Sutcliffe, Caroline Sporleder, Co-
rina Forascu, Yassine Benajiba, and Petya Osenova.
2012. Overview of QA4MRE at CLEF 2012: Ques-
tion Answering for Machine Reading Evaluation.
Working Notes, CLEF.

Richard Sutcliffe, Anselmo Peñas, Eduard Hovy,
Pamela Forner, Álvaro Rodrigo, Corina Forascu,
Yassine Benajiba, and Petya Osenova. 2013.
Overview of QA4MRE Main Task at CLEF 2013.
Working Notes, CLEF.

189



Michael Wise. 1996. Yap3: Improved detection of
similarities in computer program and other texts. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh SIGCSE Tech-
nical Symposium on Computer Science Education,
SIGCSE ’96, pages 130–134, New York, NY, USA.

Appendix A. Error Analysis

Errors typically occur when there are difficulties
in finding a lexical overlap between question
and answer. This may happen due to under-
specification, where an answer is not specific
enough to the question; over-specification,
where an answer contains irrelevant material;
or non-trivial overlap, for example when an
answer contains synonyms of terms for the
questions, or when lemmas overlap but surface
forms do not. Following are examples where the
RELATED answer was wrongly predicted due to
vocabulary mismatches.

QID 123529:
؟مرحملايكلانمربتعترزيøابةيلمعلاله

DIRECT :
تاحارجلاوتاجالعلاعاونأيفرزيøالامعتساربتعيالف

قبسدقو.امهتقيقحفالتخال،مرحملايكلانمةيبطلا

ضارمألانمعاونأيفرزيøابيوادتلازاوجىلعهيبنتلا

،رظنلارصقو،بابشلابحو،هحالصإورعشلاةلازإك

[...]:اهماقرأةيلاتلاىواتفلايف،كلذريغو

RELATED :
بارعأùملسوهيلعúاىلصهلوقل،عورشميوادتلانإف

:لاقف،ىوادتنأ،úالوسراي:اولاقف،هولأسنيذلا

ءاودهلعضوالإءادعضيمللجوزعúانإف،اووادت"

هذهنمعنامالف،هيلعءانبو[...]"مرهلادحاوءادريغ

رييغتنمربتعتالةيقلخلاتاهيوشتلاةاوادمنأل،ةيلمعلا

ةرورضøًارظناهونثتسادقءاملعلانأل،مرحملاúاقلخ

[...]

Discussion: The question asks if it is allowed to
undergo laser treatments. The related answer says
that treatments are allowed based on the author-
ity of the Prophet, but does not mention laser,
whereas the direct answer refers to laser explicitly.

QID 127396:
دلبيفهعيبويعارزلالوصحملايفةرجاتملامكحام

دلبلاهعيبودلبلانماهجارخإةموكحلارظحعم،رخآ

نأملعلاعم؟اهيلإدالبلاةجاحلدوعتبابسأل،رواجم

.ةملسمريغةموكحلا

DIRECT :
مزتلينأنيملسملاريغدالبيفماقأاذإملسملاىلعف

[...]مالسإلاةعيرشنيناوقلاهذهفلاختملاممهنيناوقب

ةرجاتملامدعوروكذملانوناقلامازتلاكمزليفاذهىلعو

هنأتركذدقوـاميسالـروكذملادلبلاجراخلوصحملاب

[...]دلبلاةحلصملعوضوم

RELATED :
اممهنيناوقمرتحينأهيلعبجونامأبمهضرألخدنمف

اذهىلعو[...]،مالسإلاةعيرشنيناوقلاهذهفلاختمل

[...]ينوناقريغًالمعيلمعتنأزوجيالف

Discussion: The question asks if it is allowed to
trade farm products from a non-Muslim country
out of that country, given that the law in that
country forbids it. The related answer says that
one has to follow a non-Muslim country’s laws,
as long as they do not contradict the Islamic
law. This answer does not specifically address
the matter of selling farm products, whereas the
direct answer uses specific words that appear in
the question.

QID 59300:
ايجاتنإاضرقةلودلانمضرتقأنأنكمملانمله

الثماعنصمةلودلاكلذخأتنأباذهوابرلابيأةدئافلاب

فلأ١٠٠يلعفداكللوقتوافلأ٨٠الثمغلبمبهزهجتو

.لاثملاليبسىلعاذه

DIRECT :
زوجياليتلاةمرحملادوقعلانمةيوبرلاضورقلاف[...]

ةفرعمل،:مقرىوتفلاًامازلعجارنكلو،اهيلعمادقإلا

[...].يوبرلاضرقلاوةحبارملابكنبلاعيبنيبقرفلا

RELATED :
يفةبولطملاتاودألاءارشبموقيكنبلاناكنإف[...]

اهعيبيمثهنامضيفحبصتفاهكلمتيوليمعلاعورشم

øءارشلانمثنعديزينمثبطسقملاوألجؤملابليمع

،زئاجوهوءارشلابرمآùةحبارملاعيبىمسييذلااذهف

هنامضيفلخدتالوتاودألاهذهكلميالكنبلاناكنإو

تاودألاهذهنمثهضرقأرمألاةقيقحيفهنألزوجيالف

[...]،ابرلاوهاذهوةدئافبضرقلاعجرأمث

Discussion: The question asks whether it is
allowed to borrow with interest from the state,
for example when the state builds a factory for
someone. Both the direct and related answers
are very similar, pointing to a difference between
interest loans and ownership of something by the
bank. The related answer refers to equipment,
which is different from the factory asked about
in the question, while the direct answer does not
refer to anything specifically.

190


