



















































Classification and Acquisition of Contradictory Event Pairs using Crowdsourcing


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on EVENTS at the NAACL-HLT 2015, pages 99–107,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Classification and Acquisition of Contradictory Event Pairs
using Crowdsourcing

Yu Takabatake1 Hajime Morita1,2 Daisuke Kawahara1
Sadao Kurohashi1,2 Ryuichiro Higashinaka3 Yoshihiro Matsuo3

1 Kyoto University 2 CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency
3 NTT Media Intelligence Laboratories

takabatake@nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, {hmorita, dk, kuro}@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp,
{higashinaka.ryuichiro, matsuo.yoshihiro}@lab.ntt.co.jp

Abstract

We propose a taxonomy of contradictory event
pairs and a method for building a database
of such pairs. When a dialog system partici-
pates in an open-domain conversation with a
human, it is important to avoid the generation
of utterances that conflict with the context of
the dialog. Here, we refer to a pair of events
that are not able to co-occur or that are not in-
consistent with each other as a contradictory
event pair. In this study, we collected contra-
dictory event pairs using crowdsourcing and
constructed a taxonomy of such pairs. We also
built a large-scale database of Japanese contra-
dictory event pairs for each class using crowd-
sourcing. This database will be used for con-
sistent utterance generation in dialog systems.

1 Introduction

In recent years, speech dialog systems such as Siri
have become widespread. A user of such sys-
tems can obtain weather and traffic information by
speaking to his/her smartphone. Although such
information-seeking applications are now used in
our daily lives, natural open-domain conversations
are also expected.

Current open-domain conversation functions not
only repeat single isolated utterances, but can also
maintain previous dialog logs and conduct multi-
tern conversations. However, many technical prob-
lems must be solved to generate natural utterances
in the context of conversations.

In open-domain conversations, it is necessary to
talk about related things. Such relatedness can be

automatically learned from a large corpus, but a sim-
ple strategy of saying related things can lead to a
nonsensical utterance as follows:

U: I like traveling, but I’ve never been to Paris.
S: Have you ever climbed the Eiffel Tower?

In this conversation, the system utterance (S) was
generated using the keyword “Eiffel Tower,” which
is related to “Paris” in the user utterance (U). How-
ever, because “having never been to Paris” and “hav-
ing climbed the Eiffel Tower” are contradictory, this
system utterance is totally unacceptable. To conduct
natural conversations, it is necessary to cope with
contradictory phenomena.

In the field of natural language processing, contra-
dictions have been dealt with in recognizing textual
entailment (RTE), but there have been no studies that
classify contradictory phenomena, to the best of our
knowledge. In this study, we collected contradictory
event pairs using crowdsourcing and constructed a
taxonomy of such pairs. Furthermore, based on
the contradiction taxonomy, we built a large-scale
database of Japanese contradictory event pairs using
crowdsourcing.

2 Related Work
There are several studies related to this research, in-
cluding recognition and acquisition of contradictory
event pairs (Harabagiu et al., 2006; Hashimoto et
al., 2012; Kloetzer et al., 2013), acquisition of world
knowledge (Fujita et al., 2014; Inui et al., 2005), and
quality control of crowdsourced products (Whitehill
et al., 2009). In contrast, we construct a taxon-
omy of contradictory event pairs, and thus the aim
is different. However, our taxonomy could assist

99



the recognition and acquisition methods proposed in
these studies.

2.1 Recognition of Contradictory Event Pairs
As mentioned above, the recognition of contradic-
tory event pairs is related to RTE. In some RTE
tasks, contradiction is one of the relations between
text and hypothesis. For example, Harabagiu et
al. (2006) proposed a method to recognize contra-
dictions between texts using negation expressions,
antonyms, and discourse analysis.

Recognition of contradictory event pairs plays an
important role in the systems that detect contra-
dictions between information extracted from web
texts. For example, there are several systems that
detect contradictory information, such as WISDOM
(Akamine et al., 2009), Statement Map (Murakami
et al., 2009), and Dispute Finder (Ennals et al.,
2010).

2.2 Acquisition of Contradictory Event Pairs
Hashimoto et al. (2012) and Kloetzer et al. (2013)
proposed methods for acquiring contradictory event
pairs. Hashimoto et al. (2012) collected Japanese
contradictory and consistent event pairs using tem-
plates of semantic polarities that indicate excitatory,
inhibitory, and neutral properties. A template con-
sists of a particle and a predicate, such as “を (parti-
cle)破壊する (destroy)” and “を (particle)進行させ
る (develop).” They collected one million contradic-
tory event pairs, such as “ガンを破壊する (destroy
cancer)” and “ガンを進行させる (develop cancer),”
with a precision of 70% in their experiments. Most
of the pairs were categorized as simultaneous con-
tradiction, in particular, as continuous or binary con-
tradiction in our taxonomy (described later). Kloet-
zer et al. (2013) refined this method and collected
75,000 contradictory event pairs with a precision of
80%.

2.3 Construction of World Knowledge
Fujita et al. (2014) and Inui et al. (2005) proposed
a method for constructing world knowledge. Both
methods focus on causal knowledge among world
knowledge and automatically collected such knowl-
edge for Japanese. Fujita et al. (2014) extracted text
fragments preceding and following the conjunction
“のに (but),” aiming to collect expressions indicat-
ing events that are unexpected by the author of the

text. They finally extracted a small number of causal
event pairs (approximately 1,400 pairs) from com-
munity question answering texts.

Inui et al. (2005) defined four types of causal re-
lations between events based on whether the event
is an action or a situation. They classified sentences
that included the conjunction “ため (because)” into
the four types of relations. They achieved a preci-
sion of over 95% with a recall of 80% for three types
of relations (“cause,” “precondition” and “means”),
and achieved a precision of 90% and a recall of 30%
for the fourth relation, “effect.”

2.4 Quality Control of Crowdsourced Products

There are two common approaches to quality control
of crowdsourced products. Whitehill et al. (2009)
proposed a probabilistic method for combining the
labels of multiple crowdworkers to acquire reliable
labels. Their method outperforms the commonly-
used majority voting. The second approach is to
measure the reliability of crowdworkers using gold
standard data. We used both approaches to build a
large-scale database of contradictory event pairs via
crowdsourcing.

3 Taxonomy of Contradictory Event Pairs

3.1 Collecting Contradictory Event Pairs

To construct a taxonomy of contradictory event
pairs, we need to investigate real examples of such
pairs. To obtain a large number and variety of con-
tradictory event pairs, we employed crowdsourcing,
which can employ a large number of people to per-
form micro-tasks inexpensively and over a short pe-
riod of time. We used Yahoo! crowdsourcing1 as a
crowdsourcing service.

Considering future applications of the resulting
taxonomy in open-domain dialog systems, we fo-
cused on two domains: “gourmet” and “traveling.”
We first prepared sentences referring to events spe-
cific to each domain. Presenting the domain and one
of its specific sentences (hereafter, called a target
sentence), we asked crowdworkers to write contra-
dictory sentences. We asked crowdworkers to avoid
writing self-contradictory sentences such as “The
sun rises in the west.” as well as sentences that
are unrelated to the target sentence, such as “It’s my

1http://crowdsourcing.yahoo.co.jp/

100



birthday today.” for the target sentence “It’s raining
today.”

We prepared 15 target sentences for each domain,
and asked 20 crowdworkers to write five contradic-
tory sentences for each target sentence. That is, we
collected 100 contradictory sentences for each tar-
get sentence. For example, presenting the domain
“gourmet” and the target sentence “I love Chinese
cuisine,” we obtained contradictory sentences such
as “I don’t like Chinese cuisine.” and “I’ve eaten
only Japanese cuisine.”

3.2 Basic Idea

When classifying collected contradictory event
pairs, the interpretation of these sentences can be
a problem. For example, the event pair ⟨being in
Tokyo, being in Kyoto⟩ is not contradictory if the
events happen at different times, but is contradictory
when they happen simultaneously. The event pair
⟨the pasta tastes delicious, he didn’t eat the pasta⟩ is
not contradictory if the subject knew that the pasta
was delicious but did not eat it for some other rea-
son. However, for the event pair ⟨he ate the pasta,
and the pasta tasted delicious⟩, if the former event is
“he didn’t eat the pasta,” such an event pair is con-
tradictory because the subject cannot know that the
pasta that he did not eat tasted delicious.

Therefore, we do not interpret the collected
event pair sentences, but instead examine the possi-
ble variations of contradictory phenomena between
these event pairs by only referring to the original
sentences.

As discussed above, it is necessary to discrim-
inate whether an event pair occurs simultaneously
or has a temporal or order relation to judge if it is
contradictory. We call the former type a simulta-
neous contradiction, such as ⟨being in Tokyo, be-
ing in Kyoto⟩. We call the latter type a transitional
contradiction, such as ⟨he didn’t eat the pasta, the
pasta tasted delicious⟩. In this way, we first classify
contradictory event pairs into simultaneous contra-
dictions and transitional contradictions.

The rest of this section further classifies both si-
multaneous contradictions and transitional contra-
dictions. Table 1 summarizes our taxonomy of con-
tradictory event pairs and lists examples.

Simultaneous contradictions
(1-a) binary ⟨a coin comes up heads,

a coin comes up tails⟩
⟨eating pasta, not eating pasta⟩

(1-b) discrete ⟨eating pasta, eating ramen⟩
⟨being in Tokyo, being in Osaka⟩
⟨this is my first time traveling overseas,

this is my second time traveling overseas⟩
(1-c) continuous ⟨the dish is expensive, the dish is cheap⟩

⟨the sky is clear, it is raining⟩
⟨the cake is delicious, the cake is disgusting⟩

(1-d) sequential
event

⟨getting on a bus, getting off a bus⟩
⟨reserving it, canceling it⟩

(1-e) counterpart
perspective

⟨I sell a cake, I buy a cake⟩
⟨shooting a gun, being shot by a gun⟩

Transitional contradictions
(2-a) former

negation
⟨not standing for an election, being elected⟩
⟨not eating pasta, the pasta tasted delicious⟩

(2-b) latter
negation

⟨entering a ramen shop, not eating ramen⟩
⟨entering an Italian restaurant,

ordering buckwheat noodles⟩
Table 1: Our taxonomy of contradictory event pairs with
examples. Examples are translated into English.

3.3 Simultaneous Contradictions
When a pair of two events occurs simultaneously,
contradictions of such pairs have a strong relation
with negation, such as ⟨having a meal, not having
a meal⟩ and ⟨eating to excess, eating moderately⟩.
There are also contradictory event pairs based on
sibling relations, such as ⟨being in Tokyo, being in
Kyoto⟩, where “Tokyo” and “Kyoto” have a sibling
relation. We therefore classify negation and sibling
relations into binary (e.g., “single” and “married”),
discrete (e.g., “Tokyo” and “Kyoto”), and continu-
ous (e.g., “expensive” and “cheap”).

Furthermore, negation has the following two
classes that can cause contradictions (Izumi et al.,
2014): sequential event relations, such as “getting
on” and “getting off,” and counterpart perspective
relations, such as “selling” and “buying.” We added
these classes to our taxonomy. The subclasses of si-
multaneous contradictions are detailed below.

1-a. binary When an event pair includes mutually
exclusive antonyms (e.g., “single” and “mar-
ried”) or a predicate and its negation (e.g., “go-
ing” and “not going”), these events are contra-
dictory. We call such contradictory event pairs
binary.

1-b. discrete When an event pair consists of pred-
icates or arguments that have sibling relations,
such as ⟨being in Tokyo, being in Kyoto⟩ and

101



⟨eating pasta, eating ramen⟩, these events are
contradictory.2 We call such contradictory
event pairs discrete pairs to discriminate them
from the next class, “continuous.” We also in-
clude contradictory event pairs caused by nu-
merical values in the discrete class such as ⟨this
is my first time traveling overseas, this is my
second time traveling overseas⟩.

1-c. continuous When an event pair consists of
antonym predicates that represent continuous
states, such as “expensive” and “cheap,” these
events are contradictory. We call such con-
tradictory event pairs continuous. In addition
to ⟨being expensive, being cheap⟩, ⟨being ex-
pensive, not being expensive⟩ and ⟨being ex-
tremely expensive, being a little expensive⟩ are
also contradictory event pairs. Since continu-
ous states are not necessarily one-dimensional,
various continuous event pairs can be con-
tradictory, such as ⟨it’s clear, it’s raining⟩,
⟨it’s clear, it’s stormy⟩, and ⟨it’s snowing, it’s
raining⟩.

1-d. sequential event relations Sequential event
pairs, such as ⟨getting on a bus, (and then)
getting off a bus⟩, are not contradictory if time
goes by between the two events. However,
when we consider ⟨getting on a bus, getting
off a bus⟩ as a pair of simultaneous events, this
event pair is contradictory.

1-e. counterpart perspective relations
Counterpart perspective events such as ⟨I
sell a book to him, he buys a book from me⟩
are not contradictory if these event descriptions
indicate the same event from a different view.
However, when we consider ⟨I sell a book to
him, I buy a book from him⟩ as a simultaneous
event with the same participants, this event
pair is contradictory.

For an event pair of simultaneous contradictions,
event pairs where one of the events is replaced by its
synonymous event are also regarded as simultane-
ous contradictions. For example, ⟨tasting delicious,
not tasting delicious⟩ is a “simultaneous contradic-

2Event pairs that have a sibling relation in their arguments
are not always contradictory, as in ⟨I like Toyotas, I like
Nissans⟩.

tion: continuous,” and thus ⟨tasting nice, not tasting
delicious⟩, where “tasting delicious” is synonymous
with “tasting nice,” is also classified as a “simulta-
neous contradiction: continuous.”

3.4 Transitional Contradictions
Transitional contradictions are a relation between
two events that have a temporal or order relation. We
call the event that happens earlier the former event
and the event that happens later the latter event, and
represent this relation as A;B. When A and B have
such a temporal or order relation, a pair of ⟨¬A, B⟩
or ⟨A, ¬B⟩ is contradictory if one of the following
conditions is satisfied.

2-a. former negation Under A;B, there is a case
such that A is a precondition for B. For exam-
ple, for the event pair ⟨having a passport, go-
ing overseas⟩, the precondition for “going over-
seas” is “having a passport.” For such a rela-
tion, the negation of the precondition (¬A) is
contradictory to B. For the passport example,
⟨not having a passport, going overseas⟩ is con-
tradictory.

2-b. latter negation Under A;B, when A gener-
ally leads B, the negation of B is contradic-
tory to A. For example, the event “entering
a restaurant” generally leads to the event “or-
dering something.” Accordingly, ⟨entering a
restaurant, not ordering something⟩, which is
made by negating B, is contradictory.

The above classification for A;B is based on a
temporal or order relation between A and B. This
can be also interpreted from another viewpoint as
follows. For the former negation class of A;B, it
generally holds that if B is true, A is true as a pre-
condition (e.g., “if going overseas, a traveler has a
passport”), and A is negated to be a contradictory
event pair. For the latter negation class of A;B, it
generally holds that if A is true, B is true, and negat-
ing B leads to be a contradictory event pair. That is
to say, the above classes are the negation of the for-
mer event and the latter event, respectively, from the
viewpoint of a temporal or order relation, but they
are also the negation of consequences from the view-
point of an if-then relation.

For transitional contradictions, it is difficult to de-
fine the extent of generally accepted common sense.

102



If we suppose real-world event pairs, it is very rare
that if-then relations absolutely hold. That is, we can
easily think of a counterexample that does not satisfy
an if-then relation. Furthermore, if there are some
cases that do not meet an if-then relation, we do not
believe that its former negation or latter negation is
contradictory. For example, we can easily think of
counterexamples for “if going to a spa, he/she wears
a summer kimono,” and thus we do not believe that
the event pair ⟨going to a spa, not wearing a summer
kimono⟩ is contradictory.
3.5 Multistage Inference Contradictions
There are contradictory event pairs based on mul-
tistage inferences. For example, ⟨I made a supper
using leftovers, I had a full course dinner⟩ is a con-
tradictory event pair. First, we can generally accept
the following event relations: ⟨I made a supper using
leftovers, I ate a few dishes for supper⟩ and ⟨I had
a full course dinner, I ate many dishes for dinner.⟩
Here, ⟨I ate a few dishes for supper, I ate many
dishes for dinner⟩ is classified as a “simultaneous
contradiction: continuous” (1-c), and thus ⟨I made a
supper using leftovers, I had a full course dinner⟩ is
a result of these inferences.

4 Data Construction by Crowdsourcing

We constructed domain-specific contradictory event
pairs using crowdsourcing, exploiting their classi-
fications explained in the previous section. Con-
sidering the application to open-domain conversa-
tional systems, we selected 12 domains: “gourmet,”
“travel,” “weather,” “sports,” “life,” “political
and economic,” “child-rearing,” “learn,” “health,”
“work,” “baseball,” and “shopping.”

To construct the data, we presented a domain to
crowdworkers and asked them to create domain-
specific contradictory event pairs. However, it is ac-
tually difficult to make this a single complete task.
In crowdsourcing, a task is supposed to be relatively
simple so that it may be done in a short time by ordi-
nary people. The task explanation is also ought to be
simple and quickly understandable. A complex task
that requires a long explanation increases the load
on crowdworkers and makes it difficult for the task
to be accurately completed.

In this study, the process of constructing contra-
dictory event pairs was divided into two phases, the

construction of a domain-specific sentence and con-
struction of its contradictory sentence. Furthermore,
each phase was completed using a task comprising
two stages: construction and evaluation. That is,
the process of constructing contradictory event pairs
consisted of the following four crowdsourcing tasks:
• Phase 1: Construction of domain-specific sen-

tences (target sentences).
• Phase 2: Evaluation of target sentences to de-

termine if they are actually suitable for each do-
main.

• Phase 3: Construction of contradictory sen-
tences for each target sentence.

• Phase 4: Evaluation of each pair of domain-
specific and contradictory sentences to deter-
mine if they are really contradictory.

Here, by using the classifications of contradic-
tory event pairs in Phase 3 and 4, we make the task
clearer and more simple (Sections 4.3 and 4.4 ex-
plain the details).

4.1 Phase 1: Construction of Domain-specific
Sentences (Target Sentences)

Crowdworkers were shown a domain and were
asked to submit sentences that express domain-
specific events. For the music domain, the following
examples of domain-specific events were shown to
crowdworkers: “a guitar is too noisy” and “I bought
high-quality earphones.” To make Phase 3 easier,
types of inappropriate sentences and instructions for
revising them were also presented to crowdworkers.
• Nominals: “performance of instruments” → “I

play instruments”
• Pronouns: “It’s fun to play it” → “It’s fun to

play a violin”
• Monologue: “It’s jazz!” → “I listen to jazz”
• Call/Invitation: “Let’s go to a concert” → “I

would like to go to a concert”
For each domain (out of 12 domains), we asked

100 crowdworkers to submit five sentences, that is,
we constructed 6,000 target sentences in total.

4.2 Phase 2: Evaluation of Target Sentences
We asked crowdworkers whether the target sentence
constructed in Phase 1 was really domain-specific
and met all the following criteria. Counter-examples
(CE) for each criterion in the domain of music are
shown below.

103



• It makes sense.
CE: “a component of a band is necessity to sell
a music.”

• It is domain-specific.
CE: “These noodles are delicious.”

• It is a sentence (not just a noun or verb)
CE: “chorus”, “enjoy.”

• It is not a noun phrase
CE: “favorite guitar”, “performance of instru-
ments.”

• Not including a pronoun
CE: “it’s fun to play it.”

• It is not a remark
CE: “it’s a jazz!”

• It is a call/invitation
CE: “let’s go to a concert”

• It is a interrogative
CE: “Do you like a classic music?”

We asked five crowdworkers to evaluate for each
of the target sentences in 6,000 sentences obtained
in Phase 1. For each domain, approximately 200
sentences received all positive evaluations. Based
on this result, for each domain, we selected the top
200 target sentences to use in Phase 3. To select
these top sentences, we used Whitehill’s EM-based
evaluation method (Whitehill et al., 2009), which is
widely used for the evaluation of crowdsourcing re-
sults.

4.3 Phase 3: Construction of Contradictory
Sentences

Our preliminary experiments found that it is diffi-
cult to collect transitional contradictions by just ask-
ing crowdworkers to write “some contradictory sen-
tences.” To solve this problem, we divided the task
into three smaller tasks to create, simultaneous con-
tradictions, former-negative transitional contradic-
tions, and latter-negative transitional contradictions.

Simultaneous contradictions
We asked crowdworkers to write simultaneous

contradictory sentences for a given target sentence.
To help workers understand the concept of simulta-
neous contradiction, the following examples, based
on the taxonomy described in Section 3, were
shown.
• Opposite meaning: ⟨a coin comes up heads, a

coin comes up tails⟩ or, ⟨eating pasta, not eating
pasta⟩

• Same category, but different: ⟨eating pasta, eat-
ing ramen⟩ or, ⟨I’m in Tokyo, I’m in Osaka⟩

• Difference in degree: ⟨the cake is delicious, the
cake is disgusting⟩ or, ⟨it’s clear, it is raining⟩

• Different role: ⟨I sell a cake, I buy a cake⟩ or,
⟨he shot a gun, he was shot by a gun⟩

• Simultaneous occurrence of naturally sequen-
tial events: ⟨getting on a bus, getting off a bus⟩
or, ⟨enrolling in a school, graduating from a
school⟩

The following example contradictory phrases for
“saving money” were shown to crowdworders: “sav-
ing stamps” and “spending money.” The following
cautions were also given:
• Do not write a sentence that is impossible by

itself, such as “The sun rises in the West”
• Do not write a sentence that is totally unre-

lated to a given target sentence, such as “It’s
my birthday today.” for “It’s raining.”

For each domain (out of 12 domains), we pre-
pared 200 target sentences. For each target sen-
tence, we asked 10 crowdworkers to submit more
than one contradictory sentence. As a result, after
discarding inappropriate sentences (such as single
word sentences) and merging identical sentences,
we obtained 14 contradictory sentences for each tar-
get sentence on average.

Former-negative transitional contradictions
A former-negative transitional contradiction is the

relation between an event and the negation of its pre-
condition. For crowdworkers, however, it is eas-
ier to consider preconditions for a target sentence
than, consider the precondition negations. There-
fore, we asked crowdworkers to write preconditions
to a given target sentence.

As example of preconditions for “being elected,”
“standing for election” and “being eligible for elec-
tion” were shown to crowdworkers. The following
cautions were also given to them.
• Do not write an unrelated or mostly un-related

sentence for a given target sentence, such as
“there is air.” to “The candidate is elected.”

For each domain (out of 12 domains), we pre-
pared 200 target sentences. For each target sentence,
we asked 10 crowdworkers to submit more than one
contradictory sentence. As a result, we obtained 17
precondition sentences for each target sentence on
average.

104



Latter-negative transitional contradictions
A latter-negative transitional contradiction is the

relation between an event and the negation of the
event that generally follows it. However, simi-
larly to the case of former-negative transitional con-
tradictions, it is easier for crowdworkers to con-
sider generally-following events than their nega-
tions. Therefore, we asked crowdworkers to write
sentences that generally follow a given target sen-
tence. We modified target sentences to be past tense
in order to emphasize that former events expressed
by the target sentences had already happened, and
that we were interested in the following events.

As example events that generally follow “I went
to a hot spring.”, “I wash one’s body.” and “I soak
in a hot spring.” were shown to crowdworkers. The
following cautions were also given to them.

• Do not write a sentences that is unrelated or
mostly unrelated to a given target sentence,
such as “The next day comes” for “He stood
as a candidate.”

Similarly to the case of former-negative tran-
sitional contradictions, we obtained 17 generally-
following sentences for each target sentence on av-
erage.

4.4 Phase 4: Evaluation of Contradictory
Sentence Pairs

Evaluations using crowdsourcing were performed
for each of the three categories.

Simultaneous contradictions
We asked crowdworkers if a pair of the target and

contradictory sentences was really contradictory.
We asked five crowdworkers to evaluate for each

of the 34,900 simultaneous contradiction pairs ob-
tained in Phase 3. As a result, 77% of the pairs re-
ceived more than two positive answers.

Former-negative transitional contradictions
We modified the preconditions collected in Phase

3 into a negative form automatically. We then asked
crowdworkers if a pair of target sentence and its
negated precondition was really contradictory.

We asked five crowdworkers to evaluate each pair
in 41,300 former-negative transitional contradiction
pairs. As a result, 49% of the pairs received more
than two positive answers.

simultaneous contradiction
binary ⟨going to Tokyo by plane,

going to Tokyo, but not by plane⟩
⟨making a plan, planning nothing⟩

discrete ⟨going to Las Vegas on vacation,
going to Hawaii on vacation⟩

⟨going to Tokyo by air, going to Tokyo by train⟩
continuous ⟨I find overseas travel hard,

I find overseas travel easy⟩
⟨the guide was very kind, the guide was unkind⟩

sequential event ⟨checking into a hotel, checking out of a hotel⟩
relations ⟨booking a tour abroad,

canceling a tour abroad⟩
counterpart perspective ⟨staying at a hotel, accomodating a guest⟩
relations
Transitional Contradictions
former negation ⟨not buying flight ticket,

going to Tokyo by plane⟩
⟨not applying for a passport,

going to Las Vegas on vacation⟩
⟨not arriving at a hotel, checking into a hotel ⟩
⟨I have never traveled abroad,

I find hard overseas travel difficult⟩
latter negation ⟨booking a tour abroad,

not applying for a passport⟩
⟨going to Tokyo by plane,

not landing at the airport⟩
⟨going to Las Vegas to play,

not taking a plane trip⟩
⟨staying at a hotel, not receiving a room key⟩

Table 2: Examples of contradictory event pairs obtained
by crowdsourcing. Examples have been translated into
English.

Latter-negative transitional contradictions
We modified the generally-following sentences

collected in Phase 3 into a negative form automat-
ically. We then asked crowdworkers if a pair of the
target sentence and its negated generally-following
sentence is really contradictory.

We asked five crowdworkers to evaluate for each
of the 42,080 latter-negative transitional contradic-
tion pairs. As a result, 37% of the pairs received
more than two positive answers.

4.5 Discussion

As a result of the series of crowdsourcing tasks, we
constructed 118,380 contradictory event pairs, each
of which has been evaluations by five crowdworkers.

To make the crowdsourcing tasks clearer, we di-
vided the tasks into three categories according to our
taxonomy. However, we sometimes obtained miss-
classified contradictory pairs in each category. For
example, we acquired ⟨I have no credit card, I buy
something with my credit card⟩ as a simultaneous
contradiction, but we classify it as a former-negative

105



 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

 0  5000  10000  15000  20000  25000  30000  35000

co
nt

or
ad

ic
to

ry
 p

ro
ba

bi
lit

y

rank of the obtained pair

Figure 1: Contradictory probabilities distribution for si-
multaneous contradiction pairs.

transitional contradiction.
The distributions of contradictory probabilities of

the constructed pairs calculated by the Whitehill’s
EM-based method is shown in Figures 1, 2 and 3.
Because negation, antonym and sibling relation are
relatively clear, we were able to obtain high-quality
data for simultaneous contradiction. However, the
number of contradictory event pairs with a high
probability became smaller for former-negative tran-
sitional contradictions, and much smaller for latter-
negative ones.

In the case of latter-negative transitional contra-
dictions, for example, ⟨the Japanese legislature was
dissolved, there are no breaking news stories⟩ has
a probability of 0.8, and it can be considered as a
widely-acceptable contradictory event pair. How-
ever, ⟨I watched a baseball broadcast, I did not enjoy
the baseball game⟩ has a probability of 0.5 and we
feel that it is not necessarily a contradiction. Be-
cause the judgment of a transitional contradiction
is based on common knowledge or the life-style of
each person, its contradictory probabilitiy often de-
creases.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed a taxonomy of contra-
dictory event pairs. We first discriminated between
simultaneous contradictions and transitional contra-
dictions, and then classified these further. The event
pair ⟨having never been to Paris, having climbed the
Eiffel Tower⟩, which was mentioned in Section 1,
is classified as a “transitional contradiction: former
negation” (2-a).

Based on our taxonomy, we built a large-scale
database of Japanese contradictory event pairs for

 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

 0  5000  10000  15000  20000  25000  30000  35000  40000  45000

co
nt

or
ad

ic
to

ry
 p

ro
ba

bi
lit

y

rank of the obtained pair

Figure 2: Contradictory probabilities distribution for
former-negative transitional contradiction pairs.

 0

 0.1

 0.2

 0.3

 0.4

 0.5

 0.6

 0.7

 0.8

 0.9

 1

 0  5000  10000  15000  20000  25000  30000  35000  40000  45000

co
nt

or
ad

ic
to

ry
 p

ro
ba

bi
lit

y

rank of the obtained pair

Figure 3: Contradictory probobility distribution for latter-
negative transitional contradiction.

each class using crowdsourcing. As a result, we
obtained more than 100,000 possible contradictory
event pairs in total, and out of these, over 60,000
event pairs can be accepted as contradictory event
pairs based on the evaluations of crowdworkers.

In the future, we intend to develop an open-
domain conversational system that does not generate
contradictory utterances on the basis of the acquired
contradiction database.

106



References
Susumu Akamine, Daisuke Kawahara, Yoshikiyo Kato,

Tetsuji Nakagawa, Kentaro Inui, Sadao Kurohashi, and
Yutaka Kidawara. 2009. WISDOM: A web infor-
mation credibility analysis system. In Proceedings of
ACL-IJCNLP2009 Software Demonstrations, pages 1–
4.

Rob Ennals, Beth Trushkowsky, and John Mark Agosta.
2010. Highlighting disputed claims on the web. In
Proceedings of the 19th international conference on
World wide web, pages 341–350. ACM.

Hiroshi Fujita, Akira Fujita, and Naoyoshi Tamura.
2014. Extracting implicit causal knowledge using the
conjunctive marker noni (in Japanese). IEICE techni-
cal report. Natural language understanding and mod-
els of communication, 114(366):61–66, dec.

Sanda Harabagiu, Andrew Hickl, and Finley Lacatusu.
2006. Negation, contrast and contradiction in text pro-
cessing. In Proceedings of AAAI, volume 6, pages
755–762.

Chikara Hashimoto, Kentaro Torisawa, Stijn De Saeger,
Jong-Hoon Oh, and Jun’ichi Kazama. 2012. Excita-
tory or inhibitory: A new semantic orientation extracts
contradiction and causality from the web. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP2012, pages 619–630.

Takashi Inui, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Matsumoto. 2005.
Acquiring causal knowledge from text using the con-
nective marker tame. ACM Transactions on Asian
Language Information Processing (TALIP), 4(4):435–
474.

Tomoko Izumi, Tomohide Shibata, Hisako Asano, Yoshi-
hiro Matsuo, and Sadao Kurohashi. 2014. Con-
structing a corpus of Japanese predicate phrases for
synonym/antonym relations. In Nicoletta Calzolari,
Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson,
Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno,
Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceed-
ings of the Ninth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14), pages
1394–1400, Reykjavik, Iceland, May. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA). ACL Anthol-
ogy Identifier: L14-1244.

Julien Kloetzer, Stijn De Saeger, Kentaro Torisawa,
Chikara Hashimoto, Jong-Hoon Oh, Motoki Sano, and
Kiyonori Ohtake. 2013. Two-stage method for large-
scale acquisition of contradiction pattern pairs using
entailment. In Proceedings of EMNLP2013, pages
693–703.

Koji Murakami, Eric Nichols, Suguru Matsuyoshi, Asuka
Sumida, Shouko Masuda, Kentaro Inui, and Yuji Ma-
tumoto. 2009. Statement map: Assisting information
crediblity analysis by visualizing arguments. In Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Information Credibil-
ity on the web, pages 43–50. ACM.

Jacob Whitehill, Ting fan Wu, Jacob Bergsma, Javier R.
Movellan, and Paul L. Ruvolo. 2009. Whose vote
should count more: Optimal integration of labels from
labelers of unknown expertise. In Y. Bengio, D. Schu-
urmans, J.D. Lafferty, C.K.I. Williams, and A. Culotta,
editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 22, pages 2035–2043. Curran Associates, Inc.

107


