



















































Is it possible to recover personal health information from an automatically de-identified corpus of French EHRs?


Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (Louhi), pages 31–39,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Is it possible to recover personal health information
from an automatically de-identified corpus of French EHRs?
Cyril Grouin

LIMSI-CNRS, UPR 3251
Rue John von Neuman
91400 Orsay, France
grouin@limsi.fr

Nicolas Griffon
LIMICS, INSERM U 1142

CISMeF-TIBS-LITIS, EA 4108
CHU de Rouen, 76031 Rouen

nicolas.griffon
@chu-rouen.fr

Aurélie Névéol
LIMSI-CNRS, UPR 3251

Rue John von Neuman
91400 Orsay, France
neveol@limsi.fr

Abstract

De-identification aims at preserving pa-
tient confidentiality while enabling the use
of clinical documents for furthering med-
ical research. Herein, we aim to evalu-
ate whether patient re-identification is pos-
sible on a corpus of de-identified clini-
cal documents in French. Personal Health
Identifiers are automatically marked by a
de-identification system applied to the cor-
pus, followed by reintroduction of plau-
sible surrogates. The resulting docu-
ments are shown to individuals with vary-
ing knowledge of the documents and
de-identification method. The individu-
als are asked to re-identify the patients.
The amount of information recovered in-
creases with familiarity with the doc-
uments and/or de-identification method.
Surrogate re-introduction with localiza-
tion from the same (vs. different) geo-
graphical area as the original documents
is found more effective. The amount
of information recovered was not suffi-
cient to re-identify any of the patients, ex-
cept when privileged access to the hospi-
tal health information system and several
documents about the same patient were
available.

1 Introduction

Research using clinical data requires the informed
consent of patients involved. Privacy rules and
regulation in France require that, in the absence of
informed consent, clinical records used in research
be anonymized or de-identified.

Anonymization consists in ensuring that health
data used in the research can not be linked to in-
dividual patients. Alternatively, de-identification
consists in removing or hiding personal health

identifiers found in health documents (Meystre
et al., 2010). In this study, we focus on
the result of an automatic de-identification pro-
cess. Both anonymization and de-identification
aim at preserving patient confidentiality while en-
abling the use of clinical documents for furthering
medical research. State-of-the-art automatic de-
identification methods are often evaluated for their
ability to redact a set of personal health identifiers
(PHI) from clinical documents (Meystre et al.,
2010). PHIs are defined according to the Ameri-
can Health Insurance Portability and Accountabil-
ity Act (HIPAA) of 1996∗.

In this study, we are investigating whether it is
possible for individuals to recover patients’ per-
sonal information based on the content of automat-
ically de-identified documents. We caracterize the
re-identification attempts using the skills, tools or
information at the attacker’s disposal. The targets
of the re-identification attempts can be both surro-
gates wrongly used in replacement of original PHI
and data not processed during the de-identification
step (data missed during the de-identification pro-
cess as well as data not being in the scope of this
process).

Assessing whether patients can be re-identified
after documents have been automatically de-
identified is a difficult task, since the combina-
tion of seemingly innocuous pieces of informa-
tion could endanger patient privacy (Benitez and
Malin, 2010; Barbaro and Zeller Jr, 2006). The
combination of a de-identification system that au-
tomatically tags PHIs in clinical text with the re-
placement of PHIs by plausible surrogates has
been used to create realistic modified clinical
records (Sweeney, 1996; Neamatullah et al., 2008)
that are clinically and linguistically valid. This

∗U.S. Department of Health Human Services,
1996 http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/
hipaa/administrative/privacyrule/
adminsimpregtext.pdf

31



method is also referred to as “hiding in plain
sight” obfuscation and was shown to contribute
to increase the effective recall of automatic de-
identification systems from about .94 to .99 (Car-
rell et al., 2013).

While the impact of de-identification on clini-
cal information contained in the records has been
studied (Deleger et al., 2013; Meystre et al.,
2014b), fewer efforts have addressed the effec-
tive impact on patient privacy. Encouragingly, it
was recently shown that doctors were not able to
identify patients they had recently treated when
relying on de-identified records (Meystre et al.,
2014a). There is a need for other studies that eval-
uate whether re-identification is possible based on
de-identified records.

In this study, we address re-identification at-
tempts from the perspective of making a small de-
identified clinical corpus available to the research
community in circumstances such as a shared
task or NLP challenge. Although a dataset re-
leased in the context of a shared task or challenge
would require participants to sign a user agree-
ment specifically binding recipients to not engage
in re-identification attempts, this study considers
an attack scenario where a negligent (or malig-
nant) user would overlook this requirement.

In this context, we anticipate that the corpus
would be accessed by individuals with a variety
of backgrounds including researchers, develop-
pers and clinicians. Furthermore, depending on
the type of NLP task addressed by the challenge,
there may be a need to include several documents
pertaining to the same patient (e.g., to evaluate
systems that create a cross-document patient time-
line) or not (e.g., to evaluate systems that perform
named-entity or concept recognition).

Accordingly, we consider re-identification at-
tempts by individuals with varied knowledge
of clinical records and de-identification methods
(medical doctors and computer scientists) on auto-
matically de-identified records in French. In addi-
tion, we also assess the success of re-identification
attempts on different types of datasets (documents
pertaining to the same patient, vs. random pa-
tients) and surrogate re-introduction methods (us-
ing localization information similar to that of orig-
inal documents, vs. different). The corpus used in
our study has been automatically de-identified by
a system, without any human intervention to check
the outputs produced by the automatic process.

2 Background

The release of datasets containing personal infor-
mation about the individuals who contributed to
the creation of the data raises the concern of pri-
vacy protection. When such datasets are prepared
for research purposes, the risks of privacy breach
must be assessed and weighed against the poten-
tial benefits the research conducted using the data.
In prior instances of data release, inadequate as-
sessment of the possibility of privacy breach has
led to public embarrassment and legal action (Bar-
baro and Zeller Jr, 2006). In light of this expe-
rience, extreme caution is needed prior to releas-
ing sensitive data. The case of medical data such
as those contained in Electronic Health Records
requires specific attention, since the first rule of
medical ethics as outlined in the Hippocratic Oath
is to “first, do no harm”. This makes it unethical
to release medical data that could cause harm to a
patient, e.g., through privacy breach.

The Multiparameter Intelligent Monitoring in
Intensive Care II (MIMIC-II) database (Saeed et
al., 2002; Saeed et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2011) is
an example of a success story in the clinical do-
main. In addition to applying a high-performing
automatic de-identification method, the creators of
MIMIC have drawn a data use agreement that re-
quires the users to be informed about the sensitive
nature of the data, and to contribute to privacy pro-
tection, should they identify any potential breach.
To our knowledge, this is the only clinical database
of this scale available for clinical and Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) research in English or in
any other language. Smaller de-identified clinical
datasets have also been released in conditions sim-
ilar to MIMIC in the context of international NLP
challenges, such as i2b2 with a variety of goals,
including the evaluation of de-identification meth-
ods (Uzuner et al., 2007).

We believe that studies assessing the possibil-
ity of privacy breach on realistically de-identified
data can lead to a better understanding of the risk
benefit balance for dataset release. In addition,
such studies can contribute to building confidence
in de-identification systems and methods that are
otherwise evaluated quantitatively.

32



Original EHRs
• one subset from one patient
• one subset from several patients

Documents with annotated PHI

 PHI identification (MEDINA-CRF)

Documents with plausible surrogates and residual PHI

 Identified PHI replaced by plausible surrogates
 (same or distinct geographical area)

15 documents
• same patient
• same geographical area

15 documents
• same patient
• distinct geographical area

15 documents
• several patients
• same geographical area

15 documents
• several patients
• distinct geographical area

Documents selection (inclusion criteria)

Figure 1: Production of corpora used in this study

3 Material and methods

3.1 Corpus preparation

The corpus used in this study was approved by the
French administrative authority on data privacy†

for research on Information Retrieval (IR) in large
Electronic Health Records.

Twelve types of PHIs pertaining to patients, pa-
tient relatives and health professionals were tar-
geted in our study: first names, last names, ini-
tials, addresses, cities, countries, zip codes, tele-
phone and fax numbers, email addresses, hospi-
tal names, identifiers (such as social security num-
bers or medical device serial number) and dates
(including patient date of birth).

In this study, we selected documents among the
three most frequent types in the corpus: discharge
summaries, correspondance and procedure or con-
sult report.

We assess the chances of re-identification on
a worst-case scenario, using a high-performing
automatic de-identification method (Medina-CRF,
see details below) on a corpus comprising 60 doc-
uments that will likely cause the system to fail
identifying some PHI.

Rule-based criteria for finding files that we an-
ticipate to be “hard to de-identify” for the auto-
matic tool were compiled based on an error analy-
sis.

†CNIL - Commission nationale de l’informatique et des
libertés http:www.cnil.fr

They include:

Name criteria The tool often fails to identify
complex names or part of complex names that
include a hyphen or space (e.g., Dorothy Jane,
Watterman-Smith).

Contact information criteria The tool often
fails to identify contact information that appears
in the content section of document (i.e., outside of
header/footer sections), even when introduced by
trigger words (e.g., “domicilié” residing at, “per-
sonne de confiance” support person )

Date criteria The tool often erroneously marks
dates that are not linked to the patient record, e.g.,
dates of legal procedures quoted in the patient
record. Marking these dates for replacement can
compromise the confidentiality of the other dates
in the file or record, because marked dates are
shifted by a random number of days at the step
of surrogate re-introduction.

The Medina-CRF de-identification tool for
French clinical documents was designed by one of
the authors (Developer 2). It is a statistical tool
that was trained on a corpus of 100 gold-standard
documents (Grouin and Névéol, 2014). The au-
tomatically tagged PHIs are replaced by plausible
surrogates in order to create a de-identified corpus
where PHIs may or may not pertain to the original
documents.

The idea behind surrogate introduction is to ap-
ply the “hiding in plain sight” principle, with the

33



hypothesis that original PHIs will be less conspic-
uous in the corpus among surrogate PHIs. The
original version of the surrogate replacement mod-
ule was developed by one of the authors (Devel-
oper 2) and then extended by another author (De-
veloper 1).

We assess the possibility of re-identification in
different situations, relevant to clinical NLP re-
search using de-identified records. Depending on
the aim of a study, it may be necessary to use a
corpus comprising documents pertaining to medi-
cal record of the same patient (e.g., patient time-
line analysis) or documents pertaining to different
patients (e.g., concept identification).

Our hypothesis is that re-identification might be
more difficult for a corpus of documents pertain-
ing to random patients (vs. same patients), as a
corpus of documents from the same patient pro-
vides more information about a unique patient and
also offers the possibility to cross-reference infor-
mation between documents.

We also assess the possibility of re-
identification with different settings of the
surrogate re-introduction tool. Our surrogate re-
introduction method relies on lists of surrogates
for each type of PHI that can be marked by the
de-identification tool. A setting of the tool allows
the user to select a geographical area (at the level
of French departments, equivalent to U.S. states)
for the re-introduction of surrogates for cities, zip
codes and hospitals.

We experimented with two settings of the tool,
one where the geographical area of surrogates was
the same as that of original PHIs, one where the
geographical area was different.

The corpus was divided into four sections to
study the variations in medical purpose and sur-
rogate setting (see Figure 1):

1. 15 documents pertaining to the same patient
with surrogate reintroduction from the same
geographical area

2. 15 documents pertaining to random patients
with surrogate reintroduction from the same
geographical area

3. 15 documents pertaining to the same patient
with surrogate reintroduction from a different
geographical area

4. 15 documents pertaining to random patients
with surrogate reintroduction from a different
geographical area

For files collected from the same patient, we se-
lected a random record from all records with at
least one file meeting the “hard to de-identify” cri-
teria. Then, we selected one random file meeting
the “hard to de-identify” criteria for this record,
and then selected other files randomly from the
record.

For files collected from random patients we first
selected three files meeting each type of criteria,
and then selected other files randomly.

The file selection method was automatic, so that
the authors who designed the method and partici-
pated in the annotation (Developers 1 and 2) knew
of the selection criteria, but did not have prior
knowledge of why a particular file in the corpus
had been selected.

3.2 Gold standard set development
Two sets of gold standard annotations were cre-
ated for the study corpus of 60 documents.

One gold standard set comprises annotations of
all PHIs on the original corpus (see gold stan-
dard 1 in Figure 2). It was obtained by revising the
original corpus with automatically marked PHIs.
This gold standard is used to determine the per-
formance of the de-identification tool on the study
corpus.

Another gold standard set comprises annota-
tions of the original PHIs that were not replaced
by surrogates (see gold standard 2 in Figure 2).
This was obtained by comparing the study corpus
(after surrogates were re-introduced) to the origi-
nal corpus (with automatically marked PHIs). One
annotator prepared this gold standard corpus after
they had produced their annotations on the original
corpus, in an experimental setting similar to that of
other annotators. This gold standard set is used to
determine the number of “unmarked” PHIs in the
study corpus, and to compute the performance of
annotators to identify original PHIs.

3.3 Re-identification experiment
The corpus was shown to individuals with varying
knowledge of the documents and corpus process-
ing method: one clinician practicing in the hos-
pital that supplied the corpus for this study, two
informatics researchers who designed and devel-
oped Medina (the de-identification tool and sur-
rogate re-introduction tool), and three other re-
searchers without specific knowledge of the cor-
pus or de-identification methods. Each individual
was asked to mark PHIs that they believed to be

34



original, i.e., that may reveal information about
the patients. The annotations were made using
the BRAT rapid annotation tool (Stenetorp et al.,
2012).

The annotators that were not familiar with either
the corpus or the de-identification method (Re-
searchers 1-3) were told briefly that clinical doc-
uments were processed automatically to replace
twelve types of PHIs. They were given the spe-
cific list of PHIs, which was encoded in BRAT as
categories available for creating annotations. They
were told that the automatic system was not per-
fect, and that some of the PHIs present in the doc-
uments might be original PHIs, that they had to try
and identify.

The annotators were told that the four sections
of the corpus corresponded to a document selec-
tion from either the same or random patients. Re-
searchers 1-3 were told that the geographical set-
ting of surrogate re-introduction varied between
corpus sections. However, they were not told that
one setting was the original geographical location,
while the other was not.

After the annotators had worked on the docu-
ments, they were asked to provide any specific
information on any patient that they believed to
have re-identified in the course of the study. They
could use any tool at their disposal to attempt
re-identifying the patients. In practice, the tools
used included: a generic search engine, an online
reverse look-up directory service and a hospital
health information system.

For each individual, we computed the perfor-
mance of identifying original PHIs as well as inter-
annotator agreement (IAA) with other individuals
in terms of F-measure. Performance of PHI iden-
tification and IAA were assessed both overall for
the entire corpus as well as for each of the four
sub-sections.

4 Results

Table 1 shows the distribution of PHIs in the cor-
pus. About 10.0% were original PHIs, while
90.0% were re-introduced surrogates.

Table 2 shows the detailed performance of
the automatic de-identification tool, for exact
matches. The overall performance on the corpus
was 0.93 F-measure, with 0.96 precision and 0.90
recall, which can be considered state-of-the-art.

Figure 2 shows an excerpt of a sample corpus
document. This document was selected as “hard

PHI type Total Unmarked
Last name 541 18 (3.3%)
First name 487 17 (3.5%)
Initials 39 35 (89.7%)
Address 60 21 (51.7%)
City 153 39 (25.5%)
Zip Code 67 12 (17.9%)
Phone 282 0 (0.0%)
Email 42 0 (0.0%)
Identifier 20 16 (80.0%)
Date 233 17 (7.3%)
Hospital 166 24 (14.5%)

Table 1: Distribution of total and unmarked PHIs
in the final corpus

Category Precision Recall F-measure
Last name 0.97 0.95 0.96
First name 0.98 0.96 0.97
Initials 0.67 0.05 0.09
Identifier 1.00 0.25 0.40
Hospital 0.74 0.53 0.62
Address 0.98 0.82 0.89
Zip code 1.00 0.79 0.88
City/Country 0.99 0.95 0.97
Date 0.94 0.97 0.96
E-mail 1.00 1.00 1.00
Telephone 0.99 1.00 0.99
Overall 0.96 0.90 0.93

Table 2: Performance of Medina-CRF on the study
corpus

to identify” per our contact information criteria as
it contains the trigger word “personne de confi-
ance” support person, along with a contact phone
number for the patient’s spouse. While this partic-
ular PHI was correctly identified and substituted
by the automatic system, additional information
about the patient’s family was not. Documents are
shown to annotators without any markings (pro-
cessed text). On the gold standard 2 section of
the figure, surrogate PHIs are shown in italic font,
and original PHIs (that were not substituted by the
automatic processing) are underlined. In this ex-
ample, the original PHIs were the residence loca-
tion of the patient’s children - the passage reports
“Marital Status: married. 3 Children (2 in Mar-
seille, 1 in Corse).” For this particular document,
two annotators (Developer 1 and 2) correctly iden-
tified that the two original PHIs were, indeed, orig-
inal. One annotator (Researcher 1) identified that

35



original text gold standard 1
Mary Smith Mary Smith
née le 05/08/1928 née le 05/08/1928
Mariée, 3 enfants (2 à Marseille et 1 en Corse) Mariée, 3 enfants (2 à Marseille et 1 en Corse)
Profession: sans profession Profession: sans profession
... ...
Personne de confiance: époux Tél: 06 41 69 31 72 Personne de confiance: époux Tél: 06 41 69 31 72
... ...
Pathologie pancréatique en 1993 Pathologie pancréatique en 1993
... ...
Dr. Daniel Lucas, Médecin attaché. Dr. Daniel Lucas, Médecin attaché.
processed text, shown to annotators gold standard 2
Jane Doe Jane Doe
née le 04/07/1927 née le 04/07/1927
Mariée, 3 enfants (2 à Marseille et 1 en Corse) Mariée, 3 enfants (2 à Marseille et 1 en Corse)
Profession: sans profession Profession: sans profession
... ...
Personne de confiance: époux Tél: 06 02 41 57 15 Personne de confiance: époux Tél: 06 02 41 57 15
... ...
Pathologie pancréatique en 1992 Pathologie pancréatique en 1992
... ...
Dr. Gregory House, Médecin attaché. Dr. Gregory House, Médecin attaché.

Figure 2: Sample corpus document. Original PHIs (annotated in the gold standard corpora) are
underlined. For illustration purposes on this figure, surrogate PHIs are shown in italic font.

the country PHI “Corse” was original. Relying on
their knowledge of the “hard to identify” criteria,
Developer 1 also marked the phone number “06
02 41 57 15” as original PHI, when it was in fact
a surrogate.

On average, the annotators each spent 2 hours
working on the corpus to produce the annotations.

Table 3 presents the performance of PHI iden-
tification by annotator, ordered by prior knowl-
edge of data and method; we can classify them
into three groups, represented by double bars:
advanced knowledge of both documents and
method, advanced knowledge of either documents
or method, little knowledge of either documents or
method. The table presents results for each of the
four sections of the corpus (lines 2 to 5) as well as
overall (line 6).

Table 4 presents the inter-annotator agreement
for PHI identification.

Patient re-identification using the generic search
engine and online reverse look-up directory ser-
vice was unsuccessful. However, two patients
could be re-identified using the hospital health in-
formation system.

5 Discussion

Performance of original PHI identification
Table 3 shows that overall, PHI recognition is low.
It suggests that the ability to identify original PHIs
is associated with prior knowledge of the doc-
uments and/or corpus de-identification method.
The highest PHI recognition is 0.50, which is
not very high performance. Researchers 1-3 had
no prior knowledge of either the method or the
documents. After the experiment, Researcher 1
correctly identified the hospital that supplied the
documents. No individual was able to supply
more specific information about any of the patients
based on the corpus alone.

Table 4 shows that the higher inter-annotator
agreement was observed between the annotators
with the highest performance for PHI recognition,
Developer 1 and Clinician. Nonetheless, agree-
ment was only 0.33, which is considered very low
(Artstein and Poesio, 2008). This indicates that the
“hiding in plain sight” strategy is working well,
and that the original PHIs are not obvious to the
annotators.

36



Corpus 1 2 3 4 Overall

Dev1

34 35 31 42 142 n
0.71 0.57 0.61 0.67 0.62 P
0.33 0.54 0.40 0.50 0.50 R
0.45 0.56 0.49 0.57 0.57 F

Clin

13 11 19 25 68 n
0.62 0.64 0.47 0.76 0.61 P
0.11 0.18 0.19 0.34 0.20 R
0.19 0.29 0.27 0.47 0.30 F

Dev2

285 59 28 41 413 n
0.16 0.19 0.71 0.51 0.23 P
0.64 0.30 0.43 0.38 0.46 R
0.26 0.23 0.53 0.43 0.30 F

Res1

30 8 6 15 59 n
0.47 0.50 0.33 0.80 0.54 P
0.19 0.11 0.04 0.21 0.15 R
0.27 0.18 0.08 0.34 0.23 F

Res2

0 66 0 43 109 n
0.00 0.02 0.00 0.07 0.04 P
0.00 0.03 0.00 0.05 0.02 R
0.00 0.02 0.00 0.06 0.03 F

Res3

26 24 26 10 86 n
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 P
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 R
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 F

Table 3: Performance of PHI identification in
terms of number of PHIs annotated (n), Precision
(P), Recall (R) and F-measure (F). Clin=Clinician,
Dev=Developer, Res=Researcher. The corpus
subsets are listed as per the description in sec-
tion 3.1: 1=same patient, same location; 2=ran-
dom patients, same location; 3=same patient, dif-
ferent location; 4=random patients, different loca-
tion

Dev1 Clin Dev2 Res1 Res2
Clin 0.32 –
Dev2 0.21 0.10 –
Res1 0.21 0.11 0.18 –
Res2 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 –
Res3 0.01 0.01 0.03 0.01 0.00

Table 4: Inter-Annotator Agreement in terms
of F-measure (Clin=Clinician, Dev=Developer,
Res=Researcher)

Methods for re-identification attempts The
tools available to the annotators to attempt re-
identifying the patients mainly consisted of infor-
mation publicly available over the internet.

One annotator (Researcher 1) systematically
checked hospital names, person names and lo-
cations using a generic search engine, and was
able to identify the hospital that the patients were
treated in. Two annotators (Developer 1 and Clin-
ician) used an online reverse look-up directory
service for all phone numbers and addresses that
they believed might be original PHIs; however, the
queries did not return any results.

One annotator (Clinician) had access to the hos-
pital Health Information System (HIS). They re-
ported that the information they were able to re-
cover about any single patient in the random sets
was likely not sufficient to submit a valid query
into the system‡. However, for patients with sev-
eral documents available, recouping an approxi-
mate stay date with diagnostic codes such as ICD
or CPT either found directly in a document (these
codes are not considered PHIs) or inferred us-
ing medical coding knowledge, they were able to
pull the patient record from the HIS and there-
fore identify the patients. For the two patients in
our study corpus (corpus subsets 1 and 3) the re-
identification required several attempts at query-
ing the HIS and took 20 minutes for one patient,
30 minutes for the other.

Other annotators did not report using any re-
identification strategies that relied on data sources
outside the documents themselves.

The most powerful tool used is definitely the
hospital HIS, by an individual with access creden-
tials. The system search services are set-up in a
way that requires the users to provide sufficient in-
formation about the patients before a record can
be retrieved. In our study, it did not help with
patient re-identification when there was only one
document available about the patient.

However, when there were several documents
available about the same patient, the patient could
be identified in 30 minutes or less. In this case, pa-
tient identification required (i) access to the HIS;
(ii) knowledge of how records are coded and re-
trieved in the HIS; and (iii) medical knowledge to
identify or infer diagnostic codes from the patient
documents.

‡In practice, re-identification was attempted for a few doc-
uments that the Clinician thought had re-identification po-
tential. Attempts to re-identify a patient were stopped after
30 minutes when they were not successful. After a few fail-
ures, the clinician focused his efforts on the patients for which
more than one document were available.

37



Perfomance variation according to medical
purpose and surrogate setting We can see
from table 3 that overall, the performance of PHI
identification seems to be higher when the geo-
graphical area of re-introduced surrogate is differ-
ent from that of the original PHIs (row 4 vs. row 2,
row 5 vs. row 3). This indicates that the “hiding
in plain sight effect” is stronger when location sur-
rogates come from the same geographical area as
the original PHIs.

The initial argument against using same-area lo-
cation surrogates was that, as surrogates are re-
introduced randomly, a surrogate could happen to
be the same as the original PHI, therefore void-
ing the replacement operation. We did identify a
few occurrences of this phenomenon in our data
set, when the surrogate and original PHI were in
fact different strings (e.g., “Bois-Guillaume” vs.
“BOISGUILLAUME”).

The PHI identification results from table 3 do
not clearly indicate that PHI identification was
made easier in the corpus subsets of documents
from the same patients vs. random patients (line 2
vs. line 3 and line 4 vs. line 5). However, when
the hospital HIS was available, patients with mul-
tiple documents available could be identified while
patients with only document available could not.

Implications for the design of a clinical cor-
pus to be used in an NLP challenge or shared-
task The results of our study suggest that re-
identification attempts from researchers without
privileged access to the hospital health informa-
tion system (which is expected to be the case
of most individuals accessing a corpus through a
challenge) will not be successful.

It is also important to point out that the identifi-
cation of the patient identities in this study were
only possible because the de-identification was
performed automatically and some original PHIs
(dates) could be found in the documents.

In the context of data release for a challenge or
shared-task, the de-identification process should
include multiple rounds of manual review of PHI
to ensure that no original PHIs were left.

In summary, this study suggests that patient
privacy can be reasonably preserved in a cor-
pus comprising documents pertaining to ran-
dom patients, with same-area geographical sur-
rogate re-introduction and manually reviewed de-
identification.

Limitations The main limitation in this study is
the size of the corpus, which comprises 60 doc-
uments. This size was chosen to keep the anno-
tation time manageable. It is comparable to the
size of the corpus (85 documents) used previously
by Meystre et al. (2014a). The study of variations
leads us to partition the corpus into four subsets of
15 documents, which can only provide indicative
results. The study will need to be reproduced on a
larger scale.

Also, one important category of individual
likely to identify patients from the content of de-
identified files includes patients themselves, or pa-
tients’ relatives and acquaintances. For instance,
an individual who personally knows the patient
that our sample file pertains to (see Figure 2) might
read this document and realize that the informa-
tion (stay at home mother of 3 children who expe-
rienced a pancreas disorder in the past) matches
the circumstances of their acquaintance. How-
ever, we have not been able to devise an adequate
experimental setting to evaluate this chance. Ar-
guably, the chance might be similar to that of pa-
tient re-identification by a doctor who had person-
ally attended to the patient within the past three
months. It was found that doctors were not able
to re-identify their own patients from de-identified
documents (Meystre et al., 2014a).

6 Conclusion

In spite of shortcomings of the de-identification
system identified by the developpers in a thor-
ough error-analysis, patient privacy was not com-
promised by individuals without privileged access
to the relevant hospital health information system.

When access to the hospital health information
system is available, patients can be re-identified
by recouping information found in more than one
document, and medical knowledge of medical
coding. However, patient privacy is preserved
when only one document per patient is available.

Furthermore, less information can be recovered
when location surrogates for the same geographi-
cal area as the original files are used.

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by the French National
Agency for Research under grant CABeRneT§

ANR-13-JS02-0009-01. The authors thank the
§CABeRneT: Compréhension Automatique de Textes

Biomédicaux pour la Recherche Translationnelle

38



Biomedical Informatics Department at the Rouen
University Hospital for providing access to the
LERUDI corpus for this work, and the annotators
who kindly participated in this study.

References
Ron Artstein and Massimo Poesio. 2008. Inter-coder

agreement for computational linguistics. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 34(4):555–96.

Michael Barbaro and Tom Zeller Jr. 2006. A face is
exposed for aol searcher no. 4417749. The New York
Times, August 9.

Kathleen Benitez and Bradley Malin. 2010. Evaluat-
ing re-identification risks with respect to the HIPAA
privacy rule. J Am Med Inform Assoc, 17(2):169–
77.

David Carrell, Bradley Malin, John Aberdeen, Samuel
Bayer, Cheryl Clark, Ben Wellner, and Lynette
Hirschman. 2013. Hiding in plain sight: use of
realistic surrogates to reduce exposure of protected
health information in clinical text. J Am Med Inform
Assoc, 20(2):342–8, Mar-Apr.

Louise Deleger, Katalin Molnar, Guergana Savova,
Fei Xia, Todd Lingren, Qi Li, Keith Marsolo, Anil
Jegga, Megan Kaiser, Laura Stoutenborough, and
Imre Solti. 2013. Large-scale evaluation of auto-
mated clinical note de-identification and its impact
on information extraction. J Am Med Inform Assoc,
20(1):84–94.

Cyril Grouin and Aurélie Névéol. 2014. De-
identification of clinical notes in french: towards
a protocol for reference corpus developpement. J
Biomed Inform, 46(3):506–515, Aug.

Joon Lee, Daniel J Scott, Mauricio Villarroel, Gari D
Clifford, Mohammed Saeed, and Roger G Mark.
2011. Open-access MIMIC-II database for inten-
sive care research. In Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc,
pages 8315–8.

Stephane M Meystre, F Jeffrey Friedlin, Brett R South,
Shuying Shen, and Matthew H Samore. 2010. Au-
tomatic de-identification of textual documents in the
electronic health record: a review of recent research.
BMC Med Res Methodol, 10(70).

Stephane Meystre, Shuying Shen, Deborah Hofmann,
and Adi Gundlapalli. 2014a. Can physicians recog-
nize their own patients in de-identified notes? In
Stud Health Technol Inform, volume 205, pages
778–82.

Stephane M Meystre, Oscar Ferrández, F Jeffrey
Friedlin, Brett R South, Shuying Shen, and
Matthew H Samore. 2014b. Text de-identification
for privacy protection: a study of its impact on clin-
ical text information content. J Biomed Inform,
50:142–50, Aug.

Ishna Neamatullah, Margaret M Douglass, Li-Wei H
Lehman, Andrew Reisner, Mauricio Villaroel,
William J Long, Peter Szolovits, George B Moody,
Roger G Mark, and Gari D Clifford. 2008. Auto-
mated de-identification of free-text medical records.
BMC Med Inform Decis Mak, 8(32).

Mohammed Saeed, Christine Lieu, Greg Raber, and
Roger G Mark. 2002. MIMIC II: a massive tempo-
ral ICU patient database to support research in intel-
ligent patient monitoring. Comput Cardiol, 29:641–
4.

Mohammed Saeed, Mauricio Villaroel, Andrew T.
Reisner, Gari Clifford, Li-Wei Lehman, George
Moody, Thomas Heldt, Tin H. Kyaw, Benjamin
Moody, and Roger G. Mark. 2011. Multiparameter
intelligent monitoring in intensive care ii (MIMIC-
II): A public-access intensive care unit database.
Crit Care Med, 39(5):952–60.

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topić,
Tomoko Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Juni’chi Tsu-
jii. 2012. BRAT: a web-based tool for NLP-assisted
text annotation. In Proc of EACL Demonstrations,
pages 102–7, Avignon, France. ACL.

Latanya Sweeney. 1996. Replacing personally-
identifying information in medical records, the scrub
system. In AMIA Annu Fall Symp Proc, pages 333–
7, Washington, DC.

Özlem Uzuner, Yuan Luo, and Peter Szolovits. 2007.
Evaluating the state-of-the-art in automatic de-
identification. J Am Med Inform Assoc, 14(5):550–
63.

39


