



















































Sentence Ordering in Electronic Navigational Chart Companion Text Generation


Proceedings of the 15th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 66–70,
Brighton, September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Sentence Ordering in Electronic Navigational Chart
Companion Text Generation

Julie Sauvage-Vincent
Institut Mines-Télécom

Télécom Bretagne
Technopôle Brest Iroise

CS 83818
29238 Brest Cedex 3, France
jsauva01@telecom-bretagne.eu

Yannis Haralambous
Institut Mines-Télécom

Télécom Bretagne
Technopôle Brest Iroise

CS 83818
29238 Brest Cedex 3, France

yannis.haralambous@telecom-bretagne.eu

John Puentes
Institut Mines-Télécom

Télécom Bretagne
Technopôle Brest Iroise

CS 83818
29238 Brest Cedex 3, France

john.puentes@telecom-bretagne.eu

Abstract

We present the sentence ordering part of a
natural language generation module, used
in the framework of a knowledge base of
electronic navigation charts and sailing di-
rections. The particularity of the knowl-
edge base is that it is based on a controlled
hybrid language, that is the combination of
a controlled natural language and a con-
trolled visual language. The sentence or-
dering process is able to take into account
hybrid (textual and visual) information, in-
volving cartographic data, as well as land-
scape “read” by the navigator.

1 Introduction

The French Marine Hydrographic and Oceano-
graphic Service (SHOM, Service Hydrographique
et Océanographique de la Marine) issues, on a
quadrennial basis, Instructions nautiques, a series
of nautical books providing navigators of coastal
and intracoastal waters with useful information.

Instructions nautiques are intended as a com-
plement to Electronic Navigational Charts (ENCs)
and add a wide variety of essential information not
provided in the ENCs for maritime navigation. In
this sense they are considered as companion texts
of ENCs.

Information found in Instructions nautiques are
in some cases subject to real-time updates. To
make this possible, an ongoing SHOM project is to
build a knowledge base (KB) covering both ENCs
and nautical instructions. This KB is intended to
communicate with ENCs and more globally with
any compatible Electronic Charts Display Infor-
mation System.

Updates are planned to be operated mainly by
SHOM domain experts, who may not be neces-
sarily proficient in ontology formalism or in lan-
guage technology. Therefore, it has been decided

to use a controlled natural language for exchanges
between experts and the KB (Haralambous et al.,
2014). On the other hand, information contained
in the KB covers not only (textual) Instructions
nautiques but also (visual) ENCs. These two
modalities are tightly bound, coreferential and
complementary: each modality covers informa-
tion that the other is unable to transmit.

In order to establish intermodal coreferential-
ity and complementarity, a new type of controlled
language has been defined (Haralambous et al.,
2015), called controlled hybrid language (CHL),
which is intended to be based on hybrid sentences,
like for instance:

ê
Morania #130

LAKE
 ERIE

[The wreck of Morania 130]
lies at the bottom of [lake
Erie].

In Fig. 1 (on the next page), the reader can see this
(multimodal) sentence analyzed. On the bottom of
the figure one can see the two visual and textual
modalities; and above them, the corresponding
syntactic trees: on the right, the usual constituency
syntax tree of the textual sentence (georeferenced
named entities, placed in brackets, are considered
as indivisible noun phrases); on the left, the syn-
tax tree of a small part of the map, considered as a
sentence in a visual language, using the Symbol-
Relation formalism (Ferrucci et al., 1996; Ferrucci
et al., 1998). In both cases, the formal grammars
have synthesized attributes (in the sense of Knuth
(1968)) carrying semantics: using a bottom-up
synthesis approach we obtain their semantics, rep-
resented as First-Order Logic graphs (predicates
are hexagons, connectors are circles, functions are
rounded rectangles, and constants are rectangles).
Once the two graphs are established, and after a
coreference resolution step, they are transformed
and merged into the KB graph, at the top.

When starting from the KB, operators V and
T filter their input into information that is repre-
sented visually and information that is represented

66



#1 #2 #1 #2 #1 #2
#1

#2

#1

D0

B2

B3 B4 NTPP(B3,B4)

B5 s2

λ(        ,"Morania 130")

λ(B5,s2)

"Morania 130"

B6 λ(B6,s3)s3

λ(        ,"lake Erie")"lake Erie"

NTPP(B5,B4)

NTPP(B5,B6)

NTPP(         ,        )

S

NP

NN

VP

V PP

P NP

NP PP

DET N P NP

NN

[The wreck of Morania 130] lies

at

the bottom of

[lake Erie]
[The wreck of Morania 130] lies at the bottom of [lake Erie]

lies(#1,#2)

bottom(#1)

@type=Wreck
@coord=(42.83978,-78.93453)

@name="Morania 130"

lies(#1,#2)

bottom(#1)
NTPP(#1,#2) λ(#1,#2) λ(#1,#2)

@type=Lake
@coord=(42.135,81.170)

@name="Lake Erie"

"Lake Erie" "[the wreck of Morania 130]" "[Lake Erie]"

#1

#1

#2

"Morania 130"

MergeMerge

VLG NLGSemantics Semantics

Semantics of controlled 
visual language Semantics of controlled natural language

Semantics of controlled 
hybrid language

Figure 1: An example of sentence in the CHL INAUT (taken from Haralambous et al. (2015)).

textually (with some redundancy in order to es-
tablish coreferential entities). Their outputs are
graphs corresponding to FOL formulas. To obtain
text, we use NLG and VLG (visual language gen-
eration) to obtain a part of the map.

The goal of the INAUT NLG module—which
we are currently developing—is to produce the
most fluent1 multi-sentence texts possible. This
paper addresses the stage of sentence ordering (as
part of discourse planning), which plays a central
role in the achievement of this goal.

2 Related work

Ordering sentences to create a natural and under-
standable paragraph for the reader is part of what
Reiter and Dale (2000) call discourse planning.

A widely used approach to discourse planning
is based on rhetorical structure theory (Mann and
Thompson, 1988), which requires writing a rule
for each textual structure. Although this solu-
tion has been proved efficient in various contexts
(cf. Taboada and Mann (2006)), this is not the case
for the Instructions nautiques corpus, written by
different authors who do not necessarily share the
same rhetorical structures and processes.

The NaturalOWL (Androutsopoulos et al.
(2013)) system per se could be used for INAUT

1In the sense of criteria S1–S5 of Androutsopoulos et al.
(2013, p. 703).

automatic text generation, if there were not for
some major differences. NaturalOWL is essen-
tially based on Centering Theory, i.e., it respects
thematic intersentential coherence. In our case
there are some additional issues, related to the fact
that INAUT is build upon a hybrid language: in-
formation contained in text is not the only input
anymore, and we must guarantee conformance to
the itinerary of a vessel, to the geographic “guid-
ing path” of each Instructions nautiques volume
and, last but not least, to the visual characteristics
of the landscape. Indeed, Instructions nautiques
are, inter alia, textual interpretations of the real
world as seen by the navigator, and for this reason
sentence order must respect the order navigators
“read” the landscape. Another major difference
in our system is real-time interaction with users.
The latter necessarily has an impact on the struc-
ture of generated text: when content determination
may be relaunched on different data every few mil-
liseconds, the stability of generated text becomes
a major issue.

3 Data and pre-processing

The corpus consists of 462 INAUT controlled hy-
brid language sentences manually translated from
the legacy Instructions nautiques.

Let us consider the first step of NLG, namely
content determination.

2

67



3.1 Content determination

Among the attributes of nodes in the KB we have
coordinates for all geolocalized objects. There-
fore, hybrid language structure provides a link be-
tween geolocalization and (textual) sentence en-
tities. Content determination can be initiated by
both (1) textual criteria (selecting a paragraph in
the document tree structure), and (2) visual crite-
ria (selecting an area on an ENC).

In case (1), one obtains immediately a sub-
graph of the KB by taking the nodes hierarchi-
cally located under the chosen paragraph node. In
case (2), a query sent to the KB server returns all
georeferenced nodes located entirely or partially
in the selected area of the map.In both cases one
obtains a (not necessarily connected) subgraph of
the KB.

By the nature of the data, two further steps are
needed, both obtained by inference, but on differ-
ent kinds of data, namely spatial data and tempo-
ral/meteorological context.

The first inference step concerns cases where in-
formation about a geolocalized object can be in-
ferred from the map. More generally, one can ex-
tract knowledge from the map data, which will
complement, enhance, or contradict the textual
data.

As for temporal and meteorological context,
tide and weather conditions obviously have an im-
pact on navigation. This is also the case for reg-
ulations based on a schedule. Inference based on
these data may act as a filter on the subgraph ob-
tained either hierarchically or by area selection.

Finally, an important feature of the INAUT sys-
tem is to inform navigators on potentially danger-
ous situations. By attaching—either manually or
by applying inference to geography and context—
a dangerousness coefficient to specific nodes un-
der given conditions, the system may introduce
specific warnings in the generated text.

4 Modelling the domain experts sentence
ordering process

We consider the discourse planner as a multicrite-
ria decision process based on frequent patterns of
the writing process. Therefore, our main task is to
model the implicit knowledge of authors concern-
ing the description of a maritime environment.

4.1 Domain experts sentence ordering
process

We detected common patterns in the way authors
describe the maritime environment, and will try to
discuss them from a cognitive and linguistic point
of view.

These patterns are constrained by several crite-
ria: our approach is to assign score to each crite-
rion found in a sentence, in order to calculate the
global sentence score in our “bag” of sentences,
and reorganize the latter by sorting it in decreasing
order of score. The greater the score, the greater
the likelihood for the sentence to appear at the be-
ginning of a paragraph. The computation of the
score is done by the sum f(s) =

∑n
i=1 ci · wi

where s is a sentence, ci is a criterion value and
wi is the corresponding score. Given a set S of n
sentences si, if f(s1) > f(s2), then the sentence
s1 is more likely to precede s2.

To assign score to objects, we must understand
which features domain experts use to describe a
natural environment in general.

Let us consider the different features used in our
ordering sentences module.

Landmarks When dealing with (a) authors tend to
use landmarks as much as possible. Selection of
elements useful in assisting human navigation in
an open space has been addressed in the context of
urban orientation. Michon and Denis (2001) attest
the landmark usage preference in order to identify
areas where difficulties in term of way finding are
likely to occur.

We find this preference in our corpus as well:
Instructions nautiques authors often prefer man-
made landmarks —that facilitate the environment
reading— over natural objects.

Geometric primitives Objects occurring in the de-
scription of a map or of a landscape can be of
three different topological natures: areas, lines
and points. We observed that SHOM domain ex-
perts describe objects in this order: polygonal
shapes before lines, before points. According to
Brosset et al. (2008) this can be explained by the
fact that, from the point of view of observers, natu-
ral environment is seen as a spatial network: linear
objects structure the network with edges and links,
polygonal shapes act as a partition of the space,
and finally points act as visual landmarks.

3

68



Name and size Two other features are directly
connected to individual objects: their size and
name. Indeed, named objects appear more fre-
quently in the corpus than unnamed ones and
larger objects more frequently than smaller ones.

Proximity spaces Another feature taking part in
the multicriteria decision process is geographic
position relative to the vessel.

When receiving directions, users tend to create
by anticipation a mental representation of the route
—whether they are standard or problematic routes.
Unlike pedestrian navigation, maritime navigation
requires a most precise representation of the sur-
rounding and forthcoming environment.

According to Tversky (2003) humans struc-
ture environment in various mental spaces.
Le Yaouanc et al. (2010) extended Tversky’s
spaces to proximity spaces. These structure the
visual perception of the landscape and therefore,
logically, also its description. Proximity spaces
are defined by actions users are able to perform
within them. We distinguish four different prox-
imity spaces (from the closest to the observer to
the furthest away): (a) the space of the body,
(b) the experienced space, (c) the distant space
(d) and, finally, the space at the horizon. In their
paper, Le Yaouanc et al. (2010) state that the dif-
ferent subjects of their study have used an order
following these proximity spaces when describing
an environmental scene.

It is interesting to note that in the SHOM cor-
pus the order assigned by domain experts is the re-
verse of the one stated above in 93% of the cases.
This difference relates to the fact that Le Yaouanc
et al. (2010) used terrestrial environmental scene
descriptions while the SHOM corpus deals exclu-
sively with offshore environmental scene descrip-
tions.

Thus, the further away objects are, the greater
the score assigned to them. Proximity spaces are
a typical example of an hybrid feature: the textual
part alone would be clearly insufficient in provid-
ing information about size and position of objects.

Cardinal directions In the same spirit, we add yet
another feature, namely cardinal directions. In-
deed the latter provide an additional hint on the
order of sentences in a paragraph since an environ-
mental scene is usually observed in the reading di-
rection of the observer (Nachson and Hatta, 2001;
Fuhrman and Boroditsky, 2010), in our case from

left to right for 84.8% of the paragraphs where
the description of objects is done in a longitudinal
way.

Using the various features mentioned in this
section, we have built a SVM classifier for ranking
sentences. The classifier provides a lattice struc-
ture of ranked sentence pairs. Out of this lattice
we obtain a best possible global order of sentences
by a standard lattice-traversal algorithm.

4.2 The Stability Issue

Content determination, as part of the NLG pro-
cess, depends on several parameters (the area se-
lection, the temporal and meteorological context,
etc.) which operate on three different temporal
scales affecting NLG: slow landscape changes im-
ply very few KB updates but temporal and meteo-
rological context changes may need to be updated
several times daily. Finally, selection updates done
on the GUI with a mouse may be only millisec-
onds apart.

All three temporal scales, and the last one at the
highest degree, raise the problem of NLG stability:
a text should not change while the user is reading
it or while the reader is using the mouse to change
the selection area.

The issue of stability is a general NLG issue,
and as such also affects sentence ordering. Chang-
ing the sentence order of a paragraph can be ex-
tremely disturbing for the reader.

In fact, user interaction with the GUI causes not
only visual changes, but also simultaneous multi-
level linguistic structure changes. To overcome
this issue we introduce the method of smooth text
generation, as follows:

We consider the function T that maps the val-
ues of the various text generation parameters to
the text generated. This discrete function is
“smoothed” in the following way:

1. When the mouse crosses a boundary between
two areas covering the same nodes but different
sentence orders, then the same sentence order is
kept, until some nodes disappear or new nodes
appear.

2. When the mouse enters a zone covering new
nodes, then the sentences generated out of these
nodes are—as much as possible—added at the
end of the generated paragraph.

3. Generated text updates are slightly delayed so
that a quick mouse move will not alter the gen-

4

69



erated text until the mouse is still for a time du-
ration longer than a given threshold.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

We presented in this paper the sentence ordering
part of the natural language generation module
of the INAUT system. The particularity of this
system is that it is based on a controlled hybrid
language and hence covers simultaneously textual
and visual knowledge.

We have shown that hybrid features (textual and
visual) can be used to build a classifier that orders
sentences in a paragraph.

Future work in the project involves a two-parts
evaluation —(1) an automatic method based on
comparison with the legacy corpus, and (2) a
human-centered evaluation— and the exploration
of other hybrid features impacting on sentence or-
der, in particular by using the domain experts feed-
back of the second evaluation phase.

Furthermore, we will also consider hybrid lan-
guage generation, i.e., having the system choose
which information will be represented in visual or
in textual modality, and insure coreferential redun-
dancy among the modalities.

References
Ion Androutsopoulos, Gerasimos Lampouras, and

Dimitrios Galanis. 2013. Generating natural
language descriptions from OWL ontologies: the
NaturalOWL system. J. Artif. Int. Res., 48:671–715.

David Brosset, Christophe Claramunt, and Éric Saux.
2008. Wayfinding in natural and urban envi-
ronments: a comparative study. Cartographica,
43(1):21–30.

Filomena Ferrucci, Giuliano Pacini, Giorgio Satta,
Maria I. Sessa, Genoveffa Tortora, Maurizio Tucci,
and Giuliana Vitiello. 1996. Symbol-Relation
Grammars: A Formalism for Graphical Languages.
Information and Computation, 131:1–46.

Filomena Ferrucci, Genny Tortora, Maurizio Tucci,
and Giuliana Vitiello. 1998. Relation Grammars:
A Formalism for Syntactic and Semantic Analysis
of Visual Languages. In Kim Marriott and Bernd
Meyer, editors, Visual Language Theory, pages 219–
243. Springer.

Orly Fuhrman and Lera Boroditsky. 2010. Cross-
cultural differences in mental representations of
time: Evidence from an implicit nonlinguistic task.
Cognitive Science, 34(8):1430–1451.

Yannis Haralambous, Julie Sauvage-Vincent, and John
Puentes. 2014. INAUT, a Controlled Language for

the French Coast Pilot Books Instructions nautiques.
In Brian Davis, Kaarel Kaljurand, and Tobias Kuhn,
editors, Controlled Natural Language, volume 8625
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 102–
111. Springer.

Yannis Haralambous, Julie Sauvage-Vincent, and John
Puentes. 2015. A hybrid (visual/natural) controlled
language. Submitted.

Donald E. Knuth. 1968. Semantics of context-free lan-
guages. Math. Syst. Theor., 2:127–145.

Jean-Marie Le Yaouanc, Éric Saux, and Christophe
Claramunt. 2010. A semantic and language-based
representation of an environmental scene. Geoinfor-
matica, 14(3):333–352.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Pierre-Emmanuel Michon and Michel Denis. 2001.
When and why are visual landmarks used in giving
directions? In Daniel R. Montello, editor, Spatial
Information Theory, volume 2205 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 292–305. Springer.

Israel Nachson and Takeshi Hatta. 2001. Directional
tendencies of Hebrew, Japanese, and English read-
ers. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 93:178–180.

Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building Natural
Language Generation Systems. Studies in Natural
Language Processing. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, U.K.

Maite Taboada and William C. Mann. 2006. Applica-
tions of rhetorical structure theory. Discourse stud-
ies, 8(4):567–588.

Barbara Tversky. 2003. Structures of mental spaces.
how people think about space. Environment and be-
havior, 35(1):66–80.

5

70


