



















































Gender-Based Vocation Identification in Swedish 19th Century Prose Fiction using Linguistic Patterns, NER and CRF Learning


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 89–97,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Gender-Based Vocation Identification in Swedish 19th Century Prose 

Fiction using Linguistic Patterns, NER and CRF Learning 

 

 

Dimitrios Kokkinakis 

Department of Swedish, 

Språkbanken 

University of Gothenburg 

Sweden 

dimitrios.kokkinakis@gu.se 

Ann Ighe 

Economic History, School of 

Business Economics and Law 

University of Gothenburg 

Sweden 

ann.ighe@gu.se 

Mats Malm 

Department of Literature, 

History of Ideas and Religion 

University of Gothenburg 

Sweden 

mats.malm@lir.gu.se 
 

  

 

Abstract 

This paper investigates how literature could 

be used as a means to expand our understand-

ing of history. By applying macroanalytic 

techniques we are aiming to investigate how 

women enter literature and particularly which 

functions do they assume, their working pat-

terns and if we can spot differences in how 

often male and female characters are men-

tioned with various types of occupational ti-

tles (vocation) in Swedish literary texts. 

Modern historiography, and especially femi-

nist and women’s history has emphasized a 

relative invisibility of women’s work and 

women workers. The reasons to this are man-

ifold, and the extent, the margin of error in 

terms of women’s work activities is of course 

hard to assess. Therefore, vocation identifica-

tion can be used as an indicator for such ex-

ploration and we present a hybrid system for 

automatic annotation of vocational signals in 

19th century Swedish prose fiction. Beside 

vocations, the system also assigns gender 

(male, female or unknown) to the vocation 

words, a prerequisite for the goals of the 

study and future in-depth explorations of the 

corpora. 

1 Introduction 

Can we use literary text as a (valid) source for 

historical research? Evidence shows that the an-

swer is probably yes and in this paper we inves-

tigate how literature can be used as a means to 

expand our understanding of history; (Rutner & 

Schonfeld, 2012). This paper presents a system 

for the automatic annotation of vocational signals 

in Swedish text, namely 19th century prose fic-

tion. Vocation in this context is defined as a sin-

gle word or a multi word expression intended to 

capture the (professional) activities with which 

one occupies oneself, such as employment or 

other, wider, forms of productive occupations not 

necessarily paid. Therefore vocation is used here 

in a rather broad sense since we do not want to 

disallow word candidates that might not fit in a 

strict definition of the term. Apart from vocation 

identification, the described system recognizes 

and assigns gender, i.e. male, female or un-

known, to the vocations by using various Natural 

Language Processing (NLP) technologies. 

The purpose of this work is to use literature 

as means to expand our understanding of history 

(Pasco, 2014) by applying macroanalytic tech-

niques (Moretti, 2013; Jockers, 2013) in order to 

start exploring how women enter literature as 

characters, which functions do they assume and 

their working patterns. The research questions 

themselves are not new, but in fact central to the 

field of gender studies and to a certain extent, 

economic history. From a historical point of 

view, the 19th century in Sweden, and several 

other western countries, is a period with a dra-

matic restructuring of gender relations in formal 

institutions such as the civil law, and also a peri-

od where the separation of home and workplace 

came to redefine the spatial arenas for human 

interaction. Singular works of fiction can be ana-

lyzed and interpreted in historical research and 

current development in digital humanities cer-

tainly opens new possibilities in this direction. 

Therefore, vocation identification can be used as 

one such indicator for achieving some of the 

above stated goals. The starting point of this 

study has been to create an infrastructure of suit-

able lexical resources and computational tools 

for empirical NLP in the cultural heritage do-

main and digital humanities area. Supporting 

future users of digitized literature collections 

89



with tools that enable the discovery and explora-

tion of text patterns and relationships, or even 

allow them to semantically search and browse 

(Don et al., 2007; Vuillemot et al., 2009; Oelke 

et al., 2013), using computer-assisted literary 

analysis with more semantically oriented tech-

niques, can lay the foundations to more distant 

reading or macroanalysis of large corpora in 

novel ways, impossible to investigate using tradi-

tional qualitative methods or close reading. 

2 Background 

Digital humanities is an umbrella term used for 

any humanities research with potential for real 

interdisciplinary exchange between various fields 

and can be seen as an amalgamation of method-

ologies from traditional humanities disciplines 

(such as literature and art, corpus linguistics), 

and social sciences, with computational ap-

proaches and tools provided by computer science 

(such as text and data mining) and digital pub-

lishing. During the last couple of decades there 

has been a lot of research on applying automatic 

text analytic tools to annotate, enrich, explore 

and mine historical or other digital collections in 

various languages and for several reasons (Pen-

nacchiotti & Zanzotto, 2008; Mueller, 2009; 

Manning, 2011; Piotrowski, 2012; Jockers, 2013; 

McEnery & Baker, 2014). The focus of such re-

search is to reduce the time consuming, manual 

work that is often carried out e.g. by historians or 

other literature scholars, in order to identify val-

id, useful and meaningful results such as seman-

tic associations, gender patterns and features of 

human networks (Agarwal et al., 2012). Also, 

recently, a small number of studies have been 

published where gender and other biographical 

characteristics are explored (Hota et al., 2006; 

Argamon et al., 2007; Garera & Yarowsky, 2009; 

Bullard & Oveesdotter Alm, 2014). These meth-

ods apply various types of classifiers with good 

performance results. 

Boes (2014) discusses the content of the “Vo-

cations of the Novel Project” which consists of a 

database of roughly 13,000 German-language 

prose works, published between 1750-1950, and 

in which each entry in this database is tagged 

with vocational metadata identifying occupations 

that receive extended narrative treatment. Fifteen 

occupational clusters, such as agricultural pro-

fessions, health and nautical professions, are 

used for estimating the proportional distribution 

of those with the database content, showing for 

instance that members of the clergy diminished 

after about 1885 or that agricultural professions 

first declined in importance but then become to 

rise around the turn of the century, after which 

they rapidly sank again. However, even closer to 

our goals is the research by Pettersson & Nivre 

(2011); Fiebranz et al. (2011) and Pettersson et 

al. (2012; 2014), who in cooperation with histo-

rians, study what men and women did for a liv-

ing in the early modern Swedish society (“The 

Gender and Work project”, GaW) between 1550-

1800. In the context of GaW’s verb-orientated 

studies, historians are building a database with 

relevant information, by identifying working ac-

tivities often described in the form of verb 

phrases, such as chop wood or sell fish. Automat-

ically extracted verb phrases from historical texts 

are presented to historians as a list of candidate 

phrases for revision and database inclusion. 

Since Swedish NLP tools for that period are very 

scarce, the historical texts are first normalized to 

a more modern spelling, before tagging and pars-

ing is applied – the techniques applied in GaW 

are different and thus complementary to the ones 

we apply in the research described in this paper. 

3 Material 

The textual data we use in this work is the con-

tent of an 18-19th century Swedish Prose Fiction 

database – Spf
1
. Spf is comprised by ca 300 

prose works that were originally published as 

books during the years 1800, 1820, 1840, 1860, 

1880 and 1900. The material is representational 

of its times in ways that the canonized literatures 

are not, in the sense that it contains not only can-

onized literature but mainstream as well as mar-

ginalized treatments of 19th century society. The 

database makes it possible to examine a particu-

lar year span and compare it to the material of 

other years in order to obtain a comprehensive 

view of societal development across an entire 

century. However, the main part of this work 

deals with the construction and adaptation of 

several lexical and semantic resources developed 

for modern Swedish to the language of Spf and 

algorithmic resources that use those for automat-

ic labeling, and we have left as future work the 

fine-grained comparison between different time 

spans. 

Furthermore, there are several classificatory 

systems available where occupations are orga-

nized into clearly defined sets of groups accord-

ing to the tasks and duties undertaken in the job; 

                                                 
1 <http://spf1800-1900.se/#!/om/inenglish>. 

90



such as the International Standard Classification 

of Occupations
2
 or the National Occupational 

Classification
3
 which is the nationally accepted 

reference on occupations in Canada. Such classi-

fications are basically structured by skill type, 

e.g. Agricultural, Animal Husbandry and Forest-

ry Workers, Fishermen and Hunters which can 

further increase the usability of such resources. 

However, in this study we did not have the hu-

man resources to structure the collected occupa-

tions in a finer-grained manner, apart from some 

very basic and coarse encoding (see further Sec-

tion 3.1); therefore this task is left as a future 

work. A large number of vocation and other re-

lated terms from three lexically-oriented re-

sources were collected and structured. As our 

starting point we used ca 3,500 lexical units 

found in relevant frames, such as Medi-

cal_professionals and People_by_origin, from 

the Swedish FrameNet
4
. Moreover, several other 

lexical units in related frames, that are slightly 

more general but still relevant, were used, i.e. 

entries that belong to other types of both generic 

and more specific frames that indicate person 

activities, relationships or qualities of various 

kinds, such as Kinship or Performer. Secondly, 

we used several hundred of vocation names from 

the Swedish dictionary Svensk Ordbok
5
 ‘Swedish 

Dictionary’ (SO) and finally, several thousand 

vocation names from the Alfabetiskt yrkesregis-

ter ‘Alphabetically list of professional designa-

tors’ published by the Statistics Sweden
6
. 

3.1 Vocation Lexicon Structure 

Semi-automatically, all lexicon entries were as-

signed two features. The first one was gender 

(i.e. Male, Female or Unknown) and the second 

one Vocation. Depending on the content and 

structure of the three resources we used to extract 

occupations and similar entries from, we tried to 

keep and encode any kind of relevant to our 

goals descriptive information for these entries in 

tab-separated fields. For our study we only use 

Vocation and combinations with Vocation and 

other labels. For instance, in FrameNet, vocation 

related frames such as Medical_professionals (a 

label that was transformed to a more generic and 

shorter one, Health, and which consists of single 

                                                 
2 <http://www.ilo.org/ public/english/bureau/stat/isco/>. 
3 <http://www5.hrsdc.gc.ca/NOC/Eng lish/NOC/ 

2011/OccupationIndex.aspx>. 
4 <http://spraakbanken.gu.se/eng/swefn>. 
5  <http://www.svenskaakademien.se/publikationer/bocker_ 

om_svenska_spraket>. 
6 <http://www.scb.se/>. 

and compound lexical units for health-related 

occupations) was encoded using both Vocation 

and Health, e.g. patolog ‘pathologist’ or sjukskö-

terska ‘nurse’. Similarly other combinations of 

FrameNet-originating labels were extracted and 

encoded in a similar manner. Since we adopted a 

broad definition of the term Vocation we allow 

such words to be included in the knowledge 

base, but not all were used for the study de-

scribed here if there were not directly vocation-

related. For instance, tjuvpojke ‘thief boy’ is 

coded as Morality-negative; here Morality-

negative is of course not a vocation but rather a 

general human quality and not used in the study. 

Also words with the label Person, which is the 

most generic category, including mentions such 

as baldrottning ‘prom queen’; äventyrerska ‘ad-

venturess’ or söndagsskoleelev ‘Sunday school 

student’, are not used in the study presented in 

this paper. 

Gender assignment is based on reliable or-

thographic features of the lexicon entry in ques-

tion (if available), these include: 

 

 typical gender bearing morphological suf-
fixes, such as –inna [female] värdinna 

‘hostess’, prestinna ‘priestess’or –rska 

[female] ångfartygskokerska ‘steamboat’s 

cook’, städerska ‘cleaning woman’. 

 gender bearing head noun words that un-
ambiguously can assign gender in com-

pound word forms; for instance hustru 

‘wife’ [female]: soldathustru ‘soldier’s 

wife’, bagarehustru ‘baker’s wife’; or 

dräng [male] ‘farmhand’: stalledräng 

‘stable farmhand’, fiskardräng ‘fisherman 

farmhand’. 

 

After consulting international efforts in the area, 

we automatically normalized and attempted to 

group together and harmonize the labels of all 

available lexical units (these labels are primarily 

encoded in the Swedish FrameNet) to the follow-

ing 14 single types and 4 complex ones, without 

putting too much effort to introduce finer-grained 

types for practical reasons (see the previous sec-

tion for discussion on this issue). Thus, the final 

set of categories we applied are: Age (yngling 

‘youth’), Expertise-Neg (okunnige ‘ignorant’), 

Expertise-Pos (specialist), Jurisdiction (invånare 

‘resident’), Kinship (dotterdotter ‘granddaugh-

ter’), Morality-Neg (tjuv ‘thief’), Morality-Pos 

(nationalhjälte ‘national hero’), Origin (jugoslav 

‘yugoslavian’), Person (vän ‘friend’), Politics 

(socialdemokrat ‘social-democrat’), Religion 

91



(metodistpredikant ‘methodist preacher’), Resi-

dence (granne ‘neighbour’), Vocation (bussföra-

re ‘bus driver’), Vocation+Health, Voca-

tion+Military (kavallerilöjtnant ‘cavalry lieuten-

ant’), Vocation+Performer (dragspelare ‘accor-

dionist’) and Person+Disease (autistiker ‘autistic 

person’). The resulting lexicon consists of 19,500 

terms, of which over 77% (15,000) are distinct 

occupational titles (vocations), and used in vari-

ous ways by the system, mainly as the core lexi-

con for rule based pattern matching and as a fea-

ture for supervised machine learning (see Section 

4.4). Moreover, 75% (or 11,000) of all these vo-

cations in the lexical resources have been as-

signed Unknown gender as a default since no 

classificatory orthographic features, as previous-

ly described, could be applied for that purpose. 

4 Methods 

Figure 1 provides a general outline of the meth-

ods applied in the study. 

 

 
 

Figure 1. The major steps used to extract gender-

bearing vocations from raw text. 

4.1 Linguistic Patterns: Morphology, Com-
pounding and Continuous Space Word 

Representations 

The previously outlined lexicon
7
 is used for pat-

tern matching based on a number of manually 

coded rules that explore regularities in the sur-

rounding context of potential vocation words. 

Inflectional morphology is determined program-

matically, while the lexicon’s content is also 

used for discovering “new” terms (not in the stat-

ic lexicon) using compound segmentation and 

matching of the head of a candidate vocation to 

the content of the knowledge base. 

For instance, a potential new term candi-

date, that is a word over 6 characters long not in 

the lexicon, is de-compounded and its head is 

matched against the lexicon’s content. If a match 

                                                 
7 All lexicon entries annotated with the Vocation label are 

available from: <http://spraakbanken.gu.se/swe/personal/ 

dimitrios#research>. 

is found, the new term gets the vocation annota-

tion of the matched head. The length of six char-

acters is determined after testing with other low-

er values and six is the lowest number that can be 

safely used and which minimizes the number of 

false positives returned to a minimum. Suppose 

prestinna ‘priestess’ is in the lexicon with fea-

tures Vocation and Female and a new word, over 

six characters long, e.g. öfverprestinna ‘head 

priestess’, is found in a text, öfverprestinna will 

be then decomposed to öfver+prestinna and the 

head prestinna will match an existing lexicon 

entry with the same form; consequently öfver-

prestinna will inherit the annotation Vocation 

and Female. Alternative surface text forms, e.g. 

with hyphenation (solo-sångare ‘solo singer’ 

versus solosångare) are treated in a similar man-

ner, breaking the compound at the hyphen. This 

processing allows a set of potential new terms to 

be efficiently recognized, while the results using 

the lexicon based pattern matching approach 

show nearly perfect precision scores. The recog-

nition step is made using case insensitive match-

ing against the lexicon’s content. 

Furthermore, we also experimented with con-

tinuous space word representations (Mikolov et 

al., 2013) in order to extract, manually review 

and incorporate lists of near synonyms to voca-

tion-specified words. For instance, the top-10 

closest words for the word soldat ‘soldier’ were: 

bonde ‘farmer’, officer, simple* ‘simple’, knekt 

‘foot soldier’, tapper* ‘brave’, sjöman ‘seaman’, 

adelsman ‘nobleman’, munk ‘monk’, duktig* 

‘capable’ and matros ‘sailor’; only three of these 

words, marked with ‘*’, are not directly associat-

ed with vocations. This experiment resulted into 

roughly a hundred of new vocation words inte-

grated in the knowledge base. 

4.2 Person Entity Recognition 

During processing we also use named entity 

recognition (NER) (Borin et al., 2007), but only 

a component that deals with person entity identi-

fication. Since gender is a prominent attribute for 

a very large number of first names, we apply a 

NER component that uses a first name gazetteer 

with 21,000 first names, in which each name has 

been pre-assigned gender and thus used to assign 

gender to recognized person first names. For in-

stance the NER processing of the sentence: Jan 

och Johan skulle just gå in i stugan, då Maja 

ropade dem tillbaka ‘Jan and John were about to 

go into the cottage, when Maja called them back’ 

will recognize three first names (Jan, Johan and 

Maja) and assign male gender to the first two, 

92



Jan and Johan and female to the last one, Maja. 

Thereafter, the results obtained during the appli-

cation of the method described in Section 4.1 and 

the results from the NER will be merged, and a 

post-NER pattern matching script will try to as-

sign gender to vocation words for which gender 

is marked as Unknown by the process described 

in 4.1 and there is a first name annotation close 

by. This is accomplished under the condition that 

the NER has assigned a gender to a first name in 

the near context of a “genderless” vocation. For 

instance, a vocation word, for which its surface 

characteristics does not reveal any gender affilia-

tion according to the vocation lexicon, can be 

assigned appropriate gender if a recognized first 

name appears in its near context; e.g. bonden 

Petter ‘(the) farmer Petter’ or Gusten är en 

fiskare ‘Gusten is a fisherman’. In these exam-

ples bonden and fiskare are coded in the 

knowledge base as vocation words with un-

known gender and the process outlined in 4.1 

recognizes it as such. Petter and Gusten, on the 

other hand, are recognized by the NER as human 

with male gender. The gender attribute will be 

then propagated to the vocation words bonden 

and fiskare which will get the same gender as its 

appositive Petter in the first case and the person 

entity’s gender close by in the second case. 

4.3 Local Context Regularities 

Since not all vocation annotations get gender 

assignment during recognition, we use hand-

coded rules based on various lexical patterns for 

that purpose. The heuristics applied to these rules 

include four major types of reliable information: 

personal pronouns, gender-bearing adjectives, 

gender-bearing suffixes and certain forms of lo-

cal context: 

 

 personal pronouns, e.g. the Swedish hans 
‘his’ and hennes ‘her’, are used for gender 

assignment if they appear in a context very 

close to a vocation (1 to 5 tokens); e.g. in 

the text fragment …fiskaren och hans 

barn ‘… the fisherman and his children’, 

fiskaren is identified as a vocation but with 

unknown gender which at this stage will 

be assigned male since the pronoun hans is 

male and refers to the fiskaren ‘fisher-

man’; while in the text fragment …hon var 

en agitator ‘… she was an agitator’, agita-

tor is identified as a vocation but with un-

known gender which at this stage will be 

assigned female since the pronoun hon is 

female referring to agitator 

 historical forms of Swedish adjectives 
used to be gender bearing; e.g. the majori-

ty of adjectives ending in -e designate 

male gender. For example, fattige bonden 

‘the poor farmer’, here bonden is identi-

fied as a vocation with unknown gender 

which will be assigned male since the ad-

jective fattige is indicating a male noun 

 similarly to the process described in Sec-
tion 4.1, we also here take advantage of 

the fact that many noun suffixes or head 

words of compounds are also gender bear-

ing; e.g. suffixes -erska or -inna designate 

female gender; e.g. tvätterska ‘laundress’ 

or värdinna ‘hostess’ are assigned female 

gender because of their gender bearing 

suffixes. Gender bearing head words are 

also used for gender assignment; e.g. 

compounds ending in -fru ‘wife’ such as 

bondefru [bonde+fru] ‘peasant wife’ will 

be assigned female gender; while com-

pounds ending in e.g. karl ‘man’ such as 

besättningskarl [besättning+s+karl] ‘crew 

man’ will be assigned male gender 

 local context is also used to merge two or 
more consecutive vocation and related an-

notations into one; typically when a geni-

tive form of a noun precedes another noun. 

For instance, the text snippet: ryttmästarns 

betjent ‘[the] rittmeister's servant’ will ini-

tially receive two vocation annotations 

(with unknown gender) that will be 

merged into one [ryttmästarns+betjent] 

which unknown gender; while the snippet 

drottningens hofmästarinna ‘(the) queen’s 

hofmeisteress’ will initially receive two 

vocation annotations (with female gender) 

that will be merged into one [drottning-

ens+hofmästarinna] with female gender. 

4.4 Statistical Modeling 

Finally, we also use a complementary statistical 

modelling method, conditional random fields 

(CRF) for learning gender-assigned vocations in 

combination with the results of the rule-based 

system and the NER (the vocation words togeth-

er with basic features such as n-grams and word 

shape were used as features for training the 

learner). For that purpose we use the Stanford 

CRF off-the-shelf software (Finkel et al., 2005). 

The purpose of the CRF is to identify vocations 

and (possibly) correct gender not captured by the 

previous techniques, in order to increase recall. 

Training and testing is based on a pre-annotated 

and manually inspected sample (by the first au-

93



thor). This sample was randomly selected from 

Spf and it was first automatically annotated by 

the rule based and NER components, and then 

sentences with at least one annotation were se-

lected, manually inspected, corrected and used 

for training (390,000) and testing (50,000). 

5 Results, Evaluation and Analysis 

The fact that a large number of vocations in the 

lexical resources have been assigned Unknown 

gender implies that the computational processing 

requires to heavily relying on a (wider) context 

to assign proper gender to these words. This is a 

serious drawback since there is not always relia-

ble near context, e.g. at the sentence level, that 

can be used. This fact is mirrored on the results 

of e.g. the CRF classifier. Different complemen-

tary techniques have been tested, but still, a large 

number of vocations remains with unknown gen-

der. More elaborated ways are probably required 

to identify gender, perhaps using discourse in-

formation, e.g. CRF is used with default features, 

new features might be necessary to test. 
 

Female Male Unknown 
hustru [wife] 
(2016) 

kung [king] (976) präst [priest] 
(1341) 

majorska [ma-

joress] (1054) 

prost [provost] 

(614) 

kapten [captain] 

(532) 

grefvinna [coun-
tess] (805) 

brukspatron [iron-
master] (582) 

löjtnant [lieuten-
ant] (487) 

jungfru [maid] 

(698) 

patron [land ten-

ure] (430) 

major (382) 

grevinna [coun-
tess] (593) 

kyrkoherde [vicar] 
(325) 

bonde [farmer] 
(343) 

överstinna [colo-

nel's wife] (308) 

konung [king] 

(258) 

*don (322) 

prostinna [minis-
ter’s wife] (304) 

biskop [bishop] 
(242) 

tjänare [servant] 
(283) 

drottning [queen] 

(274) 

grefve [count] 

(227) 

överste [colonel] 

(241) 

hushållerska 
[housekeeper] 

(260) 

baron (215) tiggare [beggar] 
(236) 

prästfru [minister’s 
wife] (218) 

kejsare [emperor] 
(208) 

husbonde [master] 
(217) 

 

Table 1. The top-10 most frequent lemmatized 

vocations (and their occurrences) in the Selma 

Lagerlof Archive (‘*’: error). 
 

Table 1 above shows the top-20 occurrences of 

three automatically extracted lists of male, fe-

male and unknown gender vocations from the 

Selma Lagerlof Archive (a collection of the au-

thor’s works of fiction published as books during 

her lifetime), a completely new corpus, not used 

for the development of the resources in the study 

with 3.341.714 tokens. 

5.1 Evaluation of the CRF 

The results of the classifier’s evaluation
8
 are giv-

en in tables 2 and 3. Low recall scores can be 

possibly attributed to two facts; one is the 

amount of test and training texts used for training 

the classifier and second the use of default fea-

tures for training. Addition of new features, such 

as part-of-speech, syntactic and/or co-reference 

links could have possibly being beneficial, in-

cluding larger training corpora. Moreover, vari-

ous types of errors could be identified during all 

stages of processing. With respect to the CRF 

component evaluation, most of the errors had to 

do with the occurrences of e.g. male designated 

adjectives, such as svenske ‘Swedish’ or danske 

‘Danish’. A number of last names and also 

common words that were homographic to voca-

tions were also annotated erroneously as such; 

for instance the last names Skytte ‘Shooter’ (e.g. 

in the context Malin Skytte) and Snickare ‘car-

penter’ (e.g. in the context Gorius Snickare); and 

common nouns such as simmaren ‘(the) swim-

mer’ or vakt ‘guard’ in idiomatic contexts such 

as hålla vakt ‘be on one's guard’. 
 

 Precision Recall f-score 

B
9
 96.33% 58.22% 72.57% 

I 89.09% 72.06% 79.67% 
 

Table 2. Precision, recall and f-scores for the 

CRF learner. 
 

 Precision Recall f-score 

F 97.03% 43.75% 60.31% 

M 94.52% 55.44% 69.89% 

U 53.25% 45.00% 48.78% 
 

Table 3. Precision, recall and f-scores for the 

CRF learner on gender (M=male; F=female; 

U=unknown). 
 

Another type of important omission has been the 

fact that a large number of vocations are assigned 

                                                 
8 For the evaluation we used the conlleval script, vers. 2004-

01-26 by Erik Tjong Kim Sang. 
9 We use the IOB tags for file representation: I (inside), O 

(outside), or B (begin). A token is tagged as B if it marks 

the beginning of a chunk. Subsequent tokens within the 

chunk are tagged I. All other tokens are tagged O. E.g. 

the context Fru majorskan skrek till majorn… ‘Mrs. ma-

jor's wife shouted to the major ...’ is represented as: 

Fru B-Female 

majorskan I-Female 

skrek O 

till O 

majorn B-Male ... 

94



unknown gender since there is no reliable con-

text (at the sentence level) that could be used. 

Moreover, we have been restrictive to the gender 

assignment of certain vocations in the resources, 

although, in principle, and considering the nature 

and publication time of the texts, we could by 

default assign gender to a large number of these 

vocations. For instance, a large number of mili-

tary-related vocations, such as löjtnant ‘lieuten-

ant’ or generalmajor ‘major general’ are as-

signed unknown gender, although these, predom-

inantly, refer to males in the novels. Moreover, 

identical singular and plural forms of vocation 

terms are yet another difficult problem, e.g. poli-

tiker ‘politician’ or ‘politicians’ or spritfabrikar-

betare ‘distillery worker’ or ‘distillery workers’. 

Some sort of linguistic pre-processing, such as 

idiom identification and part of speech annota-

tion, could probably exclude word tokens in plu-

ral form (or verbs in that matter, but such cases 

were extremely rare in our data), nevertheless 

part of speech tagging is not used at the moment. 

Also, more elaborative models could be used to 

first determine who the personal pronouns refer 

to before an attempt could be made to assign the 

pronoun’s gender to a vocation word with un-

known one. 

5.2 Evaluation of the Knowledge-based 
Components 

Besides the evaluation of the CRF learner, we 

also conducted an analysis on a small random 

sample of similar text from different, but compa-

rable, corpora, in order to investigate the contri-

bution of the different components for the voca-

tion identification. A selection of a randomized 

subset of 1000 sentences from two sources was 

conducted from the August Strindberg's Collect-

ed Works (“August Strindbergs Samlade Verk”) 

and the Selma Lagerlof Archive (“Selma Lager-

löf-arkivet”), both parts of the Swedish Litera-

ture Bank
10

. These 1000 sentences were automat-

ically annotated by: i) the rule-based system 

without any sort of disambiguation or other pro-

cessing only lexicon look-up; this can be consid-

ered as a baseline system where only inflectional 

morphology is considered; and ii) all the rest 

without the CRF. That included the rule-based 

system with the use of lexical patterns for disam-

biguation, compound segmentation and the 

named entity recognition. 

                                                 
10  Information about the Literature Bank is here: 

<http://litteraturbanken.se/#!/om/inenglish>. 

A total of 341 of vocation identifiers could be 

manually recognised and confirmed the assump-

tion that best results are produced by using all 

available resources at hand. Moreover, the preci-

sion of the rule-based system (i.e. the lexicon 

lookup) is very high. Out of the 341 possible vo-

cations, the baseline, i.e. the rule-based system 

without any sort of disambiguation, compound 

analysis etc., identified 329 vocations (46% with 

the correct gender and the rest with unknown 

gender); 12 (most of them compounds such as 

klädessömmerska ‘clothing dressmaker’) and a 

few others such as penitentiarius ‘confessor’, 

could not be found and 15 tokens were annotated 

as vocations but were wrong. These 15 wrong 

ones originate from (possibly) inappropriate lex-

icon vocation entries, entries that shouldn’t have 

entered the lexicon as vocations, such Sachsare 

‘a person from Saxony’ befrämjare ‘promoter’ (a 

borderline case) and homographs with proper 

names, such as Jarl (which is a title given to 

members of medieval royal families before their 

accession to the throne, but also used as a last 

name). 

The combination of all available tools and re-

sources improved these figures; marginally on 

the gender but substantially on the recognition of 

the compounds. All vocation compounds were 

recognized (10) and also four more that were 

wrong, such as Nekropolis ‘Nekro+polis’ (since 

polis ‘police’ is in the lexicon) and Notre-Dame 

‘Notre-+Dame’ (since dame ‘female equivalent 

of the honour of knighthood’ is in the lexicon as 

well). These compounds could be identified be-

cause of the compound decomposition step and 

matching of the compounds’ heads to the lexicon 

content. Compared to the baseline results the 

percentage of vocations with correct gender 

raised to 49.6%. 

6 Conclusions 

Women’s history has emphasized a relative in-

visibility of women’s work and women workers. 

The reasons to this are manifold, and the extent, 

the margin of error in terms of women’s work 

activities is of course hard to assess, e.g. work 

wasn’t a tax base also work wasn’t the point of 

departure for a collective political interest (i.e. 

labour) as it later developed into; while the polit-

ical organisation also excluded women from 

some certain areas and particularly from formal 

authority. This means that women were to a less-

er extent mentioned, authorised, appointed or 

nominated in formal sources. This is obviously 

95



the case for many but not all traditional sources, 

population registers, cameral, and fiscal sources. 

However, we still don’t have good reasons to 

believe that this means either that women didn’t 

work or that other types of material couldn’t be 

more rewarding. And the suggestion of this paper 

is that prose fiction is still possible to utilise fur-

ther and that the methodological developments in 

digital humanities should be tried in this endeav-

our, e.g. by investigating women’s work and 

economic activities represented longitudinally in 

prose fiction and the differences between the 

texts of female, male (and unknown) authors, in 

all those aspects. In this work we have applied 

automatic text analytic techniques in order to 

identify vocation signals in 19th century Swedish 

prose fiction. Our goal has been to reduce the 

time consuming, manual work that is usually 

carried out by historians, literature scholars etc., 

in order to e.g. identify and extract semantically 

meaningful information such as gender patterns 

and semantic associations. Literature is a com-

prehensive source for data on employment and 

occupation, economy and society, and to e.g. an 

economic historian or gender researcher such 

data can be of immense value, particularly for 

the period between 1800-1900 since gender rela-

tions in and through work is a long-standing 

problem due to repeated underestimation of 

women’s work attributed to among other com-

pelling reasons, the systematic under-reporting of 

women’s work in the used sources (Humphries 

& Sarasua, 2012; Ighe & Wiechel, 2012). Prose 

fiction does not necessarily have the same limita-

tions and can be utilized as a fruitful point of de-

parture. 

For future work we would like to explore 

even in more detail the variation of both the per-

formance of the processing steps and also com-

pare the results across time periods and authors’ 

gender. Deeper analysis could provide interesting 

insights on the nature of which types of person 

activities are used by different authors or com-

pare and explore other types of collections
11

 from 

the same period, and thus confirm or reject estab-

lished hypotheses about the kind of vocabulary 

used; e.g. do male authors use more vocation or 

kinship labels?  

                                                 
11  Such collections could be the Dramawebben 

(<http://www.dramawebben.se/>), i.e. digital versions of 

over 500 plays of Swedish drama from the 1600s to 

modern times; or the Digidaily, i.e. digitized Swedish 

newspapers from the 18-19th century 

(<https://riksarkivet.se/digidaily>). 

 
 

Figure 2. Comparison male and female authors 

(based on absolute frequencies) of the Vocation 

and Kinship categories during the period 1840-

1860-1880-1900. 

 

As Fig. 2 shows, other types of investigations are 

possible and the analysis can provide information 

about the kind of vocabulary used by various 

authors during different periods; e.g. do male 

authors use more vocation than kinship labels 

and of which type? Kinship (section 3.1) is one 

of the categories already encoded in the 

knowledge base and can be easily used to com-

pare the style of authors diachronically. 

Acknowledgements 

This work is partially supported by the Swedish 

Research Council’s framework grant “Towards a 

knowledge-based culturomics” dnr 2012-5738. 

References 

Apoorv Agarwal, Augusto Corvalan, Jacob Jensen 

and Owen Rambow. 2012. Social Network Analy-

sis of Alice in Wonderland. Workshop on Compu-

tational Linguistics for Literature. Pp 88–96, 

Montréal, Canada. 

Shlomo Argamon, Russell Horton, Mark Olsen and 

Sterling Stuart Stein. 2007. Gender, Race, and Na-

tionality in Black Drama, 1850-2000: Mining Dif-

ferences in Language Use in Authors and their 

Characters. Digital Hum. Pp. 8-10. U. of Illinois. 

Tobias Boes. 2014. The Vocations of the Novel: Dis-

tant Reading Occupational Change in 19th Centu-

ry German Literature. Distant Readings – Topolo-

96



gies of German Culture in the Long 19th Century. 

Erlin&Tatlock (eds). Pp. 259-283. Camden House. 

Lars Borin, Dimitrios Kokkinakis and Leif-Jöran Ols-

son. 2007. Naming the past: Named entity and 

animacy recognition in 19th century Swedish lit-

erature. 1st LaTeCh. Pp. 1-8. Prague. 

Joseph Bullard and Cecilia Oveesdotter Alm. 2014. 

Computational analysis to explore authors’ depic-

tion of characters. Proc. of the 3rd Workshop on 

Computational Linguistics for Literature. Pp. 11–

16. Gothenburg, Sweden. 

Anthony Don et al. 2007. Discovering interesting us-

age patterns in text collections: Integrating text 

mining with visualization. 16th ACM Conf. on info 

& knowledge management (CIKM). Pp. 213-222.  

Rosemarie Fiebranz, Erik Lindberg, Jonas Lindström 

and Maria Ågren. 2011. Making verbs count: the 

research project ‘Gender and Work’ and its meth-

odology. Scan Econ Hist Rev. 59:3, pp. 273-293. 

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager and Christopher 

Manning. 2005. Incorporating Non-local Infor-

mation into Information Extraction Systems by 

Gibbs Sampling. 43rd ACL. Pp. 363-370. 

Nikesh Garera and David Yarowsky. 2009. Modeling 

latent biographic attributes in conversational gen-

res. 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and 4th 

IJCNLP. Pp. 719–718. Singapore. 

Sobhan Raj Hota, Shlomo Argamon and Rebecca 

Chung. 2006. Gender in Shakespeare: Automatic 

stylistics gender character classification using syn-

tactic, lexical and lemma features. Chicago Col-

loq. on Digital Humanities and Computer Science 

(DHCS). Pp. 100-106. U. of Chicago, USA. 

Jane Humphries and Carmen Sarasua. 2012. Off the 

Record: Reconstructing Women's Labor Force 

Participation in the European Past. Feminist Eco-

nomics. Vol. 18:4. Taylor and Francis. 

Ann Ighe and Anna-Helena Wiechel. 2012. Without 

title. The dynamics of status, gender and occupa-

tion in Gothenburg, Sweden, 1815-45. Eur. Social 

Science History Conf.. Glasgow, Scotland. 

Matthew L. Jockers. 2013. Macroanalysis - Digital 

Methods and Literary History. Topics in the Digi-

tal Humanities. University of Illinois Press. 

Christopher Manning. 2011. Natural Language Pro-

cessing Tools for the Digital Humanities. Availa-

ble at <http://nlp.stanford.edu/~manning/courses/ 

DigitalHumanities/> (Visited 20150105). 

Tony McEnery and Helen Baker. 2014. The Corpus 

as Social History - Prostitution in the 17th Centu-

ry. Exploring Historical Sources with LT: Results / 

Perspectives CLARIN Workshop. Den Haag, The 

Netherlands. <https://www.clarin.eu/sites/default/ 

files/Mcenery_DenHaag.pdf> (Visited 20150222) 

Tomas Mikolov, Wen-tau Yih and Geoffrey Zweig. 

2013. Linguistic Regularities in Continuous Space 

Word Representations. Proc. of NAACL HLT. Pp. 

746–751. Atlanta, USA. 

Franco Moretti. 2013. Distant Reading. Verso. 

Martin Mueller. 2009. Digital Shakespeare, or to-

wards a literary informatics. Shakespeare. 4:3, 

284-301, Routledge. 

Daniela Oelke, Dimitrios Kokkinakis and Daniel 

Keim. 2013. Visual Literature Analysis: Uncover-

ing the dynamics of social networks in prose liter-

ature. 15th Eurographics Conf. on Visualization 

(EuroVis). Pp. 371-380. Leipzig, Germany. 

Allan H. Pasco. 2004. Literature as Historical Ar-

chive. New Literary History. Vol. 35:3, pp 373-

394. John Hopkins University Press. 

Marco Pennacchiotti and Fabio M. Zanzotto. 2008. 

Natural Language Processing across time: an em-

pirical investigation on Italian. Proc. of GoTAL. 

LNAI. Vol. 5221. Pp 371-382. Springer. 

Eva Pettersson and Joakim Nivre. 2011. Automatic 

Verb Extraction from Historical Swedish Texts. 

5th LaTeCH. Pp 87-95. Oregon, USA. 

Eva Pettersson, Beáta Megyesi and Joakim Nivre. 

2012. Parsing the Past – Identification of Verb 

Constructions in Historical Text. 6th LaTeCH. Pp 

65-74. Avignon, France. 

Eva Pettersson, Beáta Megyesi and Joakim Nivre. 

2014. Verb Phrase Extraction in a Historical Con-

text. Proc. of the first Swedish national SWE-

CLARIN workshop. Uppsala, Sweden. 

Michael Piotrowski. 2012. Natural Language Pro-

cessing for Historical Texts. Synthesis Lectures on 

HLT. 5(2):1. Morgan & Claypool Publ. 

Jennifer Rutner and Roger C. Schonfeld. 2012. Sup-

porting the Changing Research Practices of His-

torians. National Endowment for the Humanities. 

Ithaca S+R. New York. 

Romain Vuillemot, Tanya Clement, Catherine 

Plaisant and Amit Kumar. 2009. What’s being 

said near “Martha”? Exploring NEs in Literary 

Text Collections. VAST. Pp. 107-114. NJ, USA. 

97


