



















































Creating Textual Driver Feedback from Telemetric Data


Proceedings of the 15th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 156–165,
Brighton, September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Creating Textual Driver Feedback from Telemetric Data

Daniel Braun Ehud Reiter Advaith Siddharthan
Department of Computing Science

University of Aberdeen
{r01db14, e.reiter, advaith}@abdn.ac.uk

Abstract

Usage based car insurances, which use
sensors to track driver behaviour, are en-
joying growing popularity. Although the
data collected by these insurances could
provide detailed feedback about the driv-
ing style, this information is usually kept
away from the driver and is used only to
calculate insurance premiums. In this pa-
per, we explored the possibility of pro-
viding drivers with textual feedback based
on telemetric data in order to improve
individual driving, but also general road
safety. We report that textual feedback
generated through NLG was preferred to
non-textual summaries currently popular
in the field and specifically was better at
giving users a concrete idea of how to
adapt their driving.

1 Introduction

Although the number of road deaths in the UK is
steadily decreasing, 1,713 people died in road ac-
cidents in 2013 and 21,657 were seriously injured
according to the Department for Transport (2014).
Nearly 35% of those who died were under the age
of 30. Modern cars are often equipped with nu-
merous driving assistance systems that detect and
resolve dangerous situations, but these systems are
not available in cheaper and older cars, which are
particularly popular among younger drivers. In
this group so called “black box” or “telematic”
car insurances are becoming more and more pop-
ular and insurance companies expect that by 2020
nearly 40% of all car insurances in the UK will be
telemetric (Rose, 2013).

Telematic insurances use different sensors in-
stalled in the car to track the individual driving
style of their customers. Instead of calculating in-
surance premiums based on statistical risk groups,

insurance companies can use these data to cre-
ate individual risk profiles and calculate insurance
premiums accordingly. This offers drivers who be-
long to a high-risk group, like young male drivers,
the opportunity to save money. Very detailed feed-
back could be produced from these data which
could be able to help drivers to improve their driv-
ing and hence road safety. However the feedback
insurance companies give to their customers, if
they give any feedback at all, is often very sparse:
The current state of the art of driver feedback, as
used by insurance policies like AXA Drivesave1

and Aviva Drive2, are scores (e.g. from 0 to 100) in
general categories like “pace” and “smoothness”
or maps where incidents are marked with pins, as
used by Intelligent Marmalade3. As we show in
Section 4, this feedback is not perceived as help-
ful by drivers.

Drivers who use such an insurance have a par-
ticularly high motivation (i.e. money) to change
their behaviour. However a system which pro-
vides helpful feedback could also be useful for
other drivers, especially for example for learners
and young drivers. Therefore, in this paper, we ex-
plored the possibility of providing drivers with in-
dividual textual feedback based on telemetric data,
in order to improve road safety. We evaluated the
concept of textual driver feedback against the cur-
rent state of the art feedback mechanisms, to find
out if a textual feedback system is perceived as
more helpful by drivers.

From an NLG point of view there are two main
challenges in creating such a system: Driving one
hour can create up to 300,000 data points, which
have to be grouped and analysed in a way that al-
lows us to describe important information within

1https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=com.mydrive.axa.drivesave

2https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=com.aviva.ukgi.avivadrive

3https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=com.wantstudios.marmalade

156



this huge amount of data in a short text. And, like
all systems that try to achieve a behaviour change,
the texts produced by such a feedback system
should take psychological considerations into ac-
count, in order to increase the likelihood to achieve
a behaviour change. This distinguised our work
from NLG systems summarising spatio-temporal
data in other domains (Turner et al., 2008; Pon-
namperuma et al., 2013).

2 Related Work

Although earlier work, like Reiter et al. (2003),
has shown that behaviour changes are difficult to
achieve, we believe that concrete individual driver
feedback, based on telemetric data, could con-
tribute to a more secure driving style.

2.1 Psychological Aspects of Behaviour
Change

There are many theories about how behaviour
changes can be achieved. Fogg (2009), for ex-
ample, identifies three factors which control hu-
man behaviour: motivation, ability, and triggers.
A similar point was made by Fishbein (2000), who
postulated that “any given behaviour is most likely
to occur if one has a strong intention to perform
the behaviour, if one has the necessary skills and
abilities required to perform the behaviour, and if
there are no environmental constraints preventing
behavioural performance”. Abraham and Michie
(2008) defined 26 “generally-applicable behavior
change techniques”, like providing information on
consequences and providing general encourage-
ment.

2.2 Giving Feedback

There is also a huge amount of literature about
how to formulate feedback in order to increase the
likelihood of having an impact on the recipient.
Three popular advices, which were used in this
work, are:

Positive feedback is in general perceived as
more accurate and correct than negative feed-
back (Ilgen et al., 1979). Starting with posi-
tive feedback therefore gives the feedback source
more credibility in general, what has a positive in-
fluence of the perception and acceptance of pos-
sibly following negative feedback (Steelman and
Rutkowski, 2004). This technique is often used in
clinical settings as part of the so called “feedback
sandwich” (Dohrenwend, 2002).

Hattie and Timperley (2007) pointed out, that
“specific goals are more effective than general or
nonspecific ones” (emphasis added).

Ye and Johnson (1995), Teach and Shortliffe
(1987), Weiner (1980) and many others pointed
out, that it is crucial for the acceptance of feedback
from computer systems, that the feedback is jus-
tified in a way that allows the user to reconstruct
how conclusions were drawn.

2.3 Feedback Generation
NLG systems that generate feedback have proven
to be helpful in many different areas. Gkatzia et
al. (2013) for example showed that an NLG sys-
tem can provide students with feedback that is
perceived as helpful as feedback from lecturers,
using reinforcement learning. The SkillSum sys-
tem (Williams and Reiter, 2008), which generates
feedback about basic reading skills and performed
significantly better than a comparable system that
used canned texts. In the context of citizen sci-
ence, automatically generated feedback has been
shown to improve both skill levels and motiva-
tion levels among participants (Blake et al., 2012;
van der Wal et al., 2016).

As Eugenio et al. (2005) have shown, aggrega-
tion is one important factor that influences the ef-
fectiveness of feedback generation systems. This
is especially important for the system we present
in this paper, since it will deal with a huge amount
of data.

Another important task, that is closely related
to the aggregation, is the identification of impor-
tant information which will also be an important
part of our system. The approach that we present
in Section 3.2.2 and Section 3.2.3 is similar to
the work from Gatt et al. (2009) and Hallett et al.
(2006)

2.4 Automotive Behaviour Change Support
Systems

Some projects with focus on ecological driving
have already successfully used feedback in order
to influence driving behaviour: Like Tulusan et
al. (2012), who were able to achieve an improve-
ment in fuel efficiency of more than 3% by pro-
viding drivers with numerical feedback that was
calculated after each route. Boriboonsomsin et
al. (2010), who used a combination of instant
and non-instant feedback, achieved an average im-
provement of 6% on city streets and 1% on high-
ways. And Endres et al. (2010) improved fuel effi-

157



ciency by using social networks and gamification
elements.

There are also systems which use instant feed-
back, like the CarCoach project from Arroyo et
al. (2006). CarCoach uses numerous sensors, like
cameras and pressure sensors, to provide imme-
diate feedback on incidents like not looking at
the road or being distracted by handling the ra-
dio while driving. However, Sharon et al. (2005)
showed that negative feedback from the system is
easily perceived as frustrating. And there is also
always a risk that the feedback itself is a further
distraction, when given immediately.

3 Methods

3.1 Data Collection
Insurance companies use mainly two different ap-
proaches to collect their data: They either use
permanently installed sensors, often called “black
box”, or smart phone applications. In both cases
GPS timestamps and coordinates as well as accel-
eration data are logged. Although especially smart
phone solutions, but to a less extent also black box
solutions, raise a lot of questions about data relia-
bility and integrity, as pointed out by Händel et al.
(2014) and others, according to Nol (2015) these
two approaches have together a worldwide market
share of nearly 80% of all telematic insurances.

As our research is focused on data analysis and
presentation, rather than the collection, we de-
cided to choose a smart phone based approach, as
this method is less intrusive for the car owner and
can be used by any driver interested in feedback,
without going through an insurance company. The
application we used for the data collection was
based on previous work by Braun et al. (2011).

The data corpus we used to develop our pro-
totype consisted of about 600 road miles, driven
by five different drivers in four different countries.
Table 1 shows an example of the data logged by
the acceleration sensor, Table 2 shows data logged
by the GPS receiver. The acceleration sensor logs
the date, the time and the acceleration in m

s2
. The

GPS receiver logs the latitude and longitude co-
ordinates, the accuracy of the localization in me-
ters and the GPS timestamp. Additional informa-
tion that is needed during the data analysis, like
street names, street types and speed limits, are ob-
tained from OpenStreetMap. In order to access
these data, we used Nominatim4, to match GPS

4https://nominatim.openstreetmap.org

coordinates to streets in OpenStreetMap.

3.2 Data Analysis

In order to provide feedback, we first have to
decide which behaviour should be classified as
“right” and which as “wrong” and when wrong
behaviour is relevant or significant enough to be
taken into account for the feedback generation.

3.2.1 Specification of Relevant Behaviour
The most obvious approach would probably be
to expect law-abiding behaviour. However it is
worth considering different points of view before
specifying which behaviour should be regarded as
“good” and which should be regarded as “bad”.
From the police’s point of view the naive ap-
proach of law-abidance may be sufficient, from
a driving instructor’s point of view other things
are also important, like energy-saving and smooth-
ness. As our research is closely related to telem-
atic insurances, particular attention should be paid
to the point of view of insurance companies. Al-
though their exact metrics are secret, we know that
they take into account speeding, time of day, day
of week, acceleration, braking, elapsed distance,
road type and other parameters (cf. Händel et al.
(2014) for a more extensive list). On one hand we
understandably wanted to stick close to the insur-
ance metrics, on the other hand, from a motiva-
tional point of view, it is strongly advised to anal-
yse these parameters critically. It would be, for
example, very frustrating for a driver who needs to
drive to work at 6 a.m. every weekday, to be told
that he should not drive before 9 a.m., because it
could increase his insurance premium.

After taking all these different considerations
into account, we decided to concentrate on speed-
ing and acceleration and braking behaviour. These
are three of the most important parameters for in-
surance companies, because wrong behaviour in
these categories often causes accidents. They are
also important for driving instructors. There are,
of course, many other important parameters, like
distraction and safety distance, which can not be
taken into account due to the limitation of the
available data.

Speeding, acceleration and braking also have
quantitative dimensions, which are very important
for feedback generation. While it is reasonable to
define driving 30 mph where 20 mph are allowed
as wrong behaviour it is arguable if that is the case
for driving 21 mph too. In the UK, there is no com-

158



date time x y z
08.01.2015 12:07:10.838 1.4939818 2.1068976 9.768343
08.01.2015 12:07:10.858 1.4556746 2.183512 9.730036
08.01.2015 12:07:10.879 1.6472107 2.1452048 9.653421

Table 1: Data logged by the acceleration sensor (in m
s2

)

lat lon accuracy (in m) timestamp
57.16042614 -2.09462595 10.0 1420718831921
57.1604265 -2.0946818 6.0 1420718832933
57.16042663 -2.0946828 6.0 1420718833934

Table 2: Data logged by the GPS receiver

pulsory law about how to handle these issues and
the decision is up to the police officer’s discretion.
The Association of Chief Police Officers (2015)
suggest a tolerance of 10% of the speed limit +
2mph. Other countries have fixed tolerance, like
Germany, with a tolerance of 3%, or no tolerance
at all, like Switzerland. Due to the limited ac-
curacy of our measuring method, we decided to
adopt a tolerance of 10% of the speed limit, be-
fore an incident is classified as speeding. We also
decided to ignore violations of the speed limit with
a length under 10 meters.

While the quantification of speeding incidents
can be derived from laws, the situation is less obvi-
ous for inappropriate acceleration or braking. Af-
ter numerous test, we decided to adopt the guide-
lines we derived from the AXA Drivesave app,
which categorises speeding and braking incidents
in 4 classes: An acceleration up to +/- 2m

s2
is

permissible. Non-permissible behaviour is classi-
fied in three categories: Acceleration between +/-
2− 3m

s2
, +/- 3− 4m

s2
and >+/<- 4m

s2
.

3.2.2 Detection of Relevant Behaviour
After finishing a trip, the raw sensor data, ob-
tained by the smart phone application, is parsed
for incidents that meet the above described cri-
teria. While acceleration and braking incidents
can be detected directly from the sensor data, the
recognition of speeding needs further information,
namely the speed limit. The prototype we de-
veloped uses speed limits provided by the Open-
StreetMap project. As the speed limit is not avail-
able for all streets in the OpenStreetMap-data, we
also implemented a fall-back-mechanism, which
sets the speed limit to the general national limit for
the road type, for example 60 mph for single car-
riageways in the UK, if no further information is

provided. Although data from OpenStreetMap has
shown to be relatively reliable (Neis et al., 2011)
user generated data can always have flaws. But
since our analysis focuses on recurring behaviour
patterns, rather than single incidents, the impact of
single failures is minimized. However, for a com-
mercial system, more reliable data sources could
be used.

Each detected incident is stored in a database, as
shown in Figure 1. The saved data set contains two
timestamps and two GPS coordinate-pairs (start
and end), the distance of the incident, the maxi-
mum value during the incident (either maximum
speed or maximum acceleration) and the average
value, as well as a unique ID that links to the street
the incident happened on.

Based on these information an importance value
is calculated for each incident. The importance of
an incident is expressed as a number between 0
and 100 and is based on the type of the incident
(speeding incidents are more important than brak-
ing incidents, which are more important than ac-
celeration incidents), the distance, the maximum
and average value and the type of the road the in-
cident happened on.

3.2.3 Aggregation through Clustering
Common feedback systems for drivers, like lane
departure warning systems or distance alert sys-
tems, give instant feedback about current or even
upcoming situations. Our approach however is
based on non-instant feedback and aims for a
weekly feedback period. The significance of a
single incident is therefore considerably lower in
our system. As past behaviour can not be changed
anyway, we focus on influencing future behaviour.
We try to achieve this goal by identifying recurring
behaviour patterns in the driving as these patterns

159



Nominatim

Violation DBUser Application

encrypted raw sensor data

GPS
coordinates

street, city, country, 
type, speed limit, city

violation type, time, position, 
value, importance, osmID

Multimodal HTML Feedback

Violation Parser

Data-2-Text-System

Mo
st i

mp
ort

ant
 vio

lati
ons

OpenStreetMap API

osmID osmID

Figure 1: System architecture

are likely to occur again in the future. In this way
we hope to not only achieve a change of behaviour
in a current situation, but a long-term behaviour
change.

Together with domain experts (i.e. driving in-
structors), we identified features which are suit-
able to group incidents by, in order to find be-
haviour patterns: street names, road types, speed
limits, time of the day and day of the week. Some
of the most common behaviour patterns, according
to our domain experts, can be identified by these
features. For example the tendency to speed on
roads with “extreme” (i.e. very high or very low)
speed limits, carelessness on well known routes
and dangerous behaviour at certain times (e.g. late
in the night or after work).

In order to detect these patterns in the database
of all incidents, we use an agglomerative cluster-
ing algorithm, where the distance between two in-
cidents is defined by the weighted similarity of
all above mentioned features. The algorithm also
has a minimal cluster size, which is influenced
by the total number of incidents, and a maximum
distance, which are used to decide, when to stop
the agglomeration and which clusters are irrele-
vant. In this way we try to balance the interest be-
tween greatest possible and tightest possible clus-

ters, since neither very small nor very loose clus-
ters represent significant behaviour patterns.

3.3 NLG

The Data-2-Text module of our prototype follows
the three-stage pipelined architecture, as described
by Reiter (2007), and uses simpleNLG (Gatt and
Reiter, 2009) as surface realiser.

3.3.1 Psychological Background
Since we try to achieve a behaviour change, we
use different psychological techniques for the ver-
balisation of feedback, which have been shown to
be useful in the literature (cf. Section 2.1) to max-
imize the likelihood of achieving this goal. This is
reflected particularly in the document plan, which
follows mainly the three techniques described in
Section 2.2. Another psychological aspect was al-
ready taken into account during the specification
of relevant behaviour. We try to avoid unneces-
sary frustration by only reporting behaviour that
can be easily influenced by the driver, as described
in Section 3.2.1.

3.3.2 Document Plan
The high level organisation of the document is
based on these ideas. While the number of com-

160



Summary
Comparison

Map
Single Speeding Incidents

Speeding Clusters
Acceleration Clusters

Table 3: Content order

municated messages differs, depending on the to-
tal number of incidents, the order in which the
five different messages types (in terms of “mes-
sage types” as used by Reiter and Dale (2000))
are communicated is fixed, as shown in Table 3.
The report always starts with a summary, which
sums up facts about the reporting period, like the
length of the period and the driven distance dur-
ing this time. The summary is followed, whenever
possible, by pointing out a positive development,
compared to the last reporting period. This can
be very general, if the driver improve broadly, like
in Figure 2, “you reduced the number of speed-
ing incidents per mile by more than 10%”, or can
also be more specific, if the driver did not improve
overall, but in one particular aspect, like “you re-
duced the number of speeding incidents per mile
in residential areas by 20%”.

After this, a map follows, the main purpose of
which is to justify the presented feedback. Each
incident is marked with a pin on the map. By
clicking on the description of a cluster or a vi-
olation type in the text, the map shows only the
selected group of incidents and visualizes the fre-
quency of the selected incidents to the user.

Below the map, up to five of the “worst”
speeding incidents are reported, described by the
amount of speeding and the names of the streets
they occurred on. This is only shown if serious
speeding, which means exceeding the speed limit
by 20 mph or more, happened. Thereupon follows
a phrase that specifies how much shorter the brak-
ing distance would be, if the driver obeys the speed
limit, like “Going 30 mph slower could shorten
your braking distance by 108 yards.” in the exam-
ple in Figure 2.

At the end of the report the behaviour patterns,
found in form of clusters, are reported. As a short
length of the reports is crucial to potential users
(c.f. Section 4.6), the number of reported clusters
is strictly limited to two of each type, which are
selected by their importance. The importance of a

Driving Report 19 ­ 25 January
You drove 390 miles in 10 hours and 50 minutes during the
last week. You reduced the number of speeding incidents
per mile by more than 10 %, well done!

Five times you drove more than 30 mph too fast: On Castle
Road, on Kirkton Road, on North Deeside Road and twice
on A92. Going 30 mph slower could shorten your braking
distance by 108 yards. You also speeded on 175 other
occasions, 7 times on roads with 20 mph speed limit and 12
times on weekends on roads with 30 mph speed limit.

You accelerated or braked harshly 645 times, mostly on
highways and on roads with 20 mph speed limit.

Figure 2: Feedback type text

Figure 3: Feedback type score

Figure 4: Feedback type map

161



cluster is a combination of the importance values
of the single incidents within the cluster and the
size of the cluster.

3.3.3 Variation
Due to the fixed structure and the brevity of the
text, the space for variation is limited. Neverthe-
less, as feedback reports will be generated weekly,
we added some variation to the text generation. As
we expect behaviour changes, there should be a
“natural” variation, because of the change of the
underlying messages. The most static text, with
regard to the underlying data, is the summary at
the beginning, therefore there are nine different
possibilities how the content of the same message
can be realised as text, by changing the order of
the sentence, formulations or leaving less impor-
tant facts, like the driven time, out. In the second
part, which starts after the map and consists of two
sections, there is also a possible structural varia-
tion, as there is either one section about speeding
and one about acceleration or one section with sin-
gle incidents and one with clusters.

4 Evaluation

In order to evaluate our approach, we developed a
questionnaire to find out how potential users per-
ceive textual feedback, compared to the two state
of the art types of feedback, maps and scores.

4.1 Data

For this evaluation we used two real datasets
recorded in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire each of
which was used twice, once in full length and once
by selecting a smaller subset. The feedback that
was evaluated by the participants of our study was
based on these datasets. These trips were not part
of the training dataset we used to develop our pro-
totype.

4.2 Questionnaire

We presented feedback reports for four configura-
tions to every participant:

1. low (i.e. short) driven distance, low number
of incidents (LL)

2. low driven distance, high number of incidents
(LH)

3. high (i.e. long) driven distance, low number
of incidents (HL)

Score Map Text
1

1.5

2

2.5

3

A
ve

ra
ge

ra
nk

in
g

po
si

tio
n

(A
M

+
SE

)

Figure 5: Ranking results

4. high driven distance, high number of inci-
dents (HH)

For each of these four configurations, which
were shown in a random order, we presented three
types of feedback, which were also shown in a ran-
dom order: A score, a map and a text. Figures
2, 3 and 4 show the three different types of feed-
back for the configuration HH. For each type of
feedback three statements were given: “The feed-
back is helpful.”, “The feedback gives me an idea
how I could adapt my driving behaviour.” and
“The feedback encourages me to change my driv-
ing behaviour.”. Participants were asked to indi-
cate how much they agree or disagree with each
statement on a Likert scale with seven options. Af-
ter that, we asked the participants to give a rank-
ing, which type of feedback would be their first,
second and third choice, if they had to choose
one. We also asked which type(s) of feedback they
would choose if they could choose a combination
of different types (only one, two or all three). In
the end, participants were asked about their atti-
tude towards telematic car insurances in general.

4.3 Participants

The survey was completed by 21 participants be-
tween the age of 20 and 52. The average age of the
participants was 25. About 19% of all participants
were female, 81% male. In average the partici-
pants had 7 years of driving experience and more
than 66% of them drive every day.

162



map & score
1

text & map & score

2

text & score

6

text & map

12

Figure 6: Preferred combination of feedback types

4.4 Basic Findings

The most basic conclusion that we can draw from
the results of this survey is, that our participants
preferred the textual feedback over the two other
feedback types: 13 participants chose textual feed-
back as their first preference, 4 the score and 4 the
map (χ2 = 7.722; df = 2; p = 0.02). The aver-
age ranking position for the text was 1.4, for the
map 2.1 and 2.4 for the score (cf. Figure 5). When
asked to choose a combination of feedback types,
only one participant chose a combination without
textual feedback. The most chosen combination
was text and map (12 times). Only two people
chose a combination of all three types of feedback
(cf. Figure 6).

4.5 Likert Scale Results

We ran three ANOVA analyses, one with each of
the three statements (“The feedback is helpful.”,
“The feedback gives me an idea how I could adapt
my driving behaviour.” and “The feedback en-
courages me to change my driving behaviour.”) as
dependent variables (Likert scale of 1-7) and feed-
back type (score, map or text), distance travelled
and number of incidents (low/high) as fixed factors
and the participant as a random factor. We found
an overwhelming main effect of the feedback type
(p < 0.0001). No other effects or interactions
were significant at p < 0.05. Post hoc analysis
by TukeyHSD confirmed that the textual feedback
was more helpful, encouraging and provided more
ideas than either the map or the score (p < 0.0001
in all cases, except text-map, p = 0.0002). Figures
7a to 7c display the differences graphically.

LL LH HL HH
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

M
ed

ia
n

of
al

la
ns

w
er

s Score Map Text

(a) Results for: “The feedback is helpful.”

LL LH HL HH
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

M
ed

ia
n

of
al

la
ns

w
er

s Score Map Text

(b) Results for: “The feedback gives me an idea how I could
adapt my driving behaviour.”

LL LH HL HH
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

M
ed

ia
n

of
al

la
ns

w
er

s Score Map Text

(c) Results for: “The feedback encourages me to change my
driving behaviour.”

Figure 7: Evaluation of the Likert scale questions
(1 = completely disagree, 4 = neutral, 7 = com-
pletely agree; LL = distance low & incidents low,
LH = distance low & incidents high, HL = dis-
tance high & incidents low, HH = distance high &
incidents high)

163



4.6 Comments
Six participants used the possibility to give addi-
tional comments via a free text field. Three partic-
ipants said that the length of the text is important
and should not be too long. Two participants ex-
pressed concerns about the score and that they do
not trust the score, because they are not able to re-
construct how it is calculated.

4.7 Privacy
Although it was not the focus of our work, we
were, of course, aware of the privacy issues that
come with a system that tracks locations and anal-
yse behaviour patterns. In our survey, more than
76% of the participants agreed that they would
have privacy concerns if they would use a telem-
atic car insurance. Our system itself can run com-
pletely autonomously on the phone of the user.
That means, in order to guarantee the utmost pri-
vacy, no user data will be transmitted. If used in
combination with a telematic car insurance, our
system does not produce any additional personal
data. Instead it processes existing data in a way
that, as our evaluation has shown, is more helpful
and preferred by users. In this way, the user prof-
its more from his own data and also gets a better
understanding of which data is collected.

5 Conclusion and Outlook

The results of our evaluation show, that textual
driver feedback is perceived as more helpful than
the currently used forms of feedback. It also gives
drivers a more concrete idea how to adapt their
driving. We are confident that textual feedback
could not only increase acceptance for automatic
generated driver feedback, but could also have a
bigger impact on the behaviour than other forms
of feedback.

The upcoming EU-legislation “eCall”5, which
will make telematic sensors mandatory in new
cars from April 2018, will lead to a rapid spread
of telematic devices in cars within the European
Union and will make feedback systems, like the
one presented in this paper, even more attrac-
tive. Besides the possible applications mentioned
above, textual feedback systems could also be
used in driving training.

At the moment we are conducting a field study
in order to evaluate whether the perceived advan-

5http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/
ecall-time-saved-lives-saved

tages of the textual feedback also manifest in a
bigger influence on the behaviour of drivers. For
this study, we equipped the experimental subjects
with smart phone applications, so that each partic-
ipant will evaluate feedback that is based on his or
her own driving and we will be able to analyse if
their is a change in behaviour.

References
Charles Abraham and Susan Michie. 2008. A taxon-

omy of behavior change techniques used in interven-
tions. Health psychology, 27(3):379.

Ernesto Arroyo, Shawn Sullivan, and Ted Selker. 2006.
Carcoach: A polite and effective driving coach. In
CHI ’06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI EA ’06, pages 357–362,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Association of Chief Police Officers. 2015. Acpo
speed enforcement policy guidelines 2011 - 2015:
Joining forces for safer roads. Technical report.

Steven Blake, Advaith Siddharthan, Hien Nguyen,
Nirwan Sharma, Anne-Marie Robinson, Elaine
O’Mahony, Ben Darvill, Chris Mellish, and Rene
Van Der Wal. 2012. Natural language genera-
tion for nature conservation: Automating feedback
to help volunteers identify bumblebee species. In
COLING, pages 311–324.

Kanok Boriboonsomsin, Alexander Vu, and Matthew
Barth. 2010. Eco-driving: pilot evaluation of driv-
ing behavior changes among us drivers. University
of California Transportation Center.

Daniel Braun, Christoph Endres, and Christian Müller.
2011. Determination of mobility context using low-
level data. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 3rd In-
ternational Conference on Automotive User Inter-
faces and Interactive Vehicular Applications (Auto-
motiveUI 2011), pages 41–42.

Department for Transport. 2014. Reported road casu-
alties great britain: 2013 annual report. Technical
report.

Anne Dohrenwend. 2002. Serving up the feedback
sandwich. Family practice management, 9(10):43–
50.

Christoph Endres, Jan Miksatko, and Daniel Braun.
2010. Youldeco-exploiting the power of online so-
cial networks for eco-friendly driving. In Adjunct
proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicu-
lar Applications (AutomotiveUI 2010), page 5.

Barbara Di Eugenio, Davide Fossati, Dan Yu, Susan
Haller, and Michael Glass. 2005. Aggregation im-
proves learning: experiments in natural language

164



generation for intelligent tutoring systems. In Pro-
ceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 50–57. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Martin Fishbein. 2000. The role of theory in hiv pre-
vention. AIDS care, 12(3):273–278.

Brian J Fogg. 2009. A behavior model for persuasive
design. In Proceedings of the 4th international Con-
ference on Persuasive Technology, page 40. ACM.

Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. Simplenlg: A re-
alisation engine for practical applications. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation, pages 90–93. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Albert Gatt, Francois Portet, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter,
Saad Mahamood, Wendy Moncur, and Somayajulu
Sripada. 2009. From data to text in the neonatal in-
tensive care unit: Using nlg technology for decision
support and information management. Ai Commu-
nications, 22(3):153–186.

Dimitra Gkatzia, Helen Hastie, Srinivasan Ja-
narthanam, and Oliver Lemon. 2013. Generating
student feedback from time-series data using
reinforcement learning. ENLG 2013, page 115.

Catalina Hallett, Richard Power, and Donia Scott.
2006. Summarisation and visualisation of e-health
data repositories.

Peter Händel, Isaac Skog, Johan Wahlström, Farid
Bonawiede, Richard Welch, Jens Ohlsson, and Mar-
tin Ohlsson. 2014. Insurance telematics: oppor-
tunities and challenges with the smartphone solu-
tion. Accepted in IEEE Intell. Transport. Syst. Mag.,
2014.

John Hattie and Helen Timperley. 2007. The
power of feedback. Review of educational research,
77(1):81–112.

Daniel R Ilgen, Cynthia D Fisher, and M Susan Tay-
lor. 1979. Consequences of individual feedback on
behavior in organizations. Journal of applied psy-
chology, 64(4):349.

Pascal Neis, Dennis Zielstra, and Alexander Zipf.
2011. The street network evolution of crowdsourced
maps: Openstreetmap in germany 2007–2011. Fu-
ture Internet, 4(1):1–21.

Matthieu Nol. 2015. The role of obd in the 2015
connected car market. SMis Telematics for Usage-
Based Insurance Conference.

Kapila Ponnamperuma, Advaith Siddharthan, Cheng
Zeng, Chris Mellish, and René Van Der Wal. 2013.
Tag2blog: Narrative generation from satellite tag
data. In ACL (Conference System Demonstrations),
pages 169–174.

Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building natu-
ral language generation systems, volume 33. Cam-
bridge university press.

Ehud Reiter, Roma Robertson, and Liesl M Osman.
2003. Lessons from a failure: Generating tailored
smoking cessation letters. Artificial Intelligence,
144(1):41–58.

Ehud Reiter. 2007. An architecture for data-to-text
systems. In Proceedings of the Eleventh European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages
97–104. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Stuart Rose. 2013. Telematics: How big data is trans-
forming the auto insurance industry. Technical re-
port, SAS.

Taly Sharon, Ted Selker, Lars Wagner, and Ariel J
Frank. 2005. Carcoach: a generalized layered ar-
chitecture for educational car systems. In Software-
Science, Technology and Engineering, 2005. Pro-
ceedings. IEEE International Conference on, pages
13–22. IEEE.

Lisa A Steelman and Kelly A Rutkowski. 2004. Mod-
erators of employee reactions to negative feedback.
Journal of Managerial Psychology, 19(1):6–18.

Randy L Teach and Edward H Shortliffe. 1987. An
analysis of physician attitudes regarding computer-
based clinical consultation systems. In Use and im-
pact of computers in clinical medicine, pages 68–85.
Springer.

Johannes Tulusan, Thorsten Staake, and Elgar Fleisch.
2012. Providing eco-driving feedback to corporate
car drivers: what impact does a smartphone applica-
tion have on their fuel efficiency? In Proceedings of
the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Comput-
ing, pages 212–215. ACM.

Ross Turner, Somayajulu Sripada, Ehud Reiter, and
IanP Davy. 2008. Selecting the content of tex-
tual descriptions of geographically located events in
spatio-temporal weather data. In Richard Ellis, Tony
Allen, and Miltos Petridis, editors, Applications and
Innovations in Intelligent Systems XV, pages 75–88.
Springer London.

Rene van der Wal, Nirwan Sharma, Anne-Marie Robin-
son, Chris Mellish, and Advaith Siddharthan. 2016.
The role of automated feedback in training and re-
taining conservation volunteers: a case study of
bumblebee recording. To appear in Conservation
Biology.

JL Weiner. 1980. Blah, a system which explains its
reasoning. Artificial intelligence, 15(1):19–48.

Sandra Williams and Ehud Reiter. 2008. Skillsum:
basic skills screening with personalised, computer-
generated feedback.

L Richard Ye and Paul E Johnson. 1995. The impact
of explanation facilities on user acceptance of expert
systems advice. Mis Quarterly, pages 157–172.

165


