



















































Analysing ParCor and its Translations by State-of-the-art SMT Systems


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Discourse in Machine Translation (DiscoMT), pages 24–32,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Analysing ParCor and its Translations by State-of-the-art SMT Systems

Liane Guillou
School of Informatics

University of Edinburgh
Scotland, United Kingdom

L.K.Guillou@sms.ed.ac.uk

Bonnie Webber
School of Informatics

University of Edinburgh
Scotland, United Kingdom
bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Previous work on pronouns in SMT has
focussed on third-person pronouns, treat-
ing them all as anaphoric. Little atten-
tion has been paid to other uses or other
types of pronouns. Believing that further
progress requires careful analysis of pro-
nouns as a whole, we have analysed a par-
allel corpus of annotated English-German
texts to highlight some of the problems
that hinder progress. We combine this
with an assessment of the ability of two
state-of-the-art systems to translate differ-
ent pronoun types.

1 Introduction

Previous work on the translation of pronouns in
Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) has fo-
cussed on the specific problem of translating
anaphoric pronouns – i.e., ones that co-refer with
an antecedent entity previously mentioned in the
discourse (Le Nagard and Koehn, 2010; Hard-
meier and Federico, 2010; Guillou, 2012; Novák
et al., 2013; Hardmeier, 2014; Weiner, 2014). This
is because languages differ in how an anaphoric
pronoun relates to its antecedent, and the relation-
ship does not fit naturally into the SMT pipeline.
Some pronoun forms also have non-anaphoric
uses, and there are other types of pronouns. Lan-
guages also differ as to what types of pronouns are
used for what purposes.

To investigate similarities and differences in
pronoun usage across languages, we conducted
an analysis of the ParCor corpus1 of pronoun an-
notations over a set of parallel English-German
texts. The corpus contains a collection of texts
from two different genres: 8 EU Bookshop2 pub-
lications (written text) and 11 TED3 Talks (tran-

1http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/ParCor/
2EU Bookshop: https://bookshop.europa.eu
3TED: WIT3 corpus: https://wit3.fbk.eu/

scribed planned speech). In the ParCor anno-
tations, each pronoun is marked as being one
of eight types: Anaphoric/cataphoric, event ref-
erence, extra-textual reference, pleonastic, ad-
dressee reference, speaker reference, generic ref-
erence, or other function4. Additional features
are recorded for some pronoun types, for example
anaphoric/cataphoric pronouns are linked to their
antecedents. Full details of the annotation scheme
are provided in Guillou et al. (2014).

Through analysing similarities and differences
in pronoun use in these parallel texts, we hope to
better understand the problems of translating dif-
ferent types of pronouns. This knowledge may in
turn be used to build discourse-aware SMT sys-
tems in the future. In addition, through analysing
translations produced by state-of-the art systems,
we hope to understand how well current systems
translate a range of pronoun types. This infor-
mation may be used to identify the pronoun types
where future efforts would be best directed.

The advantage of using the ParCor corpus is that
it allows us to conduct part of the analyses auto-
matically once we have word–aligned the paral-
lel texts. The annotations also allow for the sepa-
ration of ambiguous pronouns such as “it” which
may serve as an anaphoric, event or pleonastic pro-
noun5. This allows for a more granular analysis
than has been provided in other similar studies.

2 Previous Work

There has been previous work both on com-
paring pronoun usage in English and German
(in the genre of business letters using compa-
rable rather than parallel texts (Becher, 2011)
and for the multi-genre GECCo corpus (Kunz
and Lapshinova-Koltunski, 2015)) and on pro-
noun translation accuracy by SMT systems (Hard-
meier and Federico, 2010; Novák et al., 2013;

4Pronoun does not belong to any of the other categories
5Each pronoun type has different translation requirements

24



Pronoun Type TED Talks EU Bookshop

English German English German

Anaphoric 886 (27.71) 1,228 (40.52) 2,767 (20.32) 3,036 (22.72)
Anaphoric (pronominal adverb) N/A N/A 70 (0.51) 84 (0.63)
Cataphoric 5 (0.16) 16 (0.53) 67 (0.49) 19 (0.14)
Event 264 (8.26) 331 (10.92) 239 (1.76) 255 (1.91)
Event (pronominal adverb) N/A N/A 0 (0.00) 78 (0.58)
Extra-textual reference 52 (1.63) 26 (0.86) N/A N/A
Pleonastic (non-referential) 61 (1.91) 224 (7.39) 191 (1.40) 391 (2.93)
Addressee reference 499 (15.61) 525 (17.32) 112 (0.82) 76 (0.57)
Speaker reference 1,386 (43.35) 1,467 (48.41) 548 (4.02) 580 (4.34)
Generic N/A N/A 9 (0.07) 58 (0.43)
Pronoun (other) N/A N/A 135 (0.99) 126 (0.94)
Pronoun (unsure) N/A N/A 14 (0.10) 0 (0.00)

Total 3,153 (98.62) 3,817 (125.95) 4,152 (30.49) 4,703 (35.20)

Table 1: Pronoun type counts for English (source) and German (translation) texts in ParCor. Counts per
1000 tokens are provided in parentheses. N/A indicates that the type is not marked for one of the corpora

Weiner, 2014), these being relatively small scale.
The main focus, however, has been on building
models to improve pronoun translation in SMT
through targeting different stages of the transla-
tion process. These include pre-annotation of
the source-language data (Le Nagard and Koehn,
2010; Guillou, 2012), decoder features (Hard-
meier and Federico, 2010; Novák et al., 2013;
Hardmeier, 2014; Weiner, 2014) and post-editing
/ re-ranking (Weiner, 2014). Despite these efforts,
little progress has been made.

In the most comprehensive study to date, Hard-
meier (2014) concludes that current models for
pronoun translation are insufficient and that “...fu-
ture approaches to pronoun translation in SMT
will require extensive corpus analysis to study how
pronouns of a given source language are rendered
in a given target language”. This paper reports on
such a corpus analysis.

3 Analysis of Manual Translation

Identifying and understanding systematic differ-
ences in pronoun use between a pair of languages
may help inform the design of SMT systems. With
this in mind, we compared original English texts
and their human-authored German translations in
the ParCor corpus, for both genres, at the corpus,
document and sentence levels.

3.1 Corpus-level
Corpus-level comparison reveals the first differ-
ences between pronoun use in the two languages.
(See Table 1. Some counts differ from those
in (Guillou et al., 2014) due to minor changes

prior to corpus release and the automatic addi-
tion of first person pronouns and German “man”.)
Specifically, the German translations contain more
anaphoric and pleonastic pronouns than the origi-
nal English texts. (A pleonastic pronoun does not
refer to an antecedent, e.g. “It is raining” / “Es
regnet”.) Paired t-tests show that this difference
is significant for pleonastic pronouns in both the
TED corpus, t(10)=-5.08, p < .01, and the EU
Bookshop corpus, t(10)=-3.68, p < .01. The dif-
ference in anaphoric pronoun use is significant for
the TED corpus, t(7)=-3.52, p < .01, but not the
EU Bookshop corpus, t(7)=-1.09, (p=0.31).

3.2 Document-level
Again, at the document-level we observe that
the German translations typically contain more
anaphoric and pleonastic pronouns than the orig-
inal English texts. (See Table 2 for the pronoun
counts of a randomly selected document, 767.)

Pronoun Type English German

Anaphoric 121 (22.53) 189 (39.58)
Cataphoric 0 (0.00) 2 (0.42)
Event 49 (9.12) 59 (12.36)
Extra-textual ref. 5 (0.93) 6 (1.26)
Pleonastic 8 (1.68) 54 (11.31)
Addressee reference 102 (18.99) 91 (19.06)
Speaker reference 156 (29.04) 163 (34.14)
Pronoun (unsure) 3 (0.56) 0 (0.00)

Total 444 (82.67) 564 (118.12)

Table 2: Pronoun type counts for TED Talk 767.
Counts per 1000 tokens provided in parentheses

Similar trends were observed for the other doc-
uments in the corpus which suggests that this is

25



not simply a consequence of stylistic differences
over authors or speakers. A presentation of the full
analysis would, however, require a longer paper.

Documents in ParCor were originally produced
in English and then translated into German. To
ascertain whether similar patterns of pronoun use
can be observed for the opposite translation direc-
tion, we annotated two German TEDx talks and
their English translations, again using the guide-
lines described in Guillou et al. (2014).

We observed similar patterns, with more
pleonastic pronouns used in German than in En-
glish (19 vs. 11 pleonastic pronouns in one doc-
ument, and 15 vs. 2 in the other). For anaphoric
pronouns, one document has 119 in the German
original and 140 in the English translation, with
near equal numbers (54 vs. 51) in the other docu-
ment. With only two documents it is not possible
to confirm whether German systematically makes
use of more anaphoric and pleonastic pronouns,
but cf. Becher (2011) who points to several pat-
terns, in particular the insertion of explicit pos-
sessive pronouns in English-to-German translation
and pronominal adverbs in the opposite direction.

3.3 Sentence-level
Pronoun counts at the corpus and document levels
are simply raw counts. They do not tell us any-
thing about cases in which a pronoun is used in
the original text and dropped from the translation
(deletions), or is absent from the original text but
present in the translation (insertions). To discover
this, we need to drill down to the sentence–level.

We start with the sentence–aligned parallel texts
provided as part of the ParCor release. In order
to identify the German translation of each pro-
noun in the original English text, we compute
word alignments using Giza++ (https://code.
google.com/p/giza-pp/) with grow-diag-final-
and symmetrisation. To ensure robust alignments,
we concatenated the ParCor texts and additional
data – specifically, the IWSLT 2013 shared task
training data (for TED and TEDx) and Europarl
data (for EU Bookshop). We consider an English
and German pronoun to be equivalent if the fol-
lowing conditions hold: (a) a word alignment ex-
ists between them, and (b) they share the same pro-
noun type label in the ParCor annotations.

To evaluate the word-alignment quality we ex-
amined a random sample of 100 parallel sentences
from the TED corpus. The sentences contain 213

English and 241 German pronouns. We define a
bad alignment as one where a pronoun is aligned
to something that is not the corresponding pronoun
in the other language, or should be unaligned but
is not. We find that 6.57% of English and 9.12%
of German pronouns are part of a bad alignment.

Taking TED talk 767 as an example and using
the combination of pronoun type and alignments
to identify a source-target pronoun match, we ob-
serve many mismatches. Table 3 shows that 412
pronouns are unique to either the English original
or the German translation, with only 298 matching
English-German pronoun pairs. The largest abso-
lute difference lies in the number of anaphoric pro-
nouns in the target for which there is no compara-
ble pronoun in the source (anaphoric insertions),
followed by pleonastic insertions.

Pronoun Type English
(deletion)

German
(insertion)

Anaphoric 49 117
Cataphoric 0 2
Event 26 36
Extra-textual ref. 4 5
Pleonastic 3 49
Addressee reference 31 20
Speaker reference 30 37
Pronoun (unsure) 3 0

Total 146 266

Table 3: Sentence-level pronoun type + align-
ment mismatches for TED Talk 767

There is no single reason for anaphoric dele-
tions: Anaphoric pronouns may be omitted from
the German output for stylistic reasons, as a re-
sult of paraphrasing or possibly to conform with
language-specific constraints. With respect to
anaphoric insertions, intra-sententially, many cor-
respond to relativizers in English. That is, while
in English a relative clause is introduced with a
that-, wh- or null-relativizer, an anaphoric pro-
noun serves as a relativizer in German.6 For exam-
ple, “that” in “The house that Jack built” is a rela-
tivizer and the corresponding “das” in “Das Haus,
das Jack gebaut hat” is a relative pronoun. Man-
ual analysis of the German translation for TED
Talk 767 identified 42 cases where an anaphoric
pronoun was inserted as a relative pronoun corre-
sponding to a relativizer in English. While this
does not explain all of the anaphoric insertions, it
is frequent enough to deserve further attention.

6The ParCor corpus has not marked instances of that
when used as a relativizer in English.

26



Several fixed expressions in English appear to
trigger pleonastic insertions in German. A com-
monly observed pair is “There +be”/“Es gibt”.
These existential there constructions are not an-
notated in ParCor, but their presence accounts for
some (not all) of the insertions of pleonastic pro-
nouns in German. As the fixed expressions are
short and occur frequently, phrase-based systems
could be expected to provide accurate translations.

3.4 Discussion
We have observed differences in pronoun use in
both genres of the ParCor corpus. Since SMT sys-
tems are trained on parallel data similar to that
in ParCor, it is important to be aware that con-
tent words such as nouns and verbs are more
likely to be faithfully translated as there are fewer
ways to convey the same meaning. On the other
hand, there is more variation in the translation of
function words such as pronouns — for example
in active to passive conversions (and vice versa).
Where there is a lot of variation the SMT system
may not be able to learn accurate mappings.

To this is added the problem of ambiguous pro-
nouns such as “it”, for which the anaphoric and
pleonastic forms both translate as “es” in Ger-
man. These frequent alignments in the training
data may also bias the likelihood that “it” is in-
correctly translated as “es” (neuter), even if a fem-
inine or masculine pronoun is required in German.

4 Assessing Automated Translation

Analyses of the output of state-of-the-art SMT
systems provide an indication of how well current
systems are able to translate pronominal corefer-
ence — what they are good and bad at. We follow
our analysis of manual translation and examine
English-to-German translation for anaphoric pro-
nouns (“it” and “its”) and relativizers.

For our state-of-the-art systems, we selected
two systems from the IWSLT 2014 shared task in
machine translation (Birch et al., 2014). The first
is a phrase-based system that incorporates factored
models for words, part-of-speech tags and Brown
clusters. The second is a syntax-based, string-to-
tree, system. Both systems were trained using a
combination of TED data and corpora provided for
the WMT shared task. Here, TED talks are consid-
ered to be in-domain, with the EU Bookshop texts
considered out-of-domain.

We are not interested in making direct compar-

isons between the two systems, as their different
training makes such comparisons unfair. However,
similarities in the translation accuracy of two sys-
tems can show that our findings are not specific to
a single system or type of system.

For manual translation, we can assume that
a pronoun is accurately translated, inserted or
dropped, as part of a close translation of the origi-
nal sentence or an acceptable paraphrase. As such,
it is reasonable to use automated analysis based
on the ParCor annotations and alignments between
the texts. With automated translations, however,
there is no guarantee that a source pronoun is
translated correctly by the system. We therefore
need to rely more heavily on manual analysis.

However, manual analysis can be aided by some
automated pre-processing steps, to help select pro-
nouns for further study. Using the source text and
its translation together with word alignments out-
put by the SMT systems, we can investigate which
pronouns may be more difficult to translate than
others – i.e. we can produce frequency distribu-
tions of the translations produced for each source
pronoun surface-form (split by pronoun type).

4.1 Identifying Pronouns for Analysis
Examining the translation frequency distributions
for the two state-of-the-art systems, we can ob-
serve the following. First, “it” can be translated
into German, depending on the context, as either
masculine singular (sg.), feminine sg. or neuter
sg., or plural. As plural pronouns are not gen-
dered, “they” has fewer translations. The posses-
sive pronoun “its” has additional possible transla-
tion options due its multiple dependencies. That
is, possessive pronouns in German must agree in
number/gender with both the possessor and the ob-
ject that is possessed. Different base forms are
used depending on whether the possessor is fem-
inine/plural (“ihr”) or masculine/neuter (“sein”).
Other anaphoric pronouns such as “he” and “she”
have far fewer translation options and are therefore
less interesting. Based on the possible translation
options, we selected (anaphoric) “it” and “its”.

Our analysis of manual translation (Section 3.3)
showed that relativizers in English often corre-
sponded to a relative pronoun inserted in the Ger-
man translation. We wish to see how well SMT
systems handle the translation of relativizers. We
selected that-relativizers (explicit in English text)
and null-relativizers (implicit). We exclude wh-

27



relativizers, also explicit, but with many forms
(what, who, etc.), to reduce the annotation effort.

4.2 Pronoun Selection Task
Our manual analysis of pronoun translation is
framed as a pronoun selection task. In this setting
a human annotator is asked to identify which pro-
noun(s) could validly replace a placeholder mask-
ing a pronoun at a specific point in the SMT out-
put. By masking the pronoun, we remove the risk
that the annotator is biased by the pronoun present
in the SMT output. The annotator’s selections may
then be compared with the pronouns produced by
the system in order to assess translation accuracy.

We used the tool described by Hardmeier
(2014) for the pronoun selection task. The inter-
face presents the annotator with the source sen-
tence and its translation plus up to five previous
sentences of history, as well as a number of pro-
noun options. The source pronoun in the final sen-
tence of each example block is highlighted and its
translation is replaced with a placeholder.

To determine how many sentences of history to
present to the annotator (to help them identify the
antecedent of an anaphoric pronoun), we used the
manual annotations in ParCor. We calculated both
the mean number of sentences between a pronoun
and its antecedent, and two standard deviations
from the mean (accounting for 95% of pronouns).
(Intra-sentential pronouns have a distance of zero.)
For the TED corpus the mean distance between
pronoun and antecedent is 1.33 sentences, and two
standard deviations from the mean is 4.95 sen-
tences. For the EU Bookshop (whose sentences
are longer), the distances between pronoun and
antecedent are typically shorter, with a mean dis-
tance of 0.67 sentences and two standard devia-
tions from the mean at 3.57 sentences. We never-
theless allow for up to five previous sentences of
history for each example, regardless of genre.

4.3 Pronoun Selection Task: Guidelines
The following guidelines were adapted from those
used by Hardmeier (2014) in order to cater for the
requirements of English-German translation:
1) Select the pronoun that will create the most flu-
ent translation, while preserving the meaning of
the English sentence as much as possible. The
latter means assigning correct number/gender to
the pronoun that replaces the placeholder: Its case
may be left “unknown”.

• If the SMT output is sufficiently fluent to be
able to determine the case of the pronoun, se-
lect the appropriate check-box.

• Use the plural options if the antecedent is
translated as a plural, or in any other scenar-
ios in which a plural might seem appropriate.

• If different, equally grammatical options are
available, select all appropriate check-boxes.

2) Alternatively select “Other” if the sentence
should be completed with a pronoun not included
in the list, “Bad translation” if a grammatical and
faithful translation cannot be created without mak-
ing major changes to the surrounding text, or “Dis-
cussion required” if you are unsure what to do.
3) Ignore minor disfluencies (e. g., incorrect verb
agreement or obviously missing words).
4) Always try to select the pronoun that best agrees
with the antecedent in the SMT output, even if
the antecedent is translated incorrectly, and even
if this forces you to violate the pronoun’s agree-
ment with immediately surrounding words such as
verbs, adjectives etc.
5) If the translation does not contain a placeholder,
but a pronoun corresponding to the one marked in
the English text should be inserted somewhere, in-
dicate which pronoun should be inserted.
6) If the SMT output does not contain a place-
holder, but already includes the correct pronoun,
annotate the example as if a placeholder were
present. This will mean selecting the same pro-
noun that is included in the SMT output.

4.4 Anaphoric “it”
The anaphoric pronoun “it” can co-refer either
intra-sententially (i.e., to an antecedent in the
same sentence) or inter-sententially (i.e., to an
antecedent in a different sentence). While co-
reference imposes number–gender constraints on a
pronoun and its antecedent, intra-sentential coref-
erence imposes additional constraints.

We randomly selected 50 inter- and 50 intra-
sentential tokens of “it” labelled anaphoric in the
ParCor annotations. Tokens were selected from
the TED Talks, as sentences there are typically
shorter than those in the EU Bookshop and hence,
potentially easier to work with. Additional guide-
lines are provided for “it”:

• Select “Pronominal adverb” if the most flu-
ent translation would come from using a Ger-

28



man pronominal adverb7. (Selection of the
pronominal adverb is not required.)

• If a demonstrative pronoun (e.g. “diese” or
“jene”) is possible, select whether it is more
or less likely than the personal pronoun(s).

• Genitive options are not available as these are
used for possessives.

The annotator is presented with a table of options
for number/gender and case combinations. The
number/gender options are masculine, feminine,
neuter and plural. The case options are: “case
unknown”, and three German cases: nominative,
accusative and dative. See Figure 1.

Figure 1: Annotator options for “it”

Although the ParCor annotations contain an-
tecedent links for anaphoric pronouns, we did not
display these to the annotator for any of the tasks.

4.5 Anaphoric possessive “its”
In German, dependent possessive pronouns (i.e.
those that precede a noun) must agree not only
with the number/gender of its antecedent (posses-
sor) but also with the number/gender of its object
(i.e. the noun that follows the pronoun). For ex-
ample in: “Der Staat und seine Einwohner” (“The
state and its inhabitants”) the antecedent “Staat”
(“state”) is masculine (sg.) and so a “sein” form
is required for the possessive pronoun. The end-
ing “e” in “seine” is needed because the noun
following the possessive pronoun is plural (“Ein-
wohner/inhabitants”).

We randomly selected 50 instances of “its”
marked as anaphoric in ParCor. As “its” is un-
common in the TED corpus, all 50 instances came
from the EU Bookshop corpus. Additional guide-
lines are provided for “its”:

• Select the relevant combination of num-
ber/gender of possessor and object. Select the

7Pronominal adverbs also exist in English (e.g. therefore,
wherein, hereafter) but are used more frequently in German

case of the pronoun if the quality of the SMT
output permits this.

• Select “Pronoun not required” if the transla-
tion does not require a pronoun.

The annotator is presented with a table of options
capturing the number/gender of the possessor vs.
the number/gender of the object. To reduce the
number of options, a separate set of check-boxes
is provided for case options, including “case un-
known”, nominative, accusative, dative and geni-
tive.

4.6 Relativizers
English relativizers may be explicit (that- and wh-
relativizers), or implicit (null-relativizers). Both
may be translated as relative pronouns in German.

We randomly selected 50 instances of relativiz-
ers from the TED corpus; 25 that- and 25 null-
relativizers. The selection was semi-automatic,
based on identifying relative clauses in the output
of the Berkeley Parser (Petrov et al., 2006) and
manually selecting those that contained a that- or
null-relativizer.

As null-relativizers are implicit, there are no to-
kens in the English text to highlight. To keep this
task in line with the others, we manually insert
symbols for the nulls, i.e. the “;” in “The house ;
Jack built”, and (manually) align them to the cor-
responding token in the SMT output. (Unalignable
tokens are left untranslated.) Instead of a pronoun
in the English text, the annotator is presented with
an instance of “that” or a symbol representing the
null-relativizer. Placeholders are included in the
translation as normal.

The options table captures pronoun num-
ber/gender and case. It is similar to the table for
“it”, but with relative pronoun forms and options
for “case unknown” and all four German cases.

5 Results

The results of the three pronoun selection tasks are
presented in Table 4. We automatically compared
the translations produced by the systems with the
selections made by the annotator. If the system-
generated pronoun matches one of the annotator’s
selections, there is a “pronoun match”. If it doesn’t
match any of the annotator’s selections or the sys-
tem did not generate a pronoun there is a “pro-
noun mismatch”. Matches are recorded in terms
of number/gender and case if the annotator sup-
plied it, or number/gender only, if not.

29



Result “it” “its” Relativizers
Inter Intra That Null

PB Syn PB Syn PB Syn PB Syn PB Syn
Pronoun match (number/gender + case) 20 8 14 15 15 9 14 12 13 12
Pronoun match (number/gender only) 0 1 1 0 8 10 0 0 2 0
Pronoun mismatch 14 28 27 26 24 28 2 3 1 1
Pronoun not translated (mismatch) 1 0 0 0 0 0 4 3 5 6
Pronominal adverb match 5 8 2 2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Pronominal adverb mismatch 2 0 0 1 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Other 2 0 2 1 0 0 2 3 3 3
Bad translation 4 1 1 2 1 1 3 4 1 2
Pronoun not required 0 1 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 1
Anaphoric but could not find antecedent 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Unsure: may not be anaphoric 2 2 3 3 0 0 0 0 0 0
Sub-total 50 50 50 50 50 50 25 25 25 25
Total 200 100 100

Table 4: Pronoun selection task results for anaphoric “it”, anaphoric possessive “its” and relativizers.
PB=Phrase-based system, Syn=Syntax-based system, Inter=pronoun and antecedent are not in the same
sentence. Intra=pronoun and antecedent in same sentence. Pronominal adverb is an option for “it” only

For most examples the annotator was able to de-
termine the case of the pronoun as well as its num-
ber/gender. Recall that the annotator was specifi-
cally instructed to only select the case of the pro-
noun if the SMT output was sufficiently fluent so
as to make this possible. It would therefore appear
that our initial assumption that it might be difficult
to identify syntactic role was not entirely correct.

“Pronominal adverb match” is used when the
SMT output contains a pronominal adverb and the
annotator had indicated that one would be appro-
priate. As the annotator was not asked to specify
the pronominal adverb, we make no further com-
parison. “Pronominal adverb mismatch” is the op-
posite; the annotator indicated that a pronominal
adverb should be used but the system did not out-
put one. “Other”, “Bad translation” and “Pronoun
not required”8 are used for those pronouns marked
as such in the pronoun selection task.

Some instances of “it” were initially left for dis-
cussion. These were later assigned one of two
new categories: “Anaphoric but could not find an-
tecedent” where the antecedent could not be iden-
tified due to insufficient history or “Unsure: may
not be anaphoric” where the annotator believed
that the pronoun may not in fact be anaphoric, de-
spite being labelled as such in the ParCor corpus.

Instead of comparing the systems, we use the
results from both to assess how well state-of-the-
art systems perform at pronoun translation. We
find that both systems typically produce more in-
correct translations than correct ones.

8Although “pronoun not required” was not initially pro-
vided for the “it” task, we added it later when the need arose.

Both systems regularly translate “it” as “es”:
79/100 cases for the phrase-based and 78/100 for
the syntax-based system. This reflects biases in
the training data, where the use of “it” and “es”
as both anaphoric and pleonastic pronouns leads
to their frequent alignment. A similar bias is ob-
served for relativizers, with both that- and null-
relativizers commonly translated as “die”. For ex-
ample, both systems translate “that” as “die” in 13
of the 21 instances in which a translation is pro-
vided, though not the same 13 of 21 instances.

It is often acceptable to translate “it” using ei-
ther a personal or demonstrative pronoun: 49/100
cases for the phrase-based and 59/100 cases for
the syntax-based system. However, neither system
generated demonstrative pronouns, perhaps due to
the bias toward translating “it” as “es”.

For “its” the systems often select an incorrect
base form for the pronoun: i.e. “ihr” when “sein”
should be used, and vice versa. The phrase- and
syntax-based systems selected the incorrect base
form for 17/50 and 15/50 instances respectively.

Both systems are able to insert relative pro-
nouns when a null-relativizer is encountered in the
English source text, with a similar accuracy to the
translation of that-relativizers. One might have
expected that translating an explicit source token
would be easier (and more accurate) than inserting
a token in the SMT output which has no explicit
representation in the source.

6 Discussion: Anaphoric “it”

When annotating the English side of ParCor, de-
ciding whether a pronoun was anaphoric, event-

30



related or pleonastic was one of the major causes
of annotator disagreement. It is therefore not sur-
prising that problems might arise in identifying
the pronoun’s antecedent for the pronoun selec-
tion task. This ambiguity did not arise for the “its”
or relativizers tasks. With “its”, events are rarely
(if ever) possessors and so rarely serve as an-
tecedents. With relativizers, the relative pronoun
and its antecedent (in German) are likely to be
very close together, and certainly intra-sentential.

The syntax-based system is much better at
translating intra-sentential pronouns than inter-
sentential ones. Although this system contained
no such enhancements, one might expect that
pronoun-aware syntax-based systems could be de-
signed to leverage the fact that intra-sentential
pronouns are syntactically governed, and produce
better translations. One possible option would
be to combine two systems: a phrase-based sys-
tem to translate inter-sentential pronouns, and an
enhanced syntax-based system to translate intra-
sentential pronouns.

7 Discussion: Relative pronouns

When the antecedent is not a noun, i.e. “some-
thing” (“etwas”), “anything” (“alles”/“jedes” etc.)
or “nothing” (“nichts”), “was” should be used:

(1) Now , when I use the term miracle , I don ’t
mean something that ’s impossible.

(2) Nun , wenn ich den Begriff Wunder
verwenden , ich meine nicht etwas , XXX ist
unmöglich .

As “was” is not provided as an option in the pro-
noun selection task, the annotator marked exam-
ple 2 (and others like it) as “other”. SMT systems
must decide whether to use a relative pronoun that
conveys the number/gender of the antecedent (i.e.
der/die/das) or “was/wer/wo” (if the antecedent
cannot be determined / there is no antecedent). As
this decision depends on the antecedent, relative
pronouns may therefore be treated as a more lo-
calised sub-set of anaphoric pronouns.

The translation of relativizers may require a
preposition preceding the relative pronoun:

(3) That ’s the planet ; we live on .
(4) Das ist die Welt , XXX wir leben .

The correct translation of example 3, which con-
tains a null-relativizer (indicated by ;), would be
“Das ist die Welt, in der wir leben”. However,

in the SMT output the preposition “in” is missing,
and so the annotator was required to select the cor-
rect pronoun as if the preposition had been present.

In German, the choice of preposition and case
of the pronoun are determined by the verb of the
clause. As these choices are connected, SMT sys-
tems could also consider the translation of prepo-
sitions when translating relative pronouns.

8 Conclusion

The analysis of manual translation revealed that
pronouns are frequently dropped and inserted by
human translators and that German translations
contain many more pleonastic and anaphoric pro-
nouns than the original English texts. Both of
these differences can result in SMT systems learn-
ing poor translation mappings.

The analysis of state-of-the-art translation re-
vealed that biases in the training data and incor-
rect selections of the base form pronoun (i.e. “ihr”
vs. “sein” for “its”) are both problems which SMT
systems must overcome. For relative pronouns se-
lecting the correct preposition is also important as
it influences the case of the pronoun.

9 Future Work

Possible directions for future work include fur-
ther analyses of manual and automated translation
and applying the knowledge that is gained to build
pronoun-aware SMT systems. Initial efforts could
focus on syntax-based SMT — leveraging infor-
mation within target-side syntax trees constructed
by the decoder, to encourage pronoun-antecedent
agreement for intra-sentential anaphoric pronouns
(i.e. “it/its” and relative pronouns).

Pronoun-aware SMT systems could also ad-
dress translation of the ambiguous second-person
pronouns “you” and “your”. In English, they have
both deictic and generic use, while in German, dif-
ferent forms are used (“Sie/du” vs. “man”).

Acknowledgements

Thanks to Christian Hardmeier for providing the
pronoun-selection tool, to Susanne Tauber for
completing the annotations and to Felix Suessen-
bach and Sam Gibbon for assisting with the signif-
icance testing. This project has received funding
from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under grant agreement
no 645452 (QT21).

31



References
Viktor Becher. 2011. Explicitation and implicita-

tion in translation. A corpus-based study of English-
German and German-English translations of busi-
ness texts. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Applied Lin-
guistics (Institut für Sprachlehrforschung), Univer-
sity of Hamburg.

Alexandra Birch, Matthias Huck, Nadir Durrani, Niko-
lay Bogoychev, and Philipp Koehn. 2014. Ed-
inburgh SLT and MT System Description for the
IWSLT 2014 Evaluation. In International Work-
shop on Spoken Language Translation, pages 49–56,
Lake Tahoe, CA, USA.

Liane Guillou, Christian Hardmeier, Aaron Smith, Jörg
Tiedemann, and Bonnie Webber. 2014. ParCor
1.0: A Parallel Pronoun-Coreference Corpus to Sup-
port Statistical MT. In Proceedings of the Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Liane Guillou. 2012. Improving Pronoun Transla-
tion for Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceed-
ings of the Student Research Workshop, EACL 2012,
pages 1–10.

Christian Hardmeier and Marcello Federico. 2010.
Modelling Pronominal Anaphora in Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. In Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Workshop on Spoken Language Translation.

Christian Hardmeier. 2014. Discourse in Statistical
Machine Translation. Ph.D. thesis, Department of
Linguistics and Philology, Uppsala University.

Kerstin Kunz and Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski.
2015. Cross-linguistic analysis of discourse vari-
ation across registers. Nordic Journal of English
Studies, 14(1):258–288.

Ronan Le Nagard and Philipp Koehn. 2010. Aiding
Pronoun Translation with Co-Reference Resolution.
In Proceedings of the Joint Fifth Workshop on Statis-
tical Machine Translation and MetricsMATR, pages
252–261.

Michal Novák, Anna Nedoluzhko, and Zdeněek
Žabokrtský. 2013. Translation of ”It” in a Deep
Syntax Framework. In Proceedings of the 1st Work-
shop on Discourse in Machine Translation, ACL
2013, pages 51–59.

Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and Dan
Klein. 2006. Learning Accurate, Compact, and
Interpretable Tree Annotation. In Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and the 44th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, ACL-44,
pages 433–440, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Jochen Weiner. 2014. Pronominal Anaphora in Ma-
chine Translation. Master’s thesis, Karlsruhe Insti-
tute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany.

32


