






















Automatic Lemmatisation of Lithuanian MWEs

Loïc Boizou Jolanta Kovalevskaitė
Centre of Computational Linguistics

Vytautas Magnus University
Kaunas, Lithuania

{l.boizou, j.kovalevskaite, e.rimkute}@hmf.vdu.lt

Erika Rimkutė

Abstract

This article presents a study of lemmatisa-
tion of flexible multiword expressions in
Lithuanian. An approach based on syntac-
tic analysis designed for multiword term
lemmatisation was adapted for a broader
range of MWEs taken from the Dictionary
of Lithuanian Nominal Phrases. In the
present analysis, the main lemmatisation
errors are identified and some improve-
ments are proposed. It shows that auto-
matic lemmatisation can be improved by
taking into account the whole set of gram-
matical forms for each MWE. It would
allow selecting the optimal grammatical
form for lemmatisation and identifying
some grammatical restrictions.

1 Introduction

In Lithuanian, in addition to fully fixed multiword
expressions (MWEs), there are many MWEs with
one or more constituents (possibly all) which can
be inflected. Therefore, these “flexible” MWEs
appear in texts in several forms1: as shown by the
corpus data, the Lithuanian verbal phraseme pak-
išti koją, meaning ‘to put a spoke in somebody’s
wheel’, has a form with the verb in definite past
pakišo koją, a form with the verb in past frequen-
tative (pakišdavo koją), and future (pakiš koją)
(for more examples, see Kovalevskaitė (2014)). If
we extract MWEs of a strongly-inflected language
like Lithuanian from a raw text corpus using sta-
tistical association measures, we often get MWEs
with their different grammatical forms (GF). How-
ever, in lexical databases and terminology banks, a
single lemma is usually used in order to represent
the MWE independently from its concrete forms
which appear in the corpus.

1Grammatical forms of the same MWE (or phraseme) can
be labelled as phraseme-types (Kovalevskaitė, 2014).

In traditional Lithuanian dictionaries of idioms,
there is no problem of MWE lemmatisation, be-
cause data are collected manually and represented
following the rule that a verb of an idiom is pro-
vided in infinitive form (Paulauskas (ed), 2001),
e.g.: Savo vietą žinoti ‘to know one‘s place’, Vie-
tos neturėti ‘to have nowhere to go’. The re-
cent Dictionary of Lithuanian Nominal Phrases2,
which was compiled semi-automatically from a
corpus, contains the unlemmatised list of MWEs.
Therefore, automatic phrase lemmatisation could
help in organizing the dictionary data and in im-
proving the user interface.

This article describes the main problems oc-
curring during the lemmatisation of Lithuanian
MWEs. The concept of lemmatisation is quite
clear for single words, but for MWEs, it can be un-
derstood differently as it will be discussed in part
3. Although the accuracy of lemmatisation of in-
dividual words is high (99% for lemmatisation and
94% for grammatical form identification (Rimkutė
and Daudaravičius, 2007)), the lemmatisation of
single words included in MWEs cannot produce
well-formed MWE lemmas. Indeed, base forms
of Lithuanian multiword terms which should oc-
cur in dictionaries and terminology databases are
not the same as the sequences of lemmas of their
constitutive words (Boizou et al., 2012, p. 28). For
example, if we lemmatise each constitutive word
in MWEs taupomųjų bankų, taupomuoju banku
(‘savings bank’ in genitive plural and instrumen-
tal singular), the result is taupyti bankas (infini-
tive ‘to save’ and nominative singular ‘bank’), be-
cause the morphological annotator of the Lithua-
nian language (Zinkevičius, 2000; Zinkevičius et
al., 2005) assignes infinitive as the proper lemma
for participles and other verb forms. The struc-
ture of such improperly lemmatised MWE fails to
reflect the syntactic relations (agreement and gov-

2http://donelaitis.vdu.lt/lkk/pdf/dikt_fr.pdf

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 41



ernment) which ensure the grammatical cohesion
between the constitutive words of an MWE.

This work is focused on syntagmatic lemma,
which is the form of the MWE where the MWE
syntactic head is lemmatised and the necessary
adaptations are made in order to ensure the mor-
phosyntactic unity of the MWE. With a similar
approach, a tool for automatic Lithuanian sintag-
matic lemmatisation called JungLe was first de-
veloped and trained with multiword terms during
the project ŠIMTAI 2 (semi-automatic extraction
of education and science terms). The first ex-
periments with the Lithuanian multiword terms
showed accuracy close to 95% (Boizou et al.,
2012), but it can be related to a relatively low vari-
ety of term structures. For this study, JungLe was
adapted for a broader set of types of Lithuanian
compositional and non-compositional MWEs, e.g.
idioms, collocations, nominal compounds, MW
terms, MW named entities, MW function words,
proverbs, etc.

2 Data

This study is based on the data from the Dictionary
of Lithuanian Nominal Phrases (further on, dictio-
nary). The database of the dictionary3 consists of
68,602 nominal phrases. It has to be mentioned,
that the term nominal phrase refers to all MWEs
which contain at least one noun: it can be phrases
with a noun as a syntactic head, as well as phrases
with a verb or an adjective as a syntactic head. In
this article, the terms MWE and phrase are used
interchangeably.

In the dictionary, the phrases are of different
length: from two-word phrases (31,853 phrases)
to phrases comprising 46 words (1 phrase). The
major part of the dictionary phrases is made up
of two-word phrases (46.4%), whereas three-word
phrases and four-word phrases form accordingly
28.7% and 10.1% of the dictionary (Rimkutė et
al., 2012, p. 19). The phrases are not lemmatised,
but given in the form as they appear in the corpus,
e.g.:

• mobilaus ryšio telefonas, mobilaus ryšio tele-
fono, mobilaus ryšio telefoną, mobilaus ryšio
telefonus (‘mobile phone’ in various gram-
matical forms: nominative singular, genitive
singular, accusative singular and accusative
plural);

3http://tekstynas.vdu.lt/page.xhtml?id=dictionary-db

• nenuleisti rankų, nenuleido rankų, nenulei-
džia rankų (‘not to give up’, lit. ‘not to lower
hands’, in various grammatical forms: infini-
tive, definite past, present tense).

As Lithuanian is a strongly inflected language,
it is an advantage that users can see phrases in the
form they are used in the corpus. Phrases were ex-
tracted by the method of Gravity Counts (Dauda-
ravičius and Marcinkevičienė, 2004, p. 330) from
the Corpus of Contemporary Lithuanian Language
(100 m running words; made up of periodicals,
fiction, non-fiction, and legal texts published in
1991-2002). Gravity Counts helps to evaluate
the combinability of two words according to in-
dividual word frequencies, pair frequencies or the
number of different words in a selected 3 word-
span. As a result, it detects collocational chains as
text fragments, not as a list of collocates for the
previously selected node-words.

After automatic extraction of collocational
chains from the corpus, manual procedures were
performed: transformation of collocational chains
into phrases (the procedure is described in de-
tail in Marcinkevičienė (2010) and Rimkutė et
al. (2012)). According to the lexicographical ap-
proach, linguistically well-formed collocational
chains have to be grammatical, meaningful, and
arbitrary. Therefore, some chains were shortened,
complemented, joined or deleted manually. At
present, the dictionary database contains phrases
without additions (1) and with additions: additions
can be explicitly specified (2) or not (3), e.g.:

1. ne tuo adresu ‘under a wrong address’;

2. (gauti; suteikti) daugiau informacijos ‘(get;
give) more information’;

3. atkreipiant dėmesį į (. . . ) ‘paying attention to
(. . . )’.

Phrase Number of Number of lemmas
type lemmas with 2 or more GF
2-word 18,581 6,585 (35,4%)
3-word 10,970 2,245 (20,5%)
4-word 3,333 477 (14,3%)
In total 32,884 9,307 (28,3%)

Table 1: Statistical information about MWEs from
the type (1).

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 42



Only two-, three-, and four-word phrases from
the type (1) were filtered out for this study (see
Table 1). As already mentioned, these phrases
make up 85% of the whole dictionary database,
and thus can be considered as the most typical
multiword units in Lithuanian (Marcinkevičienė,
2010; Rimkutė et al., 2012). Most of them are id-
ioms, phraseologisms and collocations, although
there are many multiword terms as well.

It was calculated that two-word expressions
have on average 1.71 different grammatical forms,
three-word expressions – around 1.35 different
grammatical forms, and four-word expressions –
1.22 different grammatical forms. The maximum
number of grammatical forms for one lemma are
respectively 21 (aukšta mokykla ‘high school’), 15
(mobilaus ryšio telefonas ‘mobile phone’) and 8
(kandidatas į seimo narius ‘candidate as MP’). For
this study, only the 9,307 MWEs with two or more
grammatical forms were selected. The remaining
MWEs, those for which only one form was iden-
tified automatically, are excluded, as they do not
always need to be lemmatised and require a fur-
ther study.

The next section describes the main approaches
applied to the process of automatic lemmatisation
of MWEs.

3 Approaches to Lemmatisation of
MWEs

In Lithuanian, a great number of MWEs can ap-
pear in different grammatical forms. As such, they
do not differ from variable simple words. Accord-
ingly, a lot of Lithuanian MWEs consist of nouns,
verbs and/or adjectives that are used in a particular
grammatical form. Some of these word classes can
have from a few to dozens of different grammati-
cal forms. Traditionally, for the set of grammati-
cal forms of each variable word, one basic form is
assigned. The latter, a lemma, is a convenient rep-
resentation of the whole set of grammatical word
forms. Although in principle a lemma could be an
artificial form (a stem, for example), the tradition
is to select as a lemma one form from the whole
set of grammatical forms, e.g. in Lithuanian:

• nominative singular form for nouns (except
for plural nouns);

• nominative singular masculine positive in-
definite form for adjectives;

• positive form for adverbs (if they vary in de-
gree);

• infinitive for verbs (including participles).

In the field of computational linguistics, it is
common to use artificial lemmas for MWEs, be-
cause they can be easily generated by automatic
means. There are two main kinds of artificial lem-
mas:

a) It is possible to use a lemmatic sequence
which is the sequence of lemmas of each con-
stitutive word of the MWE4. Using the morpho-
logical annotation tool for Lithuanian (the tool
is described in Zinkevičius (2000) and Zinke-
vičius et al. (2005)), each grammatical form of the
multiword term, bendrosioms mokslo programoms
’framework programme’, is annotated morpholog-
ically as follows:

• <word="bendrosioms" lemma="bendras"
type="bdv., teig, nelygin. l., įvardž., mot. g.,
dgs., N."/>5

• <word="mokslo" lemma="mokslas" type=
"dkt., vyr. g., vns., K."/>6

• <word="programoms" lemma="programa"
type="dkt., mot. g., dgs., N."/>7

The lemmatic sequence, e.g. for the previous
example bendras mokslas programa, is often used
in the field of automatic term recognition (e.g.,
Loginova et al. (2012, p. 9)) to represent a term or
another type of MWE. Nonetheless, such a substi-
tute, which lacks grammatical cohesion between
the parts of the MWE, appears as a heap of words,
which is unnatural for human users8.

4The difference between syntagmatic lemma (with mor-
phosyntactic relations between constitutive words) and lem-
matic sequence (the sequence of lemmas of constitutive
words) is relevant only for MWEs, not for single words.

5The field type contains the following grammatical fea-
tures: adjective, positive, undefined, positive degree, femi-
nine, plural, dative.

6Grammatical features: noun, masculine, singular, geni-
tive.

7Grammatical features: noun, feminine, plural, dative.
8In about 5% of the studied phrases, the sequences of iso-

lated lemmas incidentally correspond to their natural lemma,
e.g. vyras ir moteris ‘man and woman’, valstybinis simfoni-
nis orkestras ‘national symphony orchestra’. Such cases re-
quire the following conditions: the nominal syntactic head is
masculine singular, the only syntactic relation inside the term
is agreement or implies invariable words, degree and defi-
niteness must not be retained in the lemma, no participle is
implied.

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 43



b) The second frequent method is stemming,
that is, dropping of endings. For example, the
forms of the previously mentioned MWE bendroji
mokslo programa, bendrosios mokslo programos
and bendrosioms mokslo programoms can be rep-
resented as: bendr moksl program. This option is
even more artificial for Lithuanian, since, in addi-
tion to the loss of syntactic cohesion, this approach
generates shortened words without endings, which
do not exist in Lithuanian.

Other approaches attempt to provide a natural
lemma, i.e., by either choosing the most frequent
form as a lemma, or generating a correct syntag-
matic lemma from grammatical forms. Taking the
most frequent form of the lemma avoids mistakes
in generation, but the result is that the set of ba-
sic forms is heterogeneous: some MWEs will be
in nominative, some will be in accusative, genitive
or in some other case, some will be in the plural
form, others - in the singular.

Automatic lemmatisation according to the syn-
tactic structure of each MWE ensures the con-
stitency of basic forms, but it is the most com-
plicated process. The tool JungLe, which is de-
scribed in Boizou et al. (2012), was specifically
designed for this task. This software analyses an
MWE and attempts to distinguish three types of
syntactic components (as a concrete example the
multiword term individualus studijų grafikas ‘in-
dividual study plan/schedule’ is provided):

• syntactic head (e.g., the noun grafikas
‘plan/schedule’);

• words congruent with the head (e.g., the ad-
jective individualus ‘individual’);

• other words, that is, words governed by the
head and their own dependents (e.g., the noun
in genitive case studijų ‘study’).

The generation of the syntagmatic lemma re-
quires the syntactic head to be lemmatised (for
terms, the syntactic head is a noun, but there is
more diversity with other types of MWEs). Words
(usually in the genitive case) governed by the head
and their own dependents remain in their gram-
matical form, e.g., švietimo {lygmuo} ‘education
level’, socialinių mokslų {sritis} ‘field of social
sciences’.9

9Here and below the syntactic head is indicated in curly
brackets.

The most difficult case concerns words congru-
ent with the head, since they often have to be cor-
rected to remain congruent with the head once it
is lemmatised. If the head is masculine singular,
the adaptation usually requires only taking lem-
mas for each congruent word, e.g., in the mul-
tiword term individualus studijų grafikas ‘indivi-
dual study plan/schedule’ (the adjective individ-
ualus ‘individual’ agrees with the noun grafikas
‘schedule’, not with the noun studijų ‘study’).
When the syntactic head is feminine, congruent
words must also be put in their feminine form, e.g.,
nuotolinės studijos ‘distance studies’ (instead of
*nuotolinis studijos, where the masculine singular
indefinite positive form of the adjective nuotolinis
is incongruent with the feminine plural head studi-
jos).

Besides, some lexico-grammatical features,
e.g., definiteness, comparative/superlative de-
grees, are usually semantically relevant, so that
they have to be kept in the syntagmatic lemma,
which requires to generate the proper form, even
when the head is masculine and singular, e.g.
Senasis ir Naujasis testamentas ‘The Old and
New Testament’ (where the adjectives Senasis
and Naujasis are in the definite form, instead of
*Senas ir Naujas testamentas), aukštesnioji žemės
ūkio mokykla ‘high school of agriculture’ (where
the adjective aukštesnioji is in the definite com-
parative form, instead of *aukštas žemės ūkio
mokykla).

Syntagmatic lemmatisation also requires to
lemmatise participles in a different manner than
single words. Indeed, participles are traditionally
lemmatised as verbs in infinitive form. For ex-
ample, the single word lemmatisation of the term
perkeliamieji gebėjimai ‘transferable skills’ gives
a result perkelti gebėjimai, that is a sequence of
an infinitive (perkelti ‘to transfer‘) and a noun in
nominative (gebėjimai ‘skills‘). The correct syn-
tagmatic lemmatisation requires participles to be
corrected in gender, number and case only, in or-
der to remain congruent with their lemmatised
head, e.g. perkeliamasis gebėjimas.

All required generations are made by a light-
weighted generative module. This module uses
to the largest possible extent the information pro-
vided by the morphological analyser, which works
on a single word basis. Its generative capacities
are restricted to the nominative forms, since noun,
adjective and participle lemmas are in the nomina-

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 44



tive form. Aiming at facilitation of the process, the
generation proceeds either from a single lemma or
a grammatical form. For example, lemmas for par-
ticiples are generated from the grammatical form,
because it helps to avoid the problem of numer-
ous verbal paradigms in Lithuanian, while adjec-
tives are generated from the lemma. Indeed, some
endings of nouns and adjectives (e.g., -(i)ų geni-
tive plural) hide the declension paradigm (which
is necessary for the selection of the correct fem-
inine ending), so that it is better to decide from
the lemma, which expresses the adjectival declen-
sion paradigm by its ending10, e.g., nuotolinis
‘distant‘ (third adjectival declension paradigm)→
nuotolinė. The whole process is very similar to
Thurmair (2012, p. 257).

4 Syntagmatic Lemmatisation of
Lithuanian MWEs: Evaluation and
Results

In this part of the article, we present our results:
what problems are solved by syntactic analysis,
and what problems still remain and pose chal-
lenges for automatic MWE lemmatisation.

Two-, three- and four-word phrases were au-
tomatically lemmatised with the help of Jun-
gLe tool and the results were evaluated manu-
ally (see Table 2). JungLe generates a lemma
for each MWE grammatical form separately, so
that more than one lemma can be provided for
the same MWE, especially when it is difficult to
identify automatically to which word an attribute
in genitive belongs, e.g., two lemmas, both in-
accurate, were provided for the MWE bendroji
dalinės nuosavybės teisė ‘general partial owner-
ship’, where the first adjective bendroji ‘general’
is congruent with the MWE head teisė ‘law’ and
the second adjective dalinės ‘partial’ with the
noun nuosavybės ‘property’ (which depends on
the MWE head). In the first provided lemma *ben-
droji dalinė nuosavybės teisė, dalinė incorrectly
agrees with teisė, and in the second one, *ben-
drosios dalinės nuosavybės teisė, bendrosios in-
correctly agrees with nuosavybės.

As each grammatical form is lemmatised sepa-
rately, in some cases there is more than one lemma
for the same MWE. Thus, lemmatisation accuracy
was assessed for individual grammatical forms of

10Ending -as for the first adjectival declension, -ias for the
second, -is and -ys for the third and fourth, and -us for the
fifth.

MWEs. Table 2 shows that the highest accuracy
is with two-word phrases; however, the number of
incorrectly lemmatised MWEs increases for three-
and four-word phrases. It shows that the syn-
tactic complexity increases with the length of the
MWEs.

Phrase Number of Number Correctly
type lemmas of GF lemmatised GF
2-word 6,585 19,822 91.56%
3-word 2,245 6,110 80.57%
4-word 477 1,206 76.43%
In total 9,307 27,138

Table 2: Statistical information about the analysed
MWEs (2 or more forms only).

The analysis of the automatic lemmatisation
revealed three groups of errors11: a) agreement
errors (number, gender); b) government errors;
c) lexico-grammatical errors (degree, definiteness,
lexical plural).

4.1 Agreement Errors

Many errors occur with numerals, e.g., *beveik
du trečdalis ‘*nearly two third’ (it should be
beveik du trečdaliai, ‘nearly two thirds’, with treč-
dalis ‘third’ in the plural form), also *aštuoni
mėnuo ‘*eight month’ (while it should be aštuoni
mėnesiai, ‘eight months’, with mėnuo ‘month’ in
the plural form). Many of these errors can be elim-
inated by applying proper rules in the syntactic
analysis.

During the syntactic analysis gender errors oc-
cur when the composition of an MWE is more
complex, e.g., *vienas ar kita grupė ‘one or the
other group’(instead of viena ar kita grupė, with
viena ‘one’ and kita ‘other’ in the feminine form).
We can see that the coordinating link could be the
factor determining the agreement errors12.

11Some errors of lemmatisation occur due to errors of
the previous morphological analysis, e.g., the lemma for the
MWE arbatinio šaukštelio (‘tea spoon’, sing. Gen.) is pro-
vided incorrectly as *arbatinio šaukštelis (genitive singular +
nominative singular, instead of arbatinis šaukštelis, nomina-
tive singular for both the adjective and the noun), because of
an improper morphological analysis: arbatinis was annotated
as a noun, not an adjective.

12Some similar errors, which must be corrected, appear
with the genitive case, e.g. Afrikos ir Azija (genitive and nom-
inative, it should be Afrika ir Azija ‘Africa and Asia’, nomina-
tive and nominative), *daina ir šokių ansamblis (nominative
noun, conjunction, genitive noun, nominative noun), instead
of dainų ir šokių {ansamblis} (genitive noun, conjunction,
genitive noun, nominative noun) ‘song and dance ensemble’.

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 45



It was observed that a large number of agree-
ment errors take place when one of the attributes
is an apposition, i.e., a noun which has to agree in a
case (sometimes gender and number) with the ad-
jacent noun, e.g., *šalies gavėja (it should be šalis
gavėja, ‘the recipient party’), *mergelės Marija (it
should be mergelė Marija, ‘the Virgin Mary’, with
both parts in nominative). One the other hand,
such attributes are not numerous, and such errors
could be solved by looking at other cases than gen-
itive.

4.2 Government Errors

Problems mainly arise when the tool fails to cor-
rectly identify the syntactic head of a phrase. Such
a problem usually occurs when the head is not at
the end of an MWE, e.g. *paskolos {studijos} (in-
stead of {paskola} studijoms ‘study loan’), *atliko
savo {darbas} ‘carried out their work’ (instead of
{atlikti} savo darbą, where the verb is the head).
Problems also occur in phrases, where the head is
a half-participle or a gerund: *įsigaliojus nauja-
sis civilinis {kodeksas} ‘when the new civil code
came into effect’ (it should be {įsigaliojus} nau-
jajam civiliniam kodeksui, i.e. where dative is re-
quired).

It must be noticed that in some cases the rep-
resentation of the lemma does not correspond to
a natural linguistic form. It occurs in colloca-
tions which contain a conjugated verb (pakilo)
with a (nominative) subject, e.g. pakilo tem-
peratūra ‘temperature rised’. In the assigned lem-
mas, conjugated verbs are substituted for infinitive
forms (pakilti). Infinitives cannot have a subject in
Lithuanian, and therefore the MWE subject could
be presented in brackets in the nominative form
(e.g. pakilti (temperatūra) ‘to rise (temperature)’).
A further exception comes from the MWEs with a
gerund, since the logical subject of a gerund is not
expressed as a nominative, but as a dative comple-
ment, e.g., atsitikus nelaimei ‘a disaster occurs’.
In such cases, we propose to assign two differ-
ent lemmas: one lemma, which retains the gram-
matical form without change, atsitikus nelaimei
(gerund + dative complement), as used in gerund
grammatical form; and the second lemma, where
the gerund is substituted for the infinitive and the
dative complement is substituted for a nominative
form in bracket, e.g. atsitikti (nelaimė) (infinitive
+ nominative), as in the previous example.

We should also mention, among other compli-

cated lemmatisation instances, the loss of gram-
matical forms which carry the meaning of an
MWE, e.g., atstovų teigimas (‘representatives’ as-
sertion’) could be considered as a correctly gen-
erated lemma; however, after a closer investiga-
tion of the grammatical forms, we can see that
in this MWE the syntactic head is always used
in the instrumental case (teigimu), i.e., atstovų
teigimu (‘according to the representatives’), thus
the lemma should keep this form. Similarly, the
lemma of an MWE balsavimo paštas (‘voting
post’) is not accurate, as the syntactic head (paš-
tas) should be in the instrumental case, i.e., bal-
savimas paštu (‘voting by mail’), while the lemma
of a phrase visa išgalė (‘all possible measures’)
should be visomis išgalėmis (‘by all possible mea-
sures’), because this phrase as an MWE is used
only in the form of instrumental plural.

4.3 Lexico-grammatical Errors

There are many errors made by JungLe where
a lemma has to be assigned to nouns which are
used in plural in the phrase, e.g., *žmogaus teisė
ir laisvė ‘human right and freedom’, instead of
žmogaus teisės ir laisvės, ‘human rights and free-
doms’; *jungtinė tauta ‘united nation’, instead of
Jungtinės Tautos, ‘United Nations’; *visa Baltijos
šalis ‘the whole Baltic country’, instead of visos
Baltijos šalys ‘all Baltic countries’, *Vilniaus ir
Šalčininkų rajonas ‘Vilnius and Šalčininkai dis-
trict’, instead of Vilniaus ir Šalčininkų rajonai
‘Vilnius and Šalčininkai districts’. As number er-
rors were considered the examples when a lemma
looked correct at first sight, i.e., a lemma is pro-
vided in the same number as in the dictionary.
However, from the usage data (all forms of a
phrase) one can see that certain MWEs are used
only in plural, e.g., meteorologinės sąlygos ‘me-
teorological conditions’, mineralinės trąšos ‘min-
eral fertilizers’, mirties aplinkybės ‘death circum-
stances’. All these phrases, which are made of an
adjective or a genitive noun followed by a noun,
are incorrectly lemmatised in the singular form,
e.g. *meteorologinė sąlyga, *mineralinė trąša,
*mirties aplinkybė. Many of the above-mentioned
nouns can be used in plural and singular, when
they are used independently, but they can be re-
stricted to one of these numbers inside MWEs.
Traditional grammars and dictionaries do not pro-
vide necessary information to solve this problem,
which could often be resolved if we take into ac-

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 46



count actual usage from the corpus.
There are two types of degree errors: a) in some

phrases a particular degree form is used, thus, the
same form should be in the lemma (Aukščiausia-
sis Teismas ‘supreme court’; daugiau kaip dveji
metai ‘more than two years’); b) there are phrases,
where an adverb or an adjective is used in several
degrees: then different phrases can contain adjec-
tives or adverbs of different degrees (cf. įvairūs /
įvairiausi būdai (‘various/ the most various ways’)
and skirti daug/daugiau/daugiausia dėmesio (to
pay a lot of/more/ most attention)). Analysis of
all forms of an MWE can help to distinguish a)
and b) phrases.

Errors of definiteness often occur in phrases
joined by coordination, when one adjective is pro-
vided in the definite form while the other one is in-
definite, e.g., *Senas ir Naujasis testamentas (‘Old
and New Testament’).

After the examination of errors and problem-
atic cases created by JungLe, we can draw a con-
clusion that automatic lemmatisation is aggravated
by:

1. syntactic heads in the genitive form: when
there are several nouns in the genitive in the
MWE, it leads to attachment ambiguities;

2. the length of an MWE: the longer the phrase,
the more complicated syntactic structure; the
accuracy of lemmatisation decreases (see Ta-
ble 2);

3. problems of lexico-grammatical nature, when
a grammatical form depends on a lexical
meaning (here, errors of number must be em-
phasized).

It must be emphasized that the numbers in Ta-
ble 2 show the situation after the first extension of
JungLe. The results can still be improved signifi-
cantly. Some errors can be corrected by improving
the grammar used by JungLe for syntactic analy-
sis, some of them require adding new capacities
to JungLe, other errors will be difficult to correct
without human intervention.

5 Discussion and Recommendations

The traditional morphological analyser, which
analyses every word individually, cannot produce
natural lemmas for MWEs. It is necessary to carry
out the syntactic analysis for automatic assigna-
tion of natural lemmas for different grammatical

forms of MWEs. But beside syntactic analysis of
MWEs, we often need to take into account the us-
age data of a particular MWE and to apply addi-
tional criteria. The automatic syntagmatic lemma-
tisation tool was tested on the data from the Dic-
tionary of Lithuanian Nominal Phrases, which are
characterized by a high variety. For this reason, it
can be stated that the essential features, as well as
problems, of automatic lemmatisation of Lithua-
nian MWEs were identified.

One of the most important lemmatisation is-
sues that is difficult to solve is the problem of
an attribute which is incongruent with a noun
and usually expressed in genitive. Most com-
monly, such problems (in automatic lemmatisa-
tion) are inevitable, because ambivalent syntac-
tic relations can exist in MWEs composed of the
same words, e.g., the lemma for MWE gram-
matical forms administracinės teisės pažeidimų,
administracinės teisės pažeidimą, administracinės
teisės pažeidimus ‘breach of administrative law’
(where administracinis ‘administrative’ is con-
gruent with teisė ‘law’) should be adminis-
tracinės teisės pažeidimas, while the lemma for
MWE grammatical forms administracinį teisės
pažeidimą, administracinių teisės pažeidimų, ad-
ministracinius teisės pažeidimus ‘administrative
breach of law’ (where administracinis ‘adminis-
trative’ is congruent with pažeidimas ‘breach’)
should be administracinis teisės pažeidimas. In
order to set the right lemma, the noun with which
the adjective agrees must be correctly assigned.

The head of a phrase in genitive can influence
adjective agreement errors, too. For instance, the
genitive grammatical form periodinio mokslo lei-
dinio, where it is unclear if periodinio ‘periodic’ is
congruent with mokslo ‘science’ or leidinio ‘pub-
lication’, could formally be lemmatised as *pe-
riodinio mokslo leidinys ‘a publication of peri-
odic science’ or periodinis mokslo leidinys ’a pe-
riodic scientific publication’ by looking at the in-
ternal syntactic structure of the term. In order to
disambiguate syntax correctly, we need to com-
pare other (unambiguous, i.e., cases other than
the genitive) forms of the term, e.g., periodiniams
mokslo leidiniams (in dative plural), which shows
that the adjective periodinis ‘periodic’ is congru-
ent with the noun leidinys ‘publication’, therefore,
this MWE should properly be lemmatised as peri-
odinis mokslo leidinys.

The problems concerning the genitive case

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 47



would decrease, if the usage criterion was applied,
i.e., if lemma was identified considering all forms
of the MWE. For example, it is especially com-
plicated to lemmatise an MWE with all genitive
cases, e.g., it is impossible to identify an accurate
lemma for MWEs valstybinio socialinio draudimo
biudžeto (‘the budget of state social insurance’),
fizinių asmenų pajamų mokesčių (‘income taxes of
natural persons’). In such cases, a rule should be
applied: if the same phrase is used in genitive and
in other cases, the lemma should be identified on
the basis of phrases with other cases than genitive.

The usage criterion would help to avoid the
number errors. Quite often this criterion proved
the rule that if different grammatical forms of
an MWE are in plural, then the lemma should
keep the plural form too. For example, a dictio-
nary of nominal phrases provides two grammatical
forms: laužas ir atliekos, laužo ir atliekų ‘debris
and waste’, in both phrases the noun laužas is in
the singular form, while atliekos is used in plural.
Thus, when merging the two MWEs to one lemma,
atliekos has to remain in the plural form. During
the lemmatisation of the forms žvėris ir paukščius,
žvėrių ir paukščių, žvėrys ir paukščiai (‘beasts and
birds’, repectively accusative plural, genitive plu-
ral, nominative plural), we have to assign plural
lemmas for both nouns – žvėrys ir paukščiai, be-
cause all forms of these nominal phrases are in
the plural form. This is especially important for
names, cf. *Lietuvos geležinkelis (it should be Li-
etuvos geležinkeliai, ‘Lithuanian Railways’), *Vil-
niaus šilumos tinklas (it should be Vilniaus šilu-
mos tinklai, ‘Vilnius Heating Network’).

Based on the usage data, it would be possible
to distinguish between the MWEs where a certain
word is used only in one form of the degree (Aukš-
čiausiasis Teismas, superlative, ‘Supreme Court’),
and those where several forms of a degree are used
(̨ivairūs būdai and įvairiausi būdai, positive and
superlative, ‘various ways’).

When applying the usage criterion, it is impor-
tant to remember that in this case the accuracy of
the tool will be linked to the corpus data: the rarer
the phrase, the higher the risk for the tool to make
a mistake. For example, if we recognize only two
forms of a particular phrase, and they are both in
the plural form, the tool can come to a false con-
clusion that the lemma of that phrase is also in plu-
ral, although that phrase could also be used in sin-
gular. But such a risk is significant for rare MWEs

only.
It is possible that next to the usage criterion,

other criteria will have to be introduced. For ex-
ample, in order to avoid lemmatisation errors re-
lated to definiteness, it would be worthwhile to in-
voke not only the usage, but, also, frequency cri-
terion. Indeed, according to the data, nekilnoja-
mas turtas (with the indefinite form of the adjec-
tive nekilnojamas) and nekilnojamasis turtas (with
the definite form of the adjective nekilnojamasis),
which both mean ‘real property’, are concurrently
used. However, one can expect the standard form,
the definite one, to be more frequent, as it is a term.

The evaluation of the research results has re-
vealed that the accuracy of the MWE lemma-
tisation is not only influenced by the accuracy
of the syntactic analyser, but, also, by the vari-
ability of MWEs. If we come across a phrase
which has two variants, then a separate lemma
will be assigned to each variant during the au-
tomatic lemmatisation, e.g., užrašų knygutė and
užrašų knygelė (‘a notebook’, the difference lies
in the diminutive suffix of the nouns). However,
several forms of degree, different forms of defi-
niteness could be used in the same MWE; for this
reason, we have to discuss how to reflect all this
in a lemma. The substituting component could be
presented in angle brackets: skirti [daug/daugiau]
dėmesio ‘to pay [much/more] attention’; [nekilno-
jamas/nekilnojamasis] turtas ‘real property’ (with
a definite or indefinite adjective). Thus, this would
indicate that some syntagmatic lemmas contain
substituting components.

References
Loïc Boizou, Gintarė Grigonytė, Erika Rimkutė, and

Andrius Utka. 2012. Automatic Inference of Base
Forms for Multiword Terms in Lithuanian. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth International Conference Hu-
man Language Technologies – The Baltic Perspec-
tive, pages 27–35.

Vidas Daudaravičius and Rūta Marcinkevičienė. 2004.
Gravity Counts for the Boundaries of Colloca-
tions. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics,
9(2):321–348.

Jolanta Kovalevskaitė. 2014. Phraseme-type and
Phraseme-token: a Corpus-driven Evidence for
Morphological Flexibility of Phrasemes. Res Hu-
manitariae, XVI, pages 126–143.

Elizaveta Loginova, Anita Gojun, Helena Blancafort,
Marie Guégan, Tatiana Gornostay, and Ulrich Heid.
2012. Reference Lists for the Evaluation of Term

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 48



Extraction Tools. In Proceedings of the 10th Inter-
national Congress on Terminology and Knowledge
Engineering (TKE), pages 177–192, Madrid, Spain.

Rūta Marcinkevičienė. 2010. Lietuvių kalbos
kolokacijos. Vytauto Didžiojo universitetas, Kau-
nas, Lithuania.

Jonas Paulauskas (ed). 2001. Frazeologijos žodynas.
Lietuvių kalbos institutas, Vilnius, Lithuania.

Erika Rimkutė and Vidas Daudaravičius. 2007. Mor-
fologinis dabartinės lietuvių kalbos tekstyno ano-
tavimas. Kalbų studijos, 11:30–35.

Erika Rimkutė, Agnė Bielinskienė, and Jolanta Ko-
valevskaitė (eds). 2012. Lietuvių kalbos
daiktavardinių frazių žodynas. Vytauto Didžiojo
universitetas, Kaunas, Lithuania.

Gregor Thurmair and Vera Aleksić. 2012. Creating
Term and Lexicon Entries from Phrase Tables. In
Proceedings of the 16th EAMT Conference, pages
253–260.

Vytautas Zinkevičius, Vidas Daudaravičius, and Erika
Rimkutė. 2005. The Morphologically Annotated
Lithuanian Corpus. In Proceedings of The Second
Baltic Conference on Human Language Technolo-
gies, pages 365–370.

Vytautas Zinkevičius. 2000. Lemuoklis – mor-
fologinei analizei. Darbai ir Dienos, 24:245–273.

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 49


