



















































Automated Simultaneous Interpretation: Hints of a Cognitive Framework for Machine Translation


Proceedings of the ACL 2015 Fourth Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation (HyTra), pages 35–39,
Beijing, China, July 31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automated Simultaneous Interpretation:                                                     
Hints of a Cognitive Framework for Machine Translation    

 
 

Rafael E. Banchs 
Institute for Infocomm Research 

1 Fusionopolis Way, #21-01, Singapore 138632 
rembanchs@i2r.a-star.edu.sg 

 
 

 
 

Abstract 

This discussion paper presents and analyses the 
main conceptual differences and similarities be-
tween the human task of simultaneous interpre-
tation and the statistical approach to machine 
translation. A psycho-cognitive model of the 
simultaneous interpretation process is reviewed 
and compared with the phrase-based statistical 
machine translation approach. Some interesting 
differences are identified and their possible im-
plications on machine translation methods are 
discussed. Finally, the most relevant research 
problems related to them are identified.  

1. Introduction  
Nowadays, translation has become an important 
element of daily life. Indeed, the emergence of 
modern information and communication technolo-
gies and the resulting globalization phenomenon 
are continuously boosting the need for translation 
services and applications. Within the context of 
professional translation, three different types of 
human translation tasks can be identified:  

Document translation. This task refers to the 
situation in which the professional translator is re-
quired to generate a target-language-version of a 
given source document. In this kind of situations, 
full understanding of the source material is re-
quired and full generation of the target must be 
accomplished. In general, free translations are ac-
ceptable, no specific time constraints are imposed, 
and the best translation quality is expected. 

Consecutive interpretation. This task refers to 
the situation in which the professional translator is 
required to mediate the communication between 

two persons that speaks different languages. The 
basic communication protocol in this case is based 
in a turn-taking strategy, in which interlocutors 
must speak one at a time when they are given the 
right to speak. In this kind of situations, full under-
standing of the source material is required and full 
generation of the target must be ideally accom-
plished, while a ‘shared’ time constrains exists. 

Simultaneous interpretation. This task refers to 
the situation in which the professional translator is 
required to translate on-the-fly what other person is 
saying in a different language. In this case no turn-
taking is allowed as the translator is expected to 
produce the translated speech while the main 
speaker continues speaking. In these situations, full 
understanding and full generation is not mandato-
ry, as the interpreter must keep the main speaker’s 
pace because ‘concurrent’ time constraints exist. 

Current machine translation technologies have 
been theoretically and empirically designed under 
assumptions related to the first and second catego-
ries defined above. As far as we know, only few 
attempts have been done to apply machine transla-
tion to the specific problem of simultaneous inter-
pretation. Indeed, previous research in this area can 
be traced back to the Vermobil1

The main objective of this discussion paper is to 
highlight the differences and similarities between 
the human task of simultaneous interpretation and 
statistical machine translation aiming at proposing 

 project, as well as 
to work from Kitano (1991) and Furuse and Iida 
(1996), who proposed the use of incremental trans-
lation. Later on, Mima et al. (1998) developed the 
idea of example-based incremental transfer. 

                                                           
1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verbmobil 

35



a research agenda for problems related to automat-
ed simultaneous interpretation. The rest of this dis-
cussion paper is structured as follows. First, in 
section 2, a recently proposed psycho-cognitive 
model of human simultaneous interpretation is pre-
sented along with its possible implications on ma-
chine translation. Then, in section 3, a cognitive 
framework for machine translation based on the 
described psycho-cognitive model is proposed. 

2. Comparative Analysis 
Although the translation process might slightly 
vary from person to person depending on a wide 
variety of factors, according to recently proposed 
psychological models of memory and attention 
(Padilla-Benítez and Bajo 1998), during a simulta-
neous interpretation task five different subtasks are 
conducted by the human brain: listening, segmen-
tation, translation, reordering, and utterance pro-
duction. 

2.1 A Model of Simultaneous Interpretation 
According to the aforementioned process, a human 
interpreter segments the input utterance into mean-
ing units, which constitute basic semantic units that 
can be represented and manipulated at the cogni-
tive level (Oleron and Nanpon 1965). An interest-
ing, and also curious, fact about these meaning 
units is that the average human brain is able to pro-
cess 7 + 2 of such units at a time (Miller 1956). 
This seems to be indicating some sort of cognitive 
buffer size which happens to be independent of the 
language.  

In parallel to the segmentation process, each 
meaning unit is translated by taking into account 
the surrounding 7 + 2 unit context, and after having 
translated several units reordering and post-edition 
procedures are performed; producing, in this way, 
the output utterance. All these parallel processes 
are continuously operating while the input utter-
ance is being received and the output utterance is 
being emitted; this last one with a corresponding 
latency of some few words.  

2.2 Main Differences with SMT 
Based on the information above, some important 
observations can be derived. 

First, notice that the processes of translation and 
reordering are conducted sequentially, in the sense 
that reordering and utterance production are con-

ducted after some meaning units have been trans-
lated. So, differently from the SMT framework, in 
which translation and reordering are performed 
simultaneously during decoding; in the human in-
terpretation case, reordering is performed after 
translation. This means that reordering decisions 
do not affect unit selection. 

Second, unit selection is made by taking into ac-
count a 7 + 2 meaning unit context, which includes 
both preceding and subsequent semantic infor-
mation. As each meaning unit is composed of sev-
eral words, the considered contexts in this case are 
larger than the ones considered in SMT, as well as 
they span over subsequent words. 

No complex search strategy seems to be applied 
by the human interpreters. Indeed, the search strat-
egy seems to be much simpler than in the case of 
SMT decoding. By decomposing the decoding task 
into two separated processes: translation and reor-
dering, a simpler search strategy can be utilized. 

2.3 Automated Simultaneous Interpretation 
The three basic observations described above have 
very important implications on the way state-of-
the-art SMT operates, and on the possible avenues 
of research for adapting this kind of systems to the 
specific task of simultaneous interpretation. These 
implications are described below. 

The translation strategy is indeed very simple: a 
1-to-1 mapping between meaning units which is 
context dependent. In the ideal case, the context 
and the source meaning unit must almost uniquely 
define the corresponding target meaning unit. 

Although meaning units are not clearly defined 
by psychologists, they can be thought of as a set of 
optimal units for information representation and 
transference, which admit translation. According to 
this, meaning units should not be either generated 
or deleted during translation (i.e. for a given input, 
the corresponding translation must have the same 
number of meaning units). 

Although reordering continues to be a NP-
complete problem, the search space can be strongly 
reduced as meaning unit mapping should be able to 
produce a much reduced set of candidate transla-
tion units. In the ideal scenario, stacks of size 1 
would be produced and reordering can be reduced 
to a simple permutation strategy of meaning units 
rather than words. 

Source context plays a very important role in the 
human simultaneous interpretation framework, and 

36



human translation in general. This means that both 
semantics and pragmatics have a preponderant role 
in the process of translation production, which 
moves a step ahead from current state-of-the-art 
technologies that make a very limited use of source 
context information. 

Based on these important implications and the 
corresponding observations they were derived 
from, in the following section, we will attempt to 
define a research agenda for the problem under 
consideration. In such a research agenda, we define 
the main challenges and subtasks that must be ad-
dressed for successfully applying current state-of-
the-art machine translation technologies to the 
problem of automatic simultaneous interpretation. 

3. A Cognitive Framework for SMT 
By taking into account the psycho-cognitive model 
for simultaneous interpretation described in the 
previous section, we can propose a SMT frame-
work for automated simultaneous interpretation. In 
such an approach, the following four basic sub-
tasks must be considered: 

Segmentation. This subtask is responsible for 
segmenting the input data stream into meaning 
units which admit translation. Such meaning units 
must be minimal in the sense that not subunits can 
be contained into them, and must be maximal in 
the sense that, given a semantic context, translata-
bility for every unit is guaranteed. 

Translation or target unit selection. This sub-
task is responsible for selecting (or generating) the 
most appropriate target meaning unit for translat-
ing each input meaning unit within the current 
block of data under consideration. Target unit se-
lection must be done by taking into account both 
the source unit to be translated and its context. 

Reordering. This subtask is responsible for gen-
erating appropriate reordering for target units. No-
tice that this kind of reordering accounts only for 
long reordering (chunk reordering), as short reor-
dering (word reordering) has been already ac-
counted for in the unit selection stage. Reordering 
decisions in this task must be mainly done based 
on target language information. 

Post-edition. This subtask is responsible for 
concatenating the reordered target units. This sub-
task must deal with two specific types of problems: 
boundary overlapping, where consecutive units are 
to be merged by resolving possible word overlap-

ping; and boundary gaps, where consecutive units 
are to be concatenated by filling-in possible gaps. 

The proposed strategy allows for concurrently 
generating a target output stream while a source 
input stream is being received. The four aforemen-
tioned subtasks are to be pipelined so they sequen-
tially process a given block of data. However, they 
are concurrently operating over a buffered stream 
of data. As a logical consequence of the pipeline, 
the overall system exhibits some latency, which 
must be in the range between 5 to 15 words if the 
automatic system is intended to mimic human sim-
ultaneous interpretation (Padilla-Benítez and Bajo 
1998). 

3.1 Source Input Segmentation   
The main challenges of this subtask include the 
definition and operationalization of meaning units, 
as well as the definition of contextual boundaries. 
According to the previous discussion, a meaning 
unit must satisfy the following constraints: 

Informative. The meaning unit must constitute a 
self-contained and elementary unit of information, 
which should be understandable within its context 
but without the need for specific informational el-
ements from the surrounding units. 

Translatable. The meaning unit must have an 
equivalent representation in the target language. If 
the complete source message is to be transmitted 
through the translation process, all individual 
source units must have a corresponding target unit. 
Source and target meaning units in a parallel sen-
tence pair should admit one-to-one alignments. 

Minimal. A meaning unit should not contain 
sub-units that are coherently both informative and 
translatable. 

Although there is not a clear definition on what 
psychologists refer to as a meaning unit, the above 
described properties make it clear their utility as 
basic elements for information transmission and 
understanding. From these properties and the spe-
cific characteristics of the problem under consider-
ation, a pragmatic definition for meaning units can 
be grounded on a translation optimality criterion, 
such as a unique segmentation which minimizes 
the translation effort and maximizes the translation 
quality. 

Research work on this specific subtask must be 
supported by and would certainly benefit from re-
cent research in the areas of collocation extraction, 

37



multiword expression identification, name entity 
recognition and shallow parsing. 

A recent study (Williams et al. 2013) explored 
the task of meaning unit segmentation by human 
annotators in languages such as English and Chi-
nese. The result of this study suggested that no op-
timal solution seems to exist for this problem. 
Although any random segmentation is definitively 
not acceptable, it seems to be some preferential but 
variable trends on how humans perform meaning 
unit segmentation. 

3.2 Target Unit Selection   
One of the most interesting observations derived 
from the psycho-cognitive model is that the trans-
lation of a given meaning unit seems to be unique-
ly determined by its surrounding context. This fact 
allows for a theoretical justification on decoupling 
the problem of unit selection from the problem of 
reordering (long reordering, actually), as the prob-
lem of target unit selection becomes independent 
from the target language structure, which can be 
dealt with afterwards by means of reordering strat-
egies that should only use target language infor-
mation. The main properties that are desirable for 
target unit selection according to the proposed 
methodology are as follows: 

Completeness. One source meaning unit should 
be translated by means of one target meaning unit 
which conveys an equivalent amount and type of 
information. 

Unambiguousness. The available context in-
formation must be used to resolve ambiguity prob-
lems at this stage. According to this, the possible 
options for a target meaning unit, given a source 
meaning unit, should be restricted to a very small 
set of equivalent meaning units. 

Different from state-of-the-art SMT, in which a 
large number of possible translations are consid-
ered and filtered by means of frequency-based cri-
terions, the main objective of the proposed target 
unit selection approach is to fully use the context 
information to resolve ambiguity and produce a 
restricted set of candidate units. This reduction of 
target unit candidates should guarantee a better 
overall lexical selection as well as reduce the com-
putational complexity of the decoding process. 

Research work on this specific subtask of target 
unit selection can be supported by and would cer-
tainly benefit from recent research in the areas of 
word sense disambiguation, distributional seman-

tics, syntax-based machine translation, and cross-
language information retrieval. 

Significant effort on using source-context in-
formation to improve target unit selection has been 
reported during the last few years for both domain 
adaptation and lexical semantics (Carpuat and Wu 
2005, España-Bonet et al. 2009, Haque et al. 2010, 
Banchs and Costa-jussà 2011)    

3.3 Target Unit Reordering   
Reordering is probably one of the most important 
challenges in SMT research, as well as it is the key 
factor responsible for decoding being an NP-
complete problem (Zaslavskiy et al. 2009). The 
significant reduction of candidate hypothesis re-
sulting from the use of source context information 
during target unit selection certainly reduces the 
computational burden for reordering. According to 
this, a more exhaustive search of the solution space 
can be afforded, which should also help improving 
the quality of the resulting translations. 

Notice that, in this specific subtask, we are deal-
ing with chunk-based reordering rather than word-
based reordering. Indeed, word-reordering is as-
sumed to be accounted for during the phase of tar-
get unit selection, in which each target meaning 
unit should already incorporate the corresponding 
word-reordering that is required to convey the de-
sired meaning. 

Valuable research related to this area includes 
lexicalized reordering as well as class-based reor-
dering, dependency parsing and syntax based ma-
chine translation (Li et al. 2007, Nagata et al 2006, 
Zhang et al. 2007, Costa-jussa and Fonollosa 2006, 
Wang et al. 2007). 

3.4 Output Post-Edition   
The final subtask in our proposed framework has 
to do with the specific problem of merging the re-
sulting sequence of output meaning units. After 
meaning unit selection and reordering, a simple 
concatenation strategy does not guarantee a fluid 
and grammatically correct output utterance.  

Specific problems at the boundaries of the con-
secutive meaning units can be expected to occur, 
which can be basically grouped into two catego-
ries: boundary overlapping and boundary gaps. In 
this sense, the post-edition subtask can be thought 
of as a smoothing procedure for making the con-
catenation of consecutive meaning units more fluid 
and grammatical. 

38



Research work on this specific subtask of output 
post-edition can be supported by and would cer-
tainly benefit from recent research in areas such as 
language modeling, syntactic- and semantic-based 
grammatical correction, and paraphrasing.  

4. Conclusions 
This paper discussed the main conceptual differ-
ences and similarities between the human task of 
simultaneous interpretation and the statistical ap-
proach to machine translation. A psycho-cognitive 
model of the simultaneous interpretation process 
was reviewed and compared with the statistical 
machine translation approach. Based on this, a re-
search agenda for cognitive-based automated sim-
ultaneous interpretation has been discussed. 

The most important application of automated 
simultaneous interpretation would be in the area of 
speech-to-speech translation; and more specifically 
in the case computer-mediated cross-language dia-
logue or discourse. 

References  
Rafael E. Banchs and Marta R. Costa-jussa. 2011. A 

semantic feature for statistical machine translation. In 
Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Syntax, Se-
mantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, 
SSST-5, pages 126–134. 

Marine Carpuat and Dekai Wu. 2005. Word sense dis-
ambiguation vs. statistical machine translation. In-
Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on 
Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’05, 
pages 387–394, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. 

Boxing Chen, Roland Kuhn, and George Foster. 2013. 
Vector space model for adaptation in statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1285– 1293, 
Sofia, Bulgaria, August. 

Marta R. Costa-jussà and José A. R. Fonollosa. (2006) 
Statistical machine reordering}. In Proceedings of the 
2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing, p.70--76 

Cristina España Bonet, Jesus Gimenez, and Lluıs Mar-
quez. 2009. Discriminative phrase-based models for 
arabic machine translation. Transactions on Asian 
Language and Information Processing, 8(4):15:1–
15:20, December. 

Osamu Furuse and Hitoshi Iida. 1996. Incremental 
Translation Utilizing Constituent Boundary Patterns. 
In Proceedings of Coling’96, pages 544–549 

Hiroaki Kitano. 1991. Φ DM-Dialog: An Experimental 
Speech-to-Speech Dialog Translation System. Com-
puter 24(6):36–50. 

C.H. Li, D. Zhang, M. Li, M. Zhou, M. Li, and Y. 
Guan. 2007. A probabilistic approach to syntax-
based reordering for statistical machine translation. 
In Proc. of ACL, pages 720–727, June 

George A. Miller. 1956. The Magical Number Seven, 
Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity of 
Processing Information. The Psychological Review, 
Vol 63:81–97. 

Hideki Mima, Hitoshi Iida and Osamu Furuse. 1998. 
Simultaneous interpretation utilizing example-based 
incremental transfer. In Proceedings of the 36th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, pages 855–861 

M. Nagata, K. Saito, K. Yamamoto, and K. Ohashi. 
2006. A clustered global phrase reordering model for 
statistical machine translation. In Proc. of ACL, page 
720 

Pierre Oleron and Hubert Nanpon. 1965. Recherches sur 
la traduction simultan´ee. Journal de Psychologie 
Normale et Pathologique, 62(1):73–94. 

Presentación Padilla Benítez and Teresa Bajo. 1998. 
Hacia un modelo de memoria y atención en interpre-
tación simultanea. Quaderns. Revista de traduccio, 
2:107–117. 

C. Wang, M. Collins, and P. Koehn. 2007. Chinese syn-
tactic reordering for statistical machine translation. In 
Proc. of EMNLP, pages 737–745. 

Jennifer Williams, Rafael E. Banchs and Haizhou Li. 
2013. Meaning unit segmentation in English and 
Chinese: a new approach to discourse phenomena. In 
Proceedings of Workshop on Discourse in Machine 
Translation (DiscoMT), ACL 2013. 

Mikhail Zaslavskiy, Marc Dymetman and Nicola 
Cancedda. 2009. Phrase-Based Statistical Machine 
Translation as a Travelling Salesman Problem. In 
Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL 
and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP, pages 333–341, 
Suntec, Singapore. 

Y. Zhang, R. Zens, and H. Ney. 2007. Improved 
chunklevel reordering for statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proc. of IWSLT, pages 21–28, Trento, Italy, 
October. 

 

39


