




































Integrating support verb constructions into a parser
Amanda Rassi1,2, Jorge Baptista2,3, Nuno Mamede3, Oto Vale1,4

1Centro de Ciências Humanas – Universidade Federal de São Carlos (UFSCar)
Caixa Postal 676 – São Carlos – SP – Brazil – 13.565-905

2Faculdade de Ciências Humanas e Sociais – Universidade do Algarve (UAlg)
Campus Gambelas – Faro – Portugal – 8005-139

3Instituto de Engenharia de Sistemas e Computadores (INESC-ID Lisboa/L2F)
Lisboa – Portugal – 1000-029

4Cental – Université Catholique de Louvain
Louvain-la-Neuve – Belgium – B-1348

amandarassi85@gmail.com, jbaptis@ualg.pt

nuno.mamede@inesc-id.pt, otovale@ufscar.br

Abstract. This paper describes the process of integrating into a rule-based par-
ser a set of approximately 1,000 nominal predicates forming support verb cons-
tructions (SVC) with the verb dar ‘give’ in Brazilian Portuguese. The system
was evaluated on a sample of 580 sentences containing verb-noun combina-
tions candidates to SVC, manually and independently annotated. Best results
yield 85% precision, 79% recall, 76% accuracy and 82% F-measure.

1. Introduction
Support verb constructions (SVC) [Gross 1981] pose a challenge to Natural Language
Processing (NLP) because they are superficially alike verbal predicates (cp. John gave a
kiss to Mary vs. John gave a book to Mary), but semantically they present a special confi-
guration since the predicate is actually expressed by the predicative noun (kiss) instead of
the verb (give). This entails a set of SVC-specific properties that distinguish them from or-
dinary (distributional) verbal constructions (e.g. John gave my *kiss/book to Mary, John’s
kiss/*book to Mary). From the perspective of identifying the meaning units of texts, SVC
are a combination of verb and noun corresponding to a single semantic unit, although
syntactically analysable. In this sense, they do not form a compound word, but a special
type of collocation [Mel’cuk 1997], where the verb functions as an auxiliary of the noun,
conveying the grammatical values of person-number and tense.

This paper briefly presents the formalization of the linguistic properties of 1,000
SVC constructions with verb dar ’give’ in Portuguese, under the Lexicon-Grammar (LG)
framework [Gross 1981]; it sketches the integration of the data into the rule-based par-
ser XIP – Xerox Incremental Parser [Mokhtar et al. 2002], through an automatic process
for generating, directly from a Lexicon-Grammar matrix, the dependency extraction ru-
les, which are then integrated into a fully-fledged NLP system built for Portuguese – the
STRING system [Mamede et al. 2012]1; and, finally, it evaluates the performance of the
system, by comparing it with a golden standard of a manually and independently annota-
ted corpus of 580 SVC candidate sentences [Rassi et al. 2015].

1For more information on XIP and STRING: string.l2f.inesc-id.pt

Proceedings of Symposium in Information and Human Language Technology. Natal, RN,
Brazil, November 4–7, 2015. c©2015 Sociedade Brasileira de Computação.

57



2. Related work
Most studies on SVC aim at the detection, identification, and extraction from corpora,
based only in linguistic information, such as the degree of compositionality of the SVC;
or only in statistical information, such as association measures on co-occurrence dis-
tribution; or, else, hybrid approaches using both linguistic and statistical information
[Stevenson et al. 2004], [Tan et al. 2006], [Wang and Ikeda 2008]. Hybrid methods for
identification of MWE are, nowadays, the most commonly used [Tu and Roth 2011],
[Gurrutxaga and Alegria 2011].

In order to parse SVC in texts, two main approaches can be adopted: (i) con-
sidering SVC as a whole block, whose constituents are relatively fixed and treated as
a subtype of multiword expressions (MWE), such as compound words and many ty-
pes of idioms (see [Calzolari et al. 2002], [Sag et al. 2002], [Fazly and Stevenson 2007],
[de Cruys and Moirón 2007], [Diab and Bhutada 2009], among others); and (ii) an ap-
proach that, in spite of some specific syntactic-semantic properties, considers that SVC do
have syntactic structure and follow the same constituency rules as the general grammar of
the language, systematically admitting several lexically determined syntactic transforma-
tions (alternative wordings), e.g. passive, clefting etc. To the best of our knowledge, no
study reports any attempt to integrated SVC into a parser, under this second perspective.

Portuguese SVC constructions have been intensively studied since the late 80’s,
and extensive lexicon-grammars of SVC (over 10 thousand predicative nouns) for both
the European (EP) and the Brazilian (BP) variety of Portuguese have been produced,
including the SVC with support verb dar ’give’ [Baptista 1997, Rassi et al. 2014b]. For
lack of space, see [Rassi et al. 2014a] for a recent overview.

3. Integration of SVC in XIP parser
Firstly, about 1,000 SVC with the verb dar ‘give’ in EP and BP were formalized into
a Lexicon-Grammar matrix, where the lines correspond to the lexical entries (predica-
tive nouns) and the columns indicate linguistic properties. In this matrix, the linguistic
properties encoded are: (i) formal properties, such as the number of arguments, sub-
clausal arguments, prepositions introducing the complements and type of determinant of
the predicative noun; (ii) distributional properties, such as the semantic type of arguments
(human or non-human nouns, locative complements, etc.) and the arguments’ semantic
roles (<agent>, <patient>, etc.); the main support verbs specific to each predicative
noun are also explicitly encoded; and (iii) transformational properties, such as Passive,
Symmetry, Conversion (see below). Secondly, the original lexicon was enriched with the
predicative nouns built with suffix -ada ‘-ed’, which is a quite productive derivational
device in Portuguese (particularly in BP), e.g. dar uma cadeirada ‘give an chair-ed’, dar
uma mãozada ‘give a hand-ed’, dar uma esquentada ‘give a warm-ed’, etc.

This dataset was integrated into STRING [Mamede et al. 2012], a fully-fledged,
hybrid (statistical and rule-based) Natural Language Processing chain for Portuguese. It
performs all the basic NLP tasks (tokenization, sentence splitting, part-of-speech (POS)
tagging, POS-disambiguation, chunking and deep parsing). The STRING system uses
XIP – Xerox Incremental Parser [Mokhtar et al. 2002] for its parsing module, which is
rule-based and uses finite-state technology. XIP segments sentences into chunks (NP, PP,
VP, etc.) and extracts dependency relations between the chunks’ heads: SUBJect, CDIR

Integrating support verb constructions into a parser

58



(Direct Object), MODifier, etc. In this framework, SVC parsing consists in the automatic
generation, directly from the LG matrix, of dependency rules in the XIP format, which
allow the parser to extract the dependency holding between the support verb and the
predicative noun. This dependency is called SUPPORT. A set of programs were built
for: (i) validating the linguistic data manually inputed into the LG matrix; and, then, (ii)
automatically converting it into XIP dependency extraction rules.

The general strategy towards the implementation of SVC in STRING is sketched
as follows: First, all XIP’s normal parsing procedures are applied and the basic syntactic
dependencies are extracted, specially SUBJ[ect], CDIR (direct object) and MOD[ifier] (for
PPs), that is, the dependencies holding between the verb and its arguments, as for any
ordinary distributional verb. Then, the special set rules for SVC identification operate
upon the parse that has been produced so far in order to extract the SUPPORT dependency.
Basically, these rules match, for each support verb and predicative noun combination, the
dependencies already extracted (e.g., the CDIR between deu ’gave’ and abraço ’hug’
in Rui deu um abraço no João ‘Rui gave a hug to João’). Rules also consider Passive,
Relative, and other structures transformationally derived from the base sentence (e.g. O
abraço que foi dado pelo Rui no João ‘The hug that was given by Rui to João’). Once
this SUPPORT dependency has been extracted, then the following parsing stages can take
it into account, for example, in the assignment of semantic roles.

The dependency rules consider the distinction between two main cases: (i) ele-
mentary sentences, whose dependency is called SUPPORT; these include both the stan-
dard (or active-like) constructions (e.g. Rui deu um beijo na Eva ‘Rui gave a kiss
to Eva’) and the converse (or passive-like) constructions [Gross 1989, Baptista 1997,
Rassi et al. 2014b] (e.g. Eva ganhou um beijo do Rui ‘Ana got a kiss from Rui’);
the SUPPORT dependency receives two features, depending on whether it corres-
ponds the standard and converse constructions; and (ii) causative constructions
[Gross 1981, p.23], which involve a causative operator verb (VopC) and a predicative
noun, whose dependency is called VOP-CAUSE, and which are not considered as ele-
mentary sentences (e.g. Algo deu raiva na Ana ‘Something gave anger in/on Ana’; cp.
Ana tem raiva ‘Ana has anger’). As the causative constructions occurred only 3 times in
the 580 sentences of the reference corpus, they were ignored in this paper.

4. Evaluation

In order to evaluate the overall performance of the system, a reference corpus containing
2,646 sentences with SVC in (Brazilian) Portuguese was produced [Rassi et al. 2015],
constituting a golden standard for SVC processing. These constructions have been manu-
ally and independently annotated by 5 annotators, all Portuguese native speakers, professi-
onal linguists, and experts in SVC. The average agreement between annotators was 80.8%
and Cohen’s Kappa was 0.604, which can be considered in the range between “moderate”
and “substantial”. The reference subcorpus for this paper consists of a sample containing
580 sentences with the verb dar give’ and 8 stylistic or aspectual variants2.

The evaluation of the new module of the Portuguese grammar for XIP parser in
STRING was carried out in two stages: (i) a preliminary evaluation took as reference the

2The reference corpus is available at https://sites.google.com/site/amandaprassi/recursos

Integrating support verb constructions into a parser

59



580 manually annotated sentences, considering the majority agreement among the anno-
tators; (ii) the second evaluation was carried out with the same sample of sentences but
after error analysis was performed. This analysis made possible to spot some inconsisten-
cies in the annotation as well as some few errors in the Lexicon-Grammar. For example,
some diminutive forms of -da ‘-ed’ ending nouns (e.g. arrumadinha ‘little tidy-ed up’)
had not been adequately analyzed by STRING and hence were not associated with its
lemma (arrumada ‘tidy-ed up’). This enabled us to improve the STRING lexicon. On the
other hand, the inconsistent annotation of some SVC as idioms or some linking operator
verbs as support verbs led us to refine the criteria for a more precise distinction between
those categories. For lack of space, a fully detailed error analysis can not be presented
here. The new (corrected) reference was then compared with STRING’s new results in a
second evaluation run. Results from both runs are compared in Table 1, using standard
evaluation metrics (Precision, Recall, Accuracy and F-Measure). In this table, TP=true
positives, FP=false-positives, FN=false-negatives and TN=true-negatives.

TP FP FN TN Precision Recall Accuracy F-Measure
First evaluation 350 91 114 25 79% 75% 65% 77%
Second evaluation 325 56 84 115 85% 79% 76% 82%

Tabela 1. First and second evaluations of STRING’s performance

Comparing the first and second evaluation runs, one can see that the system’s ove-
rall performance shows a small improvement. The most important change is the number
of true-negative cases (TN), due mostly to a more precise definition and reclassification
of idioms (e.g. dar nome ‘give name to’, dar a volta por cima ‘turn things around’) or the
verb ter ‘have’ as a linking Vop (e.g. Eu tenho uma informação para (dar para) você ‘I
have an information to (give to) you’). Some errors derive from previous modules of the
processing chain, for example errors in POS-tagging and disambiguation, in the chunking
or in the syntactic parsing. Other errors came from the ambiguity between standard and
converse constructions, especially when involving the verb ter ‘have’[Rassi et al. 2014a].

5. Final remarks and future work
This paper reported preliminary experiments in integrating into the STRING NLP sys-
tem, more precisely into the rule-based parser XIP, a set of about 1,000 SVC, involving
the elementary support verb dar ‘give’ and its variants, from European and Brazilian Por-
tuguese. The results are promising and suggest that a rule-based approach is suitable for
the analysis of support verb constructions. Furthermore, the methodology presented in
this paper proved that it is possible to parse the (sometimes complex) syntactic structure
that SVC present, so as to be able to use this for further NLP processing (e.g. semantic
role labeling, anaphora resolution).

In the near future, we intend to integrate into STRING the already available
Lexicon-Grammar matrices of the remaining predicative nouns, with the support verbs
estar Prep ‘be Prep’, ser de ‘be of’, fazer ‘make/do’ and ter ‘have’, and evaluate the
system’s performance, by using the full corpus of 2,646 manually annotated sentences.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by national funds through Portuguese Fundação para a Ciência e a Tec-
nologia (ref. UID/CEC/50021/2013), and Brazilian CAPES (ref. BEX 12751/13-8).

Integrating support verb constructions into a parser

60



Referências
Baptista, J. (1997). Sermão, tareia e facada: uma classificação das expressões conversas dar-levar. Se-

minários de Linguı́stica 1, pages 5–37.

Calzolari, N., Fillmore, C. J., Grishman, R., Ide, N., Lenci, A., Macleod, C., and Zampolli, A. (2002).
Towards best practices for Multiword Expressions in Computational Lexicons. In Proceedings of
LREC’02, pages 1934–1940, Las Palmas, Spain.

de Cruys, T. V. and Moirón, B. V. (2007). Semantics-based Multiword Expression extraction. In Procee-
dings of MWE’07, pages 25–32, Morristown, NJ, USA. ACL.

Diab, M. and Bhutada, P. (2009). Verb Noun Construction MWE Token Supervised Classification. In
Proceedings of the MWE’09, pages 17–22, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. ACL.

Fazly, A. and Stevenson, S. (2007). Distinguishing Subtypes of Multiword Expressions Using
Linguistically-Motivated Statistical Measures. In Proceedings of MWE’07, pages 9–16, Prague, Czech
Republic. ACL.

Gross, G. (1989). Les construction converses du français. Droz, Genève.

Gross, M. (1981). Les bases empiriques de la notion de prédicat sémantique. Langages, (63):7–52.

Gurrutxaga, A. and Alegria, I. (2011). Automatic extraction of NV Expressions in Basque: Basic Issues on
Cooccurrence Techniques. In Proceedings of MWE’11, pages 2–7, Portland, Oregon, USA. ACL.

Mamede, N., Baptista, J., Cabarrão, V., and Diniz, C. (2012). STRING: An hybrid statistical and rule-
based Natural Language Processing chain for Portuguese. In International Conference on Computational
Processing of Portuguese (PROPOR 2012), volume Demo Session, Coimbra, Portugal.

Mel’cuk, I. (1997). Vers une linguistique Sens-Texte. Collège de France, Paris.

Mokhtar, S. A., Chanod, J.-P., and Roux, C. (2002). Robustness beyond shalowness: incremental depen-
dency parsing. Natural Language Engineering, pages 121–144.

Rassi, A., Baptista, C. S.-T. A. J., Mamede, N., and Vale, O. (2014a). The fuzzy boundaries of operator verb
and support verb constructions with dar ‘give’ and ter ‘have’ in Brazilian Portuguese. In Proceedings
of Workshop on Lexical and Grammatical Resources for Language Processing, pages 92–101, Dublin,
Ireland. COLING 2014.

Rassi, A., Perussi, N., Baptista, J., and Vale, O. (2014b). Estudo contrastivo sobre as construções conversas
em PB e PE. In Anais do Congresso de Estudos do Léxico, volume 1, Araraquara, SP, Brasil. UNESP.

Rassi, A. P., Baptista, J., and Vale, O. A. (2015). Um corpus anotado de construções com verbo-suporte em
Português. Gragoatá, 38(1):207–230.

Sag, I. A., Baldwin, T., Bond, F., Copestake, A., and Flickinger, D. (2002). Multiword Expressions: A
Pain in the Neck for NLP. In Gelbukh, A., editor, Proceedings of CICLing, pages 1–15, Mexico City,
Mexico.

Stevenson, S., Fazly, A., and North, R. (2004). Statistical Measures of the Semi-Productivity of Light Verb
Constructions. In Proceedings of MWE’04, pages 1–8, Barcelona, Spain. ACL.

Tan, Y. F., Kan, M.-Y., and Cui, H. (2006). Extending corpus-based identification of light verb constructions
using a supervised learning framework. In Proceedings of MWE’06, pages 49–56, Trento, Italy. ACL.

Tu, Y. and Roth, D. (2011). Learning English Light Verb Constructions: Contextual or Statistics. In
Proceedings of MWE’11, pages 31–39, Portland, Oregon, USA. ACL.

Wang, Y. and Ikeda, T. (2008). Translation of the Light Verb Constructions in Japanese-Chinese Machine
Translation. Advances in Natural Language Processing and Applications, 33:139–150.

Integrating support verb constructions into a parser

61


