



















































An agent-based model of a historical word order change


Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Computational Language Learning, pages 22–27,
Lisbon, Portugal, 18 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

An agent-based model of a historical word order change

Jelke Bloem Arjen Versloot

Amsterdam Center for Language and Communication
University of Amsterdam

1012 VB Amsterdam, Netherlands
{j.bloem, a.p.versloot, f.p.weerman}@uva.nl

Fred Weerman

Abstract

We aim to demonstrate that agent-based
models can be a useful tool for historical
linguists, by modeling the historical devel-
opment of verbal cluster word order in Ger-
manic languages. Our results show that
the current order in German may have de-
veloped due to increased use of subordi-
nate clauses, while the English order is pre-
dicted to be influenced by the grammatical-
ization of the verb to have. The methodol-
ogy we use makes few assumptions, mak-
ing it broadly applicable to other phenom-
ena of language change.

1 Introduction

Agent-based modeling is a method for simulating
the behaviour of individual agents (i.e. a speaker
of a language) in a larger community of agents (i.e.
all speakers of the language). While agent-based
models have been successfully used as tools in
the field of evolutionary linguistics to study how
linguistic structures may have emerged, they have
not yet spread to the field of historical linguistics,
which is more interested in describing and mod-
eling change in existing natural languages. Both
fields are concerned with changing language mod-
els, although the starting assumptions and context
are different. In historical linguistics there is data
available about structures in earlier and more mod-
ern states of the language, while in evolutionary
linguistics the structures have to emerge from the
implemented mechanisms. Nevertheless, the mech-
anisms described, such as grammaticalization, are
often similar and lend themselves to study using
similar methodology.

In the field of evolutionary linguistics, agent-
based models are used to model language as a com-
plex dynamic system, whose structure depends on
the interactions of its speakers. An early overview

of such work is provided by Steels (1997), who
emphasizes the possibilities of modeling various
aspects of language in this way. Among this work
is a study by Briscoe (1997) on the default word
order of languages, though it assumes a framework
of universal grammar in which learning consists
of setting parameters. Subsequent work included
the application of this method to specific domains
of linguistics, such as the emergence of vowel
systems (De Boer, 2000) and the development of
agent-based models specific to language, such as
the iterated learning model of Kirby and Hurford
(2002). Language change was often only discussed
in terms of the emergence of new structures, and
lacked comparisons to historical data (de Boer
and Zuidema, 2009), or used artificial languages,
as noted by Choudhury et al. (2007), whose own
work is an exception. A few other studies that re-
late to historical linguistics can be found. Daland
et al. (2007) and Van Trijp (2012) model some
apparent idiosyncrasies in inflectional paradigms
of natural languages, Daland et al. (2007) doing
so with a model that includes social structure,
and Van Trijp (2012) using the Fluid Construc-
tion Grammar framework. A further example is
Landsbergen et al. (2010)’s study that models some
mechanisms of language change from the perspec-
tive of cultural evolution. Overall, agent-based lan-
guage studies informed by historical data are not
widespread, and often involve many assumptions
or dependence on a framework. A recent exception
to this is a study by Pijpops and Beuls (2015) on
Dutch regular and irregular verbs.

Our emphasis in this work is on creating an
agent-based model that makes minimal assump-
tions, in order for the presented methodology to
be useful for any theory of language that allows for
functionalism in language change. Our case study,
the historical development of verbal cluster order
in Germanic languages, involves a word order vari-
ation in which multiple constructions are grammat-

22



ical. This kind of phenomenon has not been inves-
tigated with an agent-based model before. Besides
syntactic analyses (Evers, 1975), recent work on
verb clusters has also discussed non-syntactic fac-
tors influencing word order, using frequency-based
methods (De Sutter, 2005; Arfs, 2007; Bloem et al.,
2014) and historical data (Coussé, 2008). We fol-
low up on this line of work with our agent-based
model, in which a functional bias induces language
change. Using this model, we will show how the
current orders of verb clusters in modern West-
Germanic languages might have developed and di-
verged from the proto-Germanic cluster orders.

In the next section, we briefly outline the phe-
nomenon of verbal cluster order variation. We then
describe the methodology of the simulation and its
initial state, followed by the results and a discus-
sion of those results

2 Verbal clusters

Many verbal cluster word orders are attested in
different Germanic languages (Wurmbrand, 2006).
We will illustrate this with a Dutch example, a lan-
guage where the ordering of these verbs is rela-
tively free. In two-verb clusters, the finite verb can
be positioned before or after the infinitive:

(1) Ik
I

denk
think

dat
that

ik
I

het
it

heb
have

begrepen.
understood

‘I think that I have understood it’

(2) Ik
I

denk
think

dat
that

ik
I

het
it

begrepen
understood

heb.
have

‘I think that I have understood it’

In the literature, construction 1 is called the 1-2
order (ascending order or red order), and construc-
tion 2 is called the 2-1 order (descending order
or green order). Both orders are grammatical in
Dutch, and express the same meaning, though there
are differences in usage. German and Frisian only
allow order (2) for two-verb clusters, while English
and Scandinavian languages only allow order (1)
1. Despite these differences, all of these languages
evolved from Proto-West-Germanic.

This raises the question of why some of the West
Germanic languages ended up with verbal clusters
in 2-1 order, and others with the 1-2 order. To study
this, we need to select some factors that may have

1English and Scandinavian verb groups are generally not
called verb clusters in the literature because they can be in-
terrupted by nonverbal material, but for the purposes of this
study the distinction is not important.

% 1-2 mod+inf have+PP cop+PP
main 97% 50% 10%
sub 80% 50% 5%

Table 1: Reconstructed proto-Germanic probabili-
ties for the 1-2 order.

influenced the change, and the best place to look
for this is the Dutch language, in which both orders
are possible. Language variation often indicates
language change, with the variation being a state of
transition from one structure to another, in which
both structures can be used. Factors that correlate
with different word order preferences in modern
Dutch may therefore be involved in the change as
well.

The order variation in Dutch has been claimed
to be an instance of language change in progress.
In the 15th century, the 2-1 order was used almost
exclusively. After this, the 1-2 order starts appear-
ing in texts, and becomes increasingly frequent,
moving towards the current state of the language
(Coussé, 2008). This was not the first time the 1-2
order had been attested though, it also appears in
some of the oldest Dutch texts.

3 Methodology

Our simulation consists of a group of agents that
can function as speakers and recipients of verbal
cluster utterances. Each agent has its own instance
of a probabilistic language model that stores and
produces such utterances. We will first describe the
language model and the linguistic features of ver-
bal clusters that it stores, and then we will explain
what happens when the simulation is ran and the
agents interact.

To find linguistic features that may be associated
more with one order than with the other, we rely on
synchronic corpus studies of Dutch, the language
in which both orders are possible. Associations
have been found with a variety of factors, includ-
ing contextual factors such as regional differences
between speakers (Coussé et al., 2008). When cre-
ating a language model for an agent, we are only
interested in factors that may cause a particular
speaker (or agent) to choose a particular word or-
der. A recent study found that verbal cluster order
variation correlates with both constructional fac-
tors (the use of a particular linguistic form) and pro-
cessing factors (such as sentence length) (Bloem
et al., 2014). We will examine only the construc-

23



tional factors, because those are likely to be stored
in the lexicon with their own associated word order
preferences. The most important of these are the
main clause / subordinate clause distinction (there
are more 2-1 orders in main clauses), and the type
of auxiliary verb (there are more 2-1 orders when a
copula verb is used in a cluster). These two factors
not only have different order preferences in modern
Dutch, but have also undergone historical changes
that may have triggered our word order change:
subordinate clauses have become more prevalent,
and one type of auxiliary verb, to have, grammat-
icalized during the time period we are interested
in.

We will assume that the two factors, clause type
and auxiliary type, are stored as features, each with
their own word order preferences. This way of stor-
ing features is based on the bidirectional model in
Versloot (2008), though our models learn by inter-
acting rather than iterating.

Table 1 shows all of the possible combinations
of feature values a verbal cluster can have in our
model. Our model assumes two clause types (main
and subordinate) and three different types of auxil-
iary verbs, reflecting the historical sources of verb
clusters:

1. Clause type feature

(a) Main clause context
(b) Subordinate clause context

2. Auxiliary type feature

(a) modal + infinitive: the origin of verb
clusters in Germanic

(b) ‘to have’ + participial main verb (PP):
arose only later in history to extend the
possibilities of expressing temporal and
aspectual features

(c) copula + PP: originally a passive, pred-
icative, construction — not purely verbal,
rather adjectival.

A cluster can have either of two word orders: the
1-2 and the 2-1 order.

The simulation consists of a language agents,
each starting out with n exemplars of verbal clus-
ters, stored in the agent’s language model. An
agent’s language model contains the type of infor-
mation shown in Table 1: for each possible combi-
nation of feature values, exemplars are stored. In
addition to their features they have the property of

being either in the 2-1 or 1-2 order (from which
a percentage can be calculated, as in the table).
The agents’ language models do not contain any
other structures. We did not use an existing frame-
work in order to have as few parameters as possible.
The simulation was implemented in the Python pro-
gramming language.

When the model is run, each run consists of
a ∗ n ∗ i interactions. In an interaction i, a random
agent is picked as the speaker and another random
agent as the recipient. The speaker agent generates
a verbal cluster based on its language model,
and the recipient agent stores it as an exemplar.
When a speaker agent generates a verbal cluster,
it picks the features of a random exemplar from
its language model, and then assigns word order
based on the word order probabilities of both
of its features individually. A 1-2 (ascending)
realization of a modal subordinate clause cluster
may be produced according to the following:

P (asc|x) = P (asc|xsub) + P (asc|xmodinf ) (1)
where x is a set of feature values. P (asc|xsub)
is the probability of a subordinate clause be-
ing in 1-2 order, and P (asc|xmodinf ) for the
modal+infinitive construction type. These proba-
bilities are calculated from the stored frequency of
the features in 1-2 contexts:

P (asc|xsub) = F (sub, asc)
F (sub)

(2)

So, the probability of a modal subordinate clause
cluster being expressed in the 1-2 order depends
on how many exemplars the agent has stored in
which a subordinate clause cluster was in the 1-
2 order (relative to 2-1), as well as exemplars in
which a modal cluster was in the 1-2 order (rela-
tive to 2-1). Example (3) is an example of a modal
subordinate clause cluster in 1-2 order, though our
language model is more abstract and does not use
actual words, only the features.

(3) Ik
I

denk
think

dat
that

ik
I

het
it

wil
want

horen
hear

‘I think that I want to hear it’

After producing this exemplar, the agent nor-
mally deletes it from its own storage, because we
do not want the relative frequencies of the various
feature values (i.e. the number of copular verbs)
to vary randomly. We are only interested in the
word order. Furthermore, this avoids an endless

24



growth of the agents’ language models. Only when
a growth factor applies, this deletion does not hap-
pen. The simulation includes two growth factors
g have and g sub to simulate two relevant histor-
ical changes: the grammaticalization of ‘to have’
as an auxiliary verb, and an increase in the use
of subordinate clauses. When these growth factors
are set to 1, after every a interactions, an exemplar
with the relevant feature is kept where it otherwise
would have been deleted from the language model.
A growth factor of 2 doubles the rate. g have ap-
plies while there are fewer have-clusters than clus-
ters of either of the other types, and g sub while
there are fewer subordinate clause clusters than
main clause clusters.

When an agent is the recipient of a verbal cluster
exemplar, it simply stores it in its language model,
including the word order. So, when example (3) is
perceived, the 1-2 order production probability of
subordinate clause clusters and that of modal clus-
ters will go up (separately) in the language model
of the recipient agent. A critical learning bias is
simulated here: the tendency to decompose an ut-
terance into features and storing information about
the features, rather than storing it as a whole. This
is the only assumption we make about the language
faculty in this model, and it is a functional one. It
simulates the fact that people do not perfectly copy
a language from each other.

We initialize each experiment with 30 agents
(a = 30), and i = 5000 to simulate a long time
course in which simulations will almost always sta-
bilize in the end. With fewer agents, some agents
lose all of their exemplars during the simulation.
Each agent starts with a language model of 73 ex-
emplars (n = 73) that follows frequency patterns
as reconstructed for 6th century Germanic, based
on a comparison of verb cluster frequencies in Old
English, Old High German and Old Frisian texts.
These figures are also summarized in table 1. For
any unattested combination of features and word
order a single exemplar is included to simulate
noise.

4 Results

Figures (a) and (b) show example results of the
agent-based model simulation, with different pa-
rameter settings. The graphs show the results of 50
different simulation runs overlaid, each run being
a possible language. The X-axis represents time
(in number of interactions) and the Y-axis repre-

sents the proportion of 1-2 orders, a value between
0 and 1. The proportions are calculated over all
of the agents in the simulation. When the simula-
tion is ran for long enough, it will always stabilize
into a situation where a language either has only
1-2 or only 2-1 orders, though some feature com-
binations stabilize faster than others. Due to space
constraints, we only show results for subordinate
clause clusters (with any auxiliary type), but the
general patterns are similar for all of the features,
though some change sooner than others. We can
observe that the model correctly predicts both lan-
guages with dominant 1-2 orders such as English,
and dominant 2-1 orders as in German.

However, a model that predicts everything is not
very interesting. We would like to know when a
language in the model becomes English-like or
German-like. We can do this by changing the
growth factors: the rise of subordinate clauses
(g sub) and of to have (g have). Figure (a) shows
simulations in which to have grammaticalizes
faster, while in Figure (b), subordinate clauses
catch on more quickly. A clear difference can be
observed — Figure (a) shows more languages gain-
ing English-like 1-2 orders (35% 1-2, 56% 2-1 and
the rest had not stabilized yet), while Figure (b)
shows more German-like 2-1 orders (92% 2-1, 7%
1-2). Different speeds of grammaticalization of to
have and growth of subordinate clauses result in
different dominant word orders.

5 Discussion

With this study, we hope to have shown that an
agent-based model with just a single learning bias
can be used to gain insight into processes of change
in natural languages, and generate new hypothe-
ses. Specifically, the model makes two predictions:
that to have grammaticalized faster in English, and
that subordinate clauses gained use more quickly in
German. These predictions can be tested using his-
torical corpora of these languages in future work.

In the model, the 2-1 order is supported by sub-
ordinate clauses. Due to verb-second (V2) move-
ment in these languages, the finite verb (the 1) pre-
cedes the other verb in main clauses (the 2). This
1-2 order differentiates main clauses from subor-
dinate clauses, motivating the preservation of a 2-
1 order in the subordinate clauses. Increased use
of subordinate clauses may then have supported
the 2-1 order as the default order. However, if to
have grammaticalizes earlier, the 1-2 order is sup-

25



(a) 50 runs with faster growth of have+pp constructions
(g have = 2, g sub = 1)

(b) 50 runs with faster growth of subordinate clauses (g have =
1, g sub = 2)

ported. This new grammatical verb becomes asso-
ciated with the most prevalent word order at the
time, and pushes the language further in the direc-
tion of that word order. In the beginning this is
the 1-2 order, more associated with main clauses
in proto-West-Germanic due to V2 movement, but
later on the 2-1 order is more prevalent, due to its
association with subordinate clauses.

Our model cannot yet account for the current
state of the Dutch language, which first moved to-
wards mainly 2-1 orders like German, and then
shifted towards 1-2 orders again (Coussé, 2008),
a change that is still in progress. There is evidence
that the 1-2 order has become the default order
(Meyer and Weerman, submitted), and this second
change was likely caused by a factor outside the
scope of our model, such as language contact.

Nevertheless, we believe that agent-based mod-
elling can be a useful tool for historical linguists,
particularly those working with frequency-based
explanations. The present work and the study of
Pijpops and Beuls (2015) show that testing of dif-
ferent mechanisms and parameters in a simulation,
informed by historical data, can provide additional
evidence for theories on what may or may not have
been possible in a case of language change, given
the assumptions built into the model. We believe it
is particularly interesting to test how few assump-
tions are necessary to explain the observed histori-
cal data, which previous work has not focused on.

We would like to emphasize that this method
is applicable to other cases of language change
in which the use of structures changed over time.
Any processes of historical change that can be cap-
tured in terms of frequencies and features may be

used as factors to be investigated, and the fact that
the model makes few assumptions also means that
no particular social or cultural phenomena need
to have happened for the model to be applicable.
However, these simplifications also limit the ex-
tend of what can be modeled. In future work, con-
tact phenomena could be simulated by including
non-learning agents, or influxes of agents with dif-
ferent language models. Subsequent work on other
cases of historical change may need to include such
additional assumptions, if they are known to have
been historically relevant.

References

Mona Arfs. Rood of groen? De interne woord-
volgorde in tweeledige werkwoordelijke eind-
groepen met een voltooid deelwoord en een hulp-
werkwoord in bijzinnen. Göteborg University,
2007.

Jelke Bloem, Arjen Versloot, and Fred Weer-
man. Applying automatically parsed cor-
pora to the study of language variation. In
Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics: Technical Papers, pages 1974–1984,
Dublin, Ireland, August 2014. Dublin City Uni-
versity and Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. URL http://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/C14-1186.

Ted Briscoe. Co-evolution of language and of the
language acquisition device. In Proceedings of
the eighth conference on European chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,

26



pages 418–427. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 1997.

Monojit Choudhury, Vaibhav Jalan, Sudeshna
Sarkar, and Anupam Basu. Evolution, optimiza-
tion, and language change: The case of bengali
verb inflections. In Proceedings of Ninth Meet-
ing of the ACL Special Interest Group in Compu-
tational Morphology and Phonology, pages 65–
74. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2007.

Evie Coussé. Motivaties voor volgordevariatie.
Een diachrone studie van werkwoordvolgorde
in het Nederlands. Universiteit Gent, 2008.

Evie Coussé, Mona Arfs, and Gert De Sutter. Vari-
abele werkwoordsvolgorde in de Nederlandse
werkwoordelijke eindgroep. Een taalgebruiks-
gebaseerd perspectief op de synchronie en di-
achronie van de zgn. rode en groene woordvol-
gorde. Taal aan den lijve. Het gebruik van cor-
pora in taalkundig onderzoek en taalonderwijs,
pages 29–47, 2008.

Robert Daland, Andrea D Sims, and Janet Pierre-
humbert. Much ado about nothing: A social net-
work model of russian paradigmatic gaps. In AN-
NUAL MEETING-ASSOCIATION FOR COM-
PUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS, volume 45, page
936. Citeseer, 2007.

Bart De Boer. Self-organization in vowel systems.
Journal of phonetics, 28(4):441–465, 2000.

Bart de Boer and Willem Zuidema. Models of lan-
guage evolution: Does the math add up. ILLC
Preprint Series PP-2009-49, University of Ams-
terdam, 2009.

Gert De Sutter. Rood, groen, corpus! Een taal-
gebruiksgebaseerde analyse van woordvolgo-
rdevariatie in tweeledige werkwoordelijke eind-
groepen. University of Leuven: PhD thesis,
2005.

Arnold Evers. The transformational cycle in Dutch
and German, volume 75. Indiana University Lin-
guistics Club Bloomington, 1975.

Simon Kirby and James R Hurford. The emer-
gence of linguistic structure: An overview of
the iterated learning model. In Simulating the
evolution of language, pages 121–147. Springer,
2002.

Frank Landsbergen, Robert Lachlan, Carel ten
Cate, and Arie Verhagen. A cultural evolution-

ary model of patterns in semantic change. Lin-
guistics, 48(2):363–390, 2010.

Caitlin Meyer and Fred Weerman. Cracking the
cluster: The acquisition of verb raising in Dutch.
Manuscript in preparation, submitted.

Dirk Pijpops and Katrien Beuls. Strong ”island
of resilience” in the weak flood. Dutch strate-
gies for past tense formation implemented in
an agent-based model. Presented at Computa-
tional Linguistics in the Netherlands (CLIN) 25,
Antwerp, 2015.

Luc Steels. The synthetic modeling of language
origins. Evolution of communication, 1(1):1–34,
1997.

Remi Van Trijp. Self-assessing agents for explain-
ing language change: A case study in german.
In ECAI, pages 798–803, 2012.

Arjen Pieter Versloot. Mechanisms of language
change: vowel reduction in 15th century West
Frisian. 2008.

Susi Wurmbrand. Verb clusters, verb raising, and
restructuring. The Blackwell companion to syn-
tax, pages 229–343, 2006.

27


