
























 

The ACCEPT Academic Portal: Bringing Together Pre-editing,    
MT and Post-editing into a Learning Environment 

Pierrette Bouillon, Johanna Gerlach, Asheesh Gulati, Victoria Porro, Violeta Seretan    
Université de Genève FTI/TIM, accept@unige.ch   

www.accept-portal.unige.ch 
 

Description 
The ACCEPT Academic Portal is a user-centred online platform specifically designed to offer 
a complete machine translation workflow including pre-editing and post-editing steps for 
teaching purposes. The platform leverages technology developed in the ACCEPT1 European 
Project (2012-2014) devoted to improving the translatability of user-generated content. Origi-
nally available as a series of plug-ins and demonstrators on the ACCEPT portal2, the various 
software components have been interconnected into an easy-to-use platform reproducing all 
phases of a real MT workflow. The platform provides a unique environment to study the inter-
action between MT-related processes and to assess the contribution of new technologies to 
translation. It will be useful for research and teaching purposes alike. 

The platform allows a user to select existing data (or supply their own data, in plain text for-
mat) and to subject it to a sequence of processes, until the desired output is reached. Source 
and target content reformulation can be performed automatically or interactively, the interface 
allowing experimentation with specific editing rules, visual comparison, on-the-fly translation, 
XLIFF-based recording of post-editing actions, and one-click export of results. The steps can 
be executed in a flexible manner according to the desired scenario; users may, for instance, 
upload their own machine-translated texts and perform post-editing only. Users can stop at 
any step in the workflow and download their results. In-context documentation (tool tips, user 
guide) is available at all steps. The platform has a minimalistic app-like look-and-feel for op-
timised user experience. It is designed for the non-expert, and can therefore bring the MT  
benefits to a larger community of users.  

The platform’s main modules and functionalities are briefly described below. 

- Start page: Selection of data (existing; own data entered in text area; own data uploaded as 
text file); selection of language pairs (en–fr, fr–en and en–de are currently supported);   
selection of processing scenario (different combinations of pre-editing, MT and 
post-editing). 

- Pre-editing module: Automatic or interactive checking using the ACCEPT rules devel-
oped for user-generated content using the Acrolinx technology (www.acrolinx.com). 

- MT module: Translation using the ACCEPT phrase-based Moses system adapted to      
user-generated content. 

- Post-editing module: Free post-editing; interactive checking using ACCEPT post-editing 
rules for user-generated content; final check with pre-editing rules; XLIFF report. 

- Statistics page: Final summary; editing statistics; XLIFF-based report (keystrokes, time); 
results download.  

The ACCEPT Academic Portal can be freely accessed at: www.accept-portal.unige.ch. 

                                                           
1ACCEPT: Automated Community Content Editing PorTal, FP7 grant agreement 288769 (www.accept-
project.eu; accessed: March, 2015). 
2 www.accept-portal.com (Accessed: March, 2015). 

212


