
























Identifying main obstacles for statistical machine translation of
morphologically rich South Slavic languages

Maja Popović
DFKI – Language Technology Lab

Berlin, Germany
maja.popovic@dfki.de

Mihael Arčan
Insight Centre for Data Analytics

National University of Galway, Ireland
mihael.arcan@insight-centre.org

Abstract

The best way to improve a statistical ma-
chine translation system is to identify con-
crete problems causing translation errors
and address them. Many of these prob-
lems are related to the characteristics of
the involved languages and differences be-
tween them. This work explores the main
obstacles for statistical machine transla-
tion systems involving two morphologi-
cally rich and under-resourced languages,
namely Serbian and Slovenian. Systems
are trained for translations from and into
English and German using parallel texts
from different domains, including both
written and spoken language. It is shown
that for all translation directions structural
properties concerning multi-noun colloca-
tions and exact phrase boundaries are the
most difficult for the systems, followed by
negation, preposition and local word order
differences. For translation into English
and German, articles and pronouns are the
most problematic, as well as disambigua-
tion of certain frequent functional words.
For translation into Serbian and Slovenian,
cases and verb inflections are most diffi-
cult. In addition, local word order involv-
ing verbs is often incorrect and verb parts
are often missing, especially when trans-
lating from German.

1 Introduction

The statistical approach to machine translation
(SMT), in particular phrase-based SMT, has be-

c� 2015 The authors. This article is licensed under a Creative
Commons 3.0 licence, no derivative works, attribution, CC-
BY-ND.

come widely used in the last years: open source
tools such as Moses (Koehn et al., 2007) have
made it possible to build translation systems for
any language pair, domain or text type within days.
Despite the fact that for certain language pairs, e.g.
English-French, high quality SMT systems have
been developed, a large number of languages and
language pairs have not been (systematically) in-
vestigated. The largest study about European lan-
guages in the Digital Age, the META-NET Lan-
guage White Paper Series1 in year 2012 showed
that only English has good machine translation
support, followed by moderately supported French
and Spanish. More languages are only fragmen-
tary supported (such as German), whereby the ma-
jority of languages are weakly supported. Many
of those languages are also morphologically rich,
which makes the SMT task more complex, espe-
cially if they are the target language. A large part
of weakly supported languages consists of Slavic
languages, where both Serbian and Slovenian be-
long. Both languages are part of to the South
Slavic language branch, Slovenian2 being the third
official South Slavic language in the EU and Ser-
bian3 is the official language of a candidate mem-
ber state. For all these reasons, a systematic inves-
tigation of SMT systems involving these two lan-
guages and defining the most important errors and
problems can be very very beneficial for further
studies.

In the last decade, several SMT systems have
been built for various South Slavic languages and
English, and for some systems certain morpho-
syntactic transformations have been applied more

1http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/
key-results-and-cross-language-comparison
2together with Croatian and Bulgarian
3together with Bosnian and Montenegrin

97



or less successfully. However, all the experiments
are rather scattered and no systematic or focused
research has been carried out in order to define ac-
tual translation errors as well as their causes.

This paper reports results of an extensive er-
ror analysis for four language pairs: Serbian and
Slovenian with English as well as with German,
which is also a challenging language – complex
(both as a source and as a target language) and
still not widely supported. SMT systems have
been built for all translation directions using pub-
licly available parallel texts originating from sev-
eral different domains including both written and
spoken language.

2 Related work

One of the first publications dealing with SMT sys-
tems for Serbian-English (Popović et al., 2005)
and Slovenian-English (Sepesy Maučec et al.,
2006) are reporting first results using small bilin-
gual corpora. Improvements for translation into
English are also reported by reducing morpho-
syntactic information in the morphologically rich
source language. Using morpho-syntactic knowl-
edge for the Slovenian-English language pair was
shown to be useful for both translation directions
in (Žganec Gros and Gruden, 2007). However, no
analysis of results has been carried out in terms
of what were actual problems caused by the rich
morphology and which of those were solved by the
morphological preprocessing.

Through the transLectures project,4 the
Slovenian-English language pair became available
in the 2013 evaluation campaign of IWSLT.5 They
report the BLEU scores of TED talks translated by
several systems, however a deeper error analysis
is missing (Cettolo et al., 2013).

Recent work in SMT also deals with the Croat-
ian language, which is very closely related to Ser-
bian. First results for Croatian-English are re-
ported in (Ljubešić et al., 2010) on a small weather
forecast corpus, and an SMT system for the tourist
domain is presented in (Toral et al., 2014). Fur-
thermore, SMT systems for both Serbian and Croa-
tian are described in (Popović and Ljubešić, 2014),
however only translation errors caused by lan-
guage mixing are analysed, not the problems re-
lated to the languages themselves.

4https://www.translectures.eu/
5International Workshop on Spoken Language Translation,
http://workshop2013.iwslt.org/

Different SMT systems for subtitles were devel-
oped in the framework of the SUMAT project,6

including Serbian and Slovenian (Etchegoyhen et
al., 2014). However, only the translations be-
tween them have been carried out as an example
of closely related and highly inflected languages.

3 Language characteristics

Serbian (referred to as “sr”) and Slovenian (“sl”),
as Slavic languages, have quite free word order and
are highly inflected. The inflectional morphology
is very rich for all word classes. There are six
distinct cases affecting not only common nouns,
but also proper nouns as well as pronouns, adjec-
tives and some numbers. Some nouns and adjec-
tives have two distinct plural forms depending on
the number (less than five or not). There are also
three genders for the nouns, pronouns, adjectives
and some numbers leading to differences between
the cases and also between the verb participles for
past tense and passive voice.

As for verbs, person and many tenses are ex-
pressed by the suffix, and, similarly to Spanish and
Italian, the subject pronoun (e.g. I, we, it) is of-
ten omitted. In addition, negation of three quite
important verbs, “biti (sr/sl)” (to be), “imati (sr) /
imeti (sl)” (to have) and “hteti (sr) / hoteti (sl)” (to
want), is formed by adding the negative particle
to the verb as a prefix. In addition, there are two
verb aspects, namely many verbs have perfective
and imperfective form(s) depending on the dura-
tion of the described action. These forms are either
different although very similar or are distinguished
only by prefix.

As for syntax, both languages have a quite free
word order, and there are no articles, neither indef-
inite nor definite.

Although the two languages share a large degree
of morpho-syntactic properties and mutual intel-
ligibility, a speaker of one language might have
difficulties with the other. The language differ-
ences are both lexical (including a number of false
friends) as well as grammatical (such as local word
order, verb mood and/or tense formation, question
structure, dual in Slovenian, usage of some cases).

4 SMT systems

In order to systematically explore SMT issues re-
lated to the targeted languages, five different do-
mains were used in total. However, not all do-
6http://www.sumat-project.eu

98



(a) number of sentences

# of Sentences sl-en sl-de sr-en sr-de
DGT 3.2M 3M / /
Europarl 600k 500k / /
EMEA 1M 1M / /
OpenSubtitles 1.8M 1.8M 1.8M 1.8M
SEtimes / / 200k /

(b) average sentence length

Avg. Sent. Length sl sr en de
DGT 16.0 / 17.3 16.6
Europarl 23.4 / 27.0 25.4
EMEA 12.7 / 12.3 11.8
OpenSubtitles 7.7 7.6 9.2 8.9
SEtimes / 22.4 23.8 /

Table 1: Corpora characteristics.

mains were used for all language pairs due to
unavailability. It should be noted that accord-
ing to the META-NET White Papers, both lan-
guages have minimal support, with only fragmen-
tary text and speech resources. For the Slovenian-
English and Slovenian-German language pairs,
four domains were investigated: DGT transla-
tion memories provided by the JRC (Steinberger
et al., 2012), Europarl (Koehn, 2005), Euro-
pean Medicines Agency corpus (EMEA) in the
pharmaceutical domain, as well as the Open-
Subtitles7 corpus. All the corpora are down-
loaded from the OPUS web site8 (Tiedemann,
2012). For the Serbian language, only two do-
mains were available: the enhanced version of
the SEtimes corpus9 (Tyers and Alperen, 2010)
containing “news and views from South-East Eu-
rope” for Serbian-English, and OpenSubtitles for
the Serbian-English and Serbian-German language
pairs. It should be noted that all the corpora
contain written texts except OpenSubtitles, which
contains transcriptions and translations of spoken
language thus being slightly peculiar for machine
translation. On the other hand, this is the only cor-
pus containing all language pairs of interest.

Table 1 shows the amount of parallel sentences
for each language pair and domain (a) as well as
the average sentence length for each language and
domain (b). For each domain, a separate system
has been trained and tuned on an unseen portion of
in-domain data. Since the sentences in OpenSubti-
tles are significantly shorter than in other texts, the
tuning and test sets for this domain contain 3000
sentences whereas all other sets contain 1000 sen-
tences. Another remark regarding the OpenSubti-
tles corpus is that we trained our systems only on
those sentence pairs, which were available in En-

7http://www.opensubtitles.org/
8http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/
9http://nlp.ffzg.hr/resources/corpora/
setimes/

glish as well as in German in order to have a com-
pletely same condition for all systems.

All systems have been trained using phrase-
based Moses (Koehn et al., 2007), where the word
alignments were build with GIZA++ (Och and
Ney, 2003). The 5-gram language model was build
with the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002).

5 Evaluation and error analysis

The evaluation has been carried out in three steps:
first, the BLEU scores were calculated for each of
the systems. Then, the automatic error classifica-
tion has been applied in order to estimate actual
translation errors. After that, manual inspection of
language related phenomena leading to particular
errors is carried out in order to define the most im-
portant issues which should be addressed for build-
ing better systems and/or develop better models.

5.1 BLEU scores
As a first evaluation step, the BLEU scores (Pap-
ineni et al., 2002) have been calculated for each of
the translation outputs in order to get a rough idea
about the performance for different domains and
translation directions.

The scores are presented in Table 2:

• the highest scores are obtained for transla-
tions into English;

• the scores for translations into German are
similar to those for translations into Slovenian
and Serbian;

• the scores for Serbian and Slovenian are bet-
ter when translated from English than when
translated from German;

• the best scores are obtained for DGT (which
contains a large number of repetitions), fol-
lowed by EMEA (which is very specific do-
main); the worst scores are obtained for spo-
ken language OpenSubtitles texts.

99



Domain/Lang. pair sl-en sr-en sl-de sr-de en-sl de-sl en-sr de-sr
DGT 77.3 / 59.3 / 72.1 58.6 / /
Europarl 58.9 / 33.8 / 56.0 36.5 / /
EMEA 69.7 / 53.8 / 66.0 56.2 / /
OpenSubtitles 38.4 33.2 21.5 22.4 26.2 19.6 22.8 18.4
SEtimes / 43.8 / / / / 35.8 /

Table 2: BLEU scores for all translation outputs.

In addition, all the BLEU scores are compared
with those of Google Translate10 outputs of all
tests. All systems built in this work outperform
the Google translation system by absolute differ-
ence ranges from 1 to 10%, confirming that the
languages are weakly supported for machine trans-
lation.

5.2 Automatic error classification

Automatic error classification has been performed
using Hjerson (Popović, 2011) and the error distri-
butions are presented in Figure 1. For the sake of
brevity and clarity, as well as for avoiding redun-
dancies, the error distributions are not presented
for all translation outputs, but have been averaged
in the following way: since no important differ-
ences were observed neither between domains (ex-
cept that OpenSubtitles translations exhibit more
inflectional errors than others) nor between Ser-
bian and Slovenian (neither as source nor as the
target language), the errors are averaged over do-
mains and two languages called “x”. Thus, four
error distributions are shown: translation from and
into English, and translation from and into Ger-
man.

The following can be observed:

• translations into English are “the easiest”,
mostly due to the small number of morpho-
logical errors; however, the English transla-
tion outputs contain more word order errors
than Serbian and Slovenian ones;

• all error rates are higher in German transla-
tions than in English ones, but the mistransla-
tion rate is especially high;

• German translation outputs have less mor-
phological errors than Serbian and Slovenian
translations from German; on the other hand,

10http://translate.google.com, performed on
27th February 2015

more reordering errors can be observed in
German outputs;

• all error rates are higher in translations from
German than from English, except inflec-
tions.

The results of the automatic error analysis are
valuable and already indicate some promising di-
rections for improving the systems, such as word
order treatment and handling morphologic gen-
eration. Nevertheless, more improvement could
be obtained if more precise guidance about prob-
lems and obstacles related to the language proper-
ties and differences were available (apart from the
general ones already partly investigated in related
work).

5.3 Identifying linguistic related issues

Automatic error analysis has already shown that
that different language combinations show differ-
ent error distributions. This often relates to linguis-
tic characteristics of involved languages as well as
to divergences between them. In order to explore
those relations, manual inspection of about 200
sentences from each domain and language pair an-
notated by Hjerson together with their correspond-
ing source sentences has been carried out.

As the result of this analysis, the following has
been discovered:

• there is a number of frequent error patterns,
i.e. obstacles (issues) for SMT systems

• nature and frequency of many issues depend
on language combination and translation di-
rection

• some of translation errors depend on the do-
main and text type, mostly differing for writ-
ten and spoken language

• issues concerning Slovenian and Serbian both
as source and as target languages are almost

100



 5

 10

 15

 20

form order omission addition mistrans

e
rr

o
r 

ra
te

s 
[%

]

x-en
en-x
x-de
de-x

Figure 1: Error rates for five error classes: word form, word order, omission, addition and mistranslation;
each error rate represents the percentage of particular (word-level) error type normalised over the total
number of words.

the same – there are only few language spe-
cific phenomena.

The most frequent general issues11, i.e. relevant
for all translation directions, are:

• noun collocations (written language)
Multi-word expressions consisting of a head
noun and additional nouns and adjectives in
English poses large problems for all transla-
tion directions, especially from and into En-
glish. Their formation is different in other
languages and often the boundaries are not
well detected so that they are translated to un-
intelligible phrases.

source 12th ”Tirana Fall” art and
music festival

output∗ 12th ”Tirana collection fall of
art and a music festival

reference the ratings agency’s first
Emerging Europe Sensitivity
Index ( EESI )

output the first Index sensitivity
Europe in the development of
( EESI ) this agency

11Non-English parts of examples are literally translated into
English and marked with ∗.

• negation

Due to the distinct negation forming, mainly
concerning multiple negations in Serbian and
Slovenian, negation structures are translated
incorrectly.

reference the prosecution has done
nothing so far

source∗ the prosecution has not done
nothing so far

output the prosecution is not so far
had done nothing

source Being a rector does not give
someone the freedom

reference∗ Being a rector does not give
nobody the freedom

output∗ Being a rector does not
give some freedom

• phrase boundaries and order

Phrase boundaries are not detected properly
so that the group(s) of words are misplaced,
often accompanied with morphological errors
and mistranslations.

101



reference of which about a fifth is used
for wheat production

output of which used to produce
about one fifth of wheat

reference But why have I brought
this thing here?

output This thing, but why
am I here?

reference The US ambassador to Sofia
said on Wednesday .

output Said on Wednesday ,
US ambassador to Sofia .

• prepositions
Prepositions are mostly mistranslated, some-
times also omitted or added.

• word order
Local word permutations mostly affecting
verbs and surrounding auxiliary verbs, pro-
nouns, nouns and adverbs.

Some of the frequent issues are strongly dependent
on translation direction. For translation into En-
glish and German the issues of interest are:

• articles
Due to the absence of articles in Slavic lan-
guages, a number of articles in English and
German translation outputs are missing, and
a certain number is mistranslated or added.

• pronouns
The source languages are pro-drop, therefore
a number of pronouns is missing in the En-
glish and German translation outputs.

• possessive pronoun “svoj”
This possessive pronoun can be used for all
persons (“my”, “your”, “her”, “his”, “our”,
“their”) and it is difficult to disambiguate.

• verb tense
Due to different usage of verb tenses in some
cases, the wrong verb tense from the source
language is preserved, or sometimes mis-
translated. The problem is more prominent
for translation into English.

• agreement (German target)
A number of cases and gender agreements in
German output is incorrect.

• missing verbs (German target)
Verbs or verb parts are missing in German
output, especially when they are supposed to
appear at the end of the clause.

• conjunction “i” (and) (Serbian source)
The main meaning of this conjunction is
“and”, but another meaning “also, too, as
well” is often used too; however, it is usually
translated as “and”.

• adverb “lahko” (Slovenian source)
This word is used for Slovenian conditional
phrases which correspond to English con-
structions with modal verbs “can”, “might”,
“shall”, or adverbs “possibly”; the entire
clause is often not translated correctly due to
incorrect disambiguation.

For translation into Serbian and Slovenian, the
most important obstacles are:

• case
Incorrect case is used, often in combination
with incorrect singular/plural and/or gender
agreement.

• verb inflection
Verb inflection does not correspond to the
person and/or the tense; a number of past
participles also has incorrect singular/plurar
and/or gender agreement.

• missing verbs
Verb or verb parts are missing, especially for
constructions using auxiliary and/or modal
verbs. The problem is more frequent when
translating from German.

• question structure (spoken language)
Question structure is incorrect; the problem
is more frequent in Serbian where additional
particles (“li” and “da li”) should be used but
are often omitted.

• conjunction “a” (Serbian target)
This conjunction does not exist in other lan-
guages, it can be translated as “and” or “but”,
and its exact meaning is something in be-
tween. Therefore it is difficult to disam-
biguate the corresponding source conjunc-
tion.

102



• “-ing” forms (English source)
English present continuous tense does not ex-
ist in other languages, and in addition, it is
often difficult to determine if the word with
the suffix “-ing” is a verb or a noun. There-
fore words with the “-ing” suffix are difficult
for machine translation.

• noun-verb disambiguation (English source)
Apart from the words ending with the suf-
fix “-ing”, there is a number of other English
words which can be used both as a noun as
well as a verb, such as ”offer”, “search”, etc.

• modal verb “sollen” (German source)
This German modal verb can have differ-
ent meanings, such as “should”, “might”
and “will” which is often difficult to disam-
biguate.

It has to be noted that some of the linguistic
phenomena known to be difficult are not listed –
the reason is that their overall number of occur-
rences in the analysed texts is low and therefore
the number of related errors too. For example, Ger-
man compounds are well known for posing prob-
lems to natural language processing tasks among
which is machine translation – however, in the
given texts only a few errors related to compounds
were observed, as well as a low total number of
compounds. Another similar case is the verb as-
pect in Serbian and Slovenian – some related errors
were detected, but their count as well as the overall
count of such verbs in the data is very small.

Therefore the structure and nature of the texts
for a concrete task should always be taken into ac-
count. For example, for improvements of spoken
language translation more effort should be put in
question treatment than in noun collocation, and in
technical texts the compound problem would prob-
ably be significant.

6 Conclusions and future work

In this work, we have examined several SMT
systems involving two morphologically rich and
under-resourced languages in order to identify
the most important language related issues which
should be dealt with in order to build better sys-
tems and models. The BLEU scores are reported
as a first evaluation step, followed by automatic
error classification which has captured interesting

language related patterns in distributions of error
types. The main part of the evaluation consisted
of (manual) analysis of errors taking into account
linguistic properties of both target and source lan-
guage. This analytic analysis has defined a set
of general issues which are causing errors for all
translation directions, as well as sets of language
dependent issues. Although many of these issues
are already known to be difficult, they can be ad-
dressed only with the precise identification of con-
crete examples.

The main general issues are shown to be struc-
tural properties concerning multi-noun colloca-
tions and exact phrase boundaries, followed by
negation formation, wrong, missing or added
preposition as well as local word order differences.
For translation into English and German, article
and pronoun omissions are the most problematic,
as well as disambiguation of certain frequent func-
tional words. For translation into Serbian and
Slovenian, cases and verb inflections are most dif-
ficult to handle. In addition, other problems con-
cerning verbs are frequent as well, such as local
word order involving verbs and missing verb parts
(which is especially difficult when translating from
German).

In future work we plan to address some of the
presented issues practically and analyse the effects.
An important thing concerning system improve-
ment is that although most of the described issues
are common for various domains, the exact nature
of the texts desired for the task at hand should
always be kept in mind. Analysis of issues for
domains and text types not covered by this paper
should be part of future work too.

Acknowledgments

This publication has emanated from research sup-
ported by the QT21 project – European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under grant number 645452 as well as a research
grant from Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) under
grant number SFI/12/RC/2289. We are grateful to
the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feed-
back.

103



References
Cettolo, Mauro, Jan Niehues, Sebastian Stüker, Luisa

Bentivogli, and Marcello Federico. 2013. Report on
the 10th IWSLT evaluation campaign. In Proceed-
ings of the International Workshop on Spoken Lan-
guage Translation (IWSLT), Heidelberg, Germany,
December.

Etchegoyhen, Thierry, Lindsay Bywood, Mark Fishel,
Panayota Georgakopoulou, Jie Jiang, Gerard Van
Loenhout, Arantza Del Pozo, Mirjam Sepesy
Maučec, Anja Turner, and Martin Volk. 2014.
Machine Translation for Subtitling: A Large-Scale
Evaluation. In Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC14), Reykjavik, Iceland, May.

Koehn, Philipp, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondřej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL
on Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Koehn, Philipp. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
the 10th Machine Translation Summit, pages 79–86,
Phuket, Thailand, September.

Ljubešić, Nikola, Petra Bago, and Damir Boras. 2010.
Statistical machine translation of Croatian weather
forecast: How much data do we need? In Lužar-
Stiffler, Vesna, Iva Jarec, and Zoran Bekić, editors,
Proceedings of the ITI 2010 32nd International Con-
ference on Information Technology Interfaces, pages
91–96, Zagreb. SRCE University Computing Centre.

Och, Franz Josef and Hermann Ney. 2003. A Sys-
tematic Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment
Models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51,
March.

Papineni, Kishore, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wie-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. pages 311–318,
Philadelphia, PA, July.

Popović, Maja and Nikola Ljubešić. 2014. Explor-
ing cross-language statistical machine translation for
closely related South Slavic languages. In Proceed-
ings of the EMNLP14 Workshop on Language Tech-
nology for Closely Related Languages and Language
Variants, pages 76–84, Doha, Qatar, October.

Popović, Maja, David Vilar, Hermann Ney, Slobodan
Jovičić, and Zoran Šarić. 2005. Augmenting a
Small Parallel Text with Morpho-syntactic Language
Resources for Serbian–English Statistical Machine
Translation. pages 41–48, Ann Arbor, MI, June.

Popović, Maja. 2011. Hjerson: An Open Source
Tool for Automatic Error Classification of Machine

Translation Output. The Prague Bulletin of Mathe-
matical Linguistics, (96):59–68, October.

Sepesy Maučec, Mirjam, Janez Brest, and Zdravko
Kačič. 2006. Slovenian to English Machine Trans-
lation using Corpora of Different Sizes and Morpho-
syntactic Information. In Proceedings of the 5th
Language Technologies Conference, pages 222–225,
Ljubljana, Slovenia, October.

Steinberger, Ralf, Andreas Eisele, Szymon Klocek,
Spyridon Pilos, and Patrick Schlüter. 2012. DGT-
TM: A freely available Translation Memory in 22
languages. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC12), pages 454–459, Istanbul, Turkey, May.

Stolcke, Andreas. 2002. SRILM – an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. volume 2, pages 901–904,
Denver, CO, September.

Tiedemann, Jörg. 2012. Parallel data, tools and inter-
faces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC12), pages 2214–2218, May.

Toral, Antonio, Raphael Rubino, Miquel Esplà-Gomis,
Tommi Pirinen, Andy Way, and Gema Ramirez-
Sanchez. 2014. Extrinsic Evaluation of Web-
Crawlers in Machine Translation: a Case Study on
CroatianEnglish for the Tourism Domain. In Pro-
ceedings of the 17th Conference of the European
Association for Machine Translation (EAMT), pages
221–224, Dubrovnik, Croatia, June.

Tyers, Francis M. and Murat Alperen. 2010. South-
East European Times: A parallel corpus of the
Balkan languages. In Proceedings of the LREC
Workshop on Exploitation of Multilingual Resources
and Tools for Central and (South-) Eastern European
Languages, pages 49–53, Valetta, Malta, May.

Žganec Gros, Jerneja and Stanislav Gruden. 2007. The
voiceTRAN machine translation system. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th Annual Conference of the In-
ternational Speech Communication Association (IN-
TERSPEECH 07), pages 1521–1524, Antwerp, Bel-
gium, August. ISCA.

104


