



















































Word Embeddings Pointing the Way for Late Antiquity


Proceedings of the 9th SIGHUM Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 53–57,
Beijing, China, July 30, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics and The Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing

Word Embeddings Pointing the Way for Late Antiquity

Johannes Bjerva
University of Groningen

The Netherlands
j.bjerva@rug.nl

Raf Praet
University of Groningen

The Netherlands
r.g.l.praet@rug.nl

Abstract

Continuous space representations of
words are currently at the core of many
state-of-the-art approaches to problems in
natural language processing. In spite of
several advantages of using such methods,
they have seen little usage within digital
humanities. In this paper, we show a case
study of how such models can be used to
find interesting relationships within the
field of late antiquity. We use a word2vec
model trained on over one billion words
of Latin to investigate the relationships
between persons and concepts of interest
from works of the 6th-century scholar
Cassiodorus. The results show that the
method has high potential to aid the
humanities scholar, but that caution must
be taken as the analysis requires the
assessment by the traditional historian.

1 Introduction

Continuous space representations of words are
currently the backbone of several state-of-the-
art approaches to problems in natural language
processing. The distributional hypothesis, sum-
marised as: ‘You shall know a word by the
company it keeps’ (Firth, 1957) is the basis of
many approaches for obtaining such representa-
tions. Word embeddings are an example of such
a model (e.g. Collobert and Weston (2008)),
and have been found to encapsulate interesting
semantic properties; in a model presented by
Mikolov et al. (2013b), the result when calculat-
ing −−−→KING −−−→MAN +−−−−−→WOMAN, is close to −−−−→QUEEN.

In this work in progress within the Cassiodigi-
talis project, we investigate how such representa-
tions can be adapted to aid humanities researchers,
using the case of late antiquity as an example.
Using such a model has several advantages, such

as speed and cost-effectiveness. An automated
method such as presented here can save time by,
e.g., finding potentially interesting interrelations
between historical figures and concepts, or quanti-
tatively corroborate results of an otherwise quali-
tative study. It is, of course, not expected that this
can replace the manual perusal of a historian. The
goal is, indeed, to use these models to point the
way for late antiquity. We expect that the method
outlined in this paper can also be used for other
disciplines within the humanities.

The digital approach is easily applicable to his-
torical research of periods which are highly doc-
umented, i.e., from the beginning of printing up
to today. Yet in this paper we want to ascertain
whether a digital approach could be relevant to
periods which are less documented. As for clas-
sical studies, the field of late antique studies is
relatively recent, following the seminal work of
Brown (1971). This crucial period of transition
from antiquity to the middle ages could prove a
fertile ground for a digital approach; the late an-
tique world abounds in dense networks of schol-
ars and politicians who publish their letters in or-
der to further their ambitions. We chose to fo-
cus on the person of Cassiodorus for several rea-
sons; this 6th-century scholar was a pivotal figure
in the transition of classical literature and knowl-
edge through his Vivarium monastery (O’Donnell,
1979). Yet many aspects of his biography remain
enigmatic. A digital analysis of his vast oeuvre
could show us new ways to answer questions as
why Cassiodorus abandoned his political ambi-
tions to found his monastery.

In this paper, we demonstrate how word embed-
dings can be used to aid humanities scholars by
showing that relations between concepts and his-
torical characters can be found and corroborated.
The embeddings used in this paper are released
along with scripts to reproduce our plots.1

1github.com/bjerva/cassiodigitalis

53



The rest of the paper is organised as follows.
Related work is briefly covered in Section 2. The
methodology is detailed in Section 3. Section 4
contains the experiment overview and results. We
discuss the results in Section 5 and conclude in
Section 6.

2 Related Work

Word embeddings have seen much recent use
within computational linguistics, however usage
within digital humanities appears to be limited.
Recent work by Koopman et al. (2015) employs
vector representations to calculate similarities be-
tween entities such as authors and journals in an
article database. Usage of word embeddings in
the humanities is further discussed by Tahmasebi
et al. (2015), who suggest that they could be use-
ful for comparing word vectors trained on different
epochs of time, thus revealing changes in usage of
words across time. The usage of digital methods
within the late antiquities in particular largely fo-
cusses on approaches such as the use of geoposi-
tioning data to aid classicists and archaeologists,
or linking data from, e.g., funerary monuments in
order to facilitate research (cf. Bodard and Ma-
hony (2012)). This field should therefore provide
fertile grounds for this relatively new approach.
Our contribution to previous work thus constitutes
a first study showing concrete usages of word em-
beddings for the late antiquities in particular, and
digital humanities in general.

3 Method

The core of the method used in this paper is based
on the freely available word2vec tool, which can
be used to quickly create high quality word em-
beddings based on a large corpus of text (Mikolov
et al., 2013a).2 We train word2vec using param-
eters similar to those used for the best perform-
ing English vectors in Baroni et al. (2014). We
use the continuous bag-of-words model, a window
size of 5, a vector dimensionality of 400, 10 neg-
ative samples and set subsampling to 1e−5. We
further allow the model to train on the corpus over
the course of 100 epochs.

3.1 Data
3.1.1 Large Corpus of Latin
Our word2vec model is trained on a large cor-
pus of Latin texts, containing about 1.38 billion

2code.google.com/p/word2vec/

tokens, collected from 11,261 texts spanning two
millennia of use of Latin (Bamman and Crane,
2011; Bamman and Smith, 2012). This corpus is
freely available.3 The texts have been manually
confirmed as containing Latin text. Seeing as the
texts have been OCR-scanned, the quality varies
widely. Prior to training the word2vec model, we
pre-process the corpus in order to reduce noise.
We convert all text to lower case, remove all punc-
tuation and non-alphanumeric characters.

3.1.2 Cassiodorus’ Variae
Flavius Magnus Aurelius Cassiodorus Senator (c.
485 – c. 585) served under the Ostrogothic king
Theodoric and his successors until the collapse of
the kingdom under the Byzantine armies (535 – c.
540). After his stay (or detention) in Constantino-
ple (c. 540 – 554), he fully concentrated on his
own Christian didactical project within the con-
fines of his Vivarium monastery in the south of
Italy (O’Donnell, 1979). The main testimony to
his political career were the Variae, a collection of
state letters in twelve books (Fridh and Halporn,
1973; Zecchini et al., 2014). Cassiodorus wrote
them on behalf of king Theodoric, his successors,
or on his own account as praetorian prefect. The
date of the compilation and composition of the
Variae is posited between 540 and the mid-540’s.
In this paper, the Variae are used as a source of
historical figures and concepts.

4 Mapping Person – Concept Relations

Our experiment deals with investigating relations
between historical figures and central concepts
in the period in question. We compile a list of
six concepts with their related Latin words which
were deemed relevant for the investigation in ques-
tion. The selected concepts are shown in Table 1.
We further compile a list of 14 persons of in-
terest within Cassiodorus’ Variae. These histori-
cal figures were selected based on their proxim-
ity to Cassiodorus and their significance in the
presentation of Cassiodorus and his Ostrogothic
masters in the Variae. We selected several his-
torical characters who were Cassiodorus’ peers
and competitors in cultural networks (Boethius,
Symmachus), political networks (Liberius) and
ecclesiastical circles (Agapetus). Furthermore
we added representatives of the political forces
with whom the Ostrogothic kingdom in Italy in-

3cs.cmu.edu/˜dbamman/latin.html

54



teracted and competed: apart from the Ostro-
gothic kings themselves (Theodoric, Athalaric,
Theodahad), we have their barbarian predecessors
(Alaric and Odoacer), and the Roman emperors
from the Byzantine east (Anastasius, Iustinianus,
Theodora). This selection of persons, along with
relevant details, is shown in Table 2.

Table 1: Relevant concepts used in the study, with
related Latin words.

Concept Words
Modernity Modernus Novus Novitas
Romanness Romuleus Quirites Latialis
Greekness Graecus Graeculus Atticus
Gothness Gothus Hamalus Gothicus
Antiquity Vetus Antiquitas Senex
Liberty Libertas Libertatus Liber

Table 2: Persons of interest used in the study,
along with personal details.

Name Status Lifetime
Cassiodorus scholar, Ostrogothic official c. 485 – c. 585
Theoderic Ostrogothic king of Italy 454 – 526
Alaricus Visigothic king c. 370 – 410
Odovacer barbarian general, king of Italy 433 – 494
Athalaricus Ostrogothic king of Italy 516 – 534
Theodahadus Ostrogothic king of Italy c. 480 – 536
Anastasius Byzantine emperor c. 431 – 518
Iustinianus Byzantine emperor c. 482 – 565
Theodora Byzantine empress c. 500 – 548
Boethius scholar, Ostrogothic official c. 480 – 524
Symmachus mecenas, Ostrogothic official ? – 526
Liberius Ostrogothic/Roman official c. 465 – c. 554
Agapetus pope ? – 536

We calculate the relatedness between each per-
son and concept as follows. For each concept, x,
we amass a set of vectors X based on the related
Latin words. For each person, y, we use the vec-
tor representation in our model based on the nom-
inative form of the person’s name. We then find
the smallest cosine distance between each vector
representation of a concept, ~xi ∈ X, and each per-
son’s vector representation, ~y. We take this dis-
tance to be a measure of the relationship between
a person of interest and the concept in question.

Before visualizing the results, we split the per-
sons of interest into two groups. Group 1 consists
of the leading figures of the 6th-century political
patchwork. Group 2 consists of Cassiodorus’ col-
leagues and competitors. Heat maps of the re-
lationships between each person and concept are
shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2. Blue is used to
indicate an absent or relatively small relationship,

while red is used to indicate a relatively strong re-
lationship.

5 Discussion

5.1 The Blurring of the Barbarian-Roman
Boundary

Whereas the Visigoth king Alaric and the bar-
barian general Odoacer are intensively associated
with words which denote the Goths, this asso-
ciation fades away with the rulers of the Ostro-
goth kingdom in Italy: Theodoric and his suc-
cessors Athalaric and Theodahad (see Figure 1).
This could reflect the success of Theodoric’s cul-
tural and political profiling as being the true heir to
the Roman legacy in Italy (Jones, 1962; Heather,
1992). This diminishing association with the
Goths does not, however, correlate with an in-
creasing association with the Romans; Theodoric
and Theodahad’s association with “Romanness”
are rather meagre in comparison with Odoacer.
This could be explained by Odoacer’s exemplary
role as the general who officially put an end to the
Western Roman empire by deposing its last em-
peror, Romulus Augustulus (ca. 464 – ca. 507).
This negative association with the legacy of Rome
apparently endured in the reception of this histori-
cal character.

5.2 The Roman Empire is Dead, Long Live
the Byzantine Empire!

The transition of the Roman empire into a me-
dieval Byzantine empire was a gradual and eva-
sive process, which cannot be exactly pinpointed
in time. However, the rule of the emperor Justinian
has been considered to be pivotal in this gradual
process (Maas, 2005). The digital approach seems
to corroborate Justinian’s role; whereas there still
is a high association between “Romanness” and
Anastasius, the emperor of the Eastern Roman
empire before Justinian’s dynasty, this association
dramatically diminishes in the case of Justinian
(see Figure 1). This would mean that in the Latin
sources, or, from a western perspective, Justinian
is considered emperor of the Greeks instead of Ro-
man emperor. However, caution has to be exhib-
ited when comparing Justinian to Anastasius, as
there are several historical characters extant with
the name Anastasius and the word representations
used only consider the surface forms of the names
in question.

55



Figure 1: Heatmap showing relationships between persons and concepts in group 1.

Figure 2: Heatmap showing relationships between persons and concepts in group 2.

5.3 Different Intellectual Profiles

When we compare the results of the contem-
poraries Cassiodorus, Liberius, Symmachus and
Boethius, we can see some differences. Sym-
machus and Boethius have a distinct association
with the Greek cultural sphere, whereas Cas-
siodorus and Liberius lack this link (see Figure 2).
In this case the results shed a light on the social
networks and cultural aspirations of both pairs.
Symmachus and his son-in-law Boethius had, as
members of the senatorial aristocracy, close ties
with their counterpart in the Greek Eastern Ro-
man empire, as they still cherished the cultural
ideal of a bilingual Roman legacy. Boethius
translated Greek philosophical treatises, and Sym-
machus was involved in the bilingual project of
the grammarian Priscian of Caesarea (around 500)
(Marenbon, 2003). Liberius and Cassiodorus fore-
shadow the gradual disintegration of the links be-
tween the east and the west. Liberius’ long po-
litical career was mainly based in Gaul and Italy
(O’Donnell, 1981), whereas Cassiodorus was ac-
tive in the administration of the Ostrogothic realm
in Italy. Cassiodorus’ association with antiquity
points to his success as central figure in the trans-
mission of ancient works of literature and science
through his Vivarium monastery (see Figure 2).
Furthermore, this association can be traced to the

meticulous self-presentation in his letter collection
Variae as an ardent intellectual. The high associa-
tion between Liberius and the concept of liberty
should be disregarded because of linguistic rea-
sons; naturally there is a high association between
the concept of liberty and a name which can also
be a form of the adjective liber, ‘free’.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we have shown an example of how
word embeddings can be used to point the way
for late antiquity, and in extension, humanities.
Such a digital method has high potential to aid the
humanities scholar in assessing different historio-
graphical questions. Not only do the results cor-
roborate or nuance the findings of qualitative re-
search. Surprising results also generate new histo-
riographical questions. Nevertheless, the example
of Liberius and liberty urges to exhibit caution; the
digital approach cannot be used without the guid-
ing assessment of the traditional historian.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the anonymous
reviewers for their helpful suggestions, and Vivian
Bouwer for her input on earlier versions of this
manuscript.

56



References

Bamman, D. and Crane, G. (2011). Measuring his-
torical word sense variation. In Proceedings of
the 11th annual international ACM/IEEE joint
conference on Digital libraries, pages 1–10.
ACM.

Bamman, D. and Smith, D. (2012). Extracting two
thousand years of latin from a million book li-
brary. Journal on Computing and Cultural Her-
itage (JOCCH), 5(1):2.

Baroni, M., Dinu, G., and Kruszewski, G. (2014).
Don’t count, predict! A systematic compari-
son of context-counting vs. context-predicting
semantic vectors. In Proceedings of the 52nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, volume 1.

Bodard, G. and Mahony, M. S. (2012). Digital re-
search in the study of classical antiquity. Ash-
gate Publishing, Ltd.

Brown, P. (1971). The World of Late Antiquity:
from Marcus Aurelius to Muhammad. London.

Collobert, R. and Weston, J. (2008). A uni-
fied architecture for natural language process-
ing: Deep neural networks with multitask learn-
ing. In Proceedings of the 25th international
conference on Machine learning, pages 160–
167. ACM.

Firth, J. R. (1957). A synopsis of linguistic theory.
pages 1930–1955. 1952–1959:1–32.

Fridh, A. and Halporn, J. (1973). Magni aurelii
cassiodori senatoris opera pars i: Variarum libri
xii. Corpus Christianorum, Series Latina, 96.

Heather, P. J. (1992). The historical culture of Os-
trogothic Italy. In Teoderico il Grande e i Goti
d’Italia. Atti del XIII Congresso internazionale
di studi sull’Alto Medioevo.

Jones, A. H. M. (1962). The constitutional posi-
tion of Odoacer and Theoderic. Journal of Ro-
man Studies, 52(1-2):126–130.

Koopman, R., Wang, S., Scharnhorst, A., and En-
glebienne, G. (2015). Ariadne’s thread: Inter-
active navigation in a world of networked infor-
mation. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems, pages 1833–1838.
ACM.

Maas, M. (2005). Roman Questions, Byzantine
Answers. The Cambridge Companion to the

Age of Justinian (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press), pages 3–27.

Marenbon, J. (2003). Boethius. Oxford University
Press.

Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean,
J. (2013a). Efficient estimation of word rep-
resentations in vector space. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3781.

Mikolov, T., Yih, W.-t., and Zweig, G. (2013b).
Linguistic regularities in continuous space word
representations. In Proceedings of NAACL-
HLT, pages 746–751.

O’Donnell, J. J. (1979). Cassiodorus. Los Ange-
les: University of California Press.

O’Donnell, J. J. (1981). Liberius the Patrician.
Traditio, pages 31–72.

Tahmasebi, N., Borin, L., Capannini, G., Dub-
hashi, D., Exner, P., Forsberg, M., Gossen, G.,
Johansson, F. D., Johansson, R., Kågebäck, M.,
et al. (2015). Visions and open challenges for
a knowledge-based culturomics. International
Journal on Digital Libraries, 15(2-4):169–187.

Zecchini, G., Giardina, A., Cecconi, G., Tantillo,
I., Oppedisano, F., Marcone, A., Lo Cascio, E.,
LA Rocca, A., La Rocca, C., Neri, V., et al.
(2014). Cassiodoro Varie. Volume 2: Libri III,
IV, V. Erma di Bretschneider.

57


