



















































Event analysis for information extraction from business-based technical documents


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on EVENTS at the NAACL-HLT 2015, pages 58–65,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Event characterization for information extraction 

from business-based technical documents 

 

 
Bell Manrique Losada Carlos M. Zapata Jaramillo 
Universidad de Medellín Universidad Nacional de Colombia 

Cra. 87 30-65 Belén Cra. 80 65-223 Robledo 

Medellín, AQ, Colombia Medellín, AQ, Colombia 
bmanrique@udem.edu.co cmzapata@unal.edu.co 

 
 
 

 

Abstract 
Event identification plays a crucial role in sev-

eral natural language processing applications 

such as information extraction, question an-

swering, and text analysis. In this paper, we de-

scribe a novel approach for analyzing events, 

their distribution, and the event mentions from 

a corpus of unlabeled business-based technical 

documents—a specific genre. In order to infer 

such mentions, we analyze the subject-verb-

object structure for semi-automatically extract-

ing several lexical, syntactic, and semantic fea-

tures for each event mention from the corpus. 

Extracting event mentions allows us to cast 

grouping together the mentions with same fea-

tures and propose properties leading to the dif-

ferences of the specific genre. The obtained 

results are used for supporting an event-

centered processing level, from an automated 

machine for processing texts. 

 

1 Introduction 
 

Information extraction (IE) is a process for extract-

ing structured information from unstructured texts 

(Sangeetha et al., 2010). Event identification plays 

a crucial role in IE and other natural language pro-

cessing applications (e.g., question answering, text 

analysis, etc.). Identification of event structures 

can exploit cross-document techniques. A special 

attention is given to the recognition of events from 

heterogeneous document sources, stemming from 

several genres and domains (Petrenz and Webber, 

2011). 

According to Pivovarova et al. (2013), in the 

context of IE, events represent real-world facts and 

they should be extracted from plain text. By the 

unique nature of events, they receive in-depth at-

tention in current research, by trying to identify 

what events are mentioned within texts and how 

they are related semantically (Do et al., 2011). 

In this paper we propose an unsupervised ap-

proach for identifying events, from unannotated 

sentences of business-based technical documents 

contained in a training corpus. We base our ap-

proach on text expressions referring to real-world 

events—also called event mentions— for identify-

ing events (Bejan & Harabagiu. 2013) from a set of 

clusters. 

We define training documents based on lexical 

chains by holding the set of semantically related 

words of given sentences. WordNet lexicon was 

used for constructing lexical chains with the event 

mentions. A set of features and properties for each 

event has been identified in order to obtain a char-

acterization of the specific genre concerned to the 

technical document. 

The preliminary results, in terms of events fea-

tures and properties, are the based on a processing 

level in an automated system for processing texts. 

Then, such event-centered processing level is the 

basis for identifying the organizational domain 

knowledge and some business information as the 

first instances of the requirement elicitation pro-

cess. 

The remainder sections of this paper are orga-

nized as follows: in Section 2 we describe the re-

lated work in the field of information extraction 

and event extraction. In Section 3 we present our 

approach to event identification for extracting in-

formation from the genre business-based technical 

documents. Finally, in Section 4 we draw conclu-

sions and we outline future work. 

58



2 Overview and related work 
 

This Section provides a short overview and related 

work of the most relevant research in terms of 

event analysis, information extraction, and event 

extraction. 

 

2.1 Events 
 

Events represent real-world facts. Also, they may 

have several relationships to such facts, and differ-

ent sources may have contradictory views on the 

facts (Saurí & Pustejovsky, 2012). Thus, the struc-

ture and content of an event is influenced by both 

the structure of the specific real-world fact and the 

properties of the surrounding text. The role of the 

events in a text depends directly on the context, 

real-world domain, or scenario in which the text is 

used. In this sense, events are representations of 

facts and also linguistic units. Whereby, and ac-

cording to Pivovarova et al. (2013), in the analysis 

and research of events should be considered the 

particular language, genre, scenario and medium of 

the text—i.e., events should be analyzed in the 

context of particular corpora. 

Our motivation yields on the event study in 

practice, looking for identifying domain-specific 

characteristics of events in a business-based cor-

pus. We hope this preliminary study of the corpus 

can be used in the same or greater depth of linguis-

tic analysis by a language processing system or an 

IE system. 
 

2.2 Basics of lexical-semantic analysis 
 

WordNet is a lexical semantic resource which de-

fines word senses by using methods for grouping 

senses of the same word and thus producing coars-

er word sense groupings (Fellbaum, 1998). For the 

aim of this work and looking for analyzing events, 

we consider the syntactic categories of verbs. 

Verbs form language-specific structures in the 

WordNet ontology and they are included in the 

category of 2nd Order Entity. According to Vossen 

(2002), such a category comprises entities referring 

to any situation—being static or dynamic—which 

cannot be grasped, heard, seen, or felt as an inde-

pendent physical thing. These situations can occur 

or take place in a time or place/space, rather than 

exist (e.g. happen, cause, occur, apply, etc.). Also, 

they are related to: i) verbs or events denoting 

nouns, and ii) events, processes, states-of-affairs, 

or situations located in time. Verbs in this category 

can be further subrogated according to the physical 

entities involved in the following subcategories: 

Process. This category implies all physical enti-

ties, i.e., those located in space-time. Entities relat-

ed to objects and processes are involved in it. 

Verbs in this category are mostly related to pro-

cesses since they are things that ‘happen’ and have 

‘temporal parts/stages’. A process can be consid-

ered as a set of denotations related to dual object 

process, intentional process, motion, internal 

change, shape, or change. 

Situation Type. Refers to a situation—event or 

set of events, featured as a conceptual unit—

happening over time. This kind of verbs is repre-

sented in terms of the event-structure or the predi-

cate properties.  

Conceptual Domain. EuroWordNet is a multi-

lingual database for multiple languages containing 

200 domain labels organized in a hierarchical 

structure for grouping the words in categories 

based on a domain hierarchy. Semantic domains 

are knowledge areas—e.g. economy or politics—

used to describe texts according to general subjects 

characterized by domain specific lexica. The do-

main hierarchy is represented as an ontology which 

comprises conceptual levels for each language. 

The levels of the domain hierarchy are called basic 

domains. 
 

2.3 Language processing techniques 
 

Several language processing techniques centered in 

events have been used in areas such as text-mining 

and information extraction. They have been ap-

plied by considering many kinds of documents, 

e.g., technical documents, patents, and software 

requirement documents, as follows.  

Cascini et al. (2004) present a functional analy-

sis of patents and their implementation in the PAT-

Analyzer tool. They use techniques based on the 

extraction of the interactions from the entities de-

scribed in the document and expressed as subject-

action-object triples, by using a suitable syntactic 

parser. Rösner et al. (1997) generate multilingual 

documents from knowledge bases by using auto-

mated techniques. The resulting documents can be 

represented in an interchangeable way centered in 

events.  
 

59



2.4 Information Extraction and Text Analytics 
 

Information Extraction includes techniques for 

extracting any kind of information from texts. Re-

lation extraction techniques require the identifica-

tion of significant entities and relationships 

between entities and significant properties of enti-

ties (Grimes, 2008). The goal of IE is storing the 

extracted entities and relationships in a database—

structured information. The prototypical document 

extraction relies on the identification of frequent 

sequences of terms in the documents, and uses 

language processing techniques, such as POS tag-

ging and term extraction, for pre-processing the 

textual data (Rajman & Besancon, 1997). Such a 

technique can be considered as an automated, gen-

eralized indexing procedure for extracting linguis-

tically significant structures from documents. 

According to Wilcock (2009), Text Analytics 

(TA) refers to a subfield of information technology 

dealing with applications, systems, and services for 

doing some kind of text analytics as a way to ex-

tract information from them. Several techniques 

for TA have been developed, among them: named 

entity recognition, co-reference resolution, infor-

mation extraction, chunking, semantic role label-

ing, text mining, and semantic search. 

The state-of-the-art review present several ap-

proaches in the previous areas for studying events, 

as follows. 

Meth et al. (2012) propose an automated and 

knowledge-based support system for eliciting ac-

tivities and process, in the context of knowledge 

engineering. RARE project (Cybulski & Reed, 

1998) is focused on parsing texts based on a se-

mantic network assisted by a thesaurus; they com-

bine NLP with faceted classification for identifying 

and analyzing needs and expectations of stake-

holders. Hahn et al. (1996) develop a methodology 

for knowledge acquisition and concept learning 

from texts written in German. The method relies 

on a quality-based model for reasoning on termi-

nology, by using concepts from NLP.  

Focused on goal identification we found several 

approaches (Dardenne et al., 1993; Darimont et al., 

2005; Giorgini et al., 2005). Such goals describe 

desired states or actions performed by actors re-

gardless of specific consideration for normative 

positions (e.g., permissions, recommendations, and 

obligations). Young and Antón (2010) propose the 

analysis of the commitments, privileges, and rights 

conveyed within online policy documents.  

 

2.5 Event extraction 
 

The event extraction has been approached by sev-

eral authors as we present in the following para-

graphs. 

Huttunen et al. (2002a) propose linguistic cues 

for identifying the overlapping or partial events 

including specific lexical items, locative and tem-

poral expressions, and usage of ellipsis and anaph-

ora. Grishman (2012) emphasizes in unsupervised 

event extraction by using extensive linguistic anal-

ysis. Do et al. (2011) develop a minimally super-

vised approach, based on focused distributional 

similarity methods and discourse connectives, for 

identifying causality relations between events in 

context. Sun et al. (2007) are focused on detecting 

causality between search query pairs in temporal 

query logs. 

Riaz and Girju (2010) propose cluster sentences 

into topic-specific scenarios, and then focus on 

identifying causal relations between events and 

building a dataset of causal text spans headed by a 

verb. Etzion and Niblett (2010) work with event 

processing and present a software system including 

specific logic to filter, transform, or detect patterns 

in events as they occur. The event analysis in spe-

cific genres has been approached as follows: 

 Beamer and Girju (2009) work on detecting 
causal relations among verbs in a corpus of 

screen plays, limited to consecutive or adjacent 

verb pairs. 

 Szarvas et al. (2012) study the linguistic cues 
of events in three genres: news, scientific pa-

pers, and Wikipedia articles. They demonstrate 

significant differences in lexical usage across 

the genres by using syntactic cues. 

 Pivovarova et al. (2013) propose the event 
analysis for generating particular statistics and 

capturing the scenario-specific characteristics 

of event representation in a particular corpus. 

 The PULS1 system is based on the event struc-
ture for discovering, aggregating, verifying, 

and visualizing events in various scenarios. 

Finally, relevant proposals for event extraction 

have been developed: Chambers and Jurafsky 

(2011) propose a template-based IE algorithm for 

                                                         
1 http://puls.cs.helsinki.fi  

60



learning sets of related events and semantic roles 

from an unlabeled corpus; Kasch and Oates (2010) 

define script learning and narrative schemas to 

capture knowledge from unlabeled text. Scripts are 

sets of related event words and semantic roles 

learned by linking syntactic functions with corefer-

ring arguments; Benson et al. (2011) propose a 

method for discovering event records from social 

media feeds. Such a method operates on a noisy 

feed of data and extracts canonical records of 

events by aggregating information across multiple 

messages. 

3 Approach for event analysis  

3.1 Corpus and Analysis Tools 
 

The corpus definition starts by collecting possible 

technical documents circulating on the web related 

to the genre business domain. We have not so 

many restrictions by selecting the texts for building 

the corpus, because the focus is getting as many 

samples as possible, but not the entire track rolling 

stock. We collect and analyze a set of documents 

from such a domain in different subject fields (e.g. 

medicine, forestry, and laboratory). The corpus 

used as the basis for this preliminary study com-

prises 50 English-written documents with inde-

pendence of its variety. Assuming the population is 

evenly distributed, we selected a sample of 32 

documents, corresponding to 64% of the total cor-

pus population—the minimum percentage statisti-

cally random, calculated with proportions Z test. 

The variety of subject fields is important to the 

analysis of the events identified in the corpus. 

The training documents belong to the ‘Standard 

Operating Procedure (SOP) category. All the doc-

uments sum 167,905 tokens and 9,252 word types. 

The initial exploration of this experimental corpus 

was supported by AntConc 3.3.5w® (Anthony, 

2009) and TermoStatWeb™ (Drouin, 2003). 

AntConc was used to manually and systematically 

find frequent expressions and select their contexts, 

and TermoStatWeb™ was used to list most fre-

quent verbs, for analyzing its organization in the 

texts. 

 

3.2 Analysis approach 
 

This analysis is based on the semantic behavior of 

the events, under the premise the analysis of mean-

ings or senses of the verbs should be closely linked 

to the analysis of events and terms used in a con-

text. This event-centered analysis is approached 

from the point of view of the possible meanings 

suggested by the Multilingual Central Repository 

(MCR)
2
. 

Based on the training corpus (SOP), we identify 

the set of most frequent verbs. Prioritized verbs are 

classified by categories, according to Vossen 

(2002). Then, we use the types of verb in order to 

identify patterns. Such patterns will be the basis of 

rules for inferring and extracting organizational 

relationships from business-based information. In 

this way, we guide the analysis to all situations 

concerning the verb regarding its usage in the 

SOPs. Based on an incremental method, we per-

formed this step-by-step analysis as follows:  

 

Review. In this phase we look for identifying 

the verbs in the relevant sections of the documents, 

according to the rhetorical organization units de-

fined by Manrique (2015). For the sake of identify-

ing verbs, we first prioritize the most used verbs in 

the SOPs according to the occurrence frequency. 

Analysis of the occurrence frequency of verbs in 

the corpus was supported by corpus analysis tools. 

We selected the first 58 verbs corresponding to the 

interval of hits [501–72], with 501 the highest fre-

quency and 72 the lower occurrence. In Table 1 we 

present the 10 most used verbs in the corpus.  
 

Term Frequency 

use 501 

include 458 

provide 355 

follow 314 

require 314 

ensure 226 

submit 175 

approve 166 

prepare 156 

identify 143 

involve 143 

perform 136 

describe 133 

 

Table 1. Sample of prioritized verbs 

                                                         
2 http://adimen.si.ehu.es/web/MCR  

61



 

Verb feature identification. The semantic fea-

tures of each prioritized verb are addressed, and 

the discriminant features for relevant and irrelevant 

verbs, according to some categories—conceptual, 

functional, process-based, and situational—are 

identified. The classification of verbs is based on 

the meanings reported by WordNet 3.0 by using 

the Interlingual Index (ILI 3.0) included into the 

EuroWordNet Interface (WEI consult mode)
3
. For 

each prioritized verb, we define the categories of 

classification according to the classes defined in 

section 2.2, by following an iterative and sequen-

tial process: 
 

i) For each verb, checking the meanings reported in 

WEI. For the first four meanings reported: 

 

o Assign an occurrence indicator (value) for 

each associated conceptual category. 

o Assign a value for each functional category 

the verb has. 

o Assign values to situational category (unique 

value for situation type) and multiple value 

for the situation component. 

 

ii) Generating the sum of all values for each cate-

gory 

 

iii) Identifying which categories correspond to the 

highest sum of the corresponding analysis. The 

complete verb classification was presented by 

Manrique (2015), as a result of the previous analy-

sis. In Table 2 a sample of such results is present-

ed, where: column 1 is de list of prioritized verbs; 

columns 2 to 6 correspond to the conceptual clas-

sification category of verb (based on WordNet 3.0 

and ILI). The number appearing in each cell 

verb/category corresponds to the frequency of 

verb is taking such a category. We generate the 

sum of all values by category and identify the cat-

egories corresponding with the highest sum. 

 

iv) Analyzing and presenting results. Based on the 

defined classification and categorization of verbs, 

we make an analysis and identify findings in 

terms of features and properties capturing the par-

ticularities of the specific genre. 

                                                         
3 http://adimen.si.ehu.es/cgi-bin/wei/public/wei.consult.perl  

 

3.3 Characterization of events from business-
based technical documents 

 

As a result of the previous process and according 

to the each analyzed and prioritized category, we 

identify the following findings, characterizing the 

genre: 

Conceptual Category. The conceptual do-

mains are based on a relation of specificity. We 

identified the events are not assigned to a particular 

conceptual category, due to their nature. Unlike 

nouns which somehow can be grouped by do-

mains, the events/verbs can be used in similar 

senses by several different domains. For instance 

we can find that ‘apply’ is used in a specific do-

main like ‘Medicine’ for saying ‘a nurse is apply-

ing medication to a patient,’ or in a general domain 

involving an intentional process for saying ‘The 

operator works applying rules.’ 
 

 

V
er

b
 

Conceptual classification of verb (Category) 

fa
ct

o
 t

u
m

 

so
ci

al
 

fr
ee

-t
im

e
 

ap
p

lie
d

 s
c

ie
n

ce
 

h
u

m
an

it
ie

s
 

p
u

re
-s

ci
en

ce
s

 

so
ci

al
 

P
o

ss
es

si
o

n
 

ch
an

g
e

 

co
g

n
it

io
n

 

st
at

iv
e

 

co
m

m
u

n
ic

at
io

n
 

cr
ea

ti
o

n
 

assign        1       

use 3 1      1       

include 3       1   1    

provide  2 1 1      1    1  

follow 4         2     

require 4            2  

review 2 1   1      3  1  

process 1 1  2  1 2  1 1    

ensure 2          1  1  

request 3            3  

submit 4        1    2  

work 3 1      3       

approve 2          1  1  

prepare  3  1       1    3 

Table 2. Sample of prioritized verbs 

 

As we show in the results of classification, the 

prioritized verbs are mostly used in any domain, 

for example the one appearing under the label Fac-

totum, which is assigned when none of the labels 

were assigned. When verb is not labeled as facto-

tum, the second mostly used conceptual category is 

social label. 

62



Functional category. According to the tracks 

of the analysis, most of verbs are marked as an 

intentional process (general), whose intention is no 

longer identified (e.g. attaching, comparing, substi-

tuting, and separating). Generally speaking, an 

intentional process is deliberately set in motion by 

a Cognitive Agent, i.e. it is a human action, act, or 

activity of a thing for accomplishing or achieving a 

work. 

The second most frequent functional category is 

social interaction as a kind of intentional process 

involving interactions between Cognitive-Agents. 

This category relates a social relation, an interac-

tion, or a socially accepted situation. 
Situation Category. The situation type for 

most of the verbs is dynamic. Such verbs are relat-

ed to the situations implying either a transition 

from one state to another or a continuous transition 

perceived as an unbounded process (e.g. event, act, 

action, become, happen, take place, process, habit, 

change, and activity). No change in their properties 

or relation is involved by the verb. 
Dynamic situations. More than half of verbs 

occur with bounded event, when they are implied 

with a specific transition from one situation to 

another, which is bounded in time and directed to a 

result (e.g., to implement, to remove, to develop, 

etc.). Regarding to the situation component, the 

results show the main semantic components char-

acterizing the situation are the following: 

 

 Cause. Component of situations involving 
causation. This component is coherent with 

the situation type since the causation is al-

ways combined with dynamic and it can 

take several forms. Such forms depend on 

the grade of intervention of an agent. The 

form with the higher frequency is agentive 

which can be related to a controlling agent 

who intentionally tries to achieve some 

change. The agentive situations imply a 

controlling agent causing a dynamic change 

(e.g. to implement, to write, to record, etc.). 

 Purpose. Abstract components reflecting 
the intentionality of acts and activities. Sit-

uations intended to have some effect are 

implied. As the previous situation compo-

nent, this one reflects consistency with the 

context as applied to dynamic situations. 

Also, this component strongly correlates to 

agentive and cause, clustering mainly hu-

man acts and activities. Situation Compo-

nents such as usage, social, and communi-

cation often combine with purpose. 

 Communication. Component of situations 
involving communication (e.g. designate, 

request, describe, issue, etc.). Communica-

tion verbs are often speech-acts (bounded 

events) or denote more global communica-

tive activities (unbounded events). Also, 

they include different phases of the com-

munication referring to causation of com-

munication effects (e.g., to explain or to 

show) or creation of a meaningful represen-

tation (e.g., to write or to draw). 

 Physical. Component of situations involv-
ing perceptual and measurable properties of 

objects (e.g., to shape, to prepare, to de-

scribe, etc.); or dynamic changes and per-

ceptions of its physical properties (e.g., to 

monitor, to collect, to copy, to notice, etc.).  

 

Based on the previous characterization (features 

and properties) and the prioritized verbs, we finally 

develop a dependency parsing. For the parsing 

process we use the Freeling dependency parser
4
. 

The goals of such parsing are: 

 Defining patterns of occurrence of the iden-
tified verbs and defining a set of seman-

tic/dependency rules for transforming each 

pattern to a controlled language structure. 

 Defining a script for preprocessing the 
SOPs, trying to extract simple sentences for 

the parser to maximize its performance. 

 Processing the evaluation corpus with a de-
pendency parser. 

 Evaluating the extracted relations and the 
findings. 

 

According to the event characterization and feature 

identification resulted from the dependency pars-

ing, we propose a set of semantic rules for trans-

forming each feature into a controlled language. 

We used the UN-Lencep (named by its Spanish 

acronym for ‘Universidad Nacional de Colom-

bia—Lenguaje Controlado para la Especificación 

de Esquemas Preconceptuales’), as an intermediate 

representation between natural language and con-

ceptual schemas for software engineering.  

                                                         
4 http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/freeling/ 

63



We present the rules defined for such mapping 

in Manrique & Zapata (2013). Each mapping rule 

is assigned to one category expressed in terms of 

the pattern in the SOP and the expression in UN-

Lencep generated. The pattern composing each 

defined rule considers attributes relating the tags 

(e.g., syntactic or semantic tag—synt—, function 

tag—func—, etc.) assigned by the dependency 

parser. 

By means of the basic interface of the parser li-

brary, we analyzed the text files of the corpus from 

the command line. We extract the relations match-

ing the semantic rules from the parser. Based on 

them, we performed a preliminary evaluation in 

terms of the useful relations being extracted, the 

number of relevant extracted relations with the 

necessary components for measuring precision and 

recall. According to the results, we could identify 

the potential of the parsing, the quality of the de-

fined rules, and the aspects improved by the text 

preprocessing. 
 

 

4 Conclusions  
 

This study aims at characterizing SOPs by re-
vealing key features and properties of events used 
in an English corpus belonging to the business 
genre. We proposed an approach for analyzing 
events from a training corpus, which can be pro-
cessed as input for further knowledge engineering 
processes. The appropriateness of JSDs in re-
quirements elicitation was verified with this study. 

We analyze the structure of training text for 
semi-automatically extracting several features for 
each event mention from the corpus. Extracting a 
rich set of features allows us propose properties 
capturing the differences of this specific genre. We 
contribute to the research about the identification 
of events from heterogeneous document sources 
stemming from different genres and domains 

Our proposal is focused on the events study in 
the practice, for identifying domain-specific char-
acteristics of them in a business-based corpus. This 
is a preliminary study which we expect can be used 
in the same or greater depth of linguistic analysis 
by language processing systems or IE systems. 

We are testing the performance of the rules de-
rived from this event analysis approach in 
NAHUAL, our functional prototype of a software 
system for processing texts. 

As future work, we expect to increase the num-
ber of documents in the corpus and refine the study 
of event features. Statistical measures can be also 
considered as a way to support the presented event 
analysis and the event representation in this partic-
ular corpus, as suggest Pivovarova et al. (2013). 
The automated event extraction in the frame of 
knowledge acquisition from business-based docu-
ments is also our interest.  

Likewise, given the importance of the event 

structure, the supervised event causality identifica-

tion and the causal relations analysis seems to be a 

promising approach in the current research. 

 

Acknowledgments 
 

This work has been partly founded by the Vice-

rrectoría de Investigación from both the Universi-

dad de Medellín and the Universidad Nacional de 

Colombia, under the following projects: “Método 

de transformación de lenguaje natural a lenguaje 

controlado para la obtención de requisitos, a partir 

de documentación técnica”; “Especificación de un 

lenguaje controlado de Dominio Específico: Fun-

damentos Lingüísticos y bases de Transformación 

desde Documentos Técnicos Corporativos en Len-

guaje Natural”. Also, it was supported in part by 

the COLCIENCIAS, under the doctoral program 

“Generación del Bicentenario, Colombia 2010.” 
 

 

References  
 

Anthony, L. 2009. Issues in the design and development 

of software tools for corpus studies: The case for col-

laboration. Contemporary corpus linguistics, Lon-

don: P. Baker Ed.: 87-104. 

Bejan, C.A. and Harabagiu, S. 2013. Unsupervised 

Event Coreference Resolution. Computational Lin-

guistics, 40: 2. 

Benson, E., Haghighi, A. and Barzilay, R. 2011. Event 

discovery in social media feeds. In Proceedings of 

the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for 

Computational Linguistics, ACL, Stroudsburg, PA, 

USA, 1: 389-398. 

Cascini, G. Fantechi, A. and Spinicci E. 2004. Natural 

Language Processing of Patents and Technical Doc-

umentation. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 

3163:508-520. 

Chambers, N. and Jurafsky, D. 2011. Template-Based 

Information Extraction without the Templates, ACL-

2011, Portland, OR. 

64



Cybulski, J. and Reed, K. 1998. Requirements Classifi-

cation and Reuse: Crossing domains boundaries. 6th 

Intl. Conf. on Software Reuse (ICSR’2000). Vienna, 

Austria. Springer. 

Dardenne, A., van Lamsweerde, A. and Fickas, S. 1993. 

Goal-directed Requirements Acquisition. Science of 

Comp. Prog., 20:3-50. 

Darimont, R., Delor, E., Massonet, P., van Lamsweerde, 

A. 2005. GRAIL/KAOS: An Environment for Goal-

driven Requirements Engineering. IEEE 19th Inter-

national Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 

612-613. 

Do, Q.X., Chan, Y.S., and Roth, D. 2011. Minimally 

Supervised Event Causality Identification. 

EMNLP’2011. 

Drouin, P. 2003. TermoStat Web 3.0. Désormais utilisa-

ble qu'après enregistremen. Available in: 

http://olst.ling.umontreal.ca/~drouinp/termostat_web/ 

Etzion O., Niblett P. 2010. Event Processing in Action. 

Manning Publications, Co. NY, USA. 

Fellbaum, C. 1998. WordNet. An Electronic Lexical 

Database. The MIT Press. NY, USA. 

Giorgini, P., Massacci, F., Mylopoulos, J., Zannone, N. 

2005. Modeling Security Requirements through 

Ownership, Permission and Delegation. 13th IEEE 

International Requirements. Engineering Confer-

ence, pp. 167-176. 

Grimes, S. 2008. Text technologies in the mainstream: 

Text analytics solutions, applications and trends. 

Available in: http://altaplana.com 

Grishman, R. 2012. Structural linguistics and unsuper-

vised information extraction. Automatic Knowledge 

Base Construction and Web-scale Knowledge Ex-

traction (AKBC-WEKEX 2012), pp. 57–61. 

Hahn, U. Klenner, M. and Schnattinger, K. 1996. A 

Quality-Based Terminological Reasoning Model for 

Text Knowledge Acquisition. Advances in 

Knowledge Acquisition. Shadbolt, O’Hara & 

Schreiber (Eds.). Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 

Huttunen, S., Yangarber, R. and Grishman, R. 2002. 

Diversity of scenarios in information extraction. Pro-

ceedings of the Third International Conference on 

Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2002), 

Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain. 

Manrique, B. 2015. A formalization for mapping dis-

courses from business-based technical documents in-

to controlled language texts for requirement 

elicitation. Ph.D. Thesis. Universidad Nacional de 

Colombia, Medellín.  

Meth, H., Li, Y., Maedche, A. Mueller, B. 2012. Ad-

vancing task elicitation systems–An experimental 

evaluation of design Principles. Proceeding of 33 In-

ternational Conference on Information Systems, pp. 

54-68.  

Petrenz, P. and Webber, B. 2011. Stable classification 

of text genres. Computational Linguistics, 37(2):385–

393. 

Pivovarova, L., Huttunen, S. and Yangarber, R. 2013. 

Event representation across genre. Proceedings of the 

1
st
 Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, Detection, Co-

reference, and Representation, pp. 29–37. 

Rajman, M. and Besancon, B. 1997. Text Mining: Natu-

ral Language techniques and Text Mining applica-

tions. IFIP 1997. Chapman & Hall. NY, USA. 

Riaz, M. and Girju, R. 2010. Another look at causality: 

Discovering scenario-specific contingency relation-

ships with no supervision. Proceedings of the 2010 

IEEE Fourth International Conference on Semantic 

Computing, pp. 361-368. 

Rösner, D., Grote, B., Hartmann, K. and Höfling, B. 

1997. From Natural Language Documents to Shara-

ble Product Knowledge: A Knowledge Engineering 

Approach. Journal of Universal Computer Science. 

3(8): 955-987. 

Sangeetha S, R.S. Thakur, and Arock, M. 2010. Event 

detection using lexical chain. Hrafn Loftsson, Eirikur 

Rögnvaldson,  Sigrun Helgadottir (eds.). In: IceTAL 

2010, LNAI 6233: 314-319. 

Saurí, R. and Pustejovsky, J. 2012. Are you sure that 

this happened? Assessing the factuality degree of 

events in text. Computational Linguistics, 38(2):261– 

299. 

Sun, Y., Liu, N., Xie, K., Yan, S., Zhang, B. and Chen, 

Z. 2007. Causal relation of queries from temporal 

logs. Proceedings of the 16th international confer-

ence on World Wide Web, NY, USA. 

Szarvas, G. Vincze, V., Farkas, R., Mófra, G. and 

Gurevych, I. 2012. Cross-genre and cross-domain de-

tection of semantic uncertainty. Computational Lin-

guistics, 38(2):335–367. 

Vossen, P. 2002. EuroWordNet General Document. 

Version 3. Piek Vossen (ed.). University of Amster-

dam. Amsterdam, Holanda. 

Wilcock, G. 2009. Introduction of linguistics annotation 

and texts analytics. Synthesis Lectures on Human 

Language Technologies. Morgan & Claypool (eds). 

Toronto, CA. 

Young, J. D. and Antón, A. I. 2010. A Method for Iden-

tifying Software Requirements Based on Policy 

Commitments. 18th IEEE International Require-

ments Engineering Conference. Available in: 

http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.ezproxy.unal.edu.co/stamp/

stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5636634   

 

65


