



















































And That's A Fact: Distinguishing Factual and Emotional Argumentation in Online Dialogue


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Argumentation Mining, pages 116–126,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

And That’s A Fact:
Distinguishing Factual and Emotional Argumentation in Online Dialogue

Shereen Oraby∗, Lena Reed∗, Ryan Compton∗,
Ellen Riloff †, Marilyn Walker∗ and Steve Whittaker∗

∗ University of California Santa Cruz
{soraby,lireed,rcompton,mawalker,swhittak}@ucsc.edu

† University of Utah
riloff@cs.utah.edu

Abstract

We investigate the characteristics of factual
and emotional argumentation styles observed
in online debates. Using an annotated set of
FACTUAL and FEELING debate forum posts,
we extract patterns that are highly correlated
with factual and emotional arguments, and
then apply a bootstrapping methodology to
find new patterns in a larger pool of unanno-
tated forum posts. This process automatically
produces a large set of patterns representing
linguistic expressions that are highly corre-
lated with factual and emotional language. Fi-
nally, we analyze the most discriminating pat-
terns to better understand the defining charac-
teristics of factual and emotional arguments.

1 Introduction

Human lives are being lived online in transformative
ways: people can now ask questions, solve prob-
lems, share opinions, or discuss current events with
anyone they want, at any time, in any location, on
any topic. The purposes of these exchanges are var-
ied, but a significant fraction of them are argumenta-
tive, ranging from hot-button political controversies
(e.g., national health care) to religious interpretation
(e.g., Biblical exegesis). And while the study of the
structure of arguments has a long lineage in psychol-
ogy (Cialdini, 2000) and rhetoric (Hunter, 1987),
large shared corpora of natural informal argumenta-
tive dialogues have only recently become available.

Natural informal dialogues exhibit a much
broader range of argumentative styles than found
in traditional work on argumentation (Marwell and

Schmitt, 1967; Cialdini, 2000; McAlister et al.,
2014; Reed and Rowe, 2004). Recent work has be-
gun to model different aspects of these natural in-
formal arguments, with tasks including stance clas-
sification (Somasundaran and Wiebe, 2010; Walker
et al., 2012), argument summarization (Misra et al.,
2015), sarcasm detection (Justo et al., 2014), and
work on the detailed structure of arguments (Bi-
ran and Rambow, 2011; Purpura et al., 2008; Yang
and Cardie, 2013). Successful models of these
tasks have many possible applications in sentiment
detection, automatic summarization, argumentative
agents (Zuckerman et al., 2015), and in systems that
support human argumentative behavior (Rosenfeld
and Kraus, 2015).

Our research examines FACTUAL versus FEELING
argument styles, drawing on annotations provided
in the Internet Argument Corpus (IAC) (Walker et
al., 2012). This corpus includes quote-response
pairs that were manually annotated with respect to
whether the response is primarily a FACTUAL or
FEELING based argument, as Section 2.1 describes
in more detail. Figure 1 provides examples of re-
sponses in the IAC (paired with preceding quotes
to provide context), along with the response’s FAC-
TUAL vs. FEELING label.

FACTUAL responses may try to bolster their ar-
gument by providing statistics related to a position,
giving historical or scientific background, or pre-
senting specific examples or data. There is clearly a
relationship between a proposition being FACTUAL
versus OBJECTIVE or VERIDICAL, although each of
these different labelling tasks may elicit differences
from annotators (Wiebe and Riloff, 2005; Riloff and

116



Wiebe, 2003; Saurı́ and Pustejovsky, 2009; Park and
Cardie, 2014).

Class Debate Forum Dialogue
FACT Quote: Even though our planet is getting

warmer, it is still a lot cooler than it was 4000
years ago.
Response: The average global temperature
follows a sinusoidal pattern, the general con-
sensus is we are supposed to be approach-
ing a peak. Projections show that instead of
peaking, there will be continue to be an in-
crease in average global temperature.

FACT Quote: “When you go to war against your
enemies...suppose you see a beautiful woman
whom you desire...you shall take her..and she
shall marry you.” - Deut. 21:10
Response: Read to the very end of the verse.
“If you are not pleased with her, let her go
wherever she wishes. You must not sell her or
treat her as a slave, since you have dishon-
ored her.”

FEEL Quote: Talk about begging the question! I
don’t want your gun, and if such a law were
passed it’s not my job to enforce the law.
Response: I see you are willing to violate my
constitutional rights yet you expect someone
else to do your dirty work.... How typical.

FEEL Quote: “WASHINGTON &#8211; Supreme
Court aspirant Sonia Sotomayor said Tues-
day that she considers the question of abor-
tion rights is settled precedent and says there
is a constitutional right to privacy. The fed-
eral appeals court judge was asked at her con-
firmation....”
Response: While I’m still iffy on her with the
whole New Haven case, and her off-the-bench
comments on race, this is one thing I com-
mend her for and agree completely with.

Figure 1: Examples of FACTUAL and FEELING
based debate forum Quotes and Responses. Only
the responses were labeled for FACT vs. FEEL.

The FEELING responses may seem to lack argu-
mentative merit, but previous work on argumenta-
tion describes situations in which such arguments
can be effective, such as the use of emotive argu-
ments to draw attention away from the facts, or
to frame a discussion in a particular way (Wal-
ton, 2010; Macagno and Walton, 2014). Further-

more, work on persuasion suggest that FEELING
based arguments can be more persuasive in partic-
ular circumstances, such as when the hearer shares
a basis for social identity with the source (speaker)
(Chaiken, 1980; Petty and Cacioppo, 1986; Benoit,
1987; Cacioppo et al., 1983; Petty et al., 1981).
However none of this work has documented the
linguistic patterns that characterize the differences
in these argument types, which is a necessary first
step to their automatic recognition or classification.
Thus the goal of this paper is to use computational
methods for pattern-learning on conversational argu-
ments to catalog linguistic expressions and stylistic
properties that distinguish Factual from Emotional
arguments in these on-line debate forums.

Section 2.1 describes the manual annotations for
FACTUAL and FEELING in the IAC corpus. Sec-
tion 2.2 then describes how we generate lexico-
syntactic patterns that occur in both types of ar-
gument styles. We use a weakly supervised pat-
tern learner in a bootstrapping framework to au-
tomatically generate lexico-syntactic patterns from
both annotated and unannotated debate posts. Sec-
tion 3 evaluates the precision and recall of the FAC-
TUAL and FEELING patterns learned from the anno-
tated texts and after bootstrapping on the unanno-
tated texts. We also present results for a supervised
learner with bag-of-word features to assess the diffi-
culty of this task. Finally, Section 4 presents analy-
ses of the linguistic expressions found by the pattern
learner and presents several observations about the
different types of linguistic structures found in FAC-
TUAL and FEELING based argument styles. Section
5 discusses related research, and Section 6 sums up
and proposes possible avenues for future work.

2 Pattern Learning for Factual and
Emotional Arguments

We first describe the corpus of online debate posts
used for our research, and then present a bootstrap-
ping method to identify linguistic expressions asso-
ciated with FACTUAL and FEELING arguments.

2.1 Data

The IAC corpus is a freely available annotated col-
lection of 109,553 forum posts (11,216 discussion

117



threads). 1 In such forums, conversations are started
by posting a topic or a question in a particular cate-
gory, such as society, politics, or religion (Walker et
al., 2012). Forum participants can then post their
opinions, choosing whether to respond directly to
a previous post or to the top level topic (start a
new thread). These discussions are essentially di-
alogic; however the affordances of the forum such
as asynchrony, and the ability to start a new thread
rather than continue an existing one, leads to dia-
logic structures that are different than other multi-
party informal conversations (Fox Tree, 2010). An
additional source of dialogic structure in these dis-
cussions, above and beyond the thread structure, is
the use of the quote mechanism, which is an in-
terface feature that allows participants to optionally
break down a previous post into the components of
its argument and respond to each component in turn.

The IAC includes 10,003 Quote-Response (Q-R)
pairs with annotations for FACTUAL vs. FEELING
argument style, across a range of topics. Figure 2
shows the wording of the survey question used to
collect the annotations. Fact vs. Feeling was mea-
sured as a scalar ranging from -5 to +5, because pre-
vious work suggested that taking the means of scalar
annotations reduces noise in Mechanical Turk anno-
tations (Snow et al., 2008). Each of the pairs was
annotated by 5-7 annotators.

For our experiments, we use only the response
texts and assign a binary FACT or FEEL label to each
response: texts with score > 1 are assigned to the
FACT class and texts with score < -1 are assigned to
the FEELING class. We did not use the responses
with scores between -1 and 1 because they had a
very weak Fact/Feeling assessment, which could be
attributed to responses either containing aspects of
both factual and feeling expression, or neither. The
resulting set contains 3,466 FACT and 2,382 FEEL-
ING posts. We randomly partitioned the FACT/FEEL
responses into three subsets: a training set with 70%
of the data (2,426 FACT and 1,667 FEELING posts), a
development (tuning) set with 20% of the data (693
FACT and 476 FEELING posts), and a test set with
10% of the data (347 FACT and 239 FEELING posts).
For the bootstrapping method, we also used 11,560
responses from the unannotated data.

1https://nlds.soe.ucsc.edu/iac

Slider Scale -5,5: Survey Question
Fact/Emotion: Is the respondent attempting to make a
fact based argument or appealing to feelings and emo-
tions?

Figure 2: Mechanical Turk Survey Question used
for Fact/Feeling annotation.

2.2 Bootstrapped Pattern Learning

The goal of our research is to gain insights into the
types of linguistic expressions and properties that
are distinctive and common in factual and feeling
based argumentation. We also explore whether it is
possible to develop a high-precision FACT vs. FEEL-
ING classifier that can be applied to unannotated data
to find new linguistic expressions that did not occur
in our original labeled corpus.

To accomplish this, we use the AutoSlog-TS sys-
tem (Riloff, 1996) to extract linguistic expressions
from the annotated texts. Since the IAC also con-
tains a large collection of unannotated texts, we then
embed AutoSlog-TS in a bootstrapping framework
to learn additional linguistic expressions from the
unannotated texts. First, we briefly describe the
AutoSlog-TS pattern learner and the set of pattern
templates that we used. Then, we present the boot-
strapping process to learn more Fact/Feeling pat-
terns from unannotated texts.

2.2.1 Pattern Learning with AutoSlog-TS
To learn patterns from texts labeled as FACT

or FEELING arguments, we use the AutoSlog-TS
(Riloff, 1996) extraction pattern learner, which is
freely available for research. AutoSlog-TS is a
weakly supervised pattern learner that requires train-
ing data consisting of documents that have been la-
beled with respect to different categories. For our
purposes, we provide AutoSlog-TS with responses
that have been labeled as either FACT or FEELING.

AutoSlog-TS uses a set of syntactic templates to
define different types of linguistic expressions. The
left-hand side of Figure 3 shows the set of syn-
tactic templates defined in the AutoSlog-TS soft-
ware package. PassVP refers to passive voice verb
phrases (VPs), ActVP refers to active voice VPs, In-
fVP refers to infinitive VPs, and AuxVP refers to
VPs where the main verb is a form of “to be” or “to
have”. Subjects (subj), direct objects (dobj), noun
phrases (np), and possessives (genitives) can be ex-

118



tracted by the patterns. AutoSlog-TS applies the
Sundance shallow parser (Riloff and Phillips, 2004)
to each sentence and finds every possible match for
each pattern template. For each match, the template
is instantiated with the corresponding words in the
sentence to produce a specific lexico-syntactic ex-
pression. The right-hand side of Figure 3 shows an
example of a specific lexico-syntactic pattern that
corresponds to each general pattern template.2

Pattern Template Example Pattern
<subj> PassVP <subj> was observed
<subj> ActVP <subj> observed
<subj> ActVP Dobj <subj> want explanation
<subj> ActInfVP <subj> expected to find
<subj> PassInfVP <subj> was used to measure
<subj> AuxVP Dobj <subj> was success
<subj> AuxVP Adj <subj> is religious
ActVP <dobj> create <dobj>
InfVP <dobj> to limit <dobj>
ActInfVP <dobj> like to see <dobj>
PassInfVP <dobj> was interested to see <dobj>
Subj AuxVP <dobj> question is <dobj>
NP Prep <np> origins of <np>
ActVP Prep <np> evolved from <np>
PassVP Prep <np> was replaced by <np>
InfVP Prep <np> to use as <np>
<possessive> NP <possessive> son

Figure 3: The Pattern Templates of AutoSlog-TS
with Example Instantiations

In addition to the original 17 pattern templates in
AutoSlog-TS (shown in Figure 3), we defined 7 new
pattern templates for the following bigrams and tri-
grams: Adj Noun, Adj Conj Adj, Adv Adv,
Adv Adv Adv, Adj Adj, Adv Adj, Adv Adv
Adj. We added these n-gram patterns to provide
coverage for adjective and adverb expressions be-
cause the original templates were primarily designed
to capture noun phrase and verb phrase expressions.

The learning process in AutoSlog-TS has two
phases. In the first phase, the pattern templates
are applied to the texts exhaustively, so that lexico-
syntactic patterns are generated for (literally) every
instantiation of the templates that appear in the cor-
pus. In the second phase, AutoSlog-TS uses the la-

2The examples are shown as general expressions for read-
ability, but the actual patterns must match the syntactic con-
straints associated with the pattern template.

bels associated with the texts to compute statistics
for how often each pattern occurs in each class of
texts. For each pattern p, we collect P(FACTUAL | p)
and P(FEELING | p), as well as the pattern’s overall
frequency in the corpus.

2.2.2 Bootstrapping Procedure
Since the IAC data set contains a large num-

ber of unannotated debate forum posts, we embedd
AutoSlog-TS in a bootstrapping framework to learn
additional patterns. The flow diagram for the boot-
strapping system is shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Flow Diagram for Bootstrapping Process

Initially, we give the labeled training data to
AutoSlog-TS, which generates patterns and asso-
ciated statistics. The next step identifies high-
precision patterns that can be used to label some
of the unannotated texts as FACTUAL or FEELING.
We define two thresholds: θf to represent a mini-

119



mum frequency value, and θp to represent a mini-
mum probability value. We found that using only a
small set of patterns (when θp is set to a high value)
achieves extremely high precision, yet results in a
very low recall. Instead, we adopt a strategy of set-
ting a moderate probability threshold to identify rea-
sonably reliable patterns, but labeling a text as FAC-
TUAL or FEELING only if it contains at least a cer-
tain number different patterns for that category, θn.
In order to calibrate the thresholds, we experimented
with a range of threshold values on the development
(tuning) data and identified θf =3, θp=.70, and θn=3
for the FACTUAL class, and θf =3, θp=.55, and θn=3
for the FEELING class as having the highest classifi-
cation precision (with non-trivial recall).

The high-precision patterns are then used in the
bootstrapping framework to identify more FACTUAL
and FEELING texts from the 11,561 unannotated
posts, also from 4forums.com. For each round
of bootstrapping, the current set of FACTUAL and
FEELING patterns are matched against the unanno-
tated texts, and posts that match at least 3 patterns
associated with a given class are assigned to that
class. As shown in Figure 4, the Bootstrapped Data
Balancer then randomly selects a balanced subset
of the newly classified posts to maintain the same
proportion of FACTUAL vs. FEELING documents
throughout the bootstrapping process. These new
documents are added to the set of labeled docu-
ments, and the bootstrapping process repeats. We
use the same threshold values to select new high-
precision patterns for all iterations.

3 Evaluation

We evaluate the effectiveness of the learned patterns
by applying them to the test set of 586 posts (347
FACT and 239 FEELING posts, maintaining the orig-
inal ratio of FACT to FEEL data in train). We classify
each post as FACTUAL or FEELING using the same
procedure as during bootstrapping: a post is labeled
as FACTUAL or FEELING if it matches at least three
high-precision patterns for that category. If a doc-
ument contains three patterns for both categories,
then we leave it unlabeled. We ran the bootstrapping
algorithm for four iterations.

The upper section of Table 1 shows the Preci-
sion and Recall results for the patterns learned dur-

ing bootstrapping. The Iter 0 row shows the perfor-
mance of the patterns learned only from the original,
annotated training data. The remaining rows show
the results for the patterns learned from the unan-
notated texts during bootstrapping, added cumula-
tively. We show the results after each iteration of
bootstrapping.

Table 1 shows that recall increases after each
bootstrapping iteration, demonstrating that the pat-
terns learned from the unannotated texts yield sub-
stantial gains in coverage over those learned only
from the annotated texts. Recall increases from
22.8% to 40.9% for FACT, and from 8.0% to 18.8%
for FEEL.3 The precision for the FACTUAL class is
reasonably good, but the precision for the FEELING
class is only moderate. However, although precision
typically decreases during boostrapping due to the
addition of imperfectly labeled data, the precision
drop during bootstrapping is relatively small.

We also evaluated the performance of a Naive
Bayes (NB) classifier to assess the difficulty of this
task with a traditional supervised learning algorithm.
We trained a Naive Bayes classifier with unigram
features and binary values on the training data, and
identified the best Laplace smoothing parameter us-
ing the development data. The bottom row of Ta-
ble 1 shows the results for the NB classifier on the
test data. These results show that the NB classifier
yields substantially higher recall for both categories,
undoubtedly due to the fact that the classifier uses

3The decrease from 19.2% to 18.8% recall is probably due
to more posts being labeled as relevant by both categories, in
which case they are ultimately left unlabeled to avoid overlap.

Table 1: Evaluation Results

Fact Feel
Prec Rec Prec Rec

Pattern-based Classification
Iter 0 77.5 22.8 65.5 8.0
Iter 1 80.0 34.6 60.0 16.3
Iter 2 80.0 38.0 64.3 18.8
Iter 3 79.9 40.1 63.0 19.2
Iter 4 78.0 40.9 62.5 18.8

Naive Bayes Classifier
NB 73.0 67.0 57.0 65.0

120



Table 2: Examples of Characteristic Argumentation Style Patterns for Each Class

Patt ID# Probability Frequency Pattern Text Match
FACT Selected Patterns

FC1 1.00 18 NP Prep <np> SPECIES OF
FC2 1.00 21 <subj> PassVP EXPLANATION OF
FC3 1.00 20 <subj> AuxVP Dobj BE EVIDENCE
FC4 1.00 14 <subj> PassVP OBSERVED
FC5 0.97 39 NP Prep <np> RESULT OF
FC6 0.90 10 <subj> ActVP Dobj MAKE POINT
FC7 0.84 32 Adj Noun SCIENTIFIC THEORY
FC8 0.75 4 NP Prep <np> MISUNDERSTANDING OF
FC9 0.67 3 Adj Noun FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS

FC10 0.50 2 NP Prep <np> MEASURABLE AMOUNT
FEEL Selected Patterns

FE1 1.00 14 Adj Noun MY ARGUMENT
FE2 1.00 7 <subj> AuxVP Adjp BE ABSURD
FE3 1.00 9 Adv Adj MORALLY WRONG
FE4 0.91 11 <subj> AuxVP Adjp BE SAD
FE5 0.89 9 <subj> AuxVP Adjp BE DUMB
FE6 0.89 9 Adj Noun NO BRAIN
FE7 0.81 37 Adj Noun COMMON SENSE
FE8 0.75 8 InfVP Prep <np> BELIEVE IN
FE9 0.87 3 Adj Noun ANY CREDIBILITY

FE10 0.53 17 Adj Noun YOUR OPINION

all unigram information available in the text. Our
pattern learner, however, was restricted to learning
linguistic expressions in specific syntactic construc-
tions, usually requiring more than one word, because
our goal was to study specific expressions associated
with FACTUAL and FEELING argument styles. Ta-
ble 1 shows that the lexico-syntactic patterns did ob-
tain higher precision than the NB classifier, but with
lower recall.

Table 3: Number of New Patterns Added after Each
Round of Bootstrapping

FACT FEEL Total
Iter 0 1,212 662 1,874
Iter 1 2,170 1,609 3,779
Iter 2 2,522 1,728 4,520
Iter 3 3,147 2,037 5,184
Iter 4 3,696 2,134 5,830

Table 3 shows the number of patterns learned
from the annotated data (Iter 0) and the number of
new patterns added after each bootstrapping itera-
tion. The first iteration dramatically increases the

set of patterns, and more patterns are steadily added
throughout the rest of bootstrapping process.

The key take-away from this set of experiments
is that distinguishing FACTUAL and FEELING ar-
gumets is clearly a challenging task. There is
substantial room for improvement for both preci-
sion and recall, and surprisingly, the FEELING class
seems to be harder to accurately recognize than the
FACTUAL class. In the next section, we examine the
learned patterns and their syntactic forms to better
understand the language used in the debate forums.

4 Analysis

Table 2 provides examples of patterns learned for
each class that are characteristic of that class. We
observe that patterns associated with factual argu-
ments often include topic-specific terminology, ex-
planatory language, and argument phrases. In con-
trast, the patterns associated with feeling based argu-
ments are often based on the speaker’s own beliefs
or claims, perhaps assuming that they themselves are
credible (Chaiken, 1980; Petty et al., 1981), or they
involve assessment or evaluations of the arguments

121



(a) Percentage of Each Unique Syntactic Form (b) Percentage of Each Syntactic Form, by Instance Counts

Figure 5: Histograms of Syntactic Forms by Percentage of Total

of the other speaker (Hassan et al., 2010). They are
typically also very creative and diverse, which may
be why it is hard to get higher accuracies for FEEL-
ING classification, as shown by Table 1.

Figure 5 shows the distribution of syntactic forms
(templates) among all of the high-precision patterns
identified for each class during bootstrapping. The
x-axes show the syntactic templates4 and the y-axes
show the percentage of all patterns that had a spe-
cific syntactic form. Figure 5a counts each lexico-
syntactic pattern only once, regardless of how many
times it occurred in the data set. Figure 5b counts the
number of instances of each lexico-syntactic pattern.
For example, Figure 5a shows that the Adj Noun syn-
tactic form produced 1,400 different patterns, which
comprise 22.6% of the distinct patterns learned. Fig-
ure 5b captures the fact that there are 7,170 instances
of the Adj Noun patterns, which comprise 17.8% of
all patterns instances in the data set.

For FACTUAL arguments, we see that patterns
with prepositional phrases (especially NP Prep) and
passive voice verb phrases are more common. In-
stantiations of NP Prep are illustrated by FC1, FC5,
FC8, FC10 in Table 2. Instantiations of PassVP are
illustrated by FC2 and FC4 in Table 2. For FEEL-
ING arguments, expressions with adjectives and ac-
tive voice verb phrases are more common. Almost
every high probability pattern for FEELING includes

4We grouped a few of the comparable syntactic forms to-
gether for the purposes of this graph.

an adjective, as illustrated by every pattern except
FE8 in Table 2. Figure 5b shows that three syntactic
forms account for a large proportion of the instances
of high-precision patterns in the data: Adj Noun, NP
Prep, and ActVP.

Next, we further examine the NP Prep patterns
since they are so prevalent. Figure 6 shows the per-
centages of the most frequently occurring preposi-
tions found in the NP Prep patterns learned for each
class. Patterns containing the preposition “of” make
up the vast majority of prepositional phrases for
both the FACT and FEEL classes, but is more com-
mon in the FACT class. In contrast, we observe that

Figure 6: Percentage of Preposition Types in the NP
Prep Patterns

122



patterns with the preposition “for” are substantially
more common in the FEEL class than the FACT class.

Table 4 shows examples of learned NP Prep pat-
terns with the preposition “of” in the FACT class
and “for” in the FEEL class. The “of” preposition
in the factual arguments often attaches to objective
terminology. The “for” preposition in the feeling-
based arguments is commonly used to express advo-
cacy (e.g., demand for) or refer to affected popula-
tion groups (e.g., treatment for). Interestingly, these
phrases are subtle indicators of feeling-based argu-
ments rather than explicit expressions of emotion or
sentiment.

Table 4: High-Probability FACT Phrases with “OF”
and FEEL Phrases with “FOR”

FACT “OF” Phrases FEEL “FOR” Phrases
RESULT OF MARRIAGE FOR
ORIGIN OF STANDING FOR
THEORY OF SAME FOR
EVIDENCE OF TREATMENT FOR
PARTS OF DEMAND FOR

EVOLUTION OF ATTENTION FOR
PERCENT OF ADVOCATE FOR
THOUSANDS OF NO EVIDENCE FOR
EXAMPLE OF JUSTIFICATION FOR

LAW OF EXCUSE FOR

5 Related Work

Related research on argumentation has primarily
worked with different genres of argument than found
in IAC, such as news articles, weblogs, legal briefs,
supreme court summaries, and congressional de-
bates (Marwell and Schmitt, 1967; Thomas et al.,
2006; Burfoot, 2008; Cialdini, 2000; McAlister et
al., 2014; Reed and Rowe, 2004). The examples
from IAC in Figure 1 illustrate that natural informal
dialogues such as those found in online forums ex-
hibit a much broader range of argumentative styles.
Other work has on models of natural informal ar-
guments have focused on stance classification (So-
masundaran and Wiebe, 2009; Somasundaran and
Wiebe, 2010; Walker et al., 2012), argument sum-
marization (Misra et al., 2015), sarcasm detection
(Justo et al., 2014), and identifying the structure
of arguments such as main claims and their justifi-
cations (Biran and Rambow, 2011; Purpura et al.,

2008; Yang and Cardie, 2013).
Other types of language data also typically con-

tains a mixture of subjective and objective sen-
tences, e.g. Wiebe et al. (2001; 2004) found that
44% of sentences in a news corpus were subjec-
tive. Our work is also related to research on distin-
guishing subjective and objective text (Yu and Hatzi-
vassiloglou, 2003; Riloff et al., 2005; Wiebe and
Riloff, 2005), including bootstrapped pattern learn-
ing for subjective/objective sentence classification
(Riloff and Wiebe, 2003). However, prior work has
primarily focused on news texts, not argumentation,
and the notion of objective language is not exactly
the same as factual. Our work also aims to rec-
ognize emotional language specifically, rather than
all forms of subjective language. There has been
substantial work on sentiment and opinion analysis
(e.g., (Pang et al., 2002; Kim and Hovy, 2004; Wil-
son et al., 2005; Bethard et al., 2005; Wilson et al.,
2006; Yang and Cardie, 2014)) and recognition of
specific emotions in text (Mohammad, 2012a; Mo-
hammad, 2012b; Roberts et al., 2012; Qadir and
Riloff, 2013), which could be incorporated in future
extensions of our work. We also hope to examine
more closely the relationship of this work to pre-
vious work aimed at the identification of nasty vs.
nice arguments in the IAC (Lukin and Walker, 2013;
Justo et al., 2014).

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we use observed differences in argu-
mentation styles in online debate forums to extract
patterns that are highly correlated with factual and
emotional argumentation. From an annotated set
of forum post responses, we are able extract high-
precision patterns that are associated with the argu-
mentation style classes, and we are then able to use
these patterns to get a larger set of indicative pat-
terns using a bootstrapping methodology on a set of
unannotated posts.

From the learned patterns, we derive some char-
acteristic syntactic forms associated with the FACT
and FEEL that we use to discriminate between the
classes. We observe distinctions between the way
that different arguments are expressed, with respect
to the technical and more opinionated terminologies
used, which we analyze on the basis of grammatical

123



forms and more direct syntactic patterns, such as the
use of different prepositional phrases. Overall, we
demonstrate how the learned patterns can be used to
more precisely gather similarly-styled argument re-
sponses from a pool of unannotated responses, car-
rying the characteristics of factual and emotional ar-
gumentation style.

In future work we aim to use these insights about
argument structure to produce higher performing
classifiers for identifying FACTUAL vs. FEELING
argument styles. We also hope to understand in
more detail the relationship between these argument
styles and the heurstic routes to persuasion and as-
sociated strategies that have been identified in previ-
ous work on argumentation and persuasion (Marwell
and Schmitt, 1967; Cialdini, 2000; Reed and Rowe,
2004).

Acknowledgments

This work was funded by NSF Grant IIS-1302668-
002 under the Robust Intelligence Program. The col-
lection and annotation of the IAC corpus was sup-
ported by an award from NPS-BAA-03 to UCSC
and an IARPA Grant under the Social Constructs
in Language Program to UCSC by subcontract from
the University of Maryland.

References
W.L. Benoit. 1987. Argument and credibility appeals in

persuasion. Southern Speech Communication Journal,
42(2):181–97.

S. Bethard, H. Yu, A. Thornton, V. Hatzivassiloglou, and
D. Jurafsky. 2005. Automatic Extraction of Opinion
Propositions and their Holders. In Computing Attitude
and Affect in Text: Theory and Applications. Springer.

O. Biran and O. Rambow. 2011. Identifying justifica-
tions in written dialogs. In 2011 Fifth IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC),
pages 162–168. IEEE.

C. Burfoot. 2008. Using multiple sources of agree-
ment information for sentiment classification of polit-
ical transcripts. In Australasian Language Technology
Association Workshop 2008, volume 6, pages 11–18.

J.T. Cacioppo, R.E. Petty, and K.J. Morris. 1983. Ef-
fects of need for cognition on message evaluation, re-
call, and persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 45(4):805.

S. Chaiken. 1980. Heuristic versus systematic informa-
tion processing and the use of source versus message

cues in persuasion. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 39(5):752.

Robert B. Cialdini. 2000. Influence: Science and Prac-
tice (4th Edition). Allyn & Bacon.

J. E. Fox Tree. 2010. Discourse markers across speak-
ers and settings. Language and Linguistics Compass,
3(1):1–13.

A. Hassan, V. Qazvinian, and D. Radev. 2010. What’s
with the attitude?: identifying sentences with attitude
in online discussions. In Proceedings of the 2010 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1245–1255. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

John E. Hunter. 1987. A model of compliance-
gaining message selection. Communication Mono-
graphs, 54(1):54–63.

Raquel Justo, Thomas Corcoran, Stephanie M Lukin,
Marilyn Walker, and M Inés Torres. 2014. Extracting
relevant knowledge for the detection of sarcasm and
nastiness in the social web. Knowledge-Based Sys-
tems, 69:124–133.

Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. 2004. Determining the
sentiment of opinions. In Proceedings of the 20th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING 2004), pages 1267–1373, Geneva, Switzer-
land.

Stephanie Lukin and Marilyn Walker. 2013. Really?
well. apparently bootstrapping improves the perfor-
mance of sarcasm and nastiness classifiers for online
dialogue. NAACL 2013, page 30.

Fabrizio Macagno and Douglas Walton. 2014. Emo-
tive language in argumentation. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

G. Marwell and D. Schmitt. 1967. Dimensions of
compliance-gaining behavior: An empirical analysis.
sociomety, 30:350–364.

Simon McAlister, Colin Allen, Andrew Ravenscroft,
Chris Reed, David Bourget, John Lawrence, Katy
Börner, and Robert Light. 2014. From big data to
argument analysis. Intelligence, page 27.

Amita Misra, Pranav Anand, Jean E. Fox Tree, and Mar-
ilyn Walker. 2015. Using summarization to discover
argument facets in dialog. In Proceedings of the 2015
Conference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies.

Saif Mohammad. 2012a. #emotional tweets. In *SEM
2012: The First Joint Conference on Lexical and Com-
putational Semantics.

Saif Mohammad. 2012b. Portable features for classify-
ing emotional text. In Proceedings of the 2012 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies.

124



Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment Classification using
Machine Learning Techniques. In Proceedings of the
2002 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 79–86.

Joonsuk Park and Claire Cardie. 2014. Identifying ap-
propriate support for propositions in online user com-
ments. ACL 2014, page 29.

R.E. Petty and J.T. Cacioppo. 1986. The elaboration
likelihood model of persuasion. Advances in experi-
mental social psychology, 19(1):123–205.

R.E. Petty, J.T. Cacioppo, and R. Goldman. 1981. Per-
sonal involvement as a determinant of argument-based
persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 41(5):847.

S. Purpura, C. Cardie, and J. Simons. 2008. Active learn-
ing for e-rulemaking: Public comment categorization.
In Proceedings of the 2008 international conference
on Digital government research, pages 234–243. Dig-
ital Government Society of North America.

Ashequl Qadir and Ellen Riloff. 2013. Bootstrapped
learning of emotion hashtags# hashtags4you. In Pro-
ceedings of the 4th workshop on computational ap-
proaches to subjectivity, sentiment and social media
analysis, pages 2–11.

Chris Reed and Glenn Rowe. 2004. Araucaria: Software
for argument analysis, diagramming and representa-
tion. International Journal on Artificial Intelligence
Tools, 13(04):961–979.

Ellen Riloff and William Phillips. 2004. An introduc-
tion to the sundance and autoslog systems. Techni-
cal report, Technical Report UUCS-04-015, School of
Computing, University of Utah.

E. Riloff and J. Wiebe. 2003. Learning Extraction Pat-
terns for Subjective Expressions. In Proceedings of
the 2003 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing.

E. Riloff, J. Wiebe, and W. Phillips. 2005. Exploiting
Subjectivity Classification to Improve Information Ex-
traction. In Proceedings of the 20th National Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence.

Ellen Riloff. 1996. Automatically generating extrac-
tion patterns from untagged text. In AAAI/IAAI, Vol.
2, pages 1044–1049.

Kirk Roberts, Michael A. Roach, Joseph Johnson, Josh
Guthrie, and Sanda M. Harabagiu. 2012. Empatweet:
Annotating and detecting emotions on twitter. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2012).
ACL Anthology Identifier: L12-1059.

Ariel Rosenfeld and Sarit Kraus. 2015. Providing argu-
ments in discussions based on the prediction of human
argumentative behavior. AAAI.

Roser Saurı́ and James Pustejovsky. 2009. Factbank:
A corpus annotated with event factuality. Language
resources and evaluation, 43(3):227–268.

R. Snow, B. O’Connor, D. Jurafsky, and A.Y. Ng. 2008.
Cheap and fast—but is it good?: evaluating non-expert
annotations for natural language tasks. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 254–263. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

S. Somasundaran and J. Wiebe. 2009. Recognizing
stances in online debates. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL
and the 4th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 1-Volume
1, pages 226–234. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

S. Somasundaran and J. Wiebe. 2010. Recognizing
stances in ideological on-line debates. In Proceedings
of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion in
Text, pages 116–124. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

M. Thomas, B. Pang, and L. Lee. 2006. Get out the
vote: Determining support or opposition from Con-
gressional floor-debate transcripts. In Proceedings of
the 2006 conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing, pages 327–335. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Marilyn Walker, Pranav Anand, , Robert Abbott, and
Jean E. Fox Tree. 2012. A corpus for research on
deliberation and debate. In Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference, LREC2012.

Douglas Walton. 2010. The place of emotion in argu-
ment. Penn State Press.

J. Wiebe and E. Riloff. 2005. Creating Subjective
and Objective Sentence Classifiers from Unannotated
Texts. In Proceedings of the 6th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics and Intelligent
Text Processing, pages 486–497, Mexico City, Mex-
ico, February.

Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Matthew Bell. 2001.
Identifying collocations for recognizing opinions. In
Proceedings of the ACL-01 Workshop on Collocation:
Computational Extraction, Analysis, and Exploitation,
pages 24–31, Toulouse, France.

Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, Rebecca Bruce, Matthew
Bell, and Melanie Martin. 2004. Learning subjective
language. Computational Linguistics, 30(3):277–308.

Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 2005 Hu-
man Language Technology Conference / Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing.

125



T. Wilson, J. Wiebe, and R. Hwa. 2006. Recognizing
strong and weak opinion clauses. Computational In-
telligence, 22(2):73–99.

Bishan Yang and Claire Cardie. 2013. Joint inference
for fine-grained opinion extraction. In ACL (1), pages
1640–1649.

B. Yang and C. Cardie. 2014. Context-aware learning for
sentence-level sentiment analysis with posterior regu-
larization. In Proceedings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL).

Hong Yu and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. Towards
answering opinion questions: Separating facts from
opinions and identifying the polarity of opinion sen-
tences. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 129–136, Sapporo, Japan.

Inon Zuckerman, Erel Segal-Halevi, Avi Rosenfeld, and
Sarit Kraus. 2015. First steps in chat-based negotiat-
ing agents. In Next Frontier in Agent-based Complex
Automated Negotiation, pages 89–109. Springer.

126


