



















































AUTOMATED TRANSLATION OF A LITERARY WORK: A PILOT STUDY


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 114–122,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Automated translation of a literary work: a pilot study

Laurent Besacier
LIG, Univ. Grenoble - Alpes

UJF - BP 53
38041 Grenoble Cedex 9, France
laurent.besacier@imag.fr

Lane Schwartz
Department of Linguistics

University of Illinois
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
lanes@illinois.edu

Abstract

Current machine translation (MT) techniques
are continuously improving. In specific ar-
eas, post-editing (PE) can enable the pro-
duction of high-quality translations relatively
quickly. But is it feasible to translate a liter-
ary work (fiction, short story, etc) using such
an MT+PE pipeline? This paper offers an
initial response to this question. An essay
by the American writer Richard Powers, cur-
rently not available in French, is automatically
translated and post-edited and then revised by
non-professional translators. In addition to
presenting experimental evaluation results of
the MT+PE pipeline (MT system used, auto-
matic evaluation), we also discuss the quality
of the translation output from the perspective
of a panel of readers (who read the translated
short story in French, and answered a survey
afterwards). Finally, some remarks of the offi-
cial French translator of R. Powers, requested
on this occasion, are given at the end of this
article.

1 Introduction

The task of post-editing consists of editing some text
(generally produced by a machine, such as a ma-
chine translation, optical character recognition, or
automatic transcription system) in order to improve
it. When using machine translation in the field of
document translation, the following process is gen-
erally used: the MT system produces raw trans-
lations, which are manually post-edited by trained
professional translators (post-editors) who correct
translation errors. Several studies have shown the
benefits of the combined use of machine transla-
tion and manual post-editing (MT+PE) for a docu-
ment translation task. For example, Garcia (2011)
showed that even though post-editing raw transla-
tions does not always lead to significant increases in

productivity, this process can result in higher qual-
ity translations (when compared to translating from
scratch).1 Autodesk also carried out an experiment
to test whether the use of MT would improve the
productivity of translators. Results from that exper-
iment (Zhechev, 2012) show that post-editing ma-
chine translation output significantly increases pro-
ductivity when compared to translating a document
from scratch. This result held regardless of the lan-
guage pair, the experience level of the translator, and
the translator’s stated preference for post-editing or
translating from scratch.

These results from academia (Garcia, 2011) and
industry (Zhechev, 2012) regarding translation in
specialized areas lead us to ask the following ques-
tions:

• What would be the value of such a process
(MT + PE) applied to the translation of a lit-
erary work?

• How long does it take to translate a literary doc-
ument of ten thousand words?

• Is the resulting translation acceptable to read-
ers?

• What would the official translator (of the con-
sidered author) think of it?

• Is “low cost” translation produced by commu-
nities of fans (as is the case for TV series) fea-
sible for novels or short stories?

This work attempts to provide preliminary an-
swers to these questions. In addition to our ex-
perimental results, we also present a new transla-

1The work of Garcia (2011) is somewhat controversial, be-
cause the manual translation without post-editing appears to
have been done without allowing the translator to use any form
of digital assistance, such as an electronic dicitonary.

114



tion (into French) of an English-language essay (The
Book of Me by Richard Powers).

This paper is organized as follows. We begin in
§2 by surveying related work in machine translation
in the literary domain. In §3, we present our ex-
perimental methodology, including the choice of lit-
erary work to be translated and the machine trans-
lation, domain adaptation, and post-editing frame-
works used. In §4, we present our experimental re-
sults,2 including an assessment of translation qual-
ity using automated machine translation metrics. In
§5, we attempt to assess machine translation qual-
ity beyond automated metrics, through a human as-
sessment of the final translation; this assessment was
performed by a panel of readers and by the official
French translator of Richard Powers.

2 Related Work

While the idea of post-editing machine translations
of scientific and technical works is nearly as old
as machine translation (see, for example (Oettinger,
1954)), very little scholarship to date has examined
the use of machine translation or post-editing for
literary documents. The most closely related work
(Voigt and Jurafsky, 2012) that we were able to iden-
tify was presented at the ACL workshop on Compu-
tational Linguistics for Literature3 ; since 2012, that
workshop has examined the use of NLP in the lit-
erary field. Voigt and Jurafsky (2012) examine how
referential cohesion is expressed in literary and non-
literary texts and how this cohesion affects transla-
tion (experiments on Chinese literature and news).
The present paper, however, tries to investigate if
computer-assisted translation of a complete (and ini-
tially un-translated) short story, is feasible or not.

For the purposes of this paper, we now define
what constitutes a literary text. We include in this
category (our definition is undoubtedly too restric-
tive) all fiction or autobiographical writing in the
form of novels, short stories or essays. In such
texts, the author expresses his vision of the world of
his time and life in general while using literary de-
vices and a writing technique (form) that allows him

2Our translations and collected data
are available at https://github.com/
powersmachinetranslation/DATA

3https://sites.google.com/site/clfl2014a

to create effects using the language and to express
meanings (explicit or implied).

3 Methodology

For this study, we follow a variant of the post-editing
methodology established by Potet et al. (2012). In
that work, 12,000 post-edited segments (equivalent
to a book of about 500 pages) in the news domain
were collected through crowdsourcing, resulting in
one of the largest freely available corpora of post-
edited machine translations.4 It is, for example,
three times larger than that collected by Specia et
al. (2010), a well known benchmark in the field.

Following Potet et al. (2012), we divide the doc-
ument to be translated into three equal parts. A
translation/post-edition/adaptation loop was applied
to the three blocks of text according to the following
process:

• The first third of the document was translated
from English to French using Moses (Hoang et
al., 2007), a state-of-the-art phrase-based ma-
chine translation system. This machine transla-
tion output was then post-edited.

• The post-edited data from the third of the doc-
ument was used to train an updated domain-
adapted English-French MT system. Given
the small amount of post-edited data, adapta-
tion at this point consisted only in adapting the
weights of the log-linear SMT model (by using
the corrected first third as a development cor-
pus). A similar method is suggested by Pecina
et al. (2012) for domain adaptation with a lim-
ited quantity of data (we are aware that other
more advanced domain adaptation techniques
could have been used but this was not the cen-
tral theme of our contribution).

• Then, the second third of the text was translated
with the adapted MT system, then the results
were post-edited and a second adapted MT sys-
tem was obtained starting from the new data.
This second system was used to translate the
third and last part of the text.

4http://www-clips.imag.fr/geod/User/
marion.potet/index.php?page=download

115



Our methodology differs in two important ways
from Potet et al. (2012). First, our study makes use
of only one post-editor, and does not use crowd-
sourcing to collect data. Second, once the post-
editing was completed, the final text was revised:
first by the post-editor and then by another reviewer.
The reviewer was a native French speaker with a
good knowledge of the English language. The times
taken to post-edit and revise were recorded.

3.1 Choice of literary document

To test the feasibility of using machine translation
and post-editing to translate a literary work, we be-
gan by selecting an essay written in English which
had not yet been translated into French. The choice
of text was guided by the following factors:

(a) we had a contact with the French translator
of the American author Richard Powers5 (author of
the novel The Echo Maker which won the National
Book Award and was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize)

(b) In his writing, Powers often explores the ef-
fects of modern science and technology, and in some
ways his writings contain commonalities with sci-
entific and technical texts. We hypothesized that
this characteristic may somewhat reduce the gap be-
tween translation of scientific and literary texts.

Via his French translator (Jean-Yves Pellegrin),
Powers was informed by e-mail of our approach,
and he gave his consent as well as his feeling on
this project (Richard Powers: “.../... this automated
translation project sounds fascinating. I know that
the field has taken a big jump in recent years, but
each jump just furthers the sense of how overwhelm-
ing the basic task is. I would be delighted to let him
do a text of mine. Such figurative writing would be a
good test, to be sure. .../... “The Book of Me” would
be fine, too.”).

We selected an essay by Powers, entitled The
Book of Me, originally published in GQ magazine.6

The essay is a first-person narrative set in 2008, in
which Powers describes the process by which he be-
came the ninth person in the world to see his genome
fully sequenced. Although the topic is genetics and

5http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_
Powers

6http://www.gq.com/
news-politics/big-issues/200810/
richard-powers-genome-sequence

in spite of the simple, clinical style used by the au-
thor, The Book of Me is truly a work of literature in
which the author, who teaches narrative technique at
the university level, never puts aside his poetic am-
bition, his humour and his fascination for the impact
of science and technology on the society.

3.2 MT system used
Our machine translation system is a phrase-based
system using the Moses toolkit (Hoang et al., 2007).
Our system is trained using the data provided in
the IWSLT machine translation evaluation campaign
(Federico et al., 2012), representing a cumulative to-
tal of about 25M sentences:

• news-c: version 7 of the News-Commentary
corpus,

• europarl: version 7 of the Europarl corpus7
(Koehn, 2005),

• un: the United-nations corpus,8

• eu-const: corpus which is freely available
(Tiedemann, 2009),

• dgt-tm: DGT Multilingual Translation Memory
of the Acquis Communautaire (Steinberger et
al., 2012),

• pct: corpus of Parallel Patent Applications9,
• gigaword: 5M sentences extracted from the Gi-

gaword corpus; after cleaning, the whole Gi-
gaword corpus was sorted at sentence level ac-
cording to the sum of perplexities of the source
(English) and the target (French) based on two
French and English pretrained language mod-
els. Finally, the 5M subset was obtained after
filtering out the whole Gigaword corpus with a
cut-off limit of 300 (ppl). This leads to a subset
of 5M aligned sentences.

Prior to training the translation and language
models, various pre-processing steps are performed
on the training data. We begin by filtering out

7http://www.statmt.org/europarl/
8http://www.euromatrixplus.net/multi-un/
9http://www.wipo.int/patentscope/en/

data/pdf/wipo-coppatechnicalDocumentation.
pdf

116



badly aligned sentences (using several heuristics),
filtering out empty sentences, and sentences having
more than 50 words. Punctuation is normalized,
and we tokenize the training data, applying spe-
cific grammar-based rules for the French tokeniza-
tion. Spelling correction is applied to both source
and target side, and certain words (such as coeur)
are normalized. Abbreviations and clitics are dis-
ambiguated. Various additional cleaning steps (as
described in the list above) were applied to the Gi-
gaword corpus. Many heuristics (rules) were used in
order to keep only good quality bi-texts.

From this data, we train three distinct translation
models on various subsets of the parallel data (ted;
news-c+europarl+un+eu-const+dgt-tm+pct; giga-
word5M). The French part of the same corpus is
used for language model training, with the addition
of the news-shuffle corpus provided as part of the
WMT 2012 campaign (Callison-Burch et al., 2012).
A 5-gram language model with modified Kneser-
Ney smoothing is learned separately for each cor-
pus using the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002); these
models are then interpolated by optimizing perplex-
ity on the IWSLT dev2010 corpus. The weights for
the final machine translation system are optimized
using the data from the English-French MT task of
IWSLT 2012. The system obtains BLEU (Papineni
et al., 2002) scores of 36.88 and 37.58 on the IWSLT
tst2011 and test2012 corpora, respectively (BLEU
evaluated with case and punctuation).

The training data used is out-of-domain for the
task of literary translation, and as such is clearly not
ideal for translating literary texts. In future work, it
would be desirable to at least collect literary texts
in French to adapt the target language model, and if
possible gain access to other works and translations
of the same author. Additionally, in future work we
may examine the use of real-time translation model
adaptation, such as Denkowski et al. (2014).

3.3 Post-editing
We use the SECTra w.1 post-editing interface of
Huynh et al. (2008). This tool also forms the foun-
dation that gave rise to the interactive Multilingual
Access Gateway (iMAG) framework for enabling
multilingual website access, with incremental im-
provement and quality control of the translations. It
has been used for many projects (Wang and Boitet,

2013), including translation of the EOLLS encyclo-
pedia, as well as multilingual access to dozens of
websites (80 demonstrations, 4 industrial contracts,
10 target languages, 820k post-edited segments).

Figure 1 shows the post-editing interface in ad-
vanced mode. In advanced mode, multiple auto-
matic translations of each source segment (for ex-
ample, from Google, Moses, etc.) can be displayed
and corrected. For this experiment, the output of our
Moses system was prioritized when displaying seg-
ment translations.

Post-editing was done by a (non-English native)
student in translation studies at Université Grenoble
Alpes.

4 Experimental results

4.1 Corpus and post-editing statistics

The test data, The Book of Me (see §3.1), is made
up of 545 segments comprising 10,731 words. This
data was divided into three equal blocks. We apply
machine translation and post-editing to the data, as
described in §3.2 and §3.3.

Table 1 summarizes the number of source and tar-
get (MT or PE) words in the data. Not surprisingly,
a ratio greater than 1.2 is observed between French
target (MT) and English source words. However,
this ratio tends to decrease after post-editing of the
French output. The post-editing results reported in
Table 1 are obtained after each iteration of the pro-
cess; the last stage of revision is thus not taken into
account at this stage.

4.2 Performance of the MT system

Table 2 summarizes machine translation perfor-
mance, as measured by BLEU (Papineni et al.,
2002), calculated on the full corpus with the sys-
tems resulting from each iteration. Post-editing time
required for each block is also shown. The BLEU
scores, which are directly comparable (because eval-
uated on the full corpus), show no real improvement
of the system. It therefore appears that adaptation
of weights alone (which resulted in improvements in
(Pecina et al., 2012)) is ineffective in our case. How-
ever, post-editing time decreases slightly with each
iteration (but again, the differences are small and it
is unclear whether the decrease in post-editing time
is due to the adaptation of the MT system or to in-

117



Figure 1: Post-editing interface in advanced mode

Iteration (no. seg) English (no. words) French MT (no. words) French PE (no. words)
Iteration 1 (184) 3593 4295 4013
Iteration 2 (185) 3729 4593 4202
Iteration 3 (176) 3409 4429 3912
Total (545) 10731 13317 12127

Table 1: Number of words in each block of the English source corpus, French machine translation (MT), and French
post-edited machine translation (PE).

creasing productivity as the post-editor adapts to the
task). In the end, the total PE time is estimated at
about 15 hours.

4.3 Analyzing the revised text

Reading the translated work at this stage (after PE)
is unsatisfactory. Indeed, the post-editing is done
”segment by segment” without the context of the full
corpus. This results in a very embarrassing lack of
homogeneity for a literary text. For this reason, two
revisions of the translated text are also conducted:
one by the original post-editor (4 hours) and one by
a second French-English bilingual serving as a re-
viewer (6 hours). The final version of the translated
work (which has been obtained after 15+4+6=25
hours of work) provides the basis for more qualita-
tive assessments which are presented in the next sec-
tion. The difference between the rough post-edited
version (PE - 15 hours of work) and the revised ver-
sion (REV - 25 hours of work) is analyzed in Table
3. It is interesting to see that while the revision takes
40% of the total time, the revised text remains very
similar to the post-edited text. This can be observed
by computing BLEU between the post-edited text
before and after revising; the result is a BLEU score

of 79.92, indicating very high similarity between the
two versions. So, post-editing and revising are very
different tasks. This is illustrated by the numbers
of Table 3: MT and PE are highly dissimilar (post-
editor corrects a lot of MT errors) while PE and REV
are similar (revision probably focuses more on im-
portant details for readability and style). More qual-
itative analysis of the revised text and its comparison
with post-edited text is part of future work (and any
reader interested in doing so can download our data
— see footnote 2 on page 2).

5 Human evaluation of post-edited MT

5.1 The views of readers on the post-edited
translation

Nine French readers agreed to read the final trans-
lated work and answer an online questionnaire. The
full survey is available on fluidsurveys.com.10. A pdf
version of the test results and a spreadsheet file con-
taining the results of the survey are also made avail-

10https://fluidsurveys.com/
surveys/manuela-cristina/
un-livre-sur-moi-qualite-de-la-traduction/
?TEST_DATA=

118



MT system used BLEU score (full corpus) PE (block it.) time
Iteration 1 (not adapted) 34.79 5h 37mn
Iteration 2 (tuning on Block 1) 33.13 4h 45mn
Iteration 3 (tuning on Blocks 1+2) 34.01 4h 35mn

Table 2: BLEU after tokenization and case removal on full corpus, and time measurements for each iteration

Comparison BLEU score
MT vs PE 34.01
MT vs REV 30.37
PE vs REV 79.92

Table 3: Automatic Evaluation (BLEU) on full corpus between unedited machine translation (MT), post-edited ma-
chine translation (PE), and revised post-edited machine translation (REV).

able on github (see footnote 2 on page 2).
After three questions to better understand the pro-

file of the participant (How old are you? Do you fre-
quently read? If yes, what is your favorite genre?),
the first portion asks readers five questions about
readability and quality of the translated literary text:

• What do you think about text readability?

• Is the text easy to understand?

• Does the language sound natural?

• Do you think sentences are correct (syntacti-
cally)?

• Did you notice obvious errors in the text?

The second portion (7 questions) verifies that certain
subtleties of the text were understood

• What is the text about?

• Who is the main character of the story?

• Who is funding the genome sequencing?

• Chronologically sort the sequence of steps in-
volved in genome sequencing.

• How many base pairs are in the genome?

• When the novel was written, how many people
had already fully sequenced their genome?

• Which genetic variant is associated with a high
risk for Alzheimer’s disease?

The text is considered to be overall readable (5
Very Good and 3 Good), comprehensible (8 yes, 1
not) and containing few errors (8 seldom, 1 often).
The easiest comprehension questions were well han-
dled by the readers, who all responded correctly (4
questions). However, three questions led to different
answers from the readers:

• 2 readers responded incorrectly to a seemingly
simple question (Who funded the genome se-
quencing of Powers?)

• The question At the time the story was writ-
ten, how many people’s genomes had been se-
quenced? was ambiguous since the answer
could be 8 or 9 (depending on whether Powers
is counted), giving rise to different responses
from readers

• Only 4 of 9 readers were able to give the cor-
rect sequence of steps in the process of genome
sequencing; the translated text is not unclear on
this point (the errors are on the part of the read-
ers); this mixed result may indicate a lack of
interest by some readers in the most technical
aspects of the text.

In short, we can say that this survey, while very
limited, nevertheless demonstrates that the text (pro-
duced according to our methodology) was consid-
ered to be acceptable and rather readable by our
readers (of whom 3 indicated that they read very of-
ten, 4 rather often, and 2 seldom). We also include
some remarks made in the free comments:

119



• “I have noticed some mistakes, some neolo-
gisms (I considered them to be neologisms and
not mistranslations because they made sense)”

• “Very fluid text and very easy reading despite
precise scientific terms”

• “I found the text a little difficult because it con-
tains complex words and it deals with an area I
do not know at all.”

5.2 The views of R. Powers’s French translator

To conclude this pilot study, the views of a tenth
reader were solicited: the author’s French transla-
tor, Jean-Yves Pellegrin, research professor at Paris-
Sorbonne University. His comments are summa-
rized here in the form of questions and answers.

Readability? “The text you have successfully re-
produces faithfully the content of the article by Pow-
ers. The readability bet is won and certain parts (in
particular those which relate to the scientific aspects
of the described experiment) are very convincing.”

So the MT+PE pipeline seems also efficient for
obtaining quickly readable literary texts, as it is the
case for other domain specific data types.

Imperfections? “There are, of course, imperfec-
tions, clumsy expressions, and specific errors which
require correction”

Top mistakes?

• “The most frequent defect, which affects the
work of any novice translator, is the syntactic
calque, where French structures the phrase dif-
ferently .../... One understands, but it does not
sound very French”

• “Another fairly common error is the loss of id-
iomatic French in favor of Anglicisms.” Some-
times these Anglicisms can be more disturbing
when flirting with Franglais,11 such as translat-
ing ‘actionable knowledge’ as ‘connaissances
actionnables’ (p. 18) instead of ‘connaissances
pratiques / utilisables’.”

11Frenglish

• “A third defect is due to not taking into account
certain cultural references .../... For example,
Powers made several references to the topog-
raphy of Boston that give rise to inaccuracies
in the translation: ‘Charles River’ for exam-
ple (p. 12) is not ‘une riviere’ but ‘un fleuve’;
that is why we translate by ‘la Charles River’
or simply ‘la Charles’”

The errors mentioned above are considered as not
acceptable by a professional translator of literary
text. These are hard problems for computer assisted
translation (move away from the syntactic calque,
better handle idioms and multi-word expressions,
take into account cultural references).

Could this text serve as a starting point for a
professional literary translator? “Instinctively, I
am tempted to say no for now, because from his first
cast the translator has reflexes that allow him to pro-
duce a cleaner text than the one you produced .../....
however, this translator would spend more than 25
hours to produce the 42 pages of 1500 characters
that comprise Power’s text. At a rate of 7 pages
per day on average, it would take 6 eight-hour days.
If, however, I could work only from your text (while
completely forgetting Powers’s) and I could be guar-
anteed that your translation contains no errors or
omissions from the original, but just that it needs to
be improved, made more fluid, more authentically
French, things would be different and the time saved
would be probably huge.”

As expected, the professional translator of liter-
ature wants to control the whole translation pro-
cess. But the last part of his comment is interest-
ing: if the meaning were guaranteed, he could con-
centrate on the form and limit going back and forth
between source and target text. Thus, working more
on quality assesment of MT and confidence estima-
tion seems to be a promising way for future work
on literary text translation. Based on the translation
speed rates provided by Pellegrin, we can estimate
the time savings of our technique. Our computer-
assisted methodology can be said to have accelerated
the translation factor by a factor of 2 — our process
took roughly 25 hours, compared to the 50 hours es-
timated for a professional literary translation.

120



6 Conclusion

6.1 Collected Data Available Online

The data in this article are avail-
able at https://github.com/
powersmachinetranslation/DATA. There
one can find:

• The 545 English source and French target (MT,
PE) segments mentioned in Table 1

• The translated and revised work (REV in Ta-
ble 3), in French, that was read by a panel of 9
readers

• The results of the survey (9 readers) compiled
in a spreadsheet (in French)

6.2 Comments and open questions

We presented an initial experiment of machine trans-
lation of a literary work (an English text of about
twenty pages). The results of an MT+PE pipeline
were presented and, going beyond that, the opinions
of a panel of readers and a translator were solicited.
The translated text, obtained after 25 hours of hu-
man labor (a professional translator told us that he
would have needed at least twice that much time)
is acceptable to readers but the opinion of a profes-
sional translator is mixed. This approach suggests a
methodology for rapid “low cost” translation , sim-
ilar to the translation of TV series subtitles found
on the web. For the author of the literary text, this
presents the possibility of having his work trans-
lated into more languages (several dozen instead of
a handful, this short story by Richard Powers has
also been translated into Romanian using this same
methodology).

But would the author be willing to sacrifice the
quality of translation (and control over it) to enable
wider dissemination of his works? For a reader who
cannot read an author in the source language, this
provides the ability to have faster access to an (ad-
mittedly imperfect) translation of their favorite au-
thor. For a non-native reader of the source language
this provides a mechanism for assistance on the parts
he or she has trouble understanding. One last thing:
the title of the work The Book of Me has remained
unchanged in the French version because no satis-
factory translation was found to illustrate that the

author refers both to a book but also to his DNA;
this paradox is a good illustration of the difficulty
translating a literary work!

Thanks

Thanks to Manuela Barcan who handled the first
phase of post-editing machine translations in French
and Romanian during the summer of 2013. Thanks
to Jean-Yves Pellegrin, French translator of Richard
Powers, for his help and open-mindedness. Thanks
to Richard Powers who allowed us to conduct this
experiment using one of his works.

References

Chris Callison-Burch, Philipp Koehn, Christof Monz,
Matt Post, Radu Soricut, and Lucia Specia. 2012.
Findings of the 2012 Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation. In Proceedings of the Seventh Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 10–
51, Montréal, Canada, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Michael Denkowski, Alon Lavie, Isabel Lacruz, and
Chris Dyer. 2014. Real time adaptive machine
translation for post-editing with cdec and TransCenter.
In Proceedings of the EACL 2014 Workshop on Hu-
mans and Computer-assisted Translation, pages 72–
77, Gothenburg, Sweden, April. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Marcello Federico, Mauro Cettolo, Luisa Bentivogli,
Michael Paul, and Sebastian Stüker. 2012. Overview
of the IWSLT 2012 evaluation campaign. In In pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Spoken
Language Translation (IWSLT), December.

Ignacio Garcia. 2011. Translating by post-editing: is it
the way forward? Journal of Machine Translation,
25(3):217–237.

Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris Callison-burch,
Richard Zens, Rwth Aachen, Alexandra Constantin,
Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, Chris Dyer,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, and
Ondřej Bojar. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit
for statistical machine translation. In ACL’07, Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 177–180, Prague, Czech Republic.

Cong-Phap Huynh, Christian Boitet, and Hervé Blan-
chon. 2008. SECTra w.1: an online collaborative
system for evaluating, post-editing and presenting MT
translation corpora. In LREC’08, Sixth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
pages 28–30, Marrakech, Morocco.

121



Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
Tenth Machine Translation Summit, Phuket, Thailand,
September.

Anthony Oettinger. 1954. A Study for the Design of an
Automatic Dictionary. Ph.D. thesis, Harvard Univer-
sity.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Zhu
Wei-Jing. 2002. BLEU: A method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In ACL’02, 40th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 311–318, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Pavel Pecina, Antonio Toral, and Josef van Genabith.
2012. Simple and effective parameter tuning for do-
main adaptation of statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 2209–2224, Mum-
bai, India.

Marion Potet, Emmanuelle Esperança-Rodier, Laurent
Besacier, and Hervé Blanchon. 2012. Collection of
a large database of French-English SMT output cor-
rections. In Proceedings of the Eighth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), Istanbul, Turkey, May.

Lucia Specia, Nicola Cancedda, and Marc Dymetman.
2010. A dataset for assessing machine translation
evaluation metrics. In 7th Conference on Interna-
tional Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2010), pages 3375–3378, Valetta, Malta.

Ralf Steinberger, Andreas Eisele, Szymon Klocek, Spyri-
don Pilos, and Patrick Schlüter. 2012. DGT-TM: A
freely available translation memory in 22 languages.
In LREC 2012, Istambul, Turkey.

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM: An extensible language
modeling toolkit. In ICSLP’02, 7th International Con-
ference on Spoken Language Processing, pages 901–
904, Denver, USA.

Jörg Tiedemann. 2009. News from OPUS - a collection
of multilingual parallel corpora with tools and inter-
faces. In Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural
Language Processing.

Rob Voigt and Dan Jurafsky. 2012. Towards a literary
machine translation, the role of referential cohesion.
In Computational Linguistics for Literature, Workshop
at NAACL-HLT 2012, Montreal, Canada.

Lingxiao Wang and Christian Boitet. 2013. Online pro-
duction of HQ parallel corpora and permanent task-
based evaluation of multiple MT systems. In Proceed-
ings of the MT Summit XIV Workshop on Post-editing
Technology and Practice.

Ventsislav Zhechev. 2012. Machine translation infras-
tructure and post-editing performance at Autodesk. In
AMTA’12, Conference of the Association for Machine
Translation in the Americas, San Diego, USA.

122


