



















































The Dependency Status of Function Words: Auxiliaries


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 111–120,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

 

 

The Dependency Status of Function Words: Auxiliaries 

 

 

Thomas Groß Timothy Osborne 
Aichi University Zhejiang University 

tm.gross@yahoo.de tjo3ya@yahoo.com 

 
 

Abstract 

The Universal Stanford Dependencies 

(USD) subordinates function words to 

content words. Auxiliaries, adpositions 

and subordinators are positioned as de-

pendents of full verbs and nouns, respec-

tively. Such an approach to the syntax of 

natural languages is contrary to most 

work in theoretical syntax in the past 35 

years, regardless of whether this work is 

constituency- or dependency-based. A 

substantial amount of evidence delivers a 

strong argument for the more conven-

tional approach, which subordinates full 

verbs to auxiliaries and nouns to adposi-

tions. This contribution demonstrates that 

the traditional approach to the dependen-

cy status of auxiliary verbs is motivated 

by many empirical considerations, and 

hence USD cannot be viewed as model-

ing the syntax of natural languages in a 

plausible way.  

1 The dependency status of function 
words 

The Universal Stanford Dependencies (USD), as 

presented in de Marneffe et al. (2014), advocates 

a scheme for parsing natural languages that cate-

gorically subordinates function words to content 

words. Auxiliary verbs, adpositions (prepositions 

and postpositions), subordinators (subordinate 

conjunctions), etc. are subordinated to the con-

tent words with which they co-occur. A more 

traditional dependency-based analysis assumes 

the opposite, i.e. most function words dominate 

the content words with which they co-occur.
1
 

The following diagrams illustrate both approach-

es:  

                                                           
1 Determiners are one area of disagreement among linguists.  

(1)2       waiting       - V(Aux) 

   Fred  is        them 

            for   

   a. Fred  is   waiting  for them.   

      is           - Aux(V) 

   Fred    waiting     

            for 

              them 

  b. Fred  is  waiting  for them.  

The USD analysis (1a) subordinates the auxiliary 

is to the full verb waiting and the preposition for 

to the pronoun them, whereas the traditional 

analysis (1b) does the opposite.  

While the USD approach is still novel, it is 

based on the Stanford Dependencies (SD) by de 

Marneffe et al. (2006) and de Marneffe and 

Manning (2008). SD is available for English, 

Chinese, Finnish, and Persian.  

The assumption that function words should be 

categorically subordinated to content words 

stands in stark contrast to work in theoretical 

syntax in the last 35 years, which has been pursu-

ing an approach to syntactic structures that is 

more congruent with the analysis shown in (1b). 

Most phrase structure grammars – e.g. HPSG 

(Pollard and Sag 1994), Lexical Functional 

Grammar (Bresnan 2001), Categorial Grammar 

(Steedman 2014), Government and Binding 

(Chomsky 1981, 1986), Minimalist Program 

(Chomsky 1995) – and most dependency gram-

mars (DGs) – Lexicase (Starosta 1988), Word 

Grammar (Hudson 1984, 1990, 2007), Meaning 

Text Theory (Mel’čuk 1988, 2003, 2009), the 

German schools (Kunze 1975, Engel 1994, 

Heringer 1996, Eroms 2000) – assume that func-

tion words are heads over content words as 

shown in (1b).  

There are, however, also exceptions. Hays 

                                                           
2  Whenever two tree representations are contrasted, their 

respective preference on dependency direction is indicated 

at the top. 

111



 

 

(1964: 521) assumes that non-copula auxiliaries, 

such as are in They are flying planes, are de-

pendents of full verbs. Matthews (1981: 63), too, 

argues for subordinate auxiliaries. On the other 

hand, DG sources that directly motivate the sta-

tus of the finite verb as the root of the clause are 

plentiful: Starosta (1988: 239ff.), Engel (1994: 

107ff.), Jung (1995: 62f.), Eroms (2000: 129ff.), 

Mel’čuk (2009: 44f., 79f.). 

The next section addresses the difficulty of de-

lineating function words from content words. It 

looks at semi-auxiliaries, light verbs, and func-

tional verb constructions. Section 3 produces 

evidence that support the view that auxiliaries are 

heads over their full verbs. Section 4 briefly out-

lines the importance of functional hierarchies, 

and argues for a token-based morphological ac-

count. 

2 Degrees of content 

The parsing scheme that USD advocates takes 

the division between function word and content 

word as its guiding principle. One major difficul-

ty with doing this is that the dividing line be-

tween function word and content word is often 

not clear. The next three subsections briefly ex-

amine three problem areas for USD in this regard: 

semi-auxiliaries, light verb constructions, and 

functional verb constructions. 

2.1 Semi-auxiliaries 

Many constructions in natural language distribute 

functional meaning over varied syntactic units. 

Semi-auxiliaries in English – e.g. be going to, be 

able to, be about to, ought to, used to, etc. – are a 

case in point. The meaning contribution of these 

expressions is functional, yet their distribution 

and subcategorization traits are more like that of 

full content verbs. USD therefore faces the 

dilemma of having to value the one aspect of 

these expressions more than the other when 

deciding upon an analysis. 

The point is illustrated with an example of be 

going to: 

(2)  V(SemiAux)       leave 

   They are going to          

 a.  They are going to  leave. 

        going     - SemiAux(V) 

   They are    to  leave 

 b.  They are going to  leave 

If USD wants to be consistent, it should choose 

the (a)-analysis because that analysis is most in 

line with the distinction between function word 

and content word. The (b)-analysis foregoes this 

consistency by taking going as the root. It is 

motivated by a syntactic consideration (distribu-

tion). Either way, USD is challenged; no matter 

which of the two analyses it chooses, it has to 

ignore an important fact that speaks for the other 

analysis. 

The traditional approach favors the following 

analysis: 

(2)     are        - SemiAux(V)  

   They   going 

           to 

             leave 

 c.  They are going to  leave. 

The hierarchy of verb forms here is motivated by 

various syntactic criteria, such as the ability to 

topicalize (e.g. …and going to leave they 

are;…and leave they are going to) and the ability 

to elide (e.g …and they are; ….and they are 

going to).  

2.2 Light verb constructions 

The challenge of distinguishing function word 

and content word is perhaps most visible with 

light verb constructions. Typical light verbs in 

English are do, give, have, make, take, etc.; in 

German: geben, haben, machen, sein, etc.; in 

Japanese: s-uru ‘do’, tor-u ‘take’, yar-u ‘do/give’, 

etc. The defining trait of a light verb is that it co-

occurs with a content noun, whereby it is the 

noun that is semantically loaded. Examples from 

English of light verb constructions are to take a 

shower (vs. to shower), give a hug (vs. to hug), 

have a smoke (vs. to smoke), etc. Many light verb 

constructions have a simple verb that they 

correspond to, as with the examples just given; 

other light verb constructions do not correspond 

to a simple verb, e.g. make a mistake, have fun, 

etc.   

Light verbs straddle the function vs. content 

division. They are more like function words from 

a semantic point of view since they lack semantic 

substance, but they are more like content verbs 

from a syntactic point of view since their 

distribution is that of a full content verb.  

Consider the following analyses of sentences 

containing the meaning ‘stroll’: 

112



 

 

(3)         stroll      - N(v) 

   We took  a     around 

 a.  We took  a stroll around 

     took           - v(N) 

   We     stroll 

        a    around 

 b.  We took  a stroll around.  

If USD chooses the analysis in (3a), then it has to 

ignore the fact that took distributes like a normal 

content verb, but if USD chooses the analysis in 

(3b), then it has to ignore the fact that took is 

largely devoid of semantic content and should 

therefore be treated like an auxiliary, auxiliary 

verbs of course lacking semantic content.  

The problem just illustrated with English 

examples is now solidified with an example from 

Japanese, using the light verb construction 

hanashi-o shi-ta ‘talked’. 

(4) N(v) -        hanashi-o 

   Kare-wa boku-to      shi-ta 

  a. Kare-wa boku-to hanashi-o  shi-ta.  

   He-top  I-com  talk-acc  do-pst 

   ‘He talked to me.’ 

  v(N) -             shi-ta 

   Kare-wa boku-to hanashi-o  

  a. Kare-wa boku-to hanashi-o  shi-ta.  

USD should choose the (4a)-analysis, since it 

positions the noun hanashi-o as the root. In so 

doing, it would be consistently subordinating 

function words to content words. The 

(4a)-analysis is implausible, though, mainly be-

cause Japanese is widely judged to be a strict 

head-final language. The traditional analysis 

shown in (4b) accommodates the head-final na-

ture of Japanese syntax. Therefore the example 

illustrates that the traditional analysis is more in 

line with broad typological generalizations that 

have been used to characterize the syntax of the 

world’s languages.   

2.3 Functional verb constructions 

German is known for its many functional verb 

constructions (Funktionsverbgefüge). These con-

structions involve a verb combined with a prepo-

sitional phrase, whereby varying degrees of se-

mantic compositionality are involved,  e.g. in 

Kraft treten ‘come into force’, in Frage kommen 

‘be possible’, in Kauf nehmen ‘accept’, etc. 

Functional verb constructions differ from light 

verb constructions insofar as the verb in the latter 

is bleached but the noun is loaded with full se-

mantic content; in the former, in contrast, the 

entire expression is bleached. There is no 

strength present in in Kraft treten, no question in 

in Frage kommen, and no buying in in Kauf 

nehmen. 

Given the inability to identify the one or the 

other part of these constructions as the semantic 

center, the analysis that USD chooses becomes 

arbitrary. Consider the following possibilities: 

(5) n(v) -            Frage 

   Das  kommt  nicht  in  

 a.  Das  kommt  nicht  in  Frage. 

   that  comes  not  in  question 
      ‘That’s not possible.’  

  v(n) -   kommt 

   Das      nicht    Frage 

             in 

 b.  Das  kommt  nicht  in  Frage. 

Since it is implausible to view either kommt or 

Frage as being semantically more loaded than 

the other, USD cannot provide a convincing rea-

son why the one or the other of these two anal-

yses should be preferred. If it chooses the (b)-

analysis because kommt is a verb, then it is 

reaching to a syntactic criterion, and has thus 

departed from its guiding principle, this principle 

being that the distinction between function word 

and content word is decisive. 

Functional verb constructions reside closer to 

idiomatic expressions than to light verb construc-

tions, but both construction types are located on 

an idiomaticity cline. USD, as well as its precur-

sors, can hardly acknowledge this idiomaticity 

cline; its guiding principle sees it shoehorning all 

complex expressions with somewhat non-

compositional meaning into the multi-word-

expression box. The problem with doing this is 

that it tends to view all structures with non-

compositional meaning as fundamentally differ-

ent from compositional ones. Consider in this 

area that, disregarding how one labels the de-

pendency branches between nodes, the depend-

ency structures of an idiom like He kicked the 

bucket and the similar, but non-idiomatic sen-

tence He kicked the car should be isomorph. The 

need for such syntactic isomorphism is problem 

for USD, though, because it would have to depart 

from its guiding principle to accommodate the 

isomorphism. 

113



 

 

3 Auxiliaries 

The following subsections provide evidence from 

subcategorization, the subject-verb relation, va-

lency change, VP-ellipsis, string coordination, 

and sentential negation that challenge USD’s 

analysis of auxiliaries.  

3.1 Subject-verb relation 

In many languages, the finite verb enjoys a spe-

cial relationship with the subject. One expression 

of this is agreement. The salient property is the 

correlation of nominative case with tense/mood 

markers. Tense/mood is marked only on finite 

verbs. Consider the following examples from 

German: 

(6)           gesagt  - V(Aux) 

   Du hast    das 

 a.  Du hast    das gesagt. 

   you have.2sg  that said 

   ‘You have said that.’ 

     hast          - Aux(V) 

   Du     gesagt 

       das 

 b.  Du hast das gesagt.  

The USD structure in (6a) does not accommodate 

the correlational property of tense/mood – nomi-

native, whereas the conventional DG analysis 

(6b) does. The analysis in (6b) expresses this 

relationship by subordinating the subject directly 

to the finite verb. One finds the same issue in 

Hebrew, where agreement is present in every 

verb: 

(7)         ba-bait    - P(Aux) 

   Hi haiita 

 a.  Hi haiita   ba-bait. 

   she was.3sgf  at.the-house 

   ‘She was at home.’ 

     haiita         - Aux(P) 

   Hi    ba-bait 

 b.  Hi haiita ba-bait.  

Example (7a) sees the pronoun Hi depending on 

ba-bait, even though tense and person/number is 

marked on the verb. The conventional DG struc-

ture (7b) assumes again that subject and finite 

verb enter a special relationship. 

One of the most salient reasons for assuming 

such a special relationship is that verbs not 

marked for tense/mood cannot govern the nomi-

native. This insight is the main motivation for the 

assumption of IP/TP (inflection phrase/tense 

phrase) in Chomskian grammars. Attempts at 

subordinating auxiliaries fail to provide an ac-

count of the cross-linguistically salient subject-

verb relationship. In particular, it fails to account 

for nominative case assignment to the subject. 

3.2 Sentential negation 

Whenever negation and auxiliation coincide, the 

canonical situation is that the (topmost) auxiliary 

is negated, rather than the lexical verb. If the lex-

ical verb were truly the root node, then the ex-

pectation would be that the lexical verb is where 

negation takes place. A look across English, He-

brew, Japanese, and French shows that this ex-

pectation is not met. In English, contractions of 

the auxiliary and the negation are common at the 

top of the verb chain, but not in between: 

(8) a.   He won’t have gone by then. 

  b. *He will haven’t gone by then. 

The full negation is marginally possible: He will 

have not gone. 

In Hebrew, lo precedes the expression it ne-

gates, and in the case of an auxiliary, lo precedes 

it: 

(9) a. ata   lo  jaxol  li-sxot? 

   you.msg neg pot  inf-swim 

   ‘You can’t swim?’ 

  b. *ata  jaxol  lo  li-sxot? 

In Japanese, negation is usually present as a suf-

fix. Canonical negation requires that the top-most 

word in the verb chain to be marked with it: 

(10) a. oyog-u   koto-wa deki-na-i-no? 

   swim-npst that-top pot-neg-npst-int 

   ‘You can’t swim?’ 

  b.*oyog-ana-i   koto-wa deki-ru-no? 

   swim-neg-npst  that-top pot-npst-int 

Negation in French requires two items. This two-

part negation straddles the finite verb, the root of 

the clause, as is shown in (11): 

(11)         ont       - Aux(V) 

  linguistes  n-   pas lu 

Les               littérature 

              la 

Les linguistes  n’ont  pas lu  la  littérature.   

the linguists  n-have not read the literature 

 ‘The linguists haven’t read the literature.’ 

114



 

 

This analysis speaks to intuition, since it has the 

negation straddling the only hierarchically singu-

lar word, i.e. the root of the clause.  

 The USD analysis produces a much less intui-

tive analysis: 

(12)           lu     - (V)Aux 

  linguistes     ont        littérature 

Les      n-   pas   la 

Les linguistes  n’ont  pas lu  la  littérature.   

the linguists  n-have not read the literature 

The negation ne…pas is now no longer strad-

dling the root word of the clause, a situation that 

would seem to complicate the account of the dis-

tribution of the negation. Note that ne…pas can 

also attach to a nonfinite verb, but when it does 

so, it no longer straddles the verb, e.g. ne pas lire 

‘not read’. 

3.3 VP-ellipsis 

The traditional approach easily accommodates 

core aspects of the distribution of VP-ellipsis in 

English. The finite auxiliary verb is the root of 

the clause, which means the elided VP of VP-

ellipsis is (usually) a complete subtree, i.e. a con-

stituent, e.g.  

(13) Fred won’t make that claim, but 

    will           - V(Aux) 

  Sue   make 

           claim 

         that 

  Sue will make that claim.  

The elided string make that claim is a complete 

subtree. Given the treatment of function words 

that the USD analysis pursues, one would expect 

to find the following structural analysis of VP-

ellipsis: 

(14) Fred won’t make that claim, but 

      make        - Aux(V) 

  Sue will      claim 

         that 

  Sue will make that claim.  

The elided string make that claim is now no 

longer a complete subtree, a situation that com-

plicates the analysis and distribution of VP-

ellipsis. 

But in fact de Marneffe et al. (2014: 4588) do 

not produce an analysis of VP-ellipsis that is 

consistent with the principles they have laid out; 

they assume instead that in cases like (13-14), the 

auxiliary is in fact the root of the clause. In other 

words, they assume the analysis shown in (13), 

not the one in (14). Their solution is thus ad hoc; 

it reveals the difficulties they are having making 

their approach work.  

3.4 Subcategorization 

Another problem facing USD’s analysis concerns 

subcategorization. When auxiliaries accompany a 

lexical verb, the lexical verb takes on a specific 

form that is subcategorized for by the auxiliary, 

e.g.  

(15) The proposal was reexamined. 

The lexical verb reexamined appears in the past 

participle subcategory because in this subcatego-

ry it can express the passive together with the 

auxiliary BE. The subcategory of the content 

word reexamined depends on the appearance of 

the function word BE (here was). Note that the 

opposite reasoning does not work, i.e. one cannot 

view the subcategory of was, a finite form, as 

reliant on the appearance of reexamined, because 

reexamined can appear without the specific form 

was, e.g. The proposal has been reexamined. 

This asymmetry indicates that the content verb is 

subordinate to the function verb. Section 4 con-

siders multiple auxiliation with the framework of 

token-based morphology. 

In German and Hebrew (and many other lan-

guages), modal auxiliaries govern infinitives, but 

infinitive verbs do not govern the form of modal 

auxiliaries: 

(16) a. Er  *(muss) komm-en. 

   he     must  come-inf 

   ‘He must come.’ 

  b. Hu *(rotse) li-shon. 

   he   wants inf-sleep. 

   ‘He wants to sleep.’ 

The brackets denote optionality, and the asterisk 

indicates that optionality is ungrammatical. This 

means that the presence of a modal auxiliary 

subcategorizes for the form of the content word. 

This is a reliable, surface-grammatical criterion. 

Finally, when languages distinguish between 

indicative and subjunctive mood, they require an 

auxiliary in a complement clause to be marked 

for the subjunctive. The full verb is marked for 

the subjunctive only in the absence of an auxilia-

ry: 

115



 

 

(17)   command          - A(Aux) 

   I           silent 

         that  you  be 

  a. I command  that  you  be silent. 

    command          - Aux(A) 

   I       that 

             be 

           you   silent 

  b. I command  that  you  be silent. 

Compared with (17a), the traditional analysis in 

(17b) can argue for the subcategorization of the 

subjunctive auxiliary by demonstrating that the 

branch command that immediately above the 

auxiliary can elicit the subjunctive. In (17a) the 

subordinate conjunction and the subjunctive aux-

iliary are not in one another’s domains, nor are 

they in the immediate domain of the verb com-

mand. 

3.5 Valency change 

The occurrence of auxiliaries with valency po-

tential can override the valency potential of the 

full verb: 

(18)        eat
3
       - V(Aux) 

   let       broccoli 

  I   him/*he 

  I let him/*he eat broccoli. 

The ungrammaticality of he, even though it is 

retained as the semantic subject of eat, cannot be 

explained on the assumption that the causative 

auxiliary let is subordinate to the full verb eat. At 

the same time, I is clearly the matrix subject, but 

it should depend on the auxiliary let, because it is 

not the subject of eat. The causee him should 

also depend on let. If, however, let is indeed sub-

ordinate to eat then (18) lacks a matrix subject.   

An account more in line with valency theory 

assumes two valency structures: 

(19) a. N1nom eat N2obj 

  b. N0nom  let  N1obj  Vbinf 

(19a) shows the valency of eat. (19b) shows the 

valency of the causative auxiliary let: N0 desig-

nates a newly introduced subject. The causee N1, 

i.e. the demoted subject from (19a), must appear 

in the object case, and a bare infinitive verb must 

                                                           
3  It is unclear how USD would structure (18). The term 

causative does not appear in de Marneffe et al. (2006, 2014), 

or de Marneffe and Manning (2008). 

appear. Since the auxiliary overrides the lexical 

valency of the full verb, the expectation is that 

the auxiliary resides in a structurally higher posi-

tion, which is associated with the potential to 

override grammatical functions. A tree that as-

sumes higher position of the auxiliary is shown 

below: 

(20)   let            - Aux(V) 

  I     him  eat  

             broccoli 

  I  let  him  eat  broccoli. 

Example (20) shows the words I, him, and eat as 

dependents of the auxiliary let, which corre-

sponds with (19b). The full verb eat in (20) con-

tinues to dominate its object, but it has relin-

quished its subject dependency to the auxiliary.  

The assumption on the dependency structure 

between valency-bearing auxiliaries and full 

verbs is cross-linguistically valid, as the Japanese 

translation of (20) demonstrates:
4
 

(21)          -ta 

      -sase 

 Boku-ga kare-ni  tabe  

   burokkori-o 

 Boku-ga kare-ni burokkori-o tabe-sase-ta. 

 I-nom he-dat broccoli-acc eat-caus-pst 

Example (21) exhibits exactly the same depend-

ency structure of a causative auxiliary, its full 

verb, and their dependents. In fact, the current 

account has already accomplished what the USD 

try to achieve, namely a cross-linguistically valid 

representation of dependency structure.  

3.6 String coordination 

String coordination is constrained with respect to 

the material that can be shared by the conjuncts. 

While the exact principles that constrain sharing 

are at present not fully established, data are 

available for comparison. Material preceding the 

coordinate structure can be shared by both con-

juncts if the conjuncts are constituents (22a), but 

sharing is ungrammatical if the conjuncts are 

non-constituents (22b): 

(22) a.  He treats the old [women] and [men]. 

  b. * He treats the old [women for free],  

    but [men for $10]. 

                                                           
4 The verb tabe-sase-ta is shown as three nodes in (14), 

according to a dependency morphological account that is 

the topic of Section 4. 

vrb 

obj 

obj 

sub causee vrb 

causee 
sub 

116



 

 

On the intended reading that the men are also old, 

(22b) is ungrammatical.  

A second observation concerns the dependen-

cy status of the shared material. If material is not 

subordinate to the root of the first conjunct, then 

it can be shared (23a). However, if the material is 

subordinate, sharing is ungrammatical (23b): 

(23) a.  He met [Pete on Friday]  

    and [Jane on Saturday]. 

  b. * He met young [Pete on Friday]  

    and [Jane on Saturday]. 

The string He met in (23a) can be shared. The 

verb met immediately preceding the coordinate 

structure is dominating every constituent inside 

the two conjuncts. In (23b), however, the adjec-

tive young cannot be shared across the conjuncts. 

The adjective is dependent on Pete. (23b) is, thus, 

grammatical only on the reading that Jane is not 

necessarily young. 

Applying these observations to auxiliaries, the 

expectation is that auxiliaries should not be 

shared across non-constituent conjuncts as long 

as they are viewed as dependents of the full verbs. 

That expectation, however, is not met, as the next 

example demonstrates: 

(24)  He has had [to grade papers since March]  

   and [to write an essay since April]. 

On the assumption, that has and had are depend-

ents of the full verb grade, they should not be 

able to be shared. The auxiliaries should behave 

like the old in (22b), and young in (23b). The fact 

that the auxiliaries do not behave in the same 

manner, and that sharing is grammatical, sup-

ports the assumption that they are not subordi-

nate to the full verb. 

4 Functional hierarchies  

De Marneffe et al. (2014: 4585) take a lexicalist, 

i.e. word-based, position. Such a stance comes 

naturally to dependency grammars, which are by 

their very nature word-based grammars. Regard-

ing lexicalism, however, three issues must be 

considered. The first one is that lexicalism does 

not advocate or imply the subordination of func-

tion words to content words. The previous sec-

tion produced a number of arguments that do not 

empirically support the proposal made by de 

Marneffe et al. (2014). This section adds to these 

arguments by addressing functional hierarchies. 

Secondly, not all linguists who support the 

Lexical Integrity Hypothesis regard morphology 

as futile. Quite to the contrary, we believe that a 

token-based morphology can shed light on intra-

word and inter-word structure. Under “token-

based” morphology, we understand a morpholo-

gy that acknowledges pieces, but that restricts 

these pieces to surface forms. Such an approach 

can account for functional hierarchies, while 

staying loyal to dependency-based approaches to 

linguistic structure. Below we follow the pro-

posals made in Groß (2011, 2014), Osborne & 

Groß (2012), and Groß & Osborne (2013). 

Finally, regarding the Lexical Integrity Hy-

pothesis, several versions of differing strictness 

constrain how blind syntax is to derivational 

(weak hypothesis) or inflectional (strong hypoth-

esis) suffixes (Lieber and Scalise 2007). The fol-

lowing Japanese data are a counterexample 

against the strong hypothesis: 

(25)      mae  (26)       ato 

      -u             -ta  

  kaer           kaet 

 a. kaer-u   mae    a. kaet-ta   ato 

  return-npst front           return-pst  rear 
  ‘before [he] returns’   ‘after [he] returns’ 

 b. *kaet-ta mae     b. * kaer-u ato 

The nominal mae ‘front’ subcategorizes non-past 

tense (25a), and past tense is ungrammatical 

(25b). Conversely, ato ‘rear’ subcategorizes past 

tense (26a), while non-past tense is ungrammati-

cal (26b). This behavior cannot be explained if 

the strong hypothesis were correct.  

The discussion now turns to functional hierar-

chies. Research in morphology (Bybee 1985), on 

clause structure (Chomsky 1986; Rizzi 1997), on 

adverbs (Cinque 1999), and on verbs (Rice 2006) 

has produced substantial evidence that functional 

hierarchies must be assumed to exist above the 

lexical material, rather than beneath it. This ne-

cessity becomes evident when one is faced with 

multiple auxiliation. The earliest discussion of 

such a case can be found in Chomsky (1957: 39): 

(27) That has been being discussed. 

The complex predicate has been being discussed 

expresses ‘perfective’, ‘progressive’, and ‘pas-

sive’.  Chomsky realized that the functional 

meanings are expressed by two items, respective-

ly: 

(28) a. perfective:   has + en  

  a. progressive:  be + ing 

  c. passive:    be + ed  

The discontinuous surface order of these items 

led him to the notion of affix hopping: 

117



 

 

 

(29) That (has t1) (be-t2)-en1 (be-t3)ing2 (discuss)-ed3. 

The first bracket expresses the perfective, and the 

suffix -en dislocates and attaches to the end of 

the next auxiliary, i.e. the second bracket, asf. 

Chomsky also realized that there is a hierarchy, 

i.e. perfective > progressive > passive, that may 

not be scrambled, e.g. *That was had being dis-

cussed, *That was been having discussed, etc. 

Bybee (1985: 196f) expands on this work when 

she posits the hierarchy: valency < voice < aspect 

< modality < tense < mood < person < number. 

Cinque (1999) tries to identify these categories, 

and possible subcategories, by looking at adverbs 

related to these notions. Rizzi (1997) tries to es-

tablish a phrase structure framework that can 

account for topic, focus, and force expressions.   

Hierarchies of any type lend themselves to a 

dependency-based expression because hierar-

chies and dependencies are directed. A view that 

the auxiliaries in (27) are dependents of dis-

cussed not only forfeits the spirit of dependency, 

but it is also useless in explaining functional hi-

erarchies.   

(30) V(Aux)           discussed 

  That  has  been  being 

  That  has  been  being discussed. 

Tree (30) assumes that auxiliaries are daughters, 

i.e. functionally equidistant to the full verb. But 

the perfective always dominates the progressive, 

and never vice versa, and the progressive always 

dominates the passive, and never vice versa. An 

attempt to view word order, rather than depend-

encies, as the critical ingredient, faces problems 

in more synthetic languages, e.g. Hebrew katuv 

‘written”, where the transfix ¯a¯u¯ expresses the 

passive participle. Finally, it incurs the typologi-

cal problem that the right-branching, i.e. head-

initial, English predicate is now viewed as left-

branching, i.e. head-final. 

A dependency-based morphology overcomes 

these challenges by assuming node status for 

morphs, and that the relationships between 

morph nodes are directed, i.e. are dependencies. 

The result is a transparent representation of the 

structural relationships between morph nodes. 

This allows reading complex functional meaning 

directly off the tree structure. Finally, such an 

account succeeds in acknowledging functional 

hierarchies in spirit and form. The next example, 

taken from Groß (2011), illustrates these points: 

(31)    perfective   - Aux(V) 

   has     

 That   -en   progressive 

   be     

      -ing   passive 

     be 

        -ed 

       discuss 

 That has be -en be -ing discuss -ed. 

Compare (28a-c) to the meanings ascribed to the 

respective catenae in (31). (31) should also be 

compared to example (30). In (31), not only syn-

tactic, but also morphological dependencies are 

accounted for, as well as the functional hierarchy.  

One central motive in de Marneffe et al. 

(2014: 4589) is to provide “a uniform treatment 

of both morphologically rich and poor lan-

guages”. In more synthetic languages the func-

tional meanings tend to occur inside one word, 

whereas they tend to occur as distinct words in 

more analytic languages: 

(32) V(pass)   eat     was   pass(V) 

   was     -en        -en 

  a. was   eat-en      eat 

   pst.pass EAT-pass  b. was eat-en 

(33)  tabe    V(pass)  pass(V)    -ta 

     -rare -ta       -rare 

  a. tabe -rare -ta     tabe   

   EAT-pass-pst    b. tabe -rare -ta 

Example (32) shows the more analytic English 

past passive of eat, and (33) the corresponding 

synthetic construction in Japanese. The (a)-

examples show an analysis that subordinates 

functional material to lexical material, i.e. 

V(pass), and the (b)-examples show the alterna-

tive approach, i.e. pass(V). Analyses similar to 

the (a)-examples are few in dependency grammar, 

with Anderson’s (1980) study of Basque verbs 

the most famous example. Since dependency 

grammar tends towards granting lexical material 

higher priority due to valency-based considera-

tions, analyses such as the (a)-examples naturally 

match preconceptions. The problem is, however, 

that these analyses do not offer any insights into 

the morphological or morpho-syntactical struc-

ture of language. Analyses such as the (a)-

examples have been taken as proof against the 

118



 

 

attainability of a dependency-based morphology. 

As a result, dependency grammar stands apart 

from rival theories not only in their inability to 

acknowledge functional hierarchies, but also in 

the obvious lack of a dependency-based mor-

phology. However, the (b)-analyses illustrate that 

it is not only possible to produce accurate struc-

tures, but they also account for functional hierar-

chies (here: content verb < voice < tense), and 

furthermore, they are compatible with the majori-

ty cross-theoretical research on these issues. 

5 Conclusion 

This paper has produced diverse observations, all 

of which support the conventional wisdom that 

lexical verbs are subordinate to auxiliaries, rather 

than vice versa. In Section 2, the paper argued 

that the distinction between function words and 

content words is not discrete, but rather gradient. 

Section 3 provided evidence from the subject-

verb relation, sentential negation, VP-ellipsis, 

subcategorization, valency change, and string 

coordination supporting the assumption that aux-

iliaries are heads over their full verbs, which is 

therefore contrary to the position de Marneffe et 

al. (2014) adopt. Section 4 argued that a lexical-

ist stance does not support the assumption that 

function words are subordinate to content words. 

The Lexical Integrity Hypothesis was also shown 

to be less solid than it appeared. In conjunction 

with the possibility of a token-based approach to 

morphology, an account of the dependency rela-

tionships between function words and content 

words is attainable that not only is consistent 

with acknowledged research on functional hier-

archies, but that also honors the dependency-

based view of language.  

References  

John Anderson. 1980. Towards dependency morphol-

ogy: The structure of the Basque verb. In John An-

derson & Colin J. Ewen (eds.), Studies in Depend-

ency Phonology, pp. 221–271. Ludwigsburg: 

R.O.U. Strauch.  

Joan Bresnan. 2001. Lexical-Functional Syntax, 

Blackwell. 

Joan L Bybee. 1985. Morphology: A study of the rela-

tion between meaning and form. John Benjamins 

Publishing Company, Amsterdam. 

Noam Chomsky. 1957. Syntactic Structures. The 

Hague: Mouton & Co. 

Noam Chomsky 1981. Lectures on Government and 

Binding: The Pisa Lectures. Mouton de Gruyter.  

Noam Chomsky. 1986. Barriers. Cambridge, Mass.: 

MIT Press. 

Noam Chomsky. 1995. The Minimalist Program. MIT 

Press, Cambridge, MA. 

Guglielmo Cinque. 1999. Adverbs and functional 

heads: A cross-linguistic perspective. Oxford: Ox-

ford University Press.  

Ulrich Engel. 1994. Syntax der deutschen 

Gegenwarts-sprache, 3
rd

 fully revised edition. 

Erich Schmidt, Berlin. 

Hans-Werner Eroms. 2000. Syntax der deutschen 

Sprache. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin. 

Thomas Groß. 2011. Catenae in morphology. In Kim 

Gerdes, Eva Hajičová & Leo Wanner (eds.), De-

pling 2011, pp. 47–57, Barcelona: Pompeu Fabra 

University. 

Thomas Groß. 2014. Some Observations on the He-

brew Desiderative Construction. SKY Journal 27: 

7-41. 

Thomas Groß and Timothy Osborne. 2013. Katena 

und Konstruktion: Ein Vorschlag zu einer 

dependenziellen Konstruktionsgrammatik. Zeit-

schrift für Sprachwissenschaft 32 (1): 41–73. 

David G. Hays. 1964. Dependency theory: A formal-

ism and some observations. Language 40. 511-525. 

Hans J. Heringer. 1996. Deutsche Syntax Depen-

dentiell. Staufenberg, Tübingen.  

Richard Hudson. 1984. Word Grammar. Basil Black-

well, New York.  

Richard Hudson. 1990. An English Word Grammar. 

Oxford: Basil Blackwell.    

Richard Hudson. 2007. Language Networks: The New 

Word Grammar. Oxford University Press.  

Wha-Young Jung. 1995. Syntaktische Relationen im 

Rahmen der Dependenzgrammatik. Buske, Ham-

burg. 

Jürgen Kunze. 1975. Abhängigkeitsgrammatik. Studia 

Grammatica 12. Akademie Verlag, Berlin.   

Rochelle Lieber and Sergio Scalise. 2007. The Lexi-

cal Integrity Hypothesis in a New Theoretical Uni-

verse. Geert Booij et.al. (eds.), On-line Proceedings 

of the Fifth Mediterranean Morphology Meeting 

(MMM5). University of Bologna. 

  http://mmm.lingue.unibo.it/ 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney and 

Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating Typed 

Dependency Parses from Phrase Structure Parses. 

In LREC 2006. 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher Man-

ning. 2008. The Stanford typed dependencies rep-

resentation. In Workshop on Cross-framework and 

Cross-domain Parser Evaluation. 

119



 

 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Natalia 

Silvaire, Katrin Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Joakim 

Nivre, Christopher D. Manning. 2014. Universal 

Stanford Dependencies: A cross-linguistic typolo-

gy. LREC 14.  

Peter H. Matthews. 1981. Syntax. Cambridge: Cam-

bridge University Press. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory and 

Practice. State University of New York Press, Al-

bany. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2003. Levels of dependency descrip-

tion: concepts and problems. In Vilmos Agel et al. 

(eds.), Dependency and Valency: An International 

Handbook of Contemporary Research, vol. 1, pp. 

188-229. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 2009. Dependency in Natural language. 

In Igor Mel’čuk and Alain Polguère (eds.): De-

pendency in linguistic description, pp. 1-110. Am-

sterdam ; Philadelphia : John Benjamins Pub.  

Timothy Osborne and Thomas Groß. 2012. Construc-

tions are catenae: Construction Grammar meets 

dependency grammar. Cognitive Linguistics 23 (1): 

163–214. 

Carl Pollard and Ivan Sag. 1994. Head-driven phrase 

structure grammar. University of Chicago Press. 

Keren Rice. 2006. Morpheme Order and Semantic 

Scope: Word Formation in the Athapaskan Verb. 

Cambridge et al.: Cambridge University Press. 

Luigi Rizzi. 1997. The Fine Structure of the Left Pe-

riphery. L. Haegeman (ed.), Elements of Grammar. 

A Handbook in Generative Syntax, pp 281–337. 

Dordrecht: Kluwer. 

Stanley Starosta. 1988. The Case for Lexicase: An 

Outline of Lexicase Grammatical Theory. Pinter 

Publishers, New York.   

Mark Steedman 2014. Categorial Grammar. In An-

drew Carnie, Yosuke Sato, and Daniel Siddiqi 

(eds.), The Routledge Handbook of Syntax, pp. 

670-701. Routledge, London.    

120


