



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and E Sherly. Proc. of the 12th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 183–188,
Trivandrum, India. December 2015. c©2015 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

 

Resolution of Pronominal Anaphora for Telugu Dialogues 

 

Hemanth Reddy Jonnalagadda 

IIIT Hyderabad 

hemanth.reddy 

@research.iiit.ac.in 

Radhika Mamidi 

IIIT Hyderabad 

radhika.mamidi 

@iiit.ac.in 

Abstract 

The challenge of anaphora resolution has 

been taken up from long time. However, most 

of the work did not include for dialogues. In 

this paper we discuss the types of pronouns 

and anaphora in Telugu language and make 

an attempt to build a rule based pronominal 

anaphora resolution algorithm for human to 

human conversations. The model mainly con-

sists of two parts, creating a knowledge base 

with a set of pronouns along with its morpho-

logical information and designing an algo-

rithm which uses this knowledge base to give 

an output. In this process we have worked on 

normal pronominal anaphora and suggested a 

set of rules applicable for Telugu dialogues. 

However, since there was no corpus for the 

Telugu language, we built a corpus and tested 

the algorithm on it. Results show that the 

suggested algorithm produced an output with 

an accuracy of 61.1%. 

1 Introduction 

Anaphora is the linguistic unit which refers to an 

entity that is previously mentioned in the same 

discourse. The word or phrase which it refers is 

called antecedent. The process of identifying the 

antecedent of an anaphora is called anaphora 

resolution. We find the importance of anaphora 

resolution in various NLP applications such as 

dialogue systems, text summarization, machine 

translation and so on. The pronouns in Telugu 

language carry much more information about the 

nouns than pronouns in English. Telugu is a 

morphologically rich and free word order lan-

guage. The morphological richness of the lan-

guage helps in building various NLP applications 

using simple parsing tools. Three types of 

anaphora are identified in Telugu language, they 

are normal pronominal anaphora, discourse deic-

tic anaphora and one - anaphora which are dis-

cussed in detail in section 3. This paper concen-

trates mainly on normal pronominal anaphora. 

Many approaches have been proposed for anaph-

ora resolution in discourse and in dialogues for 

different languages. This is the first attempt at 

anaphora resolution in Telugu dialogues. 

2 Related work 

Research has been going extensively in this area 

from past few decades. Many rule based, ma-

chine learning based and knowledge based sys-

tems have come up. One of the earliest work has 

been done by Hobbs (1976) on pronominal co-

reference. Hirst (1981) has compared 5 different 

approaches and presented their strengths, weak-

nesses in resolving the anaphora. Lappin and 

Leass (1994) came up with salience feature 

based approach. Mitkov (1994a) came up with 

integrated anaphora resolution approach which 

relies on set of preferences and constraints. Ro-

bust knowledge poor pronoun resolution was 

developed by Mitkov (1998) which makes use of 

part-of-speech tagger and simple noun phrase 

rules. Strube and Eckert (1998) made an attempt 

to resolve discourse diectic anaphora in dia-

logues.   et al., (2004) built an anaphora resolu-

tion method for multi person dialogues where 

they brought in semantic, syntactic and 

knowledge based techniques which were used in 

anaphora resolution. 

Coming to the Indian languages, work has 

been done mostly on Hindi, Bengali, Tamil and 

Malayalam. Shobha and Patnaik (2002) came up 

with a rule based approach VASISTH which cur-

rently handles anaphora in Malayalam and Hindi 

languages. Shobha.L (2007) resolves pronomi-

nals in Tamil, in which they have adopted a 

probabilistic model. Praveen et al., (2013) built a 

hybrid approach for anaphora resolution in Hindi 

using dependency parser and decision tree classi-

fier. A generic anaphora resolution engine using 

machine learning was developed for Indian lan-

guages by Shobha et al., (2014), they have tested 

the system on Bengali, Hindi and Tamil. In Tel-

ugu Chandramohan and Sadanandam (2014) im-

plemented a rule based pronominal anaphora 

resolution system for discourse. The algorithm 

was tested on a limited set of data and an accura-

cy of 60.75% was obtained. 
183



 

3 Anaphora in the context of Telugu 
language 

Telugu belongs to the Dravidian family of Indian 

languages. It is a free word order language. Two 

or more words undergoing some modifications to 

form a single compound word is called sandhi. It 

is very common in agglutinative languages. In 

Telugu an entire sentence can be expressed as a 

single word which can be seen in the following 

example where three words are combined to 

form a single word. 

Example 1: 

nuvvekkaDunnAvu - nuvvu + ekkaDa + unnAvu 

(Where are you?)       you        where     present 

These words cannot be analyzed by the NLP ap-

plications. To handle these cases there is a need 

for sandhi splitter which splits the word as shown 

above. 

 

In Telugu, verbs are inflected with gender, num-

ber and person which give information about the 

subject, 

Example 2:  

The verb “vellu” can take all the below forms in 

Telugu. When subject is 

male, sg, 3rd person       -   veltunnADu   

female, sg, 3rd person    -   veltundi 

neutral, pl, 3rd person    -   veltunnAru  

neutral, sg, 1st person    -   veltunnAnu 

3.1 Pronouns in Telugu 

There are a wide variety of pronouns in Telugu. 

A pronoun can take different forms depending on 

gender, number, person, case and also on social 

relationships such as informal, formal, impolite, 

very polite etc. 

 

This is illustrated below where all the pro-

nouns refer to a male person relatively distant 

from the speaker. 

vADu     -    3rd person, sg, male, impolite 

atanu      -    3rd person, sg, male, neutral 

Ayana    -    3rd person, sg, male, polite 

vAru      -    3rd person, sg, male, very polite 

 

There are 4 different types of pronouns in Tel-

ugu namely personal pronouns, demonstrative 

pronouns, reflexive pronouns and interrogative 

pronouns. The proposed algorithm works on all 

the above types of pronouns, excluding interrog-

ative pronouns. In this paper we have classified 

these pronouns into two different categories and 

formed rules based on this. 

Personal pronouns: Pronouns which map to 

human characters 

Example 3: 

 “atanu” (he), “Ame” (she), “vADu” (he), “tama-

ru” (you), “adi” (she), “nuvvu” (you), “nEnu” 

(me) etc. 

Non-personal pronouns: These pronouns map 

to the objects or animals 

Example 4: 

“adi” (it), “avi” (they), “vATiki” (them) etc. 

3.2 Types of Anaphoras in Telugu Dia-
logues 

Normal pronominal Anaphora: Where pro-

noun is referring to single word which is previ-

ously introduced in the context. 

Example 5:  
ramaNa:   rAjA    elA     unnAvu?    ninnu        

                (Raja      how    present       you) 

   cUsi    cAlA     rojulayiMdi. 

  (seen    many      days back) 

(Ramana: How are you? It’s been long time since I 

met you) 

rAjA:   nEnu bAgunnAnu, nuvvela     unnAvu? 

            ( me       good          you_how     present) 

(Raja: I am fine. How are you?) 

 

Discourse Diectic Anaphora: In this case, there 

is no single antecedent possible. The pronoun 

will be referring to multiple words in the previ-

ous sentence. This is illustrated in example 7 

where the pronoun “adi” (that) is referring to the 

entire dialogue. 

Example 6: 
rAmu:    rAju      cAla      mancivADu. 

             ( Raju       very       good person.) 

(Ramu: Raju is a very good person)  

ravi:    adi       nIku      ela       telusu? 

           (that     you       how      know) 

(Ravi: How do you know that?) 

 

One - Anaphora: It is the anaphoric noun phrase 

headed by the word one (okaTi in Telugu). 

Example 7: 
rAju:  nEnu   kotta   baMDi   koMdAmani  

          ( I        new     bike       buying) 

          anukuMTunnAnu. 

          (thinking.) 

(Raju: I am thinking of buying a new bike) 

ravi:   nAku    okaTi     kAvali. 

          ( I           one         need.) 

(Ravi: I too need one.) 

 

184



 

4 Anaphora Resolution 

Our approach for anaphora resolution can be ex-

plained in three steps 

 Parsing the dialogues  

 Creating the knowledge base and  

 Identifying the antecedent. 

4.1 Parsing 

We parse the dialogues one after the other using 

morph analyzer. In this process we store the 

speaker of each dialogue. The output of the 

morph analyzer is given as input to the POS tag-

ger. The final output at this stage is in Shakti 

standard format (SSF). It is the highly readable 

representation for storing language analysis, an 

English and Telugu examples in SSF are given 

below. 

atanu PRP <fs af='atanu,pn,m,sg,3,d,0,0'  

name="atanu">      

 

Initially we have implemented the system using 

only morph analyzer where POS tag of most of 

the pronouns, nouns and their features were not 

identified.  

Example 8: 

vATini 

<fsaf='vATini,unk,,,,,,'poslcat="NM"name="vA

Tini"> 

 

As we can see in this example, the category of 

this pronoun is shown as unknown and gender, 

number, person and case features are also null 

values. 

The use of POS tagger in addition to the morph 

analyzer helped in obtaining POS tags for the 

nouns and pronouns which could not be tagged 

by the morph analyzer. 

4.2 Knowledge Base 

We stored all the pronouns which are tagged by 

POS tagger and not detected by the morph ana-

lyzer in a separate database file. Along with it we 

have also stored the gender, number, person and 

case features of these pronouns in the knowledge 

base. While running the anaphora resolution al-

gorithm, if a pronoun falls in the above category 

then the information of that particular pronoun is 

obtained from the database file. 

We have also stored the list of reflexive pro-

nouns in the knowledge base as the algorithm 

consists of rules applicable only for reflexive 

pronouns. 

4.3 Algorithm 

We have implemented a rule based pronoun 

resolution algorithm. These rules were formed 

based on various pronouns and features obtained 

from the parsers. We have tried to concentrate 

more on 3rd person pronouns because it was 

relatively easy to identify the antecedents of 1st 

and 2nd person pronouns compared to 3rd person 

in human conversations. The system works on 

the rules explained below, 

 

4.3.1 Personal pronouns 

As mentioned in sec 3.1 personal pronouns 

should be referring to the human characters, 

these pronouns are mapped to the proper nouns 

or common nouns which tell about human identi-

ty.  

Example 9:  

“tammuDu” (younger brother), “anna” (elder 

brother), “akka” (elder sister), “amma” (mother), 

“DAktar” (doctor), “tIcAr” (teacher), etc. 

 

1st person pronouns 
1st person pronouns are mapped to the current 

speaker, if the root word of the pronoun is “ma-

na” (we) then it will map to both speaker and 

listeners. Listeners are the speakers of previous 

and next dialogues.  

  

Example 10:   
amala:    nA    pEru    amala.    nI      pEreMTi? 

              (My  name    Amala.  You    name_what) 

(Amala: My name is Amala. What’s your name?) 

sIta:        nA      pEru       sIta. 

               (My    name     Seetha.) 

(Seetha: My name is Seetha.) 

Example 11:  
srInivAs:   nAku      edayina           kottagA          

      (I         something         new) 

      nercukovAlani   uMdi. 

                   (   learn              there.) 

(Srinivas: I want to learn something new.) 

gOpAl:    kAni     manaku     vIlavvutuMdA? 

  (but           us               feasible.) 

(Gopal: But is it feasible for us?) 

 

As we can see, in example 10 “nA” is referring 

to “amala” and in example 11 “manaku” which is 
185



 

a plural pronoun is referring both “srInivAs” and 

“gOpAl” 

2nd Person pronouns 

2nd person pronouns are mapped to the listener, 

if there is a previous dialogue then it will refer to 

the speaker of the previous dialogue. If there is 

no previous dialogue then it will be mapping to 

speaker of the next dialogue.  

 

Example 12:  
sIta:          nA       pEru          sIta. 

    (my       name       Seetha.) 

(Seetha: My name is Seetha.) 

amala:     nuvvu    ekkaDa      caduvutunnAvu? 

  ( you       where          studying?) 

(Amala: Where are you studying?) 

 

Example 13:  
amala:      nA     pEru     amala.     nI        

   (My    name    Amala    you) 

      pEreMTi? 

                name_what? 

(Amala: My name is Amala. What’s your name?) 

sIta:        nA       pEru          sIta. 

  ( my       name       Seetha) 

(Seetha: My name is Seetha.) 

“nuvvu” in example 12 and “nI” in example 13 

are referring to the speakers of previous and next 

dialogues respectively. 

3rd Person pronouns 

We have tried to identify the antecedents based 

on gender, number, person features and a few 

rules. The step by step procedure and the rules 

are as follows, 

 

1) While analyzing the parsed text word by 
word. If a possible antecedent is detected 

then it is stored along with its POS tag, gen-

der, number and person. 

 

Example 14: 
 ravi:   rAmuki  Dabbu    evaru   iccAru? 
          (to_Ramu   money    who     gave) 

(Ravi: Who gave the money to Ramu?) 

rAju: gOpi    ataniki   Dabbu     iccADu. 

         (Gopi      him       money      gave) 

(Raju: Gopi gave him the money) 

 

All the nouns that appear before pronoun 

can be possible antecedents. Possible an-

tecedents for the pronoun “ataniki” in 

example 14 are shown below with its 

morphological features, 
 

rAmuki NNP <fs af='rAmuki,unk,,,,,,' 

poslcat="NM" name="rAmuki"> 

Dabbu   NN      <fs 

af='Dabbu,n,,sg,,d,0,0'name="dabbu_2"> 

gOpi  NNP <fs af='gOpi,n,,sg,,d,0,0' 

name="gOpi"> 

2) If a pronoun is detected then we will be ex-
tracting its gender, number and person fea-

tures from the morph analyzer or through the 

preprocessing stage mentioned above. 
ataniki PRP <fs 

af='atanu,pn,m,sg,3,,ki,ki' name="ataniki"> 

3) From the list of all possible antecedents, the 
antecedents which do not agree in gender, 

number and person features with the pronoun 

are removed from the list. Below constraints 

will be applied on the remaining antecedents. 

As we can see the noun “dabbu” agree in 

gender, number and person with the pro-

noun. Though the features of “rAmuki” 

and “gOpiki” are not identified by the 

morph analyzer, we have considered it as 

the possible antecedent. 

4) Pronouns which come under the category of 
personal pronouns will be mapped to the 

proper nouns or the common nouns which 

tells about human identity. Some of these 

common nouns are given in example 9. 

As “Dabbu” cannot be referred by the 

personal pronouns, it is removed from 

the possible antecedent lists, we are left 

with “rAmuki”, “gOpiki” 

5) Reflexive pronouns will be referring the an-
tecedents within the sentence. Example: “ta-

nu” (he/she),”tAmu” (they). 

Example 15: 
ravi:    rAmuki   Dabbu     evaru  iccAru? 

           (to_Ramu   money    who      gave) 

(Ravi: Who gave the money to Ramu?) 

rAju:   gOpi    tana  Dabbu   ataniki  

           (Gopi   his    money   him) 

            iccADu. 

            (gave.) 

(Raju: Gopi gave his money to him.) 

6) Whereas demonstrative pronouns will be 
referring to the antecedents outside the sen-

tence. Example: “vADu” (he), “Ame” (she), 

etc. 

The referent in the Example 14 is a 

demonstrative pronoun, it should be re-

ferring the antecedent outside the sen-

tence. So “gOpi” is removed from the 

list and we are left with only one possi-

bility “rAmuki” which is the antecedent 

of the pronoun.  

186



 

7) If more than one antecedent is left in the list, 
recently appeared one is preferred as its an-

tecedent. 

4.3.2 Non-personal Pronouns 

We have applied the same procedure as men-

tioned above but the steps 4, 5, 6 will change 

because these pronouns will be mapping to the 

objects or animals. So, there is no possibility of 

reflexive pronouns. 

 

Example 16:  
gOpi:  ravi    nI     kukkalu   elA     unnAyi?      

(Ravi  your    dogs      how     present) 

vATiki     AhAram    peTTAvA? 

(them        food kept?) 

(Gopi: How are your dogs? Did you feed them?) 

ravi:    avi      bAgunnAyi.     vATiki     AhAraM  

           (they       good                them          food) 

            peTTAnu. 

            (Kept.) 

(Ravi: They are good. I fed them.) 

5 Building the corpus 

We have noted all the possible pronouns possible 

for Telugu and for each pronoun, we considered 

all the possible forms which it can take in differ-

ent cases (Genitive, Nominative, Objective, and 

Dative). 

 The corpus consists of human to human con-

versations which has all the above pronouns ex-

cluding interrogative pronouns, as it is not part of 

our research currently. 

The corpus consists of 108 human conversa-

tions, each conversation may contain around 2-8 

dialogues. Total number of pronouns in the cor-

pus are 509. About 40% of the corpus has been 

taken from online chat conversations and the re-

maining 60% of the conversations have been 

taken from telugu.webdunia.com and 

www.learningtelugu.org.  

6 Results 

Once we built the corpus, we have tagged all the 

pronouns in the corpus with its corresponding 

antecedents. This has been done manually. Cor-

pus consists of all categories of pronouns men-

tioned in sec 3. The algorithm has been run on 

the entire corpus and we have compared the re-

sults with the tagged data. 

We have analyzed the results based on the person 

of the referents. The accuracy of the system on 

different pronouns is shown in the below table, 

 No. of pro-
nouns 

Pronouns un-

resolved 
Pronouns wrong-

ly resolved 
Pronouns cor-

rectly resolved 
Accuracy 

1st person 138 11 14 113 81.88% 

2nd Person 106 14 19 73 68.87% 

3rd person 202 23 91 88 43.56% 

Non personal 

pronouns  
63 3 23 37 58.73% 

Overall 509 51 147 311 61.10 % 

 

7 Issues in Telugu 

Corpus 

Annotated text and annotated dialogues are not 

available for Telugu language. All the data is in  

printed books format and the text which is pre-

sent in most of the Telugu websites is in image 

format which makes it difficult to extract. 

Sandhi 

This phenomenon makes it difficult for the par-

ser to analyze the text. In such cases the algo-

rithm is not able to identify the antecedent or the 

anaphora present in the sentence. The accuracy 

of the parsers will be less resulting in the low 

accuracy of the system which was dependent on 

these parsers. 

 

Example 17: 
ravi:    ninna          sIta      inTiki       vacindi. 187



 

           (yesterday   seetha    home        came) 

(Ravi: Yesterday, Seetha came to my home.) 

rAju: AmeMdukocindi? 

          Ame  + eMduku + vacindi. 

         (she          why         came.) 

(Raju: Why did she come?) 

In example 17 Pronoun is a part of the compound 

word in such a case it becomes difficult to identi-

fy the anaphora/antecedent.  Hence we require a 

good sandhi splitter for parsing the text. 

Subject identification 

Telugu is a free word order language. The morph 

analyzer which we are using is taking individual 

word as an input, so we are unable to get the case 

of the words and are unable to identify the sub-

ject. Identifying the subject of the sentence will 

improve the accuracy of 3rd person pronouns. 

Example 18: 
rAju:     raviki      sIta        pustakaM    icindi.  

             (to_Ravi    Seetha      book          gave) 

 ataniki    pariksa     undanta. 

             (he           exam       present.) 

(Raju: Seetha gave the book to Ravi. He has an ex-

am.) 

In the above example, “sIta” is the subject of the 

first sentence and its gender is feminine which 

can be identified from the verb “icindi”. As the 

algorithm is unable to identify the subject, the 

pronoun “ataniki” (male) is mapped to “sIta” 

(female).  

Parsers 

   Morph analyzer and POS tagger used are giv-

ing lot of errors. These errors are carried forward 

affecting the overall accuracy of the anaphora 

resolution algorithm.  

8 Future Work 

In this paper we have concentrated mainly on 

normal pronominal anaphora. We would like to 

concentrate on cataphora in our future work as 

Telugu is a free word order language the possi-

bility of occurrence of cataphoric reference is 

very high. 

Work has been going on in dialogue systems 

in Telugu for tourism domain. We would like to 

add this anaphora resolution system into dialogue 

system. 

We would like to work on 3rd person pro-

nouns as it has very less accuracy. 

Adding a good sandhi splitter to the system 

will improve the accuracy of the system. 

 

References 

Krishnamurti, Bhadriraju; J.P.L.Gwynn (1985). A 

Grammar of Modern Telugu. New Delhi: Oxford 

University Press. 

http://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~vemuri/Grammar/9.%20pr

onouns-1.pdf 

Lappin & Leass (1994) Sh. Lappin, H. Leass - An 

algorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution. 

Computational Linguistics, 20(4), pp. 535-561. 

Miriam Eckert & Michael Strube (1998). Discourse 

Deictic Anaphora in Dialogues. Institute for Re-

search in Cognitive Science. University of Penn-

sylvania. 

Mitkov R. (1998). Robust pronoun resolution with 

limited knowledge. In: 17th International Confer-

ence on Computational Linguistics (COLING‟ 

98/ACL‟98), Montreal, Canada, pp. 869-875. 

Hobbs,J. R. (1976). Pronoun Resolution, Research 

Report 76-1, Department of Computer Science, 

City College, New York 

D. Chandra Mohan and M. Sadanandam (2014), Tel-

ugu Pronominal Anaphora Resolution. Internation-

al Journal of Research and Applications 

Daniel Jurafsky and James Martin (2009), Speech and 

Language Processing, Prentice-Hall. 

Sobha.L and B.N.Patnaik, VASISTH (2002) - An 

anaphora resolution system for Hindi and Malaya-

lam. In Proceedings of Symposium on Translation 

Support Systems. 

Sobha.L and Vijay Sundar Ram (2014) - A Generic 

anaphora resolution engine for Indian languages. In 

the proceeding of COLING. 

Sobha, L. (2007) Resolution of Pronominals in Tamil, 

Computing Theory and Application. The IEEE 

Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 

475-79. 

Praveen Dakwale, Vandan Mujadia, Dipti M. Sharma 

(2013). “A Hybrid Approach for Anaphora Resolu-

tion in Hindi.”  LTRC, IIIT-Hyderabad. India. 

Prateek Jain, Manav R. Mittal, A Mukerjee and Achla 

M. Raina, 2004. "Anaphora Resolution in Multi-

Person Dialogue", Strube, M. and Candy Sidner 

(ed.), Proceedings of the 5th SIGdial Workshop on 

Discourse and Dialogue. 

Akshar Bharathi, Rajeev Sangal and Dipti Mishra 

(2007) Shakti Standard Format. 

188


