



















































Acoustic-prosodic entrainment in Slovak, Spanish, English and Chinese: A cross-linguistic comparison


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2015 Conference, pages 325–334,
Prague, Czech Republic, 2-4 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Acoustic-prosodic entrainment in Slovak, Spanish, English and Chinese:
A cross-linguistic comparison

Rivka Levitan 1,2, Štefan Beňuš 3, Agustı́n Gravano 4,5, Julia Hirschberg 2
1 Department of Computer and Information Science, Brooklyn College CUNY, USA

2 Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, USA
3 Constantine the Philosopher University in Nitra & Institute of Informatics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Slovakia

4 National Scientific and Technical Research Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina
5 Departamento de Computación, FCEyN, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina

levitan@sci.brooklyn.cuny.edu, sbenus@ukf.sk,

gravano@dc.uba.ar, julia@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

It is well established that speakers of Stan-
dard American English entrain, or become
more similar to each other as they speak, in
acoustic-prosodic features of their speech
as well as other behaviors. Entrainment
in other languages is less well understood.
This work uses a variety of metrics to mea-
sure acoustic-prosodic entrainment in four
comparable corpora of task-oriented con-
versational speech in Slovak, Spanish, En-
glish and Chinese. We report the results
of these experiments and describe trends
and patterns that can be observed from
comparing acoustic-prosodic entrainment
in these four languages. We find evidence
of a variety of forms of entrainment across
all the languages studied, with some ev-
idence of individual differences as well
within the languages.

1 Introduction

In general, entrainment is a ubiquitous tendency
observed in human-human dialogues in which in-
terlocutors adapt their communicative behavior to
the behavior of their conversational partners in
several modalities. Empirical evidence of en-
trainment in human-human conversations has been
documented for numerous acoustic-prosodic fea-
tures, including intensity (Natale, 1975; Gregory
et al., 1993; Ward and Litman, 2007), speaking
rate (Street, 1984), and pitch (Gregory et al., 1993;
Ward and Litman, 2007). Humans have been
shown to entrain to their interlocutor’s language as
well, at the lexical level (Brennan, 1996), syntactic
level (Branigan et al., 2000; Reitter et al., 2010),
and on what (Niederhoffer and Pennebaker, 2002)
called linguistic style, which includes, among

other features, the use of pronouns and verb tenses
(Niederhoffer and Pennebaker, 2002; Danescu-
Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2011; Michael and Otter-
bacher, 2014). Motivated by Communication Ac-
commodation Theory (CAT) (Giles et al., 1991),
which holds that speakers converge to or diverge
from their interlocutors in order to attenuate or
accentuate social differences, numerous studies
have looked for links between entrainment and
positive social behavior. Entrainment on various
features and at all levels of communication has
been linked, respectively, to liking (Chartrand and
Bargh, 1999; Street, 1984), positive affect in con-
versations between “seriously and chronically dis-
tressed” married couples discussing a problem in
their relationship (Lee et al., 2010), mutual ro-
mantic interest in speed dating transcripts (Ireland
et al., 2011), cooperation in a prisoner’s dilemma
(Manson et al., 2013), task success (Nenkova et
al., 2008; Reitter and Moore, 2007; Friedberg et
al., 2012; Thomason et al., 2013), and approval-
seeking (Natale, 1975; Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil
et al., 2012). Given that these social aspects are
assumed to be culture-specific, and the fact that
research on entrainment has been done mainly on
English and other Germanic languages, the types
and degree of entrainment in other languages and
cultures should be explored. Although there are
numerous studies documenting entrainment in dif-
ferent aspects of spoken dialogue in particular lan-
guages collected in particular circumstances, it has
been difficult to compare entrainment across lan-
guages due to differences in the corpora exam-
ined and and analytical approaches employed. Re-
cently, this gap has been addressed in (Xia et al.,
2014; Ben̆us̆ et al., 2014) who report on common-
alities observed across languages as well as sys-
tematic differences in global measures of acoustic-
prosodic entrainment (i.e. over entire dialogues)

325



in comparable corpora of conversational speech in
Chinese, English and Slovak.

In this study we expand on these findings by
focusing on local acoustic-prosodic entrainment
(i.e. dynamic adjustments at turn exchanges)
on a session-by-session basis and present results
from a comparative study of four very different
languages, English, Chinese, Slovak, and Span-
ish, collected from subjects engaged in delib-
erately similar conversational tasks for the pur-
pose of comparison: the Columbia Games Cor-
pus (English), the SK-Games Corpus (Slovak), the
Porteño Spanish Games Corpus, and the Tongji
Games Corpus (Chinese), and employ identical
tools and methods for their analysis. We present
the results of analyses of these corpora for positive
and negative (complementary) entrainment using a
variety of metrics (proximity, synchrony and con-
vergence), and a variety of acoustic and prosodic
features (pitch, intensity, speaking rate, and sev-
eral measures of voice quality).

Section 2 describes the four corpora used in our
analysis, the features we examined in the study
and the units of analysis over which they were
calculated. Section 3 discusses three methods of
measuring entrainment at the local level, proxim-
ity, synchrony, and convergence, and reports the
results of applying each of these measures to the
four corpora. Section 4 summarizes our results
and discusses patterns that emerge from our anal-
ysis.

2 Data and features

This section describes the comparable task-
oriented corpora that are analyzed in this study.

2.1 Columbia Games Corpus

The Columbia Games Corpus is a collection of 12
spontaneous dyadic conversations between native
speakers of Standard American English (SAE).
Thirteen subjects participated in the collection of
the corpus. Eleven returned on another day for
another session with a different partner. Their
ages ranged from 20 to 50 years (M = 30.0,
SD = 10.9). Six subjects were female, and
seven were male; of the twelve dialogues in the
corpus, three are between female-female pairs,
three are between male-male pairs, and six are be-
tween mixed-gender pairs. All interlocutors were
strangers to each other.

In order to elicit spontaneous, task-oriented

speech, subjects were asked to play a series of four
computer games of two kinds: Cards games and
Objects games. The games were designed to re-
quire cooperation and communication in order to
achieve a high score. Participants were motivated
to do well by a monetary bonus that depended on
the number of points they achieved in each game.
All games were played on separate laptops whose
screens were not visible to the other player; the
players were separated by a curtain so that all com-
munication would be vocal. During game play,
keystrokes were captured and were later synchro-
nized with the speech recordings and game events.

There are approximately 9 hours and 13 minutes
of speech in the Games Corpus, of which approx-
imately 70 minutes come from the first part of the
Cards game, 207 minutes from the second part of
the cards Game, and 258 minutes from the Objects
game. On average, each session is approximately
46 minutes long, comprised of three Cards games
of approximately 8 minutes each and one Objects
game, which is approximately 22 minutes long.

The corpus has been orthographically tran-
scribed and manually word-aligned by trained an-
notators. In addition, disfluencies and other par-
alinguistic events such as laughs, coughs and
breaths were marked by the annotators. The
corpus has also been annotated prosodically ac-
cording to the ToBI framework (Silverman et al.,
1992); all turns have been labeled by type; affir-
mative cue words have been labeled according to
their pragmatic functions; and all questions have
been categorized by form and function. The anno-
tation of the Games Corpus is described in detail
in (Gravano, 2009).

2.2 Sk-Games Corpus

SK-games is a corpus of native Slovak (SK) con-
versational speech that is identical to the Objects
games of the Columbia Games Corpus for SAE
barring adjustments to some of the screen images
and their positioning. Subjects were seated in a
quiet room facing computer screens without vi-
sual contact with each other. The corpus cur-
rently includes 9 dyadic sessions with a total of
11 speakers (5F, 6M). Seven of the speakers (4F,
3M) participated in two sessions and thus we can
compare their behavior in identical communica-
tive situations when they are paired with a dif-
ferent interlocutor. Of the nine sessions, two are
between female-female pairs, two between male-

326



male pairs, and five between mixed-gender pairs.
The analyzed material makes roughly six hours of
speech, and consists of 35,758 words and 3,189
unique words. The audio signal was manually
transcribed, and the transcripts were automatically
aligned to the signal using the SPHINX toolkit
adjusted for Slovak (Darjaa et al., 2011), which
forces the alignment of both words and individual
phonemes. This forced alignment was then manu-
ally corrected.

2.3 Porteño Spanish Games Corpus
The Spanish data were taken from a larger cor-
pus of Porteño Spanish (Sp) that is currently under
construction. Porteño is a variant of the Spanish
language spoken by roughly 20-25 million peo-
ple in East-Central Argentina and Uruguay. It
is characterized by substantial differences with
other variants of Spanish at the lexical, phono-
logical and prosodic levels (e.g. (Colantoni and
Gurlekian, 2004)). The portion of the corpus used
in this study is also similar to the Objects games
of the Columbia Games Corpus, and currently in-
cludes 7 dyadic sessions with a total of 12 na-
tive speakers of Porteño Spanish (7F, 5M); only
two female speakers participated in two sessions,
with different partners in each session. Of the
seven sessions, three are between female-female
pairs, one between male-male pairs, and three be-
tween mixed-gender pairs. The analyzed material
makes roughly two hours of speech, and consists
of 17,571 words and 1,139 unique words. The
audio signal was manually transcribed, and the
transcripts were manually aligned to the signal by
trained annotators.

2.4 Tongji Games Corpus
The Tongji Games Corpus (Xia et al., 2014) is
a corpus of spontaneous, task-oriented conversa-
tions in Mandarin Chinese (MC). The corpus con-
tains approximately 12 hours of speech, compris-
ing 99 conversations between 84 unique native
speakers (57 female, 27 male), some of whom par-
ticipated in more than one conversation with a dif-
ferent partner. Conversations average 6 minutes
in length. Participants in the corpus were ran-
domly selected from university students who had
a National Mandarin Test Certificate level 2 with
a grade of A or above. This restriction enforced
that the elicited speech would be standard Man-
darin, with minimal effect of regional dialect. As
in the collection of the Columbia Games Corpus,

recordings were made in a sound-proof booth on
laptops with a curtain between participants so that
neither could see the other’s screen and so that all
communication would be verbal.

Two games were used to elicit spontaneous
speech in the collection of the corpus. In the Pic-
ture Ordering game, one subject, the information
giver, gave the other, the follower, instructions for
ordering a set of 18 cards. When the task was com-
pleted, the same pair switched roles and repeated
the task. In the Picture Classifying game, each
pair worked together to classify 18 pictures into
appropriate categories by discussing each picture.
Seventeen pairs played the Picture Ordering game,
39 pairs played the Picture Classification game,
and 14 pairs played both games (each time with
the same partner).

The corpus was segmented automatically using
SPPAS (SPeech Phonetization Alignment and Syl-
labification) (Bigi and Hirst, 2012), a tool for au-
tomatic prosody analysis. The automatic segments
were manually checked and orthographically tran-
scribed. Turns were identified by two PhD stu-
dents specializing in Conversation Analysis.

For our analysis, we include one randomly cho-
sen conversation from each of ten female-female
pairs, ten male-male pairs, and ten female-male
pairs, for a total of 30 conversations.

2.5 Features

In each corpus, we look for evidence of entrain-
ment on eight acoustic-prosodic features: intensity
mean and max, pitch mean and max, jitter, shim-
mer, noise-to-harmonics ratio (NHR), and speak-
ing rate. Speaking rate for English was deter-
mined from the orthographic transcriptions of the
data using an online syllable dictionary. For Slo-
vak, the syllable count for each word was de-
termined algorithmically utilizing the availability
of phonemes (from grapheme-to-phoneme conver-
sion required for alignment) and a known set of
phonemes forming syllable nuclei. For Spanish,
syllable counts were computed automatically us-
ing the toolkit developed by Hernández-Figueroa
et al. (2013). All other features were extracted
using the open-source audio analysis tool Praat
(Boersma and Weenink, 2012).

To allow for meaningful comparisons between
female and male pitch values, female pitch val-
ues in the English, Spanish and Slovak corpora
were linearly scaled to lie within the male pitch

327



range. This gender normalization was not done
for the Chinese data. However, a linear scaling of
a given speaker’s feature values does not affect the
analysis, since all comparisons are relative to the
speaker’s own speech.

The analysis of the Chinese data did not con-
sider the voice quality features (jitter, shimmer, or
NHR).

The details of the feature extraction and au-
dio analysis of the Columbia Games Corpus can
be found in (Gravano, 2009); the same methods
were used for the other three corpora, without any
corpus-specific refinements.

2.6 Units of analysis

We compute and compare features from the fol-
lowing units of analysis:

An inter-pausal unit (IPU) is a pause-free
chunk of speech from a single speaker. The thresh-
old for pause length for three of the corpora was
derived empirically from the average length of
stop gaps in each corpus (50ms for English and
Spanish, 80ms for Chinese); for the Slovak data,
pauses were detected with a minimum threshold
of 100ms and then manually adjusted.

A turn is a consecutive series of IPUs from a
single speaker. We include in our definition of
“turns” utterances that are not turns in the dis-
course sense of the term, such as backchannels or
failed attempts to take the floor.

A session is a complete interaction between a
pair of interlocutors.

3 Local entrainment

Local entrainment is defined as similarity between
interlocutors at well-defined points in a conversa-
tion. Two speakers may be globally similar—for
example, having similar feature means—while di-
verging widely at most given points in a conversa-
tion, as in Figure 1.

Local entrainment can be thought of as dynamic
entrainment: a continuous reaction to one’s inter-
locutor and updating of one’s own output in re-
sponse to what has just been heard. Such entrain-
ment can be convergent, adjusting toward greater
similarity to the interlocutor, or complementary,
adjusting away from the interlocutor. Comple-
mentary entrainment is often called disentrain-
ment or divergence (Healey et al., 2014), with the
connotation that this behavior reflects a speaker’s
desire to distance herself from her interlocutor, but

Figure 1: Global vs. local entrainment

it can also be viewed as a cooperative behavior in
which a speaker completes or resolves the prosody
of her interlocutor’s previous turn. Independently
of either interpretation, local entrainment denotes
dynamic responsiveness to an interlocutor’s be-
havior.

Following (Levitan and Hirschberg, 2011), and
using the measures described there, we look
for evidence of three aspects of local entrain-
ment:proximity, synchrony, and convergence. (Xia
et al., 2014) analyzed local entrainment in English
and Chinese, and found similar patterns over en-
tire corpora. Here, for a more nuanced view of
the prevalence of local entrainment, we apply our
analysis separately to each session.

Multiple statistical tests are conducted in the
course of this analysis. All significance tests cor-
rect for family-wise Type I error by controlling the
false discovery rate (FDR) at α = 0.05. The kth
smallest p value is considered significant if it is
less than k×αn (where n is the number of p values).

3.1 Proximity

Proximity describes entrainment by value. A ses-
sion that displays proximity on a given feature will
have turns which are more similar to their preced-
ing turns than they are to others of the interlocu-
tor’s turns in the session. To measure proximity,
we look at the differences in feature values be-
tween adjacent IPUs at turn exchanges. For each
turn t, and for each feature f , we calculate an ad-
jacent difference—the absolute value of the dif-

328



ference between the value of f in the first IPU of
t and the value of f in the last IPU of t − 1—and
a non-adjacent difference—the averaged absolute
values of the differences between the value of f
in the first IPU of t and the values of f in the last
IPUs of 50 other turns chosen randomly from the
turns of the other speaker.1

These non-adjacent differences serve as a base-
line for the degree of similarity we might expect to
see at turn exchanges if there is no effect of local
entrainment. For each session and each feature, if
adjacent differences are smaller than non-adjacent
differences, we conclude that the speakers in that
session are locally entraining to each other.

Table 1 shows the results of paired t-tests be-
tween adjacent and non-adjacent differences for
each of the nine Slovak sessions we analyze. We
see little evidence of local proximity in our Slovak
data. Only two sessions show evidence of local
proximity on intensity mean, and only one shows
negative proximity for intensity max. No other
feature shows evidence of local proximity, posi-
tive or negative.

Table 2 shows the results of the test for proxim-
ity in the seven Spanish sessions. Spanish shows
even less evidence of local proximity: Only one
session shows evidence of negative proximity of
intensity max; there is no evidence of convergent
proximity.

Feature Session
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

IntMean + +
IntMax -

PchMean
PchMax

Jitter
Shimmer

NHR
Spkrt

Table 1: Local proximity by session in Slovak (+:
significant positive proximity; -: significant nega-
tive proximity; ‘ ’: no significant proximity)

English, in contrast, shows significant positive
local proximity on intensity mean and max in four
out of 12 sessions. There is no evidence of positive

1Since some of the Spanish sessions did not have as many
as 50 turns from the other speaker, the non-adjacent differ-
ences in the Spanish analysis were averaged over 20 turns
from the other speaker.

local proximity on any other feature in English,
and no evidence of negative local proximity at all.

The Chinese data also shows evidence of pos-
itive local proximity on intensity mean and max
in several sessions (three out of 30 for intensity
mean), but there is also evidence of negative prox-
imity on those features in multiple sessions. In
addition, nearly all sessions show strong nega-
tive proximity on the pitch features. Finally, one
session (out of 30) shows negative proximity on
speaking rate.

Feature Session
1 2 3 4 5 6 7

IntMean
IntMax -

PchMean
PchMax

Jitter
Shimmer

NHR
Spkrt

Table 2: Local proximity by session in Spanish (+:
significant positive proximity; -: significant nega-
tive proximity; ‘ ’: no significant proximity)

3.2 Synchrony

Synchrony describes entrainment by direction
rather than value, measuring how the dynamics
of an individual speaker’s prosody relate to those
of his or her interlocutor. We take the Pearson’s
correlation between feature values from adjacent
IPUs at turn exchanges to see whether speakers’
values at turn exchanges vary together, in syn-
chrony, even if they are not similar in absolute val-
ues.

As Table 3 shows, synchrony is a much more
significant factor in entrainment in Slovak than
proximity is. Nearly every feature shows evidence
of synchrony in multiple sessions. Strikingly,
nearly every feature in fact shows negative syn-
chrony, or complementary synchronous entrain-
ment. Only intensity mean shows positive syn-
chrony in three sessions (and negative synchrony
in a fourth); synchrony on the other seven features
is consistently negative.

Table 3 also makes it clear that this aspect of en-
trainment is highly individualized. Session 1, for
example, shows no evidence of synchrony at all;
Session 5 shows significant negative synchrony in

329



Feature Session
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

IntMean + + + -
IntMax - - -

PchMean - - - - -
PchMax - - - -

Jitter - -
Shimmer -

NHR - - - -
Spkrt -

Table 3: Local synchrony in Slovak by session (+:
significant positive synchrony; -: significant nega-
tive synchrony; ‘ ’: no significant synchrony)

Feature Session
1 2 3 4 5 6 7

IntMean
IntMax -

PchMean -
PchMax

Jitter
Shimmer - -

NHR - - -
Spkrt -

Table 4: Local synchrony in Spanish by session
(+: significant positive synchrony; -: significant
negative synchrony; ‘ ’: no significant synchrony)

everything except intensity mean and pitch max;
Session 4 shows only positive synchrony in in-
tensity mean; and Session 9 shows negative syn-
chrony in intensity and pitch mean and max. Fur-
ther research will be needed to explore the rela-
tionships between entrainment on different aspects
of prosody.

Table 4 reveals similar trends in the Spanish
data. Synchrony is evident for a plurality of fea-
tures and sessions, and all observed synchrony is
negative. One notable difference is in synchrony
on pitch features, which is present in five of nine
Slovak dialogues, and only one of seven Spanish
dialogues. Intensity mean, which shows positive
synchrony in three Slovak dialogues and negative
synchrony in one, shows no evidence of synchrony
in any Spanish dialogue.

In the English data, positive synchrony is evi-
dent for intensity mean in six of the 12 dialogues.
Intensity max shows positive synchrony in three
sessions and negative synchrony in another three.
There is also some evidence of positive synchrony

on pitch mean, pitch max, and shimmer (one ses-
sion each), and negative synchrony on pitch mean
(three sessions); pitch max, jitter, shimmer, and
NHR (two sessions each); and speaking rate (one
session).

The most notable aspect of entrainment by syn-
chrony in the Chinese data is the strong negative
synchrony on pitch that is present in many of the
sessions (19 out of 30 for pitch mean, 15 for pitch
max). One session shows positive synchrony on
pitch max; none show positive synchrony on pitch
mean. The results on intensity are more evenly
split: for intensity mean, six sessions show posi-
tive synchrony and five show negative, while the
count is 3-4 for intensity max. Three sessions
show negative synchrony on speaking rate.

3.3 Convergence

We add another dimension to our analysis of local
entrainment by looking at convergence: whether
interlocutors become increasingly similar over the
course of a conversation. Where previously we
looked at the degree to which interlocutors react
and adapt to each other at each turn exchange, now
we look at how that degree of adaptation changes
with time. This is measured by the Pearson’s
correlation between adjacent differences (absolute
differences in feature values in adjacent IPUs at
turn exchanges) and time. A significant nega-
tive correlation over a session (differences become
smaller with time) is evidence of convergence.

Feature Session
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

IntMean - +
IntMax +

PchMean
PchMax -

Jitter +
Shimmer

NHR -
Spkrt

Table 5: Local convergence in Slovak by session
(+: significant convergence; -: significant diver-
gence; ‘ ’: no significant convergence)

Table 5 shows little evidence of local conver-
gence in Slovak. Only two sessions show evi-
dence of convergence: one on intensity mean and
max, and one on jitter. Three others show evi-
dence of divergence, differences that increase with

330



Feature Session
1 2 3 4 5 6 7

IntMean + +
IntMax

PchMean
PchMax

Jitter
Shimmer

NHR +
Spkrt

Table 6: Local convergence in Spanish by session
(+: significant convergence; -: significant diver-
gence; ‘ ’: no significant convergence)

time: one on intensity mean, one on pitch max,
and one on NHR. The diversity of these results,
with individual interlocutor pairs converging or
diverging on specific features, suggests a strong
speaker-dependent component to this aspect of en-
trainment. The same is true for the Spanish data
(Table 6) — two sessions show convergence on in-
tensity mean, and one on NHR — and the Chinese
data: one session shows convergence on intensity
mean and one on pitch max. English is the outlier
here, with evidence of local convergence on inten-
sity mean (two sessions), intensity max (five ses-
sions), pitch mean (six sessions), pitch max (three
sessions), and NHR (three sessions).

The significant correlation strengths (for all lan-
guages) are not high, ranging in absolute value be-
tween 0.13 and 0.32. The effect of convergence,
even when significant, is only one of numerous
factors affecting speakers’ prosodic expression.

4 Discussion

This analysis explored three kinds of local entrain-
ment on eight features over a total of 58 sessions in
four languages. Table 7 summarizes our findings.
Out of all this data certain patterns emerge:

Negative (complementary) synchrony is more
prevalent than positive (convergent) synchrony. In
each of the four languages under analysis, negative
synchrony is present in a greater number of dia-
logues and for a greater number of features than
is positive synchrony. This seems to indicate that
at a local level, and to some extent independently
of the specific prosodic characteristics of the lan-
guage being spoken, human interlocutors adjust
the prosodic features of their speech in the oppo-
site direction from the dynamics of their partner’s

speech. That is, if speaker A produces a turn end-
ing in the low part of her range for turn endings,
speaker B will produce a turn beginning in the
high part of his range for turn beginnings. (This is,
of course, simplistic; the correlation strengths are
mainly low to moderate, and entrainment is only
one of many factors influencing the prosody of a
given production.) It should be noted that this rela-
tionship cannot be attributed to the prosodic differ-
ences inherent in turn beginnings and turn endings,
since the Pearson’s correlation compares fluctua-
tions within a series rather than the actual values.
These results do not show that a low IPU tends to
be followed by a high IPU, but that an IPU that is
low for a turn ending tends to be followed by one
that is high for a turn beginning.

This finding is in line with recent research ques-
tioning the ubiquity of entrainment in the syntactic
and semantic domains and calling for more refined
analyses of entrainment behavior (Healey et al.,
2014). As discussed above, negative synchrony
may be termed “disentrainment” and interpreted
as a distancing behavior. However, its prevalence
in cooperative dialogues is an argument for a more
neutral interpretation. This can be explored in fu-
ture work by determining whether negative syn-
chrony is associated with objective and subjective
measures of partner engagement and liking, as in
(Levitan et al., 2012).

Another consistency found across languages is
that mean intensity is the only feature to show sig-
nificant positive synchrony in a plurality of ses-
sions. In English, in fact, it only shows positive
synchrony, the only feature to do so; in the other
three languages it is more evenly split between in-
stances of positive and negative synchrony.

Synchrony is more prevalent than proximity.
In measuring local entrainment, we have distin-
guished between proximity, the similarity of a pair
of feature values, and synchrony, the similarity of
the dynamics of two sets of feature values. Our
results show that synchrony is a more useful mea-
sure for characterizing the way in which human
interlocutors adjust to each other at the local level.
This is especially true for Slovak and Spanish,
which show almost no evidence of proximity, but
show evidence of synchrony in multiple sessions
for almost every feature. Comparing proximity
and synchrony, however, should be taken with cau-
tion since their prevalence has been assessed with
different statistical tests.

331



Feature Proximity (% sessions) Synchrony (% sessions) Convergence (% sessions)
SAE MC Sk Sp SAE MC Sk Sp SAE MC Sk Sp

+ - + - + - + - + - + - + - + - + - + - + - + -
IntMean 33 10 20 22 50 20 17 33 11 17 3 11 11 29
IntMax 25 7 17 11 14 25 25 10 13 33 14 42 11
PchMean 67 8 25 63 56 14 50
PchMax 63 8 17 3 50 44 25 3 11
Jitter - - 17 - - 22 - - 11
Shimmer - - 8 17 - - 11 28 - -
NHR - - 17 - - 44 43 25 - - 11 14
Spkrt 3 8 10 11 14

Table 7: Cross-linguistic summary of results on local acoustic-prosodic entrainment as percentages of
sessions with significant positive (+) and negative (-) entrainment type (proximity, synchrony, conver-
gence) A ‘-’ indicates that the corresponding statistical test was not done for that language.

Chinese shows the strongest evidence of pitch
synchrony. While all four languages show evi-
dence of negative synchrony on pitch, Chinese has
the strongest and most prevalent negative pitch
synchrony: it is present in a majority of the ses-
sions, with correlation strengths of about 0.90.
The reason for this is unknown, but it is reasonable
to hypothesize that it is linked to the importance of
pitch in Chinese, a tonal language.

Pitch is also the feature displaying the strongest
and most prevalent negative synchrony in Slovak:
negative pitch synchrony is present in a majority of
sessions, as in Chinese, with correlation strengths
of about 0.50.

English shows the strongest evidence of local
convergence. In English, we observe positive lo-
cal convergence in a plurality of sessions, on all
features except jitter, shimmer, and speaking rate.
There is no evidence of negative convergence. The
only other language with significant evidence of
local convergence is Spanish, which displays local
convergence on intensity mean in two sessions and
on NHR in one (out of seven). Chinese and Slovak
have scattered instances of convergence; Slovak is
the only language to show negative convergence,
though the evidence is sparse (one session each for
intensity mean, jitter, and NHR).

Individual behavior varies. While the patterns
we have identified are apparent when looking at
the data in the aggregate, none can be said to ap-
ply to all the sessions they describe, or even almost
all. Clearly, a session’s entrainment behavior is
significantly influenced by the particular dynamics
of its speaker pair. Gender, power, liking, person-
ality, and similar factors have all been shown to
influence the degree of entrainment to some extent
(Levitan et al., 2012; Š. Beňuš et al., 2014; Gra-
vano et al., 2014). Exploring how these factors
correlate with entrainment in different languages
and cultures is an interesting area for future work.

5 Conclusion

We have presented the results of applying an iden-
tical analysis of acoustic-prosodic entrainment to
comparable corpora in four different languages.
This approach allows us to identify trends that are
characteristic of human behavior independently of
language and culture, and behaviors that seem to
be characteristic of a given language.

This study can be considered an exploratory
contribution to what is currently a very small body
of work concerning language differences in en-
trainment. Since three of the corpora we analyze
have a relatively small number of participants, it
is possible that the differences we identify may
be the products of individual behavior rather than
the characteristics of the given language. In future
work, these results will be confirmed or refined by
further research on a larger scale.

Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported
by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research,
Air Force Material Command, USAF under
Award No. FA9550-15-1-0055 and by UBACYT
20020120200025BA.

References
S̆. Ben̆us̆, R. Levitan, J. Hirschberg, A. Gravano, and

S. Darjaa. 2014. Entrainment in Slovak collabora-
tive dialogues. In Proceedings of the 5th IEEE Con-
ference on Cognitive Infocommunications, pages
309–313.

Brigitte Bigi and Daniel Hirst. 2012. SPeech phone-
tization alignment and syllabification (SPPAS): a
tool for the automatic analysis of speech prosody.
In Speech Prosody, pages 19–22. Tongji University
Press.

Paul Boersma and David Weenink. 2012. Praat:
doing phonetics by computer [computer program].

332



Version 5.3.23, retrieved 21 August 2012 from
http://www.praat.org.

Holly P. Branigan, Martin J. Pickering, and Alexan-
dra A. Cleland. 2000. Syntactic co-ordination in
dialogue. Cognition, 75(2):B13–B25.

Susan E Brennan. 1996. Lexical entrainment in spon-
taneous dialog. Proceedings of ISSD, pages 41–44.

T. L. Chartrand and J. A. Bargh. 1999. The chameleon
effect: The perception-behavior link and social in-
teraction. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 76(6):893–910.

L. Colantoni and J.A. Gurlekian. 2004. Convergence
and intonation: Historical evidence from Buenos
Aires Spanish. Bilingualism: Language and Cog-
nition, 7(2):107–119.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Michael Gamon,
and Susan Dumais. 2011. Mark my words! linguis-
tic style accommodation in social media. In Pro-
ceedings of WWW.

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, Lillian Lee,
Bo Pang, and Jon Kleinberg. 2012. Echoes of
power: language effects and power differences in
social interaction. In Proceedings of WWW.

S. Darjaa, M. Cern̆ak, M. Trnka, M. Rusko, and
R. Sabo. 2011. Effective triphone mapping for
acoustic modeling in speech recognition. In Pro-
ceedings of Interspeech.

Heather Friedberg, Diane Litman, and Susannah BF
Paletz. 2012. Lexical entrainment and success
in student engineering groups. In Spoken Lan-
guage Technology Workshop (SLT), 2012 IEEE,
pages 404–409. IEEE.

Howard Giles, Nikolas Coupland, and Justine Coup-
land. 1991. Accommodation theory: Communica-
tion, context, and consequence. Contexts of accom-
modation: Developments in applied sociolinguis-
tics, 1.

A. Gravano, S. Benus, R. Levitan, and J. Hirschberg.
2014. Three tobi-based measures of prosodic en-
trainment and their correlations with speaker en-
gagement. In IEEE Spoken Language Technology
Workshop (SLT).

Agustı́n Gravano. 2009. Turn-taking and affirmative
cue words in task-oriented dialogue. Ph.D. thesis,
Columbia University.

Stanford Gregory, Stephen Webster, and Gang Huang.
1993. Voice pitch and amplitude convergence as a
metric of quality in dyadic interviews. Language &
Communication, 13(3):195–217.

Patrick GT Healey, Matthew Purver, and Christine
Howes. 2014. Divergence in dialogue. PloS one,
9(6):e98598.

Z. Hernández-Figueroa, F.J. Carreras-Riudavets, and
G. Rodrı́guez-Rodrı́guez. 2013. Automatic syllabi-
fication for Spanish using lemmatization and deriva-
tion to solve the prefix’s prominence issue. Expert
Systems with Applications, 40(17):7122–7131.

Molly E Ireland, Richard B Slatcher, Paul W Eastwick,
Lauren E Scissors, Eli J Finkel, and James W Pen-
nebaker. 2011. Language style matching predicts
relationship initiation and stability. Psychological
Science, 22(1):39–44.

Chi-Chun Lee, Matthew Black, Athanasios Katsama-
nis, Adam Lammert, Brian Baucom, Andrew Chris-
tensen, Panayiotis G. Georgiou, and Shrikanth
Narayanan. 2010. Quantification of prosodic en-
trainment in affective spontaneous spoken interac-
tions of married couples. In Proceedings of Inter-
speech.

Rivka Levitan and Julia Hirschberg. 2011. Measuring
acoustic-prosodic entrainment with respect to multi-
ple levels and dimensions. In Proceedings of Inter-
speech.

Rivka Levitan, Agustı́n Gravano, Laura Willson, Stefan
Benus, Julia Hirschberg, and Ani Nenkova. 2012.
Acoustic-prosodic entrainment and social behavior.
In Proceedings of the 2012 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 11–19, Montréal, Canada, June. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Joseph H Manson, Gregory A Bryant, Matthew M Ger-
vais, and Michelle A Kline. 2013. Convergence
of speech rate in conversation predicts cooperation.
Evolution and Human Behavior, 34(6):419–426.

Loizos Michael and Jahna Otterbacher. 2014. Write
like i write: Herding in the language of online re-
views. In Proceedings of the Eigth International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.

Michael Natale. 1975. Convergence of mean vocal
intensity in dyadic communication as a function of
social desirability. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 32(5):790–804.

Ani Nenkova, Agustı́n Gravano, and Julia Hirschberg.
2008. High frequency word entrainment in spoken
dialogue. In Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
on Human Language Technologies: Short Papers,
pages 169–172. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Kate G. Niederhoffer and James W. Pennebaker. 2002.
Linguistic style matching in social interaction. Jour-
nal of Language and Social Psychology, 21(4):337–
360.

David Reitter and Johanna D. Moore. 2007. Predict-
ing success in dialogue. In Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, pages 808–815.

333



David Reitter, Johanna D. Moore, and Frank Keller.
2010. Priming of syntactic rules in task-oriented di-
alogue and spontaneous conversation.

K. Silverman, M. Beckman, J. Pitrelli, M. Osten-
dorf, C. Wightman, P. Price, J. Pierrehumbert, and
J. Hirschberg. 1992. ToBI: A standard for labeling
English prosody. In International Conf. on Spoken
Language Processing, volume 2, pages 867–870.

Richard L Street. 1984. Speech convergence and
speech evaluation in fact-finding interviews. Human
Communication Research, 11(2):139–169.

Jesse Thomason, Huy V Nguyen, and Diane Litman.
2013. Prosodic entrainment and tutoring dialogue
success. In Artificial Intelligence in Education,
pages 750–753. Springer.

Š. Beňuš, A. Gravano, R. Levitan, S.I. Levitan, L. Will-
son, and J. Hirschberg. 2014. Entrainment, dom-
inance and alliance in Supreme Court hearings.
Knowledge-Based Systems, 71:3–14.

Arthur Ward and Diane Litman. 2007. Measuring con-
vergence and priming in tutorial dialog. Technical
report, University of Pittsburgh.

Zhihua Xia, Rivka Levitan, and Julia Hirschberg.
2014. Prosodic entrainment in Mandarin and En-
glish: A cross-linguistic comparison. In Speech
Prosody.

334


