



















































Regional Linguistic Data Initiative (ReLDI)


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 40–42,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 10–11 September 2015.

Regional Linguistic Data Initiative (ReLDI)

Tanja Samardžić
Corpus Lab

URPP Language and Space
University of Zurich

tanja.samardzic@uzh.ch

Nikola Ljubešić
Dept. of Information

and Communications Sciences
Faculty of Humanities
and Social Sciences
University of Zagreb

nljubesi@ffzg.hr

Maja Miličević
Dept. of General Linguistics

Faculty of Philology
University of Belgrade

m.milicevic@fil.bg.ac.rs

1 Introduction

Regional Linguistic Data Initiative is a two-year
institutional partnership between research units
in Switzerland, Serbia and Croatia, funded by
the Swiss National Science Foundation grant No.
160501.1 The partners in the project are the au-
thors of this article. The goal of the partnership is
two-fold. First, we will collect and distribute var-
ious kinds of linguistic data and tools to support
empirical research on Croatian and Serbian. Sec-
ond, we will organise didactic activities and estab-
lish a regional community of researches who will
use these data and tools in their research and teach-
ing. In this paper, we describe the key components
of the partnership.

2 The Infrastructure

The collected data and tools are mostly man-
aged through the infrastructure at the University
of Zurich. In collaboration with the S3IT support
service, we have set up a virtual server running
most of the software used in the project:

• WordPress for the main project website / ac-
cess point for data and tools
• WebAnno for collaborative manual annota-

tion of language corpora
• NoSketch Engine for searching corpora
• R and Python for data processing
• EdX for online courses
We also use a public GitHub repository to share

the source code of specialised NLP tools and the
related documentation.

3 Online Content

We collect and distribute two main kinds of data
and tools: a natural language processing set and
an experimental set. Both sets of resources are as-
sociated with courses and tutorials.

1http://p3.snf.ch/project-160501

3.1 NLP Resources and Tools

The natural language processing set consists of
Croatian and Serbian corpora, morphological dic-
tionaries and processing tools. While such re-
sources and tools already exist for both languages
(Vitas et al., 2003; Agić et al., 2008), they
are mostly inaccessible to researches outside the
groups that develop them. Our aim is to compile
and distribute resources that will be available to all
interested researches.

Corpora include smaller manually annotated
samples2 and large automatically annotated cor-
pora (Ljubešić and Klubička, 2014); annotation
will be improved and enriched in the course of
the project. Free existing morphological dictio-
naries3 are extended inside the project in a semi-
automated fashion (Ljubešić et al., in press). Tools
currently include a state-of-the-art part-of-speech
tagger and lemmatiser reaching a new best per-
formance for both languages (∼91% for full mor-
phosyntactic annotation and ∼97% for lemmati-
sation). Development of tools for other kinds
of analysis (dependency syntax, semantic role la-
belling) is planned for the remainder of the project.
In addition to the standard tools, we provide a
set of scripts for extracting corpus data commonly
needed for quantitative linguistic analysis (e.g.,
for extracting and comparing frequency lists), and
scripts for format conversion and file handling.
Special emphasis is placed on detailed documen-
tation of all resources.

The presented resources and tools for Croatian
are currently more developed than those for Ser-
bian. We take advantage of the large structural and
lexical overlap between the two languages to de-
velop Serbian resources starting from the existing
Croatian ones.

2https://github.com/ffnlp/sethr
3https://svn.code.sf.net/p/apertium/

svn/languages/apertium-hbs/

40



3.2 Linguistic Experimental Data
Another important empirical trend in language sci-
ence concerns experimental research. Linguists
increasingly rely on sampling and statistical pro-
cessing of human judgements about and their reac-
tions to linguistic phenomena (acceptability judge-
ments, reading times, etc.; see e.g., Kraš and
Miličević (in press)). Currently, such empirical
data tend to be used only within the studies for
which they are collected. Through our partner-
ship, experimental data for Croatian and Serbian
will be collected and their wider distribution and
reuse encouraged. Both instruments (stimuli lists)
and results will be included. Papers published
based on the given stimuli and results will serve
as documentation. Similar initiatives are still rare
in linguistics (but see Marsden and Mackey (2014)
for instruments in second language acquisition re-
search), so our work in this domain is largely pio-
neering even beyond the regional context.

3.3 Online Courses and Tutorials
One of the major obstacles to a wider use of both
corpus and experimental linguistic data is a lack of
skills required for obtaining and analysing them.
Despite the growing demand, experimental de-
sign, data manipulation and statistical analysis are
not yet covered in standard linguistic curricula. An
important part of our initiative is thus devoted to
online courses and tutorials.

The educational component of the project is in-
tended to equip the interested researchers with the
skills needed to fully exploit the resources shared
through our initiative. The courses are based on
the current teaching activities of the three partners.
They cover issues in three main domains:

• Methodological: general principles of exper-
imental design, corpus-based studies, statisti-
cal analysis, basics of machine learning
• Theoretical: the role of data in language sci-

ence, corpus annotation as a form of linguis-
tic analysis
• Technical: data processing with R and

Python, data visualisation, use of annotation
tools and other NLP resources

All courses will include exercises in which par-
ticipants will have an opportunity to use the data
and tools collected within the project. The courses
will emphasise the points in common between the
analysis of corpus and experimental data.

4 Activities in the Region

The work on creating a regional research commu-
nity will be centred around four three-day work-
shops, two in Belgrade and two in Zagreb, which
are planned for the second project year. The tar-
geted participants are graduate students and re-
searchers at universities and institutes, joined by
professionals from companies that work with lin-
guistic data.

All four workshops will be composed of in-
vited talks, tutorials given by the project partners
(based on the online courses), and a range of ac-
tivities geared towards encouraging exchange and
networking between the participants. Each work-
shop will have two invited speakers – internation-
ally recognised experts in linguistics or NLP who
have worked on Croatian and/or Serbian. Tutori-
als will have the form of live classes based on the
online materials, with hands-on sessions and prac-
tical exercises. Exchange and networking will take
place during panel discussion and social events.
To facilitate participant mobility within the region,
we will offer a number of small grants covering
travel and accommodation costs.

Different activities will be undertaken to adver-
tise the workshops, promoting at the same time the
project goals: the project website (currently under
construction), local media, social media, and pre-
sentations at various academic events.

5 Expected Outcomes

The partnership is expected to result in a commu-
nity of researchers working with linguistic data in
a shared empirical framework, exchanging ideas,
and adhering to common research quality stan-
dards. Some of the contacts established through
the initiative are expected to result in research col-
laborations that will extend beyond the duration of
the partnership; these collaborations should bring
about new research ideas and new projects.

The data and training provided through the ini-
tiative are expected to increase the competitive-
ness of researchers from the region in the inter-
national context. The initiative will also help re-
searches contribute to the study of language be-
yond their specific subject languages.

Finally, Regional Linguistic Data Initiative is
expected to help establishing contacts between re-
searchers and professionals in the domain of lan-
guage technology, identifying common interests
and potential for collaboration.

41



References
Željko Agić, Marko Tadić, and Zdravko Dovedan.

2008. Improving part-of-speech tagging accuracy
for Croatian by morphological analysis. Informat-
ica, 32(4):445–451.

Tihana Kraš and Maja Miličević. in press. Eksper-
imentalne metode u istraživanjima usvajanja dru-
goga jezika. Filozofski fakultet, Rijeka.

Nikola Ljubešić and Filip Klubička. 2014.
{bs,hr,sr}WaC – web corpora of Bosnian, Croatian
and Serbian. In Proceedings of the 9th Web as Cor-
pus Workshop (WaC-9), pages 29–35, Gothenburg,
Sweden. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Nikola Ljubešić, Miquel Esplà-Gomis, Filip Klubička,
and Nives Mikelić Preradović. in press. Predict-
ing inflectional paradigms and lemmata of unknown
words for semi-automatic expansion of morpholog-
ical lexicons. In Proceedings of Recent Advances in
Natural Language Processing, Hissar, Bulgaria.

Emma Marsden and Alison Mackey. 2014. IRIS: A
new resource for second language research. Lin-
guistic Approaches to Bilingualism, (4):125–130.

Duško Vitas, Cvetana Krstev, Ivan Obradović,
Ljubomir Popović, and Gordana Pavlović-Lažetić.
2003. An overview of resources and basic tools for
processing of Serbian written texts. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Balkan Language Resources, 1st
Balkan Conference in Informatics, pages 97–104,
Thessaloniki, Greece.

42


