



















































Invited Talk: Lexicon Embedded Syntax


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 2–9,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

Lexicon Embedded Syntax

Alain Polguère
ATILF UMR 7118, CNRS-Université de Lorraine

44 avenue de la Libération, BP 30687
54063 Nancy cedex, France

alain.polguere@univ-lorraine.fr

Abstract

This paper explores the notion of lexicon
embedded syntax: syntactic structures that
are preassembled in natural language lex-
icons. Section 1 proposes a lexicologi-
cal perspective on (dependency) syntax:
first, it deals with the well-known problem
of lexicon-grammar dichotomy, then intro-
duces the notion of lexicon embedded syn-
tax and, finally, presents the lexical mod-
els this discussion is based on: lexical sys-
tems, as implemented in the English and
French Lexical Networks. Two cases of
lexicon embedded syntax are then treated:
the syntax of idioms, section 2, and the
syntax of collocations, section 3. Section 4
concludes on the possible exploitation of
syntactic structures that can be extracted
from lexical systems.

1 Lexicological Perspective on Syntax

1.1 Lexicon-Grammar Dichotomy

The task of modeling languages is often equated
with a task of writing so-called grammars. This is
clearly demonstrated by the fact that most theoret-
ical proposals in modern linguistics are designated
as specific types of grammars: Generative Gram-
mar, Case Grammar, Lexical Functional Gram-
mar, Word Grammar, Generalized Phrase Struc-
ture Grammar, Construction Grammar(s), Role
and Reference Grammar, Functional Discourse
Grammar, etc. (Polguère, 2011, pp 82–83). It
should be noted that this focalization on an all-
encompassing notion of grammar runs deep. For
instance, the 1795 law that created the school of
oriental language studies in France (INALCO1)
specified as follows the linguistic descriptive task
assigned to its professors:

1http://www.inalco.fr

“Lesdits professeurs composeront en
français la grammaire des langues
qu’ils enseigneront: ces divers ouvrages
seront remis au comité d’instruction
publique.”2

No mention of a need to compile dictionaries
for oriental languages, as if it were natural to des-
ignate with the term grammar the main tool to be
used by XVIIIth century officials and merchants
for communicating with “locals”. It should be
stressed that this rather confusing notion of Gram-
mar – with a capital G – is extremely broad and en-
compasses the set of all linguistic rules that make
up a natural language. It is distinct from the gram-
mar as a language module that stands in opposi-
tion with its functional counterpart: the lexicon.
Both linguistic modules have been loosely charac-
terized as follows by O. Jespersen – in terms of
their corresponding fields of study:

“[g]rammar deals with the general facts
of language, and lexicology with special
facts” (Jespersen, 1924, p 32).

In the present discussion, we will strictly abide
by the above characterization and consider the
grammar of a language as being the system of all
general rules of that language – i.e. rules that are
not properties assigned to given words – and the
lexicon of that language as being the system of all
its word-specific rules.

It is a well-established fact that there exists a
blurry demarcation between grammar and lexicon
(Keizer, 2007). Rules that are specific to linguistic
entities that present analogies with “words” but are
not strictly speaking lexical units are less lexical
in nature and possess a certain grammatical flavor.
For instance, rules that account for the properties

2‘Said professors will elaborate in French the grammar of
languages they will be teaching: these various books will be
submitted to the public instruction committee.’

2



of bound morphemes (the English derivative suf-
fix -ly, the prefix poly-, etc.) belong to the lexi-
con because they are specific to a linguistic sign,
hence not general, but they are borderline due to
the morphological nature of the sign in question.
In what follows, quite a few linguistic entities will
be presented as belonging to lexical models based
on this preliminary characterization of the respec-
tive scope of grammar and lexicon and in spite of
widespread practices that may tend to view lexi-
cons strictly as repositories of lexical units.

1.2 Focus on Lexicon Embedded Syntax

Another factor that blurs the lexicon-grammar par-
tition is the very fact that, in any natural language,
a considerable number of syntactic structures are
preassembled in the lexicon. Valency-controlled
dependencies – whose modeling is directly rele-
vant to lexicological studies – are the most ob-
vious manifestation of this phenomenon. A va-
lency dictionary or lexical database (Fillmore et
al., 2003; Mertens, 2010) is nothing but a lexi-
cographic description of a significant part of lex-
icon embedded syntax. This fact is now widely
acknowledged. What is much less known and/or
taken into account, specially in Natural Language
Processing, is the extent to which syntactic struc-
tures of natural languages find their origins in lex-
icons, thanks to the omnipresence of phraseology
(Becker, 1975).

In what follows, we will focus of two types of
lexicon embedded syntactic structures:

• lexico-syntactic structures of idioms (sec-
tion 2);

• collocational syntactic structures (section 3).

We are particularly interested in showing how
a rich formal lexical model (see 1.3 below) can
account for lexicon embedded syntax and serve as
repository of “canned” syntactic structures that are
directly extractable from lexical data.

1.3 Lexical Systems

In order to provide data for the proper treatment
of lexicon embedded syntax, lexical models need
to have “phraseological genes”: they have to be
based on theoretical and descriptive principles
that fully take into consideration the omnipres-
ence of phraseology in natural languages. Such is
the case of Explanatory Combinatorial Lexicology

(Mel’čuk et al., 1995; Mel’čuk, 2006), that is be-
ing used as theoretical background in the present
discussion. More specifically, we will refer to a
new type of lexical model built within this frame-
work – lexical systems (Polguère, 2009) –, using
two specific instances of such models: the English
and French Lexical Networks – hereafter, en- and
fr-LNs.

Lexical systems are huge graphs of intercon-
nected lexical entities. Polguère (2014) discusses
the rationale behind the choice of this particular
type of structure, formally characterized by four
main properties.

Property 1. The lexical system of a language L
is mathematically defined as an oriented graph: a
set of nodes and a set of oriented edges (= ordered
pairs of nodes).

• Nodes correspond, first, to lexical units of
L (lexemes and idioms) and, second, to
quasi-lexical units (linguistic clichés, prover-
bial clauses, etc.).

• Edges correspond primarily to Meaning-Text
lexical function relations (Mel’čuk, 1996).3

Property 2. Nodes of the graph are non-atomic
entities. They are “containers” for a rich variety
of semantic and combinatorial information about
the corresponding unit (grammatical characteris-
tics, definition, etc.); they also contain pointers to
lexicographic examples (sense illustrations), their
content being informationally analogous to that of
dictionary articles (Polguère, 2014, pp 15–16).

Property 3. Lexical systems possess a non-
ontological graph structure that belongs to the
family of so-called small-world networks. As
such, they display remarkable mathematical prop-
erties (Gader et al., 2014, §3) that can be used
to extract node clusters corresponding to seman-
tic spaces (Polguère, 2014, §2.2.2).
Property 4. Each important piece of informa-
tion in lexical systems (existence of a lexical unit,
assignment of a grammatical characteristic, lexi-
cal link, etc.) possesses an associated measure of

3Other relations are, at the moment: copolysemy links
(FOREST 1 [of oak trees] and FOREST 2 [of antennas] belong
to the same polysemic vocable and are connected by a re-
lation of metaphor), definitional inclusions (the meaning of
DOG is included in the definition of [to] BARK) and formal
inclusions (the lexeme BULLET is formally included in the
lexico-syntactic structure of the idiom BITE THE BULLET) –
we will examine this latter type of relation in section 2 below.

3



confidence that can be used to perform probabilis-
tic computing on the graph. Measurement of con-
fidence is particularly relevant for the implemen-
tation of analogical reasoning on lexical models.

Figure 1 illustrates the graph structure of lexical
systems. It visualizes a semantic space controlled
by the French lexeme FORÊT I ‘forest’ in the fr-
LN. In this figure, spatialization and coloring of
nodes visualize the result of an automatic seman-
tic clustering performed on the lexical graph; this
mode of visualization reflects semantic proximity
inferred from the topology of the graph (Chudy et
al., 2013).

Work on lexical systems started with exper-
iments on the mechanical compilation of tra-
ditional Explanatory and Combinatorial models
(Polguère, 2009), then evolved into full-scale lex-
icography with the construction of the fr-LN, the
first manually-built lexical system (Lux-Pogodalla
and Polguère, 2011; Gader et al., 2012). While
lexicographically developing the fr-LN, a first ver-
sion of a lexical system for the English language –
the en-LN – has been automatically compiled from
the Princeton WordNet (Gader et al., 2014). This
latter lexical system offers a large-scale coverage
of English in terms of wordlist. It is however es-
sentially based on synonymy-like relations, inher-
ited from WordNet; only the fr-LN fully reflects
the amplitude of both paradigmatic and syntag-
matic lexical function relations. Additionally, it is
only in the fr-LN that the actual Explanatory Com-
binatorial approach to phraseology is fully imple-
mented at present. For this reason, we will need
to use both French and English illustrations in the
following discussion, depending on the availabil-
ity of data in the current language models.

Table 1 gives statistics on the en- and fr-LNs in
their present state.

Graph characteriscs en-LN fr-LN
Num. lexical units = senses (LU) 206 995 26 020
Num. vocables = dict. entries (V) 156 587 16 981
Polysemy rate (LU/V) 1.32 1.53
Num. lexical functions links (LFL) 945 971 49 539
Num. other links (OL) 46 13 672
Connectivity rate ((LFL+OL)/LU) 4.57 2.43

Table 1: Current statistics on the en- and fr-LNs

2 Syntax of Idioms

We can now proceed with the examination of the
first type of lexicon embedded syntax: the syntax

of idioms. By this we mean lexico-syntactic struc-
tures that are associated with idioms in the fr-LN.4

Because they are semantically non-
compositional, idioms are considered as full-
fledged lexical units in Explanatory Combinato-
rial Lexicology. For this reason, they possess, just
like lexemes, their own individual description in
the fr-LN.

On the one hand, the behavior of idioms is
known to be highly irregular (for instance, some
idioms allow syntactic modification on some of
their lexical constituents and other do not); on
the other hand, it can be expected that general
rules could be identified that condition part of id-
ioms’ behaviors, based on their lexico-syntactic
structure. For this reason, it has been decided
to specify, for each individual idiom in the fr-LN
wordlist, its constitutive lexemes and its basic syn-
tactic structure (Pausé, to appear). This is imple-
mented as follows.

First, each phrasal part of speech – nominal
idiom, verbal idiom, etc. – is linked to a set
of syntactic templates that identify possible syn-
tactic structures for idioms belonging to this part
of speech. For instance, the verbal idiom part
of speech (Fr. locution verbale) is associated,
among others, with a syntactic template named
V Art NC (‘Verb + Article + Common noun’)
that designates the syntactic structure shown in
Figure 2.

Figure 2: Syntactic structure of the V Art NC
idiom template.

Second, each time an idiom is created in the fr-
LN, two operations are performed:

1. the newly created idiom is linked to one of
the syntactic templates associated to its part
of speech;

4Work on assigning lexico-syntactic structures to idioms
in the en-LN has not started yet and all our examples in this
section will therefore be borrowed from French.

4



Figure 1: Semantic space controlled by Fr. FORÊT I ‘forest’ in the French Lexical Network (fr-LN)

2. lexical nodes in this syntactic template are
linked to actual lexical units that make up the
idiom.

For instance, Figure 3 shows how the
lexico-syntactic structure of the idiom
pSUCRER LES FRAISES Iq ‘to tremble because of
advanced age’ (lit. ‘to sugar.the.strawberries’)5 is
specified on the V Art NC template using the
fr-LN lexicographic editor. In this figure, names
appearing in the Sense column correspond to
actual pointers to lexemes (senses) of the fr-LN;
names in the Form column are only wordforms
that will be used when displaying the instantiated
syntactic template. (If nothing is specified, the
name in the corresponding Sense cell will be
displayed.)

Figure 3: Specifying a lexico-syntactic structure.

Once the lexico-syntactic structure of
pSUCRER LES FRAISES Iq has been fully in-

5There is another sense pSUCRER LES FRAISES IIq, de-
rived from the first one, that means ‘to be senile’.

stanciated (Figure 3), in can be interpreted by the
general – hence, grammatical – syntactic template
of Figure 2 in order to derive the fully lexicalized
syntactic structure shown in Figure 4.6

Figure 4: Syntax of pSUCRER LES FRAISES Iq.

To our knowledge, the fr-LN is the first lexi-
cal database that systematically accounts for the
lexico-syntactic structure of idioms it contains –
in point of fact, current lexical resources seldom
provide individual descriptions for idioms. At
present, it is possible to derive from fr-LN data
3,018 syntactic structures of individual idioms
(such as that in Figure 4), which is only a small
portion of the syntax of idioms embedded in the
French lexicon.

6An important piece of information is missing in this
structure: the fact that the lexeme FRAISE 11 has to
carry the grammeme ‘plural’ (psucrer les fraisesq and not
*psucrer la fraiseq). The fr-LN does not support yet the spec-
ification of grammemes in idiom syntactic structures.

5



3 Syntax of Collocations

3.1 Functional notion of collocation
We now examined a second case of lexicon em-
bedded syntax: the syntax of collocations. Collo-
cation is understood here as designating a func-
tional rather than statistical notion (Hausmann,
1979); it can be defined as follows.

A collocation, e.g. to run a fever,
is a phraseological but compositional
phrase made up of two main elements:

1. a semantically autonomous ele-
ment – fever – called base of the
collocation;

2. a bound element – to run – called
collocate of the base; the collo-
cate is said to be bound, or not
“free”, because its selection by the
Speaker in order to express a given
meaning depends on the prior se-
lection of the base.

As collocations are modeled in lexical systems
by means of standard syntagmatic lexical func-
tions, we will start with a brief presentation of the
notion of lexical functions (3.2). We will then pro-
ceed with the interpretation of syntagmatic lexical
functions as a special type of grammar rules (3.3).
Finally (3.4), we will show how such rules can
be used to derive a considerable amount syntactic
structures embedded in natural language lexicons.

3.2 Standard Lexical Functions
A given standard lexical function is a generaliza-
tion of a lexical link that possesses the following
properties:

• it is either paradigmatic (synonyms,
antonyms, nominalizations, verbaliza-
tions, actant names, etc.) or syntagmatic
(collocates that are intensifiers [driving rain],
light verbs [to run a fever], etc.);

• it is recurrent and universally present in natu-
ral languages;

• it is often (though not necessarily) expressed
by morphological means (drive→ driver [ac-
tant name], store→megastore [intensifier], etc.).

For instance, Magn is the standard lexical func-
tion that denotes collocational intensifiers; it can

be applied to any full lexical unit in order to re-
turn the set of all typical intensifiers for that unit.7

This is illustrated in (1), with the two semantically
related units FEVER and HEADACHE as arguments
of Magn.

(1) a. Magn( fever ) = high < raging
b. Magn( headache ) = bad, severe < ter-

rible, violent < pounding, splitting

Note that collocative meanings can sometimes be
expressed synthetically (within a paradigmatically
related term) rather than analytically (as collo-
cates). This phenomenon is call fusion and fused
values of syntagmatic lexical functions are flagged
with the “//” symbol in lexicographic descriptions;
for instance:

(2) Magn( rainV ) = hard, heavily, //pour down

Years of lexical studies on a wide spectrum of
natural languages have allowed for the identifica-
tion of a now stable set of approximately 65 sim-
ple lexical functions;8 additionally, these functions
can be combined to form complex lexical functions
(Kahane and Polguère, 2001).

The system of lexical functions is a descriptive
tool that allows for a rationalization and formal-
ization of the web of paradigmatic and syntag-
matic links that connect lexical units in natural lan-
guages. This explains why we have adopted lexi-
cal functions as the main structuring principle for
lexical systems.

3.3 Standard Syntagmatic Lexical Functions
as Grammar Rules

We will now focus on standard syntagmatic lexi-
cal functions in order to examine how they offer
an original treatment of the syntax of collocations.
For this, we will use as illustration one specific
standard syntagmatic lexical function: Real1. It is
commonly characterized as follows.

The lexical function application
Real1( L ) stands for a full verb:

• that expresses such meanings as ‘to
realize L’, ‘to do what is supposed
to be done as regards to L’ . . . ;

7A lexical function is thus quite similar to an algebraic
function f, that can be applied to a given number x in order to
return a given value y: f(x ) = y.

8The exact number of lexical functions varies according
to the descriptive granularity one wants to adopt.

6



• that takes L as second deep-
syntactic actant (i.e. first comple-
ment) and the first deep-syntactic
actant of L as its first deep-
syntactic actant (i.e. grammatical
subject).9

In case of fusion, the meaning ‘L’ is encapsu-
lated in the meaning of the lexical function appli-
cation, together with the sense of realization, and
therefore //Real1( L ) doesn’t take L as second syn-
tactic actant.

As an illustration, Figure 5 gives the so-called
article-view of Real1 values for BALLOONN 2 [We
could get there by balloon.] in the en-LN.10

Figure 5: Real1( balloonN 2 ) in the en-LN.

Standard lexical functions such as Real1 can be
conceptualized from at least two perspectives.

• From the viewpoint of the structure of lexical
knowledge, they are universal relations that
paradigmatically and syntagmatically con-
nect lexical units within lexical systems.

• From the viewpoint of the universal system of
deep-syntactic paraphrasing (Mel’čuk, 2013,
Chap. 9), they are “meta lexical units” whose
application to a given lexical unit (argument
of the lexical function) stands for a set possi-
ble lexicalizations in a deep-syntactic struc-
ture.

In this latter case, it is important to note that
each standard syntagmatic lexical function actu-
ally denotes two dependency structures: one for
“normal” values of the lexical function applica-
tion and one for “fused” values. Therefore, the
two deep-syntactic trees11 in Figure 6 are inher-
ently associated to Real1.

If we refer to what was said earlier about the
lexicon-grammar dichotomy (section 1.1), we are

9On the notions of semantic and deep-/surface-syntactic
actants, see Mel’čuk (2015, Chap. 12).

10An article-view, in the lexicographic editor used for
building the en- and fr-LNs, is a textual rendering of lexical
data associated with a given headword. For details on how
lexical function applications are computationally encoded in
the en- and fr-LNs, see Gader et al. (2012).

11For a concise presentation of Meaning-Text levels of
sentence representation and the deep- vs. surface-syntax di-
chotomy, see Kahane (2003).

Figure 6: Real1’s Deep-syntactic structures.

entitled to consider that trees in Figure 6, because
they correspond to general (in this case, universal)
linguistic rules about syntactic structuring, are in
essence grammatical: they designate syntactic po-
tential that can be run on any lexical rules of the
type illustrated in Figure 5 in order to participate
in the generation of actual surface-syntactic struc-
tures.

3.4 Deriving surface-syntactic structures

In this particular case, rules in Figures 5 and
6 allow for the generation of the three surface-
syntactic structures in Figure 7.

Figure 7: Derived surface-syntactic structures.

If we consider the prospect of such derivation
throughout a full lexical system for a given lan-
guage, we see that a considerable amount of lexi-
con embedded syntactic structures are extractable
from these models. At present, a total number
of 7,739 surface-syntactic micro-structures of the
type given in Figure 7 can be extracted from the
fr-LN.12 This is of course only a small portion of
what is available in the actual French lexicon.

12This corresponds to the number of syntagmatic lexical
function relations already woven in the fr-LN.

7



4 Conclusion: Lexicalized Grammars
the Other Way Round

By presenting the syntax of idioms and colloca-
tions, we hope to have shown that syntactic in-
formation embedded in natural language lexicons
goes far beyond phenomena associated to active
valency (subcategorization frames). Lexicon em-
bedded syntax is conceptually and quantitatively
an essential element of lexical knowledge.

It was also our goal to demonstrate that lexical
systems such as the fr-LN are particularly suited
to the modeling of embedded syntax. In our view,
one very promising exploitation of such models
for Natural Language Processing (NLP) is the use
of large collections of extracted syntactic struc-
tures by NLP parsers, for such tasks as disam-
biguation or processing of phraseological expres-
sions found in corpora.

Collections of syntactic structures extractable
from lexical systems bear some conceptual resem-
blance with lexicalized grammars (Schabes et al.,
1988), except for the fact that the perspective is to-
tally inverted: rather than lexicalizing grammars,
we propose to extract from lexical systems every-
thing actual grammars do not know about syntax.

Acknowledgments

Lexicographic work on the French Lexical Net-
work (fr-LN) originally started at the ATILF
CNRS laboratory (Nancy, France) in the context
of the RELIEF project funded by the Agence de
Mobilisation Économique de Lorraine (AMEL)
and the European Regional Development Fund
(ERDF).

References
Joseph D. Becker. 1975. The Phrasal Lexicon. In:

Proceedings of the 1975 Workshop on Theoreti-
cal Issues in Natural Language Processing (TIN-
LAP’75). Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Cambridge, Mass., 60–63.

Yannick Chudy, Yann Desalle, Benoıt Gaillard, Bruno
Gaume, Pierre Magistry and Emmanuel Navarro.
2013. Tmuse: Lexical Network Exploration. In:
The Companion Volume of the Proceedings of IJC-
NLP 2013: System Demonstrations. Asian Federa-
tion of NLP, Nagoya, 41–44.

Charles J. Fillmore, Christopher R. Johnson and
Miriam R. L. Petruck. 2003. Background to
FrameNet. International Journal of Lexicography,
16(3):235–250.

Nabil Gader, Veronika Lux-Pogodalla and Alain
Polguère. 2012. Hand-Crafting a Lexical Network
With a Knowledge-Based Graph Editor. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Third Workshop on Cognitive As-
pects of the Lexicon (CogALex III). The COLING
2012 Organizing Committee, Mumbai, 109–125.

Nabil Gader, Sandrine Ollinger and Alain Polguère.
2014. One Lexicon, Two Structures: So What
Gives? In Heili Orav, Christiane Fellbaum and Piek
Vossen (eds.): Proceedings of the Seventh Global
Wordnet Conference (GWC2014). Global WordNet
Association, Tartu, 163–171.

Franz Josef Hausmann. 1979. Un dictionnaire des
collocations est-il possible? Travaux de littérature
et de linguistique de l’Université de Strasbourg,
XVII(1):187–195.

Otto Jespersen. 1924. The Philosophy of Grammar.
George Allen & Unwin, London.

Sylvain Kahane. 2003. The Meaning-Text Theory. In
Vilmos Ágel, Ludwig M. Eichinger, Hans Werner
Eroms, Peter Hellwig, Hans Jürgen Heringer and
Henning Lobin (eds.): Dependency and Valency. An
International Handbook of Contemporary Research.
Handbücher zur Sprach- und Kommunikationswis-
senschaft / Handbooks of Linguistics and Commu-
nication Science, de Gruyter, Berlin & New York,
546–569.

Sylvain Kahane and Alain Polguère. 2001. Formal
Foundation of Lexical Functions. In: Proceed-
ings of “COLLOCATION: Computational Extrac-
tion, Analysis and Exploitation”. 39th Annual Meet-
ing and 10th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Toulouse, 8–15.

Evelien Keizer. 2007. The lexical-grammatical di-
chotomy in Functional Discourse Grammar. Alfa –
Revista de Lingüı́stica, 51(2):35–56.

Veronika Lux-Pogodalla and Alain Polguère. 2011.
Construction of a French Lexical Network: Method-
ological Issues. In: Proceedings of the First Interna-
tional Workshop on Lexical Resources, WoLeR 2011.
An ESSLLI 2011 Workshop. Ljubljana, 54–61.

Igor Mel’čuk. 1996. Lexical Functions: A Tool for
the Description of Lexical Relations in the Lexicon.
In Leo Wanner (ed.): Lexical Functions in Lexicog-
raphy and Natural Language Processing. Studies
in Language Companion Series 31, John Benjamins,
Amsterdam/Philadelphia, 37–102.

Igor Mel’čuk. 2006. Explanatory Combinatorial Dic-
tionary. In Giandomenico Sica (ed.): Open Prob-
lems in Linguistics and Lexicography. Polimetrica,
Monza, 225–355.

Igor Mel’čuk. 2013. Semantics: From meaning to text,
volume 2. Studies in Language Companion Series
135, John Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.

8



Igor Mel’čuk. 2015. Semantics: From meaning to text,
volume 3. Studies in Language Companion Series
168, John Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.

Igor Mel’čuk, André Clas and Alain Polguère. 1995.
Introduction à la lexicologie explicative et combina-
toire. Duculot, Paris/Louvain-la-Neuve.

Piet Mertens. 2010. Restrictions de sélection et
réalisations syntagmatiques dans DICOVALENCE.
Conversion vers un format utilisable en TAL. In:
Proceedings of TALN 2010. Montréal.

Marie-Sophie Pausé. To appear. Modélisation de
la structure lexico-syntaxique des locutions au sein
d’un réseau lexical. In Maurice Kauffer (ed.): Actes
du colloque international “Approches théoriques et
empiriques en phraséologie”. Eurogermanistik Se-
ries, Stauffenburg Verlag, Tübingen.

Alain Polguère. 2009. Lexical systems: graph models
of natural language lexicons. Language Resources
and Evaluation, 43(1):41–55.

Alain Polguère. 2011. Perspective épistémologique
sur l’approche linguistique Sens-Texte. Mémoires
de la Société de Linguistique de Paris, XX:79–114.

Alain Polguère. 2014. From Writing Dictionaries to
Weaving Lexical Networks. International Journal
of Lexicography, 27(4):396–418.

Yves Schabes, Anne Abeillé and Aravind K. Joshi.
1988. Parsing Strategies with ‘Lexicalized’ Gram-
mars: Application to Tree Adjoining Grammars. In:
Proceedings of the 12th Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics – Volume 2 (COLING’88). As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Budapest,
578–583.

9


