



















































Towards Cross-language Application of Dependency Grammar


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 171–180,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

Towards Cross-language Application of Dependency Grammar 

Timo Järvinen
*
, Elisabeth Bertol

*
, Septina Larasati

+
, Monica-Mihaela 

Rizea‡, Maria Ruiz Santabalbina○, Milan Souček
*

*
Lionbridge 

Technologies Inc. 

Tampere, Finland 

+
Charles University 

in Prague, Czech 

Republic 

‡University of   

Bucharest, 

Romania 

○
University of 

Valencia,            

Spain

{timo.jarvinen, milan.soucek}@lionbridge.com, {liz.bertol, 

septina.larasati, monicamihaelarizea, mrsantabalbina}@gmail.com

Abstract 

This paper discusses the adaptation of the 

Stanford typed dependency model (de 

Marneffe and Manning 2008), initially 

designed for English, to the requirements of 

typologically different languages from the 

viewpoint of practical parsing. We argue for 

a framework of functional dependency 

grammar that is based on the idea of 

parallelism between syntax and semantics.    

There is a twofold challenge: (1) specifying 

the annotation scheme in order to deal with 

the morphological and syntactic peculiarities 

of each language and (2) maintaining cross-

linguistically consistent annotations to ensure 

homogenous analysis for similar linguistic 

phenomena. We applied a number of 

modifications to the original Stanford scheme 

in an attempt to capture the language-specific 

grammatical features present in 

heterogeneous CoNLL-encoded data sets for 

German, Dutch, French, Spanish, Brazilian 

Portuguese, Russian, Polish, Indonesian, and 

Traditional Chinese. From a multilingual 

perspective, we discuss features such as 

subject and object verb complements, 

comparative phrases, expletives, 

reduplication, copula elision, clitics and 

adpositions. 

1 Introduction 

Dependency-based grammars (DG) have been 

used in computational linguistics since the 

formalization of Tesnière‟s (1959) structural 

grammar by Hays (1964).   The starting point of 

the work presented in this paper was Stanford 

typed dependencies (SD) by Marneffe and 

Manning (2008, revised November 2012). In 

parallel to our work, the authors of SD have 

proposed an extended scheme to account for 

“several linguistically interesting constructions 

and extend the scheme to provide better coverage 

of modern web data”  (Marneffe & al., 2013), 

and later, they suggested a revised cross- 

linguistic typology (Marneffe & al., 2014), and 

an online discussion forum for Universal 

Dependencies was opened at 

http://universaldependencies.github.io/docs/. 

However, we feel the discussion has not yet fully 

taken into account the important notions in 

dependency grammar tradition or the practical 

requirements of annotation and use of the 

syntactically annotated data. Our theoretical 

framework relies on the notions elaborated 

earlier by Järvinen and Tapanainen (1998).       

2 Functional approach for 
dependencies 

The theoretical framework adopted here applies 

notions inherent in dependency grammar theory 

to guide the descriptive decisions for particular 

languages with the aim of producing a universal 

syntactic annotation scheme that is intuitively 

clear and that presents the functional syntactic 

structure in a way that makes it most efficiently 

available for practical use. A more rigorous 

framework would help us to address the follow-

ing (interrelated) deficiencies: 

 English bias due to the fact that English 
was the starting point for the SD.   

 Idiosyncracies due to various descriptive 
traditions as most of the languages under 

investigation have a long descriptive 

tradition not related to formal dependency 

theory. 

171



 Use of notions derived most notably 
from phrase-structure grammar, though 

they are not suitable as primitives in DG. 

 Pure language-engineering perspective, 
which may lead to ad-hoc solutions. 

The main features of the suggested dependency 

scheme are: 

 The basic syntactic element is a not a 
word but a nucleus consisting of a 

semantic head and one or more optional 

functional words or markers. 

 The dependency functions between 
nuclei are unique within a simple, 

uncoordinated clause and the inventory of 

these extranuclear functions is broadly 

universal. 

As elaborated by de Marneffe & al. (2014), 

SD adopts the lexicalist hypothesis as its first 

design principle, which regards the word as the 

fundamental unit in syntax and posits that 

grammatical relations exist between whole words 

or lexemes.    The authors acknowledge the 

existence of cases where this assumption fails. 

First, there are certain types of clitics, which they 

suggest be treated as independent words even 

when they are spelled as a single word, following 

a common practice in many treebanks. Second, 

there are multi-word lexemes, for which they 

suggest specific labels such as mwe, name and 

compound for annotation of the compound 

parts.  

The existence of clitics and multi-word 

lexemes is not a marginal phenomenon, but it 

shows that the orthographic word is not suitable 

as a primitive in DG descriptions. In order to 

capture what is universal in functional 

dependency grammar, the notion of nucleus is 

crucial.  It acknowledges the fact that the 

relations between grammatical markers and 

content words are different in nature from the 

relations between content words.   The relations 

within the nuclei are language-specific as there is 

a large amount of variation in the types of 

grammatical markers used in different languages. 

Prototypical markers include adpositions, 

conjunctions and auxiliaries.  

The latest version of SD has adopted a similar 

view in treating not only auxiliaries but also 

adpositions as dependents and marking 

adpositions with a label case, which captures 

the parallelism of adpositional constructions and 

morphological case.    

We discuss the adpositional constructions in 

detail to illustrate the variation between 

languages in the choice of adpositional 

construction versus a specific case marker in the 

verb complement. In order to achieve a uniform 

description between languages that takes the 

functional parallelism fully into account a more 

thorough revision would be in order. The 

problem of tokenization is closely related to this 

issue.  

It is a common phenomenon that an 

orthographic word corresponds to a multiple 

nucleus; for example, the subject is often 

incorporated into the verb. Thus, the Spanish 

token dámelo includes three syntactic functions 

in the verb form: subject, object and indirect 

object.  In practical parsing it may be convenient 

to use an orthographic word as a primary token, 

but unless we specify the functional information 

in the morphological description of the token, the 

syntactic analysis is not complete.  

As both the grammatical markers and 

syntactic nucleus may consist of several 

orthographic words, it is convenient to use 

specific intra-nuclear dependencies linking the 

parts within them.  A common morphological 

process of reduplication poses problems for the 

lexicalist hypothesis. The nucleus analysis 

predicts that there is a continuum from 

morphological reduplication to full 

lexicalization.    

2.1 Universal dependencies 

There are obvious reservations for the 

universality of the functional dependencies.  

Presumably, an exhaustive list of functional 

dependencies may not exist, nor is it necessary to 

investigate this from the linguistic point of view.  

As empirical linguists, we only need to list the 

functions that are applicable to the languages we 

are analyzing, but we can not assume that all of 

the universal functional dependencies are 

applicable to all languages.  

From a practical point of view, the most 

important choices are (i) the selection of the 

relevant functional categories that need to be 

covered and (ii) the granularity of the description.  

The choice of granularity has an impact both 

on parsing accuracy and usability of the parsing 

results. Consider the inventory of adverbial 

functions as an example. We can use a single 

functional dependency, adverbial modifier 

(advmod), to annotate optional adverbial 

modifiers. Alternatively, we could use a more 

fine-graded set of adverbial functions that 

172



includes functions typically distinguished in 

traditional grammars, such as time, duration, 

frequency, quantity, manner, location, source, 

goal, contingency, condition. An obvious 

advantage of using a large inventory for 

adverbials is more usable output to various 

applications requiring even a rough semantic 

analysis. In fact, a larger set of adverbial roles 

may improve the parsing accuracy. Though the 

adverbial modifiers are optional and to a large 

extent freely combinable with any predicate 

(save strictly semantic restrictions), it is a 

commonplace in linguistics that a predicate may 

have only one non-coordinated adverbial of the 

same type – a behavior similar to the obligatory 

arguments or complements. This principle of 

uniqueness is applicable to practical parsing of 

adverbials (e.g. to solve the so-called PP-

attachment ambiguities) only if all types of 

adverbial functions, in addition to the 

complements, are covered in the language model. 

Recently, Jaworski and Przepiórkowski (2014) 

have applied a similar idea for assigning 

approximate semantic roles based on 

grammatical functions and morphosyntactic 

features in syntactic-semantic parsing for Polish.  

For practical parsing, the uniqueness principle 

is more important than the distinction of 

obligatory arguments. An obligatory argument is 

often missing (being implicit or contextually 

recoverable), but uniqueness cannot be violated 

as this would render the clause contradictory or 

nonsensical. Note that the principle of 

uniqueness is no longer applicable if several 

subcategories for unique functional labels are 

used. For example, the subcategories of subject 

proposed in SD (nsubj, nsubjpass, 

csubj and csubjpass) are mutually 

exclusive. As this distinction is automatically 

recoverable from the linguistic context, it is 

redundant and it would be advantageous to use 

only one subject label when doing practical 

annotation work. 

3 Selected linguistic phenomena with 

reference to SD 

3.1 Verb complementation 

The grammatical form of complements of verb is 

governed by the verb. Traditionally, these are 

considered obligatory versus adjuncts that may 

occur freely without grammatical restrictions 

imposed by the verb. From the viewpoint of 

functional grammar the complements have a 

specific status. The semantic roles assigned to 

them are idiosyncratic, depending on the verb. 

For example, in English, a specific verbs may 

assign the role of location to a direct object, for 

example: They swam a lake.   

The inventory of complement types shows a 

large amount of language-specific variation, but 

the core set of complement types is broadly 

universal. Which complement types are instanti-

ated in a given language can be determined by 

the uniqueness test.  Regarding complement 

types, our solution was to introduce new de-

pendency relations in our application of the SD 

model as needed. The cases in point are subject 

complement (scomp) and object complement 

(ocomp), complements that refer to the subject 

and object, respectively.  

Subject complement. The new dependency 

label scomp (subject complement) was 

introduced to replace attr, cop and acomp 

(McDonald et al., 2013, p. 3, Table 1; de 

Marneffe and Manning, 2008), which had been 

used inconsistently across languages and caused 

considerable confusion. A subject complement 

(scomp) to a verb has as its antecedent the 

subject of the clause. In English as well as other 

languages, it is a widely used grammar term 

covering the traditional syntactic functions of 

predicative noun and predicative adjective, 

frequently, but not exclusively, following a 

copular verb that links the scomp with the 

subject. Scomp occur not only as (pro)nouns (1)  

and adjectives (2), but also as adverbs (3) as well 

as prepositional (4) and genitive phrases (5) and 

in passive structures (6).  In languages where 

scomp inflects, adjective scomp will agree with 

the subject in number and gender, as in Romance 

languages (7). 

(1) ¿Qué es esto? 

“What is this?” 

(2) Gold is expensive. 

(3) Who is there? 

(4) Sie wurde zur ersten Astronautin 

Lichtensteins. 

“She became to the first astronaut of 

Liechtenstein.” 

(5) Sie ist guter Dinge. 

“She is of good things.” 

(6) Il a été nommé president. 

“He has been named president.” 

(7) Quelle est la distance? Jean est petit. 

“Which is the distance? Jean is small.” 

 

173



 

Object complement (ocomp) is another 

dependency label that was introduced to capture 

complements to the direct object of the verb. It 

usually occurs in connection with verbs of 

creating or nominating/naming such as make, 

name, elect, paint, call, etc., which govern at 

least two complements. The ocomp relation 

occurs not only with nouns (8) and adjectives (9), 

but also in prepositional phrases (10). In 

languages where ocomp inflects, adjective 

ocomp will agree with the object in number and 

gender, as in Romance languages (11).  

(8) Te considero una persona inteligente. (es) 
“I consider you an intelligent person.” 

(9) We painted the house green. 
(10) Ich halte die Idee für blöd. (de) 

“I hold the idea for dumb.” 

(11) Os críticos acharam o filme fabuloso.(pt) 
“Critics found the movie amazing.” 

 

Contrary to scomp, which replaces three 

previously used labels, ocomp is less a 

replacement for specific labels than an addition 

to the dependency relations.  Only the previous 

label acomp (adjective complement) was 

replaced either by scomp or ocomp, depending 

on the functional role of the adjective. For 

example, Tapanainen and Järvinen (1997) 

include object complement, but de Marneffe and 

Manning, (2008), do not include anything akin to 

an ocomp in their list of complements. Prior to 

the introduction of ocomp, annotators resorted 

to a variety of solutions, such as acomp if the 

object complement was an adjective or appos if 

nominal. Ocomp has been accepted as a viable 

dependency label by the annotators of all 

languages in the scope of this project. 

Expletive or Topic: The dependency relation 

expl (expletive) is defined as “a relation that 

captures an existential there”. The main verb of 

the clause is the governor as (12) in de Marneffe 

and Manning, (2008). 

(12) There is a ghost in the room. 
Expl (is, There) 
 

Also later SD adaptations use this label similarly 

(McDonald et al, 2013). 

 Although “expletive” is often defined to in-

clude non-referential it and equivalents in other 

languages as in English “it is raining” or German 

“Es regnet”, by default we adhered to SD 

guidelines in that expl is used only for 

equivalents of English existential there or non-

referential it in clauses or sentences containing  a 

subject in addition to the expletive. Even though 

there is no semantic subject in structures like It is 

raining, the dummy subject is obligatory in verb-

second clauses and it is tagged as nsubj. 

However in French, we used a broader definition 

of the notion expletive by making a distinction 

between the expletive value of the subject and 

expl as a dependency relation. Therefore, we 

were able to apply this relation to nouns as well 

as adverbs or even to prepositions. We needed 

expl in order to account for a particular 

dependency relation established by such “empty” 

words. 

For example, we analyzed structures like (12) 

as expl(a,y) and decided to analyze nsubj(a,il). 

We also used expl when the subject or direct 

object position was already filled (for example, 

in co-referent expressions where we decided that 

the semantic subject should be analyzed as 

nsubj (14) expl(est, c‟). There were also other 

situations such as non-negative ne (15), euphonic 

-t: ("y a-t-il") (13), to introduce the impersonal 

subject "on" (16), where we had to opt for expl. 

We have adapted this deprel to the specific 

situations of French grammar. Our use of  expl 

does not contradict the initial definition. It is 

only a broader definition, allowing a wider range 

of uses. 

(13) Il y a un problème.(fr) 
“There is a problem.” 

(14) C'est quoi la distance? (fr) 
[Expl]-It-is what the distance. 

“What is the distance?” 

(15) Je crains qu'elle ne parte. (fr) 
“I fear she left.” 

(16) La situation est bien plus grave que l'on 
peut imaginer. (fr) 

“The situation is well more serious than 

one can imagine.” 

 

 We would like to point out the parallelism 

between the expletive in subject-prominent 

languages discussed here and topic in topic-

prominent languages like Japanese and Korean, 

following the distinction by Li and Thompson 

(1976). From the universal dependency point of 

view, a single label might be appropriate for both 

types of languages. The difference is merely the 

semantically empty topic in subject-prominent 

174



languages versus the semantically indeterminate 

topic in topic-prominent languages.  

3.2 Adpositional structures 

Typically, adpositional constructions are used as 

adjuncts. However, in many languages some of 

the complements are marked with an adposition 

or a specific case. For example, in English a 

complement semantically equivalent to an 

indirect object (iobj) is marked with the 

preposition to.  

3.3 Comparative constructions 

Comparative sentences are those in which a 

comparison is established. The main clause 

contains the first term of the comparison, and 

particular words (like que and como in Spanish 

and Portuguese) introduce the second term of the 

comparison. This second term of the comparison 

could be a clause or a sentence. 

(17) La empresa realizó trabajos más 
avanzados que los pioneros de la 

transmisión. (es) 

 “The company accomplished more advanced 

tasks than the pioneers of the transmission 

did.” 

(18) La guardería no es tan cara como 
decían. (es) 

nsubj(es, guardería); det(guardería, La); 

root(es); cop(es,cara); advmod(cara, tan); 

mark(es,como); advcl(como,decían) 

“The nursery school isn‟t as expensive as they 

said.” 

 

The difference between (17) and (18) is that 

the first one contains a comparative phrase with 

no verb in the second term of comparison 

whereas the latter contains a comparative clause 

with a verb. This formal distinction has syntac-

tic consequences so the two cases cannot be 

treated in the same way. 

Comparative clauses: Spanish and Portuguese 

grammars have pointed out that comparative and 

consecutive clauses are syntactically very similar.  

(19) es tan alto que no cabe por la puerta (es) 
“he‟s so tall he cannot get through the door” 

(20) era tão alto que batia na porta (pt) 
”he‟s so tall he cannot get through the door” 

 

Sentences (19) and (20) are formally very 

close to (18), but the underlying meaning is 

different. In these cases there is not a comparison, 

but a cause – consequence relation. This 

syntactic similarity could be a good reason to 

consider comparative clauses as advcl and, 

consequently, consider the word that introduces 

the second term of the comparison as a marker 

(mark). 

As shown in the example (18), since the deprel 

assigned to the clause is advcl, the head of 

comparative clause should be the verb of the 

main clause, that is, the root. 

A final observation to be made about 

comparative clauses is that the preferred POS tag 

of these markers is CONJ: dictionaries have 

already pointed this out, and it is consistent with 

the consecutive – comparative analogy, too. 

Comparative phrases: The case of comparative 

phrases is more complicated because they do not 

have a verb, and there is thus no parallelism with 

other kinds of clauses. While it would be 

possible to analyze these as clauses with omitted 

verbs, we still would not be able to identify the 

head. 

The most controversial decision was to deter-

mine the most appropriate label for the word that 

introduces the second term of the comparison, 

because this decision would influence the 

complete analysis of these phrases. 

It was pointed out that como could be 

considered as an adposition (ADP) in some 

contexts in Portuguese (even if in these cases the 

dictionaries say it should be a conjunction). In 

Italian, this marker even selects the oblique case 

of the pronoun as regular prepositions do, but 

that is not the case in Portuguese or in Spanish. 

(21) bella come te  (it); 
bela como tu (pt); 

bella como tu (es)  

“beautiful like you” 

 

In Spanish, we can find some examples where 

the comparative meaning is introduced by an 

unequivocal ADP: 

(22) es más alto de lo normal 
“he‟s taller than the average” 

 

Similarly, if we say that como is a conjuction 

functioning as prep, the same can be applied to 

que as well: 

(23) mais bela que tu (pt); 
más bella que tu (br) 

“more beautiful than you” 

175



 

Since the final annotation decision was to treat 

these words as conjunctions with prepositional 

function, ADP, the complete analysis of the 

comparative phrase was affected. The 

corresponding deprel to an ADP should be prep, 

which is always the head of a pobj. 

Consequently, the most appropriate analysis for 

the comparative phrase is indeed pobj and the 

head would be the verb of the main clause, as in 

(25). 

(24) La empresa realizó trabajos más 
avanzados que los pioneros de la 

transmisión. (es) 

nsubj(realizó, empresa);  det(empresa, La); 

root(realizó); dobj(realizó, trabajos); 

amod(trabajos, avanzados); 

advmod(avanzados, más); prep(realizó, 

que); pobj(que, pioneros); prep(pioneros, 

de); pobj(de, transmisión); det(transmisión, 

la) 

“The company accomplished more 

advanced tasks than the pioneers of the 

transmission did.” 

 

Comparative constructions were also 

discussed by de Marneffe & al. (2013). We agree 

that their analysis to treat the word that acts as 

the standard of comparison as the head for the 

comparative clause or phrase is more adequate 

from a semantic point of view. This was also the 

intended analysis in the FDG description 

(Järvinen & Tapanainen 1997): 

(25) There are monkeys more intelligent than 
Herbert. 

      modifier(more,than); pobj(than,Herbert) 

 

This analysis is further corroborated by 

typological evidence. For example, in Korean the 

comparative particle „more than‟ is a single unit 

that attaches to the object of comparison (Yeon 

& Brown, 2011):  

(26) 러시아가    한국보다 더  크다. 
Russia-TOPIC Korea-THAN big 

“Russia is bigger than Korea.” 

 

 

 

 

 

3.4 Clitic particles 

 
New POS tag Description 

VERBPRONACC verb + accusative clitic 

VERBPRONDAT verb + dative clitic  

VERBPRONDATACC verb + dative clitic  + 

accusative clitic 

VERBPRT verb + verbal 

morpheme (PRT) 

VERBPRTPRONACC verb + PRT + 

accusative clitic 

AUXPRONACC auxiliary verb + 

accusative clitic 

AUXVPRT auxiliary verb + PRT 

Table 1. List of  new POS tags created for 

Spanish. 

Even in closely related languages such as 

Portuguese and Spanish, which exhibit a broadly 

similar behavior of clitics, the differences in 

orthography make the practical analysis for the 

latter more challenging. In Spanish, the enclitic 

pronouns are orthographically attached directly 

to the verb form and consequently, a mechanical 

tokenization of the complex word form is not 

possible as in Portuguese, which uses a hyphen 

in this context. Rather than attempting to 

tokenize the Spanish clitics separately, we used 

an extended set of POS labels for Spanish as 

illustrated in Table 1, so that there would be no 

loss of information as compared to the analysis 

of other Romance languages. This descriptive 

solution is made for convenience, but note that 

the functional description is not compromised. It 

is a purely technical question whether to use a 

single POS label or a main POS label with 

separate morpho-syntactic descriptors to encode 

the values for incorporated syntactic functions. A 

more complete syntactic description for the 

example dámelo would be VERB + Subj_Sg2 + 

Dat + Acc, thereby making the information 

available for conversion to a proper functional 

DG description showing the three nuclei as direct 

dependents of the verbal nucleus.      

176



3.5 Multi-word expressions 

As for mwe modifiers, we have consistently 

annotated idiomatic word combinations whose 

internal structure is not relevant for the 

functional analysis by using the other existing 

dependency relations and POS (regent–

subordinate) combinations that were permitted 

for each language.  

In de Marneffe and Manning (2008), the mwe 

dependency relation implies a closed set of items 

(restricted mainly to function words). By 

convention, the internal head of the mwe relation 

is consistently analyzed, across languages, as the 

rightmost element of the structure.  

We kept a list of possible mwe candidates that 

were approved during the project for all 

languages. For some Romance languages (e.g. 

French), it was convenient to define patterns of 

mwe, as opposed to a plain list of these. 

Generally, idiomatic combinations that consisted 

of preposition + (preposition) + noun, pronoun, 

adjective, adverb or infinitive were analyzed as 

surface prep and pobj or/and pcomp 

structures; mwe was used for semantically 

opaque expressions that mostly included 

structures consisting of  adverb, noun or 

conjunction  + adposition or conjunction, for 

example in Spanish mientras que mark(*,que), 

mwe(que, mientras) POS: CONJ, CONJ; para 

que mark(*, que), mwe(que, para) POS: ADP, 

CONJ; in Brazilian Portuguese até que mark(*, 

que); mwe(que, até) POS: ADP, CONJ;  and 

French avant/afin de, see (30); pour que 

mark(*,que), mwe(qu',pour)  POS:ADP, CONJ. 

Additionally, in deciding whether a multi-

word structure is analyzable, we also had to 

consider the relation that needed to be 

established between the components of the 

structure and the external elements. For example, 

some French „locutions prépositives‟ of the type 

preposition + noun that are followed by a 

nominal are analyzed as mwe since there is no 

acceptable interpretation for the following 

nominal in case we analyze the prepositional 

structure as prep and pobj: 

(27) Ils sont tous venus, à part Christian. 
prep (venus, part); mwe(part, à); 

pobj(part,Christian). 

“They are all come, except Christian.” 

(28) Cet objectif peut être réalisé à travers 
les règles à fixer par la Commission. 

prep(réalisé,travers); mwe(travers, à); 

pobj(travers, règles). 

“This objective can be realized by means 

of the rules to fix by the commission.” 

 

It can be noticed that the governor of a multi-

word expression annotated as mwe takes the head 

of the expression as a subordinate, using a 

dependency relation which describes the rela-

tion between the governor and the mwe. 

Examples from French: 

(29) en tant que 
prep(*,tant), mwe(tant,en), mwe(tant,que) 

POS: ADP/ADV/CONJ 

“as” 

(30) avant de  
mark(*,de), mwe(de,avant) 

POS:ADV/ADP 

“before” 

(31) beaucoup de 
det(*,de), mwe(de,beaucoup); 

POS:ADV/ADP 

“a lot of” 

 

In (31) the pattern comprises of beaucoup, 

plein, bien, peu, tant, assez, plus, advantage and 

sufficamment.  

Sometimes, mwe might imply a head which is 

morphologically different from the function of 

the whole structure. For example, the French 

mwe peut-être has an adverbial value. This 

implies that the head of the mwe, être, which is 

actually a verb, becomes subordinated by an 

advmod deprel to the governor of the multi-

word the structure:  

(32) Criton sait que Socrate est aussi fidèle 
que lui et il pense que si Socrate ne se sauve 

pas pour lui - même , peut - être se sauvera - 

t - il pour ses amis.   

advmod(sauvera, être); mwe(être, peut).  

“Criton knows that Socrates is as faithful 

as him and he thinks that if Socrates not 

himself saves not for himself, maybe 

himself will save he for his friends.” 

 

Spanish and Brazilian Portuguese also permit 

a noun (which was the head of a mwe functioning 

as a conjunction) as a subordinate in a cc deprel:  

(33) Los objetivos de los aliados , sin 
embargo , diferían. (es)  

cc(diferían, embargo); mwe(embargo,sin).  

“However, the aims of the allies differed.” 

Similarly with a verb:  

177



(34) Es decir, un jugador puede jugar como 
un WHM. (es)  

cc(jugar, decir); mwe(decir, es).  

“That is, a player can play as a WHM.” 

(35) Denomina - se oblíquo quando não é um 
cone reto , ou seja , quando o eixo é oblíquo 

ao plano da base. (pt)  

cc(é, seja); mwe(seja, ou). 

“A cone is called oblique when it's not 

upright, that is, when its axis is oblique to 

the plane of its base.” 

3.6 Elision 

Dependency theory is inherently verb-centered. 

Therefore elision of a verb poses a descriptive 

problem that could be solved either by (a) 

inserting an empty node (represented as EMP in 

the example below), which assumes the 

functions of the elided element or (b) raising an 

existing element to the position of the elided 

node. The examples for solution (a) and (b) are 

provided in (36) and (38), respectively, for 

comparison. 

(36) Beliau seorang penerbit. 
PRON DET NOUN 

root(*, EMP); nsubj(EMP, 

beliau);  dobj(EMP, 

penerbit);  det(penerbit, seorang) 

“He is a publisher.” 
 

The former solution (a) is not plausible if the 

purpose is to provide a surface-syntactic 

functional description rather than an abstract 

deep-syntactic representation of an elliptic 

sentence. Positing an abstract representation by 

analogy, as ellipsis is often described in 

traditional grammar, is questionable as a 

syntactic analysis in the sentence level and 

computationally more challenging as it would 

mean that the parser should somehow be able to 

map the non-elliptic construction to the elliptic 

construction to produce the intended analysis. 

Therefore, achieving the best possible analysis 

between the actual elements in the sentence or 

sentence fragment is strongly preferred.     

Elision of a copula in present tense is standard 

in Russian and it may appear in informal regis-

ters (speech transliterations) in Indonesian.   

Our examples are from Indonesian, which uses 

copulas to link a subject to nouns, adjectives, or 

other constituents in a sentence. There are three 

copula constructions found in our data. These 

constructions are sentences with a copula, 

sentences with a dropped copula, and sentences 

with a verb that acts like a copula. For some of 

these constructions we use the scomp deprel to 

create the link between the constituents. These 

copulas are not auxiliary verbs, hence they are 

not annotated as AUX, but instead they are an-

notated as VERB. 

Sentences with copulas: There are two copulas 

in Indonesian, adalah and ialah. They have the 

same function and can be used interchangeably. 

These copulas cannot be negated. We use the 

scomp deprel to link the subject and the other 

constituents that surround the copula. 

(37) Beliau adalah seorang penerbit. 
PRON VERB DET NOUN 

root(ROOT, adalah); nsubj(adalah, Beliau); 

scomp(adalah, penerbit); det(penerbit, 

seorang) 

“He is a publisher.” 

 

Sentences with dropped copulas: In some 

cases, especially in spoken Indonesian, the 

copulas can be dropped. The sentence can be 

negated. 

(38)  Beliau seorang  penerbit. 
PRON DET NOUN 

root(*, Beliau); scomp(Beliau, penerbit); 

det(penerbit, seorang) 

“He is a publisher.” 

 

Sentence with copula-like verb: The verb that 

acts like a copula is the word merupakan, which 

links the subject to the other constituents. This 

verb can be negated. The sentence is annotated 

as a usual Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) structure 

in Indonesian without the scomp deprel. 

(39)  Beliau  merupakan  seorang  penerbit. 
PRON  VERB  DET      NOUN 

root(*, merupakan); nsubj(merupakan, 

Beliau); dobj(merupakan, penerbit); 

det(penerbit, seorang) 

“He is a publisher.” 

3.7 Reduplication 

Another common morphological process that is 

of interest here is reduplication. This structure is 

found in our data in Indonesian and traditional 

Chinese (Larasati, 2012, Wang, 2010). Redupli-

cated forms were tokenized into separated to-

kens. 

To accommodate this phenomenon, a new de-

pendency relation, redup, was introduced to 

178



link the reduplicated token. Depending on the 

language, a reduplicant may copy either from the 

right or from the left and the governing head is 

either to the left or to the right, respectively. We 

used the leftmost token as the head (Wang, 2012).   

One of the uses of reduplication in Indonesian 

is to indicate plurality, e.g. the word senapan-

senapan (n. „riffles‟, lit. riffle-riffle). Some 

reduplicated nouns are lexicalized, e.g. langit-

langit („ceiling; palate‟ < langit, „sky‟).  

From the functional point of view, redup is 

an intranuclear link. The analysis may not dis-

tinguish fully between lexicalized and non-

lexicalized instances, though in the former case a 

single-token analysis would be more appropriate.   

For Traditional Chinese, one of the uses of 

reduplication is to intensify the degree to which 

the property denoted by the adjective holds, e.g. 

the word “小小”(adj. very small, lit. small small). 
In the data, the word is tokenized into two tokens 

“小”and “小”. 

4 Conclusion 

Applying a strict linguistic theory would assist 

linguists in choosing between alternative 

annotations more consistently and efficiently. 

It is not possible to achieve a consistent and 

descriptively adequate cross-lingual description 

without a consistent theoretical framework.  A 

plain eclecticism would only lead to a prolifera-

tion of the grammatical descriptors.  

Functional syntactic descriptions have gained 

ground in computational applications. The 

notions of phrase-structure grammar are tied to 

the form of a particular language, and as there is 

a need to cover more and more new languages of 

various types, functional descriptions that 

capture the implicit semantic parallelisms 

between languages provide an even more 

adequate framework for practical work and 

practical applications. 

Acknowledgements 

We wish to thank the three anonymous 

reviewers for their comments on the submitted 

version. The data annotation was conducted in a 

Multilingual Data Annotation Project executed 

for Google. This research was partially supported 

by SVV project No. 260 224 of the Charles 

University in Prague.  

 

 

References  

Bernard Comrie. 1989. Language universals and 

linguistic typology. 2nd edition. Chicago: 
University of Chicago. 

David G. Hays. 1964. Dependency theory: A 

formalism and some observations. Language, 

40:511-525. 

Charles N. Li and Sandra A. Thompson . 1976. Sub-

ject and Topic: A New Typology of Language". In 

Charles N. Li. Subject and Topic. New York: Aca-

demic Press. 

Wojziech Jaworski and Adam Przepiórkowski: 

Syntactic Approximation of Semantic Roles. 2014. 

In Proceedings of 9
th
 International Conference on 

NLP, PolTAL 2014. Pp. 191-201. 

Timo Järvinen and Pasi Tapanainen. 1997. A 

Dependency Parser for English. Technical Reports, 

No. TR-1. University of Helsinki. 

Timo Järvinen and Pasi Tapanainen. 1998. Towards 

an Implementable Dependency Grammar. In: 

Proceedings of Dependency-Based Grammars, 

(eds.) Sylvain Kahane and Alain Polguère, 

Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada.   

Septina Dian Larasati. 2012. IDENTIC Corpus: Mor-

phologically Enriched Indonesian-English Parallel 

Corpus. In Proceedings of LREC 2012, page 902-

906. 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Miriam Connor, 

Natalia Silveira, Samuel R. Bowman, Timothy 

Dozat and Christopher D. Manning. 2013.  More 

constructions, more genres: Extending Stanford 

Dependencies. In: Proceedings of the Second 

International Conference on Dependency 

Linguistics (Depling 2013). 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Natalia 

Silveira, Katri Haverinen, Filip Gintner, Joakim 

Nivre and Christopher D. Manning. 2014. 

Universal Stanford Dependencies: A cross-

linguistic typology. In:  Proceedings of LREC 2014. 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Christopher D. 

Manning. 2008 (revised Nov. 2012). Stanford 

typed dependencies manual. 

Ryan McDonald, Nivre, J., Quirmbach-Brundage, Y., 

Goldberg, Y., Das, D., Ganchev, K., Hall, K., 

Petrov, S., Zhang, H., Täckström, O., Bedini, C., 

Bertomeu, Castelló, N., Lee, J.2013. Universal 

Dependency Annotation for Multilingual Parsing. 

In: Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Katarzyna Marszałek-Kowalewska, Anna Zaretskaya 

and Milan Souček. 2014. Stanford Typed 

Dependencies: Slavic Languages Application. In 

Proceedings of 9
th
 International Conference on 

NLP, PolTAL 2014. Pp. 151-163. 

179



Milan Souček, Timo Järvinen and Adam LaMontagne. 

2013. Managing a Multilingual Treebank Project. 

In: Proceedings of the Second International 

Conference on Dependency Linguistics. (Depling 

2013).  

Lucien Tesnière. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe 

structurale. Librairie C. Klincksieck, Paris. 

Jaehoon Yeon and Lucien Brown. 2011. Korean: A 

Comprehensive Grammar. Routledge. 

Wang, Zhijun, 2010. The Head of the Chinese Adjec-

tives and ABB Reduplication. NACCL. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

180


