



















































Encoding event structure in Urdu/Hindi VerbNet


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on EVENTS at the NAACL-HLT 2015, pages 25–33,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Encoding event structure in Urdu/Hindi VerbNet

Annette Hautli-Janisz
Department of Linguistics

University of Konstanz
annette.hautli@
uni-konstanz.de

Tracy Holloway King
Search Science

eBay Inc.
tracyhollowayking@

gmail.com

Gillian Ramchand
Institute for Linguistics
University of Tromsø

gillian.ramchand@
uit.no

Abstract

We propose a new kind of event structure
representation for computational linguistics,
based on the theoretical framework of First-
Phase Syntax (Ramchand, 2008). We show
that the approach not only gives a theoreti-
cally well-motivated set of subevents and re-
lated semantic roles, it also posits the lev-
els of representation needed for analyzing
a linguistic phenomenon that has repeatedly
caused problems in computational systems,
namely the treatment of complex predica-
tion. In particular, we look at V+V com-
plex predicates in Urdu/Hindi and show that
Ramchand’s subevent decomposition imple-
mented in a VerbNet-style resource allows for
a consistent semantic analysis of these com-
plex events. We also show how the proposed
event representation can be added to existing
resources in the language, in particular the
Hindi-Urdu Treebank and Hindi PropBank.

1 Introduction

With the advent of large-scale computational seman-
tic analyses, an issue that repeatedly crops up is
how verbal event structure can be represented. In
this paper we propose a new way of representing
events and semantic roles in computational linguis-
tics, based on the theoretical linguistic framework
of First-Phase Syntax (Ramchand, 2008). The ap-
proach makes predictions as to how events should
be encoded across languages; moreover it provides
a computationally attractive way of encoding them
in a lexical resource. We demonstrate this by tack-
ling a notoriously difficult phenomenon, namely the

analysis of complex predicates (CPs) in Urdu/Hindi,
and show that First-Phase Syntax not only provides
a well-motivated analysis for simplex verbs, but also
posits the levels of representation needed for pro-
viding a consistent and computational analysis for
CPs. We encode the representation in a VerbNet-
style resource for Urdu/Hindi and show that it can
also be incorporated into existing lexical resources,
namely the Hindi-Urdu Treebank (Bhatt et al., 2009)
and Hindi PropBank (Hwang et al., 2010; Vaidya et
al., 2012).

The paper proceeds as follows: After providing
a brief overview of related work in Section 2, we
introduce First-Phase Syntax and its application in
computational linguistics and also provide a linguis-
tic background to Urdu/Hindi CPs (Section 3). We
then show how these complex predicates are han-
dled in First-Phase Syntax and how the information
is incorporated in the VerbNet-style lexical resource
for Urdu/Hindi (Section 4). This is followed by a
discussion on how the information can be incorpo-
rated into other resources for the language (Section
5). Section 6 concludes the paper.

2 Related work

For English, one of the central resources for en-
coding the syntactic and semantic information on
verbs is VerbNet (Kipper-Schuler, 2005). Verb-
Net uses the temporal ontology proposed by Moens
and Steedman (1988), an approach that has proven
highly useful in the past and is still employed in
many computational applications. However, with
the substantial progress of theoretical linguistic
work in the area of formalizing event structure, the

25



initP (cause)

DP
INITIATOR

init procP (process)

DP
UNDERGOER

proc resP (result)

DP
RESULTEE

res XP

Figure 1: Event decomposition and projection by Ramchand (2008)

field has gained a deeper understanding of the un-
derlying structure of events.

One key aspect of the automatic meaning rep-
resentation of verbs is the assignment of semantic
roles to the participants of the event. Here, Verb-
Net uses thematic roles (e.g. Agent, Patient, Theme)
based on work of Gruber (1965), Fillmore (1968)
and Jackendoff (1972). In contrast, FrameNet
(Baker et al., 1998) is based on a cognitive ap-
proach to event structure and defines frames which
are characterized by frame-specific roles, yielding
a large number of distinct roles. Finally, in Prop-
Bank (Palmer et al., 2005), verb arguments are given
numerical values: Arg0 has agentive or causer-like
properties, whereas Arg1 is more patient-like.

For Urdu/Hindi, only a few lexical resources exist
to date. In the spirit of English PropBank, Hindi-
Urdu PropBank (Vaidya et al., 2011; Vaidya et al.,
2012) uses PropBank-style thematic roles, account-
ing for CPs by merging the roles of main verbs and
light verbs. In the Hindi/Urdu Treebank (Bhatt et
al., 2009), these PropBank-style roles are combined
with the kar.aka roles assumed by Pān. ini (see Butt
(2006) for a discussion of Pān. ini’s system).

In general, the issue with thematic roles is that
they are difficult to define and hard to consis-
tently apply across verb classes (let alone across
languages). As we will show in the following,
the semantic roles assumed in First-Phase Syntax
are language-independent and can be motivated by
language-internal entailments based on event struc-

ture. Moreover, the complex predicates found in
Urdu/Hindi call for an analysis that is theoretically
well-motivated and can be consistently and produc-
tively applied across the verbal inventory.

In the following we introduce the framework of
First-Phase Syntax (§3.1) and provide an overview
of the phenomenon of complex predication in
Urdu/Hindi (§3.2).

3 Background

3.1 First-Phase Syntax

First-Phase Syntax (Ramchand, 2008) is an ap-
proach which proposes hierarchical linguistic rep-
resentations that directly encode structural seman-
tic interpretational properties in the domain of event
structure. In the framework, an event maximally
decomposes into three subevents: an initiation
subevent, a process subevent and a subevent denot-
ing a result state. Each subevent licenses a semantic
role and has its own projection in the tree. Figure
1 shows the general architecture: The [init] projec-
tion is responsible for introducing the external argu-
ment, i.e. the causer of the event (‘subject’ of cause
= INITIATOR), the specifier of the process subevent
undergoes the action denoted by the verb (‘subject’
of process = UNDERGOER) and the result state of
the event is licensed by resP (‘subject’ of result =
RESULTEE). The initiating as well as the resultative
subevent are stative, whereas the process subevent
has a dynamic interpretation. The “glue” between
subevents is one of causation: The [init] subevent

26



initP

Katherine

init procP
break

stick

proc resP
〈 break 〉

〈 stick 〉

res XP
〈 break 〉 in(to) pieces

Figure 2: First-phase representation of (1)

causes the [proc] subevent to happen which brings
about a change of state, which in turn leads to a re-
sult state under [res]. The reason for this decompo-
sition is that across languages, the system allows for
the identification of the general parts of verb mean-
ing and therefore provides a set of principles that
languages adhere to.

For example, the English verb ‘to break’, as
shown in example (1) with the analysis in Figure
21, licenses three subevents, namely [init], [proc]
and [res]. Here, Katherine is the INITIATOR of the
event, with the stick being the UNDERGOER as well
as the RESULTEE of the breaking event. The op-
tional phrase ‘in(to) pieces’ is a RHEME, a seman-
tic role which contributes the predicational/rhematic
content to the state described by the result projec-
tion. The syntactic diagnostics for the subevent de-
composition in English are the following: The [init]
subevent is licensed by the ungrammaticality of the
causative form of the verb, with [proc] being li-
censed by the grammaticality of a durative event
modification like ‘for hours’. The result subevent
is licensed by the ungrammaticality of the latter.

(1) Katherine broke the stick in(to) pieces.

In order to make the approach compatible with
computational lexical resources, we assume that
each verb corresponds to a lexical entry which con-
tains the subevental structure of the verb and the se-

1The terminals in angle brackets represent the Minimalist
assumptions of insertion and movement of lexical items in the
tree.

mantic roles that it licenses.2 Since one argument
can carry more than one semantic role, e.g. the stick
in Figure 2 is both the UNDERGOER and the RESUL-
TEE of the breaking event, the subevental structure
is indexed as shown in (2). The subscripts i and j
indicate that the semantic role of the INITIATOR in
[initi] is filled by a different argument than the roles
licensed by the [proc] and the [res] subevent ([procj ,
resj ]). As will be shown in Section 4, this informa-
tion can be encoded in a VerbNet-style resource.

(2) break: [initi, procj , resj]

First-Phase Syntax has a number of properties that
set it apart from other approaches to event structure
and semantic role representation and make it attrac-
tive to use in computational linguistics. First of all, it
preempts the problem that thematic roles are hard to
delimit and to define. In First-Phase Syntax, each se-
mantic role is licensed by a subevent which in turn is
tied to a syntactic diagnostic that identifies it. These
diagnostics can vary from language to language, but
have to be consistent within a language. Defining
these syntactic criteria does away with the recurring

2Unlike some explicitly syntactic decompositional ac-
counts of argument structure (e.g. Distributed Morphology),
Ramchand assumes that the syntactically relevant part of the
verb entries containa information on the event structures li-
censed as well as the relevant coindexation relations among
subevents. Thus, her lexical entries are similar to what we
assume here. Unlike lexical decompositional accounts, Ram-
chand does not assume that lexical entries contain richer argu-
ment role information independent of the relationship to event
structure.

27



problem of thematic role assignment, which gener-
ally lacks an explicit demarcation. Moreover, in the
light of lexical resource development, these criteria
greatly facilitate the annotation process.

Another property of First-Phase Syntax is that
composite semantic roles are explicitly allowed, i.e.
an entity can be both the INITIATOR and the UN-
DERGOER of an event. This feature is not accounted
for in other semantic role encodings, but it adds
considerable expressive power to the system with-
out extending the set of roles. Moreover, the roles
proposed by Ramchand (2008) have the benefit that
they are abstract enough to allow for a consistent se-
mantic analysis and are valid across languages. The
set of roles bears a striking resemblance to the top-
most level of the role hierarchy introduced by Bo-
nial et al. (2011), an attempt to find a more coarse-
grained and language-independent set of semantic
roles for the mapping between different resources.
A direct comparison of the two sets is difficult, be-
cause the role set of Bonial et al. is motivated by a
conceptual view of semantics. Nevertheless, Ram-
chand’s roles are in the spirit of other approaches
that aim at establishing a more general set of seman-
tic roles in theoretical and computational linguistics,
with the First-Phase roles having the additional ben-
efit of being tied to concrete syntactic diagnostics.

3.2 Urdu/Hindi complex predicates
A central characteristic of the verbal system of
Urdu/Hindi is the heavy usage of complex predi-
cates (CPs) that can appear in V+V, N+V, A+V and
P+V combinations (Hook (1974), Masica (1976),
Mohanan (1994), Butt (1995), Raza (2011), inter
alia). The formation of CPs is a highly productive
process with around 20 light verbs participating. As
a consequence of the expressive power of CPs, the
number of simple verbs in Urdu/Hindi (∼700 verb
roots (Raza, 2011)) is comparatively fewer than in
many other languages.

In general, Urdu/Hindi CPs comprise two verbs:
The first verb is the main verb and contributes the
main propositional content of the clause. The sec-
ond verb is finite and serves as the light verb of the
CP, contributing a bleached-out version of its full
verb meaning to the event denoted by the main verb
of the CP. In Urdu/Hindi, different types of CPs ex-
ist: One type of CP are aspectual complex predicates

(Butt, 1995) where the light verbs contribute a sense
of “completion, suddenness, directionality, benefac-
tion, etc.” (Masica, 1976, p. 143): The example in
(3) (Butt, 1995, p. 91) shows a construction with
gIr-na ‘to fall’ as the main verb of the clause and the
light verb ja-na ‘to go’, which adds completeness to
the falling event. Example (4) (Butt, 1995, p. 34)
shows a permissive complex predicate with the main
verb ja-na ‘to go’ and the permissive light verb de-
na ‘to give’. Here, the light verb adds an argument
to the clause which is not licensed by the main verb,
namely the ‘lettee’, Anjum. A third type of complex
predicate, the complex predicate of motion (Hautli-
Janisz, 2013), is illustrated in example (5): Here,
the main verb kud-na ‘to jump’ is complemented by
the light verb nIkAl-na ‘to emerge’, which adds the
source argument mAkan=se ‘from the house’ to the
clause and adds a general telic path reading.

CPs in Urdu/Hindi are problematic for shallow as
well as deep parsing approaches. Their frequency
and productivity means that a static list is insuffi-
cient, but a dynamic resource has to account for the
fact that the syntactic structures, semantic roles and
event structures of two verbs need to be merged to
form a single predicational head. This, we claim,
can be done with the First-Phase Syntax approach
presented above and we implement it using a class-
based approach like VerbNet. The methodology is
described in the remainder of the paper.

4 Encoding event structure

The two levels of representation that are generally
assumed in VerbNet are the syntactic and the seman-
tic/conceptual representation. Each verb is charac-
terized by a set of syntactic frames or alternations
that it participates in. From the viewpoint of syntax,
a frame is characterized by the obligatory syntactic
constituents and the semantic roles that these con-
stituents play in the event.

One difference in the syntactic representation be-
tween English and Urdu/Hindi VerbNet (henceforth
UHVN) is due to a structural difference between the
two languages. English has a fixed word order and
the order of constituents in the description and the
order of elements in the syntactic frame indicate
which constituent occupies which thematic role in
the frame. This way of relating syntactic to seman-

28



(3) AnjUm gIr gA-yi
Anjum.F=Erg fall go-Perf.F.Sg
‘Anjum fell (completely).’

(4) AnjUm=ne sAddAf=ko ja-ne dI-ya
Anjum.F=Erg Saddaf.F=Dat go-Inf.Obl give-Perf.M.Sg
‘Anjum let Saddaf go.’

(5) cor mAkan=se bahAr kud nIkl-a
thief.M.Sg.Nom house.M.Sg=Source outside jump emerge-Perf.M.Sg
‘The thief jumped out of the house.’ (Hook 1974, p. 69)

tic information cannot be directly transferred to lan-
guages with a free word order such as Urdu/Hindi,
which require the resource to be more explicit about
the way the syntactic and semantic role information
is connected. To account for this, case information is
recorded in the syntactic frames to capture the map-
ping of semantic roles to syntactic constituents.

Another difference between English and
Urdu/Hindi is the existence of several classes
of light verbs, in addition to the standard VerbNet
classes representing main verbs. Extending the
VerbNet system, we posit a special class for light
verbs in Urdu/Hindi and within this class are several
subclasses. The syntactic and semantic structures of
the light verbs and main verbs constrain the possible
CPs in the language and their interpretation.

4.1 Simple verbs

The main verb component of a CP has an underlying
semantics which includes the First-Phase subevents
and the roles of its arguments. A basic intransi-
tive motion verb like gIr-na ‘to fall’ has a Verb-
Net entry as shown in Figure 3: The verb licenses
a [proc] subevent, with the nominative argument in
the clause occupying the UNDERGOER role. The
semantic representation employs the ‘motion’ pred-
icate also used in English VerbNet, showing that
the UNDERGOER undergoes motion in the process
subevent (motion(proc, UNDERGOER)).

Paths and locations of motion are also encoded
as in English VerbNet, in particular following the
proposal made by Hwang et al. (2013). For that,
the rhematic position of the [res] subevent, inter-
preted as the LOCATION role in motion events, is
split into INITIAL LOCATION and DESTINATION.

Main verb gIr-na ‘to fall’
Frame: 1.2.1
Description: NP.UNDERGOER V
Syntax: NP (nom) = UNDERGOER

V
Semantics: motion(proc, UNDERGOER)
Example: AnjUm gIri.

‘Anjum fell.’

Figure 3: Example of [proc] event structure in UHVN

The representation in UHVN is illustrated in Fig-
ure 4: The verb nIkAl-na ‘to emerge’ licenses two
subevents, namely [proc, res], with the seman-
tic roles of the UNDERGOER and the RESULTEE
combined on the nominative argument (the sub-
ject). The INITIAL LOCATION is characterized by
an NP with locative case marking. The seman-
tic representation of nIkAl-na ‘to emerge’ is simi-
lar to the one in Figure 3: The UNDERGOER per-
forms a motion in the process subevent, but with
the additional information on the path of motion
that is defined by the INITIAL LOCATION, with
DESTINATION and TRAJECTORY left unspecified
in the frame. In the result subevent, the RE-
SULTEE is not at the INITIAL LOCATION anymore
(!at(INITIAL LOCATION)).

4.2 Light verbs
In CPs, the light verb only contributes a bleached
version of its full verb counterpart to the event. In
CP formation, the VerbNet lexical entry of the main
verb combines with that of the light verb. The
same main verb may combine with different light
verbs, and it is the VerbNet syntax of the light verb

29



Main verb nIkAl-na ‘to emerge’
Frame: 1.2.4
Description: NP.UNDERGOER+RESULTEE NP.INITIAL LOCATION V
Syntax: NP (nom) = UNDERGOER + RESULTEE

NP (loc) = INITIAL LOCATION
V

Semantics: motion(proc, UNDERGOER)
path(proc, INITIAL LOCATION, ?TRAJECTORY, ?DESTINATION)
result state(res, RESULTEE, !at(INITIAL LOCATION))

Example: Amra kAmre=se nIkli.
‘Amra emerged from the room.’

Figure 4: Semantic representation of location and path in UHVN

Permissive light verb de-na ‘to give’
Frame: 0.1
Description: NPINITIATOR XP* V Vlight
Syntax: NP (erg/nom) = INITIATOR

XP*
Vn
Vlight

Semantics: permission(init, INITIATOR, UNDERGOER)
Example: AnjUm=ne sAddAf=ko gar. i cAlane di.

‘Anjum let Saddaf drive the car.’

Figure 5: Syntactic frame for the permissive light verb de-na ‘to give’ in UHVN

which governs the surface realization of the argu-
ments. The light verb may introduce new semantic
arguments and the structure of the First-Phrase roles
(Figure 1) governs which light verbs can combine
with which main verbs.

Figure 5 shows the lexical entry for the permis-
sive light verb de-na ‘to give’ (as exemplified in
(4)), which adds a permission-giving argument to
the event denoted by the main verb. On the syn-
tactic level, the light verb contributes an argument
which can alternate between nominative and erga-
tive case marking (Mohanan (1994), Butt and King
(2005), inter alia). This is the INITIATOR of the
event. Otherwise, no restriction on the number and
role of the other arguments in the clause is assumed,
represented by XP* for any kind of phrase appearing
zero or more times. For the CP, the light verb de-na
‘to give’ expects the main verb in the nominal form
(Vn). For the semantic representation, we introduce
the predicate ‘permission’, showing that in the ini-
tiation subevent, the INITIATOR gives permission to

the UNDERGOER (permission(init, INITIATOR, UN-
DERGOER)). The remaining semantic information
of the event, e.g. the aspect of motion as in (4), is
contributed by the main verb ja-na ‘to go’.

As shown in example (5), nIkAl-na ‘to emerge’
can, in addition to its full-verb counterpart, also
serve as a light verb in CPs of motion. Figure 6
shows the light verb entry in UHVN: Similar to the
permissive light verb, the syntactic frame comprises
the arguments that are required by the light verb,
here a nominative-marked argument which is the
RESULTEE and a locative-marked argument which
denotes the INITIAL LOCATION. As the light verb
can only combine with main motion verbs of the
class ‘iTHlAnA-1.1’, a syntactic restriction needs to
be encoded in the VerbNet entry: In UHVN, this in-
formation is attached to the main verb entry in the
syntactic frame (V: synres=iTHlAnA-1.1), facilitat-
ing an automatic lookup and analysis of valid CP
constructions. If no constraint is encoded, as is the
case for the permissive light verb de-na ‘to give’ in

30



Light verb of motion nIkAl-na ‘to emerge’
Frame: 1.4.2.1
Description: NP (nom) NP (loc) XP* V Vlight
Syntax: NP (nom) = RESULTEE

NP (loc) = INITIAL LOCATION
XP*
V: synres = iTHlAnA-1.1
Vlight

Semantics: path(proc, INITIAL LOCATION, ?TRAJECTORY, ?DESTINATION)
result state(res, RESULTEE, !at(INITIAL LOCATION))

Example: cor mAkan=sE kud nIkla
‘The thief jumped out of the house.’

Figure 6: Syntactic frames for light verbs of motion in UHVN

Figure 5, the light verb forms CPs with verbs from
across the verbal inventory.

The semantic representation of the light verb does
not contribute motion information, but solely con-
tributes the ‘path’ and ‘result state’ predicates, in
parallel to the encoding of these notions for main
verbs. This reduced information in the VerbNet en-
try of the light verb reflects the view in theoretical
linguistics that light verbs only contribute a bleached
version of their full verb meaning.

4.3 Representing CPs
As shown above, light verbs comprise a separate

class in UHVN. Many light verbs in Urdu/Hindi
have full verb counterparts and hence have multi-
ple entries in UHVN: one for the light verb meaning
and one (or more) for their full, main verb mean-
ing. For a semantic representation of CPs, the Verb-
Net information of the main and the light verb is
merged: The syntactic constraints of the light verb
are checked against the information contained in the
main verb entry; if they are fulfilled, the informa-
tion regarding event structure, semantic roles and
semantic predicates is combined.3 In the following
we illustrate the resulting CP analysis using example
(5) with the CP of motion kud nIkAl-na ‘to jump out
of (lit. to jump emerge)’. The representation looks
as in (6): The motion information in the first line
is contributed by the main verb kud-na ‘to jump’,

3Ramchand explicitly assumes the merging of information
in First-Phase Syntax by way of the underassociation principle,
whereby semantic roles that can be identified based on their en-
cyclopedic content can be unified.

which licenses a [proc] subevent in which an UN-
DERGOER undergoes motion. The path and the re-
sultative information (second and third line) come
from the light verb nIkAl-na ‘to emerge’, which li-
censes a [res] subevent and, in its light verb usage,
only contributes the ‘path’ and ‘result’ information.

Similarly, the analysis of the permissive CP ja-ne
de-na ‘to let go (lit. to go give)’ exemplified in (4)
is a combined version of the representations of the
main and light verbs: The ‘permission’ information
and the INITIATOR in (7) is contributed by the light
verb de-na ‘to give’, with the motion information
coming from the main verb ja-na ‘to go’.

This treatment of CPs in UHVN reflects the
theoretical linguistic approach to analyzing these
constructions: The light verb only contributes a
bleached version of its full-verb-information to the
CP and constrains the types of arguments and the
combinatorial possibilities of the verbs. Both of
these aspects are accounted for in the resource.

4.4 Interim summary

Overall, the UHVN approach to encoding event
structure makes use of three subevents, namely ini-
tiation, process and result. In order to represent mo-
tion events and CPs, we use the semantic roles of
INITIATOR, UNDERGOER and RESULTEE. For the
VerbNet-encoding of the path, the First-Phase roles
of LOCATION and RHEME are further split into INI-
TIAL LOCATION, TRAJECTORY and DESTINATION.

31



(6) motion(proc, UNDERGOER)
path(proc, INITIAL LOCATION, ?TRAJECTORY, ?DESTINATION)
result state(res, RESULTEE, !at(INITIAL LOCATION))

(7) permission(init, INITIATOR)
motion(proc, UNDERGOER)

5 Implementation in other resources

The subevents and semantic roles of UHVN are com-
patible with information contained in other lexical
resources for Urdu/Hindi, in particular Hindi/Urdu
PropBank (Palmer et al., 2005; Hwang et al., 2010)
and the Hindi/Urdu Treebank (Bhatt et al., 2009). In
Hindi/Urdu PropBank, the semantic role informa-
tion of each verb is stored in a frame, which can,
with the semantic role encoding assumed in First-
Phase Syntax, be extended to encode two different
layers of semantic role assignment. Figure 7 shows
the annotation for nIkAl-na ‘to emerge’: Whereas
the PropBank entry assigns Arg0 (actor) and Arg2-
sou (source attribute) to the arguments of the frame,
the UHVN representation assigns the UNDERGOER
as well as the RESULTEE role to the moving entity,
with the source location complemented by the INI-
TIAL LOCATION role.

Main verb nIkAl-na ‘to emerge’
Hindi/Urdu PropBank Urdu/Hindi VerbNet
Arg0 UNDERGOER

RESULTEE
Arg2-sou INITIAL LOCATION

Figure 7: Hindi/Urdu PropBank and UHVN roles

The light verb entry of nIkAl-na ‘to emerge’ in
Hindi/Urdu PropBank contains an Argm, an argu-
ment modifier role, which combines with nouns in
N+V CPs (Vaidya et al., 2013). This entry, as shown
for complex predicates of motion, can be extended,
adding the semantic roles of RESULTEE and INI-
TIAL LOCATION shown in Figure 6.

The semantic roles can also be added to the
Hindi/Urdu Treebank, where the dependencies be-
tween verbs and arguments are encoded using the
kar.aka roles of Pān. ini. Here, nIkAl-na ‘to emerge’
receives the roles k1 ‘karta’ (most independent par-
ticipant in an event) and k2 ‘karma’ (locus of the re-

sult implied by the verb root). Extending the layer of
annotation with the semantic roles established here
would provide an interesting comparison of different
principles of annotating participants of an event.

6 Discussion and conclusion

Overall, for its use in computational linguistics,
First-Phase Syntax has a number of attractive prop-
erties: First of all, participants in an event can have
more than one semantic role, enhancing the expres-
siveness of the system without increasing the num-
ber of roles. Secondly, having a set of syntactic crite-
ria that govern the assignment of the semantic roles
facilitates the process of extending the resource, as
annotators can more easily decide what the correct
semantic role of an argument is. Moreover, the as-
sumptions made in First-Phase Syntax provides a
framework for analyzing a notoriously difficult con-
struction in Urdu/Hindi, namely CP formation.

Another benefit of First-Phase Syntax is its
crosslinguistic validity. As shown in Ramchand
(2008), the framework can be applied across lan-
guages and linguistic phenomena. Instead of having
different annotation schemes emerge to accommo-
date constructions in languages other than English,
the framework can serve as a guiding principle to en-
code event structure consistently across languages.

Using the class-based approach of VerbNet to an-
alyzing CPs of different types has been shown to be a
clean and theoretically well-motivated way of deal-
ing with CPs in this kind of resource. The bleached
content of the light verbs is reflected at the syn-
tactic as well as semantic level of the VerbNet en-
tries. The syntactic constraints as to their combina-
torial possibilities with main verbs allow for a con-
sistent and efficient computational treatment. This,
together with the event decomposition and semantic
roles assumed in First-Phase Syntax, paves the way
for a cross-linguistic, theoretically well-motivated
computational analysis of event structure.

32



References

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Filmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet Project. In Proceed-
ings of the 17th International Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics (Coling-ACL’98), pages 86–90.

Rajesh Bhatt, Bhuvana Narasimhan, Martha Palmer,
Owen Rambow, Dipti Sharma, and Fei Xia. 2009. A
Multi-Representational and Multi-Layered Treebank
for Hindi/Urdu. In Proceedings of the Third Linguistic
Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 186–
189.

Claire Bonial, William Corvey, Martha Palmer, Volha
Petukhova, and Harry Bunt. 2011. A Hierarchical
Unification of LIRICS and VerbNet Semantic Roles.
In Proceedings of the ICSC Workshop on Semantic
Annotation for Computational Linguistic Resources
(SACL-ICSC 2011), pages 483–489.

Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway King. 2005. The status
of case. In V. Dayal and A. Mahajan, editors, Clause
Structure in South Asian Languages, pages 153–198.
Berlin: Springer Verlag.

Miriam Butt. 1995. The Structure of Complex Predicates
in Urdu. Stanford: CSLI Publications.

Miriam Butt. 2006. Theories of Case. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Charles J. Fillmore. 1968. Lexical entries for verbs.
Foundations of Language, 4(4):373–393.

Jeffrey Gruber. 1965. Studies in Lexical Relations.
Ph.D. thesis, MIT, (reprinted in Lexical Strutures in
Syntax and Semantics. Amsterdam, North-Holland,
1976).

Annette Hautli-Janisz. 2013. Moving Right Along: Mo-
tion verb sequences in Urdu. In M. Butt and T. Hol-
loway King, editors, In Proceedings of the LFG13
Conference, pages 295–215.

Peter Edwin Hook. 1974. The Compound Verb in Hindi.
The University of Michigan: Center for South and
Southeast Asian Studies.

Jena D. Hwang, Archna Bhatia, Claire Bonial, Aous
Mansouri, Ashwini Vaidya, Nianwen Xue, and Martha
Palmer. 2010. Propbank annotation of multilingual
light verb constructions. In Proceedings of ACL 2010:
The Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages
82–90.

Jena D. Hwang, Martha Palmer, and Annie Zaenen.
2013. Representing paths of motion in verbnet. In
T. Holloway King and V. de Paiva, editors, From
Quirky Case to Representing Space: Papers in Hon-
our of Annie Zaenen, pages 155–166. Stanford: CSLI
Publications online.

Ray Jackendoff. 1972. Semantic Interpretation in Gen-
erative Grammar. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Karin Kipper-Schuler. 2005. VerbNet: A Broad-
Coverage, Comprehensive Verb Lexicon. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Pennsylvania.

Colin P. Masica. 1976. Defining a Linguistic Area.
Chicago and London: The University of Chicago
Press.

Marc Moens and Mark Steedman. 1988. Temporal on-
tology and temporal reference. Computational Lin-
guistics, 14:15–38.

Tara Mohanan. 1994. Argument Structure in Hindi. Dis-
sertations in Linguistics. Stanford: CSLI Publications.

Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Cor-
pus of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics,
31(1):71–106.

Gillian Ramchand. 2008. Verb Meaning and the Lexi-
con: A First-Phase Syntax. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Ghulam Raza. 2011. Subcategorization Acquisition and
Classes of Predication in Urdu. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sität Konstanz.

Ashwini Vaidya, Jinho Choi, Martha Palmer, and Bhu-
vana Narasimhan. 2011. Analysis of the hindi
proposition bank using dependency structure. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth Linguistic Annotation Workshop
(ACL’11), pages 21–29.

Ashwini Vaidya, Jinho Choi, Martha Palmer, and Bhu-
vana Narasimhan. 2012. Empty Argument Insertion
in Hindi PropBank. In Proceedings of the Eighth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2012), pages 1522–1526.

Ashwini Vaidya, Martha Palmer, and Bhuvana
Narasimhan. 2013. Semantic roles for nominal
predicates: Building a lexical resource. In Proceed-
ings of the 9th Workshop on Multiword Expressions
(MWE 2013), pages 126–131.

33


