



















































A Computer Program for Tracking the Evolution of a Psychotherapy Treatment


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality, pages 134–145,
Denver, Colorado, June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Computer Program for Tracking the Evolution
of a Psychotherapy Treatment

Bernard Maskit
Mathematics Department
Stony Brook University

Stony Brook NY 11794-3651
USA

daap@optonline.net

Wilma Bucci
Derner Institute

Adelphi University
Garden City NY 11530 USA
wbucci@optonline.net

Sean Murphy
New York Psychoanalytic Society

and Institute
247 East 82 Street

New York NY 10028, USA
smurphy1@gmail.com

Abstract

Describing troubling events and images and
reflecting on their emotional meanings are
central components of most psychotherapies.
The computer system described here tracks
the occurrence and intensity of narration or
imagery within transcribed therapy sessions
and over the course of treatments; it likewise
tracks the extent to which language denoting
appraisal and logical thought occurs. The Dis-
course Attributes Analysis Program (DAAP)
is a computer text analysis system that uses
several dictionaries, including the Weighted
Referential Activity Dictionary (WRAD), de-
signed to detect verbal communication of
emotional images and events, and the Re-
flection Dictionary (REF), designed to detect
verbal communication denoting cognitive ap-
praisal, as well as other dictionaries. For each
dictionary and each turn of speech, DAAP
uses a moving weighted average of dictio-
nary weights, together with a fold-over pro-
cedure, to produce a smooth density func-
tion that graphically illustrates the rise and
fall of each underlying psychological variable.
These density functions are then used to pro-
duce several new measures, including mea-
sures of the vividness of descriptions of im-
ages or events, and a measure of the extent to
which descriptions of events or images and re-
flection on their meaning occur separately.

1 Introduction

In most forms of therapy, the treatment process in-
cludes two major phases of discourse: (1) the client

talks about his or her concerns or problems and de-
scribes incidents related to these concerns, and (2)
the client, perhaps with the help of the therapist,
thinks about these concerns and evaluates the sig-
nificance of the described incidents (Bucci, 2013).
These phases are likely to be repeated in different
contexts and with different contents. Some versions
of psychodynamic therapy include reports of mem-
ories and dreams, as well as current interactions and
interpretations of these. Some types of Cognitive-
Behavioral Therapy include ‘experiments’ and other
forms of ‘homework’ outside the treatment situa-
tion, and descriptions and evaluations of these crit-
ical events in the session. Some exposure therapies
require that the client tell and retell the story of the
trauma. Different treatments have different mixes of
these two crucial phases.

These two styles of discourse have been termed
Symbolizing and Reorganizing by Bucci (1997) and
defined within the framework of her general theory
of the referential process as this plays out in psy-
chotherapy. According to this theory, an emotion
schema is first aroused (this phase will not be dis-
cussed here); then communicated in the form of an
image or narrative in the Symbolizing phase. The
meaning of this image or story is then reflected on
in the Reorganizing phase.

Much also occurs in a therapy session that lies
outside these two modes of discourse; the client
sometimes talks in general terms, sometimes is dis-
fluent, and sometimes discusses matters outside the
problem areas. In this paper, we describe a com-
puter system designed to read texts, including tran-
scriptions of therapy sessions, and track the extent

134



to which the speaker or writer is engaged in either of
these two major phases or in some other mode.

The key components of our system are the Dis-
course Attributes Analysis Program (DAAP); the
empirically derived Weighted Referential Activity
Dictionary (WRAD) (Bucci and Maskit, 2006),
which measures the extent to which the speaker or
writer is in symbolizing mode; and the conceptually
derived unweighted Reflection dictionary (REF),
which measures the extent to which the speaker or
writer is in reorganizing mode; in this paper we fo-
cus on these measures and measures derived from
them. The system also includes other dictionaries,
including disfluency and affect. These dictionaries
can be used to help distinguish different phases of
discourse (Kingsley, 2009), and also as measures of
session effectiveness (Bucci and Maskit, 2007; Mar-
iani et al., 2013; Andrei, 2011)1.

According to Bucci (1997), Referential Activity
(RA) is a psycholinguistic variable that concerns the
extent to which language can capture a speaker’s
bodily, sensory and affective experience in such a
way as to evoke corresponding experience in the lis-
tener. This communication generally takes the form
of narratives or descriptions of imagery, and is the
central indicator of the Symbolizing phase. The
Weighted Referential Activity Dictionary (WRAD),
which was designed to model RA, will be described
in more detail below.

The Discourse Attributes Analysis Program
(DAAP) is a modern text analysis program that pro-
duces, for each weighted or unweighted dictionary,
and for each turn of speech or other user-defined
segment a smoothly varying density function that
tracks the rise and fall of the underlying psycholog-
ical variable that the dictionary is designed to repre-
sent. DAAP uses the WRAD density function to de-
rive a measure of average vividness while in symbol-
izing mode, and a measure of the extent of discourse
spent in the symbolizing mode; DAAP also pro-
duces a measure of the extent to which a speaker’s
language is simultaneously in both symbolizing and
reorganizing modes; there is evidence that a client’s
separation of these two modes of speech is related to
session or treatment effectiveness.

1This system is publicly available for non-commercial use;
it can be downloaded from ww.thereferentialprocess.org/the-
discourse-attributes-analysis-program-daap.

There are several computer programs that have
been used for the study of the content of psychother-
apy sessions. Earlier programs, such as the General
Inquirer (Stone et al. , 1966), as well as more recent
comprehensive programs such as the LIWC of Pen-
nebaker et al. (2001), use counts of words within
user-defined segments, such as turns of speech, that
match words in dictionaries defined by particular
grammatical or psychological categories. Mergen-
thaler’s Text Analysis System (1996) uses artificial
segmentation into word blocks of approximately 150
words each, which enables some differentiation of
different text modes. However this segmentation
does not correspond to turns of speech or boundaries
of meaning units. Some modern systems, as for ex-
ample Salvatore et al. (2012), Imel et al. (2014) or
Werbart et al. (2011) use topic models, Latent Se-
mantic Analysis and/or other machine learning tech-
niques to form their categories. Such programs are
primarily concerned with the contents of discourse;
some of these start by eliminating function words.

1.1 The Referential Process as a Common
Mechanism in Talking Cures

Bucci (2013) argues that the sequence of Symboliz-
ing and Reorganizing, characterized as the referen-
tial process, constitutes a common factor that occurs
in different forms in a wide range of psychother-
apies practiced today. In all these treatments, ef-
fectiveness of treatment depends on communicating
emotional experiences in specific and concrete lan-
guage. Such language has been shown by Bucci and
Maskit (2007) to be associated with effective ther-
apeutic work in psychodynamic treatment. In their
extensive and critical review of process-outcome re-
search, appearing in the current Handbook of Psy-
chotherapy and Behavior Change, which provides
the standard reference for the field of psychother-
apy research, Crits-Cristoph, et al. (2013) have pro-
vided evidence that arousal of emotional experience,
for example through retelling narratives of central
traumatic events, is likely to be an essential ingredi-
ent in achieving positive outcomes in exposure treat-
ments. They have also shown that concrete tech-
niques, such as asking for specific examples of be-
liefs, also lead to better outcome in cognitive ther-
apy, while abstract techniques were unrelated to sub-
sequent improvement. Several studies reviewed by

135



Crits-Cristoph et al. (2013), have provided evidence
that gains in self-understanding lead to improve-
ments in symptoms in psychodynamic therapy. Re-
organizing also occurs in the various forms of cog-
nitive behavioral, schema and exposure treatments,
in processes characterized as reappraisal, cognitive
restructuring and development of techniques of self-
regulation.

2 Dictionaries

The DAAP system uses several dictionaries to locate
different phases of discourse. We are concerned here
only with the Weighted Referential Activity Dictio-
nary (WRAD), as a measure of the extent to which
the speaker is in the Symbolizing phase, and the Re-
flection dictionary (REF), as a measure of the extent
to which the speaker is in the Reorganizing phase.

2.1 Referential Activity

Variation in RA is interpreted as indicating a
speaker’s or writer’s degree of emotional engage-
ment or immersion in an experience as represented
in language (Bucci, 1997). Such engagement is indi-
cated by qualities of language ranging widely across
divergent contents. A novelist may write about chas-
ing the white whale, life in an English village in
the early nineteenth century, or experiences in the
Spanish Civil War with equivalent degrees of en-
gagement; clients may describe a similarly wide
range of experiences. The challenge in develop-
ing a lexical measure of engagement in experience
was in capturing features of language that are de-
pendent on style and essentially independent of con-
tent. Bucci and colleagues began development of
the RA measure by turning to the principles of lan-
guage style as given by Strunk and White, in partic-
ular their sixteenth principle of composition, which
states: “Use definite, specific, concrete language.”
(1972) (pp. 16–18). Based on the features specified
in this principle, four scales were developed: Speci-
ficity (quantity of detail), Clarity (organization and
focus) Concreteness (degree of reference to sensory
and other bodily experience) and Imagery (degree
to which language evokes imagery). Definitions of
the scales and procedures for rating them are out-
lined in a manual (Bucci et al. , 1992; Bucci and
McKay, 2014). Scores for the four attributes are av-

eraged to yield an overall RA measure for texts or
text segments. The manual provides some explicit
features of the several dimensions, but the scoring is
based primarily on intuitive judgments. As for most
linguistic processing, speakers of a language have
more implicit knowledge concerning language style
and its effects than they are able to state in explicit
terms. Scorers achieve acceptable reliability levels
by reading the manual and brief training with prac-
tice segments.

The RA scales have been applied to many types
of texts, including brief monologues, early mem-
ories, and Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) pro-
tocols as well as transcripts of therapy sessions, in
populations varying on demographic and clinical di-
mensions. In a meta-analysis of 23 studies, Samstag
(1996) found significant relationships, with moder-
ate to strong effect size, between RA scales and
other indicators of capacity to connect cognitive,
and emotional experience to language. While the
scales are reliably scored with relatively brief train-
ing, computerized procedures are needed to enable
assessment of RA in large sample and longitudinal
studies, and micro-analytic tracking of fluctuation
in RA within various forms of communicative dis-
course. Traditional methods of computerized lan-
guage analysis depend on construction of word lists
representing specified contents and concepts. For
the RA dimension, a different approach to modeling
the scales was used.

A first computer model of Referential Activity,
called CRA, was empirically derived by Mergen-
thaler and Bucci (1999) using a set of transcriptions
of spoken language that had been scored for RA. The
model consisted of two dictionaries; one made up of
words that are used significantly more often in high
RA speech and the other of words used significantly
more often in low RA speech. These were used as a
measure of RA with the Text Analysis System (TAS)
of Mergenthaler (1996), which segments each text
into word blocks of approximately 150 words each,
and then computes a mean CRA score for each such
word block (High RA words minus Low RA words
divided by the total number of words).

The dictionary currently in use, the Weighted Ref-
erential Activity Dictionary (WRAD), was also em-
pirically derived from a set of transcriptions of spo-
ken language that had been scored for RA (Bucci

136



and Maskit, 2006). Weighted referential activity
dictionaries have also been constructed in Span-
ish (Roussos and O’Connell, 2005), and Italian
(Mariani et al., 2013). The WRAD contains ap-
proximately 700 single-word items, including many
very frequent function words; thus WRAD covers
roughly 75–85% of spoken language. Each item
in the WRAD has a weight, ranging from −1 to
+1, that was empirically derived so as to model
that item’s usage in segments at different RA levels.
For example, an item with weight −1 is used much
more often in text segments having RA scores in the
range of 0 to 2.75, an item with weight +1 is used
much more often in text segments having RA scores
in the range of 7.25 to 10. As described in Bucci
and Maskit (2006), the algorithm used to make the
WRAD uses different definitions of the term ‘much
more often’ to construct different dictionaries; the fi-
nal one is chosen by maximizing the correlation with
judge’s scores of RA on a separate set of texts.

As shown in Bucci and Maskit (2006), the WRAD
and CRA were tested on a set of 113 text segments
that had been scored for RA, and that had not been
used in the construction of either dictionary. For
this test set, the WRAD/RA correlation was .47;
the CRA/RA correlation was .31. As the coverage
of a dictionary could be important for interpreting
the corresponding density function, we note that the
CRA coverage of this material was .50, while the
WRAD coverage was .83. To the best of the authors’
knowledge, there are no other computer measures of
RA to test the WRAD against.

Since the contents of the WRAD are based on
the scales, which are intuitively scored, the weights
are generally independent of linguistic or grammat-
ical category and relate to language style in ways
that are generally not explicitly understood. Thus
general content or grammatical categories, such as
are applied in the LIWC and other text analysis
systems, could not be used in making the WRAD.
For example, ‘in’ and ‘inside’ might be grouped to-
gether in typical categorical systems; however the
WRAD weight of the word ‘in’ is +1, signifying
that people generally use this word far more often
in symbolizing mode than otherwise; the weight of
the word ‘inside’ is −1, signifying that people gen-
erally use this word far less often in symbolizing
mode than otherwise. Similarly, the words ‘and’,

‘was’, ‘she’ and ‘on’ each have the highest possi-
ble WRAD weight of +1, while the words ‘also’,
‘is’, ‘it’ and ‘off’, which appear semantically re-
lated to these four items respectively, have very low
WRAD weights (‘it’ has weight −.875, the others
have the lowest possible weight of−1). The content
words in the dictionary include ‘mother’ and ‘class’,
which have WRAD weight +1, as well as ‘family’
and ‘money’, which have WRAD weight −1.

Post-hoc examination of the lexical contents of
the WRAD suggests that many frequent words with
high WRAD weights are those with the types of
functions required for telling stories. The five most
frequent words with weights of +1 are the conjunc-
tion ‘and’, the definite article ‘the’, the past tense
verb ‘was’, the spatial preposition ‘in’, and the per-
sonal pronoun ‘she’; these are items with the types
of pointing and connecting functions that are likely
to be used in describing episodes — to locate the
objects of discourse in place and time, and to join
together or relate objects or ideas — as well as past
tense verbs that serve as indicators of memory re-
trieval, and third person singular animate pronouns
that are used to refer to specific other people figur-
ing in an episode. The most frequent words with low
WRAD weights are associated with subjective focus
(‘I’) rather than pointing to objects and describing
events, present rather than past tense (‘is’), general
and abstract usage (‘it’ and ‘that’) and disfluency in-
dicated by the filled pause term (‘mm’) (Bucci et al.,
2015). Other factors contributing to the contents of
the WRAD are now being studied by Murphy et al.
(2015).

2.2 Reflection

The Reflection dictionary (REF) is an unweighted
list of over 1400 words that relate to reflection
or logical thought. These include logic terms
(‘if’, ‘but’); words referring to cognitive functions
(‘think’, ‘plan’), or entities (‘cause’, ‘belief’); prob-
lems of failure of cognitive or logical functions
(‘confuse’, ‘confound’); complex verbal commu-
nicative functions (‘comment’, ‘argue’); and fea-
tures of mental functioning (‘creative’, ‘logical’).

The REF dictionary was formed by having three
judges, using a definition of the Reflection category,
independently rate words from a large set of texts,
including the texts used to make and test the WRAD.

137



For each word, if all three judges agreed on its inclu-
sion, it was added to the REF dictionary. If two of
the three agreed on inclusion, the word was given to
a fourth judge, and included in the dictionary if the
fourth judge agreed.

3 The Discourse Attributes Analysis
Program (DAAP)

The DAAP system operates on the assumption that
each dictionary represents an underlying psycholog-
ical process that varies over time. For each dic-
tionary and each turn of speech DAAP produces
a smoothly varying density function that models
the underlying psychological variable. DAAP uses
these density functions to produce several derived
measures; the density functions and some derived
measures will be described and illustrated below.

The WRAD weights are given as lying between
−1 and +1, with a neutral value of 0, correspond-
ing to the RA scale score neutral value of 5. As is
usual for a text analysis system, DAAP assigns the
weight 0 to a word that is not in a dictionary; a word
that is in an unweighted dictionary is assigned the
weight +1; a word that is in a weighted dictionary
is assigned its dictionary weight. As negative values
are sometimes difficult to interpret for psychological
variables, the WRAD dictionary scores are linearly
transformed so as to lie between 0 and 1, with neu-
tral value at .5. With this transformation, the DAAP
density functions are all non-negative and have val-
ues between 0 and +1.

In what follows, the WRAD neutral value of .5
is used as a dividing line between segments of dis-
course that are considered to be high in RA and those
that are considered to be low. This division enables
DAAP to segment text into contiguous sets of words
for which the WRAD density function is either high
or low; that is, greater than or less than this neutral
value.

3.1 Ordinary Text Analysis Functions

Session material is usually transcribed with markers
indicating changes in speaker. DAAP permits but
does not require this or other segmentation markers
and treats each such marker as indicating a new turn
of speech, thus allowing for different definitions of
’turn of speech’. For example, pauses of a certain

length or longer might be viewed as indicating a new
turn of speech, even if no change of speaker has ac-
tually occurred; or certain interjections, such as ‘um-
hm’, might be viewed as not indicating a change of
speaker. For qualitative analysis of content spoken at
interesting points as indicated by the graphs of the
density functions, DAAP produces a marked text;
this reproduces the original text file with markers in-
serted every 50 words.

3.2 The Density Function

For each dictionary and each turn of speech, DAAP
constructs a density function, which has a non-
negative value at each word in the turn of speech.
This construction starts with a moving weighted av-
erage of the dictionary weights, where the weighting
function is an exponential closely related to the nor-
mal curve. This weighting function is equal to zero
for all values outside the range, −99 ≤ x ≤ +99.
Except for the first and last 99 words of each turn
of speech, the density function is equal to this mov-
ing weighted average. Special adjustments using a
fold-over technique are made for the first and last
99 words. These adjustments have the consequence
that the mean of the density function is equal to the
mean of the dictionary weights. Precise definitions
of the density function and the measures outlined be-
low are given in the appendix.

Most therapy sessions have a total of between
5,000 and 7,000 words. For each dictionary, the
density function appears as a visually smooth curve
with discontinuities at each change of speaker. (As
explained in the appendix, one can regard the den-
sity function as being defined at every real number
so that it is a mathematically smooth function for ev-
ery turn of speech.) The segments where the WRAD
density function lies above the neutral value of .5 are
easily located, and the text corresponding to these
segments can be located in the marked text.

We illustrate the density function and the derived
measures with graphs of the WRAD and REF den-
sity functions of Session 4 from a treatment carried
out by Carl Rogers at the research program in psy-
chotherapy of the University of Chicago; the client is
known as Miss Vib (Rogers and Kinget, 1965). The
treatment was regarded as highly successful, and this
session was considered a pivotal session. Rogers and
Kinget say that during Session 4 “the inner disorga-

138



nization that characterizes this phase of the process
reaches its climax” leading then to a shift into an
evaluation mode in Session 5. In both these figures,
the client data appears as the thinner black line; the
therapist data appears as the thicker black line.

0.2	  

0.3	  

0.4	  

0.5	  

0.6	  

0.7	  

0.8	  

1	  
10
1	  

20
1	  

30
1	  

40
1	  

50
1	  

60
1	  

70
1	  

80
1	  

90
1	  

10
01
	  

11
01
	  

12
01
	  

13
01
	  

14
01
	  

15
01
	  

16
01
	  

17
01
	  

18
01
	  

19
01
	  

20
01
	  

21
01
	  

22
01
	  

23
01
	  

24
01
	  

25
01
	  

26
01
	  

27
01
	  

28
01
	  

29
01
	  

30
01
	  

31
01
	  

32
01
	  

33
01
	  

34
01
	  

35
01
	  

36
01
	  

37
01
	  

38
01
	  

39
01
	  

40
01
	  

41
01
	  

42
01
	  

43
01
	  

44
01
	  

45
01
	  

46
01
	  

47
01
	  

Ms.	  Vib	  Session	  4	  WRAD	  

C	  WRAD	   T	  WRAD	  

Figure 1: Client and therapist WRAD density.

0	  

0.05	  

0.1	  

0.15	  

0.2	  

0.25	  

1	  
10
1	  

20
1	  

30
1	  

40
1	  

50
1	  

60
1	  

70
1	  

80
1	  

90
1	  

10
01
	  

11
01
	  

12
01
	  

13
01
	  

14
01
	  

15
01
	  

16
01
	  

17
01
	  

18
01
	  

19
01
	  

20
01
	  

21
01
	  

22
01
	  

23
01
	  

24
01
	  

25
01
	  

26
01
	  

27
01
	  

28
01
	  

29
01
	  

30
01
	  

31
01
	  

32
01
	  

33
01
	  

34
01
	  

35
01
	  

36
01
	  

37
01
	  

38
01
	  

39
01
	  

40
01
	  

41
01
	  

42
01
	  

43
01
	  

44
01
	  

45
01
	  

46
01
	  

47
01
	  

Ms.	  Vib	  Session	  4	  REF	  

C	  REF	   T	  REF	  

Figure 2: Client and therapist REF density.

The session opens with the client expressing her
concern that she is not accomplishing much in the
treatment, she wonders whether she should be doing
something different, she’s not sure what she should
talk about. She feels she was functioning well sev-
eral years ago; she doesn’t know what is blocking
her now in her life. The conversational pattern of rel-
atively brief utterances by the client and responses
by the therapist is characteristic of the treatment

and continues until about word 1200; the therapist
reflects the client’s ideas, with some shifts in lan-
guage. Following these interactions, Miss Vib be-
gins a turn of speech of approximately 1400 words,
lasting from about word 1200 to about word 2600;
this is the longest uninterrupted utterance in this
treatment.

In this segment, which reaches a WRAD peak of
.73, as shown in Figure 1, the client tells how she had
accepted a fellowship for graduate training without
realizing what the fellowship required; then tells a
detailed and vivid story of how she had to push her-
self through a project that she did not want to do, that
she did not believe in, and that required work with a
population and in a setting that was frightening for
her. She is deeply immersed in the description and
it is highly evocative for the reader.

During the same period, the Reflection (REF)
measure is very low, as shown in Figure 2. As
WRAD declines following the extended speech seg-
ment, REF increases; the graphs of the WRAD and
REF density functions are close to mirror images of
one another. This configuration, indicating separa-
tion of the Symbolizing and Reorganizing phases, is
a major marker of the referential process. Miss Vib
tells a pivotal story, and then reflects on it, leading
to development of new emotional meanings.

3.3 Derived Functions
The covariation between two variables is a measure
of the degree to which the variables are simultane-
ously high and low. Mathematically it is exactly
the same as the (Pearson) correlation coefficient be-
tween the corresponding density functions. As the
values of a density function at nearby words are not
statistically independent, we call this operation co-
variation rather than correlation. The covariation
of REF and WRAD is an indicator of the extent to
which the speaker is separating the functions of sym-
bolizing and reorganizing; we expect this measure to
be mainly negative and to be more negative in more
effective sessions and treatments (see Sec. 4.2). The
REF-WRAD covariation for the 1405 words in the
client’s extended turn of speech shown above is -.76;
for the session as a whole the covariation is -.56.

The High WRAD Proportion (HWP) is computed
for each turn of speech, or for any user-defined set of
turns of speech, as the proportion of words for which

139



the WRAD density function lies above its neutral
value of .5. It is used as an indicator of the propor-
tion of time in a session that the client is in symbol-
izing mode. We expect this measure to be high for
client speech in effective sessions, and at least not to
decrease over time in successful treatments (see Sec.
4.2).

The Mean High WRAD (MHW) is the mean of the
difference between the WRAD density function and
the WRAD neutral value of .5, when this difference
is positive. That is, MHW is computed by consider-
ing only those words for which the WRAD density
function is greater than its neutral value of .5. It is
used as an indicator of the intensity or vividness of
language when the speaker is in symbolizing mode,
and is independent of the number of words in the
turn of speech or other text segment(s) under con-
sideration. As with HWP, we expect this measure
for client speech to be relatively high in more effec-
tive sessions and to be at a generally high level in
successful treatments (see Sec. 4.2).

The figures above illustrate the power of the den-
sity functions to identify pivotal moments of a ses-
sion. For the long turn of speech discussed above,
Mean WRAD (MWRAD) = .55, HWP = .79, MHW
= .07 and Mean REF = .07. For this session as a
whole, the client Mean WRAD = .47, HWP = .40,
MHW = .07 and Mean REF = .09.

4 Related Research

4.1 Evidence for Construct Validity

A relationship between WRAD and narrativity was
established by Nelson et al. (2008), who used a set
of 55 narratives from high school students talking
about their most stressful time. They found a high
(Spearman) correlation (ρ = .69, p < .01) between
Mean WRAD and a measure of narrativity given by
a count of temporal sequences (Labov, 1997).

Using a data set provided by Addis et al. (2008),
Maskit et al. (2015) found a relationship for both
MWRAD and HWP with a measure of episodic
memory given by the proportion of ‘internal’ to total
‘details’; the measures were applied to a set of re-
sponses by 32 participants to prompts for 8 past and
8 future personal (episodic) events. The responses
were recorded, transcribed and separated into details
by Addis et al. (2008). A detail was considered to

be internal if it was a specific fact concerning the
main event being described, and was considered to
be external if it was general rather than specific, or
it concerned an event other than the main event or
was a repetition. For the 32 subjects, high (Pear-
son) correlations were found between this measure
of episodic memory and HWP (r = .68, p < .01)
and with MWRAD (r = .58, p < .01).

A set of 70 segments taken from psychoanalytic
sessions were rated by judges on a scale of 1 to 7
for location in each of the phases: Arousal, Sym-
bolizing and Reorganizing. For the symbolizing
phase, high (Pearson) correlations were found be-
tween those ratings and MWRAD (r = .56, p <
.01), HWP (r = .58, p < .01) and MHW (r = .55,
p < .01); a high negative correlation with REF
(r = −.27, p = .02) was also found. For the re-
organizing phase, a high positive correlation with
REF (r = .42, p < .01), and high negative corre-
lations with MWRAD (r = −.60, p < .01), HWP
(r = −.60, p < .01) and MHW (r = −.52, p < .01)
were also found (Kingsley, 2009).

Murphy (2015) presents three studies showing
that WRAD scores tend, on average, to be substan-
tially higher when participants are asked to discuss
stories, events, or other scenarios such as dreams in
comparison to other speech contexts (1.5 ≤ d ≤
3.5). These studies also show that WRAD scores
have moderate temporal stability over a six week pe-
riod for the same task (.33 ≤ r ≤ .61).
4.2 Applications to Psychotherapy
In a study of 16 sessions from a long term psycho-
analysis, Bucci and Maskit (2007) found high (Pear-
son) correlations between a measure of session ef-
fectiveness based on clinical judgments (Freedman
et al., 2003) and DAAP measures; these include
the negative REF-WRAD covariation (r = .70,
p < .01), and MWRAD (r = .54, p < .05). These
suggest that in the more effective sessions, the client
had more separation of symbolizing and reorganiz-
ing discourse, and was more vivid while in symbol-
izing mode.

Using the Italian version of this system, Mariani
et al. (2013) used Spearman correlations to examine
the client speech for entire sessions of three success-
ful psychotherapies. They found as expected that
HWP increased over time; that is, the client spent an

140



increasing proportion of time in symbolizing mode
[(N = 10, ρ = .79, p < .01), (N = 33, ρ = .43,
p < .01), (N = 23, ρ = .33, p = .07)]; the over-
all Mean WRAD (MWRAD) also increased over
time for all three treatments, [(N = 10, ρ = .60,
p < .05), (N = 33, ρ = .50, p < .01), (N = 23,
ρ = .36, p < .05)], and the REF-WRAD covariation
decreased over time; that is, the client on average
had more separation of the functions of symbolizing
and reorganizing, [(N = 10, ρ = −.48, p = .08),
(N = 33, ρ = −.49, p < .01), (N = 23, ρ = −.44,
p < .05)].

Andrei (2011) studied 15 sessions of a success-
ful psychotherapy treatment (as measured by stan-
dard client self-report measures). Using Spearman
correlations for client speech only and for sessions
as a whole, she found predicted increases in MHW
(ρ = .52, p < .05); MWRAD (ρ = .37) and the
HWP ( ρ = .35).

In a study of 14 sets of candidate treatment notes
from the New York Psychoanalytic Society and In-
stitute Treatment Center, high (Pearson) correlations
were found between a measure of treatment effec-
tiveness (found by comparisons of client functioning
between beginning and end of treatment) and both
MHW (r = .73, p < .01) and MWRAD (r = .70,
p < .01), for the treatment notes as a whole (Bucci
et al. , 2012).

5 Limitations and Future Research

The system presented here for the study of psy-
chotherapy process is based on Bucci’s theory of
the referential process (1997). We are concerned
with measurements for two of the three phases of
this process, Symbolizing and Reorganizing. The
WRAD, which was designed as a measure of the
Symbolizing phase has been extensively validated
and has been favorably compared with the only other
known measure of this psycholinguistic style, the
CRA. WRAD’s correlation to the scales might be
improved by including some number of less fre-
quently used words, as was done with the Italian
WRAD (Mariani et al., 2013), and/or by enlarging
the number of text segments scored for RA on which
the measure is based and using some machine learn-
ing techniques.

The Reflection dictionary, used to mark the Re-

organizing phase, is unweighted and theoretically
based. Our current information concerning the
REF-WRAD covariation suggests that, just as peo-
ple use different function words to different extents
when speaking at different levels of the Symbolizing
phase, so they may also use different function words
to different extents for different aspects of the Reor-
ganizing phase. To the best of the authors’ knowl-
edge, no weighted reorganizing dictionary or set of
dictionaries based on these ideas has as yet been de-
veloped.

We have not here addressed the Arousal phase
of the referential process, in part due to limitations
of space, and in part because this phase is some-
times marked by silence, variation in speech rate and
acoustic features rather than lexical items. The sys-
tem described here, based on word count, includes
a Disfluency measure, which can to some extent be
used to mark the Arousal phase. We are currently
developing a Variable Time DAAP (VTDAAP) that
uses sound recordings to provide acoustic data, such
as changes in pitch and intensity as well as paus-
ing and speech rate. VTDAAP produces data for
which the independent variable is time rather than
word count. A first version of this program has been
tested and is currently being revised; we expect it to
be publicly available in early 2016.

A major feature of the DAAP system is the pro-
duction of density functions. These depend on
the values of the parameters used for the weight-
ing function, as described in the appendix. These
parameters were chosen so as to make the graphs
of the WRAD and REF density functions for psy-
chotherapy sessions reasonably smooth and read-
able. Changes in these parameters would produce
changes in the derived functions described above; as
there are, however, no other measures of the vari-
ables these measures are meant to model, we have
no standard against which to measure the effect of
changing the weighting function parameters.

Several new studies are currently under way re-
lating WRAD to narrativity and Episodic Memory;
these use a new version of DAAP that produces den-
sity functions based on user-defined segmentation.2

2We expect this version of DAAP to be publicly available in
2016.

141



References

Donna Rose Addis, Alana T. Wong and Daniel L.
Schacter. 2008. Age-Related Changes in the
Episodic Simulation of Future Events. Psychological
Science,19(1):33–41.

Claudia G. Andrei. 2011. A multi-perspective analysis
of a psychodynamic treatment. Doctoral dissertation
retrieved from ProQuest (AAT 3491569).

David Arvidsson, Sverker Sikström and Andrzej Wer-
bart. 2011. Changes in self and object representations
following psychotherapy measured by a theory-free,
computational, semantic space method. Psychother-
apy Research 21(4):430–446.

Wilma Bucci. 1997. Psychoanalysis and Cognitive Sci-
ence: A multiple code theory. Guilford Press, New
York NY

Wilma Bucci. 2002. The Referential Process, Con-
sciousness, and the Sense of Self. Psychoanalytic In-
quiry, 22:766–793.

Wilma Bucci. 2013. The referential process as a com-
mon factor across treatment modalities. Research in
Psychotherapy: Psychopathology, Process and Out-
come, 16:16–23.

Wilma Bucci, Rachel Kabasakalian and the RA Research
Group. 1992. Instructions for scoring Referential
Activity (RA) in transcripts of spoken narrative texts.
Ulm, Germany, Ulmer Textbank.

Wilma Bucci, Rachel Kabasakalian and the RA Research
Group. 2004. Instructions for scoring Referential Ac-
tivity (RA) in transcripts of spoken narrative texts.

Wilma Bucci and Bernard Maskit. 2006. A weighted
dictionary for Referential Activity. In James. G.
Shanahan, Yan Qu and Janyce Wiebe (Eds.) Comput-
ing Attitude and Affect in Text. Springer, Dordrecht,
The Netherlands; 49–60.

Wilma Bucci and Bernard Maskit. 2007. Be-
neath the surface of the therapeutic interaction; The
psychoanalytic method in modern dress. Jour-
nal American Psychoanalytic Assn., 55, 1355–1397.
doi:10.1177/000306510705500412.

Wilma Bucci, Bernard Maskit and Leon Hoffman. 2012.
Objective Measures of Subjective Experience; The
use of Therapist Notes in Process-Outcome Research.
Psychodynamic Psychiatry, 40(2):303–340.

Wilma Bucci, Bernard Maskit and Sean Murphy. 2015.
Connecting emotions and words: the referential pro-
cess. Phenomonology and the Cognitive Sciences,
doi:10.1007/s11097-015-9417-z.

Wilma Bucci and Rachel K. McKay. 2014.
Manual for Scoring RA Scales. figshare
http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.962956.

Paul Crits-Christoph, Mary Beth C. G. Gibbons and
Dahlia Mukherjee. 2013. Psychotherapy Process-
Outcome Research. In Michael J. Lambert. Bergin
and Garfields’s Handbook of Psychotherapy and Be-
havior Change, Sixth Edition. (pp. 298–340) Hoboken
NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

General Inquirer. www.wjh.harvard.edu.
Norbert Freedman, Richard Lasky and Marvin Hurvich.

2003. Two pathways torwards knowing psychoana-
lytic process. In M. Leuzinger-Bohleber, A.U. Dreher
and J. Canestri (eds.) Pluralism and unity: Methods of
reserach in psychoanalysis, International Psychoana-
lytical Association, pp. 207–221.

Zac E. Imel, Mark Steyvers and David C. Atkins.
2014. Computational Psychotherapy Research: Scal-
ing up the Evaluation of Patient-Provider Interac-
tions. Psychotherapy, Advance online publication.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0036841.

George Kingsley. 2009. The clinical validation of mea-
sures of the Referential Process. Retrieved from Dis-
sertations & Theses Adelphi University. (Publication
No. AAT 3377938)

W. Labov. 1997. Some further steps in narrative analysis.
Journal of Narrtive and Life History,7: 395–415.

Rachele Mariani, Bernard Maskit, Wilma Bucci
and Alessandra DeCoro. 2013. Linguistic
measures of the referential process in psychody-
namic treatment: The English and Italian ver-
sions. Psychotherapy Research., 23(4):430–447;
doi:10.1080/10503307.2013.794399

Bernard Maskit. 2014. The Discourse Attributes Analy-
sis Program (DAAP) Operating Instructions. figshare.
http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.947740.

Bernard Maskit, Wilma Bucci and Sean Murphy. 2015
Computer Based Measures of Referential Activ-
ity and their Use as Measures of Episodic Mem-
ory. www.thereferentialprocess.org/theory/episodic-
memory-and-referential-activity.

Erhard Mergenthaler. 1996. Emotion-Abstraction pat-
terns in Verbatim Protocols: A new way of describing
psychotherapeutic processes. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 64:1306–1315.

Erhard Mergenthaler and Wilma Bucci. 1999. Linking
verbal and nonverbal representations: Computer anal-
ysis of Referential Activity. British J. of Medical Psy-
chology, 72:339–354.

Sean Murphy. 2015. Measuring the Details that Mat-
ter: The Validity and Psychometric Properties of the
Weighted Referential Activity Dictionary. (Under Re-
view)

Sean Murphy, Wilma Bucci and Bernard Maskit. 2015.
Putting Feelings into Words: Cross-Linguistic Mark-
ers of the Referential Process. This Volume.

142



Kristin L. Nelson, Damian J. Moskovitz and Hans
Steiner. 2008. Narration and Vividness as Measures of
Event-Specificity in Autobiographical Memory. Dis-
course Processes, 45:195–209.

J. W. Pennebaker, M. E. Francis and R. J. Booth.
2001. Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC):
LIWC2001. Mahwah, NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum Asso-
ciates.

Carl R. Rogers and M. G. Kinget. 1965. Psy-
chothérapie et relations humaines. Théorie et pratique
de la thérapie non-directive. Ed. Nauwelairts Louvain

Andres J. Roussos and M. O’Connell. Construcción de
un diccionario ponderado en español para medir la Ac-
tividad Referencial. Revista del Instituto de Investiga-
ciones de la Facultad de Psicologa. UBA, 10(2):99–
119.

Sergio Salvatore, Alessandro Gennaro, Andrea F.
Auletta, Marco Tonti and Mariangella Nitti. 2012.
Automated method of content analysis: A device for
psychotherapy process research Psychotherapy Re-
search, 22(3):256–273.

Nicholas Samstag. 1996. A meta-analysis of referential
activity. (Doctoral Dissertation) Retrieved from Pro-
Quest (9705478).

P. J. Stone, D. C. Dunphy, M. S. Smith and D. M. Ogilvie.
1966. The general inquirer: A Computer approach to
content analysis. Cambridge MA and London, The
MIT Press.

W. Strunk Jr. and E. B. White. 1972. The elements of
style. The Macmillan Company.

6 Appendix: The Density Function and
Associated Measures

In this appendix we give precise definitions of the
density function and the DAAP measures derived
from it. The density function is constructed in two
steps; the first is a moving weighted average of the
dictionary weights using an exponential function re-
lated to the normal curve as the weighting function.
It is a general statement that the mean of a moving
weighted average is equal to the mean of the orig-
inal function; however, the moving weighted aver-
age may have non-zero values at points where the
original function is not defined. That is, if we are
looking at dictionary values defined for the points,
0, . . . , N , and the weighting function is different
from 0 for the points −m < x < +m, then the
moving weighted average may have non-zero values
at the points −m + 1 ≤ x ≤ N +m − 1. The sec-
ond step in the construction of the density function
is a fold-over procedure that adjusts the values of the
moving weighted average to take these ’extra’ values
into account. After the second step is accomplished,
the density function is defined exactly for the words
0, . . . , N , and its mean is equal to the mean of the
original function.

The Weighting Function for the moving weighted
average is defined in terms of two parameters: a
’pointedness’ parameter q, and a ’support’ param-
eter m. We start with the function W0, which is zero
for all x outside the range −m < x < +m. Inside
this range

W0(x) = exp(−qm2 m
2 + x2

(m2 − x2)2 ). (1)

Let S =
∑m−1

x=−m+1W0(x). Then the weighting
function W (x) = W0(x)/S.

This weighting function has the following proper-
ties:

• ∑W (x) = 1.
• W is centered at 0, where it attains its maxi-

mum; its graph is symmetric with respect to the
y-axis. (It is an even function.)

• W is strictly increasing from −m to 0 and
strictly decreasing from 0 to m.

143



• W is equal to zero for all x outside the range
−m < x < +m.

For most purposes used here, the values of q and
m are taken to be q = 2 and m = 100. We assume
below that these are the values of q and m.

Using the same formula, we could have defined
W0 for all real numbers x, where it is positive ex-
actly in the range −m < x < m, and then replaced
the sum S by the corresponding integral. In this way
W would be defined for all x, would have the prop-
erties listed above, and would also have derivatives
of all orders at all points.

Let R denote some dictionary function defined
on the set of words numbered from 0 to N , where
R(x) ≥ 0 for all x in this range. We also set
R(x) = 0 for x outside this range. The first ap-
proximation to the R density function is the moving
weighted average (convolution product)

CR(x) =
m−1∑

y=−m+1
R(y − x)W (y). (2)

This is a finite sum for every x, and is equal to
zero for all x outside the range −100 < x < N +
100. As remarked above, the mean of CR, taken
inside this range, is equal to the mean of R in the
range 0 ≤ x ≤ N . As it is difficult to assign a
meaning to the value of CR outside the range 0 ≤
x ≤ N , some adjustments are needed to account for
these values. The adjustments described below are
equivalent to the idea that we ”fold over” the x-axis,
along with the graph of CR at the points x = −1/2
and x = N +1/2; then add these folded over values
to the original values of CR; and repeat this process
as often as necessary.

As a particular example, assume that N = 300.
Then CR is defined and non-negative for the points,
−99 ≤ x ≤ 399. For this example, we can write
down the density function DR as follows:

DR(0) = CR(0) + CR(−1),
DR(1) = CR(1) + CR(−2), . . . ,
DR(100) = CR(100), . . . ,
DR(200) = CR(200), . . . ,
DR(299) = CR(299) + CR(302),
DR(300) = CR(300) + CR(301).

To make this process precise, we first define the
auxiliary function C̃(R), by introducing the reflec-
tions: r1(x) = −x− 1, which is reflection about the

point x = −1/2, and r2(x) = −x+2N+1, which is
reflection about the point x = N+1/2. We consider
the group of motions G of the real line generated by
r1 and r2, and define the auxiliary function C̃R by

C̃R(x) =
∑
g∈G

CR(g(x)). (3)

This is a finite sum for every integer x. This func-
tion C̃R is invariant under the group G; that is, for
every x and for every g ∈ G, C̃R(x) = C̃R(g(x)).

Finally, the density function DR is defined by
DR(x) = C̃R(x) for 0 ≤ x ≤ N , and DR(x) =
0 for x outside this range. With this definition,
the mean of the density function DR is equal
to the mean of the dictionary values, R; that is∑N

x=0DR(x) =
∑N

x=0R(x).
Let DW be the density function for WRAD; once

this density function has been defined, it is easy to
describe the High WRAD Proportion (HWP) and the
Mean High WRAD (MHW).

Let V be the set of all integers x in the range 0 ≤
x ≤ N for which DW (x) > .5, and let Z be the
number of points in V ; so that 0 ≤ Z ≤ N + 1.
Then

HWP = Z/(N + 1), (4)

and

MHW =
∑
x∈V

(D(x)− .5)/Z. (5)

The covariation C(D1, D2) between two distinct
density functions, D1 and D2, both defined on the
same set of words labeled 0, . . . , N , is then defined
exactly as the Pearson correlation coefficient (pro-
vided both densities are not constant):

C(D1, D2) =
∑N

x=0(D1(x)−M1)(D2(x)−M2)√
V1V2)

,

where M1, respectively M2, is the mean of D1,
respectively D2, and V1, respectively V2, is the vari-
ance of D1, respectively D2.

The graph of the density function D for each turn
of speech appears as a smooth curve. This can be
explained by the underlying mathematical theory,
which uses the continuous version of the weight-
ing function W . Here, the dictionary values R(x)
are extended so as to be defined for all x in the

144



range −1/2 ≤ x < N + 1/2, by requiring that,
for each integer n, where we already have R(n) de-
fined, we set R(x) = R(n) for all x in the interval
n−1/2 ≤ x < n+1/2. Then the moving weighted
average CR(x) is defined as in equation 2, replac-
ing the sum by an integral. The definitions of C̃R
and DR then follow exactly as above. One can use
this continuous definition of the density function to
define MHW, HWP and the covariations by appro-
priate modifications of the above formulae; that is,
by replacing sums with integrals, and by replacing
counts of words by sums of lengths of intervals.

145


