



















































Augmented Comparative Corpora and Monitoring Corpus in Chinese: LIVAC and Sketch Search Engine Compared


Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, pages 1–2,
Beijing, China, July 30, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Augmented Comparative Corpora and Monitoring Corpus
in Chinese:

LIVAC and Sketch Search Engine Compared

Benjamin K. Tsou
City University of Hong Kong,

The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

The increasing availability of numerous cor-
pora has significantly contributed to the un-
derstanding of words in terms of their under-
lying semantic structures and lexical networks
(e.g. COBUILD, WordNet etc.). Through
data mining and information retrieval, re-
search in this area has vastly expanded our
appreciation that what constitutes lexical
knowledge goes beyond synonymy, hyponymy,
metonymy, meronymy, grammatical and other
collocations. Furthermore, they are fundamen-
tal to a universalistic conceptual base of on-
tologies and knowledge representation which
are often enriched by deeper and newer analy-
sis. In this context, each language foregrounds
specific features or nodes within this knowl-
edge base by usually non-uniform means.

At the same time, the arrival of the age of
Big Data has attracted extensive studies on
the actual and dynamic use of language as
contextualized (ala. Jakobson 1960) within a
given society, especially through the mass me-
dia. What are foregrounded in this medium
tend to have graded cognitive saliency charac-
terizing members of the common speech com-
munity, and such shared knowledge is usually
at great variance with the thesaurus approach
and show noticeable localized features. It is
proposed here that the two kinds of knowl-
edge (thesauric vs cognitive-cultural) comple-
ment each other in human cognition, and are
integral to it.

We draw on two large Chinese media
databases Sketch (2.1 billion character to-
kens1) and LIVAC (550 million character to-
kens2) for illustration and discussion. The
Sketch Engine in Chinese shows how apple
is, as expected, primarily related to orange,
peach, fruit, vegetable, food etc. At the

1As per Sketch Engine website.
2As per LIVAC website.

same time three sub-corpora of LIVAC we
draw on show that apple has a different set
of saliency linkage with computer, iPhone,
Jobs, roll out, share price, company etc.
This linkage is related less to the universalis-
tic semantic network for apple, than to the
foregrounded awareness of apple as a cul-
tural artifact in actual human social interac-
tion and encoded as social knowledge (Park
1955, Longino 1990). We also show and ex-
amine how the salient information associated
with apple varies across the three major Chi-
nese speech communities: Beijing, Hong Kong
and Taipei, reflecting social and societal dif-
ferences, and regional developments, as well as
variations over time. Similarly free-freedom
in Chinese varies in associated saliency linkage
in the three speech communities in interesting
ways but also contrasts with the Sketch Engine
results.

The above comparison in LIVAC is made
possible by rigorous improvement to the com-
mon and simplistic approach to the cultiva-
tion and use of databases. The augmentation
efforts included the rigorous cultivation of 3
comparable (sub-) corpora for Beijing, Hong
Kong and Taipei through geographical (hor-
izontal), chronological (vertical) and domain
(topical) partitioning of what is often assumed
to be a common linguistic database. This par-
titioning required well-reasoned pre-conceived
criteria to ensure adequate equivalency in com-
parability in terms of size, period and depth of
analysis.

To facilitate comparison we propose a
Cognitive-cultural Salience Index (CSI) which
draws on comparable corpus data (e.g. LI-
VAC) to provide comparison of the relative
saliency of target words in the relevant corpus
and presented as word clouds. The results are
viewed in the light of the Sketch Engine output

1



to explore how our appreciation of knowledge
representation may be enhanced. It will also
serve to echo the call to optimize our data col-
lection efforts and to broaden our queries with
data judiciously curated and cultivated.

References
K. E. Boulding. 1956. The image: Knowledge in

life and sociology. University of Michigan Press,
Ann Arbor, MI.

C. R. Huang, A. Kilgarriff, Y. Wu, C. M. Chiu,
S. Smith, P. Rychly, and K. J. Chen. 2005.
Chinese Sketch Engine and the extraction of
grammatical collocations. In Proceedings of
the Fourth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Lan-
guage Processing, pages 48–55.

R Jakobson. 1960. Closing statement: Linguis-
tics and poetics. In T. Sebeok, editor, Style in
Language.

A. Kilgarriff, V. Baisa, J. Bušta, M. Jakubíček,
Kovář V., J. Michelfeit, P. Rychlý, and Suchomel
V. 2014. The Sketch Engine: Ten years on.
Lexicography: Journal of ASIALEX, 1(1):7–36.

Livac. http://www.livac.org; https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/LIVAC_Synchronous_
Corpus.

H. E. Longino. 1990. Science and social knowl-
edge: Values and objectivity in scientific inquiry.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

R. E. Park. 1955. Society: Collective behavior,
news and opinion, sociology and modern society.
The Free Press, Glencoe, IL.

Sketch engine. https://the.sketchengine.
co.uk; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Sketch_Engine.

B. Tsou and O. Kwong. 2015. LIVAC as a moni-
toring corpus for tracking trends beyond linguis-
tics. In B. K. Tsou and O. K. Kwong, editors,
Linguistic Corpus and Corpus Linguistics in the
Chinese Context, number 25 in Journal of Chi-
nese Linguistics Monograph Series, pages 447–
471, Hong Kong. Hong Kong Chinese University
Press.

2


