



















































The "News Web Easy'' news service as a resource for teaching and learning Japanese: An assessment of the comprehension difficulty of Japanese sentence-end expressions


Proceedings of The 2nd Workshop on Natural Language Processing Techniques for Educational Applications, pages 73–81,
Beijing, China, July 31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics and Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing

The “News Web Easy” news service as a resource for teaching and
learning Japanese: An assessment of the comprehension difficulty of

Japanese sentence-end expressions

Hideki Tanaka, Tadashi Kumano and Isao Goto
Science and Technology Research Labs. of NHK

1-10-11, Kinuta, Setagaya, Tokyo, Japan
{tanaka.h-ja,kumano.t-eq,goto.i-es}@nhk.or.jp

Abstract

Japan’s public broadcasting corporation,
NHK, launched “News Web Easy” in
April 2012 1. It provides users with
five simplified news scripts (easy Japanese
news) on a daily basis. This web ser-
vice provides users with five daily sim-
plified news scripts of “easy” Japanese
news. Since its inception, this service
has been favorably received both in Japan
and overseas. Users particularly appreci-
ate its value as a Japanese learning and
teaching resource. In this paper, we dis-
cuss this service and its possible contri-
bution to language education. We focus
on difficulty levels of sentence-end expres-
sions, compiled from the news, that cre-
ate ambiguity and problems when rewrit-
ing news items. These are analyzed and
compared within regular news and News
Web Easy, and their difficulty is assessed
based on Japanese learners’ reading com-
prehension levels. Our results revealed
that current rewriting of sentence-end ex-
pressions in News Web Easy is appropri-
ate. We further identified features of these
expressions that contribute to difficulty in
comprehension.

1 Introduction

The convergence of TV and internet has enabled
the creation of new services that allow users to
overcome various temporal and spatial constraints
(Hamada, 2013; Fu et al., 2006). It may even
prove possible to effectively re-purpose content
across different media. In this paper, we describe
one such example: the application of TV news
scripts for language teaching and learning on the
internet.

1http://www3.nhk.or.jp/news/easy

Japan’s public broadcaster, NHK, launched
the News Web Easy web service in April
2012 (Tanaka et al., 2013). This site provides
users with five daily simplified news scripts of
easy Japanese news. Its purpose is to provide daily
news to the foreign population in Japan, which has
steadily increased to currently over two million. It
would, of course, be preferable to provide news
to these residents in their native languages. How-
ever, Japan’s foreign population is so diverse that
it would be virtually impossible to provide broad-
casts in all of the expatriates’ languages. NHK
decided to tackle this issue by providing broad-
casting services in simplified Japanese tailored to
the language comprehension levels of foreign res-
idents. Surveys among foreign residents have con-
firmed that a demand exists for broadcasts in easy
Japanese (Yonekura, 2012).

News Web Easy’s targeted audience in Japan
comprises foreign residents learning Japanese as a
second language 2 who are already fairly fluent in
conversational Japanese, but who want to learn to
read news articles and newspapers. Their Japanese
is thus at a pre-intermediate level.

The easy Japanese news comprises regular news
that is jointly rewritten by a Japanese language
instructor, with special training in easy Japanese,
and a reporter. They closely adhere to the basic
vocabulary and sentence patterns listed in the test
guidelines of the Japanese-Language Proficiency
Test (JLPT) (The Japan Foundation and Japan Ed-
ucational Exchange and Services, 2002).

The test measures learners’ Japanese profi-
ciency at four levels ranging from level 4 (elemen-
tary) to level 1 (the most advanced) 3. The vocab-
ulary lists and sentence patterns in the test guide-
lines are graded, and the instructors can consult

2For the sake of brevity, in this paper we use the terms
“foreigners” or “foreign residents” to signify foreign resi-
dents learning Japanese as a second language.

3The test has now been revised to cover five levels ranging
from N5 (elementary) to N1 (the most advanced).

73



these to verify the level of difficulty. News Web
Easy employs vocabularies and sentence patterns
ranked at levels 3 and 4.

NHK has received favorable comments about
News Web Easy from foreign residents in Japan
as well as from people overseas who appreciate
this service for learning Japanese. Japanese lan-
guage instructors also regard News Web Easy as
a valuable educational resource. We believe that
this favorable reaction is the result of the language
level being set to an educational standard appropri-
ate for Japanese. Moreover, the News Web Easy
interface is similar to that adopted in language tu-
toring systems.

In this paper, we outline the features of News
Web Easy and discuss its impact on language
learning and education. We focus analytically on
sentence patterns (sentences-end expressions) in
news scripts that are not adequately covered in
the JLPT test guidelines. Our analysis was based
on an extensive collection of these materials com-
piled from a corpus of regular news texts and easy
Japanese texts. We present an assessment of the
difficulty levels of these expressions according to
foreigners’ reading comprehension levels ascer-
tained from online questionnaires. Last, we con-
sider the possibility of extending News Web Easy
as a learning and teaching resource for native-level
Japanese used within regular news scripts.

2 News Web Easy and language teaching
and learning

In this section, we explain the features of News
Web Easy and discuss its impacts on Japanese
teaching and learning.

2.1 Features of Japanese in News Web Easy

Target level

We were involved in the production of News Web
Easy content. Our aim was to ensure that while the
news texts were easy to understand, they were as
natural as possible. After many trials conducted
by NHK the pre-intermediate level was found to
be the lowest level necessary for achieving these
aims. This level was consequently set by NHK
as the target for Japanese rewriting. It approxi-
mately corresponds to the proficiency level ranked
between levels 3 and 2 of the old JLPT, and be-
tween levels N3 and N2 of the new JLPT.

Rewriters
For the production of News Web Easy, five regu-
lar news texts are chosen daily and rewritten by a
news reporter and a Japanese instructor who per-
form different tasks. While the reporter stream-
lines the news texts and retains only the core infor-
mation, the instructor simplifies difficult expres-
sions.

Rewriting policies
When rewriting news articles, reporters and
Japanese instructors confine themselves as much
as possible to elementary vocabulary and sentence
patterns. As noted above, rewriters use the JLPT
test guidelines to check words and sentence pat-
terns. An editor is specially assigned for this pur-
pose to News Web Easy.

It is noteworthy that reporters and instructors
also use terms that are not listed. These include
technical terms, proper nouns, and terms that fre-
quently appear in news articles but are difficult to
simplify.

2.2 Features of News Web Easy interface

In addition to the above-mentioned measures used
to simplify Japanese, News Web Easy has several
reading support functions, described below and
shown in Figure 1.

Furigana (ruby) characters
Japanese text is a combination of Chinese charac-
ters (kanji), two types of Japanese phonetic sym-
bols (hiragana and katakana), Latin characters
(romaji), and numbers.

Kanji characters are notoriously difficult to
master because there are so many of them and also
because the same characters can be read in differ-
ent ways depending on the context. Foreign res-
idents often find themselves unable to understand
the meaning of words written in kanji.

To assist them, very small hiragana characters,
called furigana, are offered above all kanji char-
acters in News Web Easy to indicate the pronun-
ciation. This enhances the ability of foreign read-
ers to understand the meanings of Japanese words,
even if they are unable to read kanji.

Glossaries
The basic approach adopted by News Web Easy is
to write simple Japanese using elementary vocab-
ulary. However, it is not possible to simplify the
vocabulary of all difficult terms.

74



All	  Kanji	  characters	  
have	  Furigana	  	  
(phone6c	  characterｓ)	  

Underlined	  words	  have	  
dic6onary	  explana6on	  

Blue	  words	  are	  place	  names	  
Magenta	  words	  are	  person’s	  names	

Text	  is	  read	  out	  by	  	  
speech	  synthesizer	  	  

Link	  to	  the	  original	  
news	  	  

Figure 1: Screen shot of News Web Easy

News Web Easy resolves this issue by provid-
ing glossaries to explain difficult terminology. On
the News Web Easy site, a glossary entry can be
accessed by simply positioning the cursor over
a word. A pop-up explaining the term is then
displayed. A dictionary for Japanese elementary
school students was used to provide the glossary
entries.

Proper nouns
Proper nouns, not included within preexisting
glossaries, inevitably appear in news articles. On
the News Web Easy pages, different kinds of
proper nouns are highlighted in different colors to
capture the readers’ attention. The reader may not
know exactly what the terms mean, but at least this
feature enables them to differentiate between the
names of people, places, and organizations.

Text to speech
Some foreigners have difficulty reading Japanese,
but are perfectly capable of understanding the text
if it is read out to them. News Web Easy features a
text-to-synthesized voice function to facilitate this
mode of understanding.

Links to original news
Because News Web Easy reporters usually con-
dense information from the original news item,
full details are available through a link provided
to the source web page.

2.3 Teaching and learning
The content produced by broadcasters is quite of-
ten used for language learning and teaching. Ac-
cordingly, it is important that News Web Easy con-
tributes to this educational purpose as long as the
main goal of providing news to foreign residents
is not hampered. In this section, we discuss News
Web Easy’s contribution to Japanese teaching and
learning.

Contribution of Japanese texts
News Web Easy essentially delivers “authentic”
documents at a pre-intermediate level in natural
Japanese. These texts are incorporated within
automatic tutoring (learning) systems such as
Reader-Specific Lexical Practice for Improved
Reading Comprehension (REAP) (Brown and Es-
kenazi, 2004). Such documents attract keen inter-
est among educators, although texts in languages
other than English and French are rare (Uitden-
bogerd, 2014). Thus, the simplified texts featured
in News Web Easy are all the more valuable.

Contribution of the interface
The interface of News Web Easy offers reading
support, as elaborated in section 2.2. Reading
support is often used in language tutoring sys-
tems. For example, the Automatic Text Adapta-
tion Tool (Burstein et al., 2007) automatically adds
vocabulary support, automatic text reading by a
speech synthesizer, summary text, and a transla-

75



tion of the original text as “marginal notes.” The
reading support functions in News Web Easy can,
therefore, be invaluable by providing simplified
texts for pre-intermediate level Japanese learners.

The interface could also facilitate understanding
of regular news for foreigners. As noted above,
News Web Easy provides links to the original
news stories so readers can compare both versions
of the text. The scaffolding effect of providing
simplified text for reading original text is widely
recognized (Burstein et al., 2007; Eskenazi et al.,
2013; Petersen and Ostendorf, 2007). Thus, this
comparative reading should contribute to the com-
prehension of regular news.

2.4 Language-level issues

As noted in section 2.1, the News Web Easy
rewriters currently use the JLPT test guidelines to
check the language levels of words and sentence
patterns in news items.

Because Japanese lessons typically start with
the use of daily conversations, words and sentence
patterns specific to news texts are often lacking in
the JLPT test guidelines.

The rewriters have to judge for themselves the
difficulty levels of words and phrases that are
missing from the list. This could result in in-
consistency in the language level of the simplified
texts. Therefore, the content of the JLPT guide-
lines needs to be extended. As a first step toward
this, we decided to focus on sentence patterns that
were not included in the guidelines.

3 Analysis of sentence-end expressions

The sentence patterns in the JLPT test guidelines
takes the form of a word sequence in the final po-
sitions of a sentence. We refer to this as sentence-
end expressions. In the next section, we will define
these and explain the features.

3.1 Features of Japanese sentence-end
expressions

Japanese is a subject-object-verb (SOV) type of
language in which predicates are positioned at
the end position of a sentence. Japanese predi-
cates usually contain one content word followed
by some function words. Content words are typ-
ically verbs, nouns, and adjectives, and function
words are auxiliary verbs, particles, formal nouns,
and delexical (formal) verbs.

In this paper, we use the term sentence-end
expressions (SEEs) to signify the function word
sequence. SEEs add tense, polarity, voice, and
modality to a sentence which we refer to as func-
tional information, or simply as function. Such
functions play an important role in deciding the
meaning of a sentence.

SEEs may have more than one function lined
up at the sentence end positions. We refer to such
lined up functions as the function sequence (FS).
An SEE, therefore, has a FS whose length is at
least one 4 .

Because Japanese is an SOV type of language,
SEEs may become quite long when the “O” is in
an embedded sentence, as in S(SOV)V. Let us con-
sider a sentence with a single function of probabil-
ity:

X 社は 来年の 利益を 3 倍に する
かもしれない (probability)．
Xsha wa rainen no rieki wo 3bai ni suru
kamosirenai (probability).
(X Inc. may (probability) triple their
profit next year.)

This may be embedded in a sentence that ends
withということです (toiukotodesu) (people say),
which has a hearsay function, as in:

X 社は 来年の 利益を 3 倍に
す る かもしれない (probability)
ということです (hearsay)．
Xsha wa rainen no rieki wo 3bai
ni suru kamosirenai (probability)
toiukotodesu (hearsay).
(People say (hearsay) that X Inc.
may (probability) triple their profit next
year.),

The English predicates in the above examples
occupy different positions and do not have lined
up functions. However, the Japanese predicates
(SEEs) of both the main and subordinate clauses
are linked to form a long SEE with the following
FS: probability + hearsay (length 2). This com-
plex structure is common in long Japanese SEEs
and can be difficult for learners of the language
to understand. We, therefore, consider SEE re-
wording to be essential for reducing the language
difficulty level. We decided to extensively com-
pile SEEs from regular news and News Web Easy
to evaluate their difficulty for foreigners’ compre-
hension.

4We consider the number of functions in FS as the length.

76



Regular Easy Total
Sentence Count 3,937,214 20,616 -
SEEs 477 775 1,063
Meaningful SEEs - - 841

Table 1: Corpus size and SEE counts

3.2 Compilation of SEEs

We morphologically analyzed our corpus of reg-
ular news scripts covering a 16-year period and
searched for SEEs. Our corpus contained about
four million sentences. We only selected those that
appeared over 100 times, resulting in a total of 466
SEE sentence types. Although our selection was
restricted to the above frequency threshold, it still
covered 98% of the total occurrence of all SEEs.
Considering the corpus size, we found that SEE
variation in the regular news was relatively lim-
ited.

We also extracted SEEs from our corpus of
News Web Easy scripts, collected over a two-year
period. This corpus contained about 20,000 sen-
tences from which we obtained 755 SEE types.
The total number of SEE types collected from
both corpora was thus 1,063. We then excluded
SEEs with a plain statement, that is, SEEs that
did not contain any meaningful functional infor-
mation. This yielded 841 SEE types. Table 1
shows the corpus size and SEE counts.

3.3 Functions specific to news scripts

Before assigning a FS to each of the 841 SEEs,
we first checked the SEEs and functions in a lead-
ing Japanese grammar textbook (Nihongo Kizyutu
Bunpô Kenkyûkai, 2010). We found that some
SEEs did not appear in that textbook and thus rep-
resented new functions that we termed objectivity
and perception groups.

Objectivity
Two expressions—mono-da and koto-da—fell
within this category. The formal noun, mono, has
little meaning and simply refers to things in gen-
eral. Another formal noun, koto, refers to gen-
eral events. These terms are often added to sim-
ple factual statements in news stories, as in irei
(exceptional)-no koto-da. Although it is possible
to simply say irei-da, the addition of koto adds for-
mality to the sentence. We believe this reflects the
journalistic tendency of describing events as ob-
jectively as possible. We, therefore, termed this an

objectivity function.

Perception group
Verbs such as mieru (seem), kiku (hear), and omou
(think) entail the modality of how the speaker rec-
ognizes an statement’s proposition. We thus re-
ferred to this modality as perception. We iden-
tified several SEEs that varied in objectivity and
contained perceptions of third parties. Table 2
presents a list of SEEs with the perception group
function.

The first expression, to-miteiru, comprises the
content verb miru (see). The second expression,
to-mirareteiru, is the passive version. Because,
Japanese passive forms are often used without an
agent (subject in a positive sentence), the person
who does the seeing is not specified in this case.
This lack of specification increases the level of ab-
straction of the sentence and adds objectivity.

The third expression, to-shiteiru, entails a
delexical verb, suru (do) that ambiguously refers
to miru (see), iu (say), and omou (think). This
ambiguity further increases the level of abstraction
and objectivity of the sentence.

The last expression, to-sareteiru, is the pas-
sivized version of to-shiteiru that we consider to
have the highest level of ambiguity and objectiv-
ity.

Table 3 shows a list of all the functions used in
this study. These are divided into functions of syn-
tax, common modalities, and regular news specific
modalities.

3.4 FS assignment to SEEs
To assign a FS to each of the 841 SEEs (described
in section 3.2), we first compiled a set of regu-
lar expressions that linked function words to units
bearing a single function. We then applied these
regular expressions to the 841 SEEs and assigned
a FS to each SEE.

Each SEE with a FS had a number of occurrence
counts for each news type: regular and News Web
Easy. We used these numbers to determine the as-
sociation between FS and news type. An odds ra-
tio was used to estimate the association:

O =
p

1− p
1− q

q
, (1)

where p is the relative frequency of a given FS in
normal news and q is the relative frequency of the
FS in News Web Easy. A FS whose odds ratio was
greater than or equal to 1 was considered to have

77



SEE Function Explanation Objectivity
to miteiru percept. see low
to mirareteiru pas.-percept. be seen middle
to shiteiru amb.-percept. do (see, say or think) middle
to sareteiru pas.-amb-percept. be done (seen, said, or thought) high

amb. = ambiguous, pas. = passive, percept. = perception

Table 2: SEEs bearing perception group function

Syntax causative passive aspect give-get change
example parallel nominalization noun

Modality hope need order question will
(Common) selection prohibition invitation guess probability

reason explanation change-guess
(News specific) percept.group objectivity hearsay

Table 3: Functions assigned to SEEs

Length 1 2 3 4
Regular 9(0.14) 35 (0.54) 21 (0.32) 0 (0)
Easy 13 (0.16) 43 (0.51) 22 (0.27) 3 (0.04)

Table 4: The distribution of FS types

an association with normal news; otherwise it had
an association with News Web Easy 5 .

Table 4 shows the number and relative fre-
quency of FS types categorized by length and
news type. The numbers for both news types
peaked with the FS length of 2 and showed a sim-
ilar distribution.

We calculated the relative frequency distribu-
tion of FSs using the same categories as in Table4.
The results are shown in Figure 2.

Because FS may have occurrence counts in both
news types, we calculated the average relative fre-
quency for each one. We found that FSs assciated
with News Web Easy had a high frequency con-
centration at length 1, while FSs associated with
regular news peaked at length 2. We therefore
concluded that SEEs with a single function were
preferred in easy Japanese news.

Next, we compared the unique single functions
that appeared specifically in each news type . We
collected these functions from FSs of length 1 and
the final functions in FSs of length 3 (see Table 4).
Table5 summarizes these results. A sharp contrast
is evident between the two types. Those functions

5We, therefore, considered the function sequence to be
associated with regular news if p was greater than or equal to
q; otherwise, it was considered to be associated with News
Web Easy.

Easy

Regular

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

1 2 3 4
Length of function sequence

A
ve

ra
ge

 re
la

tiv
e 

fre
qu

en
cy

 o
f R

eg
ul

ar
 a

nd
 E

as
y

Figure 2: Average relative Frequency

used exclusively in regular news were all functions
in the perception group. Those used exclusively in
News Web Easy were syntactic types and modali-
ties commonly used in daily conversation.

4 Evaluation of SEE difficulty for
foreigners

4.1 Measure of difficulty
The difficulty levels of SEEs for foreign students
were determined based on Japanese proficiency
levels. This was measured according to the new
JLPT version, using the lowest grade required to
read and understand SEEs. Since the new JLPT
has five grades, ranging from N1 (the most ad-
vanced) to N5 (elementary), we attached numbers

78



Length Easy Regular
1 give-get amb.-percept.

order pas.-percept.
probability pas.-amb.-percept.
prohibition

3 (final) order amb.-percept.
explanation pas.-percept.
reason

Table 5: Single functions unique to each news type

Grade Number Grade Number
N5 1 N2 4
N4 2 N1 5
N3 3 above N1 6

Table 6: JLPT levels and numbers for selection

ranging from 1 to 5 to them, with 5 indicating the
most difficult SEEs and 1 the easiest. The number
6 was designated to SEEs that were difficult, even
for N1-grade students. Table 6 presents the JLPT
grades and numbers for the selection.

4.2 Selection of SEEs

We aimed to evaluate the difficulty levels of the
841 SEEs for foreign students learning Japanese
and to analyze the factors governing these diffi-
culty levels. The total number of SEEs (841) was
too high to evaluate individually. Moreover, the
word types for building SEEs were too diverse for
the extraction of just a few factors.

We, therefore, decided to first sample FSs and
then select SEEs bearing the sampled FSs. The
number of FS types was 146 (Table 4) and that of
function types was only 28 (Table 3) which would
result in a highly tractable analysis of FSs. Ac-
cordingly, we selected SEEs based on the follow-
ing assumptions and procedures.

(A1) Any FS belonging to the same cell in Table 4
would have the same difficulty level 6 .
Based on this assumption, we randomly sam-
pled 13 FSs from the four cells in Table 4 of
length 1 and 3, and for both news types. This
resulted in a sample of 52 FSs.

(A2) Any SEE belonging to the same FS had the
same difficulty level. Based on this assump-
tion, we selected the most frequently occur-

6In other words, the difficulty level of FS only depends on
the news type and the length of FS.

Target level (3.5)

Easy

Regular

3.0

3.2

3.4

3.6

3.8

1 3
Length of function sequence

A
ve

ra
ge

 s
co

re

Figure 3: Score difference for the SEEs

ring SEEs from each of the 52 FSs sampled
in (A1) which also yielded 52 SEEs.

Because the regular news cell with a length of 1
had nine functions, we sampled 13 SEEs, allow-
ing for FS duplication. It should be noted that the
difficulty level of each sampled SEE and its FS
was considered to be equal, because FS and SEE
corresponded on a one-to-one basis.

4.3 Subjects and questions
We believed that foreign students—especially at
the elementary level—would find it very difficult
to respond to questions about their comprehension
levels of SEE as they would need an in depth un-
derstanding of the functions to do so. We, there-
fore, asked Japanese instructors, and not the stu-
dents, directly, to evaluate the difficulty levels of
the SEEs.

Each questionnaire for the 52 SEEs consisted
of the following parts: the SEE in question; func-
tional features; and examples of usage in sen-
tences. We sent questionnaires to 500 Japanese in-
structors through Internet. They specified the dif-
ficulty number in Table 6 for each of the 52 SEEs.
In total, 390 effective responses were returned to
us.

4.4 Results and discussion
Based on the responses of the 390 instructors, Fig-
ure 3 shows the average numbers (scores) calcu-
lated for the difficulty of SEEs and FSs obtained
for the four cells (see Table4). The x-axis shows
the FS length and the y-axis shows the average

79



Function News type Score
pas.-percept. regular 3.800
pas.-amb.-percept. regular 3.791
percept. regular 3.736
noun regular 3.731
amb.-percept. regular 3.701
objectivity regular 3.513
hearsay regular 3.485
causative regular 3.369
passive regular 3.354
probability easy 3.346

Table 7: The top 10 single functions according to
difficulty levels

scores. The solid line indicates score changes for
News Web Easy and the dotted line shows those
for regular news. It should be noted that we set
our target level of Japanese between N3 and N2 of
the current JLPT. The target threshold score was
3.5.

The graph shows that the difficulty level of
SEEs with a FS length of 1 from the News Web
Easy cell was under the target threshold, while
those in other cells were above this level.

Effect of news type and FS length

From that graph, it is evident that for both the
lengths, SEEs obtained from News Web Easy were
easier to comprehend than those obtained for reg-
ular news. We may conclude that the rewriting
of the SEEs evidently reduced difficulty in under-
standing.

SEEs of a FS length of 3 were more difficult
than those of a length of 1 for both types of news.
As can be seen from the difference in the lines’
gradients, the increase in difficulty associated with
an increase in FS length was more apparent for
SEEs from News Web Easy 7 . Although single
functions used in News Web Easy evidenced low
difficulty levels, these levels rose rapidly when
they were lined up. Length of SEE is obviously
one of the factors that affect the difficulty level.

Effect of functions

To confirm individual differences in FSs found in
regular news and News Web Easy, we focused on
the FSs with a length of 1 and arranged them,
score-wise, in descending order (Table 7).

7The two-way analysis of variance test revealed that the
difference was statistically significant.

It is evident from Table 7 that the nine single
functions that appeared in regular news (see Ta-
ble 4) occupied the top nine positions. In partic-
ular, the perception group functions were consid-
ered the most difficult. These were the ones that
only appeared in regular news (c.f. Table 5). We
can, therefore, conclude that many Japanese in-
structors consider the elimination of these func-
tions in easy Japanese news to be an appropriate
approach for maintaining the difficulty level below
the pre-intermediate level.

5 Conclusions and future work

We were involved in NHK’s web service initia-
tive, News Web Easy. This initiative aims to de-
liver news in simplified Japanese to foreign resi-
dents learning Japanese as a second language. As
we reported, the service has been welcomed as a
Japanese teaching and learning resource. For this
study, we analyzed features of News Web Easy
that contribute to learning the language.

We focused on SEEs occurring in news most
of which are not listed in JLPT test guidelines.
We compiled an extensive collection of SEEs from
regular news texts and News Web Easy and identi-
fied differences in SEE usage within regular news
and News Web Easy. Consequently, we found a
sharp contrast in terms of grammatical functions.
We then examined the difficulty levels of these ex-
pressions for foreign students learning Japanese
based on a wide-scale evaluation by Japanese in-
structors. Our results revealed that the current
rewriting of SEEs is appropriate. Moreover, we
identified features of these expressions that con-
tribute to the difficulty factor.

A future challenge entails extending News Web
Easy to make it a useful resource for those who
wish to follow regular news that is written in
native-level Japanese. Because News Web Easy
facilitates comparative reading of both normal and
easy Japanese, it offers such an opportunity to
some extent. To further enhance this function,
we believe that the findings of the present study
will be valuable. The difficult SEEs that we found
were appropriately reworded into simpler expres-
sions and became unnoticeable in the simplified
texts. If we can explicitly provide feedback about
such information to News Web Easy users, they
will be able to learn native-level Japanese more ef-
ficiently. Creating such an interface is, therefore,
part of our future plans.

80



References
Jonathan Brown and Maxine Eskenazi. 2004. Re-

trieval of authentic documents for reader-specific
lexical practice. In Proceedings of InSTILL/ICALL
Symposium.

Jill Burstein, Jane Shore, John Sabatini, Yong-Won
Lee, and Matthew Ventura. 2007. The automated
text adaptation tool. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technologies: The Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (NAACL-HLT), pages 3–
4, April.

Maxine Eskenazi, Yibin Lin, and Oscar Saz. 2013.
Tools for non-native readers: the case for translation
and simplification. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Natural Language Processing for Improving Tex-
tual Accessibility, pages 20–28, June.

Hsin Chia Fu, Yeong Y. Xu, and C.L. Tseng. 2006.
Generation of multimedia TV news contents for
WWW. In Proceedings of the 15th International
Conference on World Wide Web, pages 909–910.
ACM, May.

Hiroyuki Hamada. 2013. Overview of the hybridcast
system. Broadcast Technology, 51:1–8.

Nihongo Kizyutu Bunpô Kenkyûkai, editor. 2010.
Modern Japanese Syntax (Gendai Nihongo Bunpô)
1-7. Kuroshio Shuppan. (in Japanese).

Sarah E. Petersen and Mari Ostendorf. 2007. Text sim-
plification for language learners: A corpus analysis.
In Proceedings of ISCA SLaTE2007, pages 69–72.

Hideki Tanaka, Hideya Mino, Shinji Ochi, and Motoya
Shibata. 2013. News services in simplified Japanese
and its production support systems. In Proceedings
of the International Broadcasting Convention 2013.

The Japan Foundation and Japan Educational Ex-
change and Services, editors. 2002. Japanese–
Language Proficiency Test: Test Content Specifica-
tions (Revised Edition). Bonjinsha. (in Japanese).

Alexandra Uitdenbogerd. 2014. Tools for supporting
language acquisition via extensive reading. In Work-
shop Proceedings of the 22nd International Confer-
ence on Computers in Education, pages 35–41.

Ritsu Yonekura. 2012. Information search
and media access of foreign residents in Japan
in disaster period—telephone interviews on four
nationalities—. The NHK Monthly Report on
Broadcast Research, pages 62–75, August. (in
Japanese).

81


