



















































Non-projectivity and processing constraints: Insights from Hindi


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 141–150,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

Non-projectivity and processing constraints: Insights from Hindi

Samar Husain
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi

Department of Humanities and Social Sciences
India

samar@hss.iitd.ac.in

Shravan Vasishth
Universität Potsdam

Department of Linguistics
Germany

vasishth@uni-potsdam.de

Abstract

Non-projectivity is an important theoret-
ical and computational concept that has
been investigated extensively in the depen-
dency grammar/parsing paradigms. How-
ever, from a human sentence processing
perspective, non-projectivity has received
very little attention. In this paper, we look
at existing work and propose new factors
related to processing non-projective con-
figuration. We argue that (a) counter to
the claims in the psycholinguistic litera-
ture (Levy et al, 2012), different aspects of
prediction maintenance can lead to higher
processing cost for a non-projective de-
pendency, (b) parsing strategies can in-
teract with the expectation for a non-
projective dependency, and (c) memory
(re)activation can explain processing cost
in certain non-projective configurations.

1 Introduction

Within the dependency grammar framework, non-
projectivity has received considerable attention
from both the theoretical as well as the computa-
tional perspectives. Non-projective structures are
assumed to be both more complex to analyze as
well as more difficult to parse. Figure 1 shows a
Hindi sentence involving a non-projective depen-
dency between abhay kaa ‘Abhay’s’ and caSamaa
‘spectacles’.

abhay kaa kala caSamaa khoo gayaa
Abhay GEN yesterday spectacles lost PAST

Figure 1: A Hindi sentence involving a non-
projective dependency. English translation: ‘Ab-
hay’s spectacles got lost yesterday.’

Formally, an arc i→ j is projective if and only
if there is no word k between i and j that i does not
dominate1 (Nivre and Nilsson, 2005).

While some parsing paradigms can handle such
dependencies, others either cannot or have spe-
cial mechanisms to process them (e.g., Kuhlmann
and Nivre (2010); Rambow and Joshi (1994)).
Many theoretical approaches have special mech-
anisms to account for these constructions within
their framework (e.g., Chomsky (1981); Pollard
and Sag (1994)).

It is unclear if the complexity arising from non-
projectivity has any processing cost in human lan-
guage comprehension. That is, does the human
sentence processing system find such sentences
difficult to process, compared to projective depen-
dencies? Previous work has addressed this ques-
tion. In a classic study, Bach et al. (1986) showed
that Dutch speakers find cross-serial dependencies
in Dutch more acceptable compared to German
speakers who read matched set of embedded con-
structions in German. Other work has looked at
filler-gap dependencies, but these have generally
focused on the question of wh movement (e.g.,
Traxler and Pickering (1996)). More recently,
Levy et al. (2012) have directly taken up the issue
of non-projectivity and sentence processing. They
raised the following questions:

1. Under what circumstances are non-
projective dependency structures easier
or harder to comprehend than corresponding
projective-dependency structures?

2. How can these differences in comprehension
difficulty be understood with respect to exist-
ing theories of online comprehension?

Levy et al. (2012) try to answer the above ques-
tions using right-extraposed relative clauses in En-
glish. They show that the right-extraposed version

1Linearly, i could either precede j or follow it.

141



is more costly than the embedded relative clause
(RC), hence demonstrating that non-projective
structures are indeed costlier than the projec-
tive counterpart. Additionally, they argue that
the expectation-based theory of surprisal (Levy,
2008) explains the experimental results better than
other competing theories like the cue-based mem-
ory model of Lewis and Vasishth (2005) and the
derivational theory of complexity (Miller, 1962).

In this paper, we take up Levy’s questions by
investigating non-projectivity in Hindi participle
clauses. We confirm that non-projectivity is in-
deed costly. However, we show that surprisal
is unable to account for the increased process-
ing cost, and that the cue-based memory model
of Lewis and Vasishth (2005) can partly account
for the results. To anticipate the conclusion, we
argue that while expectation (formalized as con-
ditional probability of the head in a dependency
given previous syntactic dependencies) is relevant
for explaining processing of non-projective depen-
dencies, other factors (that can be orthogonal to
predictive processing) can be equally critical. In
particular, the following factors are implicated in
the processing of non-projective dependencies: (a)
The nature of the intervening material between a
head and its dependent; (b) The nature of the head-
dependent relation; (c) The length/complexity of
the intervening material; (d) Memory activation;
and (e) Parsing strategies.

Hindi2 is a useful language for investigating
non-projectivity because its relatively free-word
order allows non-projective dependencies to occur
quite frequently (see Mannem et al. (2009) for a
more detailed discussion).

The paper is organized as follows, we first dis-
cuss relevant processing theories and their predic-
tions regarding non-projectivity in Section 2. Fol-
lowing this, in Section 3 we discuss experiments
that investigate processing of non-projective struc-
tures in Hindi. In Section 4 we discuss these find-
ings and discuss potential factors that could in-
fluence processing non-projective configurations.
Section 5 concludes.

2Hindi is one of the official languages of India. It is the
fourth most widely spoken language in the world [source:
http://www.ethnologue.com/statistics/size]. It is a free-word
order language and is head final. It has relatively rich mor-
phology with verb-subject, noun-adjective agreement. See
Kachru (2006) for more details on the grammatical proper-
ties of Hindi.

2 Two theories of sentence
comprehension

Here, we introduce two well-established theories
of sentence comprehension, surprisal and the cue-
based memory model, and discuss their predic-
tions regarding the processing of non-projective
dependencies.

2.1 Surprisal

Expectation-based theories appeal to the predic-
tive nature of the human sentence comprehension
system. On this view, processing becomes dif-
ficult if the upcoming sentential material is less
predictable. Surprisal (Levy, 2008) is one such
account. Surprisal presupposes that sentence-
comprehenders know a grammar describing the
structure of the word-sequences they hear. This
grammar not only says which words can combine
with which other words but also assigns a prob-
ability to all well-formed combinations. Such a
probabilistic grammar assigns exactly one struc-
ture to unambiguous sentences. But even before
the final word, one can use the grammar to an-
swer the question: what structures are compati-
ble with the words that have been read (or heard)
so far? This set of structures may contract more
or less radically as a comprehender makes their
way through a sentence. Intuitively, surprisal in-
creases when a parser is required to build some
low-probability structure. Surprisal formalises the
processing difficulty of a non-projective depen-
dency (for that matter any dependency) as the con-
ditional probability of encountering the head of the
dependency given previous context. The process-
ing cost at word n can be formally represented as
(1).

surprisal(n) = log
1

Pr(n|context) (1)

It is easy to see that surprisal can predict higher
processing cost of a non-projective dependency
because such dependencies are generally quite in-
frequent compared to their projective counterpart.

2.2 The cue-based memory model

The cue-based memory model is a working
memory-based theory of human sentence process-
ing proposed by Lewis and Vasishth (2005). Here
sentence processing is modeled as skilled mem-
ory retrieval, where independently motivated prin-
ciples of memory and cognitive skill play an im-

142



portant role in formulating the overall model. It
uses the notion of decay as one determinant of
memory retrieval difficulty. Elements that exists
in memory without being retrieved for a long time
will decay more, compared to elements that have
been retrieved recently or elements that are recent.
In addition to decay, the theory also incorporates
the notion of interference. Memory retrievals are
feature based, and feature overlap during retrieval,
in addition to decay, will cause difficulty. The ac-
tivation of a word i is computed using (2).

Ai = Bi +


∑

j

WjSji


+ �i (2)

Activation is based on two separate quantities.
One is the word’s baseline activation Bi, which
calculates activation decay due solely to the pas-
sage of time. The second variable that is used
in determining a word’s activation is the amount
of similarity-based interference that occurs with
other words that have been parsed (see Lewis and
Vasishth, 2005 for a more extensive discussion).

The cue-based memory model also predicts
higher processing cost for certain non-projective
configurations such as the one shown in figure 2.
Vasishth and Lewis (2006) have proposed that the
reactivation of upcoming VPs by adjuncts, and/or
reactivation of arguments by intervening adjuncts
might lead to facilitation at the reactivated VP.
This is because such modifications lead to an ac-
tivation boost of the upcoming verb. Now assume
a non-projective structure for figure 2 where ad-
junct1 does not modify the non-finite verb, rather
it modifies the matrix verb that follows the non-
finite verb. This will make NP-gen ← non-finite
verb a non-projective dependency. The cue-based
model will predict higher processing cost at the
non-finite verb in the non-projective case as fewer
pre-modifers will reactivate the critical non-finite
verb compared to when all intervening phrases
modify the verb in the projective configuration.

So, both surprisal (via expectation) and cue-
based memory model (via memory activation)
predict higher processing cost for certain non-
projective configurations. The first experiment de-
scribed in the next section tests this prediction us-
ing self-paced reading. The second experiment
is a sentence completion study and tests the hy-
pothesis that subjects tend to avoid producing non-
projective dependencies when they can. Together,

NP-gen adjunct1 adjunct2 non-finite verb . . .

subj

Figure 2: The base activation of a memory chunk
gets a boost everytime it gets retrieved after it
has been created. Above we show a schematic
configuration where the non-finite verb is cre-
ated/predicted at NP-gen, and it gets reactivated
by its modifiers, adjunct1 and adjunct2. NP-gen:
Noun phrase with a genitive postposition.

these two studies suggest that reactivation can at-
tenuate the cost of non-projective dependencies,
and non-projective structures are hard (otherwise
subjects would not try to avoid building them).

3 Experiments

We discuss two experiments in this section. In
the first experiment, we test whether expectation
and memory activation affect non-projective de-
pendency configuration.

3.1 Experiment 1: Role of Memory
Activation

The experiment has a 2 × 2 × 2 factorial design,
with factors Distance, Attachment, and Context.
The critical region, where the dependency of in-
terest is completed, is the non-finite verb has-
naa ‘laughing’ (see examples 1). In the context
condition, the subject of the non-finite verb raam
kaa and the non-finite verb hasnaa are expected,
while in the no-context conditions they are not. As
shown in Figure 3 and the examples 1, the attach-
ment factor has two levels, an intervening phrase
either attaches with the main verb (AttachMV)
(Figure 3a), or it attaches to the non-finite verb
(AttachNFV) (Figure 3b). The intervening phrase,
mere Xayaal se ‘according to me’, does not mod-
ify the non-finite verb (rather it modifies the main
verb); by contrast, meri vajah se ‘because of me’,
modifies the non-finite verb. The Distance factor
has two levels; in the short condition there is an
adverbial modifying the upcoming non-finite verb
(example 1a) compared to three adverbials in the
long condition (example 1b). The Distance ma-
nipulation modulates the activation of the critical
non-finite verb; as explained in section 2.2, in the
cue-based model, more preverbal modification can

143



lead to higher memory activation.
Note that in examples 1, some conditions

are not shown due to space constraints, but
they can be derived from the other conditions.
In the context conditions participant first see a
screen with kyaa raam kaa haMsnaa Thiik thaa?
‘Was it ok for Ram to laugh’ (literally: Was
Ram’s laughing ok?). Following this, they see
the critical sentence (shown below) on the next
screen. In the no-context condition, they see
kyaa huaa? ‘What happened?’ prior to see-
ing the critical sentence (shown below). The
dots after each sentence represent the continua-
tion bilkul Thiik thaa, aisaa karne meM koii bu-
raaii nahi hai ‘was absolutely ok, there is no
harm in doing that’. All experimental items
can be obtained from http://web.iitd.ernet.in/∼
samar/data/experimental-items-depling2015.txt

(1) a. Short, AttachMV, Context
haan,
yes,

/ [raama kaa
Ram GEN

/ mere Xayaal se
according to me

/ zor zor se
loudly

/ haMsnaa]
laughing

/ . . .
. . .

‘Yes, according to me it was abso-
lutely ok for Ram to laugh loudly,
there is no harm in doing that.’

b. Long, AttachMV, Context
haan,
yes,

/ [raama kaa
Ram GEN

/ mere Xayaal se
according to me

/ do din pehle
two days ago

/ sabke saamne
in front of everyone

/

zor zor se
loudly

/ haMsnaa]
laughing

/ . . .
. . .

‘Yes, according to me it was abso-
lutely ok for Ram to laugh loudly two
days ago infront of every one, there is
no harm in doing that.’

c. Short, AttachNFV, Context
haan,
yes,

/ [raama kaa
Ram GEN

/ merii vajah se
because to me

/

zor zor se
loudly

/ haMsnaa]
laughing

/ . . .
. . .

‘Yes, it was absolutely ok for Ram to
laugh loudly because of me, there is
no harm in doing that.’

d. Long, AttachNFV, Context
see above

e. Short, AttachMV, No context
[raama kaa
Ram GEN

/ mere Xayaal se
according to me

/

zor zor se
loudly

/ haMsnaa]
laughing

/ . . .
. . .

‘According to me it was absolutely ok
for Ram to laugh loudly, there is no
harm in doing that.’

f. Long, AttachMV, No context
see above

g. Short, AttachNFV, No context
see above

h. Long, AttachNFV, No context
see above

3.1.1 Procedure and Participants
We used the centered self-paced reading (SPR)
method (Just et al., 1982); centering was used
to prevent readers from using the sentence-
length cue to adapt their processing strat-
egy. Stimulus items were presented us-
ing Douglas Rohde’s Linger software, version
2.94 (http://tedlab.mit.edu/∼dr/Linger/). A Latin
square design ensured that each participant saw
each item in only one condition. The target items
and fillers were pseudo-randomized for each par-
ticipant.

The experimenter (Husain) began by explaining
the task to the participants. After this, six prac-
tice sentences were presented in order to familiar-
ize participants with the task. At the beginning
of each trial, the computer screen showed a single
hyphen that covered the first word of the upcom-
ing sentence; the hyphen appeared in the center
of the computer screen. When the space bar was
pressed, the word was unmasked. With each suc-
cessive press of the space bar, the next word or
phrase replaced the previous word in the center of
the screen. This successive replacement continued
until the participant had read the whole sentence.
Reading times or RTs (in milliseconds) were taken
as a measure of relative momentary processing dif-
ficulty. The f-key for was pressed for answering a
question with a ‘yes’ response and the the j-key
was pressed for answering with a ‘no’ response.

Eighty two native speakers of Hindi in Jawa-
harlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India, par-

144



(a) [NP-gen according to me . . . non-finite verb] . . . main verb . . .

subj

(b) [NP-gen because of me . . . non-finite verb] . . . main verb . . .

subj

Figure 3: Projectivity manipulation in the self-paced reading (SPR) experiment discussed in section 3.1;
see examples 1. (a) shows AttachMV, the main verb attachment condition, the non-projective depen-
dency, while (b) shows AttachNFV, the embedded verb attachment condition, the projective dependency.
NP-gen: Noun phrase with a genitive postposition.

ticipated for payment. Their mean age was 23.7
years, SD 3.3 years.

3.1.2 Statistical analyses
All analyses for fixation measures were carried out
using the package lme4, version 1.1-7, (Bates et
al., 2014) for fitting linear mixed models, which
is available for R, version 3.1.2 (R Development
Core Team, 2006). In the lme4 models, we fit
cross varying intercepts for subjects and items,
no varying slopes for subject and item were esti-
mated, as data of this size is usually insufficient to
estimate these parameters with any accuracy. The
data analysis was done on log-transformed reading
times to achieve approximate normality of residu-
als. From the lme4 analyses, we present the t-
values (z-values for response data).

3.1.3 Pretest
Before conducting the SPR study, we carried out
a sentence completion study to ensure that the ex-
perimental items used in the study had the appro-
priate properties. Participants were asked to com-
plete the incomplete version of the items shown in
(1); for example, for 1(a) they were supposed to
complete the incomplete string haan, raama kaa
mere Xayaal se zor zor se . . . Twenty four sets
of items, each with eight versions were presented
using the centered self-paced reading method in
the standard Latin square design. Items were pre-
sented using Douglas Rohde’s Linger software,
version 2.94 (http://tedlab.mit.edu/∼dr/Linger/).
The critical items were presented with 122 filler
items unrelated to this study. Twenty-one Hindi
native speaker in Jawaharlal Nehru University par-
ticipated for payment. Their mean age was 22.7
years, SD 3.1 years.

The sentence completion confirmed that there
were more exact predictions3 in the context con-

3A response is considered as an exact prediction if it
matches in type and tense/aspect features with the expected
verb.

ditions (70.75%) compared to just 2.25% in the
no-context condition; this confirms that the con-
text condition allows us to manipulate the con-
ditional probability of the upcoming critical non-
finite verb. If considering the prediction of a non-
finite verb category (i.e. any non-finite verb), then
the percentage prediction in the context condition
is 86.25%, and 56% in the no-context condition.
This shows that in the no-context condition a non-
finite verb is being predicted. Similarly, the ex-
act prediction of the main verb was 81% and 31%
respectively for the context and no-context condi-
tions. If considering only the finite category infor-
mation, i.e. any finite verb, this percentage predic-
tion was 98% and 87% for context and no-context
conditions respectively. Analysis of the binomial
responses4 using generalized linear mixed models
with a logit link function also shows a significant
main effect of context (z=5.76) on non-finite verb
prediction accuracy.

3.2 Results

As mentioned above, the critical region in the SPR
study was the non-finite verb. We find a main ef-
fect of context (t=-12.11), such that the non-finite
verb was read faster in the context condition com-
pared to the no-context condition. This is expected
given the results of the sentence completion study
just discussed. We also get an interaction between
the three factors, distance, attachment, and con-
text (t=-2.04). A nested contrast shows that this in-
teraction is driven by the no-context, AttachNFV
condition, such that the reading time at the non-
finite verb is faster in the long condition compared
to the short condition. Figure 4 shows the reading
times for all the eight conditions.

4Non-finite category prediction was coded as 1, while
wrong category prediction was coded as 0. Data from two
subjects were removed during the analysis as they did not un-
derstand the task.

145



●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Context No−Context

600

700

800

900

1000

1100

Short Long Short Long
Distance

re
ad

in
g 

tim
e 

[m
s]

Attachment

AttachMV

AttachNFV

Figure 4: Reading times in ms (with 95% CIs) at
the critical region (non-finite verb). The Distance
× Attachment × Context interaction (t=-2.04) is
driven by the No-Context condition. A nested con-
trast (details omitted due to lack of space) shows
that RT in AttachNFV, Short, No-Context is longer
than AttachNFV, Long, No-Context, this is evi-
dence for reactivation effects as suggested by Va-
sishth and Lewis (2006). Note that the difference
between the No-Context, AttachMV conditions is
not significant.

3.2.1 Discussion

The three-way interaction is driven by a speedup
in the attach non-finite verb (projective) condi-
tion when we compare the long vs short condi-
tions in the no-context case. This is established
by a nested contrast comparison. Additionally, in
the attach main verb condition (the non-projective
condition), when we compare long vs short con-
ditions in the no-context case, we see no such
speedup. This absence of a speedup could be due
to the additional cost of non-projectivity. We sug-
gest that the facilitation in reading time in the pro-
jective condition in long vs short cases (in the no-
context condition) may be due to reactivation of
the non-finite verb, and this is attenuated if the
dependency is non-projective. This reactivation-
based speedup is not seen in the context condi-
tions (nested contrasts, not presented here, show
that there is no significant interaction between dis-
tance and attachment in the context case). Thus,
the underlying cause for the three-way interaction
seems to be the reactivation-based speedup in the

no-context condition. In other words, expectation
in the context condition could be playing a role
in eliminating any effect of reactivation between
the two attachment types. These results can there-
fore be partly explained by Vasishth and Lewis
(2006).5

The surprisal account cannot easily account for
these results. As noted in section 3.1.3, a sentence
completion study using the same items shows no
significant difference in prediction type for the
projective vs non-projection condition in the no-
context condition. Surprisal will therefore only
predict a main effect of the context condition and
not predict any interactions. This does not seem to
hold.

3.3 Experiment 2: The Role of Prediction
Revision

Next, we investigate the role of prediction revision
in processing non-projective configuration. We
employ a sentence completion task with a modi-
fied design of example 1.

Similar to experiment 1, we use embedded non-
finite constructions. This experiment also has a
2× 2× 2 design: Distance × Attachment × Con-
text. Context either generates a strong expecta-
tion for an upcoming non-finite verb or does not.
The Distance factor has two levels; the short con-
dition has one adverbial modifying the upcoming
non-finite verb, while the long condition has three
adverbials. The Attachment factor has two lev-
els, AttachMV and AttachNFV. Compared to ex-
periment 1, this manipulation has a subtle differ-
ence. While the phrase ‘according to me’ in the
AttachMV condition of Experiment 1 was clearly
an adjunct, in Experiment 2, the phrase used
has an Accusative case-marker. The Accusative
case marker in Hindi generally appears with argu-
ments. In the AttachNFV condition, the phrase has
the genitive case-marker, which generally appears
with adjuncts. This is shown in example 2(a); the
phrase abhay ko ‘Abhay ACC6’ is an argument of
the matrix verb lagaa thaa ‘found’. By modifying
the matrix verb, abhay ko makes the dependency
between raama kaa ← haMsnaa non-projective.
In example 2(b), on the other hand, the phrase ab-

5An important caveat here is that the results are rather
weakly supportive of the account we present. A stronger re-
sult would have entirely parallel lines in the context condi-
tions, and a stronger effect size for the interaction seen in the
no-context condition. We intend to try to replicate this effect
in a future study.

6ACC: Accusative case-marker

146



hay par ‘Abhay LOC7’ is an adjunct of the up-
coming non-finite verb haMsnaa ‘laughing’. Ex-
ample 2 shows only the attachment manipulation,
we don’t list all the items due to space constraints.
In the context conditions participant first see a
screen with kyaa kal raam kaa haMsnaa Thiik
thaa? ‘Was it ok for Ram to laugh yesterday’ (lit-
erally: Was Ram’s laughing yesterday ok?), fol-
lowing this, on the next screen, they see fragment
of the critical sentence upto zor zor se ‘loudly’
(shown below). In the no-context condition, they
see kyaa huaa? ‘What happened?’ prior to see-
ing the critical sentence. All experimental items
can be obtained from http://web.iitd.ernet.in/∼
samar/data/experimental-items-depling2015.txt

(2) a. Short, AttachMV, Context
haan
yes

Thiik
ok

thaa,
was,

magar,
but,

mere Xayaal se
according to me

[raama kaa
Ram GEN

abhay ko
Abhay ACC

do din pehle
two days ago

zor zor se
loudly

haMsnaa]
laughing

Thiik
good

nahii
not

lagaa
find

thaa
was

‘Yes it was ok, however, according to
me Abhay did not find it was ok for
Ram to laugh loudly two days ago.’

b. Short, AttachNFV, Context
haan
yes

Thiik
ok

thaa,
was,

magar,
but,

man hi man
in my heart

mujhko
I ACC

[raama kaa
Ram GEN

abhay par
Abhay LOC

do din pehle
two days ago

zor zor se
loudly

haMsnaa]
laughing

Thiik
good

nahii
not

lagaa
find

thaa
was

‘Yes it was ok, however, in my heart
I did not find it ok for Ram to laugh
loudly on Abhay two days ago.’

The question here was: when the reader is given
a context in which an embedded non-finite verb is
highly predictable, if he encounters a phrase that
requires a non-projective dependency, would the
prediction for the specific non-finite verb be re-
vised such that a projective dependency is built
with a different non-finite verb?

7LOC: Locative case-marker

Condition % exact predictions
AttachMV 10
AttachNFV 53

Table 1: Exact prediction (in percentage) of the
non-finite verb (haMsnaa ‘laughing’) in the sen-
tence completion study for the AttachMV and At-
tachNFV conditions in the context, short condi-
tions.

3.3.1 Procedure
The same procedure as discussed in section 3.1.3
was followed. The same subjects participated in
the experiment.

3.3.2 Results
The dependent measure is the proportion of exact
predictions for the non-finite verb in the different
conditions. There are more exact predictions of
the non-finite verb in the context conditions (29%)
compared to just 3% in the no-context condition.
This is as expected; however, note that the pro-
portion of exact predictions is relatively low in the
context condition (cf. table 1). This is because of
the AttachMV condition—the non-projective de-
pendency causes a reduction in the proportion of
exact predictions; in this condition, participants
tend to use verbs that would form a projective
structure (more details in the next section). We
found a a significant main effect of Attachment
(z=-5.05) and of context (z=5.41).8

3.3.3 Discussion
Together, the main effect of Attachment, Context
and the percent of exact predictions shown in ta-
ble 1 suggests that subjects override the prediction
generated by the context in order to avoid form-
ing a non-projective dependency. The sentence
completion data show that in the AttachMV (non-
projective dependency) conditions subjects used
verbs that were compatible with the critical case-
markers (genitive and accusative), rather than us-
ing the verb used in the context. In doing so,
they form a projective structure, rather than form-
ing a non-projective structure using the context
verb. For example, subjects tend to use a tran-
sitive participle (e.g., maarnaa ‘hitting’) due to
the presence of abhay ko ‘Abhay ACC’ which is

8Non-finite category prediction was coded as 1, while
wrong category prediction was coded as 0. Data from two
subjects were removed during the analysis as they did not un-
derstand the task.

147



not easily incorporated with the contextual pre-
diction of intransitive haMsnaa ‘laughing’. Using
haMsnaa after seeing an accusative case-marker is
only possible by positing a non-projective depen-
dency shown in example 2(a), i.e. abhay ko →
lagaa makes raama kaa→ haMsnaa dependency
non-projective. On the other hand, in the Attach-
NFV (projective dependency) condition, the re-
sponse was haMsnaa ‘laughing’, i.e. participants
did not deviate from the verb that was provided in
the context. This is because the case-marker on
the phrase in the AttachNFV condition abhay par
‘Abhay LOC’ can easily be incorporated with an
intransitive verb like haMsnaa ‘laughing’.

Given these results, it is reasonable to as-
sume that, in an online study, when subjects will
hear/read haMsnaa ‘laughing’ in 2(a), they would
be surprised (as they are expecting maarnaa ‘hit-
ting’) leading to additional processing cost as a
result of dashed expectation. Note that, surprisal
will correctly predict that reading time at haM-
snaa in sentence 2(a) will be higher than 2(b) be-
cause P(haMsnaa|Noun-ACC) will be lower than
P(haMsnaa|Noun-LOC)9. However, it is impor-
tant to stress that this cost does not reflect predic-
tion maintenance per se (as is argued by Levy et al.
(2012)), rather it is prediction revision that even-
tually gets reflected as additional processing cost.

4 General Discussion

Experiment 1 shows that for a Hindi participle
clause construction involving a non-projective de-
pendency, expectation in the context condition
could be playing a role in eliminating any ef-
fect of reactivation between the two attachment
types; recall that in the no-context condition, re-
activation effect was seen in the projective depen-
dency conditions while non-projective processing
seemed to attenuate reactivation facilitation in the
non-projective conditions. This shows that a non-
projective structure might not be inherently dif-
ficult to process, a claim also made in Levy et
al. (2012). Levy et al. (2012) essentially cast
the problem of processing a non-projective depen-
dency as maintenance of such syntactic expecta-
tion. While such a formalization does account for
the processing difficulty in their experiments, it
fails to explain the results discussed in section 3.2.

9haMsnaa is an intransitive verb and in its non-finite form
can only take a subject with a genitive case marker. It can
easily take a locative adjunct however.

Basically, Levy et al. (2012) do not explore pro-
cesses that are orthogonal to surprisal but have rel-
evance for non-projective dependency processing.
One such process is memory activation discussed
in Experiment 1.

Another factor, prediction revision, was illus-
trated in Experiment 2 where although surprisal
does correctly predict the results, it does not flesh
out the source of the processing cost. As shown
in figure 5, we argue that the processing cost at a
head depends on the compatibility of intervening
material with the predicted head. Closely related
to this is the issue of dependency type. While
certain dependencies are more inert (e.g., Adj ←
Noun), others are less so (e.g., Noun ← Verb).
This has the effect of making a prediction more
immune to the influence of other dependencies in
some cases. For example, once a prediction for
an extraposed RC is made, following material has
little influence over the validity of the prediction.
On the other hand, a prediction of a verb at an ar-
gument is susceptible to revisions once additional
arguments are encountered. This means that to-
gether the dependency type and the intervening
material influence the longevity of a prediction.

(a) Dep C X . . .

head X predicted at Dep

(b) Dep C X . . .

head X predicted at Dep

(c) Dep IC X . . .

head X predicted at Dep

prediction changes to Y at IC intervener

Figure 5: Incompatible (IC) vs compatible (C) in-
tervener. Only when the intervener is compatible
will the original prediction triggered at the depen-
dent (Dep) be maintained. The compatible inter-
vener can either cause the predicted dependency
to be projective or non-projective. (a) was seen in
example 2(b), (b) was seen in example 1(a), and
(c) was seen in example 2(a).

We have so far discussed two factors (other than
expectation strength) that can account for process-
ing cost in non-projective structures, these are (a)
memory activation, (b) prediction revision due to
intervening material and dependency type. In ad-
dition to these one can posit some more factors.

One such factor is prediction decay. While
keeping the prediction strength constant, a pre-
diction can suffer memory decay due to the com-
plexity of the intervening material. Such effects

148



can arise due to limited working memory con-
straints. There is a large body of work that sup-
ports the role of working memory in sentence
comprehension (e.g., Gibson (1998); Grodner and
Gibson (2005)). Expectation-based theories such
as surprisal do not make any predictions about
such effects. Indeed, recent work has argued for
a more unified approach to sentence processing
where both expectation and working memory play
a role (e.g., Vasishth and Drenhaus (2011); Levy
and Keller (2012)).What concerns us here is the
issue of expectation maintenance and how it in-
teracts with working memory. Two recent results
need to be mentioned here. For German, Levy
and Keller (2012) show that the benefits of predic-
tive processing can be attenuated (and be reversed)
if the complexity of the phrases before the pre-
dicted head is high. Similary, Safavi et al. (2015)
show that in Persian separable complex predicate,
processing time at the light verb can be high in
spite of it being highly predictable if the precritical
phrase is a complex NP. Both works point to the
possibility that even for a highly predictable non-
projective dependency, processing cost can be in-
fluenced by the complexity of the intervening ma-
terial. If this complexity is high, it will affect the
prediction adversely and lead to higher processing
cost of the non-projective dependency.

Another important factor is the frequency of
a dependency. It is quite well known that non-
projective dependencies are infrequent compared
to their projective counterparts, for example, in
English the right-extraposed RC is less frequent
compared to the embedded RC10 (Levy et al.,
2012). Two related questions need to be asked
here: (a) Will a dependency that is non-projective
but highly frequent be easy to process? An inter-
esting case in point is the relative clause in Hindi.
Unlike English, the right-extraposed RC in Hindi
is more frequent than the embedded RC. (b) Sim-
ilarly, certain heads are always triggered due to
the specific dependents, e.g., relative-correlative
dependency and paired discourse connectives in
Hindi. Many of these dependencies are non-
projective (and are also long distance dependen-
cies). Given their high collocational frequency,
will they still be difficult to process? Surprisal will
predict that, in Hindi, right-extraposed RC should
be easier to process than the embedded counter-

10Table 1 in Levy et al. (2012), P(extraposedRC|context)
is 0.00004, while P(RC|context) is 0.00561.

part. This needs to verified experimentally.
Finally, the processing cost of a non-projective

dependency could also reflect certain parsing
heuristics/strategies. For example, it is possible
that when the expectation is weak (i.e. when the
head of the dependency cannot be predicted with
high certainty), cases like Figure 3(a) are costly
due to incorrect dependency attachment. In par-
ticular, the phrase according to me is incorrectly
attached to the upcoming unknown verb. After en-
countering the non-finite verb the attachment has
to be revised leading to additional processing cost.
Such a strategy implies that when expectation is
weak and therefore prebuilding of structures is not
possible, the parser employs a conservative projec-
tive attachment heuristic. The parser pursues and
maintains a non-projective dependency only when
the expectation strength is strong.

More recent developments in transition-based
incremental parsing (Nivre, 2009) introduce spe-
cial transitions to handle non-projectivity. Such
transitions can only be employed in cases where
expectation of a non-projective dependency is
high, in all other cases a projective parsing algo-
rithm could be pursued. In this context, the pars-
ing strategies proposed by Joshi (1990)11 to ac-
count for the results of Bach et al. (1986) are
relevant. The ease of processing cross-serial de-
pendency and the use of embedded push-down au-
tomata to process them could be understood as
the parser adapting to a specific property of a lan-
guage.

Processing cost of a non-projective dependency
can therefore arise as a result of variety of factors.
This could be either structural or non-structural.
Structural factors include syntactic expectation, its
revision and frequency. Non-structural factors in-
clude expectation decay, memory activation and
parsing heuristics.

The factors mentioned above might interact in
interesting ways and such interaction can form
the focus of future investigations. In addition,
as mentioned by Levy et al. (2012), information
structure and grammatical weights might also have
some role to play in determining processing cost
in such syntactic configurations. In addition, it is
an open question whether the processing patterns
observed for non-projective dependency also hold
true for other dependency configurations such as
well-nestedness, etc. (Bodirsky et al., 2005).

11Also see Rambow and Joshi (1994)

149



5 Conclusion

Current evidence suggests that human sentence
processing is sensitive to non-projective depen-
dencies. The increased processing cost could be a
result of either structural or non-structural factors.
It is unclear if these varied factors interact and if
so under what circumstances. Current experimen-
tal research provides us with means to investigate
these important questions along with investigat-
ing processing cost of other types of dependency
configurations such as well-nestedness. Such in-
vestigations are critical and will constructively in-
form both theoretical work as well as parsing ap-
proaches in the dependency linguistics framework.

6 Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Dr. Ayesha Kidwai for
helping with logistics to run the experiments at
Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi.

References
E. Bach, C. Brown, and W. Marslen-Wilson. 1986.

Crossed and nested dependencies in german and
dutch: A psycholinguistic study. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 1:249–262.

D. Bates, M. Maechler, B. M. Bolker, and S. Walker.
2014. lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using
eigen and s4. ArXiv e-print; submitted to Journal
of Statistical Software.

M. Bodirsky, M. Kuhlmann, and M. Möhl. 2005.
Well-nested drawings as models of syntactic struc-
ture. In In Tenth Conference on Formal Grammar
and Ninth Meeting on Mathematics of Language,
pages 88–1. University Press.

N. Chomsky. 1981. Lectures on government and bind-
ing. Dordrecht: Foris.

E. Gibson. 1998. Linguistic complexity: Locality of
syntactic dependencies. Cognition, 68:1–76.

D. Grodner and E. Gibson. 2005. Consequences of the
serial nature of linguistic input. Cognitive Science,
29:261–290.

A. K. Joshi. 1990. Processing crossed and nested de-
pendencies: An automaton perspective on the psy-
cholinguistic results. Language and Cognitive Pro-
cesses, 5:1–27.

M. A. Just, P. A. Carpenter, and J. D. Woolley. 1982.
Paradigms and processes in reading comprehen-
sion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen-
eral, 111(2):228–238.

Y. Kachru. 2006. Hindi. John Benjamins Publishing
Company, Philadelphia.

M. Kuhlmann and J. Nivre. 2010. Transition-based
techniques for non-projective dependency parsing.
Northern European Journal of Language Technol-
ogy, 2(1):1–19.

R. Levy and F. Keller. 2012. Expectation and locality
effects in German verb-final structures. Journal of
Memory and Language.

R. Levy, E. Fedorenko, M. Breen, and E. Gibson. 2012.
The processing of extraposed structures in English.
Cognition, 122(1):12–36.

R. Levy. 2008. Expectation-based syntactic compre-
hension. Cognition, 106:1126–1177.

R. L. Lewis and S. Vasishth. 2005. An activation-
based model of sentence processing as skilled mem-
ory retrieval. Cognitive Science, 29:1–45, May.

P. Mannem, H. Chaudhry, and A. Bharati. 2009.
Insights into non-projectivity in Hindi. In ACL-
IJCNLP Student Research Workshop.

G. A. Miller. 1962. Some psychological studies of
grammar. American Psychologist, 17:748–762.

J. Nivre and J. Nilsson. 2005. Pseudo-projective de-
pendency parsing. In Proceedings Of ACL 2005.

J. Nivre. 2009. Non-Projective Dependency Parsing in
Expected Linear Time. In Proceedings of the Joint
Conference of the 47th ACL and the 4th IJCNLP,
pages 351–359.

C. Pollard and I. A. Sag. 1994. Head-Driven Phrase
Structure Grammar. The University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.

R Development Core Team, 2006. R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. R Foundation
for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. ISBN 3-
900051-07-0.

O. Rambow and A. Joshi. 1994. A Processing Model
for Free Word Order Languages. In C. Clifton
Jr., L. Frazier, and K.Rayner, editors, Perspective
on Sentence Processing, pages 267–301. Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ.

M. S. Safavi, S. Vasishth, and S. Husain. 2015. Lo-
cality and expectation in Persian separable complex
predicates. In Proceedings of the 28th CUNY Sen-
tence Processing Conference, Los Angeles, CA.

M. J. Traxler and M. J. Pickering. 1996. Plausibil-
ity and the processing of unbounded dependencies:
an eye tracking study. Journal of Memory and Lan-
guage, 35:454–475.

S. Vasishth and H. Drenhaus. 2011. Locality in Ger-
man. Dialogue and Discourse, 1:59–82.

S. Vasishth and R. L. Lewis. 2006. Argument-
head distance and processing complexity: Explain-
ing both locality and antilocality effects. Language,
82(4):767–794.

150


