



















































Applying Multi-Dimensional Analysis to a Russian Webcorpus: Searching for Evidence of Genres


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 65–74,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 10–11 September 2015.

 

 

Applying Multi-dimensional Analysis to a Russian Webcorpus: 

Searching for Evidence of Genres 

 
 

Anisya Katinskaya 

Russian State University for the 

Humanities 

Moscow, Russia 

a.katinsky@gmail.com 

Serge Sharoff 

Leeds University 

Leeds, UK 

s.sharoff@leeds.co.uk 

 
  

 

Abstract 

The paper presents an application of Multi-

dimensional (MD) analysis initially 

developed for the analysis of register 

variation in English (Biber, 1988) to the 

investigation of a genre diverse corpus, which 

was built from modern texts of the Russian 

Web. The analysis is based on the idea that 

each linguistic feature has different 

frequencies in different registers, and 

statistically stable co-occurrence of linguistic 

features across texts can be used for 

automatic identification of texts with similar 

communicative functions. By using a 

software tool which counts a set of linguistic 

features in texts in Russian and by 

performing factor analysis in R, we identified 

six dimensions of variation. These 

dimensions show significant similarities with 

Biber's original dimensions of variation.    

We studied the distribution of texts in the 

space of the dimensions of our factors and 

investigated their link to 17 externally 

defined Functional Text Dimensions (Forsyth 

and Sharoff, 2014), which were assigned to 

each text of the corpus by a group of 

annotators. The results show that dimensions 

of linguistic feature variation can be used for 

better understanding of the genre structure of 

the Russian Web. 

1 Introduction 

Automatic genre classification is an important 

step in different kinds of text processing tasks 

and in scientific research of linguists working 

with corpus data. As Mikhail Bakhtin (1996) said 

about genres: “Specific function (scientific, 

technical, journalistic, official, and informal) and 

specific conditions of each communication field 

generate specific genres, i.e., thematic, 

compositional, and stylistic types of utterances”. 

This idea has special importance for texts from 

the Web since this communication field is in the 

process of continuous change, so it is difficult to 

make a fixed classification of Web genres, so 

that the annotators normally disagree about the 

genre labels (Sharoff et al., 2010). For that 

reason, we will use the Functional Text 

Dimensions (FTDs) which allow determining the 

similarity of texts in terms of their functional 

characteristics (Forsyth and Sharoff, 2014). 

Since Biber’s work (Biber, 1988) the idea for 

classification via a link between genres and their 

linguistic categories has been implemented by 

numerous researchers (Nakamura, 1993; Michos 

et al., 1996; Sigley, 1997; Stamatatos et al., 

2001; Finn et al., 2002; Finn and Kushmerick, 

2003; Lee and Myaeng, 2004). Linguistic 

parameters of different genres for Russian have 

also been studied. Braslavski (2011) investigated 

genre analysis in the context of Web search. A 

small set of simple syntactic constructions was 

used to distinguish fiction, news and scientific 

texts in (Klyshinsky et al., 2013). These three 

types of texts were also investigated in the space 

of 11 low-level frequency parameters, e.g., 

type/token ratio or verb frequency, in (Yagunova 

and Pospelova, 2014). 

Our idea is to implement the MD analysis for 

Russian and, firstly, to test whether this approach 

could be used for finding sets of linguistic 

features covering a wide range of web texts 

rather than just three genres. Secondly, unlike 

(Sharoff et al., 2010) and (Forsyth and Sharoff, 

2014) these studies have not investigated the 

issue of inter-annotator reliability. 

MD analysis has not been applied to Russian 

language before, but it ha been used to analyse 

texts in English (Biber, 1988; de Mönnink et al., 

65



 

 

2003; Crossley and Louwerse, 2007; Daems et 

al., 2013), Nukulaelae Tuvaluan (Besnier, 1988), 

Somali (Biber and Hared, 1994), Korean (Kim 

and Biber, 1994), Spanish (Biber and Tracy-

Ventura, 2007; Parodi, 2007), Gaelic (Lamb, 

2008), Brazilian Portuguese (Berber Sardinha et 

al., 2014). 

In spite of variation in the use of terms 

“genre” and “register” among researchers, this 

study refers to externally recognized text types, 

e.g., news or fiction, as “genres” (Lee, 2001). 

In Section 2 we shortly describe the 

methodology of the MD approach. In Section 3 

we describe the corpus we used, the principles 

how we chose a set of linguistic features and the 

software tool built for extracting these features 

from texts. In Section 4 we analyse the 

dimensions of linguistic feature variation 

resulting from factor analysis and briefly 

compare them to dimensions from other works. 

Section 5 shows the distribution the FTDs in the 

factor space. In Section 6 we analyse the results 

and discuss possible applications. 

2 Short Overview of Multi-dimensional 
Analysis 

The procedure of the MD analysis can be 

described in several methodological steps (Biber 

et al., 2007). Firstly, texts are collected as a 

corpus representing the variety of genres. Then a 

research is performed to define a set of 

linguistics features to be found in texts of the 

corpus along with functions of features. 

The third step is to develop a computer 

program to automatically identify linguistic 

features. After tagging of the corpus and 

correcting results by the researcher, additional 

programs compute frequency counts of each 

linguistic feature in each text, and the counts are 

normalized. 

The next step is to conduct the procedure of 

finding latent features (co-occurrence patterns) 

among the linguistic features using factor 

analysis of the obtained frequency counts. Each 

set of co-occurrence patterns is referred to as a 

factor. The factors are interpreted in terms of 

their functions as underlying dimensions of 

linguistic feature variation. Factor scores of each 

text are calculated with respect to each 

dimension of variation. Then mean factor scores 

for each genre are computed and compared to 

each other to analyse specific linguistic features 

of each genre. 

3 Data acquisition 

3.1 Description of the Corpus 

The corpus used for the experiment consists of 

618 texts (see Table 1). The texts were collected 

from Open Corpora (Bocharov et al., 2011), as 

well as from news portals (e.g., chaskor.ru, 

ru.wikinews.org, ria.ru, lenta.ru), Wikipedia and 

other online encyclopedias (e.g., krugosvet.ru), 

online magazines (e.g., vogue.ru, popmech.ru) 

and text collections (primarily fiction, e.g., 

lib.ru), blogs (e.g., vk.com, lifejournal.com, 

habrahabr.ru), forums (e.g., forum.hackersoft.ru, 

litforum.ru), scientific and popular scientific 

journals (e.g., cyberleninka.ru, sci-article.ru), 

promotional web-sites (e.g., mvideo.ru,  

avito.ru), legal resources (e.g., base.garant.ru, 

consultant.ru), and other online resources. 

 
Number of texts: 618 

Number of words: 741831 

Number of sentences: 52031 

Length of texts: 88 (min), 10848 (max), 573 (med.)  

Number of texts < 200 words: 133 

Number of texts > 200 words: 482 
  

Table 1: Annotated corpus used in study. 

 

Noticeable differences in the length of texts 

are mostly determined by their genre 

characteristics: it is difficult to find a very long 

advertisement or a joke and a very short 

scientific paper or a law.  

Despite the fact that we could have used a big 

collection of texts from the Web, at this stage we 

decided to settle on a manually built and quite 

small corpus for several reasons. Firstly, even in 

texts obtained from the same source, e.g., news 

or blog posts, we can often find considerable 

variation in subgenres. For instance, one news 

text from chaskor.ru expresses the author’s 

attitude to the topic, whereas the second one is 

relatively neutral, so these two texts from the 

same news portal differ in their FTD A17 

(evaluation).
1
 

Secondly, we tried to obtain maximal variety 

of Web genres. Thirdly, annotation of texts on 17 

parameters is very labour-intensive, while we 

wanted to ensure a reasonable level of inter-

annotator agreement. A significant part of the 

corpus was annotated by 11 annotators with three 

annotations per text. Then the full corpus 

annotation has been revised by 2 annotators. 

                                                           
1
 http://goo.gl/XZdg1t  and http://goo.gl/wMkuCL  

66



 

 

Class Main 

FTDs 

Num 

of 

texts 

Main interpretation 

C1 A1, 

A13 

21 Argumentative texts 

C2 A11 101 Personal blogs 

C3 A8 79 News reports 

C4 A9 76 Legal texts 

C5 A12 66 Advertisement 

C6 A14 59 Scientific texts 

C7 A16 

(-A14) 

186 Encyclopedic texts 

C8 A7 33 Instructional texts 

C9 A4, 

A16 

10 Fictional texts 

 

Table 2: Classes of the FTDs. 

 

The annotated texts were clustered with scores 

of 17 FTDs as predictors. Clustering was 

performed by a variant of kNN, which had 

additional constraints to limit the size of small 

clusters; the method is fully described in 

(Lagutin et al., 2015). After manual analysis of 

the clustering results, nine stable classes (C1-C9) 

were revealed and interpreted as reliably 

annotated genres, which can also be described on 

the basis of their principal FTDs (see Table 2). In 

our paper below we will treat these classes as 

genres for illustrating dimensions of linguistic 

feature variation. 

3.2 Linguistic Features 

Sets of grammatical and lexico-grammatical 

linguistic features identified by Biber’s tagger 

range from 60 to 120+ linguistic variables. The 

largest inventory (Berber Sardinha et al., 2014) 

comprises 190 features. For our purposes, we 

relied on the list presented in the Appendix 2 in 

(Biber et al., 2007) and the description of 

features in the manual of Multidimensional 

Analysis Tagger (Nini, 2014) that replicates 

Biber’s tagger, while adapting the English 

features to reflect Russian grammar. 

There are several reasons why we have chosen 

a relatively short list of features. Firstly, 

necessary features should be accessible for 

extraction from texts by the tools available to us 

(morphological tagger and our program, which 

we will describe further). For instance, it is very 

difficult to specify the difference between 

phrasal coordination (e.g., coordination of 

extended noun phrases) and independent clause 

coordination, using only POS tags and a small 

window (from 1 to 10 words) for shallow 

parsing. We plan to add a syntactic module to the 

next version of the feature tagger. 

Secondly, each feature reflected the Russian 

grammar. For example, researchers disagree with 

respect to the existence of proforms of verbal 

phrases in Russian. Preposition stranding (when 

a preposition with an object occurs somewhere 

other than adjacent to its object, e.g., the thing I 

was thinking of) does not exist in Russian; 

therefore, we did not include such linguistic 

features to the list. The reflexive pronouns in 

Russian do exist, but their forms are different 

from the reflexive pronouns in English, which 

derive from personal pronouns and can be added 

to the corresponding features as it was done in 

MAT v.1.2. (myself as the first person pronoun, 

itself as the third person pronoun, and so on). For 

this reason, the Russian reflexive pronouns are 

considered as an independent linguistic feature. 

Under nominalizations we mean verbal nouns 

like возрождение, ‘revival’, or вход, ‘entrance’. 

A feature called ‘wh-relative’ means relative 

clause with a wh-element (e.g., который, 

‘which’) that is fronted to the beginning of the 

clause. ‘Wh-question’ marks interrogative 

sentences with a wh-element at the left edge 

(e.g., кто, ‘who’). A feature ‘that-complement’ 

means a complement clause with the 

complementizer что or чтобы (‘that’) at the left 

edge. More details see in (Bailyn, 2012). 

The third reason is that we want to test our 

hypothesis about appropriateness of the Multi-

dimensional approach for the task of automatic 

genre classification of texts of the Russian Web. 

The list of features can be extended in the future. 

3.3 MD Analysis for Russian  

Biber’s computational tools have been used to 

tag lexical, grammatical, and syntactical features 

and to count their frequencies in each analysed 

text. Using large-scale dictionaries and context-

dependent disambiguation algorithms, the tagger 

marks word classes and syntactic information. 

The description of the early version of the tagger 

is presented in (Biber, 1988), computational 

methods are outlined in (Biber, 1993a; Biber et 

al., 2007). 

We have developed a program in Python, 

which uses a morphologically parsed corpus as 

an input.
2

                                                           
2
 https://github.com/Askinkaty/MDRus_analyser 

67



 

 

Factors PA1 PA2 PA3 PA4 PA5 PA6 

PA1 1.00 -0.01 -0.16 0.30 0.49 0.17 

PA2 -0.01 1.00 -0.28 0.13 0.17 -0.03 

PA3 -0.16 -0.28 1.00 -0.53 -0.43 -0.22 

PA4 0.3 0.13 -0.53 1.00 0.46 0.48 

PA5 0.49 0.17 -0.43 0.46 1.00 0.20 

PA6 0.17 -0.03 -0.22 0.48 0.20 1.00 

 

Table 3: Inter-factor correlation. 

 
 PA4 PA1 PA2 PA3 PA5 PA6 

Proportion Variance 0.08 0.09 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.04 

Cumulative Variance 0.08 0.17 0.23 0.29 0.34 0.38 

Proportion Explained 0.22 0.22 0.15 0.15 0.14 0.11 

Cumulative Proportion 0.22 0.45 0.60 0.75 0.89 1.00 

 

Table 4: Output of the factor analysis. 

RFTagger (Schmid and Laws, 2008) was used 

to process the corpus with the accuracy rate close 

to accuracy of the tools described in (Sharoff and 

Nivre, 2011), which is near 95-97%.
3
 For the 

lexical features we used dictionaries derived 

from the Russian National Corpus.
4
  

Then we can run our feature analyser for each 

text to identify and count linguistic variables. We 

have developed a processing algorithm for each 

feature, considering the requirements of Russian 

grammar and possible ambiguity, which we try 

to resolve by relatively simple methods such as 

specifying contextual conditions and exceptions. 

For example, we have to identify time adverbs 

весной (‘in spring’) or порой (‘at times’), which 

might be confused with nouns. In almost every 

case RFTagger processes them as nouns.  

Therefore, we should specify the context in 

which these words cannot be used as adverbs 

(e.g., if one of these words agrees with an 

adjective or a pronoun, it is likely to be a noun).  

All processing rules were tested on wider 

outputs obtained from the General Internet 

Corpus of Russian (GICR) (Piperski et al., 2013). 

Because we work with texts from the Web, we 

took into account some possible mistakes. For 

instance, people often make mistakes with 

conjunctions like вследствие того что 

(‘because of’), ввиду того что (‘in view of 

that’) and miss commas or white spaces between 

words in these complex conjunctions. For our 

practical purposes, we have attempted a unified 

                                                           
3 http://www.cis.uni-muenchen.de/~schmid/tools/RFTagger/ 
4
 http://www.ruscorpora.ru 

processing of the most common cases of this 

sort.  

Unlike Biber, we did not edit the results of 

feature extraction because it is labour-intensive 

and not consistent with the idea of applying the 

method to a large-scale corpus in the next step. 

Accuracy of the most complicated rules (e.g., 

detection of proforms of noun phrases) is around 

67-85%, simple rules have much higher 

accuracy, mostly above 95%. 

Counted frequencies of all features in each 

text (except for word length, sentence length, and 

type/token ratio) are divided by the number of 

words in the texts. As an output of the program 

we get a matrix of 618 to 40 including the 

frequencies of 40 linguistic variables for each 

text. 

4 Searching for Dimensions of 
Variation 

4.1 Factor Analysis 

Factor analysis is an important part of the MD 

analysis. It is a useful tool for investigating the 

underlying structure of complex phenomena and 

for reducing data to a smaller set of latent 

variables called factors. Each of the observed 

variables is assumed to depend on a linear 

combination of factors, and the coefficients (the 

strength of relation to a factor) are known as 

factor loadings. For the justification of factor 

analysis for genre research we refer the reader to 

(Biber, 1988).  

68



 

 

Linguistic features, which are observed 

variables in our study, are supposed to co-occur 

in different texts. We are interested in systematic 

patterns among this co-occurrence. Patterns of 

variation reflect an underlying system of factors, 

with which variables have strong association. A 

rotated factor analysis was performed in R with 

Promax rotation since we assume possible 

correlation among factors (Kabakoff, 2011).  

The inter-factor correlation ranges from -0.53 

to 0.49, see Table 3. Other output of the factor 

analysis is presented in Table 4.  

Table 5 presents linguistic features with factor 

loadings over 0.3 or below -0.3 correlating with 

corresponding factors. Features with lower 

loadings cannot be considered as informative for 

interpretation of factors. Large loading means 

stronger correlation between a feature and a 

factor. Only three features have been excluded 

(verbal adverb, concessive subordinate clauses, 

and pied-piping, which for Russian is interpreted 

as a preposition moved to the front of its relative 

clause) due to low factor loadings. Six 

dimensions of feature variation were selected as 

optimal for our data. Dimensions 3 and 5 are 

relatively small: each of them includes only three 

features. 

The factor structure is very stable and does not 

change significantly if different models 

(maximum likelihood, iterated principal axis, 

etc.) or different types of rotation are used. 

4.2 Interpretation of Dimensions of 
Variation 

Each factor combines linguistic features that 

serve related communicative functions. It is also 

important that a feature can have positive or 

negative loading in a factor; therefore, features 

with opposite loadings have a complementary 

distribution. In our case, only three factors have 

so called negative features, i.e., features with 

negative loadings. For convenience, we will call 

the obtained factors as dimensions and rename 

PA4, PA1, PA2, PA3, PA5, and PA6 to D1, D2, 

D3, D4, D5, and D6 correspondingly.   

The positive features of Dimension 1 (D1) are 

1st person pronouns, 2nd person pronouns, 

exclamation, and wh-questions what can be 

associated with interactivity and indicates 

dialogue. A possible interpretation of place 

adverbs in D1 is proposed in (Biber, 1988), 

according to which place and time adverbs are 

‘reflecting the description of other people in 

particular places and times’. Nouns, long words, 

prepositional phrases, and attributive adjectives 

mostly relate to the informational purpose (high 

frequency of nouns and modifiers of noun 

phrases usually signs high informational 

saturation). It follows that D1 is very close to the 

‘Informational vs. Involved’ dimension in 

(Biber, 1993b) since it also includes such 

features as nouns, word length, prepositional 

phrases, attributive adjectives vs. 1st and 2nd 

personal pronouns and wh-questions. 

 
Dimension 1: interactive/informative  

POSITIVE FEATURES:  1th person pronoun, 2nd 

person pronoun, place adverb, exclamation, wh-

question 

NEGATIVE FEATURES: word length, nouns, 

attributive adjective, all prepositional phrases 

(total PP) 

 

Dimension 2: presentation of personal view of 

subject/impersonal 

POSITIVE FEATURES:  pro-form of noun phrase 

(pro-form of NP), negation, mental verb, that-

complement, speech verb, wh-relative, 3rd person 

pronoun, indefinite pronoun, predicative adjective, 

pro-form of adjective phrase (pro-adjective), 

reflexive pronoun, causative subordinate clause 

 

Dimension 3: narrative/non-narrative 

POSITIVE FEATURES: past tense, perfect aspect 

NEGATIVE FEATURES: present tense 

 

Dimension 4 : abstract/non-abstract 

POSITIVE FEATURES: passive participle clause, 

agentless passive, nominalization, passive with 

agent, active participle clause, type/token ratio 

NEGATIVE FEATURES: sentence length 

 

Dimension 5 
POSITIVE FEATURES: all adverbs, time adverb, 

indefinite pronoun 

 

Dimension 6: directive/ non-directive/ 

POSITIVE FEATURES: infinitive, conditional 

subordinate clause, imperative mood, purpose 

subordinate clause 

 

Table 5: Result of the factor analysis (factorial 

structure). 

 

Dimension 2 (D2) combines features that can 

be interpreted as a report of speech of others (3th 

person pronouns, speech verbs) and features that 

can be used to frame a personal attitude towards 

some topic (mental verbs, that-complements, 

reflexive pronouns). Some features have a 

referential meaning: wh-relatives (elaborated 

reference), pro-forms of noun phrases, pro-

adjectives, and indefinite pronouns, which can be 

69



 

 

interpreted as generalized reference in a shared 

context of communication between the author 

and the reader. D2 is somewhat similar to the 

dimension in (Grieve et al., 2010) called 

Thematic Variation Dimension and also similar 

in several features to the argumentative 

Dimension 2 in (Berber Sardinha et al., 2014). 

We will interpret D2 as the dimension presenting 

an informal personal argumentation or personal 

opinion on something like other’s words or a 

context that is well known to the reader. 

Two positive (past tense and perfect aspect) 

and one negative (present tense) features allow 

interpreting of Dimension 3 (D3) as narrative vs. 

non-narrative. A similar dimension in (Biber, 

2004) has the label called ‘Narrative-focused 

discourse’.  

Dimension 4 (D4) includes a set of features 

like agentless passive, passive with an agent, 

many non-repeating words, and nominalizations 

and can be interpreted as presenting an abstract 

style of writing. It also correlates with high 

frequency of active and passive participle 

clauses. The negative correlation of this 

dimension with the average sentence length is 

unexpected. D4 is almost similar to the 

dimension called ‘Abstract vs. Non-Abstract 

style’ in (Biber, 1993b). 

It is more difficult to interpret Dimension 5 

(D5), which includes only the total number of 

adverbs, time adverbs (both usually narrative 

features), and indefinite pronouns. In the next 

section we will investigate which kind of texts is 

characterized by D5. This dimension is stable in 

the space of 40 features. However, having run 

the analysis with 63 linguistic features (it has not 

been fully tested at the time of writing), we got 

that adverbs and indefinite pronouns do not form 

a separate dimension and correlate with other 

dimensions along with place adverbs.  

The features of Dimension 6 (D6) (infinitives, 

conditional subordinate clauses, imperative 

mood, purpose subordinate clauses) reflect the 

directive function. Purpose subordinate clauses 

mostly refer not to how some action can be 

performed but for what purpose. This dimension 

can be compared to Biber’s dimension named 

‘Overt expression of persuasion’ including 

infinitives, conditional subordination, and 

different modals (Biber, 1993b). 

5 Distribution of Classes of the FTDs in 
the Space of Dimensions 

It is interesting to see how the classes of the 

FTDs, which we interpret as genres in this study, 

relate to the six dimensions of feature variation. 

For this purpose, we counted dimension scores of 

each class by summation of dimension scores of 

texts having a value 2 on the corresponding FTD 

(or FTDs), see Table 2. 

 
Class D1 D2 D3 D4 D5 D6 

C1 3.2 7.7 0.6 -4.1 4.4 2.8 

C2 13.7 12.3 3.5 -12.9 12.0 7.7 

C3 -4.0 -1.8 2.5 0.4 -1.9 -1.8 

C4 -16.8 -15.7 -6.2 17.9 -15.8 -8.5 

C5 -4.6 -8.1 -2.8 4.5 -4.8 -2.1 

C6 -5.6 -6.0 -3.2 7.0 -5.8 -5.7 

C7 -6.5 -7.8 -1.7 6.1 -5.6 -4.5 

C8 6.0 -2.4 1.5 -3.5 3.0 9.0 

C9 24.8 12.3 9.5 -19.5 13.4 9.8 

 

Table 6: Medians of dimension scores for C1-C9. 
 

Medians of the dimension scores of the classes 

are presented in Table 6. The difference between 

scores is statistically significant with p-value < 

0.05. 

Clusters C1 and C2 are quite close to each 

other; however, all average factor scores of C2 

are considerably stronger than average factor 

scores of C1. The first class is a class of 

argumentative texts. Samples from C1 mostly 

include political articles, blog posts about social 

situation, and religious texts. Most of the texts 

are non-informative, slightly interactive, non-

narrative, non-abstract, and slightly directive 

(religious texts are very directive). C1 has one 

main dimension D2, which means expressing a 

personal point of view on a particular subject and 

on positions of other people.  

C2 is a big class of different personal blogs. 

These blogs are non-abstract, highly interactive, 

and expressing personal positions about a 

subject. The class has a relatively high value on 

the narrative dimension D3 because it is 

heterogeneous to some extent and includes a set 

of narrative personal stories. 

A number of reviews from C2 (blogs with 

personal reasons about something like a political 

situation, a tour, a concert, or a book) have 

especially high scores on the argumentative 

dimension D2. So, if we want to distinguish 

70



 

 

reviews from other types of blogs automatically, 

we should take this feature into account.  

C3 is a class of news reports. The texts of this 

class appear to be informative (D1), not 

presenting personal thoughts about describing 

events, not sharing the same context with readers 

(D2), narrative (D3), mostly neutral on ‘abstract 

vs. non-abstract style’ (D4), and non-directive 

(D6).  

All legal texts belong to C4. This class is 

characterized by the highest value of D4, and 

other dimension values are low. The texts are 

very abstract, very informative, non-narrative, 

non-directive, and not presenting any personal 

positions about subjects. C4 is the most 

informative class in the set; its texts are 

characterized by long words, a large number of 

noun phrases, and its modifiers. 

C5, the class of advertisements, has a large 

standard deviation for D1, D2 and D4-D6. The 

analysis of the texts which factor scores are far 

from the means of the dimensions indicated 

above showed that C5 includes very different 

sets of advertisements. It has an impact on the 

resulting dimension scores of the class. Most of 

advertising texts are informative, not showing 

personal argumentation about anything, and not 

highly directive; however, in the corpus we have 

several advertisements on dating sites which 

have appeal to potential partners and strong 

motivation to write a respond. As opposed to 

these addressee and personal focused texts, 

another set of advertisements is highly abstract 

because it describes technically complicated 

products (cameras, automobiles, synthesizers, 

etc.). It is unusual for advertisements in our 

corpus and more typical for scientific texts. So, 

we could see that values of dimensions scores 

could help us to find different subgenres in the 

genres of advertisement in the present corpus. 

The type of texts related to a field of Science 

and Technology is included in the class C6. All 

the texts of the class are informative, non-

narrative, non-directive, abstract, and not 

presenting a personal position. It is relevant for 

the scientific articles presented in the corpus. 

C7 (encyclopedic texts) and C8 (instructive 

texts) have large standard deviations for D1, D2, 

D4, and D5. C7 includes texts which are highly 

informative and abstract, but also it contains a set 

of texts which do define some topics but not 

encyclopedic at all (interactive, non-abstract, and 

presenting a personal argumentation), e.g., a 

description of an episode from The Simpsons, a 

movie review or an obituary. We suppose that 

the problem with C7 can be solved by adding to 

the corpus more variety of texts defining some 

topic, especially texts not written by academic 

language. On the other hand, it might be 

reasonable to suppose that we had some errors in 

the annotation on the FTD 16 (defining a topic). 

The main characteristic of C8 is high values of 

D6, which has a directive meaning. Looking at 

the samples from the class, we can understand 

that large values of a standard deviation are due 

to the fact that C8 consists of two sets of 

different instructions. The first small set consists 

of technical instructions, user’s guides, and 

recipes; they all are informative, non-interactive, 

and abstract. The second big set includes highly 

interactive and non-abstract texts with some kind 

of informal communication with the reader, for 

example, a blog post advising on how to quit 

smoking. This spread of dimension values shows 

two different types (or subgenres) of instructions 

in our corpus.  

Fiction texts of C9 are highly interactive, 

presenting personal attitude and argumentation, 

highly narrative, non-abstract, and directive.  We 

undoubtedly should extend the corpus for further 

research because it contains only 10 fictional 

texts although they are quite long. Even though it 

is difficult to analyse the class C9, it shows the 

highest values on D3 (narrative vs. non-

narrative). C9 is also highly marked on D2 which 

once again shows the close proximity of D2 to a 

personal side of discourse. Only C9 has as high 

values on D6 as C8. Analysis of the samples of 

C9 showed that it is mostly due to specific 

features of fictional texts in our corpus (high 

frequency of infinitives, purpose and conditional 

subordinate clauses). 

Concerning D5, which includes only such 

features as total adverbs, time adverbs, and 

indefinite pronouns, we have a hypothesis that 

this dimension is a part of some other dimension, 

which might be or might be not presented in our 

current set. After analysing the medians of the 

scores on D5, we can suppose that D5 is close to 

D1 or D2. High positive scores on D5 mark 

mostly personal blogs and fictional texts. 

Negative scores are typical for legal texts, 

scientific, encyclopedic texts, and adverts. All 

texts labeled by the highest values of D5 are 

personal blog stories, so we assume that D5 is a 

part of D2. D5 is also very similar to the negative 

pole of the dimension called ‘Elaborated vs. 

Situated reference’ in (Biber, 1993b) including 

such features as place, time and other adverbs.  

     

71



 

 

 
 

Figure 1: Distribution of 9 classes of the FDTs in D3 (narrative vs. non-narrative) and D6 (directive 

vs. non-directive). 

Figure 3 presents an illustration how the 

classes are located in the space of D3 (narrative 

vs. non-narrative) and D6 (directive vs. non-

directive).  

6 Conclusions and Further Research 

We have investigated variations in the linguistic 

properties of texts from the Russian Web by 

applying Biber's Multi-dimensional analysis to a 

Web corpus and have successfully used a much 

bigger Web corpus (GICR) to build a linguistic 

tagger.  

By using factor analysis, we found six 

dimensions around which all functionally similar 

linguistic features are grouped for the presented 

corpus, and which were interpreted from the 

point of view of their functions. The dimensions 

obtained in this study are very similar to (Biber, 

1993b) except for D2, which combines features 

usually found in several other dimensions such 

as ‘Involved’ (e.g., mental verbs or negation), 

‘Elaborated reference’ (e.g., relative clauses), 

and 'Narrative' (e.g., 3rd personal pronouns, 

speech verbs). A larger corpus might provide a 

better match to the classical features. 

Russian is not fundamentally different from 

English with respect to implementation of MD 

analysis; many features can be mapped, even 

though more morphological and syntactical 

features need to be processed. 

The results of the MD analysis show that the 

classes of the FTDs (close to traditional genres) 

and the dimensions of language variation in 

Russian have evident connection. Every class has 

its own place in the multidimensional space of 

linguistic features. Deviations in dimension 

values for each text in each cluster allow us to 

find errors in annotation or functional groups of 

texts within a cluster (e.g., technical instructions 

vs. advice in C8). This shows that the MD 

approach can be used for finding text features 

specific for different genres and also for 

detecting fine-grained differences between 

subgenres. 

The FTDs are not genres, but we assume that 

different genres in big corpora can be described 

by sets of different FTDs, so we should be able 

to identify them in texts. Our analysis shows that 

every major FTD describing a genre corresponds 

to a set of linguistic features. This could be used 

for the purpose of the automatic genre 

classification (the results of the first experiments 

with classification see in Lagutin et al., 2015). 

In further research we intend to examine the 

FTDs in the space of an extended set of linguistic 

features, to experiment with a bigger corpus and 

to add discourse structure features. 

Acknowledgements 

This study has been supported by a joint project 

with Skoltech and Moscow State University, 

‘Brains, minds and machines’ (Joint Lab. Agr. - 

No 081-R 1.10.2013). 

 

72



 

 

References 

John F. Bailyn. 2012. The Syntax of Russian. 

Cambridge: CUP, pages 84–109. 

Mikhail Bakhtin. 1996. The problems of speech 

genres [Problemy rechevykh zhanrov]. Russian 

dictionaries [Risskie slovari]. Collected writings. 

Moscow, pages 159–206.  

Tony Berber Sardinha, Carlos Kauffmann, and 

Cristina Mayer Acunzo. 2014. A multi-

dimensional analysis of register variation in 

Brazilian Portuguese. Corpora, volume 9(2), pages 

239–271. 

Niko Besnier. 1988. The linguistic relationships of 

spoken and written Nukulaelae registers. 

Language, volume 64(4), pages 707–736. 

Douglas Biber. 1986. Spoken and written textual 

dimensions in English: resolving the contradictory 

findings. Language, volume 62, pages 384–414.  

Douglas Biber. 1988. Variation across Speech and 

Writing. Cambridge: CUP. 

Douglas Biber. 1993a. Using register-diversified 

corpora for general language studies. 

Computational Linguistics, volume 19, pages 219–

241. 

Douglas Biber. 1993b. The multi-dimensional 

approach to linguistic analyses of genre variation: 

an overview of methodology and findings. 

Computers and the Humanities, volume 26, 

pages 331–345. 

Douglas Biber. 2004. Conversation text types:  a 

multi-dimensional analysis. In Gérald Purnelle,   
Cédrick Fairon, and Anne Dister (eds.) Le poids 

des mots: Proc. of the 7th International Conference 

on the Statistical Analysis of Textual Data, 

Louvain: Presses universitaires de Louvain, p.15–

34. 

Douglas Biber and Mohamed Hared. 1994. Linguistic 

correlates of the transition to literacy in Somali: 

language adaptation in six press registers. In 

Douglas Biber and Edward Finegan (eds.) 

Sociolinguistic Perspectives on Register, Oxford, 

pages 182–216. 

Douglas Biber and Nicole Tracy-Ventura. 2007. 

Dimensions of register variation in Spanish. In 

Giovanni Parodi (ed.) Working with Spanish 

Corpora, London: Continuum, pages 54–89. 

Douglas Biber, Ulla Connor, and Thomas A. Upton. 

2007. Discourse on the Move: Using Corpus 

Analysis to Describe Discourse Structure, 

Amsterdam – Philadelphia, pages 261–271. 

Victor Bocharov, Svetlana Bichineva, Dmitry 

Granovsky, et al. 2011. Quality assurance tools in 

the OpenCorpora project. Proc. Dialogue, Russian 

International Conference on Computational 

Linguistics, Bekasovo, pages 101–110. 

Pavel Braslavski. 2011. Marrying relevance and genre 

rankings: an exploratory study. Genres on the Web 

Computational Models and Empirical Studies. 

Text, Speech and Language Technology, volume 

42, pages 191–208.  

Scott A. Crossley and Max Louwerse. 2007. Multi-

dimensional register classification using bi-grams. 

International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 

volume 12(4), pages 453–478. 

Jocelyne Daems, Dirk Speelman, and Tom Ruette. 

2013. Register analysis in blogs: correlation 

between professional sector and functional 

dimensions. Leuven Working Papers in Linguistics, 

volume 2(1), pages 1–27. 

Jesse Egbert, Douglas Biber, and Mark Davies. 2015. 

Developing a bottom-up, user-based method of 

web register classification. Journal of the 

Association for Information Science and 

Technology, pages 1–15. 

Aidan Finn, Nicholas Kushmerich, and Barry Smyth. 

2003. Learning to classify documents according to 

genre. IJCAI-2003 Workshop on Computational 

Approaches to Text Style and Synthesis, Acapulco, 

pages 35–45.   

Richard S. Forsyth and Serge Sharoff. 2014. 

Document dissimilarity within and across 

languages: a benchmarking study. Literary and 

Linguistic Computing, volume 29, pages 6–22. 

Jack Grieve, Douglas Biber, Eric Friginal, and 

Tatiana Nekrasova. 2010. Variations among blogs: 

a multi-dimensional analysis. In Alexander Mehler, 

Serge Sharoff, and Marina Santini (eds.) Genres on 

the Web: Computational Models and Empirical 

Studies, Berlin – New York: Springer, pages 303–

323. 

Robert Kabakoff. 2011. R in Action. Data Analysis 

and Graphics with R. New York, pages 347–348. 

YouJin Kim and Douglas Biber. 1994. A corpus-

based analysis of register variation in Korean. In 

Douglas Biber and Eric Finegan (eds.) 

Sociolinguistic Perspectives on Register, Oxford, 

pages 157–181. 

Eduard Klyshinsky, Natalia Kochetkova, Oksana 

Mansurova, Elena Iagounova, Vadim Maximov, 

and Olesia Karpik. 2013. Development of Russian 

subcategorization frames and its properties 

investigation. Keldysh Institute preprints, 

Moscow, no. 41, pages 1–23. 
Mikhail Lagutin, Anisya Katinskaya, Vladimir 

Selegey, Serge Sharoff, and Alexey Sorokin. 2015. 

Automatic classification of web texts using 

Functional Text Dimensions. Proc. Dialogue, 

Russian International Conference on 

Computational Linguistics, Bekasovo, volume 1, 

pages 398–414. 

William Lamb. 2008. Scottish Gaelic Speech and 

Writing: Register Variation in an Endangered 

Language. Belfast: Cló Ollscoil na Banríona. 

David Lee. 2001. Genres, registers, text types, 

domains, and styles: clarifying the concepts and 

navigating a path through the BNC jungle. 

Language Learning and Technology, volume 5(3), 

pages 37–72. 

Yong-Bae Lee and Sung Hyon Myaeng. 2004. 

Automatic identification of text genres and their 

73



 

 

roles in subject-based categorization. Proc. of the 

37th Hawaii International Conference on System 

Science (HICSS ’04), pages 1–10. 

Stephanos E. Michos, Efstathios Stamatatos, Nikos 

Fakotakis, and Georgios Kokkinakis. 1996. An 

empirical text categorizing computational model 

based on stylistic aspects. Proc. of the 8 the 

International Conference on Tools with Artificial 

Intelligence (TAI’96), pages 71–77. 

Inge de Mönnink, Niek Brom, and Nelleke Oostdijk. 

2003. Using the MF/MD method for automatic text 

classification. In Sylviane Granger and Stephanie 

Petch Tyson (eds.) Extending the Scope of Corpus-

based Research: New Applications, New 

Challenges, Amsterdam, pages 15–25.  

Junsaku Nakamura. 1993. Statistical methods and 

large corpora – a new tool for describing text type. 

In Mona Baker, Gill Francis, and Elena Tognini-

Bonelli (eds.) Text and technology, Philadelphia – 

Amsterdam, pages 291–312.  

Andrea Nini. 2014. Multidimensional Analysis Tagger

 1.2, Manual. Available: 

http://sites.google.com/site/multidimensionaltagger  

Giovanni Parodi. 2007. Variation across registers in 

Spanish: exploring the El Grial PUCV corpus. In 

Giovanni Parodi (ed.) Working with Spanish 

Corpora, London: Continuum, pages 11–53. 

Alexander Piperski, Vladimir Belikov, Nikolay 

Kopylov, Vladimir Selegey, and Serge Sharoff. 

2013. Big and diverse is beautiful: a large corpus 

of Russian to study linguistic variation. Proc. 8th 

Web as Corpus Workshop (WAC-8), pages 24–29. 

Alexey Sorokin, Anisya Katinskaya, and Serge 

Sharoff. 2014. Associating symptoms with 

syndromes: reliable genre annotation for a large 

Russian webcorpus. Proc. Dialogue, Russian 

International Conference on Computational 

Linguistics, Bekasovo, pages 646–659. 

Helmut Schmid and Florian Laws. 2008. Estimation 

of conditional probabilities with decision trees and 

an application to fine-grained POS tagging. Proc. 

of the 22
nd

 International Conference on 

Computational Linguistics (COLING’08), 

Manchester, volume 1, pages 777–784. 

Serge Sharoff. 2010. In the garden and in the jungle: 

comparing genres in the BNC and the internet. In 

Alexander Mehler, Serge Sharoff, and Marina 

Santini (eds.) Genres on the Web: Computational 

Models and Empirical Studies, Berlin – New York: 

Springer, pages 149–166.  

Serge Sharoff and Joakim Nivre. 2011. The proper 

place of men and machines in language 

technology: processing Russian without any 

linguistic knowledge. Proc. Dialogue, Russian 

International Conference on Computational 

Linguistics, Bekasovo, pages 591–604. 

Efstathios Stamatatos, Nikos Fakotakis, and Georgios 

Kokkinakis. 2001. Automatic text categorization in 

terms of genre and author. Computational 

Linguistics, volume 26(4), pages 471–495. 

Robert Sigley. 1997. Text categories and where you 

can stick them: a crude formality index. 

International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 

volume 2(2), pages 199–237. 

Elena Yagunova and Anna Pospelova. 2014. Opyt 

primeneniya stilevyh i zhanrovyh harakteristik dlya 

opisaniya stilevyh osobennostej kollekcij tekstov. 

Novye informacionnye tekhnologii v 

avtomatizirovannyh sistemah, no. 17, pages 347–

356.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

74


