



















































Modeling and Characterizing Social Media Topics Using the Gamma Distribution


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on EVENTS at the NAACL-HLT 2015, pages 117–122,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Modeling and Characterizing Social Media Topics Using the Gamma
Distribution

Connie Yee, Nathan Keane, Liang Zhou
Text Analytics and Machine Learning

Thomson Reuters
New York, NY 10036, USA

{connie.yee,nathan.keane,l.zhou}@thomsonreuters.com

Abstract

We present a novel technique to identify
emerging or important topics mentioned on
social media. A sudden increase in related
posts can indicate an occurrence of an ex-
ternal event. Assuming that the sequence
of posts is a homogeneous Poisson process,
this sudden change can be modeled using the
Gamma distribution. Our Gamma curve fitter
is used to return a set of emerging topics. We
demonstrate our algorithm on Twitter data and
evaluate empirically using the Reuters News
Archive and manual inspection. Our exper-
imental results show that our algorithm pro-
vides a good picture of the emerging topics
discussed on Twitter.

1 Introduction

Over the past decade, microblogging sites, such as
Twitter, have emerged as an important source of
real-time news updates, with each microblogger act-
ing as an information source. In contrast with news
writing and reporting, microbloggers post content
that is brief and uses colloquial language.

Some posts are reactions to events that have al-
ready broken out to the public. For content that orig-
inated in standard media outlets, such as newswire,
the social medium can act as a filter and amplifier
(Asur et al., 2011). Other posts serve as originators
of events. For example, Twitter has been observed
to lead newswire in reporting on sporting events and
natural disasters (Petrovic et al., 2013). For sport-
ing events, such as the FIFA World Cup, millions of
users turn to microblogs to comment on what they
just witnessed at a stadium or watched on television.

We are interested in discovering events related to
both content from news outlets and content that orig-
inates on social media. An event occurrence can be
detected by the volume and sudden change in vol-
ume of posts. After examining the distributions of
the volumes of topics in Twitter, we observe two
main categories of topics:

• Long-lasting topics that Twitter users fre-
quently discuss in their daily lives, such as the
foods they ate and the activities they are cur-
rently doing

• Emerging topics1, or topics of importance to
the general public, such as sporting events and
natural disasters

Long-lasting topics tend to have a uniform distribu-
tion of volume over time, while emerging topics usu-
ally contain spikes in volume.

In this paper, we aim to detect the emerging top-
ics by modeling a topic’s frequency distribution with
the Gamma distribution. It is a suitable function for
modeling if we assume that the posts responding to
an event arrive as a homogeneous Poisson process.

We begin with an initial set of event candidates by
taking a topic modeling approach and assume that
the words in a topic cluster represent one event. The
event candidates are the inputs to the curve fitting
algorithm, which returns the events that have valid
model parameter values. We consider the outputs of
our algorithm to be the emerging topics.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 in-
troduces related work in event detection in Twitter.

1We view an emerging topic as an event so we use the words
“topic” and “event” interchangeably in this paper.

117



Section 3 explains our modeling algorithm and the
theory behind it. Section 4 reports our experimental
results, which are evaluated in Section 5. We con-
clude and discuss future work in Section 6.

2 Related Work

Event detection in Twitter has been well-researched
in recent years. Some focus on a keyword-based ap-
proach, such as through hashtags or term n-grams,
to track trends. Shamma et al. (2011) investigated
using a normalized term frequency to identify peaky
and persistent topics. A challenge with a bursty term
analysis is the difficulty in capturing an event with
just a single string of words. Furthermore, the abil-
ity to identify an event requires that at least one term
has a burst of relative frequency.

Other research has leveraged topic models as a
means of learning clusters of events that are asso-
ciated with an event. Topic models express a dis-
tribution over terms and thus are more descriptive
than single keywords. Of the research that is based
on topic modeling, much has been in the form of
retrospective event detection models (Ramage et al.,
2010). Recently, more work has been performed
in the area of on-line processing of documents as
they arrive (Lau et al., 2012), temporal topic mod-
els (Hong et al., 2011), and user-temporal mixture
models (Yin et al., 2013).

There has been some prior work to incorporate the
above-mentioned types of event detection methods
with the properties of the topics or events. Zubiaga
et al. (2014) aimed to classify trending topics by
running a classifier using 15 features that consider
the way a topic spreads.

Much of the focus of unsupervised methods has
been on particular types of tweets or terms. Yang
and Leskovec (2011) examined patterns of tempo-
ral behavior for hashtags. They presented the K-
spectral centroid clustering algorithm to determine
six classes of common temporal patterns that tweets
containing hashtags follow. Further research by
(Matsubara et al., 2012) proposed a general model
for the rise and fall patterns of influence propaga-
tion. Zhao et al. (2012) studied a global bursty pat-
tern derived from multiple types of tweets (posts,
retweets, URL-embedded tweets) and modeled the
smoothness of the state context. Their model was

solely tested on keywords.
Shapes are a concise way of describing temporal

variable behaviors. Each shape can be assessed by
attributes, such as the rate a spike increases (Gregory
and Shneiderman, 2012). There is evidence in data
from the digital web site digg.com that the novelty
of a topic determines how it decays over time (Wu
and Huberman, 2007). Asur et al. (2011) observed
that the number of tweets across trending topics can
be characterized by a log-normal distribution and a
linear decay. The trending topics were provided by
the Twitter Search API and mostly consisted of two
to three word expressions.

3 Modeling Topic Frequency Distributions

3.1 Topic Modeling and Segment Selection

This section describes how we form our initial set
of event candidates and then select the segment of
the frequency distribution for the next step of our
algorithm.

Topics can be extracted from textual corpora
through probabilistic topic models. Latent Dirich-
let Allocation (LDA) is a widely adopted generative
model for topic modeling (Blei et al., 2003). For
each document, there is a multinomial distribution
over topics. For each topic, there is another multi-
nomial distribution over words. A popular algorithm
for LDA model parameter estimation and inference
is Gibbs sampling (Griffiths and Steyvers, 2004).

We used an LDA algorithm, similar to the MAL-
LET topic model package (McCallum, 2002), with
an efficient Gibbs sampling to identify 50 topics per
day as event candidates. Each tweet was treated as
one document. The resulting topics were then ana-
lyzed as follows:

1. Count the number of tweets that contain at least
30% of the topic in 15-minute intervals.

2. Determine the most relevant portion of the time
series to model. Identify the highest peak and
the points immediately preceding and follow-
ing it, whose volumes are at least x% of the
peak volume. We experimented with x rang-
ing from 10–90% in increments of 10% and se-
lected x = 30 based on manual inspection.

118



3.2 Modeling Tweet Frequency

In this section, we explain how we model the num-
ber of tweets regarding a particular event.

We envisage the arrival of tweets as a Poisson pro-
cess. A Poisson process is a widely-used stochas-
tic process for modeling the times at which arrivals
enter a system. The sequence of interarrival times
X1, X2, ... in the Poisson process is a sequence of in-
dependent and identically distributed (IID) random
variables, each having a probability density of an ex-
ponential, fX(x) = λe−λx , for some rate λ > 0 and
x > 0. A unique property of the Poisson process is
the memoryless quality. This means that the distri-
bution of the remaining arrivals is the same as the
original arrival time distribution, i.e. the remaining
arrival time has no “memory” of previous arrivals.

Using the Poisson distribution, we model a poster
tweeting after an event as an IID random variable
with an exponential density function fX(x). Assum-
ing a homogeneous Poisson process, where the post-
ing rate λ for this event is constant, a second poster
independently tweeting after the same event also has
an exponential density function fX(x).

The interarrival times of tweets after an event then
become the sum of n IID random variables, each
with the density function fX(x) = λe−λx. Given
that the density of the sum of two independent ran-
dom variables can be found by convolving their den-
sities, the convolution of multiple exponential dis-
tributions is called the Gamma density (Akkouchi,
2005). Thus, the time of the nth post, Tn, follows a
Gamma distribution.

If we letNt be the number of posts in time interval
[0, t], it can be shown that {Nt ≥ n} and {Tn ≤ t}
represent the same event. Using this duality, we can
fix the time interval and model the frequencies of the
tweets.

3.3 Curve Fitting and Parameter Estimation

The Gamma distribution has three different types,
one of which is the two-parameter gamma distribu-
tion, given by (1).

f(x;α, β) =
1

Γ(α)βα
xα−1e−x/β,

0 < x <∞;α, β > 0
(1)

The parameter α is known as the shape parameter,
since it most influences the peakedness of the distri-
bution, while the parameter β is called the scale pa-
rameter, which mostly influences the spread of the
distribution.

Since there is no closed-form solution for the
Gamma distribution, we used a heuristic search
method to estimate the parameters of the distribu-
tion. A commonly used nonlinear optimization tech-
nique called the Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm
(Lagarias et al., 1998) was employed for this pur-
pose.

To avoid the need to normalize the time series, we
fit the time series segments to the three-parameter
probability density function. It can be obtained from
(1) by adding a scaling factor A0 and replacing x by
x− µ, where µ is the location parameter, as in (2).

f(x;α, β, µ) =
A0

Γ(α)βα
(x− µ)α−1e−(x−µ)/β,

x ≥ µ;α, β > 0
(2)

The estimated values for α and β, as well as the
sum of squared errors, or χ2, were further analyzed.
A threshold on A0 can be optionally set so that only
tweets that meet a minimum volume level are con-
sidered.

4 Experimental Results

Our experiments were conducted in a retrospective
fashion, whereby we assumed the full document col-
lection was given as input.

4.1 Data Cleaning and Topic Modeling

First, we gathered approximately 127 million tweets
spanning 2014-06-14 0:00 GMT to 2014-06-27
11:59 GMT from Twitter Decahose, which is a feed
of 10% of all tweets. We then conducted pre-
processing by removing stopwords, URLs, and non-
ASCII characters.

Following the data cleaning, we ran LDA on each
of the 14 days of tweets to obtain 700 topics. Out of
the 700 raw topics, we achieved convergence with
defined χ2 for 36 topics. Table 1 lists four topics that
were randomly selected for further examination.

119



Date Topic Top Words
2014-06-14 Stanley

Cup
game kings cup win
hockey

2014-06-15 Wonder
Goal

goal messi argentina
france #worldcup

2014-06-19 Biting england rooney
suarez goal uruguay

2014-06-27 Player
Contract

money pay million
shaw united

Table 1: Selected topics.

4.2 Curve Fitting
The frequency distribution of the “Stanley Cup”
topic over a 24-hour window is shown in Fig. 1.
The curve segment between the two labeled points
served as the input to the curve fitter, which esti-
mated α and β to be 48.55 and 0.08, respectively.

Figure 1: Frequency distribution of the “Stanley Cup”
topic.

To better understand these estimated parameter
values, we can compare it to another topic with the
same β value. Fig. 2 shows the distributions of the
“Stanley Cup” (solid line) and the “Biting” (dotted
line) topics. The “Biting” topic, which refers to a
shocking biting incident during the World Cup, has a
sharper peak, thereby translating to a higher α value
of 129.25. On the other hand, the “Stanley Cup”
topic denotes an expected or planned event whose
outcome happened to be predictable.

We can analyze the effect of the β parameter by
keeping α constant. Fig. 3 shows two topics with the
same α value. The solid line represents the “Player
Contract” topic, while the dotted line is the “Won-
der Goal” topic. The latter topic refers to one of the

Figure 2: Distributions of two topics with β = 0.08 and
different αs.

greatest soccer goals made by a player. While this
event is impressive enough to make it on social me-
dia, it appears to dissipate quickly and is likely soon
replaced by the next great play in the World Cup.
Its α value is a mere 1.69. In contrast, the “Player
Contract” topic with α of 8.03 is discussed over the
course of ten hours, as the signing of a well-known
player to a new team can have great implications for
the coming season.

Figure 3: Distributions of two topics with α = 1.74 and
different βs.

5 Evaluation

We evaluated empirically all the events discovered
from the curve fitting algorithm. For purposes of
evaluation, we considered an event to be an actual
event if it falls in one of two categories:

• news, if it reached the standard media outlets

• social, if it was solely discussed on social me-
dia

120



By determining the number of news and social
events, and dividing it by the total number of events
discovered, we calculated precision, as defined in
(3). Our algorithm achieved 77.8% precision.

Precision =
|news|+ |social|

total
(3)

5.1 News Events

We leveraged the news domain to identify news
events. Traditional news media, such as Reuters,
typically span a wide range of categories, from fash-
ion to finance. Although its distribution over the cat-
egories differs from that in Twitter, it is safe to as-
sume that if an event is mentioned in newswire, it
carries some importance.

We performed a query-based search in the Reuters
News Archive to collect documents written within
one day of the event date. By querying stories both
before and after the event, we analyzed events that
originated either in newswire or on social media. A
news story was counted if it contained at least five
of the top ten words. 15 of the 36 topics had at least
one corresponding story in Reuters News, and con-
centrated on major sporting events.

5.2 Social Events

There are events that fail to reach the standard media
outlets but are significant in the social media context.
We inspected the remaining 21 topics which lacked a
corresponding news story and categorized them into
three main areas, as shown in Table 2.

Entertainment #shawntotop shawn buy follow
follow sos love luke

Daily Life happy birthday day love hope
day happy fathers dad

Twitter Related tweet cool funny haha post
follow ya follback yo click

Table 2: Examples of events not mentioned in newswire.

After examining some representative tweets, we
concluded that the “Entertainment” events were
largely based on the Twitter users’ interests, such
as a new music album release. They were labeled
as social events. The “Daily Life” and “Twitter Re-
lated” topics are examples of long-lasting topics that
do not carry much news nor social significance.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

Our novel technique based on the Gamma distribu-
tion offers a useful starting point for using the shapes
of the frequencies to determine whether a topic is
an emerging topic. Although some long-lasting top-
ics were also detected, the algorithm is able to pro-
vide a good picture of the news and social events
discussed on social media. Some advantages of our
method are that it is unsupervised and independent
of how the initial set of event candidates are formed,
which means that LDA can be replaced with a dif-
ferent topic model.

While we made simplifications and assumptions
in our algorithm, there are several directions for fu-
ture research. One area is to relax the assumption of
modeling the sequence of posts as a homogeneous
Poisson process. Since the posting rate λ for an
event likely changes over time, we can divide the en-
tire sequence into smaller segments and model each
separately. In addition, removing cyclical or sea-
sonal topics before curve fitting may help eliminate
false positives.

References
Mohamed Akkouchi. 2005. On the convolution of expo-

nential distributions. Soochow Journal of Mathemat-
ics, 31(2):205-211.

Sitaram Asur, Bernardo A. Huberman, Gabor Szabo, and
Chunyan Wang. 2011. Trends in social media: per-
sistence and decay. In Proceedings of the 5th Interna-
tional AAAI conference on Weblogs and Social Media.

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. The Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 3:993–1022.

Machon B. Gregory and Ben Shneiderman. 2012. Shape
identification in temporal data sets. In Expanding the
Frontiers of Visual Analytics and Visualization, pages
305–321. Springer London.

Thomas L. Griffiths and Mark Steyvers. 2004. Find-
ing scientific topics. In Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science, 101: 5228-5235.

Liangjie Hong, Dawei Yin, Jian Guo, and Brian D. Davi-
son. 2011. Tracking trends: incorporating term vol-
ume into temporal topic models. In Proceedings of
the 17th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 484–
492.

Jeffrey C. Lagarias, James A. Reeds, Margaret H. Wright,
and Paul E. Wright. 1998. Convergence properties of

121



the Nelder–Mead simplex method in low dimensions.
SIAM Journal on optimization, 9(1):112–147.

JeyHan Lau, Nigel Collier, and Timothy Baldwin. 2012.
On–line trend analysis with topic models: #twitter
trends detection topic model online. In Proceedings
of COLING 2012, pages 1519–1534.

Yasuko Matsubara, Yasushi Sakurai, B. Aditya Prakash,
Lei Li, and Christos Faloutsos. 2012. Rise and fall
patterns of information diffusion: model and implica-
tions. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD In-
ternational Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pages 6–14. ACM.

Andrew K. McCallum. 2002. MALLET: A machine
learning for language toolkit. http://mallet.
cs.umass.edu.

Sasa Petrovic, Miles Osborne, Richard McCreadie, Craig
Macdonald, Iadh Ounis, and Luke Shrimpton. 2013.
Can Twitter replace Newswire for breaking news? In
Proceedings of the 7th International AAAI Conference
on Weblogs and Social Media.

Daniel Ramage, Susan Dumais, and Dan Liebling. 2010.
Characterizing microblogs with topic models. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth International AAAI Conference
on Weblogs and Social Media, pages 130–137.

Daniel M. Romero, Wojciech Galuba, Sitaram Asur, and
Bernardo A. Huberman. 2011. Influence and passivity
in social media. In Machine Learning and Knowledge
Discovery in Databases, pages 18–33. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.

David A. Shamma, Lyndon Kennedy, Elizabeth F.
Churchill. 2011. Peaks and persistence: modeling
the shape of microblog conversations. In Proceedings
of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, pages 355–358. ACM.

Fang Wu and Bernardo A. Huberman. 2007. Novelty
and collective attention. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 104(45):17599–17601.

Jaewon Yang and Jure Leskovec. 2011. Patterns of tem-
poral variation in online media. In Proceedings of the
Fourth ACM International Conference on Web Search
and Data Mining, pages 177–186. ACM.

Hongzhi Yin, Bin Cui, Hua Lu, Yuxin Huang, and Junjie
Yao. 2013. A unified model for stable and temporal
topic detection from social media data. In Data Engi-
neering (ICDE), pages 661–672. IEEE.

Wayne X. Zhao, Baihan Shu, Jing Jiang, Yang Song,
Hongfei Yan, and Xiaoming Li. 2012. Identifying
event–related bursts via social media activities. In
Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
1466–1477. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Arkaitz Zubiaga, Damiano Spina, Raquel Martinez, and
Victor Fresno. 2014. Real–time classification of Twit-
ter trends. Journal of the Association for Information
Science and Technology.

122


