



















































The Subjectival Surface-Syntactic Relation in Serbian


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 231–240,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

The Subjectival Surface-Syntactic Relation in Serbian 

 
Jasmina Milićević 

Dalhousie University in Halifax 
Department of French 

Canada 
jmilicev@dal.ca 

 

Abstract 

The paper focuses on the notion of (surface) 
syntactic subject in Serbian within the syntac-
tic dependency framework of the Meaning-
Text linguistic theory. Properties of the subject 
are described and its text implementations il-
lustrated with data from a variety of contem-
porary texts. 

1 The Problem Stated 
The aim of this paper is to describe and illustrate, 
from a syntactic dependency viewpoint, the no-
tion of syntactic subject as applied to Serbian. By 
doing so, the paper puts to test the adequacy of 
the conceptual and formal tools of the Meaning-
Text dependency syntax, hoping to contribute to 
a broader understanding of the general notion of 
syntactic subject itself.  

Syntactic subject is the dependent element of 
the subjectival surface-syntactic relation, a major 
valence-controlled syntactic-dependency rela-
tion. It is the most privileged dependent element 
of the clause in that it possesses properties that 
do not accrue to any other clause element. Un-
derstandably, the notion of syntactic subject has 
been vigorously investigated, especially in typo-
logical/cross-linguistic perspective, for instance, 
in Keenan (1976), Kibrik (1977), Foley & Van 
Valin (1997), Mithun & Chafe (1999), Lazard 
(2009), Creissels (2014) and Mel’čuk (2014), to 
mention just a few influential papers. Yet, a 
number of issues surrounding the notion remain 
controversial: null subjects, quirky subjects, psy-
chological vs. grammatical subject, and so on; 
even the cross-linguistic nature of the notion has 
been questioned. For the viewpoint taken on 
some of these issues in this paper, see the next 
section.  

As for the syntactic subject in Serbian, even 
though it has been described in studies such as 
Piper et al. (2005: 487-491), Klajn (2005: 225-
227 and 256-257), and Mrazovac & Vukadinović 

(2009: 525-527), the latter being dependency-
oriented, to the best of my knowledge, there has 
been no comprehensive account of this syntactic 
role—at any rate, not in a formalized dependency 
framework of the type used here. For Croatian, 
studies dedicated specifically to issues related to 
the syntactic subject include Kučanda (1998), 
Buljan & Kučanda (2004) and Belaj & Kučanda 
(2007); given the proximity of the two lan-
guages, the findings for Croatian are valid for 
Serbian as well.  

The research reported in the paper is part of a 
larger project on identification and description of 
surface-syntactic relations in Serbian. The lin-
guistic data used in the research comes from two 
contemporary novels (Žurić 2009, Arsenijević 
2013), the Corpus of Serbian language, and Ser-
bian Internet pages, accessed through Google 
searches; some examples are my own.  

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: 
Section 2 presents the theoretical framework of 
the paper and introduces the necessary notions; 
Section 3 describes and illustrates the subject-
hood in Serbian; Section 4 formulates a conclu-
sion. 

2 The Framework 
Meaning-Text linguistic theory (Mel’čuk 1974, 
1988, 2012-2013-2015; Kahane 2003) is a 
framework for the construction of functional 
models of languages, called Meaning-Text Mod-
els. These are dependency-based models, making 
use of three major dependency types: semantic, 
syntactic and morphological (Mel’čuk, 2009). 

In a binary phrase L1—L2, L1 is the syntactic 
governor of L2, its dependent, if L1 determines to 
a greater extent the passive syntactic valence, or 
distribution, of the entire phrase; we then write: 
L1–synt→L2. In most cases the syntactic governor 
also determines the dependent’s linear position in 
the clause with respect to itself and/or its other 
dependents. 

A Meaning-Text linguistic model has multi-
stratal and modular organization, i.e., it presup-

231



poses several levels of representation of utter-
ances and consists of sets or rules, or modules, 
operating between adjacent representation levels. 
In syntax, two representational levels are fore-
seen: deep- and surface syntactic levels. As men-
tioned above, the subjectival relation is one of 
valence-controlled surface-syntactic relations [= 
SSyntRel]. Valence-controlled, or actantial, rela-
tions are opposed to circumstantial relations, this 
opposition being fundamental in syntax; for the 
Meaning-Text take on actants, see Mel’čuk 
(2004). Unlike deep-syntactic relations, which 
are language independent, SSyntRels are lan-
guage specific and need to be discovered empiri-
cally. Special criteria and tests have been devel-
oped to this end within the Meaning-Text 
framework; for their application for distinguish-
ing the valence-controlled SSyntRels in French, 
see Iordanskaja & Mel’čuk (2009). Mille (2014) 
follows largely the same methodology for estab-
lishing the SSyntRels for Spanish. 

A given SSyntRel is described by stating the 
properties of its dependent element. Building 
upon the seminal work of Keenan (1976), 
Mel’čuk (2014) establishes the properties of the 
syntactic subject, dividing them into defining (= 
coding) properties and characterizing (= behav-
ioral) properties.  

Defining properties of the SyntSubj are speci-
fied along the parameters given in Table 1. For a 
sentence element L to be declared the subject (in 
a given language), at least some of these parame-
ters must apply to it (i.e., have the positive val-
ue). 

Characterizing properties concern the sub-
ject’s specific behavior in various syntactic oper-
ations: pronominalization, ellipsis, passivization, 
dislocation, extraction, etc. (for a fuller list, see 
Table 2 below). These properties accrue only to 
prototypical subjects, i.e., they are not necessari-
ly valid for all subjects in a language and can 
apply to clause elements other than the subject.  

The prototypical subject is the subject that is 
the least constrained in its co-occurrence with the 
MV; in other words, the one that “passes” with 
the highest number of governors. Thus, the pro-
totypical subject in Serbian is a noun in the nom-
inative case because an NNOM can function as the 
subject of any verb, but an infinitive, for in-
stance, is not a prototypical subject in this lan-
guage because a VINF can be the subject of only a 
small number of verbs (copular and some modal 
verbs).  

 
 

1. L depends only on the MV  
2. L cannot be omitted from the SyntS  
3. L has a particular linear position with 

respect to the MV 
 

4. L controls the agreement of the MV  
5. L’s grammatical case is controlled by 

the MV 
 

6. L’s morphological links with the MV 
are affected by the MV’s inflection  

 

7. L’s pronominalization affects its mor-
phological links with the MV 

 

Table 1: Defining Properties of the SyntSubj 
(Mel’čuk 2014: 175) 

 
The recourse to the prototypical subject means 

that in our approach the subject is characterized 
inductively: first the prototypical subjects are 
identified, and than the less typical ones are de-
termined by analogy, as those sharing at least 
some properties of the prototypical subjects. 
(This is also Keenan’s 1976 legacy.) 

The above inventory of subject properties—
including both the defining properties and the 
standard characterizing properties—is universal 
(= sufficient to identify the subject in any lan-
guage); their specific combination for a given 
language, however, has to be discovered empiri-
cally, as it differs from one language to the next.1 
Additionally, the subject in any given language 
may have some other, language-specific, charac-
terizing properties. 

 
Definition: Syntactic subject (Mel’čuk 2014: 
179) 

The syntactic subject is the most privileged 
dependent of the Main Verb in (a clause of) 
a language L; its privileged status is deter-
mined by a list of properties elaborated spe-
cifically for L. 

 
Under the postulate that there always is such a 

thing as the most privileged clause element, the 
above definition of the syntactic subject implies 
its existence in every language. Not everyone 
                                                             
1 In the literature, there is a wide consensus as to sub-

jecthood properties; cf., for instance, those men-
tioned in Creissels (2014: 3-4): marking by a spe-
cial grammatical case and/or indexation on the 
MV (i.e., imposition of agreement on the MV) in 
conjunction with particular syntactic behavior: re-
flexivization, serialization, raising/control, topical-
ization, focalization, relativization, etc. It should 
be noted, though, that not everyone separates de-
fining and characterizing properties as strictly as 
we do.  

232



shares this point of view; thus, the universality of 
the syntactic subject is not recognized by a num-
ber of researches working in the typological per-
spective, including Kibrik (1997), Lazard (2009) 
and Creissels (2014). (This attitude is actually 
not new; already Martinet (1972) asked whether 
linguists should dispense with the notion.) The 
reluctance stems from a particular way in which 
these researchers approach the problem. Either 
they strive to isolate the core properties of the 
syntactic subject that are shared by all lan-
guages—which turns out to be impossible.2 Or, 
while readily admitting that a universal definition 
of the syntactic subject is logically possible, they 
are not interested in finding one, focusing instead 
on (the limits of) cross-linguistic variation in the 
organization of the clause3. But for the propo-
nents of Meaning-Text approach, this is exactly 
what is needed: a universally applicable, rigor-
ously defined notion of subject. Because it is be-
lieved that many of the controversies surround-
ing the syntactic subjects arise precisely from the 
fact that in virtually all of the relevant linguistic 
literature the correspondent notion simply is not 
clearly defined. 

This is not to deny the well-known fact that 
the identification of the subject is problematic in 
some languages: examples include syntactically 
ergative (or in our terminology, deep ergative) 
languages, as well as languages in which the 
communicative structure is the prevalent factor 
of clause organization. But even in such difficult 
cases, Meaning-Text approach does a very good 
job; see, for instance, Beck (2000) for the syntac-
tic subject in Lushootseed, and case studies of 
subjecthood in several “problematic” languages 
(Amele, Archi, Lezgian, etc.) in Mel’čuk (2014).  

A serious consideration in favor of maintain-
ing the notion of syntactic subject, even though 
descriptions that do not make use of it are possi-
ble, is its utility for cross-linguistic compari-
sons.4  

                                                             
2 Thus, in Lazard (2009: 152), we find (translation is 

mine–JM): “[…] the variations [in the inventory 
of the properties of the subject across languages–
JM] are so great that it seems impossible to identi-
fy a single property that could be considered as 
defining the subject in all languages”.  

3 Cf. Creissels (2014: 1-2): […] it is not about a quest 
for a universal notion of subject, which, if conven-
iently defined, should be identifiable in any lan-
guage […]. 

4 As (Beck 2000: 317) puts it succinctly: “While 
treatments of Lushootseed grammar which avoid 
the term [syntactic subject–the author] meet the 

3 Subjectival SSyntRel in Serbian 
In this section I will describe and illustrate the 
properties of the SSynt-Subject in Serbian (3.1), 
as well as its implementation in the clause (3.2). 
I will start with some basic data about the lan-
guage.  

Serbian has three general properties relevant 
for our topic:  

1) It is a PRO-Drop language, i.e., it features 
the obligatory deletion of a communicatively 
unmarked pronominal subject.  

2) It has a number of impersonal sentence pat-
terns containing a semantically empty zero sub-
ject.  

3) It is a flexible word-order language in 
which the subject can occupy any linear position 
in the clause as a function of specific communi-
cative conditions. The basic, communicatively 
neutral, word order in a simple declarative clause 
is SV(O) in clauses with a Theme ~ Rheme divi-
sion, and V(O)S in all-rhematic clauses. 

3.1 Properties of the SSynt-Subject in Ser-
bian 

First the subject’s defining properties are dis-
cussed, followed by its characterizing properties. 

3.1.1 Defining Properties of the SSynt-
Subject 

The subject in Serbian possesses six out of seven 
defining subjecthood properties listed in Table 1 
above.5  
• Exclusive Dependence on the Clause Predicate 

In a prototypical clause, whose head 
(= predicate) is a finite verb, the subject depends 
on this verb; all the examples in this paper except 
(1) illustrate this case. In a verbless sentence, the 
subject depends on the item in the role of the 
predicate: an interjection (1a) or a presentative 
(1b). Example (1b) also illustrates a non-
canonical syntactic subject—in the genitive case; 
on genitive subjects in Serbian, see Subsection 
3.2.2. 

                                                                                            
criterion of language-specific descriptive adequa-
cy, syntactic subject remains an important theoret-
ical concept and a necessary benchmark for dis-
course-analysis and cross-linguistic comparison”. 

5 It lacks property 7: the pronominalization of the sub-
ject does not affect in any way the MV’s mor-
phology. As an example of language where the 
MV is so affected, we can cite Breton, where the 
MV agrees with an elided subject pronoun, but 
does not agree with one overtly present in the 
clause. 

233



(1) a. A on←subj(ectival)–hop kroz prozor. Lit. ‘And 
he off through window.’ = ‘And off he went through 
the window.’ 

b. Eno–subj→Jovana. Lit. ‘There of.Jovan.’ 
‘There comes Jovan.’ 

• Non-Omissibility from the Syntactic Structure 
Note that we are talking here about the non-

omissibility of the subject from the syntactic 
structure of the clause—rather than the clause 
itself. Thus, a communicatively unmarked pro-
nominal subject in a Pro-DROP language and the 
subject of a verb in the imperative, which do not 
appear on the surface, are present in the corre-
sponding syntactic structures—if the language in 
question has agreement;6 this is the case in Ser-
bian. Sentences (2a), with an elided 1sg personal 
pronoun, and (2b), with this pronoun overtly pre-
sent, have the SSyntSs shown in Figures 1 and 2, 
respectively.  
(2) [Q: Zašto? ‘Why?’] 

a. Ne zna+m1,SG. Lit. ‘Not know.’ 
b. Ja←subj–[ne]–zna+m1,SG. (Ali neko možda 

zna.) Lit. ‘I not know. (But someone perhaps 
does.)’ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1: SSyntS of (2a) 
 
The communicatively unmarked 1sg pronoun 

in the role the SSynt-Subject is earmarked for 
deletion (as indicated by a strikethrough of the 
corresponding node label) and “dropped” in the 
subsequent stages of text synthesis. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Figure 2: SSyntS of (2b) 

 

                                                             
6 In languages that have the MV agreement with the 

subject, all sentences, including so-called “imper-
sonal” sentences, necessarily have a subject, at 
least in their SSyntSs. But in a language without 
agreement, such as Lezguian, subjectless sentenc-
es—with no subject postulated in the correspond-
ing SSyntSs—do exist (Mel’čuk 1988: 228-230). 

The same pronoun in the same syntactic role, 
if communicatively marked as focalized, “sur-
vives” and eventually surfaces in the clause as an 
overt pronominal subject. 
• Specific Linear Position with Respect to the 

MV 
In Serbian, linear position of clause elements 

is determined more by communicative than syn-
tactic factors. As mentioned at the beginning of 
this section, in an all-Rhematic clause, the MV is 
clause-initial, i.e., the Subject follows it, but in a 
communicatively articulated clause, a Subject 
expressing the Theme is clause-initial, i.e., it 
precedes the MV. Both of these states of affairs 
are illustrated in (3a). A Subject expressing the 
Rhematic focus is clause-final, i.e., it follows the 
MV, as shown (3b).  
(3) a. [Zatutnjaše–subj→bubnjevi,]Rh [oglasi– 

[se]–subj→frulica,]Rh [ali je oduvaše–
subj→trube]Rh. [Trube]Th←subj–[su(MV) za 
sada samo otpuhivale]Rh, dok … Lit. ‘Thun-
dered drums, was.heard flute, but her blew.away 
trumpets. Trumpets are for now only having. blow-
ing.in.response, while …’ = ‘There was a thunder of 
drums, there sounded a flute, but it was blown away 
by trumpets. The trumpets, for the time being, were 
only blowing in response, while …’ 

b. [Prvu nagradu dobio je(MV)]Th–
subj→[pesnik Z.G.]Rh. Lit. ‘First prize-ACC hav-
ing.gotten is poet Z.G.’ = ‘The first prize went to the 
poet Z.G.’ 

Given the fact that the subject’s position vis-a-
vis the MV can be determined, at least partially, 
by the communicative structure (= is not exclu-
sively determined by the MV), does the Parame-
ter 3 apply in Serbian (and other communicative-
ly oriented languages)? I believe that it does be-
cause, if we exclude all-Rhematic sentences 
(namely, on the basis of their lesser frequency) 
and consider the simplest sentence possible, like 
[Jovan]Th [je bolestan]Rh ‘Jovan is sick’, in Ser-
bian, the subject precedes the MV, whereas in 
Arabic, for example, it follows the MV. 
• Control of the Agreement of the V 

The subject controls the agreement of the MV 
in number and person (4a); in compound tenses, 
it also controls the agreement of the participle—
in number and gender (4b-e). Example (4c) illus-
trates a more complex case of agreement, with 
the subject quantified by a numeral. In (4d)-(4e), 
we see the singular neuter agreement of the par-
ticiple with a zero empty subject (see Subsection 
3.2.1) and an infinitive/clausal subject, respec-
tively. 

ZNATIIND.PRES ‘(to) know’ 
 

JA ‘I’ 

subjectival 

NE ‘no’ 

restrictive 

ZNATIIND.PRES ‘(to) know’ 
 

JA ‘I’ 
NE ‘no’ Focalized 

subjectival 
restrictive 

234



(4) a. Dete(N, neut)NOM.SG←subj–spava+∅3.SG. ‘The child 
is sleeping’ ~ Deca(N)NOM.PL←subj–spava+ju3.PL. 
‘The children are sleeping.’ 

b. Dete(N, neut)NOM.SG←subj–je(MV)3.SG 
spava+lPAST+oNEUT.SG. ‘The child was sleeping.’ 
~ Deca(N, neut)NOM.PL←subj–su(MV)3.PL 
spava+lPAST+aNEUT.PL. ‘The children were sleep-
ing.’ 

c. Osta+lPAST+eFEM.PL su(MV)3,PL–
[dve]subj→jabuke(N, fem)GEN.SG. Lit. ‘Were left 
two apple’. ~ Osta+l+oNEUT.SG je(MV)3.SG–[pet]–
subj→jabuka(N, fem)GÉN.PL. Lit. ‘Was left two ap-
ples.’ 

d. Bi+lPAST+oNEUT.SG mi je(MV)3.SG–subj→∅(Pron, 
3.SG.NEUT) hladno. Lit. ‘Being.been to.me is cold’ = 
‘I was cold.’ 

e. Otići(V)INF <[Da se ode]COMPLETIVE.CL>←subj–
nije(MV)3.SG bi+lPAST+oNEUT.SG moguće. Lit. 
‘To.leave <That REFL leaves> not being.been possi-
ble’ = ‘To leave <Leaving> was not possible.’ 

• Government for Case by the MV 
Most often, a nominal subject in Serbian re-

ceives the nominative case imposed by the MV. 
In some special contexts it receives the genitive 
case; see below, examples (12)-(15). 
• Demotion Under Passivization 

Under passivization of the MV, the subject is 
demoted to the role of the Agentive Comple-
ment, while the former direct object gets promot-
ed to the subject position. This is a standard fea-
ture of the subject of a passive verb and needs 
not be illustrated. 

3.1.2 Characterizing properties of the 
SSynt-Subject 

Recall that characterizing properties are valid 
only for a prototypical subject, which in Serbian 
is a noun in the nominative case [= NNOM]. Table 
2 lists some of the characterizing properties of 
the Serbian subject. 
 
1. Target of cliticization ✖  
2. Target of relativization ✔  
3. Controller of reflexivization ✔  
4. Target of (pseudo-)clefting ✖  
5. Controller of an attributive actantial 

complement 
✔  

6. Controller of anaphora ✔  
7. Controller of ellipsis in coordination ✔  
8. Left/right dislocation ✔  
9. Raising ✔  
10. Extraction from a completive clause  ✔  
11. Reaction to negation ✖  
Table 2: Characterizing Properties of the proto-

typical SyntSubj in Serbian 

Properties 1, 4 and 11 do not apply: property 1 
is not applicable because Serbian personal pro-
nouns have no clitic forms in the nominative 
case, and property 4 because this language lacks 
the corresponding syntactic operations altogeth-
er. As for property 11, although some negated 
verbs can take either the genitive subject or the 
canonical nominative subject, this behavior can-
not be tied exclusively to the negation since the 
same verbs in the positive polarity also allow for 
the genitive ~ nominative variation in the case of 
the subject; see example (12b) and (13a). 

Illustrations for properties 3, 7-10 follow. (In 
the examples (5) and (6), the syntactic subject is 
boxed.) 
• Controller of Reflexivization 
(5) a. Jovani pije svoji <≠ njegovj> čaj Lit. ‘Jovani 

drinks selfi <≠ hisj> tea’ = ‘Jovan drinks his (= ‘his 
own’) tea.’ 

vs. 
b. Jovanui se pije *svoj <njegovi/j> čaj.  

Lit. ‘To.Jovani REFL drinks *self’si <hisi/j> tea’ = 
‘Jovan feels like drinking his tea.’ 

In (5a), the special form of the possessive de-
terminer (SVOJ), is used, necessarily co-
referential with the subject (JOVAN). But in (5b), 
with the MV in the reflexive form, within the 
desiderative (‘feel-like’) construction, where ČAJ, 
rather than JOVAN, is the subject, SVOJ is un-
grammatical. The correct possessive form here is 
NJEGOV, which has an ambiguous reading (‘his 
own’ or ‘that person’s’), just like in English.  
• Controller of Ellipsis in Coordination 
(6) a. Petar je sreo Kostu i rekao mu (je)... Lit. 

‘P. is having.met K. and having.told him (is) …’ = 
‘P. met K. and told him…’ 

vs. 
b. *Petari je sreo Kostu i oni mu je rekao…  

Lit. ‘P. is having.met K. and he him is having.told 
…’ = ‘P. met K. and he told him…’ 

As can be concluded from the ungrammati-
cality of (6b), under coordination, ellipsis of the 
subject in the second conjunct is obligatory (and 
that of the auxiliary, optional). 
• Dislocation 

Left dislocation is illustrated in (7a-b), and 
right dislocation in (7c); the dislocated element is 
boxed. 

(7) a. Colloq. Jovani oni←subj–je super momak 
Lit. ‘Jovan he is super guy’ = ‘As for J., he is a 
swell guy.’ 

b. Colloq. Francuzii onii←subj–ručaju(MV) u 
podne. ‘The French they lunch at noon’ = ‘As 
for French, they have lunch at noon.’ 

c.  Nije–subj→oni naivan, taj tvoj drugi. Lit. 
‘Not.is he naïve, that your friend.’ = ‘He is not na-
ïve, that friend or yours.’ 

235



Left dislocation, frowned upon by purists, is 
freely used in colloquial speech; its discourse 
function is topic shifting or topic layering (ter-
minology taken from Delais-Roussarie et al. 
2004). Right dislocation, not stylistically marked, 
serves the discourse function of topic back-
grounding. 
• Raising 
(8) a. Izgleda [da je(MV)–subj→Jovan bolestan 

<u pravu, to zaboravio>]. Lit. ‘Seems that is 
J. sick/in right/this having.forgotten’ = ‘It seems 
that J. is sick/is right/has forgotten this.’ 

b. Jovan←subj–izgleda(MV) bolestan <*u 
pravu, *to zaboravio>. ‘Jovan seems sick 
<right, to have forgotten that>.’ 

Raising of the subject is allowed in Serbian 
only out of the subordinate clause whose MV is a 
copula controlling an adjectival attributive com-
plement (“N+V(copula)+Adj”); it is thus more lim-
ited than in English or French, for instance, 
where the sentences corresponding to the starred 
Serbian examples are fully acceptable. 
• Extraction from a Completive Clause 
(9) a. Ko misliš [da ko←subj–dolazi]? Lit. ‘Who 

(you) think [that who comes]? = ‘Who do you think 
is coming’? 

b. Ko kažeš [da ko←subj–voli Petra]? Lit. 
‘Who (you) say [that who loves P.]? = ‘Who do 
you say loves P.?’ 

c. Šta veruješ [da šta←subj–[se]–desilo]? Lit. 
‘What (you) believe [that what REFL hav-
ing.occurred]? = ‘What do you believe happened?’ 

Subject extraction from a completive clause 
seems to be unrestricted at least with communi-
cation and opinion verbs in the matrix clause; the 
precise conditions under which this operation is 
allowed remain to be determined.  From a dis-
cursive viewpoint, the extraction makes the sub-
ject of the subordinate clause the rhematic focus 
of the entire sentence.  

Discussing the prototypical subject in Croa-
tian, Belaj & Kučanda (2007: 4) ascribe to it only 
the defining properties 4 and 5 from our Table 1. 
As one of the subject’s behavioral properties, 
they indicate the following one: the subject is the 
addressee of the imperative provided it is the 
Agent or someone pragmatically conceived of as 
acting as an Agent. It is questionable, however, 
whether this is a purely syntactic property. Typo-
logically, the syntactic subject of an imperative is 
not necessarily the Addressee: see Mel’čuk 
(1988: 194-196). 

3.2 Implementation of the SSynt-Subject in 
Serbian 

In addition to a prototypical implementation by 
an NNOM, the SSynt-Subject can be implemented 
in Serbian by items 2-7 in Table 3 below, some 
of which have already been illustrated in the pre-
ceding discussion. 

In what follows, I will illustrate two less usual 
types of subject: zero (nominative) subjects, both 
semantically full and empty, and subjects in the 
genitive case. 

 
1. NNOM  
2. NGEN   
3. N(quant)NOM <Adv-quant> [→NGEN]  
4. PREP→NGEN [→Num]7  
5. Clause (completive, interrogative, head-

less relative) 
 

6. VINF  
7. Direct speech fragment  
Table 3: Implementation of the SyntSubj in Ser-

bian 

3.2.1 Zero Subjects 
These subjects are genuine lexemes, not to be 
confounded with null subjects of the generative 
syntax. The fact that there are lexemes that can 
only function as subjects speaks to the im-
portance of this syntactic role. In Serbian, there 
are two such lexemes.  
• ∅ ‘people’(Pron, masc, 3.PL) is a semantically full ze-

ro subject. This is an indefinite personal (as 
opposed to impersonal) pronoun, meaning, 
roughly, ‘some unspecified people’ (cf. Fr. 
ON and Ger. MAN).8 It is used within the 
“normal” personal construction and imposes 
the 3pl agreement on the MV and (in com-
pound tenses) the plural masculine agree-
ment on the participle.  

(10) a. ∅‘people’(Pron, masc, 3.PL)←subj–Kaž+u(MV)3PL da je 
to davno bilo. Lit. ‘Say that is that long.ago be-
ing.been. = ‘People <They#2> say that happened 
long ago.’ 

b. O tome ∅‘people’(Pron, masc, 3.PL)←subj–su(MV)3PL 
pisa+lPAST+i.MASC, PL u novinama. Lit. ‘About 
that are having.written in newspapers.’ = ‘They#2 
wrote about that in newspapers.’ 

                                                             
7 Some prepositions allowed in this construction: 

OKO/CIRKA ‘around’, DO ‘up.to’, OD ‘start-
ing.from’, PREKO ‘over’, etc. 

8 3pl indefinite pronouns, both zero and non-zero, are 
common in the world’s languages (see Siewierska, 
2010); they are sometimes (incorrectly) called im-
personal pronouns. 

236



This pronoun is of course not interchangeable 
in texts with the substitute 3pl personal pronoun 
form oni ‘they’ = ‘entities/facts the Speaker men-
tioned in the previous discourse, whose referents 
the Addressee can identify’. (English has an 
overt indefinite pronoun—THEY#2 in the transla-
tion of the examples in (10)—that corresponds to 
Serbian ∅‘people’(Pron, masc. 3,PL).) 
• ∅ (Pron, neut, 3.SG) is a semantically empty zero 

subject. This is an indefinite impersonal 
pronoun, which means that it underlies the 
so-called impersonal construction, imposing 
the 3sg agreement on the MV and the singu-
lar neuter agreement on the participle. 

(11) a. Kreta+lPAST+oNEUT,3.SG se [je(MV)3.SG–
subj→∅(Pron, neut, 3.SG)] u 8. Lit. ‘Being.left REFL 
is at 8’ = ‘The departure was at 8.’ 

b. Vesni se [je(MV)3.SG.–subj→∅(Pron, neut, 3.SG)]9 
spava+lPAST+oNEUT.3.SG. Lit. ‘To.Vesna REFL is 
being.slept’ = Vesna was sleepy.’ 

c. Zuja+lPAST+oNEUT.3.SG mi je(MV)3.SG.–
subj→∅(Pron, neut, 3.SG) u ušima.  Lit. ‘Be-
ing.hummed to.me is in ears’ = ‘It was humming 
in my ears’. 

The impersonal construction is used in Serbian 
with (among other things): 1) meteorological 
verbs and expressions; 2) some verbal voices, 
such as absolute suppressive (11a); 2) some ver-
bal derivations, such as desiderative, aka invol-
untary state construction ((11b) and (5b)), and 
3) verbs and expressions denoting some sensa-
tions ((10c and (4d)) and feelings. 

Impersonal constructions have received a 
widely varying treatment in the literature. Thus, 
(11a) is considered by some to be a “subjectless 
sentence” (Radovanović 1990, or else a “sen-
tence with a generalized Agent” (Tanasić  
(2003). Sentences like those in (11b)-(11c) are 
sometimes described as featuring non-canonical 
subjects (Vesni ‘to.Vesna’ and mi ‘to.me’, re-
spectively), variously called dative, oblique, 
quirky or quasi subjects (see Belaj & Kučanda, 
2007 for Croatian, Rivero & Milojević-
Sheppard, 2006 for Slovenian, and Moore & 
Perlmutter, 2000 for Russian). For us, however, 
the MV agreement is the key: since the MV 
clearly does not agree with the noun in the da-
tive, the latter cannot be the subject; more on this 
at the very end of this section. For a treatment of 
                                                             
9 Sentences (11a) and (11b) actually have a slightly 

different surface form, from which the clitic auxil-
iary je ‘is’ is deleted; the deletion happens in order 
to avoid the illegitimate clitic sequence *se je. 
This is an interesting and rare case of deletion of 
the MV from the clause. 

impersonal constructions in the Meaning-Text 
framework, see Milićević (2013) and (2009: 107-
113). 

3.2.2 Subjects in the Genitive Case 
In what follows, I will distinguish the genuine 
use of the genitive to mark the syntactic subject, 
i.e., such that the subject is assigned the genitive 
case exclusively by the main predicate, from two 
apparently similar but very different situations: 
the genitive of the subject used in semantic ca-
pacity and in the context of quantification. 
• Genuine genitive of the subject—imposed 

by the clause predicate 
As we have seen, verbless sentences of type 

(1b) have the subject in the genitive case, as-
signed to it by the presentative functioning as the 
main predicate. In full-fledged sentences, sub-
jects in the genitive case are encountered with 
the existential verbs IMATI/BITI ‘there.be’:  
(12) a. Ima(MV)–[li]–subj→vode(N, fem)GEN.SG 

<*vodaNOM.SG> na Marsu? Lit. ‘Be INTERR of. 
water <*water> on Mars’? = ‘Is there water on 
Mars?’ 

b. Biće/Neće(MV)–subj→kiše(N, fem)GEN.SG 
<kišaNOM.SG> za vikend. Lit. 
‘Will.be/Will.not.be of.rain <rain> this weekend’ 
= ‘It will rain on the weekend.’ 

These verbs are suppletive in the following 
sense: IMATI (lit. ‘to have’) is used in the present 
tense, BITI (lit. ‘to be’) in the past and the future. 
The former takes only an NGEN as the subject, 
while the latter can also take a nominative sub-
ject—in some restricted contexts, with a slight 
difference in meaning (for the time being, I can-
not make this statement more precise). This is a 
case bordering on the semantic use of genitive, to 
be discussed immediately below.  
• Genitive of the subject used in semantic 

capacity  
In some specific cases, for instance, with verbs 

having privative meaning, like NEDOSTAJATI 
‘(to) lack’ or FALITI ‘(to) lack’, the subject can 
appear either in the canonical nominative or in 
the genitive, this alternation being accompanied 
by a semantic difference. 
(13) a. Tebi (ne) nedostaje strpljenj+aSG.GEN 

<strpljenje+∅NOM.SG> Lit. To.you (not) lacks 
some.patience <patience>. = ‘You (do not) lack 
patience.’ 

b. Zafali+lPAST+oNEUT.3.SG mi je(MV)3.SG–
subj→hleb+aGEN.SG <Zafali+oPAST+∅MASC.3.SG 
mi je(MV)3.SG–subj→hleb+∅NOM.SG> Lit. Be-
ing.lacked to.me is some.bread <bread>. 

In (13a), with the NGEN as the subject, the 
meaning conveyed is ‘You have some patience 

237



(but not enough)’, while with the NNOM as the 
subject the meaning is ‘You have no patience’; 
the same difference is observed in (13b). Here, 
the structural case is overridden, as it were, for 
semantic reasons: the genitive expresses more 
than it normally does (‘a part of’), and the same 
is true for the nominative (‘the whole’).10 This is 
different from what we observe in Russian, 
where the corresponding verbs take only a geni-
tive subject and where the partial ~ total ambigu-
ity persists: Mne ne xvataet bumagi <*bumaga> 
Lit. ‘To.me not suffice of.paper <*paper>’ = ‘I 
don’t have enough paper’ or ‘I do not have paper 
at all’. 

Antonić (2005) treats both (12) and (13) as 
impersonal constructions, on the grounds of the 
default, 3sg neuter, agreement of the participle in 
compound tenses.  
• Genitive of the subject in the context of 

quantification 
A subject quantified by a numeral other than 1 

or ending in 1 gets automatically the genitive 
case. This state of affairs is illustrated in (14), as 
well as in (4c). 
(14) a. Trenutno se u bioskopu “Zvezda” pri-

kazuje(MV)–subj–[tri]→film+a(N)GEN.SG. 
Lit. ‘Currently REFL in cinema “Zvezda” shows 
three movie’ = ‘Currently, three movies are play-
ing in the cinema “Zvezda”. 

b. Doći će(MV)–subj→oko(Prep) deset 
zvanic+a(N)GEN.PL. Lit. ‘Will.come around ten 
invitees’ = ‘Around ten invitees will come.’ 

The subjects FILM ‘movie’ and ZVANICA ‘in-
vitee’ are imposed the genitive case (as well as 
the number) by the numerals11. But, while they 
are morphologically governed by the numerals, 
the nouns govern the latter syntactically. 

Finally, note that quantifying nouns/adverbs, 
like those in (15), appear themselves in the role 
of syntactic subject, taking an obligatory NGEN as 
their complement. 
(15) a. Binu zaveja(MV)–subj→milion(N, Quant) šarenih 

konfet+a(N)GEN.PL. Lit. ‘The scene snowed.under 
a million of multi-colored confetti’ = ‘The scene 
was showered by a million of multi-colored con-
fetti.’ 

                                                             
10 Cf. the same phenomenon occurring in Imate li 

struj+e SG.GEN <struj+u SG.ACC>?, with the direct 
object in the genitive or the accusative, which 
mean, respectively, ‘Do you have power right 
now?’, and ‘Are you on the power grid?’ 

11 Strictly speaking, the subject in (14b) is the preposi-
tion, rather than the noun in the genitive, since the 
dependency arrow (in the corresponding SSynt-
structure) enters the node labeled by the preposi-
tion. I will allow myself to ignore this fact here. 

 b. Bez krova nad glavom ostalo je(MV)–
subj→mnogo(Adv, Quant) ljud+i(N)GEN.PL. Lit. 
‘Without roof above head stayed is many people’ 
= ‘Many people were left without a roof above 
their heads.’ 

I will conclude this section by illustrating the 
production of sentence (11c) within a Meaning-
Text linguistic model of Serbian, starting from its 
Semantic Structure [= SemS] and “going up” to 
the Deep-Syntactic Structure [= DSyntS] and the 
Surface-Syntactic Structure [= SSyntS]. 

Figure 3 shows the SemS underlying the verbs 
of unpleasant sensations, such as ZUJATI ‘(to) 
hum’ featured in (11c). The corresponding situa-
tion has two participants: the Experiencer of the 
sensation (‘X’) and the Body Part in which the 
sensation is localized (‘Y’), representing, respec-
tively, the verb’s semantic actants (SemA) 1 and 
2. (For ease of reading, the SemS is written in 
English although, strictly speaking, it should 
contain semantemes of Serbian.) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 3: Incomplete SemS of (11c) 
 
In the transition towards the DSyntS (Figure 

4), the Experiencer is mapped onto the DeepSyn-
tA II, and the Body Part, to the DSyntA III. At 
this stage, there is no DSynt-actant correspond-
ing to the surface-syntactic subject. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 4: DSyntS of (11c) 
 
This mapping is done using the information in 

the Government Pattern [= GP] of the verb 
ZUJATI, which is part of its dictionary entry: 

 
XExperiencer ⇔ II YBodypart ⇔ III   

-indir-objectival→ N-DAT -obj.oblique→ u ’in’ N-LOC 
 

Figure 5: GP of ZUJATI ‘(to) hum’ 

‘X’living  
       being 

‘Y’bodypart 

1 

‘localized’ 
2 

1 

1 

‘sensation’ 

1 ‘un-
pleasant’ 

2 

ZUJATIIND.PAST ‘(to) hum’ 
 

JA ‘I’ 
II 

UHOPL ‘ear’ 

III 

238



The first row in the GP indicates the verb’s 
diathesis, i.e., the correspondence between its 
SemAs and its DSyntAs; this correspondence is 
known in other frameworks as linking.  

The implementation of DSyntAs by concrete 
SSynt constructions intervenes in the transition 
towards the SSyntS, using the information indi-
cated in the second row of the GP above: the Ex-
periencer ends up being an indirect object, and 
the Body Part gets the position of an oblique ob-
ject. It is at this stage that the empty zero subject 
is introduced (by a special syntactic rule)—for 
the purposes of MV agreement. The resulting 
SSyntS is shown in Figure 6. 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Figure 6: SSyntS of (11c) 
 
As one can see, what is “quirky” is not the 

subject itself (at least not in the usual sense of the 
dative subject, although an empty zero subject is 
perhaps as deserving of the label), but the link-
ing: the fact that in this case the Experiencer fails 
to correspond to DSyntA I of the verb, which 
itself corresponds to the SSynt subject.  

4 Conclusion 
The syntactic subject in Serbian is a well-

behaved Indo-European subject with some more 
specific Slavic features. While this is obviously 
no news, the paper’s contribution consists in a 
systematic overview of these features and their 
presentation within a coherent, formal dependen-
cy-oriented framework.  

Acknowledgments 

I am very grateful to Igor Mel’čuk for his com-
ments on a pre-final version of this paper. 
Thanks are also due to three anonymous review-
ers for their helpful suggestions. All the usual 
disclaimers apply. 

References  
Antonić, I. (2005). Subjektski genitiv u standardnom 

srpskom jeziku [The Subjective Genitive in Stand-
ard Serbian]. Južnoslovenski filolog, LXI (2005): 
125-143. 

Beck, D. (2000). Semantic Agents, Syntactic Sub-
jects, and Discourse Topics: How to Locate 
Lushootseed Sentences in Space and Time. Studies 
in Language 24/2: 277-317. 

Belaj, B. & Kučanda, D. (2007). On the Syntax, Se-
mantics and Pragmatics of Some Subject-like NPs 
in Croatian. Suvremena Lingvistika, vol. 33, issue 
63 (2007): 1-12. 

Buljan G. & Kučanda, D. (2004). Semantičke funkcije 
subjekta, teorija prototipova i metonimija [Seman-
tic Functions of the Subject, the Prototype Theory 
and Metonymy]. Jezikoslovlje 5.1-2 (2004): 87-
101. 

Creissels, D. (2014). Approche typologique de la no-
tion du sujet. Colloque international “Du Sujet et 
de son absence dans les langues”. Université du 
Maine, 27-28 mars 2014; pp. 17. 

Delais-Roussaire, E. Doetjes, J. & Sleeman, P. 
(2004). Dislocation. In Corblin, F. & Swart, H. eds, 
2004, Handbook of French Semantics. CSLI Publi-
cations; 501-529. 

Foley, W. & Van Valin, R. (1997). On the Viability of 
the Notion of Subject in Universal Grammar. Pro-
ceedings of the Third Annual Meeting of the Berke-
ley Linguistic Society; 293-320. 

Iordanskaja, L. & Mel’čuk, I. (2009). Establishing an 
Inventory of Surface-Syntactic Relations: Valence-
controlled Surface- syntactic Dependents of the 
Verb in French. In Polguère, A. & Mel’čuk, I., eds, 
2009: 151-234. 

Kahane, S. (2003). The Meaning-Text Theory, in 
Agel, V., Eichinger L. M., Eroms, H.-W., Hellwig, 
P. Heringer H. J., Lobin, H., eds, Dependency and 
Valency. An International Handbook of Contempo-
rary Research, vol. 1. Berlin/New York: De Gruy-
ter; 546-570. 

Keenan, E. (1976). Towards A Universal Definition 
of  “Subject”. In Li, Ch., ed., Subjects and Topics. 
New York, etc.: Academic Press; 305-333. 

Keenan, E. & Comrie, B. (1977). Noun Phrase Acces-
sibility and Universal Grammar. Linguistic Inquiry 
8/1: 63–99. 

Kibrik, A. (1997). Beyond Subject and Object: To-
wards a Comprehensive Relational Typology. Lin-
guistic Typology, 1: 279-346.  

Klajn, I. (2005). Gramatika srpskog jezika [A Gram-
mar of Serbian]. Beograd: Zavod za udžbenike i 
nastavna sredstva. 

BITIIND.PRES ‘(to) be’ 
 

JADAT ‘I’ 
indir-objectival 

UHOPL.LOC ‘ear’  

oblique-objectival 

subjectival Ø(3.SG.NEUT) 

prepositional 

U ‘in’  

ZUJATIACT.PART  
‘(to) hum’ 
 

auxiliary 

239



Kučanda, D. (1998). Rečenični subject u hrvatskom i 
engleskom jeziku (Clausal Subjects in Croatian and 
English). PhD Thesis. Zagreb: Philological Facul-
ty, University of Zagreb. 

Lazard, G. (2009). Qu’est-ce qu’un sujet ? La linguis-
tique, 2009/1 Vol. 45: 151-159. 

Martinet, A. (1972). Should We Drop the Notion of 
Subject? La revue canadienne de linguistique, vol. 
17/2-3: 175-179. 

Mel’čuk, I. (2014). Syntactic Subject: Syntactic Rela-
tions, Once Again. In Plungjan, V., ed., Jazyk. 
Konstanty. Peremenye. Pamjati Aleksandra Ev-
gen’eviča Kibrika. Sankt-Peterburg: Aleteija; 169-
216. 

Mel’čuk, I. (2012-2013-2015): Semantics: from 
Meaning to Text, vols. 1-3. Amsterdam/Philadel-
phia: John Benjamins. 

Mel’čuk, I. (2009). Dependency in Natural Language. 
In: Polguère, A. & Mel’čuk, I. (2009); 1-1-110. 

Mel’čuk, I. (2004). Actants in Semantic and Syntax. 
Linguistics, 42/1: 1-66 and 42/2: 247-291. 

Mel’čuk, I (1988). Dependency Syntax: Theory and 
Practice. Albany (N.-Y.): SUNY Press.  

Mel’čuk, I. (1974). Opyt teorii lingvističeskix modelej 
Smysl-Tekst. Moskva: Nauka. 

Milićević, J. (2013). Impersonal Constructions in Ser-
bian. A Description within a Meaning-Text Lin-
guistic Model. In: Kor-Chahine, I. ed., Current 
Studies in Slavic Linguistics. Amster-
dam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins; 169-183. 

Milićević, J. (2009). Schéma de régime: le pont entre 
le lexique et la grammaire. Blanco, X. & P.-A. Bu-
vet, eds, La représentation des structures prédicat-
argument. Langages, 176-4/2009 (numéro special): 
94-116. 

Mille, S. (2014). Deep Stochastic Sentence Genera-
tion: Resources and Strategies. PhD Thesis, DTIC, 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona. 
http://www.taln.upf.edu/system/files/biblio_files/th
esis-SM-140602.pdf 

Mithun, M. & Chafe, W. (1997). What are S, A, and 
O? Studies in Language 23/3: 569-596. 

Moore, J. & Perlmutter, D. (2000). What Does it Take 
to Be a Dative Subject? Natural Language and 
Linguistic Theory 18/2: 373-416. 

Mrazovac, P. & Vukadinović, Z. (2009). Gramatika 
srpskog jezika za strance [A Grammar of Serbian 
for Foreigners]. Sremski Karlovci/Novi Sad: Izda-
vačka knjižarnica Zorana Stojadonovića.  

Piper, P., Antonić, I., Ružić, V., Tanasić, S., Popović, 
Lj. & Tošović, B. (2005). Sintaksa savremenoga 
srpskog jezika: prosta rečenica [Syntax of Con-

temporary Serbian: the Simple Clause]. Beograd: 
Beogradska knjiga & Novi Sad: Matica srpska. 

Polguère, A. & Mel’čuk, I., eds (2009). Dependency 
in Natural Language. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: 
John Benjamins. 

Radovanović, M. (1990). O bezličnoj rečenici [On the 
Impersonal Sentence]. In Radovanović, M., Spisi iz 
sintakse i semantike. Novi Sad: Dobra vest; 209-
219. 

Rivero, M.-L. & Milojević-Sheppard, M. (2006). Re-
visiting Involuntary State Constructions in Slove-
nian. In: Marušič, F. & Žaucer, R. (2006), Studies 
in Formal Slavic Linguistics. Contributions from 
Formal Descriptions of Slavic Languages 6.5, held 
in Nova Gorica. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang. 

Siewierska, A. (2010). From Third Plural to Passive. 
Incipient, Emergent and Established Passives. Dia-
chronica 27/1: 73-103. 

Tanasić, S. (2003). Bezlične rečenice sa uopštenim 
agensom [Impersonal Sentences with a Generalized 
Agent]. Južnoslovenski filolog, LX (2003): 41-55. 

Sources of Examples  
Arsenijević, V. (2013). Let. Beograd: Laguna.  

Žurić, V. (2009). Narodnjakova smrt. Melo(s)drama. 
Beograd: Laguna. 

Korpus srpskog jezika [The Corpus of Serbian Lan-
guage]: www.korpus. matf.bg.ac.rs 

Serbian WWW pages 

240


