



















































Validating Literary Theories Using Automatic Social Network Extraction


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 32–41,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Validating Literary Theories Using Automatic Social Network Extraction

Prashant Arun Jayannavar
Department of Computer Science

Columbia University
NY, USA

pj2271@columbia.edu

Apoorv Agarwal
Department of Computer Science

Columbia University
NY, USA

apoorv@cs.columbia.edu

Melody Ju
Columbia College

Columbia University
NY, USA

mj2558@columbia.edu

Owen Rambow
Center for Computational Learning Systems

Columbia University
NY, USA

rambow@ccls.columbia.edu

Abstract

In this paper, we investigate whether long-
standing literary theories about nineteenth-
century British novels can be verified using
computational techniques. Elson et al. (2010)
previously introduced the task of computa-
tionally validating such theories, extracting
conversational networks from literary texts.
Revisiting their work, we conduct a closer
reading of the theories themselves, present a
revised and expanded set of hypotheses based
on a divergent interpretation of the theories,
and widen the scope of networks for validat-
ing this expanded set of hypotheses.

1 Introduction

In his book Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models
for Literary History, literary scholar Franco Moretti
proposes a radical transformation in the study of lit-
erature (Moretti, 2005). Advocating a shift from the
close reading of individual texts in a traditionally se-
lective literary canon, to the construction of abstract
models charting the aesthetic form of entire genres,
Moretti imports quantitative tools to the humanities
in order to inform what he calls “a more rational lit-
erary history.” While Moretti’s work has inspired
both support and controversy, this reimagined mode
of reading opens a fresh direction from which to ap-
proach literary analysis and historiography.

By enabling the “distant reading” of texts on sig-
nificantly larger scales, advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and applied Machine Learning can
be employed to empirically evaluate existing claims

or make new observations over vast bodies of litera-
ture. In a seminal example of this undertaking, Elson
et al. (2010) attempted to validate an assumption of
structural difference between the social worlds of ru-
ral and urban novels using social networks extracted
from nineteenth-century British novels. Extrapo-
lating from the work of various literary theorists,
Elson et al. (2010) hypothesized that nineteenth-
century British novels set in urban environments fea-
ture numerous characters who share little conversa-
tion, while rural novels have fewer characters with
more conversations. Using quoted speech attribu-
tion, the authors extracted conversation networks
from 60 novels, which had been manually classified
by a scholar of literature as either rural or urban. El-
son et al. (2010) concluded that the results of their
analysis of conversation networks, which indicated
no difference between the social networks of rural
and urban novels, invalidated literary hypotheses.
However, we believe that Elson et al. (2010) misrep-
resented the original theories, and that their results
actually support rather than contradict the original
theories in question.

In this paper, we revisit the work of Elson et al.
(2010), presenting a nuanced interpretation of their
results through a closer reading of the original the-
ories cited. We propose that Elson et al. (2010)’s
results actually align with these theories. We then
employ a more powerful tool for extracting social
networks from texts, which allows us to examine a
wider set of hypotheses and thus provide deeper in-
sights into the original theories. Our findings con-
firm that the setting (rural versus urban) of a novel

32



in Elson et al. (2010)’s corpus has no effect on its
social structure, even when one goes beyond con-
versations to more general and different notions of
interactions. Specifically, we extend the work of El-
son et al. (2010) in four significant ways: (1) we
extract interaction networks, a conceptual general-
ization of conversation networks; (2) we extract ob-
servation networks, a new type of network with di-
rected links; (3) we consider unweighted networks
in addition to weighted networks; and (4) we inves-
tigate the number and size of communities in the ex-
tracted networks.

For extracting interaction and observation net-
works, we use our existing system called SINNET
(Agarwal et al., 2010; Agarwal et al., 2013b; Agar-
wal et al., 2014). In addition to validating a richer set
of hypotheses using SINNET, we present an evalu-
ation of the system on the task of automatic social
network extraction from literary texts. Our results
show that SINNET is effective in extracting interac-
tion networks from a genre quite different from the
genre it was trained on, namely news articles.

The paper is organized as follows. In section 2
we revisit the theories postulated by various liter-
ary theorists and critics. In Section 3, we present
an expanded set of literary hypotheses. Section 4
presents the methodology used by Elson et al. (2010)
for validating their literary hypothesis. We use the
same methodology for validating our expanded set
of literary hypotheses. In Section 5, we give details
on the difference between conversation, observation,
and interaction networks. We then evaluate SIN-
NET on the data set provided by Elson et al. (2010)
(Section 6). We test our hypotheses against the data
in Section 7 and conclude with future directions of
research in Section 8.

2 Literary Theories

In section 3 of their paper, Elson et al. (2010)
present a synthesis of quotations from literary the-
orists Mikhail Bakhtin (Bakhtin, 1937), Raymond
Williams (Williams, 1975), Franco Moretti (Moretti,
1999; Moretti, 2005) and Terry Eagleton (Eagleton,
1996; Eagleton, 2013). Elson et al. (2010) simplify
the quotations to derive the following hypotheses:

• EDM1: There is an inverse correlation between
the number of dialogues and the number of

characters.

• EDM2: In novels set in urban environments,
numerous characters share little conversational
interactions. Rural novels, on the other hand,
have fewer characters with more conversations.

We argue that the theories themselves are miscon-
strued and that the results of Elson et al. (2010)’s
experiments actually support what theorists imply
about the distinction between rural and urban nov-
els as sub-genres of 19th century realist fiction. For
instance, Elson et al. (2010) quote Williams (1975)
as follows:

Raymond Williams used the term “know-
able communities” to describe this [ru-
ral] world, in which face-to-face rela-
tions of a restricted set of characters are
the primary mode of social interaction
(Williams, 1975, 166). By contrast, the
urban world, in this traditional account, is
both larger and more complex.

On re-visiting this quotation in a larger and orig-
inal context, we note that Williams (1975) actually
apply the term “knowable communities” to novels
in general, not to settings, and specifically not – as
Elson et al. (2010) presume – to any particular set-
ting (rural in this case). Williams (1975) states that
“most novels are in some sense knowable communi-
ties”, meaning that the novelist “offers to show peo-
ple and their relationships in essentially knowable
and communicable ways.” However, the need or
desire to portray some setting in a realistic (“know-
able”) way does not automatically entail the ability
to do so: evolutions in real-world social milieu may
occur independently of the evolutions in novelistic
technique that specifically allow such evolutions to
be captured in literature.

In the same vein, Robert Alter asserts that “there
may [at any point in social history] be inherent limits
on the access of the novelistic imagination to objec-
tive, collective realities” (Alter, 2008, p. x). And
Moretti’s central point is that a shortage of linguis-
tic resources for reproducing the experience of an
urban community persisted as literature shifted its
focus toward the portrayal of urban realities in the

33



nineteenth century. Moretti asks, “given the over-
complication of the nineteenth-century urban set-
ting - how did novels ‘read’ cities? By what nar-
rative mechanisms did they make them ‘legible’,
and turn urban noise into information?” (Moretti,
1999, p. 79). To answer this question, Moretti
points to the reductive rendering techniques of the
urban genre’s first wave; these novels “don’t show
‘London’, only a small, monochrome portion of it”
(Moretti, 1999, p. 79). In order to make London
legible, nineteenth century British novelists, includ-
ing Austen and Dickens, reduce its complexity and
its randomness, thereby amputating the richer, more
unpredictable interactions that could occur in a more
complex city (Moretti, 1999, p. 86). Moretti com-
pares Dickens’s London with Balzac’s Paris; unlike
Dickens, Balzac allows the complications of his ur-
ban subject to flourish and inform narrative possi-
bility. The following quote presented by Elson et
al. (2010) is actually used by Moretti to describe
Balzac’s Paris specifically, not urban settings in gen-
eral, and specifically not Dickens’s London:

As the number of characters increases,
Moretti argues (following Bakhtin in his
logic), social interactions of different
kinds and durations multiply, displacing
the family-centered and conversational
logic of village or rural fictions. “The
narrative system becomes complicated,
unstable: the city turns into a gigantic
roulette table, where helpers and antago-
nists mix in unpredictable combinations”
(Moretti, 1999).

In summary, the simple fact that a novel is set in
an urban environment (and the evocation of the ur-
ban setting by name or choice of props) does not
equate with the creation of a truly urban space. The
latter is the key that renders possible an urban story
with an urban social world; “without a certain kind
of space,” Moretti declares, “a certain kind of story
is simply impossible” (Moretti, 1999, p. 100).

Moretti exposes another reductive rendering tech-
nique used by Dickens: the narrative crux of the
family romance. This technique, he asserts, “is a
further instance of the tentative, contradictory path
followed by urban novels: as London’s random and

unrelated enclaves increase the ‘noise’, the ‘disso-
nance’, the complexity of the plot – the family ro-
mance tries to reduce it, turning London into a co-
herent whole” (Moretti, 1999, p. 130). Alter agrees,
arguing that in Dickens’ London, “representation
of human solidarity characteristically sequesters it
in protected little enclaves within the larger urban
scene” (Alter, 2008, p. 55) and that “in these elab-
orately plotted books of Dickens’s, almost no char-
acter is allowed to go to waste; each somehow is
linked with the others as the writer deftly brings all
the strands together in the complication and reso-
lution of the story” (Alter, 2008, p. 67). In terms
of the “perception of the fundamental categories of
time and space, the boundaries of the self, and the
autonomy of the individual” (Alter, 2008, p. xi),
Dickens essentially writes a rural fiction, but in an
urban setting.

To summarize these arguments: when novelists
– like Dickens – employ narrative techniques not
originally evolved for the portrayal of urban areas
in novels with an urban setting, they fail to create in
the novel the type of urban space in which an urban
story with an urban social world is possible. Set-
ting is sociological (it exists outside of novels), but
space is literary (it exists only in novels): it is only
the development of new practices in writing that are
able to create truly urban spaces, those which reflect
the fundamental transformations in the nature of hu-
man experience by the city: “Urban crowds and ur-
ban dwellings may reinforce a sense of isolation in
individuals which, pushed to the extreme, becomes
an incipient solipsism or paranoia. This feeling of
being cut off from meaningful human connections
finds a congenial medium in modes of narration –
pioneered by Flaubert – that are rigorously centered
in the consciousness of the character” Alter (2008,
p. 107).

We now turn to Elson et al. (2010)’s presentation
of the literary theories. They muddy the difference
between setting and space, a serious flaw in inter-
preting Bakhtin. Urban setting does not equal urban
space, and space – not setting – is what concerns
Bakhtin’s chronotope. The nature of the space of a
novel, not its explicit setting, defines what can hap-
pen in it, including its social relationships. Each text
in Elson et al. (2010)’s corpus of 60 novels is classi-
fied as either rural or urban by the following defini-

34



tions. They define urban to mean set in a metropoli-
tan zone, characterized by multiple forms of la-
bor (not just agricultural), where social relations are
largely financial or commercial in character. Con-
versely, rural is defined to mean set in a country or
village zone, where agriculture is the primary activ-
ity, and where land-owning, non-productive, rent-
collecting gentry are socially predominant. Thus,
the distinction between rural and urban for Elson et
al. (2010) is clearly one of setting, not one of space.
Hypothesis EDM2 of Elson et al. (2010) is therefore
not a correct representation of the theories they cite.

Interestingly, Elson et al. (2010) cannot validate
their own hypothesis EDM2: their results suggest
that the “urban” novels within the corpus do not be-
long to a fundamentally separate class of novels, in-
sofar as basic frameworks of time and space inform
the essential experience of the characters. They con-
clude:

We would propose that this suggests that
the form of a given novel – the standpoint
of the narrative voice, whether the voice
is “omniscient” or not – is far more de-
terminative of the kind of social network
described in the novel than where it is set
or even the number of characters involved.

Put differently, differences in novels’ social net-
works are more related to literary differences
(space) than to non-literary differences (setting).

3 Expanded Set of Literary Hypotheses

In light of the analysis in the previous section, we
propose that Elson et al. (2010)’s results, though
they invalidate hypotheses EDM1 and EDM2, ac-
tually align with the parent theories from which
they are derived. In direct opposition to EDM1 and
EDM2, we expect our analysis to confirm the ab-
sence of correlation between setting and social net-
work within our corpus of novels. While Elson et al.
(2010)’s approach is constricted to examining social
networks from the perspective of conversation, we
obtain deeper insight into the novels by exploring
an expanded set of hypotheses which takes general
interaction and observation into account. If a com-
prehensive look at the social networks in our cor-
pus confirms a lack of structural difference between

the social worlds of rural- and urban-set novels, we
confirm the need to look beyond setting in order to
pinpoint facets of novelistic form that do determine
social networks.

Similar to the approach of Elson et al. (2010),
our hypotheses concern (a) the implications of an
increase in the number of characters, and (b) the im-
plications of the dichotomy between rural and urban
settings. However, unlike Elson et al. (2010), we do
not claim any hypothesized relation between the in-
crease in number of characters and the social struc-
ture. We formulate our own hypotheses (H1.1, H1.2,
H3.1, H3.2, H5) concerning the increase in number
of characters and study them out of curiosity and as
an exploratory exercise. Furthermore, unlike Elson
et al. (2010), we claim that literary theorists did not
posit a relation between setting and social structure.
Following is the set of hypotheses we validate in this
paper:

• H0: As setting changes from rural to urban,
there is no change in the number of characters.
The number of characters is given by the for-
mula 1 in table 1.

• H1.1: There is a positive correlation between
the number of interactions and the number of
characters. The number of interactions is given
by the formula 3 in table 1.

• H1.2: There is a negative correlation between
the number of characters and the number of
other characters a character interacts with (un-
weighted version of H1.1, formula 4).

• H2.1: As setting changes from rural to urban,
there is no change in the total number of inter-
actions that occur. The number of interactions
is given by the formula 3 in table 1.

• H2.2: As setting changes from rural to urban,
there is no change in the average number of
characters each character interacts with.

• H3.1: There is a positive correlation between
the number of observations and the number
of characters. The number of observations is
given by the formula 3 in table 1.

35



• H3.2: There is a negative correlation between
the number of characters a character observes
(formula 4), and the number of characters.

• H4.1: As setting changes from rural to urban,
there is no change in the total number of obser-
vations that occur. The number of observations
is given by the formula 3 in table 1.

• H4.2: As setting changes from rural to urban,
there is no change in the average number of ob-
servations performed by each character. (This
hypothesis is the unweighted version of H4.1,
formula 4, and the OBS counterpart of H2.2).

• H5: As the number of characters increases, the
number of communities increases, but the aver-
age size of communities decreases.

• H6: As setting changes from rural to urban,
there is no change in the number nor the av-
erage size of communities.

4 Methodology for Validating Hypotheses

Elson et al. (2010) provide evidence to invalidate
EDM1. They report a positive Pearson’s correlation
coefficient (PCC) between the number of characters
and the number of dialogues to show that the two
quantities are not inversely correlated. We use the
same methodology to examine our hypotheses re-
lated to the number of characters.

Elson et al. (2010) provide evidence to invalidate
EDM2. They extract various features from the social
networks of rural and urban novels and show that
these features are not statistically significantly dif-
ferent. They use the homoscedastic t-test to mea-
sure statistical significance (with p < .05 =⇒ sta-
tistical significance). We employ the same method-
ology to examine our hypotheses related to the ru-
ral/urban dichotomy.

The features that Elson et al. (2010) use to inval-
idate EDM2 are as follows: (a) average degree, (b)
rate of cliques, (c) density, and (d) rate of characters’
mentions of other characters. EDM2 posits that the
number of characters in urban settings share lesser
conversation as compared to the rural settings. The
average degree (count of the number of conversa-
tions normalized by the number of characters, see
formula 4 in Table 1) seems to be the metric that

is relevant for (in)validating EDM2. It is unclear
why Elson et al. (2010) report the correlation be-
tween other features to invalidate EDM2. We there-
fore, validate our formulation of the theory (similar
to EDM2) using only the average degree metric.

5 Types of Networks

This section provides definitions for the three differ-
ent types of networks we consider in our study.

5.1 Conversation Network

Elson et al. (2010) defined a conversation network
as a network in which nodes are characters and links
are conversations. The authors defined a conversa-
tion as a continuous span of narrative time in which
a set of characters exchange dialogues. Since dia-
logues are denoted in text by quotation marks, El-
son et al. (2010) used simple regular expressions
for dialogue detection. However, associating dia-
logues with their speakers (a task known as quoted
speech attribution) turned out to be non-trivial (El-
son and McKeown, 2010; He et al., 2013). In a sep-
arate work, Elson and McKeown (2010) presented a
feature-based, supervised machine learning system
for performing quoted speech attribution. Using this
system, Elson et al. (2010) successfully extracted
conversation networks from the novels in their cor-
pus. We refer to the system as EDM2010 through-
out this paper.

5.2 Observation and Interaction Networks

In our past work (Agarwal et al., 2010), we defined
a social network as a network in which nodes are
characters and links are social events. We defined
two broad categories of social events: observations
(OBS) and interactions (INR). Observations are de-
fined as unidirectional social events in which only
one entity is cognitively aware of the other. Inter-
actions are defined as bidirectional social events in
which both entities are cognitively aware of each
other and of their mutual awareness.

In Example 1, Mr. Woodhouse is talking about
Emma. He is therefore cognitively aware of Emma.
However, there is no evidence that Emma is also
aware of Mr. Woodhouse. Since only one charac-
ter is aware of the other, this is an observation event
directed from Mr. Woodhouse to Emma.

36



No Name Formula Weighted? Remark
1 # of characters |V |
2 # of interaction pairs |E| unw.
3 # of interactions W := Σ|E|i=1wi weighted
4 average degree Σv∈V |Ev ||V | =

2|E|
|V | unw. number of characters a character inter-

acts with on average

5 average weighted degree Σu∈V Σv∈Euwu,v|V | =
2W
|V | weighted number of interactions a character has

on average

Table 1: Table connecting the social network terminology to the natural language interpretation, along with the for-
mulae. Interactions may be replaced with observations to obtain the corresponding formula.

(1) “[Emma] never thinks of herself, if she can do
good to others,” {rejoined} [Mr. Woodhouse]
OBS

In Example 2, Mr. Micawber is talking about go-
ing home with Uriah. Since Mr. Micawber is talking
about Uriah, there is a directed OBS link from Mr.
Micawber to Uriah. Since he went home with Uriah,
they must both have been aware of each other and
of their mutual awareness. Thus, there is a bidirec-
tional INR link between the two characters.

(2) [Mr. Micawber] {said}OBS , that [he] had
{gone home with}INR [Uriah] OBS and INR

In Example 3, the author (Jane Austen) states a
fact about three characters (Elton, Mr. Knightley,
and Mr. Weston). However, the author does not tell
us about the characters’ cognitive states, and thus
there is no social event between the characters.

(3) [Elton]’s manners are superior to [Mr. Knight-
ley]’s or [Mr. Weston]’s. NoEvent

As these examples demonstrate, the definition of
a social event is quite broad. While quoted speech
(detected by Elson et al. (2010)) represents only a
strict sub-set of interactions, social events may be
linguistically expressed using other types of speech
as well, such as reported speech.

In our subsequent work (Agarwal and Rambow,
2010; Agarwal et al., 2013b; Agarwal et al., 2014),
we leveraged and extended ideas from the relation
extraction literature (Zelenko et al., 2003; Kamb-
hatla, 2004; Zhao and Grishman, 2005; GuoDong
et al., 2005; Harabagiu et al., 2005; Nguyen et al.,

2009) to build a tree kernel-based supervised sys-
tem for automatically detecting and classifying so-
cial events. We used this system for extracting ob-
servation and interaction networks from novels. We
will refer to it as SINNET throughout this paper.

5.3 Terminology Regarding Networks
A network (or graph), G = (V,E), is a set of ver-
tices (V ) and edges (E). The set of edges incident
on vertex v is written Ev. In weighted networks,
each edge between nodes u and v is associated with
a weight, denoted by wu,v. In the networks we con-
sider, weight represents the frequency with which
two people interact or observe one another. An edge
may be directed or undirected. Interactions (INR)
are undirected edges and observations (OBS) are di-
rected edges. Table 1 presents the name and the
mathematical formula for social network analysis
metrics we use to validate the theories.

Edges in a network are typed. We consider
four types of networks in this work: networks
with undirected interaction edges (INR), with di-
rected observation edges (OBS), with a combina-
tion of interaction and observation edges (INR +
OBS), and with a combination of interaction, obser-
vation, and undirected conversational edges (CON).
We denote these networks by GINR = (V,EINR),
GOBS , GINR+OBS , and GINR+OBS+CON respec-
tively. Each of these networks may be weighted or
unweighted.

6 Evaluation of SINNET

In our previous work, we showed that SINNET
adeptly extracts the social network from one work of
fiction, Alice in Wonderland (Agarwal et al., 2013b).

37



Novel Excerpt CONV-GOLD INT-GOLD
EDM2010 SINNET EDM2010 SINNET

R R P R F1 P R F1
Emma 0.40 0.70 1.0 0.13 0.22 0.86 0.48 0.61
Study in Scarlet 0.50 0.50 1.0 0.18 0.31 0.69 0.41 0.51
David Copperfield 0.70 0.80 1.0 0.22 0.36 0.80 0.63 0.70
Portrait of a Lady 0.66 0.66 1.0 0.22 0.36 0.73 0.44 0.55
Micro-Average 0.56 0.68 1.0 0.18 0.30 0.79 0.50 0.61

Table 3: Performance of the two systems on the two gold standards.

# of char. # of links
Novel Excerpt pairs CG IG
Emma 91 10 40
Study in Scarlet 55 8 22
David Copperfield 120 10 32
Portrait of a Lady 55 6 18

Table 2: A comparison of the number of links in the two
gold standards; CG is CONV-GOLD and IG is INT-GOLD

In this paper, we determine the effectiveness of SIN-
NET on an expanded collection of literary texts. El-
son et al. (2010) presented a gold standard for mea-
suring the performance of EDM2010, which we
call CONV-GOLD. This gold standard is not suitable
for measuring the performance of SINNET because
SINNET extracts a larger set of interactions beyond
conversations. We therefore created another gold
standard more suitable for evaluating SINNET, and
refer to it as INT-GOLD.

6.1 Gold standards: CONV-GOLD and
INT-GOLD

Elson et al. (2010) created their gold standard for
evaluating the performance of EDM2010 using ex-
cerpts from four novels: Austen’s Emma, Conan
Doyle’s A Study in Scarlet, Dickens’ David Copper-
field, and James’ The Portrait of a Lady. The authors
enumerated all pairs of characters for each novel ex-
cerpt. If a novel features n characters, its corre-
sponding list contains n∗(n−1)2 elements. For each
pair of characters, annotators were asked to mark
“1” if the characters converse (defined in Section 5)
and “0” otherwise. Annotators were asked to iden-
tify conversations framed with both direct (quoted)
and indirect (unquoted) speech.

As explained in previous sections, conversations
are a strict subset of general interactions. Since
SINNET aims to extract the entire set of observa-
tions and interactions, the gold standard we created
records all forms of observation and interaction be-
tween characters. For each pair of characters, anno-
tators were asked to mark “1” if the characters ob-
serve or interact and “0” otherwise.

Table 2 presents the number of character pairs in
each novel excerpt, the number of character pairs
that converse according to CONV-GOLD and the
number of character pairs that observe or inter-
act according to INT-GOLD. The difference in the
number of links between CONV-GOLD and INT-
GOLD suggests that the observation and interac-
tion of many more pairs of characters is expressed
through reported speech in comparison to conversa-
tional speech. For example, the number of conversa-
tional links identified in the excerpt from Emma by
Jane Austen was 10, while the number of interaction
links identified was 40.

6.2 Evaluation and Results

Table 3 presents the results for the performance of
EDM2010 and SINNET on the two gold standards
(CONV-GOLD and INT-GOLD). The recall of SIN-
NET is significantly better than that of EDM2010
on CONV-GOLD (columns 2 and 3), suggesting
that most of the links expressed as quoted conver-
sations are also expressed as interactions via re-
ported speech. Note that, because SINNET ex-
tracts a larger set of interactions, we do not re-
port the precision and F1-measure of SINNET on
CONV-GOLD. By definition, SINNET will pre-
dict links between characters that may not be linked
in CONV-GOLD; therefore the precision (and thus

38



Hypothesis As # of characters ↑ . . . As settings go from rural to urban . . .
PCC Valid? t-test Valid?

[H0] . . . # of characters ∼ p > 0.05 3
[H1.1] . . . # of interactions ↑ 0.83 3
[H1.2] . . . # of characters interacted with ↓ -0.36 3
[H2.1] . . . # of interactions ∼ p > 0.05 3
[H2.2] . . .# of characters interacted with ∼ p > 0.05 3
[H3.1] . . . # of observations ↑ 0.77 3
[H3.2]. . . # of characters observed ↓ -0.36 3
[H4.1] . . . # of observations ∼ p > 0.05 3
[H4.2] . . . # of characters observed ∼ p > 0.05 3
[H5] . . . # of communities ↑ 0.98 3
[H5] . . .average size of communities ↓ -0.26 3
[H6] . . .# of communities ∼ p > 0.05 3
[H6] . . . average size of communities ∼ p > 0.05 3

Table 4: Hypotheses and results. All correlations are statistically significant. ∼ denotes no significant change. As
an example, hypothesis H0 may be read as: As settings go from rural to urban . . . the number of characters does not
change significantly.

F1-measure) of SINNET will be low (and uninter-
pretable) on CONV-GOLD.

Table 3 additionally presents the performance
of the two systems on INT-GOLD (the last six
columns). These results show that EDM2010
achieves perfect precision, but significantly lower
recall than SINNET (0.18 versus 0.50). This is ex-
pected, as EDM2010 was not trained (or designed)
to extract any interactions besides conversation.

6.3 Discussion of Results

If there are any conversational links that EDM2010
detects but SINNET misses, then the two systems
should be treated as complementary. To determine
whether or not this is the case, we counted the num-
ber of links in all four excerpts that are detected by
EDM2010 and missed by SINNET. For Austen’s
Emma, SINNET missed two links that EDM2010
detected (with respect to INT-GOLD). For the other
three novels, the counts were SINNET two, zero,
and one, respectively. In total, the number of links
that SINNET missed and EDM2010 detected is
five out of 112. Since the precision of EDM2010 is
perfect, it seems advantageous to combine the out-
put of the two systems.

7 Results for Testing Literary Hypotheses

Table 4 presents the results for all hypotheses (H0-
H6) formulated in this paper. There are two broad
categories of hypotheses: (1) ones that comment on
social network analysis metrics (the rows) based on
the increase in the number of characters (columns
2 and 3), and (2) ones that comment on the social
network analysis metrics based on the type of setting
(rural versus urban, columns 4 and 5).

The results show that as settings change from ru-
ral to urban, there is no significant change in the
number of characters (row H0, column t-test). Fur-
thermore, as the number of characters increases, the
number of interactions also increases with a high
Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.83 (row H1.1,
column PCC). Similarly, for all other hypotheses,
the relation between the number of characters and
the setting of novels behaves as expected in terms of
various types of networks and social network analy-
sis metrics. Our results thus provide support for the
cogency of the original theories.

These results highlight one of the critical find-
ings of this paper: while network metrics are sig-
nificantly correlated with the number of characters,
there is no correlation at all between setting and
number of characters within our corpus (hypoth-
esis H0 is valid). If H0 were invalid, then all hy-

39



potheses concerning the effects of setting would be
false. However, since H0 is true, we may conclude
that setting (as defined by our rural/urban classifica-
tion) has no predictive effect on any of the aspects
of social networks that we investigate.

We also consider whether examining different
network types (interaction, observation, and com-
bination) in conjunction produces the same results
as examining each individually. The results indeed
align with those in Table 4, but with slightly differ-
ent correlation numbers. We give one example: we
find that the correlation between number of charac-
ters and number of interactions (hypothesis H1.1)
increases from 0.83 for GINR alone (as shown in
Table 4) to 0.85 for GINR+OBS and also 0.85 for
GINR+OBS+CONV . This pattern is observed for all
hypotheses.

8 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we investigated whether social net-
work extraction confirms long-standing assumptions
about the social worlds of nineteenth-century British
novels. Namely, we set out to verify whether the
social networks of novels explicitly located in ur-
ban settings exhibit structural differences from those
of rural novels. Elson et al. (2010) had previously
proposed a hypothesis of difference as an interpre-
tation of several literary theories, and provided ev-
idence to invalidate this hypothesis on the basis of
conversational networks. Following a closer read-
ing of the theories cited by Elson et al. (2010), we
suggested that their results, far from invalidating the
theories themselves, actually support their cogency.
To extend Elson et al. (2010)’s findings with a more
comprehensive look at social interactions, we ex-
plored the application of another methodology for
extracting social networks from text (called SIN-
NET) which had previously not been applied to fic-
tion. Using this methodology, we were able to ex-
tract a rich set of observation and interaction rela-
tions from novels, enabling us to build meaningfully
on previous work. We found that the rural/urban
distinction proposed by Elson et al. (2010) indeed
has no effect on the structure of the social networks,
while the number of characters does.

As our findings support our literary hypothesis
that the urban novels within Elson et al. (2010)’s

original corpus do not belong to a fundamentally
separate class of novels, insofar as the essential ex-
perience of the characters is concerned possible di-
rections for future research include expanding our
corpus in order to identify novelistic features that do
determine social worlds. We are particularly inter-
ested in studying novels which exhibit innovations
in narrative technique, or which occur historically
in and around periods of technological innovation.
Lastly, we would like to add a temporal dimension
to our social network extraction, in order to capture
information about how networks transform through-
out different novels.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank anonymous reviewers for
their insightful comments. We would also like to
thank David Elson for providing the gold standard
the data set used in their previous work. This paper
is based upon work supported in part by the DARPA
DEFT Program. The views expressed are those of
the authors and do not reflect the official policy or
position of the Department of Defense or the U.S.
Government.

40



References

Apoorv Agarwal and Owen Rambow. 2010. Automatic
detection and classification of social events. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1024–
1034, Cambridge, MA, October. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Apoorv Agarwal, Owen C. Rambow, and Rebecca J. Pas-
sonneau. 2010. Annotation scheme for social network
extraction from text. In Proceedings of the Fourth Lin-
guistic Annotation Workshop.

Apoorv Agarwal, Anup Kotalwar, and Owen Rambow.
2013a. Automatic extraction of social networks from
literary text: A case study on alice in wonderland. In
the Proceedings of the 6th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP 2013).

Apoorv Agarwal, Anup Kotalwar, Jiehan Zheng, and
Owen Rambow. 2013b. Sinnet: Social interaction net-
work extractor from text. In Sixth International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing, page 33.

Apoorv Agarwal, Sriramkumar Balasubramanian, Anup
Kotalwar, Jiehan Zheng, and Owen Rambow. 2014.
Frame semantic tree kernels for social network ex-
traction from text. 14th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Robert Alter. 2008. Imagined cities: urban experience
and the language of the novel. Yale University Press.

Mikhail M Bakhtin. 1937. Forms of time and of the
chronotope in the novel: Notes toward a historical po-
etics. Narrative dynamics: Essays on time, plot, clo-
sure, and frames, pages 15–24.

Terry Eagleton. 1996. Literary theory: An introduction.
U of Minnesota Press.

Terry Eagleton. 2013. The English novel: an introduc-
tion. John Wiley & Sons.

David K Elson and Kathleen McKeown. 2010. Auto-
matic attribution of quoted speech in literary narrative.
In AAAI.

David K. Elson, Nicholas Dames, and Kathleen R. McK-
eown. 2010. Extracting social networks from literary
fiction. Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
138–147.

Zhou GuoDong, Su Jian, Zhang Jie, and Zhang Min.
2005. Exploring various knowledge in relation extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of 43th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sanda Harabagiu, Cosmin Adrian Bejan, and Paul
Morarescu. 2005. Shallow semantics for relation ex-
traction. In International Joint Conference On Artifi-
cial Intelligence.

Hua He, Denilson Barbosa, and Grzegorz Kondrak.
2013. Identification of speakers in novels. In ACL
(1), pages 1312–1320.

Nanda Kambhatla. 2004. Combining lexical, syntactic,
and semantic features with maximum entropy mod-
els for extracting relations. In Proceedings of the
ACL 2004 on Interactive poster and demonstration
sessions, page 22. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Franco Moretti. 1999. Atlas of the European novel,
1800-1900. Verso.

Franco Moretti. 2005. Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract
Models for a Literary History. Verso.

Truc-Vien T. Nguyen, Alessandro Moschitti, and
Giuseppe Riccardi. 2009. Convolution kernels on
constituent, dependency and sequential structures for
relation extraction. Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing.

Raymond Williams. 1975. The country and the city. Ox-
ford University Press.

Dmitry Zelenko, Chinatsu Aone, and Anthony
Richardella. 2003. Kernel methods for relation
extraction. The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 3:1083–1106.

Shubin Zhao and Ralph Grishman. 2005. Extracting re-
lations with integrated information using kernel meth-
ods. In Proceedings of the 43rd Meeting of the ACL.

41


