



















































A Conventional Orthography for Algerian Arabic


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Arabic Natural Language Processing, pages 69–79,
Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Conventional Orthography for Algerian Arabic 

Houda Saadane1       and       Nizar Habash2  
 

(1) Univ. Grenoble Alpes, LIDILEM, Grenoble, France 
GEOLSemantics & Consulting, Paris, France 
houda.saadane@e.u-grenoble3.fr 

(2) New York University Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates 
nizar.habash@nyu.edu 

  

 

Abstract 

Algerian Arabic is an Arabic dialect spoken 
in Algeria characterized by the absence of 
writing resources and standardization, hence 
it is considered as an under-resourced lan-
guage. It differs from Modern Standard Ara-
bic on all levels of linguistic representation, 
from phonology and morphology to lexicon 
and syntax. In this paper, we present a con-
ventional orthography for Algerian Arabic, 
following a previous effort on developing a 
conventional orthography for Dialectal Ara-
bic (or CODA), demonstrated for Egyptian 
and Tunisian Arabic. We explain the design 
principles of Algerian CODA and provide a 
detailed description of its guidelines. 

1 Introduction 

The Arabic language today is characterized by a 
complex state of polyglossia. Modern Standard 
Arabic (MSA) is the official variety of Arabic 
used primarily in written literal contexts. There is 
also a large number of dialects whose dominant 
features are noticeable to Arab-speaking people. 
The Arabic dialects differ from Modern Standard 
Arabic (MSA) on all levels of linguistic repre-
sentation, from phonology and morphology to 
lexicon and syntax. MSA is classified as a high 
variety as is contains lot of normalization and 
standardization. It is generally considered as a 
prestigious, valued and official language; hence 
it is used for training (media and education). Ar-
abic Dialects (DA) are considered a low variety 
which includes languages with less normaliza-
tion and standardization. These languages are 
used in daily life, interviews and for informal 
conversations. Algerian Arabic (henceforth, 
ALG) is one of the Western group of Arabic dia-
lects spoken in Algeria. ALG differs from other 
Arabic dialects, neighboring or far ones  by hav-

ing some specific features. In addition to MSA 
and DA, foreign languages, particularly French 
and English have been increasingly part of the 
Arabic spoken in daily basis. 
 
With the emergence of Internet and social media, 
ALG (and other DAs) have become the language 
of informal online communication, for instance 
emails, blogs, discussion forums, SMS, etc. Most 
Arabic natural language processing (NLP) tools 
and resources were developed specially to treat 
MSA. Corresponding tools processing ALG are 
not as mature and sophisticated as those for 
MSA. This is due to the recent involvement of 
works on ALG dialect and the limit quantity of 
results and resources generated till today. To ad-
dress this problem, some solutions propose to 
apply NLP tools designed for MSA directly to 
ALG. This proposition is interesting but yields to 
significantly low performance. This is why it is 
necessary to develop solutions and build re-
sources for ALG treatment.  
 
In this paper, we present a basic layout of ALG 
processing which is necessary to build efficient 
NLP tools and applications. This layout is a de-
sign of standard common convention orthogra-
phy dedicated to ALG dialect. The proposed 
standard is an extension of that proposed in the 
work of Habash et al, (2012a) who proposed a 
Conventional Orthography for Dialectal Arabic 
(CODA). CODA is designed in order to develop 
computational models of Arabic dialects and 
provided a detailed description of its guidelines 
as applied to Egyptian Arabic (EGY). 
 
In this paper, we present a conventional orthog-
raphy for Algerian Arabic. The paper is orga-
nized as follows. Section 2, discusses related 
works. In Section 3, we present an historical 
overview of ALG. In Section 4, we highlight the 

69



linguistic differences between ALG and the lan-
guages MSA, EGY and TUN in order to moti-
vate some of our ALG CODA decisions. In Sec-
tion 5, we present ALG CODA guidelines. 

2 Related works 

Studying and processing dialects is an interesting 
recent research area which took progressively a 
big attention, especially with the explosion of 
internet public communications. Hence, there is 
actually a big interest to develop new tools to 
process an exploit the huge quantities of re-
sources established using dialects (oral commu-
nications, web, social networks, etc.). However, 
Arabic dialects are languages without standardi-
zation or normalization, these why much efforts 
are necessary to modernize Arabic orthography 
and develop orthographies for Arabic dialects. 
 
Maamouri et al. (2004) have developed a set of 
rules for Levantine dialects. These rules define 
the conversational Levantine Arabic transcription 
guidelines and annotation conventions. Habsh et 
al.(2012a) have proposed a conventional orthog-
raphy for Egyptian dialectal (CODA). This work 
is inspired by the Linguistic Data Consortium 
(LDC) guidelines for transcribing. However, 
CODA is intended for general purpose writing 
allowing many abstracts from these variations, 
whereas the LDC guideline are dedicated for 
transcription, and thus focus more on phonologi-
cal variations in sub-dialects. A proposition for 
transcription Algerain dialect are developed in 
(Harrat et., 2014) where a set of rules for tran-
scription Algerain dialect are defined and a 
grapheme-to-phoneme converter for this dialect 
was presented. Grapheme-to-Phoneme (G2P) 
conversion or phonetic transcription is the pro-
cess which converts a written form of a word to 
its pronunciation form; hence this technique fo-
cuses only on phonological variations.  
 
To remedy the lack of building resources and 
tools dedicated to the treatment of ALG issue, 
(Harrat et al., 2014) built parallel corpora for Al-
gerian dialects, because their ultimate purpose is 
to achieve a Machine Translation (MT) for Mod-
ern Standard Arabic (MSA) and Algerian dia-
lects (AD), in both directions.  They also propose 
language tools to process these dialects. First, 
they developed a morphological analysis model 
of dialects by adapting BAMA, a well-known 
MSA analyzer. Then they propose a 
diacritization system, based on a MT process 

which allows restoring the vowels to dialects 
corpora. And finally, they propose results on ma-
chine translation between MSA and Algerian 
dialects. 

 
In the same way, (Harrat et al., 2015) present an 
Arabic multi-dialect study including dialects 
from both the Maghreb and the Middle-east that 
they compare to the Modern Standard Arabic 
(MSA). Three dialects from Maghreb are con-
cerned by this study: two from Algeria : Anna-
ba's dialect (ANB), the language spoken in the 
east of Algeria, on Algiers's dialect (ALG), the 
language used in the capital of Algeria, and one 
from Tunisia, on Sfax's dialect (TUN) spoken in 
the south of Tunisia and two dialects from Mid-
dle-east (Syria and Palestine). The resources 
which have been built from scratch have lead to 
a collection of a multi-dialect parallel resource. 
 
Furthermore, (Zribi, et al., 2014) extend the 
CODA guidelines to take into account to Tunisi-
an dialect and (Jarrar, et al., 2014) have adapted 
it to the Palestinian dialect. In addition, authors 
of Egyptian and Tunisian CODA encourage the 
adaptation of CODA to other Arabic dialects in 
order to create linguistic resources. Following 
this council, we extend in this paper CODA 
guidelines to ALG. 

3 Algerian Arabic: Historical Overview  

Arabic speakers have Arabic dialects or vernacu-
lar as their mother tongues. These dialects can be 
stratified in two big families of dialects: the 
Western group (the Maghreb) or North African 
group and the Eastern group (the Mashriq). Alge-
rian dialect, noted ALG, is one of the Western 
group which is spoken in Algeria. This dialect is 
also called دارجة daArjaħ1 or جزايري jazaAyriy or 
 dziyriy simply meaning "Algerian". These دزيري
variations do not create generally barriers to un-
derstand the dialect. In addition to ALG, the Al-
gerian’s population speaks also Berber but with 
different ratios: ALG is used by 70 to 80% of the 
population however; the Berber language is the 
mother tongue of 25% to 30% of population. 
Berber is used mainly in center of Algeria (Al-
giers and Kabylie), East of Algeria (Béjaia and 
Sétif), in Aures (chaoui), the Mzab (north of the 

                                                 
1 Arabic transliteration is presented in the Habash-Soudi-
Buckwalter (HSB) scheme (Habash et al., 2007). 
Phonological transcriptions will be presented between /…/ 
but we will use the HSB consonant forms when possible to 
minimize confusion from different symbol sets. 

70



Sahara) and it is used by the Twaregue based in 
south of the Sahara (Hoggar mountains). Even if 
ALG is spoken by Algeria’s population, estimat-
ed to 40 million of persons, it is characterized by 
variation of this same dialect according to geo-
graphic location of ALG’s speakers.  
 
This dialect cannot be presented as homogeneous 
linguistic system but it has many varieties. Ac-
cording to (Derradji et al., 2002) we distinguish 
four varieties for ALG as follow: I) the Oranais: 
is the variety spoken in the Western of Algeria, 
precisely from Moroccan frontiers to the limit of 
Ténès, ii) Algérois: this variety covers the central 
zones of Algeria to Béjaia and it is widely 
spread, iii) Rural: the speakers of this variety are 
located in the East of Algeria like Constantine, 
Annaba or Sétif, and iv) Sahara: is the dialect of 
the south of Algeria population. ALG is also the 
language used in press, television, social com-
munication, internet exchanges, SMS, etc. Only 
in official communications, both reading and 
writing ones, where ALG is not used.  

 
Furthermore, we note that ALG is enriched by 
the languages of the groups colonized or man-
aged the Algerian population during the history 
of the country. Among these group’s languages 
we can cite: Turkish, Spanish, Italian and more 
recently French. This enrichment, materialized 
by the presence of foreign words in the dialect, 
has contributed to create many varieties of ALG 
from one region to another one, with a quite 
complex linguistic situation resulting from this 
language mixture. Indeed, this language mixture 
has been studied by many socio-linguistic like 
(Morsly, 1986; Ibrahimi, 1997; Benrabah, 1999; 
Arezki, 2008). They described the linguistic 
landscape of Algeria as 'multilingualism' or 
“poly-glossic” where multiple languages and 
language varieties coexist. In other words, the 
ALG is a suitable example of a complex socio-
linguistic situation (Morsly, 1986).  
  
Historically, Berber was the native language of 
the population of the Maghreb in general and 
Algeria in particular before the Islamic conquest, 
which introduced Arabic in all aspects of life. 
Centuries of various foreign powers introduced 
vocabulary from Turkish, Spanish and finally 
(and most dominantly today) French. French 
colonization tried to impose the French language 
as the only way of communication during its 132 
year control of Algeria. This situation caused a 
significant decline in the Arabic language, char-

acterized by increased French influence and the 
introduction of some other languages like Italian 
and Spanish due to migratory flow from Europe 
(Ibrahimi, 2006). The influence of these lan-
guages on ALG realizes in frequent code-
switching without any phonology adaptation in 
daily conversations, particularly from French, 
e.g., “lycée”, “salon”, “quartier”, “normal”, etc.  

4 Comparison among Algerian, Egyp-
tian, Tunisian and Standard Arabic 

There are many differences among ALG, EGY, 
TUN and MSA regarding many levels: phono-
logical, morphological and orthographic. In this 
section we present some of these differences that 
are important and determinant of the distinction 
between these Arabic flavors. We refer the read-
er to (Habash, 2010) for further elements and 
discussions.  

4.1 Phonological Variations 

We give in the following list the major phono-
logical differences between ALG and both MSA 
and EGY: 
The consonant equivalent the MSA (ق) /q/ is one 
of the sounds that deserve special attention. This 
sound has many varieties of pronunciation in 
Algerian Arabic dialects that we can find in the 
different regions, cities and localities of Algeria. 
Hence, the pronunciation of "q" can be realized 
as q, g, ʔ, or k.  
• uvular stop "ق" [q]: like Moroccan and Tuni-

sian dialects, this pronunciation is present in 
ALG in different localities as in some urban 
cities like Algiers or Constantine.  

• palatal sound "ڨ" [g]: this sound is also used 
in both Moroccan and Tunisian dialects in ad-
dition to the ALG one. In Algeria, this sound 
is used in some cities like Annaba and Sétif, 
in addition to the Bedouin dialects where this 
sound is widely employed.  

• glottal stop [ʔ]: this sound is used in Tlemcen 
city in the same manner we find it in the 
Egyptian dialect.  

• k postpalatal: this sound is a particularity of 
the ALG dialect that we do not find it in the 
other north African dialects. This sound is 
used in the rural localities and some cities like 
Kabylia, Jijel, Msirda and Trara. 

 
We note that in the case of dialects not using 
glottal stop consonant, there are some exceptions 
where the pronunciation is the same way regard-
less of the dialect. This is the case of the word 

71



bagraħ بڤرة  ‘ cow’ which is pronounced in the 
same way using the palatal sound bagra.  
 
The pronunciation of the consonant (ج) /j/ has 
also different from specific for a location or a 
group of speakers in the north of Africa. It is 
pronounced [dj] in Algiers and most of central 
Algeria as in the word نجاح ndjaH ‘success’, but 
when the consonant (ج) /j/ precedes a (د) /d/ con-
sonant it will be pronounced with the allophone 
[j] like in the word جديد jdid ‘new’. In Egypt this 
consonant is pronounced as /g/. For Tunisian, 
Tlemcenian and east Algerian speakers, 'ج' is 
realized as /j/ or /z/ when the word contains the 
consonant (س) /s/ or (ز) /z/ like in the words جبس 
ğibs or djibs ‘plaster’ become زبس zebs; and 
 .ςzuwz عزوز ςadjuwz ‘old women’ become عجوز
 
The MSA consonant (غ) /γ/ is assimilated in dif-
ferent manner according to some categories of 
speakers. In the eastern Algerian Sahara, like 
M'sila and BouSaâda, /γ/ is assimilated to (ق) /q/, 
for instance, the words غالي γaAliy ‘expensive’ 
and صغيرة sγayraħ ‘small’, are pronounced re-
spectively /qaAliy/, and /sqayra/. Sometimes, it 
is assimilated to (خ) /x/, like Tunisian and eastern 
Algeria speakers, e.g., the word غسل ‘washed’ is 
pronounced /xssel/ or /γssel/. 
 
The interdental MSA consonant (ث) /θ/ can be 
pronounced as (ت) /t/, in both ALG and EGY 
dialects like for the word ثوم θuwm ' garlic’ is 
pronounced as توم /tuwm/. But it is also pro-
nounced /θ/ in some urban Algerian dialects as in 
the word ثوم θuwm -f/ like in nomadic dia/ (ف) ,
lects of Mostaganem where for instance the word 
 faAniy; or فاني θaAniy ‘also’ is pronounced ثاني
-s/ in some cases in EGY dialect, for exam/ (س)
ple, the word ثابت θaAbit ‘fixe’ is pronounced 
 saabit. Another MSA interdental consonant سابت
has also special pronunciations; it is the conso-
nant (ذ) /ð/. In the EGY dialect, it can be pro-
nounced (د) /d/, like the word ذھب ðhab ‘gold’ 
pronounced دھب dhab, or (ز) /z/ for instance the 
word  clever’ is realized zakiy. However, in‘  ذكي
the ALG dialect, the consonant (ذ) /ð/ has one of 
the following pronunciations: (ذ) /ð/ or (د) /d/. 
For instance the word ذراع ‘arm’ can be pro-
nounced ðraAς or draAς. Moreover, in some re-
gions in Algeria, like Mostaganem, this conso-
nant is realized as (ڢ) /v/, like for the word ذھب 
ðhab  ' gold’ pronounced ھبڢ  vhab.  
 

The pronunciation of the glottal stop phoneme 
that appears in many MSA words in ALG dialect 
has different forms: 
• The glottal stop becomes longue: this pronun-

ciation is also present in TUN and EGY dia-
lects. We can give as example the words : فأس    
faÂs /fa’s/ → /fa:s/  Diŷb  ذئب ,'faAs ‘pickaxe  فاس
/Di’b/ → /Di:b/  مؤمن diyb ‘wolf’, and  ذيب
muŵmin /mu’men/ → /mumin/ مومن  muwmin 
‘beliver’. 

• The glottal stop disappears: it consists on 
simply removing the glottal when pronouncing 
the word. This form is also used in TUN and 
EGY dialects. For instance, let us take the fol-
lowing word: زرقاء zarqaA’ /zarqa:’/ → /zarqa:/ 
 .’zarqA ‘blue  زرقا

• The glottal stop is replaced by a semi-vowel 
/w/ or /y/: this pronunciation is found in ALG 
and TUN dialects and not in EGY one. It is 
used for instance in the case of the words َأَكَّل 
/Âak~al /‘to give eating’ → وّكل wuk~al, أمس 
/Âams/ ‘yesterday’ → يامس yaAmas 

• The glottal stop is replaced by the letter /l/: 
This form is also used uniquely in the ALG 
and TUN dialects unlike the EGY one. Let us 
take the following examples of using of this 
form: أفعى  /Âafςa/  ‘snake’ → لفعى /lafςa/, أرض 
/ÂaarD/ ‘earth’ → لرض /larD/. We note that 
the given examples are also exceptions where 
we use the same form for both definite and in-
definite. 

• The glottal stop is replaced by the letter /h/: 
opposite to the EGY dialect, the ALG and 
TUN ones use this form to pronounce in some 
cases the glottal stop, like in the words الة  أَجَّ
Âaj~aAlaħ /Âajja:la/ ‘widow’ → الة   ھجَّ
hajjaAlaħ /hajja:la/,Lأّما Âam~aAlaA 
/Âamma:laA/ ‘however’ → Lھّما ham~aAlaA 
/hamma:laA/. 

 
Unlike the Egyptian dialect, the Algerian dialect 
elides many short vowels in unstressed contexts. 
This feature characterizes also the other Maghreb 
dialects. This is the case of the following words: 
MSA جمل jamal ‘Camel’ (and EGY /gamal/) be-
comes ALG /jmal/. In addition, this feature in-
troduce an interesting element to distinguish the 
Maghreb dialects from the EGY one, this ele-
ment is the presence of a succession of two con-
sonants at the beginning of the word which in-
troduces a specific particularity in the verb 
scheme ‘fςal’ in ALG instead of ‘faςal’ in EGY, 
like in the verb MSA  qatal/ ‘he killed’ (and/  قتل
EGY /’atal/) becomes ALG /qtal/. 
 

72



The MSA diphthongs ay and aw are generally 
reduced uniformly to /i:/ and /u:/. For example, 
let us take the words: حيط /HayT/ ‘wall’ becomes 
ALG /Hi:T/, لون /lawn/ ‘color’ becomes ALG 
/lu:n/. We note that this particularity is found in 
the younger generation speakers; however, older 
speakers still retain them in some words and con-
texts, for instance the word عود stills pronounced 
/ςawd/ ‘horse’ by some old speakers.  
 
Another feature of ALG dialect, shared with the 
TUN one, is the pronunciation of the MSA /a:/: 
in some words it is realized as /e:/ and in others 
remains /a:/. For example, the word  َْجَمال /jam:al/ 
‘beauty’ with this signification is pronounced 
with /a:/ but it is realized with /e:/ in the word 
 .’jme:l/ meaning ‘camels/ ْجَمالْ 

4.2 Morphological Variations 

ALG dialect has also some morphological as-
pects that are different from that of the MSA, and 
closer to that of Maghreb dialects. These aspects 
consist essentially on a simplification of some 
inflexions and inclusion of new clitics as follow: 
 
As regards the inflexion, in ALG dialect, like 
other Arabic ones, the casual endings in nouns 
and verbs mood are lost. We note that the indica-
tive mood is the one which is used as default un-
like the other moods that are not used. Moreover, 
the dual and the feminine plural disappeared; 
they are assimilated to the masculine in the plural 
form. For example, the word  َْرتُنَّ َشك  šakartun∼a 
‘they (fem.pl.) thank’ is normalized in the ALG 
dialect in ْشَكْرتُوا škar-tuwA ‘they thank’. In addi-
tion, the first and the second person of the singu-
lar form are conjugated in the same way in the 
dialect, e.g., in MSA we say  َُشَكْرت šakartu ‘I 
thank’ and  ََشَكْرت šakarta ‘you thanks’, these two 
forms are normalized in ALG dialect in the fol-
lowing unique form:  ْْشَكْرت škart ‘I/you thank’. 
This simplification can lead to some ambiguities 
in ALG.  
 
The ALG dialect modifies the interne form of the 
verbs when it does their flexion in imperfective 
form. It introduces a gemination in the first radi-
cal letter and moving to this radical the vowel of 
the second one. This modification is applied only 
in the plural form and the 2nd person of feminine 
singular. For example, in ALG the verb ‘to 
thank’ in 3rd person of masculine singular is  ْيُْشُكر 
yu-škur (he is thanking) and in 3rd person of 
masculine plural we have: ْكُروا  yuš~ukr-uwA يُشُّ
(they are thanking) but in EGY the same case 

have the form: يُْشُكُروا yuškur-uwA. To enforce 
this statement we refer to (Souag, 2005) work 
where they defend that: “As is common in Alge-
ria, when normal short vowel elision would lead 
to another short vowel being in an open syllable, 
we have slight lengthening on the first member 
so as to change the stress: يضرب yaDṛab 'he hits’ 
→ yaD~arbuwA  يضربوا "they hit”,ركبة  rukba 
'knee’ → ركبتي ruk~ubtiy ‘my knee’; this 
gemination need not occur, however, if the con-
sonant to be geminated is one of the sonorants r, 
ṛ, l, n, although for younger speakers it often 
does. I have the impression that these compensa-
tory geminates are not held as long as normal 
geminates; this needs further investigation.” 
 
Otherwise, ALG dialect uses, like the other Ara-
bic dialects, only the suffix ين /yn/ to form the 
regular plural. However, the ALG elides the 
short vowels in plural forms like in the following 
examples:  ُْمْلَحد mulHad 'unbeliever', in the plural 
form ُمْلْحِدين mulHdiyn,  ُْمھَْنِدس muhandis 'engineer', 
pl.  ُْمھَْنْدِسين muhandsiyn. But in some dialects, like 
the EGY one, they don’t elide the short vowel, 
for instance the plural of  ُْمھَْنِدس muhandis 
'engineer' in EGY is  ُْمھَْنِدِسين muhandisiyn. But for 
some exception, like for the active participle 
[1A2i3] → [1A23-iyn] (Gadalla, 2000), this eli-
sion is maintained whatever the dialect like for 
the word  َْصاِيم SaAyim 'fasting' →  َْصاْيِمين 
SaAymiyn. 
 
Cohen (1912) describes the emphatic suffix تيك /–
tiyk/ as a characteristics of the Muslim Algiers 
dialect that is used to express adverbs ending 
with –a like in for the words اناڤ  gana ‘also’ 
which becomes ganaAtiyk, زعما zaςma ‘suppos-
edly’ which becomes zaςmaAtiyk.  
 
For the form استفعل [Aista12a3] which exists in 
the different dialects, the ALG introduces in ad-
dition a new variant of this form. This variant is 
 ssa-12a3] and it is used essentially by the] سفعل
speakers of the west of Algeria (Marçais, 1902). 
For example, let us take the verb  ْاِْستَْكلَف Aistaklaf 
‘take care of’ can be also used like  ْْكلَف  ssaklaf سَّ
or  َْسْكلَف saklaf.   
Another feature of the ALG dialect is the inser-
tion of vowel /i:/ between the stem and the con-
sonantal suffixes of the perfect form of the pri-
mary geminate verb, e.g in MSA the verb 

شددت/شدّ   šad∼a/šadadtu 'he/I pulled' becomes in 
ALG  ّشديت/شد  šad∼/šad∼iyt. This feature is also 
present in the other Arabic dialects.  
 

73



The passive voice in classical Arabic uses vowel 
changes and not verb derivation but in ALG as in 
many Arabic dialects, the passive form is ob-
tained by prefixing the verb with one the follow-
ing elements:  
• t- / tt-, for example : تبنى tabnaý ‘it was 

built’, ترفد ttarfad ‘it was lifted’ 
• n-, for instance : نفتح nftah 'it opened' 
• /tn- / or /nt/, e.g., نتكل ntkal 'was edible', تنقتل 

tnaqtal 'to be killed'. We note that this last 
element is specific for the ALG dialect. 

 
The ALG dialect uses the particle «n» for the 
first person of singular like the other Maghreb 
dialects. This particle is generally absent from 
the Mashreq dialects like EGY one. In those dia-
lects the «n» is substituted by the «a» like shown 
in the following example: نكتب /naktab/ ‘I write’ 
in ALG while the equivalent of it in EGY is اكتب 
/Aaktib/. 
 
Like several dialects (EGY and TUN), ALG in-
clude the clictics, that are reduced forms of the 
MSA words, e.g., the demonstrative proclitic +  ه
ha+ which strictly precedes with the definite ar-
ticle +ال Al+ is related to the MSA demonstrative 
pronounsھذا haðaA and ھذه haðihi, e.g.; (MSA → 
ALG) ھذه الدنيا haðihi AldunyaA → haAldinyaA 
'this life'. 
 
Several dialects include the proclitic +ع, ςa+ a 
reduced form of the preposition  /ςalaý/ على
'on/upon/about/to’. For example, (MSA → ALG) 

 عالمايدة → /ςalaý AlTaAwilaħ/ على الطاولة
ςaAlmaAydaħ 'on the table'. The same interpreta-
tion is valid for the proclitics + ف   f + a and +م 
m+; which are the reduced form of the preposi-
tions في fiy 'in' and من min 'from' respectively. 
Also, several dialect include the non-MSA nega-
tion circum-clitic +ما  mA+ +ش  +š. For example  ما
 .’mA qriyteš ‘I haven’t read قريتش
 
Furthermore, ALG almost lost all of the nominal 
dual forms, which are replaced with the word زوج 
zudwj /zu:dj/ 'two' with the plural form, e.g., 
(MSA→ ALG) كتابين kitaAbayn → زوج كتب zuwdj 
ktub 'two books' 

4.3 Orthographic Variations 

 The orthographic variation in writing of Arabic 
dialects words is due to two reasons: i) the non-
existence of an orthographic standard for Arabic 
dialects because these varieties are not codified 
and normalized, and ii) the phonological differ-
ences between MSA and Algerian dialect (ALG). 

For these dialects words can be spelled phono-
logically or etymologically using their corre-
sponding MSA form. This fact creates some in-
consistency among dialect writers. For example, 
the corresponding word to ‘gold’ can be written 
 ðhab. In addition, in some cases ذھب dhab or دھب
the phonology or underlying morphology is re-
flected by some regular phonological assimila-
tion writing, e.g. طوموبيل Tuwmuwbiyl ‘cars’ is 
also written as طونوبيل Tuwnuwbiyl, إسماعيل 
AismaAςiyl, ‘Ismaël’ is also written as إسماعين 
AismaAςiyn, من بعد min baςd ‘after’ is also written 
as مم بعد mim baςd. Furthermore, these different 
spelling can conduce to some semantic confu-
sion, like for شربو šrbw may be شربوا šarbuwA 
‘they drank’ or شربه šarbuh ‘he drank it’. Finally, 
the shortened long vowels, can be spelled long or 
short, for instance, شفوھا/شافوھا  šAfw+hA/ šfw+hA 
‘they saw her, and مجابش majaAbaš ‘he didn’t 
bring’ ماجابش mAjaAbaš. 

4.4 Lexical Variations 

 As presented in Section 3, the Algerian dialect, 
like other Arabic dialects, has been influenced, 
over centuries, by other languages like Berber, 
Turkish, Italian, Spanish and French. Table 1 
shows some examples of borrowed words 2  in 
ALG. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 Algerian Arabic CODA Guidelines  

In this section we present a mapping of the 
CODA convention for the Algerian dialect. The 
CODA convention is presented and its goals and 

                                                 
2 We refer to (Guella, 2011) for more examples. 

Words Translation Transliteration Origin 
 a tortoise Fakruwn فكرون

Berber غمnش Moustache šliAγam 
 a throat  Qarjuwmaħ ڤرجومة
 Socks tqaAšiyr تقاشير

Turkish سكارجي a drunkard sukaArjiy 
 Feast Zardaħ زردة
 Party fiyšTaħ فيشطة

Italian 
 

 Foul Zablaħ زبلة
 Money Suwrdiy صوردي
 a week siymaAnaħ سيمانة

Spanish 
 

 Snickers Spardiynaħ سبردينة
 a school Sukwiylaħ ُسكويلة
 Table TaAblaħ طابلة

French 
 

 Phone Tiyliyfuwn تيليفون
 Nurse Farmliy فرملي

Table 1: The origin and the meaning of some bor-
rowed words used in ALG. 

 

74



principals are described in details in (Habash et 
al, 2012a). An example of Algerian CODA is 
presented in Table 5. 

5.1 CODA Guiding Principles 

We summarize the main CODA design elements 
(Habash et al., 2012a, Eskander et al., 2013): 

 
• CODA is an internally consistent and coher-

ent convention for writing Dialectal Arabic. 
• CODA is created for computational purposes. 
• CODA uses the Arabic script. 
• CODA is intended as a unified framework for 

writing all Arabic dialects. 
• CODA aims to strike an optimal balance be-

tween maintaining a level of dialectal unique-
ness and establishing conventions based on 
MSA-DA similarities. 

CODA is designed respecting many principles: 
 

1. CODA is an Ad Hoc convention which uses 
only the Arabic script characters including 
the diacritics used for writing MSA. 

2. CODA is consistent as it associates to each 
DA word a unique orthographic form that 
represents its phonology and morphology.  

3. CODA uses and extends the basic MSA or-
thographic decisions (rules, exceptions and 
ad hoc choices), e.g., using Shadda for pho-
nological gemination or spelling the definite 
article morphemically.  

4. CODA generally preserves the phonological 
form of dialectal words given the unique 
phonological rules of each dialect (e.g., 
vowel shortening), and the limitations of 
Arabic script (e.g., using a diacritic and a 
glide consonant to write a long vowel). 

5. CODA preserves DA morphology and syn-
tax. 

6. CODA is easy to learn and write.  
7. The CODA principles are the same for all 

the dialects, however each dialect will have 
its proper CODA map. This unique map re-
spects the phonology and the morphology of 
the considered dialect.  

8. CODA is not a purely phonological repre-
sentation. Text in CODA can be read per-
fectly in dialect given the specific dialect 
and its CODA map. 

5.2 Algerian CODA 

As we said above, CODA principles are applica-
ble for all dialects but with a specific map for 
each dialect. Hence, in this section we present 

the map of the Algerian dialect (ALG) to CODA 
by summarizing the specific CODA guidelines 
for ALG. Firstly we chose a variant of the ALG 
which is the one used in the media as default. 
This variant represents the dialect of the capital 
city Algiers and follows the same orthographic 
rules as MSA by taking into accounts all the fol-
lowing exceptions and extensions.  

5.3 Phonological Extensions 

Long Vowels In ALG CODA the long vowel 
/e:/, which do not exist in MSA, will be written 
as ay or iA depending on its MSA cognate: ay or 
aA, respectively. In MSA orthography, the se-
quence iA is not possible, hence using words 
with aA MSA cognates can be a good solution 
for ALG. This orientation is suitable since the 
basic non-diacritical form of the word is pre-
served, for instance, دار daAr /da:r/ ‘turn’ and 
diAr /de:r/ ‘do’. This extension is present also in 
Tunisian CODA unlike the Egyptian one.  
 
Vowel Shortening Like the EGY and TUN 
CODA, the ALG long vowels are written in long 
form. In some cases, which are shortened in cer-
tain cases such as when adding affixes and clitics 
even if it is writing long. For example, ماجابھاش 
mA jAb+hA+š ‘he did not forghets for her’ and 
 tquwl lhm /tqullhum/ ‘you tell them’ (not تقول لھم
 tqulhm). This vowel shorting can be also تقلھم
considered in words with two long vowels. Pho-
nologically, in DA, even if the two long vowels 
are written, only one is allowed in a word, in 
other terms, it should be only one stressed sylla-
ble in each phonological word. For instance, 
 .(Saymiyn صيمين SaAymiyn ‘fasting’ (not صايمين

5.4 Phono-Lexical Exceptions 

 The Algerian "qaf" The letter (ق) /q/ is used to 
represent the four following consonants: /q/, /g/ 
(like TUN), /k/ and (') (like EGY). The table 2 
gives some examples of exceptional pronuncia-
tion for /g/. 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Consonant with Multiple Pronunciations 
 In ALG we use the MSA forms to write conso-
nants with multiple pronunciations. The used 
MSA form has to be closer to the considerate 

CODA Pronunciation English 

 baqraħ          /bagra/   Cow بقرة

 … qaAnaAtiyk  /ga :na :ti :k/ so ڤاناتيك

 qiAwriy /ge:wriy/ foreign  قاوري

Table 2: ALG exceptional pronunciation examples 

75



consonant if it has a corresponding MSA cog-
nate. We give in Table 3 some examples. Like 
TUN CODA, the ALG one has more variations 
than the ones addressed in EGY CODA as for 
the former the efforts were focused on Cairene 
Arabic. Hence, ALG seems to have more MSA-
like pronunciations where MSA spelling is simp-
ly the same as ALG.  
 
Hamza Spelling Hamzated MSA cognate may 
not be spelled in ALG CODA in a way corre-
sponding to the MSA cognate. In other words, 
the glottal stop will be spelled phonologically. 
This feature is also present in EGY and TUN 
CODA. However, when Hamza is pronounced in 
ALG, we apply the same MSA spelling rules. 
Furthermore, the glottal stop phoneme, appearing 
in many MSA words, has disappeared in ALG, 
like in the words: فاس fAs 'pickaxe' (not like MSA 
 ذئب Diyb 'wolf' (not like MSA ذيب ,(faÂs فأس
Diŷr). In addition, words starting with Hamzated 
Alif are not seen in ALG CODA, e.g, رضLا 
AlAarD /larD/ ‘earth’ (not لرض larD). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Definite Article If the word contains the article 
Al (ال), we must distinguish between the sun and 
the moon letters. In the case of the sun letters, the 
"L" is silent and the letter that follows is doubled 
(gemination) in pronunciation and in writing, 
e.g., النّھار AlnnhAr 'day' (not انّھار AnnhAr). Con-
versely, with the moon letters, the ‘A’ is not pro-
nounced, the "L" of the article is pronounced and 
the letter that follows is not doubled, neither in 
pronunciation nor in writing, e.g., القمر Alqmar 
‘the moon’ (not مرلق  lqmar) (Saadane and 
Semmar, 2012; Biadsy et al., 2009). 

 

N of Number Construct The ALG CODA adds 
the phoneme /n/ after some numerals in construct 
cases, e.g.,سطاشن طابلة sTaAšn TaAblaħ ‘16 ta-
bles’ whereas the number 16 is pronounced alone 
 sTaAš. This exception is valid for Number سطاش
Construct forms with number between 11 and 19 
preceding a noun in the singular. This property is 
also valid in TUN CODA.  

5.5 Morphological Extensions 

Attached clitics ALG dialect, as many other dia-
lects, uses almost all the attached clitics in MSA, 
the definite article + ال  Al+, the future particle 
proclitic +ح Ha+ (expressed in east of Algeria 
like Annaba city), the coordinating conjunction و 
+ w+, the negation particle enclitic ش+ +š. In 
addition ALG uses the new attached clitics re-
duced forms of the MSA, e.g., + ع   ς+, + م   m+, + ه   
h+, + ف   f+. The following table illustrates some 
examples of these clitics where we consider the 
word وكليناھالكم wikliynaAhaAlkum ‘and we have 
eaten your food’ 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Separated Clitics The spelling rule for the indi-
rect object enclitics and the negation proclitic ما 
mA is preserved in the ALG CODA map. This 
map puts a separation using a space between the 
negation particle and the indirect object, e.g.,  ما
 mA jAb lkumš /ma+jab+lkum+š/ 'he did جاب لكمش
not give/com you'.  

5.6 Lexical Exceptions 

 The ALG CODA, like the TUN and EGY ones, 
contains a list of Algerian dialect words that have 
a specific ad hoc spelling. This specific spelling 
may be inconsistent with the map of CODA in-
troduced above and can be spelled commonly in 
different ways. These exceptions include for in-
stance:  
• The demonstratives ھذوك haðuwk (not ھاذوكة 

haðukaħ) ‘that’, ھكذا hakðaA ‘like this’ (not 
 ھاكدا hakdaA or ھكدا haAkðaA, or ھاكذا
haAkdaA) 

• The preposition 'I know' is expressed with the 
phrase ْعلَى بَالِي ςlaý baAliy (not عمبالي 
ςambaAliy, or عن بالي ςan baAliy, or علبالي 
ςlabaAliy)  

CODA Pronunciations English 

  /ςjuwz  /ςadju:z/, /ςzu:z عجوز
/ςju:z/ 

old women 

 θaAniy /fa:niy/, /θa:niy/  Also ثاني

 Sadr /sadr/, /Sadr/ Chest صدر

 ,/qahwaħ /qahwa/, /gahwa قھوة
/kahwa/, /’ahwa/ 

Coffee 

 γsal /γsal/,/xsal/ he washed غسل

 γaliy  /γaa:li/, /qaa:li/ Expensive غالي

 faAsdaħ /fa:zda/, /fa:sda/ Corrupt فاسدة 

 /ðhab /ðhab/, /dhab ذھب
/vhab/ 

Gold 

 hbaT /hbaT/, /HbaT/ he descended ھبط

Table3: examples of multiple pronunciations in 
ALG. 

Enclitics Suffixes Stem Proclitics 
 و كلي نا ھا ل كم

kum l haA naA kliy wi 
Table 4: Tokenization of the word وكليناھالكم  

wikliynaAhaAlkum 
 

76



• The adverbs زعمة zaςmaħ (not زعما zaςma) 
‘supposedly’, ضركة Durkaħ (not ضركا Durka) 
‘now’, انةڤ  gaAnaħ (not اناڤ  gaAna) ‘also’  

 
In addition, in influence and integration of for-
eign words from other languages, like French, 
Berber or Italian, have emerged new phonemes 
like /g/, /p/ or /v/. These phonemes are used to 
express sounds that do not exist in MSA, but in 
CODA we will use the following Arabic charac-
ters: /q/, /b/ and /f/ to express respectively g, p 
and v. For example, جافال jaAfiAl ‘detergent’, كافي 
kaAvi ‘stupid’, بوبية puwpiyaħ ‘doll’, قيدون 
qiyduwn ‘handlebar’. 

 

6 Conclusions and Future Work 

We presented in this paper a set of guidelines 
towards a conventional orthography for Algerian 
Arabic. We discussed the various challenges of 
working with Algerian Arabic and how we ad-
dress them. In the future, we plan to use the de-
veloped guidelines to annotated collections of 
Algerian Arabic texts, in a first step towards de-
veloping resources and tools for Algerian Arabic 
processing. 
 

 
Acknowledgment 
The first author was supported by the DGCIS 
(Ministry of Industry) and DGA (Ministry of 
Defense): RAPID Project 'ORELO', referenced 
by N°142906001. The second author was sup-
ported by DARPA Contract No. HR0011-12-C-
0014. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or 
recommendations expressed in this paper are 
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect 
the views of DARPA. We would like to thank 
Bilel Gueni, Emad Mohamed and Djamel 
Belarbi for helpful feedback. 

 

 

 

  

Raw Text  تو حصةnالنساء الي  ڤاعإنشاء هللا . الخط لحمر لنھار اليومة والي يتزامن مع عيد المرأةبرنامج مرحبا بكم في ب
قبل منروحو . إنشاء هللا يتھناو ب ماليھم، ب والديھم ووLدھم. راھم يشوفو فينا إنشاء هللا أيام سعيده وجميلة فحياتھم

 .للموضوع نتاع اليومة والي خصصناه للمرأة ف الجزاير وكيفاش راھي عايشة خلونا نرحبو بالضيوف تع لبرنامج

mrHbA bkm fy plAtw HSħ brnAmj AlxT lHmr lnhAr Alywmħ wlly ytzAmn mς ςyd 
AlmrÂħ. ǍnšA' Allh gAς AlnsA' Aly rAhm yšwfw fynA ǍnšA' Allh ÂyAm sςydh wjmylħ 
fHyAthm. ǍnšA' Allh ythnAw b mAlyhm, b wAldyhm wwlAdhm. qbl mnrwhw llmwDwς 
ntAς Alywmħ wAly xSSnAh llmrÂħ f AljzAyr wkyfAš rAhy ςAyšħ xlwnA nrhbw bAlDywf 
tς lbrnAmj. 

CODA  تو حصة برنامج الخط الحمر لنھار اليوم واللي يتزامن معnانشا هللا قاع النسا اللي راھم . عيد المراةمرحبا بكم في ب
قبل ما نروحوا للموضوع . انشا هللا يتھناوا بماليھم، بوالديھم ووLدھم. يشوفوا فينا انشا هللا ايام سعيدة وجميلة فحياتھم

 .تاع اليوم واللي خصصناه للمراة فالجزاير وكفاش راھي عايشة خلونا نرحبوا بالضيوف تاع البرنامج

mrHbA bkm fy blAtw HSħ brnAmj AlxT AlHmr lnhAr Alywm wAlly ytzAmn mς ςyd 
AlmrAħ, AnšA Allh qAς AlnsA Aly rAhm yšwfwA fynA AnšA Allh AyAm sςydħ wjmylħ 
fHyAthm. AnšA Allh ythnAwA bmAlyhm, bwAldyhm wwlAdhm. qbl mA nrwhwA 
llmwDwς tAς Alywm wAlly xSSnAh llmrAħ fAljzAyr wkfAš rAhy ςAyšħ xlwnA nrhbwA 
bAlDywf tAς AlbrnAmj.   

English Hello everyone, in « The Red Line » daily show, which coincides with the Women's 
Day. God willing, for all the women who watch this show, they may have happy and 
beautiful days in their lives. God willing, and they will rejoice in their families, parents 
and children. Before addressing the topic of the day, where we focus on women in 
Algeria and how they are living, let's welcome to our program's guests. 
 

Table 5: An example sentence in ALG 

77



References 

Abdenour Arezki. 2008. Le rôle et la place du 
français dans le système éducatif algérien. Re-
vue du Réseau des Observatoires du Français 
Contemporain en Afrique, (23), 21-31. 
 
Mohamed Benrabah. 1999. Langue et pouvoir en 
Algérie: Histoire d'un traumatisme linguistique. 
Seguier Editions. 
 
Fadi Biadsy, Nizar Habash and Julia Hirschberg. 
2009, Improving the Arabic Pronunciation Dic-
tionary for Phone and Word Recognition with 
Linguistically-Based Pronunciation Rules, The 
2009 Annual Conference of the North American 
Chapter of the ACL, pages 397–405, Boulder, 
Colorado. 
 
Marcel Cohen. 1912. Le parler arabe des Juifs 
d’Alger. Champion :Paris. 

 
Yacine Derradji, Valéry Debov, Ambroise Quef-
félec, Dalila S. Dekdouk and Yasmina C. Ben-
chefra. 2002. Le français en Algérie : lexique et 
dynamique des langues, Ed. Duclot, AUF, 2002, 
590 p. 
 
Ramy Eskander, Nizar Habash, Owen Rambow 
and Nadi Tomeh. 2013. Processing Spontaneous 
Orthography. In Proceedings of Conference of 
the North American Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (NAACL), Atlanta, Georgia. 
 
Charles A. Ferguson. 1959. Diglossia. Word-
Journal of the International Linguistic Associa-
tion, 1959, vol. 15, no 2, p. 325-340. 

 
Hassan A. Gadalla. 2000. Comparative Mor-
phology of Standard and Egyptian Arabic (Vol. 
5). Lincom Europa. 

 
Noureddine Guella. 2011. Emprunts lexicaux 
dans des dialectes arabes algériens. Synergies 
Monde arabe, 8, 81-88.  
 
Nizar Habash, Abdelhadi Soudi and Tim Buck-
walter. 2007. On Arabic Transliteration. Book 
Chapter. In Arabic Computational Morphology: 
Knowledge-based and Empirical Methods. Edi-
tors Antal van den Bosch and Abdelhadi Soudi. 
 
Nizar Habash. 2010. Introduction to Arabic Nat-
ural Language Processing. Synthesis Lectures 

on Human Language Technologies, Graeme 
Hirst, editor. Morgan & Claypool Publishers. 
 
Nizar Habash, Mona Diab and Owen Rambow. 
2012a. Conventional Orthography for Dialectal 
Arabic. In: Proceedings of the Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference (LREC), Is-
tanbul. 
 
Nizar Habash, Ramy Eskander and Abdelati 
Hawwari. 2012b. A Morphological Analyzer for 
Egyptian Arabic. In the Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Computational Research in Pho-
netics, Phonology, and Morphology 
(SIGMORPHON) in the North American chapter 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics 
(NAACL), Montreal, Canada. 

 
Salima Harrat, Karima Meftouh, Mourad Abbas 
and Kamel Smaïli. 2014. Grapheme To Phoneme 
Conversion-An Arabic Dialect Case. In Spoken 
Language Technologies for Under-resourced 
Languages. 
 
Salima Harrat, Karima Meftouh, Mourad Abbas 
and Kamel Smaili. 2014. Building Resources for 
Algerian Arabic Dialects. Corpus (sentences), 
4000(6415), 2415. 

 
Salima Harrat, Karima Meftouh, Mourad Abbas, 
Salma Jamoussi, Motaz Saad, and Kamel Smaili. 
2015. Cross-Dialectal Arabic Processing. In 
Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text 
Processing (pp. 620-632). Springer International 
Publishing. 
 
Khawla T. Ibrahimi. 1997. Les Algériens et leur 
(s) langue (s): éléments pour une approche so-
ciolinguistique de la société algérienne. Éds. El 
Hikma. 
 
Khawla T. Ibrahimi, K. 2006. L’Algérie: coexis-
tence et concurrence des langues. L’Année du 
Maghreb, (I), 207-218. 

 
Mustafa Jarrar, Nizar Habash, Diyam Akra and 
Nasser Zalmout. 2014. Building a Corpus for 
Palestinian Arabic: a Preliminary Study. ANLP 
2014, 18. 

 
Mohamed Maamouri, Tim Buckwalter and 
Christopher Cieri. 2004. Dialectal Arabic tele-
phone speech corpus: Principles, tool design, 
and transcription conventions. In NEMLAR In-

78



ternational Conference on Arabic Language Re-
sources and Tools, Cairo (pp. 22-23). 
 
William Marçais. 1902. Le dialecte arabe parlé 
à Tlemcen: grammaire, textes et glossaire (Vol. 
26). E. Leroux. 
 
Philippe Marçais. 1956. Le parler arabe de Djid-
jelli: Nord constantinois, Algérie (Vol. 16). Li-
brairie d'Amérique et d'Orient Adrien-
Maisonneuve. 
 
Dalila Morsly. 1986. Multilingualism in Algeria. 
The Fergusonian Impact: In Honor of Charles A. 
Ferguson on the Occasion of His, 65. 

 
Houda Saadane, Aurélie Rossi, Christian Fluhr 
and Mathieu Guidère. 2012. Transcription of 
Arabic names into Latin. In Sciences of Electron-
ics, Technologies of Information and Telecom-
munications (SETIT), 2012 6th International 
Conference on (pp. 857-866). IEEE. 
 
Houda Saadane and Nasredine Semma. 2013. 
Transcription des noms arabes en écriture latine. 
Revue RIST| Vol, 20(2), 57. 
 
Lameen Souag. 2005. Notes on the Algerian Ar-
abic dialect of Dellys. Estudios de dialectología 
norteafricana y andalusí, 9, 1-30. 

 
Ines Zribi, Rahma Boujelbane, Abir Masmoudi, 
Mariem Ellouze, Lamia Belguith, and Nizar Ha-
bash. 2014. A Conventional Orthography for 
Tunisian Arabic. In Proceedings of the Language 
Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC), 
Reykjavik, Iceland. 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

79


