



















































From Light to Rich ERE: Annotation of Entities, Relations, and Events


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on EVENTS at the NAACL-HLT 2015, pages 89–98,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

From Light to Rich ERE:  

Annotation of Entities, Relations, and Events 

 

 

Zhiyi Song, Ann Bies, Stephanie Strassel, Tom Riese, Justin Mott, Joe Ellis, Jonathan 

Wright, Seth Kulick, Neville Ryant and Xiaoyi Ma 

 
Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania 

3600 Market Street, Suite 801 

Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA 
{zhiyi,bies,strassel,riese,jmott,joellis,jdwright,skulick,nryant,xma}@

ldc.upenn.edu 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Abstract 

We describe the evolution of the Entities, Re-

lations and Events (ERE) annotation task, cre-

ated to support research and technology 

development within the DARPA DEFT pro-

gram. We begin by describing the specifica-

tion for Light ERE annotation, including the 

motivation for the task within the context of 

DEFT. We discuss the transition from Light 

ERE to a more complex Rich ERE specifica-

tion, enabling more comprehensive treatment 

of phenomena of interest to DEFT. 

1 Introduction 

DARPA's Deep Exploration and Filtering of Text 

(DEFT) program aims to improve state-of-the-art 

capabilities in automated deep natural language 

processing, with a particular focus on technologies 

dealing with inference, causal relationships, and 

anomaly detection (DARPA, 2012). Evaluations 

within the DEFT program focus on a variety of 

component technologies, united by a common fo-

cus on the problem of populating a knowledge base 

with information about entities and events and the 

relationships among them. Given the variety of 

approaches and evaluations within DEFT, we set 

out to define an annotation task that would be 

supportive of multiple research directions and 

evaluations, and that would provide a useful foun-

dation for more specialized annotation tasks like 

inference and anomaly. The resulting Entities, Re-

lations and Events (ERE) annotation task has 

evolved over the course of the program, from a 

fairly lightweight treatment of entities, relations 

and events in text, to a richer representation of 

phenomena of interest to the program. 

While previous approaches such as ACE (Dod-

dington et al., 2004), LCTL (Simpson et al., 2008), 

OntoNotes (Pradhan et al., 2007), Machine Read-

ing (Strassel et al., 2010), TimeML (Boguraev and 

Ando, 2005), Penn Discourse Treebank (Prasad et 

al., 2014), and Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann 

and Thompson, 1988) laid some of the groundwork 

for this type of resource, the DEFT program re-

quires annotation of complex and hierarchical 

event structures that go beyond any of the existing 

(and partially-overlapping) task definitions. Rec-

ognizing the effort required to define such an anno-

tation task for multiple languages and genres, we 

decided to adopt a multi-phased approach, starting 

with a fairly lightweight implementation and intro-

ducing additional complexity over time.  

In the first phase of the program, we defined 

Light ERE as a simplified form of ACE annota-

89



tion, with the goal of being able to rapidly produce 

consistently labeled data in multiple languages 

(Aguilar et al., 2014). In Phase 2, Rich ERE ex-

pands entity, relation and event ontologies and ex-

pands the notion of what is taggable. Rich ERE 

also introduces the notion of Event Hopper to ad-

dress the pervasive challenge of event co-

reference, particularly with respect to event men-

tion and event argument granularity variation with-

in and across documents, thus paving the way for 

the important goal of creating (hierarchical or nest-

ed) cross-document event representations.  

In the remaining sections we describe the Light 

ERE annotation specification and the resources 

produced under this spec. We discuss the motiva-

tion for transitioning from Light ERE to Rich ERE, 

and present the Rich ERE specification in detail, 

along with developments in smart data selection 

and annotation consistency analysis. We conclude 

with a discussion of annotation challenges and fu-

ture directions. 

2 Related Annotation Efforts 

A number of previous and current event annotation 

tasks have influenced the development of Rich 

ERE, including ACE and several tasks with the 

TAC KBP Evaluation series. We describe each in 

turn in the sections that follow. 

2.1 ACE and Light ERE 

At the start of the DEFT program it was necessary 

to scale up quickly to produce resources for system 

training and development, and so we looked to ex-

isting annotation tasks that were compatible with 

our desired approach. One such task was ACE 

(Automatic Content Extraction), designed to 

benchmark research in information extraction, fo-

cusing on entity detection and tracking, relation 

detection and characterization, as well as event 

detection and characterization (Doddington et al., 

2004; Walker et al., 2006). ACE annotation labels 

mentions of people, organizations, locations, geo-

political entities, weapons, and vehicles, as well as 

subtypes for each entity type. ACE also annotates a 

target set of relations and events between and 

among those constructs. Multiple mentions of the 

same entity, relation or event within a document 

are coreferenced.  

Light ERE was designed as a lighter-weight 

version of ACE (LDC, 2005; Walker et al., 2006) 

and a simple approach to entity, relation, and event 

annotation, with the goal of making annotation 

easier and more consistent. Light ERE captures a 

reduced inventory of entity and relation types, with 

fewer attributes (for example, only specific entities 

and actual relations are taggable, and entity sub-

types are not labeled). Events are labeled following 

approaches developed in ACE and Machine Read-

ing (Strassel et al., 2010), but adapted for informal 

genres such as Discussion Forums (DF). The event 

ontology of Light ERE is similar to ACE, with 

slight modification and reduction, and events are 

coreferenced within documents (Aguilar et al., 

2014). As in ACE, the annotation of each event 

mention includes the identification of a trigger, the 

labeling of the event type, subtype, and participat-

ing event argument entities. Simplifying from 

ACE, only attested actual events are annotated (no 

irrealis events or arguments).  

Our Light ERE annotation effort also includes 

creating fully annotated resources in Chinese and 

Spanish in addition to English, with a portion of 

the annotation being cross-lingual. We developed a 

Chinese-English parallel Light ERE corpus which 

consists of approximately 100K words of Chinese 

data along with the corresponding English transla-

tion, both annotated in Light ERE. Portions of the 

parallel data have had other layers of annotation 

performed on it, particularly Chinese Treebank 

(CTB) on the Chinese side (Zhang and Xue, 2012) 

as well as English-Chinese Treebank (ECTB) on 

the English side (Bies et al., 2014). Light ERE an-

notation is in progress for Spanish on a dataset 

which is currently being annotated for Spanish 

Treebank as well. Multiple levels of annotation, 

such as ERE and treebank, that are keyed to the 

same dataset should together provide a resource 

that is expected to facilitate experimentation with 

machine learning methods that jointly manipulate 

the multiple levels. 

2.2 TAC KBP Event Evaluations 

The Text Analysis Conference (TAC) is a series of 

workshops organized by the National Institute of 

Standards and Technology (NIST) that was devel-

oped to encourage research in natural language 

processing (NLP) and related applications by 

providing a large test collection, common evalua-

90



tion procedures, and a forum for researchers to 

share their results. Through its various evaluations, 

the Knowledge Base Population (KBP) track of 

TAC encourages the development of systems that 

can match entities mentioned in natural texts with 

those appearing in a knowledge base and extract 

novel information about entities from a document 

collection and add it to a new or existing 

knowledge base. 

In 2014, TAC KBP moved into the events do-

main with the addition of the Event Argument Ex-

traction (EAE) evaluation, in which systems were 

required to extract mentions of entities from un-

structured text and indicate the roles they played in 

events as supported by text (Ellis et al., 2014). Ad-

ditionally, TAC KBP 2014 also conducted a pilot 

evaluation on Event Nugget Detection (END), in 

which systems were required to detect event nug-

get tuples, consisting of an event trigger, the type 

and subtype classification, and the realis attribute 

(Mitamura et al., 2015). 

TAC KBP 2015 EAE and END evaluations both 

plan to expand the tasks such that event tuples 

would be grouped together or linked to one another 

to show event identity, either by linking event ar-

guments that participate in the same event (EAE) 

or by grouping event nuggets that refer to the same 

event (END). Such expansion in both evaluations 

would require identification of event coreference, 

which is a challenging issue in both ACE and 

Light ERE. The transition from Light ERE to Rich 

ERE tackles this challenge with the addition of 

event hoppers. 

3 Transition from Light ERE to Rich ERE 

The simplified annotation in Light ERE allowed 

the annotation effort to scale up quickly. As the 

DEFT program moves toward more sophisticated 

algorithms and evaluations, the transition to a rich-

er representation of events within the ERE frame-

work becomes necessary. The development of 

Rich ERE lays the groundwork for upcoming ex-

pansion into the realm of event-event relations, as 

well as cross-document and even cross lingual 

event representation. Transitioning to Rich ERE 

requires both developing annotation guidelines for 

the expanded annotation of events and event argu-

ments and also developing a new annotation tool to 

handle the new annotation task. 

3.1 Development of Annotation Guidelines 
for Rich ERE 

3.1.1 Expanded Entity Annotation 

Rich entity annotation expands many areas of 

Light annotation starting with a general increase in 

taggability. Instead of restricting annotation to spe-

cific, asserted entities, we have added what ACE 

called underspecified and generic entities to the 

scope for Rich ERE annotation. Under the umbrel-

la term “non­specific” (NonSPC), we now capture 

both underspecified and generic entities, in addi-

tion to the specific (SPC) entities that Light ERE 

already captured. We encountered many discussion 

forum documents that contained generic language 

while annotating Light ERE data. Previously, we 

would deprioritize such documents, but with the 

inclusion of NonSPC entity tagging in Rich ERE, 

our range of annotatable documents is much larger. 

Some other ACE features that we have revived 

are nominal head marking and distinguishing be-

tween Location and Facility entity types. Instead of 

marking heads for named and pronominal men-

tions as required in ACE, heads are manually 

marked only for nominal mentions in Rich ERE. 

Since named and pronominal heads are generally 

exactly the same string of text as the entity men-

tion, their heads do not need to be manually 

marked separately. However, since the heads of 

nominal mentions are not trivially derivable, they 

are manually marked in Rich ERE. Furthermore, 

Light ERE lumped regions, landforms, buildings, 

and other structures into the Location entity type. 

Following ACE and to better align with TAC KBP 

evaluation tasks
1
, Rich ERE separates the Light 

ERE Location entity type into Facility as well as 

Location types. Man-made structures and infra-

structure are considered Facilities, while regions, 

landforms, and other non-descript sites fall under 

Locations. Examples include (note that the heads 

of nominal mentions are indicated by underscor-

ing): 

 [Tourists]PER.NOM.NonSPC always end up at 
[Love Park]FAC.NAM.SPC 

 [The last four tourists to show up]PER.NOM.SPC 
missed the bus 

In addition, we created a new class called Ar-

gument Fillers, which are entity-like participants in 

                                                           
1 NIST, 2015. http://www.nist.gov/tac/2015/KBP/ 

91



relations and events that are not annotated at the 

entity level. Argument fillers are annotated only 

when they fill argument roles in tagged relations or 

events. Examples of argument fillers are included 

in the discussion of relations and events below. 

Whereas ACE exhaustively tagged weapons and 

vehicles as entities, Rich ERE captures them as 

argument fillers. Rich ERE also adds the annota-

tion of commodities as fillers. 

Additionally, title entities from Light ERE have 

been reclassified as argument fillers, because they 

are only annotated when they can be connected to 

a named person entity in the relation phase. The 

full list of argument fillers is Title, Age, URL, Sen-

tence, Crime, Money, Vehicle, Weapon, Commod-

ity, and Time types. Each of these argument fillers 

corresponds to specific relation or event subtypes, 

meaning that they will only appear if the corre-

sponding subtype lends itself to such information. 

For example, a person’s age will only be annotated 

as an argument filler of a generalaffiliation-

personage relation, and a weapon will be annotated 

only in a limited number of event subtypes, includ-

ing Conflict.Attack, Manufacture.Artifact, and 

Life.Injure. 

3.1.2 Expanded Relation Annotation 

Rich ERE relations looked to the TAC KBP Slot 

Filling Evaluation for inspiration by doubling the 

ontology from ten subtypes in Light ERE to twenty 

subtypes in Rich ERE. The KBP Slot Filling task 

asks annotators to look for textual information that 

is very similar in scope to ERE annotation. For 

example, both ERE and KBP Slot Filling annotate 

material that is based on a person's employment or 

membership within an organization, familial rela-

tions, and nationality, as well as subsidiary-parent 

organization relationships and organization loca-

tion. It was a natural step to expand the ERE rela-

tion ontology to incorporate more facets of KBP 

Slot Filling. Part of this cross-project sync up re-

quired the addition of brand new argument fillers 

for some relation types. Three new subtypes of 

relations use the argument fillers described above: 

personalsocial-role (Title), generalaffiliation-

orgwebsite (URL) and generalaffiliation-personage 

(Age). Table 1 shows the newly added relation in-

ventory in Rich ERE as compared with Light ERE. 
 

 

Light Rich 

Type Subtype Subtype Type 

p
h

y
si

ca
l 

n/a orgheadquarter p
h

y
sical 

located locatednear 

resident 

origin orglocationorigin 

member-origin-

religion-ethnicity 

(more) 

g
en

eralaffiliatio
n
 

  

  

  

n/a personage 

n/a orgwebshite 

n/a org-political-

religious-affiliation 

(opra) 

p
ar

tw
h

o
le

 

subsidiary subsidiary p
artw

h
o

le 

p
er

so
n

al
so

ci
al

 membership membership 

business business 

p
erso

n
also

cial 

family family 

unspecified unspecified 

role role 

o
rg

af
fi

li
at

io
n

 

employment-

membership 

employmentmem-

bership 

o
rg

affiliatio
n

 

leadership leadership 

n/a investshareholder 

n/a studentalum 

n/a ownership 

n/a founder 

Table 1: ERE Relation Taxonomy in Light and Rich 

 

Finally, while Light ERE only annotated attest-

ed, asserted relations, Rich ERE annotates future, 

hypothetical, and conditional (but not negated) re-

lations as well. All relations are assigned a realis 

attribute of “Asserted” vs. “Other” to mark this 

distinction. Examples of these additions and 

changes can be seen below: 

 Now [53]AGE.ARG, [Barack Obama]PER.NAM.SPC 
signed important documents this morning. 

(General-Affiliation.PER-Age, Realis: As-

serted) 

 [[Spanish]GPE.NAM.SPC students]PER.NOM.SPC 
gathered to protest the growing cost of tui-

tion. (General-Affiliation.MORE, Realis: 

Asserted) 

92



 [She]PER.PRO.SPC has been living in [Califor-
nia]GPE.NAM.SPC for three years now. (Physi-

cal.Resident, Realis: Asserted) 

 [He]PER.PRO.SPC may end up in [New 
York]GPE.NAM.SPC. (Physical.Located-Near, 

Realis: Other) 

3.1.3 Expanded Event Annotation 

For each event mention, Rich ERE labels the event 

type and subtype, its realis attribute, any of its ar-

guments or participants that are present, and a re-

quired “trigger” string in the text. 

Rich ERE event annotation includes increased 

taggability in several areas
2
, compared to Light 

ERE Event annotation: a slightly expanded event 

ontology, the addition of generic and other (irreal-

is) event mentions, the addition of argumentless 

triggers for event mentions, additional attributes 

for contact and transaction events, double tagging 

of event mentions for multiple types/subtypes, and 

multiple tagging of event mentions for certain 

types of coordination.  
 

A. Expansion of event ontology, and additional 

attributes for Contact and Transaction events 

Rich ERE adds one new event type (Manufac-

ture) to the Light ERE inventory of event types. 

The complete list of event types is as follows: Life, 

Movement, Business, Conflict, Contact, Personnel, 

Transaction, Justice, Manufacture. The Manufac-

ture event type has only one subtype (Manufac-

ture.Artifact), and can have the following 

arguments: agent, patient (weapon, facility, vehi-

cle, commodity), time and location. For example, 

 [China]AGENT is reportedly constructing [a 
second aircraft carrier]PATIENT.VEHICLE 

 [the Imboulou hydroelectric power sta-
tion]PATIENT.FACILITY, which was constructed by 

[Chinese technicians]AGENT 

In addition to the new event type, Rich ERE 

adds several new event subtypes to already exist-

ing event types: Movement.Transport-Artifact, 

Contact.Broadcast, Contact.Contact, Transac-

tion.Transaction. 

The Movement.Transport-Artifact subtype can 

take weapon, vehicle, facility, or commodity as the 

patient. For example, 

                                                           
2 Changes to coreference in Rich ERE are discussed below, in 

section 3.1.4. 

 [122 kilos of heroin hidden in a 
truck]ARTIFACT.COMMODITY which was set to cross 

into [Greece]DESTINATION.GPE 

 [the cans of marijuana]ARTIFACT.COMMODITY were 
launched about 500 feet into the 

[U.S.]DESTINATION.GPE using [a pneumatic-

powered cannon]INSTRUMENT.WEAPON 

Contact event mentions are now labeled with at-

tributes to describe Formality (Formal, Informal, 

Can’t Tell), Scheduling (Planned, Spontaneous, 

Can’t Tell), Medium (In-person, Not-in-person, 

Can’t Tell), and Audience (Two-way, One-way, 

Can’t Tell). Contact event subtypes are determined 

(automatically) based on the annotated attributes: 

 Contact.Meet: Medium attribute must be 
“In-person” and audience attribute must be 

“Two-way” 

 Contact.Correspondence3: Medium attribute 
must be “Not-in-person” and audience at-

tribute must be “Two-way” 

 Contact.Broadcast: Any Contact event men-
tion where the audience attribute is “One-

way” 

 Contact.Contact: Used when no more spe-
cific subtype is available, and occurs when 

either the medium or audience attribute is 

“Can’t Tell” 

Contact.Meet and Contact.Correspondence as 

subtypes are unchanged from Light ERE, but Con-

tact.Broadcast and Contact.Contact are new sub-

types in Rich ERE. 

Note that that the Formality and Scheduling at-

tributes are annotated for all Contact event men-

tions, but these attributes have no effect on the 

subtype determination. 

Transaction.Transaction is a new subtype added 

to indicate cases where it is clear that a transaction 

event is mentioned, but it is not clear in context 

whether money or a commodity is being trans-

ferred. For example, 

 I received a gift (Transaction.Transaction) 
 

B. Addition of generic and other irrealis event 

mentions 

In order to align ERE annotation more closely 

with the current EAE and END tasks, Rich ERE 

annotates a Realis attribute for each event mention. 

                                                           
3 The Contact.Correspondence subtype is simply the new 

name for the subtype called Contact.Communication in Light 

ERE. 

93



This is in sync with both EAE and END and is also 

compatible with ACE annotation. 

The realis attributes are Actual (asserted), Ge-

neric (generic, habitual), and Other (future, hypo-

thetical, negated, uncertain, etc.). Previously Light 

ERE annotation was restricted to Actual event 

mentions only. 

 Actual: He emailed her about their plans 

 Other: Saudi Arabia is scheduled to begin 
building the world’s tallest tower next week 

 Generic: Turkey is a popular passageway for 
drug smugglers trafficking from south Asia 

to Europe 

The realis of the relationship between each ar-

gument and the event mention will also be tagged, 

separately from the realis of the event mention it-

self. For example, 

 [+irrealis] “Jon” as the agent for the asserted 
Conflict.Attack event: [Jon] denied [he] 

master-minded the attack  

 

C. Addition of argumentless triggers for event 

mentions 

Unlike Light ERE, Rich ERE will allow the an-

notation of event mention triggers even when there 

are no arguments or participants of the event pre-

sent in the text. This additional annotation will al-

low Rich ERE to align more closely with END 

(Mitamura et al., 2015).  

 

D. Double tagging of event mentions for multi-

ple types/subtypes 

Rich ERE will permit double tagging of event 

triggers to allow obligatory inferred events that are 

in the ERE event taxonomy to be tagged. For ex-

ample, if both money and ownership are trans-

ferred in a Transaction event, then the event 

mention should be tagged twice, once for each sub-

type: 

 I paid $7 for the book (tagged as both 
Transaction.TRANSFER-OWNERSHIP, 

and Transaction.TRANSFER-MONEY) 

The triggers that can be annotated this way are 

restricted to triggers that clearly indicate more than 

one event type or subtype in context. For example, 

 Conflict.Attack and either Life.Injure or 
Life.Die: murder, victim, decapitate, kill 

 Transaction.Transfer‐Money and Transac-
tion.Transfer‐Ownership (money being ex-
changed for an item): buy, purchase, pick up 

 Legal language that might trigger multiple 
Justice Events or other Event Types: guilty 

plea, execution (Life.Die / Justice. Execute), 

death penalty, testimony (Justice.Trial-

Hearing, Contact.Meet) 

In a change from Light ERE, event triggers may 

be the same string of text as an entity or the same 

string of the head of a NOM entity mention. Event 

triggers that are nested within an entity mention are 

also acceptable. 

 The situation escalated and the [murderer] 
fled the scene. (This is an event trigger, even 

though “murderer” would already be a nom-

inal PER entity.)  

 The mayor agreed to meet with [angry pro-
testors]. (This is a trigger, even though 

“protesters” would already be the head of a 

nominal PER entity.)  

 [The one who divorced me] only thinks of 
himself. (Here “divorce” can be a trigger for 

a Life.DIVORCE event, even though it is 

nested within a longer PER entity and it is 

not the head noun.) 

 

E. Multiple tagging of event mentions for cer-

tain types of coordination 

Rich ERE will also allow a single trigger to be 

tagged multiple times in cases where multiple 

events are indicated through coordination of argu-

ments. The argument role that is coordinated de-

termines whether a single event mention or 

multiple event mentions are tagged: 

 If the TIME or PLACE role is coordinated 
or if there are separate times and places in-

dicated, then multiple events are tagged. 

 If any other argument role is coordinated, a 
single event is tagged. In this case, each of 

the coordinated arguments will be tagged 

separately as an argument of the event men-

tion, and the result will be a single event 

with multiple arguments tagged for the co-

ordinated argument role. 

If the context or the language is too complicated 

to sort out the number of events, annotators are 

instructed to default to annotating a single event 

with multiple arguments. 

In this example, there are two Conflict.Attack 

events, and two Life.Die events triggered by “mur-

der”, because the TIME argument is different: 

94



 Cipriani was sentenced to life in prison for 
the murder of Renault chief George Besse 

in 1986 and the head of government arms 

sales Rene Audran a year earlier 

o Conflict.Attack: Trigger = murder, 
agent = Cipriani, victim = George Bes-

se, time = 1986 

o Conflict.Attack: Trigger = murder, 
agent = Cipriani, victim = Rene Au-

dran, time = a year earlier 

o Life.Die: Trigger = murder, argument = 
George Besse, agent = Cipriani, time = 

1986 

o Life.Die: Trigger = murder, argument = 
Rene Audran, agent = Cipriani, time = a 

year earlier 

In the following example, only one event is 

tagged, with multiple giver arguments and multiple 

recipient arguments: 

 China and the US are the biggest lenders to 
Brazil and India 

o Transaction.Transfer-Money: Trigger = 
lenders, giver = China, giver = US, re-

cipient = Brazil, recipient = India 

3.1.4 Event Hoppers and Event Coreference 

In Light ERE as well as ACE, event coreference 

was limited to strict event identity. Following 

component judgments, annotators marked two 

events as coreferential in Light ERE if they had the 

same agent(s), patient(s), time, and location. How-

ever, there are many event mentions that annota-

tors intuitively feel are the same that do not meet 

the strict event identity standard and therefore 

would not be coreferential in Light ERE or ACE. 

Some events might have been inconsistently 

marked as coreferential because of the conflict be-

tween the annotators’ intuitive judgment and the 

strict identity coreference standard. 

In Rich ERE, we instead introduce the concept 

of Event Hopper as a more inclusive, less strict 

notion of event coreference. Event hoppers contain 

mentions of events that “feel” coreferential to the 

annotator even if they do not meet the earlier strict 

event identity requirement. More specifically, fea-

tures of event mentions that go into the same hop-

per are 

 They have the same event type and subtype 
(exceptions to this are Contact.Contact and 

Transaction.Transaction mentions, which 

can be added to any Contact or Transaction 

hopper, respectively) 

 They have the same temporal and location 
scope, though not necessarily the same tem-

poral expression or specifically the same 

date (Attack in Baghdad on Thursday vs. 

Bombing in the Green Zone last week) 

 Trigger granularity can be different (assault-
ing 32 people vs. wielded a knife) 

 Event arguments may be non-coreferential 
or conflicting (18 killed vs. dozens killed) 

 Realis status may be different (will travel 
[OTHER] to Europe next week vs. is on a 5-

day trip [ACTUAL]) 

Every tagged event mention will be put into an 

event hopper in Rich ERE, and all tagged event 

mentions that refer to the same event occurrence 

will be grouped into the same event hopper.  

Event hoppers will allow annotators to group to-

gether more event mentions and therefore also la-

bel more event arguments in Rich ERE. This richer 

annotation will lead to a more complete knowledge 

base and better support for the Event Argument 

Linking and END evaluations in 2015, when one 

of the goals is to evaluate event identity. 

3.2 Development of an Annotation GUI for 
Rich ERE 

The Rich ERE annotation tool was developed fol-

lowing the framework described in Wright et al. 

(2012), allowing for rapid development of a new 

interface for Rich ERE. Numerous features were 

included “for free” in that they were developed for 

previous interfaces, and therefore required no addi-

tional development time. One important example 

of this is the representation of annotated text ex-

tents with underlines that can overlap arbitrarily, 

be color coded based on other annotations (e.g., 

entity type), and allow the user to click to navigate 

among the annotations. An important feature de-

veloped specifically for the Rich ERE tool is a 

“reference annotation”, which is essentially one 

widget pointing to another. Once a complete set of 

annotations for a mention or entity has been done, 

a single annotation can be used to plug them as a 

whole into relation or event arguments, but refer-

entially, allowing the original annotations to be 

safely changed. In addition, annotation managers 

had an important role in development of the tool 

beyond specification, as there is an editor that 

95



grants direct access to the database where the inter-

face is defined. Managers can add widgets, change 

them (e.g., add menu choices), and even specify 

logical constraints between the annotations (e.g., a 

“resident” relation must take a “person” argument). 

4 Linguistic Resources Labeled for ERE 

To date we have released approximately 570,000 

words of English Light ERE data, including both 

NW and DF, plus 200,000 words of Chinese DF. 

Another 100,000 words of Spanish Light ERE data 

is currently in progress and is expected to be com-

pleted in the coming weeks.  Rich ERE annotation 

in English is also currently underway, with 32,420 

words (91 documents) completed to date. We ex-

pect to complete another 170,000 words of English 

and 100,000 words in each of Chinese and Spanish 

within the next several weeks. A portion of the 

Rich ERE data is new, while the remainder has 

previously been annotated for Light ERE. Details 

for each language, genre and task are provided in 

Table 2 below. The ERE data is currently available 

to DEFT and TAC KBP performers and will also 

be published in LDC’s catalog in future, making it 

available to the research community at large. 
 

 Genre English  Chinese Spanish 

Light 

ERE 

NW 220Kw -- 50Kw 

DF 350Kw 200Kw 50Kw 

Rich 

ERE 

NW 24Kw -- 50Kw 

DF 175Kw 100Kw 50Kw 

Table 2: Existing and Planned ERE Resources 

 

The overall target for this phase of DEFT is to 

complete 400Kw of Rich ERE annotation per lan-

guage on English, Chinese and Spanish data. 

100Kw each from Spanish and Chinese will be 

parallel to Rich ERE annotation on English transla-

tions of the same data. We expect the annotation 

goal to be met by the end of this year.   

4.1 Smart Data Selection 

In an attempt to minimize annotator effort on doc-

uments with insufficient content, documents were 

fed into the annotation pipeline in descending or-

der of event trigger density, defined as the number 

of event triggers per 1,000 tokens. Triggers were 

automatically tagged using a deep neural network 

based tagger trained on the ACE 2005 annotations 

(Walker et al., 2006) with orthographic and word 

embedding features. The word embeddings were 

trained using word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) on 

several billion words of newswire and discussion 

forum data. Preliminary results using this selection 

process have been very encouraging, with annota-

tors reporting much richer documents on average, 

compared to the prior approach in which no rank-

ing was imposed. 

4.2 Rich ERE Challenges and Next Steps 

One of the challenges in event annotation is to de-

termine the level of granularity that will be distin-

guished as sub-event vs. event hopper. We 

observed this issue in our pilot Rich ERE annota-

tion, and the goal is to have sub-event annotation 

be a relationship between event hoppers in the fu-

ture. In order to represent the relations between 

event hoppers, we are planning the addition of a 

notion such as Narrative Container (Pustejovsky 

and Stubbs, 2011) to capture non-identity event-

event relations such as causality, part-whole, prec-

edence, enablement, etc. Event hoppers will serve 

as a level between individual event mentions and 

Narrative Containers. Event hoppers will be 

grouped into Narrative Containers, and so relations 

will be between event hoppers, instead of between 

individual event mentions. More specific relations 

between individual event mentions can then be 

derived from the event-event relations between the 

event hoppers within narrative containers or from 

relations between narrative containers. 

4.3 Inter-Annotator Agreement 

Work on inter-annotator agreement (IAA) will be 

based on the method outlined in Kulick et al. 

(2014), which described a matching algorithm used 

at each level of the annotation hierarchy, from enti-

ty mentions to events. This work focused on the 

evaluation for entity, relation, and event mentions, 

as well as for entities overall. The algorithm for 

entity mention mapping is based on the span for an 

entity mention, while the mapping for relation and 

event mentions is more complex, based on the 

mapping of the arguments, which in turn depends 

on the entity mention mapping. IAA work will be 

conducted on dual annotation for Rich ERE. Anal-

ysis will be reported in the future. 

96



5 Conclusion 

Rich ERE annotation includes a more comprehen-

sive annotation of entities, relations and events, 

including expanded taggability, expanded catego-

ries, annotation for realis and specificity, and ex-

panded coreference with the event hopper level. 

The expansion and change will populate more in-

formation to a knowledge base. Looking to the fu-

ture, the additions to Rich ERE, particularly 

expanded taggability and the looser coreference of 

the event hopper level, are expected to improve 

support of within-document event-event relations 

and eventually cross-document and cross-lingual 

annotation.  

Event Hoppers group events according to a more 

inclusive coreference specification, which will al-

low a wider range of event mentions to be corefer-

ential. This is closer to the real world situation in 

which the same event is often referred to in a varie-

ty of ways that cannot meet a strict identity stand-

ard as was used in ACE and Light ERE. This kind 

of more inclusive event coreference will be in-

creasingly necessary as work on informal genres, 

cross-document, and cross-lingual data is desired. 

In addition, event hopper annotation will allow 

knowledge base population to draw from a broader 

grouping of coreferenced event mentions, allowing 

for a more complete representation of event slots. 

Acknowledgments 

This material is based on research sponsored by 

Air Force Research Laboratory and Defense Ad-

vanced Research Projects Agency under agreement 

number FA8750-13-2-0045. The U.S. Government 

is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints 

for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any 

copyright notation thereon. The views and conclu-

sions contained herein are those of the authors and 

should not be interpreted as necessarily represent-

ing the official policies or endorsements, either 

expressed or implied, of Air Force Research La-

boratory and Defense Advanced Research Projects 

Agency or the U.S. Government. 

References 

Jacqueline Aguilar, Charley Beller, Paul McNamee, 

Benjamin Van Durme, Stephanie Strassel, Zhiyi 

Song, Joe Ellis. 2014. A Comparison of the Events 

and Relations Across ACE, ERE, TAC-KBP, and 

FrameNet Annotation Standards. ACL 2014: 52nd 

Annual Meeting of the Association for Computation-

al Linguistics, Baltimore, June 22-27. 2nd Workshop 

on Events: Definition, Detection, Coreference, and 

Representation. 

Ann Bies, Justin Mott, Seth Kulick, Jennifer Garland, 

Colin Warner. 2014. Incorporating Alternate Transla-

tions into English Translation Treebank. In Proceed-

ings of the 9th Edition of the Language Resources 

and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2014), Reykja-

vik, May 26-31. 

Branimir Boguraev and Rie Kubota Ando. 2005. 

TimeML-Compliant Text Analysis for Temporal 

Reasoning. In Proceedings of International Joint 

Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 

997--1003. 

DARPA. 2012. Broad Agency Announcement: Deep 

Exploration and Filtering of Text (DEFT). Defense 

Advanced Research Projects Agency, DARPA-BAA-

12-47.  

George Doddington, Alexis Mitchell, Mark Przybocki, 

Lance Ramshaw, Stephanie Strassel, Ralph Weische-

del. 2004. The Automatic Content Extraction (ACE) 

program- tasks, data, and evaluation. In Proceedings 

of the Fourth International Conference on Language 

Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2004), Lisbon, 

May 24-30. 

Joe Ellis, Jeremy Getman, Stephanie M. Strassel. 2014. 

Overview of Linguistic Resources for the TAC KBP 

2014 Evaluations: Planning, Execution, and Results. 

In Proceedings of TAC KBP 2014 Workshop, Na-

tional Institute of Standards and Technology, 

Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA, November 17-18, 

2014. 

Seth Kulick, Ann Bies, Justin Mott. 2014. Inter-

annotator Agreement for ERE Annotation. ACL 

2014: 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for 

Computational Linguistics, Baltimore, June 22-27. 

2nd Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, Detection, 

Coreference, and Representation. 

Linguistic Data Consortium. 2005. ACE (Automatic 

Content Extraction) English Annotation Guidelines 

for Events Version 5.4.3. 

William C. Mann and Sandra Thompson. 1988. Rhetor-

ical Structure Theory: Toward a Functional Theory 

of Text Organization. Text 8(3) (243-281). 

Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, Jeffrey Dean. 

2013. Efficient estimation of word representations in 

vector space. In ICLR, 2013. 

Teruko Mitamura, Yukari Yamakawa, Sue Holm, Zhiyi 

Song, Ann Bies, Seth Kulick, Stephanie Strassel. 

2015. Event Nugget Annotation: Processes and Is-

sues. The 2015 Conference of the North American 

Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-

guistics - Human Language Technologies (NAACL 

97



HLT 2015). 3rd Workshop on EVENTS: Definition, 

Detection, Coreference, and Representation. 

Sameer S. Pradhan, Eduard Hovy, Mitch Marcus, Mar-

tha Palmer, Lance Ramshaw, Ralph Weischedel. 

2007. OntoNotes: A Unified Relational Semantic 

Representation. In Proceedings of the First IEEE In-

ternational Conference on Semantic Computing 

(ICSC-07). Irvine, CA. 

Rashmi Prasad, Bonnie Webber, Aravind Joshi. 2014. 

Reflections on the Penn Discourse TreeBank, Com-

parable Corpora and Complementary Annotation. 

Computational Linguistics, Vol. 40, No. 4, pp. 921-

950, doi:10.1162/COLI_a_00204. 

James Pustejovsky, and Amber Stubbs. 2011. Increasing 

Informativeness in Temporal Annotation. Linguistic 

Annotation Workshop V (LAW-V), Portland, Oregon. 

ACL, June 2011. 

Heather Simpson, Christopher Cieri, Kazuaki Maeda, 

Kathryn Baker, Boyan Onyshkevych. 2008. Human 

Language Technology Resources for Less Common-

ly Taught Languages: Lessons Learned Toward 

Creation of Basic Language Resources. In Proceed-

ings of SALTMIL Workshop: Free/Open-Source Lan-

guage Resources for the Machine Translation of 

Less-Resourced Languages, at LREC 2008: 7th In-

ternational Conference on Language Resources and 

Evaluation, Marrakech, May 28-30. 

Stephanie Strassel, Dan Adams, Henry Goldberg, Jona-

than Herr, Ron Keesing, Daniel Oblinger, Heather 

Simpson, Robert Schrag, Jonathan Wright. 2010. The 

DARPA Machine Reading Program - Encouraging 

Linguistic and Reasoning Research with a Series of 

Reading Tasks. In Proceedings of the 7th Interna-

tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-

uation (LREC 2010), Valletta, May 17-23.  

Christopher Walker, Stephanie Strassel, Julie Medero, 

Kazuaki Maeda. 2006. ACE 2005 Multilingual Train-

ing Corpus. Linguistic Data Consortium, LDC Cata-

log No.: LDC2006T06. 

Jonathan Wright, Kira Griffitt, Joe Ellis, Stephanie 

Strassel, Brendan Callahan. 2012. Annotation Trees: 

LDC's Customizable, Extensible, Scalable Annota-

tion Infrastructure. In Proceedings of the 8th Interna-

tional Conference on Language Resources and 

Evaluation (LREC 2012), Istanbul, May 21-27.  

Xiuhong Zhang and Nianwen Xue. 2012. Extending and 

Scaling up the Chinese Treebank Annotation. In Pro-

ceedings of the 2nd CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference 

on Chinese Language Processing (CLP-2012), Tian-

jin, China. 

 

98


