



















































Harmonizing word alignments and syntactic structures for extracting phrasal translation equivalents


Proceedings of SSST-9, Ninth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 1–9,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Harmonizing word alignments and syntactic structures for extracting
phrasal translation equivalents

Dun Deng, Nianwen Xue and Shiman Guo
Computer Science Department

Brandeis University
415 South Street, Waltham, MA 02453

ddeng@brandeis.edu, xuen@brandeis.edu, shim@brandeis.edu

Abstract
Accurate identification of phrasal translation
equivalents is critical to both phrase-based
and syntax-basedmachine translation systems.
We show that the extraction of many phrasal
translation equivalents is made impossible by
word alignments done without taking syntactic
structures into consideration. To address the
problem, we propose a new annotation scheme
where word alignment and the alignment of
non-terminal nodes (i.e., phrases) are done si-
multaneously to avoid conflicts between word
alignments and syntactic structures. Relying
on this new alignment approach, we construct
a Hierarchically Aligned Chinese-English Par-
allel Treebank (HACEPT), and show that all
phrasal translation equivalents can be automat-
ically extracted based on the phrase alignments
in HACEPT.

1 Introduction
During the past two decades since the emergence

of the statistical paradigm of Machine Translation
(MT) (Brown et al., 1993), the field of StatisticalMa-
chine Translation (SMT) has attained consensus on
the need for structural mappings between languages
in MT. Accurately identifying structural mappings
(i.e., phrasal translation equivalents) is critical to the
performance of both phrase-based systems (Koehn,
Och, and Marcu, 2003; Och and Ney, 2004) and
syntax-based systems (Chiang, 2005; Chiang, 2007;
Galley et al., 2004). The fact is that phrasal transla-
tion equivalents are identified based on word align-
ments, so how word alignments are done directly af-
fects the identification of phrasal translation equiv-

alents. As reported by (Zhu, Li, and Xiao, 2015),
even one spurious word alignment can prevent some
desirable phrasal translation equivalents from being
extracted. The unfortunate fact is that spurious word
alignments abound in current word-aligned parallel
texts used for extracting phrasal translation equiva-
lents. This is because the word alignments in these
parallel texts, whether they are induced in an unsu-
pervised manner such as that described by (Och and
Ney, 2003) or manually annotated based on exist-
ing word alignment standards such as (Li, Ge, and
Strassel, 2009) and (Melamed, 1998), are generally
done as an independent task without taking syntac-
tic structures into consideration. As a result, con-
flicts between word alignments and syntactic struc-
tures are inevitable, and when such a conflict arises,
the extraction of desirable phrasal translation equiv-
alents will be impossible.
To address this shortcoming, we designed a hi-

erarchical alignment scheme in which word-level
alignment (namely alignment of terminal nodes) and
phrase-level alignments (namely alignment of non-
terminals) are done simultaneously in a coordinated
manner so that conflicts between word alignments
and syntactic structures are avoided. Based on this
alignment scheme, we constructed a Hierarchically
Aligned Chinese-English Parallel Treebank (HA-
CEPT) which currently has 9,897 sentence pairs. We
show that this hierarchically aligned corpus provides
a new way to extract hierarchical translation rules
and can be used as a training corpus to learn this type
of alignments.
The rest of the paper is organized like this: Section

2 shows how phrasal translation equivalents can be

1



made impossible to extract by word alignments done
without considering syntactic structures. To avoid
the problem, Section 3 introduces our new alignment
scheme and how HACEPT is constructed using the
scheme. Section 4 shows how hierarchical transla-
tion rules can be extracted from the phrase align-
ments in HACEPT. We also provide statistics about
two important aspects of the rules, namely the dis-
tributions of terminal and non-terminal nodes in the
rules and the number of terminal nodes contained in
a single rule. Section 5 discusses some work in the
literature that are related to what is discussed in this
paper. Section 6 concludes the paper and points out
furture work to do.

2 Spurious word alignments impede the
extraction of phrase pairs

Spurious word alignments arise in any word align-
ment practice where the alignment is done as an inde-
pendent task without taking sysntactic structures into
consideration, regardless of whether the alignment is
automatically generated by utilizing a word aligner
such as the GIZA++ toolkit (Och and Ney, 2003) or
manually annotated using alignment standards such
as (Li, Ge, and Strassel, 2009) and (Melamed, 1998).
(Zhu, Li, and Xiao, 2015) has described how a spuri-
ous word alignment in automatically generated word
alignments prevents some phrasal translation equiv-
alents from being extracted. In this section, we will
show how spurious word alignments in human anno-
tated word alignments make the extraction of phrasal
translation equivalents impossible.
Consider the following example quoted from (Li,

Ge, and Strassel, 2009), where the relevant word
alignment in each sentence/phrase pair is highlighted
by underlining. Note that the word alignments are
done without taking syntactic structures into consid-
eration, as can be told from the fact that all the under-
lined aligned multi-word strings do not correspond
to a constituent in a Penn TreeBank (Marcus, San-
torini, and Marcinkiewicz, 1993) or Chinese Tree-
Bank (Xue et al., 2005) parse tree.
1a. He is visiting Beijing <>他正访问北京
1b. He has gone to Beijing <>他去北京了
1c. to quickly and efficiently solve the problem <>
迅速有效地解决问题

1d. Results can be obtained by doing experiments
<>做实验可以得出结果

1e. We fully agree with the Chinese position that
there is only one China in the world <>我们完
全同意中方的立场，世界上只有一个中
国

Just like the spurious word alignment discussed
by (Zhu, Li, and Xiao, 2015), the underlined word
alignment in each of the sentence/phrase pair above
makes it impossible to extract at least one diserable
phrasal translation equivalent. For each of the sen-
tence/phrase pair in (1), (2) lists the phrasal transla-
tion equivalents that cannot be extracted due to the
word alignment done in that pair:

2a. visiting Beijing <>访问北京
2b. gone to Beijing <>去北京
2c. solve the problem <>解决问题
2d. doing experiments <>做实验
2e. the Chinese position <>中方的立场

The reasonwhy the phrasal translation equivalents
in (2) cannot be extracted is because a word in a
phrase on one side is aligned to a word that is not
part of the corresponding phrase on the other side.
Take (2c) for instance. The Chinese verb解决/solve
in the phrase解决问题 is aligned to both solve and
to in (1c), which is not part of the phrase solve the
problem. As a result, the phrase pair in (2c) cannot
be obtained.
It is not desirable that legitimate phrase pairs such

as those in (2) cannot be extracted. To fix the prob-
lem, Section 3 proposes a new alignment scheme.

3 Hierarchical alignment and the creation
of HACEPT

Hierarchical alignment is a new alignment scheme
where both terminal nodes (words) and non-terminal
nodes (linguistic phrases) between parallel parse
trees are aligned in a coordinated way so that con-
flicts in the form of redundancies and incompatabili-
ties between word alignments and syntatic structures
are avoided. We use this scheme to construct HA-
CEPTwith the goal of providing the field ofMTwith2

2



a resource that has human annotated tree-structured
mappings for MT training purposes.
The word alignment done in HACEPT differs

from the common practice of word alignment in the
field (Melamed, 1998; Li, Ge, and Strassel, 2009) in
that the requirement that every word in a sentence
pair needs to be word-aligned is relaxed. On the
word level, we only align words that have an equiv-
alent in terms of lexical meaning and grammatical
function. For those words that do not have a trans-
lation counterpart, we leave them unaligned at word
level and instead the appropriate phrases in which
they appear. This strategy makes sure that both
redundancies and incompatibilities between word
alignments and syntactic structures are avoided. In
addition, artificial ambiguities are also eliminated.
These points will be illustrated in the discussion of
the concrete example in Figure 1 below.
We take the Chinese-English portion of the Paral-

lel Aligned Treebank (PAT) described in (Li et al.,
2012) for annotation. Our data have three batches:
one batch is weblogs, one batch is postings from on-
line discussion forums and one batch is news wire.
The English sentences in the data set are annotated
based on the original Penn TreeBank (PTB) annota-
tion stylebook (Bies et al., 1995) as well as its exten-
sions (Warner et al., 2004), while the Chinese sen-
tences in the data set are annotated based on the Chi-
nese TreeBank (CTB) annotation guidelines (Xue
and Xia, 1998) and its extensions ZhangandXue12.
The PAT has no phrase alignments and the word
alignments in it are done under the requirement that
all the words in a sentence should be aligned.
Next we discuss our annotation procedure in de-

tail. Our annotators are presentedwith sentence pairs
that come with parallel parse trees. The task of the
annotator is to decide, first on the word level and then
on the phrase level, if a word or phrase needs to be
aligned at all, and if so, to which word or phrase it
should be aligned. The decisions about word align-
ment and phrase alignment are not independent, and
must obey well-formedness constraints as outlined
in (Tinsley et al., 2007):

a. A non-terminal node can only be aligned once.
b. if Node nc is aligned to Node ne, then the de-

scendants of nc can only be aligned to descen-
dants of ne.

c. if Node nc is aligned to Node ne, then the an-
cestors of nc can only be aligned to ancestors of
ne.

This means that once a word alignment is in place,
it puts constraints on phrase alignments. A pair of
non-terminal nodes (nc, ne) cannot be aligned if a
word that is a descendant of nc is aligned to a word
that is not a descendant of ne on the word level.
Let us use the concrete example in Figure 1 to

illustrate the annotation process, which is guided
by a set of detailed annotation guidelines. On the
word level, only those words that are connected with
a dashed line are aligned since they have equiva-
lents. Note that the Chinese prenominalmodification
marker的 and the existential verb有/have, and the
English determiner the, the relative pronounwho, the
preposition of, the expletive subject it, the copular
verb is, the infinitive marker to and the conjunction
word both are all left unaligned on the word level.
Aligning these words will generate artificial ambigu-
ous cases and create both redundancies and incom-
patibilities between word alignments and parse trees.
For instance, if的 is to be word-aligned, it could

be glued to the preceding verb 喋喋不休 and the
whole string will be aligned to harp. Note that 喋
喋不休 and harp are both unambiguous and form
a one-to-one correspondence. With the word align-
ment between喋喋不休的 and harp, we make the
unambiguous harp correspond to both喋喋不休 and
喋喋不休的 (and possibly more strings), thus cre-
ating a spurious ambiguity. Also note that the string
喋喋不休的 does not form a constituent in the Chi-
nese parse tree, so the word alignment is incompat-
ible with the syntactic structure of the sentence. By
leaving 的 unaligned, we avoid both the spurious
ambiguity and the incompatibility.
As for redundancies, consider the English deter-

miner the, which has no translation counterpart in
the Chinese sentence. If the is to be word-aligned, it
could be attached to the noun people and the whole
string the people will be aligned to人们. This will
create a redundancy, since the English parse tree al-
ready groups the and people together to form an NP,
and therefore there is no need to repeat this infor-
mation on the word level by attaching the to people,
especially when the word alignment also generates a
spurious ambiguity for人们, which unambiguously3

3



means people but is aligned to the people.
With word alignments in place, next the annotator

needs to perform phrase alignments. Note that word
alignments place restrictions on phrase alignments.
For instance, VPc0 cannot be a possible alignment
for VPe1, because 通常, a descendant of VPc0, is
aligned to often, which is not a descendant of VPe1.
For a phrase that does have a possible alignment,
the annotator needs to decide whether the possible
phrase alignment can be actually made. This is a
challenging task since, for a given phrase, there usu-
ally are more than one candidate from which a single
alignment needs to be picked. For instance, for the
English ADJP, there are in total two possible phrase
alignments, namely VPc6, and VPc7, both of which
obey the well-formedness constraints. Since a non-
terminal node is not allowed to be aligned to multi-
ple non-terminal nodes on the other side, the anno-
tator needs to choose one among all the candidates.
This highlights the point that the alignment of non-
terminal nodes cannot be deterministically inferred
from the alignment of terminal nodes. This is espe-
cially true given our approach where some terminal
nodes are left unaligned on the word level. For in-
stance, the reason why VPc7 is a possible alignment
for ADJP is because the word 有 is left unaligned.
If 有 were aligned with, say, is, VPc7 could not be
aligned with ADJP since is is not a descendant of
ADJP and aligning the two nodes will violate Con-
straint b.
While Constraints b and c can be enforced au-

tomatically given the word alignments, the deci-
sions regarding the alignment of non-terminal nodes
which satisfy Constraint a are based on linguistic
considerations. One key consideration is to de-
termine which non-terminal nodes encapsulate the
grammatical relations signaled by the unaligned
words so that the alignment of the non-terminal
nodes will effectively capture the unaligned words
in their syntactic context. When identifying non-
terminal nodes to align, we follow two seemingly
conflicting general principles:

• Phrase alignment should not sever key depen-
dencies involving the grammatical relation sig-
naled by an unaligned word.

• Phrase alignment should be minimal, in the
sense that the phrase alignment should contain

only the elements involved in the grammatical
relation, and nothing more.

The first principle ensures that the grammatical re-
lation is properly encapsulated in the aligned non-
terminal nodes. For example in Figure 1, if we attach
the English preposition on to tolls and aligning them
to 通行费, we would fail to capture the lexical de-
pendency between harp and on. Aligning VPc2 with
VPe2 captures the dependency.
The first principle in and of itself is insufficient

to produce desired alignment. Taken to the ex-
treme, it can be trivially satisfied by aligning the two
root nodes of the sentence pair. We also need the
alignment to be minimal, in the sense that aligned
non-terminal nodes should contain only the elements
involved in the grammatical relation, and nothing
more. These two requirements used in conjunction
ensure that a unique phrase alignment can be found
for each unaligned word. The phrase alignments in
Figure 1 which are indicated by blue dotted lines, all
satisfy these two principles.
Following the principles and the procedure intro-

duced above, we constructued HACEPT,1 which has
9,897 sentence pairs. In the next section, we show
how the alignments in HACEPT can help to extract
translation rules.

4 Extracting hierarchical translation rules
in HACEPT

Hierarchical translation rules can be automatically
extracted from the phrase alignments in HACEPT.
Take a pair of aligned non-terminal nodes (nc, ne),
a translation rule based on the alignment between nc
and ne can be extracted like this: Check each of the
immediate daughter nodes of both nc and ne. For
any of the daughter nodes that is aligned, stop look-
ing down into the node and keep the phrase cate-
gory label of the node as a variable the rule. For
each daughter node that is not aligned, recursively
traverse its children until either an aligned node is
found, in which case its phrase category label will
be kept as a variable in the rule, or a terminal node is

1As of thewriting of this paper, we are in the process of doing
adjudication on the double annotation done to create HACEPT.
We look forward to finishing adjudication soon and releasing the
resouce to the public.4

4



....IP0.....

..VPc0.....

..VPc1.....

..IP1.....

..VPc7.....

..VPc6.....

..VP...

..VA...

..昂贵.

..

..ADVP...

..AD...

..多么.

..

..VV...

..有.

..

..VPc3.....

..VPc5.....

..NPc3...

..PN...

..它.

..

..VV...

..维护.

....

..CC...

..和.

..

..VPc4...

..VV...

..运营.

..

..VV...

..知道.

....

..ADVP...

..AD...

..不.

..

..ADVP...

..AD...

..通常.

..

..NPc0.....

..NPc1...

..NN...

..人们.

..

..CP.....

..DEC...

..的.

..

..VPc2.....

..VP...

..VV...

..喋喋不休.

..

..PP.....

..NPc2...

..NN...

..通行费.

..

..P...

..对

.

..S0.....

..VPe1.....

..NP.....

..PP.....

..S1.....

..S.....

..VP.....

..VP.....

..VPe3.....

..VPe5.....

..NPe3...

..PRP...

..it

.
..

..VB...

..maintain

.
....

..CC...

..and

.
....

..VPe4.....

..NP...

..PRP...

..it

.
..

..VB...

..run

.
..

..CC...

..both

.
..

..TO...

..to

.
..

..VB...

..is

.
..

..NP...

..PRP...

..it

.
..

..ADJP.....

..JJ...

..costly

.
..

..WRB...

..how

.
..

..IN...

..of

.
..

..NP.....

..NN...

..idea

.
..

..DT...

..no

.
..

..VBP...

..have

.
....

..ADVP...

..RB...

..often

.
..

..NPe0.....

..S.....

..VPe2.....

..PP.....

..NPe2...

..NNS...

..tolls

.
..

..IN...

..on

.
..

..VBG...

..harp

.
..

..NP...

..WP...

..who

.
..

..NPe1.....

..NNS...

..people

.
..

..DT...

..The

Figure 1: A hierarchically aligned sentence pair

5

5



reached, in which case the word is included as part
of the translation rule.
To illustrate the rule extraction process specified

above, let us take the phrase alignment betweenNPc0
and NPe0 in Figure 1 for instance. The search starts
top-down from the two root nodes. On the Chinese
side, NPc0 has two immediate daughter nodes: CP
and NPc1. NPc1 is aligned, so we stop looking in-
side the node and just keep the phrase category label
of the node as part of the rule. CP is not aligned, so
we keep checking its two immediate daughter nodes:
VPc2 and DEC. VPc2 is aligned and will not be fur-
ther checked. DEC is not aligned and dominates
the terminal node的, which will be kept in the rule.
SinceDEC is the last node insideNPc0 and a terminal
node is reached, the search on the Chinese side ends.
The same procedure will simultaneously take place
on the English side, and when the search is done, we
will get the translation rule in (3) below:
(3) NPc0⇔ NPe0:

VPc2的 NPc1 <> NPe1 who VPe2
Note that the rule contains both terminals (的 and

who) and non-terminals represented by phrase cate-
gory labels.
The rule in (3) illustrates one type of rule, namely

the rules containing both terminal and non-terminal
nodes. There are also rules with only terminal nodes
and rules with only non-terminal nodes. Figure 1 has
quite a few examples for the former and an example
is given below:
(4) NPc2⇔ NPe2:
通行费 <> tolls

The rule above contains only terminals. Figure 1
does not contain an example for rules with only non-
terminals, but such rules do exist and here is a com-
mon example:
(5) IP⇔ S:

NPsubj VPpred <> NPsubj VPpred
The rule above illustrates parallel sentences whose

subjects and predicates are both aligned.
Table 1 provides the statistics of the distribution

of the three types of rules in HACEPT.

Rule types No. Percentage
with only terminals 52379 50.46

with only non-terminals 2621 2.53
with both 48796 47.01
Total 103796 100

Table 1: Rule distribution

Given the importance of hierarchical translation
rules for MT, a natural question to ask about the hier-
archical translation rules extracted from HACEPT is
this: are these rules usable? The most crucial factor
deciding the usability of a rule is its length in terms
of the number of terminal nodes it contains. If a rule
contains too many terminal nodes, it cannot be easily
used for MT purposes. Table 2 provides the statis-
tics about the number of terminal node (TN) in the
extracted rules:

TN Rule Percentage Cumulative
0 6974 6.72 6.72
1 4017 3.87 10.59
2 30829 29.70 40.29
3 18780 17.09 58.38
4 12897 12.43 70.81
5 9387 9.04 79.85
6 6079 5.86 85.71
7 4404 4.24 89.95

More than 7 10429 10.05 1

Table 2: Rule length

As shown by the table, 89.95 percent of the rules
contain 7 or less than 7 terminal nodes. There are
still 10 percent of the rules that contain more than 7
terminal nodes.
One primary reason that increases the number of

terminal nodes in a rule is how the parse trees are de-
signed. To be specific, some parts of the parse trees
are designed to be flat, presumably for the sake of
increasing treebank annotation throughput, but this
makes some otherwise legitimate phrase alignments
inaccessible unless we change the underlying parse
trees. When a phrase alignment cannot be made,
some terminal nodes will be left out to appear in the
rule. This is illustrated by Figure 1.
On the Chinese side, there is a node, namely VPc0,

which dominates the predicate part of the sentence.6

6



On the English side, the predicate part of the English
sentence is split into ADVP andVPe1, and there is no
single node dominating these two nodes. As a result,
VPc0 has no phrase alignment. Suppose a node VPe0
is created that includes ADVP and VPe1 as its imme-
diate daughters, VPc0 and VPe0 could be aligned. (7)
below is the rule based on the alignment between the
two sentences in Figure 1, and (8) is the rule based on
the alignment between the two sentences if a node is
created for the predicate of the English sentence and
aligned to VPc0.

(6) IP0⇔ S0
NPc0 ADVP不知道 IP1 <> NPe0 ADVP have
no idea of S1

(7) IP0⇔ S0
NPc0 VPc0 <> NPe0 VPe0

(VPe0⇒ ADVP VPe1)

Note that the rule in (6) has 6 terminal nodes in
total whereas the rule in (7) has none. This is a
good example to illustrate the fact that a flat struc-
ture makes some legitimate phrase alignment impos-
sible and as a result increases the number of terminal
nodes in a rule.
There is another place in Figure 1 that has the same

problem. Note that the Chinese VPc0 has three im-
mediate daughter nodes: ADVP, ADVP, and VPc1.
This structure is flat and can become deeper if an in-
termediate node is created to dominate the second
ADVP and VPc1. This node can then combine with
the first ADVP to form VPc0. Note that this inter-
mediate node will serve as the phrase alignment of
VPe1, which cannot be unaligned in the figure. With
the phrase alignment between VPe1 and the hypo-
thetical intermediate node (call it VPc9), the number
of terminal nodes in (6) will be reduced to zero even
without the creation of VPe0 in (7). The new rule
looks like this:

(8) IP0⇔ S0
NPc0 ADVP VPc9 <> NPe0 ADVP VPe1

(VPc9⇒ ADVP VPc1)

In the near future, we plan to binarize the flat struc-
tures as illustrated above to create some intermediate
nodes, which can be aligned and reduce the number
of terminal nodes in existing rules.

5 Related work
To address the problem caused by spurious word

alignments, there has been research done to improve
word alignment quality by incorporating syntactic
information into word alignments (May and Knight,
2007; Fossum, Knight, and Abney, 2008). An-
other research direction has been explored to con-
duct syntactic alignment between parse trees (Tins-
ley et al., 2007; Pauls et al., 2010; Sun, Zhang, and
Tan, 2010b; Sun, Zhang, and Tan, 2010a), and im-
plements syntactic rule extraction based on syntactic
alignment instead of word alignment. Our work re-
ported in Section 3 can be viewed as a combination
of these two lines of research.
There has also been reasearch done to automati-

cally obtain phrasal translation equivalents (Ambati
and Lavie, 2008; Hanneman, Burroughs, and Lavie,
2011; Lavie, Parlikar, and Ambati, 2008; Zhu, Li,
and Xiao, 2015). This line of research is different
from our work in two respects:
First, word alignment as the foundation of phrase-

pair extraction is done differently in the two ap-
proaches. Automatic extraction of phrase pairs uses
automatically generated word alignments, where
there are lots of spurious word alignments, which, as
pointed out by (Zhu, Li, andXiao, 2015), are harmful
to rule extraction and affect translation quality. By
contrast, HACEPT is free of spurious word align-
ments. As already mentioned in Section 3, all the
word alignments in HACEPT are compatible with
the syntactic structures and will not block any legit-
imate phrase alignment.
Second, phrase alignment is inferred from word

alignment in automatic approaches. As reported by
(Ambati and Lavie, 2008), in places where language-
particular function words such as English auxiliary
verbs that exist in one language but not the other are
involved, there are usually more than one candiate in
the language that has the function words for a phrase
in the language that does not have a counterpart of
the function words. Automatic inference cannot al-
ways make the right decision in such situations. We7

7



have strict standards for choosing the correct phrase
alignment in such cases and as a result, HACEPT
can function as a training corpus for automatic ap-
proaches.

6 Conclusion
In this paper, we report a resource we have con-

structed with a novel alignment scheme. The cor-
pus contains both word and phrase alignments and
can help extract hierarchical translation rules and
train syntax-based MT models. The next step is, of
course, to do MT experiments with this resource to
see if it indeed helps to improve system performance.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the IBM subcontract

No. 4913014934 under DARPA Prime Contract No.
0011-12-C-0015 entitled "Broad Operational Lan-
guage Translation". We would like to thank Libin
Shen and Salim Roukos for their inspiration and dis-
cussion during early stages of the project, Abe Itty-
cheriah and Niyu Ge for their help with setting up
the data, Loretta Bandera for developing and main-
taining the annotation tool, and two anonymous re-
viewers for their helpful comments. We are grateful
for the hard work of our annotators Hui Gao, Tse-
ming Wang and Lingya Zhou. Any opinions, find-
ings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not nec-
essarily reflect those of the sponsor or any of the peo-
ple mentioned above.

References
Ambati, Vamshi and Alon Lavie. 2008. Improving syn-

tax driven translation models by re-structuring diver-
gent and non-isomorphic parse tree structures. In Pro-
ceedings of AMTA-2008 Student Research Workshop,
pages 235--244.

Bies, Ann, Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz, Robert Mac-
Intyre, Victoria Tredinnick, Grace Kim, Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz, and Britta Schasberger. 1995. Brack-
eting guidelines for treebank ii style penn treebank
project. Technical report, University of Pennsylvania.

Brown, Peter F., Vincent J. Della Pietra, Stephen A. Della
Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathemat-
ics of statistical machine translation: Parameter esti-
mation. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):263--311.

Chiang, David. 2005. A hierarchical phrase-based model
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 43rd AnnualMeeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 263--270. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Chiang, David. 2007. Hierarchical phrase-based transla-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 33(2):201--228.

Fang, Licheng and Chengqing Zong. 2008. An effi-
cient approach to rule redundancy reduction in hier-
archical phrase-based translation. In Proceedings of
NLP-KE '08 International Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Knowledge Engineering, pages
1--6.

Fossum, V., K. Knight, and S. Abney. 2008. Using syn-
tax to improve word alignment precision for syntax-
based machine translation. In Proceedings of the Third
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
44--52.

Galley, Michel, Mark Hopkins, Kevin Knight, and Daniel
Marcu. 2004. What's in a translation rule? In Su-
san Dumais, Daniel Marcu, and Salim Roukos, editors,
HLT-NAACL 2004: Main Proceedings, pages 273--
280.

Hanneman, Greg, Michelle Burroughs, and Alon Lavie.
2011. A general-purpose rule extractor for scfg-based
machine translation. In Proceedings of SSST-5, Fifth
Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Sta-
tistical Translation, pages 135--144.

Koehn, Philipp, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2003 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics on Human Language Technology, volume 1, pages
48--54.

Lavie, Alon, Alok Parlikar, and Vamshi Ambati. 2008.
Syntax-driven learning of sub-sentential translation
equivalents and translation rules from parsed parallel
corpora. In Proceedings of the Second ACL Work-
shop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation
(SSST-2), pages 87--95.

Li, Xuansong, Niyu Ge, and Stephanie Strassel. 2009.
Tagging guidelines for chinese-english word align-
ment. Technical report, Linguistic Data Consortium.

Li, Xuansong, Stephanie Strassel, Stephen Grimes, Safa
Ismael, Mohamed Maamouri, Ann Bies, and Nianwen
Xue. 2012. Parallel aligned treebanks at ldc: New
challenges interfacing existing infrastructures. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC-2012, Istanbul, Turkey.

Marcus, Mitchell P., Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of english: The penn treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2):313--330.

May, J. and K. Knight. 2007. Syntactic re-alignment
models for machine translation. In Proceedings of the8

8



2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning (EMNLP--CoNLL), pages 360-
-68.

Melamed, I. Dan. 1998. Annotation style guide for the
blinker project. Technical report, University of Penn-
sylvania.

Och, Franz Josef and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19--51.

Och, Franz Josef and Hermann Ney. 2004. The align-
ment template approach to statistical machine transla-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 30(4):417--449.

Pauls, A., D. Klein, D. Chiang, and K. Knight. 2010.
Unsupervised syntactic alignment with inversion trans-
duction grammars. In Proceedings of Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (HLT--NAACL), pages 118-
-26.

Sun, J., M. Zhang, and C.L. Tan. 2010a. Discriminative
induction of sub-tree alignment using limited labeled
data. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics (COLING), pages
1047--55.

Sun, J., M. Zhang, and C.L. Tan. 2010b. Exploring
syntactic structural features for sub-tree alignment us-
ing bilingual tree kernels. In Proceedings of the 48th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), pages 306--15.

Tinsley, John, Ventsislav Zhechev, Mary Hearne, and
Andy Way. 2007. Robust language pair-independent
subtree alignment. In Proceedings of Machine Trans-
lation Summit XI, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Warner, Colin, Ann Bies, Christine Brisson, and Justin
Mott. 2004. Addendum to the penn treebank ii style
bracketing guidelines: Biomedical treebank annota-
tion. Technical report, University of Pennsylvania.

Xue, Nianwen and Fei Xia. 1998. The bracketing guide-
lines for penn chinese treebank project. Technical re-
port, University of Pennsylvania.

Xue, Nianwen, Fei Xia, Fudong Chiou, and Martha
Palmer. 2005. The penn chinese treebank: Phrase
structure annotation of a large corpus. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 11(2):207--238.

Zhu, Jingbo, Qiang Li, and Tong Xiao. 2015. Improv-
ing syntactic rule extraction through deleting spurious
links with translation span alignment. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, pages 1--23.

9

9


