



















































Universalizing BulTreeBank: a Linguistic Tale about Glocalization


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 81–89,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 10–11 September 2015.

Universalizing BulTreeBank: a Linguistic Tale about Glocalization

Petya Osenova
Linguistic Modeling Department

IICT-BAS
petya@bultreebank.org

Kiril Simov
Linguistic Modeling Department

IICT-BAS
kivs@bultreebank.org

Abstract

The paper presents the strategies and
conversion principles of BulTreeBank
into Universal Dependencies annotation
scheme. The mappings are discussed from
linguistic and technical point of view. The
mapping from the original resource to the
new one has been done on morphological
and syntactic level. The first release of the
treebank was issued in May 2015. It con-
tains 125 000 tokens, which cover roughly
half of the corpus data.

1 Introduction

The efforts within the NLP community towards
universalized language datasets for getting compa-
rable, objective and scalable results in parsing and
other tasks are not so recent. Concerning syntax,
some shared representations have been proposed
and used at CoNLL contests on dependency pars-
ing in 2006 (Buchholz and Marsi, 2006) and 2007
(Nivre et al., 2007). Another stream of sharing
the same annotation framework was the adoption
of the schemes of already existing treebanks. For
example, a number of syntactic annotation works
followed the style of Prague Dependency Tree-
bank (Bejček et al., 2013) (i.e., Slovene (Džeroski
et al., 2006), Croatian (Berovic et al., 2012), Tamil
(Ramasamy and Žabokrtsky, 2012) etc.); many
other treebanks followed the Penn Treebank style
(i.e., Arabic (Maamouri et al., 2008), Chinese
(Xue et al., 2005), etc.). An alternative way of
pursuing a common annotation architecture is the
pre-shared core deep grammar, such as the Matrix
Grammar (Bender et al., 2002) in DELPH-IN ini-
tiative,1 which helps to develop the language spe-
cific part further. However, all shared annotation
schemes face the same challenges, namely what

1http://www.delph-in.net/matrix/

model might ensure maximum coverage of lan-
guage specific phenomena and then, how to deal
with the phenomena that are easy to universalize,
and with those that are hard to incorporate.

The most recent initiatives which refer to Stan-
ford typed dependencies (de Marneffe and Man-
ning, 2008) and Universal Dependencies (de
Marneffe et al., 2014) are not an exception to the
above presented situation. They build on the exist-
ing treebanks and aim at universal parts-of-speech
(POS) and dependency relations. With more and
more languages coming on board, new issues are
raised and considered. For that reason, the Univer-
sal Dependencies initiative has taken a dynamic
approach. This means that there are regular re-
leases of the treebanks in accordance to some cur-
rent annotation model. Each release is frozen to
its agreed annotation model. Then the model is
enriched, changed, reconsidered, and the follow-
up release takes into account the revised one. It
seems that versioning is indeed the only fair way
to tackle the diversity of language phenomena.

BulTreeBank did not participate in the first re-
lease of universalized treebanks (UD v1.0 (Nivre
et al., 2015)). However, part of it was delivered in
the second one – UD v1.1 (Agić et al., 2015) to-
gether with other 17 languages. Its size is 125 000
tokens, which constitute half of the data.

In this paper we present the strategies of con-
verting BulTreeBank into Universal Dependency
format with respect to morphology and syntax.
The undertaken conversion steps and various lin-
guistic issues are discussed in the context of man-
ual/automated work and universal/specific lan-
guage features.

The structure of the paper is as follows: Sec-
tion 2 focuses on related work. Section 3 high-
lights the BulTreeBank resource in a nutshell.
Section 4 outlines the universalizing principles of
morphology and syntax. Section 5 describes the
conversion procedure. Section 6 reports on some

81



preliminary results from training MATE Tools on
the converted treebank. Section 7 concludes the
paper.

2 Related Work

The Universal Dependency initiative evolved
mainly from the Stanford Type Dependency ef-
forts and Google attempts (Petrov et al., 2012) in
universalizing parts-of-speech. However, it is also
ideologically related to CoNLL contests (2006 and
2007).

The universalizing activities started with two
main directions of research. The first can be il-
lustrated by the work of Rosa et al. (2014) where
30 treebanks have been harmonized into a com-
mon Prague Dependency style, and then converted
into Stanford Dependencies.2 It does not han-
dle language specific features. BulTreeBank was
also among the harmonized treebanks. The second
can be exemplified by the work of Sanguinetti and
Bosco (2014) and Bosco and Sanguinetti (2014).
The authors describe the conversion of the paral-
lel treebank ParTUT (Italian, English, French) into
Stanford dependencies. In the same context is the
work of Lipenkova and Souček (2014) on Russian
dependency treebank.

Later on came also work on the conversion of
the treebanks into Universal Dependencies. These
include the conversion of the Swedish treebank
(Nivre, 2014) and the Finnish treebank (Pyysalo
et al., 2015). The experiments with the converted
Finnish treebank showed that the parsing results
are better with the Universal Dependencies (UD).

3 BulTreeBank Resource in a Nutshell

The original BulTreeBank (Simov et al., 2004;
Simov and Osenova, 2003) that has been used
in the conversion to the universal format com-
prises 214,000 tokens, which form a little more
than 15,000 sentences. Each token has been an-
notated with elaborate morphosyntactic informa-
tion. The original XML format of the BulTree-
Bank is based on HPSG. The syntactic structure is
presented through a set of constituents with head-
dependant markings. The phrasal constituents
contain two types of information: the domain of
the constituent (NP, VP etc.) and the type of the
phrase (head-complement (NPC, VPC etc.), head-

2This initiative as well as the Universal Dependencies
stream build on the idea of interset, proposed by Zeman
(2008).

subject (VPS), head-adjunct (NPA, VPA etc.). The
treebank provides also functional nodes, such as
clausal ones – CLDA (subordinate clause intro-
duced by the auxiliary particle да to), CLCHE
(subordinate clause introduced by the subordina-
tor че that), etc.

Tracing back to the developments of BulTree-
Bank, its first ‘glocalization’ happened in 2006,
when it was converted into the shared CoNLL de-
pendency format – (Chanev et al., 2006), (Chanev
et al., 2007). The rich structure was flattened to a
set of 18 relations.3 This part consists of 196 000
tokens, because the sentences with ellipses were
not considered.

Alternative versions of BulTreeBank exist in
two other popular formats: PennTreebank (Ghay-
oomi et al., 2014) and Stanford Dependencies
(Rosa et al., 2014). The former was used for con-
stituent parsing of Bulgarian, while the latter was
part of a bigger endevour towards universalizing
syntactic annotation schemes of many languages.

Now, BulTreeBank is part of the common ef-
forts that evolved from the previous initiatives to-
wards the creation of comparable syntactically an-
notated multilingual datasets. For the Universal
Dependencies initiative we used the original Bul-
TreeBank constituent-based format, because in the
previous conversions to dependency format some
important information was either lost, or under-
specified.

4 Universalizing Morphology and Syntax

At this stage our conversion adheres fully to the
universal annotation schemes. This means that we
postponed the addition of language specific fea-
tures for the next stage. The only language spe-
cific feature considered in this version is the mor-
phologically marked count form – remnant of the
old Slavic dual form within the category of Num-
ber. The morphological mapping includes parts-
of-speech and their lexical as well as inflectional
features. The syntactic mapping focuses on de-
pendency relations.

In this section we do not aim at exhaustive de-
scription of the mappings, but rather at illustrating
the varieties between the models.

4.1 Morphology

In morphology the following mapping cases oc-
curred from the direction of the original tagset to

3http://www.bultreebank.org/dpbtb/

82



the UD tagset: identical parts-of-speech, division
of one POS into more parts-of-speech and chang-
ing the POS. It should be noted however that all
the processes are interrelated.

1. Direct Mapping. The first case refers to
subordinators and conjunctions, adjectives,
prepositions.

2. Division of one POS into more parts-of-
speech. The BulTreeBank original POS
tagset4 respects the morphological nature of
the parts-of-speech, i.e., their origin. The
UD tagset, however, is more syntactically
oriented. It considers the syntactic func-
tion at the cost of parts-of-speech partition-
ing into several other groups. For exam-
ple, in our original tagset the group of pro-
nouns is homogeneous in spite of their differ-
ing functions. However, in UD this group is
split into the groups DET, PRON and ADV.
The category DET (determiner) is syntac-
tic for Bulgarian, since the definite article
is a phrasal affix and part of the word (ма-
сата ’table.DET’ the table; високата ма-
са ’tall.DEF table’ the tall table). Thus,
to this category belong the appropriate pro-
nouns that are used attributively (definite, in-
definite, collective, etc.). The pronouns that
are used substantively, remain in the group
PRON (pronoun). The pronouns that are
used adverbially, are considered in the group
ADV (adverb). Another division applies to
nouns. The common ones map the group
NOUN, while the proper nouns go to the spe-
cific group PROPN. Numerals also divide be-
tween the groups of ADJ, ADV and NUM.
The verbs are divided into the groups VERB
(main verbs, copulas and modals, participles
that are part of verb forms), AUX (auxil-
iaries), ADJ (participles with attributive us-
ages).

3. Changing the POS. One case of changing
the original POS is the transition of the affir-
mative and negative particles to the group of
INTJ (interjections). Also, all the pronouns
that went to DET group, also changed their
POS label.

Concerning the UD set of accompanying fea-
tures, three of them were not specifically encoded

4http://www.bultreebank.org/TechRep/
BTB-TR03.pdf

in the original tagset: animacy, degree and pas-
sive forms. Concerning animacy, in Bulgarian
the grammar-related dichotomy is more specific
– Person vs. Non-Person. Thus, it is derivable
from some explicit grammatical features, such as
the case in some pronouns, the count form of the
masculine nouns and the masculine form of the
numerals. Concerning degree, the original tagset
does not differentiate among positive, comparative
and superlative forms. Concerning passive, active
voice is considered a default, and passive form is
handled at the syntactic level, since both ways of
its formation are analytical (participial forms and
se-forms).

4.2 Syntax
The transfer of the syntactic relations faces the
following situations: direct transfer relations;
non-direct relations; ‘floating’ relations and non-
handled relations.

1. Direct transfer relations. Direct mappings
are those that provide the necessary informa-
tion on phrasal level. They include relations
like dobj, iobj, nsubj, csubj, etc.5 Also the
distinction between the relations aux and cop
is directly derived from the original annota-
tion. The former being annotated lexically
with V(erb) and the latter being annotated
syntactically with a head-complement rela-
tion (VPC).

2. Non-direct relations. Indirect mappings are
those that provide the necessary information
in a more underspecified way. One example
of such relations is the division of our original
complement clauses (CLDA, CLCHE, etc.)
into control (xcomp) and non-control ones
(ccomp) within UD. Another example is the
division of our head – adjunct nominal phrase
(NPA) into several relations depending on the
non-head sister: nummod (the non-head sis-
ter is numeral), amod (the non-head sister is
adjective), det (the non-head sister is deter-
miner). The division of complement clauses
and head-adjunct nominal phrases into more
specific structures is linguistically sound with
respect to semantics. Our original style in-
troduces preferences to generalization over
structural analyses. In our opinion, these
two approaches exhibit two different models

5The UD labels are given in footnote 6.

83



Figure 1: An HPSG-based tree and a Universal Dependency tree for the sentence: Аз съм, ако искаш
да знаеш, в най-решителния завой на живота си. ‘I am, if want.2PER.SG to know.2PER.SG, in
most-crucial turn of life.DEF my.REFL’ If you would like to know, I am in the most important turn of
my life.

84



which might be useful for various tasks in
NLP. Also, in the original treebank the pas-
sive constructions together with their partici-
pants were not marked explicitly. Hence, ad-
ditional work was needed for annotating re-
lations such as nsubjpass (nominal subject of
a passive verb form) and csubjpass (clausal
subject of a passive verb form). Thus, the
specific auxiliary relation auxpass (relation
between an auxiliary verb and the main verb
form) is handled manually (see in Table 2 that
at the moment only one such relation is avail-
able in the data).

3. ‘Floating’ relations. There are mappings
that have selected one alternative among sev-
eral appropriate possibilities in the tagset.
Such decisions might be temporary, since
they are likely to be reconsidered in the fu-
ture. Such a case is the encoding of the ques-
tion particle ли ‘li’ in Bulgarian, which is
used in yes – no questions. At the moment it
is annotated with the relation discourse, but
there are also other options, such as aux, expl
or mark.

Here also belongs the phenomenon of clitic
doubling. In the original annotation we con-
sider argument-like clitics at lexical level,
while their counterparts (long pronoun forms
or nouns) – at syntactic level. Here is an
example: На него му се падна труден
въпрос на изпита. ‘To him.LONG-PRON
him.SHORT-PRON REFL happened diffi-
cult question at exam.DEF’ He got a difficult
question at his exam.

In UD, however, at the moment clitics receive
two different relations depending on whether
they are part of clitic doubling (then they are
marked as expl) or not (then they are marked
as dobj or iobj)).

4. Non-handled relations. We still have to
analyze the elliptical phenomena in the re-
maining sentences of the treebank. Another
thing to be reflected in the next release is
the secondary predication, since this phe-
nomenon requires also some co-reference in-
formation. Here is an example: Тя влезе
тъжна в стаята. ‘She entered sad.FEM-
SG in room.DEF’ She entered the room sad.

5 Conversion Procedure

Since in our original resource some multiword ex-
pressions were analyzed as one unit (especially
those that matched one POS), for the UD scheme
they had to be syntactically analyzed. In cases
where it was not obvious what the head and depen-
dencies are, the expressions were processed man-
ually.

The parts-of-speech together with the relevant
grammatical features were converted automati-
cally through pre-defined mappings.

The syntactic relations required more work.
Part of them were converted automatically, while
part of them needed human intervention. For that
reason all sentences with at least one unsolved
mapping have been left for the next release.

In almost every constituent the head daughter
could be determined unambiguously. However,
more specific rules are needed in some combina-
tions of constituents. For example, in NPs of type
NN the head might be the first or the second noun
depending on the semantics of the phrase. In such
cases manual annotation of the head is necessary.
Coordinations originally have been considered to
be non-headed phrases, where the grammatical
function overrides the syntactic labels. Thus, they
also needed some special conversion treatment.

The procedure for the conversion of the Bul-
TreeBank to Universal Dependencies is rule-
based. The rules are of two kinds: (1) lexical head
identifier moving up the constituent tree; and (2)
relation assignment for a constituent node of the
dependent child when all children of the parent
node have lexical identifiers.

For example, let us have the following con-
stituent, whose lexicalized example might be this
one: твърде висок зелен стол. ‘too tall green
chair’ [NPA [APA too tall] [NPA green chair]].

NPA → APAid1 NPAid2 ,
where id1 is a lexical head identifier for the ad-

jectival phrase APA and id2 is a lexical head iden-
tifier for the noun phrase NPA. Then we establish
the relation amod from APAid1 to NPAid2 and the
identifier for the child NPA is moved up, because
the lexical head of the child NPA is the lexical head
for the whole phrase. After the application of these
two rules we have the constituent tree annotated
with lexical identifiers and dependency relations
in this way:

NPAid2 → APAid1,amod NPAid2 .

85



Through the recursive application of such rules
for the different types of phrases we annotated the
whole constituent trees with lexical identifiers and
universal dependency relations. When the root
node receives an identifier, then the process stops
and the constituent tree is converted to universal
dependency tree.

In this way, we keep the original constituent an-
notation, while constructing the universal depen-
dency annotation on top of it.

Some constructions like coordination, as men-
tioned above, require more complicated rules,
since the necessary information was not directly
encoded but it is trackable via the morphological
annotation. However, the basic principle is the
same.

Label Num Label Num
A 9922 M 2436
APA 681 N 31513
APC 247 ND-Elip 27
Adv 5197 NPA 27664
AdvPA 381 NPC 67
AdvPC 52 Nomin 17
C 5407 PP 17478
CL 1479 Participle 3883
CLCHE 722 Prep 17286
CLDA 1965 Pron 9315
CLQ 166 Subst 497
CLR 1084 T 4817
CLZADA 147 V 22431
Conj 5465 VPA 8576
ConjArg 8958 VPC 11291
CoordP 4387 VPF 203
Gerund 15 VPS 9579
H 1037 Verbalised 4
I 25

Table 1: Statistics over the HPSG Labels.

Table 16 summarizes the statistics of the syn-
6A – lexical adjective; APA – head-adjunct adjective

phrase; APC – head-complement adjective phrase; Adv –
lexical adverb; AdvPA – head-adjunct adverb phrase; Ad-
vPC – head-complement adverb phrase; C – lexical con-
junction; CL – clause that is outside the specific classes of
clauses; CLCHE – clause introduced via “che” conjunction;
CLDA – clause introduced via “da” verbal form; CLQ – in-
terrogative clause; CLR – relative clause; CLZADA – ad-
juct clause for purpose; Conj – conjuction in a coordination
phrase; ConjArg – argument of a coordination phrase; Co-
ordP – coordination phrase; Gerund – lexical gerund form;
H – lexical family name; I – lexical interjection; M – lex-
ical numeral; N – lexical noun; ND-Elip – elliptical noun
defined in the discourse; NPA – head-adjunct noun phrase;

tactic labels in the original HPSG-based BulTree-
Bank, while Table 27 gives an overview of the con-
verted BulTreeBank-UD. As it can be seen, direct
comparisons cannot be made due to the fact that
most often one original relation has been divided
into more relations, or some UD relation combines
material from two or more original ones. But even
in such a setting, it can be observed that the most
frequent type of relation is the one, in which a
noun is connected to another noun via preposition
(see relation PP in Table 1 and relations case and
nmod in Table 2).

Label Num Label Num
acl 1051 discourse 591
advcl 1258 dobj 5332
advmod 4437 expl 2790
amod 9528 iobj 2655
appos 38 mark 1410
aux 4839 mwe 671
auxpass 1 name 1110
case 18362 neg 1137
cc 3992 nmod 17293
ccomp 2428 nsubj 8506
conj 4573 nsubjpass 789
cop 1944 nummod 1460
csubj 368 punct 18013
csubjpass 16 root 9405
det 1586 vocative 6

Table 2: Statistics over the Universal Dependency
Labels.

Additionally, in Fig. 1 an original treebank sen-
tence is shown together with its UD conversion.
Definitely, the new presentation flattens the tree,

NPC – head-complement noun phrase; Nomin – nominal-
ization of a phrase; PP – prepositional phrase; Participle –
lexical participle; Prep – lexical preposition; Pron – lexical
pronoun; Subst – substantive usage; T – lexical particle; V
– lexical finite verb form; VPA – head-adjunct verb phrase;
VPC – head-complement verb phrase; VPF – head-filler verb
phrase; VPS – head-subject verb phrase; Verbalised – ver-
balization of a phrase.

7acl – clausal modifier of noun; advcl – adverbial clause
modifier; advmod – adverbial modifier; amod – adjectival
modifier; appos – appositional modifier; aux – auxiliary;
auxpass – passive auxiliary; case – case marking; cc – co-
ordinating conjunction; ccomp – clausal complement; conj
– conjunct; cop – copula; csubj – clausal subject; csubj-
pass – clausal passive subject; det – determiner; discourse
– discourse element; dobj – direct object; expl – expletive;
iobj – indirect object; mark – marker; mwe – multi-word
expression; name – name; neg – negation modifier; nmod –
nominal modifier; nsubj – nominal subject; nsubjpass – pas-
sive nominal subject; nummod – numeric modifier; punct –
punctuation; root – root; vocative – vocative

86



but it also adds more specific relations to it. It
should be noted that the two lines in the HPSG-
based tree in Fig. 1 connect the coreferences in the
sentence (between the subject ‘I’ and the reflexive
pronoun; and between the unexpressed subjects of
the verbs ‘want’ and ‘know’).

6 Preliminary Experiments for POS
Tagging and Dependency Parsing

We performed some preliminary experiments with
the BulTreeBank-UD to train existing tools for
POS tagging and Dependency Parsing. The 10-
fold cross validation approach was used. We se-
lected MATE tools8 for the experiments, because
they provide all the necessary components in one
framework. The results are surprisingly good
for the POS and Morphological tagging, while
the dependency parsing performs somewhat sub-
optimally. As background information it should
be noted that the state-of-the-art results achieved
in our previous work, with different data and dif-
ferent settings are as follows: in POS tagging (13
tags) – 99.30 % accuracy; in morphological tag-
ging (680 tags) – 97.98 % accuracy (Georgiev et
al., 2012), and in dependency parsing on BulTree-
Bank (ConLL-2006): LAS – 89.14 % and UAS –
92.45 % (Simova et al., 2014), using an ensemble
model.

The current results are presented in Table 3 be-
low:

Task Accuracy LAS UAS
POS Tagging 96.89 % – –
Mor. Tagging 98.50 % – –
Dep. Parsing – 83.50 % 88.08 %

Table 3: Evaluation. LAS = Labeled Accuracy
Score, UAS = Unlabeled Accuracy Score.

However, we consider these results preliminary,
because, as it was mentioned above, only part of
the original treebank has been transformed into the
universal representation and thus, only this part
was used for the training. Additionally, many
complex phenomena have not been represented
within the current version yet.

It is worth noting that at the moment the origi-
nal BulTreeBank tagset consists of 680 tags, while
the UD one has 535 tags as combinations between
POS and the respective grammatical features. This

8http://code.google.com/p/mate-tools/

situation will change when more language specific
features are added.

7 Conclusion

In this paper we describe the conversion of the
original HPSG-based BulTreeBank into the Uni-
versal Dependencies format. The process included
assigning Universal POS and Universal Morpho-
logical Features to the original annotations as well
as conversion of the tree structures.

The conversion and the label assignments were
done mainly automatically with a high level of cer-
tainty because the dependent elements in the orig-
inal treebank were easy to track. At the same time,
some phenomena will be detailed and handled in
the next release of the treebank due to the need of
human intervention in the language or annotation
model specific cases.

The reported effort is part of a wider initiative
that includes many languages and working groups.
As such it faces similar challenges and shares sim-
ilar perspectives. The main challenge is the proper
handling of the language universal and language
specific phenomena at a minimal linguistic and
data model loss. The most important perspective
is the ultimate goal of having comparable syntacti-
cally annotated resources for many languages that
would serve better for various NLP tasks.

Acknowledgements

This research has received partial support by the
EC’s FP7 (FP7/2007 – 2013) project under grant
agreement number 610516: “QTLeap: Quality
Translation by Deep Language Engineering Ap-
proaches” and FP7 grant 316087 AComIn "Ad-
vanced Computing for Innovation", funded by the
European Commission in 2012 – 2016.

We are grateful to the three anonymous review-
ers, whose remarks, comments, suggestions and
encouragement helped us to improve the initial
variant of the paper. All errors remain our own
responsibility.

References
Željko Agić, Maria Jesus Aranzabe, Aitziber Atutxa,

Cristina Bosco, Jinho Choi, Marie-Catherine
de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Richárd Farkas,
Jennifer Foster, Filip Ginter, Iakes Goenaga,
Koldo Gojenola, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajič, An-
ders Trærup Johannsen, Jenna Kanerva, Juha
Kuokkala, Veronika Laippala, Alessandro Lenci,

87



Krister Lindén, Nikola Ljubešić, Teresa Lynn,
Christopher Manning, Héctor Alonso Martínez,
Ryan McDonald, Anna Missilä, Simonetta Monte-
magni, Joakim Nivre, Hanna Nurmi, Petya Osen-
ova, Slav Petrov, Jussi Piitulainen, Barbara Plank,
Prokopis Prokopidis, Sampo Pyysalo, Wolfgang
Seeker, Mojgan Seraji, Natalia Silveira, Maria Simi,
Kiril Simov, Aaron Smith, Reut Tsarfaty, Veronika
Vincze, and Daniel Zeman. 2015. Universal De-
pendencies 1.1. LINDAT/CLARIN digital library at
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles
University in Prague.

Eduard Bejček, Eva Hajičová, Jan Hajič, Pavlína
Jínová, Václava Kettnerová, Veronika Kolářová,
Marie Mikulová, Jiří Mírovský, Anna Nedoluzhko,
Jarmila Panevová, Lucie Poláková, Magda
Ševčíková, Jan Štěpánek, and Šárka Zikánová.
2013. Prague Dependency Treebank 3.0.

Emily M. Bender, Dan Flickinger, and Stephan Oepen.
2002. The Grammar Matrix: An Open-Source
Starter-Kit for the Rapid Development of Cross-
Linguistically Consistent Broad-Coverage Precision
Grammars. In John Carroll, Nelleke Oostdijk, and
Richard Sutcliffe, editors, Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Grammar Engineering and Evaluation at
the 19th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 8–14, Taipei, Taiwan.

Dasa Berovic, Zeljko Agic, and Marko Tadić. 2012.
Croatian Dependency Treebank: Recent develop-
ment and initial experiments. In Nicoletta Calzo-
lari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry
Declerck, Mehmet Uğur Doğan, Bente Maegaard,
Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk,
and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of
the Eight International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), Istanbul,
Turkey, May. European Language Resources Asso-
ciation (ELRA).

Cristina Bosco and Manuela Sanguinetti. 2014. To-
wards a Universal Stanford Dependencies paral-
lel treebank. In Verena Henrich, Erhard Hin-
richs, Daniël de Kok, Petya Osenova, and Adam
Przepiórkowski, editors, Proceedings of TLT-13,
pages 14–25, Tübingen, Germany. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).

Sabine Buchholz and Erwin Marsi. 2006. CoNLL-X
Shared Task on Multilingual Dependency Parsing.
In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning, CoNLL-X
’06, pages 149–164, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Atanas Chanev, Kiril Simov, Petya Osenova, and Sve-
toslav Marinov. 2006. Dependency conversion and
parsing of the BulTreeBank. In Proceedings of the
LREC workshop Merging and Layering Linguistic
Information, pages 16–23.

Atanas Chanev, Kiril Simov, Petya Osenova, and Sve-
toslav Marinov. 2007. The BulTreeBank: Parsing

and Conversion. In Proceedings of the Recent Ad-
vances in Natural Language Processing Conference,
pages 114–120.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Man-
ning. 2008. The Stanford Typed Dependen-
cies Representation. In Coling 2008: Proceedings
of the Workshop on Cross-Framework and Cross-
Domain Parser Evaluation, CrossParser ’08, pages
1–8, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Na-
talia Silveira, Katri Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Joakim
Nivre, and Christopher D. Manning. 2014. Uni-
versal Stanford Dependencies: a cross-linguistic ty-
pology. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference Chair),
Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Hrafn Lofts-
son, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion
Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors,
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14),
Reykjavik, Iceland, May. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Sašo Džeroski, Tomaž Erjavec, Nina Ledinek, Petr Pa-
jas, Zdenek Žabokrtsky, and Andreja Žele. 2006.
Towards a Slovene dependency treebank. In In Proc.
Int. Conf. on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC.

Georgi Georgiev, Valentin Zhikov, Kiril Simov, Petya
Osenova, and Preslav Nakov. 2012. Feature-rich
part-of-speech tagging for morphologically complex
languages: Application to Bulgarian. In Proceed-
ings of the 13th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 492–502. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Masood Ghayoomi, Kiril Simov, and Petya Osen-
ova. 2014. Constituency parsing of Bulgarian:
Word- vs class-based parsing. In Nicoletta Cal-
zolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry
Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Maegaard, Joseph
Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios
Piperidis, editors, Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland, May. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Janna Lipenkova and Milan Souček. 2014. Con-
verting Russian Dependency Treebank to Stanford
Typed Dependencies Representation. In Proceed-
ings of the 14th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
page 143–147, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Mohamed Maamouri, Ann Bies, and Seth Kulick.
2008. Enhanced annotation and parsing of the Ara-
bic treebank. In In 6th International Conference on
Computers and Informatics, INFOS2008.

Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra Kübler, Ryan Mc-
Donald, Jens Nilsson, Sebastian Riedel, and Deniz

88



Yuret. 2007. The CoNLL 2007 Shared Task on
Dependency Parsing. In Proceedings of the CoNLL
Shared Task Session of EMNLP-CoNLL 2007, pages
915–932, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Joakim Nivre, Cristina Bosco, Jinho Choi, Marie-
Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Richárd
Farkas, Jennifer Foster, Filip Ginter, Yoav Gold-
berg, Jan Hajič, Jenna Kanerva, Veronika Laippala,
Alessandro Lenci, Teresa Lynn, Christopher Man-
ning, Ryan McDonald, Anna Missilä, Simonetta
Montemagni, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo, Natalia
Silveira, Maria Simi, Aaron Smith, Reut Tsarfaty,
Veronika Vincze, and Daniel Zeman. 2015. Uni-
versal Dependencies 1.0. LINDAT/CLARIN digital
library at Institute of Formal and Applied Linguis-
tics, Charles University in Prague.

Joakim Nivre. 2014. Universal dependencies for
Swedish. In SLTC Conference 2014, Uppsala, Swe-
den.

Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald.
2012. A universal part-of-speech tagset. In Nico-
letta Calzolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri,
Thierry Declerck, Mehmet Uğur Doğan, Bente
Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan
Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proceedings
of the Eight International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), Istanbul,
Turkey, May. European Language Resources Asso-
ciation (ELRA).

Sampo Pyysalo, Jenna Kanerva, Anna Missilä,
Veronika Laippala, and Filip Ginter. 2015. Univer-
sal Dependencies for Finnish. In Proceedings of the
20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguis-
tics (NODALIDA 2015), page 163–172.

Loganathan Ramasamy and Zdenek Žabokrtsky. 2012.
Prague Dependency Style Treebank for Tamil. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012),
pages 23–25, Istanbul, Turkey. European Language
Resources Association.

Rudolf Rosa, Jan Mašek, David Mareček, Martin
Popel, Daniel Zeman, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský.
2014. Hamledt 2.0: Thirty Dependency Treebanks
Stanfordized. In Nicoletta Calzolari (Conference
Chair), Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Hrafn
Loftsson, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Asun-
cion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, ed-
itors, Proceedings of the Ninth International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’14), Reykjavik, Iceland, May. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Manuela Sanguinetti and Cristina Bosco. 2014. Con-
verting the parallel treebank ParTUT in Universal
Stanford Dependencies. In Proceedings of CLiC-it
2014, pages 316–321, Pisa, Italy.

Kiril Simov and Petya Osenova. 2003. Practical anno-
tation scheme for an HPSG treebank of Bulgarian.
In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on
Linguistically Interpreteted Corpora (LINC-2003),
Budapest, Hungary.

Kiril Simov, Petya Osenova, Alexander Simov, and
Milen Kouylekov. 2004. Design and implemen-
tation of the Bulgarian HPSG-based treebank. In
Journal of Research on Language and Computation,
Special Issue, pages 495–522, Kluwer Academic
Publishers.

Iliana Simova, Dimitar Vasilev, Alexander Popov, Kiril
Simov, and Petya Osenova. 2014. Joint ensem-
ble model for POS tagging and dependency pars-
ing. In Proceedings of the First Joint Workshop
on Statistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich Lan-
guages and Syntactic Analysis of Non-Canonical
Languages, pages 15–25, Dublin, Ireland, August.
Dublin City University.

Naiwen Xue, Fei Xia, Fu-dong Chiou, and Marta
Palmer. 2005. The Penn Chinese TreeBank: Phrase
Structure Annotation of a Large Corpus. Nat. Lang.
Eng., 11(2):207–238, June.

Daniel Zeman. 2008. Reusable tagset conversion us-
ing tagset drivers. In Bente Maegaard Joseph Mar-
iani Jan Odijk Stelios Piperidis Daniel Tapias Nico-
letta Calzolari (Conference Chair), Khalid Choukri,
editor, Proceedings of the Sixth International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’08), Marrakech, Morocco, May. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2008/.

89


