



















































Identifying Argumentation Schemes in Genetics Research Articles


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Argumentation Mining, pages 12–21,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Identifying Argumentation Schemes in Genetics Research Articles 

 
 

 Nancy L. Green 
Dept. of Computer Science 

U. of N. Carolina Greensboro 
Greensboro, NC 27402, USA 
nlgreen@uncg.edu 

 

 
  

 

Abstract  

This paper presents preliminary work on 
identification of argumentation schemes, 
i.e., identifying premises, conclusion and 
name of argumentation scheme, in argu-
ments for scientific claims in genetics re-
search articles. The goal is to develop 
annotation guidelines for creating corpo-
ra for argumentation mining research. 
This paper gives the specification of ten 
semantically distinct argumentation 
schemes based on analysis of argumenta-
tion in several journal articles. In addi-
tion, it presents an empirical study on 
readers’ ability to recognize some of the 
argumentation schemes.  

1 Introduction 
There has been an explosion in the on-line publi-
cation of genetics research articles, creating a 
critical need for information access tools for ge-
netics researchers, biological database curators, 
and clinicians. Research on biologi-
cal/biomedical natural language processing (Bi-
oNLP) is an active area of research with the goal 
of developing such tools. Previous research in 
BioNLP has focused mainly on fundamental text 
mining challenges such as named entity recogni-
tion and relation extraction (Cohen and Demner-
Fushman 2014). However, a key feature of scien-
tific writing is the use of argumentation.             
    It is important for information access tools to 
recognize argumentation in scientific text. First, 
argumentation is a level of discourse analysis 
that provides critical context for interpretation of 
a text. For example, a text may give an argument 
against a hypothesis P, so it would be misleading 
for a text mining program to extract P as a fact 

stated in that text. Second, a user should be able 
to access a summary of arguments for and 
against a particular claim. Also, to evaluate the 
strength of an argument a user should be able to 
see the arguments upon which it depends, i.e., 
arguments supporting or attacking its premises. 
Third, tools that display citation relationships 
among documents (Teufel 2010) could provide 
finer-grained information about relationships 
between arguments in different documents. 
    Argumentation mining aims to automatically 
identify arguments in text, the arguments’ prem-
ises, conclusion and argumentation scheme (or 
form of argument), and relationships between 
arguments in a text or set of texts. Most previous 
work in argumentation mining has focused on 
non-scientific text (e.g. Mochales and Moens 
2011; Feng and Hirst 2011; Cabrio and Villata 
2012). Previous NLP research on scientific dis-
course (e.g. Mizuta et al. 2005; Teufel 2010; 
Liakata 2012a) has focused on recognizing in-
formation status (hypothesis, background 
knowledge, new knowledge claim, etc.) but has 
not addressed deeper argumentation analysis. 
     This paper presents our preliminary work on 
identification of argumentation schemes in ge-
netics research articles. We define this subtask, 
unlike some others, e.g. Feng and Hirst (2011), 
as identifying the premises and conclusion of an 
argument together with the name of its argumen-
tation scheme. One contribution of the paper is 
the specification of ten semantically distinct ar-
gumentation schemes based on analysis of argu-
mentation in several genetics journal articles. 
Our goal is to develop annotation guidelines for 
creating corpora for argumentation mining re-
search. Most of the schemes do not appear in the 
principal catalogue of argumentation schemes 
cited in past argumentation mining studies (Wal-
ton et al. 2008). In addition, we present an empir-
ical study on readers’ ability to recognize some 

12



of the argumentation schemes. The paper con-
cludes with discussion on plans for annotating 
debate in this type of discourse. 

2 Background and Related Work 
An argument consists of a set of premises and a 
conclusion. Enthymemes are arguments with im-
plicit premises and/or conclusions. Argumenta-
tion schemes are abstract descriptions of ac-
ceptable, but not necessarily deductively valid, 
forms of argument used in everyday conversa-
tion, law, and science (Walton et al. 2008). To 
illustrate, an abductive argumentation scheme is 
common in medical diagnosis. The premise is 
that a certain event E has been observed (e.g. 
coughing). Another, sometimes implicit, premise 
is that C-type events often lead to E-type events. 
The tentative conclusion is that a certain event C 
has occurred (e.g. a respiratory infection) that 
caused the event that was observed.  
    As in this example, the conclusions of many 
argumentation schemes are considered to be de-
feasible, and are open to debate by means of crit-
ical questions associated with each scheme (Wal-
ton et al. 2008). For example, one of the critical 
questions of the above argumentation scheme is 
whether there is an alternative more plausible 
explanation for the observed event. Recognition 
of the argumentation scheme underlying an ar-
gument is critical for challenging an argument 
via critical questions and recognizing answers to 
those challenges, i.e., in representing and reason-
ing about scientific debate. 
     There has been some work on argumentation 
mining of debate, but none addressing debate in 
the natural sciences. Teufel et al. (2006) devel-
oped a scheme with categories such as support 
and anti-support for annotating citation function 
in a corpus of computational linguistics articles. 
Cabrio and Villata (2012) addressed recognition 
of support and attack relations between argu-
ments in a corpus of on-line dialogues stating 
user opinions. Stab and Gurevych (2013) and 
Stab et al. (2015) are developing guidelines for 
annotating support-attack relationships between 
arguments based on a corpus of short persuasive 
essays written by students and another corpus of 
20 full-text articles from the education research 
domain. Peldszus and Stede (2013) are develop-
ing guidelines for annotating relations between 
arguments which have been applied to the Pots-
dam Commentary Corpus (Stede 2004). Howev-
er research on mining debate has not addressed 
more fine-grained relationships such as asking 

and responding to particular critical questions of 
argumentation schemes. 
     Furthermore, there has been no work on ar-
gumentation scheme recognition in scientific 
text. Feng and Hirst (2011) investigated argu-
mentation scheme recognition using the Arauca-
ria corpus, which contains annotated arguments 
from newspaper articles, parliamentary records, 
magazines, and on-line discussion boards (Reed 
et al. 2010). Taking premises and conclusion as 
given, Feng and Hirst addressed the problem of 
recognizing the name of the argumentation 
scheme for the five most frequently occurring 
schemes of  Walton et al. (2008) in the corpus: 
Argument from example (149), Argument from 
cause to effect (106), Practical reasoning (53), 
Argument from Consequences (44), and Argu-
ment from Verbal Classification (41). (The num-
ber of instances of each scheme is given in pa-
rentheses.) Classification techniques achieved 
high accuracy for Argument from example and 
Practical reasoning.  
     Text with genetics content has been the object 
of study in some previous NLP research. Mizuta 
et al. (2005) investigated automatic classification 
of information status of text segments in genetics 
journal articles. The Colorado Richly Annotated 
Full Text Corpus (CRAFT) contains 67 full-text 
articles on the mouse genome that have been lin-
guistically annotated (Verspoor et al. 2012) and 
annotated with concepts from standard biology 
ontologies (Bada et al. 2012). The Variome cor-
pus, consisting of 10 journal articles on the rela-
tionship of human genetic variation to disease, 
has been annotated with a set of concepts and 
relations (Verspoor et al. 2013). None of these 
corpora have been annotated for argumentation 
mining.  
     Finally, Green et al. (2011) identified argu-
mentation schemes in a corpus of letters written 
by genetic counselors. The argumentation 
schemes were used by a natural language genera-
tion system to generate letters to patients about 
their case. However, the argumentation in genet-
ics research articles appears more complex than 
that used in patient communication.  Green 
(2014; 2015) analyzed argumentation in one ge-
netics journal article but did not generalize the 
results to other articles, nor provide any empiri-
cal evaluation. 

3 Argumentation Schemes 
This section describes ten argumentation 
schemes that we identified in four research arti-

13



cles on genetic variants/mutations that may cause 
human disease (Schrauwen et al. 2012; Baumann 
et al. 2012; Charlesworth et al. 2012; McInerney 
et al. 2013). The ten schemes are not the only 
ones we found but they represent major forms of 
causal argumentation for the scientific claims of 
the articles. The schemes are semantically dis-
tinct in terms of their premises and conclusions. 
Most of these schemes are not described in the 
catalogue of argumentation schemes frequently 
cited by argumentation mining researchers (Wal-
ton et al. 2008). None of them are the same as 
the ones addressed by Feng and Hirst (2011). 
     To facilitate comparison of the schemes, they 
are presented in Table 1 in a standardized format 
highlighting how the schemes vary in terms of  
two event variables, X and Y. The articles where 
the schemes were found are identified by the first 
initial of the surname of the first author, in paren-
theses next to the name of the scheme. Most 
scheme names were chosen for mneumonic val-
ue. In the table, X and Y are events, such as the 
existence of a genetic mutation and disease, re-
spectively, in an individual or group. The prem-
ises describe (i) whether the X events have been 
hypothesized, observed, or eliminated from fur-
ther consideration, (ii) whether the Y events have 
been observed, and  (iii) (the Causal potential 
column) whether a potential causal relation has 
been previously established  between Xs and Ys.  
The conclusions, which are understood to be de-
feasible, describe whether an event X is conclud-
ed to have possibly occurred and/or to be a/the 
possible cause of Y.  
     As a step towards annotating these argumen-
tation schemes in a corpus, we created initial 
guidelines containing examples and descriptions 
of the ten schemes.  Illustrating some of the chal-
lenges in identifying arguments in this literature, 
Figure 1 shows the guidelines for two schemes 
(Effect to Cause and Failed to Observe Effect of 
Hypothesized Cause). In Figure 1, three text ex-
cerpts from an article are presented. The first two 
excerpts contain general information needed to 
interpret the arguments, including one premise of 
each argument. The third excerpt contains an 
additional premise of each argument, and con-
veys the conclusion of each argument. The last 
sentence of the third excerpt, “He was initially 
suspected to have EDS VIA, but the urinary 
LP/HP ratio was within the normal range” con-
veys the conclusion of the first argument: the 
patient may have EDS VIA. However, by 
providing evidence conflicting with that conclu-
sion (the LP/HP data), the sentence also implicit-

ly conveys the conclusion of the second argu-
ment: it is not likely that the patient has EDS 
VIA. The only overt signals of this conflict seem 
to be the qualifier ‘initially suspected’ and the 
‘but’ construction.  
     Our guidelines provide a paraphrase of each 
argument since many of the example arguments 
have implicit premises or conclusions (i.e. are 
enthymemes). For example, the conclusion of the 
Failed to Observe Effect of Hypothesized Cause 
argument shown in Figure 1 is implicit. In some 
cases a missing premise is supplied from infor-
mation presented in the article but not in the giv-
en excerpts. In other cases, a missing premise is 
paraphrased by presenting generally accepted 
background knowledge of the intended reader 
such as “A mutation of a gene that is expressed 
in a human tissue or system may cause an ab-
normality in that tissue or system.” In yet other 
cases, a conclusion of one argument is an implic-
it premise of another argument. 
     As illustrated in Figure 1, each paraphrased 
argument in the guidelines is followed by a more 
abstract description of the argumentation 
scheme. Abstract descriptions of each argumen-
tation scheme are presented in Figures 2 and 3.  
Note that Effect to Cause, Eliminate Candidates, 
and Failed to Observe Effect of Hypothesized 
Cause are similar but not identical to the Abduc-
tive Argumentation Scheme, Argument from Al-
ternatives, and Argument from Falsification of 
(Walton et al. 2008), respectively.  However, 
none of the descriptions in (Walton et al. 2008) 
are attributed to arguments found in the science 
research literature.   

4 Pilot Study 
A pilot study was performed to determine the 
effectiveness of the initial guidelines for identify-
ing a subset of the argumentation schemes. For 
the study, we added a two-page overview of the 
task to the beginning of the guidelines and a quiz 
at the end; and, in the interest of reducing the 
time required to complete the task, removed the 
five examples from one article (Charlesworth et 
al. 2012), which repeated three of the argumenta-
tion schemes from the other sources. To summa-
rize, the pilot study materials consisted of exam-
ples of eight schemes from (Schrauwen et al. 
2012) and (Baumann et al. 2012), and a multiple-
choice quiz based upon examples from (McIner-
ney et al. 2013). 
     The quiz consisted of five multi-part prob-
lems, each problem concerning one or more ex-

14



cerpts from (McInerney et al. 2013) containing 
an argument. The quiz did not address the task of 
determining the presence of an argument and its 
boundaries within an article. Problems I-III test-
ed participants’ ability to recognize premises 
and/or conclusions and names of four key argu-
mentation schemes: Effect to Cause, Eliminate 
Candidates, Causal Agreement and Difference, 
and Joint Method of Agreement and Difference. 
Problem I (shown in Figure 4) presented a para-
phrase of the conclusion of the argument and 
asked the participant to identify the excerpts con-
taining the premises; and to identify the name of 
the argumentation scheme from a list of six 
names (the four scheme names that begin with 
Failed were omitted, although the participant 
could have selected None of the above for those). 
Problem II asked the participant to select the 
premises and conclusion of the argument from a 
list of paraphrases; and to identify the name of 
the argumentation scheme from the same list of 
choices given in problem I.  
     In problem III, the excerpts contained two 
arguments for the same conclusion. The partici-
pant was given a paraphrase of the conclusion 
and asked to select the excerpt best expressing 
the premise of the Causal Agreement and Differ-
ence argument and the excerpt best expressing 
the premise of the Joint Method of Agreement 
and Difference argument. The purpose of prob-
lems IV and V was to evaluate participants’ abil-
ity to interpret more complex argumentation. The 
excerpts given in problem IV actually conflated 
multiple arguments. Rather than ask the partici-
pant to tease apart the component arguments, the 
problem asked the participant to select the para-
phrases expressing the (main) conclusion and 
premise. Problem V asked the participant to se-
lect the paraphrase best expressing the conclu-
sion of the excerpts in IV and V together.  
    The study was performed with two different 
groups of participants. The first group consisted 
of university students in an introductory genetics 
class early in the course. They had not received 
instruction on argumentation in their biology 
courses, had covered basic genetics in their first 
two years of study, and had no experience read-
ing genetics research articles. The students were 
required to participate in the study but were in-
formed that the quiz results would not influence 
their course grade and that allowing use of their 
quiz results in our study was voluntary. The stu-
dents completed the study in 45 to 60 minutes. 
The results are shown in Table 2.  

     To comment, since the students had limited 
relevant background and may not have been mo-
tivated to succeed in the task, some of the class 
did very poorly. The mean number answered cor-
rectly on the 11 problems was 49% (N=23). 
However, six students scored between 73% and 
82% (the highest score). The best performance 
was on Problem I on an Effect to Cause argu-
ment. This may be due, at least in part, to the fact 
that this argumentation scheme appeared first in 
the guidelines and was also the first problem. 
The question that the fewest number of students 
answered correctly was III.1, which was to iden-
tify the excerpt containing a premise of a Causal 
Agreement and Difference argument. Overall, 
the main lesson we learned from this group of 
study participants, compared to the other partici-
pants (see below), is that training and/or motiva-
tion need to be improved before running such a 
study with a similar group of students. 
     The second group of participants consisted of 
researchers at several different universities in 
North America. No compensation was provided. 
The researchers came from a variety of back-
grounds: (A) computer science with no back-
ground in genetics, NLP or argumentation, (B) 
learning sciences with background in argumenta-
tion but none in genetics, (C) biology with exten-
sive background in genetics but none in NLP or 
argumentation, and (D and E) BioNLP research-
ers. The results are shown in Table 3. Research-
ers A, C, and D answered all of the questions 
correctly; B missed only one (III.1); E missed 
two (II.3 and IV.1). B commented that B did not 
have sufficient knowledge of genetics to under-
stand the excerpt.  The results from this group 
confirm that several key schemes could be rec-
ognized by other researchers based upon reading 
the guidelines.  

5 Annotating Debate 
The guidelines do not yet address annotation of 
relationships between pairs of arguments within 
an article. Our plan is to annotate the following 
types of relationships which we found. First, as 
illustrated by the two arguments shown in Figure 
1, two arguments with conflicting conclusions 
may be presented. Note that four of the argumen-
tation schemes we have identified (see Table 1) 
may play a prominent role in annotation of this 
type of relationship, since they provide a way of 
supporting the negation of the conclusions of 
other schemes. Second, multiple evidence may 
be presented to strengthen the premises of an 

15



argument. In the excerpt illustrating Failed Pre-
dicted Effect in Figure 2, the premise that G is 
not predicted to have effect P is supported by 
evidence from three different genetic analysis 
tools (Mutation Taster, SIFT, or PolyPhen-2).   
     The third relationship is to preempt an attack 
by addressing one of the critical questions of an 
argumentation scheme. One instance of this oc-
curs in (McInerney-Leo et al. 2013), in which a 
Causal Agreement and Difference argument con-
cludes that a certain variant is the most likely 
cause of a disease in a certain family, since the 
occurrence of the variant and the disease is con-
sistent with (the causal mechanism of) autosomal 
recessive inheritance. Nevertheless, one might 
ask the critical question whether some other fac-
tor could be responsible. Addressing this chal-
lenge, a Joint Method of Agreement and Differ-
ence argument is given to provide additional 
support to that claim, since the disease was not 
found in a control group of individuals who do 
not have the variant.   

6 Conclusion 
This paper presented a specification of ten causal 
argumentation schemes used to make arguments 
for scientific claims in genetics research journal 
articles. The specifications and some of the ex-
amples from which they were derived were used 
to create an initial draft of guidelines for annota-
tion of a corpus. The guidelines were evaluated 
in a pilot study that showed that several key 
schemes could be recognized by other research-
ers based upon reading the guidelines. 
 
Acknowledgments  

 
We thank Dr. Malcolm Schug of the UNCG De-
partment of Biology for verifying our interpreta-
tion of some of the articles. We also thank the 
reviewers for their helpful comments.    

 

 
Argumentation 

Scheme 
X Y Causal 

potential 
Conclusion 

Effect to Cause  
(B, M) 

Unknown Observed Yes X occurred & caused Y 

Failed to Observe 
Effect of Hypothe-
sized Cause (B) 

Hypothesized Not observed Yes X did not occur & not 
cause of Y 

Failed to Observe 
Expected Cause (S) 

Not observed Observed Yes X not cause of Y 

Consistent with Pre-
dicted Effect (S) 

Observed Observed Yes X cause of Y 

Failed Predicted Ef-
fect (C) 

Observed Observed  No X not cause of Y 

Hypothesize Candi-
dates (S, C) 

Observed set of 
Xs 

Observed Yes One of Xs cause of Y 

Eliminate Candidates 
(S, C, M) 

Observed set of 
Xs but  X0 can 
be eliminated  

Observed Yes All Xs but X0  cause of 
Y 

Causal Agreement 
and Difference  
(S, C, M) 

Observed in 
group 1, not in 
group 2 

Observed in group 1, 
not in group 2 

Yes X cause of Y 

Failed Causal 
Agreement and Dif-
ference (C) 

Observed in all 
of group 

Not observed in all of 
group 

Yes X not cause of Y 

Joint Method of 
Agreement and Dif-
ference (S, M) 

Observed in all 
of group 

Observed in all of 
group 

No X cause of Y 

Table 1. Semantic distinctions among argumentation schemes identified in genetics articles. 
 
 

I.1 I.2 I.3 II.1 II.2 II.3 III.1 III.2 IV.1 IV.2 V. 

16 12 15 9 14 11 4 10 12 13 8 

Table 2. Number of students (N=23) who answered each question correctly. 
16



 
I.1 I.2 I.3 II.1 II.2 II.3 III.1 III.2 IV.1 IV.2 V. 

5   5 5 5 5 4 4 5 4 5 5 

Table 3. Number of researchers (N=5) who answered each question correctly. 

 
 
 
 
Excerpts from (Baumann et al. 2012): 
The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) comprises a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of heritable 
connective tissue disorders that predominantly affect skin, joints, ligaments, blood vessels, and internal organs … 
The natural history and mode of inheritance differ among the six major types … Among them, the kyphoscoliot-
ic type of EDS (EDS VIA) … is characterized by severe muscle hypotonia at birth, progressive kyphoscoliosis, 
marked skin hyperelasticity with widened atrophic scars, and joint hypermobility. …  
 
The underlying defect in EDS VIA is a deficiency of the enzyme lysyl hydroxylase 1 … caused by mutations in 
PLOD1 …  A deficiency of lysyl hydroxyl results in an abnormal urinary excretion pattern of lysyl pyridinoline 
(LP) and hydroxylysyl pyridinoline (HP) crosslinks with an increased LP/HP ratio, which is diagnostic for EDS 
VIA. 
 
At 14 years of age, the index person P1 … was referred to the Department of Paediatrics … for the evaluation of 
severe kyphoscoliosis, joint hypermobility and muscle weakness. He was initially suspected to have EDS VIA, 
but the urinary LP/HP ratio was within the normal range. 
 
First Argument Paraphrase: 
a. Premise: P1 has severe kyphoscoliosis, joint hypermobility and muscle weakness. 
b. Premise:  EDS VIA is characterized by severe muscle hypotonia at birth, progressive kyphoscoliosis, 

marked skin hyperelasticity with widened atrophic scars, and joint hypermobility.  
c. Conclusion: P1 may have EDS VIA. 
 
The above is an example of this type of argument:   
Effect to Cause (Inference to the Best Explanation) 

• Premise (a in example):  Certain properties P were observed (such as severe kyphoscoliosis) in an indi-
vidual. 

• Premise (b in example): There is a known potential chain of events linking a certain condition G to ob-
servation of P. 

• Conclusion (c in example): G may be the cause of P in that individual.   
 
Second Argument Paraphrase: 
a. Premise:  P1’s LP/HP ratio was within normal range. 
b. Premise:   The underlying defect in EDS VIA is a deficiency of the enzyme lysyl hydroxylase 1 
caused by mutations in PLOD1. A deficiency of lysyl hydroxyl results in an abnormal urinary excretion 
pattern of lysyl pyridinoline (LP) and hydroxylysyl pyridinoline (HP) crosslinks with an increased 
LP/HP ratio. 
c. Conclusion: It is not likely that P1 has EDS VIA. 
 
The above is an example of this type of argument: 
Failed to Observe Effect of Hypothesized Cause 

• Premise (a in example):  Certain properties P were not observed (such as increased LP/HP ratio) in an 
individual. 

• Premise (b in example): There is a known potential chain of events linking a certain condition G to ob-
servation of P. 

• Premise (c in example): G may not be present in that individual.   
 
 

Figure 1. Description of two argumentation schemes in the initial guidelines. 

17



Effect to Cause 
Premise: Certain properties P were observed in an individual. 
Premise: There is a potential chain of events linking a condition G to observation of P. 
Conclusion: G may be the cause of P in that individual.   
Example: See Figure 1. 
 
Failed to Observe Effect of Hypothesized Cause 
Premise: Certain properties P were not observed in an individual. 
Premise: There is a potential chain of events linking a condition G to observation of P. 
Conclusion: G may not be present in that individual (and is not the cause of P in that individual). 
Example: See Figure 1.  
 
Failed to Observe Expected Cause 
Premise: G is missing from one or more individuals with property P. 
Premise: G may be a cause of P in some cases. 
Conclusion: G is not likely the cause of P in this case. 
Example (Schrauwen):  “We screened 24 unrelated affected Belgian and Dutch individuals with a 
moderate to severe hearing loss for mutations in CABP2 …, but we could not identify a clear damag-
ing mutation in any of them.”  
 
Consistent with Predicted Effect 
Premise: G and P were observed in certain individuals. 
Premise: There is a potential chain of events linking G to P. 
Conclusion: G may be the cause of certain cases of P. 
Example (Schrauwen) : “On the basis of our present findings … dysregulation of IHC synaptic trans-
mission could be one pathogenic mechanism underlying hearing impairment in DFNB93. … In IHCs, 
the c.637+1G>T mutation in CABP2 would most likely enhance inactivation of synaptic Ca2+ influx. 
This, in turn, could reduce rates of transmitter release and consequently diminish spiral ganglion neu-
ron firing and ascending auditory-pathway activation.”  
[Note: Earlier in the article, the authors describe finding the c.637+1G>T variant of CABP2, which is 
in the DFNB93 region, in members of a family who were affected with autosomal recessive non-
syndromic hearing loss.] 
 
Failed Predicted Effect 
Premise: G was (previously considered to be) a candidate cause of P in some individuals. 
Premise: G is not predicted to have effect P. 
Conclusion: G may not be a cause of P. 
Example (Charlesworth): “The second was a heterozygous missense variant … in exon 2 of PPM1K 
… on chromosome 4. It was not predicted to be damaging by MutationTaster, SIFT, or PolyPhen-2 ...” 
 
Hypothesize Candidates 
Premise: There is a potential causal relationship between a certain type of event and a certain type of 
effect.  
Premise: Some individual(s) has experienced a certain effect of that type 
Conclusion: There is a set of candidates, one of which may be the cause of that effect. 
Example (Charlesworth): “In order to maximize the chances of isolating the causal variant … The 
first strategy involved selecting only those variants that were present in the exome data of both affect-
ed family members for analysis.”   
[Note: Elsewhere in the article two affected family members whose exome data was analyzed are 
identified as II-2 and III-7. They are members of a family that exhibits autosomal dominant inher-
itance of cervical dystonia.]  
 
 

Figure 2: Some Argumentation Scheme Definitions and Examples 
 

18



Eliminate Candidates 
Premise: There is a set of candidates C, one of which may be the cause of event E. 
Premise: Generally accepted statements that explain why some candidates may be eliminated 
Premise: One or more members of C can be eliminated as candidates. 
Conclusion: One of the remaining members of C may be the cause of E. 
Example (Charlesworth): “Homozygous variants, synonymous variants, and variants recorded in 
dbSNP135 were initially removed. We then filtered out any variant present at a global minor allele 
frequency (MAF) ≥ 1% in a range of publically available databases of sequence variation (1000 Ge-
nomes, Complete Genomic 69 Database, and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute [NHLBI] 
Exome Sequencing Project database), as well as those found in two or more of our own in-house exo-
mes from individuals (n = 200) with unrelated diseases.”   
 
Causal Agreement and Difference 
Premise: There is a set of individuals I_present that have a feature F and property P. 
Premise: There is a set of individuals I_absent that have neither feature F nor property P. 
Premise: There is a plausible causal mechanism that could account for the similarities and differences 
between I-absent and I-present. 
Conclusion: F may be the cause of P in I_present. 
Example (Charlesworth): “The third, a missense mutation (c.1480A>T …) in exon 15 of ANO3 … on 
chromosome 11, segregated perfectly with the disease status in definitely affected and unaffected indi-
viduals.” 
 
Failed Causal Agreement and Difference 
Premise: There is a set of individuals I_present who have feature F and who do not have property P. 
Premise: There is a plausible causal link from F to P that could account for the presence of P in 
I_present if P had occurred. 
Conclusion: F may not be a cause of P. 
Example (Charlesworth): “This strategy revealed three potentially pathogenic variants. The first, a 
heterozygous frameshift deletion … in exon 2 of TBC1D7 …, failed to fully segregate, given that indi-
vidual II-5, who is unaffected at age 61, and individual III-8, who is unaffected at age 32, exhibit the 
deletion.” 
 
Joint Method of Agreement and Difference  
Premise: There is a set of individuals I_present that have a feature F and property P. 
Premise: There is a set of individuals I_absent that have neither feature F nor property P. 
Conclusion: F may be the cause of P in I_present. 
Example (Schrauwen): “Next, we checked the inheritance of the CABP2 variant in the entire Sh10 
family (Figure 1) and screened an additional 100 random Iranian controls to ensure that the variant is 
not a frequent polymorphism. The mutation was not detected in any of the controls...”  
[Note: This scheme differs from Causal Agreement and Difference by the absence of the third prem-
ise, about a previously known potential causal link from F to P.] 
 
 
 

Figure 3: More Argumentation Scheme Definitions and Examples 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19



Problem I. 
 
Excerpts from (McInerney-Leo et al. 2013): 
A. Within the ciliopathies, a subgroup of disorders including short-rib polydactyly syndrome (SRPS), 

Jeune syndrome … are characterized by skeletal abnormalities including a small rib cage, shorten-
ing of the long bones, and in some cases, polydactyly … Among the skeletal ciliopathies, the 
SRPS subtypes are the most severe and are incompatible with postnatal life.  

B. To date many mutations causing skeletal ciliopathies affect genes encoding components of the 
intraflagellar transport (IFT) machinery, a motor-driven trafficking process responsible for trans-
porting proteins required for cilia assembly and function along the axoneme. 

C. The first family [SKDP42] is a nonconsanguineous Australian family of predominantly British but 
also Maori descent, with healthy parents and two affected individuals with SRPS type III. 

D. Individual SKDP42.3 presented with short long bones on ultrasound at 16 weeks’ gestation. Fol-
low-up ultrasound at 31 weeks demonstrated polyhydramnios, severe shortening of long bones 
with bowed femurs, macrocephaly, short ribs, and ambiguous genitalia. The baby was born at 
32 weeks’ gestation but died at 2 hr of age. Autopsy … revealed postaxial polydactyly of both 
hands ... 

E. None of the above excerpts. 
 
1. What evidence was presented that is consistent with the conclusion that the individual referred to as 
SKDP42.3 (a member of the family identified as SKDP42) had SRPS? (Choose the best single answer 
from excerpts A-E above.) 
 
2.  What general biomedical knowledge explains the connection between the evidence you selected (in 
A-E) and the diagnosis that individual SKDP42.3 had SRPS? (Choose the best single answer from ex-
cerpts A-E above.) 
 
3.  Select the argumentation scheme that best fits the argument for the diagnosis (Choose the best sin-
gle answer from the following): 

• Causal Agreement and Difference 
• Consistent with Predicted Effect 
• Effect to Cause (Inference to the Best Explanation) 
• Eliminate Candidates 
• Hypothesize Candidates 
• Joint Method of Agreement and Difference 
• None of the above. 

 
 
 
 

Figure 4. Part of quiz used in pilot study. The answers are 1-D, 2-A, and 3-Effect to Cause 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

20



References  
Bada, M., Eckert, M., Evans, D., et al. 2012. Con-

cept Annotation in the CRAFT corpus. BMC Bi-
oinformatics 13:161 

Baumann et al. 2012 Mutations in FKBP14 Cause a 
Variant of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome with Pro-
gressive Kyphoscoliosis, Myopathy, and Hearing 
Loss”. Am J Hum Genetics 90, 201-216  

Cabrio, E. and Villata, S. 2012. Generating Ab-
stract Arguments: A Natural Language Ap-
proach. In Verheij, B., Szeider, S., and Woltran, 
S. (eds.) Computational Models of Argument: 
Proceedings of COMMA 2012. Amsterdam, IOS 
Press, 454-461.   

Charlesworth et al. 2012. Mutations in ANO3 Cause 
Dominant Craniocervical Dystonia: Ion Channel 
Implicated in Pathogenesis. The American Jour-
nal of Human Genetics 91, 1041–1050 

Cohen, K.B. and Demner-Fushman, D. 2014 Bio-
medical Natural Language Processing, Amster-
dam: John Benjamins Publishing Company 

Feng, V.W. and Hirst, G. 2011. Classifying Argu-
ments by Scheme. In Proceedings of the 49th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Portland, OR, 987-996. 

Green, N., Dwight, R., Navoraphan, K., and 
Stadler, B. 2011. Natural Language Generation 
of Transparent Arguments for Lay Audiences. 
Argument and Computation 2(1): 23-50. 

Green, N. L. 2014. Towards Creation of a Corpus 
for Argumentation Mining the Biomedical Ge-
netics Research Literature. In Proc. of the First 
Workshop on Argumentation Mining, ACL 2014, 
Baltimore. 

Green, N. L. 2015. Argumentation for Scientific 
Claims in a Biomedical Research Article. In 
Cabrio, E., Viallata, S., and Wyner, A. (Eds.) 
ArgNLP 2014: Frontiers and Connections be-
tween Argumentation Theory and Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Forli-Cesena, Italy, July 21-
25, 2014, CEUR Workshop Proceedings, Vol-
1341. 

Liakata, M, et al. 2012. Automatic Recognition of 
Conceptualization Zones in Scientific Articles 
and Two Life Science Applications. Bioinfor-
matics 28(7).  

McInerney-Leo, A.M. et al. 2013. Short-Rib Poly-
dactyly and Jeune Syndromes Are Caused by 
Mutations in WDR60. Am J Hum Gen 93, 515-
523, Sept 5, 2013 

Mizuta, Y., Korhonen, A., Mullen, T. and Collier, 
N. 2005. Zone Analysis in Biology Articles as a 

Basis for Information Extraction. International 
Journal of Medical Informatics 75(6): 468-487. 

Mochales, R. and Moens, M. 2011. Argumentation 
Mining. Artificial Intelligence and Law 19, 1-22.  

Peldszus, A. and Stede, M. 2013. From Argument 
Diagrams to Argumentation Mining in Texts: A 
Survey. Int. J of Cognitive Informatics and Nat-
ural Intelligence 7(1), 1-31)  

Reed, C., Mochales-Palau, R., Moens, M., and 
Milward, D. 2010. Language Resources for 
Studying Argument. In Proceedings of the 6th 
Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, LREC2008, ELRA, 91-100. 

Schrauwen et al. 2012. A Mutation in CABP2, Ex-
pressed in Cochlear Hair Cells, Causes Autoso-
mal-Recessive Hearing Impairment. The Ameri-
can Journal of Human Genetics 91, 636-645, 
October 5, 2012.  

Stab, C. and Gurevych, I. 2014. Annotating Argu-
ment Components and Relations in Persuasive 
Essays. In Proc. COLING 2014, pp. 1501-1510  

Stab, C., Kirschner, C., Eckle-Kohler, J., and 
Gurevych, I. 2015. Argumentation Mining in 
Persuasive Essays and Scientific Articles from 
the Discourse Structure Perspective. In Cabrio, 
E., Viallata, S., and Wyner, A. (Eds.) ArgNLP 
2014: Frontiers and Connections between Ar-
gumentation Theory and Natural Language Pro-
cessing, Forli-Cesena, Italy, July 21-25, 2014, 
CEUR Workshop Proceedings, Vol-1341 

Stede, M. 2004. The Potsdam Commentary Corpus. 
In Proc. ACL Workshop on Discourse Annota-
tion, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 96-102. 

Teufel, S. 2010. The Structure of Scientific Arti-
cles: Applications to Citation Indexing and 
Summarization. Stanford, CA, CSLI Publica-
tions. 

Teufel, S., Siddharthan, A., and Tidhar, D. 2006. 
An Annotation Scheme for Citation Function. In 
Proc. of SIGDIAL-06, Sydney, Australia. 

Verspoor, K., Cohen, K.B., Lanfranchi, A., et al. 
2012.  A Corpus of Full-text Journal Articles is a 
Robust Evaluation Tool for Revealing Differ-
ences in Performance of Biomedical Natural 
Language Processing Tools. BMC Bioinformat-
ics 2012, 13:207 

Verspoor, K., Yepes, A.J., Cavedon, L., et al. 2013. 
Annotating the Biomedical Literature for the 
Human Variome. Database, Vol. 2013, Article 
ID bat019 

Walton, D., Reed, C., and Macagno, F. 2008. Ar-
gumentation Schemes. Cambridge University 
Press. 

 

21


