



















































Event Categorization beyond Verb Senses


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2015, pages 77–86,
Denver, Colorado, May 31 – June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Event Categorization beyond Verb Senses 

 

 

Aron Marvel Jean-Pierre Koenig 
University at Buffalo University at Buffalo 

609 Baldy Hall 609 Baldy Hall 

Buffalo, NY 14260, USA Buffalo, NY 14260, USA 
aronmarv@buffalo.edu jpkoenig@buffalo.edu 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Abstract 

Verb senses are often assumed to distinguish among 

different conceptual event categories. However, senses 

misrepresent the number of event categories expressed 

both within and across languages and event categories 

may be “named” by more than a word, i.e. a multi-word 

expression. Determining the nature and number of event 

categories in an event description requires an under-

standing of the parameters relevant for categorization. 

We propose a set of parameters for use in creating a 

Gold Standard of event categories and apply them to a 

corpus sample of 2000 sentences across 10 verbs. In 

doing so, we find an asymmetry between subjects and 

direct objects in their contributions to distinguishing 

event categories. We then explore methods of automat-

ing event categorization to approximate our Gold 

Standard through the use of hierarchical clustering and 

Latent Semantic Analysis (Deerwester et al., 1990). 

1 Introduction 

A word form is associated with one or more sens-

es, each of which may denote a distinct conceptual 

category. This association is many-to-many; one 

word may have many senses, while different words 

may also share the same sense. Additionally, just 

as two different words may denote the same con-

cept, so may a sequence of words. Consider the 

sentences in (1). 

 

(1) a. The officer entered the building. 

 b. The officer went into the building. 

 

How many concepts do these sentences contain? 

Probably officer and building each count as one 

and so does enter. But it is difficult to justify label-

ing enter as a single concept while treating go and 

into as separate. Enter and go into seem to denote 

the same concept, the first by means of a single 

word and the second through a multi-word expres-

sion (MWE). The mapping between concept and 

lexicalization becomes a real problem for AI rea-

soning systems. These systems often translate nat-

ural language input into a lingua franca, such as the 

HPSG representation used by SNePS (Shapiro & 

Rappaport, 1992), and there is no clear way for 

them to know when they have encountered a MWE 

that represents a single concept. 

While the sentences in (1) indicate that a single 

conceptual category may span syntactic boundaries 

and involve different verbs, it is also possible for 

distinct conceptual categories to be denoted using a 

single verb sense as in (2). 

 

(2) a. The senator raised a glass in celebration. 

 b. The crane raised the car out of the water. 

 

Both (2a) and (2b) employ the same sense of 

raised1 but denote very different categories of 

events. In prototypical contexts, (2a) describes a 

toast, while (2b) describes the extraction of a large 

object. The events described in (2) differ in a num-

ber of ways, among them duration, complexity, 

                                                           
1 To determine whether two uses of a word instantiate the 

same sense, we use the American Heritage Dictionary (AHD), 

which features several notable linguists among its contributors 

and consultants. 

77



available inferences, and the types of agents in-

volved. Further, several inferences one can draw 

from (2a) arise non-compositionally, i.e. cannot be 

inferred from just the meaning of the parts and the 

sentence’s syntactic structure.   

What is crucial for our purposes in (2) is that the 

two distinct event categories described by the sen-

tences are differentiated by information outside of 

the verb sense. Recognition of this fact prompts the 

question of what kinds of information beyond verb 

sense are relevant for differentiating event catego-

ries, as well as how to distinguish between MWEs 

that denote distinct event categories and those that 

do not. In this paper, we explore these problems 

and develop a new method of automatically cate-

gorizing event descriptions. 

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 

briefly discusses the limitations of lexical ap-

proaches to event categorization and outlines an 

alternative approach that takes into account clausal 

constituents beyond the verb. In Section 3, we pro-

pose a set of six general parameters by which cate-

gories of events may be distinguished beyond the 

verb sense. Those parameters are applied to a cate-

gorization task in Section 4 using a sample of cor-

pus sentences for 10 different verbs. In Section 5, 

we describe an attempt to automate the sorting task 

using relatedness measures from Latent Semantic 

Analysis in combination with hierarchical cluster-

ing. 

2 Event categories as MWEs 

Lexical approaches to event categorization, i.e. 

those that only rely upon the verb, encounter sig-

nificant problems stemming from the arbitrariness 

of lexicalization both within and across languages. 

Within a language, the same conceptual event cat-

egory may be expressed by a verb or a verb plus 

non-verbal expressions as in (1). Confining event 

categorization to the verb may additionally miss 

important differences between event categories as 

in (2). Additionally, languages differ both in the 

sizes of their verbal lexicons and in the number of 

senses assigned to each verb. The average adult 

English speaker knows approximately 4,000 verbs 

(Koenig et al. 2003), each of which has on average 

three (COBUILD, pc, 2006) or four (WordNet Sta-

tistics, 2015) senses. Under the assumption that 

verb senses approximate event categories, this re-

sults in a total of 12,000 - 16,000 distinct event 

categories. Speakers of a language such as 

Wagiman, a northern Australian language, have an 

inventory of only about 500 verbal expressions, 

90% of which have only a single recorded sense 

(Wilson, 1999). The upshot of only using verb 

senses to distinguish event categories would be the 

claim that speakers of Wagiman are capable of 

(linguistically) distinguishing only 4% of the event 

categories distinguished by speakers of English – 

an implausible statistic. 

Wagiman speakers achieve parity with speakers 

of other languages by combining verbal expres-

sions to create what Wilson calls 'complex predi-

cates': the English word watch translates to a 

combination of two words in Wagiman: the word 

nanda, meaning 'to see', from a closed class of 

basic verbs, and the word letta, meaning 'to look', 

from an open class of verbal expressions called 

coverbs. Wagiman verb-coverb combinations pro-

vide an example of a multi-word expression in one 

language serving the purpose of a single-word ex-

pression in another. This phenomenon has received 

due attention within the MWE literature (see, e.g., 

Sag et al., 2001; Villavicencio, 2007), though most 

often as it relates to idiom translation. It has also 

received attention in the typological literature, e.g. 

in discussion of 'verb-framed' vs. 'satellite-framed' 

languages, the former of which express motion 

path as part of verb meaning and the latter of 

which express it verb-externally through 'satellite' 

phrases (Talmy, 1985a).  

In addition to the above motivations, the prob-

lems we investigate are related to a large body of 

research devoted to selectional preferences, includ-

ing efforts from both psycholinguistics (e.g. 

McRae et al. 1998, 2005) and computational mod-

eling (e.g. Erk & Padó 2008, Lenci 2011). These 

efforts are primarily concerned with measuring the 

sensitivity of people and NLP systems to distribu-

tional properties of verbs, though some, such as 

FrameNet (Baker et al. 1998) and Corpus Pattern 

Analysis (Hanks 2004), do flesh out the boundaries 

within these distributions more fully. Our aim here 

is to explore the parameters that underpin divisions 

within these distributions. Many of the parameters 

involve non-compositional meaning components 

and thus benefit from an understanding of event 

descriptions as MWEs. We propose here that all 

events, not just idiomatic and institutionalized 

phrases, may be categorized at the level of multi-

word expressions. 

78



 

Consider again the two uses of raised in (2). In 

comparing the two different categories of raising 

events, we may look beyond the verb and investi-

gate the contribution of other parts of the clause: 

How is the kind of raising involved in raising a 

glass distinct from the kind involved in raising a 

car? How is the kind of raising a senator does pre-

dictably different from the kind of raising a crane 

does? We propose partial answers to these ques-

tions and motivate them with examples in the next 

section. 

3 Parameters for event categorization 

What follows is an attempt to extract from both 

previous research and common sense a set of gen-

eral parameters by which event categories may be 

distinguished beyond the level of the verb sense. 

We should be clear at the outset that the following 

parameters are not to be taken as complete, but 

rather as a subset of dimensions of experience that 

are available for event categorization. Examples 

are drawn from our corpus sample and, important-

ly, share the same verb sense as per the AHD. 

3.1 Complexity 

Event complexity often refers to the number of 

sub-events represented in the semantics of a verb 

(see e.g. Dowty 1979). However, such accounts 

ignore the contribution of event participants in in-

fluencing event categorization. Consider the two 

uses of sell in (3). 

 

(3) a. He refused to sell any of his antiques. 

 b. The support staff sells their expertise to 

 the community beyond the school. 

 

Though the sense of sell remains constant between 

(3a) and (3b), selling done by a support staff to a 

community is likely to include a larger total num-

ber of sub-events than selling done by or to an in-

dividual. This sub-event information, though, is 

only available to language users when they com-

bine verb information with information they glean 

from disparate parts of the clause.  

In addition to the number of sub-events, com-

plexity includes the relations among sub-events 

and the participants within them. Sensitivity to this 

kind of complexity has been found as a general 

trait in infants and adults. Infants have a harder 

time processing complex relations like contain-

ment than they do processing simpler relations 

such as interposition (Baillargeon & Wang, 2002). 

Additionally, recent research suggests that adult 

speakers are sensitive to event complexity in their 

willingness to violate iconicity expectations during 

narrative discourse (Dery & Koenig, in press). We 

therefore consider both the quantitative and quali-

tative aspects of complexity to be relevant for 

event categorization. 

3.2 Time scale 

The parameter of time scale includes binary dis-

tinctions such as events that are permanent rather 

than temporary or bounded rather than unbounded, 

but also includes differences in duration along a 

continuum, e.g. events that occur in the space of 

one second in comparison to events that happen 

over the course of several months, years or millen-

nia. An example of a difference along a continuum 

is found in (4). 

 

(4) a. Royal Bank of Scotland bought Bank 

 Worcester at the end of 1990. 

 b. I stopped at a bar just long enough to 

 buy two cheese rolls. 

 

While buying a couple of cheese rolls as in (4b) 

takes only a moment, the consolidation of two 

banks as in (4a) generally does not.  

The linguistics literature on event structure is 

rife with binary time scale distinctions. Events are 

often discussed in terms of whether or not they are 

telic, bounded (Verkuyl, 1972), culminating 

(Moens & Steedman, 1988), or delimited (Tenny, 

1987). In addition to the latter theoretical support, 

experimental evidence for sensitivity to binary 

time scale distinctions may be found within both 

the acquisition literature ― e.g. children's marking 

those distinctions even when their languages do 

not (Clark, 2001 & 2003) ― and studies of adult 

narrative discourse, where situations with inherent 

endpoints bias narrators towards different types of 

continuations (Dery & Koenig, in press). In estab-

lishing Gold Standard categories for our data, we 

consider both the binary and continuous dimen-

sions of temporal distinctions described above. 

79



3.3 Agent type  

We use the term ‘agent’ here in a broad sense; 

while characteristics such as animacy and volition 

are prototypical, they are not required. Agents are 

distinguishable from one another according to such 

properties as whether they are individuals or 

groups, animate or inanimate, physical or abstract, 

etc., and the type of agent exerts an influence on 

event interpretation and categorization. Example 

(5) presents two sentences that involve distinct 

types of agents. 

 

(5) a. A Genoese fleet rescued the city. 

 b. Archaeologists rescue information 

 about the past before it is destroyed. 
 
From differences in agent type it is possible to pre-

dict that the rescuing events described are different 

categories of rescuing. (5a) describes a large con-

certed operation involving many individuals, ma-

chinery, national resources, extensive planning and 

so on, while (5b) involves none of these things. 

Evidence for the parameter of agent type also 

comes from reading time experiments and experi-

ments using event-related potentials (ERPs) in 

which participants show sensitivity to the combina-

tion of agent and verb when processing event pa-

tients (Bicknell et al. 2010). 

3.4 Sociocultural salience  

A factor that, to our knowledge, has been entirely 

missed or ignored in the literature on event catego-

rization – perhaps because it is so difficult to quan-

tify – is social or cultural salience. Yet it is 

uncontestable that some objects, characteristics, or 

events are set apart from others because of their 

importance within the practices of a community. 

(6a) differs from (6b) because the event category 

described, book-borrowing, has become institu-

tionalized to the extent that we have public build-

ings devoted solely to facilitating that practice. 

 

(6) a. The room is for pupils to borrow books. 

 b. Can you borrow an iron for me? 

 

To our knowledge, the borrowing of irons has yet 

to achieve such lofty status on the public agenda. 

The salience of any particular category of event 

will vary across populations of language users, as 

well as across languages, to the extent that lan-

guage and cultural practices co-vary. 

3.5 Inferences  

As additional information combines with that of 

the verb, more inferences become available, and 

many of these inferences may be relevant to event 

categorization. Consider the examples in (7). 

 

(7) a. She adjusted the scarf to cover the 

 bruises forming on her neck. 

 b. The children covered their eyes and 

 turned away as the needle went in. 

 

In (7a), the agent presumably desires to hide a 

bruise from the sight of others, while in (7b), the 

inference is not that the children are trying to pre-

vent others from seeing their eyes; rather, they are 

trying to keep themselves from witnessing some-

thing unpleasant. Such inferences are often una-

vailable compositionally. World knowledge 

associated with the description conveyed by the 

verb and its arguments must be added to the com-

positional meaning before such inferences can be 

drawn. 

3.6 Specific motion sequence  

Certain events are characterized by a sequence of 

motions that set them apart from events that can be 

performed in any number of ways. These events 

may often be described as actions performed ac-

cording to a recognizable motor program put into 

action by the event participant(s). Though distinc-

tions along this dimension are admittedly rarer 

than those made via many of the other parameters, 

they do exist, as the examples in (8) show. 

 

(8) a. Charlery pulled the ball behind Halsall. 

 b. The General shouted at his men to pull 

 the barricade down. 

 

The category of event described in (8a) requires a 

specific motion in which the leg is moved forward 

over the ball, the toe is brought down into contact 

with the top of the ball, and the leg and ball are 

pulled back together; pulling down a barricade as 

in (8b), however, may be accomplished through a 

variety of unspecified means. 

80



4 Experiment 1: Manual categorization  

While the above parameters for distinguishing 

event categories may sound plausible, there is no 

guarantee that their application will result in a divi-

sion of event descriptions that is equally plausible. 

In order to make such a determination, each of the 

authors categorized the same large set of event de-

scriptions by hand. The results of this process were 

then used as a Gold Standard for subsequent auto-

mation of the categorization task. For the purposes 

of this exploratory study, we elected to limit our 

investigation to variation within the head noun in-

cluded in subjects and direct objects for a given 

verb, while recognizing that information from oth-

er portions of the clause may play a role in event 

categorization. The methods we employ are easily 

extendible to include other constituents such as 

prepositional phrases. 

4.1 Materials and procedure 

Through the use of the software package Tgrep2 

(Rohde, 2005), a full list of sentences containing 

the following 10 verbs was obtained from the Brit-

ish National Corpus (BNC): bake, borrow, buy, 

cover, deliver, frighten, immerse, pull, rescue, and 

sell. The total sample comprised approximately 

43,000 sentences. The sentences in the sample 

were then randomized and a list of the first 100 

sentences with unique subjects was compiled for 

each verb. Items with pronominal subjects were 

excluded because without access to an anaphoric 

or deictic referent, pronouns contribute relatively 

little information beyond that contributed by the 

verb. Items with subjects that were proper names, 

which similarly contribute little or no information 

useful for categorization, were also excluded. Last-

ly, sentences with ambiguous or incorrect parses 

were removed from the sample by hand. Sentences 

in the sample were then randomized once more and 

another list for each verb was compiled containing 

the first 100 sentences with unique direct objects. 

The product of this process was 20 lists ― two for 

each of ten verbs ― totaling 1602 sentences.2 

Because pronouns constitute a much larger pro-

portion of subjects than direct objects, our decision 

                                                           
2 Not all lists were 100 items in length, simply because some 

verbs had fewer than 100 valid BNC results after filtering; 

while we do not explicitly address these cases here, the proper 

n value for each list was used in all analyses. 

to exclude pronouns may artificially inflate the 

contribution of subjects (vs. direct objects) to the 

diversity of event categories, though this is primar-

ily an issue only with small sample sizes. In total, 

pronouns constituted 49.64% of subjects and 

19.51% of direct objects for the verbs included in 

our sample and proper names constituted 12.23% 

of subjects and 3.18% of direct objects. 

Each of the authors independently categorized 

each list of sample sentences. The event categories 

discovered were discussed until consensus was 

reached.3 The resulting event categories were then 

compared against verb senses obtained from the 

American Heritage Dictionary (AHD) in order to 

determine the efficacy of verb senses in capturing 

the event category distinctions we found. Diction-

ary senses that were not found in any of our sample 

sentences were ignored. 

4.2 Results 

The AHD provides an average of 3.8 senses per 

verb in our list.4 Categorization by application of 

our parameters provided an average of 16.5 event 

categories per verb. Of these categories, 62% came 

from the direct object sentence lists, suggesting 

that there is an asymmetry between subjects and 

direct objects in distinguishing among event cate-

gories (p = .009, n = 165 categories). A compari-

son of AHD senses to event categories is shown in 

Table 1.5 

4.3 Discussion  

Several regularities arose during the categorization 

process. The direct object lists almost always con-

tributed larger numbers of categories than the sub-

ject lists. In some respects, this finding is not 

unexpected. Agents generally play a minor role in 

characterizing events. Intuitively, "A man raised a 

finger" could be paraphrased as a finger-raising 

event, but not as a man-raising event (as opposed 

to a woman-raising event). We also found that  

                                                           
3 Because stable categories were not yet available (the task 

being to create them), inter-rater agreement was not measured.  

It is worth noting, however, that our categorizations over-

lapped to a surprisingly high degree. 
4 The total average number of senses per verb, including those 

senses not found in our sample sentences, was 5.7 for our 10 

verbs. 
5 Event category counts are summed for each verb from sub-

ject and direct object lists. 

81



Verb AHD senses Categories 

bake 2 10 

borrow 2 18 

buy 3 18 

cover 8 30 

deliver 7 17 

frighten 2 14 

immerse 3 8 

pull 6 24 

rescue 1 13 

sell 4 13 

Average 3.8 16.5 

 

some of our proposed parameters were more fre-

quently applicable than others. Unsurprisingly, 

agent type played a major role in distinguishing 

event categories within the subject sentence list. It 

most often followed from differences in plurality 

(an uncle borrowed vs. the crew borrowed), ani-

macy (an uncle borrowed vs. an atom borrowed) 

and abstractness (the crew borrowed vs. the agen-

da borrowed). Complexity, sociocultural salience 

and inferences also played a large part, while time 

scale and specific motion sequence tended to take a 

back seat in both subject and direct object lists. 

One further finding not directly evident from the 

reported results concerns the verb frighten. This 

verb belongs to a relatively small class of psych 

verbs known as 'object-experiencer' verbs, where 

one sees a reversal of what otherwise occurs in 

subject and direct object positions – e.g., a verb 

like watch may occur in Anne watched the storm, 

but frighten may only occur in the reverse pattern 

the storm frightened Anne. This reversal was found 

in our corpus data. The general asymmetry in the 

number of pronominal subjects and direct objects 

we observed did not apply to frighten, and proper 

names were found in direct object position more 

than twice as often for frighten as they were for 

other verbs. If it is world knowledge about what 

the verb and its arguments describe that is inform-

ing event categorization, one would expect that, 

when the kinds of items typically found in direct 

object position are instead found in subject posi-

tion and vice versa, the asymmetry in the relative 

importance of subjects and objects in distinguish-

ing event categories is also reversed. This is exact-

ly what we found: 64% of the frighten categories 

were distinguished by the combination of verb and 

subject. The results for frighten suggest that the 

asymmetry between subjects and objects is not due 

to grammatical function, lending support to our 

claim that the parameters outlined in Section 3 are 

independent of a language's morphosyntax. 

One final finding of our first experiment is 

worth noting and bears directly on the design of 

Experiment 2. In general, the more semantically 

similar to one another any pair of a verb's subjects 

or direct objects were, the more likely the events 

described by the combination of those items with 

the verb were to be put in the same event category. 

For example, the events described by covered their 

hands and covered their feet are more likely to be 

in the same category than either is to be in a cate-

gory with covered their city, simply because hands 

and feet are more semantically similar to one an-

other than either is to city. We adopt this finding as 

an assumption for automating event categorization 

in Experiment 2. 

5 Experiment 2: LSA categorization 

Categorizing even a relatively short list for only 

ten verbs turned out to be quite difficult and time-

consuming. It is therefore desirable to find a dy-

namic and automatic way to categorize any event 

description as it is encountered. Below we describe 

a first try at such automation, using Latent Seman-

tic Analysis (LSA) and hierarchical clustering to 

approximate our Gold Standard categories. 

LSA is a method for evaluating semantic simi-

larity from corpora containing collections of inde-

pendent documents. It requires the creation of 

large, sparse matrices which track each word's fre-

quency of co-occurrence with each other word 

within each document. The matrix is reduced to a 

target number of only the most salient dimensions, 

usually between 50 and 400, and within the result-

ing semantic space it is possible to locate each 

word as a vector (see Deerwester et al., 1990 for a 

detailed description). The upshot of this process is 

that those words which occur together in the same 

documents most often (and whose frequent com-

panions also occur together most often) are consid-

ered highly related and will usually occur near 

each other in the semantic space. LSA predictions 

matched scores of non-native college applicants in 

Table 1. Comparison of AHD senses to event 

categories discovered by application of the 

parameters discussed in Section 3. 

 

82



TOEFL tests of word similarity (Landauer et al., 

1998). 

5.1 Materials and Procedure 

Through the application of latent semantic analysis 

to a 400-dimensional semantic space created from 

the British National Corpus, pair-wise relatedness 

value were calculated for each subject list and each 

direct object list. The result was approximately 

 = 5050 relatedness values for each list. The 

hclust command in R (R Core Team, 2015) was 
then used to construct an average-linkage dendro-

gram from the half matrix containing each list of 

relatedness values. Though the full 100-item den-

drograms cannot fit a page in a readable form, a 

slice from the borrow direct object list is included 

here as Figure 1 for illustrative purposes. 

 

 

 

At a glance, three distinct categories are visible in 

Figure 1: a category of language-related items, a 

category of currency-related items, and a category 

containing videography-related items. Dendro-

grams are built from the bottom up (from left to 

right in Figure 1) by combining the most closely 

related branches at each step, eventually fusing the 

final two clusters into one unified tree. Using R's 

cutree command, this process can be reversed by 
counting splits from the top down until the number 

of categories identified in the Gold Standard cate-

gorization is reached – for the borrow direct ob-

jects list, that number was 13. Each list's full den-

drogram was deconstructed in this way. 

Precision and recall were obtained as they are 

for V-measures (Rosenberg and Hirschberg, 2007). 

For each subject or direct object in its respective 

list, we found the set H of all other words that had 

been assigned to the same category by LSA. The 

cardinality of this set represents the total number of 

hypothesized items in that word's category. We 

then found the set A of all words that had been as-

signed to the same category in the Gold Standard. 

The cardinality of this set represents the total num-

ber of actual items in that word's category. Third-

ly, we found the intersection of the latter two sets 

H∩A. The cardinality of this set represents the to-

tal number of items correctly categorized by the 

automated categorization. 

Precision (p = |H∩A|/|H|) and recall (r = 

|H∩A|/|A|) values were then calculated for each 

item and combined for an F-score that is their 

harmonic mean (F = 2pr/(p + r)). Finally, 100 ran-

dom categorizations were performed for each list 

as a measure of comparison.  

5.2 Results 

The average LSA and randomized F-scores for 

each list type are reported in Table 2.6 

 

List 
p 

LSA 

r 

LSA 

F 

LSA 

F 

rand 
Ratio 

Subj 40% 80% .53 .39 1.38 
DO 35% 66% .46 .32 1.46 

Overall 38% 73% .50 .35 1.42 

 

The LSA automated categorization resulted in an 

average of 42% more accurate categorization than 

that obtained by random categorization. 

                                                           
6 Average F-scores are weighted by list length, i.e. those lists 

significantly shorter than 100 items – specifically lists for bake 

and immerse in our sample – were given proportionally less 

weight in calculating overall averages. 

Figure 1.  A section of the dendrogram created 

by using LSA semantic distance values to 

group direct objects of the verb borrow. 

 

Table 2.  F-scores for LSA categories, com-

pared to F-scores for randomized categories.  

Ratios represent how much better than chance 

LSA categorization performed. 

83



5.3 Discussion 

The combination of high recall and low precision 

suggests that the automated categorization tends to 

lump a large portion of each list into only a few 

categories, populating the remaining categories 

with only a small number of outliers. Our categori-

zation when creating the Gold Standard, in con-

trast, tended to distribute items more evenly over 

event categories. The imbalance turns out to be a 

consequence of the particular clustering method 

used in creating the LSA categories – in this case, 

the average linkage method. Some methods (e.g. 

the Ward method) instead favor increased preci-

sion over recall. In our tests, recall-biased methods 

invariably resulted in better F-measures.7 

Looking at the differences in category members 

within Gold Standard and LSA results may provide 

insight into both where LSA fails and where alter-

native parameters may have escaped our notice. 

The bake object list yields several such exemplars. 

In creating our Gold Standard, we categorized bak-

ing events according to such criteria as whether or 

not the baked item requires preparation (e.g. mak-

ing and rolling dough, etc.), which adds to the 

complexity of the baking event, and whether the 

item undergoes a transformation in the baking pro-

cess (e.g., dough becomes bread, but a potato re-

mains a potato). The LSA categorization, in 

contrast, appeared to reflect ethnic/cultural cuisine 

categories rather than processes undergone by the 

materials involved: the cluster containing soufflé, 

aubergine, fillet and flan was separated from that 

containing potato, pie and cake. This makes sense 

when one considers that the relatedness measures 

used by the LSA are obtained from co-occurrence 

of words within documents – and recipes, from 

which many of the baking event clauses were ex-

tracted, are often found in documents that focus on 

a specific kind of cuisine. It is worth stressing that 

this difference in categorization is not simply an 

indication of the limitations of LSA. Rather, it 

brings to light an important dimension of categori-

zation that was not considered in our Gold Stand-

ard; baking events may quite plausibly be divided 

into French baking, American baking, etc. It is 

                                                           
7 Methods tested in order of improvement over random cate-

gorization were average linkage (42%), single linkage (41%), 

McQuitty (33%), complete linkage (18%) and Ward (7%).  

Note that single linkage prefers ‘lumping’ to a greater degree 

than average linkage, but results in slightly less improvement. 

possible that in this instance we simply missed dif-

ferences in sociocultural salience (the fourth pa-

rameter in Section 3) that stem from the role that 

baking plays in cultural nutrition. 

We also found reflexes of the asymmetry be-

tween subjects and objects within LSA relatedness 

measures. Average relatedness among direct ob-

jects for a given verb was significantly higher than 

relatedness among subjects for seven of the eight 

verbs listed in the results. The one verb for which 

this did not hold was frighten, where we expected 

and saw a reversal in number of categories discov-

ered when sorting by hand. When frighten is ex-

cluded, inter-object relatedness is on average 35% 

higher than inter-subject relatedness. In other 

words, the direct objects for a verb tend to be more 

closely related to one another than the subjects of 

that verb are. The exact nature of the relationship 

between this asymmetry in relatedness scores and 

the asymmetry in contribution to category for-

mation remains to be determined.  

6 Conclusion 

Preliminary categorizations suggest that language 

users are capable of much finer-grained event cat-

egorization than that provided at the level of verb 

senses (at a ratio of over 4:1) and that these event 

categories are associated with multi-word expres-

sions which include the verb plus direct ob-

ject/subject head. Using the methods described in 

this paper, it is possible to automate this finer-

grained level of event categorization to some de-

gree. With respect to both of these findings, there 

is an asymmetry between English subjects and di-

rect objects in their contribution to categorization – 

the combination of direct objects and verbs ac-

counts for a greater share of category distinctions 

than the combination of subjects with verbs. This 

asymmetry is purely conceptual, independent of 

any theoretical assumptions regarding order of syn-

tactic composition, and is reflected in LSA related-

ness measures. 

We are at the time of writing conducting exper-

iments with naïve speakers to norm our Gold 

Standard categorization and assess the independent 

contribution of different parameters in event cate-

gorization. The contribution of information other 

than the subject and direct object also deserves to 

be explored in more detail and the analysis should 

be expanded both to languages beyond English. 

84



Additionally, LSA is only one source of related-

ness measures among many; it competes with vari-

ous WordNet algorithms, mutual information 

measures, and newer predictive measures (see e.g. 

Baroni et al. 2014). Though one might expect a 

high correlation among these measures, it turns out 

that very often the correlation is surprisingly low, 

and thus one could conceivably obtain very differ-

ent categories depending on the method used to 

measure semantic similarity (Maki et al., 2004). It 

may be that some methods result in relatedness 

scores that better approximate human categoriza-

tion than others, and these alternatives deserve ex-

ploration. 

References  

Baillargeon, R. & Wang, S. (2002). Event categoriza-

tion in infancy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 85-

93. 

Baker, C., Fillmore, C. & Lowe, J. (1998). The Berke-

ley FrameNet project. In Proceedings of COLING-

ACL 1998, pp. 86-90. 

Baroni, M., Dinu, G. & Kruszewski, G. (2014). Don't 

count, predict! A systematic comparison of context-

counting vs. context-predicting semantic vectors. In 

Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Asso-

ciation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 238-247. 

Bicknell et al. (2010). Effects of event knowledge in 

processing verbal arguments. Journal of Memory and 

Language, 63, 489-505. 

Clark, E. V. (2001). Emergent categories in first lan-

guage acquisition. In M. Bowerman & S.C. Levinson 

(Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual devel-

opment (pp. 379-405). Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-

versity Press. 

Clark, E.V. (2003). First language acquisition. New 

York: Cambridge University Press. 

Deerwester, S., Dumais, S., Furnas, G., Landauer, T., & 

Harshman, R. (1990). Indexing by latent semantic 

analysis.  Journal of the American Society for Infor-

mation Science, 41(6): 391-407. 

Dery, J. & Koenig, J.P. (in press). A Narrative-

Expectation-Based Approach to Temporal Update in 

Discourse Comprehension. Discourse Processes, 00: 

1-26. 

Dowty, D. (1979). Word Meaning and Montague 

Grammar. Dordrecht: Reidel. 

Erk, K. & Padó, S. (2008). A structured vector space 

model forword meaning in context. In Proceedings of 

the 2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-

ral Language Processing, pp. 897-906. 

Evans, G. (1980). Pronouns. Linguistic Inquiry, 11: 337-

362. 

Hanks, P. (2004). Corpus Pattern Analysis. In Proceed-

ings of the 2004 Conference of the European Associ-

ation for Lexicography (EURALEX), pp. 87-97. 

Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). In-

troduction to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse 

Processes, 25(2&3). 

Lenci, A. (2011). Composing and updating verb argu-

ment expectations: A distributional semantic model. 

In Proceedings of the 2nd ACL Workshop on Cogni-

tive Modeling and Computational Linguistics, pp. 58-

66. 

Maki, W., McKinley, L., Thompson, A. (2004). Seman-

tic distance norms computed from an electronic dic-

tionary (WordNet). Behavior Research Methods, 

Instruments, & Computers, 36 (3): 421-431. 

McRae, K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. & Tanenhaus, M. 

(1998). Modeling the influence of thematic fit (and 

other constraints) in on-line sentence comprehension. 

Journal of Memory and Language, 38: 283–312. 

McRae, K., Hare, M., Elman, J. & Ferretti, T. (2005). A 

basis for generating expectancies for verbs from 

nouns. Memory & Cognition, 33(7): 1174–1184. 

R Core Team (2015). R: A language and environment 

for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical 

Computing, Vienna, Austria. Available from 

http://www.R-project.org/ 

Rohde, Douglas (2005).  Tgrep2 [Computer software]. 

Department of Brain and Cognitive Science, Massa-

chusetts Institute of Technology.  Retrieved March 

19, 2014.  Available from 

http://tedlab.mit.edu/~dr/Tgrep2/ 

Rosenberg, A. & Hirschberg, J. (2007). Vmeasure: A 

conditional entropy-based external cluster evaluation 

measure. In Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Confer-

ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 

Processing and Computational Natural Language 

Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pp. 410–420. 

Sag, I., Baldwin, T., Bond, F., Copestake, A. & Flick-

inger, D. (2001). Multiword expressions: A pain in 

the neck for NLP.  In Proceedings from 3rd Interna-

tional Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and 

Computational Linguistics: CICLing. 

Shapiro, S. C., & Rapaport, W. J. 1992. The sneps fami-

ly. Computers & Mathematics with Applications, 23, 

243-275. 

85



Talmy, L. (1985a). Force Dynamics in language and 

thought. In Papers from the Regional Meetings, Chi-

cago Linguistic Society, 21, 293–337. 

Talmy, L. (1985b). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic 

structure in lexical form. In T. Shopen (Ed.). Lan-

guage typology and syntactic description: Vol. 3. 

Grammatical categories and the lexicon, pp. 57–149. 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Tenny, C. (1987). Grammaticalizing aspect and affect-

edness. Doctoral dissertation, MIT. 

Verkuyl, H.J. (1972). On the compositional nature of 

the aspects. Dordrecht: Reidel. 

Villavicencio, A., Kordoni, V., Zhang, Y., Idiart, M., 

and Ramisch, C. (2007). Validation and evaluation of 

automatically acquired multiword expressions for 

grammar engineering. In Proceedings of the 2007 

Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 

Language Processing and Computational Natural 

Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pp. 1034–

1043. 

Wilson, S., and Center for the Study of Language and 

Information (U.S.). (1999). Coverbs and Complex 

Predicates in Wagiman. Stanford, Calif: CSLI Publi-

cations. 

WordNet Statistics. Princeton University. 2015. < 

https://wordnet.princeton.edu/wordnet/man/wnstats.7

WN.html> 

86


