



















































A computational linguistic approach to Spanish Golden Age Sonnets: metrical and semantic aspects


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 105–113,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

A computational linguistic approach to Spanish Golden Age Sonnets:
metrical and semantic aspects

Borja Navarro-Colorado
Natural Language Processing Group

University of Alicante
Alicante, Spain

borja@dlsi.ua.es

Abstract

Several computational linguistics techniques
are applied to analyze a large corpus of Span-
ish sonnets from the 16th and 17th centuries.
The analysis is focused on metrical and se-
mantic aspects. First, we are developing a hy-
brid scansion system in order to extract and
analyze rhythmical or metrical patterns. The
possible metrical patterns of each verse are ex-
tracted with language-based rules. Then sta-
tistical rules are used to resolve ambiguities.
Second, we are applying distributional seman-
tic models in order to, on one hand, extract
semantic regularities from sonnets, and on the
other hand to group together sonnets and poets
according to these semantic regularities. Be-
sides these techniques, in this position paper
we will show the objectives of the project and
partial results.

1 Introduction

16th- and 17th-Centuries Spanish poetry is judge as
one of the best period of the History of Spanish
Literature (Rico, 1980 2000; Terry, 1993; Mainer,
2010). It was the time of great, famous and “canon-
ical” Spanish poets such as Miguel de Cervantes,
Lope de Vega, Garcilaso de la Vega or Calderón de la
Barca, among others. Due to the importance given
to this period, it has been deeply studied by schol-
ars from the 19th century to the present. We are
persuaded that new approaches based on a “distant
reading” (Moretti, 2007; Moretti, 2013) or “macro-
analysis” (Jockers, 2013) framework could shed new
light on this period.

We have two general objectives: first, we will
try to extract regular patterns from the overall pe-
riod; and second, in order to analyze each author in-
side the broad literary context in which they wrote
(Garcı́a Berrio, 2000), we will look for chains of
relationships between them.

Nowadays both objectives are focused on metri-
cal and semantic aspects of Spanish Golden Age
Sonnets. In this position paper we will present the
computational linguistic techniques used to achieve
these objectives.

Next section shows how a large corpus of Span-
ish Golden-Age sonnets has been compiled and an-
notated; Section 3 describes a hybrid scansion sys-
tem developed to extract metrical patterns; Section 4
presents how we use distributional semantic models
to extract semantic patterns from the corpus; finally,
Section 5 shows some preliminar conclusions.

2 Corpus compilation and XML
annotation

A corpus of 5078 sonnets has been compiled. It
includes all the main poets of the Spanish Golden
Age: Juan Boscán, Garcilaso de la Vega, Fray Luis
de León, Lope de Vega, Francisco de Quevedo,
Calderón de la Barca, Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz,
etc. Our objetive is to include all the authors of
this period who wrote a significant amount of son-
nets. Authors who wrote but few sonnets (less than
ten) have been rejected. Most sonnets have been
obtained from the Miguel de Cervantes Virtual Li-
brary1.

1http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/

105



I must point out that sonnet quality is not taken
into account. Following Moretti’s Distant Reading
framework (Moretti, 2007), we want a representa-
tive corpus of the kind of sonnets written in that pe-
riod, not only the canonical sonnets. In other words,
the corpus must represent the literary context of any
Golden Age poet.

Each sonnet has been marked with the standard
TEI-XML2. We have followed the standard TEI in
order to ensure the re-usability of the corpus in fur-
ther research. The main metadata annotated at the
TEI-Header are:

• Project title and project manager (Title and
Publication Statement),

• Title and author of each sonnet,

• Source publication and editor (Source Descrip-
tion).

Regarding the sonnet structure, we have anno-
tated:

• Quatrains,

• Tercets,

• Verse line and number of line,

• Some extra lines included in the poem (called
“estrambote”)

The markup includes a representation of the met-
rical structure of each verse line. It will be explained
in the next section.

Nowadays we have a first version of the corpus.
We plan to publish it on the internet during 2016.

3 Metrical annotation and analysis

In order to extract the metrical pattern of each verse
line, we have created a scansion system for Spanish
based on Computational Linguistics techniques. In
this section we will show how the metrical informa-
tion is represented and what the main aspects of the
scansion system are.

2www.tei-c.org/

3.1 Metrical representation
Spanish poetry measures poetic lines by syllables.
The Spanish sonnet is an adaptation of the Italian
sonnet, where each line has eleven syllables (hen-
decasyllable). The metrical pattern of each verse
line is formed by a combination of stressed and un-
stressed syllables. There must be a stressed sylla-
ble in the tenth position. The rest of the stressed
syllables can be combined in different ways, gener-
ating different rhythms or metrical patterns: Heroic
(stressed syllables at position 2, 6 and 10), Melodic
(at 3, 6, 10), sapphic (at 4, 8, 10), etc. (Quilis, 1984;
Varelo-Merino et al., 2005)

For each verse line, we represent its metrical pat-
tern by a combination of symbols “+” (stressed syl-
lable) and “-” (unstressed syllable). For example:
<lg type="cuarteto">
<l n="1" met="---+---+-+-">
Cuando me paro a contemplar mi estado
</l>

“lg” tag represents the stanza (quatrain in this
case), and “l” tag the line. Each line has the
“met =” tag with the metrical pattern of the verse.

This verse from Garcilaso de la Vega has thirteen
linguistic syllables, but it has only eleven metrical
syllables. As we will show in the next section, “-ro
a” (in “paro a”) and “mi es-” (in “mi estado”) con-
form a single syllable each due to the synaloepha
phenomenon. Therefore this line is an hendecasyl-
lable with stressed syllables in position 4, 8 and 10
(sapphic).

3.2 Scansion system
Metrical patterns extraction does not consist of a
simple detection of syllables and accents. Due to
the fact that there is not a direct relationship between
linguistic syllables and metrical syllables, some am-
biguity problems appear that must be solved by com-
putational linguistics techniques. The main scansion
problems are the following:

• The total amount of syllables could change ac-
cording to the position of the last stressed syl-
lable. If the last stressed syllable is the last
one (oxytone), the line should have ten sylla-
bles and an extra syllable must be added. On
contrary, if the last stressed syllable is the an-
tepenultimate (proparoxytone), the line should

106



have twelve syllables and the last syllable must
be removed. This is a fixed phenomenon and
can be solved with rules.

• Not every word with linguistic accent has a
metrical accent. It depends on the Part of
Speech. Words like nouns, verbs, adjectives
or adverbs have always a metrical accent; but
prepositions, conjunctions and some pronouns
have no metrical accent.

• A vocalic sound at the end of a syllable and
at the beginning of the next one tends to be
blended in one single syllable (syneresis if
the syllables belong to the same word and
synaloepha if they belong to different words).
This phenomenon is not always carried out: it
depends on several factors, mainly the intention
during declamation.

• The opposite is possible too: a one single sylla-
ble with two vowels (normally semivowel like
an “i” or “u”) that can be pronounced as two
separated syllables (dieresis).

These phenomena could change the metrical pat-
tern extracted in two different ways: the amount of
syllables and the type of each one of them (stressed
or unstressed). The main problem are those verses in
which it is possible to extract two or more different
patterns, all of them correct.

For example, for a verse with twelve syllables
and paroxitonal final stress it is necessary to blend
at least two syllables in one through a phenomenon
of synaloepha or syneresis. The problem appears
when there are two possible synaloephas or synere-
sis: which of them must be carried out? The final
metrical pattern will be completely different.

For example, the next verse line:

cuando el padre Hebrero nos enseña

It has 12 syllables. It is necessary to blend two
syllables in one through synaloepha. However, there
are two possibles synaloephas: “cuando+el” and
“padre+Hebrero”. Different metrical patterns are
generated for each synaleopha:

- - + - - + - - - + -
- - - + - + - - - + -

A ranking of natural and artificial synaloephas has
been defined by traditional metrical studies. For ex-
ample, it is more natural to join two unstressed vow-
els than two stressed vowels (Quilis, 1984). From
our point of view, this is a “deliberate” ambiguity
(Hammond et al., 2013): both metrical patterns are
correct, choosing one depends on how the verse line
is pronounced.

An automatic metrical scansion system must re-
solve this ambiguity3. There are several compu-
tational approaches to metrical scansion for dif-
ferent languages (Greene et al., 2010; Agirrezabal
et al., 2013; Hammond, 2014). For Spanish, P.
Gervás (2000) proposes a rule-based approach. It
applies Logic-programming to detect stressed and
unstressed syllables. It has a specific module to de-
tect and resolve synaloephas that is applied recur-
sively up to the end of the verse. However, I think
that this system is not able to detect ambiguities: if
there are two possible synalephas, this system al-
ways chooses the first one. Therefore, it does not
detect other possible metrical patterns.

We follow a hybrid approach to metrical scan-
sion. First, rules are applied in order to sepa-
rate words in syllables (hyphenation module), de-
tect metrical syllables with a Part of Speech tagger4,
and finally blend or segment syllables according to
synaloephas, dieresis or syneresis.

Before the application of synaloephas or syneresis
rules, the system counts the number of syllables. If
the line has eleven syllables, then these rules are not
applied. If there are more than eleven syllables, then
the system counts how many synaloephas or synere-
sis must be resolved. If resolving all synaloephas
or syneresis the syllables amount to eleven, then the
system applies them all. If resolving all synaloephas
or syneresis the syllables amount to a number lower
than eleven, the verse is ambiguous: the system must
select which rules must be applied and which must
not.

3Or al least the system must select the most appropriate one,
even if it could detect and represent alternative patterns.

4We use Freeling as PoS tagger (http://nlp.lsi.
upc.edu/freeling/) (Padró and Stanilovsky, 2012). For
each word, the scansion system selects the most general PoS tag
(noun, verb, etc.) Only for a few cases it is necessary a deeper
analysis. For example, the system must distinguish between
personal pronouns (stressed) and clitic pronouns (unstressed)

107



For these ambiguous verses (with two or more
possible metrical patterns) we follow a statistical ap-
proach. First, the system calculates metrical patterns
frequencies from non-ambiguous patterns. These
patterns are extracted from lines in which it has not
been necessary to apply the rules for synaloephas,
or lines in which applying all possible rules for
synalopehas, a unique patter of eleven syllables is
obtained. Each time the system analyzes one of
these lines, the frequency of its pattern is increased
one.

From a total amount of 82593 verses5, 6338 are
ambiguous and 76255 non-ambiguos. Therefore,
only 7,67% of lines are ambiguous. In these cases,
from the possible pattern that can be applied to a
specific line, the system selects the most frequent
one: the pattern that has been used more frequently
in non-ambiguous verses.

Our approach tends to select common pattern and
reject unusual ones. It must be noted that we do not
claim that the metrical pattern selected in ambiguous
lines is the correct one. We claim that it is the most
frequent one. As we said before, this is a “delib-
erate” ambiguity (Hammond et al., 2013) in which
there are not correct or incorrect solutions.

Table 1 shows the most frequent patterns ex-
tracted from the corpus and its frequency.

Metrical Pattern Name Frequency
- + - - - + - - - + - Heroic 6457
- + - + - - - + - + - Sapphic 6161
- - + - - + - - - + - Melodic 5982
- + - + - + - - - + - Heroic 5015
- - - + - + - - - + - Sapphic 3947
- + - - - + - + - + - Heroic 3549
- + - + - + - + - + - Heroic 3310
+ - - + - - - + - + - Sapphic 3164
+ - - + - + - - - + - Sapphic 3150
- - - + - - - + - + - Sapphic 3105
- - + - - + - + - + - Melodic 2940

Table 1: Most frequent metrical patterns.

Therefore, the previous example is annotated with
the first metrical pattern (Melodic):

5This is the total amount of verses, including authors with
less than ten sonnets that were rejected for the final version of
the corpus.

cuando el padre Hebrero nos enseña

<l n="1" met="--+--+---+-">

Nowadays we are manually reviewing the auto-
matic annotation in order to correct errors, set up a
Gold Standard and evaluate the system.

4 Semantic analysis

In order to develop a broad semantic analysis of
Spanish Golden Age sonnets, we are applying Dis-
tributional Semantic Models (Turney and Pantel,
2010; Mitchell and Lapata, 2010). These models
are based on the distributional hypothesis (Harris,
1951): words that occur in similar contexts have
similar meanings. These models use vector space
models to represent the context in which a word ap-
pears and, then, represent the meaning of the word.

Computational distributional models are able to
establish the similarities between words according
to the similarity of their contexts. Therefore, the ap-
plication of these distributional models to corpora
of sonnets can extract semantic similarities between
words, texts and authors. A standard approach is
based on a word-text matrix. Applying well-known
distance metrics as Cosine Similarity or Euclidean
Distance it is possible to find out the similarities be-
tween words or poems. In light of these similarities
we can then establish the (distributional) semantic
relations between authors.

We are applying two specific distributional se-
mantic models: Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
Topic Modeling (Blei et al., 2003) on one hand,
and Distributional-Compositional Semantic Models
(Mitchell and Lapata, 2010) on the other hand.

4.1 LDA Topic Modeling
During the last years several papers have pro-
posed applying LDA Topic Modeling to literary
corpora (Tangherlini and Leonard, 2013; Jockers
and Mimno, 2013; Jockers, 2013; Kokkinakis and
Malm, 2013) -among others-. Jokers and Mimno
(2013), for example, use Topic Modeling to extract
relevant themes from a corpus of 19th-Century nov-
els. They present a classification of topics accord-
ing to genre, showing that, in 19th-Century English
novels, males and females tended to write about the
same things but to very different degrees. For ex-
ample, males preferred to write about guns and bat-

108



tles, while females preferred to write about educa-
tion and children. From a computational point of
view, this paper concludes that Topic Modeling must
be applied with care to literary texts and it proves
the needs for statistical tests that can measure confi-
dence in results.

Rhody (2012) analyzes the application of Topic
Modeling to poetry. The result will be different from
the application of Topic Modeling to non-figurative
texts. When it is applied to figurative texts, some
“opaque” topics (topics formed by words with ap-
parently no semantic relation between them) really
shows symbolic and metaphoric relations. More
than “topics”, these topics represent symbolic mean-
ings. She concludes that, in order to understand
them, a closed reading of the poems is necessary.

We have run LDA Topic Modeling over our cor-
pus of sonnets6. Using different configurations (10,
20, 50, 100 and 1000 topics), we are developing sev-
eral analysis. In the next sections I will present these
analysis together with some preliminary results and
comments.

4.1.1 Common and regular topics
First, we have extracted the most common and

regular topics from the overall corpus. We are an-
alyzing them using as reference framework themes
and topics established manually by scholars follow-
ing a close reading approach (Garcı́a Berrio, 1978;
Rivers, 1993).

At this moment we have found four types of top-
ics:

• Topics clearly related with classical themes.
Table 2 shows some examples.

• Topics showing rhime relations: words that
used to appear at the same sonnet because they
rhyme between them. For example, “boca loca
toca poca provoca” (Topic 14 of 100).

• Topics showing figurative and symbolic rela-
tions: words semantically related only in a
symbolic framework. For example, topic 70 re-
lates the words “rı́o fuente agua” (river, foun-
tain, water) with “cristal” (glass). This topic

6We have used MALLET http://mallet.cs.
umass.edu/ (McCallum, 2002)

is showing the presence of Petrarchan tradition
“rivers of glass”7 in the Spanish poetry.

• Noise topics.

Topic Model Traditional Theme
amor fuerza desdén arco Unrequited
niño cruel ciego flecha fuego Love
ingrato sospecha
hoy yace sepulcro fénix Funeral
mármol polvo ceniza ayer
guarda muerta piedad cadáver
españa rey sangre roma Decline of
imperio grande baña valor Spanish Empire
extraña reino carlos hazaña
engaña saña bárbaro

Table 2: Topic Models related to classical themes.

Once we detect an interesting topic, we analyze
the sonnets in which this topic is relevant. For exam-
ple, Topic 2 in table 2 represents clearly the funeral
theme, sonnets composed upon the gravestone of a
dead person. According to LDA, this topic is rele-
vant in Francisco de Quevedo (10 poems), Góngora
(6 poems), Lope de Vega (6 poems), Juan de Tas-
sis y Peralta (6 poems), Trillo y Figueroa (3 poems),
López de Zárate (3 poems), Bocángel y Unzueta (3
poems), Polo de Medina (2 poems), Pantaleón de
Ribera (2 poems), etc. We can reach interesting con-
clusions from a close reading of these poems. For
example,

• All these authors belong to 17th-century, the
Baroque Period. This topic is related to the
“brevity of life” theme, a typical Baroque topic.
Topic Modeling is, then, confirming traditional
studies.

• Most of these sonnets are really funeral son-
nets, but not all of them. There are some love
and satyrical sonnets too. However, these off-
topic sonnets use words related to sepulcher,
tomb, graves and death. In these cases, Topic
Modeling is not showing topics but stylistic and
figurative aspects of the poem. Francisco de
Quevedo is an example of this aspect: he wrote
quite a lot of funeral sonnets and, and the same

7“et giá son quasi di cristallo i fiumi” Petrarca Canzoniere
LXVI.

109



time, he used words related to death in satyri-
cal and mainly love sonnets. It is what Terry
(1993) calls “ceniza amante” (loving ash), as a
specific characteristic of Quevedos’s sonnets.

Therefore, we benefit of the relations between
sonnets and authors stablished by LDA Topic Mod-
eling. Then we follow a close reading approach in
order to (i) reject noise and random relations, (ii)
confirm relations detected by manual analysis, and
(iii) detect non-evident relations. This last situation
is our main objective.

4.1.2 Cluster of sonnets and poets
Second, we are automatically clustering sonnets

and authors that share the same topics. At this mo-
ment we have run a k-means cluster over an author-
topic matrix 8. Each author is represented by all the
sonnets that they wrote. The matrix is formed by the
weight that each topic has in the overall sonnets of
each author9. Then a k-means cluster has been run
using Euclidean distance and different amounts of
clusters.

Some preliminary analysis shows that with 20
topics and clustering authors in only two groups,
16th-Century authors (Renaissance period) and
17th-Century authors (Baroque period) are grouped
together. Only one poet (of 52) is misclassified. It
shows that topic models are able to represent dis-
tinctive characteristics of each period. Therefore, we
can assume some coherence in more fine clusters.

With 20 topics but clustering authors in ten
groups, we have obtained coherent groups too. All
poets grouped together wrote during the same period
of time. The most relevant aspects of this automatic
classification are the following:

• Íñigo López de Mendoza, Marqués de Santil-
lana, was a pre-Renaissance poet. He was the
first Spanish author who wrote sonnets. It ap-
pears isolated in a specific cluster. Topic Mod-
eling has detected clearly that this is a special
poet.

• The first generation of Renaissance poets are
grouped together in the same cluster: Hernando

8We have used the cluster algorithm implemented in pyclus-
ter https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Pycluster

9Only a stop-list filter has been used to pre-process the cor-
pus.

de Acuña, Juan de Timoneda, Juan Boscán,
Garcilaso de la Vega, Gutierre de Cetina and
Diego Hurtado de Mendoza.

• There is another cluster that groups together
poets of the second Renaissance generation:
authors than wrote during the second half of
the 16th Century as Miguel de Cervantes, Fray
Luis de León, Francisco de Figueroa, Francisco
de la Torre, Diego Ramı́rez Pagán, Francisco de
Aldana and Juan de Almeida.

• One of the poets of this generation, Fernando
de Herrera, appears in isolation in a specific
cluster.

• Baroque poets (who wrote during 1580 to
1650) are grouped together in varios cluster.
There are two main groups: the fist one in-
cludes poets born between 1560 to 159010,
and the second one poets born from 1600 on-
wards11.

This temporal coherence in the clusters, that ap-
pears in other clusters too, shows us that, on one
hand, Topic Modeling could be a reliable approach
to the analysis of corpora of poetry, and on the other
hand, that there is some relation between topic mod-
els and the generations of poets during these cen-
turies. Nowadays we are analyzing the relations be-
tween the poets grouped together in the same groups
in order to know the reasons of this homogeneity.
We plan to run other kinds of clusters in order to
analyze other possibilities.

4.1.3 Topic timeline
Taking into account an author’s timeline, we are

analyzing how trendy topics change during the pe-
riod. We want to know about the evolution of main

10Lope de Vega (b. 1562), Juan de Arguijo (b. 1567), Fran-
cisco de Medrano (b. 1570), Tirso de Molina (b. 1579), Fran-
cisco de Quevedo (b. 1580), Francisco de Borja y Aragón (b.
1581), Juan de Jáuregui (b. 1583), Pedro Soto de Rojas (b.
1584), Luis Carrillo y Sotomayor (b. 1585), Antonio Hurtado
de Mendoza (b. 1586), etc.

11Jerónimo de Cáncer y Velasco (c. 1599), Pantaleón de Rib-
era (b.1600), Enrı́quez Gómez (b. 1602), Bocángel y Unzueta
(b. 1603), Polo de Medina (b. 1603), Agustin de Salazar y Tor-
res (1642), Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz (b. 1651), José de Litala
y Castelvı́ (b. 1672). Only Francisco López de Zárate (b. 1580)
is misclassified.

110



topics during the period, which authors introduce
new topics, to what extent these topics are followed
by other poets, etc. Nowadays we have not prelimi-
nary results to illustrate this aspect.

4.1.4 Relations between metrical patterns and
semantic topics

We are analyzing possible relations between met-
rical patterns and topics. Our hypothesis is that for
specific topics, poets use specific metrical patterns
and rhythms. At this moment this is an open ques-
tion.

As a preliminary analysis, we have run a cluster
of sonnets based on their metrical patterns. First,
we have set up the most relevant metrical patterns
of each author applying LDA to the metrical pat-
terns. Instead of using the words, each sonnet is
represented only with metrical patterns. Then we
have run k-means cluster algorithm with Euclidean
Distance and 10 clusters.

From these clusters we have some preliminary
considerations:

• Íñigo López de Mendoza, Marqués de Santil-
lana, appears again in isolation. As we said
before, hos sonnets were written in a pre-
Renaissance period: their meters and rhythm
are very different from the others. The cluster
is correctly detecting this special case.

• Other cluster is conformed mainly by Renais-
sance poets: from Garcilaso de la Vega to Fray
Luis de León. Even though there are two
Baroque poets in this cluster, it seems that Re-
naissance meters are quite stable and uniform.

• The other two clusters assemble Baroque poets
together. At this moment we have not detected
if there are any literary criteria that justify these
clusters. It is noteworthy that one cluster in-
cludes Miguel de Cervantes and Lope de Vega,
who tend to use more classical rhythms, and
the other Góngora and Quevedo, that tend to
use more Baroque rhythms.

These clusters based on metrical patterns are sim-
ilar to the previous clusters based on distribution of
words. Many poets appear together in both experi-
ments: it seems that they are sharing the same distri-
butional topics and metrical patterns. This suggest,

albeit in a very speculative way, that there must be
some kind of regularity between topics and meters.

In a nutshell, as we have shown in this section, ap-
plying LDA Topics Modeling and, in general, distri-
butional model to our corpus of sonnets it is possible
to extract not evident (latent) but reliable relations
between words (specially figurative language), son-
nets and poets. In any case, a final close reading is
necessary in order to validate or reject the relations
extracted automatically and justify them according
to previous studies. These computational methods
attract attention to possible latent relations, but it
must always be manually validated.

4.2 Compositional-distributional semantic
models

Recently a new model of computational semantics
has been proposed: the compositional-distributional
model (Baroni, 2013). The main idea of this model
is to introduce the principle of compositionality in a
distributional framework.

Distributional models are based on single words.
Standard Vector Space Models of semantics are
based in a term-document or word-context matrix
(Turney and Pantel, 2010). Therefore, as we have
shown in the previous section, they are useful mod-
els to calculate similarity between single words, but
they cannot represent the meaning of complex ex-
pressions as phrases or sentences.

Following Frege’s principle of compositionality
(Montague, 1974), the meaning of these complex
expressions is formed by the meaning of their sin-
gle units and the relations between them. To rep-
resent compositional meaning in a distributional
framework, it is necessary to combine word vectors.
How semantic vectors must be combined to repre-
sent the compositional meaning is an open question
in Computational Linguistics. Some proposals are
vector addiction, tensor product, convolution, etc.
(Mitchell and Lapata, 2010; Clarke, 2011; Blacoe
and Lapata, 2012; Socher et al., 2012; Baroni, 2013;
Baroni et al., 2014; Hermann and Blunsom, 2014).

From our point of view, compositional-
distributional models are useful to detect semantic
relations between sonnets based on stylistic fea-
tures. These models are able to detect semantic
similarity according to, not only the words used in
a poem, but how the author combines these words.

111



The combination of words in a poem is the base of
its literary style.

We plan to calculate semantic similarity accord-
ing to specific phrases. For example, it is very
specific of an author how they use the adjectives.
Compositional-distributional models allow us to ex-
tract adjective-noun patterns from sonnets and to
calculate the similarities between these patterns. If
two poets tend to use similar adjective-noun pat-
terns, then it is possible to establish an influential
chain between them. We are working with stan-
dard tools as DISSECT (Dinu et al., 2013). Unfor-
tunately, at this moment we have not results to show.

5 Conclusions

In this paper we have presented the computational
linguistics techniques applied to the study of a large
corpus of Spanish sonnets. Our objective is to es-
tablish chains of relations between sonnets and au-
thors and, then, analyze each author in a global liter-
ary context. Once a representative corpus has been
compiled and annotated, we have focused on two as-
pects: metrical patterns and semantic patterns.

Metrical patterns are extracted with a scansion
system developed in the project. It follows a hybrid
approach than combines hand-mande and statistical
rules. With all these metrical patterns we plan, on
one hand, to analyze the most relevant metrical pat-
terns of the period, as well as the most relevant pat-
terns of each author. On the other hand, we plan to
cluster sonnets and authors according to the relevant
metrical pattern they use, and establish metrical re-
lational chains.

Semantic patters are extracted following a distri-
butional semantic framework. First, we are using
LDA Topic Modeling to detect the most relevant
topics of the period and the most relevant topics of
each author. Then we plan to group together authors
and sonnets according to the topics they share. Fi-
nally we will establish the influential chains based
on these topics.

We plan to combine both approaches in order to
analyze the hypothesis that poets tend to use similar
metrical patterns with similar topics. At this mo-
ment it is only a hypothesis that will be evaluated
during the development of the project.

Finally, we want to go one step beyond Topic

Modeling and try to relate authors not by what words
they use, but by how they combine the words in son-
nets. We plan to apply compositional-distributional
models to cluster sonnets and authors with similar
stylistic features.

As a position paper, we have presented only par-
tial results of our project. Our idea is to establish a
global computational linguistic approach to literary
analysis based on the combination of metrical and
semantic aspects; a global approach that could be
applied to other corpora of poetry.

References
Manex Agirrezabal, Bertol Arrieta, Aitzol Astigarraga,

and Mans Hulden. 2013. ZeuScansion : a tool for
scansion of English poetry. In Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Finite State Methods and
Natural Language Processing, pages 18–24, St An-
drews Sctotland. ACL.

Marco Baroni, Raffaela Bernardi, and Roberto Zampar-
elli. 2014. Frege in Space: A Program for Composi-
tional Distributional Semantics. Linguistics Issues in
Language Technology, 9(6):5–110.

Marco Baroni. 2013. Composition in Distributional
Semantics. Language and Linguistics Compass,
7(10):511–522.

William Blacoe and Mirella Lapata. 2012. A Com-
parison of Vector-based Representations for Semantic
Composition. In Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, number July, pages 546–556.

David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 3:993–1022.

Daoud Clarke. 2011. A context-theoretic framework for
compositionality in distributional semantics. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 38(1):41–71.

G. Dinu, N. Pham, and M. Baroni. 2013. DISSECT:
DIStributional SEmantics Composition Toolkit. In
Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. System Demon-
strations.

Antonio Garcı́a Berrio. 1978. Lingüı́stica del texto y
tipologı́a lı́rica (La tradición textual como contexto).
Revista española de lingüı́stica, 8(1).

Antonio Garcı́a Berrio. 2000. Retórica figural. Esque-
mas argumentativos en los sonetos de Garcilaso. Edad
de Oro, (19).

Pablo Gervas. 2000. A Logic Programming Application
for the Analysis of Spanish Verse. In Computational
Logic, Berlin Heidelberg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

112



Erica Greene, Lancaster Ave, Kevin Knight, and Marina
Rey. 2010. Automatic Analysis of Rhythmic Poetry
with Applications to Generation and Translation. In
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 524–533, Massachusetts. ACL.

Adam Hammond, Julian Brooke, and Graeme Hirst.
2013. A Tale of Two Cultures : Bringing Literary
Analysis and Computational Linguistics Together. In
Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Litera-
ture, Atlanta, Georgia.

Michael Hammond. 2014. Calculating syllable count
automatically from fixed-meter poetry in English and
Welsh. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 29(2).

Zellig Harris. 1951. Structural Linguistics. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Karl Moritz Hermann and Phil Blunsom. 2014. Multilin-
gual Models for Compositional Distributed Semantics.
In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 58–68.

Matthew L Jockers and David Mimno. 2013. Significant
Themes in 19th-Century Literature. Poetics, 41.

Matthew L. Jockers. 2013. Macroanalysis. Digital Me-
dia and Literary History. University of Illinois Press,
Illinois.

Dimitrios Kokkinakis and Mats Malm. 2013. A Macro-
analytic View of Swedish Literature using Topic Mod-
eling. In Corpus Linguistics Conference, Lancaster.

José Carlos Mainer. 2010. Historia de la literatura
española. Crı́tica, Barcelona.

Andrew Kachites McCallum. 2002. Mallet: A machine
learning for language toolkit.

Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Composition
in Distributional Models of Semantics. Cognitive Sci-
ence, 34:1388–1429.

R. Montague. 1974. English as a formal language. In
R. Montague, editor, Formal philosophy, pages 188–
221. Yale University Press.

Franco Moretti. 2007. Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract
Models for a Literary History. Verso.

Franco Moretti. 2013. Distant reading. Verso.
Lluı́s Padró and Evgeny Stanilovsky. 2012. FreeLing

3.0: Towards Wider Multilinguality. In Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2012), Is-
tanbul.

Antonio Quilis. 1984. Métrica española. Ariel,
Barcelona.

Lisa M. Rhody. 2012. Topic Modeling and Figurative
Language. Journal of Digital Humanities, 2(1).

Francisco Rico, editor. 1980-2000. Historia y crı́tica de
la literatura española. Crı́tica, Barcelona.

Elias L. Rivers. 1993. El soneto español en el siglo de
oro. Akal, Madrid.

Richard Socher, Brody Huval, Christopher D Manning,
and Andrew Y Ng. 2012. Semantic Compositional-
ity through Recursive Matrix-Vector Spaces. In Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
1201–1211.

Timothy R. Tangherlini and Peter Leonard. 2013. Trawl-
ing in the Sea of the Great Unread: Sub-corpus topic
modeling and Humanities research. Poetics, 41:725–
749.

Arthur Terry. 1993. Seventeenth-Century Spanish Po-
etry. Cambridge University Press.

PD Turney and Patrick Pantel. 2010. From frequency to
meaning: Vector space models of semantics. Journal
of Artificial Intelligence Research, 37:141–188.

Elena Varelo-Merino, Pablo Moı́no-Sánchez, and Pablo
Jauralde-Pou. 2005. Manual de métrica española.
Castalia, Madrid.

113


