



















































A Hierarchy with, of, and for Preposition Supersenses


Proceedings of LAW IX - The 9th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 112–123,
Denver, Colorado, June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Hierarchy with, of, and for Preposition Supersenses

Nathan Schneider
University of Edinburgh
nschneid@inf.ed.ac.uk

Vivek Srikumar
University of Utah

svivek@cs.utah.edu

Jena D. Hwang Martha Palmer
University of Colorado at Boulder

{hwangd,martha.palmer}@colorado.edu

Abstract

English prepositions are extremely frequent
and extraordinarily polysemous. In some us-
ages they contribute information about spatial,
temporal, or causal roles/relations; in other
cases they are institutionalized, somewhat arbi-
trarily, as case markers licensed by a particular
governing verb, verb class, or syntactic con-
struction. To facilitate automatic disambigua-
tion, we propose a general-purpose, broad-
coverage taxonomy of preposition functions
that we call supersenses: these are coarse and
unlexicalized so as to be tractable for efficient
manual annotation, yet capture crucial seman-
tic distinctions. Our resource, including exten-
sive documentation of the supersenses, many
example sentences, and mappings to other lexi-
cal resources, will be publicly released.

Prepositions are perhaps the most beguiling yet
pervasive lexicosyntactic class in English. They are
everywhere; their functional versatility is dizzying
and largely idiosyncratic (1). They are nearly invisi-
ble, yet indispensable for situating the where, when,
why, and how of events. In a way, prepositions are
the bastard children of lexicon and grammar, rising to
the occasion almost whenever a noun-noun or verb-
noun relation is needed and neither subject nor object
is appropriate. Consider the many uses of the word
to, just a few of which are illustrated in (1):1

(1) a. My cake is to die for.
b. If you want I can treat you to some.
c. How about this: you go to the store
d. to buy ingredients.
e. Then if you give the recipe to me
f. I’m happy to make the batter
g. and put it in the oven for 30 to 40 minutes
h. so you’ll arrive to the sweet smell of chocolate.
i. That sounds good to me.
j. That’s all there is to it.

1Though infinitival to is traditionally not considered a prepo-
sition, we allow it to be labeled with a supersense if the infinitival
clause serves as a PURPOSE (as in (1d)) or FUNCTION. See §2.

Sometimes a preposition specifies a relationship be-
tween two entities or quantities, as in (1g). In other
scenarios it serves a case-marking sort of function,
marking a complement or adjunct—principally to a
verb (1b–1e, 1h, 1i), but also to an argument-taking
noun or adjective (1f). Further, it is not always pos-
sible to separate the semantic contribution of the
preposition from that of other words in the sentence.
As amply demonstrated in the literature, prepositions
play a key role in multiword expressions (Baldwin
and Kim, 2010), as in (1a, 1b, 1j).

An adequate descriptive annotation scheme for
prepositions must deal with these messy facts. Fol-
lowing a brief discussion of existing approaches to
preposition semantics (§1), this paper offers a new
approach to characterizing their functions at a coarse-
grained level. Our scheme is intended to apply to
almost all preposition tokens, though some are ex-
cluded on the grounds that they belong to a larger
multiword expression or are purely syntactic (§2).
The rest of the paper is devoted to our coarse seman-
tic categories, supersenses (§3).2 Many of these cat-
egories are based on previous proposals—primarily,
Srikumar and Roth (2013a) (so-called preposition
relations) and VerbNet (thematic roles; Bonial et al.,
2011; Hwang, 2014, appendix C)—but we organize
them into a hierarchy and motivate a number of new
or altered categories that make the scheme more ro-
bust. Because prepositions are so frequent, so polyse-
mous, and so crucial in establishing relations, we be-
lieve that a wide variety of NLP applications (includ-
ing knowledge base construction, reasoning about
events, summarization, paraphrasing, and translation)
stand to benefit from automatic disambiguation of
preposition supersenses.

2Supersense inventories have also been described for nouns
and verbs (Ciaramita and Altun, 2006; Schneider et al., 2012;
Schneider and Smith, 2015) and adjectives (Tsvetkov et al.,
2014). Other inventories characterize semantic functions ex-
pressed via morphosyntax: e.g., tense/aspect (Reichart and Rap-
poport, 2010), definiteness (Bhatia et al., 2014, also hierarchical).

112



A wiki documenting our scheme in detail can be ac-
cessed at http://tiny.cc/prepwiki. It maps fine-
grained preposition senses to our supersenses, along
with numerous examples. The wiki is conducive to
browsing and to exporting the structure and examples
for use elsewhere (e.g., in an annotation tool). From
our experience with pilot annotations, we believe that
the scheme is fairly stable and broadly applicable.

1 Background

The descriptive challenges raised by prepositions
have not gone unnoticed in the literature; see, e.g.,
Saint-Dizier (2006a) for an assortment of syntactic
and semantic issues. Here we touch on some of the
lines of inquiry, resources, and NLP approaches to
preposition semantics found in previous work.

1.1 Linguistic Approaches
Most studies of preposition semantics are limited
to so-called “lexical” (essentially, spatiotemporal)
usages. The lexical-vs.-functional dimension and,
relatedly, the degree of association between prepo-
sitions and other words (especially verbs) used in
combination has received some theoretical attention
(e.g., Bolinger, 1971; Vestergaard, 1977; Jolly, 1993;
Rauh, 1993; O’Dowd, 1998; Tseng, 2000). We draw
on insights from this literature where possible, but
find that many of the proposed diagnostics are in-
sufficiently clear and robust for a general-purpose
preposition annotation scheme.

The structured polysemy analysis of over put for-
ward by Brugman (1981) and elaborated by Lakoff
(1987, pp. 416–461), Dewell (1994), Tyler and Evans
(2003, ch. 4), and others has been influential within
cognitive linguistics. Working in this tradition, Lind-
stromberg (2010) examines over 90 English prepo-
sitions, considering the schematic spatial situations
that can be expressed as well as their non-spatial ex-
tensions. Chapter 21 gives an inventory of about 75
“non-spatial notions”—these are not unlike the cate-
gories we will adopt below, though some are quite
fine-grained: e.g., BEING RESOLVED, FIXED as
in pin him down vs. BEING UNRESOLVED, UNDE-
CIDED as in everything’s still up in the air. How
well annotators could be trained to agree on Lind-
stromberg’s detailed categorization is unknown.

Crosslinguistic variation in adpositions and spatial
categorization systems has received considerable at-

tention from theorists (Bowerman and Choi, 2001;
Hagège, 2009; Regier, 1996; Xu and Kemp, 2010;
Zelinsky-Wibbelt, 1993) but is of practical interest as
well, especially when it comes to machine translation
and second language acquisition. A corpus creation
project for German preposition senses (Müller et al.,
2010, 2011) is similar in spirit to the supersense ap-
proach taken below. Finally, the PrepNet resource
(Saint-Dizier, 2006b) aimed to describe the semantics
of prepositions across several languages; however,
it seems not to have progressed beyond the prelimi-
nary stages. Thus far, our approach has focused on
English, but aims to define supersense categories se-
mantically rather than by language-specific criteria
(e.g., syntactic tests) so as to encourage its adaptation
to other languages in the future.

1.2 Preposition Resources

The following corpus resources contain semantic cat-
egorizations that apply to English prepositions:

The Penn Treebank. As detailed by O’Hara and
Wiebe (2009), the PTB since version II (Marcus et al.,
1994) has included a handful of coarse function tags
(such as LOCATION and TIME) that apply to con-
stituents, including PPs.

FrameNet. Semantic relationships in FrameNet
(Baker et al., 1998) are organized according to scenes,
known as frames, that can be evoked by predicates
in a sentence. Each frame defines roles, or frame
elements, for components of the scene that can be
elaborated with arguments in the sentence. Many
roles are highly specific to a single frame, while oth-
ers are quite generic. Arguments are often realized as
PPs, thus the frame element labels can be interpreted
as disambiguating the function of the preposition.

The Preposition Project (TPP). This is an
English preposition lexicon and corpus project
(Litkowski and Hargraves, 2005) that adapts sense
definitions from the Oxford Dictionary of English
and applies them to prepositions in sentences from
corpora. A dataset for the SemEval-2007 shared
task on preposition WSD (Litkowski and Hargraves,
2007) was created by collecting FrameNet-annotated
sentences (originally from the BNC) and annotating
34 frequent preposition types (listed in (2) below)
with a total of 332 attested senses. (The SemEval-
2007 sentences—of which there are over 25,000,

113



each with a single preposition token annotated—
were handpicked by FrameNet lexicographers and so
are not a statistically representative corpus sample.)
TPP now incorporates additional prepositions and
resources, with new annotated corpora under devel-
opment (Litkowski, 2013, 2014).
Dahlmeier et al. To learn and evaluate their joint
model of semantic roles and preposition senses,
Dahlmeier et al. (2009) annotated TPP senses in the
PropBank WSJ corpus for 7 high-frequency preposi-
tions (of, in, for, to, with, on, and at). This amounted
to 3,854 statistically representative instances in the
news domain. The inter-annotator agreement rate
was estimated at 86%, which suggests that clearly
applicable TPP senses are available for the prepon-
derance of tokens, but gives little insight into TPP’s
suitability for rare or borderline usages.
Tratz. Tratz (2011, ch. 4) refined the TPP sense
inventory for the SemEval-2007 corpus with the goal
of improving its descriptive adequacy and measuring
inter-annotator agreement for all 34 prepositions. The
total number of senses was reduced from 332 to 278,
though a few prepositions gained additional senses.
Srikumar and Roth (S&R). Srikumar and Roth
(2013b) modeled preposition token relations, i.e., the
preposition’s governor, object, and semantic label.
For their experiments, Srikumar and Roth coarsen
the original TPP SemEval-2007 sense annotations
into 32 categories determined semi-automatically
(the fine-grained senses were clustered automatically,
then the clusters were manually refined and given
names). Detailed in Srikumar and Roth (2013a),
those categories cut across preposition types to com-
bine related TPP senses for better data-driven gener-
alization. Cohen’s κ for inter-annotator agreement
was 0.75, which is encouraging, though it is unclear
whether the disagreements were due to systematic
differences in interpretation of the scheme or to diffi-
culty with rare preposition usages. We shall return to
this scheme in §3 below.

1.3 Prepositions in NLP
Despite a steady trickle of papers over the years (see
Baldwin et al., 2009 for a review), there is no appar-
ent consensus approach to the treatment of preposi-
tion semantics in NLP. Studies have examined prepo-
sition semantics within multiword expressions (Cook
and Stevenson, 2006), in spatial relations (Hying,

2007), across languages (Saint-Dizier, 2006b), in
nonnative writing (Chodorow et al., 2007), in seman-
tic role labeling (Dahlmeier et al., 2009), in vector
space models (Zwarts and Winter, 2000), and in dis-
course (Denand and Rolbert, 2004).

Preposition sense disambiguation systems have
been evaluated against one or more of the resources
described in §1.2 (O’Hara and Wiebe, 2003, 2009; Ye
and Baldwin, 2007; Dahlmeier et al., 2009; Tratz and
Hovy, 2009; Hovy et al., 2010, 2011; Srikumar and
Roth, 2013b). Unfortunately, all of these resources
are problematic. Neither the PTB function tags nor
the FrameNet roles were designed with prepositions
in mind: the former set is probably not comprehen-
sive enough to be a general-purpose account of prepo-
sitions, and the latter representation only makes sense
in the broader analytical framework of frame seman-
tics, which we believe should be treated as a separate
task (Das et al., 2014). The Preposition Project data,
though extensive, were selected and annotated from a
lexicographic, type-driven perspective—i.e. with the
goal of describing and documenting the uses of indi-
vidual prepositions in a lexical resource rather than
labeling a corpus with free-text preposition annota-
tions. We hope that the latter, token-driven approach
will be taken for annotating text with preposition su-
persenses so that those annotations will be suitable
for training statistical NLP systems.

2 Our Approach

With the end of free-text semantic annotation in mind,
we develop and document a preposition supersense
tagset. Notably, we seek to include in our resource
example sentences for each known preposition–
supersense pairing; these examples should be par-
ticularly useful for assisting human annotators.

Before discussing the supersense tagset, it is nec-
essary to establish the scope of the phenomenon that
our scheme aims to address.

Preposition types. For brevity, we will sidestep
the controversial aspects of defining “preposition”,
and defer to Pullum and Huddleston’s (2002) broad
definition of a lexical class including words such
as to, for, of, and up, whether they take an object
(forming a transitive PP) or act as a non-idiomatic
adverbial particle (e.g., lift the book up).

In documenting the supersense categories thus far,

114



Co-Theme

Proposed Hierarchy 12/19 

Temporal
PlaceUndergoer

Actor

Age RelativeTime

Frequency

Duration

Location

Destination

Recipient

Goal

Purpose

InitialLoc

Source

Value

Extent

Patient

Experiencer

Beneficiary Instrument

Attribute

Theme

Agent

Causer

Transit
Via

Path

Traversed

EndState

CreatorCo-Agent

Topic Co-Patient

Direction

2DArea

StartState

StartTime EndTime
DeicticTime

ClockTimeCxn

Time

1DTrajectory 3DMedium

Contour

Circumstance

Manner

Course

Locus

Function

Material ValueComparison

Comparison/Contrast

Scalar/Rank

Approximator

StateActivity

Means Donor/Speaker

Explanation

Reciprocation

Accompanier

Other
Configuration

ProfessionalAspect

Whole

Superset
Elements

Partitive
Possessor

Species
Stimulus

Figure 1: The full supersense hierarchy: categories in large font (CONFIGURATION, ACTOR, UNDERGOER, etc.) are
top-level categories, and their subcategories extend outward. Colors emphasize the different levels of the hierarchy.

our attention has been focused on the 34 preposition
types annotated in the SemEval-2007 data (§1.2):

(2) about, above, across, after, against, along, among,
around, as, at, before, behind, beneath, beside, be-
tween, by, down, during, for, from, in, inside, into,
like, of, off, on, onto, over, round, through, to, to-
wards, with

Of the 332 fine-grained TPP senses for these
34 prepositions, 285 have been mapped to one or
more supersense categories; preliminary annotation
suggests that these account for the vast majority of
preposition tokens in corpora (the remaining senses
are generally infrequent). Our resource further in-
cludes the full set of TPP sense definitions, bringing
it to a total of 309 preposition types3 and 797 senses,
though most senses for these new prepositions have
not yet been assigned to a supersense.

Multiword expressions. Multiword expressions
functioning as prepositions (e.g., out of, except for)
receive a supersense as a unit, as do PP multiword
expressions (on fire, on the run, out of one’s mind).
However, in other cases where a preposition belongs
to a multiword expression, it is generally excluded
from receiving a preposition supersense label. Ver-
bal expressions like make up ‘invent’, come to ‘re-
gain consciousness’, and take someone for some-

3A majority of TPP types are multiword prepositions (e.g.,
all over). Many of the single-word prepositions are archaic, or-
thographically nonstandard, or rare beyond specialized domains.

thing ‘regard as’ (as in take him for a fool) are as-
sumed to receive a verb supersense—not a prepo-
sition supersense—in a separate annotation pass.
Prepositions belonging to discourse and other connec-
tives are assigned to a separate category, e.g.: apart
from that, in other words, of course.
Special syntactic functions. Tokens with a subor-
dinating function are included: e.g., Unity is not
possible with John sitting on the throne is labeled
CIRCUMSTANCE. Infinitival to is considered only for
the PURPOSE and FUNCTION supersenses. All other
uses are excluded.

3 Preposition Tags

In developing our preposition supersense hierarchy,
we took Srikumar and Roth’s (2013a) inventory
(hereafter, S&R) as a starting point: as noted in
§1.2, it clusters fine-grained dictionary senses of the
prepositions in (2) into 32 labeled classes. Many
of the classes resemble semantic roles (e.g., TEM-
PORAL, LOCATION, AGENT) or spatial relations
(PHYSICALSUPPORT, SEPARATION). We revise and
extend S&R to improve its descriptive power so it
can be deployed directly as an annotation scheme.
The main areas of improvement are highlighted be-
low; full details and many more examples can be
found in the resource itself.

Two other semantic annotation schemes offer sim-
ilarly sized inventories of roles/relations: VerbNet
(Kipper et al., 2008) and AMR (Banarescu et al.,

115



ACTOR V
STIMULUS V
CAUSER S V ≈:CAUSE

AGENT S V
CO-AGENT V
CREATOR

UNDERGOER +1 V
ACCOMPANIER A
ACTIVITY +1 S
BENEFICIARY S V A
THEME V

CO-THEME V
TOPIC S V A

PATIENT V
CO-PATIENT V
EXPERIENCER V

PROFESSIONALASPECT S :EMPLOYED-BY/:ROLE
PLACE V

LOCUS
LOCATION S V A

INITIALLOCATION (ˆSOURCE) V
DONOR/SPEAKER

DESTINATION (ˆGOAL) S V A
RECIPIENT S V ≈:BENEFICIARY

TRAVERSED (ˆPATH)
1DTRAJECTORY

COURSE (ˆVIA)
2DAREA
3DMEDIUM ≈:MEDIUM

TRANSIT (ˆVIA)
STATE +2
SOURCE +1 S V A

MATERIAL V
STARTSTATE (ˆSTATE) S

GOAL +1 V
ENDSTATE (ˆSTATE) S ≈RESULT

PATH +3 :PATH
DIRECTION S A
CONTOUR (ˆMANNER)

VALUE +1 V /ASSET A /:COST
EXTENT (ˆPATH) V A

COMPARISON/CONTRAST :COMPARED-TO
SCALAR/RANK

VALUECOMPARISON (ˆVALUE)
APPROXIMATOR

TEMPORAL S TIME
FREQUENCY V A
DURATION V A
AGE (ˆATTRIBUTE) A
TIME A

RELATIVETIME
STARTTIME INITIAL_TIME
ENDTIME FINAL_TIME
DEICTICTIME
CLOCKTIMECXN

CIRCUMSTANCE V
EXPLANATION ≈:CAUSE

RECIPROCATION
PURPOSE S A

FUNCTION (ˆATTRIBUTE) ≈:MEANING
ATTRIBUTE +2 S V ≈:MOD/:PART
MANNER +1 S V A

INSTRUMENT (ˆUNDERGOER) S V A
MEANS (ˆACTIVITY)
VIA (ˆPATH) +2 ≈:MEDIUM

CONFIGURATION
ELEMENTS :EX/:SUBSET
PARTITIVE ≈:CONSIST-OF
POSSESSOR S :POSS
SPECIES S
WHOLE :PART-OF

SUPERSET :SUPERSET
OTHER S

Table 1: The supersense hierarchy and its mappings to
the S&R inventory, VerbNet thematic role hierarchy, and
AMR non-core roles. Supersenses with multiple parents
appear with one of them in parentheses; supersenses with
n children listed under some other parent have a +n desig-
nation. S indicates that the supersense maps to an S&R
category with the same name; likewise for V (VerbNet)
and A (AMR). VerbNet and AMR names differing from
the supersense name are written out: “:” names are from
AMR and others are from VerbNet. (Some of the above
are new in VerbNet, having been added subsequent to the
latest published guidelines. VerbNet PIVOT and PRODUCT
are unmapped; roles only in AMR are not shown.) Addi-
tionally, a number of S&R categories have been removed
or remapped.4

2013). Many of the categories in those schemes over-
lap (or nearly overlap) with S&R labels. Others in-
clude semantic categories that are absent from S&R,
but appropriate for English prepositions. Table 1
compares the three inventories. The new hierarchy,

4Rough mappings from remapped S&R categories to
supersenses: CAUSE → CAUSER, EXPLANATION; CO-
PARTICIPANTS → CO-AGENT, CO-PATIENT, CO-THEME; VIA
→ COURSE, TRANSIT; MEDIUMOFCOMMUNICATION → VIA;
NUMERIC → VALUE; PARTICIPANT/ACCOMPANIER → AC-
COMPANIER; PARTWHOLE → PARTITIVE, WHOLE. MEANS

comprising 73 preposition supersenses, appears in
the table, and also in figure 1.

We modified S&R categories where possible to be
more closely compatible with the other schemes. On
a descriptive level, this allows us to take advantage of
the linguistic analyses and explanations motivating

is no longer covered by INSTRUMENT. S&R’s EXPERIENCER
category has been removed (it is substantially different from
the supersense and VerbNet categories of the same name). OB-
JECTOFVERB, OPPONENT/CONTRAST, PHYSICALSUPPORT,
and SEPARATION have also been removed.

116



Temporal hierarchy v.5 condensed

Temporal
Duration Frequency

at noon 
on Friday 

(up)on arrival 
in the morning 

around/about/near midnight

Time

ClockTimeCxn
10 of/after/to/till noon 

(offset of minutes to hour 
when telling time)

ate for hours 
during/throughout the night/party 
into/through/over/across/down  
  the years/the night/3 presidencies 
ate in 20 min.

at 25mph/a steady clip 
day by/after day

StartTime EndTime

RelativeTime

from 
(ever) since

to 
until 

through

before, after, since, between 
towards, by 
3 months apart

DeicticTime
20 minutes ago/hence 

within/inside 3 months (from now) 
in 20 minutes (from now) 

haven’t eaten in/for 3 hours (before now)

Age
at/by 40 

a child of 5

Attributeby day/night

Figure 2: The TEMPORAL subhierarchy, with example preposition usages associated with each supersense.

those categories. On a practical level, this will make
it easier to combine resources (lexicons and anno-
tated corpora enriched with semantic role labels).

Following VerbNet, our preposition supersense
categories are organized into a hierarchical (multiple
inheritance) taxonomy. Not only does this explicate
some of the distinctions between related categories
that were described textually in S&R (e.g., the rela-
tionship between STARTSTATE and SOURCE), but it
also provides a practical strategy for annotators who
are unsure of how to apply a category—there is often
a less specific label to fall back on.

The preposition label set proposed here is notice-
ably larger than the supersense inventories for other
parts of speech (fn. 2). This might warrant concern
that it will be too difficult for annotators to learn.
However, there are arguments in favor of a larger
set when it comes to prepositions. First, because
prepositions range from the lexical to the grammati-
cal, they perhaps cover a wider/higher-dimensional
semantic space than verbs or nouns. Thus, more
categories might be needed for comparable descrip-
tive adequacy. Second, the hierarchy should help
guide annotators to the right category or small set
of related categories. They will not have to consider
all of them one by one. Moreover, the presence of
more and less abstract categories gives annotators
flexibility when they are uncertain. Finally, because
prepositions are closed-class, we envision that the
annotation process will be guided (to a much greater
extent than for nouns and verbs) by the word type.
Having several dozen categories at multiple levels
of granularity means that the number of prepositions

associated with most categories is small.5 For TPP
prepositions (with fine-grained senses mapped to the
new scheme), it will be possible to suggest a filtered
list of supersenses to the annotator, and these should
suffice for the vast majority of tokens. It may even
be desirable to annotate a corpus by type rather than
by token, so the annotator can focus on a few super-
senses at a time.

Based on preliminary rounds of annotation—a mix
of type-driven and token-driven—by several annota-
tors, we are optimistic that the general approach will
be successful. The preliminary annotation has also
uncovered shortcomings in the annotation guidelines
that have informed revisions to the categories and hi-
erarchy. More extensive annotation practice with the
current scheme is needed to ascertain its adequacy
and usability. Should the size of the hierarchy prove
too unwieldy, it will be possible to remove some of
the finer-grained distinctions.

Below, we examine some of the areas of the hier-
archy that have been overhauled.

3.1 Temporal Refinement

In S&R, all temporal preposition usages fall un-
der a single label, TEMPORAL. VerbNet is slightly
more discriminative, with an equivalent TIME su-
percategory whose daughters are INITIAL_TIME, FI-
NAL_TIME, DURATION, and FREQUENCY.

We have refined this further (figure 2) after coming
to the conclusion that the major temporal prepositions

5Currently, only 9 preposition types are mapped to more than
10 supersenses: for and by (20 each), of (18), to and in (16), with
(15), at and on (13), and from (11). 20 have 4–9 supersenses.

117



Place

LocationValue

Extent

Instrument

Transit

Via

Circumstance

Path

Traversed Direction

2DArea

Path Subhierarchy

1DTrajectory 3DMedium

Undergoer

Contour

Course

Locus Manner

Figure 3: PATH and its subtypes

cluster neatly into finer-grained subcategories. Rela-
tions that situate a time as before or after another time
are under RELATIVETIME; special cases are START-
TIME, ENDTIME, times implicitly situated relative
to the present (DEICTICTIME), and constructions for
telling time that express an offset in minutes rela-
tive to the hour (CLOCKTIMECXN). We also follow
AMR’s lead in creating a dedicated AGE category,
which inherits from TEMPORAL and ATTRIBUTE.

Given that most of the prepositions in figure 2 are
only associated with one or two temporal supersenses
(only in and at are known to occur with three), we
do not expect that the subcategories will impose too
much of a burden on annotators.

3.2 Paths
Extensive discussion has gone into a section of the
hierarchy for paths, which were not accounted for to
our satisfaction in any of the existing schemes (due
to unclear boundaries between the categories). Our
analysis draws upon recent studies of caused motion
constructions in the context of improving their treat-
ment in VerbNet. Those studies address the basic
scenarios of CHANGE OF LOCATION, CHANGE OF
STATE, TRANSFER OF POSSESSION, TRANSFER
OF INFORMATION, and CHANGE IN VALUE ON A
SCALE with regard to their syntactic and semantic ar-
gument structures (Hwang et al., 2014; Hwang, 2014,
ch. 5). Figure 3 shows our subhierarchy for paths,
which is closely related to the approach adopted for
VerbNet, but in some respects more detailed. Taking
PATH to be the intermediate part of literal or abstract/
metaphoric motion, we distinguish subtypes:

• TRAVERSED: A stretch of physical space that the
mover inhabits during the middle of motion (not nec-
essarily where the event as a whole is located, which
would be marked with a simple LOCATION preposi-

tion). This category is a subtype of LOCATION as it
describes the “where” of the intermediate phase of
motion. It is further refined into:

– 1DTRAJECTORY: A 1-dimensional region
of space that is traversed, such as by following
a path or passing a landmark. E.g.: walk along
the river, over the bridge, past the castle

– 2DAREA: The 2-dimensional region of space
that is “covered”, though there is less of a no-
tion of completeness than with a 1-dimensional
trajectory: I walked about/around the room

– 3DMEDIUM: Volumetric material that the
figure moves through, and which may exert a
facilitatory or opposing force on the figure: I
waded through the swamp

• DIRECTION: This covers prepositions marking
how the motion of the figure, or the figure itself,
is aimed/oriented (by contrast with DESTINATION,
where the preposition expressly indicates an in-
tended endpoint of motion): walk toward the door,
kick at the wall, toss the ball up.

• CONTOUR: This describes the shape, but not the
location, of a path; it is also a kind of MANNER:
walk in a zigzag

• EXTENT: Also a subtype of VALUE, this is the
size of a path—the physical distance traversed or the
amount of change on a scale: ran for miles

• VIA: Prepositions in this category mark something
that is used for translocation, transfer, or communi-
cation between two points/parties. It is a subtype of
PATH because it pertains to the intermediate phase
of (literal or figurative) motion, and also a subtype of
INSTRUMENT because it is something used in order
to facilitate that motion. S&R used the label VIA for
the spatial domain and MEDIUMOFCOMMUNICA-
TION for communication devices; we instead use the
VIA supersense directly for cases that are not phys-
ical motion, e.g.: talk by phone; talk on/over the
phone; make an appearance on TV; order by credit
card via/on the Internet; I got the word out via a
friend. Enablers expressed metaphorically as paths,
e.g. Hackers accessed the system via a security hole,
are included as well. There are two subcases:

– TRANSIT: The vehicle/mode of conveyance
that facilitates physical motion traversing a
path. It is also a subtype of LOCATION be-
cause it specifies where the figure was during
the motion: go by plane

– COURSE: The roadway or route that facili-
tates physical motion traversing a path. It is
also a subtype of 1DTRAJECTORY because it
specifies a 1-dimensional path for the figure’s
motion: drive via back roads

118



For spatial usages of certain prepositions that por-
tray static scenes as motion (“fictive motion”; Talmy,
1996), an argument could be made for either the loca-
tive or path categories. Our conventions are:

• With a figure whose shape/spatial extent is being
described with respect to a landmark:

– 1DTRAJECTORY for the extent of a 1-
dimensional shape: a cable runs above the
duct; the bridge [that goes] across the river

– 2DAREA for the extent of a 2-dimensional
shape: Her hair was in plaits about her head

– INITIALLOCATION for the “starting point”: a
road which runs from Ixopo into the hills; sin-
gle wires leading off the main lines

– DESTINATION for the “ending point”: every
driveway to the castle was crowded

• For the spatial orientation of a figure: DIREC-
TION: they faced away from each other

• Suggesting the spatial path that may be tra-
versed to access a place starting from a reference
point (such as the speaker’s location): LOCA-
TION: in a little street off Whitehall; He must have
parked around the front of the motel; the auditorium
is through a set of double doors

• For a physical path of perception (line of sight,
hearing, etc.): 1DTRAJECTORY: Lily peeped
around the open curtain; glance over her shoulder

• For a perspective in perception or communica-
tion: LOCATION: I can see Russia from my house;
views over Hyde Park; she rang him at home

3.3 Communication
English systematically invokes language of motion
and transfer to describe communication (Reddy,
1979). S&R includes a specific MEDIUMOFCOM-
MUNICATION category, but its boundaries are not en-
tirely clear. Similarly, AMR incorporates a :MEDIUM
role, though this conflates communicative mediums
with what we have called 3DMEDIUM above. In-
stead, our definition of VIA (§3.2) includes instru-
ments of communication but is slightly more general.

There are also cases where the preposition marks
an entity involved in communication, without fram-
ing that entity as an intermediary between two parties:

(3) a. I got the scoop from a friend/the Internet.
b. I put it down on paper.
c. The answer is somewhere in this book/room.
d. The rumor spread around the school.

Rather than create a proliferation of communication-
specific categories, we apply the abstract categories

LOCUS, SOURCE, and GOAL for abstract commu-
nication, and LOCATION, INITIALLOCATION, and
DESTINATION for communication with a concrete
component (such as writing).

3.4 Accompaniment vs. Joint Participation

The preposition with is frustratingly promiscuous. It
often marks an entity that is associated with a main
entity or event; what is frustrating is that the nature
of the association seems to lie on a continuum from
physical copresence to active counterpart in an event:

(4) a. Tim prefers [tea with crumpets].
b. Tim sat with his computer.
c. Tim walked with Lori.
d. Tim talked with/to Lori.
e. Tim fought against/with Lori.
f. Tim fought against/#with the idea.

S&R has PARTICIPANT/ACCOMPANIER and OPPO-
NENT/CONTRAST, but these miss the highly frequent
case of talk with, which involves a cooperative rather
than adversarial activity. VerbNet, on the other hand,
has roles CO-AGENT, CO-THEME, and CO-PATIENT
for “events with symmetrical participants”.6 We
adopt the following supersense conventions:

• ACCOMPANIER applies for (4a–4c), where the two
participants are physically colocated or performing
the same action in separate (but possibly inferentially
related) events. Adding together seems more natural
for these: Tim walked/?talked together with Lori.

• CO-AGENT, CO-PATIENT, and CO-THEME, as in
VerbNet, apply where both participants are engaged
in the same event in the same basic capacity (4d, 4e).

• THEME applies for (4f), where the thing being fought
is not fighting back.

3.5 Values and Comparisons

Many prepositions can be used to express a quan-
titative value (measuring attributes such as a quan-
tity, distance, or cost), to compare to another value,
or to compare to something qualitatively. S&R de-
fine a broad category called NUMERIC for preposi-
tion senses that mark quantitative values and classify
some qualitative comparison senses as OTHER. We
have developed a finer-grained scheme.

6VerbNet defines CO-AGENT as “Agent who is acting in co-
ordination or reciprocally with another agent while participating
in the same event” (VerbNet, p. 20).

119



COMPARISON/CONTRAST applies to qualitative
or quantitative analogies, comparisons, and differen-
tiations: e.g., he used to have a car like mine; he was
screaming like a banshee; the club’s nothing to what
it once was; the benefits must be weighed against
the costs; the difference between income and expen-
diture; these fees are quite distinct from expenses.
Where these are relative to a specific scale or ranking,
the subcategory SCALAR/RANK is used. Qualitative
SCALAR/RANK examples include: place duty before
all else; at a level above the common people; warm
weather for the time of year.

VALUE captures points on a formal scale—prices
start at $10; the drunken yobbos who turned up by the
cartload; my car does ten miles to the gallon—plus
prepositions used as mathematical operators.

SCALAR/RANK and VALUE share a subtype, VAL-
UECOMPARISON, for comparisons/differentiations
on a formal scale—the hill was above/below sea level.
A subtype of this, APPROXIMATOR, is for cases such
as We have over/about/around/in the vicinity of 3
eggs left and We have between 3 and 6 eggs left.7

Prepositional expressions under, more than, less than,
greater than, fewer than, at least, and at most fit into
this category as well. Note that these can all be
paraphrased with mathematical operators: ≈ < > ≤ ≥.
APPROXIMATOR applies regardless of the semantic
type of the thing measured (whether it is a spatial
extent, temporal duration, monetary value, etc.).

3.6 Manner and Means
In our supersense hierarchy, we place MANNER as
a parent of INSTRUMENT (see figure 3). We also
propose to distinguish MEANS for prepositions that
mark an action that facilitates a goal (S&R include
these under INSTRUMENT). We define MEANS as a
subtype of both INSTRUMENT and ACTIVITY.

MANNER and its subcategories are for preposi-
tions that mark the “how” of an event: How did she
lecture? With enthusiasm (MANNER); How did he
break up the anthill? With a stick (INSTRUMENT);

7Dictionaries actually disagree as to whether these senses of
about and around should be considered prepositions or adverbs.
Pullum and Huddleston (2002, p. 646) distinguish the syntactic
behavior of over in “She wrote [[over fifty] novels]” vs. “I spent
[over [a year]] here.” Whatever the syntactic evidence, semanti-
cally these are all similar: they take a measurement, quantity, or
range as an argument and “transform” it in some way into a new
measurement, quantity, or range.

How did they retaliate? With vicious shootings
(MEANS); How did we coordinate? Over Skype
(VIA); How did you drive? In a zigzag (CONTOUR).

3.7 Other Major Changes
Space does not permit a full accounting of our modi-
fications to the S&R scheme, which also include:

• EXPLANATION and RECIPROCATION, two new
causal categories with names borrowed from
FrameNet. EXPLANATION is for secondary events
introduced as contributing to the occurrence of the
main event (e.g., he lied out of dishonesty/for fear
of rejection), with special cases PURPOSE (what
somebody wants to happen) and RECIPROCATION
(what is being reacted to: he was admired/thanked/
punished for his deeds).

• CREATOR, a new subtype of AGENT that captures
usages such as stories by/of A.A. Milne.

• STATE, covering (e.g.) on morphine/off work, as a
new supertype of STARTSTATE and ENDSTATE.

• CONFIGURATION, a new top-level category for
senses marking static configurational relationships
between two entities (typically nominals). Subtypes:
WHOLE (renamed from S&R’s PARTWHOLE),
SPECIES, POSSESSOR, and new categories PARTI-
TIVE, SUPERSET, and ELEMENTS.

• LOCATION prepositions can be used with a verb of
motion to indicate a resulting location: put the hat on
the stool; go inside the house. S&R list such usages
under DESTINATION. We instead deem the preposi-
tion’s meaning as coerced by the verb, and label the
preposition as LOCATION (simplifying documenta-
tion and annotation). We reserve the DESTINATION
supersense for to, into, etc., which exclusively mark
endpoints of motion when used spatially.

4 Conclusion

English prepositions are a challenging class, given
that there are so many of them and they are put to
so many uses. We have built on prior work to pro-
pose a new hierarchical taxonomy of preposition su-
persenses, so that their semantics can be modeled
in a coarse WSD framework. Our resource docu-
ments each supersense with detailed explanations,
fine-grained dictionary senses, example sentences,
and (where possible) mappings to other resources.
The taxonomy will hopefully port well to adpositions
and case systems in other languages, though we have
not investigated that yet. We have successfully pi-
loted English corpus annotation with our resource,
and a full-fledged annotation effort is underway.

120



Acknowledgments

Improved coarse semantic categories for prepositions are
the result of ongoing collaborations; they reflect the ef-
forts of ourselves and others including Tim O’Gorman,
Katie Conger, Meredith Green, Archna Bhatia, Carlos
Ramírez, Yulia Tsvetkov, Michael Mordowanec, Matt
Gardner, Spencer Onuffer, and Nora Kazour, as well as
helpful conversations with Ken Litkowski, Orin Hargraves,
Michael Ellsworth, Ed Hovy, Lori Levin, the Berkeley
FrameNet group, and the AMR design group. We also
thank anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. This
research was supported in part by a Google research grant
for Q/A PropBank Annotation, NSF CAREER grant IIS-
1054319, and DARPA grant FA8750-12-2-0342 funded
under the DEFT program.

References

Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Proc.
of COLING-ACL, pages 86–90. Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

Timothy Baldwin and Su Nam Kim. 2010. Multiword
expressions. In Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau,
editors, Handbook of Natural Language Processing,
Second Edition, pages 267–292. CRC Press, Taylor and
Francis Group, Boca Raton, Florida, USA.

Timothy Baldwin, Valia Kordoni, and Aline Villavicencio.
2009. Prepositions in applications: a survey and intro-
duction to the special issue. Computational Linguistics,
35(2):119–149.

Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina
Georgescu, Kira Griffitt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin Knight,
Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan Schneider.
2013. Abstract Meaning Representation for sembank-
ing. In Proc. of the 7th Linguistic Annotation Workshop
and Interoperability with Discourse, pages 178–186.
Sofia, Bulgaria.

Archna Bhatia, Mandy Simons, Lori Levin, Yulia
Tsvetkov, Chris Dyer, and Jordan Bender. 2014. A uni-
fied annotation scheme for the semantic/pragmatic com-
ponents of definiteness. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid
Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Mae-
gaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk,
and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proc. of LREC, pages
910–916. Reykjavík, Iceland.

Dwight Le Merton Bolinger. 1971. The phrasal verb in
English. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Claire Bonial, William Corvey, Martha Palmer, Volha V.
Petukhova, and Harry Bunt. 2011. A hierarchical unifi-
cation of LIRICS and VerbNet semantic roles. In Fifth
IEEE International Conference on Semantic Comput-
ing, pages 483–489. Palo Alto, CA, USA.

Melissa Bowerman and Soonja Choi. 2001. Shaping
meanings for language: universal and language-specific
in the acquisition of spatial semantic categories. In
Melissa Bowerman and Stephen Levinson, editors, Lan-
guage Acquisition and Conceptual Development, pages
475–511. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Claudia Brugman. 1981. The story of ‘over’: polysemy,
semantics and the structure of the lexicon. MA the-
sis, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.
Published New York: Garland, 1981.

Martin Chodorow, Joel Tetreault, and Na-Rae Han. 2007.
Detection of grammatical errors involving prepositions.
In Proc. of the Fourth ACL-SIGSEM Workshop on
Prepositions, pages 25–30. Prague, Czech Republic.

Massimiliano Ciaramita and Yasemin Altun. 2006. Broad-
coverage sense disambiguation and information extrac-
tion with a supersense sequence tagger. In Proc. of
EMNLP, pages 594–602. Sydney, Australia.

Paul Cook and Suzanne Stevenson. 2006. Classifying
particle semantics in English verb-particle construc-
tions. In Proc. of the Workshop on Multiword Expres-
sions: Identifying and Exploiting Underlying Proper-
ties, pages 45–53. Sydney, Australia.

Daniel Dahlmeier, Hwee Tou Ng, and Tanja Schultz. 2009.
Joint learning of preposition senses and semantic roles
of prepositional phrases. In Proc. of EMNLP, pages
450–458. Singapore.

Dipanjan Das, Desai Chen, André F. T. Martins, Nathan
Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. 2014. Frame-semantic
parsing. Computational Linguistics, 40(1):9–56.

Nicolas Denand and Monique Rolbert. 2004. Contextual
processing of locative prepositional phrases. In Proc.
of Coling, pages 1353–1359. Geneva, Switzerland.

Robert B. Dewell. 1994. Over again: Image-schema trans-
formations in semantic analysis. Cognitive Linguistics,
5(4):351–380.

Claude Hagège. 2009. Adpositions. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, UK.

Dirk Hovy, Stephen Tratz, and Eduard Hovy. 2010. What’s
in a preposition? Dimensions of sense disambiguation
for an interesting word class. In Coling 2010: Posters,
pages 454–462. Beijing, China.

Dirk Hovy, Ashish Vaswani, Stephen Tratz, David Chiang,
and Eduard Hovy. 2011. Models and training for unsu-
pervised preposition sense disambiguation. In Proc. of
ACL-HLT, pages 323–328. Portland, Oregon, USA.

Jena D. Hwang. 2014. Identification and representation
of caused motion constructions. Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado.

Jena D. Hwang, Annie Zaenen, and Martha Palmer. 2014.
Criteria for identifying and annotating caused motion
constructions in corpus data. In Nicoletta Calzolari,
Khalid Choukri, Thierry Declerck, Hrafn Loftsson,
Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Asuncion Moreno,

121



Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis, editors, Proc. of LREC,
pages 1297–1304. Reykjavík, Iceland.

Christian Hying. 2007. A corpus-based analysis of geo-
metric constraints on projective prepositions. In Proc.
of the Fourth ACL-SIGSEM Workshop on Prepositions,
pages 1–8. Prague, Czech Republic.

Julia A. Jolly. 1993. Preposition assignment in English. In
Jr. Van Valin, Robert D., editor, Advances in Role and
Reference Grammar, pages 275–310. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and Martha
Palmer. 2008. A large-scale classification of English
verbs. Language Resources and Evaluation, 42(1):21–
40.

George Lakoff. 1987. Women, fire, and dangerous things:
what categories reveal about the mind. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

Seth Lindstromberg. 2010. English Prepositions Ex-
plained. John Benjamins Publishing, Amsterdam, re-
vised edition.

Ken Litkowski. 2013. The Preposition Project corpora.
Technical Report 13-01, CL Research, Damascus,
MD. URL http://www.clres.com/online-papers/
TPPCorpora.pdf.

Ken Litkowski. 2014. Pattern Dictionary of English Prepo-
sitions. In Proc. of ACL, pages 1274–1283. Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

Ken Litkowski and Orin Hargraves. 2005. The Preposition
Project. In Proc. of the Second ACL-SIGSEM Work-
shop on the Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and
their Use in Computational Linguistics Formalisms and
Applications, pages 171–179. Colchester, Essex, UK.

Ken Litkowski and Orin Hargraves. 2007. SemEval-
2007 Task 06: Word-Sense Disambiguation of Preposi-
tions. In Proc. of the Fourth International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 24–29.
Prague, Czech Republic.

Mitchell Marcus, Grace Kim, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz,
Robert MacIntyre, Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen
Katz, and Britta Schasberger. 1994. The Penn Treebank:
annotating predicate argument structure. In Proc. of
HLT, pages 114–119. Plainsboro, NJ, USA.

Antje Müller, Olaf Hülscher, Claudia Roch, Katja
Keßelmeier, Tobias Stadtfeld, Jan Strunk, and Tibor
Kiss. 2010. An annotation schema for preposition
senses in German. In Proc. of the Fourth Linguistic An-
notation Workshop, pages 177–181. Uppsala, Sweden.

Antje Müller, Claudia Roch, Tobias Stadtfeld, and Tibor
Kiss. 2011. Annotating spatial interpretations of Ger-
man prepositions. In Proc. of ICSC, pages 459–466.
Palo Alto, CA.

Elizabeth M. O’Dowd. 1998. Prepositions and particles
in English: a discourse-functional account. Oxford
University Press, New York.

Tom O’Hara and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Preposition se-
mantic classification via Treebank and FrameNet. In
Walter Daelemans and Miles Osborne, editors, Proc. of
CoNLL, pages 79–86. Edmonton, Canada.

Tom O’Hara and Janyce Wiebe. 2009. Exploiting se-
mantic role resources for preposition disambiguation.
Computational Linguistics, 35(2):151–184.

Geoffrey K. Pullum and Rodney Huddleston. 2002. Prepo-
sitions and preposition phrases. In Rodney Huddle-
ston and Geoffrey K. Pullum, editors, The Cambridge
Grammar of the English Language, pages 579–611.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Gisa Rauh. 1993. On the grammar of lexical and non-
lexical prepositions in English. In Cornelia Zelinsky-
Wibbelt, editor, The Semantics of Prepositions: From
Mental Processing to Natural Language Processing,
pages 99–150. Mouton de Gruyter, New York.

Michael J. Reddy. 1979. The conduit metaphor: a case of
frame conflict in our language about language. In An-
drew Ortony, editor, Metaphor and Thought, pages 284–
324. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Terry Regier. 1996. The human semantic potential: spatial
language and constrained connectionism. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Roi Reichart and Ari Rappoport. 2010. Tense sense dis-
ambiguation: a new syntactic polysemy task. In Proc.
of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 325–334. Cambridge,
MA.

Patrick Saint-Dizier. 2006a. Introduction to the Syntax
and Semantics of Prepositions. In Patrick Saint-Dizier
and Nancy Ide, editors, Syntax and Semantics of Prepo-
sitions, pages 1–25. Springer, Dordrecht, The Nether-
lands.

Patrick Saint-Dizier. 2006b. PrepNet: a multilingual lex-
ical description of prepositions. In Proc. of LREC,
volume 6, pages 1021–1026. Genoa, Italy.

Nathan Schneider, Behrang Mohit, Kemal Oflazer, and
Noah A. Smith. 2012. Coarse lexical semantic annota-
tion with supersenses: an Arabic case study. In Proc.
of ACL, pages 253–258. Jeju Island, Korea.

Nathan Schneider and Noah A. Smith. 2015. A corpus
and model integrating multiword expressions and su-
persenses. In Proc. of NAACL-HLT. Denver, Colorado,
USA. To appear.

Vivek Srikumar and Dan Roth. 2013a. An inven-
tory of preposition relations. Technical Report
arXiv:1305.5785. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.
5785.

Vivek Srikumar and Dan Roth. 2013b. Modeling semantic
relations expressed by prepositions. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 1:231–242.

Leonard Talmy. 1996. Fictive motion in language and
“ception”. In Paul Bloom, Mary A. Peterson, Nadel

122



Lynn, and Merrill F. Garrett, editors, Language and
Space, pages 211–276. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Stephen Tratz. 2011. Semantically-enriched parsing for
natural language understanding. Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, Cali-
fornia.

Stephen Tratz and Dirk Hovy. 2009. Disambiguation of
preposition sense using linguistically motivated fea-
tures. In Proc. of NAACL-HLT Student Research Work-
shop and Doctoral Consortium, pages 96–100. Boulder,
Colorado.

Jesse L. Tseng. 2000. The representation and selection
of prepositions. Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK. URL http:
//citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=

10.1.1.70.4995&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
Yulia Tsvetkov, Nathan Schneider, Dirk Hovy, Archna

Bhatia, Manaal Faruqui, and Chris Dyer. 2014. Aug-
menting English adjective senses with supersenses.
In Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Thierry De-
clerck, Hrafn Loftsson, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mari-
ani, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis,
editors, Proc. of LREC, pages 4359–4365. Reykjavík,
Iceland.

Andrea Tyler and Vyvyan Evans. 2003. The Semantics
of English Prepositions: Spatial Scenes, Embodied
Meaning and Cognition. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.

VerbNet. n.d. VerbNet Annotation Guidelines.
http://verbs.colorado.edu/verb-index/

VerbNet_Guidelines.pdf.
Torben Vestergaard. 1977. Prepositional phrases and

prepositional verbs: a study in grammatical function.
Mouton, The Hague.

Yang Xu and Charles Kemp. 2010. Constructing spatial
concepts from universal primitives. In Stellan Ohls-
son and Richard Catrambone, editors, Proc. of CogSci,
pages 346–351. Portland, Oregon.

Patrick Ye and Timothy Baldwin. 2007. MELB-YB:
Preposition sense disambiguation using rich semantic
features. In Proc. of SemEval, pages 241–244. Prague,
Czech Republic.

Cornelia Zelinsky-Wibbelt. 1993. Interpreting and trans-
lating prepositions: a cognitively based formulation. In
Cornelia Zelinsky-Wibbelt, editor, The Semantics of
Prepositions: From Mental Processing to Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 351–390. Mouton de Gruyter,
Berlin.

Joost Zwarts and Yoad Winter. 2000. Vector space seman-
tics: a model-theoretic analysis of locative prepositions.
Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 9:169–
211.

123


