



















































A Historical Overview of the Status of Function Words in Dependency Grammar


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 241–250,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

A Historical Overview of the Status of Function 
Words in Dependency Grammar 

 
Timothy Osborne 

Zhejiang University 
Hangzhou 

China 
tjo3ya@yahoo.com 

Daniel Maxwell 
US Chess Center 
Washington DC 

USA 
dan.maxwell@gmail.com 

 
 

Abstract 

This contribution provides a historical 
overview of the analysis of function words in 
surface syntactic dependency hierarchies. 
Starting with Tesnière (1959), the overview 
progresses through some prominent voices in 
the history of DG (Mel'čuk 1958, 1963, Hays 
1964, Matthews 1981, Schubert 1987, 
Maxwell and Schubert 1989, Hudson 1976, 
1984, etc.). The overview establishes that the 
analysis of prepositions has been almost 
unanimous: they are positioned as heads over 
their nouns. There has been more variation 
concerning the status of auxiliary verbs, 
although most DG grammarians have viewed 
them as heads over their content verbs. 
Concerning determiners, the dominant position 
is that they are dependents under their nouns, 
although there are a couple of prominent 
voices that assume the opposite stance. 

1 The dependency status of function 
words 

The distinction between function words and con-
tent words has been made by linguists of various 
backgrounds. A rough definition of the distinction 
might be that content words can be understood 
without any supporting context whereas function 
words cannot. The discussion in this article takes 
place in terms of specific syntactic categories 
which happen to be function words according to 
this definition.  
   A recent proposal for surface analyses of de-
pendencies categorically subordinates function 
words to content words. Universal Stanford De-
pendencies (USD) (de Marneffe et al. 2014) ad-
vocate an annotation scheme that positions aux-
iliary verbs, adpositions, subordinators, and de-
terminers as dependents of the content words with 
which they co-occur. Thus according to this 
scheme, the DG analysis of the sentence The kids 
have eaten at school would be as follows: 

(1)                   eaten 
          kids  have           school 
     The                   at 

  a.  The  kids  have  eaten  at  school. 

The USD analysis shown with (1a) stands in 
contrast to more conventional analyses, which 
position auxiliaries as heads over content verbs 
and prepositions as heads over their nouns: 

(1)             have 
          kids        eaten 
     The                   at 
                              school 

  b.  The  kids  have  eaten  at  school. 

In pursuing the analysis in (1a), USD is advocat-
ing an understanding of surface dependencies 
that is generally contrary to the views about 
function words that have crystallized over the 
decades in support of the analysis in (1b). 
   This contribution surveys some prominent 
voices in the DG tradition, in order to determine 
the extent to which the analysis in (1a) has been 
advocated over the decades since Tesnière (1959) 
and the period in which computational linguistics 
has become influential. Space does not allow us 
to try to evaluate these analyses in detail, but 
when the authors of these analyses attempt to 
justify their decisions, we occasionally make 
comments about their argumentation.  

2 Tesnière (1959/2015) 

Tesnière’s analysis of function words has not 
survived into most modern DGs. The reason it 
has not done so is tied to the fact that Tesnière’s 
subtheory of transfer has also not survived into 
most modern DGs. Tesnière viewed most func-
tion words as translatives (auxiliary verbs, pre-
positions, subordinators, many determiners). As 
such, they were not granted autonomy in the 
syntactic representations, but rather they ap-
peared together with a content word, the two 

241



forming a dissociated nucleus. What this means 
in the current context is that Tesniere’s Éléments 
(1959) did not provide much direct guidance 
concerning the dependency analysis of function 
words. 
  While Tesnière is widely credited as the father 
of modern DGs, he himself was not aware of the 
dependency vs. constituency distinction. That 
distinction was first established a few years after 
his death. Hays (1964) is generally credited with 
establishing the term dependency grammar (as 
opposed to phrase structure grammar). Thus the 
fact that Tesnière’s account of function words left 
much room for debate about the actual depen-
dency status of function words should not be so 
surprising. Tesnière never intended to produce an 
account of function words that would be consis-
tent with the purely dependency-based theories 
of syntax that followed him. 
   The relevant aspect of Tesnière’s grammar 
can be seen with the sentence Bernard est frappé 
par Alfred ‘Bernard is hit by Alfred’, the struc-
ture of which Tesnière showed with his Stemma 
95:  

(2)          est frappé 

   Bernard           par Alfred 

The noteworthy aspect of this stemma is the 
manner in which est frappé and par Alfred to-
gether occupy a single node each time. Neither 
can the function word be viewed as head/parent 
over the content word nor can the content word 
be viewed as head over the function word.1

   When Tesnière wanted to draw attention to 
the fact that a given function word forms a nuc-
leus together with a content word, he put the two 
in a bubble. His stemmas of the sentences Alfred 
est arrivé ‘Alfred has arrived’ (Stemma 27) and 
Alfred est grand ‘Alfred is big’ (Stemma 28) are 
given here: 

 For 
Tesnière, the two words est and frappé, and the 
two words par and Alfred, formed a single nuc-
leus together each time.  

 
(3)    est arrivé            est grand2
 

 

  a.    Alfred          b.    Alfred 

                                                           
1One of us coauthors prefers the term parent to head 
in this context, reserving the latter term for one spe-
cific kind of parent, namely those which are content 
words rather than function words.  
2The use of est ‘is’ in what is often considered two 
different ways is taken up in section 3.2. 

Each of the top bubbles encloses the words of a 
single nucleus. Neither word in a bubble is head 
over the other. 
   This greater point established, one can never-
theless examine Tesnière’s analysis of disso-
ciated nuclei more closely. When one does so, 
one sees that he actually did provide some indi-
rect guidance concerning the dependency analy-
sis of function words. He drew a distinction be-
tween the structural and the semantic function of 
a nucleus (Chapter 29). In a disassociated nuc-
leus, one of the words guarantees the structural 
integrity of the nucleus, and the other its seman-
tic integrity. He also comments (Chapter 29, §18) 
that from an etymological point of view, the sub-
sidiary word in a dissociated nucleus was once 
dependent on the constitutive word.  
   Tesnière later (Chapter 38, §19) states that 
auxiliary verbs, despite the fact that they lack 
semantic content, are constitutive of the nucleus 
in which they appear. Thus given these state-
ments, one can extrapolate that, had Tesnière 
been forced to choose, he would have viewed the 
auxiliary verb as head over the content verb. Us-
ing his conventions, he might have produced an 
analysis of the sentence Alfred est grand ‘Alfred 
is big’ along the following lines: 
 
(4)     .est 

      grand 

     .Alfred 

The two words est and grand together still form a 
single nucleus, but now the auxiliary verb is 
shown as head over the adjective, and at the 
same time, the two together form a single head 
over the noun Alfred. 
   One can also extend this extrapolated analysis 
to prepositions. Tesnière viewed a preposition as 
subsidiary to the noun with which it forms a dis-
sociated nucleus (Chapter 29, §4). Thus for the 
phrase livre d’Alfred, lit. ‘book of Alfred’, the 
following analysis reflects the distinction be-
tween constitutive and subsidiary words inside 
the nucleus: 

(5)    livre 
 
     Alfred 

      ..d’ 
     
In other words, Tesnière would probably have 
preferred an analysis that views prepositions as 
dependents of their nouns, if forced to choose.  

242



   Concerning the other two relevant types of 
function words, i.e. subordinators and articles, 
Tesnière viewed subordinators as translatives 
that were essentially the same as prepositions in 
how they function. Translatives are part of Tes-
nière’s theory of transfer, developed in the 
second half of his book. The purpose of a trans-
lative is to transfer a content word of one cate-
gory to a content word of another category, e.g. a 
noun to an adjective, an adjective to an adverb, a 
verb to noun, etc. Thus he probably would have 
favored subordinating them to the verb with 
which they co-occur inside the nucleus. And 
concerning articles (definite and indefinite), he 
took a varied stance, viewing them as translatives 
when they perform a translative function, but as 
mere dependents of their noun when they do not 
perform a translative function.  

3 Some early works  

3.1  Mel'čuk (1958, 1963, 1974, etc.) 

Unlike Tesnière, Igor Mel'čuk has been clear and 
consistent about the dependency status of func-
tion words in surface syntax. Mel'čuk and his 
collaborators have consistently subordinated 
content verbs to auxiliary verbs, nouns to adposi-
tions, verbs to subordinators, and determiners to 
nouns in surface syntax in their prolific depen-
dency-based works on syntax and grammar in the 
MTT (Meaning to Text Theory) framework and 
otherwise. Mel'čuk and his collaborators have 
been doing this since his earliest works, starting 
in 1958 (Mel'čuk 1958: 252–4, 1963: 492–3, 
1974: 221–4). These early works are in Russian, 
but the approach is consistent with the prominent 
MTT works in English from the 1980s (e.g. 
Mel'čuk and Pertsov 1987, Mel'čuk 1988). 
   Judging by the dates of these early publica-
tions, it seems likely that Mel'čuk’s works earn 
the honor of being the pathfinder in this area, 
since the majority of DGs that have come later 
have done the same, as will become increasingly 
clear below. Mel'čuk’s position concerning the 
status of function words has been and is particu-
larly firm. 

3.2 Hays (1964) 

Hays (1964) is considered a milestone in the de-
velopment of dependency theory, in part because 
the article appeared in such a prominent journal, 
Language. Hays’ article does not, however, say 
much about the dependency status of function 
words. The article concentrates instead on the 

formalization of dependency-based rewrite rules, 
as inspired directly by Chomsky (1957), and on 
the extent to which dependency and constituency 
formalisms are weakly or strongly equivalent. 
One can merely glean a sense of Hays’ under-
standing of function words from the article. 
   In particular, Hays discusses the ambiguous 
sentence They are flying planes, and he captures 
the ambiguity with the following trees: 

(6)               o 
       o    o           o 

  a.  They  are  flying  planes. 
            o 
     . .o                 o 
                 o 

  b.  They  are  flying  planes. 

Tree (6a) reflects the meaning ‘They are making 
the planes fly’, whereas tree (6b) reflects the 
meaning ‘They are planes that are flying’. Hays 
does not discuss the varying status of the aux-
iliary/copula are in these cases. But from the 
trees the reader can see that are is taken to be an 
auxiliary verb in tree (6a) and a copular verb in 
tree (6b). 
   Hays’ interpretation of the auxiliary/copula 
be is representative of how it was widely viewed 
at the time. Chomsky (1957: 38f.) viewed aux-
iliaries as a separate class (Aux), meaning he did 
not classify them as verbs. Thus when a form of 
be appears with a main verb, it was deemed an 
auxiliary, but when it appeared in the absence of 
a main verb, it was deemed a copula. For Hays 
then, are in (6a) was an auxiliary, whereas are in 
(6b) was a copular verb. 
   From a modern perspective, the distinction 
Hays was building on cannot be maintained. Di-
agnostics for identifying auxiliary verbs reveal 
that the two putative types of be behave the same 
in important ways: 

(7)  a.  Are they flying planes?    
    b.  They are not flying planes. 
    c.  They are flying planes, and they are, too. 

The words flying planes show the same ambigu-
ity in all three of these sentences, just as in Hays’ 
example. Thus the putative distinction between 
auxiliary be and copular be lacks an empirical 
basis, since the two show the same syntactic be-
havior with respect to subject-auxiliary inversion 
(7a), sentence negation (7b), and VP-ellipsis (7c). 
The two are in fact the same type of verb; they 
are both auxiliary be. 

243



3.3  Hudson (1976, 1984, 1990) 

Richard Hudson’s dependency-based framework 
Word Grammar (1984, 1990) has consistently 
taken auxiliary verbs as heads over content verbs, 
prepositions as heads over nouns, and subordi-
nators as heads over verbs. And concerning de-
terminers, Hudson has mostly preferred an anal-
ysis that positions determiners as heads over 
nouns (Hudson 1984: 90–2). Thus Hudson’s ap-
proach concerning function words is consistent 
insofar as function words are heads over the 
content words with which they co-occur. 
   Concerning the latter issue, i.e. the status of 
determiners, the determiner phrase (DP) vs. noun 
phrase (NP) debate has been an ongoing dispute 
since the 1980s. Interestingly in this regard, 
Hudson’s position is a minority one in the DG 
community in general, but it certainly finds much 
support among generative grammarians, the ma-
jority of whom presently pursue a DP analysis of 
nominal groups. This issue is not addressed here. 
The discussion focuses instead on auxiliary 
verbs. 
   By the time of Hudson’s 1976 book, he had 
apparently become convinced that auxiliary 
verbs are heads over content verbs (p. 149–51), 
and in his 1984 book Word Grammar, Hudson 
writes in this regard:   

“It is now widely accepted that a main 
verb is syntactically subordinate to its 
auxiliary verb (Pullum and Wilson 1977 is 
particularly important collection of evi-
dence), and I have accepted this analysis 
in all my dependency analyses.” (p. 91) 

The reference here to Pullum and Wilson (1977) 
is pointing to a significant debate that took place 
in the 1970s concerning the status of auxiliary 
verbs (Ross 1969, Chomsky 1972, Huddleston 
1974, Pullum and Wilson 1977). The question 
concerned the extent to which auxiliaries should 
be viewed as verbs at all. 
   As mentioned above, Chomsky (1957) took 
auxiliaries to be a syntactic class that was to a 
large extent distinct from that of content verbs, 
labeling this class simply Aux (p. 39). This view 
of auxiliaries led to a ternary-branching analysis 
of basic clause structure in which an auxiliary is 
present, as in (8a):  

(8)             S 

    .  . NP    Aux      VP 

   a.  They   have   succeeded.  

This basic constituency-based analysis is present 
in syntax textbooks from the 1970s (e.g. Bach 
1974, Emonds 1976, Baker 1978).  
   Based in part on Pullum and Wilson’s 1977 
article, a stance took hold in the 1980s that 
viewed auxiliaries of every sort (aspect, voice, 
and modality) to be syntactically like full verbs. 
For example, they distinguish between present 
and past tense and agree with the subject. In Eu-
ropean languages other than English, both full 
verbs and auxiliaries behave the same way, as 
already discussed in section 3.2. For this reason, 
auxiliaries should be granted the status of verbs 
in the hierarchy. This led to analyses like the 
following one, which shows the auxiliary as head 
over the content verb, e.g. 

(8)           S 

       NP        .VP1 

              V1      VP 

   b.  They   have  succeeded. 

Analyses along these lines can be found in many 
textbooks of the era (e.g. Haegeman 1991, Napo-
li 1993, Ouhalla 1994), and despite the addition 
of numerous varied functional categories, the 
basic hierarchy of verbs shown with (8b) remains 
intact in many recent constituency grammars (e.g. 
Culicover 2009, Carnie 2013). 
   The interesting aspect of this trend in consti-
tuency grammars, i.e. the trend toward auxiliary 
verbs as heads over content verbs, is the fact that 
Hudson’s dependency-based system (and 
Mel'čuk’s) was ahead of its time. On a depen-
dency-based analysis, there are just two basic 
possibilities for the hierarchical analysis of aux-
iliaries that must be considered: either the aux-
iliary is head over the content verb, or vice versa:    

(9)           have 
      They          understood 

   a.  They   have   understood. 

                    understood 

      They   have          

   b.  They   have   understood. 

Apparently Hudson had already decided firmly 
in favor of the analysis in (9a) by 1976. In this 
regard, the trend in constituency grammars was 
lagging significantly behind the stance that Hud-
son and Mel'čuk had adopted early in the devel-
opment of the Word Grammar and the Mean-
ing-Text frameworks. 

244



3.4  Matthews (1981) 

Matthews (1981) discusses the distinction be-
tween dependency- and constituency-based syn-
tax at length, and in this regard his book Syntax 
was a major contribution to our developing un-
derstanding of the distinction between depen-
dency- and constituency-based systems. In the 
book, Matthews took content verbs to be heads 
over auxiliaries, prepositions to be heads over 
their nouns, and nouns to be heads over their de-
terminers.  
  Two examples from the book illustrate Mat-
thews’ positions: 

(10)  a.  No  animal  shall  wear  clothes.     
                                   (p. 155) 

 
     b.  leave  the  meat  in  the  kitchen   
                                   (p. 87) 

The important observations here are that the 
modal auxiliary shall is dependent on the content 
verb wear in (10a), that the noun kitchen is de-
pendent on the preposition in in (10b), and that 
the determiners no, the, and the are dependent on 
their nouns. 
  Concerning prepositions as heads over their 
nouns, Matthews did not motivate his position 
empirically, but rather appealed to traditional 
case government. He wrote “Grammarians also 
talk of prepositions having objects…, or having 
complements…” (p. 146). Every dependency 
hierarchy in Matthews’ book containing a prepo-
sition shows the preposition as head over its 
noun. 
  Concerning the status of determiners, Mat-
thews did not produce specific empirical evi-
dence in favor of determiners as dependents of 
their nouns, but rather he appealed to the fact that 
they form a closed class. His assumption was that 
closed class categories are more appropriately 
viewed as dependents than as heads. The position 
Matthews was taking concerning determiners 
was not controversial at that time, so there would 
have been little reason for him to justify his deci-
sion in the area with further empirical observa-
tions. 
   Concerning the status of auxiliary verbs, 
however, Matthews had a bit more to say. He 
motivated their status as dependents of content 
verbs in two ways. The first was to point to their 
status as a closed class, and as a closed class, 
they were like determiners and thus should be 
viewed as dependents. He was drawing an anal-

ogy: just like determiners determine their head 
nouns, auxiliaries determine their head verbs. To 
him, this also meant that the hierarchical rela-
tionships between determiner and determined 
should be the same in both constructions. 
   The second motivation Matthews produced in 
favor of auxiliaries as dependents of their content 
verbs was subcategorization. He briefly dis-
cussed the example has appeared (p. 63). Ac-
cording to Matthews, appeared influences the 
syntactic category and semantic content of the 
noun with which it appears, whereas has lacks 
this ability. Matthews wrote: 

“As a form of APPEAR it can take just a 
subject (He has appeared) but not both a 
subject and an object (*He has appeared 
the speech or *He has appeared Cicero). 
For other lexemes it can be the reverse: 
He has distributed the speech or He has 
visited Cicero, but not *He has distributed 
or *He has visited. A relation is thus es-
tablished between appeared, or the mor-
pheme APPEAR, and a subject element. 
But at that level the relation of appeared 
to has, or of the morpheme APPEAR to the 
discontinuous HAVE...past participle, is 
quite incidental.” (p. 63) 

To restate Matthews’ point in other words, con-
tent verbs influence their linguistic environment 
in a way that auxiliary verbs do not, and for this 
reason, auxiliary verbs should be subordinated to 
content verbs. 
   A noteworthy aspect of Matthews’ reasoning 
in this area concerns its lexico-semantic nature. 
Matthews overlooked the fact that from a purely 
syntactic point of view, it is the finite verb (i.e. 
the auxiliary verb) that licenses the appearance of 
the subject, not the nonfinite verb, e.g. He has 
gone home, *He gone home, He goes home; She 
has eaten a lot, *She eaten a lot, She eats a lot. 
From this point of view, there should be a direct 
dependency linking the subject to the finite verb. 

3.5  Schubert(1987)/Maxwell & Schubert(1989) 

Using the dependency relations of Schubert 
(1987), Maxwell and Schubert (1989) gathered 
annotation schemes from a number of authors for 
machine translation of a number of languages 
(Bangla/Bengali, Danish, English, Esperanto, 
Finnish, French, German, Hungarian, Japanese, 
Polish). The project, based in the Netherlands, 
was known as Distributed Language Translation 
(DLT, 1984–1990). DG was used to provide 

245



syntactic representations of sentences in a source 
language, in Esperanto (the intermediate lan-
guage), and in a target language. Grammars 
written for this project aimed to show the struc-
tural relationships to be derived by automatic 
parsing. 
   In the current context, how function words 
were dealt with in the various languages is the 
point of interest. In Schubert’s analysis of Espe-
ranto, auxiliary verbs are heads over content 
verbs, common nouns are heads over determiners, 
and subordinators are heads over verbs. Schubert 
(1987: 45) states that his understanding of DG 
was influenced by the Mannheim school of DG 
(Engel 1982). 
  These patterns were followed for all other 
grammars with two exceptions. In Danish, sub-
ordinators are positioned as dependents of the 
following finite verb rather than as the head of 
the subordinate clause. Here is Ingrid Schubert’s 
(1989: 58) statement on this matter: 

“These clause introducers may under cer-
tain circumstances be omitted in Danish. I 
have not decided to let them be governed 
by a subordinating conjunction, but to 
consider the verb of the subordinate con-
struction a direct dependent of the verb in 
the superordinate sentence.” 

Perhaps these cases are something like the omis-
sion of the complementizer that in English, 
which makes no contribution to meaning and 
accordingly can often be left out, as in Say (that) 
it’s true. It is arguably the only subordinator 
which has this property. If so, it seems wrong to 
base the analysis on this one instance. The alter-
native of an empty node could be considered. 
   The other exception is in Lobin’s (1989) 
analysis of German. The determiner rather than 
its noun is taken as the head of the nominal 
group. Lobin justifies his analysis in this area by 
pointing to cases like the following one: 

(11)  unsere  Fahrt  an  die  See  und  eure    
     our    trip   to   the  sea   and  yours  

     in  die  Berge 
     in  the  mountains 

    ‘our trip to the sea and yours to the  
     mountains’ 

The absence of Fahrt in the second part of the 
coordinate structure forces one to view eure as 
the head of the nominal group (or to posit an 
empty nominal node).  

   While the two exceptions just noted provide 
insight into the difficult choices that had to be 
made by the authors who participated in the 
project, the greater point is that there was a large 
measure of agreement concerning the status of 
most function words. With the exception of de-
terminers, most function words were taken to be 
heads of the content words with which they 
co-occur.  

4  The German schools 

DG has enjoyed particular favor in the German 
speaking world. German grammarians recog-
nized the potential of dependency-based syntax 
early on. This early recognition may have been 
due to the particular compatibility of dependen-
cy-based syntax, which emphasizes verb central-
ity, with the verb second (V2) principle of Ger-
man (and other Germanic languages). The finite 
verb is anchored in second position in German 
declarative clauses, thematic material tending to 
precede this position and rhematic material tend-
ing to follow it. 
   The interesting and noteworthy point about 
the German schools is the unanimity that one 
encounters among the leading voices. DG gram-
marians (Kunze 1975, Lobin 1993, Engel 1982, 
1994, among others) are mostly unanimous in the 
basic hierarchical analyses of function words that 
they assume: auxiliary verbs are heads over con-
tent verbs; prepositions are heads over nouns; 
and subordinators are heads over verbs. The only 
area where one encounters some variation among 
these experts concerns determiners. The majority 
stance is certainly that nouns are heads over de-
terminers, but Lobin (1993) takes the opposite 
stance, as he does in Lobin (1989), already men-
tioned in section 3.5, and Eroms (2000) has ar-
gued for interdependence between article (defi-
nite or indefinite) and noun. 
   Due to the large measure of agreement con-
cerning the hierarchical status of most function 
words, the German-language DG world can be 
viewed as speaking with a single voice, and this 
voice is particularly loud by virtue of the fact DG 
enjoys a prominence at schools and universities 
that is not generally encountered outside of the 
German-speaking world. A point of interest, 
perhaps, is the reasoning that one finds in the 
German-language DG literature about the sen-
tence root. In a two-verb combination such as hat 
gelegt ‘has layed’, the German schools of DG 
unanimously view hat as head over gelegt. It is 
worth considering briefly why they do so. 

246



   Engel (1994:107–109) points to facts about 
subcategorization. He sees the lexical stem hab 
of the auxiliary hat determining the form of the 
nonfinite verb gelegt as a participle. This rea-
soning does not work in the opposite direction, 
that is, one cannot view the lexical stem leg- as 
determining the syntactic form of the auxiliary 
hat. The insight can then be extended to all 
manner of auxiliary verbs. For instance in a 
combination such as wird wollen ‘will want’, the 
modal auxiliary wird subcategorizes for the infi-
nitive form of the stem woll-, but not vice versa, 
that is, the lexical stem woll- does not determine 
the syntactic subcategory of the auxiliary wird.  
   A related issue concerns the motivation for 
positioning the finite verb as the root of the 
clause. Eroms (2000: 129ff.) motivates the hie-
rarchical status of auxiliary verbs in another way. 
He appeals to the fact that when an auxiliary verb 
and full verb co-occur, it is the auxiliary that is 
finite, not the full verb. The auxiliary verb then 
bears the functional information of person, num-
ber, tense, and mood. The nonfinite verb typical-
ly does not express this information. Thus in the 
example from the previous paragraph, i.e. hat 
gelegt ‘has layed’, the finite auxiliary verb hat 
expresses number (singular), person (3rd person), 
tense (present), and mood (indicative). The parti-
ciple form gelegt, in contrast, can be construed as 
helping to convey perfect aspect only. This func-
tional load that the auxiliary verb bears motivates 
its status as the root of the clause, i.e. as head 
over the content verb.  

5  The Prague school 

The Prague school of DG, as associated with the 
Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT), agrees 
with most of the other DG mentioned in this 
contribution concerning the hierarchical status of 
adpositions; they are heads over their nouns. 
However, the annotation scheme for the PDT 
(Hajič 1998) began subordinating auxiliary verbs 
to content verbs in 1996. This aspect of the PDT 
remains anchored today in the analytical level 
(surface syntax) of the PDT. Due to the promi-
nence of the PDT in the development of DG 
theory in general, the linguistic motivation for its 
choice to subordinate auxiliary verbs to content 
verbs in surface syntax is worth considering, 
however briefly. 
   There has been a difficulty in this area, 
though. Attempts to locate the linguistic motiva-
tion behind this aspect of the PDT annotation 
scheme have not turned up anything concrete in 

published works. For this reason, the two lin-
guistic observations produced next are based on 
personal communication with Jarmila Panevová, 
one of the founding members of the Prague 
school of DG.  
   Worth noting first, though, is that the PDT 
annotation scheme subordinates only non-modal 
auxiliary verbs to content verbs. Modal verbs, in 
contrast, are heads over their content verbs. What 
this means is that the PDT annotation scheme for 
surface syntax deviates from the majority posi-
tion only regarding a single auxiliary verb, 
namely být ‘be’ (in all its forms).  
   There are two linguistic motivations for sub-
ordinating the forms of být to the content verb. 
One of these concerns a general aspect of the 
verb ‘be’ in Slavic languages in general. Many 
Slavic languages lack or omit the finite form of 
this verb in certain environments. Czech omits a 
form of this verb in the 3rd person of the com-
pound past, but a 1st and 2nd person form of this 
verb appear in such environments: 

(12)  a.  Já  jsemspal.     (masculine)    
        I   am.slept   
        ‘I slept.’ 

     b.  Já  jsemspala.    (feminine)  
        I   am.slept       
        ‘I slept.’ 

     c.  John  spal.     
        ‘John slept.’ 

If the clitic auxiliary jsem- is subordinated to 
spal/spala, then there is a direct dependency that 
connects the subject to spal in each of these three 
cases. But if spal/spala is subordinated to jsem-, 
then an asymmetry appears: the subject is at 
times (in the 1st and 2nd person) an immediate 
dependent of the auxiliary verb, and at other 
times (in the 3rd person), it is an immediate de-
pendent of the participle. One thing that is dif-
ferent about this construction from others dis-
cussed earlier is that here the auxiliary and main 
verb form a single word. The question therefore 
concerns the extent to which this asymmetry 
should influence choices about the syntactic hie-
rarchy. 

A possible drawback of this choice is that it 
forces the PDT to draw a distinction between 
auxiliary být and copular být, since when a form 
of být is the only verb present, e.g. Mary je velká 
‘Mary is tall’, the PDT positions that verb as 
head over the predicative expression (here je ‘is’ 
is head overvelká ‘tall’). Examples (7a–c) above 
illustrate that there is no syntactic motivation for 

247



distinguishing between an auxiliary be and a co-
pular be in English.  
  Another linguistic argument for subordinating 
forms of the auxiliary být to its content verb is 
seen when multiple forms of být appear in one 
and the same clause: 

(13)   John  by  byl   býval   spal.  
      John  be  been been   slept 
      ‘John would have slept.’ 

This sentence is an example of the past condi-
tional. Three distinct forms of být appear togeth-
er. By subordinating all three of them directly to 
spal, a relatively flat structure obtains, and a flat 
structure has the advantage of avoiding projec-
tivity violations (cf. Mel’cuk and Pertsov 
1987:181 for a discussion of such a violation in 
terms of the arcs used in some forms of DG), 
which would occur, assuming that certain other 
sequences of these verb forms are possible. 

Gruet-Skrabalova (2012) offers a different 
account of the auxiliary být in the course of a 
Minimalist analysis of some kinds of ellipsis. 
She shows that there is a certain degree of free-
dom in the word order, but the only alternative 
order shown by her does not produce projectivity 
violations. In (13), by is the 3rd person (singular 
or plural) form of the conditional mood and the 
only one of the three which is finite. The other 
two are both past participles, the first in the per-
fect aspect and the second in the imperfect aspect. 
The first of them is subcategorized for by the 
preceding conditional verb. Gruet-Skrabovala 
does not discuss any sentence in which the two 
participles co-occur. However, sentences in this 
article suggest that both past tense forms of this 
verb subcategorize for a participial complement. 
From this, we judge that the first participle in (13) 
subcategorizes for the second, which in turn 
subcategorizes for the participial form of the 
main verb. Gruet-Skrabovala states that the final 
participle of the auxiliary must directly precede 
the main verb, although the finite conditional 
form can follow the main verb, just like in sub-
ordinate clauses in German. 
  The PDT decision to subordinate forms of být 
to the co-occurring content verb constitutes a 
narrow exception to the majority position con-
cerning function words. The PDT is otherwise 
consistent with the majority position regarding 
the status of modal verbs, copular verbs, adposi-
tions, subordinators, and determiners. 

6  Concluding discussion 
This survey has revealed that there is little sup-
port in the sources examined above for the Uni-
versal Stanford Dependencies’ (USD) decision to 
categorically subordinate function words to con-
tent words. Not one of the sources surveyed 
clearly supports the USD analysis of adpositions, 
and only two of the sources provide support for 
the USD decision to subordinate auxiliaries to 
content words. The dominant position, which has 
crystallized through the decades, is that auxilia-
ries are heads over content verbs and preposi-
tions are heads over their nouns. And concerning 
determiners, they are more widely viewed as de-
pendents of their nouns – although their status 
has been the focus of more debate.  
   The survey has turned up three published ar-
guments in support of the USD position and two 
unpublished arguments that partially support the 
USD position. The published ones are Matthews’ 
argument concerning English auxiliaries in sec-
tion 3.5, and the arguments concerning Danish 
subordinators and German determiners in section 
3.6. The unpublished ones concerned the Czech 
auxiliary být in section 5.  
   De Marneffe et al. do give a few indications 
of the supposed linguistic superiority of USD. 
The choice of having nouns as heads over adpo-
sitions allows parallelism between prepositional 
phrases and morphological case-marking (p. 
4585) and also between adpositions and adverbi-
al clauses (p. 4587). However, it ignores the fact 
that adpositions assign case to their complement 
nouns, not vice versa. Hence what one achieves 
in the way of more parallelism across the struc-
tures of distinct languages, one pays for with the 
unorthodox stipulation that adpositions assign 
case up the syntactic hierarchy to their nouns. 
   The choice of making predicates heads over 
auxiliaries allows parallelism between construc-
tions which in some languages omit the copula 
and those which do not (p. 4586). This is true, 
but alternative solutions such as an empty node 
should be considered. Also, if there are several 
linked auxiliaries, as in might have been dream-
ing, they must all have dreaming as their head, so 
the subcategorization relationship between any 
two consecutive auxiliaries cannot be shown by 
the dependency links (cf. the discussion of sub-
categorization by Engel in section 4). 
  De Marneffe et al. note that the choices dis-
cussed in their article have a negative effect on 
parsing: 

248



“It is now fairly well-known that … de-
pendency parsing numbers are higher if 
you make auxiliary verbs heads … and if 
you make prepositions the head of prepo-
sitional phrases… Under the proposed 
USD, SD would be making the ‘wrong’ 
choice in each case.” (p. 4589) 

Parsing accuracy is not the most important crite-
ria, however, as the following statements con-
cerning the importance of linguistic quality and 
downstream applications document: 

“…it seems wrongheaded to choose a 
linguistic representation to maximize 
parser performance rather than based on 
the linguistic quality of the representation 
and its usefulness for applications that 
build further processing on top of it.” (p. 
4589) 

For this reason, de Marneffe et al. propose trans-
forming the USD system to provide two other 
results, one for parsing and one called en-
hanced. 
   Thus by de Marneffe et al.’s own admission, 
parsing accuracy tends to be higher if function 
words are heads over content words, and given 
the analysis and discussion above, the DG tradi-
tion agrees to a large extent that linguistic con-
siderations support most function words as heads 
over the content words with which they co-occur, 
contrary to USD’s stance. 
   If USD wants to claim that linguistic consid-
erations support its unorthodox approach to sur-
face dependencies, it of course has every right to 
do so in the clash of ideas. But the point we hope 
to have established in this contribution is that the 
DG tradition does not support this claim. Quite to 
the contrary, the DG tradition has crystallized 
over the decades to a position that contradicts the 
USD approach. Thus if USD wants to maintain 
its claim to “linguistic quality”, the burden of 
proof rests firmly on its shoulders; it needs to 
produce the linguistic reasoning that supports its 
position in part by discussing and refuting the 
observations and reasoning that have coalesced 
over the decades to the opposite position.    
 
References  
Emmon Bach. 1974. Syntactic Theory. Holt, Rinehart 

and Winston, Inc., New York. 
Carl Lee Baker. 1978. Introduction to Generative 

Transformational Syntax. Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.  

Andrew Carnie. 2013. Syntax: A Generative 
Introduction. Wiley-Blackwell, Malden, MA. 

Noam Chomsky. 1957. Syntactic Structures. Mouton, 
The Hague. 

Noam Chomsky. 1972. Some emperical issues in the 
theory of Transformational Grammar. In S. Peters 
(ed.), Goals of Linguistic Thoery, 63–130. Prentice 
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 

Peter Culicover. 2009. Natural Language Syntax. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford UK. 

Joseph Emonds. 1976. A Transformational Approach 
to English Syntax: Root, Structure-Preserving, and 
Local Transformations. Academic Press, New 
York. 

Ulrich Engel. 1982. Syntax der deutschen 
Gegenwarts- sprache, 2nd edition. Erich Schmidt, 
Berlin.  

Ulrich Engel. 1994. Syntax der deutschen Gegenwarts- 
sprache, 3rd fully revised edition. Erich Schmidt, 
Berlin. 

Hans-Werner Eroms. 2000. Syntax der deutschen 
Sprache. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin. 

Hana Gruet-Skrabalova. 2012. VP-ellipsis and the 
Czech auxiliary být ( ‘to be‘). Xlinguae, 2012, 5, 
3–15. 

Liliane Haegeman. 1991. Introduction to Government 
and Binding Theory. Blackwell, Oxford, UK. 

Jan Hajič. 1998. Building a syntactically annotated 
corpus: The Prague Dependency Treebank. In Eva 
Hajičcová (ed.), Issues of Valency and Meaning: 
Studies in Honor of Jarmila Panevová.106–32. 
Karolinum, Charles University Press, Prague.  

David Hays. 1964. Dependency theory: A formalism 
and some observations. Language 40, 511–25. 

Rodney Huddleston. 1974. Further remarks on the 
analysis of auxiliaries as main verbs. Foundations 
of Language 11, 215–29. 

Richard Hudson. 1976. Arguments for a non- 
Transformational Grammar. University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago. 

Richard Hudson. 1984. Word Grammar. Basil 
Blackwell, New York.  

Richard Hudson. 1990. An English Word Grammar. 
Basil Blackwell, Oxford.    

Ray Jackendoff. 1977. X-bar Syntax: A Study of 
Phrase Structure. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 

Jürgen Kunze.1975.Abhängigkeitsgrammatik. Studia 
Grammatica 12. Akademie Verlag, Berlin. 

Henning Lobin. 1989. A dependency syntax of Ger-
man. 17–39. In Maxwell and Schubert. 

249



Henning Lobin. 1993. Koordinationssyntaxalsproze-
durales Phänomen. Studien zur deutschen Gram-
matik 46. Gunter NarrVerlag, Tübingen. 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Natalia 
Silveira, Katri Havarinen, Filip Ginter, Joakim Ni-
vre, Christopher Manning. 2014. Universal Stan-
ford Dependencies: A crosslinguistic typology. 
LREC, 4585–92 

Peter Matthews. 1981. Syntax. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Dan Maxwell and Klaus Schubert (eds.). 1989. Meta-
taxis in Practice: Dependency Syntax for Multilin-
gual Machine Translation. Foris Publications, 
Dordrecht. 

Igor Melʹčuk. 1958. Mašinnomperevode s vengersko-
gojazykanarusskij — On the automated translation 
of Hungarian to Russian, Problemykibernetiki, v. 1, 
222–64. 

Igor Melʹčuk. 1963. Avtomatičeskijanaliztekstov 
(namaterialerusskogojazyka) — Automated analy-
sis of texts (on the basis of Russian). In Slavjans-
koejazykoznanie — Linguistique slave. Academy of 
Sciences of the U.S.S.R., Moscow, 477–509. 

Igor Melʹčuk. 1974. Opytteoriilingvističeskixmodelej 
“Smysl - Tekst”. Semantika, Sintaksis. — Sketch of 
a linguistic model of the sort Meaning – Text. Se-
mantics, Syntax. Nauka, Moscow. 

Igor Mel’čuk and Nikolaj Pertsov. 1987. Surface Syn-
tax of English: A Formal Model within the Mean-
ing-Text Framework. John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 

Igor Meĺčuk. 1988 . Dependency Syntax: Theory and 
Practice. State University of New York Press, Al-
bany. 

Donna Jo Napoli. 1993. Syntax: Theory and Problems. 
Oxford University Press, New York. 

Jamal Ouhalla. 1994. Transformational Grammar: 
From rules to Principles and Parameters. Edward 
Arnold, London. 

Geoffrey Pullum and Deirdre Wilson. 1977. Auto-
nomous syntax and the analysis of auxiliaries. 
Language 53, 4, 741–88. 

John Robert Ross. 1969. Auxiliaries as main verbs. 
Studies in Philosophical Linguistics 1, edited by W. 
Todd, 77–102. Great Expectations Press, Evanston. 

Ingrid Schubert. 1989. A dependency syntax of Danish. 
39-68, in Maxwell and Schubert. 

Klaus Schubert. 1987. Metataxis: Contrastive depen-
dency syntax for machine translation. Foris Publi-
cations, Dordrecht. 

Klaus Schubert. 1989. A dependency syntax of Espe-
ranto. 207–32, in Maxwell and Schubert. 

Lucien Tesnière. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe structural. 
Klincksieck, Paris. 

Lucien Tesnière. 2015 (1959). Elements of Structural 
Syntax. Translated by Timothy Osborne and Syl-
vain Kahane. John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 

 

250


