
























Content Translation: Computer-assisted translation tool
for Wikipedia articles

Niklas Laxström
University of Helsinki

Dept. of Modern Languages
and

Wikimedia Foundation
nlaxstrom@wikimedia.org

Pau Giner
Wikimedia Foundation
pginer@wikimedia.org

Santhosh Thottingal
Wikimedia Foundation

sthottingal@wikimedia.org

Abstract
The quality and quantity of articles in each
Wikipedia language varies greatly. Trans-
lating from another Wikipedia is a natural
way to add more content, but the trans-
lation process is not properly supported
in the software used by Wikipedia. Past
computer-assisted translation tools built
for Wikipedia are not commonly used. We
created a tool that adapts to the specific
needs of an open community and to the
kind of content in Wikipedia. Qualitative
and quantitative data indicates that the new
tool helps users translate articles easier and
faster.

1 Introduction

Wikipedia is the most multilingual encyclopedic
knowledge archive, with over 280 languages with
varying amount of content. Knowledge available
for a user is limited by the languages used to ac-
cess it. Translation has been a common way to
expand knowledge across languages in Wikipedia.
The editing activity of the top 46 language editions
of Wikipedia shows that 25% of edits by multilin-
gual users are for the same article in different lan-
guages (Hale, 2013).

It is not necessary to use any tool to trans-
late Wikipedia articles. However, it is a com-
plicated process and mainly done by experienced
Wikipedia editors.

There were many attempts to build tools
to support translation of articles. None has
seen widespread use: in our research only few
users reported using those tools when translating
Wikipedia articles.
c⃝ 2015 The authors. This article is licensed under a Creative

Commons 3.0 licence, attribution, CC BY.

In this paper we present a new approach to sup-
port translation which has been designed taking
into account the unique needs of Wikipedia content
and their community. Content Translation (CX) is
a new tool that automates many steps of the trans-
lation process and validates the approach in prac-
tice. It was first enabled on 8 Wikipedias as an opt-
in feature to create new articles in January 2015.
Selected language pairs have machine translation
(MT) support.

2 Previous work

MediaWiki, the software powering Wikipedia, is
translated to hundreds of languages using the
Translate extension. No such solution was avail-
able for translating Wikipedia articles, leaving a
gap in the translation support.

There were at least ten instances of translation
tools built for Wikipedia1. Those tools can be di-
vided into two groups based on whether the tool
creators already possessed MT software. The first
group is composed of companies such as Google
and Microsoft, but also smaller companies and re-
searchers. The other group of tools has been cre-
ated just for Wikipedia article translation, mostly
by volunteers.

Among the earliest tools were GTT by Google
and WikiBhasha by Microsoft, using their own MT
services (Garcı́a and Stevenson, 2009; Kumarana
et al., 2011). Later, Casmacat for professionals and
researchers (Alabau et al., 2013) and CoSyne for
multilingual MediaWikis (Bronner et al., 2012),
unlike Wikipedias which are monolingual.

Common to all such tools is that they are not in-
tegrated into Wikipedia. To use them one needs
to go to another website or install software. CX
1Details collected at https://meta.wikimedia.org/
wiki/Machine_translation

194



is integrated into Wikipedia and provides a WYSI-
WYG editor (what you see is what you get).

3 Designing the translation experience

The design of CX was aimed at improving the
existing process users followed when translating.
Following the principles of User-Centered De-
sign (Norman and Draper, 1986), we organised pe-
riodic user research sessions to (a) better under-
stand the user needs during the existing translation
process, and (b) validate new ideas on how to im-
prove this process.

3.1 User research
We recruited 106 participants using a survey2.
From their responses we identified dictionaries
(76% of participants used them), and Wikipedia
(60%) as their most used tools when translating.
MT (53%), spell checkers (48%) and glossaries
(42%) were also common. Less than 6% of the
participants mentioned tools specifically aimed at
Wikipedia article translation, such as those de-
scribed in Section 2, and no tool was mentioned
by more than one participant.

We organised 16 research sessions. Sessions
were organised in two parts. In the first part, con-
textual inquiry techniques (Beyer and Holtzblatt,
1998) were applied to observe user behaviour
while translating, and identify their needs. The
second part was a usability testing study (Nielsen,
1994) to evaluate different design ideas in the form
of prototypes.

3.2 Design principles
The research sessions were instrumental to guide
the design of the translation experience3. The fol-
lowing design principles summarise the approach
we followed when designing the tool.

Freedom of translation
There is a significant diversity in Wikipedia con-

tent across languages. On average, two articles
from different languages on the same topic have
just 41% of common content (Hecht and Gergle,
2010). In contrast to other kinds of content, such
as software user interface strings or documenta-
tion, Wikipedia articles are not intended to be exact
translations that are always kept in sync. In order
to support that content diversity, CX does not force
2https://goo.gl/iKQIDh
3A detailed design specification is available at https://
www.mediawiki.org/wiki/CX

users to translate the full article. As illustrated in
Figure 1, users add content to the translation one
paragraph at a time. When a paragraph is added,
an initial translation based on MT is provided for
the user to edit. MT is used if available, but the
user can also start with the source text or an empty
paragraph if that is preferred.

Unlike other tools that define a strong bound-
ary to translate on a per sentence basis, working
at a paragraph level allows users to reorganise sen-
tences and accommodate different editing patterns.

Provide context information
In CX the original article and the translation

are shown side-by-side. Each paragraph is dy-
namically aligned vertically with the correspond-
ing translated paragraph, regardless of the differ-
ence in length. This allows users to quickly have
an overview of what has already been translated
and what has not.

Contextual information reduces the need for the
user to navigate and reorient. When translating a
sentence, the corresponding sentence in the orig-
inal document is highlighted. In addition, when
manipulating the content, options are provided an-
ticipating the user’s next steps. In Figure 1, based
on the user’s text selection, the user can explore
the article related to the selected text (in the source
or target languages), or turn the selected text into a
link. Dictionary can be accessed inside the tool by
selecting a word or by using the search box in the
tools column.

Focus on the translation
We identified many steps in the translation pro-

cess that could be automated. Users spend time
making sure each link they translated points to the
correct article in the target Wikipedia, and recre-
ating the text formatting that was lost when using
an external translation service. They also look for
categories available in the target Wikipedia to clas-
sify the translated article, and save constantly dur-
ing the process to avoid losing their work.

CX deals with those aspects automatically.
When adding a paragraph, the initial translation
preserves the text format. Modifications to the
translated content are saved automatically. Links
point to the right articles if they exist and ex-
isting categories are added to the article thanks
to Wikidata4, a structured data knowledge reposi-
tory, that maps corresponding concepts across lan-
4https://www.wikidata.org

195



Figure 1: The source and translated content side-by-side and additional tools on the right.

guages. As those aspects are automated, users can
focus on adapting content for the initial version of
the article rather than on technical and formatting
tasks.

Quality is key
One of the concerns raised early by the partici-

pants was about MT quality. Users were concerned
about the potential proliferation of low quality con-
tent in Wikipedia articles.

In order to respond to that concern, CX keeps
track of the amount of text that is added from MT
without further modification by the users. When a
given threshold is exceeded, a warning is shown to
users encouraging them to focus on quality more
than quantity.

4 WYSIWYG implementation

MediaWiki’s wikitext is not standardised. For a
long time, the only way to use wikitext was to
render it to HTML with MediaWiki. Parsoid5

is a Wikimedia project that implements a second
parser for wikitext. To follow the principle fo-
cus on translation principle we only provide lim-
ited editing and formatting options and side-step
a lot of complexity of Wikipedia article structure
5https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Parsoid

without negatively affecting the translation pro-
cess. CX is the first translation tool that provides
a WYSIWYG editor using the annotated HTML
provided by Parsoid.

Some MT services neither support HTML in-
put nor provide reordering information. Preserv-
ing markup is an essential requirement for CX be-
cause wikitext adaptation and WYSIWYG editing
are based on the markup. We devised an algorithm
that can reconstruct the reordering information by
making the MT service do some additional work.

5 MT evaluation

We use the subjective evaluations of MT quality
for a given language pair to decide whether we
will include a MT service for a language pair in
the tool. To evaluate a MT for a given language
pair, we ask the potential future users of the tool
to translate articles using it and tell whether it was
useful for them or not.

We run a MT service on our servers using
the open-source Apertium project (Forcada et al.,
2011), but we support other MT providers as well.

196



6 Evaluation

Currently the tool is only available to self-selected
users (most of them experienced editors), hence
the results cannot be generalised to the whole com-
munity. Further studies on the resulting quality
over a long term will help.

The low deletion ratio for articles created us-
ing CX suggests that there are no major problems
in terms of quality. In three months of expos-
ing the tool as an opt-in feature, 900 articles were
published using CX with an overall deletion ratio
lower than 1% across all languages, which is lower
than the deletion rate for all new articles.

We noticed that there is a significant difference
between the number of created articles in differ-
ent target language Wikipedias, which cannot be
explained by the number of active users, number
of available articles to translate nor the availabil-
ity of MT. For example in three months the Cata-
lan Wikipedia saw 455 articles created by translat-
ing from Spanish with CX, but in the Portuguese
Wikipedia only 25. Both language pairs have MT
provided by Apertium. Statistics about the tool are
collected publicly6.

We have not yet made precise measurements on
translation time saving, but we got positive reports
from our users. In a roundtable7 organised with
editors of the Catalan Wikipedia, an experienced
editor reported a 70% time saving.

We found that English is the most used source
language, consistent with Hale’s findings on mul-
tilingual user behaviour (2013).

7 Conclusions

We developed a tool that addresses the specific
needs of an open community and the specifics
of the kind of content in Wikipedia. CX is a
computer-assisted translation tool with a WYSI-
WYG editor and automatic link adaptation. CX
supports multiple different MT providers, but by
integrating the open source Apertium project we
were able to quickly provide MT for multiple lan-
guage pair We developed MT education and track-
ing features to address community concerns about
proliferation of poor quality translations.

User feedback for CX is supportive and data

6https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Content_
translation/analytics
7https://blog.wikimedia.org/2014/09/
29/round-table-with-editors-from-the-
catalan-wikipedia/

also shows that quality of the published transla-
tions is good, alleviating the community concerns.
The low translation activity in multiple languages
where the tool is already available needs further re-
search. Close integration in Wikipedia allows CX
to recruit users and suggest articles to translate in
ways not possible with the previous tools.

References
Alabau, Vicent, Ragnar Bonk, Christian Buck, Michael

Carl, Francisco Casacuberta, Mercedes Garcı́a-
Martı́nez, Jesús González, Philipp Koehn, Luis
Leiva, Bartolomé Mesa-Lao, et al. 2013. Casmacat:
An open source workbench for advanced computer
aided translation. The Prague Bulletin of Mathemat-
ical Linguistics, 100:101–112.

Beyer, H. and K. Holtzblatt. 1998. Contextual De-
sign: Defining Customer-centered Systems. Interac-
tive Technologies Series. Morgan Kaufmann.

Bronner, Amit, Matteo Negri, Yashar Mehdad, Angela
Fahrni, and Christof Monz. 2012. Cosyne: Synchro-
nizing multilingual wiki content. In Proceedings of
the Eighth Annual International Symposium on Wikis
and Open Collaboration, WikiSym ’12, pages 33:1–
33:4, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Forcada, Mikel L, Mireia Ginestı́-Rosell, Jacob Nord-
falk, Jim ORegan, Sergio Ortiz-Rojas, Juan An-
tonio Pérez-Ortiz, Felipe Sánchez-Martı́nez, Gema
Ramı́rez-Sánchez, and Francis M Tyers. 2011.
Apertium: a free/open-source platform for rule-
based machine translation. Machine translation,
25(2):127–144.

Garcı́a, Ignacio and Vivian Stevenson. 2009. Reviews-
google translator toolkit. Multilingual computing &
technology, 20(6):16.

Hale, Scott A. 2013. Multilinguals and wikipedia edit-
ing. CoRR, abs/1312.0976.

Hecht, Brent and Darren Gergle. 2010. The tower of
babel meets web 2.0: User-generated content and its
applications in a multilingual context. In Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI ’10, pages 291–300, New
York, NY, USA. ACM.

Kumarana, Narend, S Ashwani, and D Vikram. 2011.
Wikibhasha: Our experiences with multilingual con-
tent creation tool for wikipedia. In Proceedings of
Wikipedia Conference India, Wikimedia Foundation.

Nielsen, Jakob. 1994. Usability Engineering. Interac-
tive technologies. AP Professional.

Norman, D.A. and S.W. Draper. 1986. User cen-
tered system design: new perspectives on human-
computer interaction. New Perspectives on Human-
Computer Interaction Series. Lawrence Erlbaum As-
sociates.

197


