




































Polysemy and questions of lumping or splitting in the construction of
Swedish FrameNet

Karin Friberg Heppin
Språkbanken

Department of Swedish
University of Gothenburg

karin.friberg.heppin@svenska.gu.se

Dana Dannélls
Språkbanken

Department of Swedish
University of Gothenburg

dana.dannells@svenska.gu.se

Abstract

When working on a lexical resource, such
as Swedish FrameNet (SweFN), assump-
tions based on linguistic theories are made,
and methodological directions based upon
them are taken. These directions often
need to be revised when not beforehand
foreseen problems arise. One assumption
that was made already in the early devel-
opment stages of SweFN was that each
lexical entry from the reference lexicon,
SALDO, would evoke only one semantic
frame in SweFN. If a lexical entry evoked
more than one frame, it entailed more than
one sense and therefore required a new en-
try in the lexicon.

As work progressed, this inclination to-
wards splitting, in the perpetual lumpers
and splitters discussion (Kilgarriff, 1999),
proved to be progressively untenable. This
paper will give an account of the problems
which were encountered and suggestions
for solutions on polysemy issues forcing a
discussion on lumping or splitting.

1 Introduction

Regular polysemy may be automatically recog-
nized and disambiguated in a text if sufficient
amount of data covering the word senses is pro-
vided (Alonso et al., 2013). For English, substan-
tial computational work on automatic sense dis-
ambiguation has been done. Recent prominent
work was carried out on frame semantics linguis-
tic theory, more specifically Berkeley FrameNet
(BFN) (Das et al., 2013). The vocabulary, com-
prising around 11,000 lexical units (LU), in BFN
has been derived from annotated corpus sentences
rather than from a lexicon. As a result, while less
frequent words and word senses are represented,

many frequently used word senses may be miss-
ing.

Furthermore, although BFN has a huge poten-
tial advantage for work on word sense disambigua-
tion, it lacks formal definitions of polysemous be-
havior of words in frames. While there is, in
many cases a straightforward relation between lex-
ical units and semantic frames in BFN, there is
no clear methodological approach for how to sys-
tematically deal with regular polysemy. Conse-
quently, when building a new frame semantic re-
source, where BFN structure is taken as the inter-
lingua, some theoretical and methodological ap-
proaches have to be considered.

In the construction of Swedish FrameNet,
words with multiple semantically related mean-
ings, i.e. polysemous Swedish lexical units, have
forced more systematic approach to lumping or
splitting of semantic frames and lexical entries.

In this paper we address problems of polysemy
in FrameNet-like resources. We present polysemy
problems we had to deal with during the construc-
tion of the frame semantics resource SweFN. We
give an account of the reflections, and suggestions
for solutions that have been taken on issues such
as ambiguity, potential meaning, and vagueness,
each forcing a discussion on lumping or splitting.

2 Swedish FrameNet (SweFN)

Swedish FrameNet has been developed as part
of the SweFN++ project (Friberg Heppin and
Toporowska Gronostaj, 2014; Borin et al., 2010)
where the main objective is building a panchronic
lexical macro-resource for use in Swedish lan-
guage technology. This macro-resource consists
of several separate resources with the SALDO lex-
icon (Borin et al., 2013) as the pivot resource to
which all other resources are connected. One such
resource is SweFN.

SweFN is a lexical semantic resource which has
been constructed in line with Berkeley FrameNet

Karin Friberg Heppin and Dana Dannélls 2015. Polysemy, underspecification, and aspects – Questions of

lumping or splitting in the construction of Swedish FrameNet. Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic re-

sources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA

2015. NEALT Proceedings Series 27 / Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings 112: 12–20.

12



(Ruppenhofer et al., 2010). The theoretical ap-
proach taken is based on frame semantics (Fill-
more, 1982) which assumes that all content words
in a language are best explained by appealing
to the conceptual backgrounds that underlie their
meanings. Word senses are described in relation
to semantic frames, including the semantic roles
of the participants.

We have transferred the conceptual layer of
BFN to SweFN and provided one-to-one (in a
few cases many-to-one) links to BFN frames.
These frames were populated with language spe-
cific lexical units (LUs) derived from the lexicon
SALDO, which evoke the frame in question, and
example sentences from corpora. SweFN differs
from BFN in several respects including a num-
ber of new frames unique to SweFN, compound
analysis and domain information. As far as the
methodological approach is concerned, the top-
down frame building approach was extended with
a bottom-up procedure, having its starting point
in the lexicon, taking polysemous words and find-
ing or creating frames for all regular (or system-
atic) senses (Apresjan, 1974). Disambiguation de-
cisions were based on explicit lexical criteria and
corpus-related data, to assure homogeneity and
usefulness of the resulting resource.

To demonstrate the patterns of semantic roles,
example sentences are added from the KORP cor-
pus collection (Ahlberg et al., 2013). The KORP
infrastructure offers a functionality called Word
Picture which provides statistical information on
lexical collocational features. When we add LUs
to SweFN frames Word picture is used to acquire
an overview of possible senses of Swedish nouns,
verbs, and adjectives.

SALDO, Swedish Associative Thesaurus ver-
sion 2, (Borin et al., 2013) is a free electronic
lexicon resource for modern Swedish written lan-
guage, containing around 130,000 lexical entries.
It has an hierarchal structure where lexical entries
are associated to each other through two seman-
tic descriptors: primary and secondary. The pri-
mary descriptor is obligatory while the secondary
one is optional. The resource can be compared to
Princeton WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) from which
it differs in several aspects (Borin and Forsberg,
2009). On the polysemy level, the average degree
of highly ambiguous words in SALDO is 4.7%,
comparing to 12.4% in WordNet 3.1 (Johansson
and Nieto Piña, 2015).

3 Cases of polysemy

According to BFN (Fillmore et al., 2003; Fillmore
and Baker, 2009), if a word evokes more than one
frame it is represented as different LUs with differ-
ent senses. This is the background to the original
stance of SweFN that each entry of the SALDO
lexicon would only evoke one frame. Evoking a
new frame entails a different sense and thus con-
stitutes a different LU. In the work on SweFN we
have encountered three types of cases where it, at
first glance, would seem that a lexicon entry could
evoke more than one frame: (1) two frames stand
in a hyponomy relation to each other; (2) there is
a regular polysemy relation between two frames;
(3) the concept categories behind the frames di-
vide the world along different dimensions. In the
following we elaborate on each of these cases.

3.1 Hyponymy relation

When there is a hyponomy relation between
frames we see two possible solutions: (1a) If
a lexicon entry evokes more than one frame
which all have a common parent frame, the entry
becomes an LU evoking this parent frame. An
example of this is the verb bila (car.v) ‘go by
car’. It may evoke both the Operate vehicle
and the Ride vehicle frame. However, both
these frames are in a hyponym relation to the
Use vehicle frame, and thus the LU bila is
listed in this parent frame thereby evoking also
the child frames which, i this case, are related
to the parent frame in a Perspectivized relation
(see Figure 1). (1b) If instead, a lexical entry
evokes only one of several child frames in a
hyponym relation to one common parent frame,
the entry is listed as an LU in the child frame.
In this case the LU may still evoke the parent
frame. An example of this situation is found
in the child frames Medical professionals,
Member of military, Performers, and
Representative, all inheriting from the parent
frame People by vocation.

3.2 Regular polysemy relation

For regular polysemy relation between two
frames, case (2), it is difficult to avoid a certain de-
gree of arbitrariness in decisions of when to lump
and when to split, regardless of whether these de-
cisions concern entries in the lexicon or frames in
the framenet. Take as an example the relation be-
tween the Food and the Animals frames, and like-

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

13



Use_vehicle

Operate_vehicle Ride_vehicle

Figure 1: If a lexicon entry could evoke two
frames which have a common frame in a hyper-
onym relation, as in the case with bila ‘go by
car’, the entry is listed as an LU in the parent
frame. Here Use vehicle is perspectivized in
both Operate vehicle and Ride vehicle.

wise between the Food and the Plants frames.
What constitutes food is matter from either ani-
mals or plants, the names of which become LUs
evoking Animals or Plants. These words denot-
ing animals or plants could also become LUs the
Food frame, although with substantially varying
probability, and in SweFN on the condition that
they have separate entries in the SALDO lexicon.
The probability that a certain word denoting ani-
mals or plants would have a food sense evoking
the Food frame varies between cultures, circum-
stances of wellbeing, and what type of creature is
doing the eating. In the SALDO lexicon there is
only a small number of names of animals, e.g. fisk
‘fish’ and lamm ‘lamb’ with separate entries in the
lexicon, for the animal and the food sense. Creat-
ing additional entries in the lexicon for additional
animals and plants would not solve the problem as
the decision on how probable in being consumed
as food something would have to be in order to de-
serve a food sense in the lexicon would always be
arbitrary. A solution to this situation, is to let LUs
in the more basic frames, in this case Animals and
Plants, appear as Guest LUs in the other frame,
as illustrated in Figure 2. A Guest LU of a frame
does not evoke this frame, and cannot be under-
stood without the senses of the original frame, but
may still, under certain circumstances evoke the
frame in question. This means that example sen-
tences may be given and annotated in the frame
where the LU appears as Guest LU (Ruppenhofer
et al., 2010).

When there is a regular polysemy relation be-
tween frames it is not necessary to have more than
one entry for a word in the lexicon or more than
one LU evoking a frame in the framenet. However,
from corpus evidence we learn that some species

Animals

Food

Plants

Figure 2: There is a regular polysemy relation-
ship between Animals and Plants frames and the
Food frame. All LUs in first frames could, with
varying probability, evoke also the latter frame. In
these cases they are Guest LUs in this frame.

of animals and plants are more commonly con-
sumed as food since they are considerably more
frequent in the food sense than in other senses.
Such evidence could for practical purposes make
it meaningful to have additional entries in the lexi-
con. The entries, in turn, could be listed as LUs in
the corresponding frame. For example, a corpus
search on the word lax ‘salmon’ in Korp’s Word
Picture gives implicit hints for the most frequent
senses of the word, as shown in Figure 3. The
search resulted in 19,217 instances of lax from
modern Swedish corpora. Almost all collocates
of lax belong to the food sense: färsk ‘fresh’, ben-
fri (bone-free) ‘without bones’, med potatis ‘with
potatoes’, i ugn ‘in oven’, äta ‘eat’, innehålla
‘contain’, servera ‘serve’, and laga ‘cook’ Some
collocates could go with either sense, such as vara
‘be’, bli ‘become’ and köpa ‘buy’. Only three
of the collocates belong exclusively to the animal
sense, namely fiska ‘fish’, fånga ‘catch’, rädda
‘rescue’. Even though results like the one descibed
above may motivate additional lexicon entries, de-
cisions of when to do so will always be arbitrary.

Many Swedish verbs show a tendency of con-
struction shift in the object position. As a re-
sult, they evoke pairs of frames, for example,
Emptying and Removing, e.g., tömma ‘empty’,
evakuera ‘evacuate’, and Placing and Filling,
e.g., lasta ‘load’. Under the original assumption
of SweFN this would entail different senses and
consequently different entries in SALDO and list-
ing as different LUs in the two frames. Exam-
ples 1 and 2 show such a construction shift which
causes a shift of focus from what is being moved
(THEME) to the original location (SOURCE). A
problem with creating distinct entries in the lexi-
con is that these verbs frequently are used without

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

14



Figure 3: A search for the noun lax ‘salmon’ in KORP’s Word Picture tool shows that almost all collo-
cates belong to the sense of lax evoking the Food frame. Only three, vild ‘wild’, fånga ‘catch.v’, and
fiska ‘fish.v’ exclusively collocates with the sense evoking the Animals frame.

object, in which case, a specific sense is not ex-
pressed. This is a form of polysemy and the prob-
lem may be solved similarly to case (1), described
in Section 3.2, by having only one sense in the lex-
icon, making this an LU evoking the most perti-
nent frame and letting it be a Guest LU in the re-
lated frame. Polysemy due to construction change
applies to many LUs in the concerned pairs of
frames, but far from all LUs. Which frame is more
pertinent also varies between LUs. This requires a
specification on LU level for when the polysemy
relation holds, and in which direction.

(1) Olov
Olof

Lindgren
Lindgren

hade
had

redan
already

evakuerat
evacuated

[många
many

hyresgäster]THEME
tenants

när
when

[...]
[...]

‘Olof Lindgren had already evacuated
many tenants when [...]’ (Removing)

(2) [Byggnaden]SOURCE
‘building-DEF

evakueras, [...]
evacuate-PASS

‘The building is being evacuated [...]’
(Emptying)

Other Swedish verbs with tendency to such
construction changes evoke, among others,
the Removing-Emptying frames, e.g., tömma
‘empty’ and torka ‘wipe’, and the Placing-

Filling frames, e.g. spreja ‘spray’, lasta ‘load’.
A detailed description of corresponding construc-
tion changes for English may be found in Levin
(2015) in the section on locative alternations.

3.3 Different dimensions

Finally, in the case of dividing the world into
concepts along different dimensions, case (3), a
solution may be to allow one lexical entry of the
lexicon to evoke more than one frame. Consider
the Swedish word for children who get one ear
ache after the other: öronbarn (ear child) ‘child
that often gets ear aches’. As the sense is about
persons being struck by disease, the LU evokes
the frame People by disease. However, the
word is used to denote children and therefore also
evokes People by age, as in Example 3. This
does not entail that there should be more than one
entry in the lexicon, as both the age aspect and
the disease aspect are evoked at the same time.
What happens here is that the People frame is
inherited by several frames dividing the concepts
describing people along unrelated dimensions,
e.g., People by age People by disease
People by morality People by vocation

etc. The consequense is that some lexical entries
evoke more than one frame, especially in a
language such as Swedish where compounding

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

15



is a very productive linguistic process. The
Danish WordNet has also dealt with this problem
(Pedersen et al., 2010).

(3) I
in

vår
our

familj
family

har
have

vi
we

öronbarn.
ear-children.

‘Our family’s children often get ear
aches’.

3.4 Complex relations

More than one of the situations, shown in cases
(1)–(3) above, may be applicable for the some en-
tries in the lexicon. A splitting approach, demand-
ing one lexicon entry for each sense possibly evok-
ing a frame, would in such cases result in a large
number of lexicon entries, unmotivated from the
perspective of how the words are used.

To illustrate this, consider the word general
‘general’. The SALDO lexicon contains one
entry for general, which now is listed in the
SweFN Member of military frame. Other
frames within the meaning potential would
be People by vocation, Leadership, and
Appellations (titles of individuals, often used
together with the person’s surname, e.g., General
Abas Khan).

The current relations between frames in
FrameNet show that Member of military in-
herits from People by vocation, a hypon-
omy relation described in case (1). The
Appellations frame has a regular polysemy re-
lation with People by vocation where all LUs
in People by vocation could potentially evoke
also the Appellations frame, regular polysemy
relations described in case (2). At the same time
the Leadership frame describes people along a
different dimension than People by vocation,
case (3). Being a leader may be inherent in being
a general and a set of other vocations, but one does
not need to have a profession or be in the military
in order to be a leader. Neither is the case that all
vocations or roles in the military involves being a
leader. The sets of LUs evoking Leadership and
Member of military or People by vocation
are overlapping.

Summing it up, the SALDO entry gen-
eral has several potential meanings which
evoke the four frames Member of military,
People by vocation, Leadership, and
Appellations. Following the discussion above,
the same lexical entry general would be listed
in the Member of military and Leadership

frames. As Member of military inherits
from People by vocation general would also
evoke People by vocation, and as there is a
regular polysemy relation between this frame
and Appellations, it would also evoke the
latter frame as a Guest LU. These relations are
illustrated in Figure 4.

Figure 4: The lexical unit general evokes four
frames without motivating as many entries in
the lexicon. There is a hyponomy relation
between the frames People by vocation and
Member of military, an overlapping aspect of
sense between these frames and the Leadership
frame, while there is a regular polysemy rela-
tions between People by vocation (including
Member of military) and the Appellations
frames.

The cases described here in Section 3 show that
the possibility of a lexicon entry evoking more
than one frame does not always motivate adding
a new sense to the lexicon or a regular LU to the
framenet. In the current version of SweFN the
lexical entries of SALDO are still only allowed
to populate one frame. However, it has become
obvious that solutions such as Guest LU, addi-
tional parent frames, and allowing a lexicon entry
to evoke more than one frame in restricted cases,
must be considered.

4 Meaning potentials

The construction of a framenet tends to give bias
to the splitting point of view. Work on a par-
ticular frame includes the phase of populating it
with LUs. Encountering an entry in a lexicon, or
a word/phrase in a corpus sentence, it is tempt-
ing to list it as an LU in the frame under con-
struction if it in some sense evokes it. However,

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

16



the potential of an entity to evoke a frame does
not necessarily mean that this is the only frame it
may evoke, or that it primarily evokes this frame.
Hanks (2013) describes words as having meaning
potentials in that different senses are activated in
different contexts, something which does not en-
tail that the word in question has several distinctive
senses. This fuzzyness is not a flaw in language,
but a strength, as it makes language dynamic and
flexible, useful for describing situations and con-
texts never encountered before. Neither is it al-
ways desirable to be specific.

Even though frames evoked by the word’s dif-
ferent meaning potentials may have varying se-
mantic types, without explicit internal relation in,
for example, the FrameNet system, many words
still need to keep their vagueness and should have
the possibility to evoke more than one frame. As
stated by Wierzbicka (1984) the aim must some-
times be to be vague:

An adequate definition of a vague con-
cept must aim at precision in vagueness
– it must aim at PRECISELY that level
of vagueness which characterises the
concept itself.(Wierzbicka, 1984):210

4.1 Diverse meaning potentials

A group of words which is often used under-
specified, having several meaning potentials of di-
verse semantic types, are words denoting insti-
tutions/businesses/organizations, including the ac-
tivities and people within. To illustrate this we can
look at how the noun skola ‘school’ (in the edu-
cation sense) is represented in Svensk ordbok, a
monolingual Swedish dictionary published by the
Swedish Academy (Allén et al., 2009):

• Institution where education is performed

1. with focus on the activities performed within
the educational institution

2. with focus on the building where the educa-
tion is performed

3. with focus on the collective of persons
working with/attending educational activities
within a certain institution

4. other organization which teaches a particular
skill or subject

The noun has one main sense with four sub-
senses. The different subsenses could be said to

evoke the frames in the list below. The list in-
cludes the initial part of the frame description in
BFN:

• Main sense: Institutions “This frame
concerns permanent organizations (the IN-
STITUTIONS) with a public character, mean-
ing that they are intended to affect the lives of
the public at large in a particular DOMAIN.”

• Subsense 1: Education teaching “This
frame contains words referring to teaching
and the participants in teaching.”

• Subsense 2: Buildings “This frame con-
tains words which name permanent fixed
structures forming an enclosure and provid-
ing protection from the elements.”

• Subsense 3: Aggregate “This frame con-
tains nouns denoting AGGREGATES of INDI-
VIDUALS.”

• Subsense 4: Organization. “This frame
describes intentionally formed human social
groups (here termed ORGANIZATIONS) with
some definite structure and MEMBERS.”

The various meaning potentials for a word are
brought forward by the context, often put in focus
by different collocates. Searching for collocates,
with a tool such as Korp’s Word Picture, may help
detect senses, in a similar manner as for lax in
Section 3.4. The collocational statistics for school
in Word Picture shows that the main sense of the
word together with subsenses 1 and 2 dominate.

Below is a list of frames followed by collocates
to skola found by Word Picture. The frames are
the ones which the potential meanings of skola
evokes together with the collocates respectively:

• Institutions: byta ‘change’, välja
‘choose’, driva ‘operate’

• Education teaching: kommunal ‘munici-
pal’, vanlig ‘ordinary’, gå ‘attend’

• Buildings: bygga ‘build’, ligga ‘be lo-
cated’, brinna ‘be on fire’

The word skola shows several forms of regu-
lar polysemy in that is has several different mean-
ing potentials, and is often used underspecified, in-
cluding more than one sense. This is seen in Ex-
ample 4 where the visitor, Jag ’I’, may be seen as

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

17



visiting the persons, the activities, as well as the
building of the school itself. Making one entry in
the lexicon for each potential, each becoming an
LU evoking a different frame, would not catch the
possibility of vagueness and the relations between
the senses would be lost.

(4) Jag
I

ska
will

besöka
visit

en
a

skola
school

i
in

Köpenhamn.
Copenhagen.

’I am going to visit a school in Copen-
hagen.’

Words with the potential of denoting institu-
tions, organizations, businesses, and the people
and activities within, often show this type of reg-
ular polysemy, although with variying sets of po-
tential meaning, and thus varying sets of frames
evoked. In order to keep the possibility of vague-
ness between the potential meanings of varying
semantic types, a system allowing Guest LUs in
the frames evoked by subsenses should be de-
veloped. However, as not all LUs in the basic
frames, such as Institutions, Businesses, or
Organizations, have the same set of subsenses,
the Guest LU relation must be established on the
level of LUs, not frames.

The difficulty of choosing suitable frames for
LUs denoting institutions, businesses, and organi-
zations becomes apparent in the inconsistency in
BFN for frames which are evoked by this group of
nouns.

• school evokes Locale by use
• theater evokes Buildings, Locale by use,

and Fields
• bank evokes Businesses
• church evokes Buildings
• restaurant evokes Locale by use
• bar evokes Buildings

Although there is a lack of consistency in how
frames are split in BFN, BFN offers a possi-
ble solution for some cases of underspecification,
the non-perspectivalized frame (Ruppenhofer et
al., 2010). A frame of this type contains a di-
versity of LUs sharing a certain scene as back-
ground, but which do not have consistent semantic
types. Examples are the Education teaching
frame, which is evoked by LUs such as study.v,
teach.v, training.n, and educational.a and the

Performers and roles frame evoked by, for ex-
ample, act.v, star.n and part.n. To obtain consis-
tent perspective in each frame, the frames could
be split further, but then the possibility to house
polysemous words would be lost.

However, the purpose of non-perspectivalized
frames in BFN was not to house polysemous
words, but is described as being as a time-saving
measure (Ruppenhofer et al., 2010). The solution
of having non-perspectivalized frames is not opti-
mal in that having the definition of frames deter-
mined along the dimension of context instead of
the dimension of participants and semantic roles,
the frame definitions and division of the world are
not consistent with each other.

4.2 Related meaning potentials

While some groups of words have diverse mean-
ing potentials of a variety of semantic types, others
have meaning potentials which are more closely
related. Take the example of describing national-
ity or residence. There are words such as Canadian
and Londoner which may describe persons with
origin in a certain place. However, the same word
may also describe where a person lives or where
they are citizens. The origin of a person may well
be different from were he or she resides or is reg-
istered. When stating a persons nationality or city
it may be an advantage to be vague in this aspect.

In BFN and SweFN there are three frames
which may be evoked by words for ori-
gin/residence/citizenship: People by origin,
Residence, and People by jurisdiction,
which inherit from the People frame.1 Parts
of the frame descriptions, from the FrameNet
website,2 are given below.

• People by origin – This frame contains
words for individuals, i.e. humans, with re-
spect to their ORIGIN.

• Residence – This frame has to do with
people (the RESIDENTS) residing in LOCA-
TIONS, sometimes with a CO-RESIDENT.

• People by jurisdiction – This frame
contains words for individuals, i.e. humans,

1The Residence frame does not inherit directly from
People, but stands in a ’Used by’ relationship to the
People by residence frame which, inherits from the
People frame and in BFN contains the three LUs housemate,
neighbor, and roommate.

2https://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/
fndrupal/

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

18



who are governed by virtue of being regis-
tered in a certain JURISDICTION.

Most words denoting people in relation to geo-
graphic areas could evoke all of the frames above
e.g., stockholmare (Stockholmer) ‘person from
Stockholm’. However, a few evoke only one e.g.:
malmöbo (Malmö-liver) ‘Malmö resident’ evok-
ing Residence, and svenskfödd (Swedish-born)
‘born in Sweden’ evoking (People by origin).
For most of the words denoting people in relation
to geographic areas it is desirable to maintain the
possibility of vagueness, letting the context deter-
mine which meaning potentials should be realized.
This may be solved by creating a new a frame on
an intermediate level, inheriting from People and
itself being inherited by the other three frames,
with a name such as People by locale, for these
LUs (see figure 5). The LUs which do not evoke
all alternatives, such as malmöbo and svenskfödd
should populate the frames that they do evoke. A
solution such as this is a more elaborate example
of case (1) described in Section 3.1.

People

People_by_locale

People_by_origin Residence People_by_jurisdiction

Figure 5: When meaning potentials evoke frames
in close relation to each other, vagueness may be
maintained by creating a new frame on an inter-
mediate level, a parent frame to the more specific
frames.

FrameNet has an intricate network of relations,
such as inheritance or ’used by’ relations be-
tween frames. For example, the frame People
is inherited by several other frames, most of
them with names on the format People by . A
new frame, such as People by locale, would
easily fit in this network having People as
parent frame and the three frames described
above as child frames. There are other cases
where frames potentially evoked by an LU do
not have connecting relations in the current
FrameNet system, and are not as closely related.
An example is the verb bråka ‘fight’, which
may evoke both Quarreling inheriting from
Discussion and Hostile encounter inheriting

from Intentionally act and itself is inherited
by Fighting activity. Solving this, and simi-
lar cases which do not lend themselves easily into
any case category, could be done, by consulting
corpus data to see if any use is more frequent, or by
looking at derivational forms related to the words
in question. A fighter, for example, would more
likely be involved in physical fights than quarrels,
suggesting that the Hostile encounter frame
would be main frame evoked by fight, leaving fight
to be a Guest LU in Quarreling.

5 Summary

There are a number of situations where a lexical
entry of the lexicon, here SALDO, evokes more
than one frame in the framenet, here SweFN, but
where it is still not motivated to split the entry into
several polysemous entries. As the relations be-
tween the word senses and between the evoked
frames differ, different cases must be treated in
different ways. This does not necessarily consti-
tute a problem in a resource such as BFN which is
not directly linked to a specific lexicon. However,
in the case of SweFN, where the original assump-
tion was, and as far as possible still is, that each
lexical entry of the SALDO lexicon should only
evoke one frame, special account must be taken
for entries with several senses potentially evoking
different frames. This is especially the case when
there is a restriction in that the resource must be
compatible with other resources such as SweFN
being part of the macro-resource SweFN++.

In cases of hyponymy relations between frames,
where all child frames are evoked, it is sufficient
to list the LUs in the parent frame. If not all child
frames are evoked, the LUs should be listed in the
child frames they do evoke. When there is a regu-
lar polysemy relation between frames, the lexical
entries are listed as LUs in the most basic frame,
and as Guest LUs in the less basic frame. For
some pairs of frames, the regular polysemy rela-
tion holds for all LUs, while for other frame pairs
the relation might only concern a subset of these.
This calls for a system of relations in the framenet,
not only between frames, but also between LUs in
pairs of frames.

Other situations where an LU evokes more than
one frame is due to the manner FrameNet re-
sources are constructed: pairs of frames may be
overlapping, Leadership-People by vocation
or frames may be non-perspectivalized such as

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

19



Education teaching which is evoked by LUs
of different semantic types within one domain. In
these cases, the solution may be to allow, in a
restricted manner, one lexicon sense become LU
evoking more than one frame.

SweFN has had to let the assumption of one lex-
ical entry – one frame be less restrictive. However,
it is still the case that one SALDO entry cannot
evoke more than one frame unless some type of
relation is established. The exact forms of the re-
lations are still to be decided.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Josef Ruppenhofer for his
expert advise on FrameNet and Maria Toporowska
Gronostaj for her expert advise in lexicography.
The research presented here was supported by
the Swedish Research Council (grant agreement
2010-6013), the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary
Foundation (grant agreement P120076:1), and by
the University of Gothenburg through its support
of the Centre for Language Technology and of
Språkbanken.

References

Malin Ahlberg, Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, Martin
Hammarstedt, Leif-Jöran Olsson, Olof Olsson, Jo-
han Roxendal, and Jonatan Uppström. 2013. Korp
and karp a bestiary of language resources: the re-
search infrastructure of språkbanken. In Proceed-
ings of the 19th Nordic Conference of Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 429–433. NEALT.

Sture Allén, Daniel Berg, Sture Berg, Martin Geller-
stam, Louise Holmer, Ann-Kristin Hult, Susanne
Lindstrand, Sven Lövfors, Sven-Göran Malmgren,
Christian Sjögreen, Emma Sköldberg, Lennart
Tegner, and Maria Toporowska Gronostaj, edi-
tors. 2009. Svensk ordbok utgiven av Svenska
Akademien. 1-2.

Héctor Martı́nez Alonso, Bolette Sandford Pedersen,
and Núria Bel. 2013. Annotation of regular poly-
semy and underspecification. In Proceedings from
the 51st annual meeting in Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 725–730. ACL.

J. Apresjan. 1974. Regular polysemy. Linguistics,
142:5–32.

Lars Borin and Markus Forsberg. 2009. All in the fam-
ily: A comparison of SALDO and WordNet. In Pro-
ceedings of the 17th Nordic Conference of Computa-
tional Linguistics (NODALIDA 2009), NEALT Pro-
ceedings Series, Vol. 4 (2009), Odense, Denmark.
Kristiina Jokinen and Eckhard Bick.

Lars Borin, Dana Danélls, Markus Forsberg, Dim-
itrios Kokkinakis, and Maria Toporowska Gronos-
taj. 2010. The past meets the present in
Swedish FrameNet++. In 14th EURALEX Interna-
tional Congress, pages 269–281, Leeuwarden. EU-
RALEX.

Lars Borin, Markus Forsberg, and Lennart Lönngren.
2013. SALDO: a touch of yin to WordNet’s yang.
Language Resources and Evaluation, 47(4):1191–
1211.

Dipanjan Das, Desai Chen, André F. T. Martins,
Nathan Schneider, and Noah A. Smith. 2013.
Frame-Semantic Parsing. Computational Linguis-
tics, 40(1):9–56.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An electronic
lexical database. MIT Press.

Charles J. Fillmore and Collin Baker. 2009. A frames
approach to semantic analysis. The Oxford Hand-
book of Linguistic Analysis, pages 313–340.

Charles J. Fillmore, Christopher R. Johnson, and
Miriam R.L. Petruck. 2003. Background to
FrameNet. International Journal of Lexicography,
16(3):235–250.

Charles J. Fillmore, 1982. Frame semantics, pages
111–137. Hanshin Publishing Co., Seoul, South Ko-
rea.

Karin Friberg Heppin and Maria Toporowska Gronos-
taj. 2014. Exploiting FrameNet for Swedish: Mis-
match? Constructions and Frames, 6(1):52–72.

Patrick Hanks. 2013. Lexical Analysis: Norms and
Exploitations. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Richard Johansson and Luis Nieto Piña. 2015. Com-
bining relational and distributional knowledge for
word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the
20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguis-
tics, Vilnius, Lithuania.

Adam Kilgarriff. 1999. I don’t believe in word senses.
Computers and the Humanities, 31(2):91–113.

Beth Levin. 2015. Semantics and pragmatics of argu-
ment alternations. The Annual Review of Linguis-
tics, 1:63–83.

Bolette S. Pedersen, Sanni Nimb, and Anna Braasch.
2010. Merging specialist taxonomies and folk tax-
onomies in wordnets – A case study of plants, ani-
mals and foods in the Danish WordNet. In Proc. of
the Seventh International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, Valletta, Malta. ELRA.

Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, R. L. Miriam
Petruck, R. Christopher Johnson, and Jan Scheffczy.
2010. FrameNet II: Extended Theory and Practice.
ICSI, Berkeley.

Anna Wierzbicka. 1984. Cups and mugs: Lexicogra-
phy and conceptual analysis. Australian Journal of
Linguistics, 4(2):205–255.

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

20


