



















































Game-Changing Event Definition and Detection in an eSports Corpus


Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on EVENTS at the NAACL-HLT 2015, pages 77–81,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Game-Changing Event Definition and Detection in an eSports Corpus

Emily Grace Olshefski
Montclair State University

1 Normal Avenue
Montclair, NJ 07043, USA

olshefskie1@montclair.edu

Abstract

Despite the growing cultural presence of eS-
ports, no corpus contains this genre of en-
tertainment. This paper presents how a pre-
liminary corpus was created from broadcast
speech from a professional game of the eSport
Counter-Strike: Global Offensive (CS:GO).
The corpus was initially annotated follow-
ing the Automatic Contact Extraction (ACE)
event subtype definitions for game-changing
events: deaths, injuries, and attacks. Event
subtype definitions were modified for fur-
ther annotation to detect a wider range of
game-changing events otherwise not defined
by ACE. A high degree of inter-annotator
agreement for most event subtypes suggests
that modifying event subtype definitions for
an eSports corpus is necessary to detect the
breadth of game-changing events.

1 Introduction

The phenomenon of eSports (electronic sports, or
competitive video gaming) is relatively new but has
quickly become a global sensation. The advent of
local area networks (LAN) has made eSports as
competitive, if not more, than traditional sports, es-
pecially in countries like South Korea and China
and, “this emerging market segment produces bil-
lions of dollars and contributes economically to the
growth of the sport industry as a whole” (Lee and
Schoenstedt, 2011).

Despite the popularity, growth, and cultural im-
pact of eSports, few studies examine the nature of
eSports. Furthermore, no linguistic studies of eS-
ports exist due to the lack of eSports as a genre in

corpora. For example, the Manually Annotated Sub-
Corpus (American National Corpus Project) con-
tains multiple genres of entertainment, like fiction,
essays, and movie scripts. eSports, like film, is a
multi-billion dollar industry that is growing rapidly,
and by collecting data for eSports other corpora
can become representative of emerging language
use. While projects such as FrameNet (International
Computer Science Institute) and other genre spe-
cific corpora like GENIA (Kim et al., 2005), a bio-
textmining corpus, have undergone extensive event
annotation, eSports has not been included in prior
event annotation work, and doing so may provide
insight into event detection and definition.

This paper aims to explain how a preliminary eS-
ports corpus was created from the speech of eSports
broadcasters who provide play-by-play and color
commentary of one of the most popular eSports,
Counter-Strike: Global Offensive, or CS:GO. The
corpus was annotated by two annotators with exten-
sive knowledge of not only CS:GO but also language
the community and broadcasters use to describe the
events of CS:GO games. Creating and annotating a
corpus of CS:GO speech also provides a controlled
model for the annotation of real-life attack, injury,
and death events in, for example, a military based
corpus.

The corpus was annotated twice to explore the
nature of game-changing events (events that signif-
icantly impact the outcome or course of gameplay)
in CS:GO. The corpus was first annotated follow-
ing definitions designated by the Automatic Content
Extraction (ACE) Program. Annotations were then
made after event subtype modification. A new event

77



subtype was created to more accurately detect game-
changing events. This paper is the first step in de-
tecting game-changing events in a corpus comprised
entirely of language from eSports.

2 Approach

The first step in the approach to detecting game-
changing events in an eSports corpus began with
choosing an eSport (CS:GO) and creating a corpus
from the speech of professional CS:GO broadcast-
ers. Annotators were chosen based on knowledge of
the eSport, and event definitions and modifications
were made to better detect game-changing events.

2.1 CS:GO Classic Competitive - Bomb
Scenario

Although there are five different game modes in
the first-person shooter CS:GO, the only one played
professionally is Classic Competitive - Bomb Sce-
nario. This game mode is played between a team
of five terrorists and five counter-terrorists, loosely
modeling a terrorist bomb plant scenario.

The goal of the terrorist team is to plant the bomb
and have it explode, and/or to kill all of the counter-
terrorists. The goal of the counter-terrorist team is
to defuse a planted bomb, kill all of the terrorists,
or have a minimum of one player alive in the ab-
sence of a bomb plant. The teams switch sides (from
counter-terrorist to terrorist, and vice versa) at the
halfway mark of 15 rounds, and the first team to win
16 rounds wins the game. In the event of a tie (30
rounds, each team with 15 round wins) the game ex-
tends into overtime to determine a winner.

Each player starts each round with 100 health
and zero armor points unless they purchase armor
in the form of a Kevlar vest and/or helmet. Play-
ers lose health and armor points by taking damage
from guns, knives, tasers, bomb and grenade explo-
sions, and grenade contact, and damage can be dealt
from the opposing team, one’s own teammates, or
oneself. When a player loses all of their health and
armor points they die and are unable to participate in
the game until the next round. Professional players
often plan their strategies around planting bombs,
killing and/or injuring opposing players, and creat-
ing space with smoke and flash grenades (referred to
as flashbangs in CS:GO).

2.2 The CS:GO Corpus

The corpus consists of 47 minutes of speech com-
prised of 10,000 words from an August 2014 video
broadcast of a professional CS:GO game posted on
YouTube between a French team, Titan, and a North
American team, Cloud9. The speech was manually
transcribed by the author due to a lack of transcripts
or closed captioning. This broadcast took place
during the Electronic Sports League One Cologne
2014 tournament, and since the broadcasters were
not in soundproof booths background noise rendered
speech-to-text programs useless in obtaining data.

This video was chosen primarily on the basis
of the broadcasters, Auguste “Semmler” Massonant
and Anders “Anders” Blume. Semmler and An-
ders, as they are known in the CS:GO commu-
nity, were chosen due to their expert knowledge
of CS:GO, their extensive experience broadcasting,
and the clarity of their speech. Written permission
to use their speech as the basis of this corpus was
obtained from both broadcasters. An example of the
speech in the corpus is as follows: “Hiko tries to put
shots through with the Five Seven, and Seangares
looking to do some damage but the bomb will get
planted and Cloud9, they just don’t have the fire-
power or the nades to really get in here and have an
impact.”

2.3 Annotators

The annotation task was completed by two an-
notators, referred to as Annotator A (the author)
and Annotator B. Both annotators have spent over
1000 hours playing CS:GO, watch broadcast games
weekly, and have not completed any prior annotation
tasks.

2.4 Original Event Definitions

Originally the annotators agreed that the ACE
English Annotation Guidelines for Events Ver-
sion 5.4.3 2005.07.01 definitions for LIFE.DIE,
LIFE.INJURE, and CONFLICT.ATTACK event
subtypes represent the majority of game-changing
events in a CS:GO game. Player kills (LIFE.DIE
events) can significantly alter the outcome of rounds,
and even lowering a player’s health (LIFE.INJURE
events) affects strategy and gameplay. When players
are not killing or injuring each other different types

78



of attack events (CONFLICT.ATTACK) occur that
change the course of the game. The ACE (Linguistic
Data Consortium, 2005) definitions for these afore-
mentioned event subtypes are as follows:

“An INJURE Event occurs whenever a PERSON
Entity experiences physical harm. INJURE Events
can be accidental, intentional or self-inflicted.

A DIE Event occurs whenever the life of a PER-
SON Entity ends. DIE Events can be accidental, in-
tentional or self-inflicted.

An ATTACK Event is defined as a violent phys-
ical act causing harm or damage. ATTACK Events
include any such Event not covered by the INJURE
or DIE subtypes, including Events where there is no
stated agent. The ATTACK Event type includes less
specific violence-related nouns such as ‘conflict’,
‘clashes’, and ‘fighting’. ‘Gunfire’, which has the
qualities of both an Event and a weapon, should al-
ways be tagged as an ATTACK Event, if only for the
sake of consistency. A ‘coup’ is a kind of ATTACK
(and so is a ‘war’).”

2.5 Modified Event Definitions
After the first round of annotation where the anno-
tators followed the ACE definitions, a new event
subtype was created in order to better detect more
game-changing events and eliminate definition am-
biguity. Both annotators agreed that the LIFE.DIE
and LIFE.INJURE definitions were unambiguous
enough to complete the task.

There was a strong consensus between the anno-
tators, however, that the CONFLICT.ATTACK event
subtype did not accurately specify the idea of what
an attack always is in CS:GO. The annotators took
issue with phrasing a CONFLICT.ATTACK event
as, “a violent physical act causing harm or damage”
when there exist attacks in CS:GO that do not cause
quantifiable damage or harm but are still violent and
physical.

For example, CS:GO players have the option
of buying grenades, like the HE (high explosive)
grenade that explodes on contact, and the Molotov
cocktail/incendiary grenade that ignites players and
the ground, that are primarily used to injure or kill
other players. While these grenades can be used
strategically to create space or block access to ar-
eas of contention, the general aim of throwing these
two types of grenades is to inflict damage. Thus,

Event Subtype A B Agreement
DIE 140 140 0.976
INJURE 1 1 1.00
ATTACK-D 70 63 0.653
ATTACK-ND 22 19 0.952

Table 1: Number of Annotated Events and Degree of
Inter-Annotator Agreement

events depicting these types of attack events fit into
the ACE definition for CONFLICT.ATTACK.

Smoke grenades, on the other hand, which cre-
ate a smoke cloud and block vision, and flash-
bangs, which create a blinding light on the player’s
screen if they look in the direction of the grenade
as it is thrown, are solely used for a strategic pur-
pose. These attacks do not cause any quantifi-
able damage but are violent and physical in nature,
and despite the ACE definition, would be consid-
ered an attack by the CS:GO community. The cre-
ation of a new event subtype makes a necessary
distinction of events that are both game-changing
but vary regarding damage and harm. Attacks fit-
ting the old definition were simply relabeled as
CONFLICT.ATTACK-D, specifying that the event
causes damage. The definition for non-damaging
attack events, labeled CONFLICT.ATTACK-ND, is
identical to that of CONFLICT.ATTACK-D except
the phrase “causing harm or damage” is changed to
“cannot or would not cause harm or damage.”

3 Results and Discussion

Table 1 details the total number of game-changing
events depicted in the corpus as well as inter-
annotator agreement calculated by Cohen’s kappa
coefficient. LIFE.DIE events were depicted most
in this corpus. Killing opposing players provides a
strategic advantage in CS:GO, and the majority of
games are won by the team with the most kills. The
high degree of inter-annotator agreement is due to
the familiarity with how the broadcasters generally
describe LIFE.DIE events during CS:GO games.

Both annotators detected the same LIFE.INJURE
event and agreed that although the data for
LIFE.INJURE events in this corpus is sparse,
the likelihood of encountering more LIFE.INJURE
events in a larger corpus is high. Play style varies

79



greatly in CS:GO amongst teams and regions, and
including speech from matches between different
teams could produce more LIFE.INJURE events.

The lowest degree of agreement between the an-
notators was for CONFLICT.ATTACK-D events,
despite a similar number of events of this subtype
detected by both annotators. This lower degree of
agreement should be attributed to the fact that cer-
tain language was perceived differently, causing one
annotator to detect an event where the other did
not. For example, in the sentence, “He’s gonna
find one headshot, tries to control the spray...” one
annotator labeled the act of trying to control gun
spray as a CONFLICT.ATTACK-D event and the
other annotator did not. However, in other instances
where the word ‘spray’ is used as a verb the an-
notators detected it as a CONFLICT.ATTACK-D
event. The annotators agreed that the definition for
CONFLICT.ATTACK-D events should be revised to
eliminate existing ambiguity, and possibly include a
list of words or phrases in CS:GO that could signal
a CONFLICT.ATTACK-D event.

CONFLICT.ATTACK-ND agreement was also
high between annotators despite the relatively small
set of event depictions. This high degree of agree-
ment can be attributed to the fact that this event sub-
type was created specifically to fulfill the need to
detect game-changing non-damaging attacks. Re-
gardless, the high degree of inter-annotator agree-
ment indicates that this event subtype definition was
generated in such a way that game-changing non-
damaging attack events could be consistently and
accurately detected. Like LIFE.INJURE both an-
notators agree that a larger corpus would lead to
more CONFLICT.ATTACK-ND events, especially
if either team’s strategy relied heavily on the use
of non-damaging grenades (flashbangs and smoke
grenades).

4 Conclusion and Future Work

The high degree of inter-annotator agreement for the
majority of event subtypes demonstrates that modi-
fying event subtype definitions is necessary to more
widely detect game-changing events in an eSports
corpus. Lower inter-annotator agreement for the mi-
nority of event subtypes, however, suggests that fur-
ther modifications should be made to event subtype

definitions.
There are multiple ways to continue improve-

ment in event detection in eSports corpora. First,
the CS:GO corpus could be lengthened to achieve a
larger set of annotated events. This task could be ac-
complished efficiently with the addition of multiple
transcribers of CS:GO broadcasts.

Second, event subtype definitions could be mod-
ified further. While the majority of game-changing
events was detected in this corpus, others could be
detected as well in a larger and more varied corpus.
For example, bomb defusals are a round win condi-
tion for the counter-terrorist team in CS:GO and can
have a major impact on gameplay. Creating an event
subtype to detect less common but equally as impor-
tant event types like bomb defusals can contribute to
the detection of more game-changing events.

One advantage of conducting an artificial task
such as this on an eSports corpus is that more clear-
cut relations between events can be detected. While
this paper specifically focused on event detection in
the context of a CS:GO game, there is the possibil-
ity of using these event subtype definitions for an-
notation tasks of real-life events. This could prove
especially successful in any corpora comprised of
military texts where, what are considered game-
changing events in a CS:GO game actually occur in
real-life scenarios.

Ultimately, with extensive further development
this corpus could be used as training data for an auto-
mated event detection system. A gold standard cor-
pus could be produced not only for automation but
also as the standard for the creation of further eS-
ports corpora.

5 Acknowledgments

The author would like to thank Matthew Shanks for
completing the annotation task, Auguste Massonant
and Anders Blume for permission to use their speech
as the basis of the CS:GO corpus, and Eileen Fitz-
patrick for advice and guidance.

References
American National Corpus Project. MASC - The Corpus

Web. 9 March 2015.
Donghun Lee and Linda J. Schoenstedt. 2011. Compar-

ison of eSports and Traditional Sports Consumption

80



Motives. ICHPER-SD Journal of Research. 6(2), 39-
44.

International Computer Science Institute. FrameNet Data
Web. 17 April 2015.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Tateisi, and Jun’ichi
Tsujii. 2003. GENIA corpus - a semantically anno-
tated corpus for bio-textmining Bioinformatics. 19(1),
180-182.

Linguistic Data Consortium. 2005. ACE (Automatic
Content Extraction) English Annotation Guidelines
for Events Version 5.4.3 2005.07.01. Web. 9 March
2015.

81


