



















































Predictions for self-priming from incremental updating models unifying comprehension and production


Proceedings of CMCL 2015, pages 1–8,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Predictions for self-priming from incremental updating models unifying
comprehension and production

Cassandra L. Jacobs
Department of Psychology

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
603 E. Daniel St.

Champaign, IL 61820
cljacob2@illinois.edu

Abstract

Syntactic priming from comprehension to pro-
duction has been shown to be robust: we are
more likely to repeat structures that we have
previously heard. Many current models do not
distinguish between comprehension and pro-
duction. Here we contrast human language
processing with two variants of a Bayesian
belief updating model. In the first model,
production-to-production priming (i.e. self-
priming) is as strong as comprehension-to-
production priming. In the second, both in-
dividuals who self-prime and those who do
not are exposed to a syntactic construction
via comprehension. Our results suggest that
when production-to-production priming is as
robust as comprehension-to-production prim-
ing, then speakers who self-prime are simul-
taneously less likely to be primed by input
from comprehension and demonstrate differ-
ent distributions of responses than speakers
who do not self-prime. The computational
model accords with recent results demonstrat-
ing no self-priming, and provides evidence for
an account of syntactic priming that distin-
guishes between production and comprehen-
sion input.

1 Introduction

Syntactic priming in production is the increased
probability of using a syntactic structure when we
have recently encountered it. Many models of syn-
tactic priming treat comprehension and production
as equally influential on the language production
system (Pickering & Garrod, 2013; Chang et al.,

2006; Reitter et al., 2011). This means that syn-
tactic priming can occur without another person be-
ing present, from production to production (self-
priming). Unfortunately, little experimental research
has assessed the degree to which priming occurs
from production to production in a controlled con-
text.

The primary phenomena that are of interest to re-
search on syntactic priming are as follows: (1) Do
we incrementally and cumulatively adapt to our lin-
guistic environment, changing how we talk based on
what we hear (Jaeger & Snider, 2013; Chang et al.,
2006; Kaschak et al., 2012; Reitter et al., 2011; Pick-
ering & Garrod, 2013)? (2) Do we change how we
talk more when we encounter less probable struc-
tures (Jaeger & Snider, 2013; Chang et al., 2006)?
(3) How long-lasting is syntactic priming (Kaschak,
2007; Bock, 1986)? And finally: (4) Are we more
likely to repeat the structures that we ourselves have
said, as predicted by models that unify priming in
comprehension and production (Pickering & Gar-
rod, 2013; Chang et al., 2006)? The model presented
here accounts for these phenomena and makes addi-
tional predictions about the potential ramifications
of self-priming on linguistic representations and ef-
ficient communication.

2 Psycholinguistic evidence

In any model where speakers are influenced by their
prior experience, regardless of the source, prim-
ing should occur. Corpus linguistics has provided
evidence of self-priming in production. Some of
these studies assessed priming of specific construc-
tions such as the dative alternation or relative clauses

1



(Jaeger & Snider, 2013; Myslin & Levy, submit-
ted) or instead model the whole syntactic system
using probabilistic rules in several grammatical for-
malisms (Gries, 2005; Healey et al., 2014; Reitter
et al., 2011). These models generally find evidence
for syntactic priming from production to production,
or structural repetition that occurs more often than
would be expected by chance. In contrast to some
of these results, some studies report that structural
repetition occurs less than would be expected by
chance (Healey et al., 2014). Healey et al. (2014)
argued that this is because speakers avoid continu-
ously reusing syntactic structures.

The evidence for self-priming in a more con-
trolled environment is weaker. Within experimen-
tal psycholinguistics, structural priming in produc-
tion is almost always mediated by some intervening
comprehension task like sentence completion or a
memory task (e.g. Kaschak, 2007, Bock, 1986, etc.),
making it difficult or impossible to assess whether
self-priming occurs. Some studies have reported
that some speakers have an almost uniform bias to-
ward one structure or another (e.g. Jaeger & Snider,
2013). However, despite these claims that compre-
hension and production show similar amounts of
syntactic priming (Tooley & Bock, 2014), produc-
tion has also been shown to be substantially less
flexible than comprehension (Remez, 2013). Syn-
tactic persistence within a speaker could simply be a
product of an individual’s own syntactic preferences
rather than self-priming per se.

Some experimental work has been conducted
to test whether comprehension and production are
weighted equally in structural priming in produc-
tion. Counter to what has been found in corpus
studies, Jacobs et al. (2015) failed to find evidence
for self-priming despite strong comprehension-to-
production priming. In their study, participants pro-
duced 7 dative descriptions, comprehended 6 da-
tive descriptions of a single form of the construc-
tion, and produced an additional 7 descriptions in
order to identify effects of self-priming, individual
differences, and comprehension input on the magni-
tude of comprehension-to-production priming. They
found that the rates of structural repetition were flat
across the experiment, but speakers were strongly
sensitive to comprehension input, showing large and
sustained comprehension-to-production priming ef-

fects. They also found larger priming effects for
the less probable syntactic structure, consistent with
error-driven learning accounts of the inverse fre-
quency effect (Jaeger & Snider, 2013).

While the evidence for self-priming has been
weaker, almost all syntactic priming studies have
demonstrated that comprehension plays a very large
role in production preferences. This is to be ex-
pected if priming is a means of achieving effi-
cient communication, which requires using compre-
hended language to modify our own productions
to be more easily understood (Pickering & Garrod,
2013; Tooley & Bock, 2014). It is less clear what the
functional role of self-priming would be, however.
If speakers are likely to repeat structures they have
recently used, the language community may end up
with two types of speakers: those who only use one
structure or the other, which would pose some diffi-
culty for comprehenders (MacDonald, 2013).

We aim to address the question of the equiva-
lence of learning from comprehension and produc-
tion, as well as account for the results of Jacobs et al.
(2015). To do this, we constructed a very simple
Bayesian belief-updating model that makes predic-
tions about syntactic preferences with and without
self-priming. This model is very similar to those of
Fine et al. (2010), Kleinschmidt et al. (2012), and
Myslin & Levy (submitted), who have modeled up-
dating in syntactic comprehension. These models
perform Bayesian belief-updating of the probabili-
ties of outcomes in a syntactic alternation. In ours,
we focus on the prepositional versus double object
dative, though the model can be extended to any syn-
tactic alternation. In the computational model, we
demonstrate differences at the individual and pop-
ulation levels differences between self-priming and
no self-priming (Model 1), as well as characterize
what self-priming does to syntactic adaptation in
production after comprehension (Model 2).

3 Model structure

Many of the recent computational models that have
sought to account for syntactic priming effects in
comprehension and production use incremental al-
gorithms to represent trial-by-trial effects, while also
treating experience in comprehension and produc-
tion as contributing equally to the implicit learning

2



process (Jaeger & Snider, 2013; Chang et al., 2006;
Reitter et al., 2011; Pickering & Garrod, 2013). The
model here is simple but relies on similar assump-
tions: representations are changed when language is
processed.

Each utterance choice can be conceptualized as a
single coin flipped randomly (i.e. a binomial pro-
cess). We generate sequences of utterances by sam-
pling from either a static Binomial distribution or
one that is continually being updated. The struc-
tural alternation we consider here is the double ob-
ject dative construction, which has been extensively
studied in syntactic priming experiments (Jaeger &
Snider, 2013; Kaschak, 2007; Bock, 1986; Picker-
ing & Garrod, 2013). In this syntactic alternation,
direct and indirect objects can change places after
some English verbs like give, hand, throw, or show:

• The librarian gave the book to the boy. (prepo-
sitional object - PO)

• The librarian gave the boy the book. (double
object - DO)

For every sentence a speaker intends to use a da-
tive structure, the production system will select ei-
ther the PO or the DO form of the sentence. Selec-
tions are single samples from a Binomial distribu-
tion with p(PO) = .55, which was derived from the
empirical probability of individuals producing a PO
in Jacobs et al. (2015).

Previous models have used error-driven learning
to account for incremental adjustments in syntactic
preferences (Jaeger & Snider, 2013; Chang et al.,
2006). In our model, as in similar models, we update
the probability of using a PO using the Beta prior,
which is conjugate to the Binomial distribution. This
prior is also appropriate because in any syntactic al-
ternation, there are two possible outcomes. The Beta
distribution has only two hyperparameters, α and β.
α roughly corresponds to the number of times the
model believes that it has experienced a PO dative,
and β represents the analogous number for the DO
dative.

The selection of the α and β values was based
on exploring an integer-valued parameter space be-
tween 1 and 10 for both parameters. In Figure 1
we plot the amount of self-priming all 100 mod-
els demonstrated as a function of the two hyper-

β

α

Size of
 self−priming

 effect

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

Figure 1: As values of α and β increase from 1 to 10,
the models become less capable of self-priming. At the
smallest values of β, the model is very sensitive to its own
prior productions, while α does not seem to play a large
role in self-priming.

parameters. We determined that α does not influ-
ence the sensitivity the model has to its own produc-
tions. Contrarily, β values on the smaller end tended
to lead to large self-priming effects. Consequently
we chose identical values for α and β that would
allow for both self-priming and sensitivity to com-
prehension input. This was therefore a compromise
between flexibility and rigidity.

We initialized the model with relatively weak, but
not completely unbiased, priors that both structures
were equally possible: α = 4, β = 4. We assume that
one of the structures is slightly more probable, with
p(PO) = .55, as observed in Jacobs et al. (2015).

With every subsequent dative description that the
model processes (either via production or compre-
hension), with k POs and n descriptions containing
either a DO or a PO, the priors are adjusted via the
following update rules:

α = α+ k (1)

β = β + n− k (2)
The new probability of a PO is therefore:

p(PO) =
α+ k + 1

α+ β + n− 2 (3)

3



For both Model 1 and Model 2, we ran 1000 “ex-
periments” of 200 “participants” each. Model 1
looks at the production of seven double object da-
tives to assess self-priming. Model 2 is structured
like the experiments of Jacobs et al. (2015) and con-
sists of three stages. First, seven datives are pro-
duced, then six datives of a single syntactic structure
are comprehended, and then seven additional datives
are produced. In the production tasks, participants’
syntactic choices were randomly sampled from a Bi-
nomial distribution initialized at p(PO) = .55. This
allows us to treat individual subjects differently prior
to exposing them to the comprehension materials.

The model always updates the probability of a PO
when it encounters a PO or DO. In Model 1 we as-
sess what should happen to participants’ later pro-
ductions if they are influenced by their own produc-
tions (self-prime) to the same extent as in compre-
hension. In Model 2 we look at the magnitude of
comprehension-to-production priming when partici-
pants are allowed to self-prime versus not.

4 Model 1 - Self-priming in production

This task can be conceptualized as a spontaneous
production task. We conducted 1000 experiments
with 200 participants each. Each participant pro-
duces seven sentences. Participants’ syntactic
choices are sampled from an incrementally updat-
ing Binomial distribution where the calculated pos-
terior probability for each subject replaces the prior
probability of p(PO). Each utterance that the model
produces contains either a prepositional object da-
tive construction (e.g. The librarian gave the book
to the boy) or a double object dative (e.g. The librar-
ian gave the boy the book).

Qualitatively, the model makes the prediction
that, in general, models where self-priming occurs
should be more likely to prefer one form of a struc-
ture over the other. Self-priming increases the en-
tropy of the distribution, though it is naturally biased
toward producing more probable structures since
those are initially more likely to be drawn. We sum-
marize the results of our simulations for self-primers
and non self-primers below in Figure 2.

Importantly, self-priming always produces some
change to the model parameters. At the limit, the
production system’s predictions are often correct,

0!

0.05!

0.1!

0.15!

0.2!

0.25!

0.3!

0.35!

0! 1! 2! 3! 4! 5! 6! 7!

%
 o

f p
ar

tic
ip

an
ts

 u
si

ng
 s

pe
ci

fic
 n

um
be

r 
of

 P
O

s!

Number of POs produced!

Self-priming!
No self-priming!

Figure 2: Self-priming without adjustment from compre-
hension results in a more uniform distribution of syntac-
tic preferences across a population of speakers than in a
model where speakers do not prime themselves.

leading to minimal prediction error (e.g. Chang,
Dell, & Bock, 2006; Jaeger & Snider, 2013). A
lack of prediction error can be conceptualized as the
same thing as no self-priming in production, since
neither leads to changes in syntactic preferences.
Analogously, as the hyperparameters increase for an
individual iteration of the model, the more confi-
dent the model is in its initial representations, lead-
ing to a stable distribution for a single speaker. It is
also possible, however, that production and compre-
hension are updated separately, but production pos-
sesses more conservative hyperparameters, in line
with research showing the static preferences of the
production system (Remez, 2013).

The bulk of priming occurs early in the experi-
ment. Participants’ prior productions should play an
influential role on their later productions, with the
population’s structural preferences stabilizing over
the course of seven trials. This implies that predic-
tion error made by the model decreases over many
productions by a single speaker. We visualize this
below in Figure 3.

5 Model 2 - Transfer from comprehension
to production

We wanted to see how much self-priming diminishes
the effect of comprehension-to-production priming,
since self-priming changes the hyperparameters of
the model, meaning that the model becomes more
conservative in its estimates of the probability of us-

4



0.5!

0.525!

0.55!

0.575!

0.6!

0.625!

0.65!

1! 2! 3! 4! 5! 6! 7!

%
 P

O
!

Trial number!

Self-priming!
No self-priming!

Figure 3: Models where self-priming is permitted
converge on preferring the higher-probability structure
within two trials. Models that do not permit self-priming
show the same syntactic bias over the course of the ex-
periment.

ing a PO (that is, the values of both α and β are
larger). This experiment is structured in the same
way as Model 1, except participants later compre-
hend 1 or 6 utterances containing a single structure
(DOs or POs only) and produce an additional seven
utterances in a final production task, following the
experimental design of Jacobs et al. (2015).

Priming from comprehension to production is ac-
complished via the same updating process that we
defined above. When a participant encounters a DO
or PO structure, this updates the α and β parame-
ters, and the observed posterior probability replaces
the prior probability of a PO. The α and β parame-
ters after comprehension are therefore adjusted in fa-
vor of the primed structure, which makes the primed
structure more likely to be drawn on the next trial.

The model changes more for low-probability
structures. Because the model has flexible priors,
after hearing a single structure for six consecutive
trials, the model will believe that the primed struc-
ture, regardless of which structure was primed, will
be a certain likelihood (e.g. p(PO) or p(DO) = .75)
after the comprehension stage. The model therefore
shows more priming after exposure to the less com-
mon structure (DO) than after exposure to the more
probable structure (PO). The model here demon-
strates greater priming for dispreferred structures
because the gap to bridge is larger for the dispre-
ferred structure. Our results accord with models that
employ error-based learning principles (Chang et al.,
2006; Jaeger & Snider, 2013), where model param-

eters are adjusted via experience and change more
in response to lower-probability structures. Figure
4 summarizes the relationship between prime prob-
ability, self-priming, and cumulativity.

Self-priming leads to much smaller effects of
priming from comprehension. Even when exposed
to a relatively high number of primes (6 versus 1),
participants who self-prime do not align to com-
prehension input as much as participants who are
not affected by their own prior productions. This
is because the hyperparameters are tuned an addi-
tional seven trials before these participants go into
the comprehension stage of the experiment, which
makes it more difficult to change the probability dis-
tribution on later trials. Should the non self-priming
models’ hyperparameters be set sufficiently high, to
perhaps the same level as the average self-priming
model, this particular difference would likely disap-
pear. Additionally, if hyperparameters for both mod-
els were even higher, it is likely that the magnitude
of priming would not differ much between the two
model types. Keeping the hyperparameters small
before relevant linguistic experience (via compre-
hension or via both comprehension and production),
makes it easier to see that self-primers require more
comprehension input to offset their learned produc-
tion biases.

0!

0.05!

0.1!

0.15!

0.2!

0.25!

0.3!

0.35!

1 prime! 6 primes! 1 prime! 6 primes!

No self-priming! Self-priming!

In
cr

ea
se

 in
 p

ro
ba

bi
lit

y 
of

 u
si

ng
 p

rim
ed

 
ta

rg
et

 s
tru

ct
ur

e!

DO % Change!
PO % Change!

Figure 4: Increase in use of primed target structures in
the second half of the experiment as a function of the
number of primes, whether the models self-prime or not,
and which structure was primed. All models accommo-
date the comprehension input. Priming is strongest when
the primed structure was less frequent (DO). Similarly,
when participants are exposed to more primes (6 ver-
sus 1), the priming effects are larger. Self-primers show
smaller priming effects in all cases.

5



To assess the possibility that having high values
of α and β diminishes the effect of comprehension-
to-production priming, we ran an additional set of
experiments with α and β set to 40 and 50, re-
spectively. These values were selected to produce
a probability of p(PO) roughly equal to .55. This
experiment definitively demonstrated that an addi-
tional 6 primes of a particular structure still re-
sults in change to the model, though the non self-
priming model is much more sensitive to six items
of a single structure than the self-priming model,
which has stronger beliefs about p(PO). The self-
priming model seems inclined to not accommo-
date at all (.4% change), while the non self-priming
model changes at a measurable amount (3%, compa-
rable to the self-priming model that received 1 prime
in Figure 4). The results of these simulations are
demonstrated below in Figure 5. This suggests that
even when the model’s hyperparameters are made to
be very conservative, self-priming is detrimental to
comprehension-to-production priming.

0!

0.005!

0.01!

0.015!

0.02!

0.025!

0.03!

0.035!

Self-priming! No self-priming!

In
cr

ea
se

 in
 p

ro
ba

bi
lit

y 
of

 u
si

ng
 

pr
im

ed
 ta

rg
et

 s
tr

uc
tu

re
!

Self-priming!
No self-priming!

Figure 5: In comprehension-to-production priming mod-
els where self-priming is allowed to occur, the ability to
accommodate novel comprehension input is greatly re-
duced. The self-priming model changes toward the com-
prehension input .4%, while the non self-priming model
changes 3%.

6 Comparison to psycholinguistic data

An important test of the model is to compare its
output to existing psycholinguistic data. While the
model can account neither for the corpus linguis-
tic studies that have demonstrated repetition greater
than would be expected by chance (Jaeger & Snider,

2013; Reitter et al., 2011; Gries, 2005; Myslin
& Levy, submitted), nor for those studies report-
ing speakers with strong structural biases (Jaeger
& Snider, 2013), nor for anti-repetition and decay
(Healey et al., 2014; Reitter et al., 2011), it can ac-
count for several phenomena that have been well-
demonstrated in structural priming in production, as
well as the results of Jacobs et al. (2015).

Self-priming is predicted by many accounts of
syntactic priming where comprehension and produc-
tion input are equated (Chang et al., 2006; Pickering
& Garrod, 2013; Jaeger & Snider, 2013; Tooley &
Bock, 2014). We have demonstrated here that self-
priming leads to self-convergence. In a model where
one’s own prior productions weigh in on one’s later
productions, speakers quickly converge on a syntac-
tic preference, with the majority of speakers com-
ing to prefer the more probable structure (Figure 2).
These results are counter to the experimental results
of Jacobs et al. (2015), who reported that repetition
of syntactic structures was constant at all stages of
the production task. Had speakers primed them-
selves, the probability of using the more probable
structure should have increased, however modestly
(Figure 3).

Models allowing for self-priming with sufficiently
large hyperparameters (Figure 1) would likely show
both very little self-priming (having converged on
a particular syntactic preference) as well as rela-
tively little sensitivity to comprehension input (Fig-
ure 4). This is again counter to the results of Jacobs
et al. (2015), who found very large comprehension-
to-production structural priming effects. Production
and comprehension sharing hyperparameters leads
to radically different results than what is empirically
observed.

Altogether, the computational model and the ex-
perimental data suggest that comprehension and
production should be modeled separately. In or-
der to obtain a production system that maintains
its own internal representations and accommodates
comprehension input (Remez, 2013; Pickering &
Garrod, 2013), it is important that speakers not
overweight their own syntactic preferences. This
can be accomplished by having separate produc-
tion and comprehension systems, where production-
to-production priming (updating) is minimal while
comprehension-to-production priming is large. An

6



alternative, as described in Model 2, is to only allow
updating from comprehension to production.

The model agrees with both existing computa-
tional models of syntactic priming and psycholin-
guistic data. The model updates incrementally, as
many others have done (Chang et al., 2006; Jaeger &
Snider, 2013; Fine et al., 2010; Kleinschmidt et al.,
2012) and shows greater priming effects when ex-
posed to multiple instances of the same structure
(Kaschak et al., 2012). The priming effects are
larger for less common structures than for more
common structures because of the sensitivity of the
model to error, demonstrating the inverse frequency
effect (Chang et al., 2006; Jaeger & Snider, 2013).
Finally, in a model where self-priming does not oc-
cur, or where updating from production to produc-
tion is extremely low, structural preferences persist
(Reitter et al., 2011; Tooley & Bock, 2014; Bock &
Griffin, 2000; Kaschak, 2007; Kaschak et al., 2012).

7 Conclusion

The present model accounts for the incremental-
ity, cumulativity, error sensitivity, and persistence of
syntactic priming in production. In contrast to pre-
vious models of syntactic priming (Jaeger & Snider,
2013; Chang et al., 2006; Reitter et al., 2011; Picker-
ing & Garrod, 2013), we tested the effects of equat-
ing comprehension and production input in struc-
tural priming in production. Self-priming has con-
sequences for both individual and population-level
language use.

This model makes predictions for all of these phe-
nomena by making a single assumption: prior expe-
rience affects syntactic choices in production. Re-
gardless of whether self-priming is allowed to oc-
cur or not, we are sensitive to recent and cumu-
lative linguistic input and are primed to produce
the structures we hear. Additionally, we change
our representations more when we encounter low-
probability structures. Because syntactic represen-
tations are updated without respect to time, syntac-
tic priming effects do not necessarily decay in this
model as in others (e.g. Reitter et al., 2011). How-
ever, most syntactic priming studies report struc-
tural persistence, making the model consistent with
such studies (Bock, 1986; Tooley & Bock, 2014;
Bock & Griffin, 2000; Kaschak et al., 2012). Fi-

nally, if individuals are allowed to self-prime, prim-
ing from comprehension will be weak and a popula-
tion of speakers may be very variable in their struc-
tural preferences.

The functional value of self-priming is tempting
if language is structured optimally to be easy for
the speaker (MacDonald, 2013). Speakers can em-
ploy their own syntactic preferences, with compre-
henders accommodating them. Other theories have
stated that priming between speakers is necessary
for efficient communication (Pickering & Garrod,
2013; Jaeger & Snider, 2013), especially because
speakers must learn the distributions of the language
around them in order to become successful commu-
nicators (Chang et al., 2006). In a language commu-
nity, it may be sufficient to accommodate conversa-
tion partners rather than to develop highly idiosyn-
cratic production preferences, making self-priming
and structural repetition sub-optimal (Healey et al.,
2014). At the same time, comprehenders are sensi-
tive to the repetitive nature of conversations and may
come to expect repetition during dialogue (Myslin
& Levy, submitted). To that end, we are extending
this model to simulate population dynamics in com-
munities where speakers prime each other and pos-
sibly also prime themselves. Self-priming has con-
sequences for language-level statistics, so it is im-
portant to see what changes might take place in a
language community where individual speakers are
allowed to become highly idiosyncratic.

It is still an open question as to whether one’s
own productions influence later syntactic choices.
Some more recent psycholinguistic evidence sug-
gests that they do not (Jacobs et al., 2015). If speak-
ers do not self-prime, is it because they tend to avoid
repeating syntactic structures (e.g. Healey et al.,
2014), or is there an error-driven learning compo-
nent, where predictions about one’s own production
are almost always correct, leading to no learning? To
answer these questions, further experimental work
is needed. In the meantime, we have outlined some
predictions and accounted for the vast majority of
phenomena in syntactic priming in production with
a very simple belief-updating model.

7



References

Bock, J. K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in lan-
guage production. Cognitive Psychology, 18,
355–387.

Bock, K., & Griffin, Z. M. (2000). The persistence
of structural priming: Transient activation or im-
plicit learning? Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: General, 129, 177–192.

Chang, F., Dell, G. S., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming
syntactic. Psychological Review, 113, 234–272.

Fine, A. B., Qian, T., Jaeger, T. F., & Jacobs, R. A.
(2010). Syntactic adaptation in language compre-
hension. Proceedings of ACL Workshop on Cog-
nitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics,
(pp. 18–26).

Gries, S. T. (2005). Syntactic priming: A corpus-
based approach. Journal of Psycholinguistic Re-
search, 34, 365–399.

Healey, P. G. T., Purver, M., & Howes, C. (2014).
Divergence in dialogue. PLoS ONE, 9, e98598.

Jacobs, C. L., Bock, K., & Watson, D. G. (2015).
Speakers do not self-prime. Poster presented at
CUNY Conference on Sentence Processing, Uni-
versity of Southern California, Los Angeles..

Jaeger, T. F., & Snider, N. E. (2013). Alignment as a
consequence of expectation adaptation: Syntactic
priming is affected by the prime’s prediction error
given both prior and recent experience. Cognition,
127, 57–83.

Kaschak, M. P. (2007). Long-term structural prim-
ing affects subsequent patterns of language pro-
duction. Memory & Cognition, 35, 925–937.

Kaschak, M. P., Kutta, T. J., & Coyle, J. M. (2012).
Long and short term cumulative structural prim-
ing effects. Language, Cognition and Neuro-
science, 29, 728–743.

Kleinschmidt, D., Fine, A. B., & Jaeger, T. F. (2012).
A belief-updating model of adaptation and cue
combination in syntactic comprehension. Pro-
ceedings of the 34rd Annual Meeting of the Cog-
nitive Science Society (CogSci12), (pp. 605–610).

MacDonald, M. C. (2013). How language produc-
tion shapes language form and comprehension.
Frontiers in Psychology, 4.

Myslin, M., & Levy, R. (submitted). Comprehen-
sion priming as rational expectation for repetition:
Evidence from syntactic processing. Cognition.

Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2013). An inte-
grated theory of language production and com-
prehension. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36,
329–347.

Reitter, D., Keller, F., & Moore, J. D. (2011). A
computational cognitive model of syntactic prim-
ing. Cognitive Science, 35, 587–637.

Remez, R. E. (2013). Analogy and disanalogy in
production and perception of speech. Language,
Cognition and Neuroscience, 30, 273–286.

Tooley, K. M., & Bock, K. (2014). On the parity of
structural persistence in language production and
comprehension. Cognition, 132, 101–136.

8


