



















































A DG Account of the Descriptive and Resultative de-Constructions in Chinese


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 261–270,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

A DG Account of the Descriptive and  
Resultative de-Constructions in Chinese 

 

Timothy Osborne Shudong Ma 
Zhejiang University Zhejiang University 

Hangzhou 
China 

tjo3ya@yahoo.com 

 Hangzhou 
China 

shudong.ma@qq.com 
  

Abstract 

This contribution examines the descriptive 
and resultative de-constructions in Mandarin 
Chinese, e.g. Wǒ pǎo-de hěn kuài ‘I run very 
fast’. There is a longstanding debate about 
this construction. The primary point of 
dispute concerns the main predicate: Is the 
first predicate the root of the sentence, i.e. 
pǎo-de ‘run’, or is the second predicate the 
root, i.e. kuài ‘fast’? We demonstrate here 
that from a dependency grammar (DG) 
perspective, the second predicate should be 
taken as the root. A number of diagnostics 
support this conclusion: 1) yes/no-questions 
with ma, 2) position of the negation bù, 3) 
omission, 4) placement of the adverb yě ‘al-
so’, 5) ne-questions, and 6) modal insertion. 
The conclusion is important for the 
development of DG as applied to the syntax 
of Mandarin, since many basic questions 
about  Mandarin sentence structure have not 
yet been examined from a DG perspective.  

1 Two possibilities 

There is a longstanding debate about the syntac-
tic status of the descriptive and resultative 
de-constructions in Mandarin Chinese (hence-
forth jus Mandarin). The point of contention is 
illustrated with the following DG analyses:   

(1)       pǎo-de 
    Wǒ                kuài 
                 hěn 

 a.  Wǒ  pǎo-de  hěn   kuài.    (descriptive) 
  I    run -de   very  fast 
  ‘I run very fast.’ 

                      kuài 
    Wo  pǎo-de   hěn 

        

 b.  Wǒ  pǎo-de   hěn  kuài. 

(2)          tiào-de     
    Tāmen                  lèi 
                      hěn 

 a.  Tāmen  tiào-de    hěn   lèi.  (resultative) 
 they     jump-de   very  tired 
 ‘They jumped till they got very tired.’ 

                            lèi 

    Tāmen  tiào-de    hěn    

 b.  Tāmen  tiào-de    hěn   lèi.   

The a-analyses show the VERB-de as the root of 
the sentence, whereas the b-analyses show the 
adjective as the root? We argue for the 
b-analyses in this contribution. We will, though, 
also develop a somewhat more fine-grained de-
pendency analysis of these constructions, i.e. 
more fine-grained than what is shown with (1b) 
and (2b) here. 
   The point of contention reaches back decades. 
Early accounts of the de-construction were more 
in line with the b-analyses here (e.g. Chao 
1968/1979: 176-180; Li 1986: 250), but in the 
1980s an alternative account closer to the 
a-analyses gained a number of adherents (e.g. 
Huang 1988; Zhu 1982: 134; Zhou and Huang 
1994:47, Ding 1961/1999: 63–5; Huang et al. 
2009: 84–91). Huang’s (1988) article on the 
de-construction was particularly influential in 
establishing the validity of the a-analyses. Most 
of the relevant publications that have appeared 
more recently pursue an analysis similar to the 
a-analyses here (e.g. Xu and Pan 2014; Yang and 
Cheng 2013), though these publications diverge 
in the details.1
   Most explorations of the syntactic status of 
the de-construction have been produced in the 

 

                                                           
1 Fan (1993) proposes a tripartite demarcation: syntax, 
meaning, and pragmatics. The same one word can be 
viewed as a syntactic head but semantic dependent, or 
vice versa. That is, the syntactic root is different from 
the semantic/pragmatic root. This distinction is not 
observed in the DG account pursued here.  

261



tradition of constituency grammar. Thus the two 
competing analyses just depicted with the trees in 
(1–2) are casting the debate in a new light. In-
deed, to our knowledge the debate concerning 
the status of the de-construction in Mandarin has 
not yet been examined from a DG perspective. 
The interesting point about this situation is that 
from the DG perspective, the main question is 
less difficult insofar as the account is confronted 
with just two basic possibilities (a-trees vs. 
b-trees), and it need merely choose between 
these two. Constituency grammar accounts, in 
contrast, have the option to posit extra functional 
categories and the associated structure in order to 
accommodate specific facts about the 
de-construction. DG, with its minimal approach 
to basic sentence structure, cannot entertain the 
same multiplicity of potential analyses. 
   This situation can be viewed either as a 
strength or weakness of the DG approach. Either 
the limitation on possibilities for analysis is a 
good thing because there is less room for disa-
greement, or the possibilities are too limited and 
thus incapable of accommodating the multiplicity 
of facts associated with the construction. We of 
course prefer the former position. In any case, 
achieving certainty about the basic DG analysis 
of the de-construction should be beneficial for 
the further development of DG as applied to 
Mandarin.  

2  Overview of de-elements 

The element de has a number of different uses in 
Mandarin. In general, there are at least six dif-
ferent de-elements: 

1.  a.  de marking a premodifier  
      of a noun (的) 
   b.  de functioning as a  
      nominalizer (的) 
2.  de/dì marking premodifier of a verb (地) 
3.  dé/děi ‘should’ as a modal verb (得) 
4.  dé ‘receive’ as a content verb (得) 
5.  de ‘possible’ as a modal particle (得) 
6.  a.  de helping to express 
      descriptive meaning (得) 
   b.  de helping to express  
      resultative meaning (得)  

Mandarin orthography, i.e. the Hanzi characters, 
is a source of confusion when dealing with these 
de-elements. Hanzi distinguishes the first two 

de-elements from the other four with distinct 
characters, 的 and 地 , whereas the latter four 
de-elements are more difficult to discern due to 
the use of the same one Hanzi character, i.e. 得. 
The third de-element, the modal verb dé/děi 
‘should’, and the fourth de-element, the content 
verb dé/děi ‘get, receive’, have a distinct sound 
pattern that distinguish them from the other four, 
i.e. dé (rising tone) and děi (falling-rising tone), 
as opposed to de (neutral tone). The fifth 
de-element, the modal particle, is usually the 
second part of a three-part construction that con-
sists of a verb, de, and a post-dependent on the 
verb. This postdependent is often a verb-like par-
ticle, e.g. huá de xiàlái ‘can slide down’, kàn de 
dào ‘can see’, chēng de qǐ ‘can lift up’. 
   While these first five de-elements are cer-
tainly worthy of exploration from a DG point of 
view, this contribution concentrates on the sixth 
de-element, which can be split into two types 
depending on whether de helps convey descrip-
tive or resultative meaning. This sixth de-element 
has been the focus of significant debate, since its 
status in the syntactic hierarchy is not imme-
diately clear, as suggested above with the trees in 
(1–2). A primary characteristic of descrip-
tive/resultative de is that it appears as (what we 
view as) a clitic on a predicate (a verb or adjec-
tive) and it precedes a second predicate (often an 
adjective). It is therefore often sandwiched be-
tween two predicates.   
   The following examples illustrate the descrip-
tive and resultative de; they are taken from Li 
and Thompson (1981: 624ff.):  

       

(3)  a.  Tā   zǒu-de   hěn   màn.  

Descriptive de 

       S/he  walk-de  very   slow. 
       ‘S/he walks very slowly.’ 
    b.  Wǒmen  shuì   de  hěn   hǎo.  
       We      sleep  de  very   good 
       ‘We sleep very nicely.’  
    c.  Tā     chuān  de  hěn   piàoliang.   
       he/she  dress   de  very   beautiful  
       ‘S/he dresses very beautifully.’ 

       

(4)  a.  Tā   jiāo    de  lèi    le. 

Resultative de 

       s/he  teach   de  tired  le  
       ‘S/he taught herself tired.’   
    b.  Wǒ  kū  de  yǎnjing   dōu  hóng  le. 
        I    cry  de  eye      all   red    le 
       ‘I cried my eyes all red.’       

262



    c.  Wǒ    è     de  fā        huāng. 
        I    hungry  de  produce  panic 
       ‘I’m hungry to the point of panic.’   

When it helps convey descriptive meaning, de is 
associated with an adverb in English (here slowly, 
nicely, beautifully). When it helps convey resul-
tative meaning, de is often associated with a pre-
dicative adjective in English (here tired, red) or 
with a second verbal predicate (here produce).2
   As stated in the introduction, the main source 
of debate for these de-elements concerns the two 
predicates with which they co-occur: Is the first 
predicate (the one on the left) head over the 
second predicate, or vice versa. These two possi-
bilities can be rendered in the English transla-
tions as follows for example (3a): 

 

(5)    Tā   zǒu-de  hěn  màn. 
      s/he  walk-de very  slow  

   a.  ‘S/he walks very slowly.’ 

   b.  ‘S/he is very slow in walking.’ 

While the translation S/he is very slow in walking 
is an odd sentence in English, this manuscript 
now argues that it more accurately reflects the 
hierarchy of words in the Mandarin sentence Tā 
zǒu de hěn màn. In other words, the second pre-
dicate is in fact head over the first predicate. 

3  Overview of diagnostics 

To motivate the dependency analyses of descrip-
tive and resultative de, we use a number of diag-
nostics: 

1.  Yes/no-questions with ma,  
2.  Position of the negation bù, 
3.  Omission,  
4.  Placement of the adverb yě ‘also’,  
5.  Questions with ne, and  
6.  Modal insertion 

To illustrate these diagnostics, we first apply 
them to the following sentence: 

(6)      néng 
   Tā         tán 
                   qín 

   Ta   néng  tán   qín. 
   S/he  can   play  piano. 
                                                           
2  Even though the elements following de can be 
viewed as an adverb or adjective, worth noting is that 
with no formal marker, a Chinese word often allows 
for a flexible categorical role. 

Modal verbs such as néng here are widely taken 
to be the root of the clause in which they appear 
in many languages, and subordinating the subject 
immediately to the modal verb makes sense since 
doing so results in a hierarchy that corresponds 
exactly to the corresponding hierarchy for the 
English sentence, and further, it avoids the pro-
jectivity violation that would be incurred if the 
subject were subordinated directly to the content 
verb tán. While these aspects of the analysis in (6) 
can be disputed, we take the validity of (6) for 
granted, since doing so allows us to establish a 
framework that can be used to analyze 
de-constructions. The validity of (6) is then sup-
ported by the overall understanding of Mandarin 
sentence structure that emerges. 
   Ma-questions: The answer to a 
yes/no-question that is formed with the interrog-
ative particle ma is typically reduced down to 
just the root node, e.g.  

(7)  Tā   néng  tán   qín    ma?   
    s/he  can   play  piano  ma  
    ‘Can s/he play piano?’  
   a.  –  Néng.     – ‘Can.’ 
   b.  – *Tán.      – ‘Play.’ 

The answer is acceptable if it includes néng and 
unacceptable if it excludes néng. The assumption, 
then, is that the answer to a yes/no-question (ex-
pressed using the interrogative particle ma) 
should include the root of the sentence. 
   The negation bù: The negation bù typically 
precedes the root of the clause. Thus when bù is 
inserted into the test sentence, it should precede 
néng: 

(8)  a.  Tā   bù   néng  tán   qín. 
       S/he  not   can   play  piano. 
       ‘She cannot play piano.’  
    b.  Tā   néng  bù   tán   qín.  
       ‘S/he  can  not   play  piano.’ 
       ‘S/he may stop playing piano.’ 

Sentence (8a) is natural, whereas sentence (8b) is 
unusual. Sentence (8b) is only possible on the 
unlikely reading where it means that ‘s/he is al-
lowed to not play the piano (or to stop playing 
the piano)’. Thus the position of the negation 
helps identify the root of the sentence. To negate 
the entire sentence in a neutral manner, the nega-
tion should precede the root node. 
   Omission: Eliding or omitting a string is 
another test for identifying constituents (com-

263



plete subtrees).3

(9)  Wǒ  néng  tán   qín.    Tā   yě   néng.    

 If a string can be omitted with-
out significantly altering the meaning of the sen-
tence, then the omitted string is potentially a 
constituent. In this case, tán qín can be omitted in 
terms of VP-ellipsis, whereby the meaning re-
mains unchanged: 

     I    can   play  piano.  S/he  also  can.   
     ‘I can play the piano, and she can, too.’ 

The ability to omit the string tán qín in the same 
manner that one can omit a verb phrase in terms 
of VP-ellipsis in English suggests that tán qín 
should form a constituent. This, in turn, suggests 
that néng is head over tán qín, because if it were 
not, tán qín would not qualify as a constituent, 
and omission should then not be possible.  
   The adverb yě: The position of the adverb yě 
‘also’ is another indicator that is useful for iden-
tifying the root of the sentence. This adverb must 
precede néng; it cannot follow néng: 

(10)  a.  Tā    yě   néng  tán   qín. 
        ‘S/he  also  can   play piano.’ 
     b.  *Tā   néng  yě   tán   qín.  
        ‘S/he  can   also  play  piano.’ 

This pattern is accounted for on the assumption 
that yě must precede the root of the clause. In-
serting yě is therefore a simple diagnostic that 
can help identify which predicate is head over 
the other.  
   Ne-questions: The interrogative particle ne 
‘what about’ serves to form an abbreviated ques-
tion of a sort. On the assumption that this particle 
focuses a constituent, it can be used to identify 
constituents in the preceding sentence and thus to 
identify which verb is head over the other: 

(11)  a.  A:  Tā   néng  tán   gāngqín. 
            S/he  can   play  piano. 
        B:  Tán   xiǎotíqín   ne? 
            Play  violin     what about 
            ‘What about playing the violin?’ 
        Bʹ:  *Yīnggāi ne? 
            ‘What about should?’ 

The acceptability of the ne-question Tán 
xiǎotíqín ne? is consistent with the stance that 
tán gāngqín is a constituent, which is, in turn, 
consistent with the position of néng as head over 
tán gāngqín. If néng were not head over tán 

                                                           
3 Following Hudson (1984: 92), Starosta (1988: 105), 
and Hellwig (2003: 603), we call the complete sub-
trees of dependency structures constituents.  

gāngqín but rather a dependent of tán, then tán 
gāngqín would not be a constituent and we 
would expect the first question uttered by B to 
fail precisely because tán xiǎotíqín would not 
correspond to a constituent in the preceding 
statement. The fact that the second ne-question is 
bad is consistent with the observation that as 
head over tán gāngqín, the auxiliary néng is not a 
constituent. 
   Modal insertion: The final diagnostic intro-
duced here is modal insertion. This diagnostic 
inserts a modal auxiliary verb into a sentence that 
lacks one, e.g.  

(12)  Tā    tán    qín. 
     S/he  plays  piano. 
    a.  *Tā néng tán qín.    – néng ‘can’ 
    b.  *Néng tā tán qín. 
    c.  *Tā tán néng qín. 

Given the non-controversial assumption that tán 
is the root of the sentence in (12), inserting the 
modal auxiliary néng into the sentence provides 
clues about the hierarchy. Since Mandarin is an 
SVO language, 4

   The six diagnostics just illustrated will now 
be used to identify the root word in sentences 
containing de (descriptive and resultative de). 
The tests mostly converge, identifying the second 
predicate, i.e. the predicate that follows de as 
head over the first predicate.  

 the root verb of a sentence 
should follow the subject and precede the object. 
This means that when the modal auxiliary is in-
serted into the sentence, it becomes the root verb, 
and tán qín becomes its object in a sense. In oth-
er words, when a modal is inserted into the sen-
tence, it should follow the subject and precede 
what was the root before insertion. Doing this 
delivers helpful clues about the hierarchical 
structure of the sentence, as demonstrated with 
(12a–c).  

 
4   Descriptive and resultative de 

4.1  Descriptive de 

The six diagnostics just introduced will now be 
applied to descriptive de. Example (5) from 
above, repeated here as (13), is used as the test 
sentence: 

                                                           
4 We take Chinese to be an SVO language. However, 
there has been some debate about this. Some have 
argued that Chinese is actually SOV (e.g. Sun and 
Givón 1985, Chen 1995). 

264



(13)  Tā  zǒu-de   hěn   màn. 
     He  walk-de  very   slow. 
     ‘He walks very slowly.’ 

Descriptive de helps express a characteristic abil-
ity or trait associated with the subject. In this 
case, the characteristic trait is that of walking 
slowly. The six diagnostics will now be applied 
to this sentence, each in turn.  
   The answer to a ma-question suggests that 
màn is the root: 

(14)  Tā   zǒu-de  màn  ma?  
     S/he  walk-de slow ma 
     ‘Does s/he walk slowly? 
     a.  – *Màn.        – ‘Slow.’ 
     b.  – *Zǒu-de.      – ‘Walk.’ 

The placement of bù is consistent with the as-
sumption that màn is the root: 

(15)  a.  ?Tā   bú  zǒu-de  màn.  
         s/he  not  walk-de slow 
     b.  ?Tā   zǒu-de  bú  màn. 
         s/he  walk    not  slow 

The ability to omit zǒu-de and the inability to 
omit hěn màn indicate that màn is the root: 

(16)  a.  *Tā   hěn  màn. 
         s/he  very  slow 
         ‘S/he is very slow.’  
     b.  *Tā   zǒu-de. 
         s/he  walk-de 

The placement of yě is consistent with màn as the 
root, since in both of the following acceptable 
sentences, yě precedes màn: 

(17)  a.  Tā   yě   zǒu-de  hěn  màn. 
        s/he  also  walk-de very  slow.  
     b.  Tā   zǒu-de  yě   hěn  màn.  
        s/he  walk-de also  very  slow  

The ability to form a ne-question corresponding 
to zǒu-de and the inability to form such a ques-
tion corresponding to màn suggest that màn is 
the root: 

(18)  A:  Tā zǒu-de màn.  ‘S/he walks slowly.’ 
     B:  Pǎo-de ne?      ‘What about run-de.’ 
     Bʹ: *Kuài ne?        ‘What about quickly? 
And the fact that a modal verb can appear in two 
positions suggests that màn is the root, since in 
both cases, the modal verb follows the subject 
and precedes màn: 

(19)  a.  Tā   něng  zǒu-de  hěn  màn. 
        s/he  can   walk-de very  slow 
        ‘S/he can walk very slowly.’ 
     b.  Tā   zǒu-de  néng  hěn  màn. 
        s/he  walk-de can   very  slow 
        ‘S/he can walk very slowly.’ 

Note that if zǒu-de were head over màn here, we 
would expect (19b) to be bad.  
   Taken together, the six diagnostics strongly 
support the conclusion that màn is the root of the 
sentence. The dependency-grammar analysis of 
the starting sentence should therefore be as fol-
lows: 

(20)                  màn 

    Tā  zǒu-de   hěn 

    Tā  zǒu-de  hěn  màn.   

The status of tā as a dependent of màn – as op-
posed to as a dependent of zǒu-de – is motivated 
by the omission diagnostic (see example 16a) 
and the modal insertion diagnostic (see example 
19a). We can therefore see what the clitic de is 
doing in such cases: it serves to subordinate zǒu 
to màn. 

4.2  Resultative de 

The tests also provide consistent results when 
applied to an example with resultative de. Exam-
ple (4a) from above is repeated here as (21): 

(21)   Tā   jiāo-de     lèi    le. 
      s/he  taught-de   tired  le 
      ‘S/he taught her-/himself tired.’ 

This example differs from the one in the previous 
section insofar as the second predicate is now 
interpreted as the result of the action expressed 
by the first predicate, i.e. the teaching made 
her/him tired. The structure of the example, 
though, is similar to the structure of the example 
sentence from the previous section containing 
descriptive de. 
  The answer to a ma-question suggests that lèi 
is head over jiāo-de: 

(22)  Tā   jiāo-de   lèi   le  ma? 
     S/he  teach-de  tired le  ma 
     ‘Did s/he teach her-/himself tired?’   

     a.  – *Lèi (le).   – ‘Tired.’  

     b.  – *Jiāo-de.   – ‘Teach.’ 

The placement of bù (actually mei ‘not’ in this 
case, due to interference associated with le) sug-
gests that lèi is the root, since in both of the fol-

265



lowing sentences, méi precedes lèi:  

(23)  a.  Tā   méi  jiāo-de   lèi. 
        s/he  not   teach-de  tired 
        ‘S/he did not teach her-/himself tired.’ 

     b.  Tā   jiāo-de   méi  lèi.  
        s/he  teach-de  not   tired 
        ‘S/he did not teach her-/himself tired.’ 

If jiāo-de were the root in this case, we would 
expect (23b) to be bad because a left-branching 
verb chain would be present – verb chains in 
Mandarin are mostly right-branching. 
   The ability to omit jiāo-de and the inability to 
omit lèi le indicate that lèi is head over jiào-de:  

(24)  a.  *Tā   lèi    le. 
         s/he  tired  le 

     b.  *Tā   jiāo-de. 
         s/he  teach-de 

The placement of yě is consistent with lèi as the 
root, since in both of the following acceptable 
sentences, yě precedes lèi:  

(25)  a.  Tā   yě   jiāo-de   lèi   le.  
        s/he  also  teach-de  tired le 
        ‘S/he also taught her-/himself tired.’   

     b.  Tā   jiāo-de   yě   lèi   le.  
        s/he  teach-de  also  tired le.  
        ‘S/he also taughter her-/himself tired.’ 

The ability to form a ne-question corresponding 
to jiāo-de and the inability to form such a ques-
tion corresponding to lèi suggest that lèi is head 
over jiāo-de: 

(26)  A:  Tā   jiāo-de   lèi    le. 
         s/he  teach-de  tired  le 

     B:  Xué-de ne?  ‘What about study?’ 

     Bʹ: *Fán ne?     ‘What about bored?’ 
And the fact that a modal verb can appear in two 
positions suggests that lèi is the root, since in 
both cases, the modal verb follows the subject 
and precedes lèi: 

(27)  a.  Tā   gāi      jiāo-de   lèi   le.   
        s/he  should   teach-de  tired le 
        ‘S/he should teach her-/himself tired.’ 

     b.  Tā   jiāo-de   gāi     lèi   le. 
        s/he  teach-de  should  tired le  
        ‘S/he should teach her-/himself tired.’ 

Note that if jiāo-de were head over lèi here be-
fore insertion of the modal verb, we would ex-
pect (27b) to be bad because verb chains in 

Mandarin tend to be right-branching, not 
left-branching. 
   Taken together, the six diagnostics support 
the conclusion that lèi is head over jiāo-de. The 
DG analysis of the starting sentence should 
therefore be as follows: 

(28)                   le 
                 lèi       
    Tā   jiāo-de      

    Tā   jiāo-de  lèi   le. 
    s/he  teach-de tired le.   

The status of tā as an immediate dependent of lèi, 
as opposed to as a dependent of jiāo-de, is sup-
ported by the omission diagnostic (see example 
24a) and the modal insertion diagnostic (see ex-
ample 27a). Therefore we see again what de is 
accomplishing in such cases; its appearance 
serves to subordinate the first predicate to the 
second, i.e. jiāo to lèi. 

4.3  de-clauses  

Resultative de also occurs in bi-clausal sentences. 
The following examples are unlike the examples 
in the previous two sections in this regard insofar 
as two clauses are present each time, as opposed 
to just one:  

(29)   Tā   kū-de  yǎnjīnɡ  hónɡ le.  
      s/he  cry-de  eyes     red   le 
      ‘Her/his crying makes her/his eyes red.’  

The string tā kū-de can be evaluated as a clause 
as opposed to as a phrase because it contains the 
overt subject tā. The string tā kū-de is thus a 
clause that expresses the cause of the result ex-
pressed with the main clause yǎnjīnɡ hónɡ le.  
   When yes/no questions with ma are applied to 
this sentence, the de-clause is most naturally 
omitted entirely: 

(30)  Tā   kū-de  yǎnjīng  hōng  le  ma? 
     s/he  cry-de  eyes     red    le  ma 
     ‘Does s/he cry her/his eyes red?’ 

     a.  –  Hōng le.         ‘Red.’ 

     b.  –  Yǎnjīng hōng le.  ‘Eyes red.’  

     c.  – *Kū-de.          ‘Cry.’ 

These data are expected if hōng is head over 
kū-de, but unexpected if kū-de were head over 
hōng. 
   Negation should be located in front of the 
second predicate, not in front of the first: 

266



(31)  a. *Tā   bù  kū-de  yǎnjīnɡ  hóng  e. 
        s/he  not  cry-de  eyes     red    le  

     b.  Tā   kū-de  yǎnjīnɡ  bù  hónɡ  le. 
        s/he  cry     eyes     not  red    le 
       ‘Crying makes her/his red eyes recover.’   

The badness of (31a) is expected, since in order 
to negate the matrix clause, the negation should 
appear in the matrix clause, not in the subordi-
nate clause.   
   The structural analysis predicts that the sen-
tence should be fine if the de-clause is omitted 
entirely, and this prediction is borne out:  

(32)  Tā   kū-de   yǎnjīnɡ  hónɡ  le. 
     s/he  cries-de  eyes     red    le 

     a.  Yǎnjīnɡ hónɡ le.     ‘Eyes red.’  

 b.  ?Tā kū-de hónɡ le.   ‘S/he cries red.’  

 c.  ?Tā hónɡ le.         ‘S/he is red.’ 

Sentence (32a), from which the de-clause has 
been removed entirely, is fine. If one attempts to 
remove the matrix subject yǎnjīnɡ ‘eyes’ as in 
(32b), though, the result is marginal, and if one 
attempts to make tā ‘s/he’ the matrix subject as 
in (32c), the meaning of the sentence changes 
drastically.  
   Interestingly, however, yě can appear in the 
subordinate clause or the matrix clause: 

(33)  a.  Tā   yě   kū-de  yǎnjīnɡ  hónɡ  le.  
        s/he  also  cry-de  eyes     red    le 
        ‘She too cried her eyes red.’ 

b.  Tā   kū-de  yǎnjīnɡ  yě   hónɡ  le. 
   s/he  cry-de  eyes     also  red    le 
 ‘S/he cried so that also her eyes were red.’ 

There may, however, be a slight meaning differ-
ence across these two sentences, as indicated by 
the translations. 
   The ne-question diagnostic identifies Tā 
kū-de as a constituent, which is expected if hónɡ 
is head over kū-de: 

(34)  A:  Tā   kū-de  yǎnjīnɡ  hónɡ  le. 
         S/he  cry-de  eyes     red    le 
         ‘S/he cried her/his eyes red.’ 

     B:  Nǐ kū-de ne? ‘What about you crying?’ 

   The sixth diagnostic, modal insertion, is par-
ticularly revealing. The modal verb gāi ‘should’ 
can be inserted into either clause:     

(35)  a.  Tā   gāi     kū-de  yǎnjīnɡ  hónɡ  le. 
        S/he  should  cry-de  eyes     red    le 
       ‘S/he should cry making her eyes red.’   

     b.  Tā  kū-de  yǎnjīnɡ gāi     hónɡ  le.  
  s/he cry-de  eyes    should  red    le  
  ‘By crying her/his eyes should be red.’ 

The English translations indicate a subtle mean-
ing difference across the two sentences. This 
meaning difference is expected insofar as the 
modal verb scopes just over the clause in which 
it appears. 
   Taken together, the six diagnostics identify tā 
kū-de as a clausal constituent and hence as a de-
pendent of hónɡ. The following hierarchy models 
the data best: 

(36)                           le 

                    hónɡ 

    kū-de  yǎnjīnɡ 

Tā 

Tā  kū-de  yǎnjīnɡ   hónɡ  le. 

Thus if one wants to reflect the structure of this 
example with an English sentence, one might 
translate it as By her/his crying, her/his eyes were 
red. Perhaps the most important aspect of this 
analysis concerns the position of tā as a depen-
dent of kū-de; tā is the subject kū-de, making tā
 kū-de a separate clause. The example is there-
fore bi-clausal. 

5  Verb copying 

The first verb in the de-construction, both de-
scriptive and resultative, can, and at times must, 
be copied, e.g. 

(37)  a.  *Tā   shuō  hànyǔ-de   hǎo. 
    s/he  speak Chinese-de  good   

     b.  *Tā   shuō-de   hànyǔ   hǎo.5
         s/he  speak-de  Chinese good 

 

     c.   Tā   shuō  hànyǔ   shuō-de  hǎo. 
    s/he  speak Chinese speak-de  good   

         ‘S/he is good at speaking Chinese.’ 

Of these three sentences, only sentence (37c), in 
which the verb shuō is copied, is acceptable. The 
unacceptability of (37a) can be accounted for by 
the assumption that de must cliticize to a verb, as 
                                                           
5 Example (37b) is actually acceptable in the reading 
where it means ‘Her/his spoken Chinese is good’. On 
the intended reading however, i.e. ‘She is good at 
speaking Chinese’, the sentence is bad.  

267



opposed to a noun, i.e. it cannot be a clitic on the 
noun hànyǔ. Why sentence (37b) is bad is, how-
ever, not immediately clear, although it may have 
something to do with the fact that hànyǔ is trying 
to be a postdependent of shuō-de. Perhaps the 
appearance of de blocks the verb shuō from tak-
ing postdependents. Verb copying would thus be 
a means of overcoming this block on postdepen-
dents. 
   The stance taken here is that verb copying as 
illustrated in (37c) is revealing something im-
portant about the syntactic status of de. Much of 
the literature on the de-constructions takes de to 
be a suffix (e.g. Li and Thompson 1981). In con-
trast, the observations that we now present sug-
gest that de is better analyzed as a clitic. In par-
ticular, it behaves like possessive ’s in English in 
an important way, which demonstrates that it is 
better viewed as a clitic, since possessive ’s in 
English has clitic status.  
   First, consider (37b) again. While shuō-de 
cannot take hànyǔ as a postdependent, it can take 
hànyǔ as a predependent. Example (37b) is given 
again here as (38a) with the dependency analysis 
included, and sentence (38b) is added to illustrate 
the ability of shuō-de to take hànyǔ as a prede-
pendent: 

(38)                            hǎo 
         Tā   shuō-de  
                       hànyǔ 

     a.  *Tā   shuō-de   hànyǔ   hǎo. 
         s/he  speak-de  Chinese good 

                               hǎo 
         Tā           shuō-de 
              hànyǔ 

     b.   Tā   hànyǔ   shuō-de   hǎo. 
         s/he  speak-de  Chinese good 

If these analyses are on the right track, they point 
to a partial explanation for why verb copying 
occurs in the de-construction. Copying the verb 
helps to overcome the block on postdependents. 
   Consider the following analysis of example 
(37c), repeated here as (39) with the dependen-
cies added 

(39)                            hǎo 
   Tā                 shuō-de 
        shuō   
              hànyǔ     

   Tā   shuō  hànyǔ   shuō-de  hǎo. 
   s/he  speak Chinese speak-de  good 

On this analysis, shuō-de no longer has a post-
dependent, but rather hànyǔ is a postdependent 
of the first shuō. The account might therefore 
simply stipulate that the appearance of de blocks 
its host from taking a postdependent. This stipu-
lation would, however, be contradicted by other 
data, a point that will become evident shortly. 
   The analysis of descriptive and resultative de 
above has demonstrated that de serves to subor-
dinate one predicate to another. It behaves like a 
postposition or post-subordinator. To accommo-
date this role of de, it can be positioned as the 
root of the entire premodifier. As the root of this 
modifier, it has a hierarchical status that is quite 
similar to the possessive clitic ’s in English. 
Compare the following structures: 

(40)                            dog 
                            -s 
        woman 
    the          with 
                         hat 
                      a 

    the  woman  with   a  hat ’s  dog   

(41)                hǎo 
    Tā        -de 
         shuō 

    Tā   shuō -de   hǎo. 
    s/he  speaks -de  good 
    ‘S/he speaks well.’   

The de element is now shown as the root of the 
phrase shuō de, similar to the way that posses-
sive ’s is shown as the root of the determiner 
phrase the woman with a hat’s. Both of these 
elements are granted the status of a clitic.  
   Clitics are, following Groß (2014), indicated 
with a hyphen and the absence of a projection 
line. The hyphen appears on the side of the clitic 
where its host is, indicating that the clitic is pro-
sodically dependent on that host. The host of de 
must be a verb (here shuō), whereas the host of ’s 
can be most any category (here it is the noun hat).
  
   The analysis of the de element just sketched 
is supported by cases in which the verb to which 
it cliticizes is subordinated to a modal verb, e.g.  

268



(42)                            kū 
                   -de  wǒmen        
         huí                           
    Tā       chàng   

    Tā   huí  chàng -de  wǒmen  kū. 
    S/he  can sing   -de  we      cry   
    ‘S/he can sing (so nicely that) we cry.’ 

The de cliticizes to chàng at the same time that 
chàng is subordinate to huì. This analysis grants 
de the status of a subordinator (subordinate con-
junction). It serves to subordinate the imme-
diately preceding predicate to the following pre-
dicate.  
   To summarize, the verb copying phenomenon 
has helped reveal important traits of descriptive 
and resultive de. This element is a clitic that 
serves to subordinate one predicate to another. It 
necessarily cliticizes to the preceding predicate 
and subordinates that predicate to a following 
predicate. The fact that it cliticizes to a preceding 
predicate blocks that predicate from taking a 
postdependent. This is in turn the aspect of de 
that is responsible for motivating verb copying. 
By copying the verb, the first instance of the verb 
(on the left) can take a postdependent. 

6  Unification with de (的) and de (地) 

Descriptive/resultative de (得) shares an impor-
tant prosodic feature with de (的) and de (地). 
All three de receive a neutral tone – although 地 
does allow an archaic falling tone at times, in 
which case it is pronounced as dì. The shared 
trait of a neutral tone suggests that all three de 
can be viewed as clitics. More importantly, 
though, all three de serve to subordinate what 
immediately precedes them to what follows them. 
In other words, their roles in the syntactic struc-
ture are closely similar.  
  The most frequently occurring de often subor-
dinates material to a noun; it is written as 的, 
and the material that it subordinates typically 
corresponds to an attributive adjective, preposi-
tional phrase, or relative clause in English, e.g.   

(43)             júzi 
           -de 
      xiǎo 

  a.   xiǎo  -de   júzi 
      small -de   orange 
      ‘small oranges’ 

                        shū 
                    -de 
              shàng 
      shūjiá 

  b.   shūjiá   shàng -de  shū 
      shelf    on    -de  book  
      ‘the book on the shelf’ 

In each case, the de clitic appears to subordinate 
the material preceding it to the noun that follows 
it. 
   The other de (地) performs a closely similar 
role, although it depends on a verb as opposed to 
on a noun, and the material that it subordinates is 
restricted to an adjective. It therefore serves to 
transform an adjective into an adverb; the adjec-
tive is often doubled: 

(44)                 zuò 
   Tā           -de       zài 
        jìng-jìng              nàr 

   Tā   jìng-jìng -de  zuò  zài  nàr. 
   she   quietly  -de  sat   at   there   
   'She quietly sat there.’ 

   In sum, the aspect to acknowledge about all 
three de is that they are quite similar. They are 
clitics that subordinate what precedes them to 
what follows them. The point, then, is that a uni-
fied syntactic analysis of the three de is possible. 

7  Conclusion 

This manuscript has produced a DG account of 
the descriptive/resultative element de (得) in 
Mandarin. This element is a clitic that serves to 
subordinate the preceding predicate to the/a fol-
lowing predicate. Its role in syntax is closely 
similar to the roles of de (的) and de (地). All 
three de perform a translative function (Tesnière 
1959: Part III).    
   This manuscript ends with a word of caution. 
The exploration of de elements here has focused 
on a particular type of de, namely descriptive and 
resultative de (得), and it has drawn a parallel to 
two other types of de, 的 and 地. The de ele-
ment appears in additional constructions beyond 
these three, as mentioned above in the overview 
where six types of de were listed. The three types 
of de in the overview not examined in this con-
tribution behave much differently than the three 
types of de that have been considered. Especially 
the modal element de (the fifth de in the list) 
presents challenges to syntactic theory.  

269



Literature 

Yuen-Ren Chao. 1968/1979. A Grammar of Spoken  
Chinese. Translated by Lv Shuxiang. The Com-
mercial Press, Beijing.  

Rong Chen. 1995. Communicative dynamism and 
word order in mandarin Chinese. Language 
Sciences, 17, 2, 201–22. 

Sheng-shu Ding. 1961. Xiàndài hànyǔ yǔfǎ jiǎnɡhuà 
[Lectures on the modern Chinese grammar]. The 
Commercial Press, Beijing: 

Xiao Fan. 1993. Fù dònɡ V-de jù [The verb-copying 
V-de construction]. Yǔyánjiàoxuéyǔyánjiū 04, 
57–74. 

Thomas Groß. 2014. Clitics in dependency morphol-
ogy. In Kim Gerdes, Eva Hajičová, and Leo Wan-
ner (eds.), Dependency Linguistics: Recent Ad-
vances in Linguistic Theory Using Dependency 
Structures, 229–51. John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 

Peter Hellwig. 2003. Dependency Unification Gram-
mar. In: V. Ágel, et al. (eds.), Dependency and 
Valency: An International Handbook of Contem-
porary Research. 593–635. Walter de Gruyter, 
Berlin.   

James Huang. 1988. Wǒ pǎo de kuài and Chinese 
phrase structure. Language 64, 2, 274–311. 

Richard Hudson. 1984. Word Grammar. Basil 
Blackwell, Oxford, UK. 

Charles Li and Sandra Thompson. 1981. Mandarin 
Chinese: A Functional Reference Grammar. Uni-
versity of California Press, Berkeley. 

James Huang, Audrey Li, and Yafei Li. 2009. The 
Syntax of Chinese. Cambridge University Press. 

Lin-ding Li. 1986. Xiàndài hànyǔ jùxínɡ [The modern 
Chinese constructions]. The Commercial Press, 
Beijing.  

Stanley Starosta. 1988. The Case for Lexicase: An 
Outline of Lexicase Grammatical Theory. Pinter 
Publishers, London:. 

Chao-Fen Sun and Talmy Givón. 1985. On the 
so-called SOV word order in Mandarin Chinese: A 
quantified text study and its implications. Lan-
guage 6, 2, 329–51. 

Lucien Tesnière. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe structu-
rale. Klincksieck, Paris. 

Xin-yuan Xu and Haihua Pan. 2014. Tā de lǎoshī 
dānɡ de hǎo de shēnɡchénɡ lùjìnɡ tànxī [An inves-
tigation into the syntactic mechanism of generating 
sentences like Ta de laoshi dang–de hao]. 
Xiàndàiwàiyǔ 04, 439–451.  

Da-ran Yang and Gong Cheng. 2013. Xiànxìnɡ 
duìyīnɡ dìnɡlǐ yǔ hànyǔ zhònɡdònɡ jù de cíxiànɡ 
rónɡhé [Linear Correspondence Axiom and Mor-
phological Fusion in Mandarin Double-verb Con-
structions]. Wàiɡuóyǔ 04, 37–46. 

De-xi Zhu. 1982. Yǔfǎ jiǎnɡyì [Lectures on Grammar]. 
The Commercial Press, Beijing.  

Ming Zhou and Changning Huang. 1994. Approach to 
the Chinese dependency formalism for the tagging 
of corpus. Journal of Chinese Information 
Processing, 8, 3, 35–52. 

270


