



















































Visualizing Poetry with SPARSAR -- Visual Maps from Poetic Content


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 68–78,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Visualizing Poetry with SPARSAR –  
Visual Maps from Poetic Content 

Rodolfo Delmonte  
Department of Language Studies & Department of Computer Science 

Ca’ Foscari University - 30123, Venezia, Italy 
delmont@unive.it

Abstract 

In this paper we present a specific application of 
SPARSAR, a system for poetry analysis and 
TextToSpeech “expressive reading”. We will 
focus on the graphical output organized at three 
macro levels, a Phonetic Relational View where 
phonetic and phonological features are 
highlighted; a Poetic Relational View that 
accounts for a poem rhyming and metrical 
structure; and a Semantic Relational View that 
shows semantic and pragmatic relations in the 
poem. We will also discuss how colours may be 
used appropriately to account for the overall 
underlying attitude expressed in the poem, 
whether directed to sadness or to happiness. This 
is done following traditional approaches which 
assume that the underlying feeling of a poem is 
strictly related to the sounds conveyed by the 
words besides their meaning. This will be shown 
using part of Shakespeare’s Sonnets. 

1  Introduction 

The contents of a poem cover many different fields 
from a sensorial point of view to a mental and a 
auditory linguistic one.  A poem may please our 
hearing for its rhythm and rhyme structure, or 
simply for the network of alliterations it evokes be 
they consonances or assonances; it may attract our 
attention for its structure of meaning, organized on 
a coherent lattice of anaphoric and coreferential 
links or suggested and extracted from inferential 
and metaphorical links to symbolic meanings 
obtained by a variety of rhetorical devices. Most if 
not all of these facets of a poem are derived from 
the analysis of SPARSAR, the system for poetry 
analysis which has been presented to a number of 
international conferences (Delmonte 2013a; 2013b; 
2014) - and to Demo sessions in its TextToSpeech 
“expressive reading” version (Delmonte & Bacalu, 
2012; Delmonte & Prati, 2014; Delmonte, 2015). 

Most of a poem's content can be captured 
considering three basic views on the poem itself: 
one that covers what can be called the overall 
sound pattern of the poem - and this is related to 
the phonetics and the phonology of the words 
contained in the poem - Phonetic Relational View. 
Another view is the one that captures the main 
poetic devices related to rhythm, that is the rhyme 
structure and the metrical structure - this view will 
be called Poetic Relational View. Finally, the 
semantic and pragmatic contents of the poem 
which are related to relations entertained by 
predicates and arguments expressed in the poem, 
relations at lexical semantic level, relations at 
metaphorical and anaphoric level - this view will 
be called Semantic Relational View. 

In this paper we will concentrate on the three 
views above, which are visualized by the graphical 
output of the system and has been implemented by 
extracting the various properties and features of the 
poem and are analyzed in ten separate poetic maps. 
These maps are organized as follows: 
v A General Description map including seven 

Macro Indices with a statistical evaluation of 
such descriptors as: Semantic Density 
Evaluation; General Poetic Devices; General 
Rhetoric Devices etc., Prosodic Distribution; 
Rhyming Schemes; Metrical Structure. This 
map is discussed and presented in previous 
publications, so I will not show it here;  

v Phonetic Relational Views: five maps, 
o Assonances, i.e. all vowels contained 

in stressed vowel nuclei which have 
been repeated in the poem within a 
certain interval – not just in adjacency; 

o Consonances, i.e. all consonant onsets 
of stressed syllables again repeated in 
the poem within a certain interval; 

o All word repetitions, be it stressed or 
unstressed;  

68



o one for the Unvoiced/Voiced 
opposition as documented in syllable 
onset of stressed words (stress 
demotion counts as unstressed); 

o another for a subdivision of all 
consonant syllable onsets, including 
consonant cluster onsets, and 
organized in three main phonological 
classes: 

o Continuants (only fricatives);  
o Obstruents (Plosives and Affricates);  
o Sonorants (Liquids, Vibrants, 

Approximants; Glides; Nasals). 
v Poetic Relation Views: 

o Metrical Structure, Rhyming Structure 
and Expected Acoustic Length all in 
one single map. 

v Semantic Relational View: four maps, 
-­‐ A map including polarity marked words 

(Positive vs Negative) and words 
belonging to Abstract vs Concrete 
semantic class1; 

-­‐ A map including polarity marked words 
(Positive vs Negative) and words 
belonging to Eventive vs State semantic 
class; 

-­‐ A map including Main Topic words; 
Anaphorically linked words; Inferentially 
linked words; Metaphorically linked words 
i.e. words linked explicitly by “like” or 
“as”, words linked by recurring symbolic 
meanings (woman/serpent or 
woman/moon or woman/rose); 

-­‐ A map showing predicate argument 
relations intervening between words, 
marked at core argument words  only, 
indicating predicate and semantic role; 
eventive anaphora between verbs. 

Graphical maps highlight differences using 
colours. The use of colours associated to sound in 
poetry has a long tradition. Rimbaud composed a 
poem devoted to “Vowels” where colours where 
specifically associated to each of the main five 
vowels. Roman Jakobson wrote extensively about 
sound and colour in a number of papers (1976; 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1 see in particular Brysbaert et al. 2014 that has a database of 
40K entries. We are also using a manually annotated lexicon 
of 10K entries and WordNet supersenses or broad semantic 
classes. We are not using MRCDatabase which only has some 
8,000 concrete + some 9,000 imagery classified entries 
because it is difficult to adapt and integrated into our system. 

Jakobson & Waugh, 1978:188; lately Mazzeo, 
2004). As Tsur (1992) notes, Fónagy in 1961 wrote 
an article in which he connected explicitly the use 
of certain types of consonant sounds associated to 
certain moods: unvoiced and obstruent consonants 
are associated with aggressive mood; sonorants 
with tender moods. Fónagy mentioned the work of 
M.Macdermott (1940) who in her study identified 
a specific quality associated to “dark” vowels, i.e. 
back vowels, that of being linked with dark 
colours, mystic obscurity, hatred and struggle. For 
this reason, we then decided to evaluate all 
information made available by SPARSAR at the 
three macro levels in order to check these findings 
about the association of mood and sound. This will 
be discussed in a final section of the paper devoted 
to correlations in Shakespeare’s sonnets. 

As a result, we will also be using darker colours 
for highlighting back and front vowels as opposed 
to low and middle vowels, these latter with light 
colours. The same will apply to representing 
unvoiced and obstruent consonants as opposed to 
voiced and sonorants. But as Tsur (1992:15) notes, 
this sound-colour association with mood or attitude 
has no real significance without a link to 
semantics. In the Semantic Relational View, we 
will be using dark colours for Concrete referents vs 
Abstract ones with lighter colours; dark colours 
also for Negatively marked words as opposed to 
Positively marked ones with lighter colours. The 
same strategy will apply to other poetic maps: this 
technique has certainly the good quality of 
highlighting opposing differences at some level of 
abstraction2. 

The usefulness of this visualization is 
intuitively related to various potential users and for 
different purposes. First of all, translators of poetry 
would certainly benefit from the decomposition of 
the poem and the fine-grained analysis, in view of 
the need to preserve as much as possible of the 
original qualities of the source poem in the target 
language. Other possible users are literary critics 
and literature teachers at various levels. Graphical 
output is essentially produced to allow immediate 
and direct comparison between different poems 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2 our approach is not comparable to work by Saif Mohammad 
(2011a;2011b), where colours are associated with words on 
the basis of what their mental image may suggest to the mind 
of annotators hired via Mechanical Turk. The resource only 
contains word-colour association for some 12,000 entries over 
the 27K items listed. 

69



and different poets. In order to show the usefulness 
and power of these visualization, I have chosen 
two different English poets in different time 
periods: Shakespeare with Sonnet 1 and 60; and 
Sylvia Plath, with Edge.  

The paper is organized as follows: a short state 
of the art in the following section; then the views 
of three poems accompanied by comments; some 
conclusion. 

2. Related Work 

Computational work on poetry addresses a number 
of subfields which are however strongly related. 
They include automated annotation, analysis, or 
translation of poetry, as well as poetry generation, 
that we comment here below. Other common 
subfields regard automatic grapheme-to-phoneme 
translation for out of vocabulary words as 
discussed in (Reddy & Goldsmith, 2010). Genzel 
et al. (2010) use CMU pronunciation dictionary to 
derive stress and rhyming information, and 
incorporate constraints on meter and rhyme into a 
machine translation system. There has also been 
some work on computational approaches to 
characterizing rhymes (Byrd and Chodorow, 1985) 
and global properties of the rhyme network 
(Sonderegger, 2011) in English.  

Green et al. (2010) use a finite state transducer 
to infer the syllable-stress assignments in lines of 
poetry under metrical constraints. They contribute 
variations similar to the schemes below, by 
allowing an optional inversion of stress in the 
iambic foot. This variation is however only 
motivated by heuristics, noting that "poets often 
use the word 'mother' (S* S) at the beginnings and 
ends of lines, where it theoretically should not 
appear." So eventually, there is no control of the 
internal syntactic or semantic structure of the 
newly obtained sequence of feet: the optional 
change is only positionally motivated. They 
employ statistical methods to analyze, generate, 
and translate rhythmic poetry. They first apply 
unsupervised learning to reveal word-stress 
patterns in a corpus of raw poetry. They then use 
these word-stress patterns, in addition to rhyme 
and discourse models, to generate English love 
poetry. Finally, they translate Italian poetry into 
English, choosing target realizations that conform 
to desired rhythmic patterns. They, however, 
concentrate on only one type of poetic meter, the 

iambic pentameter. And they use the audio 
transcripts - made by just one person - to create the 
syllable-based word-stress gold standard corpus for 
testing, made of some 70 lines taken from 
Shakespeare's sonnets. Audio transcripts without 
supporting acoustic analysis3 are not always the 
best manner to deal with stress assignment in 
syllable positions which might or might not 
conform to a strict sequence of iambs. There is no 
indication of what kind of criteria have been used, 
and it must be noted that the three acoustic cues 
may well not be congruent (see Tsur, 2014). So 
eventually results obtained are rather difficult to 
evaluate. As the authors note, spoken recordings 
may contain lexical stress reversals and archaic 
pronunciations 4 . Their conclusion is that "this 
useful information is not available in typical 
pronunciation dictionaries". Further on, (p. 531) 
they comment "the probability of stressing 'at' is 
40% in general, but this increases to 91% when the 
next word is 'the'. " We assume that demoting or 
promoting word stress requires information which 
is context and syntactically dependent. Proper use 
of one-syllable words remains tricky. In our 
opinion, machine learning would need much 
bigger training data than the ones used by the 
authors for their experiment. 

There's a large number of papers on poetry 
generation starting from work documented in a 
number of publications by P. Gérvas (2001;2010) 
who makes use of Case Based Reasoning to induce 
the best line structure. Other interesting attempts 
are by Toivonen et al.(2012) who use a corpus-
based approach to generate poetry in Finnish. Their 
idea is to contribute the knowledge needed in 
content and form by two separate corpora, one 
providing semantic content, and another for 
grammatical and poetic structure. Morphological 
analysis and synthesis is used together with text-
mining methods. Basque poetry generation is the 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3 One questions could be "Has the person transcribing stress 
pattern been using pitch as main acoustic correlate for stress 
position, or loudness (intensity or energy) or else durational 
patterns?". The choice of one or the other acoustic correlated 
might change significantly the final outcome. 
4 At p.528 they present a table where they list a number of 
words - partly function and partly content words - associated 
to probability values indicating their higher or lower 
propensity to receive word stress. They comment that 
"Function words and possessives tend to be unstressed, while 
content words tend to be stressed, though many words are 
used both ways". 

70



topic of Agirrezabal et al. 2013 paper which uses 
POS-tags to induce the linear ordering and 
WordNet to select best semantic choice in context. 

Manurung et al., 2000 have explored the 
problem of poetry generation under some 
constraints using machine learning techniques. 
With their work the authors intended to fill the gap 
in the generation paradigm, and "to shed some 
light on what often seems to be the most enigmatic 
and mysterious forms of artistic expression". The 
conclusion they reach is that "...despite our 
implementation being at a very early stage, the 
sample output succeeds in showing how the 
stochastic hillclimbing search model manages to 
produce text that satisfies these constraints." 
However, when we come to the evaluation of 
metre we discover that they base their approach on 
disputable premises. The authors quote the first 
line of what could be a normal limerick but totally 
misinterpret the metrical structure. In limericks, 
what we are dealing with are not dactyls - TAtata - 
but anapests, tataTA, that is a sequence of two 
unstressed plus a closing stressed syllable. This is a 
well known characteristic feature of limericks and 
the typical rhythm is usually preceded and 
introduced by a iamb "there ONCE", and followed 
by two anapests, "was a MAN", "from maDRAS". 
Here in particular it is the syntactic-semantic 
phrase that determines the choice of foot, and not 
the scansion provided by the authors5. 

Reddy & Knight (2011) produce an 
unsupervised machine learning algorithm for 
finding rhyme schemes which is intended to be 
language-independent. It works on the intuition 
that "a collection of rhyming poetry inevitably 
contains repetition of rhyming pairs. ... This is 
partly due to sparsity of rhymes – many words that 
have no rhymes at all, and many others have only a 
handful, forcing poets to reuse rhyming pairs." The 
authors harness this repetition to build an 
unsupervised algorithm to infer rhyme schemes, 
based on a model of stanza generation. "We test 
the algorithm on rhyming poetry in English and 
French.” The definition of rhyme the authors used 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5  "For instance, the line 'There /once was a /man from 
Ma/dras', has a stress pattern of (w,s,w,w,s,w,w,s). This can be 
divided into feet as (w),(s,w,w),(s,w,w),(s). In other words, 
this line consists of a single upbeat (the weak syllable before 
the first strong syllable), followed by 2 dactyls (a classical 
poetry unit consisting of a strong syllable followed by two 
weak ones), and ended with a strong beat."(ibid.7) 

is the strict one of perfect rhyme: two words rhyme 
if their final stressed vowels and all following 
phonemes are identical. So no half rhymes are 
considered. Rhyming lines are checked from 
CELEX phonological database. 

3. Three Views via Poetic Graphical Maps 

The basic idea underlying poetic graphical maps is 
that of making available to the user an insight of 
the poem which is hardly realized even if the 
analysis is carried out manually by an expert 
literary critic. This is also due to the fact that the 
expertise required for the production of all the 
maps ranges from acoustic phonetics to semantics 
and pragmatics, a knowledge that is not usually 
possessed by a single person. All the graphical 
representations associated to the poems are 
produced by SWI Prolog, inside the system which 
is freely downloadable from its website, at 
sparsar.wordpress.com. For lack of space, we will 
show maps related to two of Shakespeare's 
Sonnets, Sonnet 1 and Sonnet 60 and compare 
them to Sylvia Plath’s Edge, to highlight 
similarities and to show that the system can handle 
totally different poems still allowing comparisons 
to be made neatly. All Phonetic Views are shown 
in Arpabet, i.e. the computer based phonetic 
alphabet . 

 

71



 
 
 

 
 
We will start commenting the Phonetic Relational 
View and its related maps. The first map is 
concerned with Assonances. Here sounds are 
grouped into Vowel Areas, as said above, which 
include also diphthongs: now, in area choice what 
we have considered is the onset vowel. We have 
disregarded the offset glide which is less persistent 
and might also not reach its target articulation. We 
will have also combined together front high 
vowels, which can express suffering and pain, with 

back dark vowels: both can be treated as marked 
vowels, compared to middle and low vowels6. 
   Assonances and Consonances are derived from 
syllable structure in stressed position of repeated 
sounds within a certain line span: in particular, 
Consonances are derived from syllable onset while 
Assonances from syllable nuclei in stressed 
position. The Voiced/Unvoiced View is taken from 
all consonant onsets of stressed words. As can be 
noticed from the maps above, the choice of warm 
colours is selected for respectively, 
CONTINUANT (yellow), VOICED (orange), 
SONORANT (green), Centre/Low Vowel Area 
(gold), Middle Vowel Area (green); and cold 
colours respectively for UNVOICED (blue), Back 
Vowel Area (brown). We used then red for 
OBSTRUENT (red), Front High Vowel Area (red), 
to indicate suffering and surprise associated to 
speech signal interruption in obstruents. 
 

 
 
The second set of views is the Poetic Relations 
View. It is obtained by a single graphical map 
which however condenses five different levels of 

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6 Area low: ae aa ah ao aw ay; area high front: iy ih ia y; area 
high back: uw uh ow ua w; area middle: er ea ax oh eh ey oy. 
Voiced consonants: l m n ng r z zh dh d b g v jh; unvoiced 
consonants: p s sh th h hh f ch t k. Obstruents: t d b p g k jh 
ch; continuants: f v z zh s sh th dh h hh; sonorants: l m n ng r. 

72



analysis. The Rhyming Structure is obtained by 
matching line endings in its phonetic form. The 
result is an capital letter associated with each line 
on left. This is accompanied by a metrical measure 
indicating the number of syllables contained in the 
line. Then the text of the poem and underneath the 
phonetic translation at syllable level. Finally, 
another annotation is added mapping syllable type 
with sequences of 0/1. This should serve a metrical 
analysis which can be accomplished by the user – 
completed by comments on poetry type which will 
be presented at the conference. The additional 
important layer of analysis that this view makes 
available is an acoustic phonetic image of each line 
represented by a coloured streak computed on the 
basis of the average syllable length in msec derived 
from our database of syllables of British English.  
   Finally, the third set of views, the Semantic 
Relational View, produced by the modules of the 
system derived from VENSES (Delmonte et al., 
2005). This view is organized around four separate 
graphical poetic maps: a map which highlights 
Event and State words in the poem; a map which 
highlights Concrete vs Abstract words. Both these 
two maps address nouns and adjectives. They also 
indicate Affective and Sentiment analysis 
(Delmonte & Pallotta, 2011; Delmonte 2014), an 
evaluation related to nouns and adjective – which 
however will be given a separate view when the 
Appraisal-based dictionary will be completed at 
the conference. A map which contains main 
Topics, Anaphoric and Metaphoric relations, and a 
final map with Predicate-arguments relations. 
 

 

 

 
 
We will now compare a love sonnet like Sonnet 1 
to Sonnet 60, which like many other similar 
sonnets depicts the condition of man condemned to 
succumb to the scythe of Time - the poet though, 
will survive through his verse. Here we will restrict 
ourselves to showing only part of the maps and 
omit less relevant ones. 
    In the Phonetic Relations Views the choice of 
words is strongly related to the main theme and the 
result is a gloomier, hasher overall sound quality of 
the poem: number of unvoiced is close to that of 
voiced consonants; in particular, number of 
obstruents is higher than the sum of sonorants and 
continuants. As to Assonances, we see that even 

73



though A and E sounds - that is open and middle 
vowels - constitute the majority of sounds, there is 
a remarkable presence of back and high front 
vowels. Proportions are very different from what 
we found in Sonnet 1: 18/49, i.e. dark are one third 
of light, compared to 21/46, almost half the 
amount. Also consider number of Obstruents 
which is higher than number of Sonorants and 
Continuants together: in Sonnet 1 it was identical 
to number of Continuants. 
 

 

 
Similar remarks can be made on the map of 
Unvoiced/Voiced opposition, where we see that we 

go from 29/43 that is dark sounds are a little bit 
more than half light ones in Sonnet 1, to 32/40 in 
Sonnet 60, i.e. they are almost the same amount. 
Eventually, the information coming from affective 
analysis confirms our previous findings: in Sonnet 
1 we see a majority of positive words/propositions, 
18/15; the opposite applies to Sonnet 60, where the 
ratio is reversed 10/21. 
 

 
 

 
 
This interpretation of the data is expected also for 
other poets and is proven by Sylvia Plath’s Edge, a 
poem the author wrote some week before her 
suicidal death. It’s a terrible and beautiful poem at 
the same time: images of death are evoked and 
explicitly mentioned in the poem, together with 
images of resurrection and nativity. The poem 
starts with an oxymoron: “perfected” is joined with 
“dead body” and both are predicated of the 
“woman”. We won’t be able to show all the maps 

74



for lack of space, but the overall sound pattern is 
strongly reminiscent of a death toll. In the 
Consonances map, there’s a clear majority of 
obstruent sounds and the balance between 
voiced/unvoiced consonants is in favour of the 
latter. In the Assonances map we see that dark 
vowel sounds are almost in same amount of light 
sounds 28/30.  
 

 
The same applies to the Voiced/Unvoiced 

distinction which is again in favour of the latter. If 
we look at the topics and the coherence through 
anaphora, we find that the main topic is constituted 
by concepts WOMAN, BODY and CHILD. 

There's also a wealth of anaphoric relations 
expressed by personal and possessive pronouns 
which depend on WOMAN. In addition, he system 
has found metaphoric referential links with such 
images as MOON GARDEN and SERPENT. In 
particular the Moon is represented as human - "has 
nothing to be sad about".  

 

 
  

    These images are all possible embodiment of the 
WOMAN, either directly - the Moon is feminine 
(she) - or indirectly, when the CHILD that the 
woman FOLDS the children in her BODY, and the 
children are in turn assimilated to WHITE 
SERPENTS. 

75



4. Computing Mood from the Sonnets 

In this final section we will show data produced by 
SPARSAR relatively to the relation holding 
between Mood, Sound and Meaning in half of 
William Shakespeare’s Sonnets. This is done to 
confirm data presented in the sections above. As 
will be made clear from Table 1. below, choice of 
words by Shakespeare has been carefully done in 

relating the theme and mood of the sonnet to the 
sound intended to be produced while reading it. 
Shakespeare’s search for the appropriate word is a 
well-known and established fact and a statistics of 
his corpus speak of some 29,000 types, a lot more 
than any English poet whose corpus has been 
quantitatively analyzed so far (see Delmonte, 
2013a).

 
Table 1. Comparing Polarity with Sound Properties of Shakespeare's Sonnets: Blue Line = Ratio of 

Unvoiced/Voiced Consonants; Red Line = Ratio of Obstruents/Continuants+Sonorants; Green Line = Ratio of 
Marked Vowels/Unmarked Vowels; Violet Line = Ratio of Negative/Positive Polarity Words/Propositions. 

1. sonnets with an overall happy mood; 2. sonnets 
about love with a contrasted mood – the lover have 
betrayed the poet but he still loves him/her, or the 
poet is doubtful about his friend’s love; 3. sonnets 
about the ravages of time, the sadness of human 
condition (but the poet will survive through his 
verse); 4 sonnets with an overall negative mood. 
We will look at peaks and dips in the Table 1. and 
try to connect them to the four possible 
interpretations of the sonnets. 
1. POSITIVE peaks (11): sonnet 6, sonnet 7, 
sonnet 10, sonnet 16, sonnet 18, sonnet 25, sonnet 
26, sonnet 36, sonnet 43, sonnet 116, sonnet 130 
4. NEGATIVE dips (15): sonnet 5, sonnet 8, 
sonnet 12, sonnet 14, sonnet 17, sonnet 19, sonnet 
28, sonnet 33, sonnet 41, sonnet 48, sonnet 58, 
sonnet 60, sonnet 63, sonnet 65, sonnet 105 

2. POSITIVE-CONTRAST (6): sonnet 22, sonnet 
24, sonnet 31, sonnet 49, sonnet 55, sonnet 59 
3. NEGATIVE-CONTRAST (1): sonnet 52 
Overall, the system has addressed 33 sonnets out 
of 75 with the appropriate mood selection, 44%. 
The remaining 42 sonnets have been projected in 
the intermediate zone from high peaks to low dips. 

Conclusion 

We presented a visualization algorithm that works 
on two XML files, the output of SPARSAR system 
for poetry analysis. The algorithm decomposes the 
content of the two XML files into 10 graphical 
maps whose content can in turn be organized into 
three macro views that encompass most of a 
poem’s poetic content. In a final section we also 
verified (successfully) the hypothesis regarding the 

76



existence of an implicit association between sound 
and meaning carried by the words making up a 
poem, by a study of 75 Shakespeare’s sonnets. 
More work needs to be done to improve the 
Polarity analysis which we intend to project onto 
the “Appraisal Theory” of meaning. A complete 
analysis of Shakespeare’s sonnets is also under 
way and will be presented at the conference, 
together with a comparison with the work of more 
recent poets. 
 
References 
Agirrezabal Manex, Bertol Arrieta, Aitzol Astigarraga, 

Mans Hulden, 2013. POS-tag based poetry 
generation with WordNet, Proceedings of the 14th 
European Workshop on Natural Language 
Generation, pages 162–166. 

Baayen R. H., R. Piepenbrock, and L. Gulikers. 1995. 
The CELEX Lexical Database (CD-ROM). 
Linguistic Data Consortium. 

Bacalu C., Delmonte R. 1999. Prosodic Modeling for 
Syllable Structures from the VESD - Venice English 
Syllable Database, in Atti 9° Convegno GFS-AIA, 
Venezia.  

Bacalu C., Delmonte R. 1999. Prosodic Modeling for 
Speech Recognition, in Atti del Workshop AI*IA - 
"Elaborazione del Linguaggio e Riconoscimento del 
Parlato", IRST Trento, pp.45-55.  

Brysbaert, M., Warriner, A.B., & Kuperman, V. 2014. 
Concreteness ratings for 40 thousand generally 
known English word lemmas. Behavior Research 
Methods, 46, 904-911. 

Byrd Roy J. and M. S. Chodorow. 1985. Using an 
online dictionary to find rhyming words and 
pronunciations for unknown words. In Proceedings 
of the 23rd Annual Meeting of ACL, 277–283. 

Delmonte R., 2013a. Transposing Meaning into 
Immanence: The Poetry of Francis Webb, in Rivista 
di Studi Italiani, Vol. XXX1, n° 1, 835-892. 

Delmonte R., et al. 2005. VENSES – a Linguistically-
Based System for Semantic Evaluation, in J. 
Quiñonero-Candela et al.(eds.), Machine Learning 
Challenges. LNCS, Springer, Berlin, 344-371. 

Delmonte R. and V. Pallotta, 2011. Opinion Mining and 
Sentiment Analysis Need Text Understanding, in 
"Advances in Distributed  Agent-based Retrieval 
Tools", Springer, 81-96. 

Delmonte R. & C. Bacalu. 2013. SPARSAR: a System 
for Poetry Automatic Rhythm and Style AnalyzeR, 
SLATE 2013 - Demonstration Track, Grenoble. 

Delmonte R. 2013b. Computing Poetry Style, in C. 
Battaglino, C. Bosco, E. Cambria, R. Damiano, V. 
Patti, P. Rosso (eds.), Proceeding ESSEM - Emotion 

and Sentiment in Social and Expressive Media: 
approaches and perspectives from AI (ESSEM 
2013), CEUR Workshop Proceedings, Torino, 148-
155, http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1096/. 

Delmonte R. & A.M. Prati. 2014. SPARSAR: An 
Expressive Poetry Reader, Proceedings of the 
Demonstrations at the 14th Conference of the 
EACL,  Gotheborg, 73–76. 

Delmonte R. 2014. A Computational Approach to 
Poetic Structure, Rhythm and Rhyme, in R. Basili, 
A. Lenci, B. Magnini (eds), Proceedings of CLiC-it - 
The First Italian Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, Pisa University Press, Vol.1,  144-150. 

Delmonte R. 2014. ITGETARUNS A Linguistic Rule-
Based System for Pragmatic Text Processing, in C. 
Bosco, P. Cosi, F. Dell’Orletta, M. Falcone, S. 
Montemagni, Maria Simi (eds.), Proceedings of 
Fourth International Workshop EVALITA, Pisa 
University Press, Vol. 2, 64-69. 

Delmonte R., 2015. SPARSAR - Expressivity in TTS 
and its Relations to Semantics, Invited Talk at AISV 
2015, Bologna. 

Genzel Dmitriy, J. Uszkoreit, and F. Och. 2010. 
“Poetic” statistical machine translation: Rhyme and 
meter. In Proceedings of EMNLP. 

Fónagy, Iván (1971) "The Functions of Vocal Style", in 
Seymour Chatman (ed.), Literary Style: A 
Symposium. London: Oxford UP, 159-174. 

Gérvas, P. (2001). An expert system for the composition 
of formal Spanish poetry. Knowledge-Based 
Systems,14(3):181–188. 

Gérvas, P. (2010). Engineering linguistic creativity: 
Bird flight and jet planes. In Proceedings of the 
NAACL HLT 2010 Second Workshop on 
Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, 
pages 23–30.  

Greene E., T. Bodrumlu, K. Knight. 2010. Automatic 
Analysis of Rhythmic Poetry with Applications to 
Generation and Translation, in Proceedings of the 
2010 Conference on EMNLP, 524–533. 

Jakobson, R. 1978. Six lectures on sound and meaning 
(Trans.: J. Mepham). Cambridge: MIT Press 
(Original work published in 1976). 

Jakobson, R., & Waugh, L. 1978. The sound shape of 
language. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 

Kao Justine and Dan Jurafsky. 2012. "A Computational 
Analysis of Style, Affect, and Imagery in 
Contemporary Poetry". in Proc. NAACL Workshop 
on Computational Linguistics for Literature. 

Keppel-Jones David. 2001. The Strict Metrical 
Tradition: Variations in the Literary Iambic 
Pentameter from Sidney and Spenser to Matthew 
Arnold, Mcgill Queens Univ. Pr., 280. 

Manurung Hisar Maruli, G. Ritchie, and H. Thompson. 
2000. Towards a computational model of poetry 
generation. In Proceedings of AISB Symposium on 

77



Creative and Cultural Aspects and Applications of 
AI and Cognitive Science, 17-20.  

Manurung M.H., G. Ritchie, H. Thompson. 2000. A 
Flexible Integrated Architecture For Generating 
Poetic Texts. in Proceedings of the Fourth 
Symposium on Natural Language Processing (SNLP 
2000), Chiang Mai, Thailand, 7-22. 

Macdermott M.M. 1940. Vowel Sounds in Poetry: Their 
Music and Tone Colour, Psyche Monographs, 
No.13, London: Kegan Paul, 148 pp. 

Mazzeo, M. 2004. Les voyelles colorées: Saussure et la 
synesthésie. Cahiers Ferdinand de Saussure, 57,129–
143. 

Mohammad Saif, Colourful Language: Measuring 
Word-Colour Associations, 2011a. In Proceedings of 
the ACL 2011 Workshop on Cognitive Modeling 
and Computational Linguistics (CMCL), June 2011, 
Portland, OR. 

Mohammad Saif, Even the Abstract have Colour: 
Consensus in Word Colour Associations, 2011b. In 
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human 
Language Technologies, June 2011, Portland, OR. 

Sonderegger Morgan. 2011. Applications of graph 
theory to an English rhyming corpus. Computer 
Speech and Language, 25:655–678. 

Sravana Reddy & Kevin Knight. 2011. Unsupervised 
Discovery of Rhyme Schemes, in Proceedings of the 
49th Annual Meeting of ACL: shortpapers, 77-82. 

Toivanen Jukka, Hannu Toivonen, Alessandro Valitutti, 
& Oskar Gross, 2012. Corpus-based generation of 
content and form in poetry. In Proceedings of the 
Third International Conference on Computational 
Creativity. 

Tsur, Reuven. 1992. What Makes Sound Patterns 
Expressive: The Poetic Mode of Speech-Perception. 
Durham N. C.: Duke UP. 

Tsur Reuven. 1997a. "Poetic Rhythm: Performance 
Patterns and their Acoustic Correlates". 
Versification: An Electronic Journal Devoted to 
Literary Prosody. (http://sizcol1.u-shizuoka-
ken.ac.jp/versif/Versification.html) 

Tsur Reuven. 2012. Poetic Rhythm: Structure and 
Performance: An Empirical Study in Cognitive 
Poetics, Sussex Academic Press, 472. 

78


