



















































A Survey of Ellipsis in Chinese


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 271–280,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

A Survey of Ellipsis in Chinese 

Timothy Osborne 
Zhejiang University 

Hangzhou 
 China 

tjo3ya@yahoo.com 

Junying Liang 
Zhejiang University 

Hangzhou 
 China 

jyleung@iipc.zju.edu 

Abstract 

Much work on ellipsis has been conducted 
using data from English, and many widely 
acknowledged types of ellipsis exist in Eng-
lish. The extent to which the named ellipsis 
mechanisms exist in other languages is, 
though, often not clear. This manuscript sur-
veys ellipsis in Mandarin Chinese using a 
dependency-based approach to syntax. It 
probes to see which ellipsis mechanisms exist 
in Mandarin. The survey demonstrates that 
gapping, stripping, pseudogapping, sluicing, 
and comparative deletion do not exist in 
Mandarin (or are highly restricted) and that 
VP-ellipsis, answer ellipsis, and N-ellipsis are 
all arguably present. Furthermore, zero ana-
phora is frequent in Mandarin, whereas it is 
absent from English (or highly restricted). 
The catena unit is pillar of the account, since 
the elided material of ellipsis is a catena.  

1 An inventory of ellipsis mechanisms 
 
The study of ellipsis recognizes numerous dis-
tinct types. The following mechanisms are 
among the most commonly acknowledged: 

1.   Gapping 
2.   Stripping 
3.   Pseudogapping 
4.   Sluicing 
5.   Comparative deletion 
6.   VP-ellipsis 
7.   Answer ellipsis 
8.   N-ellipsis 
9.   Null complement anaphora 
10.  Zero anaphora 

Excepting zero anaphora, these mechanisms oc-
cur in English, and most of them are present in 
languages related to English. The extent to which 
they exist in languages more distant from English 
is often not clear, however. This contribution 
surveys ellipsis in Mandarin Chinese, probing to 

see which ellipsis mechanisms are and are not 
present. 
   The analysis of ellipsis pursued below is de-
pendency-based, and the catena unit plays a cen-
tral role in the account. A catena is a word or 
combination of words that are linked together by 
dependencies (Osborne et al. 2012). Ellipsis me-
chanisms in English have been shown to elide 
catenae. The survey seeks to determine the extent 
to which the catena is also the central unit for a 
theory of ellipsis in Mandarin. 
   This contribution thus pursues three goals: 1) 
provide an initial exploration of ellipsis in Man-
darin, 2) determine the extent to which the catena 
unit can serve as the basis for a theory of Manda-
rin ellipsis, and 3) consider what can be learned 
about ellipsis in general from a comparison of 
ellipsis mechanisms across English and Manda-
rin. 
   A word of caution is appropriate concerning 
the dependency hierarchies assumed for Manda-
rin below. To our knowledge, many basic aspects 
of Mandarin sentence structure have not yet been 
worked out in theoretical detail from a DG pers-
pective. Basic questions about the dependency 
status of sentence-final particles, coverbs, 
de-constructions, classifiers, etc. have not been 
debated from a DG perspective. Thus the validity 
of many of the structures posited below is taken 
for granted. Future explorations into the depen-
dency structures of Mandarin may motivate cor-
rections to the dependency hierarchies for Man-
darin posited below. 

2   Gapping, stripping, pseudogapping 
Gapping, stripping, and pseudogapping have 
been thoroughly explored (e.g. Jackedoff 1971, 
Kuno 1976, Stump 1977, Levin 1986, McCawley 
1998). The following three sentences illustrate 
gapping, stripping, and pseudogapping in Eng-
lish: 

271



(1)   
Should              or  should 
         I  call                 you call 
                you                     me 

Should  I  call  you,  or  should  you  call  me? 

(2)  
 Should             or   should 
         I  call                 you  call 
                Jo                       her 

 Should  I  call  Jo,  or   should  you  call her? 

(3)  She should call me more than 

         should 
    she           call 
                      you 

    she  should   call  you.  

Example (1) illustrates gapping, example (2) 
stripping, and example (3) pseudogapping. Gap-
ping and stripping occur in coordinate structures. 
Pseudogapping can appear in subordinate clauses 
in the absence of coordination, but the pseudogap 
must find an antecedent – it cannot take a post-
cedent.  
   The elided material should…call in (1) and (2) 
is a catena, and the word call in (3) is also a ca-
tena, a one-word catena. The fact that should 
immediately dominates call is what makes the 
combination should…call a catena. The exam-
ples therefore deliver a sense of the importance 
of the catena unit for the theory of ellipsis. There 
are, however, many details of the dependency 
hierarchies shown in (1–3) that can be over-
looked here, since they are not important for 
surveying ellipsis in Mandarin.  
   Turning to Mandarin, we see that these ellip-
sis mechanisms are generally not possible. The 
following attempts at gapping fail: 
 

(4)      diǎn-le             diǎn-le 
    Tā          kāfēi   tā           chá 

   *Tā  diǎn-le  kāfēi,  tā   diǎn-le  chá. 
    s/he ordered  coffee  s/he ordered  tea 
    Intended: 'He ordered coffee, and she tea.’ 

(5) *Jō xǐhuān dàngāo,  Lǐ  xǐhuān qiǎokèlì. 
    Jo likes   cake.    Li  likes   chocolate 
    Intended: ‘Jo likes cake, and Li chocolate.’ 

The following attempts at stripping in Mandarin 
also fail:  

 

(6)      líkāi-le           líkāi-le 

    Jō           Lǐ   yě        

   *Jō  líkāi-le,  Lǐ  yě   líkāi-le. 
    Jo   leave-le  Li   also  leave-le.  
    Intended: ‘Jo left, and Li also.’ 

(7) *Jō bìxū  gōngzuò, Lǐ ye   bìxū   gōnzuò. 
    Jo  has.to work     Li also has.to work. 
    Intended: ‘Jo has to work, and Li too.’ 

Noteworthy about these failed attempts at gap-
ping and stripping is the fact that Mandarin lacks 
a direct equivalent to and for coordinating claus-
es. Perhaps the absence of such an element is a 
factor limiting the distribution of gapping and 
stripping, since these mechanisms are widely 
acknowledged as occurring only in the 
non-initial conjuncts of coordinated clauses.  
   The following attempt at pseudogappng in 
Mandarin also fails: 

(8)   Nǐ   yīngāi  xué   fǎyǔ,    
     you  should  study  French 

             yīnggāi 
     nǐ   yě          xué 
                           déyǔ 

    *nǐ   yě  yīnggāi  xué   déyǔ. 
     you also should   study  German 

     Intended: ‘You should study French, and  
               you should study German, too.’  

   The data just produced demonstrate that gap-
ping, stripping, and pseudogapping are types of 
ellipsis that are either absent from Mandarin, or 
are much more restricted than in English. The 
fact that examples involving both gapping and 
stripping are bad is not surprising since the two 
are widely viewed as involving the same one el-
lipsis mechanism.  
   Concerning the absence of pseudogapping 
from Mandarin, however, the fact that it is not 
possible is more revealing. Pseudogapping be-
haves like VP-ellipsis in certain ways, and like 
gapping in other ways. It behaves like 
VP-ellipsis mainly insofar as it is licensed by an 
auxiliary verb just like VP-ellipsis, and it is like 
gapping insofar it involves a true “gap” with a 
remnant, whereby the remnant must stand in 
contrast to the parallel constituent in the antece-
dent clause. Thus the absence of pseudogapping 
verifies to an extent the insight that pseudogap-
ping is at least somewhat related to gapping, 

272



enough so that if a language disallows gapping 
and stripping, then it will also disallow pseudo-
gapping. 

2  Sluicing 

Sluicing (Ross 1969, Merchant 2001) typically 
elides everything from a clause except an inter-
rogative expression (wh-element), e.g. 

(9)  They are hiding  something, but   

         won’t 
    they         say 
                     what 
                                are 
                           they      hidingg 

    they  won’t  say   what  they  are  hiding.1

The clause introduced by what is sluiced, that is, 
the string they are hiding is elided. Sluicing is a 
frequently occurring type of ellipsis mechanism, 
and it exists in most if not all Indo-European 
languages. 

  

   Checking to see if sluicing exists in Mandarin, 
the data are not entirely clear. Consider the fol-
lowing examples: 

(10)  Tā   xǐhuān mǒu   gè  rén,     dàn  
     s/he  likes   certain  CL  person,  but 
     ‘S/he likes a certain person, but’ 

                   zhīdào 
       wǒmen  bù         shì 
                               shuí 

    a.  wǒmen  bù  zhīdào  shì   shuí. 
       we      not  know   be   who 
       ‘we don’t know who it is.’ 

    b. *wǒmen  bù  zhīdào  shì   shuí. 
       we      not  know   be   who 

Example (10a), in which the verb shì ‘be’ ap-
pears, cannot, strictly speaking, be interpreted as 
sluicing because sluicing typically elides the do-
minate verb in a clause. When the dominant verb 
is indeed elided (here shì), the result is bad, as 
illustrated with example (10b). This fact suggests 
that sluicing is not present in Mandarin. 
   Example (10b) is an attempt at sluicing in a 
subordinate clause. When sluicing occurs across 
                                                           
1 The hierarchical status of what as the root of the 
object clause, the dashed dependency edge, and the g 
subscript follow the approach to discontinuities pre-
sented by Osborne (2014). The particularities of this 
analysis are not relevant to the account of ellipsis. 

speakers in a main clause, the acceptability 
judgments are less robust:  

(11)  A: Jō  xǐhuān  mǒu   gè  rén. 
        Jo   likes    certain  CL  person 
        ‘Jo likes a certain person.’ 

                xǐhuān 

            Jō           Shuí 

  a.  B: –  ?Jō  `xǐhuān   Shuí? 

  b.  B: – ?  Jō  Xǐhuān  shuí? 
            Jo  likes    who 

(12)  A: Lǐ zhèng  cáng  zài  mǒu  gè dìfang. 
        Li  now   hide   in  certain  CL place 
        ‘Li is now hiding in a certain place.’ 

                     cáng 
          Lǐ  zhèng        zài 
                               Nǎr 

  a.  B: – ?Lǐ  zhèng  cáng  zài  Nǎr? 
          Li   now    hide   in   where 

  b.  B: – ?Lǐ  zhèng  Cáng  zài  nǎr? 
          Li   now    hide   in   where 

While there is a preference for the b-questions, in 
which the verb is repeated, the a-questions are 
not clearly bad. This situation clouds the picture, 
since the marginal a-questions look like the 
sluicing in direct questions that is frequent in 
those languages that have sluicing. One might, 
however, assume that what has actually been 
elided from the a-questions is the auxiliary shì 
‘be’. On such an account, such examples would, 
strictly speaking, not count as instances of sluic-
ing as it is commonly understood. 
   Further data speak more clearly against the 
presence of sluicing in Mandarin. Cases of 
so-called multiple sluicing are bad in Mandarin. 
Multiple sluicing occurs when the sluiced clause 
contains two or more wh-remnants. The follow-
ing example illustrates multiple sluicing in Eng-
lish: 

(13) A: Somebody has a crush on somebody? 

             has 
       Who        crush 
                 a        on 
                             whom 

    B: Who  has  a  crush  on  whom?   

The sluiced clause contains the two wh-remnants, 
who and on whom, identifying it as an instance of 
multiple sluicing.   

273



   Multiple sluicing is impossible in Mandarin:  

(14) A: Yǒu  rén     xǐhuān mǒu    gè rén. 
       exist person  likes   certain  ge person 
       ‘Somebody likes somebody.’ 

               xǐhuān 
         Shuí          shuí  

    B:  *Shuí  xǐhuān  shuí? 
        ‘Who  likes    whom?’ 

This attempt at multiple sluicing is quite bad. 
The example cannot be rendered in terms of the 
verb shì, unlike examples (11a) and (12a). This 
confirms that sluicing as it is commonly unders-
tood in English and related languages does not 
exist in Mandarin.  
   A number of accounts of sluicing-like data in 
Mandarin have acknowledged that what at times 
looks like sluicing is in fact a different mechan-
ism, this mechanism being called pseudosluicing 
(see for instance Wei 2004, and Adams and Ta-
mioka 2014). Pseudosluicing involves the aux-
iliary shì – but at times shì can be omitted. The 
analysis of pseudosluicing put forth in the litera-
ture (Adams and Tamioka 2014) is that it in-
volves zero anaphora; a subject pronoun has been 
dropped, e.g. …wǒmen bù zhīdào (tā) shì shuí, lit. 
‘we not know it be who’ – more about zero ana-
phora below in Section 8. 
   The absence of sluicing in Mandarin is con-
sistent with the absence of sluicing in wh-in-situ 
languages in general (Merchant 2001: 84f.). 

3  Comparative deletion 

Comparative deletion (Bresnan 1975) elides a 
string of words that corresponds to focused ma-
terial in an antecedent clause, e.g.  

(15)      More  men  ordered  beer  than   
     a.         men  ordered  wine. 
     b.        *men  ordered  wine. 

(16)      We  drank  more beer than 
     a.   they  drank       beer. 
     b.  *they  drank       beer.     

These examples illustrate the manner in which 
men and beer must be elided. They must be 
elided each time because their counterparts are 
focused by the comparative element more in the 
preceding clause. Thus comparative deletion oc-
curs obligatorily; it is unlike most other ellipsis 
mechanisms in this regard, which occur option-
ally. 

   Checking to see whether comparative dele-
tion is present in Mandarin is difficult to do. The 
construction used to express comparison in 
Mandarin is of a much different nature than in 
English. The elements being compared in Man-
darin must be subjects, and the dimension along 
which they are compared must appear as the 
main predicate, e.g. 

(17)  Diǎn-le  píjiǔ     de rén     bǐ   
     order-le  beer      de people  than 

     diǎn-le  pútáojiǔ  de (rén)   gèng  duō. 
     order-le  wine     de people  more  many 

     'More people ordered beer than ordered 
      wine.’ 

The English translation employs a type of ad-
junct clause (than ordered wine) to express the 
comparison, whereas its Mandarin counterpart 
needs relative clauses (diǎn-le píjiǔ de  ‘who or-
dered beer’ and diǎn-le pútáojiǔ de ‘who ordered 
wine’) to express the comparison.  
   Due to the quite different syntactic means for 
expressing comparative meaning across the lan-
guages, it is difficult to acknowledge the pres-
ence of comparative deletion in Mandarin. Given 
the lack of solid evidence in favor of the exis-
tence of comparative deletion, we conclude here 
that it does not exist in Mandarin. 

4  VP-ellipsis 

VP ellipsis (Johnson 2001) occurs frequently in 
English. A non-finite verb phrase is elided, its 
content being retrieved from context, e.g. 

(18) have 
We      visited 
                      city 
                every           have 
                          they       visited 

We have visited  every  city they  have visited.  

Non-finite verb phrases consist of a non-finite 
verb and all of its dependents. In this case here, 
just the nonfinite verb visited alone is elided be-
cause it has no dependents. 
   VP-ellipsis occurs frequently in Mandarin as 
well. As in English, it is typically introduced by a 
(modal) auxiliary verb. Li and Thompson 
(1981:182f.) classify the following verbs as aux-
iliaries: yīngaī ‘should’, yīngdāng ‘should’, gāi 
‘should’, néng ‘be able to’, nénggòu ‘be able to’, 
huì ‘be able to’, kěyǐ  ‘be able to’, néng ‘be al-
lowed to’, gǎn ‘dare’, kěn ‘be willing to’, děi 

274



‘must’, bìxū ‘must’, bìyào ‘must’, huì ‘will, 
know how to’. The next examples illustrate 
VP-ellipsis in Mandarin: 

(19)   Wáng  yīngāi   fàngsōng,   
      Wang  should   relax,   

               yīngāi 
      Lǐ   yě           fàngsōng     

      Lǐ   yě   yīngāi   fàngsōng. 
      Li  also  should   relax 

     ‘Wang should relax, and   
      Li should relax, too.’ 

(20)  Zhāngsān  néng  dú    hànyǔ,  
     John      can   read   Chinese 

              néng 
     Mǎlì  yě       dú 
                         hànyǔ 

     Mǎlì  yě néng  dú   hànyǔ. 
     Mary  also can  read  Mandarin 

     ‘John can read Chinese, and  
      Mary  can read Chinese, too.’ 

These instances of ellipsis are closely similar to 
their English counterparts, as indicated with the 
translations. VP-ellipsis therefore appears to be 
quite similar across the two languages. 
   But while English and Mandarin both have 
VP-ellipsis, the two languages differ in the fre-
quency of the mechanism. VP-ellipsis occurs 
frequently in English, but is licensed by a rela-
tively limited set of verbs, i.e. by auxiliary verbs 
and the particle to. In Mandarin in contrast, 
VP-ellipsis occurs with auxiliary verbs as well as 
with (what are designated in English as) control 
verbs. Thus VP-ellipsis is more widely available 
in Mandarin than in English, e.g. 

(21)  Wǒ     xiǎng  hē    jiǔ,  
      I      intend  drink  wine, 

     tā   yě  xiǎng  hē    jiǔ. 
     s/he also intend  drink  wine 

     'I intend to drink some wine;     
     *s/he also intends to drink some wine.’   

(22)  Tā      yào    chī   fàn, 
     s/he     wants  eat   meal 

     wǒ  yě  yào    chī   fàn. 
      I   also want   eat   meal 

     ‘S/he wants to eat a meal;  
     *I also want to eat a meal.’ 

Note that the English translations are unaccepta-
ble (because intend and want do not license 
VP-ellipsis in English).  
   Therefore what examples (21-22) illustrate is 
that the elision of verb phrases is much less re-
stricted in Mandarin than in English. Apparently, 
most any verb in Mandarin that takes a VP com-
plement can license VP-ellipsis, not just auxiliary 
verbs. Observe also that the elided material indi-
cated in each of the examples is a catena.  

5   Answer ellipsis 
The ellipsis mechanism associated with answer 
fragments has been studied and debated in detail 
(e.g. Morgan 1973, Merchant 2004). Answer el-
lipsis exists in Mandarin just as it does in English, 
although the questions that elicit answer frag-
ments vary significantly from the questions in 
English insofar as all interrogative elements re-
main in situ, i.e. they do not appear in 
clause-initial position. Mandarin is a wh-in-situ 
language in this regard. Despite this significant 
difference across English and Mandarin, Manda-
rin has answer fragments that are similar to their 
counterparts in English. As in English, the an-
swer fragments in Mandarin are constituents (i.e. 
complete subtrees), which means that the elided 
material has the status of a catena. 
   The following examples illustrate the extent 
to which the elided words of answer ellipsis in 
English are catenae: 

(23)  Who are you waiting for? 
       am 
     I      waiting 
                   for 
                       Susan 

     I  am  waiting  for  Susan. 

(24)  Who is waiting for whom? 
           is 
     Bill       waiting 
                       for 
                           Susan 

     Bill   is   waiting  for  Susan. 

The elided material in each of these two cases 
has catena status, i.e. I am waiting for is a catena 
in (23), and is waiting is a catena in (24).  
   Switching to Mandarin, question-answer pairs 
in Mandarin also easily submit to analyses in 
terms of catenae: 

275



(25)  Tā   shénme  shíhou  lái?  
     s/he  what    time    come 
     ‘When is s/he coming?’    

                     lái 

     Tā   Míngtiān 

   – Tā   Míngtiān   lái. 
     s/he  Tomorrow  come 
     ‘He is coming Tomorrow.’      

(26)   Nǐ  bàifǎng-le  shuí? 
      you  visit-le  who    
      ‘Who did you visit? 

           bàifáng-le 
      Wǒ            Zhāngsān 

      Wǒ  bàifǎng-le  Zhāngsān. 
      I     visit-le    John   ‘I visited John.’  

(27)  Tā  bǎ wǒ  de hùzhào  fàng  zài  nǎr? 
     s/he ba I    de passport put   in   where 
     'Where did s/he put my passport?’ 

                                    le 
         fàng 
     Tā       zài                 lǐ 
                          kǒudài 
                     -de 
                  Nǐ 

   – Tā  fàng  zài  Nǐ  de  kǒudài lǐ  le.   
     s/he put   in   you de  pocket  in  le  
     ‘S/he put it In your pocket.’  

Examples like these illustrate best the potential 
of the catena concept for serving as the basis for 
theories of ellipsis. In each of these Mandarin 
examples, the elided material is discontinuous in 
the linear dimension, yet despite this fact, it 
qualifies as a catena each time. When the frag-
ment answer is a complete subtree, the elided 
material is necessarily a catena. Despite the dras-
tic differences in syntactic structures across the 
English and Mandarin examples, the elided ma-
terial is a catena in both languages.  

6  N-ellipsis 

Noun ellipsis (N-ellipsis, also called NP-ellipsis 
or NPE) elides a noun and often additional ma-
terial that is adjacent to the noun, e.g.  

(28) 
   a.  his old cat and hers old cat 
   b.  the first talk and the third talk 
   c.  their photos of me and ours photos of me  

Interestingly, however, N-ellipsis is limited in 
English. It occurs mainly just with possessive 
determiners/pronouns (mine, yours, his, hers, its, 
ours, theirs) and cardinal and ordinal numbers 
(one, two, three, first, second, third, etc.). It does 
not occur with most adjectives, e.g. *his big cat 
and her small cat.  
   In many languages closely related to English, 
however, N-ellipsis is much more productive. 
For instance, most adjectives can introduce 
N-ellipsis in German: 

(29)  

  a.  seine große Katze  und  ihre kleine Katze 
     his   big    cat    and  her  small  cat 

  b.  billiges  Bier  und  teures     Bier 
     cheap   beer  and  expensive  beer 

  c.  alte  Lieder  und  neue  Lieder 
     old   songs  and  new   songs 

English has to reach to one in such cases. That is, 
when the adjective at hand cannot introduce 
N-ellipsis in English, the pronominal count noun 
one is employed instead to reduce redundancy, 
e.g. old songs and new ones. 
   Mandarin is more like those languages that 
more freely employ N-ellipsis (such as German). 
Pre-modifiers of nouns are typically immediately 
followed by the clitic de in Mandarin, this clitic 
serving as a marker of a pre-modifier:   

(30)  Wǒ  xǐhuān  tā    de  gǒu,   
     I     like     s/he  de  dog,  

          xǐhuān 
     tā                     gǒu 
                      -de  
                  wǒ  

     tā    xǐhuān  wǒ   de  gǒu. 
     s/he  likes    I     de  dog 

     ‘I like her/his dog, s/he likes mine dog.’ 

(31)  Tā   hē     guì        de  píjiǔ,  dànshì  
     s/he  drinks  expensive  de  beer,  but   

          hē 
     tā                      píjiǔ 
                       -de 
                 piányi 

     tā    hē     piányi  de  píjiǔ. 
     s/he  drinks  cheap  de  beer 

    ‘S/he drinks expensive beer, but s/he drinks 
     cheap beer.’ 

276



   When the noun phrase contains a classifier, 
the de clitic is usually not employed, but rather 
the classifier alone introduces N-ellipsis: 

(32)  Tā   zuò-le   dì    yī    liàng  huǒchē, 
     s/he  took -le  -st   one  CL    train  

          zuò-le 
     tā                             huǒchē 
                             liǎng 
                        èr                  

                   dì 

     tā    zuò-le    dì    èr    liǎng  huǒchē. 
     s/he  took -le   -nd   two  CL    train 

    ‘S/he took the first train, and s/he took  
     the second train.’ 

(33)  Tā   tīngdào-le  dì    yī    cì   tánhuà, 
     s/he  heard -de   -st   one  CL  talk, 

          tīngdào-le 
     tā                            tánhuà 
                              cì 
                         èr 
                    dì  

     tā    tīngdào-le  dì    èr    cì   tánhuà. 
     s/he  heard-le   -nd   two  CL  talk.  

     ‘S/he listened to the first talk, and s/he 
      listened to the second talk.’ 

The analysis here positions the classifier as a de-
pendent of the noun. This analysis may be con-
troversial, since an alternative analysis might 
position the classifier as head over the noun. As 
stated in the introduction, many aspects of Man-
darin sentence structure have not yet been de-
bated in DG circles, so the analysis assumed here 
is tentative.  
   There is, however, one consideration that 
supports this preliminary analysis (i.e. the clas-
sifier as a dependent of the noun). This consider-
ation is the fact that the de marker can co-occur 
with the classifier, e.g.  

(34)  ?Tā   zuò-le   dì   yī    liàng  de huǒchē. 
      s/he took -le  -st  one  CL    de train 
      ‘She took the first train.’ 

While the co-occurrence of liàng and de is mild-
ly marginal, it is nevertheless good enough to 
support the analysis shown in (32) and (33). The 
de is serving its normal role as marker of a pre-
modifier, i.e. it helps identify dì yī liàng  as a 
predependent of huǒchē. If huǒchē were a post-
dependent of liàng, we would expect (34) to be 
bad, because in such a case, de would not be 
marking a pre-modifier of the noun.  
   Otherwise, the clitic de occurs frequently and 
in numerous varied environments. At times it 
even serves to nominalize clauses. When it does 
so, the result can at times be rendered with free 
relative clauses in the English translation, e.g.

  
(35)                                                                   hǎo 

                       dōngxī   bǐ                               gèng 
                  .-de                                  dōngxī 
           xǐhuān                                 -de 
      Tā                                   xǐhuān 
                                      tā 

      Tā   xǐhuān  de  dōngxī   bǐ     tā    xǐhuān  de  dōngxī   gèng  hǎo. 
      s/he  likes    de  things    than   s/he  likes    de  things    more  good 
                     ‘What s/he likes is better than what s/he likes. 
 
The two clauses what s/he likes in the transla-
tion are free relative clauses. The clitic de serves 
as a nominalizer in the second case, rendering 
the preceding clause a nominal. The noun 
dōngxī ‘things’ can be interpreted as having 
been elided, as indicated in the tree. 
   Many aspects of N-ellipsis in Mandarin are 
not clear. The examples just produced suggest, 
however, that N-ellipsis is a frequent occurrence 
in Mandarin, much more frequent than in Eng-

lish. The ability of de to serve as a nominalizer 
makes N-ellipsis widely available.  

7  Null complement anaphora 

Null complement anaphora (Hankamer and Sag 
1976, Depiante 2000) is a mechanism that elides 
a complement clause, to-phrase, or prepositional 
phrase, e.g. 

277



(36)  Jim promised he would help, and 

               promised 
     Bill  also                would 
                         he         help 

     Bill  also  promised  he  would  help.  

(37)  Sam refuses to help, and 

               refuses 
     Sue  also          to 
                          help 

     Sue  also  refuses  to  help. 

The predicates that license null complement 
anaphora in English (e.g. ask, know, promise, 
refuse, try) are limited. Similar predicates that 
one might expect to also license null comple-
ment anaphora fail to do so (e.g. imagine, intend, 
pretend, say, think, etc.).   
   Examples from Mandarin similar to (36-37) 
also allow ellipsis: 

(38) A: Nǐ   zhīdào  fāshēng   shénme  le  ma? 
       you  know   happened  what   le  ma 
       ‘Do you know what happened?’ 

                zhīdào 
       Wǒ  bù                           le 
                       fāshēng   
                                 shénme 

    B: Wǒ  bù  zhīdào  fāshēng    shénme  le. 
        I    not  know   happened  what    le 
       ‘I don’t know what happened.’ 

(39)    Tā      jùjué    líkāi, 
       s/he     refuses  leave  

                     jùjué 
       wǒmen  yě            líkái 

       wǒmen  yě    jùjué    líkái. 
       we      also   refuse   leave 

       ‘S/he refuses to leave, and we also 
        refuse to leave.’ 

These two examples suggest that the similar 
predicates across the languages allow for the 
ellipsis of a complement clause or phrase.  
   However, concluding that Mandarin has null 
complement anaphora in the same way that 
English does is difficult. The difficulty is due to 
the fact that Mandarin seems to freely allow the 
ellipsis of most all complements that can be eas-
ily recovered from context. When the elided 
complement is a verb phrase, one can acknowl-

edge VP-ellipsis as discussed above, and when 
the elided complement can be interpreted as a 
definite or indefinite noun phrase, an analysis in 
terms of zero anaphora is available (see the next 
section). Thus the extent to which null comple-
ment anaphora is present in Mandarin is unclear.   

8  Zero anaphora 

Zero anaphora (Kroeger 2005: 79ff.) typically 
involves a null definite or indefinite pronoun or 
noun phrase. English and Mandarin vary signif-
icantly concerning zero anaphora; zero anahora 
occurs frequently in Mandarin, whereas its oc-
currence in English is, if it exists at all, highly 
restricted. The difference across the two lan-
guages is illustrated well using the answer to a 
yes-no question: both the subject and the object 
can be absent from the Mandarin answer:   

(40)  A:  Nǐ   yuèdú   kèwén  le  ma? 
         you  read    text     le  ma 
         ‘Have you read the text?’ 

                        le 
              Yuèdú 
         Wǒ         tā 

     B:  Wǒ  Yuèdú  tā  le. 
         I     read    it  le   lit. ‘Have read.’ 

In contrast, the direct English translation of this 
example is quite bad: 

(41)  A:   Have you read the text? 

            Have 
          I        read 
                        it 

     B:  *I  Have  read   it. 

The acceptability contrast across the two lan-
guages is due to the unrestricted nature of zero 
anaphora in Mandarin, whereas zero anaphora 
may not exist in English at all.  
   Further examples suggesting that zero ana-
phora is highly restricted in, or absent from, 
English are given next:  

(42) a. *He saw me, and she saw me, too. 
    b.  He saw me, and she saw me, too. 

(43) a. *I study Mandarin, and she studies it, too. 
    b.  I study Mandarin, and she studies it, too.   

In contrast, the Mandarin equivalents of these 
a-sentences are fine: 

278



(44)  Tā        kàndào-le   wǒ, 
     s/he       saw-le      me  

     tā    yě   kàndiào-le  wǒ. 
     s/he  also  saw-le      me   

(45)  Wǒ xuéxí  hànyǔ,    tā    yě  xuéxí   tā. 
      I   study  Chinese,  s/he  also studies it 

Furthermore, Mandarin even allows the absence 
of an indefinite noun phrase, i.e. what would be 
equivalent to one in English: 

(46)  Tā        xiě-le  yī    gè  gùshì,  
     s/he       wrote  one  CL  story  

     tā    yě   xiě -le  yī    gè  gùshì. 
     s/he  also  wrote  one  CL  story 

     ‘S/he wrote a story, and s/he also 
      wrote one.’ 

  The availability of zero anaphora in Mandarin 
means that Mandarin can omit most any subject 
or object pronoun, noun, or noun phrase. In fact 
its existence clouds the picture concerning other 
ellipsis mechanism. It is, for instance, difficult 
to acknowledge VP-ellipsis and/or null com-
plement anaphora in Mandarin because what 
looks like such ellipsis mechanisms may in fact 
be zero anaphora instead. Finally, whether or 
not zero anaphora is a form of ellipsis is debata-
ble. It seems, rather, to be the unmarked form of 
anaphora in Mandarin. When tā ‘he/she/it’is or 
some other proform is overt, it is in fact an em-
phatic pronoun that serves a special discourse 
role, namely that of emphasis.      

9  Concluding remarks 

This manuscript has surveyed ellipsis in Manda-
rin. Gapping, stripping, pseudogapping, sluicing, 
and comparative deletion are either absent from 
Mandarin, or highly restricted. VP-ellipsis, an-
swer ellipsis, N-ellipsis, and zero anaphora are 
present in Mandarin. Whether null complement 
anaphora is also present in Mandarin is unclear 
due to the overlap of the data in the area with 
the data of VP-ellipsis and zero anaphora. Per-
haps the most noteworthy difference in ellipsis 
across English and Mandarin concerns the abil-
ity of Mandarin to omit complements and sub-
jects at will, as long as they can be easily re-
trieved from context. In contrast, English does 
not elide complements (and subjects) so freely, 
but rather in order to do so, the requirements of 
VP-ellipsis, null complement anaphora, or some 
other ellipsis mechanism must be met.  

   Concerning the material that is elided, ellip-
sis in Mandarin is like ellipsis in English insofar 
as the elided material is a catena. This aspect of 
ellipsis is especially evident with answer ellipsis, 
which often elides non-string catenae.  
   Finally, a comment about a possible genera-
lization is in order. Four of the five ellipsis me-
chanisms that are not present in Mandarin (or 
are highly restricted) involve the ellipsis of the 
matrix predicate (gapping, stripping, pseudo-
gapping, and sluicing). Mandarin hence seems 
in general to be less willing than English to elide 
the matrix predicate. On the other hand, it is 
much more willing to omit the arguments of 
predicates (in terms of VP-ellipsis or zero ana-
phora). The reasons why these general differ-
ences across the languages exist is unknown, 
however. 

References  

Peter Wang Adams and Satoshi Tomioka. 2012. 
Sluicing in Mandarin Chinese: An instance of 
pseudo-sluicing. In Jason Merchant and Andrew 
Simpson (eds.), Sluicing: Crosslinguistic Pers-
pectives, 219-47. Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford, UK.  

 Ellen Barton. 1990. Nonsentential Constituents. 
John Benjamins, Philadelphia. 

Joan Bresnan. 1975. Comparative deletion and con-
straints on transformations. Linguistic Analysis 1. 

Johnny Cheng. 2011. Argument ellipsis in Chinese. 
Proceedings of the 23rd North American Confe-
rence on Chinese Linguistics (NACCL-23), 
224–240. 

Marcela Depiante 2000. The Syntax of Deep and 
Surface Anaphora: A Study of Null Complement 
Anaphora and Stripping/Bare Argument Ellipsis. 
Ph.D. thesis, University of Connecticut.  

Jorge Hankamer and Ivan Sag 1976. Deep and sur-
face anaphora. Linguistic Inquiry 7, 3, 391–428. 

Ray Jackendoff. 1971. Gapping and related rules. 
Linguistic Inquiry 2, 21–35. 

Kyle Johnson. 2001. What VP ellipsis can do, and 
what it can’t, but not why. In Mark Baltin, M. and 
C. Collins, The Handbook of Contemporary Syn-
tactic Theory, ed. 439–479. Blackwell Publishers, 
Oxford. 

Paul Koreger. 2005. Analyzing Grammar: An Intro-
duction. Cambridge University Press, New York. 

Susumo Kuno 1976. Gapping: A functional analysis. 
Linguistic Inquiry 7, 300–18. 

Nancy Levin. 1986. Main-Verb Ellipsis in Spoken 
English. Garland, New York. 

279



Charles Li and Sandra Thompson. 1981. Mandarin 
Chinese: A Functional Reference Grammar. 
University of California Press, Berkeley.   

James McCawley. 1998. The Syntactic Phenomena of 
English. The University of Chicaog Press, Chi-
cago. 

Jason Merchant. 2001. The Syntax of Silence. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, UK. 

Jason Merchant. 2004. Fragments and ellipsis. Lin-
guistics and Philosophy 27, 661–38. 

Jerry Morgan. 1973. Sentence fragments and the no-
tion ‘sentence’. In Braj Kachruetal. (eds.), Issues 
in Linguistics, 719-751. University of Illinois 
Press, Urbana. 

Timothy Osborne. 2014. Type 2 rising: A contribu-
tion to a DG account of discontinuities. In Kim 
Gerdes, Eva Hajicová, and Leo Wanner, Depen-
dency Linguistics: Recent Advances in Linguistic 
Theory Using Dependency Structures, 273–98. 
John Benjamins, Amsterdam.  

Timothy Osborne, Michael Putnam, and Thomas 
Groß. 2012. Catenae: Introducing a novel unit of 
syntactic analysis. Syntax 15, 4, 354-396. 

John Ross. 1969. Guess who? In R. Binnick, A. Da-
vison, G. Green, and J. Morgan (eds.), Papers 
from the 5th Regional Meeting of the Chicago 
Linguistics Society. Chicago Linguistic Society, 
252–86. 

Gregory Stump. 1977. Pseudogapping. Ms., Ohio 
State University. 

Ting-Chi Wei. 2004. Predication and Sluicing in 
Mandarin Chinese. Ph.D. dissertation, National 
Kaohsiung Normal University.  

280


