



















































Effects of Situational Factors on Metaphor Detection in an Online Discussion Forum


Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Metaphor in NLP, pages 1–10,
Denver, Colorado, June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Effects of Situational Factors on Metaphor Detection in an Online
Discussion Forum

Hyeju Jang, Miaomiao Wen, and Carolyn Penstein Rosé
Language Technologies Institute

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

{hyejuj, mwen, cprose}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Accurate metaphor detection remains an open
challenge. In this paper, we explore a new
type of clue for disambiguating terms that may
be used metaphorically or literally in an on-
line medical support community. In particular,
we investigate the influence of situational fac-
tors on propensity to employ the metaphorical
sense of words when they can be used to illus-
trate the emotion behind the experience of the
event. Specifically we consider the experience
of stressful illness-related events in a poster’s
recent history as situational factors. We eval-
uate the positive impact of automatically ex-
tracted cancer events on a metaphor detec-
tion task using data from an online cancer fo-
rum. We also provide a discussion of specific
associations between events and metaphors,
such as journey with diagnosis or warrior with
chemotherapy.

1 Introduction

In this paper we present a novel approach to
metaphor detection that leverages situational factors
in the life of a speaker that alter the propensity to
employ the metaphorical sense of specific terms. In
recent years, the field of language technologies has
made advances in the area of metaphor detection by
leveraging some linguistic regularities such as lexi-
cal selection, lexical co-occurrence, and abstractness
versus concreteness. On the other hand, we know
that metaphor is creative at its core, and these lin-
guistic regularities, though essential, are bounded in
their ability to enable accurate metaphor detection
in a broad sense. In contrast to previous approaches
focusing on these linguistically inspired features, we

begin to explore situational factors coming from a
pragmatic perspective, related to the reasons why
people choose to use metaphors. The situational fac-
tors may provide a complementary set of indicators
to partner with tried and true linguistically inspired
features in order to increase performance. Specifi-
cally, we explore expressions of metaphors used in
a cancer support community in connection with dis-
cussion around stressful cancer events. In particu-
lar, we provide evidence that propensity to employ
metaphorical language increases around the time of
stressful cancer events.

Describing an experience metaphorically is an ef-
fective conversational strategy for achieving social
goals that are relevant within an online medical sup-
port community. For example, a metaphor may be
useful for drawing the listener closer by revealing
not just what has been experienced, but how the
speaker is personally engaged with the event, such
as journey and battle (Jang et al., 2014). For ex-
ample, the journey metaphor conveys the experi-
ence of cancer treatment as a process of progressing
along a path in which the cancer patient is a trav-
eler, whereas the battle metaphor conveys a more
active attitude towards cancer treatment by com-
paring cancer treatment to conflict and war where
the speaker is positioned as a warrior. In this way,
metaphors may be used to build solidarity or a
sense of camaraderie as they increase insight into
the speaker’s personal experience and thus facili-
tate empathetic understanding between the partici-
pants (Ritchie, 2013).

Beyond the social implications of using a
metaphor, there are implications at the cognitive
level as well. In particular, metaphor is a type of
linguistic tool used to express an abstraction. As

1



such, usage of metaphor requires somewhat more
cognitive effort than the equivalent literal descrip-
tion. Usage of a metaphor may thus reflect the effort
the speaker has invested in making sense out of the
associated experience.

Both cognitive and social factors may contribute
towards an elevated level of usage of specific
metaphors that are associated with the experience
of a stressful cancer event in the recent past of a
speaker. Specifically, speakers experience a need for
more social support during and soon after a stress-
ful event, and thus may engage in behaviors that are
useful for building closeness and drawing others in.
Additionally, as part of the coping process, experi-
encers of stressful cancer events are faced with the
need to adjust to a new reality after the experience,
and this adjustment process may be reflected in lin-
guistic mechanisms that are associated with abstrac-
tion and reasoning. Leveraging this insight, we hy-
pothesize that for ambiguous terms (those that can
be used either in a literal or metaphorical sense),
the concentration of metaphorical use will be ele-
vated within a short window of time following the
experience of the associated cancer events. We thus
hypothesize that a context variable associated with
these events will be a useful clue for increasing ac-
curacy at disambiguating the interpretation of these
terms.

In this paper, we present a corpus analysis of data
extracted from an online medical support commu-
nity, where technology has been deployed to ex-
tract mentions of specific cancer events (e.g. di-
agnosis, chemotherapy, etc.). First, we investigate
how popular metaphors we find to be unambiguous
in our data from the discussion forum are used in
connection with major cancer events. This validates
the proposed association between cancer events and
metaphor usage. Second, we evaluate the extent to
which event information can be helpful for a com-
putational metaphor disambiguation task over more
ambiguous candidate metaphor words. In this work,
we quantitatively verify the effectiveness of consid-
ering situational features in metaphor detection.

The major contribution of this work from a
computational perspective is to introduce novel
types of features for automatic metaphor detection.
Metaphor is not a purely linguistic phenomenon
only, but it is language in use. It can depend on

a variety of factors including the mood, audience,
identity of speaker, and the situational context of
the speaker. Thus, we believe that combining in-
sights both from linguistics and language in use will
be able to benefit metaphor detection. Our hope is
that this work opens a door to more diverse kinds of
situational features to be used for metaphor detec-
tion, together with linguistically inspired features.
In addition, our work reinforces and extends earlier
insights into social and cognitive factors that influ-
ence usage of metaphor in discussion, and illustrates
a new impact of accurate event extraction.

The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 relates our work to prior work on
computational metaphor detection. Section 3 de-
scribes the data used for our experiment. Section 4
explains the event extraction method we adopted.
Section 5 illustrates popular metaphors related to
cancer events in our data through a statistical analy-
sis. Section 6 presents our successful metaphor dis-
ambiguation experiments. Section 7 concludes the
paper with a discussion of limitations and next steps
in the work.

2 Related Work

In this section, we introduce two main bodies of
relevant prior work in language technologies: case
studies in online medical support communities and
computational metaphor detection.

2.1 Case Studies in Online Medical Support
Communities

Analysis of language patterns in online cancer fo-
rums have shown effects of time and experience.
For example, with respect to time, Nguyen and
Rosé (2011) examine how language use patterns
are linked with increased personal connection with
the community over time. They show consistent
growth in adoption of community language usage
norms over time. Prior work on online cancer sup-
port discussion forums also shows that participants’
behavior patterns are influenced by the experience
of stress-inducing events. For example, Wen and
Rosé (2012) show that frequency of participants’
posting behavior is correlated with stress-inducing
events. Wen et al. (2011) conducted a study to
analyze patterns of discussion forum posts relating

2



to one specific woman’s cancer treatment process.
However, these studies have not performed compu-
tational analysis on the role of metaphor in these
tasks. Metaphor use in this domain is highly preva-
lent, and plays an important role in analysis of lan-
guage use, however its usage patterns in this type of
context have not been systematically explored.

2.2 Computational Metaphor Detection
There has been much work on computational
metaphor detection. Among these published works,
the approaches used have typically fallen into one
of three categories: selectional preferences, abstract-
ness and concreteness, and lexical incoherence.

Selectional preferences relate to how semantically
compatible predicates are with particular arguments.
For example, the verb eat prefers food as an object
over chair. The idea of using selectional preferences
for metaphor detection is that metaphorically used
words tend to break selectional preferences. In the
example of The clouds sailed across the sky, sailed
is determined to be a metaphor since clouds as a
subject violates its selectional preferences. Selec-
tional preferences have been considered in a variety
of studies about metaphor detection (Martin, 1996;
Shutova and Teufel, 2010; Shutova et al., 2010;
Shutova et al., 2013; Huang, 2014)

The abstractness/concreteness approach asso-
ciates metaphorical use with the degree of abstract-
ness and concreteness within the components of a
phrase. In an phrase of adjective and noun such
as green idea and green frog, the former is consid-
ered metaphorical since an abstract word (idea) is
modified by a concrete word (green), while the lat-
ter is considered literal since both words are con-
crete (Turney et al., 2011). Broadwell et al. (2013)
use measures of imageability to detect metaphor, a
similar concept to abstractness and concreteness.

The lexical coherence approach uses the fact that
metaphorically used words are semantically not co-
herent with context words. Broadwell et al. (2013)
use topic chaining to categorize words as non-
metaphorical when they have a semantic relation-
ship to the main topic. Sporleder and Li (2009) also
use lexical chains and semantic cohesion graphs to
detect metaphors.

To the best of our knowledge, there has been no
computational work on the effect of situational fac-

tors, such as the experience of stressful events, on
computational metaphor detection. Demonstrating
how situational factors could be useful for compu-
tational metaphor detection is one of our contribu-
tions.

3 Data

We conduct experiments using data from discussion
boards for an online breast cancer support group.
Participants in the discussion forums are mainly pa-
tients, family members, and caregivers. People use
the discussion for exchanging both informational
support and emotional support with each other by
sharing their stories, and through questioning and
answering. Some people begin participating in this
forum immediately after being diagnosed with can-
cer, while others do not make their first post until a
later event in the cancer treatment process, such as
chemotherapy (Wen and Rosé, 2012).

The data contains all the public posts, users, and
profiles on the discussion boards from October 2001
to January 2011. The dataset consists of 1,562,459
messages and 90,242 registered members. 31,307
users have at least one post, and the average number
of posts per user is 24.

We picked this dataset for our study of rela-
tionship between metaphor and situational factors
for two reasons. First, people in this community
have a common set of events (e.g cancer diagnosis,
chemotherapy, etc.) that are frequently discussed
in user posts. Second, people use metaphorical ex-
pressions quite frequently in this domain. Thus, the
dataset is suitable for a study about metaphor use
related with user events. Below is an example post
containing metaphors. Some parts in the post have
been changed for private information.

Meghan, I was diagnosed this pst
09/02/07. I was upset for a day when I
realized after I had two mammograms and
the ultrasound that I had cancer-I didn’t
have a diagnosis, but I knew. After the
ultrasound came the biopsy and then the
diagnosis, I was fine. I did research. I
made up my mind about what treatement
I thought I wanted. I was good...I really
was fine up to my visit with the surgeon
last week. That made it really real for me.

3



I am waiting for my breast MRI results,
and I have to have an ultrasound needle
guided auxillary node biopsy before I
even get to schedule my surgery. My
PET showed other issues in the breast,
thus the MRI and the biopsy. Be kind to
yourself. It will be a roller coaster ride
of emotions. Some days really up and
strong, other days needing lots of hugs
and kleenex. Melody

4 Extracting Cancer Event Histories

The cancer events investigated in this paper in-
clude Diagnosis, Chemotherapy, Radiation Ther-
apy, Lumpectomy, Mastectomy, Breast Reconstruc-
tion, Cancer Recurrence and Metastasis. All these
eight events induce significant physical, practical
and emotional challenges. The event dates are ex-
tracted from the users’ posts as well as the “Diag-
nosis” and “Biography” sections in their user pro-
files. 33% of members filled in a personal profile
providing additional information about themselves
and their disease (e.g., age, occupation, cancer stage,
diagnosis date).

We apply the approach of Wen et al. (2013) to ex-
tract dates of cancer events for each of the users from
their posting histories. A temporal tagger retrieves
and normalizes dates mentioned informally in social
media to actual month and year referents. Build-
ing on this, an event date extraction system learns to
integrate the likelihood of candidate dates extracted
from time-rich sentences with temporal constraints
extracted from event-related sentences.

Wen et al. (2013) evaluate their event extraction
approach in comparison with the best competing
state-of-the-art approach and show that their ap-
proach performs significantly better, achieving an
88% F1 (corresponding to 91% precision and 85%
recall) at resolution of extracted temporal expres-
sions to actual calendar dates, and correctly iden-
tifies 90% of the event dates that are possible given
the performance of that temporal extraction step.

We adopt the same method to extract all users’
cancer event dates in our corpus. Note that even
were we to use a perfect event extraction system,
we can only extract events that the users explicitly
mention in their posts. Users may experience addi-
tional events during their cancer treatment process,

and simply choose not to mention them during their
posts.

5 Investigation into the Connection
between Metaphor and Events

As users continue to participate in the cancer com-
munity we are studying, over time they experience
more and more significant cancer events. Earlier
work (Wen and Rosé, 2012) shows elevated lev-
els of participation frequency and posting frequency
around the time of and immediately after experienc-
ing one of these stress-causing events. This pattern
suggests that one way users work to process their
traumatic experience is by participating in the fo-
rum and obtaining support from other people who
are going through similar experiences. Since us-
ing metaphorical language suggests elevated levels
of cognitive effort related to the associated concept,
it is reasonable to expect that users may also engage
in a higher concentration of metaphorical language
during this time as well as an additional reflection of
that processing. In this section, we investigate how
the use of metaphor changes with respect to specific
traumatic cancer events. We examine a set of com-
mon metaphors to see whether situational factors,
i.e. cancer events, affect their use. We use cancer
event dates extracted in (Wen et al., 2013) as de-
scribed in Section 4

5.1 Before and After Events

As our first analysis of the relationship between
metaphor use and events, we pick eight unambigu-
ous metaphor words in our data – journey, boat, war-
rior, angel, battle, victor, one step at a time, and
roller coaster ride – and consider the distribution of
these metaphors around each event. We categorized
these metaphors as unambiguous based on their us-
age within a small sample of posts we analyzed by
hand. Since these are unambiguous, we can be sure
that each time we detect these words being used, the
speaker is making a metaphor. For each metaphor-
event pair, we construct a graph showcasing the fre-
quency of the metaphor usage both before and after
the event. We center each user’s post dates around
the month of the event, so times on the x-axis are
relative dates rather than absolute dates (the center
of the graph corresponds to the actual event month).

4



The graphs for journey and warrior paired with the
diagnosis event are shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2,
respectively.

Certain metaphor/event pairs show a peak around
the event, or at 1 year after the event, for example on
the anniversary of diagnosis, which is a significant
event in the life of a cancer patient. However, the
pattern does not hold across all such pairs, making
it difficult to generalize. For example, in Figure 1,
we see a peak of metaphor frequency occurring at
the time of the event, but in Figure 2, we do not see
such a peak at the time of the event, but see other
peaks both before and after the event date. Another
complicating factor is that different users experience
different cancer treatment timelines. For instance,
one user might experience these events over a long
period of time, whereas another user may encounter
these events in quick succession (Wen and Rosé,
2012). These factors motivated us to consider other
methods, including hierarchical mixed models, for
more in-depth analysis.

Figure 1: Distribution of journey metaphor centered
around diagnosis event (x-axis: months from event, y-
axis: average frequency of metaphor usage)

Figure 2: Distribution of warrior metaphor centered
around diagnosis event (x-axis: months from event, y-
axis: average frequency of metaphor usage)

5.2 Associated Events Analysis

Hierarchical mixed models enable us to model the
effect of the experience of a cancer event in the his-
tory of a user while controlling for other important
factors, such as time and personal tendency. We pre-
pared data for analysis by sampling users. We iden-
tified the list of users who used any of our target
metaphors at least once, and extracted all the posts
of those users. In our models, we treat the message
as the unit of analysis, and the dependent measure is
always either the presence or absence of a specific
metaphor, or the presence or absence of metaphor-
ical language more generally, in all cases indicated
by a dichotomous variable. Independent variables
including dichotomous indicators of the experience
of a specific cancer event in the recent past. We treat
each user post as being in the critical period of a
cancer event if the post date falls within a time win-
dow of two months prior to the event month to two
months after the event month, which we selected
based on informal observation. Data statistics are
shown in Table 1.

We tested the association between each depen-
dent variable and the set of independent variables.
These hierarchical mixed models were built using
the Generalized Linear Latent and Mixed Models
(GLLAMM) add-on package in STATA (Rabe-
Hesketh and Skrondal, 2008; Rabe-Hesketh et al.,
2004), using maximum likelihood estimation to esti-
mate the models. A random intercept is included for
each poster, which is necessary for avoiding obtain-
ing biased estimates of the parameters since there
were multiple data points for each user, and users
varied in their tendency to use metaphorical lan-
guage or not. We also experimented with time as
an independent variable to control for potential con-
sistent increases in usage of metaphorical language
over time, but we did not find any such strong effect,
and so we dropped this variable from our models.

We did not find significant effects with a depen-
dent measure that indicated that any of the set of
metaphors were used, however, we did find sig-
nificant associations between metaphors and events
when we used dependent variables associated with
specific metaphors. Our finding was that the sub-
set of events associated with a metaphor varied by
metaphor in a way that made sense given the conno-

5



metaphor # %M L M L
journey 5,787 1,329,560 0.43 99.57
boat 21,398 1,313,849 1.60 98.40
warrior 3,462 1,331,785 0.26 99.74
angel 16,025 1,319,222 1.20 98.80
battle 6,347 1,328,900 0.48 99.52
victor 3,540 1,331,707 0.27 99.73
one step at a time 1,554 1,333,693 0.12 99.88
roller coaster ride 536 1,334,711 0.04 99.96
all 64,755 1,270,492 4.85 95.15

Table 1: Corpus-wide unambiguous popular metaphor use statistics (among posts where the user used the metaphor at
least once) (M: posts that contain each metaphor, L: posts that do not contain each metaphor).

candidate associated events
journey diagnosis, recurrence,

mastectomy
boat diagnosis, reconstruction
warrior chemo
angel chemo, rads, mets
battle diagnosis, rads, lumpec-

tomy
victor chemo, rads, reconstruc-

tion
one step at a time diagnosis
roller coaster ride diagnosis, reconstruction

Table 2: Metaphor candidates and their associated events

tation of the metaphor. For instance, warrior is asso-
ciated with chemo, and journey is associated with di-
agnosis, recurrence, and mastectomy. Associations
for all metaphors used for analysis are listed in Ta-
ble 2.

6 Metaphor Disambiguation

Knowing that there is a significant association be-
tween the experience of a cancer event and the us-
age of a metaphor opens up the possibility for using
knowledge of a user’s experience of cancer events in
the interpretation of their language choices. In par-
ticular, if they use a word that may or may not be
metaphorical, and the metaphorical usage is associ-
ated with a cancer event that occurred in their recent
past, then the model should be more likely to pre-

dict the metaphorical interpretation. Conversely, if
the user is not within the critical period of the event
associated with the potential metaphorical interpre-
tation, the metaphorical interpretation should be cor-
respondingly less preferred. We hypothesize that us-
age of this contextual information might improve the
accuracy of disambiguation of potentially metaphor-
ical language. In this section, we test that hypothesis
in a corpus based experiment conducted this time on
a set of ambiguous, potentially metaphorical words.

6.1 Task

Our task is metaphor disambiguation: given a
candidate word, decide whether the word is used
metaphorically or literally in a post. For example,
road in (1) is used metaphorically, and road in (2)
is used literally. The task is to classify road into
metaphor and literal use.

(1) Great hobbies! ... My hobbie that I
love is road bike riding. My husband
and I both have bikes and we love to
ride. ... That’s the beauty of living in
the south is that you can ride all year
long.

(2) Another thing to consider is cosmetic
outcome. ... If you have a recurrence
of cancer and have to do a mast down
the road, reconstruction is more dif-
ficult after having radiation. ...

6



6.2 Data Annotation

We picked six metaphor candidates that appear ei-
ther metaphorically or literally in the breastcancer
corpus: candle, light, ride, road, spice, and train.

We employed MTurk workers to annotate
metaphor use for candidate words. A candidate
word was given highlighted in the full post it came
from. MTurkers were instructed to copy and paste
the sentence where a given highlighted word is con-
tained to a given text box to make sure that MTurk-
ers do not give a random answer. They were given a
simple definition of metaphor from Wikipedia along
with a few examples to guide them. Then, they were
questioned whether the highlighted word is used
metaphorically or literally. Each candidate word
was labeled by five different MTurk workers, and
we paid $0.03 for annotating each word. To control
annotation quality, we required that all workers have
a United States location and have 98% or more of
their previous submissions accepted. We filtered out
annotations whose the first task of copy and paste
failed, and 18 out of 11,675 annotations were ex-
cluded.

To evaluate the reliability of the annotations by
MTurkers, we calculated Fleiss’s kappa (Fleiss,
1971). Fleiss’s kappa is appropriate for assessing
inter-reliability when different items are rated by dif-
ferent judges. The annotation was 1 if the MTurker
coded a word as a metaphorical use, otherwise the
annotation was 0. The kappa value is 0.80.

We split the data randomly into two subsets, one
for analysis of related events, and the other for clas-
sification. The former set contains 803 instances,
and the latter contains 1,532 instances. The unusual
number of instances within each subset arises from
the fact that some posts contain multiple metaphors,
and we specifically chose to set aside 1,500 posts for
classification.

6.3 Analysis on Associated Events

We performed a statistical analysis on the six
metaphor candidate words as in Section 5.2. We
combined the users from all the six metaphor can-
didates, and extracted posts of these users. Indepen-
dent variables for the model were binary values for
each event, where the value is 1 if a post was writ-
ten in the critical period (defined previously in Sec-

candidate # %N L N L
candle* 4 18 18.18 81.81
light 503 179 73.75 26.25
ride 234 185 55.85 44.15
road 924 129 87.75 12.25
spice* 3 21 12.50 87.50
train 94 41 69.63 30.37
all 1762 573 75.46 24.54

Table 3: Metaphor use statistics of data used for MTurk (*
indicates metaphor candidates for which the literal usage
is more common than the non-literal one, N: nonliteral
use L: literal use).

candidate associated events
candle none
light diagnosis, rads, mast
ride diagnosis
road diagnosis, rads
spice none
train mast

Table 4: Metaphor candidates and their associated events

tion 5.2), and 0 otherwise. The dependent variable
is a binary value regarding the usage of a metaphor
candidate within a post. If a particular post does not
include a metaphor candidate or if a post includes a
literally used metaphor candidate, the binary depen-
dent value is set to 0. Otherwise, it is set to 1.

The results of conducting the hierarchical mixed
model analysis on the data similar to the one con-
ducted above on non-ambiguous metaphors suggest
that some candidate words show an association with
different cancer events as shown in Table 4.

6.4 Classification
We used the LightSIDE (Mayfield and Penstein-
Rosé, 2010) toolkit for extracting features and clas-
sification. For the machine learning algorithm, we
used the support vector machine (SVM) classifier
provided in LightSIDE with the default options.
We used basic unigram features extracted by Light-
SIDE.

To see the effect of event information for classi-
fication, we defined two sets of event features. One
is a feature vector over all the events, consisting of

7



model Accuracy Kappa Precision Recall F1 score
(1) word 0.8133 0.3493 0.8105 0.9827 0.8884
(2) context unigram 0.8094 0.4701 0.8651 0.8860 0.8754
(3) context unigram + event 0.8127 0.4777 0.8657 0.8903 0.8778
(4) context unigram + associated event 0.8146 0.4729 0.8612 0.8998 0.8801
(5) context unigram + fs 0.8277 0.5155 0.8731 0.9033 0.8879
(6) context unigram + event + fs 0.8336 0.5325 0.8772 0.9067 0.8917
(7) context unigram + associated event + fs 0.8244 0.504 0.8695 0.9033 0.8861

Table 5: Performance on metaphor disambiguation evaluation. (6) is significantly better than (5) [p=0.013] (fs.: used
feature selection)

both binary variables to indicate whether or not a
post belongs to the critical period of each event, and
numerical variables to indicate how many months
the post is written from a known event. We will re-
fer to these features as event in Table 5. The other
is a binary variable to indicate whether or not a post
belongs to the critical period of any of the associ-
ated events for the given metaphor (defined in Sec-
tion 6.3). We will refer to this feature as associated
event in Table 5.

We used multilevel modeling for the features
when including associated event. We also used the
FeatureSelection feature in LightSIDE, where a sub-
set of features is picked on each fold before passing
it to the learning plugin. We performed 10-fold cross
validation for these experiments.

Because we want to see the effect of event in-
formation, we compare our model with a unigram
model that uses only the word itself as in (Klebanov
et al., 2014), and the context unigram model which
uses all the context words in a post as features as
baselines.

6.5 Results

Table 5 displays the results for our experiments.
First, we observe the strong performance of the un-
igram baseline. As in (Klebanov et al., 2014), our
evaluation also shows that just using the word cur-
rently being classified gives relatively high perfor-
mance. This result suggests that our candidate words
are popular metaphors repeatedly used metaphori-
cally in this domain, as precision is above 80%.

Second, surprisingly, we do not see improvement
on accuracy from adding the context words as fea-
tures. However, we do observe that this addition

results in a higher kappa value than just using the
candidate words themselves.

Finally, we can see both event and associated
event features show promising results. Both addi-
tions give higher result when added to the context
unigram model, and the event features continue to
show improvement when considering models with
feature selection. The best model, using event fea-
tures with feature selection, shows significant im-
provement (p < 0.05) over the next best model of
context unigram with feature selection.

7 Conclusion

In this paper, we discussed how situational factors
affect people’s metaphor use. We presented a study
in an online medical support community, which con-
tains a variety of related events (e.g. diagnosis,
chemotherapy, etc.). First, we investigated how pop-
ular unambiguous metaphors in the discussion fo-
rum are used in relation to major cancer events. Sec-
ond, we demonstrated that event information can be
helpful for a computational metaphor disambigua-
tion task over ambiguous candidate metaphor words.
In this work we quantitatively verified the effect of
situational features.

Our analysis showed that some popular unam-
biguous metaphors in the discussion forum are used
in connection with stressful cancer events. Usage
of different metaphors is associated with different
cancer events. We also observed that the personal
tendency factor is about 10 times as strong as the
situational factor. For our future work, it will be an
interesting problem to design a model considering
the personal tendency factor. It will require a latent
variable model to properly tease these factors apart.

8



In addition, our metaphor disambiguation exper-
iments validated the proposed association between
cancer events and metaphor usage. Using event in-
formation as features showed significant improve-
ment. Although our classification results using as-
sociated event information show weak improvement
to no improvement depending on whether feature se-
lection is used, it is important to note that our anal-
ysis consistently identified a strong relationship be-
tween metaphors and their associated events (Table
4). Therefore, we believe that it is crucial to develop
a classification model that can better leverage the
metaphor-event association, which remains as our
future work. We also want to try different sized con-
text windows for the critical period of a cancer event
in order to see the effect of time with respect to situ-
ational factors.

One limitation of this research is that our analysis
relies on the event extraction results. Although the
event extraction approach we adopted is currently
the best performing state-of-the-art technique, it still
makes mistakes that could make our analysis inac-
curate. Another limitation is that it is hard to ob-
tain data big enough to split the data into subparts
for both the hierarchical mixed model analysis and
classification.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported in part by NSF Grant
IIS-1302522.

References

George Aaron Broadwell, Umit Boz, Ignacio Cases,
Tomek Strzalkowski, Laurie Feldman, Sarah Taylor,
Samira Shaikh, Ting Liu, Kit Cho, and Nick Webb.
2013. Using imageability and topic chaining to locate
metaphors in linguistic corpora. In Social Computing,
Behavioral-Cultural Modeling and Prediction, pages
102–110. Springer.

Joseph L Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale agree-
ment among many raters. Psychological bulletin,
76(5):378–382.

Ting-Hao Kenneth Huang. 2014. Social metaphor detec-
tion via topical analysis. In Sixth International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing, page 14.

Hyeju Jang, Mario Piergallini, Miaomiao Wen, and Car-
olyn Penstein Rosé. 2014. Conversational metaphors

in use: Exploring the contrast between technical and
everyday notions of metaphor. ACL 2014, page 1.

Beata Beigman Klebanov, Chee Wee Leong, Michael
Heilman, and Michael Flor. 2014. Different texts,
same metaphors: Unigrams and beyond. ACL 2014,
page 11.

James H Martin. 1996. Computational approaches to
figurative language. Metaphor and Symbol, 11(1):85–
100.

Elijah Mayfield and Carolyn Penstein-Rosé. 2010. An
interactive tool for supporting error analysis for text
mining. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010
Demonstration Session, pages 25–28. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Dong Nguyen and Carolyn P Rosé. 2011. Language
use as a reflection of socialization in online commu-
nities. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Languages
in Social Media, pages 76–85. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Sophia Rabe-Hesketh and Anders Skrondal. 2008. Mul-
tilevel and longitudinal modeling using Stata. STATA
press.

Sophia Rabe-Hesketh, Anders Skrondal, and Andrew
Pickles. 2004. Gllamm manual.

SL. David Ritchie. 2013. Metaphor (Key Topics in Se-
mantics and Pragmatics). Cambridge university press.

Ekaterina Shutova and Simone Teufel. 2010. Metaphor
corpus annotated for source-target domain mappings.
In LREC.

Ekaterina Shutova, Lin Sun, and Anna Korhonen. 2010.
Metaphor identification using verb and noun cluster-
ing. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics, pages 1002–1010.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Ekaterina Shutova, Simone Teufel, and Anna Korhonen.
2013. Statistical metaphor processing. Computational
Linguistics, 39(2):301–353.

Caroline Sporleder and Linlin Li. 2009. Unsupervised
recognition of literal and non-literal use of idiomatic
expressions. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 754–762. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Peter D Turney, Yair Neuman, Dan Assaf, and Yohai
Cohen. 2011. Literal and metaphorical sense iden-
tification through concrete and abstract context. In
Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on the Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 680–
690.

Miaomiao Wen and Carolyn Penstein Rosé. 2012. Un-
derstanding participant behavior trajectories in on-
line health support groups using automatic extraction

9



methods. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM interna-
tional conference on Supporting group work, pages
179–188. ACM.

Kuang-Yi Wen, Fiona McTavish, Gary Kreps, Meg Wise,
and David Gustafson. 2011. From diagnosis to death:
A case study of coping with breast cancer as seen
through online discussion group messages. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication, 16(2):331–361.

Miaomiao Wen, Zeyu Zheng, Hyeju Jang, Guang Xiang,
and Carolyn Penstein Rosé. 2013. Extracting events
with informal temporal references in personal histories
in online communities. In ACL (2), pages 836–842.

10


