



















































Moving Targets: Human References to Unstable Landmarks


Proceedings of the 15th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 48–51,
Brighton, September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Moving targets: human references to unstable landmarks

Adriana Baltaretu
TiCC

Tilburg Univeristy
a.a.baltaretu@uvt.nl

Emiel Krahmer
TiCC

Tilburg University
e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl

Alfons Maes
TiCC

Tilburg University
maes@uvt.nl

Abstract

In the present study, we investigate if
speakers refer to moving entities in route
directions (RDs) and how listeners eval-
uate these references. There is a general
agreement that landmarks should be per-
ceptually salient and stable objects. Ani-
mated movement attracts visual attention,
making entities salient. We ask speakers to
watch videos of crossroads and give RDs
to listeners, who in turn have to choose a
street on which to continue (Experiment 1)
or choose the best instruction among three
RDs (Experiment 2). Our results show
that speakers mention moving entities, es-
pecially when their movement is informa-
tive for the navigation task (Experiment 1).
Listeners understand and use moving land-
marks (Experiment 1), yet appreciate sta-
ble landmarks more (Experiment 2).

1 Introduction

One of the applications of Natural Language Gen-
eration (Reiter et al., 2000) is the automatic gen-
eration of route directions, e.g., Roth and Frank
(2009); Dale et al., (2005). These instruction typ-
ically involve Referring Expressions Generation
(REG), (Krahmer and Van Deemter, 2012), for
the generation of references to landmarks. Until
recently, REG for landmarks and studies on hu-
man navigation have focussed exclusively on ref-
erences to stable entities; in fact, to the best of our
knowledge moving targets have never been studied
before. Emerging technology (e.g., Google Glass)
allows systems to include all relevant visual infor-
mation in RDs. This raises the question whether
references to moving landmarks actually occur.

With support from wearable technology, navi-
gation systems could become spatially aware. For
example, navigation systems could produce more

human-like instructions by making use of the vi-
sual information captured by devices that incor-
porate video cameras. A navigation system could
ground actions in space by referring to both sta-
ble (“the tall building”) and moving (“the cyclist
going left”) information. However, we know little
about how the dynamic character of the environ-
ment influences referential behaviour. We address
this issue by analysing if moving entities in the en-
vironment affect route direction (RD) production
and evaluation.

RDs are instructions guiding a user on how
to incrementally go from one location to another
(Richter and Klippel, 2005). These instructions
contain numerous references to entities in the en-
vironment ( henceforth landmarks). Traditionally,
landmarks have been defined as route-relevant sta-
ble entities (such as buildings) that function as
points of reference (Allen, 2000). One likely
reason for which unstable entities are underrep-
resented in most standard navigation studies, is
that the set-up of these studies often implies some
kind of (temporal and / or spatial) asymmetry
between the speaker and addressee perspectives,
which makes moving entities unreliable reference
points. For example, instructions are commu-
nicated over distance (e.g., telephone) or asyn-
chronously (e.g., after travelling the route or on
the basis of maps). In contrast, in this study we
synchronize the two perspectives and focus on in-
situ turn-by-turn RDs, where the request for as-
sistance is formulated and followed on the spot.
While having access to a shared dynamic environ-
ment, speakers can refer to any entity that could
improve the instruction. We analyse if speakers
refer to moving entities in RDs and asses listeners
preference for such references.

Among other aspects, perceptual salience has
been theorized to be an important quality of land-
marks (Sorrows and Hirtle, 1999) and movement
is known to contribute to the perceptual salience

48



of objects. Movement is processed effortlessly by
the visual system and attracts attention when in-
formative about the location of a target (Hillstrom
and Yantis, 1994). In this study, we focus on an-
imated motion. In general, animate entities in-
fluence visual attention and reference production
(Downing et al., 2004); (Prat-Sala and Branigan,
2000). Moreover, animated movement in itself
(automatically) captures visual attention (Pratt et
al., 2010). We hypothesize that if entities grab
attention, then speakers would mention them and
that listeners would prefer these RDs positively,
especially when their motion is task-informative.

2 Experiment 1 - Production

2.1 Methods

2.1.1 Participants
56 dyads of native Dutch-speaking students of
Tilburg University (50 women, 21.2 mean age)
participated in exchange for partial course cred-
its. Participants were randomly assigned to the
speaker role (35 women). All participants gave
consent to the use of their data.

2.1.2 Materials
144 street view HD videos were recorded in 72 in-
tersections of Rotterdam. The experimental videos
depicted 36 low traffic, +- shaped intersections.
Each intersection was recorded three times illus-
trating a different movement manipulation (see
Figure1): (a) no pedestrians / cyclists moving in
the intersection (no movement condition (NM), 36
videos); (b) a person walking / cycling towards the
intersection (irrelevant movement condition (IM),
36 videos); (c) the same person recorded some
seconds later, while taking a turn in the required
direction (relevant movement condition (RM), 36
videos). The people recorded were naive pedes-
trians casually walking / cycling down the street,
without paying attention to the camera. In ad-
dition, each intersection had other stable object
that could be referred to. The filler videos (36
videos) depict a different set of crowded and com-
plex shaped intersections. In addition, two paper
booklets with line drawing maps of the intersec-
tions were prepared (the speaker booklet included
an arrow showing the direction to be taken).

2.1.3 Procedure
The speaker’s task was to provide route instruc-
tions based on the map and on the video. The

Figure 1: Experimental trials: an intersection with
no movement, with a cyclist going towards the in-
tersection, and with a cyclist taking a turn.

listener had to mark in his booklet the indicated
street. The listener was allowed to ask questions
only if the instructions were unclear. Each video
lasted about three seconds and was projected on
a white wall (size: 170 x 120 cm). The videos
could not be replayed, but the last frame was dis-
played until the listener announced he is finished.
Pointing was discouraged by installing a screen
between participants up to shoulder level. Each
intersection was shown only once to each dyad.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
three presentation lists. The task started with two
warm-up trials followed by 72 video trials (36 ex-
perimental trials). There were no time constraints.

2.1.4 Design and statistical analysis

This study had Movement Type (levels: no move-
ment, irrelevant movement, relevant movement)
as within participants factor and Presentation List
(levels: 1, 2 and 3) as between participants factor.
We analysed the type of landmark mentioned by
the producer in the first instruction (moving man
/ stable objects) using logit mixed model analy-
sis with Movement Type and Presentation List as
fixed factors; participants and item pictures as ran-

49



Figure 2: For each condition, number of route di-
rections with different types of landmarks

dom factors; p–values were estimated via para-
metric bootstrapping. The factors were centred to
reduce colinearity. The first converging model is
reported. This included random intercepts for par-
ticipants and videos and random slope for Move-
ment Type in videos. Only significant results are
reported. Next we analysed if moving entities are
mentioned together with stable ones, clarification
questions and listener error rates.

3 Results

2016 RDs (56 speakers * 36 videos) were pro-
duced in this experiment. Across the three con-
ditions, participants mentioned both stable (N =
752) and moving entities (N = 361) (see Figure2).

In the NM condition, participants rarely referred
to moving people (M = 0.03). Statistical analysis
was performed only on the data from the IM and
RM conditions. There was no significant effect
of Presentation List (p > .05). There was a main
effect of Movement Type (β = 1.913; SE = 0.27; p
< .001). In the RM condition participants referred
more often to the moving person taking a turn (M
= 0.37), than in the IM condition (M = 0.13).

Few cases (0.02 %) of RDs included both the
moving and the stable landmarks (3 cases in NM;
18 cases in IM, and 22 cases in RM).

In general, the task was easy: there were 80
questions asked by listeners and no signals of ma-
jor communication breakdowns. The questions
were asked when the speaker did not refer to land-
marks in his initial instruction (55%), when the
speaker referred to a stable landmark (31.25%),
when the speaker referred to a moving landmark
(13.75%). The most frequent type of question was
the one in which listeners introduced (new) stable
landmarks.

When choosing the street, listeners made few

errors (11 cases of incorrectly marked streets and
8 cases in which the first choice was corrected).

4 Experiment 2 - RD evaluation

4.1 Participants
32 native Dutch-speaking students of Tilburg Uni-
versity (12 women, 20.7 mean age) participated
in exchange for partial course credits. All partici-
pants gave consent to the use of their data.

4.2 Materials
The materials consisted of 72 videos (the experi-
mental trials from the IM and RM condition used
in Experiment 1). Overlaid on the videos, a semi-
transparent red arrow depicted the route and the
direction to be followed.

Based on the production data, for each video a
set of three route directions was created as fol-
lows: a route direction without landmarks (e.g.,
turn left); a route direction with a stable landmark
(e.g., turn left at Hema); a route direction with a
moving landmark (e.g., turn left where that man /
woman / cyclist is going). The stable landmarks
used in these RDs were the most often mentioned
objects in Experiment 1. The moving landmarks
were referred to as the man / woman / cyclist.

4.3 Procedure
The participants’ task was to watch the videos,
read the RDs and choose the one that they liked
most. Participants saw 36 trials as follows: first a
fixation cross was displayed for 500ms, followed
by the video and the three instructions placed be-
low the video. The position on screen of the
RDs was counterbalanced. Each intersection was
shown only once, and participants were randomly
assigned to one of the two presentation lists.

4.4 Design and statistical analysis
This study had Movement Type (levels: irrelevant
movement, relevant movement) as within partici-
pants factor and Presentation List (levels: 1, 2) as
between participants factor. The dependent vari-
able was the type of RD chosen. Statistical analy-
sis was performed as in Experiment 1. The model
had Movement Type and Presentation List as fixed
factors; subjects and videos as random factors.

5 Results

Out of 1152 cases (36 scenes x 32 participants),
RDs with landmarks were chosen more often

50



Figure 3: For each condition, types of landmarks
chosen

(73% of the cases) than RDs without landmarks
(see Figure3). To see if movement influenced the
choice for a specific type of landmark, the statis-
tical analysis was done on a data set consisting of
the RDs with landmarks.

In general, participants chose more often sta-
ble landmarks (77.06% of the cases) than mov-
ing landmarks. There was a main effect of Move-
ment Type (β = 1.211; SE = .265; p < .001). This
model included random intercepts for subjects and
for videos.

For videos depicting irrelevant movement, par-
ticipants chose more often instructions with sta-
ble landmarks (M = 0.85) than with moving land-
marks (M = 0.15). For videos depicting relevant
movement, the same pattern is observed though
there was a slight increase in the preference for
moving landmarks (stable landmarks M = 0.75;
moving landmarks M = 0.25). There was no sig-
nificant effect of Presentation List (p > .05).

6 Conclusions

In conclusion, human speakers do use references
to moving landmarks. Speakers referred to mov-
ing objects especially when their movement was
informative. Listeners did not encounter difficul-
ties understanding these instructions. Yet, they
preferred instructions with stable landmarks. In
the light of technological developments our results
highlight that navigation systems should not only
add landmarks to the instructions, but also adjust
the type of landmarks. Speakers naturally refer to
items with a relevant movement trajectory. Further
work is needed to investigate if moving entities
were mentioned because they were more salient
than their stable counterparts and second, to vali-
date the efficiency of such RDs for listeners. In fu-
ture research, we hope to address the question how
current REG algorithms can be adapted to gener-

ate references to moving targets.

References
Gary L Allen. 2000. Principles and practices for

communicating route knowledge. Applied Cogni-
tive Psychology, 14(4):333–359.

Robert Dale, Sabine Geldof, and Jean-Philippe Prost.
2005. Using natural language generation in auto-
matic route. Journal of Research and practice in
Information Technology, 37(1):89.

Paul E Downing, David Bray, Jack Rogers, and Claire
Childs. 2004. Bodies capture attention when noth-
ing is expected. Cognition, 93(1):27–38.

Anne P Hillstrom and Steven Yantis. 1994. Visual
motion and attentional capture. Perception & Psy-
chophysics, 55(4):399–411.

Emiel Krahmer and Kees Van Deemter. 2012. Compu-
tational generation of referring expressions: A sur-
vey. Computational Linguistics, 38(1):173–218.

Mercè Prat-Sala and Holly P Branigan. 2000. Dis-
course constraints on syntactic processing in lan-
guage production: A cross-linguistic study in en-
glish and spanish. Journal of Memory and Lan-
guage, 42(2):168–182.

Jay Pratt, Petre V Radulescu, Ruo Mu Guo, and
Richard A Abrams. 2010. Its alive! animate mo-
tion captures visual attention. Psychological Sci-
ence, 21(11):1724–1730.

Ehud Reiter, Robert Dale, and Zhiwei Feng. 2000.
Building natural language generation systems, vol-
ume 33. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Kai-Florian Richter and Alexander Klippel. 2005.
A model for context-specific route directions. In
Spatial cognition IV. Reasoning, action, interaction,
pages 58–78. Springer, Berlin.

Michael Roth and Anette Frank. 2009. A NLG-based
application for walking directions. In Proceedings
of the 47th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 37–40, Singapore.

Molly E Sorrows and Stephen C Hirtle. 1999. The
nature of landmarks for real and electronic spaces.
In Spatial information theory. Cognitive and compu-
tational foundations of geographic information sci-
ence, pages 37–50. Springer, Berlin.

Acknowledgements

The first author received financial support from
the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Re-
search, via NWO Promoties in de Geestesweten-
schappen (322-89-008), which is greatly acknowl-
edged. Partial results of this study have been pre-
sented in CogSci 2015.

51


