






















Open-Domain Semantic Parsing with Boxer

Johan Bos
Center for Language and Cognition

University of Groningen
johan.bos@rug.nl

Abstract

Boxer is a semantic parser for English
texts with many input and output possibil-
ities, and various ways to perform mean-
ing analysis based on Discourse Represen-
tation Theory. This involves the various
ways that meaning representations can be
computed, as well as their possible seman-
tic ingredients.

1 Introduction

In this paper I present the capabilities of the open-
domain semantic parser Boxer. Boxer is dis-
tributed with the C&C text processing tools (Cur-
ran et al., 2007), and its main characteristics were
first described in my earlier work (Bos, 2008). The
roots of the current version of Boxer go back even
further, long before Boxer was officially released
to the community (Bos et al., 2004; Bos, 2001).

Boxer distinguishes itself from other seman-
tic parsers in that it produces formal meaning
representations (compatible with first-order logic)
while reaching wide coverage, and is therefore
used in a range of applications (Basile et al., 2012;
Bjerva et al., 2014). To get an idea of what Boxer
does, consider the input and output in Figure 1.

John did not go to school .
__________________
|x1 |
|..................|
|named(x1,john,per)|
| ____________ |
| |e2 x3 ||
| ¬ |............||
| |go(e2) ||
| |agent(e2,x1)||
| |school(x3) ||
| |to(e2,x3) ||
| |____________||
|__________________|

Figure 1: Example of Boxer’s input and output.

Here, the input is a simple sentence, and Boxer’s
output a formal interpretation of this sentence:
there is a person x1 named “john”, and it is not
the case that there is a school-going-event e2 that
involves the entities x1 (John) and a school (de-
noted by entity x3). But Boxer has a lot more to
offer, and what this paper contributes (and adds
with respect to previous publications) is a fine-
grained description of the many possibilities that
Boxer provides for the formal semantic analysis
of text processing.

2 Interface Formats

The input of the Boxer system is a syntactic anal-
ysis in the form of a derivation of combinatorial
categorial grammar, CCG (Steedman, 2001). This
input can be augmented in order to incorporate in-
formation of external language technology com-
ponents. The output is a meaning representation,
produced in a variety of standard formats.

2.1 Input
Boxer requires a syntactic analysis of the text in
the form of CCG-derivations, every sentence cor-
responding to one CCG derivation. The derivation
itself is represented as a ccg/2 Prolog term, com-
prising a sentence identifier and a recursively built
structure of combinatorial rules (such as fa/3,
ba/3, and so on), and terminals (the lexical items).
All combinatorial rules of CCG are supported,
including the generalized composition rules and
the type-changing rules introduced in CCGbank
(Hockenmaier and Steedman, 2007).

The terminals are captured by a Prolog term
consisting of the CCG category (Boxer imple-
ments about 600 different lexical category types),
the token, its lemma, and part-of-speech. Infor-
mation of external tools can also be included here,
such as word sense disambiguation, thematic role
labelling, noun-noun compound interpretation, or
reference resolution.

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 301



sem(1,[1001:[tok:’John’,pos:’NNP’,lemma:’John’,namex:’I-PER’],
1002:[tok:did,pos:’VBD’,lemma:do,namex:’O’],
1003:[tok:not,pos:’RB’,lemma:not,namex:’O’],
1004:[tok:go,pos:’VB’,lemma:go,namex:’O’],
1005:[tok:to,pos:’TO’,lemma:to,namex:’O’],
1006:[tok:school,pos:’NN’,lemma:school,namex:’O’],
1007:[tok:’.’,pos:’.’,lemma:’.’,namex:’O’]],

b2:drs([b1:[]:x1],
[b1:[1001]:named(x1,john,per,nam),
b2:[1003]:not(b3:drs([b3:[]:e1,b3:[]:x2],

[b3:[1004]:pred(e1,go,v,0),
b3:[]:role(e1,x1,agent,1),
b3:[1006]:pred(x2,school,n,0),
b3:[1005]:rel(e1,x2,to,0)]))])).

Figure 2: Boxer’s output in Prolog format, for “John does not go to school.”

Any parser can be used to support Boxer, as
long as it produces CCG derivation in the required
Prolog format. The standard parser used in tan-
dem with Boxer is that of the C&C tools (Clark
and Curran, 2004). Alternatively, other parsers
can be used, such as EasyCCG (Lewis and Steed-
man, 2014). The lemmas can be provided by off-
the-shells tools like morpha (Minnen et al., 2001).

2.2 Output

The standard output is a meaning representation in
the form of a Discourse Representation Structure
(Kamp and Reyle, 1993). This output is standard
shown in Prolog format, but can also be produced
in XML (with the --format xml option). Out-
put can also be suppressed, with --format no, in
case only human-readable output is wanted.

For the user’s convenience, the meaning can
also be displayed in boxed format (with the
--box true option), as shown above. In com-
bination with --instantiate true, this yields
convenient names for discourse referents that
appear in the boxes. Additionally, with the
--ccg true option, a pretty-printed version of
the input CCG-derivation is presented to the user.

3 Semantic Frameworks

3.1 Semantic Theory

The backbone of Boxer’s meaning representations
is provided by Discourse Representation Theory,
DRT (Kamp and Reyle, 1993). Boxer follows
the theory closely (--theory drt), except with
respect to (i) event semantics, where it adopts a
neo-Davidsonian approach, and (ii) the analysis of
sentential complements, where Boxer follows an
analysis based on modal logic (Bos, 2004).

By default, Boxer produces a meaning repre-
sentation for every sentence in the input. How-
ever, with --integrate true it computes a sin-
gle meaning representation spanning all sentences,
with separate boxes corresponding to all sen-
tences. Instead, using --theory sdrt, a Seg-
mented Discourse Representation Structure is pro-
duced, following SDRT (Asher, 1993).

3.2 Meaning Translations

The meaning representations of Discourse Rep-
resentation Theory can be shaped in different
ways, and Boxer supports several of these possi-
bilities. The standard representations are DRSs
(Discourse Representation Structures, the boxes,
selected with --semantics drs). Alternatively
DRSs can be shown as Projective DRSs (Ven-
huizen et al., 2013) using --semantics pdrs,
where each DRS is labelled with a pointer, and
each DRS-condition receives a pointer to the DRS
in which it appears.

For some applications and users with differ-
ent mind-sets, Boxer comes with an option to
translate DRSs into other types of meaning rep-
resentation. First of all, with --semantics fol,
Boxer supports the well-known translation from
boxes to first-order logic (Kamp and Reyle, 1993;
Bos, 2004), or to DRSs in the form of graphs
(Basile and Bos, 2013), when invoked with
--semantics drg. Secondly, the meaning repre-
sentations can be translated into flat logical forms,
as proposed in Jerry Hobbs’s framework (Hobbs,
1991), with --semantics tacitus. Note that
not all of these translations are necessary meaning-
preserving, becauce of the differences in expres-
sive power between the formalisms.

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 302



4 Meaning Details

The devil is in the detail. Indeed, to get the most
out of Boxer, it is important to know what features
it offers to compute meaning representations.

4.1 Linguistic Features
Copula Notorious among computational se-
manticists is the analysis of the copula. Boxer
gives two options: to interpret the copula as were
it an ordinary transitive verb (--copula false),
or by introducing an equality symbol between two
entities (--copula true). The latter option has
as advantage that certain inferences can directly
be drawn, but as disadvantage that some nuances
of meaning are lost (i.e., the distinction between
John is a teacher and John was a teacher).

Multiword Expressions Boxer provides two
ways to represent compound proper names. With
--mwe no a compound name such as Barack
Obama is represented by two naming condi-
tions (with the non-logical symbols barack and
obama), and with --mwe yes as a single naming
condition (with symbol barack~obama).

Noun–Noun Compounds Noun–noun com-
pounds are interpreted as two entities that form
a certain relation. By default, Boxer picks
the generic prepositional of –relation. With
--nn true, Boxer attempts to disambiguate
noun-noun compound relations by selecting from
a set of prepositional relations (Bos and Nissim,
2015). For instance, beach house would be
interpreted as: house(x) ∧ beach(y) ∧ at(x,y).

Reference Resolution By default Boxer doesn’t
resolve pronouns or other referential expressions,
but with --resolve true, Boxer attempts to re-
solve pronouns, proper names and definite de-
scriptions (currently using a rule-based approach).
The foundational algorithm to accomplish this is
based on Van der Sandt’s theory of presupposition
projection (Van der Sandt, 1992). The discourse
referents of the selected antecedents are unified
with those of the referential expression.

Thematic Role Labelling As mentioned above,
Boxer follows a neo-Davidsonian approach to
event semantics. This means that events (usu-
ally triggered by verbs) introduce discourse refer-
ents, and these are related to discourse referents of
participants by two-place relations, the thematic
roles. Standard (--roles proto) these roles

are picked from a set of five proto-roles: agent,
theme, topic, recipient, and experiencer. A more
fine-grained inventory of roles is employed with
--roles verbnet, producing thematic roles as
provided by VerbNet (Kipper et al., 2008). This is
done by mapping the obtained proto-roles to Verb-
Net roles, using a simple deterministic approach in
the semantic lexicon of Boxer.

4.2 Logical Features
Eliminating Equality In some cases equality
symbols can be elimated from the meaning rep-
resentation, resulting in a logically equivalent log-
ical form. This is possible, for instance, when the
two variables within an equality relation are bound
by discourse referents introduced in the same DRS
as the equality condition. Equality conditions are
introduced by a range of lexical entries, but in the
final meaning representation they don’t play a fun-
damental role. With --elimeq true such equal-
ity conditions are removed and their correspond-
ing discourse referents unified.

Modal Modal expressions (as introduced by
modal adverbs or modal verbs) can be made ex-
plicit in the meaning representation by invok-
ing --modal true. This triggers two addi-
tional complex DRS-conditions formed by the
unary box and diamond operators from modal
logic, expressing necessity (univerally quantify-
ing over possible worlds) and possibility (existen-
tially quantifying over possible worlds). This op-
tion also has an effect on the translation to first-
order logic, and when used in combination with
--semantics fol the translation to modal first-
order logic is used (with reification over possible
worlds).

Tense The standard reference textbook for Dis-
course Representation Theory has an extensive
analysis of various tenses found in the English lan-
guage (Kamp and Reyle, 1993). Boxer aims to re-
produce this analysis with --tense true. This
involves additional relations and discourse refer-
ents related to the events introduced by the text.

5 Conclusion

I have outlined a large set of possibilities that the
semantic parser Boxer offers. These concern input
and output modalities, as well as the level of de-
tail of meaning interpretation. I will demonstrate
a selection of these features at the conference.

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 303



References
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects

in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Valerio Basile and Johan Bos. 2013. Aligning for-
mal meaning representations with surface strings for
wide-coverage text generation. In Proceedings of
the 14th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, pages 1–9, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Valerio Basile, Johan Bos, Kilian Evang, and Noortje
Venhuizen. 2012. Negation detection with dis-
course representation structures. In The First Joint
Conference on Lexical and Computational Seman-
tics (*SEM 2012 Shared Task), pages 301–309,
Montreal, Canada.

Johannes Bjerva, Johan Bos, Rob Van der Goot, and
Malvina Nissim. 2014. The meaning factory: For-
mal semantics for recognizing textual entailment
and determining semantic similarity. In Proceedings
of the 8th International Workshop on Semantic Eval-
uation (SemEval 2014), pages 642–646, Dublin, Ire-
land.

Johan Bos and Malvina Nissim. 2015. Uncover-
ing noun-noun compound relations by gamification.
In Beáta Megyesi, editor, Proceedings of the 20th
Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics.

Johan Bos, Stephen Clark, Mark Steedman, James R.
Curran, and Julia Hockenmaier. 2004. Wide-
Coverage Semantic Representations from a CCG
Parser. In Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING
’04), pages 1240–1246, Geneva.

Johan Bos. 2001. DORIS 2001: Underspecification,
Resolution and Inference for Discourse Representa-
tion Structures. In Patrick Blackburn and Michael
Kohlhase, editors, ICoS-3, Inference in Computa-
tional Semantics, pages 117–124.

Johan Bos. 2004. Computational Semantics in Dis-
course: Underspecification, Resolution, and Infer-
ence. Journal of Logic, Language and Information,
13(2):139–157.

Johan Bos. 2008. Wide-Coverage Semantic Analy-
sis with Boxer. In J. Bos and R. Delmonte, editors,
Semantics in Text Processing. STEP 2008 Confer-
ence Proceedings, volume 1 of Research in Compu-
tational Semantics, pages 277–286. College Publi-
cations.

Stephen Clark and James R. Curran. 2004. Parsing the
WSJ using CCG and Log-Linear Models. In Pro-
ceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL ’04), pages
104–111, Barcelona, Spain.

James Curran, Stephen Clark, and Johan Bos. 2007.
Linguistically Motivated Large-Scale NLP with
C&C and Boxer. In Proceedings of the 45th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational

Linguistics Companion Volume Proceedings of the
Demo and Poster Sessions, pages 33–36, Prague,
Czech Republic.

Jerry R. Hobbs. 1991. SRI international’s TACITUS
system: MUC-3 test results and analysis. In Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd Conference on Message Under-
standing, MUC 1991, San Diego, California, USA,
May 21-23, 1991, pages 105–107.

Julia Hockenmaier and Mark Steedman. 2007. CCG-
bank: a corpus of CCG derivations and dependency
structures extracted from the Penn Treebank. Com-
putational Linguistics, 33(3):355–396.

Hans Kamp and Uwe Reyle. 1993. From Discourse
to Logic; An Introduction to Modeltheoretic Seman-
tics of Natural Language, Formal Logic and DRT.
Kluwer, Dordrecht.

Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and
Martha Palmer. 2008. A large-scale classification
of English verbs. Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, 42(1):21–40.

Mike Lewis and Mark Steedman. 2014. A* ccg pars-
ing with a supertag-factored model. In Proceed-
ings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages
990–1000, Doha, Qatar, October. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Guido Minnen, John Carroll, and Darren Pearce. 2001.
Applied morphological processing of english. Jour-
nal of Natural Language Engineering, 7(3):207–
223.

Mark Steedman. 2001. The Syntactic Process. The
MIT Press.

Rob A. Van der Sandt. 1992. Presupposition Projec-
tion as Anaphora Resolution. Journal of Semantics,
9:333–377.

Noortje Venhuizen, Johan Bos, and Harm Brouwer.
2013. Parsimonious semantic representations with
projection pointers. In Proceedings of the 10th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Seman-
tics (IWCS 2013) – Long Papers, pages 252–263,
Potsdam, Germany.

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 304


