



















































Analyzing Sentiment in Classical Chinese Poetry


Proceedings of the 9th SIGHUM Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 15–24,
Beijing, China, July 30, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics and The Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing

Analyzing Sentiment in Classical Chinese Poetry

Yufang Hou Anette Frank
Institute for Computational Linguistics, Heidelberg University, Germany

(hou|frank)@cl.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract

Although sentiment analysis in Chinese
social media has attracted a lot of in-
terest in recent years, it has been less
explored in traditional Chinese literature
(e.g., classical Chinese poetry) due to the
lack of sentiment lexicon resources. In
this paper, we propose a weakly super-
vised approach based on Weighted Person-
alized PageRank (WPPR) to create a sen-
timent lexicon for classical Chinese po-
etry. We evaluate our lexicon intrinsically
and extrinsically. We show that our graph-
based approach outperforms a previous
well-known PMI-based approach (Turney
and Littman, 2003) on both evaluation set-
tings. On the basis of our sentiment lexi-
con, we analyze sentiment in the Complete
Anthology of Tang Poetry. We extract top-
ics associated with positive (negative) sen-
timent using a position-aware sentiment-
topic model. We further compare senti-
ment among different poets in Tang Dy-
nasty (AD 618 – 907).

1 Introduction

Classical Chinese poetry is a precious cultural her-
itage. Among its over 3,000 years of history, the
Tang Dynasty (AD 618 – 907) is widely viewed
as the zenith of the art of classical Chinese poetry.
The Complete Anthology of Tang Poetry, edited
during the Qing Dynasty (1644 – 1911), contains
over 42,860 poems in 900 volumes by more than
2,500 poets. The collection provides a magnificent
insight into all aspects of social life of that period.

Research on sentiment/emotion and imagery
analysis of Tang poetry is an active subfield in
Chinese philology, with a vast literature (Watson,
1971; Kao and Mei, 1971; Kao and Mei, 1978). In
this paper, we seek to analyze the sentiment (i.e.,

positive or negative) of textual elements in Tang
poetry from a computational perspective. Specif-
ically, we propose a novel graph-based method to
create a sentiment lexicon for classical Chinese
poetry. Such a lexicon is a valuable resource for
other computational research on classical Chinese
poetry, such as semantic analysis (Lee and Tak-
sum, 2012) or poetry generation (He et al., 2012;
Zhang and Lapata, 2014).

Turney and Littman (2003) propose a PMI-
based algorithm to estimate the semantic orien-
tation or polarity of a word. The semantic ori-
entation of a given word is calculated by com-
paring its similarity to positive reference words
(e.g., excellent or beautiful) with its similarity to
negative reference words (e.g., poor or bad). In-
stead of calculating the similarity between a given
word and each of the positive (negative) reference
words separately, we apply Weighted Personalized
PageRank (WPPR) to measure the similarity be-
tween the given word and all positive (negative)
reference words simultaneously in a lexical net-
work that we build from a poetry corpus. Our
graph-based method is able to find globally opti-
mal solution because the lexical network is ana-
lyzed as a whole (Section 3).

We evaluate our poetry sentiment lexicon intrin-
sically and extrinsically. For the intrinsic eval-
uation, we compile two test datasets. The first
dataset contains 933 words (532 positive and 401
negative) taken from three Chinese sentiment lexi-
cons1. The second dataset contains 55 words taken
from literature of imagery analysis for Tang po-
etry. These words reflect the common imageries
in classical Chinese poetry and have certain fixed
emotional connotations. For instance, the char-
acter “猿” (ape) often relates to sadness, anxi-
ety and distress, while the character “荷” (lotus)

1Although these lexicons are for contemporary Chinese,
some words keep the same meaning and polarity as in classi-
cal Chinese poetry.

15



is the symbol of beauty, love and rectitude. We
show that our method outperforms the very com-
petitive PMI-based approach when evaluating on
both datasets (Section 4.1). Our method also out-
performs the baseline on an extrinsic evaluation
task of predicting sentiment orientation of classi-
cal Chinese poetry (Section 4.2).

On the basis of our sentiment lexicon, we ana-
lyze sentiment in the Complete Anthology of Tang
Poetry. We first analyze topic distributions under
positive/negative sentiment in Tang poetry using
a position-aware sentiment-topic model (Section
5.1). We then compare sentiment among different
poets in Tang Dynasty (Section 5.2).

The main contributions of our work are:

• We propose a graph-based method to build
a sentiment lexicon for classical Chinese po-
etry. Our method is weakly supervised and
does not rely on existing lexical resources
(e.g., WordNet). It can be easily ported to
other domains/languages.

• We evaluate our sentiment lexicon systemat-
ically and demonstrate that it can be utilized
to analyze sentiment orientation of classical
Chinese poetry.

• We analyze sentiment in Tang poetry on the
basis of our sentiment lexicon. We apply
a position-aware sentiment-topic model to
extract themes which are tightly associated
with positive/negative sentiment. Our model
builds in specific assumptions that character-
ize sentiment expression in classical Chinese
poetry. It assumes that lexical items from
the same region are generated from a single
sentiment-topic pair. We compare sentiment
among different famous poets and show that
our results are in accordance with studies in
Chinese philology.

The poetry sentiment lexicon described in the
paper as well as all test datasets are freely available
at http://www.cl.uni-heidelberg.
de/˜hou/resources.mhtml.

2 Related Work

Sentiment lexicons. In recent years, consider-
able attention has been given to the creation of
large polarity (positive and negative) lexicons, in-
cluding various corpus-based approaches (Turney
and Littman, 2003; Kanayama and Nasukawa,

2006; Kaji and Kitsuregawa, 2007; Kiritchenko
et al., 2014) and dictionary-based approaches
(Kamps et al., 2004; Esuli and Sebastiani, 2005;
Mohammad et al., 2009; Baccianella et al., 2010).
Unlike previous graph-based approaches which
create sentiment lexicons based on existing lexi-
cal resources (e.g., WordNet, thesauri) (Takamura
et al., 2005; Rao and avichandran, 2009; Hassan et
al., 2011), there are no such lexical resources for
classical Chinese poetry. Therefore, we choose a
corpus-based approach.

While our approach for building sentiment lexi-
cons is domain independent, in this paper we apply
it to classical Chinese poetry. This is not a triv-
ial task. There are a variety of reliable resources
for English sentiment analysis. However, only a
few sentiment lexicons for Chinese are available.
In particular, these lexicons are for contemporary
Chinese. Moreover, given that these lexicons are
developed for contemporary Chinese, they will
only have partial coverage for classical Chinese
poetry. There might also be divergences due to the
change of language over several thousand years.
To improve sentiment analysis for Chinese, one
line of work seeks to leverage rich English senti-
ment resources through machine translation (Wan,
2008; Wan, 2009; He et al., 2010). These ap-
proaches depend on the quality of machine trans-
lation and translation of classical Chinese poetry
to English is hard even for professional transla-
tors. Our work is similar to Zagibalov and Car-
roll (2008) in the sense that both approaches are
weakly supervised. They build a sentiment lexi-
con iteratively, starting from a small set of seed
items and several lexical patterns (negated adver-
bial constructions) which can indicate lexical po-
larity. However, such lexical patterns (e.g., 不
(not) 很 (quite) + 满意 (satisfied) (target word) )
are not applicable in classical Chinese poetry.

Computational analysis of classical Chinese po-
etry. There has been previous work focusing on
classical Chinese poetry generation (Zhou et al.,
2010; He et al., 2012; Zhang and Lapata, 2014).
Lee and Kong (2012) develop a dependency tree-
bank for the Complete Anthology of Tang Po-
etry. On the basis of this corpus, Lee and Tak-sum
(2012) quantitatively analyze the semantic con-
tent and word usage in the Complete Anthology
of Tang Poetry. Voigt and Jurafsky (2013) find
that the classical characters of Chinese poetry de-
creased across the century by comparing classical

16



poetry and contemporary prose.
There are only a few works trying to analyze

sentiment in classical Chinese poetry. Hu (2001)
proposes “similarity search” by using word asso-
ciation measures. For instance, given typical emo-
tional words such as “悲伤 (sadness)哀 (sorrow)”,
the system can find words (e.g., 南浦 (southern
shore, a place often used to hold farewell parties
in ancient China) ) associated with sad emotions.
However, he does not analyze sentiment in classi-
cal Chinese poetry quantitatively. Based on manu-
ally annotated data, Luo (2009) analyzes the senti-
ment of classical Chinese Song poetry among dif-
ferent poets. To the best of our knowledge, there
is no publicly available sentiment lexicon for clas-
sical Chinese poetry.

3 Building a Sentiment Lexicon for
Classical Chinese Poetry

In this section, we briefly introduce Weighted Per-
sonalized PageRank (WPPR). We then detail how
we construct a lexical network and how we apply
WPPR over the lexical network to build a senti-
ment lexicon for classical Chinese poetry.

3.1 Weighted Personalized PageRank

The original PageRank algorithm was first intro-
duced by Brin and Page (1998). It is a link-
based algorithm for ranking the vertices in a graph.
Later, various extensions have been proposed.
Weighted PageRank (Xing and Ghorbani, 2004)
takes into account the importance of both the in-
links and the outlinks of the vertices when dis-
tributing rank scores based on the popularity of
the vertices. Personalized PageRank (Haveliwala,
2002; White and Smyth, 2003) computes the im-
portance of vertices in a graph relative to one or
more root vertices. It has been successfully ap-
plied in other NLP tasks, such as word sense dis-
ambiguation (Agirre and Soroa, 2009).

Here we combine Weighted PageRank and Per-
sonalized PageRank to measure the similarity of
lexical items in a lexical network relative to senti-
ment seeds. Let G be a lexical network with N
vertices v1, . . . , vn ∈ V and wij be the weight
associated with the edge from vi to vj . Let M
be a N × N transition probability matrix, where
Mij = wij if a link from vi to vj exists, and zero
otherwise, let S be a set of sentiment seeds where
S ⊆ V . Then the Weighted Personalized PageR-

ank vector R over G can be calculated as follows:

R = αMR+ (1− α)P, (1)

where α is the damping factor and its value usu-
ally set in the [0.85..0.95] range. P is a N × 1
vector, where Pi = 1|S| for vi ∈ S, and zero other-
wise, i.e., all vertices in the sentiment seeds have
equal prior probability.

Equation 1 can be viewed as the result of a ran-
dom walk process starting from the seed nodes,
where the random walkers can jump back to the
seed nodes S with a given probability 1 − α. The
final rank of vertex vi, biased towards the set S
(the bias is encoded in P ), represents the proba-
bility of a random walk over the weighted graph
(weights associated with edges are encoded in M )
ending on vertex vi, at a sufficiently large time.

3.2 Lexical Network Construction

To create a sentiment lexicon for classical Chinese
poetry, we first build a lexical network on the ba-
sis of the Complete Anthology of Tang Poetry2.
Since poetry is imbued with emotions, we assume
that: (1) each lexical items in the lexical network
bears positive or negative sentiment; and (2) lexi-
cal items within a small window are more likely to
share the same sentiment. Therefore, by applying
WPPR on the basis of a small set of positive (nega-
tive) lexical items, we can trace how positive (neg-
ative) sentiment information is distributed over the
whole lexical network.

The lexical network G is a directed weighted
graph, where each vertex vi is a lexical item. We
define a lexical item as a word containing one or
two characters. Classical Chinese poetry is typi-
cally written in a highly compressed style, where
each line normally has a fixed five or seven char-
acters. As a result, each character itself or words
containing two characters are expressive and can
be used as the main semantic units. Instead of car-
rying out word segmentation, we simply use a fre-
quency threshold to extract lexical items: a lexi-
cal unit is extracted as a lexical item if it appears
at least x times in the corpus (x is ten for single-
character unit and 50 for two-character unit).

We then create an edge from vi to vj , if vi and vj
co-occur within a window of five characters, i.e.,
vi occurs within a window of five characters be-
fore or after vj . Let fij be the number of times

2The corpus can be downloaded from http://datatang.com

17



that vi and vj co-occur in the whole corpus, we set
the weight of the edge from vi to vj as follows:

wij =
fij∑N

k=1 fik
(2)

Alternatively, wij can be viewed as the probabil-
ity of lexical item vj occurring nearby, given the
lexical item vi.

As a result, we construct a lexical network
containing 8656 lexical items (4779 are single-
character items, 3877 are two-character items) and
8,832,234 edges. This lexical network contains
the word co-occurrence information in the Com-
plete Anthology of Tang Poetry.

3.3 Sentiment Lexicon Creation
We compile a small set of sentiment seeds, which
contains six positive lexical items and six negative
lexical items (see Table 1). These lexical items
are frequent single characters in the Complete An-
thology of Tang Poetry and carry strong sentiment.
Similar to Turney and Littman (2003) who use 14
sentiment seeds (seven positive words and seven
negative words), we only focus on a small number
of sentiment seeds to study whether we can build
a reasonable sentiment lexicon from weak super-
vision.

Characters
positive 香 (fragrant)爱 (love)欢 (happy)
seeds 贤 (virtuous)喜 (delight)瑞 (lucky)
negative 寒 (cold)愁 (anxiety)孤 (lonely)
seeds 苦 (painful)悲 (sorrow)怨 (resentment)

Table 1: Positive and negative sentiment seeds.

We apply WPPR (Section 3.1) twice over the
lexical network described in Section 3.2, initial-
ized with the positive seeds and negative seeds re-
spectively. We follow the common practice of set-
ting the damping factor to 0.85. Consequently, we
get two PageRank vectors Rp and Rn. They can
be seen as a measure of similarity of lexical items
to all positive seeds and all negative seeds respec-
tively. Finally, we calculate the sentiment vector
as follows:

Rs = Rp−Rn (3)
A lexical item i has a positive sentiment orienta-
tion if its corresponding entry in vector Rs (hence
Rsi) is positive, and a negative sentiment orienta-
tion if Rsi is negative. The value of Rsi can be
viewed as the strength of the sentiment orientation
associated with the lexical item i.

4 Sentiment Lexicon Evaluation

We evaluate our poetry sentiment lexicon intrin-
sically and extrinsically. For the intrinsic evalua-
tion, we utilize sentiment lexicons for contempo-
rary Chinese because there is a partial overlap be-
tween these lexicons and sentiment expressions in
classical poetry. We also evaluate lexical items in
our sentiment lexicon appearing only in classical
poetry. In the extrinsic evaluation, we test whether
our sentiment lexicon can be used to predict senti-
ment orientation of classical Chinese poetry.

4.1 Intrinsic Evaluation

Test Datasets. To evaluate our approach, we
compile two test datasets. The first dataset (Sen-
tiLexicon) contains 933 sentiment words taken
from three Chinese sentiment lexicons: HowNet3,
NTUSD (Ku et al., 2006), and Tsinghua sentiment
lexicon4. Although these lexicons are for contem-
porary Chinese, some words keep the same mean-
ing and polarity as in classical Chinese poetry. We
merge these three lexicons by removing duplicate
or contradictory entries. This yields a big senti-
ment lexicon containing 12,945 positive words5

and 17,114 negative words. We then create Sen-
tiLexicon by choosing single-character words and
two-character words from the big sentiment lexi-
con if they do not appear in the set of sentiment
seeds (Table 1) and occur at least 50 times6 in the
Complete Anthology of Tang Poetry. This leads to
a dataset containing 532 positive lexical items and
401 negative lexical items.

However, SentiLexicon does not reflect an im-
portant aspect of classical Chinese poetry, i.e.,
emotions are expressed implicitly through im-
agery. Skilled poets often apply concrete imagery
to evoke emotions and sensations. Certain im-
ageries have fixed emotional connotations. For
example, the falling autumn leaf ( “落叶”) often
refers to personal or dynastic decline. We call such
words imagery words. We collect 55 typical im-
agery words (ImageryLexicon) from literature of
imagery analysis for Tang poetry. Every word in
ImageryLexicon does not appear in SentiLexicon.
Table 2 shows some examples of ImageryLexicon.

3http://www.keenage.com/html/e index.html
4http://nlp.csai.tsinghua.edu.cn/˜lj/
5A word can contain one character or several characters.
6We carried out preliminary experiments with the thresh-

olds ranging from ten to 50. We found that the accuracy of
our method varies in a small range, and our approach outper-
forms the baseline at all threshold levels.

18



Characters
positive 鸳鸯 (mandarin duck)芙蓉 (hibiscus)

凤凰 (phoenix)兰 (orchid)竹 (bamboo)
negative 梧桐 (sycamore)鸦 (crow)柳 (willow)

鹧鸪 (partridge)夕阳 (sunset)子规 (cuckoo)

Table 2: Examples of ImageryLexicon.

SentiLexicon ImageryLexicon
Accuracy Accuracy

PMI 60.8 70.2
WPPR 64.4? 74.5

Table 3: Accuracy of WPPR compared to PMI
(baseline) for two test datasets. ? indicates sig-
nificant improvement relative to the baseline (Mc-
Nemar’s test at p < 0.05 level).

Baseline. We reimplement a previous PMI-
based approach (Turney and Littman, 2003) as the
baseline. We use the same sentiment seeds and the
same co-occurrence window of five characters as
our method. The sentiment orientation of a lexi-
cal item (single or two-character) is calculated as
follows:

SO (w) =
∑

s∈pSeeds
PMI (w, s)−

∑
s∈nSeeds

PMI (w, s) (4)

Results on test datasets. Table 3 shows the re-
sults of our method described in Section 3 (WPPR)
and the baseline (PMI) against two test datasets.
Our graph-based approach outperforms the base-
line in both cases. Our method is more robust than
the baseline because it measures the similarity be-
tween the candidate lexical item and the whole
positive (negative) sentiment seeds together.

Evaluation on sample data. Our test datasets
(SentiLexicon and ImageryLexicon) only cover
about 11.5% of lexical items of our sentiment lex-
icon. To evaluate the lexical items that are not
in the test sets, we randomly choose 100 items
(50 single and 50 two-character lexical items, both
with the equal positive/negative sentiment distri-
bution). They were manually checked by the first
author. We obtain an accuracy of 53% in this hard
evaluation setting.

4.2 Extrinsic Evaluation

We also carry out an extrinsic evaluation to judge
whether our sentiment lexicon can be utilized to
analyze sentiment orientation of classical Chinese

poetry. We choose 160 poems from the Tang po-
etry analysis dictionary (Xiao, 1999), which con-
tains around 1,000 Tang poems paired with pro-
fessional reviews. We manually annotate the sen-
timent of each poem as positive or negative ac-
cording to the reviewers’ analysis. This leads to
a dataset (sentiPoetry) containing 83 negative po-
ems and 77 positive poems. For each poem, we
predict its sentiment based on the accumulated
sentiment orientations of all lexical items (single
and two-character) in the poem. Specifically, a
poem is predicted as positive if its accumulated
sentiment orientation is bigger than a threshold t,
and negative otherwise. A subset of sentiPoetry
containing 30 positive poems and 30 negative po-
ems is used to tune the threshold t, the remain-
ing 100 poems are reserved as test data. Table 4
shows the accuracy of predicting poetry sentiment
on the test dataset using the sentiment lexicon for
contemporary Chinese described in Section 4.1,
as well as the two lexicons based on the baseline
(PMI) and our method (WPPR) respectively. Us-
ing our lexicon achieves an accuracy of 71% on
predicting poetry sentiment, which is 14% better
than using PMI Lexicon. It is obvious that the Out-
of-Domain lexicon (contemporarySenti Lexicon)
performs the worst because of its low coverage of
lexical items used in classical Chinese poetry. A
closer look at the results indicates that positive po-
ems are hard to predict because happy/joyful emo-
tions are often expressed in a very subtle, implicit
way.

Accuracy
contemporarySenti Lexicon 51.0
PMI Lexicon 57.0
WPPR Lexicon 71.0

Table 4: Results for poetry sentiment prediction.

5 Analyzing Sentiment in Tang Poetry

Poems are saturated with emotions that correlate
to positive or negative sentiment. But how are sen-
timents expressed in different topics? How does
sentiment differ between individual poets? We
aim to answer these questions in this section.

5.1 Sentiment-based Topic Distribution
Position-aware sentiment-topic model. Tradi-
tional topic models like latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) (Blei et al., 2003) have been explored ex-
tensively to discover topics from text. Recently,

19



LDA has been extended to capture correlations be-
tween sentiment and topic from textual data (Mei
et al., 2007; Titov and McDonald, 2008; Lin and
He, 2009; He et al., 2011; Lazaridou et al., 2013;
Li et al., 2013).

Here we modify a joint sentiment-topic model
(JST) (Lin and He, 2009) to extract topics asso-
ciated with positive/negative sentiment. Lin and
He (2009) assume that topics are generated depen-
dent on sentiment distributions and words are gen-
erated conditioned on the sentiment-topic pairs.
JST can detect sentiment and topics simultane-
ously by encoding word prior sentiment infor-
mation. However, words in the JST model are
position-unaware, i.e., words from the same sen-
tence/clause thus can have different topics or sen-
timents. We modify the JST model by assuming
that lexical items from the same couplet are gen-
erated conditioned on the same sentiment-topic
pairs. In Chinese poetry, a couplet is a pair of
lines which have the same length and express a
complete meaning. Lexical items within the same
couplet usually relate to the same topic and keep
the same polarity. Our position-aware JST model
is depicted in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Position-aware JST model.

Assume we have a corpus consisting of D doc-
uments; each document is a sequence of C cou-
plets and each word (lexical item) in the couplet
is an item from a vocabulary index with V distinct
terms; let S be the number of distinct sentiment la-
bels and T the total number of topics. The process
of generating a word w in document d under our
position-aware JST model is as follows:

• For each sentiment label l ∈ S and each topic
j ∈ T , draw ϕlj ∼ Dirichlet(λl × βTlj)

• For each document d,

– Draw the document’s sentiment distri-
bution πd ∼ Dirichlet(γ)

– For each sentiment label l, draw a topic
distribution θd,l ∼ Dirichlet(α)

– For each couplet,
1. choose a sentiment label li
∼Multinomial(πd)

2. choose a topic zi
∼Multinomial(θd,li)

3. generate words w ∼ ϕli,zi
Model Priors and hyperparameter settings.
We incorporate our sentiment lexicon (described
in Section 3) containing 4153 positive lexical
items and 4503 negative lexical items as prior
knowledge into the position-aware JST model.
Specifically, if w is found in the sentiment lexi-
con, then the element λlw = 1, and zero other-
wise. Following Lin and He (2009), we set the
symmetric β = 0.01, γ = (0.05× L)/S, where L
is the average document length, S is the total num-
ber of sentiment labels7. The asymmetric prior α
is learned from data.

Topics under different sentiment polarities.
We apply the position-aware sentiment-topic
model to the Complete Anthology of Tang Po-
etry. The corpus contains 42,862 poems written
by 2630 authors, with an average of 60 single char-
acters in each poem. We represent each poem as
couplets containing single and two-character lex-
ical items8. We conduct experiments on T =
15, 25, 50 respectively. Table 5 shows the topic ex-
amples extracted by the position-aware sentiment-
topic model with T = 25 under positive and nega-
tive sentiment labels respectively. The topics are
labeled manually according to the lexical items
found in them. Each topic is represented by the
top 15 lexical items. These topics reflect com-
mon themes associated with positive/negative sen-
timent in Tang poetry. Moreover, the sentiment-
topic distribution provides us with more insight on
different aspects of social life in that historical pe-
riod of China (AD 618 – 907).

For instance, poets wrote poems to praise the
beauty of women and flowers (topic PT0 and

7In our experiments, the value of γ is around 1.00. This
means that we do not assume any prior knowledge of the sen-
timent distribution of a poem and all possible sentiment dis-
tributions are equal.

8Similar to lexical network construction (Section 3.3), the
two-character lexical items should appear at least 50 times in
the whole corpus.

20



Positive Sentiment
Topics Lexical items
PT0: beautiful women 玉 (jade)金 (gold)红 (red)罗 (silk)香 (perfume)女 (women)翠 (green jade)歌 (song)

舞 (dance)楼 (building)画 (painting)珠 (pearl)眉 (eyebrow)双 (pair)锦 (brocade)
PT1: feast drinking 酒 (wine)醉 (drunk)歌 (song)杯 (cup)欢 (happy)殷勤 (attentive)客 (guest)对 (face to face)

饮 (drink)弦 (chord)乐 (happy)劝 (advise)酌 (drink)酣 (intoxicated)筵 (feast)
PT2: war victory 军 (military)旌 (banner)旗 (banner)马 (horse)将军 (general)天 (god)剑 (sword)骑 (ride)

弓 (bow)戎 (army)功 (achievement)旌旗 (banner)箭 (arrow)战 (battle)射 (shoot)
PT3: literary 诗 (poetry)文 (article)书 (letter)名 (reputation)题 (inscribe)句 (sentence)君 (gentleman)

字 (character)章 (chapter)才 (gift)篇 (article)咏 (sing)赋 (compose)笔 (pen)高 (high)
PT4: royal 德 (moral)神 (god)礼 (ritual)乐 (music)圣 (holy)灵 (spirit)明 (bright)万 (great number)
graciousness 惟 (only)肃 (pay respect)皇 (emperor)帝 (emperor)国 (country)功 (achievement)天 (god)
PT5: supernature 仙 (god)玉 (jade)丹 (vermilion)天 (god)神 (god)霞 (rosy clouds)紫 (violet)灵 (spirit)

龙 (dragon)烟 (mist)神仙 (god)瑶 (fairy)清 (clean)蓬 (fairyland)
PT6: Buddhism 香 (perfume)禅 (meditation)师 (master)心 (heart)世 (world)法 (dharma)清 (clean)

真 (truth)莲 (lotus)道 (Taoism)净 (clean)钟 (bell)界 (world)士 (scholar)佛 (buddhism)
PT7: traveling 楼 (building)高 (high)上 (go up)登 (climb)陵 (hill)游 (travel)州 (province)台 (terrace)

南 (south)长安 (place name)下 (go down)临 (overlook)佳 (beautiful)
浮云 (clouds)武陵 (place name)

PT8: flowers 香 (perfume)花 (flower)枝 (twig)露 (dew)芙蓉 (hibiscus)桃 (peach)光 (light)芳 (fragrant)
轻 (gentle)袅 (delicate)艳 (charming)团 (round)新 (fresh)翠 (green jade)兰 (orchid)

Negative Sentiment
Topics Lexical items
NT0: lovesickness 别 (farewell)离 (leave)惆怅 (melancholy)相思 (lovesick)忆 (memorize)望 (hope)

相逢 (meet)恨 (hate)送 (farewell)年 (year)君 (gentleman)梦 (dream)远 (remote)
归 (return)泪 (tears)

NT1: hardness of life 老 (old)病 (sickness)多 (many)无 (no)白 (gray)鬓 (temple hair)不 (no)吟 (sing)
愁 (anxious)衰 (feeble)贫(poor)白头 (old age)卧 (lie down)更 (more)难 (hard)

NT2: hardness of war 塞 (fortress)边 (border)城 (city)河 (river)胡 (barbarian)关 (barrier)征 (attack)风 (wind)
月 (moon)北 (north)战(battle)雪 (snow)虏 (captive)戍 (garrison)鼓 (drum)

NT3: traveling by boat 江 (river)水 (water)舟 (boat)湖 (lake)波 (wave)岸 (bank)浪 (wave)风 (wind)
沙 (sand)帆 (sail)孤(lonely)海 (sea)船 (boat)浦 (riverside)月 (moon)

NT4: homesickness 堪 (bear)断 (break)故 (home)落 (fall)乡 (home)凄 (sorrow)愁 (anxious)归 (return)
泪 (tears)路 (road)肠(intestine, often used to describe heartbroken)伤 (sad)悲 (sad)
涯 (shore)音 (news)

NT5: visiting monks 山 (mountain)僧 (monk)松 (pine)寺 (temple)石 (rock)林 (forest)深 (deep)泉 (fountain)
夜 (night)寒 (cold)寻(search)客 (guest)峰 (peak)云 (cloud)溪 (stream)

NT6: sad scenery 秋 (autumn)风 (wind)叶 (leaf)寒 (cold)雨 (rain)夕阳 (sunset)晚 (evening)水 (water)
暮 (twilight)霜 (frost)菊(chrysanthemum)蝉 (cicada)山 (mountain)落 (fall)凉 (cold)

NT7: sad scenery 雨 (rain)猿 (ape)峡 (gorge)啼 (cry)江 (river)云 (clouds)湘 (river name)楚 (place name)
山 (mountain)暮 (twilight)蹉跎(waste time)巫峡 (gorge name)云雨 (clouds and rain)
梦 (dream)巫山 (mountain name)

NT8: death and 死 (death)生 (birth)苦 (miserable)骨 (bone)悴 (sad)饥 (hungry)血 (blood)泥 (mud)
destruction 杀 (kill)枯 (withered)憔悴(thin and pallid)鬼 (ghost)恶 (evil)祸 (disaster)土 (dust)

Table 5: Examples of topics extracted by the position-aware sentiment-topic model.

PT8). They eulogized the Tang empire and were
proud of the country’s victory in war (topic PT4
and PT2). They enjoyed drinking at banquet (topic
PT1), admire others’ literary achievements (topic
PT3) and praised beautiful landscapes while trav-
eling (topic PT7). In addition, it seems that Bud-
dhism and supernatural beings are the favored top-
ics of poetry in the Tang Dynasty (topic PT6 and
PT5). This might reflect that Buddhism was at its
peak in the Tang Dynasty and many poets were
devout Buddhists.

On the other hand, poets felt sad for women

who separated with their loved ones (topic NT0).
They were angry for death and destruction caused
by tyranny and turmoil (topic NT8). Poets were
tired of war (topic NT2) and they were homesick
while traveling alone (topic NT3 and NT4).

It is worth noticing that some topics are asso-
ciated with both positive and negative sentiment.
For instance, poets were happy about the vic-
tory of war (topic PT2). At the same time, they
were sad about the destruction/pain caused by war
(topic NT2), i.e., soldiers were forced to leave
their homelands and loved ones. Also, traveling

21



could involve both sentiments: poets praised the
beauty of nature (PT7); but they also felt lonely
while traveling alone (NT3, NT4). Specifically,
some scenes during traveling become common im-
ageries/symbols which imply sad emotions, such
as things related to water (i.e.,江 (river),舟 (boat),
湖 (lake), 波 (wave), 岸 (bank), 帆 (sail), 浪
(wave),浦 (riverside) in topic NT3), or猿 (ape) in
topic NT7. This also reflects that poets liked trav-
eling and that traveling by boat was popular in the
Tang Dynasty.

5.2 Sentiment of Different Poets

In order to analyze how sentiment differs among
poets, we choose four famous poets from the Tang
dynasty: 李白 (Li Bai), 杜甫 (Du Fu), 王维
(Wang Wei), and白居易 (Bai Juyi).

Li Bai enjoys the title of the “Supernatural Be-
ing of Poem”. His works are full of passion, imag-
ination and elegance. Du Fu, known as the “Poet
Sage”, is known for his anti-war stance and con-
cerns for the poor. Wang Wei, the poet of land-
scape, has written lots of elegant and exquisite po-
ems. Bai Juyi has been known for his plain and
easily comprehensible style of poem, and for his
social and political criticism. Table 6 lists the po-
ets’ lifetimes and the number of their poems col-
lected in the Complete Anthology of Tang Poetry.

Poet Lifetime Number of Poems
李白 (Li Bai) 701 – 762 891
杜甫 (Du Fu) 712 – 770 1,151
王维 (Wang Wei) 701 – 761 350
白居易 (Bai Juyi) 772 – 846 2,640

Table 6: Number of poems by chosen poets.

On the basis of our sentiment lexicon, we pre-
dict the sentiment orientation of each poem using
the method described in Section 4.2 with threshold
t = 09. We then compare the percentage of poems
with different sentiment for each poet.

Figure 2 shows that the percentage of positive
poems written by Li Bai is the highest among
our four poets, whereas the percentage of nega-
tive poems written by Du Fu is the highest10. It

9We could also use our position-aware sentiment-topic
model to predict the sentiment orientation of each poem.
However, for the task of predicting sentiment orientation of
poems, we found that the position-aware JST model does not
perform as well as our simple method described in Section
4.2 on the same test dataset.

10We find that the comparison under different value of t
keeps the same pattern as shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Sentiment of different poets.

seems that Du Fu expressed sad emotions more
frequently in his poems. This may relate to his
frustrating experiences. He aspired a career as
a civil servant, but his failure in the examination
put an end to his chances to have an official ca-
reer. During the period of political turmoil, Du Fu
fled to the capital. But he was captured and then
wandered as a refugee. Most of Du Fu’s life was
spent in poverty. One of his sons even died from
starvation because of the family’s poverty. Du Fu
wrote several poems to express his deep sadness
for his son’s death. It is worth noting that although
Bai Juyi has been known for his critical political
poems, he also wrote a great amount of poems
expressing leisurely and comfortable mood, espe-
cially in his late years.

6 Conclusions

We propose a novel graph-based method to build
a sentiment lexicon for classical Chinese poetry.
Our approach is weakly supervised and outper-
forms a previous PMI-based approach (Turney and
Littman, 2003) in different evaluation settings. On
the basis of our sentiment lexicon, we analyze sen-
timent in Tang poetry from different perspectives:
which topics are associated with positive and neg-
ative sentiment, and how sentiment is distributed
among different poets. Our analysis results are in
line with the main findings established in classical
Chinese literary studies.

The work presented in this paper provides a
quantitative means to study sentiment in classi-
cal Chinese poetry. We hope it can benefit other
research topics, such as poetry generation (He et
al., 2012; Zhang and Lapata, 2014) and poetry im-
agery/style analysis (Fang et al., 2009).

22



References
Eneko Agirre and Aitor Soroa. 2009. Personalizing

PageRank for word sense disambiguation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Athens, Greece, 30 March – 3 April 2009,
pages 33–41.

Stefano Baccianella, Andrea Esuli, and Fabrizio Sebas-
tiani. 2010. SentWordNet 3.0: An enhanced lexical
resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining.
In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation, La Valetta,
Malta, 17–23 May 2010, pages 2200–2204.

David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 3(1):993–1022.

Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. 1998. The
anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web search
engine. Computer Networks and ISDN Systems,
30(1–7):107–117.

Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2005. Deter-
mining the semantic orientation of terms through
gloss analysis. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR
Conference on Information and Knowledge Man-
agement (CIKM).

Alex Chengyu Fang, Fengju Lo, and Cheuk Kit Chinn.
2009. Adapting NLP and corpus analysis techniques
to structured imagery analysis in classical Chinese
poetry. In Proceedings of the RANLP 2009 Work-
shop on Adaptation of Language Resources and
Technology to New Domains, Borovets, Bulgaria, 14
June 2013, pages 27–34.

Ahmed Hassan, Amjad Abu-Jbara, Rahul Jha, and
Dragomir Radev. 2011. Identifying the seman-
tic orientation of foreign words. In Proceedings of
the ACL 2011 Conference Short Papers, Portland,
Oreg., 19–24 June 2011, pages 592–597.

Taher H. Haveliwala. 2002. Topic-sensitive PageR-
ank. In Proceedings of the 1th World Wide Web Con-
ference, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, 7–11 May 2002,
pages 517–526.

Yulan He, Harith Alani, and Deyu Zhou. 2010. Ex-
ploring English lexicon knowledge for chinese sen-
timent analysis. In CIPS-SIGHAN Joint Conference
on Chinese Language Processing. Beijing, China,
28-29 August 2010, pages 121–128.

Yulan He, Chengua Lin, and Harith Alani. 2011.
Automatically extracting polarity-bearing topics for
cross-domain sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Portland, Oreg., 19–24 June
2011, pages 123–131.

Jing He, Ming Zhou, and Long Jiang. 2012. Gen-
erating chinese classical poems with statistical ma-
chine translation models. In Proceedings of the 26th

Conference on the Advancement of Artificial Intel-
ligence, Toronto, Canada, 22–26 July 2012, page
1650–1656.

Junfeng Hu. 2001. The Lexicon Meaning Analysis-
based Computer Aided Research Work of Chinese
Ancient Poems. Ph.D. thesis, Peking University.
Published by Graduate Linguistics Student Organ-
isation.

Nobuhiro Kaji and Masaru Kitsuregawa. 2007. Build-
ing lexicon for sentiment analysis from massive col-
lection of HTML documents. In Proceedings of
the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Language Learning, Prague, Czech Republic, 28–30
June 2007, pages 1075–1083.

Jaap Kamps, Maarten Marx, Robert J. Mokken, and
Maarten de Rijke. 2004. Using WordNet to measure
semantic orientation of adjectives. In Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, Lisbon, Portugal, 26–28
May 2004, pages 1115–1118.

Hiroshi Kanayama and Tetsuya Nasukawa. 2006.
Fully automatic lexicon expansion for domain-
oriented sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the
2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, Sydney, Australia, 22–23
July 2006, pages 355–363.

Yu-kung Kao and Tsu-lin Mei. 1971. Syntax, diction,
and imagery in T’ang poetry. Harvard Journal of
Asiatic Studies, 31(2):49–136.

Yu-kung Kao and Tsu-lin Mei. 1978. Meaning,
metaphor, and allusion in T’ang poetry. Harvard
Journal of Asiatic Studies, 38(2):281–355.

Svetlana Kiritchenko, Xiaodan Zhu, and Sarif Moham-
mad. 2014. Sentiment analysis of short informal
texts. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
50(1):723–762.

Lun-Wei Ku, Yu-Ting Liang, and Hsin-Hsi Chen.
2006. Tagging heterogeneous evaluation corpora
for opinionated tasks. In Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, Genoa, Italy, 22–28 May 2006, pages
667–670.

Angeliki Lazaridou, Ivan Titov, and Caroline
Sporleder. 2013. A Bayesian model for joint
unsupervised induction of sentiment, aspect and
discourse representations. In Proceedings of the
51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4–9 August
2013, pages 1630–1639.

John Lee and Yin Hei Kong. 2012. A dependency
treebank of classical chinese poems. In Proceed-
ings of the 2012 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Montréal,
Québec, Canada, 3–8 June 2012, pages 191–199.

23



John Lee and WONG Tak-sum. 2012. Glimpses
of ancient china from classical chinese poems. In
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, Mumbai, India, 8–15
December 2012, pages 621–632.

Chiwei Li, Myle Ott, and Claire Cardie. 2013. Iden-
tifying manipulated offerings on review portals. In
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, Seattle,
Wash., 18–21 October 2013, pages 1933–1942.

Chenghua Lin and Yulan He. 2009. Joint senti-
ment/topic model for sentiment analysis. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACM 18th Conference on Infor-
mation and Knowledge Management (CIKM 2009),
Hong Kong, 2–6 November 2009, pages 375–387.

Fengzhu Luo. 2009. The application of affective
and semantics computing in literature and history re-
search. Literature Heritage, 1(1):138–141.

Qiaozhu Mei, Xu Ling, Matthew Wondra, Hang Su,
and ChengXiang Zhai. 2007. Topic sentiment mix-
ture: Modeling facets and opinions in weblogs. In
Proceedings of the 16th World Wide Web Confer-
ence, Banff, Canada, 8–12 May, 2007, pages 171–
180.

Saif Mohammad, Cody Dunne, and Bonnie Dorr.
2009. Generating high-coverage semantic orienta-
tion lexicons from overtly marked words and a the-
saurus. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, Singapore, 6–7 August 2009, pages 599–608.

Delip Rao and Deepa avichandran. 2009. Semi-
supervised polarity lexicon induction. In Proceed-
ings of the 12th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Athens, Greece, 30 March – 3 April 2009, pages
675–682.

Hiroya Takamura, Takashi Inui, and Manabu Okumura.
2005. Extracting semantic orientation of words us-
ing spin model. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Ann Arbor, Mich., 25–30 June 2005, pages
133–140.

Ivan Titov and Ryan McDonald. 2008. A joint model
of text and aspect ratings for sentiment summariza-
tion. In Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, Columbus, Ohio, 15–
20 June 2008, pages 308–316.

Peter D. Turney and Michael L. Littman. 2003. Mea-
suring praise and criticism: Inference of semantic
orientation from association. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems (TOIS), 21(4):315–346.

Rob Voigt and Dan Jurafsky. 2013. Tradition and
modernity in 20th century Chinese poetry. In Pro-
ceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2013 Workshop on
Computational Linguistics for Literature, Atlanta,
USA, 14 June 2013, pages 1–6.

Xiaojun Wan. 2008. Using bilingual knowledge and
ensemble techniques for unsupervised Chinese sen-
timent analysis. In Proceedings of the 2008 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, Waikiki, Honolulu, Hawaii, 25–27 Oc-
tober 2008, pages 553–561.

Xiaojun Wan. 2009. Co-training for cross-lingual
sentiment classification. In Proceedings of the
Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 4th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing, Singapore, 2–7 August 2009,
pages 235–243.

Burton Watson. 1971. Chinese Lyricism: Shih Poetry
from the Second to the Twelfth Century. New York:
Columbia University Press.

Scott White and Padhraic Smyth. 2003. Algorithms
for estimating relative importance in networks. In
Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGKDD Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Wash-
ington DC, USA, 24–27 August 2004, pages 266–
275.

Difei Xiao, editor. 1999. Tang Poetry analysis dictio-
nary. Shanghai Lexicographical Publishing House,
Shanghai, China.

Wenpu Xing and Ali Ghorbani. 2004. Weighted
PageRank algorithm. In Proceedings of the Second
Annual Conference on Communication Networks
and Services Research, Fredericton, N.B., Canada,
19-21 May 2004, pages 305–314.

Taras Zagibalov and John Carroll. 2008. Automatic
seed word selection for unsupervised sentiment clas-
sification of Chinese text. In Proceedings of the
22nd International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, Manchester, U.K., 18–22 August 2008,
pages 1073–1080.

Xingxing Zhang and Mirella Lapata. 2014. Chinese
poetry generation with recurrent neural networks.
In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, Doha,
Qatar, 25–29 October 2014, pages 670–680.

Chang-Le Zhou, Wei You, and Xiao-Jun Ding. 2010.
Genetic algorithm and its implementation of auto-
matic generation of Chinese SONGCI. Journal of
Software, 21(3):427–437.

24


