



















































Linking Four Heterogeneous Language Resources as Linked Data


Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics (LDL-2015), pages 59–63,
Beijing, China, July 31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics and Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing

Linking four heterogeneous language resources as linked data

Benjamin Siemoneit, John P. McCrae, Philipp Cimiano
Cognitive Interaction Technology, Center of Excellence, Bielefeld University

Bielefeld, Germany
bsiemone@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de

{jmccrae,cimiano}@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de

Abstract

The interest in publishing language re-
sources as linked data is increasing, as
clearly corroborated by the recent growth
of the Linguistic Linked Data cloud. How-
ever, the actual value of data published
as linked data is the fact that it is linked
across datasets, supporting integration and
discovery of data. As the manual creation
of links between datasets is costly and
therefore does not scale well, automatic
linking approaches are of great importance
to increase the quality and degree of link-
ing of the Linguistic Linked Data cloud.
In this paper we examine an automatic ap-
proach to link four different datasets to
each other: two terminologies, the Euro-
pean Migration Network (EMN) glossary
as well as the Interactive Terminology for
Europe (IATE), BabelNet, and the Manu-
ally Annotated Subcorpus (MASC) of the
American National Corpus. We describe
our methodology, present some results on
the quality of the links and summarize
our experiences with this small linking
exercise We will make sure that the re-
sources are added to the linguistic linked
data cloud.

1 Introduction

Linked data has recently become a popular ap-
proach to publishing language resources on the
Web. It has been argued (Chiarcos et al., 2013)
that the linked data approach applied to language
resources has important advantages, most notably
its ability to break the limitations of classical re-
source types and to foster integration of data by
linking data across resources.

As the manual creation of links between
datasets is costly and therefore does not scale well,

automatic linking approaches are of great impor-
tance to increase the quality and degree of linking
of the Linguistic Linked Data cloud. In this paper
we describe the results of a small project attempt-
ing to link four datasets of different types (two
terminologies, one lexico-conceptual resource and
one corpus). As terminological resources, we
have considered the Glossary of the European Mi-
gration Network (EMN)1 as well as the Interac-
tive Terminology for Europe (IATE) 2. They are
both represented using the lemon model (McCrae
et al., 2012). As lexico-conceptual resource we
rely on BabelNet (Navigli and Ponzetto, 2012),
which has been previously migrated into Linked
Data (Ehrmann et al., 2014). As corpus we use
the Manually Annotated Subcorpus (MASC) of
the American National Corpus (Ide et al., 2008),
which contains disambiguated links to BabelNet.

We describe how the datasets have been mi-
grated to RDF and describe our methodology for
linking the datasets at the lexical entry level and
present a sampled evaluation of the quality of the
induced links. We first use a simple technique
based on strict matching of the canonical form
of lexical entries in different resources. By this
we then link the EMN to both IATE and Babel-
Net. MASC has been previously linked to Babel-
Net and we included these links into our version
of MASC.

The paper is structured as follows: in the next
Section 2 we briefly describe the models that
have been used to represented the data as Linked
Data. Section 3 describes how the datasets have
been converted into RDF. Section 4 describes our
methodology for linking and presents a sampled
evaluation of the quality of the automatically in-
duced links.

1http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/home-affairs/
what-we-do/networks/european_migration_
network/glossary/index_a_en.htm

2http://iate.europa.eu/

59



2 Models

We used two models to represent the datasets
presented in this paper. The terminologies and
dictionaries have been represented in RDF us-
ing the lemon model (Lexicon Model for Ontolo-
gies) (McCrae et al., 2012), which has been de-
signed to represent lexical information relative to
ontologies and other semantic structures such as
terminologies. For the MASC corpus we used the
NLP Interchange Format (NIF) (Hellmann et al.,
2013), a stand-off annotation format for the rep-
resentation of annotations of text for NLP appli-
cations. We briefly describe these models in the
following:

2.1 Lemon-OntoLex
The lemon (Lexicon Model for Ontologies) was
proposed by McCrae et al. (McCrae et al., 2012)
as a model for the representation of lexical in-
formation and has more recently been as a basis
for the standardization work of the W3C Com-
munity Group on Ontology-Lexica.3 The model
revolves around the key concept of a lexical en-
try, which consists of a number of forms (e.g.,
‘plural form’), having different written or pho-
netic representations. The meaning of the lexical
entry is specified by reference to some ontologi-
cal concept. This relation is mediated by a lex-
ical sense. In the case of the terminological re-
sources EMN and IATE we model each termino-
logical concept as a skos:Concept and model
each term as a lexical entry that has the corre-
sponding skos:Concept as reference.

2.2 NIF
Modelling corpus data such as MASC requires
that we are capable of representing the annota-
tions of this data in a compact and effective man-
ner. The NLP Interchange Format (NIF) sup-
ports the annotation of text by using stand-off an-
notations represented as RDF. For this, it reifies
strings in the document as RDF resources that
refer to a specific character offset. For exam-
ple, the URI http://www.example.com/
document.txt#char=3,7 would refer to the
word occurring in the document which can be
found at the path and server given in the URI,
the fragment identifier follows RFC 5417 (Wilde,
2008) and identifies the word between the 3rd and
7th character. This annotation object can then be

3http://www.w3.org/community/ontolex

Resource Size Triples

IATE 8,081,142 terms 74,023,248
EMN 8,855 terms 106,283
MASC 506,768 words 8,650,723

Table 1: Size of the resources described in this pa-
per without linking annotations.

further annotated with properties from NIF such as
the start and end index (to enable direct querying)
or annotations from other schemas suitable for this
corpus.

3 Transformation to Linked Data

In this section we describe the transformation of
the different datasets to RDF. The sizes of the re-
sulting resources are given in Table 1 and are avail-
able for download at:

IATE http://tbx2rdf.lider-project.eu/
data/iate/

EMN http://data.lider-project.eu/emn/

MASC http://data.lider-project.eu/
MASC-NIF/

BabelNet http://babelnet.org/rdf/

The original data resources were primarily
available as XML documents and thus conversion
was for the most part the straightforward task of
matching elements in an XML scheme to a appro-
priate RDF constructs. This was done by means
of developing converters that parsed the XML and
generated appropriate RDF. We will describe the
details of the mapping in the next sections.

3.1 Transformation of EMN
The EMN glossary consists of 388 entries related
to asylum and migration. Each entry is comprised
of an English term with translations into 22 EU
languages, a concept definition, semantic relations
to other entries, explanatory comments and the
source of the definition. We extracted the glossary
from the HTML and converted it into linked data
he lemon model.
A lemon Lexicon was created for each lan-
guage. Then, for each EMN entry and for each
of the available translations, a LexicalEntry
was added to the respective Lexicon.
In lemon, LexicalSense objects are used for
mapping terms to ontological entities. Although
EMN entries are not RDF resources, we attached

60



the URL of the respective entry as ontological ref-
erence to each sense.
The terms in EMN are not directly lemmas and
so in order to incorporate them in a lexicon such
as lemon we performed some preprocessing steps
in order to obtain proper lexical entries: All addi-
tional information given in brackets or separated
by special characters have been removed. The re-
sulting strings were added as LexicalForm to
their corresponding LexicalEntry objects.

3.2 Transformation of MASC
MASC contains 500K words of written and tran-
scribed spoken language. Annotations for a vari-
ety of phenomena including BabelNet synset an-
notations are available in the Graph Annotation
Format (GrAF) (Ide and Suderman, 2007). GrAF
defines an XML serialization of graphs contain-
ing linguistic annotations. Graphs can, for exam-
ple, be used to model the syntactic structure of the
data, with nodes representing sentences, phrases
etc. Leaf nodes refer to tokens in the primary data.
Annotations can be attached to nodes and edges as
feature structures.
In order to convert the corpus to NIF we
first created a nif:Context for each primary
data document. Nodes were then mapped to
nif:String objects with normal RDF proper-
ties for a) a reference to the respective context ob-
ject, b) the start and end indices of the chunk, c)
the string representation of the chunk and d) all
feature-value-pairs attached to the node.

3.3 Transformation of IATE
The IATE terminology is published using the
TermBase Exchange (TBX, ISO 30042). We
used the converter available under 4 to convert
the IATE terminology into lemon-based RDF. As
for EMN, terminological concepts were mapped
to skos:Concepts and terms were mapped to
lexical entries referring to the corresponding con-
cept. In the IATE dataset, each concept has a re-
liability code and subject field, which were also
represented as RDF. The language codes of terms
were mapped to LexVo (de Melo, 2015) URIs.

4 Linking

4.1 Linking EMN to IATE
Concepts in the EMN datasets were linked to con-
cepts in IATE by matching the written represen-

4https://github/cimiano/tbx2rdf

Resources Number oflinks
Percentage

of EMN Precision

EMN-
BabelNet

1,347 15% 69%

EMN-IATE
(all matches)

3,082 35% 93%

EMN-IATE
(best matches)

2,038 23% 94%

Table 2: Number of links between resources and
precision of mapping.

tation of the corresponding lexical entries in dif-
ferent languages. The number of languages for
which the lexical entries for a given concept match
was regarded as an indicator of the quality of the
match, that is the more languages yield a match,
the higher the quality of the induced link was ex-
pected to be.

In particular, EMN concepts were linked to
IATE concepts by searching for string matches
between corresponding EMN lexical entries and
IATE lexical entries in multiple languages. In or-
der to improve recall, we used Snowball stem-
ming5 for the eleven supported EU languages and
transformed all strings to lowercase. The search
was limited to IATE concepts associated with mi-
gration (subject field 2811).
Multiple IATE concepts can match a single EMN
concept. In order to decide between candidate
matches, we counted the number of languages for
which each match holds and used this count as a
measure for match plausibility (see Figure 1). We
induced 3,028 links between EMN and IATE by
considering all possible matches. Only consider-
ing the best match for each EMN concept resulted
in 2,038 links (compare Table 2).

4.2 Linking EMN to BabelNet

EMN concepts were linked to BabelNet by using
the Babelfy (Moro et al., 2014) named entity link-
ing service. Invoking the Babelfy disambiguation
algorithm on the written representation of the
lexical entries, we extracted all the synsets that
Babelfy annotated the written representation with
and considered only those annotations consisting
of exactly one synset. A precision of 69% was
determined by manually comparing concept
definitions for a sample of 100 matches.

5http://snowball.tartarus.org/

61



Resources Number oflinks

IATE-EMN-BabelNet 700
EMN-BabelNet-MASC 37,405
IATE-EMN-BabelNet-MASC 7,794

Table 3: Number of transitive links added to re-
sources.

On the basis of the existing linking between
MASC and BabelNet and the above mentioned in-
duced links between EMN and IATE (3,028, see
Table 2) as well as between EMN and Babel-
Net (1,347, see Table 2), by transitive closure we
were able to induce 700 links between IATE and
BabelNet (via EMN as pivot), 37,405 links be-
tween EMN and MASC (via BabelNet as pivot)
and 7,794 between IATE and MASC (via Babel-
Net and EMN as pivots). The results are summa-
rized in Table 3.
To give an example, the EMN term ‘visa’ was
linked to the matching term associated with
IATE concept 3556819 and to BabelNet synset
bn:00080087n, which in turn had been used to an-
notate 15 different tokens in MASC.

4.3 Linking precision

We evaluated the linking precision by manually
evaluating a sample of 100 generated links. Preci-
sion of the linking is defined as the number of cor-
rectly created links divided by the number of gen-
erated links. Precision was determined by manu-
ally comparing terms, definitions and sources for
a sample of matches: a link was judged as correct
if the concepts share the same source or if their
definitions don’t contradict and there is no better
matching concept.

The precision of the linking is shown in Table
2. The precision of linking EMN to IATE is quite
high, which is due to the fact that they are termi-
nologies and typically only contain one sense or
meaning for a certain term / lexical entry. In con-
trast, BabelNet contains many possible senses for
each lexical entry, so that the right sense among
all the candidate senses needs to be found and this
leads to errors.

We evaluated the precision of the induced links
in dependence of the number of languages for
which the written representations match. This
analysis is shown in Figure 1. We observe that
there is a clear improvement when considering

1-5 6-10 11-15 16-20
80

85

90

95

82

95
97

96

Pr
ec

is
io

n

Figure 1: Precision of linking by number of lan-
guages matching for EMN-IATE mapping.

links induced when the written representations for
more than 5 languages match.

Finally, we evaluated the transitive linking and
the results are presented in Table 3, we found that
the two chains using one intermediate resource
still maintained a large percentage of the links, as
52% of links from BabelNet to EMN could then be
further extended to IATE. Furthermore, even using
two intermediate resources still returned a useful
number of links.

5 Conclusion

In this paper we have presented an experience re-
port summarizing our experiences in developing
an automatic approach to link four different lan-
guage resources to each other. We have described
a methodology that induces a link if the written
representations of the lexical entries of the cor-
responding concepts match for a number of lan-
guages. We have shown that results are gener-
ally accurate, in particular when inducing links
between terminologies. Further, the precision in-
creases the more languages we require to have
a match. Future work should be devoted to im-
proving our methodology to increase both preci-
sion and recall of the generated links and thus re-
duce manual post-processing effort. Further, new
methodologies for involving humans in the cura-
tion and validation of such links must be devel-
oped.

Acknowledgments

This work was funded under LIDER (”Linked
Data as an enabler of cross-media and multilin-

62



gual content analytics for enterprises across Eu-
rope”), an FP7 project refererence number 610782
in the topic ICT-2013.4.1: Content analytics and
language technologies. This work was also funded
as part of the Cluster of Excellence Cognitive In-
teraction Technology ’CITEC’ (EXC 277), Biele-
feld University.

References
Christian Chiarcos, John McCrae, Philipp Cimiano,

and Christiane Fellbaum. 2013. Towards open data
for linguistics: Lexical linked data. In New Trends
of Research in Ontologies and Lexical Resources,
pages 7–25. Springer.

Gerard de Melo. 2015. Lexvo. org: Language-related
information for the linguistic linked data cloud. Se-
mantic Web, 6(4).

Maud Ehrmann, Francesco Cecconi, Daniele Vannella,
John P. McCrae, Philipp Cimiano, and Roberto Nav-
igli. 2014. Representing multilingual data as linked
data: the case of BabelNet 2.0. In In Proceedings
of the Ninth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, volume 14, pages 401–
408.

Sebastian Hellmann, Jens Lehmann, Sören Auer, and
Martin Brümmer. 2013. Integrating NLP using
linked data. In Proceedings of the 12th International
Semantic Web Conference, pages 98–113.

Nancy Ide and Keith Suderman. 2007. GrAF: A graph-
based format for linguistic annotations. In Proceed-
ings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages
1–8.

Nancy Ide, Collin Baker, Christiane Fellbaum, and
Charles Fillmore. 2008. MASC: The manually an-
notated sub-corpus of American English. In In Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation.

John McCrae, Guadalupe Aguado-de Cea, Paul Buite-
laar, Philipp Cimiano, Thierry Declerck, Asunción
Gómez-Pérez, Jorge Gracia, Laura Hollink, Elena
Montiel-Ponsoda, Dennis Spohr, et al. 2012. In-
terchanging lexical resources on the Semantic Web.
Language Resources and Evaluation, 46(4):701–
719.

Andrea Moro, Alessandro Raganato, and Roberto Nav-
igli. 2014. Entity linking meets word sense disam-
biguation: A unified approach. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2:231–
244.

Roberto Navigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2012.
Babelnet: The automatic construction, evaluation
and application of a wide-coverage multilingual se-
mantic network. Artificial Intelligence, 193:217–
250.

E. Wilde. 2008. URI fragment identifiers for text/plain
media types. Technical report, Internet Engineering
Task Force. RFC 5147.

63


