



















































RDF Representation of Licenses for Language Resources


Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics (LDL-2015), pages 49–58,
Beijing, China, July 31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics and Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing

Digital Representation of Rights for Language Resources

Victor Rodriguez-Doncel
Ontology Engineering Group

Universidad Politécnica de Madrid
vrodriguez@delicias.dia.upm.es

Penny Labropoulou
Institute for Language and Speech Processing

Athena RC - Athens
penny@ilsp.athena-innovation.gr

Abstract

Language resources are very often valu-
able assets which are offered to the pub-
lic under the terms of licenses that deter-
mine which uses are allowed and under
which circumstances. These licenses have
been typically published as natural lan-
guage texts whose specific contents cannot
be easily processed by a computer. This
paper proposes a structured representation
for the most commonly used licenses for
language resources, reusing existing vo-
cabularies and extending the Open Digital
Rights Language core model. Examples
and guidelines to use the ‘Rights Informa-
tion for Language Resources’ vocabulary
are given.

1 Introduction

Computational Linguistics started some 50 years
ago studying natural language from a computa-
tional perspective. The need for Language Re-
sources (LRs), such as lexica, thesauri, terminolo-
gies and corpora, was soon appreciated. At first,
LRs producers created them mainly for their own
use; however it was soon clear that LRs with
a minimum size and quality, as those required
for the advancement of Computational Linguistics
and related disciplines could only live in a shar-
ing paradigm, with LRs being created, distributed,
used, re-used, extended and enriched in a shared
environment.

LRs were offered to other users, following vari-
ous distribution models: some LR producers pub-
lishing and promoting their resources themselves,
either through their institutional sites or through
sites dedicated to particular LRs, other producers
forming alliances together with other interested
parties in order to distribute but also to create new

resources (e.g. LDC1) or passing on the distribu-
tion of their resources to dedicated agencies (e.g.
ELRA/ELDA2, TST-Centrale3) etc. The major-
ity of LRs were offered for research and educa-
tional purposes, at no cost or for a minimal fee,
especially when produced by public funding. The
situation, however, changed mainly as the devel-
opment of Language Technology led to the ap-
pearance of profitable business, which also led to
the realization that LRs could also be a source of
profit. As a consequence, some of the LR publish-
ers have opted to market their LRs (or the rights
thereof), thus making licensing an indispensable
aspect in the distribution of LRs.

When discussing about licensing of LRs, two
are the main dimensions that need to be taken into
account: (a) the license itself, either in the form
of a proper legal document, or some loosely ex-
pressed legal notice, (b) the clear indication of the
licensing terms on the LR, in the form of free text
or conventional metadata.

One of the priorities set by the FLARENET
Strategic Research Agenda (Soria et al., 2014) is
the availability of LRs “within an adequate IPR4

and legal framework”. The recommendations in-
clude the elaboration of “specific, simple and har-
monised licensing solutions for data resources”,
taking into account licensing schemes already in
use and simplifying them through broad-based so-
lutions for both R & D and industry, and the adop-
tion of electronic licensing and adaptation of cur-
rent distribution models to new media (web, mo-
bile devices etc.).

The digital formulation of rights and the stan-
dardisation of the licensing vocabulary have a
number of advantages such as:

• improvement of the understanding of the li-
1https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/
2http://www.elra.info/en/
3http://tst-centrale.org/nl/home
4IPR: Intellectual Property Rights

49



censing terms by human users: although li-
censes are natural language texts, the legal
jargon is quite complicated and not easily
understood by newcomers. A harmonised
vocabulary for licensing terms favours uni-
versal understanding of their precise mean-
ing; moreover, the non-flat structure of digi-
tal rights information also favours the under-
standing of the different modalities (e.g. ‘free
if used for research’, but ‘non-free if used for
commercial purposes’)

• processing of the licensing terms by ma-
chines; this is extremely important in a re-
use scenario of LRs, whereby they can be au-
tomatically processed by web services, com-
bined with other LRs, extended and enriched:
only LRs that allow such actions should be
involved in these activities; and this can only
be asserted if rights are expressed in a way
understood by machines

• enhancement of the discovery of LRs that
allow/forbid particular conditions of use
through filtered browsing of LR catalogs
based on criteria such as “license”, “condi-
tions of use” and “access rights”

• better management of the LRs by publishers,
who have a clearer account on which rights
have been granted to which resources.

Among the digital structures for representing
the rights information, RDF is the one which best
favours interoperability. The emergence of the
Linked Data paradigm as a manner of publishing
LRs on the web urged the publication of licensing
information as Linked Data as well. This paper de-
scribes a language for expressing rights informa-
tion for LRs as RDF, starting by the groundings in
Section 2 (reviewing the existent practice and the
requirements collected), continuing with the on-
tology in Section 3 and finalizing with examples
and conclusions in Section 4 and 5 respectively.

2 Motivation for a common model

2.1 Rights information in LR repositories

LRs are in general considered intellectual property
works, and as such they are protected by copy-
right laws: they should not be used in violation
of the terms set by the rights holders. The terms
of use declare the actions that are authorized (e.g.

whether they allow derivation, redistribution) and
the applicable conditions (e.g. whether they re-
quire attribution, payment of a fee). The terms
are included in the documentation of most LRs,
but their automatic retrieval and processing is dif-
ficult because of the many forms they adopt: rights
information may appear either as a textual notice
or as structured metadata elements, it may consist
of a mere reference to a well-known license (like
an Open Data Commons or Creative Commons li-
cense), or it may point to a license drafted in a non-
English language to be used solely for the specific
resource. These heterogeneous practices prevent
the automated processing of rights information.

Recently, we witness the proliferation of repos-
itories collecting LRs and their metadata descrip-
tions from various communities and sources ac-
cording to different harvesting methodologies, and
publishing them into homogeneous catalogs. The
most relevant initiatives for our discussion are:
META-SHARE5 (Piperidis, 2012), CLARIN6,
LRE-Map7 (Calzolari et al., 2012), OLAC8 (Si-
mons and Bird, 2003) and Datahub.io9.

Taking a closer look at the rights metadata
present in these catalogs, we see the following ten-
dencies:

• catalogs where the rights information is
loosely represented as a free text metadata el-
ement: this is mainly the case for portals har-
vesting from various sources, such as OLAC,
the LRE Map and the CLARIN Virtual Lan-
guage Observatory (VLO10); the reason for
this is the fact that the sources do not oblige
the depositors to document the access rights
and/or allow them to use natural language
statements for that (e.g. “free for research”,
“available at resource owner’s site”, “Public
domain resource” etc.); this is also due to
the fact that they include resources whose li-
censes are not available over the internet (e.g.
resources from older times, when licenses
were not standardised and providers asked le-
gal experts to draft specific contracts for each
resource, which were made available only to
interested parties upon request); for the LRE
Map, this practice has been dictated by the

5http://www.meta-share.eu
6http://www.clarin.eu
7http://www.resourcebook.eu
8http://www.language-archives.org/
9http://www.datahub.io

10http://catalog.clarin.eu/vlo

50



fact that the metadata are submitted by au-
thors of papers in conferences (e.g. LREC)
describing the resources connected to their
publication, which may still be under con-
struction and/or not yet be available for distri-
bution with specific licenses, so they simply
indicate their intentions;

• catalogs where the rigths information is rep-
resented with a controlled vocabulary of val-
ues referring to standard licenses; this is the
case of META-SHARE and partly Datahub
and the CLARIN network repositories; in
the case of Datahub, when registering a new
dataset, providers can choose a license from
a list, but also licensing information can be
found in the VoID description of the dataset
or even within the dataset itself. In META-
SHARE, the provider is also forced to se-
lect for the license element among a con-
trolled list of values corresponding to recom-
mended standard licenses11; this element (as
described in the following section) is part of
a more complicated set of metadata elements
describing the distribution conditions of the
LR. In the case of CLARIN, there is a set
of recommended licenses that LR providers
are asked to use when depositing their re-
sources in the repositories of the infrastruc-
ture, but legacy data can of course come
with their own licenses; to help users under-
stand the access rights, licenses are classi-
fied to one of three categories: those that can
be publicly distributed (PUB), those permit-
ting only academic use, i.e. use for research
and educational purposes and which require
user authentication, i.e. that users’ identity is
known (ACA) and those which impose addi-
tional restrictions or whose use requires ad-
ditional consent from the rightsholder (RES);
the use of easy-to-understand icons and sym-
bols (e.g. a money icon for resources dis-
tributed with-a-fee) is recommended (Oksa-
nen and Lindn, 2011).

• faceted browsing with the criterion of ac-
cess rights/ license is a feature integrated in
most of these catalogs but it is actually useful
mostly when the set of values is limited to a
manageable number of values that users can

11http://www.meta-net.eu/meta-share/
licenses

browse through; in addition, META-SHARE
allows faceted browsing with a filter for con-
ditions of use (e.g. whether the license allows
commercial use, derivatives etc.)

The most recent initiative in this line is
the Linghub portal12, supported by the Euro-
pean LIDER project, which collects metadata
from some of the repositories mentioned before
(META-SHARE, CLARIN, Datahub.io and LRE
Map) and publishes the records as Linked Data.
All licensing information present in the original
metadata records is harvested and collected to-
gether in the element “rights”, bringing together
license names, urls, free text statements etc. The
work presented in this paper is related to this ef-
fort and the need for a common licensing metadata
framework (McCrae et al., 2015).

2.2 Rights information in the META-SHARE
model

The META-SHARE (MS) metadata schema con-
stitutes an essential ingredient of the META-
SHARE infrastructure, which is an open, inte-
grated, secure and interoperable exchange infras-
tructure where LRs are documented, uploaded,
stored, catalogued, announced, downloaded, ex-
changed and discussed, aiming to support reuse of
LRs (Piperidis, 2012). The MS schema is a com-
plex but rich model and, most important for our
work, provides extensive support for the detailed
representation of licensing information, making
a remarkable effort that in some regards goes
beyond of what has been described by license-
specialized models. In consequence, the MS
model has been taken as a basis for the rest of this
work.

The original META-SHARE metadata model
(Gavrilidou et al., 2012) 13 has been implemented
as an XML Schema14. The META-SHARE
schema encodes information about the whole life-
cycle of the LR from production to usage. The
central entity of the schema is the LR per se,
which encompasses both datasets and technolo-
gies used for their processing. In addition to the

12http://linghub.lider-project.eu/
13Documentation and User Manual of the META-

SHARE Metadata Model, found at http://www.
meta-net.eu/meta-share/META-SHARE\%20\
%20documentationUserManual.pdf

14Schemas can be found at github https:
//github.com/metashare/META-SHARE/tree/
master/misc/schema/v3.0

51



central entity, other entities are also documented
in the schema; these are reference documents re-
lated to the LR (papers, reports, manuals etc.),
persons/organizations involved in its creation and
use (creators, distributors etc.), related projects
and activities (funding projects, activities of us-
age etc.) and accompanying licenses, all described
with metadata taken as far as possible from rel-
evant schemas and guidelines (e.g. BibTex for
bibliographical references). The five root entities
are represented as boxes in Figure 1. The META-
SHARE schema proposes a set of elements to en-
code specific descriptive features of each of these
entities and relations holding between them, tak-
ing as a starting point the LR. Following the CMDI
approach (Broeder et al., 2012), these elements are
grouped together into “components”. The core of
the schema is the resourceInfo component, which
subsumes

• administrative components relevant to all
LRs, e.g. identificationInfo (name, descrip-
tion and identifiers), usageInfo (information
about the intended and actual use of the LR);

• components specific to the relevant resource
and media type combinations, e.g. text or
audio parts of corpora, lexical/conceptual re-
sources etc., such as language, formats, clas-
sification etc.

The META-SHARE schema recognises obligatory
elements (minimal version) and recommended and
optional elements (maximal version).

Figure 1: Main entities in the MS model

For our discussion, the most relevant compo-
nent is the distributionInfo which brings together

all information related to licensing and IPR is-
sues, e.g. the IPR holder(s), the distribution rights
holder(s), availability status (i.e. whether the LR is
available for access, with or without restrictions);
the embedded licenseInfo component encodes all
information related to the licensing terms, e.g. the
license short name and specific terms and condi-
tions, the medium with which the LR can be ac-
cessed (i.e. whether it cam be downloaded or used
via an i/f etc.). Each resource may be linked to one
or more licenseInfo components, in case the same
resource is made available under different formats
and/or licensing conditions (e.g. for free for non-
commercial purposes vs. at a price for commercial
purposes, downloadable for commercial users vs.
accessible through interface for academic users).

In the framework of the LD4LT group, the
META-SHARE model has been the base for
the development of an ontology in OWL; the
MS/OWL ontology has been based on the on the
ontology developed by Villegas et al. (Villegas et
al., 2014) (covering part of the original schema)
and extended to the complete schema (in order to
cover all relevant LRs) (McCrae et al., 2015). The
transformation from the XSD schema to the OWL
ontology involved the transformation of compo-
nents to classes and that of elements to proper-
ties15.

3 The Rights Information for Language
Resources Ontology

In the course of this activity, the original mod-
ule of licensing and rights information has been
re-structured (in order to better accommodate
RDF modelling considerations) and enhanced
with RELs, capable of describing rights informa-
tion in a generally understood manner. RELs also
provide a hierarchical organization for the rights
information whose structure more naturally de-
picts dual licenses, nested permissions and the re-
lationship between conditions and rights. In ad-
dition, some other vocabularies like CreativeCom-
mons’16 or the price specification with GoodRela-
tions have been considered.

The licensing and rights module as perceived
in the model has also been released as a separate
ontology (“Rights Information for Language Re-
sources” ontology) at:

15This is an simplified description of the actual transfor-
mation process; for more on this, see (McCrae et al., 2015)

16http://creativecommons.org/ns#

52



http://purl.org/NET/ms-rights

The rights ontology builds upon the META-
SHARE schema for the LanguageResource and
the Distribution classes and for the License class
integrates elements of the ODRL model. In
fact, the ontology revolves around three entities/-
classes:

• the Language Resource, perceived in the
same way as in the original MS model;

• the Distribution, which comes from the orig-
inal distributionInfo component but is re-
modeled and adapted to the concept of the
dcat:Distribution17 class; thus, it now rep-
resents an accessible form of an LR, which
for instance can be available through differ-
ent delivery channels (e.g. as a downloadable
file, on a CD-ROM or accessible via an inter-
face), in different forms (e.g. as a csv or txt
file), through different distributors and with
different licensing terms;

• the License, coming from the licenseInfo
component.

The elements included in the distributionInfo and
licenseInfo components have been transformed
to OWL object and datatype properties, while a
careful study has been made in order to attach
them to the appropriate classes. For instance, the
iprHolder which was included in the distribution-
Info component has been attached to the Language
Resource class, given that this is a property that re-
mains the same irrespective of the different forms
of access an LR may take; the distributionRight-
sHolder, however, may differ for different forms
and is thus attached to the Distribution class. Sim-
ilarly, there has been a careful separation of the el-
ements included in the licenseInfo between prop-
erties attached to the license and those moved to
the Distribution class. Here, the main consider-
ation was to detach the License class from Lan-
guage resources, in an effort to generalize over
them and standardize their representation as far as
possible. By attaching, for instance, the exact sum
to be paid for the acquisition of an LR to the Distri-
bution class while the information that a payment
is due on the license class, we can re-use the same

17The prefix dcat stands for Data Catalog Vocabulary.
DCAT is a W3C Recommendation http://www.w3.
org/TR/vocab-dcat/

license representation for all LRs distributed under
this condition.

We have also introduced additional proper-
ties (e.g. licenseCategory, licenseName and li-
censeURL) and individuals (languageEngineer-
ingResearch for the ConditionsOfUse).

Licenses represented with the Rights Informa-
tion for Language Resources ontology permit a
dual representation of the information: preserving
the META-SHARE elements and structure and/or
adhering to the ODRL schema. Both are com-
patible and satisfy different requirements. Re-
dundancy is the preferred option, but expressing
rights information in either manner is acceptable.
This section describes both alternatives, introduc-
ing first the ODRL-style and then the schema in-
herited from META-SHARE.

3.1 Rights Expressions in ODRL

ODRL 2.118 is a policy and rights expression lan-
guage suitable to represent the licensing terms of
the language resources. ODRL specifies both an
abstract core model and a common vocabulary,
which can be extended for the particular domains
ODRL is applied to. There have been ODRL
profiles for representing contents’ rights in mo-
bile devices (OMA DRM), for the news industry
(RightsML by IPTC), for the eBook (ONIX) and
for general Creative Commons licenses, but no
specific terms exist for the language resources do-
main. ODRL 2.0 can be serialized in XML, JSON
and RDF. The latter serialization is based on the
ODRL 2.1 Ontology (McRoberts and Rodriguez-
Doncel (eds.), 2015).

The main entities in the ODRL Core Model19

are presented in Figure 2. An ODRL policy is a
set of rules, which can be permissions, prohibi-
tions or duties. Permissions allow executing cer-
tain actions over an asset, provided that certain
constraints are respected. An assignee can be
specified for the action to be executed by.

The example of ODRL expression in Figure 3,
serialized as RDF describes a language resource as
being reproducible (downloaded, copied) but not
derivable nor commercializable20. The absence of
assignee is understood as ‘applicable to anybody’.

18https://www.w3.org/community/odrl/
19http://www.w3.org/community/odrl/

model/2/
20The prefix odrl points to http://www.w3.org/ns/

odrl/2/

53



Figure 2: Main entities in the ODRL model

:example0
a odrl:Set;
odrl:permission [
odrl:target :langResource ;
odrl:action odrl:reproduce

] ;
odrl:prohibition [
odrl:target :langResource ;
odrl:action odrl:derive,

odrl:commercialize
] .

Figure 3: Simple example of ODRL policy

3.2 Rights expression within the
META-SHARE structure

The ODRL model satisfies most of the concepts
that are required for the licensing of LRs. Some
adjustments have been required mainly to sepa-
rate general conditions from the specifics that can
instantiate them: for instance, payment is a gen-
eral term of use but the exact amount to be paid
for each LR may differ and vary depending on a
number of other parameters (e.g. no fee for non-
commercial use, X euros for commercial use, X
euros but with a discount for a specific group of
users etc.); by keeping the payment as a general
condition in the RDF representation of the license
and putting the amount to be paid on the LR, we
can have the same standard license used for a large
number of LRs. Consequently, the semantics of
the ODRL model have been slightly altered for
the Rights Information for Language Resources:
missing attributes in the policy can be found as
attributes of the licensed asset. Besides the vo-
cabulary additions over the ODRL Common Vo-
cabulary, which are foreseen by the specification,
this is the only divergence that was made from the
ODRL language.

The primary META-SHARE metadata schema
presents conditions and rights in a flat structure.
While this information is expressed in ODRL
within the rules, having it directly accessible im-
proves readability by simple processors. Hence,

:langResource a ms:languageResource .
:langResource ms:distribution :distrib1 .
:distrib1 dct:license :lic1 .
:lic1 ms:conditionsOfUse ms:noRedistri-
bution, ms:nonCommercialUse .

Figure 5: Example equivalent to 3 using the MS
structure

as a second design decision, rights and conditions
can be redundantly given as attributes of the pol-
icy or within the rule structure.

The licensing information of a language re-
source can be entirely described with the
MS/OWL ontology. In Figure 4, key classes are
represented with orange ovals and minor classes
with gray ovals. Class individuals are rectangles
next to a class they are instances of. Properties
are represented with arrows. For our regards, the
four key elements in the META-SHARE struc-
ture are: a ‘language resource’ is published as
a ‘distribution’, which may have attached a ‘li-
cense’. ‘Licenses’ can have ’conditions of use’.
The language resource can have different levels of
availability (restricted, unrestricted, upon negoti-
ation etc.). The distribution has a specific access
medium and it can be granted to users of different
nature (academic users, commercial users, etc. or
combinations thereof). Licensors and distribution
rights holders can also be expressed at the distri-
bution level.

The License can belong to a License Category
(ACA, RES, PUB) and it may contain different
conditions of use –the fine grain but flat descrip-
tion of the license.

4 Examples of license

In the most simple setting, the metadata records
describing a language resource may point to an
RDF document with the license description. The
RDF License dataset (Rodriguez-Doncel et al.,
2014) contains a set of well-known licenses and li-
censes recommended by META-SHARE21 which
have been already written using the elements of
the ontology.

To facilitate end users, we identified commonly
used licenses in the LR domain from the values
used for LRs distributed through META-SHARE.
For our conversation we can identify the follow-
ing categories that impose different treatment as

21The list of RDF licenses can be checked at http://
rdflicense.appspot.com/

54



Figure 4: Rights Information for Language Resources

regards their RDF representation:

• Licenses, such as CC and FOSS that do not
require any signatures; they are legal docu-
ments with a general text specifying the of-
fering terms for end-users, they apply to all
and do not ask for formal commitments from
them. The text is published on a web site and
can be accessed by anyone. They can have a
direct representation in RDF.

• Standard licenses that include instantiation
elements (e.g. ELRA, META-SHARE):
legal documents that need to be signed
by both contracting parties; they consist
of a general text but include also specific
terms that must be instantiated for each LR:
the LR identification data as well as those
of the signatories, but also specific fields
such as the amount to be paid, the place
where the LR will be used etc.; the licenses
are available over the internet and can be
accessed by anyone. In this case, the general
text can be represented in RDF but we
separated what is particular to the resource
(e.g. the amount of money) and what is
general and can be included in the RDF

of the license (e.g. the obligation to pay).
For example, in order to declare that a re-
source is distributed under a META-SHARE
Commercial-NoRedistribution-ForAFee
license, the RDF fragment in Figure 6 can
be used in its metadata record. The first line
declares that :resource is a dcat:Distribution.
The Dublin Core license22 property links
the resource with the license, and the price
-whose precise number is not specific in
the generic license online- is given. The
price is specified using the GoodRelations23

vocabulary.

• License templates with potential extra terms
(e.g. CLARIN 24): legal documents that in-
clude a general text and extra potential terms
(e.g. attribution, request for a research plan,
usage of the resource only at a specific loca-
tion etc.); i.e. the use or not of specific terms
leads to a new combination and the creation
of a new license. The texts are also avail-

22dct is the prefix of http://purl.org/dc/terms/
23www.heppnetz.de/projects/

goodrelations/
24http://clarin.eu/content/

licenses-agreements-legal-terms

55



:resource a dcat:Distribution ;
dct:license <http://purl.org/NET/
rdflicense/ms-c-nored-ff> ;
gr:hasPriceSpecification [
gr:hasCurrencyValue "400"ˆˆxsd:float;
gr:hasCurrency "USD"ˆˆxsd:string

].
] .

Figure 6: Example showing the use of a license
template

able over the internet, but the combinations
of the terms are free. The basic text itself can
be represented in RDF, and so can the terms
but the full RDF representation of all com-
binations must be dynamically constructed,
with a combination of the RDF representa-
tion of the general text and the RDF repre-
sentations of each additional term, once this
is selected.25

• Non-standard licenses, such as proprietary
ones, legal notices, terms of use etc.: there’s
a large variety of them, not all of the texts are
available over the internet. There cannot be a
ready-made RDF representation available for
all of them. In this case, the conditionsOfUse
element can help the end users get a quick
grasp of what they are allowed to do with the
LR.

The next example, in Figure 8, shows
unabridged the “META-SHARE Commercial No
Redistribution” license. The main resource in the
license is an odrl:Policy (line 02) which has at-
tributed some metadata elements: version (03),
label (04), alternative name (05) or location of
the legal code26 (10). The policy additionally
has information regarding the language and a
flat list with the conditions (ms:NoRedistribution,
cc:Attribution, etc. in lines 07-09).

The main permission (lines 12-25), which ex-
plicitly authorizes for making derivative works,
making commercial use has the duty of attribution
(15-17) and the constraints of being used only for
language engineering purposes (lines 18-21) and
on the users’ site (lines 21-24). Distribution is for-
bidden in lines 26-28.

25see, for instance, https:
//www.clarin.eu/content/
clarin-license-category-calculator with
possible combination of license categories and terms of use.

26cc is prefix of http://creativecommons.org/
ns#

5 Conclusions and future work

This paper has presented the Rights Information
for Language Resources Ontology, the outcome of
a cooperation between the META-SHARE project
and the LIDER project, in the framework of
the W3C Linked Data for Language Technology
Group, which is expected to enhance the accessi-
bility of language resources, following the Linked
Data model, and facilitate their automatic process-
ing by web services.

In the future, we expect to improve on the
model, especially as regards the user modelling,
as well as implement a mechanism for the dy-
namic generation of RDF representations of non-
standard licences. Finally, the use of SPARQL
queries to fill in predefined data structures will be
investigated, so that the original ODRL structure
is preserved while keeping the concept of license
template.

Acknowledgments

We are very grateful to the members of the W3C
Linked Data for Language Technology (LD4LT)
for all the useful feedback received and for allow-
ing this initiative to be developed as an activity of
the group as well as the Legal Group at ILSP/RC
Athena who have contributed with discussions for
the overall schema. This work is supported by
the FP7 European project LIDER (610782), by
the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Compet-
itiveness (project TIN2013-46238-C4-2-R and a
Juan de la Cierva grant), the Greek CLARIN At-
tiki project (MIS 441451) and the H2020 project
CRACKER (645357).

References
Daan Broeder, Menzo Windhouwer, Dieter Van Uyt-

vanck, Twan Goosen, and Thorsten Trippel. 2012.
CMDI: a component metadata infrastructure. In De-
scribing LRs with metadata: towards flexibility and
interoperability in the documentation of LR work-
shop programme, page 1.

Nicoletta Calzolari, Riccardo Del Gratta, Gil Fran-
copoulo, Joseph Mariani, Francesco Rubino, Irene
Russo, and Claudia Soria. 2012. The LRE Map.
Harmonising community descriptions of resources.
In Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Inter-
national Language Resources and Evaluation, pages
1084–1089.

Maria Gavrilidou, Penny Labropoulou, Elina De-
sipri, Stelios Piperidis, Haris Papageorgiou, Mon-

56



Figure 7: Graphical representation of the license in Figure 8

01<http://purl.org/NET/rdflicense/ms-c-nored>
02 a odrl:Policy ;
03 dct:hasVersion "1.0" ;
04 rdfs:label "META-SHARE Commercial NoRedistribution" ;
05 dct:alternative "MS C-NoReD" ;
06 dct:language <http://www.lexvo.org/page/iso639-3/eng> ;
07 ms:conditionsOfUse ms:noRedistribution, cc:Attribution,
08 cc:CommercialUse, ms:conditionsOfUse,
09 ms:languageEngineeringResearch ;
10 cc:legalcode <http://www.meta-net.eu/meta-s[...etc...].pdf> .
11 ms:licenseCategory ms:PUB ;
12 odrl:permission [
13 odrl:action cc:Reproduction, cc:DerivativeWorks , odrl:extract,
14 odrl:aggregate, cc:CommercialUse ;
15 odrl:duty [
16 odrl:action cc:Attribution ;
17 ] ;
18 odrl:constraint [
19 odrl:operator odrl:eq ;
20 odrl:purpose ms:languageEngineeringResearch
21 ] , [
22 odrl:operator odrl:eq ;
23 odrl:spatial "only at assignee’s site"
24 ]
25 ];
26 odrl:prohibition [
27 odrl:action cc:Distribution ;
28 ] .

Figure 8: The META-SHARE Commercial No-redistribution license

57



ica Monachini, Francesca Frontini, Thierry De-
clerck, Gil Francopoulo, Victoria Arranz, and Val-
rie Mapelli. 2012. The META-SHARE metadata
schema for the description of language resources.
In Proceedings of the Eighth International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation, pages
1090–1097.

John McCrae, Penny Labropoulou, Jorge Gracia, Marta
Villegas, Victor Rodriguez-Doncel, and Philipp
Cimiano. 2015. One ontology to bind them all:
The META-SHARE OWL ontology for the interop-
erability of linguistic datasets on the Web. In Pro-
ceedings of the 4th Workshop on the Multilingual Se-
mantic Web (to appear).

Mo McRoberts and Victor Rodriguez-Doncel (eds.).
2015. ODRL Version 2.1 Ontology. Final speci-
fiction, ODRL W3C Community Group, March.
http://www.w3.org/ns/odrl/2/.

Ville Oksanen and Crister Lindn. 2011. Open content
licenses - how to choose the right one. In NEALT
Proceedings Series Vol. 13.

Stelios Piperidis. 2012. The META-SHARE language
resources sharing infrastructure: Principles, chal-
lenges, solutions. In Proceedings of the Eighth Con-
ference on International Language Resources and
Evaluation, pages 36–42.

Victor Rodriguez-Doncel, Serena Villata, and Asun-
cion Gomez-Perez. 2014. A dataset of RDF li-
censes. In Rinke Hoekstra, editor, Proceedings of
the 27th International Conference on Legal Knowl-
edge and Information System, pages 187–189.

Gary Simons and Steven Bird. 2003. Building an open
language archives community on the oai foundation.
Library Hi Tech, 21(2):210–218.

Claudia Soria, Nicoletta Calzolari, Monica Monachini,
Valeria Quochi, Nria Bel, Khalid Choukri, Joseph
Mariani, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis. 2014. The
language resource strategic agenda: the flarenet syn-
thesis of community recommendations. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 48(4):753–775.

Marta Villegas, Maite Melero, and Nuria Bel. 2014.
Metadata as Linked Open Data: mapping disparate
XML metadata registries into one RDF/OWL reg-
istry. In Proceedings of LREC 2014.

58


