



















































Tools for Digital Humanities: Enabling Access to the Old Occitan Romance of Flamenca


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 1–11,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Tools for Digital Humanities:
Enabling Access to the Old Occitan Romance of Flamenca

Olga Scrivner
Indiana University

Bloomington, IN, USA
obscrivn@indiana.edu

Sandra Kübler
Indiana University

Bloomington, IN, USA
skuebler@indiana.edu

Abstract

Accessing historical texts is often a challenge
because readers either do not know the his-
torical language, or they are challenged by
the technological hurdle when such texts are
available digitally. Merging corpus linguistic
methods and digital technology can provide
novel ways of representing historical texts dig-
itally and providing a simpler access. In this
paper, we describe a multi-dimensional paral-
lel Old Occitan-English corpus, in which word
alignment serves as the basis for search ca-
pabilities as well as for the transfer of an-
notations. We show how parallel alignment
can help overcome some challenges of his-
torical manuscripts. Furthermore, we apply a
resource-light method of building an emotion
annotation via parallel alignment, thus show-
ing that such annotations are possible without
speaking the historical language. Finally, us-
ing visualization tools, such as ANNIS and
GoogleViz, we demonstrate how the emotion
analysis can be queried and visualized dynam-
ically in our parallel corpus, thus showing that
such information can be made accessible with
low technological barriers.

1 Introduction

In the past, historical documents and manuscripts
were studied exclusively by a manual, paper-based
approach. This limited the access to such docu-
ments to scholars who, on the one hand, know the
historical variety of the language and, on the other
hand, had access to the manuscripts. However, re-
cent achievements in corpus linguistics have intro-
duced new methods and tools for digitization and

text-processing. Similarly, the progress in digital
technology has created novel ways of data visual-
ization and data interpretation. Finally, “by access-
ing linguistic annotation, we can extend the range
of phenomena that can be found” (Kübler and Zins-
meister, 2014). That is, a digital corpus enriched
with linguistic annotation, such as syntactic, prag-
matic, and semantic annotation, can amplify our un-
derstanding of the literary or historical work. With
such a corpus, a researcher can overcome many of
the challenges provided by the historical nature of
the manuscripts as well as by the technological bar-
rier provided by many available query tools. For ex-
ample, one of the challenges in working with histor-
ical texts consists in the variation in spelling or in
lexical variation. In such cases, instead of perform-
ing a direct lexical search, researchers can access
this information via linguistic annotation if lemma
information is available.

However, there are challenges for which standard
linguistic annotations are not useful. First, search-
ing in text is usually restricted to known phenomena
or explicit occurrences of data. For example, some
phenomena may involve a variation between explicit
and implicit tokens, e.g., null subjects or zero rela-
tive clauses. While some corpora allow for a query
of null occurrences, such as in the MCVF (Mar-
tineau et al., 2010), most of the monolingual corpora
do not provide such an annotation. Furthermore, it
is essential for the researcher to be aware of all pos-
sible forms and contexts for queries, which is a dif-
ficult task in monolingual corpora. That is, there is
always a possibility that “some relevant form will
be overlooked because it has never been studied”

1



(Enrique-Arias, 2013, 107). For example, consider
the study of Medieval Spanish discourse markers,
e.g., he, evás ’behold’. Enrique-Arias (2013) shows
that only by using a parallel corpus is he able to ob-
serve unexpected linguistic structures conveying the
same discourse function, e.g., sepas que ‘know that’
and cata que ‘see that’. Finally, monolingual cor-
pora are usually accessible only to an audience with
prior knowledge of a given historical language, leav-
ing a large public aside.

We propose to address these challenges by us-
ing a parallel corpus. In our case, the two doc-
uments consist of the original, historical text and
its translation into modern English. Until recently,
parallel corpora have been almost exclusively used
in the fields of machine translation, bilingual lexi-
cography, translator training, and the study of lan-
guage specific translational phenomena (McEnery
and Xiao, 2007). With the increased availability of
historical parallel corpora, we have seen the emer-
gence of their use in historical linguistics (Koolen
et al., 2006; Zeldes, 2007; Petrova and Solf, 2009;
Enrique-Arias, 2012; Enrique-Arias, 2013).

In this paper, we introduce a parallel annotated
Old Occitan-English corpus. We show how the
alignment with modern English makes this historical
corpus more accessible and how the word alignment
can facilitate the cross-language transfer of emotion
annotations from a resource-rich modern language
into a resource-poor language, such as Old Occitan.
Finally, we demonstrate how emotion visualization
techniques can contribute to a richer understanding
of the literary text for technically less inclined read-
ers.

The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows: Section 2 reviews the use of corpora in histor-
ical studies, and section 3 describes work on trans-
ferring annotations via alignment. Section 4 de-
scribes the textual basis of our corpus, the 13th-
century Old Occitan Romance of Flamenca. In sec-
tion 5, we explain the compilation of the parallel
corpus. Section 6 describes the emotion annotation,
which was carried out for English and then trans-
ferred to Old Occitan. Section 7 introduces emo-
tion queries via ANNIS, a freely available on-line
search platform, and visualization methods with mo-
tion charts in GoogleViz. Section 8 draws general
conclusions and provides an outlook on future steps

for the project.

2 Using Corpora in Historical Linguistics

Parallel corpora are collections of two or more texts
consisting of an original text (source) and its trans-
lation(s). Generally, such parallel corpora are an-
notated for word alignment between the source text
and its translation. Word alignment can be carried
out automatically via tools such as GIZA++ (Och
and Ney, 2000).

Monolingual historical corpora are undoubtedly
valuable linguistic resources. It is not uncommon,
however, to encounter different spellings and other
lexical variations in historical texts. Not knowing
an exact spelling or just a simple language barrier
may hinder data collection. Parallel corpora can as-
sist in such situations through Historic Document
Retrieval (Koolen et al., 2006), which allows re-
searchers to query via the modern translation rather
than via the older language. Given the common as-
sumption that “translation equivalents are likely to
be inserted in the same or very similar, syntactic,
semantic and pragmatic contexts” (Enrique-Arias,
2013, 114), we can assess not only lexical, but also
morphological variations. That is, it is possible to
a) identify forms that have never been studied and
b) find occurrences based on their textual or stylis-
tic conventions. For example, using the parallel
Bible corpus of Old Spanish and its English transla-
tion, Sánchez López (To Appear) is able to identify
a new form, salvante, that has never been reported.

Similarly, Enrique-Arias (2012) examines dis-
course markers, possessive structures and clitics in
the Latin Bible and its medieval Spanish translation.
In addition, the author is able to observe stylistic
variation in choices made by translators depending
on Bible sub-genres such as narrative or poetry.

In recent years, there has also been increasing
interest in the correspondence between translation
and language change. In this view, translation is
seen as a “means of tracking change” (Beeching,
2013). Various studies have demonstrated the feasi-
bility of parallel corpora in studies of semantic and
(morpho-)syntactic change. For example, Beech-
ing (2013) examines the evolution of the French ex-
pression quand-même using monolingual and paral-
lel corpora. Similarly, Zeldes (2007) looks at the

2



parallel corpus of Bible translations in two differ-
ent stages of the same language, Old and Modern
Polish. The author is able to detect various changes
in nominal affixes. Another interesting approach is
suggested by Petrova and Solf (2009), who investi-
gate the influence of Latin in historical documents.
When we deal with historical documents that are
translations of Latin or other languages, it is hard to
assess which phenomena are target language specific
or introduced via the translation from the source lan-
guage. Petrova and Solf (2009) show that this is-
sue can be resolved with a parallel diachronic cor-
pus: They analyze a change in word order in the Old
High German translation of the Bible and its original
Latin version. Given the assumption that any word
order deviation in the translation can be viewed as
evidence for Old High German syntax, their inves-
tigation is restricted to cases where word order in
the translation differs from its original. The results
reveal that in contrast to Latin, preverbal objects
in subordinate clauses in Old High German convey
given information (explicitly mentioned in the previ-
ous context), whereas postverbal objects carry new
information.

Finally, linguists and computational linguistics
can benefit from parallel corpora in studies of im-
plicit constituents, e.g. zero anaphora. Not all cor-
pora are annotated for implicit occurrences or the
omission of certain elements in a sentence. This
is a common challenge in the fields, where zero
anaphora resolution is necessary, e.g., automatic
summarization, machine translation, and studies of
syntactic variation. With a parallel corpus, it is
possible to search for the explicit form in a trans-
lated text and then observe the use or omission of
that form in the original text. For instance, in his
study of Biblia Medieval, a parallel corpus of Old
Spanish Bible translations, Enrique-Arias (2013) an-
alyzes discourse markers and observes instances of
zero-marking in Old Spanish by searching for ex-
plicit Hebrew markers. Furthermore, such corpora
can be used to investigate the convergence universal
in machine translation, a correlation between zero
anaphora and the degree of text explicitation (Rello
and Ilisei, 2009).

We argue that the addition of a translation into a
modern language is a simple and intuitive way of
giving access to historical texts. This is a useful

tool not only for historians and historical linguists
but also for a lay audience since the translation pro-
vides access to the meaning without introducing ad-
ditional hurdles such as by a semantic annotation.
In section 4, we will present our corpus of choice,
the Romance of Flamenca, an Old Occitan poem,
along with the parallel version that includes a mod-
ern English translation. Then, we will present an
approach to annotate this corpus for emotions, using
non-experts working on the English part and then
transferring the annotation to the source language.

3 Using Alignment Methods for
Annotating Resource-Poor Languages

Linguistic annotation often involves a great amount
of manual labor, which is often not feasible for
low-resourced languages. Instead, we can use
a method from computational linguistics, namely
cross-language transfer, as proposed by Yarowsky
and Ngai (2001). This method does not involve
any resources in the target language, neither train-
ing data, a large lexicon, nor time-consuming man-
ual annotation.

Cross-language transfer has been previously ap-
plied to languages with parallel corpora and bilin-
gual lexica (Yarowsky and Ngai, 2001; Hwa et al.,
2005). This approach uses parallel text and word
alignment to transfer the annotation from one lan-
guage to the next. Yarowsky and Ngai (2001) show
the transfer of a coarse grained POS tagset and base
noun phrases from English to French. Yarowsky
et al. (2001) extend the approach to Spanish and
Czech, and they include named entity tagging. Hwa
et al. (2005) use a similar approach to transfer
dependency annotations from English to Chinese.
Snyder and Barzilay (2008) extend the approach to
unsupervised annotation of morphology in Semitic
languages via a hierarchical Bayesian network. And
Snyder et al. (2009) extend the framework to include
multiple source languages.

In previous work (Scrivner and Kübler, 2012), we
used another cross-language transfer method, based
on the work by Feldman and Hana (2010), to an-
notate the Flamenca corpus with POS and syntactic
annotations. This method does not require parallel
texts, it rather uses resources such as lexical or POS
taggers from closely related languages. Our anno-

3



tations were based on resources from Old French
(Martineau et al., 2010) and modern Catalan (Civit
et al., 2006).

In machine translation, the transfer of sentiment
analysis is common in machine translation.Kim et
al. (2010) use a machine translation system to map
subjectivity lexica from English to other languages.
In word sense disambiguation, word alignment has
been used as a bridge (Tufis, 2007) based on the as-
sumption that the translated word shares the same
sense with the original word. A similar method was
used for sentiment transfer from a resource-rich lan-
guage to a resource-poor language (Mihalcea et al.,
2007).

4 Romance of Flamenca

Medieval Provençal literature is well known for its
lyric poetry of troubadours. There remains, how-
ever, a small number of non-lyric provençal texts,
such as Romance of Flamenca, Girart de Rossilho
and Daurel et Beto, that have not received much
attention. In this project we focus on Romance
of Flamenca, which can be faithfully described as
“the one universally acknowledged masterpiece of
Old Occitan narrative” (Fleischmann, 1995). This
anonymous romance, written in the 13th century,
presents an artistic amalgam of fabliau, courtly ro-
mance, troubadours lyrics, and narrative genre. The
uniqueness of this “first modern novel” is also seen
in its use of setting, adventures, and character por-
trayal (Blodgett, 1995). The narrator virtuously de-
picts Archambaut’s transmutation from a chivalrous
knight to an unbearably jealous husband who locks
his beautiful wife Flamenca in a tower, as well
as Guilhem’s ingenious conspiracy to liberate Fla-
menca. Furthermore, this prose in verse played an
influential role in the development of French litera-
ture. The potential value of this historical resource,
however, is limited by the lack of an accessible dig-
ital format and linguistic annotation.

There are no known records of Romance of Fla-
menca before the late 18th century, when it was
seized from a private collection during the French
Revolution and placed later in the library of Carcas-
sonne (Blodgett, 1995). The manuscript came in 139
folios with 8095 octosyllabic verses but missing the
beginning and end. It was first edited by Raynouard

in 1834. Since then, the manuscript has been edited
multiple times (Meyer, 1865, 1901; Gschwind 1976;
Huchet, 1982). While Gschwind’s edition (1976)
remains “the most useful edition”, which provides
a more accurate interpretation (Blodgett, 1995; Car-
bonero, 2010), we have chosen the second edition by
Meyer for two reasons: a) The edition has no copy-
right restriction and b) this edition is available in a
scanned image format provided by Google1.

5 Parallel Occitan-English Corpus

The compilation and architecture of the monolingual
Old Occitan corpus Romance of Flamenca along
with the morpho-syntactic and syntactic annotations
has been described by Scrivner and Kübler (2012)
and Scrivner et al. (2013). In this paper, we augment
the monolingual version into the Romance of Fla-
menca corpus with a parallel Old Occitan-English
level. As described in section 2, we regard mono-
lingual and parallel corpora as complementary re-
sources. That is, our new corpus conforms to the tra-
ditions of a conventional multi-layered monolingual
corpus, and at the same time, it offers the research
advantages of a parallel bilingual corpus.

In our task, we have made various methodolog-
ical decisions related to translation and alignment.
First, in the selection of a translation of the source,
it was important to find the most faithful transla-
tion to the original poem. While free translations
have their own merits, they pose a great challenge to
the alignment task. Our choice fell to the work by
Blodgett (1995) for several reasons. Blodgett “en-
deavored, so far as possible, to respect the loose and
often convoluted syntax of the original” (Blodgett,
1995). In addition, the author was able to add lines
from the manuscript that were missing in the pre-
vious editions. Finally, Blodgett (1995) followed a
“conservative approach” and omitted lines that were
suggested earlier to replace lacunae in the original.
This conservative approach is necessary for ensuring
the accurate line alignment of verses.

In a second step, we provided word alignment.
This is a challenging task, partly because of the non-
standardized spelling in the Old Occitan source, but
also because the amount of aligned text is rather
small for standard unsupervised approaches. An ad-

1https://archive.org/details/leromandeflamen00meyegoog

4



Figure 1: Word alignment: sample of results for the null pronoun in Old Occitan.

ditional challenge results from the verse structure of
the poem, which necessitates deviations in the trans-
lation. This genre is prone to various stylistic word
orders, as compared to political or historical narra-
tives. In addition, sentence boundaries in Occitan do
not always correspond to those in the English trans-
lation.

If we followed common practice in automatic
alignment and chose sentences as the basic text units
for the automatic alignment, this very likely would
result in many mis-alignments. As a result, we de-
cided to split data by lines, instead of sentences. We
performed the line alignment by means of NATools2.
NATools is a Perl package for processing parallel
corpora. This package helps with the alignment of
two files on a sentence level and with extracting a
probability lexicon.

For word alignment, after some experimenta-
tion, we decided to use a fully unsupervised ap-
proach since there do not exist any automatic align-
ers for the Old Occitan-English pair. We chose
GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2000), a freely available
automatic aligner, which allows for one-to-one and
one-to-many word alignment. In addition, when
using GIZA++, we can make use of our extracted
probability dictionary. The output of the automatic
alignment was then corrected manually. Below, we
show an example. In (1), we show the original sen-

2http://linguateca.di.uminho.pt/natools/

tence with the word index as well as the English
translation. The GIZA++ output before correction is
illustrated in (2), and the corrected version is shown
in (3). In both versions, the numbers in parentheses
behind a word indicate which word in the original is
aligned with this word in the translation.

(1) index:
OO:

1
poissas

2
lur

3
dis

4
tot

5
en

6
apert

ME: then he said to them openly

(2) then (1) he ( ) said (3) to (4) them (2) openly
(6)

(3) then (1) he (3) said (3) to (2) them (2) openly
(6)

This example shows that in (2), the subject pro-
noun he is not aligned with any word in Old Occ-
itan. This is to be expected since Old Occitan is a
pro-drop language, and the pronoun is not expressed
overtly. However, during our manual correction, we
align the pronoun he with the verb dis, a standard
treatment for null subject pronouns. In a final step,
we combine lines with corrected word alignment to
form a sentence in order to merge this parallel align-
ment with our monolingual Old Occitan corpus, as
illustrated in Figure 1.

This example also shows that such an alignment
can be used to search the Old Occitan corpus via the
modern English annotated translation. For example,
the query with an explicit English pronoun (PRP)

5



Storm & Storm Shaver et al. Plutchik
(1987) (1987) (1980)
sadness sadness sadness
anger anger anger
fear fear fear
happiness happiness joy
love affection disgust
disgust trust
anxiety surprise
contentment anticipation
hostility
liking
pride
shame

Table 1: Basic emotion models.

aligned to the Occitan verb (VJ) allows to find null
occurrences of subject pronouns in Old Occitan.

At present, our parallel corpus contains 14 100
tokens and 1 000 aligned verse lines. Our corpus is
further converted to PAULA XML (Dipper, 2005)
and imported into the ANNIS search engine (Zeldes
et al., 2009), which makes this corpus accessible on-
line3.

6 Emotion Annotation Transfer

While emotion analysis constitutes an important
component in literary analysis, narrative corpora an-
notated for emotional content are not very common.
In contrast, there is a large body of work on emotion
and sentiment analysis of non-literary resources,
such as blog posts, news and tweets (see (Liu, 2012;
Pang and Lee, 2008) for overviews). However, de-
spite the advances in the automatic annotation, the
manual annotation of emotions remains a difficult
task. On the one hand, the definition of emotion re-
mains a controversial issue as there is still no clear
distinction between emotions, attitude, personality,
and mood. Various models of emotion clusters have
been proposed, as illustrated in Table 1, but no clear
standard has emerged so far.

On the other hand, the assignment of emotion is
often a subjective decision. While many emotions
can be identified through contextual and linguistic
cues, e.g., lexical, semantic, or discourse cues, it

3www.oldoccitancorpus.org

has been shown that human annotators often assign a
different label for the same emotional context (Alm
and Sproat, 2005, 670). Finally, available annotated
resources are domain specific, e.g., movie reviews
and poll opinions, which makes it difficult to adapt
to a narrative genre. As Francisco et al. (2011) point
out, “the complexity of the emotional information
involved in narrative texts is much higher than in
those domains”.

In recent years, however, with the increasing ac-
cess to digitized books, such as the Google Books
Corpus and Project Gutenberg, there has been grow-
ing interest in applying emotion annotation for nar-
rative stories. For example, Alm and Sproat (2005)
annotate 22 Grimms’ fairy tales and demonstrate the
importance of story sequences for emotional story
evaluation and Francisco et al. (2011) create a cor-
pus of 18 English folk tales. Both corpora are built
using a manual annotation. In contrast, Moham-
mad (2012) applies a lexicon-based method to the
emotion analysis of Google Books. He creates an
emotion association lexicon with 14 200 word types,
which determines the ratio of emotional terms in
text. In addition, Mohammad shows effective visu-
alization methods that trace emotions and compare
emotional content in a large collections of texts.

As we have seen, the emotion annotation can be
a valuable resource in linguistics and literary stud-
ies. However, annotated corpora and emotion lex-
ica exist mainly for resource-rich languages, such as
English. Annotating verses in Old Occitan manually
for emotional content is a tedious task and requires
an expert in the language. Thus neither a manual an-
notation of the text nor the creation of an emotion
lexicon in the source language is viable. However,
we can use a resource-poor approach from NLP,
namely cross-language transfer (see section 3, which
allows us to take advantage of English resources in
combination with the word alignment. I.e., we can
annotate emotions in English, which is easy enough
to do given a lexicon and an undergraduate student.
In a second step, we transfer the annotation via the
word alignments to the source language.

Below, we will describe our emotion annotation
transfer method. First, we compiled a word list from
the English version Flamenca and removed common
function words. We then used the NRC emotion lex-

6



icon4, which consists of words and their associations
with 8 emotions as well as positive or negative sen-
timent. Mohammad and Yang (2011) created this
lexicon by using frequent words from the 1911 Ro-
get Thesaurus5, which were annotated by 5 human
annotators. For our application, we focus on the 8
emotion associations: anger, anticipation, disgust,
fear, joy, sadness, surprise and trust. Since the emo-
tion annotation is not neutral with regard to context,
several emotions can be assigned to the same token
in the NRC lexicon, as shown in (4).

(4)

abandon fear
abandon sadness
lose anger
lose disgust
lose fear

As we can see, the word abandon has two associ-
ations, namely with fear and sadness, and the word
lose has three possible associations, namely anger,
disgust and fear. During the initial label transfer
from the NCR lexicon to the Flamenca lexicon, we
kept multiple labels. The tokens with multiple la-
bels were further manually checked, and only one
label that would best fit the context to our knowl-
edge was retained. For example, in case of ‘aban-
don’, we selected the emotion sadness, as the con-
text describes Famenca’s father before her marriage.
Also the evaluation of 100 randomly selected labels
revealed that some associations did not fit our text
due to the difference in genre. For example, ‘court’
in our narrative genre represents a different seman-
tic entity (king’s court), whereas in the NCR lexicon,
‘court’ (a criminal case) is associated with anger or
fear. We decided to leave these cases unannotated.

Finally, the emotion annotation was transferred
from the English translated words to their aligned
words in Old Occitan. The emotion annotation layer
was further added to the main corpus and converted
to the ANNIS format.

7 Corpus Query and Visualization

In this section, we will focus on how our parallel
corpus can be queried for emotional content. Fol-
lowing the approach from Alm and Sproat (2005),

4http://saifmohammad.com/WebPages/lexicons.html
5The words must occur more than 120 000 times in the

Google n-gram corpus.

who show the relevance of textual sequencing for
emotional analysis, we have segmented the corpus
into 10 logical event sequences, namely wedding an-
nouncement, preparation for wedding, arrival of Ar-
chambaut, marriage, departure, King’s arrival, and
Queen’s jealousy. The corpus consists of different
layers of annotations: a) (morpho-)syntactic layer
(part-of-speech and constituency annotation for Oc-
citan and part-of-speech for English), b) lemmas, c)
discourse layer (speakers classification, e.g., king,
queen, Flamenca), d) temporal sequencing (events),
e) word alignment (Occitan→ English), and f) emo-
tion layer (joy, trust, fear, surprise, sadness, dis-
gust, anger and anticipation). For visualization, we
use the search engine ANNIS (Zeldes et al., 2009),
which is designed for displaying and querying multi-
layered corpora. One advantage of ANNIS con-
sists of its graphical query interface, which allows
for user-friendly, graphical queries, instead of tradi-
tional textual queries, for which one needs to know
the query language. To illustrate the visual query
tool, we present a query in Figure 2. In this query,
we search for any aligned token that expresses joy
and is spoken by Father.

One example of a query result is illustrated in Fig-
ure 3. This example shows the Occitan token honor
and the aligned English token honors that are anno-
tated with joy and spoken by Father.

Another way of analyzing emotions more gener-
ally is to look at the overall emotional content, by
querying for any words that have emotion; in other
words, they are not annotated as “None” for emo-
tion (query: emotion ! = ”None”). We can then
perform a frequency analysis of the results. The fre-
quency distribution is shown in Figure 4, where we
see that trust and joy are the most common emo-
tions.

In recent years, visual and dynamic applications
in corpus and literature studies have become more
important, thus showing a focus on non-technical
users. For example, (Moretti, 2005) advocates the
use of maps, trees, and graphs in the literary anal-
ysis. Oelke et al. (2012) suggest person network
representation, showing relations between charac-
ters. In addition, they also use fingerprint plots,
which allow to compare the mentioning of vari-
ous categories, e.g. male, female, across several
novels. Hilpert (2011) introduces dynamic motion

7



Figure 2: Search for joy with the speaker Father.

Figure 3: Resulting visualization for the query in Figure 2.

charts as a visualization methodology to the liter-
ary and linguistic studies. These charts are common
in the socio-economic statistic field and are capa-
ble of visualizing in motion the development of a
phenomenon in question across time. Hilpert (2011,
436) stresses that “the main purpose of producing
linguistic motion charts is to give the analyst an in-
tuitive understanding of complex linguistic develop-
ment”. Following Hilpert’s methodology, we con-
verted our data into the R data frame format and
produced a motion chart, as shown in Figure 5. At
present, our emotion analysis can be assessed as a
dynamic motion chart, by using GoogleViz6, inter-
nally interfaced via R (R Development Core Team,
2007). The chart allows for displaying emotion by

6http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/googleVis/index.html

type, color and size across time sequencing. Thus,
the user can access this information in an interactive
way without having to extract any information.For
the future, we plan on adding discourse and word
information.

8 Conclusion

We have presented an approach to providing access
to an Old Occitan text via parallel word alignment
with a modern language and cross-language trans-
fer. We regard this project as a case study, showing
that we can provide access to many types of infor-
mation without the user having to learn cumbersome
query languages or programming. We have also
shown that the use of methods from computational
linguistics, namely cross-language transfer, can pro-

8



Figure 5: Dynamic emotion analysis with GoogleViz.

Figure 4: ANNIS frequency analysis.

vide tools for annotating the corpus without having
access to an expert in the historical language. Us-
ing ANNIS, we showed how a multi-layered corpus
can be queried via a user-friendly visual query in-
terface. Finally, we presented a motion chart, which
allows the user analyze and trace emotions dynami-
cally without any technical requirements.

This work is part of our on-going project to fully
annotate the Romance of Flamenca. Our goal is to
provide users with necessary tools allowing for text-
mining and visualization of this romance. Given a
search query in ANNIS, we plan to develop an R
package that will enable users to visualize their indi-
vidual results exported from ANNIS and processed
as motions charts and other statistical plots. Finally,

this parallel corpus can be used as a training cor-
pus in machine translation and for parallel dictio-
nary and emotion lexicon building in resource-poor
languages, such as Old Occitan.

References
Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm and Richard Sproat. 2005. Emo-

tional sequencing and development in fairy tales. In
Jianhua Tao, Tieniu Tan, and Rosalind Picard, edi-
tors, Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction,
volume 3784 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 668–674. Springer.

Kate Beeching. 2013. A parallel corpus approach to
investigating semantic change. In Karin Aijmer and
Bengt Altenberg, editors, Advances in Corpus-Based
Contrastive Linguistics: Studies in Honour of Stig Jo-
hansson, pages 103–126. John Benjamins.

E.D. Blodgett. 1995. The Romance of Flamenca. Gar-
land, New York.

Monserat Civit, Antònia Martı́, and Nuria Bufı́. 2006.
Cat3LB and Cast3LB: From constituents to dependen-
cies. In Advances in Natural Language Processing,
pages 141–153. Springer.

Stefanie Dipper. 2005. XML-based stand-off represen-
tation and exploitation of multi-level linguistic anno-
tation. In Proceedings of Berliner XML Tage 2005
(BXML 2005), pages 39–50, Berlin, Germany.

Andrés Enrique-Arias. 2012. Parallel texts in diachronic
investigations: Insights from a parallel corpus of Span-
ish medieval Bible translations. In Exploring Ancient
Languages through Corpora (EALC), Oslo, Norway.

9



Andrés Enrique-Arias. 2013. On the usefulness of us-
ing parallel texts in diachronic investigations: Insights
from a parallel corpus of Spanish medieval Bible trans-
lations. In Paul Durrell, Martin Scheible, Silke Whitt,
and Richard J. Bennett, editors, New Methods in His-
torical Corpora, pages 105–116. Narr.

Anna Feldman and Jirka Hana. 2010. A Resource-Light
Approach to Morpho-Syntactic Tagging. Rodopi.

Suzanne Fleischmann. 1995. The non-lyric texts. In
F.R.P. Akehurst and Judith M. Davis, editors, A Hand-
book of the Troubadours, pages 176–184. University
of California Press.

Virginia Francisco, Raquel Hervás, Federico Peinado,
and Pablo Gervás. 2011. Emotales: Creating a corpus
of folk tales with emotional annotations. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 46:341–381.

Martin Hilpert. 2011. Dynamic visualizations of lan-
guage change: Motion charts on the basis of bivari-
ate and multivariate data from diachronic corpora. In-
ternational Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 16(4):435–
461.

Rebecca Hwa, Philip Resnik, Amy Weinberg, Clara
Cabezas, and Okan Kolak. 2005. Bootstrapping
parsers via syntactic projection across parallel texts.
Natural Language Engineering, 11(3):311–325.

Jungi Kim, Jin-Ji Li, and Jong-Hyeok Lee. 2010.
Evaluating multilanguage-comparability of subjectiv-
ity analysis systems. In Proceedings of the 48th An-
nual Meeting of the ACL, pages 595–603, Uppsala,
Sweden.

Marijn Koolen, Frans Adriaans, Jaap Kamps, and
Maarten de Rijke. 2006. A cross-language ap-
proach to historic document retrieval. In M. Lalmas
and et al., editors, Advances in Information Retrieval,
pages 407–419. Springer.

Sandra Kübler and Heike Zinsmeister. 2014. Cor-
pus Linguistics and Linguistically Annotated Corpora.
Bloomsbury Academic.

Bing Liu. 2012. Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Min-
ing. Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Tech-
nologies. Morgan & Claypool Publishers.

France Martineau, Paul Hirschbühler, Anthony Kroch,
and Yves Charles Morin. 2010. Corpus MCVF
(parsed corpus), modéliser le changement: les voies
du français. Départment de Français, University of Ot-
tawa.

Anthony McEnery and Zhonghu Xiao. 2007. Paral-
lel and comparable corpora: What is happening? In
G. James and G. Anderman, editors, Incorporating
Corpora: Translation and the Linguist, Translating
Europe, pages 18–31. Multilingual Matters.

Rada Mihalcea, Carmen Banea, and Janyce Wiebe. 2007.
Learning multilingual subjective language via cross-
lingual projections. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual

Meeting of the ACL, pages 976–983, Prague, Czech
Republic.

Saif Mohammad and Tony Yang. 2011. Tracking senti-
ment in mail: How genders differ on emotional axes.
In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Computa-
tional Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Anal-
ysis (WASSA), pages 70–79, Portland, OR.

Saif M. Mohammad. 2012. From once upon a time
to happily ever after: Tracking emotions in mail and
books. Decision Support Systems, 53:730–741.

Franco Moretti. 2005. Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract
Models for a Literary History. Verso.

Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2000. A comparison
of alignment models for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 1086–1090, Saarbrücken,
Germany.

Daniela Oelke, Dimitrios Kokkinakis, and Mats Malm.
2012. Advanced visual analytics methods for litera-
ture analysis. Proceedings of the 6th EACL Workshop
on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social
Sciences, and Humanities, pages 35–44.

Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and
sentiment analysis. Foundations and Trends in Infor-
mation Retrieval, 2(1-2):1–135.

Svetlana Petrova and Michael Solf. 2009. On the
methods of information-structuralanalysis in historical
texts: A case study on Old High German. In Roland
Hinterhölzl and Svetlana Petrova, editors, Informa-
tion structure and language change. New approaches
to word order variation in Germanic, pages 121–160.
Walter de Gruyter.

Shaver Philip, Schwartz Judith, Kirson Donald, and
O’Connor Cary. 1987. Emotion knowledge: Further
exploration of a prototype approach. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 52(6):1061–1086.

Robert Plutchik. 1980. A general psychoevolutionary
theory of emotion. Emotion: Theory, research, and
experience, 1(3):3–33.

R Development Core Team. 2007. A language and en-
vironment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing.

Luz Rello and Iustina Ilisei. 2009. Approach to the
identification of Spanish zero pronouns. In Student
Research Workshop, RANLP, pages 60–65, Borovets,
Bulgaria.

Cristina Sánchez López, To Appear. Sintaxis histórica
de la lengua española. Tercera parte, chapter Preposi-
ciones, conjunciones y adverbios derivados de partici-
pios. Fondo de Cultura Económica, México.

Olga Scrivner and Sandra Kübler. 2012. Building an Old
Occitan corpus via cross-language transfer. In Pro-
ceedings of the First International Workshop on Lan-

10



guage Technology for Historical Text(s), pages 392–
400, Vienna, Austria.

Olga Scrivner, Sandra Kübler, Barbara Vance, and Eric
Beuerlein. 2013. Le Roman de Flamenca : An an-
notated corpus of old occitan. In Proceedings of the
Third Workshop on Annotation of Corpora for Re-
search in Humanities, pages 85–96, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Benjamin Snyder and Regina Barzilay. 2008. Unsuper-
vised multilingual learning for morphological segmen-
tation. In Proceedings of ACL: HTL, Columbus, OH.

Benjamin Snyder, Tahira Naseem, and Regina Barzilay.
2009. Unsupervised multilingual grammar induction.
In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the 47th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 4th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing of the Asian Federa-
tion of Natural Language Processing (ACL-IJCNLP),
Suntec, Singapore. To appear.

Christine Storm and Tom Storm. 1987. A taxonomic
study of the vocabulary of emotions. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 53(4):805–816.

Dan Tufis. 2007. Exploiting aligned parallel corpora
in multilingual studies and applications. In Proceed-
ings of the 1st International Conference on Intercul-
tural Collaboration, pages 103–117, Kyoto, Japan.

David Yarowsky and Grace Ngai. 2001. Inducing multi-
lingual POS taggers and NP bracketers via robust pro-
jection across aligned corpora. In Proceedings of the
2nd Meeting of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL),
Pittsburgh, PA.

David Yarowsky, Grace Ngai, and Richard Wicentowski.
2001. Inducing multilingual text analysis tools via ro-
bust projection across aligned corpora. In Proceedings
of HLT 2001, First International Conference on Hu-
man Language Technology Research, pages 161–168,
San Diego, CA.

Amir Zeldes, J. Ritz, Anke Lüdeling, and Christian
Chiarcos. 2009. ANNIS: A search tool for multi-layer
annotated corpora. In Proceedings of Corpus Linguis-
tics, Liverpool, UK.

Amir Zeldes. 2007. Machine translation between lan-
guage stages: Extracting historical grammar from a
parallel diachronic corpus of Polish. In Proceedings
of the Corpus Linguistics Conference (CL), Birming-
ham, UK.

11


