






















The Corpus of American Norwegian Speech (CANS) 

 

Janne Bondi Johannessen 
The Text Laboratory & MultiLing, University of Oslo / P.O. Box 1102 

Blindern, 0317 Oslo, Norway 
jannebj@iln.uio.no 

 

Abstract 

This paper contains a description of the 
Corpus of American Norwegian Speech, 
a new tool for heritage language research. 
We present the background for its 
existence, the linguistic contents and its 
main technical features. The 
demonstration will show the corpus in 
use, focussing on problems that are 
specific to heritage language research, 
and how the corpus can be searched to 
provide relevant data. 

1 Introduction 
The American Norwegian language is a dying 
language. It is therefore important to record it 
and make it available for research. The best way 
to do this, is to transcribe the recordings, 
morphologically tag the transcriptions and make 
them available in a searchable corpus, The 
Corpus of American Norwegian Speech (CANS). 
The Text Laboratory at the University of Oslo 
(UiO) has developed many speech features for its 
corpus system Glossa (Johannessen et al. 2008), 
which is already used for many other speech 
corpora, so it has been a relatively easy task to 
put one more corpus into the same architecture. 
The Glossa architecture has proved to be a 
valuable corpus search system, and is used for 
many corpus projects outside the UiO, most 
recently the Finland Swedish speech corpus 
Talko. Glossa is currently undergoing further 
development under the CLARIN umbrella and 
the Norwegian project Clarino. 
   The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 
gives some background on the American 
Norwegian heritage language, while Section 3 
describes the main features of the corpus, first 
with a presentation of the informants in the 
corpus in numbers, then with a list of the special 
metadata of these heritage informants, and 

finally with the way the corpus has been 
transcribed and annotated. Section 4 presents 
some examples of search possibilities, and 
Section 5 sums up the paper. 

2 The Norwegian Heritage language in 
America 

Norwegian emigration to America started in 
1825, and by 1930, 850 000 people had left for 
the new world, i.e. the USA and Canada, 
approximately the same as the whole population 
of Norway in 1800. Most settled in the Midwest. 
In these rural areas, whole communities had a 
Norwegian population, and for a long time they 
had their own schools, churches and newspapers, 
thereby keeping the language alive. Researchers 
have been interested in the American Norwegian 
language at several points in time. Didrik Arup 
Seip and Ernst W. Selmer did recordings in the 
1930s, Einar Haugen in 1940s, Arnstein Hjelde  
in the 1990s, and the present author with 
colleagues in the 2010s.  
    Research into heritage language has recently 
become a major field of linguistics, Rothman 
(2009:159) defines this way: “A language 
qualifies as a heritage language if it is a language 
spoken at home or otherwise readily available to 
young children, and crucially this language is not 
a dominant language of the larger (national) 
society.” The last years an annual workshop 
series has been established (the last was held in 
2014 at UCLA), and in 2012 a special issue of 
Norsk Lingvistisk Tidsskrift was devoted to 
Norwegian heritage language (for both, see 
References).  
    Heritage languages usually differ from their 
mother languages (if these are a majority 
language elsewhere), in that they have a rather 
large number of loanwords, and that their 
phonology, morphology and syntax may have 
features from the neighbouring language or at 
least are different from those of their mother 
language.  

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 297



For these reasons, studying heritage language 
may bring new knowledge on the human 
language capacity. It is interesting to see which 
linguistic features that change, and how, and 
even to compare the changes with the language 
of first and second acquisition of the mother 
language. It is obvious that a good corpus of 
heritage language is a valuable resource for such 
research.  

3 The CANS corpus 

3.1 The contents of the corpus: informants 
and numbers 

The corpus will be growing as there are many 
recordings that are in the process of being 
transcribed and annotated for corpus adaption, 
but at the moment the corpus consists of 131 000 
words based on the speech of 36 informants from 
13 different speakers from Illinois, Iowa, 
Minnesota, South Dakota and Wisconsin. The 
speakers range in age from 67 to 96, but the 
majority are in their 80s. Since none of them 
have transferred the language to the next 
generation, this language is dying. The 
recordings are from the fieldwork conducted by 
the present author, from the 2010s. 

3.2 Metadata on informants 
For each informant, a variety of metadata is 
available, and searchable. This includes place 
and state of informant, age, year of birth, 
language of instruction at school, how much 
contact they have with Norway, how many times 
they have visited Norway, whether they read 
Norwegian, whether they have Norwegian as 
their mother tongue (L1), which generation 
immigrant they are, area in Norway where 
ancestors came from, number of words in the 
interview, and year of recording. The heritage 
corpus-specific metadata has been selected by 
consulting researchers who were using the 
corpus from the start (see Acknowledgments). 

3.3 Transcriptions 
All the recordings have been transcribed in two 
ways: a phonetic-like one and a standard 
orthographic one. The phonetic transcription was 
done first via the free software Transcriber and 
later by Elan. The result of this manual 
transcription has then been translated to 
orthographic transcription using a semi-
automatic Dialect Transliterator, developed at the 
Text Laboratory. This transliterator uses a “bi-

lingual” word list consisting of dialectal, 
phonetically written word forms and their 
standard orthographic equivalents, and which is a 
result of previous transliterations. It translates 
each phonetically written form to an 
orthographic word. The result is then inspected 
manually, checking the two transcription 
equivalents and comparing the transcriptions to 
the original audio versions. 

   After manual inspection and correction, the 
new transliterated set of phonetic and 
orthographic text is fed back into the 
transliterator, improving the word list for further 
use for that particular dialect or language variety. 
Whenever a word in its phonetic transcription is 
not found in the word list, the same word is used 
for transliteration, to be given an orthographic 
form later in the manual inspection. At this stage, 
certain other annotations are also added, see for 
example Section 3.5.  
    The two transcriptions are strictly aligned 
word by word, and linked together in Glossa, and 
the user can choose to search in only one of them, 
or in both simultaneously. (See list of web sites 
at the end of this paper.) 

3.4 Tagging 
The CANS corpus has been tagged with a  
TreeTagger (Schmid 1994, 1995) trained on a 
speech version of the Oslo-Bergen tagger, 
developed for a speech corpus of the Oslo dialect, 
and then measured by 10-fold cross validation at 
an accuracy of 96, 9 % (Søfteland and Nøklestad 
2008). The accuracy has not been measured for 
the CANS corpus, but with its high number of 
English loan words and dialectal word order, the 
result is likely not as good. 

3.5 Other annotation 
Since CANS contains heritage language it has 
many loanwords. These have been annotated 
manually in the transliteration process with the 
tag x. Even if the corpus contains only about 130 
000 words, the number of words tagged with x is 
nearly 4000.  

4 Searching the CANS corpus 
The corpus can be searched using words, parts of 
words or word combinations and by annotations. 
The metadata can also be used as search filters, 
see Johannessen et al. (2012) and (2014) for a 
general introduction to the corpus search features. 

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 298



In this paper the focus is on what is special for 
the CANS corpus.  

   Figure 1 illustrates a search for the x-tagging 
described in Section 4.5; the x is chosen from the 
Criteria menu that filters any search given in the 
word-box above it. (The box can be empty, too, 
as it is here.) 

 

Figure 1: Searching for x-tagged words 

This search gives 3857 hits. One is illustrated 
below, in Figure 2. (The orthographic 
transcription is on the first line, followed by the 
phonetic one on the second.) 

å jeg driver og   raiser   noe hester  

å e driv å   reiser   no hæsster  

‘Oh, I raise some horses.’ (blair_WI_01gm) 

Figure 2: One of the results from the search for  
x-tagged words (raise is an English loanword; 

the Norwegian equivalent is avle. ) 

Other typical words tagged with x are 
interjections like oh, huh, right, and words that 
have replaced Norwegian ones, like cousin 
(instead of fetter), back (tilbake), figure (think), 
telle (fortelle).  
    An example of filtering a search by informant 
metadata is given in Figure 3, where informants 
are specified to be fourth generation immigrant. 
This box comes in addition to the general word-
box, this time searching for the word ikke ‘not’.  

 

Figure 3: Filtering a search by speaker’s 
generation 

The search yielded 467 results divided amongst 7 
informants. It can be filtered further, e.g. by the 
home county of the ancestors, age or any other 
metadata.   

5 Conclusion 

This paper has presented the Corpus of American 
Norwegian Speech, a heritage language corpus. 
The paper has focussed on heritage languages in 
general and American Norwegian in particular, 
and the most central details of the corpus. Some 
statistics on the informants were offered, the 
special metadata of these heritage informants 
were presented, and transcription and annotation 
were briefly presented. Finally, some 
illustrations of search possibilities were given. 
For more general speech corpus features of 
CANS, the readers are referred to Johannessen et 
al. (2012, 2014). Expansions of the corpus are 
expected, as there is presently some funding for 
more transcriptions. The corpus may also be 
expanded with other heritage Scandinavian 
languages. 

Acknowledgments 

The Corpus of American Norwegian Speech 
could not have been developed without several 
people. The most important ones are the 
American Norwegians who have willingly sat 
down in front of a camera to talk with their 
fellow heritage speakers and the researchers. 
Signe Laake and Arnstein Hjelde have been 
excellent collaborators and company at fieldwork 
on several occasions from 2010 to 2014.  
    The people at the Text Laboratory, UiO, have 
a major role in the corpus development. Kristin 
Hagen has taken the responsibility for technical 
decisions and coordinating work. Joel Priestley 
has designed the corpus interface and is chief 
programmer for all the specific speech features. 
Eirik Olsen, André Kaasen and Eirik Tengesdal 
have been vital in observations and suggestions 
related to transcription.  
    The collection of material, i.e. fieldwork and 
recordings, has been funded by The Research 
Council of Norway (RCN) under the project 
Norwegian Dialect Syntax; the Department of 
Linguistics and Scandinavian Studies, UiO. 
Transcriptions have been funded partly by the 
Text Lab, UiO, by the University of Tromsø 
(thanks are due to Marit Westergaard and Merete 
Anderssen, who have also given input on search 
options and metadata in the corpus), and by the 
RCN project LIA, no. 225941. The fieldwork 
was partly supported by the RCN through its 
Centres of Excellence funding scheme, project 
no. 223265.  

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 299



References  
 

Johannessen, Janne Bondi, Lars Nygaard, Joel 
Priestley, and Anders Nøklestad. 2008. Glossa: a 
Multilingual, Multimodal, Configurable User 
Interface. In: Proceedings of the Sixth 
International Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC'08). Paris: European Language Resources 
Association (ELRA). 
http://www.hf.uio.no/iln/tjenester
/kunnskap/sprak/glossa/LREC-
glossa_2008.pdf 

Johannessen, Janne Bondi, Joel Priestley, Kristin 
Hagen, Anders Nøklestad, and Andre Lynum. 2012. 
The Nordic Dialect Corpus. In Proceedings of the 
Eighth International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation. European Language 
Resources Association, p. 3388-3391. 
http://dblp.uni-
trier.de/db/conf/lrec/lrec2012.htm
l 

Johannessen, Janne Bondi, Øystein Alexander 
Vangsnes, Joel Priestley, Kristin Hage,. 2014. A 
multilingual speech corpus of North-Germanic 
languages. In Raso, Tommaso; Mello, Heliana 
(eds.): Spoken Corpora and Linguistic Studies. 
John Benjamins Publishing Company, p. 69-83. 
https://www.benjamins.com/#catalog
/books/scl.61.02joh/fulltext 

Norsk Lingvistisk Tidsskrift [Norwegian Linguistics 
Journal]. 2012. Special issue on the Norwegian 
Language in America (edited by Janne Bondi 
Johannessen and Joe Salmons). 

Rothman, Jason. 2009. Understanding the Nature and 
Outcomes of Early Bilingualism: Romance 
Languages as Heritage Languages. The 
International Journal of Bilingualism 13: 155-163. 

Schmid, Helmut. 1995. Improvements in Part-of-
Speech Tagging with an Application to German. 
Proceedings of the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop. 
Dublin, Ireland.  

Schmid, Helmut. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-Speech 
Tagging Using Decision Trees. Proceedings of 
International Conference on New Methods in 
Language Processing, Manchester, UK. 

Søfteland, Åshild and Anders Nøklestad. 2008. 
Manuell morfologisk tagging av NoTa-materialet 
med støtte fra en statistisk tagger. In Johannessen, 
Janne Bondi og Kristin Hagen (eds.) Språk i Oslo. 
Ny forskning omkring talespråk. Novus, Oslo. 

 

Web sites 

5th Annual Workshop on Immigrant Languages in the 
Americas, UCLA, October 17-19, 2014. 
http://tekstlab.uio.no/WILA5/index.h
tml 

CLARIN: http://www.clarin.eu/ 

Clarino: http://clarin.b.uib.no/ 

Corpus of American Norwegian Speech (CANS):  
http://tekstlab.uio.no/glossa/html/?
corpus=amerikanorsk 

DialectTransliterator: http://omilia.uio.no
/scandiasyn/translit/ 

Elan: https://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-
tools/elan/ 

Glossa corpus search and processing tool: 
http://www.hf.uio.no/iln/english/abo
ut/organization/text-
laboratory/services/glossa.html 

Oslo-Bergen 
Tagger: http://tekstlab.uio.no/obt-
ny/english/index.html 

Talko: 
http://www.sls.fi/doc.php?category=2
&docid=943 

Text Laboratory: 
http://www.hf.uio.no/iln/english/abo
ut/organization/text-laboratory/ 

TreeTagger: http://www.ims.uni-
stuttgart.de/projekte/corplex/TreeTa
gger/ 

Transcriber: http://trans.sourceforge.n
et/en/presentation.php

 

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 300


