



















































Feeling is Understanding: From Affective to Semantic Spaces


Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 162–172,
London, UK, April 15-17 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Feeling is Understanding: From Affective to Semantic Spaces

Elias Iosif
School of ECE, National Technical University of Athens, Greece

“Athena” Research Center, Greece
iosife@central.ntua.gr

Alexandros Potamianos
School of ECE, National Technical University of Athens, Greece

“Athena” Research Center, Greece
potam@central.ntua.gr

Abstract

Motivated by theories of language development we investigate the contribution of affect to lexical se-
mantics in the context of distributional semantic models (DSMs). The relationship between semantic
and affective spaces is computationally modeled for the task of semantic similarity computation be-
tween words. It is shown that affective spaces contain salient information for lexical semantic tasks.
We further investigate specific semantic relationships where affective information plays a prominent
role. The relations between semantic similarity and opposition are studied in the framework of a bi-
nary classification problem applied for the discrimination of synonyms and antonyms. For the case of
antonyms, the use of affective features results in 33% relative improvement in classification accuracy
compared to the use of semantic features.

1 Introduction

Mainstream distributional semantic models (DSMs) rely solely on linguistic data, being ungrounded to
the real world, i.e., features from other modalities and experiential information that are related to the
acquisition of semantic knowledge are ignored. Motivated by findings from the literature of language
development, according to which language acquisition is (also) grounded on communication episodes
where partners exchange feelings (Tomasello et al., 2005), we consider emotion as part of lexical se-
mantics. We argue that emotion conveys salient information, relaxing the view of emotion as “pathos”
(Salovey and Mayer, 1990) that was ostracized by (traditional) models of semantics/logic.

In this paper, the affective content of words is investigated within a network-based framework re-
garding its contribution to lexical semantics tasks. This framework is motivated by cognitive models that
rely on the distributed representation of semantic attributes (features) (Rogers and McClelland, 2004).
Given a stimulus (e.g., a word), local areas (sub-spaces) are activated, triggering a number of attributes
that are (semantically) related with the stimulus. The activation of attributes can be explained in the
context of semantic priming according to which the presence of a word facilitates the cognitive pro-
cessing of another word (McNamara, 2005). Affective priming constitutes the emotional analogue of
semantic priming (Ferré and Sánchez-Casas, 2014). The key machinery of the used network is a two-tier
system. The first layer constitutes a local representation scheme for encoding the semantics of target
words simulating the aforementioned activation models. The activation models enable the definition of
various similarity metrics in the second layer. In this work, we investigate the creation of activation
models using both lexical and affective features, which are used for the computation of word semantic
similarity. To the best of our knowledge this is the first computational model investigating the role of
affect in semantics.

162



2 Related Work

Semantic similarity is the building block for numerous applications of natural language processing, such
as affective text analysis (Malandrakis et al., 2013). There has been much research interest on devis-
ing data-driven approaches for estimating semantic similarity between words. Distributional semantic
models (DSMs) (Baroni and Lenci, 2010) are based on the distributional hypothesis of meaning (Harris,
1954) assuming that semantic similarity between words is a function of the overlap of their linguistic con-
texts. DSMs can be categorized into unstructured that employ a bag-of-words model and structured that
employ syntactic relationships between words (Baroni and Lenci, 2010). DSMs are typically constructed
from co-occurrence statistics of word tuples that are extracted on existing corpora or on corpora specifi-
cally harvested from the web. In (Iosif and Potamianos, 2015), a language-agnostic DSM was proposed
as a two-tier system motivated by cognitive considerations such as network activation and priming.. The
first layer, encodes the semantics of words via the creation of lexical neighborhoods. In the second layer,
similarity metrics are defined on these semantic neighborhoods. The extension of DSMs for representing
the compositional aspects of lexical semantics constitutes an active research area (Baroni et al., 2014).

Analysis of text to estimate affect or sentiment is a relatively recent research topic that has attracted
great interest, as reflected by a series of shared evaluation tasks, e.g., analysis of tweets (Nakov et al.,
2013). Relevant applications deal with numerous domains such as news stories (Lloyd et al., 2005) and
product reviews (Hu and Liu, 2004). Affective analysis is also useful for other application domains such
as dialogue systems (Lee and Narayanan, 2005). Several resources enable the development of these
computational models, ranging from flat lexica (e.g., General Inquirer (Stone et al., 1966) and Affective
norms for English Words (Bradley and Lang, 1999)) to large lexical networks (e.g., SentiWordNet (Esuli
and Sebastiani, 2006) and WordNet Affect (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004)). Text can be analyzed for
affect at different levels of granularity: from single words to entire sentences. In (Turney and Littman,
2003), the affective ratings of unknown words were predicted using the affective ratings for a small set
of words (seeds) and the semantic relatedness between the unknown and the seed words. An example
of sentence-level approach was proposed in (Malandrakis et al., 2013) applying techniques from n-gram
language modeling.

3 Lexical Features and Metrics of Semantic Similarity

Co-occurrence-based (CC). The underlying assumption of co-occurrence-based metrics is that the co-
existence of words in a specified contextual environment indicates semantic relatedness. In this work,
we employ a widely-used co-occurrence-based metric, namely, Dice coefficient D (co-occurrence is
considered at the sentence level).
Context-based (CT). The fundamental assumption behind context-based metrics is that similarity of
context implies similarity of meaning (Harris, 1954). A contextual window of size 2H +1 words is
centered on the word of interest wi and lexical features are extracted. For every instance of wi in the
corpus the H words left and right of wi formulate a feature vector xi. For a given value of H the context-
based semantic similarity between two words, wi and wj , is computed as the cosine of their feature
vectors: QH(wi, wj) =

xi.xj
||xi|| ||xj || . The elements of feature vectors can be weighted according to various

schemes, while, here we use a binary scheme.

4 Affective Features and Metric of Affective Similarity

A word w is characterized regarding its affective content in a continuous (within the [−1, 1] interval)
space consisting of three dimensions (affective features), namely, valence (v), arousal (a), and domi-
nance (d). For each dimension, the affective content of w is estimated as a linear combination of its’
semantic similarities to a set of K seed words and the corresponding affective ratings of seeds (for the

163



corresponding dimension), as follows (Malandrakis et al., 2013).

û(w) = λ0 +
K∑

i=1

λi u(ti) S(ti, w), (1)

where t1...tK are the seed words, u(ti) is the affective rating for seed word ti with u denoting one of the
aforementioned dimensions, i.e., v, a, or d. λi is a trainable weight corresponding to seed ti. S(ti, w)
stands for a metric of semantic similarity (see Section 3) between ti and w. The affective distance
between two words, wi and wj , can be computed as the Euclidean distance over the three-dimensional
space, which can be transformed into similarity.

5 Semantic and Affective Networks

In this section, we summarize the main ideas of DSMs that were proposed in (Iosif and Potamianos,
2015) for building semantic networks, which are extended here for the creation of affective networks.
An overview of the semantic and affective networks is presented in Fig. 1. Each network type consists

Figure 1: Overview of semantic and affective networks. Each network consists of two layers, namely,
activation and similarity.

of two layers, namely, activation and similarity layer. For a target word, wi, the first layer is used for the
activation of a set of other words that are semantically/affectively related with the target. The second layer
is used for the computation of semantic/affective similarity between two words for which the respective
activation layers have been computed. Regardless of the network type (i.e., semantic or affective), the
network is defined as an undirected (under a symmetric similarity metric) graph F = (V,E) whose the
set of vertices V are all words in a lexicon O, and the set of edges E contains the links between the
vertices. The links (edges) between words in the network are determined and weighted according to the
pairwise (semantic of affective) similarity of the vertices. For each word (target word) that is included in
the lexicon, wi ∈ O, we consider a sub-graph of F , Fi = (Ni, Ei), where the set of vertices Ni includes
in total n members of O, which are linked with wi via edges Ei.

5.1 Layer 1: Activation Models

Semantic Activation Model. The computation of the semantic activation model for a target word wi is
motivated semantic priming (McNamara, 2005). The model can be represented as a Fi sub-graph, which
is also referred to as the semantic neighborhood of wi. The members of Ni (neighbors of wi) are selected
according to a semantic similarity metric (in this work, D or QH defined in Section 3) with respect to
wi, i.e., the n most similar words to wi are selected. The semantic neighborhood of target wi with size n
is denoted as Li(n).
Affective Activation Model. The computation of the affective activation model for a target word wi is
motivated affective priming (Ferré and Sánchez-Casas, 2014). The model can be represented as a Fi sub-
graph that denotes the affective neighborhood of wi. The members of Ni (neighbors of wi) are selected
according to an affective similarity metric (e.g., as defined in Section 4) with respect to wi, i.e., the n

164



most similar words to wi are selected. The affective neighborhood of target wi with size n is denoted as
Ai(n).

5.2 Layer 2: Similarity Model

Here, we describe two network-based similarity metrics proposed in (Iosif and Potamianos, 2015) for
computing the similarity between two (target) words wi and wj . The metrics are defined on top of the
activations models (semantic of affective) of wi and wj that were computed in the previous layer of the
network1.

(a) (b)

Figure 2: Example of network similarity metrics based on the activation models of two target words. The
targets, “forest” and “fruit”, are depicted along with their neighbors (Layer 1): {pine, tree, . . . , land} and
{juice, pie, . . . , jam}, respectively. Arcs represent the similarities between targets and neighbors. The
similarity between “forest” and “fruit” (Layer 2) is computed according to (a) maximum similarity of
neighborhoods, and (b) correlation of neighborhood similarities.

Maximum Similarity of Neighborhoods. This metric is based on the hypothesis that the similarity of
two words, wi and wj , can be estimated by the maximum similarity of their respective sets of neighbors,
defined as follows:

Mn(wi, wj) = max{αij , αji}, (2)
where

αij = max
x ∈ Nj

S(wi, x), αji = max
y ∈ Ni

S(wj , y).

αij (or αji) denotes the maximum similarity between wi (or wj) and the neighbors of wj (or wi) that
is computed according to a similarity metric S: for semantic neighborhoods one of the metrics defined
in Section 3, or the metric defined in Section 4 for affective neighborhoods. Ni and Nj are the set of
neighbors for wi and wj , respectively. For the case of semantic neighborhoods the definition of Mn
is motivated by the maximum sense similarity assumption (Resnik, 1995) hypothesizing that the most
salient information in the neighbors of a word are semantic features denoting senses of this word. An
example illustrating the computation of similarity between targets “forest” and “fruit” is depicted by
Fig.2(a). Mn(“forest”, “fruit”) = 0.30 because the similarity between “fruit” and “tree” (among all
neighbors of “forest”) is the largest.
Attributional Neighborhood Similarity. The similarity between wi and wj is defined as follows:

Rn(wi, wj) = max{βij , βji}, (3)
where

βij = ρ(CNii , C
Ni
j ), βji = ρ(C

Nj
i , C

Nj
j ).

1Similarity metrics can be applied over the semantic and affective neighborhoods of wi and wj . In the metric definitions
we use the (generic) notations Ni and Nj to refer to the neighborhoods of wi and wj , respectively, regardless of the type (i.e.,
semantic or affective) of those neighborhoods.

165



CNii = (S(wi, x1), S(wi, x2), . . . , S(wi, xn)) and Ni = {x1, x2, . . . , xn}. The vectors CNij , CNji , and
C

Nj
j are defined similarly as C

Ni
i . The ρ function stands for the Pearson’s correlation coefficient, Ni

is the set of neighbors of word wi, and S is a similarity metric: for semantic neighborhoods one of
the metrics defined in Section 3, or the metric defined in Section 4 for affective neighborhoods. The
motivation behind this metric is attributional similarity, i.e., we assume that neighborhoods encode se-
mantic or affective features of a word. Semantically/affectively similar words are expected to exhibit
correlated similarities with respect to such features. The similarity computation process is exempli-
fied in Fig.2(b) for the target words wi =“forest” and wj = “fruit”. The similarity vectors between
the neighbors Ni of “forest” and each of the words are computed: C

Ni
i = (0.16, 0.09, . . . , 0.09),

CNij = (0.10, 0.30, . . . , 0.01). Similarly, C
Nj
i , C

Nj
j are computed for the neighbors of “fruit” and

combined to estimate Rn(“forest”, “fruit”) = −0.04.

5.3 Fusion of Lexical and Affective Activation Models

In this section, we propose two schemes for the unsupervised fusion of semantic and affective activation
models defined in Section 5.1. The motivation behind this idea is the hypothesis that both semantic and
affective activations are triggered given lexical stimuli, e.g., the target words for which similarity is com-
puted. In addition, for the task of similarity computation we assume that the two activation models are
fused rather being exploited independently. Two types of fusion are proposed, namely, local and global.
The local scheme is based on the fusion of semantic and affective neighborhoods of relatively small size.
The largest possible sizes of semantic and affective neighborhoods (i.e., equal to the number of network
nodes) are used for the case of global fusion.

Local. A hybrid neighborhood NΨ(n)i for a target word wi is computed based on its lexical and af-
fective neighborhoods, Li(n) and Ai(n) of size n, as follows:

N
Ψ(n)
i = f(Li(n), Ai(n)), (4)

where f stands for a set operator given that Li(n) and Ai(n) are represented as sets.
Global. A hybrid neighborhood NΩ(n)i of size n for a target word wi is computed based on its lexical
and affective neighborhoods, Li(|O |) and Ai(|O |) of size |O | (i.e., equal to the size of the lexicon O)
as:

N
Ω(n)
i = g(S(wi, Li(|O |)), S(wi, Ai(|O |));n), (5)

where S(wi, Li(| O |)) and S(wi, Ai(| O |)) stand for the vectors including the semantic and affective
similarity scores between target wi and the members of Li(|O |) and Ai(|O |), respectively. Before the
application of the g fusion function the two vectors should be normalized and aligned. The fusion results
into a single vector of size O from which the n top-ranked values are selected and the corresponding n
lexicon entries are considered as members of the neighborhood NΩ(n)i .

Fusion level: Examples
function Lexical model Affective model Fused

Local: Li ∪ Ai Li ={pine, tree,...} Ai ={taste, sugar,...} {pine, tree, taste, sugar,...}
Global: ζLi · ζAi ζLi = [0.5, 0.3, . . . ] ζAi = [0.2, 0.8, . . . ] [0.1, 0.24, . . . ]

Global: max{ζLi , ζAi } ζLi = [0.5, 0.3, . . . ] ζAi = [0.2, 0.8, . . . ] [0.5, 0.8, . . . ]

Table 1: Fusion functions for the lexical and affective activation models.

We present results for a number of simple functions for the fusion of Li and Ai shown in Table 1. For
the case of local fusion, the hybrid neighborhood is built by taking the union of semantic and affective
neighborhoods. Denoting vectors S(wi, Li(| O |) and S(wi, Ai(| O |) as ζLi and ζAi , respectively, two
functions are used for the case of global fusion: ζLi ·ζAi and max{ζLi , ζAi }. The first stands for the product

166



of ζLi and ζ
A
i . The second function gives the maximum element-wise value, i.e, for each lexicon entry

and the target wi the respective maximum semantic or affective similarity score is selected.

6 Features of Semantic Semantic Opposition

Here, we propose two feature sets that are relevant to the relations of synonymy and antonymy (also
referred to as semantic opposition (Mohammad et al., 2013)). Antonymy constitutes a special lexical
relation, since it embodies both the notion of (semantic) proximity and distance (Cruse, 1986). These
features are based on the affective content of words and features of semantic similarity. Unlike people
that can easily distinguish synonyms and antonyms, this is a challenging problem for the framework
of DSMs. Both synonyms and antonyms exhibit strong associations which can be empirically verified
via standard psycholinguistic experiments, as well as within the computational framework of DSMs.
For example, in free association norms antonyms are frequently given as responses. Regarding DSMs,
the corpus-derived statistics for synonyms and antonyms are correlated leading to comparable similar-
ity scores. For example, in (Mohammad et al., 2013) the relatedness (similarity) scores of semantically
similar (SW) and antonymous (AW) words were analyzed. Interestingly, it was found that the average
score for AW was slightly higher compared to SW. The affective content of words can be considered
as connotations that are added to the respective semantics. The emotional similarity between synonyms
and antonyms is expected to have a contribution regarding their discrimination. For this purpose, the
following features are proposed:

1) Lex1 (lexical). Similarity score based on direct co-occurrence counts. This can be regarded as a
coefficient of semantic priming.
2) Lex2 (lexical). Similarity score computed according to (2) (max-based network metric). Lexical fea-
tures are used for both network layers.
3) Lex3 (lexical). Similarity score computed according to (3) (correlation-based network metric). Lexi-
cal features are used for both network layers.
4) Aff1 (affective). Affective distance computed on the three-dimensional space (valence–arousal–
dominance). This can be thought as a coefficient of affective priming.
5) Aff2 (affective). Similarity: score computed according to (2) (max-based network metric). Affective
features are used for both network layers.
6) Aff3 (affective). Similarity score computed according to (3) (correlation-based network metric). Af-
fective features are used for both network layers.

In essence, for each feature set (lexical and affective) there two types of similarity. The first type consid-
ers the direct similarity of the words of interest, while for the second type, the similarity is estimated via
the respective neighborhoods.

7 Experiments and Evaluation Results

In this section, we investigate the role of semantic and affective features for two tasks of lexical se-
mantics. Semantic and affective activation models are used in combination with the aforementioned
network-based similarity metrics for the computation of word semantic similarity. This is presented
in Section 7.1, while the fusion of the two activation types is shown in 7.2. In Section 7.3, semantic
and affective features are evaluated in the framework of semantic opposition. This is done as a binary
classification problem for the discrimination of synonyms and antonyms.

7.1 Word Semantic Similarity Computation

Creation of Networks. A lexicon consisting of 8, 752 (single-word) English nouns was taken from the
SemCor3 corpus. For the extraction of the textual features a web harvested corpus was created as follows.

167



For each lexicon entry an individual query was formulated and the 1, 000 top ranked results (document
snippets) were retrieved using the Yahoo! search engine and aggregated. The affective ratings (v, a and
d) for these nouns were computed using as seeds the manually annotated ANEW lexicon (Bradley and
Lang, 1999) (600 seeds were used) and estimating the λ weights of (1) according to (Malandrakis et al.,
2013). Regarding S(.) used in (1), the context-based (CT) similarity metric exploiting text features was
applied. The network creation consisted of two main steps: 1) computation of semantic and affective
neighborhoods as described in Section 5, 2) computation of similarity scores using Mn and Rn defined
by (2) and (3), respectively. For the case of semantic neighborhoods two types of similarity metrics (in
conjunction with the respective textual features) were applied: co-occurrence-based (CC), and context-
based (CT) with H =1.

Evaluation. The task of noun semantic similarity computation was used for evaluation purposes with re-
spect to the following datasets (i) MC (Miller and Charles, 1998),(ii) RG (Rubenstein and Goodenough,
1965), and (iii) WS353 (Finkelstein et al., 2002), retaining those pairs that were included in the network.
The Pearson’s correlation coefficient against human ratings was used as evaluation metric.

Type of feature for Network- Number of neighbors (n)
Selection Similarity based

of neighbors computation metric 10 30 50 100 150
(1st layer) (2nd layer)

MC dataset
Lexical (CC) Lexical (CT) Mn 0.48 0.80 0.83 0.91 0.90
Lexical (CT) Lexical (CC) Rn 0.83 0.78 0.80 0.78 0.76

Affective Lexical (CC) Rn 0.85 0.91 0.88 0.85 0.83
RG dataset

Lexical (CC) Lexical (CT) Mn 0.57 0.74 0.78 0.86 0.82
Lexical (CT) Lexical (CC) Rn 0.65 0.71 0.72 0.72 0.72

Affective Lexical (CC) Rn 0.78 0.80 0.79 0.77 0.74
WS353 dataset

Lexical (CC) Lexical(CT) Mn 0.42 0.55 0.59 0.64 0.65
Lexical (CT) Lexical(CC) Rn 0.63 0.58 0.59 0.56 0.55

Affective Lexical (CC) Rn 0.63 0.68 0.68 0.65 0.63

Table 2: Correlation for word similarity computation.

The performance for various neighborhood sizes is presented in Table 2 for two approaches regarding
the activation model (Layer 1) followed by the neighborhood-based similarity estimation (Layer 2). Two
types of activation models are used for the computation neighborhoods, namely, lexical and affective.
Once the neighborhoods are computed, the network metrics Mn and Rn are employed for the similar-
ity computation based on lexical features. Overall, there are two basic settings: Lexical+Lexical and
Affective+Lexical. The core novelty of this work is on the exploitation of affective features for the acti-
vation model, i.e., the Affective+Lexical approach. For the sake of completeness, the results when using
textual features only (Lexical+Lexical) are presented for the respective best performing metrics and fea-
ture types (according to (Iosif and Potamianos, 2015)): CC/CT for Mn and CT/CC for Rn. Regarding
the Affective+Lexical approach, the performance is reported only for Rn that was found to outperform
the (omitted) Mn metric. It is notable2 that the Affective+Lexical combination performs very well be-
ing competitive3 against the best Lexical+Lexical approach, as well as other state-of-the-art approaches
(Agirre et al., 2009). Specifically, the Affective+Lexical combination achieves higher (0.68 vs. 0.65)

2This was experimentally verified using the affective word ratings given by human annotators (ANEW affective lexicon
(Bradley and Lang, 1999)), instead of the automatically estimated ratings produced by (1).

3The detailed comparison of the proposed affective models with other lexical DSMs is beyond the scope of this study.

168



and equal (0.91) correlation scores -compared to the Lexical+Lexical combination- for the WS353 and
MC datasets, respectively. The Affective+Lexical combination consistently achieves higher (or equal)
performance compared to both Lexical+Lexical combinations when few (10-50) neighbors are used.

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Size of neighborhood

C
o

rr
el

at
io

n
 

 

 

Affective + Lexical
Lexical + Lexical

(a)

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Size of neighborhood

C
o

rr
el

at
io

n
 

 

 

Affective + Lexical
Lexical + Lexical

(b)
Figure 3: Correlation for word similarity computation as a function of neighborhood size for pairs con-
sisting of words with: (a) distant affective magnitude (150 pairs from WS353), and (b) comparable
affective magnitude (122 pairs from WS353). Results are shown for Lexical+Lexical (solid line) and
Affective+Lexical (dotted line) approaches.

Motivated by the very good performance of the Affective+Lexical approach, we conducted further
investigation regarding the role of affective information with respect to the affective relation of the words
for which the similarity is computed. For this purpose, the pairs of the largest experimental dataset
(WS353) where distinguished into two groups according to the affective magnitude of their constituents
words. The first group includes pairs whose both constituents have high or low affective magnitude
(i.e., words with comparable magnitude), e.g., (king, queen). The remaining pairs were included in the
second group (i.e., words with distant magnitude), e.g., (psychology, depression). The discrimination
resulted into 122 and 150 pairs consisting of words with comparable and distant affective magnitude,
respectively. The performance of the Lexical+Lexical and Affective+Lexical approaches using the Rn
similarity metric is shown as a function of the neighborhood size in Fig. 3(a) for words with distant
affective magnitude, and in Fig. 3(b) for words with comparable affective magnitude. We observe that the
Affective+Lexical approach consistently achieves higher correlation compared to the Lexical+Lexical
approach for both groups. The superiority of the Affective+Lexical approach is shown more clearly for
the case of words with distant affective magnitude (Fig. 3(a)).

7.2 Fusion of Lexical and Affective Activation Models

Fusion Fusion Number of neighbors
level function 10 30 50 100 150

Best individual model 0.63 0.68 0.68 0.65 0.63
Best lexical model 0.42 0.55 0.59 0.64 0.65

Local Li ∪ Ai 0.45 0.47 0.44 0.47 0.46
Global ζLi · ζAi 0.46 0.48 0.50 0.49 0.48

max{ζLi , ζAi } 0.63 0.68 0.68 0.65 0.63

Table 3: Correlation for word similarity computation (WS353 dataset).

In this section, the evaluation results for the fusion of semantic and affective models (Layer 1) are
presented. The fusion schemes shown in Table 1 were used for the computation of hybrid neighbor-

169



Semantic Baseline Feature types
relation (random) Lexical Affective

(Lex1,Lex2,Lex3) (Aff1,Aff2,Aff3)

Synonymy 50% 61% 62%
Antonymy 50% 61% 82%

Table 4: Classification accuracy for synonymy and antonymy: lexical vs. affective feature sets.

Semantic Baseline Lexical features Affective features
relation (random) Lex1 Lex2 Lex3 Aff1 Aff2 Aff3

Synonymy 50% 51% 61% 59% 61% 61% 51%
Antonymy 50% 55% 61% 61% 81% 82% 50%

Table 5: Classification accuracy for synonymy and antonymy for individual lexical and affective features.

hoods. The network-based similarity metric Rn was applied over the hybrid neighborhoods for the
computation of semantic similarity between words (Layer 2). The performance is presented in Table 3
for the largest dataset (WS353) with respect to various neighborhood sizes. The correlation achieved
by the best performing individual model (Affective+Lexical using Rn) is included for comparison pur-
poses. The performance of the best model based solely on lexical features (Lexical+Lexical using Mn)
is also presented. Regarding the different fusion schemes, the highest performance is obtained for the
global approach using the maximum-based function (max{ζLi , ζAi }). This scheme yields performance
that is identical to the best individual model. Also, we observe that the best fusion scheme consistently
outperforms the Lexical+Lexical approach for 10 − 100 neighbors.

7.3 Synonymy vs. Antonymy

Here, we compare the performance of semantic and affective features (described in Section 6) for the
discrimination of word pairs the fall into two categories, synonyms and antonyms. The word pairs were
taken from two sets of WordNet synonyms and opposites4 We retained those pairs that were included in
the networks described in Section 7.1. In total, 172 pairs are contained in each category for a total of 344
pairs. The experimental dataset include pairs such as (happiness, felicity) and (comedy, tragedy) that
correspond to synonyms and antonyms, respectively. Support Vector Machines5 with linear kernel were
applied for classification. For evaluation purposes, 10-fold cross validation (10-FCV) was used, while
classification accuracy was used as evaluation measurement.

The classification accuracy is shown for each category in Table 4 with respect to two feature sets: 1)
all lexical features (Lex1–Lex3), and 2) all affective features (Aff1–Aff3)6. The baseline performance
(yielded by random classification) is also presented. Both features types exceed the baseline for syn-
onyms and antonyms. The main observation is that the set of affective features outperforms the lexical
feature set for the case of antonyms, i.e., 82% vs. 61% classification accuracy. Regarding synonyms,
lexical and affective features yield almost identical performance. The moderate discrimination ability of
lexical features was expected since both synonyms and antonyms exhibit high similarity scores as mea-
sured in the framework of DSMs. These observations suggest that the affective information is a major
contributor for the case of antonyms, which is not surprising since such words are emotionally distant.
The performance for all individual features in presented in Table 5 for each category. It is observed that
the similarities based on word co-occurrence (Lex1) give the lowest performance for both synonyms and
antonyms, while the network-based similarities (Lex2 and Lex3) yield slightly higher results. The key
observation is that the top performance, i.e., greater than 80%, can be achieved either using the simple

4http://www.saifmohammad.com/WebPages/ResearchInterests.html\#Antonymy.
5Similar results were obtained with other classifiers, e.g., Naive Bayes.
6For the network metrics we used n=30, however, similar results were achieved for other values of n, e.g., 10, 50, 100.

170



affective similarity (Aff1) or the maximum-based network similarity metric (Aff2). Given the lack of a
standard dataset for this task, the comparison of different DSMs is not easy. A corpus-based algorithm
was evaluated with respect to similar a task (synonym/antonym discrimination for 136 pairs7) achieving
75% classification accuracy under 10-FCV (Turney, 2011).

8 Conclusions

The affective spaces were shown to contain salient information for estimating semantic similarity. The
Affective+Lexical approach achieved competitive performance compared to (an example of) the main-
stream paradigm of distributional semantic models (i.e., the Lexical+Lexical approach). Moreover, the
affective models were found to be more appropriate for the first network layer (compared to the lexical
models) when the words for which similarity is computed exhibit distant affective magnitude. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first empirical indication that the affect can be regarded as another
source of information that plays a role for the task of semantic similarity estimation between words.
Correlation-based similarity metrics and smaller neighborhoods were shown to perform better for Affec-
tive+Lexical DSMs. Another major finding is that the affective features are superior to the lexical ones
for the case of antonym identification. Regarding the fusion of lexical and affective activation models, the
global scheme (i.e., across the entire network) was found to outperform the local one. Further research
is needed for understanding the complementarities of affective and semantic spaces, which is important
for the design of improved fusion schemes. Last but not least, the role of affective features should be in-
vestigated with respect to more semantic tasks (e.g., paraphrasing) and other types of semantic relations
and linguistic phenomena (e.g., figurative language).

Acknowledgments. This work has been partially funded by the SpeDial project supported by the EU
FP7 with grant number 611396, and the BabyAffect project supported by the Greek General Secretariat
for Research and Technology (GSRT) with grant number 3610.

References

Agirre, E., E. Alfonseca, K. Hall, J. Kravalova, M. Pasca, and A. Soroa (2009). A study on similarity and
relatedness using distributional and WordNet-based approaches. In Proc. of NAACL: HLT, pp. 19–27.

Baroni, M., R. Bernardi, and R. Zamparelli (2014). Frege in space: A program for compositional distri-
butional semantics. Linguistic Issues in Language Technologies 9(6), 5–110.

Baroni, M. and A. Lenci (2010). Distributional memory: A general framework for corpus-based seman-
tics. Computational Linguistics 36(4), 673–721.

Bradley, M. and P. Lang (1999). Affective norms for English words (ANEW): Stimuli, instruction
manual and affective ratings. Tech. report C-1. The Center for Research in Psychophysiology, Univ.
of Florida.

Cruse, D. A. (1986). Lexical Semantics. Cambridge University Press.

Esuli, A. and F. Sebastiani (2006). SentiWordNet: A publicly available lexical resource for opinion
mining. In Proc. of Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, pp. 417–422.

Ferré, P. and R. Sánchez-Casas (2014). Affective priming in a lexical decision task: Is there an effect of
words’ concreteness? Psicológica 35, 117–138.

Finkelstein, L., E. Gabrilovich, Y. Matias, E. Rivlin, Z. Solan, G. Wolfman, and E. Ruppin (2002).
Placing search in context: The concept revisited. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 20(1),
116–131.
7Including verbs, while our network includes only nouns.

171



Harris, Z. (1954). Distributional structure. Word 10(23), 146–162.

Hu, M. and B. Liu (2004). Mining and summarizing customer reviews. In Proc. of Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’04, pp. 168–177.

Iosif, E. and A. Potamianos (2015). Similarity computation using semantic networks created from web-
harvested data. Natural Language Engineering 21(01), 49–79.

Lee, C. M. and S. S. Narayanan (2005). Toward detecting emotions in spoken dialogs. IEEE Transactions
on Speech and Audio Processing 13(2), 293–303.

Lloyd, L., D. Kechagias, and S. Skiena (2005). Lydia: A system for large-scale news analysis. In Proc.
SPIRE, Number 3772 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 161–166.

Malandrakis, N., A. Potamianos, E. Iosif, and S. Narayanan (2013). Distributional semantic models
for affective text analysis. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 21(11),
2379–2392.

McNamara, T. P. (2005). Semantic priming: Perspectives from Memory and Word Recognition. Psychol-
ogy Press.

Miller, G. and W. Charles (1998). Contextual correlates of semantic similarity. Language and Cognitive
Processes 6(1), 1–28.

Mohammad, S. M., B. J. Dorr, G. Hirst, and P. D. Turney (2013). Computing lexical contrast. Computa-
tional Linguistics 39(3), 555–590.

Nakov, P., S. Rosenthal, Z. Kozareva, V. Stoyanov, A. Ritter, and T. Wilson (2013). Semeval 2013 task
2: Sentiment analysis in twitter. In Proc. of Second Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational
Semantics (*SEM), Seventh International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, pp. 312–320.

Resnik, P. (1995). Using information content to evaluate semantic similarity in a taxanomy. In Proc. of
International Joint Conference for Artificial Intelligence, pp. 448–453.

Rogers, T. T. and J. L. McClelland (2004). Semantic Cognition. A Parallel Distributed Processing Ap-
proach. The MIT Press.

Rubenstein, H. and J. B. Goodenough (1965). Contextual correlates of synonymy. Communications of
the ACM 8(10), 627–633.

Salovey, P. and J. D. Mayer (1990). Emotional intelligence. Imagination, Cognition and Personality 9(3),
185–211.

Stone, P. J., D. C. Dunphy, M. S. Smith, and D. M. Ogilvie (1966). The General Inquirer: A Computer
Approach to Content Analysis. MIT Press.

Strapparava, C. and A. Valitutti (2004). WordNet Affect: An affective extension of WordNet. In Proc.
of Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, pp. 1083–1086.

Tomasello, M., M. Carpenter, J. Call, T. Behne, and H. Moll (2005). Understanding and sharing inten-
tions: The origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28, 675–691.

Turney, P. D. (2011). Analogy perception applied to seven tests of word comprehension. Journal of
Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence 23(3), 343–362.

Turney, P. D. and M. L. Littman (2003). Measuring praise and criticism: Inference of semantic orienta-
tion from association. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 21(4), 315–346.

172


