
























Okapi+QuEst: Translation Quality Estimation within Okapi

Gustavo Henrique Paetzold, University of Sheffield, ghpaetzold1@sheffield.ac.uk

Lucia Specia, University of Sheffield, l.specia@sheffield.ac.uk

Yves Savourel, ENLASO, ysavourel@enlaso.com 

https://bitbucket.org/okapiframework/quest 

Description

Due to the ever growing applicability of machine translation, estimating the quality of transla-
tions automatically has become a necessary task in various scenarios, for example, when de-

ciding whether a machine translation is good enough for human post-editing. This demonstra-
tion presents the outcome of a collaborative project between the University of Sheffield and

ENLASO, funded by EAMT, the European Association for Machine Translation. The project
aimed to integrate  a  lightweight  and  user-friendly version  of  QuEst  (http://www.quest.dc-

s.shef.ac.uk/) – a quality estimation toolkit, into Okapi (http://www.opentag.com/okapi/) – a
framework with various components and applications designed to help create and improve

translation and localisation processes. As result, Okapi users are now offered a software plugin
to build and apply quality estimation models for translations produced within the framework.

In addition to the standard functionalities of QuEst, the project involved the creation of new
methods to facilitate the generation of the linguistic resources necessary for building quality

estimation models.

When installed in the Okapi Framework, the QuEst plugin introduces three “steps” to the

Okapi Pipeline, which includes 75 other steps (for example, a Moses translation step). Users
can create translation quality estimation tasks by adding the relevant  QuEst steps to their

pipeline. The three steps provided by the QuEst plugin in Okapi are:

 SVM Model Builder step: Provides an easy way for users to extract features from texts
and train translation quality estimation models using the LibSVM tool. These models can
then be used by the Quality Estimation step.

 Quality Estimation step: Allows users to apply an existing quality estimation model or a
model created by the SVM Model Builder step to produce quality estimation scores for

new translations.

 Properties Setting step:  Gathers the quality estimation scores produced by the Quality
Estimation step and place them into an XLIFF which can be interpreted by annotation
tools such as Ocelot (http://open.vistatec.com/) and used in annotation tasks, such as qual-

ity inspection by humans.

The  Okapi  version  with  QuEst  can  be  downloaded  from  https://code.google.com/p/okapi-

quest/.  The tool  is  free,  open-source and cross-platform (Java).  It  is  easy to install  and is
provided with clear documentation through wikipages with step-by-step tutorials.  Different

from the standalone version of QuEst, it produces most necessary linguistic resources auto-
matically to help inexperienced users. Following Okapi's tradition, the tool offers a graphical

interface, making it easier to use. 

222


