


















































My title


Generating acceptable Arabic Core Vocabularies and Symbols for AAC 
users 

E.A. Draffan, Mike Wald, Nawar Halabi, Ouadie Sabia1, Wajdi Zaghouani 2 

Amatullah Kadous, Amal Idris,3 Nadine Zeinoun, David Banes, Dana Lawand4 

 
1University of Southampton, UK 

     2Carnegie Mellon University, Qatar  
       3Hamad Medical Corporation, Qatar 

                     4Mada Assistive Technology Center, Qatar 
 

ead@ecs.soton.ac.uk, mw@ecs.soton.ac.uk, nh1g12@ecs.soton.ac.uk, o.sabia@soton.ac.uk, 
wajdiz@cmu.edu, tullahk@hotmail.com, aahmad2@hamad.qa, nzeinoun@mada.org.qa, 

dbanes@mada.org.qa, dlawand@mada.org.qa 

 

 

Abstract 
This paper discusses the development of an Arabic Symbol 
Dictionary for Augmentative and Alternative Communication 
(AAC) users, their families, carers, therapists and teachers as 
well as those who may benefit from the use of symbols to 
enhance literacy skills. With a requirement for a bi-lingual 
dictionary, a vocabulary list analyzer has been developed to 
evaluate similarities and differences in word frequencies from 
a range of word lists in order to collect suitable AAC lexical 
entries. An online bespoke symbol management has been 
created to hold the lexical entries alongside specifically 
designed symbols which are then accepted via a voting system 
using a series of criteria.  Results to date have highlighted how 
successful these systems can be when encouraging 
participation along with the need for further research into the 
development of personalised context sensitive core 
vocabularies.   

Index Terms: symbols, Augmentative and Alternative 
Communication, AAC, core vocabularies  

1. Introduction 
In the last few years it has become clear that many therapists 
and teachers working with individuals who have speech and 
language difficulties in the Arabic speaking Gulf area, are 
depending on westernized symbols and English core 
vocabularies. Issues around limited Arabic language 
knowledge and dependency on translations or working in 
English can cause difficulties for those who need 
Augmentative and Alternative forms of Communication 
(AAC) due to disabilities. Huer [1] reports that “observations 
of communication across cultures reveal that non-symbolic as 
well as symbolic forms of communication are culturally 
dependent” and her later work “suggests that consumers, 
families, and clinicians from some cultural backgrounds may 
not perceive symbols in the same way as they are perceived 
within the dominant European-American culture” [2].   

With this in mind the Arabic Symbol Dictionary research 
team were determined to take a participatory approach to their 

project, involving AAC users and those supporting them as 
well as other researchers working in the field of Arabic 
linguistics and graphic design. 

2. Background 
Much has been written by speech and language therapists 
about the necessity for core vocabularies that have been 
adapted to suit symbol users who need to enhance their 
language skills [3], [4], [5] and [6]. Research has shown that 
with a few hundred of the most frequently used words 80% of 
one’s communication needs can be accommodated [7]. More 
recently concept coding [8] with the idea of mapping different 
symbol vocabularies along with a focus on psychosocial and 
environmental factors [9] to improve outcomes have been 
added to the mix.  However, there is very little research that 
has been undertaken to provide therapists with suitable 
vocabularies for Arabic AAC users [10]. In English these 
vocabularies tend to be lists of frequently used words from 
spoken and written language across all age groups and some 
from AAC users. Despite considerable searching there are 
very few of these vocabularies available in Arabic with most 
coming from language learning or frequently used word lists 
with no specified ages or Arabic AAC users. 

In some areas there is also a lack of understanding regarding 
the complexities of Arabic spoken and written language that 
disproportionately affect those who may have communication 
and reading difficulties [11], [12] and [13].  Usziel-Karl et al 
[13] cite several researchers in the course of their study 
concerning Arabic and Hebrew linguistic frameworks and 
discuss the “critical importance of morphology as the main 
organizing principle both of the lexicon and of numerous 
grammatical inflections”. The authors go on to point out the 
diglossia [two variations of a language in different social 
situations] nature of Arabic which means there is a 
‘phonological distance [in grapheme-to-phoneme mapping] 
that has a negative impact on the acquisition of basic literacy 
skills in young Arabic children…” Words or word phrases 
(referents) may also be presented above or below a 
corresponding symbol, with changing forms depending on 

91
SLPAT 2015, 6th Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 91–96,

Dresden, Germany, 11 September, 2015. c©2015 The Association for Computational Linguistics



grammatical status, gender and/or number plus many letters 
will change their shape depending on their position within a 
word.    

The authors of this research and others have also found there 
are key cultural and family values/orientations that should be 
considered in order to increase the effectiveness of symbol-
referent vocabulary interventions [14] with individuals who 
use AAC within Arab communities.  To this end not only has 
research concentrated on word frequency lists and collating an 
AAC user core vocabulary, but also instigating a voting 
system for symbol acceptance, so that words or 
multiword/word phrases are represented by symbols that are 
suitable culturally, linguistically and for the settings in which 
they will be used.  

3. Methodology for Building a Core 
Vocabulary 

The building of an Arabic AAC core vocabulary is ongoing, 
but began with the collection of word lists used by AAC users, 
their families, carers, speech and language therapists and 
teachers in Doha (Qatar) (List a).  Sixty three of these 
individuals joined an AAC forum and these participants have 
continued to work with the team as symbols for the 
vocabularies have been developed.    

The initial aim was to collect around 100 localised Arabic 
most frequently used words and multiwords to compare with 
those already in use that were in English or translated into 
Arabic based on English core vocabularies.  Participating 
therapists felt a further 400 words/multiwords would be the 
maximum the majority of their users would have in their 
communication books or devices.  Most English speaking 
three year olds use over a thousand words [15] so it was 
essential that the fringe vocabulary should be enlarged with 
words specific to the environment and personal needs 
including Qatari colloquial words and place names as well as 
to be relevant to all ages.  

Surveys of core vocabularies in Arabic have revealed that 
few are freely available [16] and even less make good 
companions when thinking of basic language and literacy 
learning for AAC users.  In order to expand the list of 500 
words a comparison was carried out against five other Arabic 
word frequency lists.  Those for general conversation included 
the Kelly Project [17], 101languages.net 1000 most common 
spoken Arabic words and Aljazeera comments often using 
colloquial language [18]. The Supreme Education Council 
(SEC) literacy lists Grade 1,2,3 and  Lebanese reading lists 
[19] have been used for literacy skill building in Modern 
Standard Arabic (MSA).   

3.1. Building a vocabulary list analyser 

An automatic system was developed that took as an input two 
main pieces of information: 

List a: The list to be analyzed as a basis for the new core 
vocabulary list: This list could optionally have frequency of 
each entry included. If no frequency is available then a default 
value should be added to all the entries before running the 
program. Frequency in this case equated to how often a word 
was used.  This frequency does not have to correspond to an 
actual frequency of occurrence in a text somewhere. 

Lists b: Lists combining existing vocabularies from a 
number of sources with the same structure as List a. Multiple 
vocabularies are used in Lists b in an attempt to weight the 

occurrence of individual words.  These vocabularies are 
ideally from different sources and should be large enough so 
that the frequencies of the entries listed are reliable. 

 
The system produced three lists shown in Figure 1: 

List 1: Initial list containing the words in List a (the in-put 
list to be analyzed) that did not occur in any of Lists b. This 
output only contained the words with no frequency scores. 

List 2: The coverage list: containing the words that occurred 
in List a and at least once in a source vocabulary in Lists b. 
This output also contained scores for each word by source 
vocabulary list (each word was given several scores, one for 
each list in Lists b). Each score equals the frequency with 
which each word appeared in the list from Lists b, normalized 
by dividing the frequencies of each word by the sum of all 
frequencies in that list. The score was set to 0 if the word did 
not occur in that list. 

 

 
Figure 1.  Input lists (list a and lists b) 

List 3: Remaining word list: This list contained all the words 
that were in Lists b but were not contained in List a. This 
output also contained the scores for each word and is the 
example of the system in use (Figure 2). This is the list on 
which the comparison in the section 3.2 is based. 

 

 

Figure 2. Example Output from lists viewed in Excel 

Figure 2. shows frequencies are normalized to allow source 
vocabularies to be compared (column one), this process can be 
problematic if the list is too small as the numbers may become 
too high and significantly affect results. Even if there is 

92



sufficient data, it is still imperative that an expert goes through 
the different output list to inspect the results, correct errors and 
choose the set of words to be added or removed from the input 
list. The scores given only act as a guide to assist the expert in 
the process. 

    In practical terms words with high scores in List 3 could 
be deemed suitable for inclusion in the Arabic Symbol 
Dictionary and added to List a.  The system has been run 
repeatedly as lists have been added so that results become 
more robust.    

3.2. Results of the Core Vocabulary building 

When comparing the list provided by participants as examples 
of AAC users’ vocabularies (List a), there were very small 
overlaps with those words most frequently found where the 
top words were based on very high frequency scores for those 
most commonly used (Lists b).   

   To provide an instant comparison between Output 1 and 3 
the top 20 words translated from Arabic are listed below.  

Output from 1 (List a) ordered by those most often used in 
AAC lists.  

“I/me (am), go, ball, car, banana, on/to, thing/something, 
to, chair, clock/watch, want, in, sit, was, eat, bike, 
flower/rose, play, cup, door” 
 

Output from 3 (Lists b) ordered by frequency 
“the, God, about, oh, to, which (masculine), and not, 
people, no, which (feminine), in, even, or, on, against, 
only, however, Arabs, must, order” 
 

Further analysis of the Lists b that were about spoken and 
colloquial language shows that nouns only made up 5% of the 
total list from the Kelly project, 25 to 30 %  of the Aljazeera 
and Oweini-Hazoury lists, but 50% of the AAC lists.  A 
concrete noun, even if it is considered part of a fringe 
vocabulary, is a much easier concept to illustrate with a 
symbol and may be seen as one of the early building blocks to 
language acquisition.  Verbs, however are more complex and 
have low frequency rates; between 5 to 20 %. The Aljazeera 
list has the lowest and the AAC lists have the highest. The 
other parts of speech, equally pertinent in communication, 
such as adjectives, adverbs, prepositions, pronouns and 
conjunctions were found to be variably frequent from one list 
to another. The Aljazeera list has a quarter of its frequencies 
made up of prepositions, whereas Kelly’s list, SEC and the 
AAC user list have only 5%. Conjunctions also show low 
frequencies through the lists in question; between 1% and 
15%. It is worth mentioning that pronouns are totally 
nonexistent in Kelly’s project list, either under their detached 
form or attached form. It should also be noted that therapists 
may choose nouns rather than pronouns for the purpose of 
symbol transparency. The other lists had less than 20% of 
pronouns all types combined. Arabic pronouns, and also some 
prepositions combine with nouns or with other parts of speech 
as single words, this morphological aspect could be the reason 
why their frequencies are rather undermined. Adverbs are also 
rarely listed, The Owein-Hazoury list has none; the highest 
adverb frequency is found in the 1000 most common Arabic 
words list (4%). In Arabic most adverbs of time and space are 
prepositional groups; typically a structure made of a 
preposition followed by a noun. This structural definition of 
adverbs explains the low number or even the lack of adverbs 

in some of the core vocabulary lists. The users would frame 
appropriate phrases to express adverbs by using existing 
prepositions combined with nouns. 

Further confirmation for these differences in the frequency 
of various parts of speech was sought for the literacy skill 
vocabularies. The conversational based lists were replaced 
with reading lists forming Lists b.  Arabic lists such as those 
used SEC and Arabic sight words [19]. It was found that in 
their top 100 frequently used words 30 and 38 were nouns 
respectively. 

3.3. Discussion about the core vocabulary data 
collection 

As can be seen from the top 20 words in List a and Lists b, 
both show nouns that would not be found in the top twenty 
frequently used words in an English core vocabulary and in 
reality would be considered fringe words. However, the lists 
do illustrate that in Arabic there are elements of the grammar 
that are equally as important such as conjunctions and 
prepositions.   

There are considerable issues with the fact that root words in 
Arabic clearly appear within other words and this can affect 
the results as well as the fact that the lists collected from AAC 
users are based on popular use, rather than large scale 
frequency levels within a huge corpus.  There will always be 
the need to improve outcomes by collecting more lists from 
AAC users in the future to improve the balance between words 
used for symbol communication and those based on frequency 
of use, although the latter informs vocabulary development 

By using this system the combined AAC word lists from the 
Doha schools and clinics making up ‘List a’ once translated 
into English, could be compared to the Prenke Romich 100 
Frequently Used Core Words [20], [21] (as Lists b). It was 
noted that the Doha Arabic AAC user list (List a) contained 38 
nouns in the top 100 words compared to none appearing in the 
English core vocabulary. It has been said that in English the 
use of nouns goes from 7% in the top 100 words to 20% in the 
top 300 [22] whereas in MSA the corresponding frequency 
levels are 26% and 45% according to one of the largest 
frequency lists [23]. 

These results highlight the need for further exploration into 
this aspect of vocabulary building. In particular there is a need 
to collect more wide ranging conversations to evaluate the 
differences in the type of words and multiwords required to 
successfully build Arabic AAC personalised and context 
sensitive vocabularies.  There is also the need to be aware of 
the differences in lists used for enhancing reading skills where 
MSA is used rather than the colloquial dialects of the area.  A 
further distinction may be needed between adult and children’s 
vocabularies where religious and social language requirements 
may impact on AAC use.  The Speech and Language 
therapists attending meetings with the team also noted the 
importance of vocabularies sensitive to user’s characters, 
interests and social setting commenting on dress and gender 
issues as well as being aware of the issues of using lists from 
AAC users of school age due to the lack of available adult 
AAC users in the region at the time of writing.  

4. Methodology for Symbol Management 
Just as it was found that there was a paucity of core AAC 
vocabulary lists in Arabic, the same could be said about the 
symbols provided for AAC devices.  Some centres in Doha 

93



were providing specifically designed symbols for the Arabic 
culture, environment, social and personalised linguistic needs 
but there were no adapted symbol sets that were freely 
available for sharing. Nor had any symbols been evaluated for 
transparency or cultural sensitivity by local AAC users, their 
supporting professionals and families.    

A bespoke Symbol Management system was developed that 
allowed the team to store symbols.  The system also offered 
participants the chance to take an active role in the decisions 
made around the development and evaluation of appropriate 
symbols as they could see and vote on uploaded symbols 
representing the core vocabularies previously collected. 

The online database was based on a Model-View-Controller 
(MVC) framework using MongodB with JavaScript (NodeJS 
and an Express JS plugin).  The code is open source and 
available on bitbucket.  View templates which generated the 
html pages were built suing the Jade templating engine.  The 
only other plugins used were for authentication and list 
filtering.  The latter will provide the basis for browse and 
search features in the final Arabic Symbol Dictionary website.  

4.1. Building symbol acceptance system 

As part of the online management system a simple voting set 
up was created using the filters developed for batches of 
symbols.  During voting sessions participants have been 
presented with a series of around 60-65 images of newly 
designed symbols, the referent in MSA, Qatari (where 
applicable) and English.  The voting criteria are presented with 
large selection areas on a scale of 1 to 5 where 5 is completely 
acceptable (see Figure 3) so that different visual displays can 
be used.  The four criteria are listed with a free text box for 
comments:  

• Feelings about the symbol as a whole  

• Represents the word or phrase  

• Color contrast     

• Cultural sensitivity 
 

 
Figure 3 Voting system with criteria for acceptance on 
a scale of 1-5 where 5 is completely acceptable 

4.2. Results from voting sessions 

The initial batch of symbols had 63 voters logging into the 
Symbol Manager resulting in 2341 votes for 65 symbols.  
Overwhelmingly the decisions were very favourable with all 
mean ratings significantly greater than a rating of 3.5.  The 
average was 4.0. (See Table 1) All voting data was 

anonymized and comments collated to inform the graphic 
designer.   

Two AAC users were also able to vote on the symbols via an 
adapted system using their own Sensory Software Grid 2 
systems with the symbols added plus a 1-5 or 1-3 ‘thumbs up’ 
to ‘thumbs down’ scoring depending on their ability.  This 
produced equally good results and comments were captured 
via recordings.  More AAC users are being encouraged to join 
the forum and as further batches of symbols are developed it is 
hoped that voting sessions will continue to occur both during 
face to face meetings and remotely.  

 

Table 1. One Sample T test for Difference of Mean 
Ratings from 3.5 

Criteria Number of voters 
Mean 
rating 

2 tail P 
Value for 
difference 
from 3.5 

1 63 3.94 <0.0001 
2 63 3.90 <0.0001 
3 63 4.07 <0.0001 
4 63 4.10 <0.0001 

4.3. Discussion about the Symbol Management 
system 

The initial development of the Symbol Management system 
was purely for the team to upload lexical entries and symbols 
with a set of filter systems based on parts of speech, gender, 
number and symbol descriptions.   However, as the 
participation by AAC users, their families, therapists and 
teachers grew it became essential to offer a voting system that 
quickly produced results because specialists wanted to use the 
symbols as they were developed. As all the speech therapists 
and teachers involved had worked for several years with AAC 
users, but were mainly from countries other than Qatar, it was 
felt that there should be a method to check acceptability within 
the community before releasing them for download, not just 
depending on the team’s opinions.  The team had already set 
up a Google+ method for initially evaluating iconicity and 
transparency [22].  

Those therapists working in the Doha area were very willing 
to express their opinions about symbol suitability and the links 
with the corresponding word lists collected.  It was noted that 
there was a general understanding that the lexical entries in 
Modern Standard Arabic and those entries in Qatari colloquial 
Arabic may share the same symbol for similar meaning words 
or multiword phrases but there may need to be additional 
symbols and / or changes in symbol labels to represent 
different parts of speech, gender and number and to take into 
account the bilingual nature of the dictionary to aid those who 
were not fluent Arabic speakers.  

5. Conclusion 
The core vocabulary and symbol management systems have 
provided the research team with quick and easy ways to 
analyse data as well as provide a platform for user 
participation.  Having a selection of MSA and Qatari core and 
fringe vocabularies has been essential for ongoing symbol 
development, but there is still a need to continually update the 
collection of local vocabularies to ensure that colloquial as 

94



well as written language is captured.  The present frequency 
levels of the words collected in Doha (List a) are low in 
comparison to global lists (Lists b).  They are also subjective, 
based on the AAC forum input rather than a wide base of 
Arabic AAC users and carers. However, with support it has 
been shown that where suitable core vocabularies are 
implemented alongside appropriate symbols AAC users, who 
have the capacity, can enhance their communication and 
improve their readiness for reading [24] and already in this 
project AAC users have greeted the newly developed symbols 
with much appreciation, but there remains the need to ‘focus 
on long-term outcomes’ [9]. 

There remains the debate as to the differences in parts of 
speech seen in English core vocabulary lists compared to some 
Arabic lists with high levels of noun use.  It is important to 
appreciate the limitations of the collection procedures as well 
as the problems of automated comparisons between lists that 
require normalization and have different methods for showing 
root words, different parts of speech and verb declensions.  

There is much research still to be carried out to ensure that 
an appropriate vocabulary list suitable for Arabic AAC users 
and the development of literacy skills can be collated in a 
diglossia situation.  But as an increasing number of words lists 
are provided by participants set against the further analysis of 
the frequency lists already gathered it is felt that this can be 
achieved.  

  

6. Acknowledgements 
This research was made possible by the NPRP award [NPRP 6 
- 1046 - 2 - 427] from the Qatar National Research Fund (a 
member of The Qatar Foundation) and thanks must go to all 
those participants in Doha who have contributed to the work 
of the Arabic Symbol Dictionary team. Grateful thanks are 
also expressed to the ARASAAC team for allowing their 
symbols to be used with participants. The statements made 
herein are solely the responsibility of the authors.  

 

7. References 
[1] M. B. Huer, “Culturally inclusive assessments for children 

using augmentative and alternative communication 
(AAC),” Journal of Children’s Communication 
Development, 19 (1), 23–34. 1997. 

[2] M. B. Huer, “Examining perceptions of graphic symbols 
across cultures: Preliminary study of the impact of 
culture/ethnicity,” Augmentative and Alternative 
Communication 16 (3): 180–185. 2000. 
doi:[10.1080/07434610012331279034] 

[3] S. Balandin and T. Iacono, “A few well-chosen words,” 
Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 
14(September), 147–161 1998. 

[4] M. Banajee, C. Dicarlo, and S. Buras Stricklin, “Core 
Vocabulary Determination for Toddlers,” Augmentative 
and Alternative Communication, 19(2), 67–73. 2003. 

[5] M. Lahey, and L. Bloom, “Planning a First Lexicon: Which 
Words to Teach First,” Journal of Speech and Hearing 
Disorders, 340–351 1975. 

[6] G. M. Van Tatenhove, “Building Language Competence 
With Students Using AAC Devices: Six Challenges,” 
Perspectives on Augmentative and Alternative 
Communication, 18(2), 38–47 2009. 

[7] G. C. Vanderheiden, and D. P. Kelso, “Comparative 
analysis of fixed-vocabulary communication acceleration 

techniques,” AAC Augmentative and Alternative 
Communication, 3, 196-206. 1987. 

[8] M. Lundälv and S. Derbring, “AAC Vocabulary 
Standardisation and Harmonisation,” Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg, pp.303–310. 2012. 

[9] J. Light, and D. Mcnaughton, “Designing AAC Research 
and Intervention to Improve Outcomes for Individuals with 
Complex Communication Needs,” Augmentative and 
Alternative Communication, (ahead-of-print), 1-12. 2015. 

[10] R. Patel and R. Dakwar-Khamis, “An AAC training 
program for special education teachers: A case study of 
Palestinian Arab teachers in Israel,” Journal of 
Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 21, 3, 205-
217. 2005. 

[11] S. Abu-Rabia, “Learning to read in Arabic: Reading, 
syntactic, orthographic and working memory skills in 
normally achieving and poor Arabic readers,” Reading 
Psychology: An International Quarterly, 16, 351–394. 
1995. 

[12] S. Abu Rabia, D. Share and S. M. Mansour, “Word 
recognition and basic cognitive processes among reading-
disabled and normal readers of Arabic,” Reading and 
Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 16, 423-442. 2003. 
doi:[10.1023/A:1024237415143] 

[13] S. Uziel-Karl, F. Kanaan, R. Yifat, I. Meir, N. Abugov, and 
D. Ravid, “Hebrew and Palestinian Arabic in Israel: 
Linguistic Frameworks and Speech-Language Pathology 
Services,” Topics in Language Disorders Vol 34 Number 
2, p 133 – 154  2014. 

[14] B. Woll, and S. Barnett, “Toward a Sociolinguistic 
Perspective on Augmentative and Alternative 
Communication,” AAC Augmentative and Alternative 
Communication, 14(December), pp.200–211. 1998. 

[15] K.J. Hill, and C. Dollaghan, “Conversations of Three-Year 
Olds: Implications for AAC Outcomes,” American Speech-
Language-Hearing (ASHA) Convention. San Francisco, 
CA. November. 1999. 

[16] W. Zaghouani, “Critical Survey of the Freely Available 
Arabic Corpora,” In the Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC'2014), OSACT Workshop. Rejkavik, Iceland, 26-31 
May 2014. 

[17] A. Kilgarriff, F. Charalabopoulou, M. Gavrilidou, J. B. 
Johannessen, S. Khalil, S. J. Kokkinakis and Volodina, E. 
“Corpus-based vocabulary lists for language learners for 
nine languages,” Language Resources and Evaluation, 1-
43 2013. 

[18] W. Zaghouani, B. Mohit, N. Habash, O.Obeid, N. Tomeh, 
and K. Oflazer. “Large-scale Arabic Error Annotation: 
Guidelines and Framework,” In the Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC'2014). Rejkavik, Iceland, 26-31 May 
2014. 

[19] A. Oweini and K. Hazoury, “Towards a list of Awards a 
Sight Word List in Arabic,” International Review of 
Education, 56 (4), 457-478 2010. 

[20] K. Hill, and B. Romich, 100 Frequently Used Core Words. 
Accessed May 2015 
https://aaclanguagelab.com/files/100highfrequencycorewor
ds2.pdf 

[21] K. Hill, and B. Romich, “A summary measure clinical 
report for characterizing AAC performance,” Proceedings 
of the RESNA ’01 Annual Conference, Reno, NV. pp 55-57. 
2001. 

[22] J. Boenisch and G. Soto, “The Oral Core Vocabulary of 
Typically Developing English-Speaking School-Aged 
Children,” Implications for AAC Practice. Augmentative 
and Alternative Communication, pp.77–84. 2015. 

[23] T. Buckwalter and D. Parkinson, “A frequency dictionary 
of Arabic: Core vocabulary for learners,” Routledge. 2014.  

[24] D. Evans, L. Bowick, M. Johnson and P. Blenkhorn, 
“Using iconicity to evaluate symbol use,” In: 

95



Proceedings of the 10th international conference on 
computers helping people. Linz, Austria, pp 874–881 2006. 

[25] P. Hatch, L. Geist, and K. Erickson, “Teaching Core 
Vocabulary Words and Symbols to Students with Complex 
Communication Needs,” Presented at Assistive Technology 
Industry Association, 2015. Retrieved 19/2/2015 
fromhttp://www.med.unc.edu/ahs/clds/files/conference-
hand-outs/atia_2015.pdf (Accessed 14 June 2015). 

96


	Paper session 3: Communication aids, speech synthesis and other topics
	Generating acceptable Arabic Core Vocabularies and Symbols for AAC users
	E.A. Draffan, Mike Wald, Nawar Halabi, Ouadie Sabia, Wajdi Zaghouani, Amatullah Kadous, Amal Idris, Nadine Zeinoun, David Banes and Dana Lawand



