



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and E Sherly. Proc. of the 12th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 152–157,
Trivandrum, India. December 2015. c©2015 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

SMT Errors Requiring Grammatical Knowledge for Prevention 

 

 Yukiko Sasaki Alam 

Department of Digital Media 

Hosei University 

3-7-2 Kajino-cho, Koganei, 

Tokyo, Japan 

sasaki@hosei.ac.jp 

 

  

 

Abstract 

This paper introduces three types of Sta-

tistical Machine Translation (SMT) out-

put errors that would require grammatical 

knowledge for prevention. The first type 

is due to words that are negative in mean-

ing but not in form. Problems arise when 

the negative forms are obligatory in tar-

get languages. The second type of errors 

is derived from the rigidity of pattern 

phrases or correlatives which do not al-

low for intervening elements. The third 

type is caused by ellipses in input sen-

tences which must be reinstated for out-

put sentences when so required by rules 

of omission in target languages or the dif-

ference in Head-Complement order be-

tween source and target languages. 

1 Introduction 

Machine translation (MT) output errors are var-

ied, and have been discussed and classified by 

many researchers. Flanagan (1994) classifies and 

ranks errors into three levels according to im-

provability and intelligibility. Elliot et al. (2004) 

identify fluency- and adequacy-related errors for 

automatic MT evaluation. Vilar et al. (2006) 

make a comprehensive classification of SMT 

output errors. Farrús et al. (2010) present a lin-

guistic-based evaluation of a variety of SMT 

output errors. Popović and Burchardt (2011) at-

tempt to provide methods for an automatic error 

analysis of MT output errors that overcome 

weaknesses of automatic evaluation metrics.   

    This paper introduces three particular types of 

errors made at the online English-to-Japanese 

translation on the Google Language Tools, a cut-

ting-edge SMT system, and demonstrates that 

grammatical knowledge is required for prevent-

ing such errors. 

2 Negative in Meaning but Not in Form 

There are several English determiners and ad-

verbs that are negative in meaning but not in 

form, which are termed negation-implying words 

in this paper. Negation-implying determiners are 

little and few, whereas negation-implying ad-

verbs include little, seldom, rarely, scarcely, 

hardly and barely. This discrepancy between 

meaning and form causes problems with transla-

tion into such languages as Japanese, the gram-

mars of which require the explicit forms of nega-

tion. 

2.1 Negation-implying determiners 

The word few used as a determiner
1
 as in Few 

men in (1a) below means “not many”, emphasiz-

ing how small a number of people is.: 
        (1a) Few people turned up for work. 

In Japanese, such an emphasis on scarcity is usu-

ally expressed both by a negation-implying de-

terminer or adverb and the negative form of the 

predicate that follows it. (1a) could be roughly 

translated as the following: 
(1b) hotondo-no hito-ga            shokuba-ni  
almost-POSS

2
 people-SUBJ

3
 workplace-LOC

4
  

araware-nakatta. 

show-up NOT-DID 

Notice that the predicate of the corresponding 

Japanese sentence is in the negative form. 

Translation of an English sentence with such a 

negation-implying word into Japanese is prob-

lematic, because it requires additional tasks in-

                                                 
1 Determiners in English are located at the beginning of 

noun phrases. They include articles, demonstrative, quanti-

fiers and possessives. 
2 POSS indicates the possessive marker. 
3 SUBJ denotes the subject marker. 
4 LOC stands for the locus marker indicating place, goal or 

point of time. 
152



cluding the recognizing of the relevant predicate 

and the changing of it into the negative form, let 

alone the identification of the part of speech of 

the word in question. Failure in carrying out such 

tasks leads to mistranslation. Take the following 

for instance: 
(2a) Few decisions will have as lasting an  

impact on your life as your choice of profession. 

The SMT system translates (2a) as a Japanese 

sentence that means: 
(2b) A few decisions turn out to have a lasting 

impact on your life as the choice of profession.
5
  

At this translation, the SMT system probably 

mistook few indicating “not many” for a few de-

noting “several”. The resulting Japanese sentence 

does not convey the same importance on the rari-

ty of such decisions as implied in the input sen-

tence. The output sentence also fails to express 

the core meaning of the input sentence. 

It is necessary to identify the part of speech of 

few in use, because it does not have a negative 

connotation when used in other parts of speech. 

It can be used as a pronoun, as illustrated below: 
(3) A lucky few will be able to enjoy the new low  

monthly payment. 

In addition, it can be used as an adjective, as be-

low: 
(4) Read the first few pages.  

A tripartite distinction should be made in a noun 

phrase (NP) with few: (i) determiner in NP[few  … 

noun],
6
  (ii) pronoun in NP[determiner ... few], 

and (iii) adjective in NP[determiner … few … 

noun]. 

A similar word little is more problematic, be-

cause it can belong to the adverb category as 

well as the same parts of speech for few. Failure 

to recognize the negation-implying determiners 

is costly, because the output sentence could indi-

cate an opposite meaning to that of the input sen-

tence. Consider the following: 
(5a) This has received little attention since 1983. 

The SMT system in question translates (5a) as a 

Japanese sentence that means: 
(5b) This has received almost attention since 

1983.
7
 

The meaning of the output is contrary to that of 

the input. This suggests that the SMT system 

requires grammatical knowledge for identifying 

                                                 
5
 The output is “いくつかの決定は、職業の選択として

あなたの人生に影響を持続として持つことになりま

す。”. 
6 NP[  … ] indicates that the phrase between brackets is a 

noun phrase. 
7 The output is “これは 1983年以来、ほとんど注目され

ています。”. 

the parts of speech for few and little, and, when 

used as a determiner, it needs to recognize the 

relevant predicate and transform it into the nega-

tive form of the equivalent of the target language. 

2.2 Negation-implying adverbs 

Adverbs such as little, seldom, rarely, scarcely, 

hardly and barely are negative in meaning but 

not in form. They seem to be treated by the SMT 

system better than the counterpart determiners, 

but a closer examination reveals that the treat-

ment is indeed erratic.  

    As long as an input sentence with a negation-

implying adverb is short and in the present tense,  

and the predicate is not a be verb, the SMT sys-

tem in question generates an output with the neg-

ative form of the predicate, thus conveying the 

same emphasis on the rarity of the event. For 

instance, the sentence It seldom works out that 

way is translated as a sentence with the intended 

meaning,
8
 only with a minor error of the wrong 

negative inflection of the predicate. 

    However, the translation of a short sentence 

fails, when the system is unable to identify the 

parts of speech of the adverb and the surrounding 

words, as illustrated below: 
(6a) The world will little note, nor long  

remember what we say here, but it can never 

 forget what they did here.
9
 

The above sentence is translated as below: 
(6b) The world will a short note, and also  

remember what we who are long say here, but  

it can never forget what they did here.
10

 

The SMT system fails to identify the parts of 

speech of little and note in the initial clause, re-

sulting in an ungrammatical output clause. It also 

fails to recognize that long is an adverb, and 

places the corresponding Japanese adjective im-

mediately before we. That means that long modi-

fies we. The negative conjunction nor is totally 

skipped, thus giving rise to the corresponding 

clause with the opposite meaning to the input 

clause 

The SMT’s treatment of the tense is puzzling 

for short sentences with a negation-implying ad-

verb. It sometimes does not make a distinction 

between the present and past tenses. For instance, 

He rarely eats red meat and He rarely ate red 

meat are translated as the same Japanese sen-

                                                 
8
 The output is “それはほとんどそのようにうまくいく

ありません。”. 
9 This is from the Gettysburg address by Abraham Lincoln. 
10 The output is “世界は少しノート、また長い私たちが

ここで言うことを覚えているだろうが、それは彼らが

ここで何をしたか忘れることはできません。”.  
153



tence in the present tense,
11

 indicating that he 

rarely eats red meat. The treatment of the tense is 

correct sporadically, though. 

Near perfect translations were produced when 

the predicates of sentences begin with could 

hardly or can hardly, and the verbs are not a be 

verb, as in: 
(7) She could hardly wait for her child coming 

 back.
12

 

(8) This fact can hardly be used to explain  

present patterns of crime.
13 

The treatment of the tense is also correct in the 

two examples above. 

With a be verb, however, even simpler input 

sentences in (9a) and (10a) than in (7) and (8) are 

translated as wrong output sentences, shown in 

(9b) and (10b): 
(9a) This was hardly surprising. 
(10a) He was barely aware of the feeling. 

The above two sentences are respectively trans-

lated as Japanese sentences meaning: 
(9b) This was something almost surprising.

14
  

(10b)  He was aware of almost every feeling.
15 

The resulting outputs convey opposite meanings 

to the English input sentences.
16

 

We have seen that the SMT system in question 

is erratic in the treatment of negation-implying 

determiners and adverbs. For a comprehensive 

treatment, it must identify the part of speech of 

such a word, and, if it is used as a determiner or 

an adverb, find the predicate and change it into 

the negative form of the corresponding predicate.  

3 Intervening Elements 

It has been observed that when an English sen-

tence consists of a pattern phrase containing an 

intervening element such as an adverb or a noun 

phrase (NP) of time, the SMT system in question 

generates incomprehensible Japanese outputs. 

                                                 
11 The output is “彼はめったに赤肉を食べません”. 
12 The output is “彼女はほとんど彼女の子供が戻ってく

るのを待つことができませんでした。”. 
13 The output is “この事実はほとんど犯罪の現在のパタ

ーンを説明するために使用することができません。”. 
14 The output is “これはほとんど驚くべきことでし

た。”. 
15 The output is “彼は感情のほとんどを知っていまし

た。”. 
16 It should be noted that when barely modifies a number as 

in The industry employed barely 150,000 men, it is translat-

ed as a word denoting “almost”, and the output Japanese 

sentence is a little awkward, but intelligible. The output is 

“業界はほとんど 15万人を採用します”. 

3.1 Adverbials causing discontinuous con-
stituents 

 Adverbs and adverbial phrases (called hereafter 

adverbials) can be located at several positions of 

sentences. This mobility of adverbials often cre-

ates problems with translation by pattern match-

ing. Take the following for instance:  
(11a) The government (may be paying incorrect 

 subsidies to more than 1 million Americans for 

 their health plans in the new federal insurance 

 marketplace and)
 17

 has been unable so far to fix 

 the errors. 
(11a) is roughly translated as below: 

(11b) The government (can pay incorrect  
subsidies to more than 1 million Americans for 

its own health plans in the new federal  

insurance marketplace, and) has not so far been 

able to do it, in order to fix the errors.
18 

The SMT system in question fails to recognize 

the pattern phrase unable to fix the errors, be-

cause the phrase contains an adverbial so far be-

tween unable and to fix the errors.
19

 Another ex-

ample follows: 
(12a) Investments in the health systems of  

low-income countries have long been geared  

toward treating infectious disease, he said.
20

 

The sentence in (12a) is translated as a Japanese 

sentence roughly meaning: 
(12b) Investments in the health systems of  

low-income countries are geared toward treating  

long infectious disease, he said. 
The part of speech of long in the input sentence 

is an adverb meaning “for a long time”, but in 

the output sentence, it is an adjective, resulting in 

a phrase denoting “a long disease”. This error is 

probably due to the presence of long in the mid-

dle of the pattern phrase have been geared. With 

long taken off, (12a) is translated correctly by the 

SMT system in question. 

   To deal with adverbs and other unexpected in-

terruptions such as interjections and rephrasing, a 

controlled skip parser was proposed (Yamada, 

1996). The parser uses statistical information (N-

                                                 
17 The parentheses in the sentence indicate that the elements 

inside them are not targets for our discussion. 
18 The output is “政府は新たな連邦政府の保険市場で自

分の健康の計画のために 100万人以上のアメリカ人に

誤った補助金を支払うことができ、エラーを修正する

ために、これまでできませんでした。”. 
19 The present focus is on translation errors caused by the 

presence of an adverbial located inside a pattern phrase, and 

thus the other errors found in the Japanese output are not 

discussed here. 
20 The output is “低所得国の保健システムへの投資が長

い感染性疾患の治療に向けられている、と彼は言いま

した。”. 
154



grams) to determine what to skip in newspaper 

articles. As far as the skipping of adverbs is con-

cerned, it does not affect the meaning of the sen-

tence when they are such adverbs as so far and 

long respectively in (11a) and (12a), but it would 

be detrimental if they are such adverbs as little 

and hardly in (6a) and (9a). A careful research 

would be conducted on the skipping of adverbi-

als.  The skipping of a constituent of an input 

sentence at machine translation (MT) should be a 

last resort.  

    A to-infinitive can be used either as an adver-

bial modifier as well as a nominal one. The fol-

lowing example shows that an adverbial use 

breaks a pattern. 
(13a) Exercise does more to bolster thinking 

than thinking does. 
(13a) is translated as a sentence roughly with the 

following meaning: 
(13b) Exercise carries out than, in order to  

bolster thinking, than thinking.
21 

The Japanese word equivalent to than is fol-

lowed by the object marker, indicating that than 

is interpreted as the object of the predicate, re-

sulting in an intelligible output.  

    The removal of to bolster thinking from (13a) 

gives rise to a grammatical and comprehensible 

sentence. This demonstrates that the SMT system 

is able to handle the pattern phrase x (Subject) + 

verb + more than + y + does, but not one with 

an intervening element. 

3.2 Elements intervening relative clauses and 
the heads 

We have seen that the SMT system in question 

goes awry when an adverbial cuts into a pattern 

phrase. A similar error occurs when an element 

intervenes between usually adjacent elements 

such as a relative clause and the head noun 

phrase (NP). Take the following for instance: 
(14) “I want to marry Mii, but I can’t do that,” 

Marini said in a video posted online that  

attracted the attention of gaming blogs and  

online forums this week.
22

 

The SMT system is unable to recognize the head 

NP and the relative clause a video … that at-

tracted … because of the intervening phrase 

posted online between. The removal of the inter-

                                                 
21 The output is “運動は思考よりも思考を強化するため

に、よりを行います。”. 
22

 The output is “「私はミイと結婚したいが、私はそれ

を行うことはできません、「マリーニは、ビデオが今

週のゲームブログやオンラインフォーラムの注目を集

め、オンラインを掲載で述べています。”. 

vening phrase produces a fairly grammatical and 

intelligible output.
23

 

   In addition, the following relatively short and 

simple sentence is translated incorrectly for the 

same reason as above: 
(15) There were nine men that year who had run 
 faster than 10.2 seconds.

24
 

Again, the SMT system is unable to recognize 

the relative clause and the head NP because of 

the presence of last year between them. It misin-

terprets last year as the head NP of the relative 

clause. Furthermore, last year is regarded as the 

subject NP of the predicate were. As a result, the 

output is an unintelligible sentence. The removal 

of last year from (15) produces a grammatical 

output,
25

 recognizing the head NP and the rela-

tive clause.
26

 

These examples indicate that the system in 

question needs grammatical knowledge to identi-

fy discontinuous constituencies and relations 

with unexpected intervening elements such as 

adverbials and NPs of time. 

4 Omission and Recoverability 

In languages, constituents of sentences which are 

predictable from context are often omitted. This 

omission, however, causes problems for machine 

translation (MT). An MT system must (i) detect 

if the sentence contains an ellipsis, and if it does 

and if the reinstatement is required by the target 

grammar, it must (ii) recover the word or phrase. 

Such reinstatement would require grammatical 

knowledge. 

4.1 Verbal omissions 

In (16a) below, the main predicate changed of 

the final clause is omitted because it is a repeti-

tion of the predicate of the immediately preced-

ing clause. As the SMT system fails to recognize 

the omission, it mistook the auxiliary verb have 

for a regular verb denoting possession: 
(16a) Values have shifted, the population has  

changed, and the cities have too. 

                                                 
23 The output is “「私はミイと結婚したいが、私はそれ

を行うことはできません、「マリーニは、今週のゲー

ムブログやオンラインフォーラムの注目を集めたビデ

オの中で述べています。”. 
24 The output is “9男性はより速く 10.2秒を実行してい

たその年がありました。”. 
25 The output is “速い 10.2秒よりも実行していた 9人の

男性がありました。”. 
26

 However, the verb run is translated as a Japanese word 
meaning “operate” instead of “move at a speed faster than a 

walk”, probably because the frequency of the chosen mean-

ing is higher on the SMT system in question. 
155



The output roughly means: 
(16b) The numbers,

27
 the population has been 

changed, has shifted, and
28

 the cities possess too 

much.
29

 

The sentence in (16a) is a flat one, conjoining 

three simple clauses. The SMT system fails to 

recognize the initial clause Values have shifted as 

a clause. It also fails to understand that the main 

verb of the final clause has been omitted. The 

word too is treated as the object NP of the verb 

have. The system does not have knowledge that 

too is an adverb, and that it cannot be the object 

of a verb. Nor does it have grammatical means of 

distinguishing have between uses of the auxiliary 

and the main verbs. 

   The following sentence in (17a) contains a 

relative clause in which both did and did not 

share the main verb phrase watch television. The 

system fails to identify the sharing, resulting in 

an unintelligible output roughly meaning (17b). 
(17a) Conversely the difference between those  

who did and did not watch television widened.
30

 

(17b) Conversely one conducted television, and 

 difference from those who did not watch it  

widened.  
It is difficult to imagine how such an output is 

produced. An MT system should be provided 

with grammatical knowledge for recognizing that 

the first did is not a verb meaning “conduct” or 

“perform”, but is an auxiliary verb. 

   The omission of the repeated verb phrase poses 

problems for translation between head-initial 

languages in Verb-Object (VO) order and head-

final languages in Object-Verb (OV) order. In 

VO languages like English, the object NP shared 

by two verbs can appear at the final position to-

gether with the second verb, creating the config-

uration of “Verb1 (=Head) and Verb2 (=Head) + 

Object (=Complement)”. On the other hand, in 

OV languages like Japanese, the object NP 

should appear at the initial position of the verb 

phrase, generating the configuration of “Object 

(=Complement) + Verb1 (=Head) and Verb2 

(=Head)”. In (17a), the shared complement is the 

verb phrase watch television. (18a) is a partial 

                                                 
27 Value has at least two meanings: principles or standards 

of behavior and a numerical amount or number. The mean-

ing of numbers is chosen in the output, probably because of 

the higher frequency stored at the SMT in question. 
28 Japanese uses different conjunctions for conjoining NPs 

and clauses. The conjunction used in the output is one for 

conjoining NPs, generating an awkward translation. 
29 The output is “値は、人口が変更された、シフトして

いる、と都市があまりにも持っています。”.  
30 The output is “逆にテレビを行なったし、見なかった

人との差が拡大しました。”. 

phrase cut off from (17a) for the sake of discus-

sion: 
 (18a) those who did and did not watch television 

The configuration showing the omission in (18a) 

is “AUX1
31

 (did=Head) and AUX2 (did 

not=Head) + Verb Phrase (watch televi-

sion=Complement)”. The Japanese configuration 

that corresponds to (18a) is “Verb Phrase (televi-

sion watch=Complement) + AUX1 

(PAST=Head) and AUX2 (NOT PAST=Head)”. 

The grammatical output of (18a) is roughly as 

below: 
 (18b) television-OBJ watch-PAST people and 

watch-NOT-PAST people 

Notice that the verb phrase watch television is 

moved to the initial position. For a proper treat-

ment of this type of omission, the system needs 

to identify the missing element (the verb phrase 

in this example), and move it to the appropriate 

place, according to the target language grammar. 

4.2 Other problematic omissions 

The omission of repeated verb phrases is fairly 

common and could be easy to handle, but repeat-

ed other categories can be omitted, too. Special 

measures should be taken for them when source 

and target languages differ much in grammars of 

omission.   For instance, with recovered missing 

constituents, (18a) would look like the following: 

(18a’) those who watched television and 

those who did not watch television 

In (18a), watched television in (18a’) is replaced 

with did, and the repeated phrase those who is 

omitted. A Japanese grammar of omission, how-

ever, does not permit such an omission, and 

therefore those who must be reinstated in transla-

tion into Japanese. It would be difficult to solve 

this type of problem by statistical means. It 

would need several rules of recognition and gen-

eration to bridge the gap in this regard between 

the two grammars. 

    Another example is an omission that takes 

place in an idiomatic phrase. English has the 

phrase as + adjective /adverb + as + x, which 

expresses a comparison in relation to the same 

degree. When the final part of the phrase is 

equivalent or similar in semantics to as before, it 

can be omitted, as follows: 
(19) When she was running this whole show, and  

had her own money, she didn’t need me as much  

from that standpoint.
32

 

                                                 
31

 AUX stands for auxiliary. 
32

 The output is “彼女はこの番組全体を実行し、自分のお金
を持っていたとき、彼女はその観点から、私は同じくらい必

要はありませんでした。”. 
156



(20) The journey from London to Bath took forty 

hours in 1720, but only half as long in 1770.
33

 

The output of (19) is unintelligible, because the 

object me of the verb need is translated as the 

subject. The phrase as much is regarded as an 

idiomatic phrase denoting the same, as in I am 

sure she would do as much for me. As a result, 

the clause she didn’t need me as much from that 

standpoint is translated to mean “she from that 

standpoint I didn’t need about the same”. Proba-

bly the quality of translation would have been 

better by skipping the phrase as much. 

   The SMT system in question also fails to pro-

duce a comprehensible output of (20). The rele-

vant portion in (20) to the topic of omission is 

only half as long in 1770. The adverb only is 

translated as a word meaning “unique”, while the 

phrase half as long as a word meaning “half” 

followed by a stem denoting “long”. The system 

cannot recognize the part of speech of long. An 

accumulation of these errors gives rise to an in-

telligible output. The removal of as long, howev-

er, generates a little ungrammatical but under-

standable Japanese sentence.
34

  While looking for 

a general solution, it might be a realistic alterna-

tive to skip problematic words or phrases. But 

even for this approach, research would be re-

quired for identifying what to skip. 

5 Conclusion 

This paper has shown three types of English-to-

Japanese SMT output errors, and demonstrated 

that the solution of these errors needs grammati-

cal knowledge. The first type is caused by differ-

ence in negative implications of words in source 

and target languages. The second type of output 

errors is derived from the rigidity of pattern 

phrases. Adverbs and adverbial phrases can ap-

pear at one of several positions of sentences, re-

sulting in discontinuous constituents. The inclu-

sion of adverbials in pattern phrases would cause 

the proliferation of pattern phrases and probably 

be not a feasible solution. Skipping them could 

be an alternative, but the investigation of which 

one to skip and not to skip would require much 

research. The third type of errors concern the 

omission of the constituents of sentences. It is 

difficult for an SMT system to find a missing 

constituent, but the target grammar sometimes 

                                                 
33

 The output is “バースへのロンドンからの旅は 1770

年に唯一の半分の長 1720年 40時間かかりました

が、。”. 
34 The output is “バースへのロンドンからの旅は、1720

年 40時間かかりましたが、1770年に半分だけ。”. 

requires the reinstatement of the omitted element. 

The solution of these problems would need syn-

tactic parsing and grammatical knowledge. 

Reference 

Bunt, H. and A Van Horck. 1996. Discontinuous 

Constituency. Mouton De Gruyter. 

Condon, Sherri, Dan Parvaz, John Aberdeen, Christy 

Doran, Andrew Freeman, and Marwan Awad. Eval-

uation of Machine Translation Errors in English and 

Iraqi Arabic. The MITRE Corporation. 7 pages. 

2010 

Elliot, Debbie, Anthony Hartley, and Eric Atwell. A 

Fluency Error Categorization Scheme to Guide Au-

tomated Machine Translation Evaluation. AMTA-

2004. 64-73, 2004. 

Farrús, Mireia, Marta R. Costa-jussa, Jose B. Marino 

and Jose A. R. Fonollosa. Linguistic-based Evalua-

tion Criteria to Identify Statistical Machine Trans-

lation Erros. Annual Conference of the European 

Association for Machine Translation. 167-173, 

2010. 

Farrús, Mireia, Marta R. Costa-jussa, Jose B. Marino, 

Marc Posh, Adolfo Hernandez, Carlos Henriquez, 

and  Jose A. R. Fonollosa. Overcoming statistical 

machine translation limitations: error analysis and 

proposed solutions for the Catalan-Spanish language 

pair. Language Resources and Evaluation (Springer). 

Vol. 45 Issue 2. 181-,. 2011.  

Flanagan, Mary A. Error classification for MT evalua-

tion.  -1994. 65-72, 1994. 

Popović, Maja and Aljoscha Burchardt. From Human 

to Automatic Error Classification for Machine 

Translation Output. Proceedings of the 15th Con-

ference of the European Association for Machine 

Translation. 265-272, 2011. 

Stymne, Sara and Lars Ahrenberg. On the practice of 

error analysis for machine translation evaluation. 

LREC. 1785-1790. 2012. 

Talbot, David, Hideto Kazawa, Hiroshi Ichikawa, 

Jason Katz-Brown, Mranz J. Och. A Lightweight 

Evaluation Framework for Machine Translation 

Reordering. Proceedings of the 6
th

 Workshop on 

Statistical Machine Translation. 12-21. 2011. 

Vilar, David, Jia Xu, Luis Fernaudo D’Haro, and 

Hermann Ney. Error Analysis of Statistical Ma-

chine Translation Output. Proceedings of the 

LREC. 697-702. 2006. 

Yamada, Ken. 1996. A controlled Skip Parser. Pro-

ceedings of the 2
nd

 AMTA Conference. 

157


