



















































Emotion and Inner State Adverbials in Russian


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 38–47,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

Emotion and Inner State Adverbials in Russian 

 
Olga Boguslavskaya 

Russian Language Institute,  
Russian Academy of Sciences 

Russia 
Boguslavskaya.Olga@gmail.com 

Igor Boguslavsky 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid / Institu-
te for Information Transmission Problems 

Spain / Russia 
Igor.M.Boguslavsky@gmail.com 

  

Abstract 

We study a group of adverbials that are 
composed of a preposition and a noun de-
noting an emotion or an inner state, such as 
v jarosti ‘in a rage’, s udovol’stviem ‘with 
pleasure’, ot radosti ‘out of joy’, s gorja 
‘out of grief’, na udivlenie ‘to the surprise 
of’, k dosade ‘to one’s disappointment’ etc. 
Being collocations, they occupy an interme-
diate position between free phrases and idi-
oms. On the one hand, some of them are 
simple adverbial derivatives of nouns and 
therefore inherit some of their properties. 
On the other hand, they may have specific 
properties of their own. Two types of prop-
erties of the adverbials are studied: the act-
antial properties in their correlation with the 
properties of the source nouns, and the se-
mantics proper. At the end a case study of 
the adverbials of the gratitude field is given. 
We show that adverbial derivatives can be 
shifted in the dependency structure from the 
subordinate clause to the main one.  

1. Introduction 

We proceed from the obvious assumption that 
adverbial derivatives refer to the same situa-
tion as the source lexical unit (LU). This im-
plies that, given the semantic structure with 
predicate P, our linguistic description should 
be able to produce a syntactic structure in 
which P is realized by means of an adverbial 
derivative of P and determine possible syntac-
tic positions for LUs that correspond to seman-
tic actants of P. And, the other way round, giv-
en sentences such as John replied by a nod and 
John nodded in reply, we should be able to 
discover that in both cases the semantic actants 
of ‘reply’ are ‘John’ and ‘his nod’. Thus, our 
aim consists in describing semantic and syn-
tactic properties of adverbial derivatives in 
their correlation with the source LU. For each 
predicate, we need to know its possible syntac-
tic realizations (e.g. ‘reply’ --> to reply – in 

reply) along with semantic modifications asso-
ciated with them. For each syntactic realiza-
tion, we should specify possible ways of va-
lency filling of the LU. The main difference 
between this approach and traditional valency 
dictionaries is that we concentrate on adverbial 
derivatives of predicates in their correlation 
with the source LU unit and take into consid-
eration a much larger range of possible realiza-
tions of their semantic actants.   

We study a group of nouns that denote emo-
tions and inner states (EIS nouns). They are 
often used in specific adverbial prepositional 
phrases – v jarosti ‘in a rage’, s udovol’stviem 
‘with pleasure’, ot radosti ‘out of joy’, s gorja 
‘out of grief’, na udivlenie ‘to the surprise of’, 
k dosade ‘to one’s disappointment’ etc. The 
phrases usually mean that a person is in this 
state or that this state is the cause or a conse-
quence of some other state or event. For brevi-
ty, we will call such phrases EIS adverbials.  

Russian explanatory dictionaries usually 
treat EIS adverbials as free phrases and attrib-
ute all their peculiarities, if any, to specific 
properties of corresponding prepositions. For 
example, the recent Active dictionary of Rus-
sian (ADR 2014), which provides deeply elab-
orated semantic definitions, lists among the 
senses of preposition v 'in', sense v 4.1 which 
«is used to denote the state A2 of a person A1 
or his relationship A2 with other people»: On 
byl v sil'nom razdraženii (v polnom izumlenii, 
v upoenii, v ekstaze). V jarosti pnul sobačonku. 
‘He was in a temper (in utter surprise, in ecsta-
sy). In a rage, he kicked the dog’. Other de-
tailed descriptions of semantics of Russian 
prepositions used in EIS adverbials can be 
found in Iomdin 1990-91, Iordanskaja-Mel’čuk 
1996, Levontina 2004.  However, even the 
most precise and detailed description of prepo-
sitions does not fully account for all peculiari-
ties of adverbials. We intend to show that EIS 
adverbials manifest a number of features that 
are not derivable from the properties of prepo-

38



sitions or nouns alone but appear only in their 
combination. Special attention will be paid to 
semantic and syntactic properties of the adver-
bials.  

In section 2 we will explain what we basi-
cally mean by adverbial derivatives and de-
scribe their certain properties relevant for our 
study. Section 3 will characterize EIS adverbi-
als of different types. In section 4 we demon-
strate a case study related to adverbials of the 
field of gratitude. We will conclude in 5.  

2. Adverbial derivatives.  

We consider EIS adverbials as adverbial deriv-
atives of corresponding nouns. An adverbial 
derivative of lexical unit (LU)  L is a LU or a 
phrase that has the same or a similar meaning 
to L and has an adverbial syntactic function, 
which means that it is primarily used as a verb 
modifier. For more details on syntactic deriva-
tives in general and adverbial derivatives in 
particular we refer the reader to Boguslavsky 
2014.  

In Russian, there are three major types of 
adverbial derivatives: a) grammatical deriva-
tives that can be derived from virtually any 
verb (deverbal adverbs, deepričastija); cf. (1a), 
b) lexico-syntactic derivatives (prepositional 
phrases) derived from nouns; cf. (1b), and c) 
lexical derivatives (adverbs); cf. (1c). The last 
two cases can be described as values of the 
lexical function Advi. 
(1a) Oni razgljadyvali kartinki, radujas' kak 
deti. 
‘they were examining the pictures rejoicing 
like children’. 
(1b) Ja s bolšoj radostju prinimaju vaše 
priglašenie. 
‘I accept your invitation with great joy’. 
(1c) Deti radostno prinjalis' narjažat' jolku. 
‘the kids merrily began to decorate the Christ-
mas tree’.  

Deverbal adverbs retain the lexical meaning 
and syntactic properties of the source LU to a 
greater extent than other types of adverbial 
derivatives. They serve to express a secondary 
predication attached to the main one. Their 
most salient feature is that their subject is al-
ways coreferential with the subject of the main 
clause and is elided from the syntactic struc-
ture. As a rule, prepositional phrases and ad-
verbs also retain the lexical meaning of the 
source word, but they can manifest noticeable 
semantic modifications.  

As far as the actantial structure of adverbials 
is concerned, it is necessary to distinguish be-
tween three types of valency slots in the se-
mantic definition of a LU depending on the 
syntactic position of the argument with respect 
to its predicate (Boguslavsky 2003)1. We call a 
valency slot of lexeme L ACTIVE if in the 
syntactic structure of the sentence it is filled by 
a word syntactically subordinated to L. Active 
valency slots are instantiated with syntactic 
actants. We call a valency slot PASSIVE if it 
is filled by a lexeme that syntactically subordi-
nates L. Finally, we call it DISCONTINUOUS 
if there is no direct syntactic link between L 
and the word filling this slot. 

To give an example, the valency slots of the 
verb to precede are active because in the proto-
typical sentence  
(2a) The conference preceded the workshop  
its actants syntactically depend on the verb. 
However, if one compares (2a) with the sen-
tence 
(2b) The conference was before the workshop  
we will see that, from the purely semantic 
point of view, the preposition before denotes 
the same situation as the verb to precede - the 
situation of the temporal precedence of one 
event with respect to the other. This situation 
has at least two participants: an event that 
takes place earlier and another one that takes 
place later. These participants can be systemat-
ically expressed in a sentence with the given 
word and therefore the preposition before has 
the same semantic rights to have valency slots 
as the verb to precede. The only difference 
between these slots concerns their syntactic 
realization. In case of the verb, both slots are 
filled with phrases which are syntactically 
subordinated to the verb in the dependency tree  
(i.e. with the subject and with the direct object) 
and therefore they are active. With the preposi-
tion it is different: one of the slots is also filled 
with a subordinated NP (before the workshop) 
whereas the other is filled with a phrase which 
syntactically subordinates the preposition (the 
conference was before), which makes this slot 
passive. 

Discontinous valency filling can be illustrat-
ed by quantifiers, cf. (3): 
(3) All the papers [Q] were revised [P]. 

                                                             
1 When we speak of syntactic positions of arguments 
with respect to predicates, we refer to syntactic positions 
of LUs that correspond to these arguments and predi-
cates.   

39



All has two valency slots, one of which (Q) is 
filled by the NP it modifies, and another one 
(P) – by a VP. Using the terms introduced 
above, Q is filled in a passive way (since pa-
pers subordinates all in the dependency struc-
ture) while P is filled in a discontinous way 
(while there is no direct dependency link be-
tween all and were revised).    

As we will show below, EIS adverbial va-
lencies can be filled in all three ways – active-
ly, passively, and discontinously.  

It is noteworthy that the passive valencies of  
adverbial derivatives can have two sources. If 
we denote an adverbial derivative as Adv(L), 
where L is the source lexeme of the derivation, 
then a passive valency may be determined, on 
the one hand, by the Adv component of this 
formula, and on the other hand – by the L part. 
The first case can be illustrated by the adverbi-
al vo sne ‘in one’s sleep’ (cf. (4).  
(4) Vo sne on gromko stonal. 
lit. in sleep he loudly groaned. 
‘he groaned loudly while sleeping’. 
As any adverbial, it is a modifier, and hence 
the modified word (stonal 'groaned ') is its pas-
sive argument.  

In the second case, a passive valency of an 
adverbial derivative corresponds to one of the 
valency slots of L. For example, in (5) v naka-
zanie ‘as a punishment’ is subordinated to (= is 
a modifier of) a VP which denotes the punish-
ment itself: 
(5) V nakazanie ego lišili slova.  
lit. in punishment him they.deprived of.word  
‘he was denied the right to speak as a punish-
ment’. 

While in (5) the syntactic governor (lišili 
'they.denied') of the adverbial is an argument 
of L (nakazanie 'punishment'), in (4) the gov-
ernor (stonal 'groaned') has nothing to do with 
the argument frame of L (son 'sleep').  

3. Syntax and semantics of EIS adverbi-
als.  

The range of prepositions used for constructing 
EIS adverbials is rather wide: s (+Instr, +Gen, 
+Gen22), ot (+Gen), iz (+Gen), v (+Loc), na 
(+Loc, Pl), na (+Acc), k (+Dat), po (+Dat). 
What strikes the eye is that the co-occurence of 
EIS nouns with prepositions is very selective. 
As is normal for collocations, even semantical-
                                                             
2 Gen2 is a special case form proper for certain classes of 
nouns and opposed to Gen: cf. so straxa (Gen) – so 
straxu (Gen2) 

ly similar nouns co-occur with different prepo-
sitions. The noun strax ‘fear’ combines with 
four causal prepositions – ot, iz-za, iz and s 
(+Gen or Gen2): posedet' ot straxa ‘turn grey 
out of fear’,  skryt'sja iz-za straxa nakazanija 
‘escape for fear of punishment’, soglasit'sja iz 
straxa pered oglaskoj ‘agree for fear of public-
ity’, ubežat' so straxa (so straxu) ‘run away out 
of fear’. Of these four prepositions, bojazn' 
‘fear’ does not co-occur with s (*s bojazni). 
Užas ‘horror’ mostly co-occurs with ot 
(drožat’ ot užasa ‘tremble with horror’ (lit. 
‘from horror’)). The main causal preposition 
iz-za ‘because of’ occurred together with užas 
only twice in the 230 million-strong Russian 
National Corpus, although užas itself occurred 
more than 25,000 times. Panika ‘panic’ rarely 
co-occurs with ot (only 10 examples in the 
corpus), even rarer with iz-za (2 examples), 
and never with iz. What is typical for panika is 
an adverbial with v ‘in’ – v panike ‘in panic’ 
(600 examples among the 3,500 occurrences of 
panika in the corpus).  

 Below, we will first discuss the actantial 
structure of EIS adverbials (Section 3.1) and 
then we will make some remarks about their 
semantic properties (Section 3.2). 

3.1 Actantial structure   

Most EIS predicates have two valency slots: 
Experiencer, who feels an emotion or is in a 
certain state, and Cause of the emotion or state: 
father's rage, fear of spiders. The Experiencer 
slot is instantiated with a genitive NP (jarost' 
otca), a possessive adjective (naše gore) or 
certain adjectives with the quantifier meaning 
(vseobščee vosxiščenie 'general admiration; = 
everybody felt admiration’). The Cause slot is 
instantiated by a larger range of elements: dif-
ferent prepositions (ot, s, pered, na and others), 
the infinitive (strax byt' ubitym ‘fear of being 
killed’), the genitive case (strax temnoty ‘fear 
of darkness’), the instrumental case 
(vozmuščenie ego postupkom ‘indignation at 
his behaviour’, vosxiščenie ee krasotoj ‘admi-
rarion for her beauty’). There are some EIS 
nouns that have more valency slots, e.g. 
blagodarnost' ‘gratitude’ (who is grateful, to 
whom and for what)3, obida ‘resentment’ (who 
feels resentment, towards whom it is felt, and 
what caused this feeling).  

                                                             
3 More on the actantial structure of blagodarnost’ in Sec-
tion 4. 

40



Now we will comment on the actantial 
structure of EIS adverbials.  

Experiencer: The Experiencer slot of EIS 
adverbials is instantiated either in an active or 
discontinuous way. The active instantiation of 
the Experiencer slot has two variants:  

(a) the form of the Experiencer is directly 
inherited from the source noun. Cf. ego (naš, 
vseobščij) vostorg ‘his (our, universal) delight’ 
– k ego (našemu, vseobščemu) vostorgu ‘to his 
(our, universal) delight’; razočarovanie rodite-
lejGen ‘disappointment of the parents’ – k ra-
zočarovaniju roditelejGen ‘to the disappoint-
ment of the parents’. 

(b) the form of the Experiencer is specific 
for the adverbial. Cf. strax vragovGen ‘fear of 
the enemies’ – na strax vragamDat ‘so that the 
enemies tremble with fear’. The adverbial re-
quires Dat, while the source noun only takes 
Gen.  

For some adverbials, the active filling of the 
Experiencer slot is obligatory: k radosti 
<užasu, vozmuščeniju, zavisti> Ivana ‘to 
Ivan's joy <horror, indignation, envy>’- *k 
radosti <užasu, vozmuščeniju, zavisti> ‘to the 
joy <horror, indignation, envy>’. 

Very often, the Experiencer is not connected 
to the adverbial by a direct syntactic link. In 
(6), the one who feels astonishment is the sub-
ject of the subordinating verb and therefore 
instantiates both the slot of the verb (perestal 
‘stopped’) and of the adverbial. In the first 
case, the instantiation is active, and in the se-
cond – discontinuous.  
(6) Ot udivlenija on perestal est’.  
‘he stopped eating from astonishment’ 

Cause: The Cause slot of EIS adverbials is 
instantiated either in an active or a passive 
way. When the filling is active, the same prep-
ositions and cases are used as the ones gov-
erned by the source nouns: v otčajanii ot 
poraženija ‘in despair from defeat’, v užase 
pered pytkami ‘in horror of tortures’, v straxe 
byt’ ubitym ‘in fear of being killed’, s 
vooduševleniem ot otkryvajuščixsja 
vozmožnostej ‘with enthusiasm for opening 
opportunities’, s obidoj za to, čto on ne pomog 
‘with resentment for his failure to help’.  

The passive instantiation of the Cause slot 
can be illustrated by example (7): 
(7) K našemu razočarovaniju, predstavlenie 
otmenili.  
‘to our disappointment, the performance was 
cancelled’   

Here, our disappointment was caused by the 
cancellation of the performance, which means 
that the Cause slot is filled by the subordinat-
ing verb (otmenjat’ ‘to cancel’).  

It is important to emphasize that the adver-
bials derived from different nouns, even if they 
are constructed with the same prepositions, 
may have different actantial properties. Cf. 
adverbials s jarostju ‘with rage’ and s 
naslaždeniem ‘with relish’.  
(8) Otec s jarostju vyrval iz ruk Meri pis'mo. 
‘Father tore the letter out of Mary's hand with 
rage’ 
(9) Otec s naslaždeniem vykuril sigaru. 
‘Father smoke a cigar with relish’.  

In (8) only the Experiencer of the emotional 
state is expressed and nothing is known about 
its cause. The father's rage had obviously been 
caused by prior events, and this emotion mani-
fested itself in the way in which he tore the 
letter out of Mary's hand. In (9) the idea of 
manifestation is also present. Judging by the 
way father was smoking a cigar one could see 
that he was enjoying it. But on top of that, the 
source of the emotion is also explicitly ex-
pressed: the relish is caused by the process of 
smoking. 

3.2 Some observations on the semantics of 
EIS adverbials  

EIS adverbials belong to three semantic 
groups: concomitant state, effect and cause.  

Concomitant state adverbials are con-
structed with three prepositions – v ‘in’ 
(+Loc), s ‘with’ (+Instr) and bez ‘without’ 
(+Gen): v otčajanii ‘in despair’, s 
vooduševleniem ‘enthusiastically, lit. with en-
thusiasm’, bez otvraščenija ‘without disgust’.  

Let us compare two very close prepositions 
that form concomitant state adverbials with 
EIS - v 'in' as v jarosti 'in rage' and s 'with' as s 
jarostju 'with rage'. First, only one of them 
allows the cause of emotion to be expressed 
explicitly: 
(10a) V jarosti ot neudači on vybežal iz kom-
naty. 
lit. in rage from the failure he ran out of the 
room. 
(10b) *S jarostju ot neudači on vybežal iz 
komnaty. 
lit. with rage from the failure he ran out of the 
room. 

Second, the phrases in which the Cause is 
unexpressed are not entirely synonymous. 
While phrases with s emphasize the external 

41



manifestation of the emotion, phrases with v 
only indicate that the Experiencer is in a cer-
tain emotional state, disregarding its external 
manifestation. This opposition between v ‘in’ 
and s ‘with’ is incidental to a large group of 
phrases in which the noun denotes a state that 
can be manifested externally, such as gnev 
‘anger’, radost’ ‘joy’, pečal’ ‘grief’, vostorg 
‘delight’ etc. (ECD 1984: 208). It is notewor-
thy that the s ‘with’ phrases point at the mani-
festation of the emotion only when the action 
they modify itself has external manifestation. 
If the action is purely mental, the s-phrases 
lose the manifestation component and denote 
simple concomitance.  
(11a) Ona s blagodarnostju <negodovaniem> 
posmotrela na nego [+ manifestation]. 
‘she looked at him with gratitude <indigna-
tion>’ 
(11b) On s blagodarnostju  <negodovaniem> 
dumaet o svoix kollegax [- manifestation]. 
‘he thinks about his colleagues with gratitude 
<indignation>’ 
(12a) Ona s otvraščeniem otvernulas' [+ mani-
festation]. 
‘she turned away with revulsion’ 
(12b) Ja s otvraščeniem vspominaju etu scenu 
[- manifestation].  
‘I recall this scene with revulsion’ 

Effect adverbials: There are three preposi-
tions that combine with EIS nouns to convey 
the idea that a certain emotion or a mental state 
of person A1 is a result of some situation A2. 
These are v (+Acc), k (+Dat) and na (+Acc).  

The first preposition is used in the predicate 
position only and combines with a very limited 
number of nouns. We know of three such 
nouns – radost’ ‘joy, happiness’, udovol’stvie 
‘pleasure’, and tjagost’ ‘burden, hard feeling’. 
Maybe there are some more, but hardly many 
more. The propositional form that serves as the 
left part of the lexicographic definition is 
(13a), and the definition itself is given in 
(13b). Examples are in (13c,d): 
(13a) А2 (jest') А1Dat v radost' (v udovol'stvie, v 
tjagost')  
lit. A2 (is) A1Dat in happiness (pleasure, hard 
feeling) 
(13b) ‘person А1 feels happiness (pleasure, 
hard feeling) caused by situation A2’ 
(13c) Tjaželye trenirovki byli emu v radost’.  
lit. hard training-sessions were to.him in hap-
piness 
‘hard training sessions made him happy’.  
(13d) Rabota byla ej ne v tjagost'. 

lit. work was to.her not in hard.feeling 
‘it was not hard for her to work’. 
This construction requires that A2 be some 
lasting or repeated process or activity. It can-
not be just a momentary action; cf. perfectly 
correct (14a) and dubious (14b): 
(14a) Postreljat' v tire bylo ej v udovol'stvie. 
‘shooting (=giving a series of shots) in a shoot-
ing gallery gave her pleasure’   
(14b) ??Vystrelit' bylo ej v udovol'stvie. 
‘firing a shot gave her pleasure’ 
Another feature of this construction worth 
mentioning is that it is often used with the ne-
gation – cf. (13d) above.  

Two other prepositions that make up effect 
adverbials are k and na: 
(15a) K razočarovaniju poeta ego nikto ne uz-
naval.  
‘to the poet's disappointment nobody recog-
nized him’ 
(15b) Na radost' roditeljam Ivan blagopolučno 
zakončil školu. 
lit. to the happiness of the parents Ivan suc-
cessfully graduated from school 
‘the parents were happy that Ivan graduated 
from school successfully’  

Although these constructions convey large-
ly similar meanings, there are several aspects 
that differentiate them. 

1. Both prepositions take A1, the Experi-
encer of EIS, in the form of the possessive 
pronoun, but if it is expressed by a noun, prep-
osition na requires the dative case, while k 
combines with the genitive. 

2. Both constructions are largely lexicalized. 
One can say na strax vragam ‘to the fear of the 
enemies’, but not *na užas vragam ‘to the hor-
ror of the enemies’ or *na ispug vragam ‘to the 
fright of the enemies’. One can say k našemu 
užasu ‘to our horror’, but not *k našemu straxu 
‘to our fear’ or *k našemu ispugu ‘to our 
fright’. The range of EIS nouns accepted by 
these prepositions is largely different, although 
there are some nouns in common. In general, k 
co-occurs with a larger set of nouns than na. 
Preposition k combines freely with: radost’ 
‘happiness’, sčastje ‘happiness’, nesčastje ‘un-
happiness’, užas ‘horror’, udovol’stvie ‘pleas-
ure’, neudovol’stvie ‘displeasure’, vostorg ‘de-
light’, vosxiščenie ‘admiration’ etc. Preposition 
na often co-occurs with: radost’ ‘happiness’, 
sčastje ‘happiness’, nesčastje ‘unhappiness’, 
strax ‘fear’ etc. One can say k našemu 
vosxiščeniju (vostorgu, udovol’stviju, 
udovletvoreniju) ‘to our admiration (delight, 

42



pleasure, satisfaction)’, but one cannot use 
preposition na with these nouns. 

3.  Na- and k-phrases differ with respect to 
the temporal correlation between the EIS and 
the motivating situation A2. In case of k, the 
EIS is simultaneous with A2. Cf.:  
(16a) Poet vypustil novuju knigu k radosti 
svoix počitatelej  
‘the poet published a new book to the joy of 
his admirers’.  

The joy of the admirers may be caused by 
the mere fact of publication. For example, the 
poet was not publishing anything for a long 
time, and now a new book appeared, and the 
admirers are happy about that. No information 
is implied as to whether this mental state will 
last for a longer period. Phrases with preposi-
tion na are different. They are usually oriented 
towards the future and imply that the mental 
state, once appeared, will last for a certain 
amount of time. Sentence (16b)  
(16b) Poet vypustil novuju knigu na radost’ 
svoim počitateljam  
rather suggests another reason for joy: the ad-
mirers will be reading the new book and enjoy 
it. Let us give more examples to support this 
point. Sentence (17a) 
(17a) Na vysokom beregu my postroili krepost’ 
na strax vragam 
‘on a high riverbank we built a fortress for the 
enemies to fear us’ 
means that the fortress was built with the aim 
of producing durable fear on the part of the 
enemies and not just to give them a single  
fright. This is confirmed by verbal para-
phrases. An adequate paraphrase requires a 
verb in the imperfective aspect (as in (17b)) 
and not in the perfective (as in (17c)):  
(17b) My postroili krepost’, čtoby vragi 
bojalis’Imperf  (stative verb). 
‘we built a fortress for the enemies to fear us’ 
(17c) My postroili krepost’, čtoby vragi is-
pugalis’Perf. 
‘we built a fortress to frighten the enemies’.    

In the same way, sentence (18) does not 
mean that the daughter did not rejoice at her 
mother's arrival, but rather that the conse-
quences of this arrival would be sorrowful to 
the daughter.  
(18) Ne na radost' dočeri priexala ona v Pe-
terburg. 
‘it is not for her daughter's joy that she came to 
St. Petersburg’ 

Causative adverbials: Causative EIS ad-
verbials are constructed with four prepositions: 

ot (+Gen), iz-za (+Gen), iz (+Gen), and s 
(+Gen): pokrasnet' ot styda ‘turn red from 
shame’, mstit' iz-za revnosti ‘take revenge out 
of jealousy’, otkazat'sja iz otvraščenija ‘refuse 
out of disgust’, pljunut' s dosady ‘spit in an-
noyance’.  

Semantic differences between causal prepo-
sitions are described in great detail in Iordan-
skaya-Mel'čuk 1996 and Levontina 2004. The-
se differences are valid for EIS adverbials as 
well, and we will not repeat them here. We 
will only make several additional remarks.  

As is known, there are several linguistically 
relevant varieties of cause. In particular, one 
distinguishes objective and subjective cause, 
on the one hand, and external and internal 
cause, on the other4. All causal EIS adverbials 
refer to internal subjective cause due to seman-
tics of EIS nouns.  

The causative preposition most widely used 
with EIS nouns is ot ‘out of’. It combines 
freely with all the nouns of this class. Howev-
er, the use of the main causal preposition iz-za 
‘because of’ is rather restricted. It is not appro-
priate with a single noun. It requires that its  
group be extended. Cf.: 
(19a) *Iz-za radosti ona zabyla svoe ogo-
rčenie. 
lit. because of joy she forgot her grief 
(19b) Iz-za radosti, vnezapno oxvativšej ee, 
ona zabyla svoe ogorčenie. 
‘because of joy that suddenly gripped her she 
forgot her grief’ 
(20a) ??On stal agentom oxranki iz-za straxa.  
‘he became a secret police agent because of 
fear’ 
(20b) On stal agentom oxranki iz-za straxa 
pered arestom. 
lit. he became a secret police agent because of 
fear for arrest. 

Other causal prepositions do not have this 
restriction, cf. preposition iz: 
(20c) On stal agentom oxranki iz straxa. 
‘he became a secret police agent out of fear’ 

Another peculiarity of preposition iz-za is 
that it is not compatible with the second form 
of the genitive case of EIS (the form ending in 
–u), which freely accepts other causal preposi-
tions: ot straxu, iz straxu, so straxu, but *iz-za 
straxu. 

4. Case study: gratitude 

                                                             
4 For details, cf. Boguslavskaya 2003, Boguslavskaya and 
Levontina 2003.  

43



The semantic field of gratitude is represented 
in Russian by several lexemes, among which 
there are verbs (blagodarit’ ‘to thank’, ot-
blagodarit’ ≈‘to do something in return show-
ing one’s gratitude’), nouns (blagodarnost’ 
‘gratitude’, priznatelnost’ ‘appreciation’), ad-
jectives (blagodarnyj ‘grateful’, priznatel’nyj 
‘appreciative’) and adverbs (blagodarno 
‘gratefully’, priznatel’no ‘appreciatively’- the 
latter is somewhat obsolescent). All these lex-
emes (except the adverb blagodarno ‘grateful-
ly’) can take three semantic arguments: 
“someone who feels gratitude”, “someone to 
whom one is grateful”, and “something for 
what one is grateful”. Semantically, the prima-
ry lexeme of this group is the noun blago-
darnost’1, which is defined in the Active dic-
tionary of Russian (ADR 2014) as ‘a good 
feeling of person A1 towards person A2, who 
did a good A3 for A1’. Contrary to what one 
could expect, the propositional form of this 
meaning is not represented by a verb, but by an 
adjective (in a short form): Ja blagodaren 
<priznatelen> emu za pomošč’ ‘I am grateful 
to him for his help’.  

As opposed to these adjectives, the verb 
blagodarit' ‘to thank’ does not convey the idea 
that person A1 feels gratitude. Instead, it 
means that person A1 desires to show person 
A2 that he appreciates good A3 that A2 has 
done for him and expresses it in a verbal way 
appropriate for such cases. These are quite dif-
ferent things. One can thank somebody without 
feeling grateful. And the other way round, one 
can feel grateful without saying it to person 
A2; cf.:  
(21) Ja blagodaren emu za pomošč', no ne 
imeju vozmožnosti poblagodarit' ego. 
‘I am grateful for his help but have no oppor-
tunity to thank him’ 

The verb blagodarit' 'to thank', as is well-
known, is performative. When uttering Thank 
you we are not informing the interlocutor of 
what we are doing, but performing an illocu-
tionary act of gratitude. It is noteworthy that 
the adjectives blagodarnyj and priznatel'nyj 
‘grateful’ (in the short form) are also performa-
tive. The utterance Ja očen' blagodaren 
<priznatelen> vam za pomošč' ‘I am very 
grateful to you for your help’ is a voiced com-
pensation for a good deed, just like the a verbal 
phrase Blagodarju vas ‘thank you’ or a per-
formative formula Spasibo ‘thanks’.  

The verb blagodarit' ‘to thank’ is nominal-
ized by means of another sense of the noun 

blagodarnost' – blagodarnost'2 ‘the act of ex-
pressing gratitude ’:  

(22) Prezident načal svoju reč' s blagodarnosti 
Vnutrennim vojskam.  
‘the president began his speech by thanks to 
the Internal security troops’ (= ‘began the 
speech with thanking’)  

The difference between the two wordsenses 
of the noun blagodarnost' is clearly seen in the 
pair (23a-b): 
(23a) On poblagodaril ee, no blagodarnosti ne 
oščushčal (blagodarnost'1 – a feeling). 
‘he thanked her but did not feel any gratitude’ 
(23b) Ego blagodarnost' prozvučala 
neiskrenne (blagodarnost'2 – an act of express-
ing gratitude). 
‘his (expression of) gratitude sounded insin-
cere’ 

While the verb blagodarit' ‘to thank’ is 
shifted from the basic concept of a feeling to-
wards deliberately expressing this feeling, the 
adjective blagodarnyj ‘grateful’ (in the full 
form) and the adverb blagodarno ‘gratefully’ 
move towards expressing manifestation: 
phrases blagodarnyj vzgljad ‘a grateful look’ 
and blagodarno posmotrel na nee ‘looked at 
her gratefully’ describe a look in which the 
gratitude is manifested.  

Adverbial phrases of gratitude are composed 
mostly with the following four prepositions – s 
‘with’, ot ‘out of’, iz ‘from’ and v ‘in’: 
(24a) Ja s blagodarnostju prinimaju vaše pri-
glashenie.  
lit. I with gratitude accept your invitation  
‘I am happy to accept your invitation’ 
(24b) Ot blagodarnosti on daže proslezilsja.  
‘feeling grateful (lit. from gratitude) he even 
shed a tear’ (the action of shedding a tear is 
uncontrolled) 
(24c) Bol’noj prineset iz blagodarnosti to 
jaiček, to rybki, to medku.  
‘out of gratitude the patients bring (to the doc-
tors) sometimes some eggs, sometimes some 
fish, sometimes some honey’  
(24d) V blagodarnost’ za konsul’taciju ona 
podarila vraču korobku konfet. 
‘in gratitude for the consultation she gave the 
doctor a box of chocolate’ 

The adverbials represented in (24a-c) have 
been commented upon above (section 3.2). In 
(24a) the adverbial expresses the meaning of 
concomitance (‘feeling grateful for some ac-
tions related to this situation’). Examples 
(24b,c) express causation. Example (24d) is 

44



more complicated and we will discuss it be-
low.  

The phrase v blagodarnost’ ‘in gratitude for’ 
is close to two other adverbial phrases – v znak 
blagodarnosti lit. ‘in sign of gratitude’ and v 
kačestve blagodarnosti ‘by way of gratitude’. 
The three expressions are often translated in 
the same way. However, the two latter expres-
sions seem to be derived from two different 
senses of blagodarnost': P v znak blago-
darnosti means that P is a sign of the fact that 
the Experiencer feels gratitude (blago-
darnost’1). P v kačestve blagodarnosti has a 
slightly different meaning: P serves as an ex-
pression of gratitude’ (blagodarnost’2). This 
observation is confirmed by the fact that pure 
feelings do not combine with v kačestve ‘by 
way of’: one cannot say *v kačestve ljubvi 
<družby> ‘by way of love <friendship>’, 
while v znak ljubvi <družby> ‘as a sign of love 
<friendship>’ is perfect.  

The idea of gratitude implies that person A1 
is doing or is willing to do something for A2 to 
show that he appreciates the good that A2 has 
done for A1. Usually, this action consists in 
uttering certain conventional expressions. 
However, to express the gratitude one can per-
form any other action that would be pleasant to 
A2. For example, one can give A2 a bunch of 
flowers or dedicate him/her a poem. Neverthe-
less, a phrase denoting such a return action can 
hardly be attached to a gratitude word. One 
cannot say *On poblagodaril ee buketom 
cvetov <posvjashčeniem stixotvorenija> ‘he 
thanked her with a bunch of flowers < by dedi-
cating a poem>’; *blagodarnost’ buketom 
cetov <posvjaščeniem stixotvorenija> ‘grati-
tude with a bunch of flowers < by dedicating a 
poem>’. 

A common wisdom is that one can only pos-
tulate a semantic valency slot for word L if it is 
instantiated by a LU directly connected to L in 
the dependency structure. For this reason, the 
action performed by A1 is not considered an 
argument of the verb blagodarit’, and still less 
so of the noun blagodarnost’. Nevertheless, 
this valency slot should be postulated. We can 
offer the following arguments in favour of this.  

First, as mentioned above, a prototypical 
expression of gratitude consists in pronouncing 
certain verbal formulae, which cannot be gov-
erned by the verb blagodarit’: *poblagodaril 
spasibo ‘thanked with a thank you’. However, 
there exist non-verbal symbolic ways of ex-
pressing gratitude – by means of gestures, and 

they can be easily attached to blagodarit’: 
poblagodaril ulybkoj <kivkom, poklonom> 
‘thanked with a smile <a nod, a bow>. Non-
gesture actions can scarcely be used that way, 
although occasional examples can be found in 
the Russian National Corpus: 
(25) Doma on rasskazal otcu, kak on spas 
zjablika i kak zjablik poblagodaril ego zvonkoj 
pesenkoj.  
lit. at home he told his father how he saved a 
chaffinch and how the chaffinch thanked him 
with a ringing song.  

Second, as shown in Mel’čuk 2014:18 (def-
inition 12.2), to recognize a participant of a 
situation a semantic actant of LU L, it is not 
obligatory that this participant be directly 
linked to L in the syntactic structure. What is 
essential is that it should be expressible along-
side L. An immediate syntactic link is not the 
only way a participant can be expressed along-
side L. It may be linked to a LU that is a par-
ticular lexical function of L (these include sup-
port verbs Operi, Func0/i, Laborij and realiza-
tion verbs Reali, Fact0/i, Labrealij, as well as 
complex lexical functions having these verbs 
as their last component). Here is one of the 
examples of Mel’čuk: the noun danger (‘some-
thing dangerous’) has two arguments: ‘X is a 
danger for Y’. The dangerous element X can-
not be an immediate syntactic dependent of 
danger. If John is dangerous for someone, we 
cannot say *John’s danger or *danger 
by�<from>�John. However, some of the lexical 
functions of danger (support verbs) can link 
the name of such an element to the noun: John 
represents an enormous danger for our plans 
[represent = Oper1(danger)]. The main danger 
for our plans comes from John [come from 
=Func1(danger)]. 

This is exactly what we see in (24d). The ac-
tion carried out as a “realization” of the grati-
tude is expressed alongside the adverbial v 
blagodarnost’ by means of the subordinating 
verb. At the same time, v blagodarnost’ is the 
value of the lexical function Adv1Real1-M5 of 
blagodarnost’. In (24d), giving a box of choco-
late is the action that the Experiencer carries 
out paying his debt of gratitude. 

                                                             
5 Lexical functions of Reali-M and Facti-M group, which 
supplement Reali and Facti, were introduced in the inven-
tory of lexical functions to denote realization of predi-
cates with modal components (Apresjan 2001). Cf. Re-
al1-M(desire) = satisfy, Real2-M(challenge)= meet, Re-
al3-M(advice)=follow.  

45



In this respect, the adverbial v blagodarnost’ 
is similar to phrases v otvet ‘in response’, po 
prikazu 'by order of ', po privyčke ‘by habit’, 
po tradicii ‘according to tradition’ etc. that are 
also values of the same lexical function of the 
nouns otvet ‘response’, prikaz ‘order’, privyčka 
‘habit’, and tradicija ‘tradition’. With all these 
adverbials, the subordinating verb obviously 
instantiates the valency slot of the correspond-
ing predicate, which is clearly seen in pairs (a)-
(b) below.  
(26a) V otvet on požal plečami. 
‘in response, he shrugged his shoulders’ 
(26b) On otvetil požatiem pleč. 
‘he responded by shrugging his shoulders’ 
(27a) Marija Stjuart byla arestovana po prika-
zu korolevy.  
‘Maria Stuart was arrested at the Queen’s or-
der’ 
(27b) prikaz korolevy arestovat’ Mariju Stjuart 
‘the Queen’s order to arrest Maria Stuart’ 
(28a) Po privyčke on vo vsem obvinil ameri-
kancev. 
‘by habit, he accused Americans of everything’ 
(28b) privyčka vo vsem obvinjat’ amerikancev 
‘the habit of accusing Americans of every-
thing’ 
(29a) Po tradicii oni legli spat’ rano. 
‘according to tradition, they went to bed early’ 
(29b) tradicija ložit’sja spat’ rano  
‘the tradition of going to bed early’ 

The specific feature of the adverbial v 
blagodarnost’  is that unlike these adverbials, 
its source predicate (blagodarit’ ‘to thank’, 
blagodarnost’ ‘gratitude’) cannot attach the 
actant, expressible alongside the adverbial.  

Another derivative of blagodarit’ ‘to thank’ 
that has a slot of the return action is the verb 
otblagodarit’ ‘to repay somebody’s kindness; 
to show one’s gratitude’, which expresses the 
idea of compensation quite clearly:  
(30a) otblagodarit’ (perfective aspect only) =  
‘person A1 has done good A3 for person A2 as 
a compensation for good A4, which A2 did for 
A1’ 
(30b) Škol'niki otblagodarili šefov za remont 
školy prazdničnym koncertom.  
‘the schoolchildren expressed their gratitude to 
the sponsors by a festive concert’. 

Some adverbials including v blagodarnost’  
can undergo an interesting syntactic process 
called shifting («smeščenie», in Russian).  It 
consists in moving a certain element of the 
dependency structure from its natural position 
that directly corresponds to its semantic links 

to a higher position in the dependency tree. 
This phenomenon was described in Paducheva 
1974 for negation and was later generalized in 
Boguslavsky 1978 and 1985. For example, in 
both sentences (31a) and (31b) the negative 
particle ne is linked to the preposition v: 
(31a) Ivan položil sumku ne v mašinu. 
lit. Ivan put his bag not in the car  
‘Ivan did not put his bag in the car’ 
(31b) Ivan položil sumku ne v svoju mašinu. 
lit. Ivan put his bag not into his car 
‘Ivan put his bag into the car of another per-
son’ 

However, in (31a) this is a proper syntactic 
position for negation, since what is negated is 
the phrase v mašinu ‘in the car’, while in (31b) 
this is the position of shifting, because what is 
negated is not the preposition but pronoun 
svoju ‘his’: (31b) = ‘Ivan put his bag into not-
his car’. 

Now, let us look at sentences (32a-b): 
(32a) Xozjain trebuet, čtoby v blagodarnost’ za 
učenie ja celyj god besplatno na nego rabotal.  
lit. the master demands that in gratitude for 
apprenticeship I for a whole year without pay-
ment for him worked 
‘the master demands that in gratitude for ap-
prenticeship, I worked for him for a whole year 
without being paid’ 

Here, the adverbial v blagodarnost’ makes 
part of the subordinate clause and, according to 
what we showed above, its syntactic governor 
(rabotal ‘worked’) fills its valency slot. Sen-
tence (32b) shows that v blagodarnost’ can be 
moved to the main clause without reinterpreta-
tion of its semantic links.  
(32b) Xozjain trebuet v blagodarnost’ za 
učenie, čtoby ja celyj god besplatno na nego 
rabotal.  
lit. the master demands in gratitude for appren-
ticeship that I for a whole year without pay-
ment for him worked 
‘in gratitude for apprenticeship, the master 
demands that I worked for him for a whole 
year without being paid’ 

In (32b), just as in (32a), the in-return va-
lency slot of v blagodarnost’ is filled by the 
verb rabotal ‘worked’, although this verb is 
located in the subordinate clause and as such 
has no syntactic link with the adverbial.  

Shifting of an adverbial from the subordi-
nate clause into the main clause, exemplified 
by (32b), is possible if the predicate of the 
main clause has a modal meaning (cf. ‘de-

46



mand’ in (32b)). Here are examples of the 
same phenomenon with other adverbials.  
(33a) V otmestku za prigovor «čubarovcam» 
«Sojuz» ugrožal, čto ubijstva i podžogi oxvat-
jat ves' gorod. 
‘in retaliation for the sentence passed upon the 
members of the Čubarov band, “Sojuz” threat-
ened that assassinations and arsons would 
spread all over the city’ 
(33b) ‘«Sojuz» threatened to retaliate… by 
organizing assassinations and arsons…’.  
(34a) On predložil v dokazatel’stvo svoej ljub-
vi, čto otdast vse svoe sostojanie na ustrojstvo 
škol dlja bednyx. 
‘he suggested as a proof of his love that he 
would give all his fortune for establishing 
schools for the poor’ 
(34b) ‘he will prove his love by giving all his 
fortune for establishing schools for the poor’ 

5. Conclusion 

We have described semantic and syntactic 
properties of EIS adverbials in their correlation 
with the corresponding source LUs. This per-
spective makes it possible to treat different 
syntactic realizations of predicates along the 
same lines and offer a uniform description of 
semantic actants of both source LUs and their 
adverbial derivatives.  

Acknowledgements 

The work reported here was partially support-
ed by the RFH grant (13-04-00343), the Presi-
dent’s Grant for the Support of Leading Scien-
tific Schools (НШ-3899.2014.6), and the “His-
torical memory and Rusian identity” grant.  

References  
ADR 2014 – Активный словарь русского языка. / 
Отв. ред. акад. Ю. Д. Апресян. — М.: Языки 
славянской культуры, 2014. — Т. 1.A– Б. — 
408 с ; Т 2. В – Г.   — 736 с.  

Apresjan 2001 – Апресян Ю.Д. 2001. О лексиче-
ских функциях семейства REAL – FACT. Nie 
bez znaczenia … Prace ofiarowane Profesorowi  
Zygmuntowi Saloniemu z okazii jubileuszu 
15000 dni praci naukowej. Białystok, 23-40.  

Boguslavskaya 2003 – Богуславская О.Ю. 2003. 
Структура значения прилагательного причи-
на. Русистика на пороге XXI века: проблемы 
и перспективы. Материалы международной 
научной конференции. М. С. 102 – 105. 

Boguslavskaya 2004 – Богуславская О.Ю. При-
чина 2, Основание 5, Резон 1. Новый объяс-
нительный словарь синонимов русского язы-
ка. Отв. ред. акад. Ю. Д. Апресян. — М.: 
Языки славянской культуры, Wiener 
Slavistisher Almanach 2004. Pp. 877-882. 

Boguslavskaya, Levontina 2004 – Богуславская 
О.Ю., Левонтина И.Б. 2004. Смыслы ‘причи-
на’ и ‘цель’’ в естественном языке. Вопросы 
языкознания. С. 68 – 88. 

Boguslavsky 1985 – Богуславский И.М. 1985. 
Исследования по синтаксической семантике. 
М. Наука.  

Boguslavsky I. 2003. On the Passive and Discon-
tinuous Valency Slots. Proceedings of the 1st In-
ternational Conference on Meaning-Text Theo-
ry. Paris, Ecole Normale Supérieure, June 16–
18.  

Boguslavsky I. 2014. Argument structure of adver-
bial derivatives in Russian. In: Proceedings of 
COLING 2014, the 25th International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics: Technical 
Papers, pp. 1071–1080, Dublin, Ireland, August 
23-29 2014. 

ECD 1984 – Толково-комбинаторный словарь 
современного русского языка (под ред. 
И.А.Мельчука и А.К.Жолковского). Wiener 
slawistischer Almanach. Sonderband 14, Wien, 
1984. 

I. Mel'čuk, Iordanskaja, L. 1996. K semantike russ-
kix pričinnyx predlogov (IZ-ZA ljubvi ~ OT ljub-
vi ~ IZ ljubvi ~ S ljubvi ~ PO ljubvi). The Mos-
cow Linguistic Journal, 2, 162-211. 

I. Mel'čuk. 2014. Semantics. From Meaning to 
Text. v.3, John Benjamins Publishing Company. 

Iomdin 1990 – Иомдин Л.Л. 1990. Русский пред-
лог ПО: этюд к лексикографическому порт-
рету. Metody formalne w opisie języków 
slowiańskich. Z. Saloni (ed.). Dzial wydawnictw 
Filii UW w Białymstoku. С. 241-260.  

Iomdin 1991 – Иомдин Л.Л. 1991. Словарная 
статья предлога ПО. Семиотика и информа-
тика. М. Вып. 32. С. 33-60.  

Levontina 2004 – Левонтина И.Б. Из-за 4, из 
8.1…. Новый объяснительный словарь сино-
нимов русского языка. Отв. ред. акад. 
Ю. Д. Апресян. — М.: Языки славянской 
культуры, Wiener Slavistisher Almanach 2004. 
Pp. 430-437.   

Paducheva 1974 – Падучева Е.В. 1974. О семан-
тике синтаксиса. Материалы к трансформа-
ционной грамматике русского языка. 
М.: Наука, 291 с. 

47


