



















































Redundancy in French Electronic Health Records: A preliminary study


Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (Louhi), pages 21–30,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Redundancy in French Electronic Health Records:
A preliminary study

Eva D’hondt
LIMSI-CNRS UPR 3251
Rue John von Neuman
91403 Orsay, France
dhondt@limsi.fr

Xavier Tannier
LIMSI-CNRS UPR 3251

Univ. Paris-Sud
Rue John von Neuman
91403 Orsay, France

xtannier@limsi.fr

Aurélie Névéol
LIMSI-CNRS UPR 3251
Rue John von Neuman
91403 Orsay, France
neveol@limsi.fr

Abstract

The use of Electronic Health Records
(EHRs) is becoming more prevalent in
healthcare institutions world-wide. These
digital records contain a wealth of infor-
mation on patients’ health in the form of
Natural Language text. The electronic for-
mat of the clinical notes has evident ad-
vantages in terms of storage and shareabil-
ity, but also makes it easy to duplicate in-
formation from one document to another
through copy-pasting. Previous studies
have shown that (copy-paste-induced) re-
dundancy can reach high levels in Amer-
ican EHRs, and that these high levels
of redundancy have a negative effect on
the performance of Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) tools that are used to pro-
cess EHRs automatically. In this paper,
we present a preliminary study on the level
of redundancy in French EHRs. We study
the evolution of redundancy over time, and
its occurrence in respect to different docu-
ment types and sections in a small corpus
comprising of three patient records (361
documents). We find that average redun-
dancy levels in our subset are lower than
those observed in U.S. corpora (respec-
tively 33% vs. up to 78%), which may in-
dicate different cultural practices between
these two countries. Moreover, we find no
evidence of the incremental increase (over
time) of redundant text in clinical notes
which has been found in American EHRs.
These results suggest that redundancy mit-
igating strategies may not be needed when
processing French EHRs.

1 Introduction

Electronic Health Records (EHRs) are becoming
prevalent in most healthcare institutions and have
been recognized to contain crucial information
about patients’ health in the form of Natural Lan-
guage text. As a result, specialized Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) methods and tools are be-
ing developed to unlock this wealth of medical in-
formation from EHRs and use it in medical appli-
cations such as clinical decision support (Demner-
Fushman et al., 2009). The electronic format of
the clinical notes in the patient records makes it
easy to duplicate information from one document
to another through copy-pasting methods. Previ-
ous studies (Wrenn et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2011;
Cohen et al., 2013) have shown that the amount
of redundancy introduced by copy-pasting could
reach up to 78% in clinical notes from American
hospitals. This situation makes it difficult to ex-
ploit the content of EHRs both for humans and
NLP tools (Cohen et al., 2013).

One motivation for introducing content redun-
dancy in clinical documents is a need for com-
pleteness: While a patient’s history grows over
time with each new hospital visit, the key informa-
tion remains the same. By copy-pasting all avail-
able information into the most recent document,
this becomes a stand-alone document which of-
fers a complete and up-to-date overview of the pa-
tient’s history and status. Other reasons for the
observed redundancy are more pragmatic: logisti-
cal issues such as the time to load previous docu-
ments from the EHR or restricted access rights to
documents created in a different hospital depart-
ment can lead health professionals to ensure that
all relevant information is present in the clinical
note they are currently writing.

21



These practices can make health professionals
more efficient but they may also represent poten-
tial risks to patient care by creating confusion be-
tween what is relevant to the patient’s current ver-
sus his or her past medical condition (Siegler and
Adelman, 2009; Weis and Levy, 2014). Interest-
ingly, in the process of copying information from
an older document into a new one, small changes
can be introduced into the narrative, such as typo
corrections, acronym expansion, and information
updates. For these reasons it is important to study
the nature and extent of redundancy in clinical
notes in more detail (Zhang et al., 2014). An
important goal is to identify which portions of a
clinical document are entirely new and which por-
tions are redundant from previous documents in
the records, and whether the redundant portions
are identical to previous documents, or modified.

To our knowledge, the issue of redundancy in
Electronic Records has been predominantly stud-
ied for English, and more specifically in docu-
ments produced in healthcare institutions in the
United States. In this paper, we present a prelim-
inary study that addresses redundancy in French
clinical narratives from a group of healthcare in-
stitutions in France. We analyse a corpus of 361
documents from 3 patient records and examine to
what extent and under which conditions redun-
dancy is present.

2 Objective and research questions

The goal of this study is to characterize redun-
dancy in French EHRs with a view to gauge its im-
pact on NLP processing. This work is motivated
by the findings of similar studies on US EHRs,
which have shown that a certain level of redun-
dancy (30% and more) affects word distribution
in the documents and therefore has a (negative)
impact on language models. Also, when annotat-
ing data, redundancy could lead to duplicate work,
which we do want to avoid.

It is important to note that our study focuses
exclusively on surface redundancy, which we de-
fine as text sections of a document that are copied
verbatim (or with marginal edits) to another docu-
ment. While surface redundancy, i.e. literal copy-
ing, entails redundant information, the reverse is
not necessarily true: In a patient’s records, the
same information may be repeated in various doc-
uments but using different wording. Although this
type of paraphrasing may be considered as con-

veying redundant information, it does not have a
negative impact on language models, because the
utterances are part of the natural language diver-
sity of expression.

In this paper we aim to answer the following
research questions:

• Does surface redundancy grow over time in a
patient’s records?

• Which parts of the documents contain the
most redundancy?

• Are certain types of documents in EHRs
more likely to contain redundant information
than others?

• Is there more redundancy within patient’s
records versus between patient’s records?

We expect the results of this study to provide
some insight on the suitable natural language pro-
cessing methods to apply to French EHRs. In
particular, in light of the research conducted on
US clinical notes, we need to understand the na-
ture of redundancy in French data in order to de-
cide whether redundancy mitigation strategies are
needed.

3 Background

Redundancy detection is closely related to the
research topic of plagiarism detection, but there
are some key differences between the two fields.
Since redundancy is introduced by (indiscrimi-
nate) copying of text without much human inter-
vention, redundancy detection is mainly focused
on literal string matching, rather than employing
semantic similarity measures (other than detecting
spelled-out variants of acronyms) or paraphrase
detection. Furthermore, redundancy detection is
usually performed within a closed reference col-
lection (as opposed to plagiarism detection sys-
tems that use the entire internet as a reference
base).

It is important to note that near-duplicate blocks
of texts that are copied from a source text can oc-
cur in different positions in the new document. As
a result, similarity measures that treat the whole
document as one string i.e., global alignment, are
not optimal for redundancy detection (see also dis-
cussion in Zhang et al. (2011)).

Table 1 presents an overview of the tools and
methods whose suitability for redundancy detec-
tion in our corpus we reviewed in the course of

22



this study. The Baldr1 and Sherlock2 (Mozgovoy
et al., 2005) software packages have been devel-
oped for plagiarism detection exclusively. Baldr is
a source-code plagiarism-detecting software that
uses ‘information distance’ (Vitányi et al., 2009)
to measure similarity between two documents.
The intuition underlying this distance is that two
objects (in this case text documents) are similar if
the transformation function to transform one docu-
ment into the other is simple to describe. If, how-
ever, all such functions are complex, the objects
are deemed dissimilar. Baldr uses real-world com-
pression software to calculate the transformation
metrics (Chen et al., 2004). The Sherlock soft-
ware package uses the more common method of
fingerprinting, i.e. hashing substrings of the text
into unique digital signatures. Redundancy is then
calculated as the proportion of common signatures
between an incoming document and documents in
the comparison set. Unlike the method described
below for Cohen et al. (2013), the Sherlock pro-
gram operates on word level, i.e. uses words as its
basic units, instead of characters.

The other methods in Table 1 were developed
specifically for the task of redundancy assessment
in EHRs. They were all applied on corpora from
healthcare institutions in the United States. Cohen
et al. (2013) developed a character-based finger-
printing method similar to the BLAST sequence
similarity method (Altschul et al., 1990) which
is popular in bioinformatics. When applied to a
subset of a large corpus of 22,500 patient notes,
they observed an average level of redundancy of
around 30% within patient records, but a much
lower amount of redundancy (on average 2.9%)
between patient records. They also found that re-
dundancy in a large corpus has a significant neg-
ative effect on the performance of language mod-
elling applications.

Wrenn et al. (2010) developed a token-based
Levenshtein edit distance measure to perform se-
quence alignment between two documents. The
reported redundancy score is the proportion of
aligned tokens over the total number of tokens in
the base document. In their study they looked at
the occurrence of redundancy over time in a cor-
pus of 100 EHRs (admissions) and found levels

1http://wassner.blogspot.fr/2014/05/
baldr-loutil-anti-fraude-anti-plagiat.
html

2http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/
dcs/research/ias/software/sherlock/

of redundancy between 54% and 78% depending
on the clinical note (i.e. document) type. Further-
more they noted that the level of redundancy con-
sistently increased over time in the corpus.

Zhang et al. (2011) used vector-based seman-
tic similarity measures to measure redundancy in
outpatient notes. They analysed a corpus of notes
from 178 patients and found that these notes con-
tain a large amount of redundancy. Like Wrenn
et al. (2010) they also studied time progression,
and observed that note redundancy increased over
time.

4 Material and Methods

4.1 Corpus

For this study, we used a set of French clini-
cal notes where personally identifying informa-
tion (PII) had been marked and replaced by sur-
rogates (Grouin and Névéol, 2014). The docu-
ments were also marked with four types of con-
tent sections: letterhead, patient header, content
and footer (Deléger et al., 2014). One of our goals
is to assess whether there is more redundancy in
notes belonging to one patient, compared to re-
dundancy in notes across patient records. To this
end we selected three complete patient records for
our corpus. These records contain a total of 361
documents. Each record comprised of at least 100
documents and tracks the treatment of a patient
over the course of several years. To allow for a
fair comparison of redundancy within and between
patient records, we selected three patient records
with similar profiles, i.e. patients that were admit-
ted for renal transplantation and follow-up care.

4.2 Measuring redundancy

For comparability with previous work, we mea-
sured corpus redundancy using the fingerprinting
method (Cohen et al., 2013). We also developed
our own fingerprinting method, which is an exten-
sion of the Cohen method: Like the Cohen mea-
sure our implementation calculates a similarity
score based on the proportion of n-character fin-
gerprints which a target document has in common
with a base document or collection, over the total
number of fingerprints in the target document. In
other words, it shows what proportion of the text
(expressed in fingerprints) is redundant, i.e. has
also appeared in the base document. Unlike Co-
hen’s method our implementation allows for the
extraction of overlapping fingerprints, which im-

23



name method score range time-ordering comparison
Cohen et al. non-overlapping fingerprints 0-1 no document-pairs
adaptedCohen overlapping fingerprints 0-1 yes document-pairs, corpus
Wren et al. Levenstein distance 0-1 yes corpus
Zhang et al. semantic similarity 0-1 yes corpus
Baldr compression range 0-1 no document-pairs
Sherlock overlapping fingerprints 0-100 no document-pairs

Table 1: Overview of redundancy measuring tools reviewed; the tools specifically used in this work
appear in italic font.

proves both coverage of the original text and al-
lows for a more precise calculation of the number
of fingerprints that are in common. It is also robust
against differences in lower/uppercase, insertion
of spaces and newlines. For the analyses reported
in this paper, we converted the whole document
to a single string and extracted overlapping fin-
gerprints of 30 characters with 10-character inter-
vals. (In the original Cohen implementation non-
overlapping 30-character fingerprints are extracted
line per line.) Since we are interested in the tem-
poral aspects of patient records, our script takes
timestamps of documents into account which al-
lows for chronological sorting and comparison be-
tween individual documents as well as that of a
document to the concatenation of all older docu-
ments in the corpus.

4.3 Vizualization of redundancy
In section 6 we describe a prototype system for
the visualization of patient records and how it can
be used for annotation purposes. The code un-
derlying the prototype is a Python wrapper script
that takes temporally-ordered document-pair re-
dundancy scores from the adapted Cohen script
and uses this information to dynamically gener-
ate a graph (using the GraphViz software package)
which depicts the flow of information in the pa-
tient’s records over time.

5 Results

5.1 Incremental redundancy
The three subfigures in Figure 1 show the progres-
sion of redundancy over time in each of the three
patient records in our corpus, measured with the
Cohen script, and our own adapted Cohen script,
respectively. Each data point shows the propor-
tion of redundant text in a given document (ticks
on the x-axis), compared to the concatenation of
text from all older documents in the corpus. The

documents on the x-axis are ordered chronolog-
ically. Since the original Cohen script does not
allow for sequential comparison implementation,
we performed manual data selection of the older
documents to ensure that the two implementations
were tested on the same corpus subsets.

While similarity measures should not be di-
rectly compared, they both show similar evolu-
tions in the patient’s records. We see that there
is no clear incremental growth of redundancy over
time such as has been reported for American
EHRs, in any of the patient records. It should
be noted that patient records 3 shows an increase
in redundancy scores for the 20 most recent (i.e.
right-hand) documents. Closer analysis shows that
this is likely due to the type of documents, namely
discharge notes (Compte Rendu de Séjour). The
level of redundancy in different document types is
discussed below.

We find that although both measures show very
similar progressions, the adapted Cohen script al-
lows for a more precise measuring than the origi-
nal Cohen script (as evidenced by the higher aver-
age redundancy scores in all three subfigures). We
will therefore be using this implementation for the
other analyses reported in the rest of the paper.

5.2 Comparison between sections

While the previous analysis showed that there is
no incremental growth of redundancy in the cor-
pus, redundancy is still present: On average3, 33%
of the text in a document in the corpus is redun-
dant. To estimate the impact on text mining and
determine whether it will be beneficial or harm-
ful, it is important to characterize which parts of
the document are more likely to contain redundant
information. To this end we created a second ver-
sion of the corpus in which the header and footer
information for all documents had been removed,

3Calculated with adapted Cohen script

24



Figure 1: Redundancy over time of original text
in three patient records, calculated by the Cohen
and adaptedCohen script. The flat lines show the
average over the whole patient records.

Category Records 1 Records 2 Records 34

CR d’Acte 10.3 (14.1) 16.3 (21.2) 15.9 (23.8)
CR de Séjour 25.7 (25.9) N/A5 38.0 (30.5)
TA de Séjour 7.3 (9.9) 9 (15.9) 9.8 (12.3)

Table 2: Average redundancy for different docu-
ment types. All numbers are percentages. Be-
tween brackets is the standard deviation. ‘CR’
stands for ‘Compte Rendu’ (report), ‘TA’ stands
for ‘Text Associé’ (associated text).

leaving only ‘topical content’.
Figure 2 shows the same progression of redun-

dancy over time as Figure 1, but calculated over
the version of the corpus without header or footer
information. We see that the overall trends of the
respective graphs remain similar for the different
patient records but that the average redundancy
level has decreased drastically. In patient records
1, 2 and 3, the average redundancy level decreases
from 31% to 17.8%, 28% to 15.7% and 41% to
23.3%, respectively.

It is clear that most of the redundant text appears
in the header and footer sections of the document.
This text is not very informative by nature: Head-
ers and footers contain contact information such
as names, addresses, de-identified patient names,
which will only add noise for text mining pur-
poses that want to exploit the Natural Language
in the EHRs. In the following analyses, we there-
fore only use the NoHeaders versions of the pa-
tient records, that is, only the free text that makes
up the body of the notes in the patient records.

5.3 Comparison between document
categories

Patient records contain a wealth of information
in a variety of document types, such as test re-
sults and surgery notes (Compte Rendu d’Acte),
discharge summaries (Compte Rendu de Séjour),
and correspondence between doctors from various
hospital departments (Texte associé de Séjour). As
each document type describes a different aspect of
the patient’s stay in a hospital, they are likely to
differ in writing style but also in their purpose in
the hospital. Following Wrenn et al. (2010) we
studied the differences in redundancies between
different document types.

Table 2 shows the differences in average redun-
dancy levels of documents from the three main
document categories in the three patient records.

25



Figure 2: Redundancy over time of text in three
patient records with header and footer information
removed, calculated by the Cohen and adaptedCo-
hen script. The flat lines show the average over the
whole patient records.

Figure 3: Document size (in number of charac-
ters) versus redundancy levels of documents from
the main three categories of the patient records of
patient 3. X-axis is set to logarithmic scale.

We can see that the average level of redundancy
differs substantially between the different docu-
ment types. Discharge summaries (Compte Rendu
de Séjour) contain by far the most redundancy,
while the associated correspondence between doc-
tors (Texte Associé de Séjour) have a fairly low
amount of redundancy. This can be explained by
their structure and use: Discharge summaries gen-
erally have a fixed structure and aim to give a full
overview of the patient’s stay in the hospital, as
well as a short overview of the patient’s history.
The associated correspondence, however, is op-
tional, and is typically in the form of a letter that
contains free text and no fixed structure.

To ensure that the measured redundancy levels
are not an artefact of document length, we per-
formed an additional analysis of document size
versus redundancy ratio. Figure 3 shows the size
distribution (in number of characters) of the docu-
ments from the three largest categories in the pa-
tient records of patient 3. Patient records 1 and 2
show similar distributions.

We find no direct correlation between docu-
ment length and redundancy level, but rather a U-
shaped distribution. The longest documents doc-
uments, i.e. discharge summaries (Compte Rendu
de Séjour) have the highest average redundancy.

4As the metadata provided for these patient records con-
tained errors, the documents have been manually reclassified
into the different document types.

5The patient records did not contain enough documents of
this type to calculate a reliable average

26



HHHHHHS
T Records 1 Records 2 Records 3

Records 1 17.8 (13.5) 14.4 (18.8) 12.4 (15.1)
Records 2 12.8 (17.9) 15.7 (20.4) 15.0 (18.0)
Records 3 9.5 (13.7) 12.1 (18.4) 23.3 (24.9)

Table 3: Redundancy scores between different pa-
tient records. All numbers are percentages. Be-
tween brackets is the standard deviation. S stands
for source corpus. T stands for target corpus. The
number in italics are the average redundancy lev-
els that correspond to the black flat lines in Figure
2.

5.4 Inter-/Intra-patient record comparison

We saw that redundancy within patient record is
fairly low (compared to the scores reported for the
American EHRs), but given the fixed structure of
certain document types (Compte Rendu de Séjour
and Compte Rendu d’Acte) phrases or formula-
tions may be shared between different records.
Identifying these would be helpful for categorizing
similar interventions and tests (as described over
different documents) in different patient records.

Table 3 shows that the average redundancy be-
tween patient records is slightly lower than those
within the EHRs. We can conclude that even
though the patient illnesses and treatments (and
the associated forms to record these) are fairly
similar, the text in the patient records differs sub-
stantially between patients.

6 Discussion

Cross-culture differences in generating and man-
aging medical information in text have been stud-
ied previously for breast cancer forums in Ger-
many vs. United Kingdom (Weissenberger et al.,
2004) and EHRs structure and narrative style for
China vs. United States (Wu et al., 2013), and
Sweden vs. Finland (Allvin et al., 2011). In this
study we offer a preliminary comparison of the
occurrence of redundancy in French EHRs, com-
pared to numbers reported on redundancy in EHRs
from the United States.

Although our corpus of the three patient records
is too small to give conclusive results, it does offer
some interesting insights: We find that the level
of surface redundancy present in (and between)
French medical records is fairly low. Moreover,
we do not see clear indications of an incremen-
tal increase of redundancy over time, as has been

reported for American EHRs. Most of the redun-
dancy that is present in the French records in our
study comes from document headers and footers.
This text does not offer information on the course
of the patient illness and should be discarded so
as not to harm the performance of Text Mining
or NLP applications that use the EHRs as train-
ing material. The absence of redundancy in the
body of texts is beneficial for text mining pur-
poses, and we can conclude that the mitigating
strategies that have been developed for American
EHRs are not probably not needed when process-
ing French EHRs.

Subjective review of some of the French clinical
notes confirms our findings and suggests that the
copy-paste practices observed in American hospi-
tals, which are meant to give health profession-
als access to comprehensive information about a
patient within a single document, are not used in
France. We find that rather than copy-pasting con-
tent from previous documents, references to pre-
vious documents are inserted in new documents
(such as cf. CR précédent, see previous report, ex-
amen biologique: voir feuilles ci-joint, lab results:
see attached).

However, as Table 2 indicates, this does differ
between category types: In discharge summaries
(Compte-Rendus de Séjour), which are generally
the longest documents in the corpus, the measured
redundancy levels are higher than in other types
of documents, which indicates that entire text por-
tions are copied from older documents. Discharge
summaries are meant to be stand-alone documents
integrating information about an entire patient stay
which is otherwise described minutely in several
other documents. We notice that these copied por-
tions of text are often not strictly copy-pasted as
they integrate small differences corresponding to
re-writing of the text for clarity, addition of details
previously unavailable and correction of erroneous
information. So rather than copy-pasting con-
tent indiscriminately, French health professionals
seem to do it strategically. In this way, redundancy
should not be seen as a source of noise in a corpus
but rather as an indication of information flow be-
tween documents.

These observations suggest that documents con-
taining highly redundant sections are key doc-
uments in the patient records. While many of
these documents are identified as Compte-Rendu
de Séjour in the metadata, this is not always the

27



case. Therefore, it would be important to automat-
ically identify these documents in a given EHR, so
as to provide a new doctor with the most complete
overview of a patient’s history. Such information
could later also serve for the purposes of automatic
summarization.

As an exploration of our hypothesis and to
gather more insight into the structure of patient
records, we developed the prototype of a visual-
ization tool that would allow us to track how in-
formation is transferred in a patient record over
time. Figure 4 shows a screen capture of (part of)
the graph generated for one of the patient records
used in this study. Each block in the figure cor-
responds to one document in the patient’s records.
The documents are ordered chronologically along
the Y-axis from earliest (top) to most recent (bot-
tom). Documents that were created at the same
moment, i.e. during the same hospital stay, are
thus positioned next to one another. The shape of
the blocks refers to the document type (Compte-
Rendu de Séjour are square, Compte-Rendu d’Acte
are circles, ... ), and their size is relative to the
document size. The number in the block refers
to the document identifier in the patient’s records.
The interlinking lines refer to the proportion of
redundant information in the more recent docu-
ment that comes from the older document. A user-
defined cut-off parameter allows for interactive ex-
ploration.

In this study we have focused exclusively on
surface redundancy, i.e. the (almost) literal rep-
etition of a piece of text from an older document.
While string-based similarity measures are useful
to detect blatant copy-pasting that throws off word
distributions in language models, they prove too
crude when we want to detect the flow of infor-
mation, i.e. strategically used copy-pasting. More
specifically, the current method cannot deal with
highly similar text that is used to described two
different events. For example, blood test results
tend to be communicated using the same stan-
dard form. If two different blood tests yield the
same results, this will result in two highly simi-
lar documents, the most recent of which would be
judged as highly redundant by our current method.
A more precise method is needed that incorpo-
rates semantic components such as identification
of temporal expressions, or even event detection,
into the string similarity method.

7 Future Work

The work presented in this paper is a preliminary
study on a small-scale corpus and was meant to
gain insight into copy-paste-induced redundancy
in French EHRs. We find that rather than focusing
on mitigating methods (as needed for American
EHRs), we should look toward developing high-
precision measures that capitalize on the existing
redundancy in French EHRs. A first step for future
work will be to replicate this study on a larger and
more diverse corpus of patient records with differ-
ent disease profiles, so as to confirm our findings
and see to what extent text is shared between pa-
tient records from different hospital departments.

As a follow-up of this study we also plan to ad-
dress two new main lines of research. First, we in-
tend to develop a more precise surface redundancy
measure which takes temporal expressions and ter-
minological variation into account and which is
more robust to small changes within large highly
similar context. We will use the WiCoPaCo cor-
pus (Max and Wisniewski, 2010) to train models
that can automatically identify reformulations, and
distinguish those from (error) corrections and up-
dates.

Second, we will study redundancy on the level
of the patient’s records as a whole, not just on
the document level. We intend to develop a mea-
sure that uses information on redundancy levels,
the number of documents copied, the (temporal)
distance of information that has been copied, ... to
identify key documents within a patient’s record.
To this end we will need a reference set of cor-
rectly identified key documents in a set of patient
records. This will be carried out by a group of
health professionals, who will manually classify
the documents in a sizable set of EHRs in terms of
their importance (and information content). Since
such annotations are very expensive, these profes-
sionals will be provided with an improved version
of the visualization tool described in section 6 to
select potential documents and speed up the anno-
tation process.

8 Conclusion

In this paper, we present a preliminary study on
the presence of copy-paste-induced redundancy in
French EHRs. We find that the high levels of re-
dundancy and incremental increase of redundant
text over time which have been observed in Amer-
ican EHRs, does not feature in our subset. As a re-

28



Figure 4: Screen shot of zoom-in from the visualization tool. Documents (represented by blocks) are
ordered chronologically (Y-axis) with the oldest at the top, and the most recent at the bottom. The number
within a block refer to the document identification number within the respective patient’s records.

sult, there is no expected impact from redundancy
on language models or other natural language pro-
cessing methods applied to French EHRs. Rather,
the limited redundancy that is present in the corpus
may be strategically exploited to yield important
information from the records.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the French National
Agency for Research under grants CABeRneT6

ANR-13-JS02-0009-01 and Accordys7 ANR-12-
CORD-0007.

The authors thank the Biomedical Informatics
Department at the Rouen University Hospital for
providing access to the LERUDI corpus for this
work.

6CABeRneT: Compréhension Automatique de Textes
Biomédicaux pour la Recherche Translationnelle

7Agrégation de Contenus et de COnnaissances pour
Raisonner à partir de cas dans la DYSmorphologie foetale

29



References

H Allvin, E Carlsson, H Dalianis, R Danielsson-
Ojala, V Daudaravičius, M Hassel, D Kokki-
nakis, H Lundgrén-Laine, GH Nilsson, O Nytrø,
S Salanterä, M Skeppstedt, H Suominen, and
S Velupillai. 2011. Characteristics of finnish and
swedish intensive care nursing narratives: a compar-
ative analysis to support the development of clinical
language technologies. J Biomed Semantics, Suppl
3:S1.

Stephen F Altschul, Warren Gish, Webb Miller, Eu-
gene W Myers, and David J Lipman. 1990. Basic
local alignment search tool. Journal of molecular
biology, 215(3):403–410.

Xin Chen, Brent Francia, Ming Li, Brian Mckinnon,
and Amit Seker. 2004. Shared information and
program plagiarism detection. Information Theory,
IEEE Transactions on, 50(7):1545–1551.

R Cohen, M Elhadad, and N Elhadad. 2013. Redun-
dancy in electronic health record corpora: analysis,
impact on text mining performance and mitigation
strategies. BMC Bioinformatics, 14:10.

L Deléger, C Grouin, and A Névéol. 2014. Auto-
matic content extraction for designing a french clin-
ical corpus. In Proc AMIA Annu Symp.

Dina Demner-Fushman, Wendy W Chapman, and
Clement J McDonald. 2009. What can natural lan-
guage processing do for clinical decision support? J
Biomed Inform, 42:760–772.

Cyril Grouin and Aurélie Névéol. 2014. De-
identification of clinical notes in french: towards a
protocol for reference corpus developpement. In J
Biomed Inform, Aug.

Aurélien Max and Guillaume Wisniewski. 2010. Min-
ing naturally-occurring corrections and paraphrases
from wikipedia’s revision history. In LREC.

Maxim Mozgovoy, Kimmo Fredriksson, Daniel White,
Mike Joy, and Erkki Sutinen. 2005. Fast plagiarism
detection system. In String Processing and Informa-
tion Retrieval, pages 267–270. Springer.

EL Siegler and R Adelman. 2009. Copy and paste: a
remediable hazard of electronic health records. Am
J Med, 122:495–496.

Paul MB Vitányi, Frank J Balbach, Rudi L Cilibrasi,
and Ming Li. 2009. Normalized information dis-
tance. In Information theory and statistical learn-
ing, pages 45–82. Springer.

JM Weis and PC Levy. 2014. Copy, paste, and
cloned notes in electronic health records: preva-
lence, benefits, risks, and best practice recommen-
dations. Chest, 145(3):632–8, Mar 1.

C Weissenberger, S Jonassen, J Beranek-Chiu, M Neu-
mann, D Müller, S Bartelt, S Schulz, JS Mönt-
ing, K Henne, G Gitsch, and G Witucki. 2004.
Breast cancer: patient information needs reflected
in english and german web sites. Br J Cancer,
91(8):1482–7, Oct 18.

JO Wrenn, DM Stein, S Bakken, and PD Stetson.
2010. Quantifying clinical narrative redundancy in
an electronic health record. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 17(1):49–53.

Y Wu, J Lei, WQ Wei, B Tang, JC Denny, ST Rosen-
bloom, RA Miller, DA Giuse, K Zheng, and H Xu.
2013. Analyzing differences between chinese and
english clinical text: a cross-institution comparison
of discharge summaries in two languages. In Stud
Health Technol Inform, volume 192, pages 662–6.

R Zhang, S Pakhomov, BT McInnes, and GB Melton.
2011. Evaluating measures of redundancy in clini-
cal texts. In Proc. AMIA Annual Symposium, page
1612–1620.

R Zhang, S Pakhomov, and GB Melton. 2014. Longi-
tudinal analysis of new information types in clinical
notes. In Proc. AMIA Summits on Translational Sci-
ence, page 232–237.

30


