



















































Emotion in Code-switching Texts: Corpus Construction and Analysis


Proceedings of the Eighth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing (SIGHAN-8), pages 91–99,
Beijing, China, July 30-31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics and Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing

Emotion in Code-switching Texts: Corpus Construction and Analysis 

Sophia Yat Mei Lee
†
, and Zhongqing Wang

†,‡
 

† 
Department of Chinese and Bilingual Studies, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 

‡ 
Natural Language Processing Lab, Soochow University, China 

{sophiaym, wangzq.antony}@gmail.com 

Abstract 

Previous researches have focused on ana-

lyzing emotion through monolingual text, 

when in fact bilingual or code-switching 

posts are also common in social media. 

Despite the important implications of 

code-switching for emotion analysis, ex-

isting automatic emotion extraction 

methods fail to accommodate for the 

code-switching content. In this paper, we 

propose a general framework to construct 

and analyze the code-switching emotion-

al posts in social media. We first propose 

an annotation scheme to identify the 

emotions associated with the languages 

expressing them in a Chinese-English 

code-switching corpus. We then make 

some observations and generate statistics 

from the corpus to analyze the linguistic 

phenomena of code-switching texts in 

social media. Finally, we propose a mul-

tiple-classifier-based automatic detection 

approach to detect emotion in the code-

switching corpus for evaluating the effec-

tiveness of both Chinese and English 

texts. 

1 Introduction 

Due to the popularity of opinion-rich resources 

(e.g., online review sites, forums, and the micro-

blog websites), emotion analysis in text is of 

great significance in obtaining useful information 

for studies on social media (Pang et al., 2002; 

Liu et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2014). Previous re-

searches have mainly focused on analyzing emo-

tion through monolingual text (Chen et al., 2010; 

Lee et al., 2013a). However, code-switching 

posts are also common in social media. Emotions 

can be expressed by either monolingual text or 

bilingual text in the code-switching posts. Code-

switching text is defined as text that contains 

more than one language (‘code’) (Adel et al., 

2013; Auer, 1999). [E1-E3] are three examples 

of code-switching emotional posts on Weibo.com 

that contain both Chinese and English texts. [E1] 

expresses the happiness emotion through English, 

and the sadness emotion in [E2] is expressed 

through both Chinese and English, while the 

sadness emotion in [E3] is expressed through a 

mixed Chinese-English phrase (hold 不住 ‘can-
not take it’). 

 

[E1] 玩了一下午轮滑 so happy ！ 
(I went rollerblading the whole afternoon, so 

happy!) 

 

[E2] 开学以来，浮躁的情绪。不安稳的心

态。确实该自己检讨一下了。。。sigh~~~ 
(I have been grumpy and emotional since the 

first day of school, unstable mindset too. It's re-

ally time to self-evaluate...sigh~~~) 

  

[E3] 上了一天的课，嗓子 hold 不住了啊 
(I have been teaching the whole day, my throat 

can't take it anymore.) 

 

Despite the important implications of code-

switching for emotion analysis, existing emotion 

analysis approaches fail to accommodate for the 

code-switching content. Thus, there is a crucial 

need for analyzing emotions in code-switching 

texts. 

In this paper, we provide a well-defined and 

efficient method for constructing and analyzing a 

large-scale code-switching corpus from social 

media. We believe the annotated corpus provides 

a valuable resource for both linguistic analysis as 

well as natural language processing of emotion 

and code-switching texts. We construct and ana-

lyze the corpus using the below steps: First, we 

extract and filter the code-switching posts from 

the large-scale dataset by removing monolingual 

91



and noise posts. Second, we propose an annota-

tion scheme to annotate both emotions and the 

language(s) expressing the emotions (hereafter 

caused language(s)) in the data set. Third, we 

analyze the agreement of the corpus to verify the 

quality of the annotation and effectiveness of the 

scheme. We also show some observations and 

statistics on the corpus to analyze the linguistic 

phenomena of code-switching texts on social 

media. Finally, we propose a multiple-classifier-

based automatic detection approach to detect 

emotion in the annotated code-switching corpus 

for indicating the effectiveness of both Chinese 

text and English text in code-switching posts in 

detecting emotions. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 

In Section 2, we give an overview on the related 

work. In Section 3, we introduce our data collec-

tion method and the annotation scheme. In Sec-

tion 4, we report the analysis of the corpus in-

cluding the inter-annotator agreement as well as 

other relevant statistics. In Section 5, we propose 

an automatic emotion detection framework on 

code-switching text. Finally, we conclude our 

work in Section 6. 

2 Related Work 

In this section, we discuss related works on 

emotion analysis and code-switching text 

analysis. 

2.1 Emotion Analysis 

The earliest research on emotion has focused on 

the representation and processing of emotion in 

facial expressions and body language (Andrew, 

1963; Ekman and Friesen, 1978). More recently, 

there has been mounting research on the neuro-

biological basis of emotion (Olson et al., 2007; 

Hervé et al., 2012) and how emotion is linked 

with other aspects of human cognition (Smith 

and Lazarus, 1993; Smith and Kirby, 2001; 

Bridge et al., 2010). 

Emotion has been well studied in natural lan-

guage processing, while most previous research-

es focused on analyzing emotions in monolingual 

text. Some of these studies focus on lexicon 

building, for example, Rao et al. (2012) automat-

ically building the word-emotion mapping dic-

tionary for social emotion detection, and Yang et 

al., (2014) propose a novel emotion-aware topic 

model to build a domain specific lexicon. More-

over, emotion classification is one of the im-

portant tasks in emotion analysis. For example, 

Liu et al., (2013) used co-training framework to 

infer the news reader’s and comment writer’s 

emotion collectively; Wen and Wan (2014) used 

class sequential rules for emotion classification 

of micro-blog texts by regarding each post as a 

data sequence. 

The research of emotion has also been linked 

to the field of bilingualism. Previous studies have 

demonstrated that emotion is closely related to  

second language learning and use (Arnold, 1999; 

Schumann, 1999), as well as bilingual perfor-

mance and language choice (Schrauf, 2000; 

Pavlenko, 2008). For example, there are a num-

ber of factors that may impact the use of emotion 

vocabulary, such as sociocultural competence, 

gender, and topic (Dewaele and Palvenko, 2002). 

Despite a growing body of research on emo-

tion, little has been done on the analysis of emo-

tion in code-switching contexts due to the com-

plications in processing two languages at the 

same time. 

2.2 Analysis of Code-switching Texts 

Research on code-switching can be traced back 

to the 1970s. Several theories have been pro-

posed to account for the motivation behind code-

switching such as diglossia (Blom and Gumperz, 

1972), communication accommodation theory 

(Giles and Clair, 1979), the markedness model 

(Myers-Scotton, 1993), and the conversational 

analysis model (Auer, 1984). 

Code-switched documents have also received 

considerable attention in the NLP community. 

Several studies have focused on identification 

and analysis, including mining translations in 

code-switched documents (Ling et al., 2013), 

predicting code-switched points (Solorio and Liu, 

2008), identifying code-switched tokens (Lignos 

and Marcus, 2013), adding code-switched sup-

port to language models (Li and Fung, 2012), 

and learning poly-lingual topic models from 

code-switching text (Peng et al., 2014). 

Another related research topic, multilingual 

natural language processing, has begun to attract 

attention in the computational linguistic commu-

nity due to its broad real-world applications. Rel-

evant studies have been reported in different nat-

ural language processing tasks, such as parsing 

(Burkett et al., 2010), information retrieval (Gao 

et al., 2009), text classification (Amini et al., 

2010), and sentiment analysis (Lu et al., 2011). 

However, none have studied the multilingual 

code-switching issues in the task of emotion de-

tection and classification. This area of research is 

especially crucial when public emotions are 

mostly expressed on the Internet. Additionally, 

92



the important implications of code-switching in 

emotion analysis serve as a first step towards an 

automatic multilingual classification system. 

3 Data Collection and Annotation 

In this section, we describe how to collect and 

filter code-switching posts on Weibo.com. We 

also discuss the annotation scheme and the anno-

tation tool. 

3.1 Data Collection 

We sourced our data set from Weibo.com, one of 

the famous SNS websites in China. We identified 

a post as code-switched if at least two predicted 

languages, i.e. Chinese and English, appeared in 

the text. As the encoding of Chinese and English 

characters is different (the maximum number of 

encoded English characters is less than 128), we 

thus utilized each character code to identify the 

language in a simple manner. We also remove 

the noise, and advertisement posts ([E4] and [E5] 

are the examples of noise and advertisement 

posts). 

 

[E4]分享  Carpenters 的歌曲《Close To 

You》 
(Share Carpenters’ music <Close To You>) 

 

[E5]the face shop 提供新款化妆品 
(the face shop provides new make-up) 

3.2 Annotation Scheme 

Five basic emotions were annotated, namely 

happiness, sadness, fear, anger and surprise (Lee 

et al., 2013b). Two languages, Chinese and Eng-

lish, were annotated as caused languages. Since 

emotion can be expressed through the two lan-

guages separately or collectively, and also could 

be expressed through mixed phrases e.g. “笑 cry” 
(very happy), we thus need to annotate four kinds 

of causal situations, i.e. English, Chinese, Both, 

and Mixed. Following are descriptions of these 

situations: 

 Chinese (CN) means the emotion of the 
post is individually expressed through the Chi-

nese text. As Weibo.com is a Chinese SNS Web-

site, Chinese is the dominant language on this 

website. Most of the posts express emotions 

through the Chinese text. [E6] is an example. 

The emotion of surprise is expressed through the 

Chinese text. 

 

[E6] 静静坐下来看别人 show 啦。刚刚在节

目里看到妈咪和弟的视频真的很意外！ 
(I set down quietly to watch someone else’s 

show. To my surprise, both my mother and 

brother appeared on the programme.) 

 

 English (EN) means the emotion of the 
post is individually expressed through the Eng-

lish text. As English is the minority language, 

there are fewer English words in the posts to ex-

press emotions. [E1] is an examples expressing 

happiness emotion and expressed through Eng-

lish text. 

 Both (BOTH) means the emotions of 
the post are expressed through both Chinese and 

English text. Note that the emotions expressed 

through the two languages would either be the 

same or different. [E2] and [E7] are two exam-

ples. The anger emotion of [E2] is expressed 

through both the Chinese and English text. How-

ever, the happiness emotion of [E7] is expressed 

through the Chinese text, while the surprise emo-

tion is expressed through English. 

 

 [E7] 太感动这真是一个大 surprise 看的时

候就鸡冻屎了  
(I was so touched and excited to see this great 

surprise.) 

 

 Mixed (MIXED) means the emotion of 
the post is expressed through a Chinese-English 

mixed phrase, such as the emotion being ex-

pressed through the mixed phrase “hold 不住” in 
[E3]. Note that there are limited mixed patterns, 

and Table 1 illustrates the examples of mixed 

phrases in our dataset. 

Moreover, the emotions of some posts are ex-

pressed implicitly, and do not contain explicit 

keywords to express emotions. [E8] and [E9] are 

examples of this, while these two posts both ex-

press a sadness emotion, [E8] is expressed 

through Chinese text, and [E9] is expressed 

through both Chinese and English text. 

 

[E8] 英语的魅力在于，好不容易看懂每个

word 却看不懂组成的 sentence. 
(The charm of English is that you can’t always 

understand the meaning of the sentence, even 

though you understand the meaning of each word 

in the sentence.) 

 

[E9] stream flow, slowly away a few leaf, al-

so taking the memory.溪水缓慢地流动着，带

走了几片落叶，也带走了记忆。 

93



(The Chinese text is translated from English text) 

 

Pattern Examples 

有 feel 
(sense) 

- 

hold住 
hold 住 (can take it) 

hold 不住 (cannot take it) 

XX cry 

笑 cry (smile, very happy) 

感动 cry (touched) 

帅 cry (awesome) 

太 man 了 
(handsome) 

- 

Table 1: Examples of mixed phrases 

3.3 Annotation Tool and Format 

An annotation tool is designed to facilitate the 

annotation process which allows better con-

sistency.  

 

 
Figure 1: A sample of code-switching emotion anno-

tation using the annotation tool 

 

Figure 1 shows an example instance annotated 

with both emotion and caused languages using 

our annotation tool. For each emotion, annotators 

marked whether the post expresses emotion, to-

gether with the caused languages toward the 

emotion. 

Figure 2 is a sample of an annotated instance. 

Each instance contains the caused language with 

the emotion tag, e.g., “<Happiness>CN 

</Happiness>”, while the example tag means the 

post expresses the happiness emotion through 

Chinese text. 

 

<Post id="1"> 

 <Happiness> 

 CN 

 </Happiness> 

 <Sadness> 

 None 

 </Sadness> 

 <Anger> 

 None 

 </Anger> 

 <Fear> 

 None 

 </Fear> 

 <Surprise> 

 None 

 </Surprise> 

 <Content> 

 baby  生日快乐！附加征婚：此女贤良
淑德 拥有现代女性智慧和古典女性的温婉  诚
征凹凸曼 非诚勿扰 

 </Content> 

</Post> 

Figure 2: A sample of an annotated instance 

 

4 Statistics and Analysis 

In this section, we analyze the agreement of the 

corpus, and present some observations and statis-

tics. 

4.1 Agreement Analysis 

To verify the quality of the annotation, two hu-

man annotators were asked to annotate 1,000 

posts. We then calculated the inter-annotator 

agreement between them using Cohen’s Kappa 

coefficient. Table 2 shows the results of agree-

ment analysis. We find that the agreement is high, 

indicating that the quality of the annotation and 

scheme is effective. In addition, the agreement of 

emotion annotation is lower than that of caused 

language, which probably due to the fact that 

some posts express more than one emotion, and 

some emotions are expressed implicitly. 

 

 Kappa score 

Emotion 0.692 

Caused 

Language 
0.767 

Table 2: Results of agreement analysis 

4.2 Statistics and Observations 

In this subsection, we discuss some statistics 

from the dataset. 

 

 

94



General Distribution of Data 

Out of 4,195 annotated posts, 2,312 posts are 

found to express emotions. Moreover, 81.4% of 

emotional posts are expressed through Chinese. 

Although English contains relatively fewer 

words in each post, there are still 43.5% of emo-

tional posts are expressed through English. This 

indicates that English is of vital importance to 

emotion expression even in code-switching con-

texts dominated by Chinese. Note that, there are 

overlaps between Chinese and English emotional 

posts, since some emotional posts are conducted 

in both Chinese and English. Besides, although 

some posts express the same emotion through 

both Chinese and English text ([E2]), there are 

still some posts expressed different emotions 

through different languages. For example, the 

happiness emotion in [E7] is expressed through 

Chinese, while the surprise emotion is expressed 

through English. 

Moreover, as shown in Figure 3, we find that 

most posts describe people’s daily lives, since 

people like to discuss their life on their micro-

blogs, and posts from financial and political do-

mains were limited. 

 

 
Figure 3: Domain statistics from the data set 

 

Joint Distribution of Emotions and Caused 

Languages 

For the purpose of analyzing the distribution 

of emotions and the caused languages, we first 

calculate the joint distribution between emotions 

and caused languages as in Figure 4. The Y-axis 

of the figure presents the conditional probability 

of a post expressing the emotion 
ie  given that jl

is the caused language, ( | )i jp e l .  

It is suggested in Figure 4 that: 1) happiness 

occurs more frequently than other emotions; 2) 

people prefer to use English text to express hap-

piness more than sadness; 3) the distribution of 

emotions expressed through Chinese and English 

text are similar; and 4) fear and surprise occur 

less frequently in English text.  

 

 
Figure 4: Joint Distribution of Emotions and Caused 

Languages 

 

Transfer Probability between Emotions 

We then examine the conditional probabilities 

of a post expressing emotion 
ie  given that the 

post contains emotion je . The conditional proba-

bilities are shown as in Table 3. 

From the table, we find that the probability 

that a post contains more than one emotion is 

small. Moreover, the probability of polarity shift-

ing between emotions (happiness vs. sadness, 

fear, anger) is limited. 
 

 
Happiness Sadness Fear Anger Surprise 

Happiness - 0.060 0.016 0.025 0.019 

Sadness 0.088 - 0.023 0.033 0.023 

Fear 0.114 0.114 - 0.068 0.023 

Anger 0.090 0.079 0.034 - 0.011 

Surprise 0.086 0.071 0.014 0.043 - 

Table 3: The transfer probability between emotions 

 

Transfer Probability between Caused Lan-

guages 

We also examine the conditional probabilities 

of the emotion(s) expressed in one language 
il  

given that the emotion is expressed in another 

language jl  simultaneously in a post. The condi-

tional probabilities are shown as in Table 4. 
 

 
Chinese English 

Chinese - 0.236 

English 0.614 - 

Table 4: Transfer probability between caused lan-

guages 

 

From the table, we find that there is a high 

probability that the two languages both express 

emotions, especially when given that the emotion 

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

Life Finance Service Celebrities Products Politics

P
r
o

b
a

b
il

it
y

 

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Happiness Sadness Fear Anger Surprise

P
r
o

b
a

b
il

it
y
 

Chinese English

95



is expressed in English. It is also highly likely 

that the emotion would be expressed in Chinese. 

 

Sentence Length Distribution of Each Lan-

guage 

Table 5 shows the statistics on the average 

sentence length of each language. We notice, as 

our data are always written by Chinese individu-

als, the length of Chinese words is longer than 

English words. Besides, the emotions expressed 

through English text are mostly single words, 

e.g., happy, high, and surprise. Note that, as 

mentioned above, although the length of Chinese 

words is longer than English words, English is of 

vital importance to emotion expressions even in 

code-switching context dominated by Chinese. 

 

 #avg. word 

Chinese 19.8 

English 2.9 
Table 5: Statistics on average word length 

 

Distribution of Cue Words 

In addition, we count the top-10 frequency 

emotion cue words of both English and Chinese 

text as given in Table 6. We find that the most 

frequent cue words express happiness emotions, 

for example, happy, nice, and 喜欢 (like). What 
is more, there are several negative expressions in 

the top-10 English cue words, e.g. sorry and shit, 

while the top-10 Chinese cue words are all posi-

tive. This may be due to the fact that expressing 

the negative emotion through native language 

(Chinese) would be too explicit for Chinese indi-

viduals, while most of them tend to express their 

negative emotions implicitly. 

 

English Chinese 

Happy 喜欢 (like) 

Love 快乐 (happy) 

Good 希望 (hope) 

Nice 开心 (joyful) 

Sorry 哈哈 (haha) 

Shit 
幸福 

(happiness) 

Luck 
真心 

(heartfelt) 

Thank 可爱 (cute) 

Perfect 感谢 (thank) 

Sweet 
成功 

(success) 
Table 6: Statistics of emotional cue words 

5 Automatic Emotion Detection in 
Code-switching Texts 

Based on the annotated corpus data, we attempt 

to detect emotion in code-switching text auto-

matically. Results show both Chinese and Eng-

lish texts are effective, and the classifier combi-

nation approach which incorporates both Chinese 

and English text achieves the best performance. 

5.1 Overview of Detection Approach 

A straightforward approach to detect emotion in 

code-switching text is using a supervised learn-

ing approach to classify the mixed text without 

any processing. Besides, we extract unigrams as 

a feature for each post. As emotions could be 

expressed in either Chinese or English text, we 

also adopt two classification approaches which 

consider Chinese or English texts individually. 

 

 
Figure 5: Overview of the multiple-classifiers-based 

detection framework 

 

However, a more effective way to detect emo-

tion in code-switching posts is incorporating both 

Chinese and English text through a Multiple 

Classifier System (MCS). The key issue in con-

structing a multiple classifier system is to find a 

suitable way to combine the outputs of the base 

classifiers. In MCS literature, various methods 

are available for combining the outputs, such as 

fixed rules including the voting rule, the product 

Documents 

Chinese Text English Text 

Code-switching text 

Identification 

Chinese Text 

Classifier fCN 

English Text 
Classifier f

EN
 

Classifiers Combination  

by sum rule 

Emotions 

96



rule and the sum rule (Kittler et al., 1998; Li et 

al., 2010). In this study, we adopt the sum rule, a 

popular fixed rule to combining the outputs of 

both Chinese and English text classifiers. 

For utilizing MCS to detect emotion in code-

switching texts, we first define the base classifi-

ers. In this paper, we use the Chinese text classi-

fier 
CNf  and English text classifier ENf  which 

only considers Chinese text or English text indi-

vidually as two base classifiers. Each base classi-

fier provides a kind of confidence measurement, 

e.g., posterior probabilities of the test sample 

belonging to each class. Formally, each base 

classifier 
if  assigns a test sample (denoted as ix ) 

a posterior probability vector ( )iP x  : 

 ( ) ( | ),..., ( | ),..., ( | )
t

i i j i n iP x p c x p c x p c x   

(1) 

Where ( | )j ip c x  denotes the probability that the 

i-th base classifier considers the sample belong-

ing jc  . 

After we define the two base classifiers, we 

can use a sum rule to combine the base classifiers 

by summing the posterior possibilities and using 

the sum possibility for decision, i.e. 

assign  where =argmax ( | )j j i
j i

y c k p c x   

Figure 5 illustrates the process of the multiple 

classifier system for emotion detection in code-

switching texts. 

5.2 Experiments 

As described in Section 3, the data are collected 

from Weibo.com. We randomly select half of the 

posts as the training data and another half as the 

test data. We use FudanNLP
1
 for Chinese word 

segmentation and Maximum Entropy (ME) as 

the basic supervised classification model, while 

the ME algorithm is implemented with the MAL-

LET Toolkit
2
. Note that, as the number of posts 

which express fear and surprise are limited, we 

only detect the other three kinds of emotions, i.e. 

happiness, sadness, and anger. 

As discussed in the above subsection, we use 

the following approaches for automatic emotion 

detection in code-switching text: 

 fALL: which uses all the words of each post 
as a feature to train a Maximum Entropy 

(ME) classification model. 

                                                 
1 https://code.google.com/p/fudannlp/ 
2 http://mallet.cs.umass.edu 

 fCN: which only uses the Chinese text of 
each post as a feature to train a Maximum 

Entropy (ME) classification model. 

 fEN: which only uses the English text of 
each post as a feature to train a Maximum 

Entropy (ME) classification model. 

 fcomb: which combines the results of the 

Chinese text classifier 
CNf   and English text 

classifier 
ENf  using the sum rule. 

The results of emotion detection are shown in 

Table 7. The performance indicates the accuracy 

of detecting emotions in code-switching text. 

 

 
Acc. 

fALL 0.509 

fCN 0.521 

fEN 0.409 

fcomb 0.539 

Table 7: Results of emotion detection in code-

switching text 

 

From the table, we find that: 

1) The performance of basic approach fALL 
which uses mixed text directly is inferior. 

2) As Chinese is the dominant language, and 
the English text is loosely distributed, us-

ing Chinese text (fCN) outperforms both 

using all text (fALL) and English text (fEN). 

Besides, as the English texts in the posts 

are always composed of single words, fEN 
is much lower than the other two ap-

proaches. 

3) As incorporating both Chinese classifiers 
and English classifiers to a multiple clas-

sifier system, fcomb achieves a better per-

formance than the other approaches. It al-

so indicates that both Chinese text and 

English text in code-switching posts are 

effective for detecting emotions. 

6 Conclusion 

This paper presents the development of a code-

switching emotion corpus in which the emotion 

is expressed through either Chinese or English. 

We first collect and filter the data from 

Weibo.com, which is annotated with both emo-

tion and caused language; we then analyze the 

inter-annotator agreement on the dataset, and 

present our findings and analysis. Finally, we 

propose a multiple-classifiers-based approach to 

detect emotion in the annotated code-switching 

corpus. Results show that both Chinese text and 

English text in code-switching posts are effective 

97



in detecting emotions. We believe that emotions 

analysis in code-switching text underlies an in-

novative approach towards a linguistic model of 

emotion as well as automatic emotion detection 

and classification. 

Acknowledgments 

The work is funded by an Early Career Scheme 

(ECS) sponsored by the Research Grants Council 

of Hong Kong (No. PolyU 5593/13H), and sup-

ported by the National Natural Science Founda-

tion of China (No. 61273320, and No. 61375073) 

and the Key Project of the National Natural Sci-

ence Foundation of China (No. 61331011). 

Firstly, we need to thank the hard works of the 

annotators. We thank Prof. Shoushan Li for his 

useful discussion. We acknowledge Helena Yan 

Ping Lau for corpus analysis and insightful 

comments. We also thank anonymous reviewers 

for their valuable suggestions and comments. 

References 

Adel H., N. Vu, and T. Schultz. 2013. Combination of 

Recurrent Neural Networks and Factored Language 

Models for Code-Switching Language Modeling. 

In Proceedings of ACL-13. 

Andrew R. 1963. Evolution of Facial Expressions. 

Science, 142, 1034-1041. 

Amini, M., C. Goutte, and N. Usunier. 2010. Combin-

ing Coregularization and Consensusbased Self-

training for Multilingual Text Categorization. In 

Proceeding of SIGIR-10. 

Auer P. 1999. Code-Switching in Conversation. 

Routledge. 

Arnold J. 1999. Affect in Language Learning. Cam-

bridge, MA: CUP. 

Auer P. 1984. Bilingual Conversation. Amsterdam: 

John Benjamins. 

Blom J., and J. Gumperz. 1972. Social Meaning in 

Linguistic Structures: Code Switching in Northern 

Norway. Directions in Sociolinguistics. New York: 

Winston. 

Bridge D., J. Chiao, and K. Paller. 2010. Emotional 

Context at Learning Systematically Biases Memory 

for Facial Information. Memory & Cognition, 38, 

125-133. 

Burkett, D., and D. Klein. 2008. Two Languages are 

Better than One (for Syntactic Parsing). In Pro-

ceedings of EMNLP-08. 

Chen Y., S. Lee, S. Li, and C. Huang. 2010. Emotion 

Cause Detection with Linguistic Constructions. In 

Proceeding of COLING-10. 

Dasgupta S., and V. Ng. 2009. Mine the Easy, Classi-

fy the Hard: A Semi-Supervised Approach to Au-

tomatic Sentiment Classification. In Proceedings of 

ACL-IJCNLP-09. 

Dewaele J., and A. Pavlenko. 2002. Emotion Vocabu-

lary in Interlanguage. Language Learning, 52 (2), 

265-324. 

Ekman, P., and W.V. Friesen. 1978. Facial Action 

Coding System. California: Consulting Psychology 

Press. 

Gao W., J. Blitzer, M. Zhou, and K. Wong. 2009. 

Exploiting Bilingual Information to Improve Web 

Search. In Proceedings of ACL/IJCNLP-09. 

Giles, H., and R. Clair. 1979. Language and Social 

Psychology. London: Basil Blackwell. 

Hervé, P., A. Razafimandimby, M. Vigneau, B. Ma-

zoyer, and N. Tzourio-Mazoyer. 2012. Disentan-

gling the Brain Networks Supporting Affective 

Speech Comprehension. NeuroImage, 61(4), 1255-

1267. 

Kittler J., M. Hatef, R. Duin, and J. Matas. 1998. On 

Combining Classifiers. IEEE Trans. PAMI. 20.226-

239. 

Lee S., H. Zhang, and C. Huang. 2013a. An Event-

Based Emotion Corpus. In Proceedings of CLSW 

2013. 

Lee S., Y. Chen, C. Huang, and S. Li. 2013b. Detect-

ing Emotion Causes with a Linguistic Rule-Based 

Approach. Computational Intelligence, 29(3), 390-

416. 

Lee S., S. Li, and C. Huang. 2014. Annotating Events 

in an Emotion Corpus. In Proceedings of LREC-14. 

Li S., S. Lee, Y. Chen, C. Huang, and G. Zhou. 2010. 

Sentiment Classification and Polarity Shifting. In 

Proceeding of COLING-10. 

Li Y., and P. Fung. 2012. Code-switch Language 

Model with Inversion Constraints for Mixed Lan-

guage Speech Recognition. In Proceedings of 

COLING-12. 

Ling W., G. Xiang, C. Dyer, A. Black, and I. 

Trancoso. 2013. Microblogs as Parallel Corpora. In 

Proceedings of ACL-13. 

Liu H., S. Li, G. Zhou, C. Huang, and P. Li. 2013. 

Joint Modeling of News Reader's and Comment 

Writer's Emotions. In Proceedings of ACL-13, 

shorter. 

Lignos C., and M. Marcus. 2013. Toward Web-scale 

Analysis of Codeswitching. In Proceedings of An-

nual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America. 

Lu B., C. Tan, C. Cardie, and B. Tsou. 2011. Joint 

Bilingual Sentiment Classification with Unlabeled 

Parallel Corpora. In Proceedings of ACL-11. 

98



Myers-Scotton C. 1997. Duelling Language: Gram-

matical Structure in Code-switching. Oxford: Clar-

endon. 

Olson I., A. Plotzker, and Y. Ezzyat. 2007. The En-

igmatic Temporal Poles: A Review of Findings on 

Social and Emotional Processing. Brain. 

Pavlenko A. 2008. Structural and Conceptual Equiva-

lence in Acquisition and Use of Emotion Words in 

a Second Language. Mental Lexicon, 3(1): 91-120. 

Peng N., Y. Wang, and M. Dredze. 2014. Learning 

Polylingual Topic Models from Code-Switched 

Social Media Documents. In Proceedings of ACL-

14. 

Quan C., and F. Ren. 2009. Construction of a Blog 

Emotion Corpus for Chinese Emotional Expression 

Analysis. In Proceedings of EMNLP-09. 

Rao Y., X. Quan, W. Liu, Q. Li, and M. Chen. 2012. 

Building Word-emotion Mapping Dictionary for 

Online News. In Proceedings of SDAD 2012 The 

1st International Workshop on Sentiment Discov-

ery from Affective Data. 

Schrauf R. 2000. Bilingual Autobiographical Memory: 

Experimental Studies and Clinical Cases. Culture 

and Psychology. 6 (4), 387-417. 

Schumann J. 1999. A Neurobiological Perspective on 

Affect and Methodology in Second Language 

Learning. Affect in Language Learning. Cambridge: 

CUP, 28-42. 

Smith C., and L. Kirby. 2001. Toward Delivering on 

the Promise of Appraisal Theory. Appraisal pro-

cesses in emotion: Theory, methods, research. Ox-

ford, UK: Oxford University Press. 

Smith C., and R. Lazarus. 1993. Appraisal Compo-

nents, Core Relational Themes, and the Emotions. 

Cognition and Emotion, 7, 233–269. 

Solorio T., and Y. Liu. 2008. Learning to Predict 

Code-Switching Points. In Proceedings of 

EMNLP-08. 

Volkova S., W. Dolan, and T. Wilson. 2012. CLex: A 

Lexicon for Exploring Color, Concept and Emotion 

Associations in Language. In Proceedings of 

EACL-12. 

Wen S. and X. Wan. 2014. Emotion Classification in 

Microblog Texts Using Class Sequential Rules. In 

Proceedings of AAAI-14. 

Xu G., X. Meng, and H. Wang. 2010. Build Chinese 

Emotion Lexicons Using A Graph-based Algo-

rithm and Multiple Resources. In Proceeding of 

COLING-10. 

Yang M., B. Peng, Z. Chen, D. Zhu, and K. Chow. 

2014. A Topic Model for Building Fine-grained 

Domain-specific Emotion Lexicon. In Proceedings 

of ACL-14. 

99


