








































Limits of Natural Logic

Lauri Karttunen
Center for the Study of Language and Information

210 Panama St. Stanford, CA 94305, USA
Stanford University

laurik@stanford.edu

1 Abstract of the Invited Talk

Natural Logic attempts to do formal reasoning in
natural language in a proof-theoretic way making
use of the syntactic structure and the semantic prop-
erties of lexical items and constructions. It goes
beyond trying to establish who did what to whom
to yield further inferences. Natural Logic contrasts
with approaches that involve a translation from a
natural into a formal language such as predicate
calculus or a higher-order logic that is sometimes
deemed a more appropriate basis for reasoning al-
though difficult to implement efficiently. Both ap-
proaches have been used in current work on compu-
tational semantics.

Natural Logic goes back to the Aristotelian syl-
logisms; computing meaning representations in an
artificial language emerged in more recent times
with the advances in logic and model-theoretic ap-
proaches to semantics.

This talk will start with a brief history of Natu-
ral Logic from its origins to the most recent work
on monotonicity, MacCartney’s lexical relations and
implicatives. This part is a success story. We will
then illustrate four areas that seem to fall outside the
classical Natural Logic framework: presuppositions,
soft inferences, the consonance/dissonance effect of
evaluative adjectives, and the double meaning of the
be lucky to VP in the future tense. These cases are
also affected by pragmatic considerations: opinions
about the world, assignments of beliefs to people,
and even by the perceived communicative intent of
the speaker.

Natural Logic needs to be augmented with pragmat-
ics to make it a richer theory of Natural Reasoning.

2 References

MacCartney, Bill and Christopher Manning (2009).
An extended model of natural logic. In Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Conference
on Computational Semantics (IWCS-8), Tilburg,
Netherlands, January 2009, pages 140-156.

Icard III, Thomas (2012). Inclusion and Exclusion
in Natural Language. Studia Logica 100 (4):705-
725.

Icard III, Thomas and Larry Moss (2014). Recent
Progress on Monotonicity. Linguistic Issues in
Language Technology 9.

Karttunen, Lauri (2012). Simple and Phrasal Im-
plicatives. Proceedings of *SEM 2012: The First
Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational
Semantics. Volume I, pages 124–131.

Karttunen, Lauri. 2013. You will be lucky to break
even. In From quirky case to representing space.
Papers in honor of Annie Zaenen, pages 167–
180. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.

Karttunen, Lauri, Stanley Peters, Annie Zaenen, and
Cleo Condoravdi (2014). The Chameleon-like
Nature of Evaluative Adjectives. Empirical Is-
sues in Syntax and Semantics 10, pages 233–250.

van Benthem, Johan (2008). A Brief History of Nat-
ural Logic. ILLC Publications, All Series, 2008,
PP-2008-05.


