



















































Understanding Cultural Conflicts using Metaphors and Sociolinguistic Measures of Influence


Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Metaphor in NLP, pages 67–76,
Denver, Colorado, June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Understanding Cultural Conflicts using Metaphors and Sociolinguistic 
Measures of Influence  

 
Samira Shaikh1, Tomek Strzalkowski1, Sarah Taylor2, Ting Liu1, John Lien1, George  
Aaron Broadwell1, Laurie Feldman1, Boris Yamrom1, Kit Cho1 and Yuliya Peshkova1 

  
1State University of New York – University at Albany 2Sarah Taylor Consulting LLC 

samirashaikh@gmail.com, tomek@albany.edu  
 
 

 

 

Abstract 

In this article, we outline a novel approach to 
the automated analysis of cross-cultural con-
flicts through the discovery and classification 
of the metaphors used by the protagonist par-
ties involved in the conflict. We demonstrate 
the feasibility of this approach on a prototypi-
cal conflict surrounding the appropriate man-
agement and oversight of gun-ownership in 
the United States. In addition, we present a 
way of incorporating sociolinguistic measures 
of influence in discourse to draw further in-
sights from complex data. The results present-
ed in this article should be considered as 
illustrative of the types of analyses that can be 
obtained using our methodology; however, no 
attempt was made to rigorously validate the 
specific findings reported here. We address 
open issues such as how our approach could 
be generalized to analyze cross-cultural con-
flicts around the world. 

1 Introduction 

All discourse is a means to convey ideas, fulfill 
goals and possibly attempt to persuade the listener 
(Perloff, 2014). Metaphors, which are mapping 
systems that allow the semantics of a familiar 
Source domain to be applied to a Target domain so 
that new frameworks of reasoning can emerge in 
the Target domain, are pervasive in discourse. 
Metaphorically rich language is considered highly 
influential. Persuasion and influence literature 
(Soppory and Dillard, 2002) indicates messages 
containing metaphorical language produce some-
what greater attitude change than messages that do 
not. Metaphors embody a number of elements of 
persuasive language, including concreteness and 
imageability (Strzalkowski et al., 2013, Broadwell 

et al., 2013, Charteris-Black, 2005). Using this line 
of investigation, we aim to understand the motiva-
tions of a group or of a political faction through 
their discourse, as part of the answer to such ques-
tions as: What are the key differences in protago-
nists’ positions? How extensive is a protagonists’ 
influence? Who dominates the discourse? Where is 
the core of the groups’ support?  

Our goal is to provide a basis for the analysis of 
cross-cultural conflicts by viewing the conflict as 
an ongoing debate or a “dialogue” between protag-
onists or participants.  

In this interpretation, each major protagonist po-
sition becomes a “speaker” and the articles, post-
ings, and commentaries published by media outlets 
representing that position become “utterances” in a 
debate. The targets (i.e. main concepts) of the con-
flict are those concepts that align with the main 
topics (we shall call them meso-topics) of the de-
bate. Protagonists’ positions in the conflict are de-
rived from their language use when talking about 
these meso-topics, particularly the metaphorical 
language. The relationships between the protago-
nist positions are determined based on sociolin-
guistic features of their “utterances”, particularly 
topic control, disagreement, argument diversity, 
and topical positioning. These and other features 
allow us to isolate “subgroups” or factions of like-
minded individuals, including those that are more 
extreme (farther apart) and those that are moderate 
(closer to a “center”). In addition, we look for indi-
cators of influence these groups exert upon each 
other as well as upon their other audiences (broad-
er public, lawmakers, policy makers, etc.) We thus 
aim to bring together two emerging technologies to 
bear upon conflict case analysis: automated meta-
phor extraction, and automated analysis of the so-
ciocultural aspects of language. 

67



Understanding conflicts in this manner may al-
low policy-makers facilitate negotiations and dis-
cussions across different communities and help 
bridge contrasting viewpoints and cultural values.  

2 Relevant Research  

The underlying core of our research is automated, 
large-scale metaphor extraction. Computational 
approaches to metaphor to date have yielded only 
limited scale, often hand-designed systems (Wilks, 
1975; Fass, 1991; Carbonell, 1980; Feldman & 
Narayan, 2004; Shutova & Teufel, 2010; inter 
alia). Baumer et al. (2010) used semantic role la-
bels and typed dependency parsing in an attempt 
towards computational metaphor identification. 
Shutova (2010) employ an unsupervised method of 
metaphor identification using nouns and verb clus-
tering to automatically impute metaphoricity in a 
large corpus using an annotated training corpus of 
metaphors as seeds. Several other similar ap-
proaches were reported at the Meta4NLP work-
shop, e.g., (Mohler et al., 2013; Wilks et al., 2013; 
Hovy et al., 2013). Strzalkowski et al. (2013) de-
veloped a data-driven approach towards the auto-
mated extraction of metaphors from text and our 
approach builds upon their work. The use of meta-
phor, along with sociocultural aspects of language 
to understand cross-cultural conflict is novel to our 
approach. Recent research in computational socio-
linguistic has developed methods for automatic 
assessment of leadership, influence and power in 
conversation (Broadwell et al., 2012; Shaikh et al., 
2012; Strzalkowski et al., 2010) and we draw 
largely upon this work. Other relevant work in-
cludes Nguyen et al. (2013), who look at non-
parametric topic modeling as a measure of influ-
ence; and Bracewell et al. (2012), who look at a 
category of social acts to determine measures of 
leadership; among others. Analysis of positions 
held by discourse participants has been studied in 
the realm of political science and computational 
sociolinguistics (Laver, Benoit & Garry, 2003; 
Slapin & Proksch, 2008; Lin et al., 2013; Pang & 
Lee, 2008) and our approach draws parallels from 
such prior work. Our topical positioning approach 
is a departure from existing approaches to senti-
ment analysis (Wiebe, Wilson and Cardie, 2005; 
Strapparava and Mihalcea, 2008) in looking at a 
larger context of discourse rather than individual 
utterances.  

3 The Conflict – U.S. Gun Debate 

The main hypothesis, and an open research ques-
tion, is then: can this new technology be effective-
ly applied to understanding of a broad cultural 
conflict such as may arise in any society where 
potentially divisive issues exist? To answer this 
question, we decided to conduct a feasibility study 
in order to scope out the problem. What we present 
below is the outcome of this study and possibilities 
it opened for future research. The actual results of 
conflict case analysis obtained here are for illustra-
tive purposes only. 

To start, we selected a conflict case that is both 
familiar and has abundance of data available that is 
easily accessible. The case can be considered as 
representative both in terms of its overall structure 
(opposing views, radical and moderate positions, 
ongoing tension) as well as the debate surrounding 
it (complexity of language, indirectness, talking 
about self and the others, etc.). At the same time, 
its familiarity provided means for immediate as-
sessment of feasibility of the proposed approach: if 
our subject matter experts could verify the out-
come as correct or at least reasonable, it would 
serve as a point of departure for more rigorous 
analysis and evaluation of other conflict cases 
elsewhere in the world. 

The cross-cultural conflict we use as an example 
can be summarized as: “People disagree about the 
oversight of guns in the U.S. Some believe that 
guns and gun safety are the responsibility of indi-
viduals; others believe that the Federal Govern-
ment should manage guns and gun ownership. This 
contrast in viewpoints has been a source of tension 
in the US since the colonial era. Although the de-
bate about guns is often thought to be political, its 
foundation is actually cultural – the proper bal-
ance between the rights of the individual citizen 
and the interests and needs of the majority.”1  

The protagonists involved in this conflict are 
those in favor of individual oversight of guns 
(INDO for short) and those in favor of Federal 
Government oversight (GOVTO for short). Given 
a conflict case such as the above, our goal is to 
develop methods that will understand and analyze 
the cultural differences that underlie the conflict 
and can be ascertained through the use of meta-
phors by protagonists on either side.  

                                                             
1 An excerpt from the Guns Practice Case description. 

68



4 Our Approach 

4.1 Data Identification and Collection  

Our objective was to identify the metaphors that 
are used to characterize the Gun Case conflict in 
the U.S. For extracted metaphors to be useful to an 
analyst in this or any other conflict case, the meta-
phors must be assigned to a particular protagonist 
or viewpoint or “side” of whatever debate or con-
flict is being explored. Without linkage to a view-
point, discovered metaphors are not particularly 
illuminating. When dealing with an unfamiliar cul-
ture, an analyst may not be able make such a link. 
Consequently, the system must provide the link. It 
is the known position, taken by the spokesperson 
using the metaphor that provides the connection 
between metaphor and position or side. A spokes-
person can be a particular named person – such as 
the head of an organization espousing the position 
(i.e., head of the NRA) – but in fact is more com-
monly a website maintained by an organization for 
the purposes of promulgating its views. 

The first step is the identification of spokesper-
sons and spokesperson sites on all sides of the 
opinion spectrum. Websites are more helpful than 
named people, because they provide a large vol-
ume of text that is readily accessible in locations 
that contain high concentrations of material on the 
focus topic. This step typically requires input from 
a cultural/political expert; however, it may be ap-
proximated (or pre-structured) using the distance 
calculation based on the Topical Positioning meas-
ure (c.f. Section 6).  

In the second step, we roughly array these sites 
along an opinion spectrum, and particularly dis-
cover the extreme positions at each end of the 
spectrum, as well as those sites that represent more 
moderate positions, if still recognizably on each 
side. This step also requires input by the cultur-
al/political expert; but it may be approximated by 
the Topical Positioning computation as in first step 
above, in cases where cultural expertise cannot be 
obtained.  

Once the websites and their positions on opinion 
spectrum are determined, the third step is collec-
tion of data from sites taking a relatively pure and 
extreme position at each end of the spectrum, after 
sites have been checked for any access restrictions. 
Data collection here means downloading snippets 
of text – passages of up to five sentences – that 

contain certain terms of relevance to the conflict 
case under investigation. We start with a broad list 
of terms that may include potential metaphorical 
targets as well as other relevant terms. Table 1 
shows a subset of these terms in the first column 
for the Gun Case. Other terms (see Figure 1) are 
folded under these broad categories in Table 1. 

 The effect of this collection method is that all 
automatically extracted metaphors can be automat-
ically tagged as representing one extreme position 
or the other, based on the initial classification of 
the site by the cultural expert. These are considered 
to be core metaphors. This material should be rea-
sonably balanced as to numbers of sites on each 
side. We make an effort to compensate significant-
ly unbalanced dataset with additional collection on 
underrepresented side. 

Step four is data collection from the sites closer 
to the middle of the opinion spectrum identified in 
the second step. When this data is processed for 
metaphors, they are labeled accordingly as “mod-
erate”.  We note that “moderate” positions in mul-
ti-side conflicts may have different interpretations 
than in a largely binary conflict of Gun Case. In 
Table 1, the column Total Passages represents the 
sum total of passages processed from the extreme 
and moderate websites.  

Target	   Total	  Passages	  

Gun	  control	   23596	  
Gun	  violence	   8464	  
Gun	  right(s)	   9472	  
Gun	  law	   11150	  
Gun	  safety	   129	  
2nd	  Amendment	   516	  
Gun	  ownership	   1147	  
Gun	  owners	   2359	  
Total	  	   57841	  
Table 1. Distribution of collected data across targets in 

Gun Case debate 
 

For the Gun Case analysis, two rounds of data 
collection were conducted. The first round was 
focused on extreme sites on both sides: data were 
derived from 10 extreme INDO sites and 20 ex-
treme GOVTO. The greater number of sites in fa-
vor of more government oversight was necessary 
because of the lesser volume of text found in these 
sites on the average. In the second round of data 
collection, we added sites that represented moder-

69



ate positions. Ultimately, we collected data from 
45 online sites and collected more than 57,000 text 
passages as seen in Table 1. 

4.2 Identifying Meso-Topics and Targets for 
Metaphor Extraction 

The downloaded data is then processed for meso-
topics (frequently mentioned and polarized topics) 
and metaphors. 

The process of identifying the key meso-topics 
(i.e., the main aspects of the conflict case) has been 
fully automated in the following 3 steps: 

1. Locating frequently occurring topics in 
text: The initial candidates are noun phrases, prop-
er names (of locations, organizations, positions, 
events, and other phenomena, but less so of specif-
ic individuals). These are augmented with co-
referential lexical items: pronouns, variants, and 
synonyms. The process of selection is quite robust 
but requires some rudimentary processing capabil-
ity in the target language: part-of-speech tagging, 
basic anaphor resolution, and a lexicon/thesaurus. 

2. Down selecting the frequent topics to a set 
of 20-30 meso-topics. The two key criteria for se-
lection are length and polarization. Topic “length” 
is measured by the number of references to it (ei-
ther direct or indirect) that form “chains” across 
the “utterances” that are part of the conflict debate. 
Topic polarization is measured by the proportion 
of polarized references to a meso-topic, either posi-
tive or negative. For example, the terms gun rights 
and gun safety are both frequently used and polar-
ized in the Gun Case. In order to keep the analysis 
manageable, we retain only top 20 to 30 meso-
topics, based on their chain lengths.  

3. Selecting metaphorical targets and assign-
ing them to case aspects. While all meso-topics are 
important to the case, only some of them will be 
targets of metaphors. We determine this by probing 
metaphor extraction for each of the meso-topics 
and then eliminating those meso-topics that bring 
back too few metaphors. In the Gun Case, we used 
2% cut-off threshold for productive targets (a typi-
cal metaphor to literal ratio is approx. 8%).  

Figure 1 shows the meso-topics selected for the 
Gun Case, and the metaphorical targets identified 
among them (bold face). Targets are grouped by 
semantic similarity and assigned to case “aspects”.  

 
Figure 1. Meso-topics and metaphorical targets identi-

fied for the Gun Case 

4.3 Extracting Linguistic Metaphors and 
Building Conceptual Metaphors 

Our metaphor extraction system was run over ap-
proximately 57 thousand passages collected from 
the Gun Case protagonists’ media outlets, resulting 
in more than 4000 distinct linguistic metaphors 
(LMs). These LMs yielded 45 conceptual meta-
phors (CMs), with 28 CMs on the individual over-
sight (INDO) side and 17 CMs at the government 
oversight (GOVTO) side. This uneven split repre-
sents the overall data distribution between INDO 
and GOVTO, reflecting their relative contributions 
to the Gun Case debate: approximately 70% of 
contributions (measured in published “utterances”) 
are attributed to the INDO side.  

We define the terms LM and CM here: a linguis-
tic metaphor (LM) is an instance of metaphor 
found in text, for example – “The roots of gun con-
trol are partially about racism”. Here the target is 
gun control and the metaphorical relation is “roots 
of”. A prototype source domain for this metaphor 
could be PLANT, where gun control is likened to 
having properties of a PLANT by the relation roots 
of. A set of linguistic metaphors all pointing to the 
same source domain, such as PLANT in the above 
example, would form a conceptual metaphor (CM). 
The focus of this article is on the use of metaphors 
towards analyzing a real world conflict scenario. 
Metaphor extraction is carried out in a data-driven, 
automated method by our system by using corpus 
statistics, imageablity and identification of source 
domains using word vectors to represent source 
domains. Our work is built upon existing ap-
proaches to automated metaphor extraction and 
source domain mapping (Strzalkowski et al., 2013; 
Broadwell et al., 2013; Shaikh et al., 2014). Our 
system extracts linguistic metaphors from text and  

70



Table 2. Conceptual Metaphors used by protagonists on 
the INDO side 

Target GOVERNMENT OVERSIGHT; Selected CMs/Total CMs: 17 

GUN RIGHTS WAR (battle, attack, victory) 
BUILDING (restore, preserve) 

CONTROL 
 OF GUNS 

BARRIER (push) 
NATURAL_PHYSICAL_FORCE (strong) 
WAR (battle, attack, defend) 
HUMAN_BODY (strong, tough) 
CLOTHING (tighten, loosen) 
PROTECTION (violate, protection) 

GUN  
VIOLENCE 

DISEASE (epidemic, survivor) 
CRIME (victim, perpetrator, rampant)  
ACCIDENT (tragic, die, gruesome) 
WAR (fight, carnage, threat) 
NATURAL_PHYSICAL_FORCE (devastating, brunt of) 

Table 3. Conceptual Metaphors used by protagonists on 
the GOVTO side 

 
automatically groups them together to form con-
ceptual metaphors. The source domains that we 
refer to in this article are a set of 67 categories that 
are frequently encountered in metaphorical data. 

Tables 2 and 3 below show the overall distribu-
tion of CMs found on each side of the debate. Se-
lected representative lexical items associated with 
each CM are shown in parentheses. Similar tables 
can be drawn for extreme and moderate positions 
separately in the debate. 

We can now automatically label the metaphors 
across given positions, extreme or moderate, on 
each side of the debate. The process of labeling the 

metaphors then leads to analytic insights into the 
data, which we shall present in the next section.  

5 Preliminary Insights using Metaphorical 
Data 

We report three observations based on automated 
processing of relevant text sources for presence of 
metaphorical language used by each protagonist.  
We should stress here that these are only tentative 
results that serve as indication of the types of anal-
yses that may be achievable. Rigorous validation is 
required to confirm these findings; however, it was 
not our objective of this feasibility study. 

5.1 Contrasting Narratives: DISEASE vs. 
WAR 

Both sides of the debate use metaphorical language 
indicative of their stances on the Gun Case issue. 
These metaphors invoke a variety of source do-
mains from which we can infer their attitudes to-
ward the issue. Among all source domains invoked 
by each side, two are predominant: 
1. DISEASE is invoked in 21% of all metaphors 

used by GOVTO 
2. WAR is invoked in 20% of all metaphors used 

by INDO 
To determine predominant Conceptual Meta-

phors for each protagonist (21% and 20% referred 
above), we rank order the Source Domains (SDs) 
for each side by number of LMs that use each SD. 
In Table 4, we show the predominant conceptual 
metaphors used for key targets by each protagonist.  

 
Table 4. The most representative CMs on both sides of 

the Gun Debate, by key Targets. Font size indicates 
relative frequency for top CMs for each target. 

 
WAR and DISEASE/CRIME dominate; howev-

er, we note also that the majority of metaphors on 
GOVTO side come in fact from gun violence topic, 
while on the INDO side the majority comes from 
the gun rights topic. Further breakdown of top 

Target INDIVIDUAL OVERSIGHT; Selected CMs/ Total CMs: 28 

GUN 
RIGHTS 

ANIMAL (shoot, survive, endanger) 
BARRIER (push, circumvent, wedge) 
WAR (battle, victory, jihad) 
GAME (win, game, champion) 
A_RIGHT (preserve, lose, violate) 
CLOTHING (wear, strip, cling) 
BUILDING (restore, prospect, platform) 
BUSINESS (sell, expand) 

CONTROL 
 OF GUNS 

MACHINE (failure of, misfire, defuse) 
ANIMAL (kill, shoot, evolve) 
BARRIER (break, ram, hinder) 
NATURAL_PHYSICAL_FORCE (strong, defy, sweep) 
WAR (fight, attack, battle) 
HUMAN_BODY (weak, relax, thrust) 
BUSINESS (launch, promote) 
GAME (champion, bandwagon, loser) 
CLOTHING (tighten, loosen) 

GUN  
VIOLENCE 

DISEASE (epidemic, scourge, plague) 
CRIME (victim, rampant) 
ACCIDENT (die from, horrific, injury) 
WAR (battle, fight, escalate) 

71



source domains for the gun debate targets is elabo-
rated as follows: NATURAL PHYSICAL FORCE, 
DISEASE and CRIME all seem to contribute to-
wards a cohesive narrative on the GOVTO side, 
which views the gun issue as an uncontrollable, 
external, negative force. BARRIER and WAR on 
INDO side may suggest an overarching narrative 
of active struggle and overcoming of obstacles.  

This resolution of narratives for each side in a 
conflict is a significant key insight that can be de-
rived from gathered data. Recognizing the underly-
ing narrative in a conflict for any given side can 
provide ways of resolving conflict by facilitating 
dialogue that can bridge such differences. 

5.2 Sociolinguistic indicators: INDO domi-
nates debate  

The INDO side contributes approximately 70% of 
all content in the Gun Case debate. This proportion 
does not change substantially even after a deliber-
ate oversampling of data from GOVTO websites. 
The absolute number of metaphors supplied by 
INDO is substantially greater than the number pro-
duced by GOVTO sites. In addition to contributing 
the most content and the largest number of meta-
phors (Figure 4), the INDO side dominates the 
Gun Case debate according to two key sociolin-
guistic measures (Broadwell et al., 2012): 
1. Showing greater Argument Diversity, which 

correlates with greater influence. Argument 
diversity is a sociolinguistic measure manifest-
ed in metaphor use by: (a) employment of a 
larger number of source domains in their met-
aphors; and (b) Employment of more varied 
metaphors using distinct relations 

2. Using action-oriented language, i.e., the rela-
tions in metaphors evoke action for change ra-
ther than describing the status quo. 

To gather evidence for this insight, we explored 
the sociocultural indicators of influence exhibited 
by the INDO side. Figure 4 shows the INDO using 
significantly more metaphors in most domains, 
except for DISEASE, CRIME, and NAT-PHYS-
FORCE, which are parts of the GOVTO core nar-
rative. Figure 5 further shows that INDO uses 
more varied relations to evoke these domains, even 
those SDs used predominantly by GOVTO.  

Figure 6 illustrates INDO using more action-
oriented language in their metaphors. The two pie 
charts represent the proportion of lexical items 

used in LMs that are of the “taking action” type 
(primarily verbs describing events, such as “at-
tack”) vs. the “passively observe” (primarily nouns 
and adjectives, such as “devastating”).  

 
Figure 4. The INDO side (red bars) dominates debate 
with use of more LMs overall. Here we show those 
source domains that are used at least 2% of the time 
overall by both sides and the count of LMs for those 

Source Domains. Y-axis represents count of metaphors. 

 
Figure 5. The INDO side dominates debate with richer 
vocabulary suggesting greater influence. Here we show 

those source domains that are used at least 2% of the 
time overall by both sides and the count of distinct rela-
tions in the LMs by each protagonist. Y-axis represents 

count of metaphors. 

 
Figure 6. The INDO side dominates debate with use of 
more action-oriented language. Size of pie chart repre-
sents the proportion of metaphors in the source role cat-

egories. The “Taking Action” type of metaphors is 
greater in proportion than “Passively Observe” type of 

metaphors. 

0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350

GOVTO INDO

0	  
20	  
40	  
60	  
80	  
100	  
120	  
140	  
160	  

GOVTO	   INDO	  

Taking	  Action	  -­‐	  Events,	  
verbs	  

GOVTO	  

INDO	  

Passively	  Observe	  -­‐	  
States,	  Nouns,	  Adjs	  	  

INDO	  
GOVTO	  

72



5.3 Topical positioning: INDO occupies the 
center ground in debate  

We wish to calculate the relative positions of pro-
tagonists in a debate and to estimate a distance be-
tween these positions. We have created a 
sociolinguistic method of computing those distanc-
es using a method called Topical Positioning (Lin 
et al., 2013). In this section, we shall explain how 
we arrive at those distances using metaphorical 
data and give details about the Topical Positioning 
Method in Section 6.  

In order to calculate the positions of extreme 
and moderate protagonists on each side of the de-
bate, we create a heat-map matrix of metaphor us-
age for each position. Each matrix represents the 
numbers of metaphors and Source Domains ap-
plied to each key target concept in the debate. Dis-
tances between matrices are calculated using 
cosine measure in multidimensional spaces. Figure 
7 shows fragments of heat maps for the extreme 
GOVTO and INDO positions.  

 
Each N× M matrix provides the representation of 

a protagonist position in a debate through their use 
of metaphors where N represents the number of 
metaphorical Targets (TCs) in a debate, while M 
represents the number of source domains (SDs) 
used in the analysis. Values in each cell represent 
an average strength score for TC → SD mappings 
found in the data collected from this protagonist 
media outlets (Shaikh et al., 2014). Empty cells are 
values below a preset threshold, replaced by 0s. To 
calculate distances we use a cosine metric; howev-
er, other distance measures may also be applicable. 

 
Figure 8. INDO side occupies center ground in the 

gun debate. We represent each protagonist position 
on a relative distance “scale” 

 
 Using this method, we find that the extreme 

proponents of the INDO and GOVTO sides are far 
apart, approximately 0.55 of the maximum theoret-
ical distance of 1.0.  Using the same measures, the 
distance between the INDO moderate position and 
both INDO and GOVTO extremes is approximate-
ly half of the above, or 0.27. This places the INDO 
moderate position in the center of the spectrum of 
positions between the two extremes. On the other 
hand, the language used by the GOVTO moderate 
position places them closer to the GOVTO ex-
treme. This finding is illustrated in Figure 8.  
  In this section we presented three observations 

that emerged, from the snapshot of data we col-
lected on this prototypical case and by running au-
tomated tools of metaphor and sociolinguistic 
analyses on the data.  These results were confirmed 
by subject matter experts, who were intimately 
familiar with the issue. We note that such verifica-
tion does not constitute a rigorous validation of our 
findings, the goal of this paper is to present a pos-
sible solution and path towards generalizability, 
validation is a separate issue that we may explore 
as future work.  The selection of a familiar cross-
cultural conflict allowed us to propose and test vi-
able solutions that can be adapted to work on pre-
viously unknown conflicts.  

Figure 7. Protagonist matrices shown as heat maps. The intensity of color shows greater proportion of LMs for particu-
lar Target-Source mappings. We compute cosine distances between these matrices to determine relative positions of 

protagonists. 

73



6 Topical Positioning  

While the two sides of the debate use different 
metaphors to convey their views of the gun issue, it 
is not immediately clear just how far apart these 
positions are, and thus how strong or intractable 
the conflict really is. One possible way to compute 
the distance between protagonists is to use the 
method of Topical Positioning (Lin et al., 2013) 

In discourse analysis, Topical Positioning is de-
fined as the attitude a speaker (our protagonist) has 
on main topics (meso-topics) of discussion. Speak-
ers in a dialogue, when discussing issues, especial-
ly ones with some controversy, will establish their 
attitude on a topic, classified as for, against, or 
neutral/undecided. 

To establish topical positioning, we first identify 
meso-topics that are present in a debate, as dis-
cussed in Section 4.1. We then distinguish multiple 
forms in which polarization or valuation is applied 
to meso-topics in protagonists’ utterances such as 
through express advocacy or disadvocacy or via 
supporting or dissenting information, and express 
agreement or disagreement with a polarized state-
ment made in a statement by the same or another 
protagonist. We create Topical Positioning Vectors 
representing each protagonist. Table 5 shows a 
fragment of positional vectors for extreme 
GOVTO and INDO positions for five meso-topics. 
In these vectors, value in each cell represents a 
prevailing combined polarity and intensity towards 
a meso-topic. We note that meso-topics form a su-
perset of metaphorical targets as explained earlier. 

M-topics Hand  guns firearms 
gun 

owners 
gun 

control 
gun 

rights 

INDO 4 5 5 0 5 

GOVTO 0 -1 0 5 -1 

Table 5. Topical Positioning vectors for extreme 
GOVTO and INDO positions in the gun debate 

 
Topical Positioning vectors can now be used to 

calculate distance between protagonists, using 
standard cosine measure. We used this method to 
compute 4-ways distances in the Gun Case: be-
tween the extreme positions on each side; between 
the moderate and extreme positions within each 
side; as well as between moderates and extremes 
across the sides and compared the distances so ob-
tained to those obtained from metaphorical matri-
ces (Section 5.3). We note that both methods 

yielded essentially identical results. The distance 
between extreme positions on INDO and GOVTO 
side appears to be very large, varying between 0.55 
and 0.58. The distances between moderates and 
between moderates and extremes are appropriately 
smaller (~0.27). The distance between moderate 
and extreme INDO places the former in the center 
between the two extremes. This result is confirmed 
by the smaller than expected distance between 
moderate and extreme GOVTO. This may suggest 
that moderate INDO (thus, the INDO side) domi-
nates the debate by effectively occupying its cen-
ter. 

7 Discussion and Open Issues 

In this paper, we presented a preliminary yet inno-
vative approach towards the understanding of cul-
tural conflict through the use of metaphors and 
sociolinguistic measures of influence. Our ap-
proach was illustrated on the analysis on a proto-
typical case centered on the U.S Gun debate. By 
casting the problem as an analysis of discourse, or 
debate between protagonists, we gain significant 
benefits – we can use established social science 
methods to draw potentially illuminating and non-
trivial insights from otherwise very complex and 
often conflicted data. We believe that the approach 
presented here can be generalized to other types of 
conflict by following the steps detailed in Section 
4. It is possible that issues with multiple, clearly 
distinct sides all aimed at clearly distinguishable 
solutions to a general issue may need to be dealt 
with as clusters or will need to be broken down 
into multiple two- or three-sided conflicts, depend-
ing upon the precise goals to be achieved. 

Acknowledgments 
This paper is based on work supported by the Intel-
ligence Advanced Research Projects Activity 
(IARPA) via Department of Defense US Army 
Research Laboratory contract number W911NF-
12-C-0024. The U.S. Government is authorized to 
reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental 
purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation 
thereon.  Disclaimer: The views and conclusions 
contained herein are those of the authors and 
should not be interpreted as necessarily represent-
ing the official policies or endorsements, either 
expressed or implied, of IARPA, DoD/ARL, or the 
U.S. Government. 

74



References 
Eric P. S. Baumer, James P. White, and Bill Tomlinson. 

2010. Comparing semantic role labeling with typed 
dependency parsing in computational metaphor 
identification. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 
2010 Second Workshop on Computational Ap-
proaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 14–22, Los 
Angeles, California.  

David B. Bracewell, and Tomlinson, Marc T. 2012. The 
Language of Power and its Cultural Influence, In 
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (COLING) 

George Broadwell, Jennifer Stromer-Galley, Tomek 
Strzalkowski, Samira Shaikh, Sarah Taylor, Umit 
Boz, Alana Elia, Laura Jiao, Ting Liu and Nick 
Webb. 2012. Modeling Socio-Cultural Phenomena 
in Discourse. Journal of Natural Language Engi-
neering, Cambridge Press. 

George Aaron Broadwell, Umit Boz, Ignacio Cases, 
Tomek Strzalkowski, Laurie Feldman, Sarah Taylor, 
Samira Shaikh, Ting Liu, Kit Cho, and Nick Webb. 
2013. Using imageability and topic chaining to lo-
cate metaphors in linguistic corpora. In Proceedings 
of International Conference on Social Computing, 
Behavioral-Cultural Modeling, & Prediction, pages 
102–109. Washington D.C. 

Jaime Carbonell. 1980. Metaphor: A key to extensible 
semantic analysis. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual 
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. 

Jonathan Charteris-Black. 2002. Second language fig-
urative proficiency: A comparative study of Malay 
and English. Applied Linguistics 23(1):104–133. 

Dan, Fass. 1991. met*: A Method for Discriminating 
Metonymy and Metaphor by Computer. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 17:49-90 

Jerome Feldman and Srinivas Narayanan. 2004. Embod-
ied meaning in a neural theory of language. Brain 
and Language, 89(2):385–392. 

Dirk Hovy, Shashank Shrivastava, Sujay Kumar Jauhar, 
Mrinmaya Sachan, Kartik Goyal, Huying Li, Whit-
ney Sanders and Eduard Hovy. 2013. Identifying 
Metaphorical Word Use with Tree Kernels. In the 
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Metaphor in 
NLP, (NAACL). Atlanta. 

Michael Laver, Kenneth Benoit, and John Garry. 2003. 
Extracting Policy Positions from Political Texts Us-
ing Words as Data. American Political Science Re-
view 97(2): 311–32. 

Ching-Sheng Lin, Samira Shaikh, Jennifer Stromer-
Galley, Jennifer Crowley, Tomek Strzalkowski and 
Veena Ravishankar. 2013. Topical Positioning: A 
New Method for Predicting Opinion Changes in 
Conversation. In Proceedings of the Workshop on 

Language Analysis in Social Media, June 2013. At-
lanta, Georgia. pp 41-48. 

Michael Mohler, David Bracewell, David Hinote, and 
Marc Tomlinson. 2013. Semantic signatures for ex-
ample-based linguistic metaphor detection. In The 
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Metaphor in 
NLP, (NAACL), pages 46–54. 

Viet-An Nguyen, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Philip Resnik, 
Deborah Cai, Jennifer Midberry, and Yuanxin 
Wang. 2013. Modeling Topic Control to Detect In-
fluence in Conversations using Nonparametric Top-
ic Models. Machine Learning, 2013. 

Bo Pang & Lillian Lee. 2008. Foundations and Trends 
in Information Retrieval 2, 1–135. 

Richard M. Perloff. 2014. The dynamics of political 
communication: Media and politics in a digital age. 
New York: Routledge. 

Samira Shaikh, Tomek Strzalkowski, Jenny Stromer-
Galley, Geoge Aaron Broadwell, Sarah Taylor, Ting 
Liu, Veena Ravishankar, Xiaoai Ren and Umit Boz. 
2012. Modeling Influence in Online Multi-Party 
Discourse. In Proceedings of 2nd International Con-
ference on Social Computing and Its Applications 
(SCA 2012), Xiangtan, China.Ekaterina Shutova. 
2010. Models of metaphors in NLP. In Proceedings 
of ACL 2010. Uppsala, Sweden. 

Samira Shaikh, Tomek Strzalkowski, Kit Cho, Ting Liu, 
George Aaron Broadwell, Laurie Feldman, Sarah 
Taylor, Boris Yamrom, Ching-Sheng Lin, Ning Sa, 
Ignacio Cases, Yuliya Peshkova and Kyle Elliot. 
2014 . Discovering Conceptual Metaphors using 
Source Domain Spaces. In Proceedings of the 4th 
Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon, pag-
es 210–220, Dublin, Ireland, August 23, 2014. 

Ekaterina Shutova and Simone Teufel. 2010. Metaphor 
corpus annotated for source - target domain map-
pings. In Proceedings of Language Resources and 
Evaluation Conference 2010. Malta. 

Jonathan B. Slapin and Sven-Oliver Proksch. 2008. "A 
Scaling Model for Estimating Time-Series Party Po-
sitions from Texts" American Journal of Political 
Science 52(3): 705-722. 

Pradeep Sopory, P. and James Price Dillard. 2002. The 
Persuasive Effects of Metaphor: A Meta-Analysis. 
Human Communication Research, 28: 382–419. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2958.2002.tb00813.x 

Carlo Strapparava, C., and Rada Mihalcea. 2008. Learn-
ing to Identify Emotions in Text. In Proceedings of 
the ACM Conference on Applied Computing ACM-
SAC. 

Tomek Strzalkowski, George Aaron Broadwell, Jennifer 
Stromer-Galley, Samira Shaikh, Sarah Taylor and 
Nick Webb. 2010. Modeling Socio-Cultural Phe-
nomena in Discourse. In the Proceedings of the 23rd 
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING-2010), Beijing, China. 

75



Tomek Strzalkowski, George Aaron Broadwell, Sarah 
Taylor, Laurie Feldman, Boris Yamrom, Samira 
Shaikh, Ting Liu, Kit Cho, Umit Boz, Ignacio Cases 
and Kyle Elliott. 2013. Robust extraction of meta-
phor from novel data. In Proceedings of the First 
Workshop on Metaphor in NLP, NAACL. Atlanta. 

Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson and Claire Cardie. 2005. 
Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions in 
language. Journal of Language Resources and Eval-
uation 39(2-3):165–210 

Yorick, Wilks. 1975. Preference semantics. Formal 
Semantics of Natural Language, E. L. Keenan, Ed. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 329–
348. 

Yorick Wilks, Lucian Galescu, James Allen, Adam Dal-
ton. 2013. Automatic Metaphor Detection using 
Large-Scale Lexical Resources and Conventional 
Metaphor Extraction. In the Proceedings of the First 
Workshop on Metaphor in NLP, (NAACL). Atlanta.  

 

76


