



















































Baidu Translate: Research and Products


Proceedings of the ACL 2015 Fourth Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation (HyTra), pages 61–62,
Beijing, China, July 31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Baidu Translate: Research and Products

Zhongjun HE
Baidu Inc.

No. 10, Shangdi 10th Street, Beijing, 100085, China
hezhongjun@baidu.com

1 Overview

In this presentation, I would like to introduce the
research and products of machine translation in
Baidu. As the biggest Chinese search engine,
Baidu has released its machine translation system
in June, 2011. It now supports translations among
27 languages on multiple platforms, including PC,
mobile devices, etc.

Hybrid translation approach is important for
building an Internet translation system. As
we know, the translation demands on the Inter-
net come from various domains, including news
wires, patents, poems, idioms, etc. It is difficult for
a single translation system to achieve high accu-
racy on all domains. Therefore, hybrid translation
is practically needed. Generally, we build a sta-
tistical machine translation (SMT) system, using
the training corpora automatically crawled from
the web. For the translation of idioms (e.g. “有
志者，事竟成,where there is a will, there is a
way”), hot words/expressions (e.g. “一带一路,
One Belt and One Road ”), example-based trans-
lation methods are used. To improve the transla-
tion of date (e.g. “2012年7月6日, July 6, 2012”),
numbers (e.g. “三千五百万, thirty-five million),
etc, rule-based methods are used as pre-process.

To improve translation quality for the resource-
poor language pairs, we used pivot-based meth-
ods. Wu and Wang (2007) proposed the triangu-
lation method that combines the source-pivot and
the pivot-target phrase tables to induce a source-
target phrase table. To fill up the data gap between
the source-pivot and pivot-target corpora, Wu and
Wang (2009) employed a hybrid method combin-
ing RBMT and SMT systems. We also proposed a
method to use a Markov random walk to discover
implicit relations between phrases in the source
and target languages (Zhu et al., 2013), thus to
improve the coverage of phrase pairs. We uti-
lized the co-occurrence frequency of source-target

phrase pairs to estimate phrase translation proba-
bilities (Zhu et al., 2014).

On May 20th this year, we have launched
a neural machine translation (NMT) system for
Chinese-English translation. The system conducts
end-to-end translation with a source language en-
coder and a target language decoder. Both the en-
coder and decoder are recurrent neural networks.
The strength of NMT lies in that it can learn se-
mantic and structural translation information by
taking global contexts into account. We further
integrated the SMT and NMT system to improve
translation quality.

We also released off-line translation packs for
NMT system on mobile devices, providing trans-
lation services in case that the Internet is unavail-
able. So far as we know, this is the first NMT sys-
tem supporting off-line translation on mobile de-
vices.

We also investigate the problem of learning a
machine translation model that can simultaneously
translate sentences from one source language to
multiple target languages (Dong et al., 2015). Our
solution is inspired by the recently proposed neu-
ral machine translation model which generalizes
machine translation as a sequence learning prob-
lem. We train a unified neural machine transla-
tion model under the multi-task learning frame-
work where the encoder is shared across different
language pairs and each target language has a sep-
arate decoder. This model gets faster and better
convergence for both resource-rich and resource-
poor language pairs under the multi-task learning
framework.

Based on the above techniques, we have re-
leased translation products for multiple platforms,
including web translation on PC, APP on mo-
bile devices, as well as free API for the third-
party developers. Our system now support trans-
lations among 27 languages, not only including
many frequently-used foreign languages, but also

61



including the traditional Chinese poem and Chi-
nese dialects, for example, Cantonese. In or-
der to make people communicate conveniently in
foreign countries, the Baidu Translate APP sup-
ports speech-to-speech translation, object transla-
tion, instance full-screen translation, image trans-
lation, etc. Object translation enables users to
identify objects and translate them into both Chi-
nese and English. For the users who cannot speak
and write foreign languages, the APP allows im-
age as the input. For example, if you aim the cell-
phone camera at a menu written in a language you
do not know, the translation will be displayed on
the screen. Furthermore, rich information related
to the food will also be displayed, including the
materials, the taste, etc.

2 Outline

1. Introduction

• Brief Introduction of Baidu MT

2. Hybrid Translation

• SMT, EBMT and RBMT
• Pivot-based Method for Resource-Poor

Languages

3. Neural Machine Translation System

• RNN Encoder-Decoder
• Multi-task Learning

4. Products

• Web
• App
• API

3 About the Speakers

Zhongjun He is a senior researcher in machine
translation at Baidu. He received his Ph.D. in 2008
from Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences (ICT, CAS). He has more
than ten years of research and development expe-
riences on statistical machine translation.

References
Daxiang Dong, Hua Wu, Wei He, Dianhai Yu, and

Haifeng Wang. 2015. Multi-task learning for multi-
ple language translation. In To appear in ACL 2015,
Beijing, China, July.

Hua Wu and Haifeng Wang. 2007. Pivot language
approach for phrase-based statistical machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 856–863.

Hua Wu and Haifeng Wang. 2009. Revisiting pivot
language approach for machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics and the 4th IJC-
NLP of the AFNLP, pages 154–162.

Xiaoning Zhu, Zhongjun He, Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang,
Conghui Zhu, and Tiejun Zhao. 2013. Improving
pivot-based statistical machine translation using ran-
dom walk. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, page 524534, Seattle, Washington, USA,
October.

Xiaoning Zhu, Zhongjun He, Hua Wu, Conghui Zhu,
Haifeng Wang, and Tiejun Zhao. 2014. Improving
pivot-based statistical machine translation by pivot-
ing the co-occurrence count of phrase pairs. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1665–
1675, Doha, Qatar, October.

62


