



















































Distinctive Similarity of Clausal Coordinate Ellipsis in Russian Compared to Dutch, Estonian, German, and Hungarian


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 75–80,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 10–11 September 2015.

Remarkable Similarity of Clausal Coordinate Ellipsis in Russian
Compared to Dutch, Estonian, German, and Hungarian

Karin Harbusch and Denis Krusko
Computer Science Department

University of Koblenz–Landau, Koblenz, Germany
harbusch, kruskod@uni-koblenz.de

Abstract
Elliptical constructions can help to avoid
repetition of identical constituents during
natural-language generation. From gram-
mar books, it is not easy to extract exe-
cutable rules for ellipsis—in our case in
Russian. Therefore we follow a differ-
ent strategy. We test the accuracy of a
rule set that has been evaluated for the two
Germanic languages, Dutch and German,
and the two Finno-Ugric languages, Esto-
nian and Hungarian. For a Russian test
corpus of about 100 syntactically anno-
tated coordinated sentences that systemat-
ically vary the conditions of rule applica-
tion, our Java program can automatically
produce all elliptical variants. Over- and
undergeneration in the resulting lists have
been tested in two experiments with na-
tive speakers. Basically, the rules work
very well for Russian. Within the four tar-
get languages, Russian works best with the
Estonian amendments. Here we report two
slight deviations partially known from the
linguistic literature.

1 Introduction

In natural-language generation, ellipsis can help
to avoid repetition of identical constituents. For
instance, the conceptual structure ‘eat(Peter, ap-
ples) & eat(Mary, apples)’ where ‘eat’ and ‘ap-
ples’ occur two times can be formulated as Pe-
ter eats apples and Mary too, a case of Stripping.
However, many other paraphrases can be produced
such as the aggregation into one sentence with NP-
coordination (Peter and Mary eat apples)—a case
of reduction we do not address in the following as
it works on the conceptual structure whereas we
only deal with syntactic structures as input.

Ellipsis occurs frequently in written and spoken
language. In the following, we study four types

of clausal coordinate ellipsis (CCE): (1) Gapping
(including Long Distance Gapping (LDG), Sub-
gapping and Stripping), (2) Forward Conjunc-
tion Reduction (FCR), (3) Backward Conjunction
Reduction (BCR), and (4) Subject Gap with Fi-
nite/Fronted Verb (SGF). In German written text,
clausal coordination, i.e., the two conjuncts com-
prise verbal constructions (not necessarily finite),
occurs in 14 and ellipsis in at least one of the two
conjuncts in 7 percent of the investigated corpus
(cf. Harbusch & Kempen, 2007). All these types
of clausal coordinate ellipsis also emerge in spon-
taneous speech in German (cf. Harbusch & Kem-
pen, 2009a). This observation is in line with En-
glish corpus studies (see, e.g., Greenbaum & Nel-
son, 1999) and Dutch (Harbusch, 2011).

For recent theoretical treatments of CCE in var-
ious linguistic frameworks see, e.g., Schwabe &
Zhang, 2000; Frank, 2002; Beaver & Sag, 2004;
te Velde, 2006; Haspelmath, 2007; Johnson, 2009;
Kempen, 2009; Van Craenenbroeck & Merchant,
2013; Griffiths & Lipták, 2014. For Russian as
target language, see, e.g., Kazenin, 2006 or Grib-
anova, 2013. Parsing elliptical constructions is
a difficult problem partially due to the fact that
both conjuncts may be grammatically incorrect
when viewed in isolation (see, e.g., Kobele, 2012).
In a natural-language generation-system, CCE is
only one realization option (cf. Shaw 1998) out
of many (e.g., Pronominalization also avoids re-
peating the same NP). The implemented CCE-
generation component ELLEIPO, which embod-
ies the CCE rule set we present below, can serve
as a post-editing component for NLG systems
that provide a syntactic structure annotated with
co-referentiality tags (cf. Harbusch & Kempen,
2009b). ELLEIPO takes these non-elliptical (re-
dundant) structures as input and provides all re-
duced to CCE options as output. ELLEIPO was
originally developed for Dutch and German (see
Harbusch & Kempen, 2006), but the implemented

75



set of CCE rules was designed in a language-
independent manner. This makes it possible to dis-
cover CCE rules in a new target language. For the
Finno-Ugric language Estonian, Harbusch, Koit &
Õim (2009) report high accuracy of the rule set,
which suggests that the entire process is language
independent. However, Estonian is suspected to be
strongly influenced by language contact with Ger-
manic languages. Nevertheless, Hungarian, an-
other Finno-Ugric language, yields equally good
results (cf. Harbusch & Bátori, 2013).

In the present paper, we aim to further ver-
ify our claim that CCE can be generated by
language-independent rules by testing ELLEIPO’s
rules for Russian. To this purpose, we built a
test corpus of about 100 Russian syntactic struc-
tures of (unreduced) coordinated sentences in Rus-
sian varying the conditions for CCE-rule applica-
tion. RUSSIAN-ELLEIPO produces all CCE re-
ductions for the test corpus. In the first experi-
ment, we let native speakers of Russian judge the
quality of the output (overgeneration of the CCE
rules). In the second, native speakers generated all
reductions (inclusive Pronominalization etc.) for
unreduced coordinated sentences in order to spot
CCE realizations that ELLEIPO does not generate
(undergeneration). In general, we observed a very
high level of accuracy of the CCE rules.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we define the CCE phenomena ELLEIPO is able
to generate. In Section 3, we describe the test cor-
pus, and elaborate on ELLEIPO’s output and on
the user studies. In Section 4, we outline our re-
sults. In the final Section, we draw some conclu-
sions and address future work.

2 Definition of the CCE Rules

We distinguish four types of CCE applicable to bi-
nary and-coordinations, and specify elision con-
ditions on the first (anterior) and second (poste-
rior) member of two conjoined clauses connected
by the Russian equivalent i1 of the coordinating
conjunction and (cf. examples in Table 1).

The CCE rules of ELLEIPO are based on the
psycholinguistically motivated definitions of CCE
types proposed by Kempen (2009). They check
the following conditions in syntactic trees whose
inner nodes additionally provide ‘referential iden-
tity features’.

1As in Russian, a ‘but’ is used for contrasts, we vary our
examples in the Gapping test where contrast is mandatory.

G
A

PP
IN

G
(g

)

(1) Ûrij živët v Tambove i ego synov´â živutg
Ûrij live3SG in Tambov and his sons live3PL

v Kaluge
in Kaluga
‘Ûrij lives in Tambov and his sons liveg
in Kaluga.’

(2) Ûrij živët v Tambove i v Kaluge živutg
Ûrij live3SG in Tambov and in Kaluga live3PL

ego synov´â
his sons
‘Ûrij lives in Tambov and in Kaluga, his sons
liveg’

L
D

G
((

g)
+
g)

(3) Segodnâ dolžen Pëtr svoû mašinu myt´ i
Today should Pëtr his car washINF and

segodnâgg dolžnag Maša svoj velosiped myt´gg
today should Maša her bike washINF
‘Today Pëtr should wash his car and todaygg
Maša shouldg washgg her bike’

SU
B

G
A

P-
PI

N
G

(g
) (4) Ivan hočet spat´ a Pëtr hočetg mečtat´

Ivan want3SG sleepINF but Pëtr want3SG dreamINF
‘Ivan wants to sleep but Pëtr wantsg to
dream’

ST
R

IP
-

PI
N

G
(s

tr
)

(5) Â splû i ty spišstr tože
I sleep1SG and you sleep2SG too
‘I sleep and you sleepstr too’

FC
R

(f
)

(6) Cvetaevu lûblû â i Cvetaevuf
CvetaevaACC like1SG I and CvetaevaACC

čitaû âs často
read1SG I often
‘I like Cvetaeva and Cvetaevaf read Is of-
ten’

(7) Maša slyšala, [čto Pëtr] popal v
Mary hearPST.SG.F that Pëtr getPST.SG.F an

avariû i [čto Pëtr]f mog umeret´
accident and that Pëtr canPSTSG.M dieINF
‘Mary heard that Pëtr had an accident and
[that Pëtr]f could die’

B
C

R
(b

)

(8) Maša pridët do trëh časovb
Maša comeFUT.3SG before threeACC o’clock

a Katâ pridëtg posle četyrëh čhasov
but Katâ comeFUT.3SG after fourACC o’clock
‘Maša will come before three o’clockb and
Katâ [will come]g after four o’clock’

SG
F

(s
)

(9) V les hodil ohotnik
Into forestACC.SG goPST.SG.M the hunter

i podstrelil ohotniks odnogo zajca
and shotPST.SG.M the hunter oneACC.M hare
‘Into the forest went the hunter and
[the hunter]s shot a hare’

Table 1: CCE examples in Russian (using the ISO
9 transliteration standard for better readability).
Crossed-out text represents elisions. Subscripts
indicate CCE type. Elided constituents and their
overt counterparts are marked in bold font.

76



1. Gapping ignores word order (compare exam-
ple (1) with the marked word order in (2).
It only requires lemma-identity of the two
Verbs in the two conjuncts & contrastiveness2

of the remnants (non-elided constituents).
For lemma-identity only the stems need to co-
incide. However, morphological properties
such as Number or Person of a Verb may
differ in the two conjuncts (e.g., in exam-
ple (1), živët and živut are lemma-identical).
The Gapping variant Long-Distance Gapping
(LDG) recursively applies the general Gap-
ping conditions top-down to corresponding
Verb pairs in the structure, provided they are
in the range of a so-called superclause3 in
both conjuncts. Subgapping works as LDG
but a Nonfinite Verb structure happens to be
not identical; this yields a Nonfinite clausal
remnant in the second conjunct. Stripping
is applied after any form of Gapping: dur-
ing read-out of Gapping results it inspects
whether there is no more than one non-
Verb remnant; in that case read-out adds a
language-specific stripping particle.

2. Forward-Conjunction Reduction (FCR) re-
quires wordform-identity, i.e., in addition
to lemma- and grammatical-function iden-
tity, identity of the morphological features
is needed in the left-periphery of major
clausal constituents, i.e., both clausal con-
juncts should start with a wordform-identical
sequence of FULL constituents.

3. Backward-Conjunction Reduction (BCR) is
licensed by lemma-identity in the right-
periphery, that is, both clausal conjuncts
end with the same sequence of wordform
and grammatical-function identical WORDS
(e.g., in example (8), o’clock is such a se-
quence). Note that FCR and BCR are not

2Contrastiveness constraints rule out elisions such as I eat
apples and you eat in the car—which is comprehensible but
not grammatical.

3A superclause is defined as a hierarchy of Finite or Non-
finite Clauses that—with the possible exception of the top-
most clause—do not include a Subordinating Conjunction.
In (3), the Subjects Pëtr and Maša each belong to a Main
Clause headed by the Verb dolžen ‘should’ whereas segodnâ
‘today’ and svoû mašinu/svoj velosiped ‘his car/her bike’ be-
long to the Nonfinite Complement Clause headed by the In-
finitive myt´ ‘wash’. Nevertheless, they form one superclause
in each of the conjuncts. Example (7)—actually, a case of
FCR where no superclause test is elicited—contains two su-
perclauses in each conjunct, due to the Subordinating Con-
junction čto ‘that’.

complete mirror images because only BCR
is allowed to disregarding major constituent
boundaries.

4. Subject Gap with Finite/Fronted Verb
(SGF) requires wordform-identical Sub-
jects where the first conjunct starts with
Verb/Modifier/Adjunct or where the first
conjunct is a Conditional Subordinate Clause
(Subject-Verb-Inversion) & FCR is applied if
licensed.

3 Set-up of RUSSIAN-ELLEIPO

In order to use ELLEIPO for any new target
language, the existing Java implementation of
ELLEIPO has to be changed only minimally be-
cause the rule set works target-language indepen-
dently. We added the Russian Conjunction and the
Russian Stripping particle along with its position
(leading or trailing) in the language-specific part
of the existing Java code.

In order to test the accuracy in a new tar-
get language, an appropriate test corpus of
ELLEIPO should contain structures that trigger
ALL constraints in the rule set, i.e., lemma- and
wordform-identity, contrastiveness, grammatical-
function and word-order variation in the left- and
right periphery. A blueprint of such a collection
is ELLEIPO’s test corpus of about 100 sentences
for German and Dutch (see Harbusch & Kempen,
2006). All these sentences have been translated
into Russian. In order to avoid biases, preserv-
ing the meaning was not essential but trying to
keep the varying constraints active in the Russian
syntactic trees, i.e., natural constructions in Rus-
sian have been set up (cf. clues for rule appli-
cation/failure of all phenomena in Table 2; N.B.
that several phenomena can occur in one test sen-
tence). The large number of Gapping examples
represents the great variety of word ordering to
be ignored, contrastiveness to be obeyed, differing
superclause-boundary violation-options (relevant
for LDG and Subgapping), grammatical-function
and lemma and wordform variation. The larger
number of FCR tests compared to (the near mir-
ror image) BCR results from more variation op-
tions for major constituents in the frontfield of a
sentence compared to the limited word variation
in the right periphery in BCR. For SGF, the range
of options is also restricted.

Processing the Russian test corpus, ELLEIPO
provides a condensed list of all reductions

77



CCE Rule Number of inclusions
GAPPING 91
STRIPPING 17
FCR 72
BCR 25
SGF 17

Table 2: Phenomena in the Russian test corpus.

with/without subscripts—slightly more elaborate
than indicated in Table 1. ELLEIPO adds
unique numbers to each CCE token so that
an elided constituent and its remnant directly
correspond. For instance, ELLEIPO’s output
for example (3) spells out the sentence vari-
ant depicting Subgapping along with Backward-
Conjunction Reduction (cf. subscript number #4
for BCR in Segodnâ2 3 dolžen1 Pëtr svoû mašinu
myt´4-b 2 i segodnâ2-gg 3-f dolžna1-g Maša svoj
velosiped myt´2-gg—also notice subscript #3 li-
censing segodnâ for FCR). ELLEIPO’s read-out
component can spell out all possible combinations
of elisions (with or without elaborate subscripts).

The complete lists of unreduced and reduced
sentences form the text materials we presented to
the participants in the two experiments that we car-
ried out to calculate the accuracy of our CCE rules,
specifically, the amount of overgeneration and un-
dergeneration of the rule set in Russian. In experi-
ment 1, we targeted overgeneration. We had native
speakers judge the acceptability of the elliptical
structures proposed by the CCE generator for the
test corpus. In experiment 2, aiming to detect un-
dergeneration, we tried to elicit yet undiscovered
elision types for a standard corpus of unreduced
test sentences (i.e., sentences without CCE). Ob-
viously, the scope of the latter experiment is re-
stricted, due to the limited number and variability
of the sentences presented to the participants.

We used a rating scale specifying three levels
of acceptability of a reduced sentence (good, du-
bious, unacceptable) in order to avoid overtaxing
and exhausting the test subjects—in contrast to the
very fine-grained method for grammaticality rat-
ing used by Keller (2000). In case of dubious ac-
ceptability, more details have been asked. Basi-
cally, a more fine-grained tendency for more/less
acceptability as well as insights in misinterpreta-
tions have been traced. This type of comments
was obtained in an interview situation with a
moderator.4 The moderator should be a linguist

4Further options are unmoderated tests conducted in an

speaking the target language to bring up follow-
up questions. Such digression does not spoil the
study—compared to a standardized experiment
as in Psychology. Another deviation from stan-
dardized testing (originally proposed for Usabil-
ity (UX) Testing and verified with a meta-study on
case studies by Nielsen (2012)) works very well
here. Few test subjects—Jakob Nielsen suggests
five in UX, although, user behavior varies more
than in grammaticality rating—suffice to point out
the majority of all problems.

In experiment 1, we let three native speakers of
Russian evaluate ELLEIPO’s output. The partic-
ipants always saw unreduced sentences together
with the reduced ones. This setup is necessary be-
cause it is known that, although some reductions
are acceptable in themselves, they do not express
the same meaning as its unreduced counterpart (cf.
example (12) in next section). We counted a match
as successful if at least one participant judged it
acceptable.5

In experiment 2, we tried to identify undergen-
eration with the CCE rule set, i.e., judged ac-
ceptable by native speakers but failing to be pro-
duced by ELLEIPO. For this purpose we presented
unreduced sentences only and let the participants
freely produce any kind of reduction crossing their
mind. In the list of answers we first identified
Pronominalization, One-anaphora and other non-
CCE forms of ellipsis as they do not count in
our study (however, the participants cannot know
this). Given the high amount of different linguistic
constructions the participants produced, the moti-
vation of the participants during the experiments
can be judged to be high (so to speak playful in
a positive sense). The experiment unveiled great
similarities of Russian with Estonian and Hun-
garian which allow weaker word-ordering condi-
tions for SGF and FCR (e.g., Ditransitive Verbs
allow for non-peripheral elision of wordform and
grammatical-function identical constituents).

observation lab or (internet) questionnaires. The user stud-
ies for Estonian, Hungarian and Russian were conducted as
face-to-face interviews to make test subjects try considerably
harder (cf. Schulte-Mecklenbeck and Huber, 2003). More-
over, all kinds of misinterpretation can be discussed on the
spot given that the moderator remains neutral in order to min-
imize unwelcome influence on the results of the test.

5This weak acceptability criterion was prompted by the
fact that CCE acceptability ratings can give rise to wide inter-
rater variability. In German, grammar books (and ELLEIPO)
license BCR for constituents that are lemma-identical but not
grammatical-function identical. However, many German na-
tive speakers rule out Hilf [dem Mann]DAT und reanimier
[den Mann]ACC ‘Help and reanimate the man’.

78



4 Results

In experiment 1 (on overgeneration), 79 % of
the sentences produced by ELLEIPO were judged
acceptable. At a first glance this sounds mea-
ger. However, one should realize that if ELLEIPO
wrongly applies a CCE rule, it does so for all sen-
tences embodying the same trigger condition. Sec-
ond experiment accomplished 97 % accuracy. The
number of identified CCE tokens along with over-
and undergeneration cases by type of CCE rules is
shown in Figure 1. Note: the columns show abso-
lute numbers, not percentages.

Figure 1: Numbers of cases revealing over- and
undergeneration in the two experiments.

Comparison of our Russian data with those ob-
tained in previous work for the two Finno-Ugric
languages revealed interesting similarities. In
Estonian and Hungarian, the left-periphery con-
straint is less strict compared to Dutch and Ger-
man. In SGF, Estonian and Hungarian allow for
more freedom in the frontfield whereas this is not
possible in Dutch and German. In Russian, Argu-
ments in the frontfield also license FCR (cf. exam-
ple (10) with a Complement Clause in the front-
field).
(10) Examen sdat´ hočet on/student i

The-examACC passINF will he/student and

examenf sdat´f možet on/students tože
the-examACC passINF can he/student also
‘The exam, he/the student wants to pass and he is also
able to’

The typical superclause violation identified as
acceptable in Hungarian for the subordinating
conjunction hogy ‘that’ was not obtained in Rus-
sian (cf. example (11)). However, some infor-
mants indicate they might use it in colloquial spo-
ken Russian.

(11) Maša nadeetsâ čto Pëtr ujdet i
Maša hope3SG that Pëtr leave3SG and

Katâ nadeetsâg that Jan ujdetgg
Katâ hope3SG that Jan leave3SG
‘Mary hopes that Peter leaves and Cathrine hopes that
Jan leaves’

The acceptability judgments suggest two rule
amendments that could help avoiding overgenera-
tion and serious misunderstandings of the reduced
sentences. In Long-Distance and Subgapping, ex-
actly two constituents may remain in the second
conjunct (see example (12) where the participants
interpret the reduced sentence as ‘you are in the
bus’). Obviously, in Russian any inflected form of
‘to be’ is assumed to be left out for two remain-
ing remnants instead of taking into account the
Verbal constituents in the anterior conjunct. No-
tice, that we expected this reaction as this Russian-
specific CCE phenomenon is discussed in the lit-
erature (see, e.g., Kazenin, 2006).

(12) * Â [vižu Petra kotoryj spit] v mašine i
I see1SG PëtrACC who sleep3SG in carDAT and

ty [videš´ Petra kotoryj spit]g v avtobuse
you see2SG PëtrACC who sleep3SG in busDAT
‘I see Pëtr that sleeps in the car and you in the bus’

Another remarkable difference that we could
not trace in the linguistic literature is the fact
that Russian speakers do not allow violation of
co-referentiality of elided constituents (cf. exam-
ple (13)). In this sentence, the constituents svoj
velosiped ‘his bike’ cannot be elided by Gapping
because the two constituents refer to two different
referential objects (4 % of the reduced corpus sen-
tences were rejected due to this fact).

(13) Maša slyšala, čto Ûrij svoj velosiped pomyl
Maša hearPST.SG.F that Ûrij his bike washPST.SG.M

i čtof Pëtr svoj velosiped pomyl
and that Pëtr his bike washPST.SG.M
‘Maša heard, that Ûrij and Pëtr washed their bikes’

5 Conclusions

We have identified remarkable similarity of the
language-independent CCE rules in Russian com-
pared to Dutch, Estonian, German, and Hungar-
ian. Russian ellipsis reveals the highest similarity
to Estonian if written text quality is considered.

As for future work, we plan to conduct a corpus
study into Russian treebanks of spoken and writ-
ten language in order to find additional subtle de-
viations that go beyond our studies (cf. Harbusch
& Kempen, 2007).

79



Acknowledgements

We thank Gerard Kempen for helpful discussions
on earlier versions of the paper, and three review-
ers for constructive criticism.

References
John Beavers and Ivan A Sag. 2004. Coordinate el-

lipsis and apparent non-constituent coordination. In
Proceedings of the HPSG04 Conference, pages 48–
69.

Anette Frank. 2002. A (discourse) functional analysis
of asymmetric coordination. In Procs. of the LFG02
Conference, pages 174–196.

Vera Gribanova. 2013. Verb-stranding verb phrase
ellipsis and the structure of the Russian verbal
complex. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory,
31(1):91–136.

James Griffiths and Anikó Lipták. 2014. Contrast
and island sensitivity in clausal ellipsis. Syntax,
17(3):189–234.

Karin Harbusch and István Bátori. 2013. Clausal Co-
ordinate Ellipsis (CCE) in Hungarian compared to
cce in Dutch, German, and Estonian. In Approaches
to Hungarian: Volume 13: Papers from the 2011
Lund conference, volume 13, page 45. John Ben-
jamins Publishing.

Karin Harbusch and Gerard Kempen. 2006. Elleipo: A
module that computes coordinative ellipsis for lan-
guage generators that don’t. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Posters
& Demonstrations, pages 115–118. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Karin Harbusch and Gerard Kempen. 2009a. Clausal
coordinate ellipsis and its varieties in spoken Ger-
man: A study with the TüBa-D/S treebank of the
Verbmobil corpus. In Eighth International Work-
shop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, pages
83–94. EDUCatt.

Karin Harbusch and Gerard Kempen. 2009b. Gen-
erating clausal coordinate ellipsis multilingually: A
uniform approach based on postediting. In Proceed-
ings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural Lan-
guage Generation, pages 138–145. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Karin Harbusch, Mare Koit, and Haldur Õim. 2009.
A comparison of clausal coordinate ellipsis in Esto-
nian and German. In Proceedings of the 12th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Demonstrations Ses-
sion, pages 25–28. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Karin Harbusch. 2011. Incremental sentence produc-
tion inhibits Clausal Coordinate Ellipsis: A tree-
bank study into Dutch and German. Schlangen,
D. & Rieser, H. (Eds.). Dialogue and Discourse,
2(1):313—-332.

Martin Haspelmath. 2007. Coordination. In Lan-
guage Typology and Linguistic Description, vol-
ume 2, pages 1–51. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, 2 edition.

Kyle Johnson. 2009. Gapping is not (VP-) ellipsis.
Linguistic Inquiry, 40(2):289–328.

Konstantin Kazenin. 2006. Polarity in Russian and the
typology of predicate ellipsis. Ms., Moscow State
University.

Frank Keller. 2000. Gradience in grammar: Ex-
perimental and computational aspects of degrees of
grammaticality. Ph.D. thesis, University of Edin-
burgh, UK.

Gerard Kempen. 2009. Clausal coordination and coor-
dinative ellipsis in a model of the speaker. Linguis-
tics, 47(3):653–696.

Gregory M Kobele. 2012. Eliding the derivation: a
minimalist formalization of ellipsis. In Proceedings
of the HPSG 2012 conference.

Jakob Nielsen. 2012. How many test users in a
usability study? Online article with date: June
4, 2012, see: http://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-
many-test-users.

Michael Schulte-Mecklenbeck and Oswald Huber.
2003. Information search in the laboratory and on
the web: With or without an experimenter. Behav-
ior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
35(2):227–235.

Kerstin Schwabe and Ning Zhang. 2000. Ellipsis in
conjunction, volume 418. Max Niemeyer Verlag.

James Shaw. 1998. Segregatory coordination and
ellipsis in text generation. In Proceedings of the
17th international conference on Computational
linguistics-Volume 2, pages 1220–1226. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

John R Te Velde. 2006. Deriving coordinate symme-
tries: A phase-based approach integrating Select,
Merge, Copy and Match, volume 89. John Ben-
jamins Publishing.

Jeroen Van Craenenbroeck and Jason Merchant, 2013.
Ellipsis phenomena, pages 701–745. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, in Marcel den Dikken
(ed.), The Cambridge handbook of generative syntax
edition.

80


