



















































Collocation Assistant for Learners of Japanese as a Second Language


Proceedings of The 2nd Workshop on Natural Language Processing Techniques for Educational Applications, pages 20–25,
Beijing, China, July 31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics and Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing

Collocational Aid for Learners of Japanese as a Second Language

Lis Pereira and Yuji Matsumoto
Graduate School of Information Science
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
{lis-k, matsu}@is.naist.jp

Abstract

We present Collocation Assistant, a pro-
totype of a collocational aid designed to
promote the collocational competence of
learners of Japanese as a second language
(JSL). Focusing on noun-verb construc-
tions, the tool automatically flags possi-
ble collocation errors and suggests better
collocations by using corrections extracted
from a large annotated Japanese language
learner corpus. Each suggestion includes
several usage examples to help learners
choose the best candidate. In a preliminary
user study with JSL learners, Collocation
Assistant received positive feedback, and
the results indicate that the system is help-
ful to assist learners in choosing correct
word combinations in Japanese.

1 Introduction

Collocational competence is one of the factors
which contribute to the differences between na-
tive speakers and second language learners (Shei
and Pain, 2000). However, studies confirm that
the correct use of collocations is challenging, even
for advanced second language learners (Liu, 2002;
Nesselhauf, 2003; Wible et al., 2003). Since there
are no well-defined rules to determine collocation
preferences, language learners are prone to pro-
duce word combinations that, although they may
be grammatically and semantically well formed,
may sound “unnatural” to a native speaker. More-
over, the number of tools designed to target lan-
guage learners’ collocation errors is limited or in-
existent for many languages, which makes it dif-
ficult for learners to detect and correct these er-
rors. Therefore, an application that can detect a
learners’ collocation errors and suggest the most
appropriate ”ready-made units” as corrections is
an important goal for natural language processing
(Leacock et al., 2014).

In this paper, we describe Collocation Assis-
tant, a web-based and corpus-based collocational
aid, aiming at helping JSL learners expand their
collocational knowledge. Focusing on noun-verb
constructions, Collocation Assistant flags possi-
ble collocation errors and suggests a ranked list of
more conventional expressions. Each suggestion
is supported with evidence from authentic texts,
showing several usage examples of the expres-
sion in context to help learners choose the best
candidate. Based on our previous study (Pereira
et al., 2013), the system generates corrections to
the learners’ collocation error tendencies by us-
ing noun and verb corrections extracted from a
large annotated Japanese learner corpus. For rank-
ing the collocation correction candidates, it uses
the Weighted Dice coefficient (Kitamura and Mat-
sumoto, 1997). We add to our previous work by
implementing an interface that allows end-users to
identify and correct their own collocation errors.
In addition, we conducted a preliminary evalua-
tion with JSL learners to gather their feedback on
using the tool.

2 The need for collocational aids

Existing linguistic tools are often of limited utility
in assisting second language learners with collo-
cations. Most spell checkers and grammar check-
ers can help correct errors made by native speak-
ers, but offer no assistance for non-native errors.
Futagi et al. (2008) note that common aids for
second language learners namely, dictionaries and
thesauri are often of limited value when the learner
does not know the appropriate collocation and
must sort through a list of synonyms to find one
that is contextually appropriate. Yi et al. (2008)
observe that language learners often use search en-
gines to check if a phrase is commonly used by ob-
serving the number of results returned. However,
search engines are not designed to offer alterna-
tive phrases that are more commonly used than the

20



learner’s phrase (Park et al., 2008). Concordancers
seem to be an alternative to search engines, but
they retrieve too much information because they
usually allow only single-word queries. Too much
information might distract and confuse the user
(Chen et al., 2014). Thus, a computer program
that automatically identifies potential collocation
errors and suggests corrections would be a more
appropriate resource for second language learners.

A few researchers have proposed useful English
corpus-based tools for correcting collocation er-
rors (Futagi et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2009; Park et
al., 2008; Chang et al., 2008; Wible et al., 2003;
Dahlmeier and Ng, 2011). In a user study, Park
et al. (2008) observed positive reactions from
users when using their system. In another study,
Liou et al. (2006) showed that the miscolloca-
tion aid proposed by Chang et al. (2008) can help
learners improve their knowledge in collocations.
One limitation is that these proposed tools rely on
resources of limited coverage, such as dictionar-
ies, thesauri, or manually constructed databases to
generate the candidates. Another drawback is that
most of these systems rely solely on well-formed
English resources (except Wible et al., 2003) and
do not actually take into account the learners’ ten-
dencies toward collocation errors.

3 Collocation Assistant

In the proposed system, we focused on provid-
ing Japanese collocation suggestions for potential
collocation errors in Japanese noun-verb construc-
tions. Given the noun-verb collocation input by a
learner, the system first checks if it exists in the
reference corpora. If not, the input is validated as
a potential collocation error and a message is dis-
played to the user. Next, the system suggests more
appropriate noun-verb collocations. For instance,
if the learner types *夢をする (yume wo suru ,
lit. ‘to do a dream’), the system flags a collocation
error. When the user clicks on “same noun”, the
system displays better collocations with the same
noun input by the user, such as 夢を見る (yume
wo miru, ‘to dream’) and 夢を持つ (yume wo
motsu, ‘to hold a dream’), as shown in Figure 1.
Likewise, when the user clicks on “same verb”, the
system displays better collocations with the same
verb input by the user. If the user clicks on ”View
all suggestions”, all possible better collocations
with the same noun or the same verb input by the
user are displayed. Aside from the collocations,

sentence examples for each phrase suggestion are
displayed, showing the phrase in context with sur-
rounding text. Showing phrases in context can be
crucial in helping users determine which phrase
is most appropriate (Park et al., 2008). Even if
the learner’s input is not flagged as an error, it
will undergo the same correction process, since
better collocations than the input might exist. In
this case, the learner will check the ranked sug-
gestions and sentence examples and choose the
most appropriate expression. The current system
does not detect which component (noun or verb)
is wrong in a noun-verb construction. Therefore,
the learner must specify which component would
be corrected by the system. This has been the
common evaluation setup in collocation error cor-
rection, which assumes that the error is already
detected and more focus is given on correcting
the identified errors. (Dahlmeier and Ng, 2011).
In case the learner types only a noun or only a
verb, the system will suggest collocations contain-
ing words that strongly collocate with this input.

3.1 Approach to collocation suggestion

Based on our previous study (Pereira et al., 2013),
our Collocation Assistant generates collocation
corrections by using noun and verb corrections
extracted from a large annotated Japanese lan-
guage learner corpus, Lang-81. This approach to
generating corrections achieved superior perfor-
mance compared to methods that generate can-
didates based solely on the semantic relation of
words. Using noun and verb corrections extracted
from a learner corpus, our system can explore the
learners’ tendency to commit collocation errors.
For ranking the collocation correction candidates,
the tool uses the Weighted Dice coefficient (Ki-
tamura and Matsumoto, 1997). This association
measure achieved the best performance in our task
among other association measures evaluated (i.e.
pointwise mutual information, log-likelihood and
dice coefficient).

3.2 Resources used for providing sentence
examples

We used several monolingual and bilingual re-
sources for providing useful sentence examples to
users. These resources are:

Bilingual resources. 1) Tatoeba Corpus2, a

1http://cl.naist.jp/nldata/lang-8/
2https://tatoeba.org/eng/

21



Figure 1: An example of collocation suggestions produced by the system given the erroneous collocation
*夢をする (yume wo suru, lit. ‘to do a dream’) as input. (a) Collocation suggestions are shown on the
left and an example sentence for each suggestion is shown on the right. In the example,夢を見る(yume
wo miru, ‘to dream’) is the correct collocation. (b) Further examples for each suggestion are shown when
the user clicks on “More examples”. In the example, further examples for the collocation夢を見る(yume
wo miru, ‘to dream’) are displayed.

22



free collaborative online database of example sen-
tences geared towards foreign language learners.
We used the Japanese-English sentences available
in the website. 2) Hiragana Times (HT) Corpus3,
a Japanese-English bilingual corpus of magazine
articles of Hiragana Times, a bilingual magazine
written in Japanese and English to introduce Japan
to non-Japanese, covering a wide range of topics
(culture, society, history, politics, etc.). 3) Ky-
oto Wikipedia (KW) Corpus4, a corpus created by
manually translating Japanese Wikipedia articles
(related to Kyoto) into English.

Monolingual resource: the Balanced Corpus
of Contemporary Written Japanese (Maekawa,
2008) was used for the noun-verb expressions
where no bilingual examples were available.

# jp sentences # en sentences
Tatoeba 203,191 203,191

HT 117,492 117,492
KW 329,169 329,169

BCCWJ 871,184 -

Table 1: Data used as sentence examples.

4 Preliminary User Study of the
Collocation Assistant

We conducted a preliminary evaluation with JSL
learners to gather their feedback on using the Col-
location Assistant. The results gave us insights
about the usefulness of the tool, and about the pos-
sible interesting evaluations that should be carried
out in the future.

4.1 Participants

In this study, 10 JSL learners, all graduate stu-
dents from the same institution as the authors were
invited to participate. Participants’ ages ranged
from 24 to 33 years, and the average age was
27.5. Among the respondents, 2 were female and 8
were male, and they had different language back-
grounds (Chinese, Indonesian, Tagalog, Swahili,
Spanish, and Basque). Regarding their proficiency
level, three were beginners, three were interme-
diate, and four were advanced learners, based on
the Japanese-Language proficiency test certificate
level they previously obtained. All participants
were regular computer users.

3http://www.hiraganatimes.com/
4https://alaginrc.nict.go.jp/WikiCorpus/

4.2 Procedure

A collocation test was designed to examine
whether or not the tool could help JSL learners
find proper Japanese collocations. This included
12 Japanese sentences from the Lang-8 learner
corpus and from another small annotated Japanese
learner corpus, NAIST Goyo Corpus (Oyama, Ko-
machi and Matsumoto, 2013). The sentences and
their corrections were further validated by a pro-
fessional Japanese teacher. Each sentence con-
tained one noun-verb collocation error made by
JSL learners. The participants were asked to use
the Collocation Assistant to identify and correct
the errors. Next, they were asked to write a small
paragraph in Japanese and to use the tool if they
needed. After performing the task, a survey ques-
tionnaire was also administered to better under-
stand the learners’ impressions of the tool. The
questionnaire contained 43 questions answerable
by a 7-point Likert-scale (with 7 labeled “strongly
agree” and 1 labeled “strongly disagree”). The
second part of the questionnaire contained 7 open-
ended questions. Our survey questionnaire in-
quired on the difficulty of Japanese collocations,
the usefulness of Collocation Assistant, the design
of Collocation Assistant and the quality of the re-
trieved data.

4.3 Results on the Collocation Test and
Survey Questionnaire

The participants successfully found corrections
for an average of 8.9 (SD=1.6) out of 12 cases.
The average time participants took to complete
the task was 29 (SD=16) minutes. The average
score of beginner and intermediate learners was
9.6 (SD=0.5). They scored higher than advanced
learners, who obtained an average score of 8.2
(SD=2.0). Analyzing the log files of their in-
teractions with the system, we observed that in-
termediate and beginner learners used the sys-
tem 40% more times (on average) than the ad-
vanced learners. We noticed that two advanced
learners tried to answer the questions without us-
ing the system when they felt confident about the
answer, whereas the beginners and intermediate
learners used the system for all sentences and ob-
tained higher scores. The participants had diffi-
culty in correcting two particular long sentences
in the test. The noun-verb collocations in the
sentences alone were not incorrect, but they were
not appropriate in the context they appeared. The

23



participants had difficulty in finding sentence ex-
amples close to the meaning of the sentences in
the test. Although we need to evaluate this tool
with a larger number of users, we observed that
the system was effective in helping the learners
choose the proper collocations. In the question-
naire administered, all participants acknowledged
their difficulty in using Japanese collocations ap-
propriately and stated that the software aids they
used did not provide enough information about the
meaning of Japanese phrases nor help in correct-
ing errors in Japanese expressions. Their attitude
toward the usefulness of Collocation Assistant was
mostly positive and they thought the tool was use-
ful to help choose the proper way to use Japanese
expressions. Most participants considered the in-
terface easy to use (M=6.3, SD=0.8). Regarding
the quality of the retrieved data, the participants
expressed satisfaction with the retrieved colloca-
tions, with an average score of 6.5 (SD=0.7). They
also expressed satisfaction with the ranking of the
collocations presented, with an average score of
5.8 (SD=0.6). Additionally, they reported that
the sentence examples further helped them under-
stand in which context an expression should be
used. However, some participants expressed dis-
satisfaction with the complexity of some example
sentences: some of the sentences were too long
and difficult to understand. In the second part of
the questionnaire, some participants stated that the
Collocation Assistant could be helpful when learn-
ing new words and when one does not know which
word combinations to use. They also suggested
that the tool could be useful for teachers too when
giving feedback to their students about the com-
mon errors they make and when providing alter-
native ways of expressing the same idea. Lastly,
they suggested several improvements regarding
the sentence examples and the interface: show
shorter and simpler example sentences, highlithgt
the user’s input in the sentence examples and allow
English search.

5 Conclusions

In this paper, we presented a collocational aid
system for JSL learners. The tool flags possible
collocation errors and suggests corrections by us-
ing corrections extracted from a large annotated
Japanese language learner corpus. Our Colloca-
tion Assistant received positive feedback from JSL
learners in a preliminary user study. The system

can be used independently as a phrase dictionary,
or it can be integrated into the writing component
of some bigger CALL systems. For example, Col-
location Assistant can be used by teachers as a
way to obtain better understanding about learners’
errors and help them provide better feedback to
the students. One limitation of our experiments is
the limited contextual information (only the noun,
particle, and verb written by the learner). In the
future, to verify our approach and to improve on
our current results, we plan to consider a wider
context size and other types of constructions (e.g.,
adjective-noun, adverb-verb, etc.). We also intend
to investigate how to adjust the difficulty level of
the sentences according to the user’s proficienSo-
lution cy level. Finally, we plan to conduct a more
extensive evaluation with JSL learners to verify
the usefulness of the tool in practical learning sce-
narios.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank anonymous reviewers for
their insightul comments and suggestions.

References
Chang, Y. C., Chang, J. S., Chen, H. J. and Liou,

H. C. 2008. An automatic collocation writ-
ing assistant for Taiwanese EFL learners: A case
of corpus-based NLP technology. Computer As-
sisted Language Learning, 21(3), 283–299. doi:
10.1080/09588220802090337.

Chen, M.-H., Huang, C.-C., Huang, S.-T., Chang, J.S.
and Liou, H.-C. 2014. An Automatic Reference
Aid for ImprovingEFL Learners’ Formulaic Expres-
sionsin Productive Language Use. IEEE Transac-
tions on Learning Technologies, 01/2014; 7(1):57-
68. doi:10.1109/TLT.2013.34.

Dahlmeier, D. and Ng, H. T. 2011. Correcting seman-
tic collocation errors with L1-induced paraphrases.
In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing- (pp. 107-
117). Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 27–31, 2011.

Futagi, Y., Deane, P., Chodorow, M. and Tetreault, J.
2008. A computational approach to detecting col-
location errors in the writing of non-native speakers
of English. Computer Assisted Language Learning
21(4), 353–367. doi: 10.1080/09588220802343561

Kitamura, M. and Matsumoto, Y. 1997. Automatic
extraction of translation patterns in parallel corpora.
Automatic extraction of translation patterns in paral-
lel corpora. Information Processing Society of Japan
Journal, 38 (4), 727–735.

24



Leacock, C., Chodorow, M., Gamon, M., and Tetreault,
J. 2014. Automated grammatical error detection for
language learners. Synthesis lectures on human lan-
guage technologies, 7(1), 1-170.

Liou, H., Chang, J., Chen, H., Lin, C., Liaw, M., Gao,
Z., Jang, J., Yeh, Y, Chuang, T. and You, G. (2006)
2006. Corpora processing and computational scaf-
folding for a Web-based English learning environ-
ment: The CANDLE Project. CALICO Journal, 24
(1), 77-95.

Liu, A. L. 2002. A Corpus-based Lexical Seman-
tic Investigation of VN Miscollocations in Taiwan
Learners’ English. Master Thesis, Tamkang Univer-
sity, Taiwan.

Maekawa, K. 2008. Balanced Corpus of Contem-
porary Written Japanese. In Proceedings of The
6th Workshop on Asian Language Resources- (pp.
101–102). Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

Nesselhauf, N. 2003. The use of collocations by ad-
vanced learners of English and some implications
for teaching. Applied Linguistics, 24, 223–242.

Oyama,H., Komachi, M. and Matsumoto, Y. 2013.
Towards Automatic Error Type Classification of
Japanese Language Learners’ Writings. In Proceed-
ings of the 27th Pacific Asia Conference on Lan-
guage, Information, and Computation, pp.163-172,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Park, T., Lank, E., Poupart, P. and Terry, M. 2008.
”Is the Sky Pure Today?” AwkChecker: An Assis-
tive Tool for Detecting and Correcting Collocation
Errors. In Proceedings of the 21th Annual Assotia-
tion for Computing Machinery Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology- pages 121-130.
Monterey, CA, USA.

Pereira, L., Manguilimotan, E. and Matsumoto, Y.
2013. Automated Collocation Suggestion for
Japanese Second Language Learners. In Proceed-
ings of the Student Research Workshop 51st Annual
Meeting of the ACL, pages 52-58, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Shei, C.-C. and Pain, H. 2000. An esl writer’s collo-
cational aid. Computer Assisted Language Learning,
13(2):167–182.

Wible, D., Kuo, C., Tsao, N., Liu, A. and Lin, H.
2003. Bootstrapping in a Language Learning En-
vironment, Journal of Computer-Assisted Learning,
19(1), pp. 90-102. SSCI, LLBA.

Yi, X., Gao, J. and Dolan, W. A web-based English
proofing system for English as a Second Language
users. 2008. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing-
pages 619–624. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.

25


