



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and E Sherly. Proc. of the 12th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 112–117,
Trivandrum, India. December 2015. c©2015 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

A Database of Infant Cry Sounds
to Study the Likely Cause of Cry

Shivam Sharma1, Shubham Asthana2, V. K. Mittal3
1,2,3Indian Institute of Information Technology, Chittoor District, India

1shivam.sharma@iiits.in, 2asthana.shubham@gmail.com and 3vkmittal@iiits.in

Abstract

Infant cry is a mode of communication, for
interacting and drawing attention. The in-
fants cry due to physiological, emotional
or some ailment reasons. Cry involves
high pitch changes in the signal. In this
paper we describe an ‘Infant Cry Sounds
Database’ (ICSD), collected especially for
the study of likely cause of an infant’s cry.
The database consists of infant cry sounds
due to six causes: pain, discomfort, emo-
tional need, ailment, environmental fac-
tors and hunger/thirst. The ground truth
cause of cry is established with the help
of two medical experts and parents of the
infants. Preliminary analysis is carried
out using the sound production features,
the instantaneous fundamental frequency
and frame energy derived from the cry
acoustic signal, using auto correlation and
linear prediction (LP) analysis. Spectro-
grams give the base reference. The in-
fant cry sounds due to pain and discomfort
are distinguished. The database should
be helpful towards automated diagnosis of
the causes of infant cry.

1 Introduction

Infant cry is an acoustic manipulation, that con-
sists of different forms of vocalization, con-
strictive silence, coughing, choking and breaks
(Neustein, 2010). Its analysis provides the infor-
mation regarding health, disease, gender and emo-
tions. In this way, infants communicate with their
environment about what they feel. Infant cry falls
in the most sensitive range of human auditory sen-
sation (Jr et al., 2005).

First cry of an infant gives significant informa-
tion to determine the APGAR count, a tool for the
categorization of the new born baby as healthy, un-
healthy or weak (Neustein, 2010). The time vary-
ing characteristics, limb movement and vocaliza-
tion give insight to the transitional characteristics.
Studies of physiological variables such as facial
expression, muscular tonus, sleep and suction abil-
ities were conducted to analyse the needs of an in-
fant (Skogsdal et al., 1997). The study of infant
cry has gained significance over the years, because
of diverse applications.

Fundamental frequency and the first three for-
mants of cry signals were studied earlier (Baeck
and Souza, 2001); (Daga and Panditrao, 2011).
Attempts were made to classify the cry signals
on the basis of pain, sadness, fear and hunger
etc. (Abdulaziz and Ahmad, 2010); (Mima and
Arakawa, 2006). The pitch characteristics, aimed
to classify the cry signals into categories: urgent,
arousing, sick, distressing etc. (Zeskind and Mar-
shall, 1988). A pitch detection algorithm was
used to compute the instantaneous fundamental
frequency (F0) (Neustein, 2010). First three for-
mants along with F0 were used for the cry analy-
sis (Hidayati et al., 2009). Cepstrum analysis was
carried out for determining the F0 and first three
formants for cry (Chandralingam et al., 2012). A
time domain cross-correlation pitch determination
method gave details of every pitch epoch (Petroni
et al., 1994).

Spectrographic analysis was carried out for
characterizing pitch and harmonics (Neustein,
2010). Short-time energy, zero-crossing rate and
LP coefficients were used for the analysis of the
cry signals (Kuo, 2010). A cry is described by the
duration and shape of the F0 contour (Varallyay-
Jr, 2007). Hyper-phonation was examined by112



mean, standard deviation and peak of the funda-
mental frequency (Zeskind and Marshall, 1988).
In another study, segment density, segment length
and pause length were used to examine the rela-
tionship between these parameters and gender of
the baby (Varallyay, 2006). The frame-wise com-
parison of the mean F0 gave insight into the analy-
sis of cries of infants with different heart disorders
(Chandralingam et al., 2012). This study also cor-
related disphonation to muscle pain or discomfort.

A different method to extract F0 was proposed
(Petroni et al., 1994). The F0 for cry was observed
to be between 200-500 Hz, with average F0 320
Hz for male infant and 400 Hz for female infant
(Daga and Panditrao, 2011). Typical characteris-
tics were observed in the shape of power spectra of
cry signals for hunger, sleepiness and discomfort
(Mima and Arakawa, 2006). Cries of infants were
divided into normal and disorders like Tetralogy
of Fallot (TOF), Ventricular Septal Defect (VSD),
Atrial Septal Defect (ASD), and Patent Ductus Ar-
teriosus (PDA) (Chandralingam et al., 2012). Spe-
cific segments of cry signals showed similarity
amongst infants with hearing disorders and nor-
mal infants. However, detailed study of an infant
cry, in conjunction with likely causes as per expert
medical opinion, is still required to be carried out
in detail.

In this paper, an ‘Infant Cry Sounds Database’
(IIIT-S ICSD) is described in detail. The database
consists of different categories of cries due to dif-
ferent reasons. The data of infant cry signals was
recorded in a doctors cabin, where the infants were
brought-in for routine check-up, vaccination trips
or due to any ailment. Spectrographic study was
carried for each case. Changes in the F0 contour
and harmonics were observed for cry causes. An
effort is made for the classification of cry signals,
based upon the spectrographic analysis and using
signal processing methods. The analysed causes
of each cry are compared with the ground truth
determined as per doctors or parents.

This paper is organized as follows. Section II
discusses details of the IIIT-S ICSD. Section III
discusses signal processing methods for analysing
the infant cry signals. Features of the Infant cry
signals are discussed in Section IV. In Section V,
the observations are made from the results of in-
fant cry analysis. The paper is summarised in Sec-
tion VI, along with the scope of future work.

Table 1: Template for naming files in IIIT-S ICSD
SPKR01 M S1a CRY07

(a) Symbols (b) Interpretation
SPKR# The infant number (Ex: 01)

M/F Sex of the infant (Ex: Male)
S#a Session number and session sub-

part (Ex: 1a)
CRY# Number of cries in the session

being considered (Ex: 07)

2 The IIIT-S ICSD Cry

2.1 Data Collection
The data was collected from Pranaam hospital,
Madinaguda, Hyderabad, under the supervision of
Dr. Manish Gour (MBBS, DCH) and Dr Nizam
(MBBS). The age group of infants was restricted
between 3 months and 2 years. The cry signals
of infants were collected during the regular check-
up visits, the vaccination trips or any emotional
need of attention. People present in the room were
requested to maintain silence, so as to record the
cry sample. Also the parents were advised not to
comfort the baby for brief duration, to ensure the
uninterrupted data collection. Along with data, the
personal details noted include: infant name, parent
name, parent profession, sex and age of the infant
and predictive causes of the cry.

For the recording purpose, Roland R-09
Wave/MP3 recorder was used and was placed at
10-20 cm from the infant's mouth. Precautions
were taken to avoid any unwanted noise or cross-
talk. Sampling rate of 48 KHz, with 24 bit cod-
ing rate, was used for recording in stereo mode.
There were no interruptions from the social envi-
ronment during the data recording. The only un-
wanted noise that could overlap the cry sound may
be from fan and air-conditioner. The ambient tem-
perature during the recordings was 38◦C, which
was regulated by the air conditioner at 25◦C.

2.2 Organization of the IIIT-S ICSD
The terminologies used in naming of the database
files, given in Table 1, are described below:

• Session: The acoustic signal, right from the
time an infant starts crying (including all in-
halations and exhalations), until the infant be-
comes quiet, is a session.

• Session subpart: Each session consists of
subparts, characterised by the contiguous set113



Table 2: Causes of Infant cry (in IIIT-S ICSD)
(a) Cry Causes (b) Description
1. Pain Cry due to pain (caused by

vaccination, physical hurt
or internal pain)

2. Discomfort Cry due to irritation caused
by the external environ-
ment (e.g., the doctor open-
ing baby's mouth to pour-in
drops, or the vaccination)

3. Emotional
Need

Cry when the baby wants to
go back to parents arms

4. Ailment Cries due to any ailments
like cold, cough, fever

5. Environmen-
tal factors

Cry due to fear of the sur-
roundings or change in en-
vironmental conditions.

6. Hunger/Thirst Cry when the baby is hun-
gry or thirsty

of signals, separated by some noise
• Cry: Each session subpart comprises of a

number of cries, separated by some noise.

A two stage process was followed for data col-
lection in the study. The first stage involved
raw data collection at the hospital, and the sec-
ond stage included pre-processing. The unwanted
noise, in the raw data was removed using ‘Wave-
Surfer’ tool, to render it cross-talk free. The cries
were categorized as per the ground reality, i.e., the
actual cause as per the doctor or parent. The main
causes of cry that we came across, are described
in Table 2, in columns (a) and (b).

The cry as combination of two or more causes
is retained in a separate category. There was also
a special case, when an infant cried by listening
to another infant cry. Not many samples could be
obtained for this cry due to Domino effect, but this
is retained as another special category, for future
study. The database consists of total 76 cry sound
files, which can be categorised in 6 classes. The
database summary is given in Table 3.

3 Signal Processing Methods

3.1 Short Time Fourier Transform

Short time Fourier Transform (STFT) (Oppenheim
et al., 1989) is used to process the segments of
the cry signals in the frequency domain. The data
is divided into overlapping frames. The Fourier

Table 3: Summary of contents in IIIT-S ICSD

Attributes Values
Total # of files 76
Total # of speakers 33
Total # of session 76
Total # of cries in sessions 693
Average # of sessions per speaker 2.3
Average # of cries in each session 9.1
Total duration of all sessions 670.1 s
Average duration of each session 8.817 s

transform for each frame is given by:

X(τ, ω) =

n=∞∑

n=−∞
x[n]w[n−m]e−jwn (1)

Where x[n] is the signal and w[n] is the win-
dow function. Here m is discrete and ω is con-
tinuous (Oppenheim et al., 1989). Magnitude of
the STFT gives the spectrogram, i.e., |X(τ, ω)|2.
Spectrographic analysis basically represents the
3D spectral information obtained from the magni-
tude spectrum, for the short-time overlapped win-
dow segments. The X-axis represents time, Y-axis
represents frequency, and the third dimension rep-
resents the log magnitude of the sinusoidal fre-
quency components, which is converted to the pro-
portional intensity.

3.2 Auto Correlation Analysis
The auto correlation function (Rabiner and Juang,
1993) reflects the similarity between a random se-
quence and the time-delayed same sequence. For
the speech signal x(n), the correlation function is
defined as

rx(m) = E[x(n)x(n+m)]

= lim
N→∞

1

2N + 1

n=N∑

n=−N
x(n)x(n+m)

(2)

Where, E[.] represents statistical expectations
(Rabiner and Juang, 1993). Since speech produc-
tion system can be regarded as stationary within
short-time frames, the cry signal is divided into
frames. The auto-correlation function is:

r′x(m) =
1

2N + 1

n=N∑

n=−N
x(n)x(n+m) (3)

114



Figure 1: Spectrogram of Pain Cry of Infant #1

Figure 2: Spectrogram of Discomfort Cry, Infant #1

When m = 0, then (3) represents short-term en-
ergy of the signal (Shuyin et al., 2009). The pitch
period information is more pronounced in auto-
correlation, than in speech signal.

3.3 Linear prediction (LP) analysis

Speech signal is produced by the convolution of
the excitation source and time-varying vocal tract
system components. These components can be
separated, using LP analysis (Makhoul, 1975).
The prediction of current sample as a linear com-
bination of past p samples forms the basis of LP
analysis, where p is the order of prediction. The
predicted sample is ŝ = −∑pk=1 aks(n − k),
where aks are the LP coefficients. Here s(n) is
the windowed speech sequence, obtained by mul-
tiplying short-time speech frame with a Hamming
window, i.e., s(n) = x(n)w(n), where w(n) is the
windowing function. The prediction error e(n) can
be computed by the difference between the actual
sample s(n) and the predicted samples ŝ(n) (Ra-
biner and Juang, 1993). This is given by e(n) =
s(n)− ŝ(n), i.e., e(n) = s(n)+∑pk=1 aks(n−k).

The LP coefficients are used to minimize the
prediction error e(n). The coefficients are com-
puted using the least squares method, that min-
imizes the LP residual or total prediction error
(Makhoul, 1975). In frequency domain, it can be

Figure 3: Spectrogram of Pain Cry of Infant #2

Figure 4: Spectrogram of Discomfort Cry, Infant #2

represented as E(z) = S(z) +
∑p

k=1 akS(z)z
−k.

A(z) =
E(z)

S(z)
= 1 +

p∑

k=1

akz
−k (4)

The LP Spectrum H(z) can be obtained as,

H(z) =
1

1 +
∑p

k=1 akz
−k =

1

A(z)
(5)

As A(z) is the reciprocal of H(z), the LP residual
is obtained by inverse filtering of the speech. The
auto-correlation of LP residual can also give infor-
mation about the pitch period.

4 Features explored

In this study, correlation between infant cry and
the likely causes is examined using mainly the
magnitude of short-time spectrogram and F0.
Spectrograms are used for obtaining the F0 and
harmonics as Ground Truth.

In this paper, F0 is obtained by using two differ-
ent methods to validate the results and the modi-
fied signal processing methods used. Autocorre-
lation and Linear Prediction analysis methods are
used after modification, to detect peaks in the auto-
correlation or LP residual. In both methods, the
signal was divided into frames of 10 ms, with a
shift of 6ms. The F0 contour was smoothed fur-
ther, using a binary mask derived using the sig-
nal energy for each frame. The results from auto-
correlation and LP analysis are compared with the115



Figure 5: Illustration of (a) signal waveform, (b) sig-
nal energy contour and (c) F0 contour of Pain Cry of
infant #1 (using auto-correlation)

Figure 6: Illustration of (a) signal waveform, (b) sig-
nal energy contour and (c) F0 contour of Discomfort
Cry of infant #1 (using auto-correlation)

ground truth, which is obtained using the spec-
trograms. Similar patterns of changes in the F0
contours are observed for the cries due to similar
causes, in particular for pain cry and discomfort
cry.

5 Preliminary Analysis

The changes in F0 contour and harmonics for in-
fant cry signals were observed using the spec-
trograms. The spectrograms were plotted for
cry signal frames of 30 ms with shift of 9ms,
for the same infant, crying for different causes.
The F0 contours and harmonics of a pain cry
(Fig. 1 and Fig. 3) indicate cyclic changes with
larger fluctuations. These could be due to psy-
chological conditions during pain. The shape of
F0 contour in the case of cries due to discomfort
(Fig. 2 and Fig. 4) have relatively flat nature, with
changes in F0 at larger periods and having lesser
fluctuations.

The F0 contours derived using auto-correlation
and LP analysis were observed in similar way.
Similar to the observations from spectrograms,
these F0 contours show cyclic changes with larger
fluctuations for cries due to pain, in Fig. 5 and
Fig. 7. In the case of cries due to discomfort, the

Figure 7: Illustration of (a) signal waveform, (b) sig-
nal energy contour, (c) LP residual and (d) F0 con-
tour of Pain Cry of infant #1 (using LP analysis)

Figure 8: Illustration of (a) signal waveform, (b) sig-
nal energy contour, (c) LP residual and (d) F0 con-
tour of Discomfort Cry, infant #1 (LP analysis)

F0 contours are relatively flat in Fig. 6 and Fig. 8,
with lesser fluctuations.

6 Summary and Conclusions

In the study of infant cry signals the database col-
lection and collation plays a vital role, as the en-
tire analysis depends upon it. Hence, in this paper
emphasis is laid upon collection and organization
of infant cry data, for the classification of infant
cries according to different causes. The predictive
reasons for infant cries were noted as per the infer-
ence by doctor and parents. Details of the IIIT-S
ICSD database are also elaborated.

In this paper, the spectrographic analysis of the
infant cry is carried out, by observing changes in
the F0 contour and harmonics, to determine the
likely cause of the cry. Signal processing meth-
ods such as auto-correlation and linear prediction
analysis are used after modification, in order to ob-
serve some particular patterns of infant cry. Pos-
sible leads, for association with any kind of ail-
ment the infant is suffering from, are explored.
The observations from spectrograms are similar
to the changes in F0 contours, derived using auto
correlation and LP analysis, for cries due to same
cause. The F0 contours have cyclic changes with116



larger fluctuations for pain cry, and are relatively
flat with lesser fluctuations for discomfort cry. The
observations are consistent across different infant
cries, and signal processing methods.

Further, we intend to utilize this database to
examine the cry characteristics using other sig-
nal processing methods and carry out quantitative
analysis in detail. This study would be helpful to-
wards enabling the early diagnostics and medical
care, if the reason of the infant cry due to a partic-
ular ailment is established early, especially where
the reaction time could be critically important.

Acknowledgement
The authors are thankful to Dr. Manish Gour
(M.B.B.S, DCH) and Dr. Nizam (M.B.B.S) of
Pranaam Hospital, Madinaguda, Hyderabad and
parents of the infants for supporting in collection
of the cry samples needed for the study.

References
Y. Abdulaziz and S.M.S. Ahmad. 2010. Infant cry

recognition system: A comparison of system perfor-
mance based on mel frequency and linear prediction
cepstral coefficients. In Int. Conf. on Information
Retrieval Knowledge Management, (CAMP), pages
260–263, March.

H.E. Baeck and M.N. Souza. 2001. Study of acous-
tic features of newborn cries that correlate with the
context. In Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, 2001. Annual IEEE Int. Conf. of the 23rd
Proceedings, volume 3, pages 2174–2177.

S. Chandralingam, T. Anjaneyulu, and K. Satya-
narayana. 2012. Estimation of fundamental and
formant frequencies of infants cries; a study of in-
fants with congenital heart disorder. In Indian Jour-
nal of Computer Science and Engineering, volume
3(4), pages 574–582.

Raina P. Daga and Anagha M. Panditrao. 2011. Arti-
cle: Acoustical analysis of pain cries in neonates:
Fundamental frequency. IJCA Special Issue on
Electronics, Information and Communication En-
gineering, ICEICE(3):18–21, December. Full text
available.

R. Hidayati, I.K.E. Purnama, and M.H. Purnomo.
2009. The extraction of acoustic features of infant
cry for emotion detection based on pitch and for-
mants. In Int. Conf. onInstrumentation, Commu-
nications, Information Technology, and Biomedical
Engineering (ICICI-BME), pages 1–5, Nov.

G. Varallyay Jr, Z. Benyo A. Illenyi, Z. Farkas, and
G. Katona. 2005. The speech-chorus method at the
analysis of the infant cry. In Acoustic Review, vol-
ume 6(2), page 915.

K. Kuo. 2010. Feature extraction and recogni-
tion of infant cries. In IEEE Int. Conf. on Elec-
tro/Information Technology (EIT), pages 1–5, May.

J. Makhoul. 1975. Linear prediction: A tutorial re-
view. Proceedings of the IEEE, 63(4):561–580,
April.

Y. Mima and K. Arakawa. 2006. Cause estimation of
younger babies’ cries from the frequency analyses of
the voice - classification of hunger, sleepiness, and
discomfort. In International Symposium on Intel-
ligent Signal Processing and Communications, IS-
PACS ’06, pages 29–32, Dec.

Amy Neustein, editor. 2010. Advances in Speech
Recognition: Mobile Environments, Call Centers
and Clinics. Springer, New York.

Alan V Oppenheim, Ronald W Schafer, John R Buck,
and et al. 1989. Discretetime signal processing, vol-
ume 2. Prentice-hall Englewood Cliffs.

M. Petroni, M.E. Malowany, C.C. Johnston, and B.J.
Stevens. 1994. A new, robust vocal fundamental
frequency (f0) determination method for the analy-
sis of infant cries. In Computer-Based Medical Sys-
tems, Proceedings IEEE Seventh Symposium, pages
223–228, June.

Lawrence Rabiner and Biing-Hwang Juang. 1993.
Fundamentals of Speech Recognition. Prentice-
Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA.

Zhang Shuyin, Guo Ying, and Wang Buhong. 2009.
Auto-correlation property of speech and its applica-
tion in voice activity detection. In First Int. Work-
shop on Education Technology and Computer Sci-
ence, ETCS ’09, volume 3, pages 265–268, March.

Y Skogsdal, M Eriksson, and J Schollin. 1997. Anal-
gesia in newborns given oral glucose. Acta Pdi-
atrica, 86(2):217–220.

Gyorgy Varallyay-Jr. 2007. The melody of cry-
ing. Int. Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology,
pages 1699–1708.

Gyorgy Varallyay. 2006. Future prospects of the appli-
cation of the infant cry in the medicine. In Electrical
Engineering, volume 50(1-2), pages 47–62.

Philip Sanford Zeskind and Timothy R. Marshall.
1988. The relation between variations in pitch and
maternal perceptions of infant crying. Child Devel-
opment, 59(1):193–196.

117


