



















































Regularity and Flexibility in English-Chinese Name Transliteration


Proceedings of the Fifth Named Entity Workshop, joint with 53rd ACL and the 7th IJCNLP, pages 34–42,
Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Regularity and Flexibility in English-Chinese Name Transliteration 

 

 

Oi Yee Kwong 

Department of Translation 

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 

Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong 

oykwong@arts.cuhk.edu.hk 

 

  

 

Abstract 

This paper reflects on the nature of 

English-Chinese personal name 

transliteration and the limitations of 

state-of-the-art language-independent 

automatic transliteration generation 

systems.  English-Chinese name pairs 

from various sources were analysed and 

the complex interaction of factors in 

transliteration is discussed.  Proposals are 

made for fuller error analysis in shared 

tasks and for expanding transliteration 

systems for computer-aided translation 

with an integrated model. 

1 Introduction 

Name transliteration is defined as the rendition 

of a name originating from a source language in 

a target language, such that its representation in 

the target language (i) is phonemically equivalent 

to the source name, (ii) conforms to the 

phonology of the target language, and (iii) 

matches the user intuition of the equivalent of the 

source language name in the target language, 

considering the culture and orthographic 

character usage in the target language.  Such a 

definition has been adopted in the NEWS shared 

task on transliteration generation since 2009 (Li 

et al., 2009). 

Automatic transliteration, or transliteration 

generation, has to do with the production of a 

transliterated name for a given source name by a 

trained system.  Criteria (i) and (ii) above are 

relatively straightforward and are often the 

primary, if not only, concerns between most 

language pairs.  For instance, the English name 

Clinton is rendered in Japanese by katakana as 

クリントン (ku-ri-n-to-n).  The Japanese form 

is entirely based on phonemic resemblance as 

individual characters bear no particular meanings.  

For this reason, the correspondence is very likely 

to be unambiguous as long as the pronunciation 

is correctly figured out.  Criterion (iii) above 

originally intends to ensure the usefulness of 

transliteration for downstream applications, in 

case the normal or expected form of the target 

name slightly violates the other two criteria.  

Nevertheless, this third criterion also applies 

quite specifically to target languages like 

Chinese.  With its ideographic nature, each 

character does not only bear a phonetic but more 

importantly also a semantic component.  This 

implies multiple possibilities for representing a 

particular phoneme, and consequently leads to 

the problem of character selection in 

transliteration.  With the example of Clinton, the 

Chinese forms 克林頓 (Hanyu Pinyin: ke4-lin2-

dun4) and 柯 林 頓  (ke1-lin2-dun4), bearing 

almost the same pronunciation in Mandarin 

Chinese, are thus both acceptable, while other 

homophonic forms like 刻林頓 (ke4-lin2-dun4) 

and 課林頓  (ke4-lin2-dun4) are not normally 

used. 

Hence, for English-Chinese transliteration, 

there is obviously much greater flexibility which 

also encompasses a certain degree of regularity.  

The relatively free combination of characters in 

Chinese proper names is not a random 

phenomenon.  In this paper, we show that 

beyond phonemic consideration, English-

Chinese transliteration is actually governed by a 

complex but systematic interaction of various 

linguistic, social, cognitive, and cultural factors.  

Current evaluation metrics thus have limitations.  

With their underlying assumptions, they are good 

for evaluating the usefulness of transliteration 

systems for language processing applications, but 

they may not be adequate to accommodate the 

34



whole range of possibilities which may be more 

appreciated by actual translation tasks.  We 

therefore propose deeper error analysis in 

transliteration evaluation, and an integrated 

model for transliteration. 

Section 2 reviews related work.  Section 3 

describes the data sources for our analysis.  

Section 4 presents general observations for 

English-Chinese personal name transliteration, 

substantiated with quantitative comparisons in 

Section 5 with respect to various factors.  In 

Section 6, deeper error analysis and an integrated 

model of name transliteration for computer-aided 

translation are proposed, followed by a 

conclusion with future work in Section 7. 

2 Related Work 

There are basically two categories of work on 

machine transliteration.  On the one hand, 

various alignment models are used for acquiring 

transliteration lexicons from parallel corpora and 

other resources (e.g. Lee et al., 2006; Jin et al., 

2008; Kuo and Li, 2008).  On the other hand, 

statistical transliteration models are built for 

transliterating personal names and other proper 

names, and these models can be based on 

phonemes (e.g. Knight and Graehl, 1998; Virga 

and Khudanpur, 2003), graphemes (e.g. Li et al., 

2004), or their combination (e.g. Oh and Choi, 

2005).  They may operate on characters (e.g. 

Shishtla et al., 2009), syllables (e.g. 

Wutiwiwatchai and Thangthai, 2010), as well as 

hybrid units (e.g. Oh and Choi, 2005).  In 

addition to phonetic features, others like 

temporal, semantic, and tonal features have also 

been found useful in transliteration (e.g. Tao et 

al., 2006; Li et al., 2007; Yoon et al., 2007; 

Kwong, 2009). 

The baseline in current English-Chinese 

transliteration generation research often refers to 

Li et al. (2004).  They used a Joint Source-

Channel Model under the direct orthographic 

mapping (DOM) framework, which skips the 

middle phonemic representation in conventional 

phoneme-based methods, and models the 

segmentation and alignment preferences by 

means of contextual n-grams of the 

transliteration units.  Their method was shown to 

outperform phoneme-based methods and those 

based on the noisy channel model.  In fact, 

transliteration of foreign names into Chinese is 

often based on the surface orthographic forms, as 

exemplified in the transliteration of Beckham, 

where the supposedly silent h in “ham” is taken 

as pronounced, resulting in 漢姆 (Hanyu Pinyin: 

han4-mu3) in Mandarin Chinese and 咸 
(Jyutping: haam4) in Cantonese. 

The reports of the shared task in NEWS 2009 

(Li et al., 2009) and NEWS 2010 (Li et al., 2010) 

highlighted two particularly popular approaches 

for transliteration generation among the 

participating systems.  One is phrase-based 

statistical machine transliteration (e.g. Song et 

al., 2010; Finch and Sumita, 2010) and the other 

is Conditional Random Fields which treats the 

task as one of sequence labelling (e.g. Shishtla et 

al., 2009).  More recent shared tasks have shown 

a wider array of promising techniques (Zhang et 

al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2012), although the 

absolute results as measured by Word Accuracy 

in Top-1 (ACC), Fuzziness in Top-1 (Mean F-

score), and Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) have 

not really demonstrated any remarkable boost.  

3 Resources 

English and Chinese personal names obtained 

from various resources were analysed to 

illustrate the properties of Chinese naming 

practice and English-Chinese name 

transliteration.  The datasets used in this study 

are described below. 

3.1 Monolingual Chinese Names (N1) 

About 40,000 distinct names written in Chinese, 

including authentic Chinese names (e.g. 胡錦濤

Hu Jintao, 曾蔭權  Donald Tsang) and those 

transliterated from foreign origins (e.g. 克林頓 

Bill Clinton, 奧尼爾  Shaquille O’Neal), were 
obtained from the Hong Kong, Beijing and 

Taipei sub-corpora of the LIVAC synchronous 

corpus
1

 (Tsou and Lai, 2003).  Names from 

Japanese and Korean (e.g. 酒井法子  Noriko 

Sakai, 金大中 Kim Dae-jung) and code-mixed 

names (e.g. C 朗拿度 Cristiano Ronaldo, A 卡達 
Anthony Carter) were excluded.  Since the 

names are personalities appearing on news media 

in the various places, there are overlaps but we 

assume that local names also occupy a 

substantial proportion in each place respectively. 

3.2 English-Chinese Name Pairs (N2) 

About 20,000 bilingual (English-Chinese) name 

pairs have been manually collected from various 

                                                 
1
 The corpus has been word segmented and annotated 

with part of speech (POS).  The names were extracted 

with the relevant POS tag. 

35



sources including the Internet, name dictionaries, 

and books on naming practice.  These names 

cover commonly used given names, big names in 

history, and contemporary personalities in 

politics, sports, entertainment, and other fields.  

The data were pre-processed and categorised 

according to: 

 Region of transliteration: Hong Kong, 
Mainland China, or Taiwan region 

 Domain: politics, sports, entertainment, or 
others 

 Gender (if known): male or female 

 Name type (if known): last name or given 
name 

This collection was organised into sub-

datasets, two of which were used in the current 

study.  Dataset N2a is a parallel collection 

containing transliterations from the three Chinese 

speech communities for a common set of English 

names, mostly for celebrities.  Dataset N2b 

consists of the transliterations for a set of 

common English given names, for both male and 

female, used predominantly in Mainland China 

and Taiwan region respectively.  The 

transliterated names were also automatically 

mapped to Hanyu Pinyin and Jyutping for their 

pronunciations in Mandarin and Cantonese 

respectively.  The mappings were manually 

verified. 

4 General Observations 

Transliteration of foreign names can lead to 

different possibilities across various Chinese 

speech communities.  Phonemic equivalence is 

often considered with Cantonese pronunciation 

in Hong Kong, and Mandarin pronunciation in 

Mainland China and Taiwan region.  This 

difference in pronunciation has led to very 

observable differences in the choice of 

characters, not only between Cantonese and 

Mandarin speaking communities, but also even 

between Mandarin speaking communities as in 

Mainland China and Taiwan region.  For 

example, the English segment “son” as in 

Richardson is often rendered as 臣  (Jyutping: 

san4; Hanyu Pinyin: chen2) in Hong Kong, but 

always as 森  (Hanyu Pinyin: sen1; Jyutping: 

sam1) in Mainland China and 遜 (Hanyu Pinyin: 

xun4; Jyutping: seon3) in Taiwan region
2
.  The 

difference in phonological properties between 

Mandarin and Cantonese also leads to noticeable 

differences in syllabification.  For example, extra 

syllables are often introduced for certain 

consonant segments in the middle of an English 

name, as in Hamilton, transliterated as 漢密爾頓 

(Hanyu Pinyin: han4-mi4-er3-dun4) in Mainland 

China but 咸美頓 (Jyutping: haam4-mei5-deon6) 
in Hong Kong.  The abundance of homophones 

and significance of tones in Chinese also 

introduces much more variability, thus Rivaldo 

could be acceptably transliterated as 里華度 

(Jyutping: lei5-waa4-dou6) or 李華度 (Jyutping: 
lei5-waa4-dou6).  Both forms have exactly the 

same pronunciation except that the first may 

more readily suggest that it is a foreign name 

while the second starts with a character which is 

also a common Chinese surname.  The 

phonological context embedding a particular 

English segment also influences the 

pronunciation of the segment and thus the choice 

of Chinese characters.  Such graphemic 

ambiguity is an important element in 

transliteration. 

The domain in which a personality is active 

often plays a role in name transliteration.  For 

instance, names of foreign stars in the showbiz 

are usually fully transliterated, with given names 

followed by last names, e.g. Julia Roberts is 

known as 茱莉亞蘿拔絲 (Jyutping: zyu1-lei6-

aa3-lo4-bat6-si1) in Hong Kong.  On the 

contrary, sports stars and people in politics are 

often only known by their transliterated last 

names, such as Wayne Rooney and Bill Clinton, 

which usually only appear as 朗尼  (Jyutping: 

long5-nei4) and 克林頓 (Jyutping: haak1-lam4-

deon6) in Hong Kong.  In addition, the gender of 

the person can somehow be reflected from the 

transliteration via character choice among 

homophones.   In the case of Julia Roberts, the 

characters 茱 , 莉 , 蘿  and 絲  very strongly 

suggest the female gender, as the first three 

characters all relate to flowers and plants, and the 

fourth character relates to silk.  This practice 

serves to meet the social and cultural preference 

                                                 
2
 Both Cantonese and Mandarin pronunciations, in 

Jyutping and Hanyu Pinyin respectively, are given for 

these examples so that the readers can have some idea 

of their difference.  For the examples in the rest of 

this paper, only the relevant pronunciation will be 

shown, according to the region in which the 

transliterations are used. 

36



and the cognitive expectation of the perceivers, 

and it seems to be more seriously observed in 

Hong Kong and Taiwan region.  Transliterations 

in Mainland China often stick quite strictly to the 

pronunciation, and tend to be more gender-

neutral especially when only last names are 

transliterated.  For example, the Danish tennis 

player Caroline Wozniacki is known by most 

Hong Kong media as 禾絲妮雅琪  (Jyutping: 

wo4-si1-nei4-ngaa5-kei4) but as 沃伊尼亞茨基 

(Hanyu Pinyin: wo4-yi1-ni2-ya4-ci2-ji1) by 

Mainland media.  The former is apparently more 

feminine, as the characters 絲, 妮, 雅 and 琪 are 

predominantly used for female names. 

These general observations thus suggest that 

in addition to phonemic resemblance, English-

Chinese name transliteration is a result of the 

interaction among different factors which could 

be linguistic, social, cognitive, and cultural in 

nature.  In the following we will look into these 

factors more thoroughly with our collected data. 

The interplay of these factors means that 

English-Chinese transliteration enjoys much 

more flexibility, while this freedom is 

accompanied by a certain degree of regularity.  It 

also points to the need for cautious interpretation 

of transliteration results measured by common 

evaluation metrics like ACC, Mean F-score and 

MRR.  They are based on two assumptions.  One 

is treating the transliteration task as a closed-set 

problem, and the other is pre-supposing a 

standard reference set of “correct” 

transliterations.  These assumptions would be 

reasonable and realistic for language pairs where 

phonemic resemblance is the entire 

consideration.  For English-Chinese name 

transliteration, however, these assumptions do 

not take into account the possibility and 

acceptability (and creativity) beyond those 

phonemically neutral and conventional 

transliterations.  These limitations have to be 

fully realised so as to perceive the performance 

of individual systems in a fair way. 

5 Beyond Phonemic Resemblance 

English-Chinese transliteration is not different 

from transliteration between other language pairs 

as phonemic resemblance is still the foremost 

consideration, and in this regard objective system 

evaluation is feasible.  However, the abundance 

of homophones makes the naming process so 

much more flexible that the space for “correct” 

transliteration is considerably, though not 

unlimitedly, expanded. 

5.1 Character Choice and Culture 

To start with, we look at the characters often 

used in personal names.  With the Hong Kong 

data in Dataset N1, we took all three-character 

names with Chinese origin and all foreign 

transliterated names, and compared the most 

frequent characters used in them.  For the 

Chinese names, we only considered the second 

and third characters, ignoring the last names for 

the current comparison.  Table 1 shows the top 

30 characters used in the two kinds of names.  It 

is very obvious that Chinese names and 

transliterated names appearing in Hong Kong 

media are composed of very different characters.  

This is possibly a result of the different 

phonology between English and Chinese, and 

thus very different pronunciations or sounds are 

found, leading to the use of characters in 

transliterated names which are not commonly 

found in traditional Chinese names. Among the 

top 100 characters in both kinds of names, only 

10 characters were found in common: 德 (dak1), 

亞  (aa3), 維  (wai4), 基  (gei1), 世  (sai3), 林 

(lam4), 安 (ngon1), 金 (gam1), 文 (man4), and 

海 (hoi2). 
A similar comparison was done on the 

Mainland China and Taiwan region data in 

Dataset N1, and a similar difference between the 

characters used for Chinese names and 

transliterated names is observed.  For instance, 

within the top 100 characters, 12% and 11% 

overlap were observed for Mainland China data 

and Taiwan region data respectively.  The 

common characters between the two types of 

names in Mainland China are 德 (de2), 克 (ke4), 

維 (wei2), 亞 (ya4), 基 (ji1), 林 (lin2), 安 (an1), 

梅 (mei2), 金 (jin1), 文 (wen2), 小 (xiao3), and 

海 (hai3); while those for the Taiwan region are 

德 (de2), 瑞 (rui4), 維 (wei2), 達 (da2), 安 (an1), 

吉 (ji2), 傑 (jie2), 林 (lin2), 雅 (ya3), 金 (jin1), 

and 華 (hua2). 

Comparing the characters used for 

transliterated names among the three regions, it 

is apparent that Hong Kong and Mainland China 

tend to use more similar characters (although the 

precise syllabification and correspondence 

between English and Chinese segments might be 

different, as discussed in Section 5.2 below), 

while Taiwan region has a somewhat different 

character choice.  Table 2 shows the 

commonality and difference among the three 

communities with respect to the top 100 

characters in individual regions. 

37



 
No. HK 

Chinese 

HK 

Foreign 

No. HK 

Chinese 

HK 

Foreign 

1 國 斯 16 英 布 

2 文 爾 17 東 阿 

3 華 德 18 雄 納 

4 明 拉 19 生 巴 

5 志 克 20 清 科 

6 建 特 21 家 迪 

7 德 夫 22 仁 亞 

8 永 里 23 小 森 

9 偉 羅 24 輝 伊 

10 光 卡 25 中 維 

11 平 利 26 林 姆 

12 榮 馬 27 麗 雷 

13 強 尼 28 金 普 

14 玉 哈 29 慶 米 

15 成 格 30 昌 基 

 

Table 1: Top 30 characters used in Chinese and 

transliterated names from Dataset N1 (HK) 
 

 

Comparison \ 

Region 

Hong 

Kong 

Mainland 

China 

Taiwan 

region 

Common 

斯  克  爾  拉  特  德  尼  卡  羅 

夫  里  布  艾  諾  利  馬  巴  格 

維  洛  亞  阿  納  茲  哈  西  迪 

麥  森  曼  達  普  塔  安  雷  魯 

瓦  貝  伊  吉  恩  米  希  蘭  波 

姆  威  奇  莫  萊  伯  勒  沙  薩 

凱  基  比  托  倫  索  多  蒂  塞 

林  法  奧  蘇  梅  杜  頓  科  金 

帕  菲  赫  耶  費  加  穆 

Unique 

 

世  高 

二  盧 

 

什  蒙  小 

朗  茨 

瑞  絲  莉 

歐  柯  佛 

瑪  葛  提 

娜  柏  傑 

妮  可  雅 

莎  華  賈 

丹  娃 

 

Table 2: Comparison of character choice in 

individual communities from Dataset N1 
 

5.2 Linguistic Factors 

According to Dobrovolsky and Katamba (1996), 

native speakers of any language intuitively know 

that certain words that come from other 

languages sound unusual and they often adjust 

the segment sequences of these words to 

conform to the pronunciation requirements of 

their own language.  These intuitions are based 

on a tacit knowledge of the permissible syllable 

structures of the speaker’s own language.  The 

difference between transliterations based on 

Mandarin and Cantonese is particularly obvious 

between Mainland China and Hong Kong, where 

the resulting number of syllables in the 

transliterated names is on average higher for the 

former.  With Dataset N2a, we can compare the 

regional differences with respect to a more or 

less common set of transliterated names. 

Among the common set of names, it was 

found that the average number of syllables 

(which correspond to the Chinese characters) is 

2.60, 2.88, and 2.74 for Hong Kong, Mainland 

China, and Taiwan region respectively.  This is 

mostly due to phonological differences.  English 

and Chinese have very different phonological 

properties.  A well cited example is a syllable 

initial /d/ may surface as in Baghdad 巴格達 
(Hanyu Pinyin: ba1-ge2-da2), but the syllable 

final /d/ is not represented.  This is true for 

Mandarin Chinese, but since ending stops like -p, 

-t, and -k are allowed in Cantonese syllables, the 

syllable final /d/ in Baghdad is already captured 

in the last syllable of 巴格達 (Jyutping: baa1-

gaak3-daat6) in Cantonese.  This difference in 

allowable codas sometimes surfaces in the form 

of an additional syllable in transliterations based 

on Mandarin.  For example, Dickson is 

transliterated as 迪克遜 (Hanyu Pinyin: di2-ke4-

xun4) in Mandarin Chinese and 迪臣 (Jyutping: 

dik6-san4) in Cantonese, where no extra syllable 

is introduced in the latter.  This possibly 

accounts for the greater number of syllables for 

transliterations found in Mainland China and 

Taiwan region, as both these communities 

transliterate by Mandarin pronunciations.  This is 

also reflected in the top English-Chinese segment 

pairs found from the three places, as shown in 

Table 3.  From the table, we can see that English 

segments like “D”, “T”, “C”, and “K” occupy the 

top positions for Mainland China and Taiwan 

region, where they consistently demand an 

additional syllable in the transliteration based on 

Mandarin.  Although the corresponding segments 

are sometimes found in Hong Kong 

transliterations, they are nevertheless not as 

apparent and frequent. 

As far as intra-regional variability is 

concerned, it is interesting to note that there are 

1,974 distinct English-Chinese segment pairs in 

the Hong Kong data, but only 1,411 and 1,734 

distinct pairs in the Mainland China and Taiwan 

region data respectively.  This suggests that 

38



transliterations in Mainland China are most 

consistent, if not perfectly standardised.  For 

instance, in the Chinese Transliteration of 

Foreign Personal Names published by the 

Xinhua News Agency (1992), a table showing 

the prescriptive Chinese rendition of individual 

English syllables is included.  Transliterations in 

Hong Kong, however, are much more variable, 

and there are many ways to render a particular 

syllable. 

 
No. Hong 

Kong 

Mainland 

China 

Taiwan 

Region 

1 S 斯 S 斯 S 斯 

2 SON 遜 L 爾 D 德 

3 S 史 D 德 T 特 

4 L 爾 T 特 K 克 

5 TON 頓 C 克 B 布 

6 G 格 SON 森 SON 森 

7 O 奧 RI 里 C 克 

8 A 亞 B 布 S 史 

9 A 艾 G 格 RO 羅 

10 BA 巴 K 克 TON 頓 

 

Table 3: Top 10 English-Chinese segment pairs 

from Dataset N2a 

 

5.3 Cognitive Factors 

There are only a few hundred Chinese characters 

commonly used in transliterated names.  

Although their choice and combination are 

relatively free, the flexibility is not entirely 

ungoverned.  For instance, the former Brazilian 

striker Ronaldo is typically rendered as 朗拿度 

(Jyutping: long5-naa4-dou6) in Cantonese, but 

never as phonetically equivalent candidates like 

朗娜度 (Jyutping: long5-naa4-dou6) or 郎拿刀 
(Jyutping: long4-naa4-dou1).  In this example, 

the second candidate is not preferred, as 娜 is 

conventionally restricted to female names 

(further discussed in Section 5.4 below).  The 

third candidate is also not suitable.  Even though 

郎 is masculine, 刀 is probably not a character 
with enough positive meanings and is only 

occasionally found in Chinese names.  This 

consideration in character choice is apparently 

cognitively based, with regard to the positive and 

negative connotations of individual characters, 

and thus their suitability for names.  Apart from 

that, cognitive factors may involve the intonation 

of a name, which may also make a difference in 

the preference of a name.  In particular, Chinese 

is a typical tonal language.  Cantonese, in 

particular, has more tones than Mandarin, and 

the sound-tone combination is more important in 

names pronounced in Cantonese.  Names which 

sound “nice” (or more “musical”) are often 

preferred to those which sound “monotonous”.  It 

is thus important to consider the tone 

combination in transliteration.  To this end, 

Kwong (2009) has shown that the improvement 

from including tones in a Joint Source-Channel 

model for automatic transliteration was more 

apparent for Cantonese data. 

5.4 Social Factors 

Gender difference is often reflected in the 

character choice for the transliterated names.  

Table 4 shows the most frequent characters for 

transliterating male and female given names in 

Mainland China and Taiwan region as analysed 

from Dataset N2b. 

 

No. Mainland China Taiwan Region 

 Male Female Male Female 

1 斯 娜 斯 莉 

2 爾 麗 爾 娜 

3 里 莉 克 拉 

4 特 拉 瑞 絲 

5 德 爾 德 妮 

6 克 特 特 瑪 

7 利 絲 艾 西 

8 尼 妮 尼 琳 

9 羅 德 羅 安 

10 雷 婭 利 凱 

 

Table 4: Top 10 characters for male and female 

names in Dataset N2b 

 

In terms of gender difference, the character 

sets are quite different for male and female 

names, in both regions alike.  For instance, 219 

and 256 distinct Chinese characters were found 

for female names and male names respectively 

from the Mainland China data, with 174 

characters in common.  For Taiwan region data, 

230 and 275 distinct Chinese characters were 

found for female names and male names 

respectively, with only 136 characters in 

common.  In other words, it suggests that the 

gender difference is much more apparent and 

significant for transliterations in Taiwan region, 

whereas transliterations in Mainland China tend 

to use more gender-neutral characters (as already 

shown in the example of Wozniacki earlier). 

The actual characters used in transliteration in 

both regions are also considerably different.  For 

39



instance, among the 219 and 230 characters for 

female names in Mainland China and Taiwan 

region respectively, 139 are in common (that is, 

around 60%); whereas among the 256 and 275 

characters for males names in the two places 

respectively, 199 characters are in common (that 

is, over 70%).  Hence the difference between the 

two regions is greater in the transliteration of 

female names than that of male names. 

Table 5 shows an example for the English 

segment “LI”.  It is obvious that the general 

graphemic and homophone ambiguity can 

somehow be reduced when gender is taken into 

account.  For instance, 莉 (li4) and 麗 (li4) are 

mostly restricted to female names, whereas 力 

(li4) and 立  (li4) are predominantly used for 

male names.  Others like 利 (li4) and 里 (li3) are 

more or less gender-neutral. 

The ability to distinguish the gender from the 

transliterated name is particularly useful as it 

could help resolve ambiguity in translation 

especially when there are more than one possible 

candidate bearing the same last name, such as 

John Williams the musician and Venus Williams 

the woman tennis player.  The gender factor in 

transliteration thus bears important implications 

not only in (back) transliteration but also in 

translation in general.  

 
 Male Female 

Mainland 

China 
利 (Cliff 克利夫) 

里 (Ali 阿里) 

萊 (Clive 克萊夫) 

利 (Melissa 梅利莎) 

里 (Ali 阿里) 

莉 (Alisha 阿莉莎) 

萊 (Carolina 卡羅萊娜) 

麗 (Alice 艾麗斯) 

Taiwan 

Region 
力 (Philip 菲力普) 

立 (Oliver 奧立佛) 

利 (Julian 朱利安) 

里 (Cliff 克里夫) 

萊 (Linus 萊納斯) 

賴 (Elijah 伊賴嘉) 

里 (Celia 賽里雅) 

莉 (Alisha 艾莉夏) 

琳 (Carolina 卡蘿琳娜) 

麗 (Lisa 麗莎) 

 

Table 5: Examples of gender-specific rendition 

of the English segment “LI” from Dataset N2b 

 

Thus in this section, we have discussed the 

impact of various factors on English-Chinese 

personal name transliteration with empirical 

evidence.  In particular, we have investigated the 

complex interaction among syllabification, 

phonological difference, homophones, tones, 

gender, and domain, in transliteration across 

three Chinese speech communities, namely Hong 

Kong, Mainland China, and Taiwan region. 

6 Proposals 

6.1 Deeper Error Analysis 

With the current paradigm adopted in the shared 

task on transliteration generation, systems are 

evaluated by how often the first-ranked 

transliteration generated by a system matches the 

“answer” given in the evaluation data, and on 

average when will the “answer” appear in the top 

10 transliterations given by the system.  In terms 

of providing a common platform for evaluation, 

this is a natural and reasonable approach.  

However, it should not be disregarded that even 

if the system-generated result is not exactly the 

same as that in the evaluation data, it does not 

necessarily mean it is “wrong” or useless.  As 

discussed above, English-Chinese name 

transliteration involves the interaction of 

linguistic, cognitive, social and cultural factors, 

and multiple renditions could be considered 

acceptable.  Thus, usually there is no right or 

wrong, but better or worse, for the system-

generated transliteration candidates. 

In fact, when we look at the evaluation results 

over the last few shared tasks, there is no 

remarkable breakthrough observed.  Literally the 

figures seem to be deteriorating.  Considering the 

system with top performance in the English-

Chinese transliteration task (standard run), the 

ACC, F-score and MRR were 0.731, 0.895 and 

0.812 respectively in 2009.   In 2010, they are 

0.477, 0.740 and 0.506 respectively.  In 2011, 

they are 0.349, 0.700 and 0.462 respectively.  In 

2012, they are 0.330, 0.669 and 0.413 

respectively. 

It will certainly be unfair to compare the 

above figures directly since different datasets 

were used, but the situation also raises the issue 

of robustness.  The shared task for this year is re-

using the test data from one of the previous years 

in order to track system improvement.
3

  In 

addition to this, we suggest that deeper error 

analysis would be useful to obtain a better idea 

of the limitation of state-of-the-art system 

performance.  It would be important to find out 

whether the bottleneck is possibly caused by the 

difference in training data, and whether the 

“unmatched” transliteration candidates could 

                                                 
3
 According to the shared task results provided by one 

of the anonymous reviewers, results for standard runs 

in the EnCh task do not seem to demonstrate any 

remarkable improvement.  Further information and 

discussion are expected with the release of the official 

analysis and comparison. 

40



also be considered acceptable; or otherwise what 

might have led to their unacceptability.  For 

instance, the inexact matches generated by 

systems could be further analysed and classified 

according to the nature of the “errors”, such as 

phonemic non-equivalence, character mismatch, 

character misuse, unseen characters, tone 

problem or perceptual idiosyncrasy, and region 

compatibility, just to name a few possibilities.  It 

will be worthwhile to pursue such a direction in 

future evaluation of machine transliteration, 

while a similar need to augment automatic metric 

with linguistic and perceptual considerations for 

machine translation evaluation has been realised 

and proposed by Farrús et al. (2012).  One of the 

primary concerns would naturally be the balance 

between automatic and manual work to be 

involved in the whole evaluation process. 

6.2 An Integrated Model 

The ability for systems to produce linguistically 

and cognitively acceptable transliterations is 

particularly important.  New names or unseen 

names appear every day in the media, and 

accurate and reasonable renditions of foreign 

names into Chinese will be very useful, not only 

for downstream language processing 

applications, but also as a significant component 

for computer-aided translation in practice.  

Transliteration is to render a source name in a 

phonemically similar way in a target language.  

The linguistic factors, considering the 

phonological properties of the two languages and 

thus the syllabification, should bear primary 

importance.  Other interacting factors, including 

the intonation, gender difference, and domain, 

may be considered peripheral, but considering 

them would certainly help produce better 

perceived candidates.  For the case of English-

Chinese transliteration, the cultural differences 

must not be ignored.  They must be taken into 

account to ensure that the resulting 

transliterations are intelligible and appropriate to 

the Chinese speakers in individual regions. 

An integrated model for transliteration is 

therefore necessary, although this might be at the 

expense of a completely language-independent 

design.  We propose that a transliteration system 

should contain three major components, for 

segmentation, candidate generation, and 

candidate ranking respectively.  The 

segmentation module should consist of a 

linguistic model, to break up a source name into 

pronunciation segments.  The linguistic model 

incorporates language-specific phonological 

properties (for both the source language and 

target language), for initial syllabification of the 

source name and reconstructing the segmentation 

structure into one which is compatible with the 

requirements of the target language.  The 

candidate generation module should consist of a 

cultural model, which provides information on 

the naming practice adopted in various cultures 

and the range of orthographic renditions usually 

allowed for personal names.  The candidate 

ranking module should consist of a social 

module to compare the candidate transliterations 

for their desirability according to social factors 

like gender difference and domain preference, as 

well as a cognitive module to consider factors 

like pleasantness of sound and intonation, and 

avoidance of unfavourable homophone strings. 

7 Conclusion and Future Work 

In this paper, we have reflected on the nature of 

English-Chinese name transliteration, which is 

distinct from transliteration between other 

language pairs in its much greater flexibility 

beyond pure phonemic equivalence.  A complex 

yet systematic interplay of cultural, linguistic, 

cognitive and social factors was shown from 

empirical data.  On the one hand, we suggest that 

deeper error analysis of transliteration systems be 

performed to realise the limitations of common 

evaluation metrics.  On the other hand, we 

propose an integrated model for a robust 

English-Chinese transliteration system.  Practical 

systems, especially those for computer-aided 

translation, should consider the art and science of 

the transliteration task.  In order to consider a 

realistically wider range of transliteration 

candidates, a system should take into account 

various interacting factors while capitalising on 

statistical patterns.  The implementation of such 

a system will constitute an important part of our 

future work. 

References 

Dobrovolsky, M. and F. Katamba. 1996. Phonology: 

the function and patterning of sounds.  In W. 

O’Grady, M. Dobrovolsky and F. Katamba (Eds.), 

Contemporary Linguistics: An Introduction. Essex: 

Addison Wesley Longman Limited. 

Farrús, M., M.R. Costa-jussà and M. Popović. 2012. 

Study and Correlation Analysis of Linguistic, 

Perceptual, and Automatic Machine Translation 

Evaluations. Journal of the American Society for 

Information Science and Technology, 63(1):174-

184. 

41



Finch, A. and E. Sumita. 2010. Transliteration using a 

phrase-based statistical machine translation system 

to re-score the output of a joint multigram model.  

In Proceedings of NEWS 2010, Uppsala, Sweden. 

Jin, C., S-H. Na, D-I. Kim and J-H. Lee. 2008.  

Automatic Extraction of English-Chinese 

Transliteration Pairs using Dynamic Window and 

Tokenizer.  In Proceedings of the Sixth SIGHAN 

Workshop on Chinese Language Processing 

(SIGHAN-6), Hyderabad, India, pp.9-15.Katamba, 

F. 1989. An Introduction to Phonology. Essex: 

Longman Group UK Limited. 

Knight, K. and J. Graehl. 1998. Machine 

Transliteration.  Computational Linguistics, 

24(4):599-612. 

Kuo, J-S. and H. Li.  2008.  Mining Transliterations 

from Web Query Results: An Incremental 

Approach.  In Proceedings of the Sixth SIGHAN 

Workshop on Chinese Language Processing 

(SIGHAN-6), Hyderabad, India, pp.16-23. 

Kwong, O.Y. 2009. Homophones and Tonal Patterns 

in English-Chinese Transliteration.  In Proceedings 

of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short 

Papers, Singapore, pp.21-24. 

Lee, C-J., J.S. Chang and J-S.R. Jang. 2006.  

Extraction of transliteration pairs from parallel 

corpora using a statistical transliteration model.  

Information Sciences, 176:67-90. 

Li, H., A. Kumaran, V. Pervouchine and M. Zhang. 

2009. Report of NEWS 2009 Machine 

Transliteration Shared task.  In Proceedings of 

NEWS 2009, Singapore. 

Li, H., A. Kumaran, M. Zhang and V. Pervouchine. 

2010. Report of NEWS 2010 Transliteration 

Generation Shared Task.  In Proceedings of NEWS 

2010, Uppsala, Sweden. 

Li, H., K.C. Sim, J-S. Kuo and M. Dong. 2007. 

Semantic Transliteration of Personal Names.  In 

Proceedings of ACL 2007, Prague, Czech 

Republic, pp.120-127. 

Li, H., M. Zhang and J. Su. 2004. A Joint Source-

Channel Model for Machine Transliteration.  In 

Proceedings of ACL 2004, Barcelona, Spain, 

pp.159-166. 

Oh, J-H. and K-S. Choi. 2005. An Ensemble of 

Grapheme and Phoneme for Machine 

Transliteration.  In R. Dale et al. (Eds.), Natural 

Language Processing – IJCNLP 2005.  Springer, 

LNAI Vol. 3651, pp.451-461. 

Shishtla, P., V.S. Ganesh, S. Sethuramalingam and V. 

Varma. 2009. A language-independent 

transliteration schema using character aligned 

models.  In Proceedings of NEWS 2009, Singapore. 

Song, Y., C. Kit and H. Zhao. 2010. Reranking with 

multiple features for better transliteration.  In 

Proceedings of NEWS 2010, Uppsala, Sweden. 

Tao, T., S-Y. Yoon, A. Fister, R. Sproat and C. Zhai. 

2006. Unsupervised Named Entity Transliteration 

Using Temporal and Phonetic Correlation.  In 

Proceedings of EMNLP 2006, Sydney, Australia, 

pp.250-257. 

Tsou, B.K. 鄒嘉彥 and T.B.Y. Lai 黎邦洋.  2003.   

漢語共時語料庫與資訊開發, 《中文資訊處理若

干重要問題》, pp.147-165. 北京:科學出版社. 

Virga, P. and S. Khudanpur.  2003.  Transliteration of 

Proper Names in Cross-lingual Information 

Retrieval.  In Proceedings of the ACL2003 

Workshop on Multilingual and Mixed-language 

Named Entity Recognition. 

Wutiwiwatchai, C. and A. Thangthai. 2010. Syllable-

based Thai-English Machine Transliteration.  In 

Proceedings of NEWS 2010, Uppsala, Sweden, 

pp.66-70. 

Xinhua News Agency. 1992. Chinese Transliteration 

of Foreign Personal Names.  The Commercial 

Press. 

Yoon, S-Y., K-Y. Kim and R. Sproat. 2007.  

Multilingual Transliteration Using Feature based 

Phonetic Method.  In Proceedings of the 45th 

Annual Meeting of the Association for 

Computational Linguistics (ACL 2007), Prague, 

Czech Republic, pp.112-119. 

Zhang, M., H. Li, A. Kumaran and M. Liu. 2011. 

Report of NEWS 2011 Transliteration Generation 

Shared Task.  In Proceedings of NEWS 2011, 

Chiang Mai, Thailand, pp.1-13. 

Zhang, M., H. Li, A. Kumaran and M. Liu. 2012. 

Report of NEWS 2012 Machine Transliteration 

Shared task.  In Proceedings of NEWS 2012, Jeju, 

Korea, pp.10-20. 

 

42


