
























Tapadóir

The Department of Arts, Heritage and the Gaeltacht, Govt. of Ireland

MT development for translation workflow

List of partners

CNGL/ADAPT, Ireland

National Centre for Language Technology, Ireland

Dublin City University, Ireland

Department of Arts, Heritage and the Gaeltacht, Government of Ireland

Project duration: July 2014 — January 2016

Summary

Tapadóir (from the Irish “tapa” – fast) is a statistical machine translation project which has

just completed its pilot phase. The heart of the project is the development of an English–Irish

translation system, intended for integration into the workflow of a professional translator at an

Irish government department. In practice, this means statistical machine translation from a

highly-resourced majority language (English) to an under-resourced minority language (Irish)

with significant linguistic differences. A secondary aim is the production of English–Irish par-

allel corpora suitable for future translation tool and NLP developers.

There is high demand for Irish-language translated texts within Irish government departments,

and  this  MT integration  aims  to  increase  the  speed  of  translation  to  meet  this  demand.

Tapadóir currently out-performs (based on BLEU score) Google Translate on data from our

use case domain (official government documents and reports). The official European Commis-

sion machine translation service, MT@EC, rate their English-to-Irish MT system as suitable

for  gist  translation,  but  below useful  editable  quality, the standard required by the client.

While MT@EC also build custom pilot projects based on existing user data, the client’s data is

limited. Therefore, further data collection constitutes a large proportion this project’s remit.

English-to-Irish translation holds a number of challenges. From an NLP perspective, Irish is

very much under-resourced, and much of the project so far has focused on corpus develop-

ment. The target language is also morphologically much richer than the source (e.g. initial mu-

tations,  synthetic verb forms,  case),  and the resulting data sparsity further compounds the

these translation challenges. Linguistically, the language pair word order is divergent (Subject-

Verb-Object vs. Verb-Subject-Object), with other word order differences at lower levels, such

as adjectives following nouns, and the genitive noun following its possessed object in Irish. 

To cope with this, we are currently developing source-side reordering rules to address word-

order divergence, and we are  exploring ways to overcome the morphological discrepancies.

Our aim is to use various methods to provide useful machine translation output for an unusual

and challenging language pair. Rather than aiming to investigate the general effectiveness of

particular methods, we are attempting to find the best practical combination for this resource-

poor and linguistically challenging use-case. We expect that our work will be of use to de-

velopers of MT systems for other under-resourced languages.

The Tapadóir MT engine will be deployed for in-house use by the Irish Department of Arts,

Heritage  and  the  Gaeltacht.  However,  we  hope  to  make  freely  available  the  resources

gathered/created over the course of its development, for the sake of future Irish-language pro-

jects.

221


