



















































THE REAL CHALLENGE 2014: PROGRESS AND PROSPECTS


Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2015 Conference, pages 209–216,
Prague, Czech Republic, 2-4 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

THE REAL CHALLENGE 2014: PROGRESS AND PROSPECTS

Maxine Eskenazi, Alan W Black, Sungjin Lee
Language Technologies Institute

Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave

Pittsburgh PA 1521
{max,awb}@cs.cmu.edu, junion@yahoo-inc.com

David Traum
Institute for Creative Technologies
University of Southern California

12015 Waterfront Drive
Playa Vista, CA 90094

traum@ict.usc.edu

Abstract

The REAL Challenge took place for the
first time in 2014, with a long term goal
of creating streams of real data that the
research community can use, by fostering
the creation of systems that are capable of
attracting real users. A novel approach
is to have high school and undergradu-
ate students devise the types of applica-
tions that would attract many real users
and that need spoken interaction. The
projects are presented to researchers from
the spoken dialog research community and
the researchers and students work together
to refine and develop the ideas. Eleven
projects were presented at the first work-
shop. Many of them have found mentors
to help in the next stages of the projects.
The students have also brought out issues
in the use of speech for real applications.
Those issues involve privacy and signif-
icant personalization of the applications.
While long-term impact of the challenge
remains to be seen, the challenge has al-
ready been a success at its immediate aims
of bringing new ideas and new researchers
into the community, and serves as a model
for related outreach efforts.

1 Introduction

This paper describes the REAL Challenge
(REAL), including the motivations for the chal-
lenge and preliminary results from the first year
and prospects for the near future. The ultimate
goal of REAL is to bring about a steady stream
of data from real users talking to spoken dialogue
systems, that can be used for academic research.
The immediate goal of the first year of REAL is
to bring together high school and undergraduate
students, who have fresh ideas of how people will

talk to things in the future and what the constraints
may be, and seasoned researchers, who know how
to create the systems and could work with the stu-
dents to realize a Wizard of Oz (WOZ) study or a
proof-of-concept prototype to try out the idea.

At SLT 2012, panelists stated that there was no
publicly available, significant stream of spoken di-
alog data coming from real users other than the
Lets Go data (Raux et al., 2006). Although Lets
Go can be used to create statistical models for
some information-giving systems, with the wide
variety of community needs, it cannot satisfy ap-
plications that are not two-way and information
giving. In answer to this, REAL was created to
spark ideas for speech applications that are needed
on a regular basis (fulfilling some real need) by
real users. Observing present applications in the
commercial and academic community and how lit-
tle use that they are getting, it was apparent, at
least to the authors of this paper, that new minds
were needed to devise the right kind of applica-
tions. This led the REAL organizers to reach out
to high school and undergraduate students.

From announcements in late summer 2013 to
the REAL workshop on June 21, 2014, and be-
yond, this paper traces how REAL was managed,
the proposals we received, what happened at the
workshop, what follow up we have had and how
we measure success.

2 Motivation

Speech and spoken dialog researchers often note
that whereas industry has access to a wealth of
ecologically valid speech data, the academic com-
munity lags far behind. The lag in quantity of data
can impede research on system evaluation and in
training the machine learning (ML) system com-
ponents. This chasm can be filled by using re-
cruited subjects. But studies (Ai et al., 2007) have
found that the resulting data does not resemble real
user data. Paid users follow the rules, but are usu-

209



ally just going through the motions. They do not
create and follow their own personal goals. With-
out personal goals, they are not overly concerned
about satisfying the problem they were asked to
solve. For example, if they asked for a specific
flight booking, they won’t change their mind op-
portunistically when a better plan becomes avail-
able. Yet this ability to find alternative ways to
accomplish a goal is present in real user behavior
and poses interesting challenges to spoken dialog
systems. Paid users are not bothered by system re-
sults that are not what they had requested. They
often want to finish the task as rapidly as possi-
ble while real users will usually take a little more
time to get what they want. And, they don’t quit
or curse the system at same rate if things are not
going well. Thus, at evaluation time, the feedback
from the paid user does not reflect the quality of
system performance on real users.

Although simulated users can be another data-
generating possibility, there are still several good
reasons to pursue direct learning from human
users. Usually conventional methods to build a
user simulator follow a cycle of operations: data
collection; annotation; model training and eval-
uation; and deployment for policy training. The
whole development cycle takes quite a long time,
and so user behavior can change by the time it is
done. Moreover, it is highly likely that the new
dialog policy, trained with the user simulator, will
cause different user behavior patterns. Addition-
ally, there are always discrepancies between real
and simulated user behavior due to many simpli-
fying assumptions in the user model. Thus, train-
ing on data from a simulated user can make dialog
policies lag behind the ones that are optimal for
real users.

While there are significant real user speech
databases in industry, that data and the platforms
that collected it are not available for release to re-
searchers due to a variety of issues including intel-
lectual property (IP), monetization, customer loy-
alty and information privacy concerns. So while
industry can forge ahead (Halevy et al., 2009),
academia is unable to show comparable perfor-
mances, not due to poor research quality, but sim-
ply because of the lack of data.

Thus the community needs new streams of
speech data that are available to academia. For
this, we must find new applications that real users
actually need and will use often. Although as-

sistant applications like Siri, Cortana et al. have
sparked the interest and imagination of the pub-
lic, many people dont use them. The speech and
spoken dialog communities must find something
else, embracing novel interfaces and applications.
And the research community may not be the place
where these new ideas should come from. They
might better originate with people who are: com-
pletely comfortable with the new technologies; not
influenced by rigid ideas of what can and can’t be
done; and not limited by an agenda of what they
need to do next. This leads us to believe that the
community needs the input of young students who
have always lived with the technology and know
how they would use it in the future. Biased as
the research community is by its knowledge of
the science behind the systems, researchers also
sometimes overlook some of the basic issues that
must be dealt with, going forward. Younger stu-
dents may also be able to identify the red flags
that are keeping speech from being an interface of
choice. An important side-benefit of this approach
is that this challenge serves as an additional vehi-
cle to bring new practitioners into the spoken di-
alogue community, by having early access to top
researchers and training materials.

3 THE REAL CHALLENGE PROCESS

There is a significant leap from a young stu-
dent’s idea to a data-generating system. The pro-
cess that REAL put in place breaks this leap into
small, achievable steps. First, the organizers of
REAL formed an international scientific commit-
tee, shown in Table 1. The scientific committee
consisted of people who had espoused the spirit of
REAL and were willing to work to make it a suc-
cess.

A webpage (https://dialrc.org/realchallenge/)
was created, including a timeline through the June
21st, 2014 workshop, a separate page with details
of REAL for students and their teachers, contact
information and an application form. Researchers
around the world were contacted and asked to re-
cruit students. Six countries began recruitment
and four, China, Ireland, Korea and the US, had
applicants for the 2014 challenge. One experi-
enced researcher headed each country’s efforts and
was responsible for recruiting and organizing their
students and for sending them to the workshop.
The international Coordination Committee mem-
bers are shown in Table 2.

210



Table 1: The REAL Scientific Committee
Alan W. Black Carnegie Mellon Univer-

sity, USA
Maxine Eskenazi Carnegie Mellon Univer-

sity, USA
Helen Hastie Heriot-Watt University,

Scotland
Gary Geunbae Lee POSTECH South Korea
Sungjin Lee Carnegie Mellon Univer-

sity, USA
Satoshi Nakamura Nara Advanced Institute

of Science and Technol-
ogy, Japan

Elmar Noeth Fredrich-Alexander
University, Erlangen-
Nuremberg, Germany

Antoine Raux Lenovo, USA
David Traum University of Southern

California, USA
Jason Williams Microsoft Research, USA

The students were encouraged to contact the or-
ganizers at any time for more information and/or
for guidance in proposal writing. The proposals
were submitted by April 1, 2014. They were sent
to the scientific committee for review, with two re-
viewers per proposal. The reviewers, taking into
account the age of the participants (from 13 to 23
years old), were asked to evaluate the proposals
according the following criteria:

novelty: the proposal could not be exactly the
same as an existing application. While exist-
ing applications could have the same subject,
like cooking, the user interaction and/or func-
tion had to be novel.

speech is clearly necessary: the students needed
to show that the application solves an issue
thanks to its use of speech communication.

practical: this idea could be implemented either
with current technology or with clearly defin-
able extensions.

viable: this application is likely to attract real
users — while it is not evident at present
how best to measure viability, at this stage
we could poll potential users. We also be-
lieve that the students are well aware of their
peers habits and needs.

Table 2: International Coordination Committee
USA Alan W. Black &

Sungjin Lee
Carnegie
Mellon
University

China Kai Yu Shanghai
Jiaotong
University

Ireland Emer Gilmartin Trinity Col-
lege Dublin

Korea Gary Geunbae Lee POSTECH
Scotland Helen Hastie Heriot-Watt

University
Sweden Samer Al Moubayed

& Jose David Lopes
KTH

The reviews were edited to take into account the
age of the students. They included feedback on
shaping the ideas (focusing the application, get-
ting rid of spurious activities) and requiring more
details about the application (how would someone
use it, under what conditions would someone use
it. who would want to use it). After the students
received their feedback, they were told what they
would need to prepare for the workshop: a one-
minute presentation of their idea, a poster and a
presentation in front of the poster. Some students
(China, Ireland) had exams at the time of the work-
shop and participated via Skype. These students
were asked to record their in-front-of-poster pre-
sentations in case Skype was not working (in the
end it worked very well!). Then the students were
given some training:

• a class on speech and spoken dialog for the
high school students (undergrads had had this
in one of their regular classes);

• a video on how to make a poster – ensur-
ing smooth communication between students
and researchers on the day of the workshop:
the poster included the goal, a comparison
to what presently exists, why their idea was
better, and an illustration of the use of their
idea showing why it is needed, how someone
would use it and how it solves the problem.

The workshop was held on June 21, 2014. After
the one-minute presentations, the students stood in
front of their posters for 90 minutes. In the follow-
ing 30 minutes they could go around to see one
another’s posters. Then groups of researchers and

211



students formed to discuss the ideas. All of the stu-
dents found at least two researchers interested in
having a discussion with them. Each group created
a few slides summarizing their discussion and re-
ported back to everyone. Most of the reports con-
tained ways to focus ideas, to make them doable
and most importantly, to define the next steps.

After the workshop, the organizers followed
up with the researcher participants to find out
their plans going forward. They were also asked
whether they would be encouraging high school
or undergraduates to join REAL in the next round.

Going forward, the organizers plan to have
yearly REAL meetings. While the first workshop
saw only proposals, the second and following ones
should see both new proposals and results of WOZ
studies and proof-of-concept demos from the pro-
posals presented the previous year. This rolling
participation enables new students and researchers
to join at any time and puts less pressure on past
participants – the successful projects will have
something to show, but aren’t expected to have a
fully working system, within just one year. The
intended cycle for successful proposals is the fol-
lowing:

1. find technical partners

2. for limitations that must be dealt with: work
on why this is a limitation and what the pos-
sible fixes are

3. for applications or systems: work on the de-
sign then on the prototype or WOZ system

4. conduct a study (testing the prototype or
WOZ system)

5. show study results (and possibly demo of sys-
tem or propose a major design change for
speech systems)

6. write a proposal for future funding to con-
tinue the work

4 Year One Winning Proposals

The first year of REAL enabled the organizers to
assess how well its goals were fulfilled, what out-
comes there were and what lessons were learned.
The main outcome of REAL can first be shown in
the quality of the proposals. Here are summaries
of the 11 successful proposals from 2014 (note

that all participants from outside the US are un-
dergrads, the US participants are high school stu-
dents):

Bocal (Jude Rosen, Joe Flot, US)
How can we protect the privacy of the user
at the same time as offering a high quality
of speech commanding and response? Bone-
conducting devices can answer this ques-
tion by capturing sounds emanating through
skulls. The next step includes finding out
a specific set of scenarios where the device
will be useful and conducting Wizard of Oz
experiments to collect data about how users
would behave with the device on.

Daily Journaling (Keun Woo Park, Jungkook
Park, Korea)
This system will help users record events in
their everyday life. Lightweight and mul-
timodal, it uses many sensors to determine
what is going on around the user. To inter-
pret what it captures, it asks the user ques-
tions. With the information gleaned from the
questions, it updates its information about the
user.

Fashion Advisor (Jung-eun Kim, Korea)
This advisor knows what clothing a person
possesses and carries on a dialog in the morn-
ing to help the user choose what to wear. It
would have a camera to capture the user and
show them how they would look when wear-
ing its suggestions (like a mirror). It also
knows what the weather will be and will sug-
gest appropriate clothing. It can also search
sources such as Pinterest for clothes to pur-
chase that would work with what the use has
and their body type.

Gourmet (Jaichen Shi, China)
The Gourmet helps people choose a restau-
rant. Many people have dietary restrictions
and the Gourmet would suggest restaurants
where the user can be assured of finding
something they can eat. It also tells the user
what other diners have thought of a restau-
rant and can find specific feedback from din-
ers who were at the restaurant on the present
day. When a choice is made, it can call the
restaurant for reservations.

Human Chatting System (Yunqi Guo, China)
This is a system that allows people to chat

212



with it. It is aimed at helping people rehearse
discussions they would have with real people,
either helping in how to deal with a difficult
social situation (asking a girl for a date, for
example), or speaking a new language (with
a tutor that detects speaking errors and tells
the student how to correct them).

Lecture Trainer (Qizhe Xie, China)
This application would listen to a user prepar-
ing a presentation and help them out. It could
help with word choice, but also with gram-
mar, intonation, and fluency. The user could
choose a topic and also listen to recorded
speeches from famous people so that the user
could imitate the latter.

Mobile Cooking App (BongJin Sohn, Jong-
Woo Choi, DongHyun Kim, Korea)
Modern-day appliances continue to evolve
based on communication with users to iden-
tify and meet their needs. The cooking app
will offer a cooking guide in the form of au-
dio or video, voice control for oven and alarm
setting, and provide a grocery list, etc. This
app traces interaction history and each step
of a recipe to make a dialog intelligent and
efficient by being context-aware.

Neeloid (Neeloy Chakraborty, US)
The invention connects people with their sur-
roundings. Camera and other sensors can
also work together to create an accurate de-
scription of the audience’s surroundings. It
also understands gestures pointing at certain
things for inquiry and looks into connected
wiki to retrieve relevant information. This in-
vention may give the visually impaired the
confidence of knowing what is around them
without the use of a white cane, hoople,
guide, etc. Another application of this idea
is as an educational tool that can be used by a
wide variety of people, in particular, children
full of curiosity.

Sam the Kitchen Assistant (Enno Hermann,
Ireland)
Sam comes to the aid of the cook who has
hands occupied and full of food and eyes also
busy. Sam can tell a cook what to do next in
a recipe, but also has information about how
to adapt a recipe to any one of many dietary
restrictions. Sam can suggest a recipe, on the

way home, given what is in the house and list
what needs to be bought.

SmartCID (Zachary McAlexander, David
Donehue, US)
Millions of consumers today use smart tech-
nology in everyday life, including smart-
phones, tablets, and desktop computers.
However, none of these technologies are truly
easy-to-use. The user must always issue
some command before the aid begins to op-
erate. SmartCID solves this problem by au-
tomatically detecting external activity and in-
stantaneously capturing content. For exam-
ple, SmartCID can detect things like people
posing for a picture, the word cheese said by
a group, or a laugh from the user, to prompt
the device to begin recording a video or au-
dio file, allowing the user to review the funny
moment at a later date.

Smart Watch (So Hyeon Jung, Korea)
This is a patient health care system. Elderly
users (some with poor eyesight) can be told
when to take their medication. They can also
find out when their supply of medication is
about to run out and get help ordering more.
The system can also guide its users in healthy
eating choices for the specific nutrients that
the individual needs. And since it can sug-
gest good foods, it can also help with calorie
counts.

5 Outcomes from the First Year

The first outcome of the workshop was the propos-
als for new ideas, described in the previous sec-
tion. All of them met the desired criteria of nov-
elty, use of speech, with potential for practicality
and viability. One of the ideas has already led to a
peer-reviewed publication (Jung et al., 2015).

Another outcome of REAL is the set of issues
in the ubiquitous use of speech that the students
raised. First, the Bocal proposal raised the issue of
privacy. Although we generally think that speech
should be used in any setting, it is possible that
privacy may restrict its frequent use in environ-
ments where there are other people in close prox-
imity to the speaker. In this situation, it may in-
deed be necessary to either whisper or use a bone-
conducting microphone. Second, several propos-
als, such as Mobile Cooking, Lecture Trainer, and
Human Chatting System show that the most com-

213



Table 3: Next steps resulting from the Workshop
type - country student type of help action
Academic -US any provide system components Webinar on virtual human toolkit
Academic - US KAIST offer of mentorship lectures to high school students, par-

ticipation in next round
Academic - Ger-
many

any present
students

could mentor students in next round

Academic/industry
- Germany

- - students in next round

Academic - US 2 students
from China

offer of internships none

Industry - US 2 students
from US

offer of internships none

Academic - US Three
projects
from US

mentorship students in next round

Academic - Ire-
land

Student
from
Ireland

mentorship Creating prototype of proposed sys-
tem also young high school students
in next round

Academic -
Scotland

- - students in next round

Academic - Ko-
rea

One stu-
dent from
POSTECH

mentorship Students will continue to participate
next year

Academic -
China

- - Students will continue to participate
next year

Academic -
Sweden

students in the next round

pelling applications for a user may not be for gen-
eral use, but rather suites of applications that are
important to individuals. Finally, we see that many
of the proposals, without being prompted by orga-
nizers or teachers, were in a context of busy hands
and eyes.

A third outcome of REAL is what took place
the day of the workshop (described in Sec-
tion 3). Students described their ideas to technol-
ogists/researchers. The participants met with stu-
dents in the afternoon. The breakout reports from
these meetings were given by both the researchers
and the students. All had made slides and the one
common element was the next steps points that all
displayed. For many of the projects, the students
got help in:

focus: concentrating on just one thing, deciding
which thing was worth it, not trying to solve
all of the worlds problems.

deciding what to do next: e.g., Is there hard-

ware to concentrate on? Should a scenario be
defined? What software is involved? What
software modules exist and which ones must
be built?

Finally, there is the promise of what is to come.
Table 3 shows the post-meeting feedback from
participants concerning their plans. For example,
one academic participant is proposing internships
to two of the students (from two different propos-
als).

6 Assessing REAL

The first year of REAL can be assessed using sev-
eral metrics. But before the metrics are used, some
perspective is needed. It is very difficult in one
year to get a large part of the speech and spoken
dialog community actively interested. It is hard to
plan the venue of the workshop so that it coincides
with a major meeting, while not taking place at
the same time. It is also hard to organize students

214



in many different countries, including the funding
for the students. And finding support for REAL is
also difficult. Industry is not yet sure what a com-
pany can get from this meeting. One measure is re-
searcher participation. There were 21 researchers
at the Workshop, 17 people were from academia,
and the rest were from industry. Another metric is
the depth and breadth of what is being proposed
to the students to take their work forward. Yet
another metric is whether colleagues plan to get
more students involved in the coming year. This
is also shown in Table 3. Three colleagues from
three different countries proposed either to:

• increase the numbers of their participants
next year

• bring in a new high school class
• bring in new undergraduate students
The use of Skype is considered to have been

very helpful this year. If a student worked on a
proposal during the year and could not, for some
reason, attend the workshop (including exams,
lack of travel funding, etc), then they were still
able to make a presentation and get feedback. An-
other way to assess REAL is to observe the re-
sults of the interaction between the students and
the researchers at the workshop breakout sessions.
Some examples of the changes in the projects:

• Smart Watch project: there were four func-
tions proposed: calorie-store, alarm, food
recommendation, exercise recommendation.
Issues that arose: hardware could become
multiple devices; calorie store might be diffi-
cult for users; it should be multimodal, com-
bining both spoken dialog and images for
the users. Plan of action: break project into
individual functions; examine existing apps
to get a sense of range of interaction; do a
WOZ data collection with diet expert func-
tion to observe dialogs and users reactions;
use WOZ data to finalize design and train
ASR/NLU. Subsequent to the workshop, this
action plan was followed, and the food and
exercise recommendation functions were im-
plemented and tested, resulting in a peer re-
view publication (Jung et al., 2015).

• Bocal project: focusing ideas into a plat-
form for allowing system-user communica-
tion when privacy is important. Noting that

the key technology will be transferring in-
put from skull microphones to text, the main
challenges were gaining an understanding of
the differences between speech through skull
and standard microphones and understand-
ing how this technology will influence users’
behavior. The action items were: choos-
ing application domains that will necessitate
privacy, like banking; collecting data with a
WOZ setup; analyzing the data to find fea-
tures for encoding the output of the skull mi-
crophone; developing models for transform-
ing the output of the skull microphone to text;
developing a spoken dialog system for ex-
hibiting the feasibility of the approach.

Thus, the students got a considerable amount of
help in focusing their ideas, in breaking down the
steps that they need to take in the upcoming year
to find out how feasible their projects are, and in
understanding what the hardware and usage issues
were. As seen on Table 3, several of the students
have found mentors and they will be going for-
ward with their projects.

7 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS

Although we have had a successful first year we
are interested in the long term continued success
of this challenge. As it grows in stability year to
year it will be easier to get students to be aware
of and take part in it. Even since out first year we
have seen more standardized SDKs for develop-
ing speech based systems on more platforms. Mi-
crosoft’s Cortana, and Amazon’s Echo offer SDKs
that we would like to utilize to aid student’s pro-
posals and eventual development.

The REAL Challenge is a bold step for re-
searchers. Its stated goal was to find new appli-
cations that would create streams of spoken dia-
log data from real users. It has achieved this goal
— students have proposed novel systems that have
the potential to be very useful and thus to attract
real users. Beyond the stated goals of the Chal-
lenge, the students have brought to the forefront
issues that must be dealt with:

• The issue of privacy must be addressed. For
example, real users would not dictate email or
text messages if they feel that their messages
are not secure.

215



• It is probable that the most successful speech
applications will not be the general ones (like
SIRI and Cortana), but may be the ones that
are highly personalized to specific tasks.

Plans going forward concern both this year’s
projects and those to come in the future. REAL
is seen as a regularly occurring event where there
are multiple levels of presentation. There will be
students who have proposed an idea (like all of the
2014 participants) who are looking for feedback
and mentorship. There will be students who pro-
posed their ideas the preceding year and are pre-
senting either WOZ study results or a prototype.
And ultimately there will be students (and re-
searchers) who proposed one year, presented pre-
liminary results the next year and are presenting a
working system and real user data.

The REAL Challenge continues in its second
year with renewed support from the National Sci-
ence Foundation. Year two proposals for the
REAL challenge are under development, with an
intended participant workshop in Fall 2015. So far
there are six proposals for 2015: three undergradu-
ates and three high school students. The undergrad
proposals are all new, while two of the ones from
the high school students are updates of last years
proposal and one is new. Table 4 shows this years
proposals.

Table 4: REAL Challenge 2015 Entries
institution level year subject

Heriot
Watt

ugrad Y1 Table talk - to order
food at a restaurant

Heriot
Watt

ugrad Y1 BuddyBot - a com-
panion for sick chil-
dren in hospital

Pittsburgh
Sci

high Y2 next stage for Smart
Content Interaction
Device project

Pittsburgh
Sci

high Y1 multilinguistic con-
ference meeting

Pittsburgh
Sci

high Y2 next stage, uses for
bone conduction

Sogang U ugrad Y1 home chat system
to dialog with home
devices

Due to the differences in academic schedules
around the world, to the success of virtual partic-
ipation and to cost, the second year will see the

students all participate remotely. Experts in the
field will be brought in to the Workshop in person.
Individual presentations will be given and group
breakouts will be organized. Given that last year
this Challenge not only proposed novel applica-
tions, but also unearthed interesting issues, part
of the Workshop will address some of the issues
(such as privacy) that are being brought to light.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The REAL Challenge has been sponsored by NSF
grant no. CNS-1405644 and 1406000. The stu-
dent participants in REAL were mentioned in the
description of their projects. We would like to
thank Ann Gollapudi, the teacher of the US high-
school students. The persons who ran the Chal-
lenge in their own countries were:

• Gary Lee, Korea
• Kai Yu, China
• Emer Gilmartin, Ireland.

The authors would like to thank the researchers
who took part in the Workshop, many of whom
have made plans to follow up on projects and/or
future versions of the Challenge.

References
Hua Ai, Antoine Raux, Dan Bohus, Maxine Eskenazi,

and Diane Litman. 2007. Comparing spoken dialog
corpora collected with recruited subjects versus real
users. In In Proceedings of the 8th SIGdial Work-
shop on Discourse and Dialogue.

Alon Halevy, Peter Norvig, and Fernando Pereira.
2009. The unreasonable effectiveness of data. IEEE
Intelligent Systems, 24(2):8–12, March.

Sohyeon Jung, SeonghanRyu, Sangdo Han, and
Gary Geunbae Lee. 2015. Diettalk: Diet and health
assistant based onspoken dialog system. In Proceed-
ings of Sixth International Workshop on Spoken Di-
alogue systems (IWSDS 2015), January.

Antoine Raux, Dan Bohus, Brian Langner, Alan W.
Black, and Maxine Eskenazi. 2006. Doing research
on a deployed spoken dialogue system: one year of
let’s go! experience. In INTERSPEECH. ISCA.

216


