



















































Using Finite State Transducers for Helping Foreign Language Learning


Proceedings of The 2nd Workshop on Natural Language Processing Techniques for Educational Applications, pages 94–98,
Beijing, China, July 31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics and Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing

Using Finite State Transducers for Helping Foreign Language Learning

Hasan Kaya
Istanbul Technical University

Department of Computer Engineering
Istanbul, 34469, Turkey

kayahasa@itu.edu.tr

Gülşen Eryiğit
Istanbul Technical University

Department of Computer Engineering
Istanbul, 34469, Turkey

gulsenc@itu.edu.tr

Abstract

The interest and demand to foreign language learn-
ing are increased tremendously along with the glob-
alization and freedom of movement in the world. To-
day, the technological developments allow the cre-
ation of supportive materials for foreign language
learners. However, the language acquisition be-
tween languages with high typological differences
still poses challenges for this area and the learning
task it self. This paper introduces our preliminary
study for building an educational application to help
foreign language learning between Turkish and En-
glish. The paper presents the use of finite state tech-
nology for building a Turkish word synthesis sys-
tem (which allows to choose word-related features
among predefined grammatical affix categories such
as tense, modality and polarity etc...) and a word-
level translation system between the languages in
focus. The developed system is observed to out-
perform the popular online translation systems for
word-level translation in terms of grammatically cor-
rect outputs.

1 Introduction
The influence of mother tongue on foreign language
learning is discussed in many linguistic and psycholog-
ical studies (Hakuta et al., 2000; Hakuta, 1999; Dur-
gunoglu and Hancin-Bhatt, 1992; Ringbom, 1987; Swan,
1997; Corder, 1983) in the literature. The typological
differences between the mother tongue and the second
language have an important role on the duration of learn-
ing process. In these studies, it is emphasized that one
of the causes of frequently made mistakes in the second
language is the rules learned from the first language. En-
glish and Turkish being languages from totally different
language families compose a very representative and in-
teresting language pair for this phenomena.

Turkish is an agglutinative language with a very rich
morphological structure. Most of the syntactic informa-

tion on the English side become morphological proper-
ties of a word on the Turkish side. In some cases, a
single Turkish word may correspond to a full English
sentence. This situation results in difficulties during lan-
guage learning between this language pair and also in sta-
tistical machine translation (MT) systems. In daily life in
Turkey, it is very common to come across with foreign-
ers making mistakes in constructing Turkish words with
invalid grammatical constructions (i.e. having difficulty
to produce the correct morpheme order to form a valid
Turkish word). Bisazza and Federico (2009), Yeniterzi
and Oflazer (2010), El-Kahlout and Oflazer (2010) and
Eyigöz et al. (2013) show the influence of using morpho-
logical clues in increasing the MT quality.

Finite state technology is proven to increase the ef-
ficiency in many rule-based NLP related tasks (Mohri,
1997; Roche and Schabes, 1997). Today, the availability
of finite state transducer (FST) frameworks such as Open-
FST (Allauzen et al., 2007), HFST (Lindén et al., 2009)
and XFST (Beesley and Karttunen, 2003) makes possible
to create FST applications very efficiently. In this paper,
we present the results of our elementary studies on us-
ing finite state transducers to build supportive tools for
foreign language learning; namely Turkish for English
native speakers and English for Turkish native speakers.
We compare our results with four popularly online trans-
lation systems: 1. Google1, 2. Yandex2, 3. Bing3 and
4. Tureng4. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2
introduces the Turkish morphology, Section 3 the system
architecture, Section 4 the learning use cases and Section
5 the conclusion and future work.

2 Turkish Morphology
As mentioned in the previous section, agglutinative lan-
guage morphology has a high impact on the performance

1https://translate.google.com/
2https://ceviri.yandex.com.tr/
3http://www.bing.com/translator/
4http://tureng.com/search/translate

94



of translation process of a word. Turkish has a com-
plex morphology and because of this reason, the usage
of suffix concatenations at the end of a word lemma may
cause the word to denote different meanings. Table 1
gives some translation examples from Turkish to English
to show that the usage of dictionary/lexicon look-up sys-
tems are not suitable for word translation between Turk-
ish and English due to unpredictable dictionary size. For-
eign language learners have even difficulty to search for
the meaning of a Turkish word from a Turkish dictionary
since this task requires to firstly determine the lemma of
that word. To give an example for this problem, word
stem for “git” (go) can be written in different conjugated
word forms such as: “gidiyorum”, “gideceğim”, “gide-
cek” etc. (up to nearly 50 variations) which refer to
very different translations in the English side although
the lemma of these words are the same. As a result, a
Turkish word may be expressed as a single English word
or a phrase or even a sentence as shown in Table 1.

Turkish English

git Go
gidiyorum I am going
gideceğim I’ll go
gidecek He will go
gittim I went
gidebiliyor He is able to go
gidebilmişlerdi They had been able to go

Table 1: Translation of Turkish words

3 System Architecture
Eryiğit (2014) introduces a web service for morphologi-
cal analysis and generation of Turkish. The provided ana-
lyzer is an updated version of the work presented in Şahin
et al. (2013) and uses finite state technology for the anal-
ysis and generation purposes. In the provided interface
the surface word form “gidiyorum” (I’m going) is ana-
lyzed as the lexical form “git+Verb+Pos+Prog1+A1sg”
where “git” (to go) is the lemma of the word and the
following tags hold for main parts-of-speech tag and
additional inflectional features: “+Pos” for the positive
marker, “Prog1” for the progressive tense, “A1sg” for the
1st singular person. Similarly the same analysis given
to the morphological generator produces the same input
word. Inspired from this work, we develop a new fi-
nite state transducer transfer model and an English an-
alyzer/generator which take the produced morphological
analysis as input and produces its English counterpart.
The system also works in reverse direction so that once
an English input is given to the system, it transfers it
to a Turkish lexical form and then uses the morpholog-
ical generator to produce a valid Turkish word. Figure 1

draws the main flow of our system which we call “ITU
Morphological Transfer module for English-Turkish lan-
guage pairs”; ITUMorphTrans4ET in short from now on.
The figure provides the intermediate stages for two given
examples: “gidiyorum” (I’m going) and “gittim” (I went).

Figure 1: ITUMorphTrans4ET System Architechture

The transfer model is very similar to an FST mor-
phological analyzer but instead of producing the relevant
morphological tags for a given surface form, it produces
a new lexical form (the English counterpart) of the input
Turkish lexical form. To this end, it contains a bilingual
lexicon for word lemmas and the transfer rules. An ex-
ample from the transfer model FST is given below where
each morphological tag (i.e. a suffix in the word surface
form) representing person agreements are coded to pro-
duce two English words.

LEXICON Fin-ED-PC
+A1sg:+am+I #;
+A2sg:+are+you #;
+A3sg:+is+he/she/it #;
+A1pl:+are+we #;
+A2pl:+are+you #;
+A3pl:+are+they #;

The English output of the transfer model may be ei-
ther some words or some tags to be further processed by
the lexical post-processor. It is not necessary that all the
Turkish tags produce an output; some of them are only
required for determining the possible paths on the FST.
This may be observed on the lexical forms of Turkish
words in Figure 1. While the “+Prog1” tag is changed to
an “+ing” tag, the “+Past” tag is changed to a “+V2” tag
and the “+A2sg” tag is changed to the word “+he/she/it”
in the transfer model’s output, the “+Verb” or “+Noun”
tags are only used for forwarding the process to possible
FST paths in the coded rules.

The English analysis and generation FST converts be-
tween lexical and surface forms of English inputs. One
should keep in mind that the English analyzer differing
from the Turkish one also accepts inputs with multiple

95



Turkish ITUMorphTrans4ET Google Bing Tureng Yandex

gidebilirse if he can go! can go if he can go! go he could leave

gidecek he will go! will go will go be destined for go

gitmelilerdi they should have
gone!

they should go they need to get it go they have to go

gitmişlerse if they had gone! they have gone if they went go if they’re gone

gidebilecekse if he will be able to
go!

go abilecekse can go go if you can go

yapmalılarsa if they should do! sign mAlIlArsA if they’re making go do they

masalarımızla with our tables! our table our table table our desks

English ITUMorphTrans4ET Google Bing Yandex

if he can go gidebilirse! O gidebilirsiniz Eğer gidebilir eğer gidip o

he will go gidecek! O gidecek! o-ecek gitmek gidecek!

they should have gone gitmelilerdi!
gitmelilermiş!

Onlar gitmiş olmalı Onlar gitmiş olmalı gitmelilerdi!

if they had gone gitmişlerse!
gitmişseler!

onlar gitmişti eğer Onlar ne gitseydin eğer gitmiş olsalardı

if he will be able to go gidebilecekse! O gitmek mümkün
olacak eğer

Eğer o-ecek var olmak
güçlü-e doğru gitmek
için

eğer gitmek mümkün
olacak

if they should do yapmalılarsa!
etmelilerse!

Onlar yapmalıyım onlar yoksa eğer yapmalıyım
eğer

with our tables listelerimizle!
tablolarımızla!

Bizim tablolarla! Bizim tablolarla! bizim tablolar ile!

Table 2: Comparison of ITUMorphTrans4ET with other popular systems

words. This doesn’t mean that the input may be any En-
glish utterance but rather English phrases or sentences
which maps to single words in the Turkish side or some
compound verb forms such as “telefon etmek” (to phone).
This FST also contains the list of irregular words for
correct transformations: e.g. “to go” with lexical form
“go+V2+I” will be converted to “went+I” as the surface
form whereas a regular verb “play+V2+I” will be con-
verted to “played+I”. There are some additional rules for
specific cases such as “clap+ing” which be transferred to
“clapping” requiring a character repetition of the letter
“p”. Finally after obtaining the last surface form such as
“playing+am+I”, we output this in reverse order5 by the
use of a script.

Table 2 gives the comparison of our proposed sys-
tem with popular online translation systems of namely

5The order of the words are rearranged so that the resulting sentence
is grammatical.

Google, Yandex, Bing and Tureng. Since the Tureng MT
system is only available from Turkish to English, its re-
sults are not provided in the second half of the table.
The acceptable translations for each case are marked with
check marks in the table. As can be noticed, the proposed
system produces better results at word-level translation.

4 Learning Use Cases

Learning a foreign language which belongs to a differ-
ent language family than the native one as in the case of
Turkish and English is a problematic task. Since, there
are no stable working translators which may be used as
a reference, learning becomes a challenging process for
new learners. Most commonly used machine translators
get use of statistical methods and do not always produce
grammatically correct results. In our study, we focus on
obtaining a better learning language system which trans-
lates words between Turkish and English in two-way effi-

96



Figure 2: An example output from ITUMorphTrans4ET (from English to Turkish)

ciently by providing a user friendly interface for learners.

4.1 Turkish Learning

Learning Turkish is very tough process especially for
learners whose mother tongue is not agglutinative due
to the fixed order of suffix concatenations to the end of
the words which may become dizzy for the new language
learners. To give an example for this problem, instead of
saying “gitmişlerdi” (they had been gone) one may say
“gittilermiş” which is not a valid word in terms of suffix
order. In the future, ITUMorphTrans4ET system may de-
tect these mistakes (by the help of additional spelling sug-
gesters) and make produce correct translations. In other
term, after having a valid analysis and necessary lexical
rules, our system can translate any written Turkish word
to English language or vice-versa. We believe that same
approach may be used for other agglutinative languages
by constructing necessary transfer rules.

Figure 2 shows the preliminary interface of ITUMor-
phTrans4ET where one may type an English lemma and
then select morphological properties by using list boxes
below. For this example, the word “go” is typed and its
properties are selected as “Verb” for the word type, “Pos-
itive” for the polarity and so on. Using these information,
our system easily translates the word to “gitmeliydim” (I
should have gone). We believe by improving our system
with a more user-friendly interface, the effect of suffixes
in Turkish may be efficiently realized and learned by the
users.

4.2 English Learning
As explained in previous sections, learning English is as
hard as learning Turkish for native Turkish speakers and
has same challenging problems. There exists no trans-
lation system that works well from Turkish to English
at word level. As a consequence, these translators can
not be efficient for language learning purposes. How-
ever, ITUMorphTrans4ET presents a very strong transla-
tion mechanism for two way Turkish-English word trans-
lation. It uses morphological model of words in order to
translate words. Using the advantage of the morpholog-
ical structure, even very complex words can be simpli-
fied into meaningful tags and then translated to English.
Figure 3 gives an example screen for English learners:
The word “gitmeliydim” is translated into “I should have
gone”.

5 Conclusion & Future Work
In this study, we presented our elementary system to
develop an educational application for foreign language
learners from Turkish and English language pair. Our
system uses finite state transducer technology to help the
language learning to learn the morphologically complex
structure of an agglutinative language and may be ap-
plied to other similar languages by developing a transfer
model. Although we couldn’t test with on large data sets
due to the unavailability of APIs of the used MT systems,
our preliminary experiments revealed the better per-
formance of ITUMorphTrans4ET. ITUMorphTrans4ET

97



Figure 3: An example output from ITUMorphTrans4ET (from Turkish to English)

may be used in many platforms such as smart boards in
classrooms, mobile applications etc. To this end, for fu-
ture work we plan to focus on improving our system by
1) Developing an user-friendly interactive application for
foreign Turkish learners, 2) Developing a mobile applica-
tion for accessing the interface more easily, and 3) Step-
ping up to sentence level instead of word level translation
by using statistical machine learning approaches. The im-
plementation of ITUMorphTrans4ET is available through
a web service found at http://tools.nlp.itu.edu.tr/ (Eryiğit,
2014).

Acknowledgments
The authors want to thank Dilara Torunoğlu Selamet for
her valuable contributions to this work.

References
Cyril Allauzen, Michael Riley, Johan Schalkwyk, Wojciech

Skut, and Mehryar Mohri. 2007. Openfst: A general and ef-
ficient weighted finite-state transducer library. In Implemen-
tation and Application of Automata, pages 11–23. Springer.

Kenneth R Beesley and Lauri Karttunen. 2003. Finite-state
morphology: Xerox tools and techniques. CSLI, Stanford.

Arianna Bisazza and Marcello Federico. 2009. Morphologi-
cal pre-processing for Turkish to English statistical machine
translation. In IWSLT, pages 129–135.

Stephen Pit Corder. 1983. A role for the mother tongue. Lan-
guage transfer in language learning, pages 85–97.

Aydin Y. Durgunoglu and Barbara J. Hancin-Bhatt. 1992. The
role of first language in the second-language reading process.
Technical report, University Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

Ilknur Durgar El-Kahlout and Kemal Oflazer. 2010. Exploit-
ing morphology and local word reordering in English-to-
Turkish phrase-based statistical machine translation. Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, IEEE Transactions on,
18(6):1313–1322.

Gülşen Eryiğit. 2014. ITU Turkish NLP web service. In Pro-
ceedings of the Demonstrations at the 14th Conference of the

EACL, Gothenburg, Sweden, April. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Elif Eyigöz, Daniel Gildea, and Kemal Oflazer. 2013. Simul-
taneous word-morpheme alignment for statistical machine
translation. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pages 32–40.

Kenji Hakuta, Yuko Goto Butler, and Daria Witt. 2000. How
long does it take English learners to attain proficiency? Uni-
versity of California Linguistic Minority Research Institute.

Kenji Hakuta. 1999. A critical period for second language ac-
quisition? a status review. National Center for Early Devel-
opment of Learning. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North
Carolina.

Krister Lindén, Miikka Silfverberg, and Tommi Pirinen. 2009.
Hfst tools for morphology–an efficient open-source package
for construction of morphological analyzers. In State of the
Art in Computational Morphology, pages 28–47. Springer.

Mehryar Mohri. 1997. Finite-state transducers in language and
speech processing. Computational linguistics, 23(2):269–
311.

Håkan Ringbom. 1987. The role of the first language in foreign
language learning, volume 34. Multilingual Matters Ltd.

Emmanuel Roche and Yves Schabes. 1997. Finite-state lan-
guage processing. MIT press.

Muhammet Şahin, Umut Sulubacak, and Gülşen Eryiğit. 2013.
Redefinition of Turkish morphology using flag diacritics. In
Proceedings of The Tenth Symposium on Natural Language
Processing (SNLP-2013), Phuket, Thailand, October.

Michael Swan. 1997. The influence of the mother tongue on
second language vocabulary acquisition and use. Vocabu-
lary: Description, acquisition and pedagogy, pages 156–
180.

Reyyan Yeniterzi and Kemal Oflazer. 2010. Syntax-to-
morphology mapping in factored phrase-based statistical ma-
chine translation from English to Turkish. In Proceedings of
the 48th Annual Meeting of ACL, pages 454–464. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

98


