
























Smart Computer Aided Translation Environment – SCATE
IWT – Agentschap voor Innovatie door Wetenschap en Technologie

Strategic basic research
Project Nr. 130041

http://www.ccl.kuleuven.be/scate

University of Leuven (CCL - ESAT/PSI - LIIR – Fac. Arts Antwerp), Belgium

University of Ghent (LT3), Belgium

Hasselt University (tUL - iMinds, Expertise Centre for Digital Media), Belgium

Project duration: March 2014 – February 2018

Summary

We aim at improving the translators' efficiency through five different scientific objectives. 
Concerning  improvements in translation technology,  we are  investigating  syntax-based fuzzy 
matching  in which we estimate similarity based on syntactic edit distance or similar measures. We 

are  working  on  syntax-based  MT using  synchronous  tree  substitution  grammars  induced  from 

parallel node-aligned treebanks, and are building a decoder to use these grammars in translation.

Concerning  improvements in evaluation of computer-aided translation, we have developed a 
taxonomy of typical MT errors and are constructing a manually annotated corpus of 3000 segments 

of Google Translate MT errors. Post-editing behaviour of translators is being monitored. 

Concerning improvements in automated terminology extraction from comparable corpora, we 
have developed C-BiLDA, a multilingual topic model. It does not assume linked documents to have 

identical topic distributions. On the task of cross-lingual document categorization, we trained it on a 

comparable corpus of Wikipedia documents, and inferred cross-lingual document representations on 

a dataset for document categorization. The document representations and category labels are fed to 

an SVM classifier: we train on the source language and predict the labels for the target language 

documents. C-BiLDA outperforms the state-of-the-art in multilingual topic modeling.

Concerning  improvements  in  speech  recognition  accuracy, we  clustered  words  by  their 
translations  in  multiple  languages.  If  words  share  a  translation  in  many  languages,  they  are 

considered synonyms. By adding context and by filtering out those that do not belong to the same 

part of speech, we find meaningful word clusters to incorporate into a language model. We found no 

improvements, and attribute this in part to errors made by the MT system and to the incorporation  

technique (hard clustered class-based n-grams). We will take context into account during evaluation 

and/or  further  improve  the  word  clusters  by  using  the  translations  as  features  in  vector  space 

modeling techniques.

Concerning improvements in work flows and personalised user interfaces, we reviewed existing  
translation systems, and created an inventory of the various features and configuration options of 

the systems. Six Flemish companies are  interviewed regarding their practices and their vision for 

future CAT tools. A worldwide survey has been conducted with more than 135 responses. Detailed 

analyses of translators'  practices have been conducted by observing more  than 7 translators by 

conducting a contextual inquiry.

In the upcoming period, the results of the different studies will be analysed in order to obtain a 

model of how CAT tools can support workflows for specific translators. This model will be used as  

a base for the personalised visualisations as part of interfaces for translation work. In contrast with 

traditional  engineering approaches,  this  model  will  also  be usable  by translators  as part  of  the 

configuration of their personal CAT tool.

229


