



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and E Sherly. Proc. of the 12th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 384–393,
Trivandrum, India. December 2015. c©2015 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Ranking Model with a Reduced Feature Set for an Automated Question 

Generation System 

 

 

 
Manisha Satish Divate Ambuja Salgaonkar 

Department of Computer science Department of Computer science 

University of Mumbai University of Mumbai 

India  India  

divate.manisha.79@gmail.com ambujas@gmail.com 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

A metric has been proposed to automatically 

generate well-formed-ness rank for machine 

generated questions. The grammatical cor-

rectness of a question, challenge due to the 

negation in the source text and number of 

transformations required to convert an ill-

formed (not appealing to humans) question to 

a well-formed (meaningful and human ap-

pealing) question seem the prominent fea-

tures.  

We used 135 questions generated by 

Heilman and Smith’s system (Heilman and 

Smith, 2011), developed a regression model 

using our feature set and tested it. The R-

squared value is 93.5% which is quiet ac-

ceptable. Relevance of the model has been 

corroborated by means of the residual plot. 

(Heilman and Smith, 2011) Metric is of 187 

features and that of (Liu, 2012) is of 11. We 

suggested 16 features for a general automatic 

question quality enhancer to look into. How-

ever, the present model has been built by con-

sidering only 10 out of them. (Heilman and 

Smith , 2011)generated questions do not pos-

sess any infirmities indicated by the remain-

ing ones. 75 questions were used in training 

and 60 were tested. Recognition accuracy is 

94.4%. 

1. Introduction  

Automatic question generation systems (AQG) 

have been attempted since the mid-1970s (Wolfe 
J.H., 1976). A significant amount of work has been 

reported during the last decade, see details in Sec-

tion 2 below. To a certain extent AQGs have as-

sisted human question-paper setters, but the quality 

of the automatically generated questions is often 

found to be inadequate. The strength and weak-

nesses of AQGs and a few remedies to enhance the 

quality of the questions have been discussed by us 

in (Salgaonkar and Divate, 2013).  

It is necessary to formally compute the worth 

of an AQG by employing a quality metric. Devel-

oping such a metric for a given set of questions and 

therefore for an AQG is a research problem. The 

quality metric would serve the purpose of evaluat-

ing any automatic system that claims to provide 

quality enhancement of a set of questions. Call 

such a system an “automatic question quality en-

hancer” (AQQE).  In the present paper we propose 

a new quality metric for questions generated by an 

AQG, suggest a framework for an AQQE, and 

demonstrate the improvement in quality due to this 

framework. 

It goes without saying that the attributes of a 

question are the arguments of the quality function, 

and that, to improve the quality of a question, the 

attribute values have to be changed appropriately.  

Therefore the task of the AQQE is to rearticulate a 

given question in such a way that the changed at-
tribute values yield a higher quality according to 

the metric. To improve the productivity of an 

AQG, our aim has to be optimization of the “objec-

tive function” of the metric, since we aspire to 

make a system to generate more and more ques-

tions that are acceptable to humans. 

2. Previous Research 

384



 

AQGs that attempt to measure factual as well 

as deep learning, including reading comprehen-

sion, writing ability and vocabulary, have been 

proposed in (Kunichika et al., 2004; Brown et al., 

2005; Liu et al., 2005; Chen et al., 2006; Liu et 

al., 2012). Systems generating MCQ type, fill-in-

the-blank type or wh-type questions are another 

thrust area (Aist, 2001; Hashino and Hiroshi, 2005; 

Aldabe et al., 2006; Mitkov, 2006; Prasad et 

al.,2008; W. Chen et al., 2009;  Chen et al., 2009; 

Heilman and Smith, 2009; Ali et al., 2010; Liske, 

2011; Agarwal and Mannem, 2011a; Agarwal and 

Mannem, 2011b). 

Incorrect articulation of linguistic structures 

and an undue focus on relatively less important 

points are two commonly observed flaws in auto-

matically generated questions. The statistics of the 

other types of errors observed in our experiments is 

given in the Table 1 below 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1: Flaws observed in system generated questions 

 According to (Heilman and Smith, 2009), only 

27.3% of the questions among the ones generated 

through their system are acceptable [Henceforth, 

the two authors are abbreviated as H&S]. The rank 

of a question has been computed by employing the 

linear regression model with 187 features (H&S, 

2010).  Among them, 53 features are as follows: 

length-based (3), language model (6), grammatical 

aspects (23), transformations (8), vagueness (3), 

negation (1), and wh-words (9). The remaining 134 

are values computed from binary histograms of 

length and count features that serve as thresholds 

for controlling non-linearity among the numerical 

parameters used for describing syntax, length and 

linguistic features.  

Empirical testing of the automatically generat-

ed questions revealed that out of the top ranked 

20% (86 out of 428 questions), 52.3% were ac-

ceptable, where top rank is defined to be rank 3.5 

and above on a 5-point scale, as selected by a team 

of human raters.  

 (Liu, 2012) is another notable work in the area 

of AQGs. This system helps in review writing and 

extracting citations from a given text. Further, the 

system categorizes the text and identifies the key-

words that are used to fill in suitable question tem-

plates from the authors’ question template library. 

Among the approaches used in (Liu, 2012) to 

rank a question, two give the best results: 

point-wise logistic regression and pair wise support 

vector machines (the later technique is named 

RankSVM).  With 11 features, when considering 

the top 25% ranked questions the acceptability of 

RankSVM was found to be 75.8%, while that of 

logistic regression was 74.2%, whereas 71.3 % of 

the top 50% are found acceptable. This figure is 

comparable to the result of (H&S, 2009). Also, it 

confirms the later result (H&S, 2011) that the in-

crease in the percentage of acceptable questions is 

statistically significant when considering only the 

top ranked ones. 

The 187 features of (H&S, 2010 and 2011) is 

arguably a large number, because a dozen features 

of (Liu, 2012) has led to a comparable result. 

Therefore the hypothesis arises whether it is possi-

ble to independently develop yet another reliable 

quality metric for questions using a model with a 

small number of features. 

The findings about our 10 features regression 

model are reported in this paper. Section 3 is on 

nomenclature that is to set up a background for a 

novice reader. Details of our experiment are listed 

in Section 4. Observations and interpretations are 

presented in Section 5. Findings are summarized in 

the end of the paper.  

3. Nomenclature  

A question is ill-formed, i.e., unacceptable, if one 

or more flaws of the following types are observed 

in its articulation: incorrect grammar, semantic 

inadequacy, vagueness with respect to the answer, 

inadequate data, a wrong choice of WH form while 

presenting a question, or some editing is needed 

(H&S, 2009; Mannem et. al, 2010). 

A question is well-formed, hence acceptable, if 

it is not ill-formed, i.e., it does not have any of the 

6 flaws mentioned above.  

A Base sentence is the source text for generating 

the questions. 

Error Type % 

No error 43.10 

Wrong WH 30.17 

Vague 11.21 

Formatting error 6.90 

Ungrammatical 5.17 

Does not make sense 4.31 

Co reference not resolve 3.45 

385



 

An answer phrase is a machine-selected portion of 

the base sentence that is expected to be an answer 

to one or many potential questions that would be 

generated by an AQG. 

Example (base sentence): As is the case in a Par-

liamentary system, the government is formed by the 

party, alliance or group of assembly members who 

command the majority. 

(Answer phrase) by the party, alliance or group of 

assembly members who command the majority 

IFQ (generated by HSAQG): What is the govern-

ment formed by? 

WFQ (manually generated): Who forms the gov-

ernment in a Parliamentary system? 

Flaw: Wrong choice of wh-form. 

4. Methodology  

Base text database consisted of five randomly se-

lected paragraphs, of length 1 to 6 sentences, from 

wiki articles on a variety of topics: University of 

Mumbai, Lokmanya Tilak as a journalist, Govern-

ment of Maharashtra, renewable energy, solar 

technology [Appendix 1].  

135 questions were generated with HSAQG, 

out of which we randomly selected 75 as a training 

set. 13 questions (17.33% or a little over 1/6) were 

found to be redundant.  Of the remaining 62, we 

found that 26 questions (42%) were acceptable to 

humans or WFQ, and 36 questions (58%) needed 

reframing in order to make them WFQs. 

It appears that there is enough scope for further 

improvement in systems like HSAQG, hence this 

is a substantive research problem.  Inspection of 

the data reveals that the changes required to im-

prove the acceptability of the AQG-generated 

questions include removal of formatting errors, 

extra precision of questions to enhance clarity, 

more complete selection of answer phrases.  

In the first step we analyzed the system gener-

ated IFQs with respect to the corresponding WFQs 

that were provided by a human expert. This exer-

cise laid the foundation for generating the 16 di-

mensional vector representation of a question 

which is the core of our quality metric.  

In the Table 2 below we list a few sample IFQs 

from our experiment, the corresponding WFQs and 

the flaws observed in each case. 

Sentence simplification is another challenge in 

AQG systems. AQG system frames all possible 

questions from the modifier phrase, subordinate 

clause, appositives phrases, and from leading prep-

ositional phrases. Those questions are unacceptable 

because they are vague or grammatically incorrect, 

or do not make sense. Our analysis reveals that 

AQGs fail to produce WFQs from the negative 

sentences.  

In the next step we had a team of 5 human 

raters rank each of the questions on a 5-point scale. 

The protocol for generating the rank of a question 

was that the majority carries the vote. In case of 

much divergence in perceived rank, we took cog-

nizance of others’ views before choosing a rank. 

The sentiments of the raters were shared, which 

gave us an idea about what is not appealing to 

them. We formalized this feedback using the 

grammatical framework of English sentence struc-

ture.  This exercise led to 16 rules for computing 

the rank of a question. These rules have been listed 

as R1 to R16.  Only 10 rules (*-marked) were ap-

plicable for the H&S AQG that we used. Examples 

for remaining 6 rules (which are not *- marked) are 

taken from various internet sources. Ill-

articulations are underlined and corrections are in 

bold. 

R1(verbTenseInQuestion): Verb exists AND Verb 

Tense is correct => 1 else 0  

Base sentence: The Martians landed near the 

aqueduct. 
IFQ: Where did the Martians landed?  

WFQ: Where did the Martians land?  

* R2(AuxVerb): AuxiliaryVerb is present in the 

base sentence AND (incorrect or no use of Auxilia-

ryVerb in the question) => 0 else 1 

The University of Mumbai was established  

 1857 by Dr John Wilson (after whom Wilson 

College in Mumbai is named), according to

  

386



 

Sr 

No 

Base Sentence Answer 

phrase 

IFQ WFQ  Flaw Flaw type 

1 Maharashtra has 

bicameral legisla-

ture, i.e., it con-

sists of two 

houses, Vidhan 

Sabha and Vidhan 

Parishad. 

a bicam-

eral legis-

lature i. e. 

What does Ma-

harashtra consist 

of two houses--

 Vidhan Sabha 

and Vidhan Pa-

rishad Maha-

rashtra has? 

Which type of 

legislature 

does Maha-

rashtra have? 

Which legisla-

ture has two 

houses? 

it refers to 

Maharashtra 

but, actually it 

should refer to 

the 

word bicamera

l 

Inappropriate 

resolution of co-

reference 

2 Following this, on 

22 June 1897, 

Commissioner 

Rand and another 

British officer, Lt. 

Ayerst, were shot 

and killed by the 

Chapekar brothers 

and their other 

associates 

Commis-

sioner 

Rand and 

another 

British 

officer 

 

Who were shot? 

Who were 

killed? 

Who were 

shot and killed 

A clearer 

question could 

be: 

Who were 

shot and killed 

on 22 June 

1897 by the 

Chapekar 

brothers and 

their other 

associates? 

Shoot and kill 

refers to an 

instance; 

Shoot and kill 

are not to be 

treated as two 

different in-

stances.     

Verbs come with 

a conjunction; 

question  is too 

short  

3 Tilak was born in 

a Chitpavan 

Brahmin family in 

Ratnagiri Maha-

rashtra on 23July 

1856 

23rd july 

1856 

 

When was Tilak 

born in a Chit-

pavan Brahmin 

family on 23 

July 1856? 

When was 

Tilak born ? 
Date, family 

and place need 

to be treated 

as three dif-

ferent things 

Additional con-

text is to be re-

moved  

4 Tilak was born in 

a Chitpavan 

Brahmin family in 

Ratnagiri Maha-

rashtra on 23July 

1856 

on 23 What was Tilak 

born in a Chit-

pavan Brahmin 

family in 

Ratnagiri Maha-

rashtra on July 

1856?  

When was 

Tilak born? 

23 July 1856 

is a phrase 

Answer phrase is 

partially selected 

5 
Based on 

REN21's 2014 

report, renewables 

contributed 19 

percent to our en-

ergy consumption 

and 22 percent to 

our electricity 

generation in 

2012 and 2013, 

respectively 

 to our 

energy 

consump-

tion and 

22 per-

cent- 

 

 What did re-

newables con-

tribute 19 

percent to to our 

electricity gen-

eration in 2012 

and 2013, re-

spectively? 

 what  [ac-

cording to 

REN21's re-

port] in 2012 

renewables 

contributed 19 

percent to? 

 Words order 

is incorrect. 

Question be-

comes un-

grammatical.  

Grammatically 

incorrect  

387



 

 

Table Continued….. 

 

 

 

Table 2: Sample IFQs with flaw types and suggested WFQ 

``Wood's dispatch'', drafted by Sir Charles 

IFQ : Who was ``Wood's dispatch'' drafted by 

in 1854? 

WFQ:  Who drafted "Woods dispatch" ? 

*R3(AnsPronoun): Correct Wh-phrase with respect 

to the Pronoun phrase in Answer => 1 else 0 

Base Sentence: It has 711 affiliated colleges 

IFQ: What has 711 affiliated colleges? 

WFQ: What has 711 affiliated colleges? 

*R4(PronounAsSubjectInQuestion): Subject of the 

question phrase is pronoun => 0 else 1 

Base Sentence: It has 711 affiliated colleges 

IFQ: What does it have? 

WFQ: How many affiliated colleges does Uni-

versity of Mumbai have? 

*R5(AnsPhraseAsPP): Answer phrase is a proposi-

tional phrase => 0 else 1 

Base Sentence: The Government of Maharash-

tra is the government for the state of Maha-

rashtra in Western India. 

IFQ: What is the Government of Maharashtra 

the government for the state of Maharashtra 

in? 

WFQ: Where in India is the Government of 

Maharashtra the government for the state of 

Maharashtra?     

Sr 

No 

Base Sentence Answer 

phrase 

IFQ WFQ  Flaw Flaw type 

6 
 

Following this, on 22 

June 1897, Commis-

sioner Rand and an-

other British officer, 

Lt. Ayerst were shot 

and killed by the 

Chapekar brothers and 

their other associates 

 yes/no  Did Commis-

sioner Rand and 

another British 

officer follow 

this? 

 

 Did Chapekar 

brothers and 

their other asso-

ciates kill and 

shoot Commis-

sioner Rand and 

another British 

officer, Lt. 

Ayerst on 22 

June 1897? 

 “Following 

this” indicates 

an event.  

Does not make 

sense 

7 

. 

Maharashtra has a 

bicameral legislature i. 

e. it consists of two 

houses-- Vidhan Sa-

bha (legislative as-

sembly) and Vidhan 

Parishad (legislative 

council). 

 yes/no 

 

 Does Maharash-

tra consist of two 

houses-- Vidhan 

Sabha and Vidhan 

Parishad Maha-

rashtra has a bi-

cameral 

legislature i. e.? 

 does maharash-

tra consist of 

two houses Vi-

dhan sabha and 

Vidhan pari-

shad? 

 

 Removal of “-“ 

and “i.e” from 

question.  

 Formatting error 

8 
In 1792, Carey, a Bap-

tist, who was not only 

a cobbler, but a lin-

guist of the highest 

order. 

Carey Who was not only 

a cobbler, but a 

linguist of the 

highest order in 

1792? 

Who was Bap-

tists, cobbler 

and linguist of 

highest order in 

1972? 

Frame affirma-

tive question. 

Negative sen-

tence 

388



 

*R6(SubordinateClause): Subordinate clause in 

question => 0 else 1 

Base Sentence: Solar technologies are broadly 

characterized as either passive solar or active 

solar depending on the way they capture, con-

vert and distribute solar energy. 

IFQ: What are Solar technologies broadly 

characterized as they capture, convert and dis-

tribute solar energy? 

WFQ: What are the ways to characterize Solor 

Technologies? 

*R7(NounPhraseInsidePP): Noun phrase that is the 

answer phrase is a part of a propositional phrase 

=> 0 else 1 

Base Sentence: The Government of Maharash-

tra is the government for the state of Maha-

rashtra in Western India. 

IFQ: What is the Government of Maharashtra 

the government for in Western India? 

WFQ: Which state in Western India the Gov-

ernment of Maharashtra is the government 

for? 

R8(SubjectMovement): Answer phrase is not a 

subject AND correct Subject-Auxiliary Verb 

movement => 1 else 0  

Base Sentence: Sam is reading the paper. 

IFQ: what Sam is reading? 

WFQ: What is Sam reading? 

R9(RemovedAppositives): Appositive phrase => 0 

else 1  

Base Sentence: In June of 1987, The Bridge of 

Trinquetaille, Vincent van Gogh's view of an 

iron bridge over the Rhone, sold for $20.2 mil-

lion. 

IFQ: what was Vincent van Gogh's view of an 

iron bridge over the Rhone sold for $20.2 mil-

lion? 

WFQ: What was sold for $20.2 million? 

R10(LeadConjunction): Leading conjunction 

phrase => 0 else  

Base Sentence: Since they had misbehaved, the 

boys were given one week suspensions from 

school. 

IFQ: who had misbehaved since? 

WFQ: who had misbehaved? 

R11(NounParticiple): Noun participle without the 

noun => 0 else 1  

Base sentence: Having been on the road for 

four days, the Todds were exhausted.  

IFQ: Who were exhausted having been on the 

road for four days? 

WFQ: Who were exhausted? 

*R12(LeadingPP): Leading proposition phrase of a 

base sentence appearing in the question AND not 

moved to the end of the question => 0 else 1 

Base sentence: Based on REN21's 2014 report, 

renewables contributed 19 percent to our en-

ergy consumption and 22 percent to our elec-

tricity generation in 2012 and 2013, 

respectively 

IFQ: Who were based on REN21's 2014 re-

port? 

WFQ: What [according to REN21's 2014 re-

port] contributed 19 percent to our energy 

consumption in 2012?  

Base sentence: For convocation, I will go to 

the University.  

IFQ: For what will you go to the University?  

WFQ: What will you go to the University for? 

WFQ: Why will you go to the University? 

WFQ with a lesser rank: When will go to the 

University? (The correct answer of this ques-

tion will be “convocation day” or “on convo-

cation day”). 

*R13(Wh-PhraseAsPerANS): Correct Wh-phrase 

with respect to the Answer in the Answer phrase 

=> 1 else 0 

Base Sentence: Tilak was born in a Chitpavan 

Brahmin family in Ratnagiri, headquarters of 

the eponymous district of present day Maha-

rashtra (then British India) on 23 July 1856. 

IFQ: Who was headquarters of the eponymous 

district of present day? 

WFQ: what was the headquarters of the epon-

ymous district of present day Maharashtra? 

*R14(LengthAnsPhrase): NOT (Answer phrase 

longer than 4 words OR Answer phrase  lesser than 

4) OR Answer phrase is a named entity => 1 else 0 

Base Sentence: The University of Mumbai of-

fers Bachelors, Masters and Doctoral degrees 

apart from diplomas and certificates in many 

disciplines. 

IFQ: What does the University of Mumbai offer 

Bachelors, Masters and Doctoral degrees 

apart from? 

WFQ: Which courses does University of Mum-

bai offer along with Bachelors, Masters and 

Doctoral degrees? 

R15(ChkNegation): Base sentence is a negation 

AND Question form is negative => 0 else 1  

If question is not affirmative then rank 0 else 1 

389



 

Base sentence: In 1792, Carey, a Baptist, who 

was not only a cobbler, but a linguist of the 

highest order. 

IFQ: Who was not only a cobbler, but a linguist 

of the highest order in 1792? 

WFQ: Who was cobbler and linguist of higher 

order in 1792? 

*R16(Wh-PhraseChange): WFQ => 0 else number 

of modifications required to make it a WFQ 

Base Sentence: Maharashtra has a bicameral 

legislature i. e. it consists of two houses-- Vi-

dhan Sabha (legislative assembly) and Vidhan 

Parishad (legislative council). 

IFQ: Does Maharashtra consist of two houses-

- Vidhan Sabha and Vidhan Parishad Maha-

rashtra has a bicameral legislature i. e.? 

WFQ: does Maharashtra consist of two houses 

Vidhan sabha and Vidhan parishad? 

A question is represented as a 16 dimensional 

vector, of which all values but the last are either 0 

or 1. Together with the human rated rank of each 

question as the dependent variable in the 17th 

place, we got a system of 62 equations in 16 inde-

pendent variables (equivalently, 62 observations 

with 16 parameters). We attempted a solution of 

this system by employing a multiple linear regres-

sion. 

5. Result and Discussion:  

At 93.5%, the R-squared value, or the coefficient 

of determination, is satisfactory. We tested the 

model by using 61 observations that were inde-

pendent of the training sample. Of which 6 ques-

tions were found redundant.  The precision of the 

model from a sample of size 54 is 0.934.  

As shown in the Figure 3 (a) and (b), the points 

in the residual plot when employed our model, are 

randomly dispersed. It confirms that the linear re-

gression model is appropriate for this data. 

We derived a quality metric for computing 

“how well-formed a question is”: 

Y= 0.097*AuxVerb  +  0.194* LeadingPP  + 

0.246* LengthAnsPhrase +  0.017* Wh-

PhraseAsPerANS + 0.714* AnsPronoun - 0.010* 

PronounAsSubjectInQuestion - 0.215* Subordi-

nateClause +  0.208*NounPhraseInsidePP - 

0.037* AnsPhraseAsPP - 0.588* Wh-

PhraseChange + 3.746  

 

  
(a)                                 (b) 

Figure 3 (a): Residual plot for ranks generated by LR   

model 

Figure 3 (b): Residual plot for Human rated ranks 

We observed a few interesting facts a majority 

of errors (30.17%) are because of wrong choice of 

Wh-phrase. It may be due to the fact that formulat-

ing a question using what is relatively easier and 

not incorrect per se. Therefore, AQGs employ this 

technique most of the time while generating a Wh-

question.  However, such questions are vague, im-

precise so we classify them as IFQ. Articulating a 

question with a right Wh-phrase involves analysis 

of the answer term. Recall the example from [Sec-

tion 4], namely, Why will you go to the University? 

The articulation of this WFQ requires the under-

standing that convocation is an event at the Uni-

versity and that has a purpose for its visitors. 

Interpretation of the event as a temporal entity 

gives rise to a less pertinent question: When will 

you go to the University? 

In the case of an IFQ with a flaw, a wrong 

choice of Wh-phrase requires up to 5 modifications 

while transforming it into a WFQ. A list of sample 

templates for a variety of Wh-questions and the 

corresponding transformations is given below. 

Sample question prototypes  

Example1: <What Verb Object?>: What drink 

chocolate of us? 

Example2: <What do-support Subject Verb?>:   

What did you eat (today)? 

Example3: <How many Helping noun Verb Ob-

ject?>: How many of us drink chocolate? 

Example3: <How many Helping noun do-

support Subject Verb?>: How many modifications 

do we need? 

 To change the Wh-phrase from a what [Ex-

ample1] type question to How many [Exam-

ple3] type we need to change the Wh-phrase and 

390



 

the addition of a helping noun. We modify the 

question in 2 steps.  

 Ex: Base Sentence : Tilak obtained his Bache-

lor of Arts in first class in Mathematics from Dec-

can College of Pune in 1877. 

Answer phrase: in first class 

IFQ : What did Tilak obtain his Bachelor of Arts in 

from Deccan College of Pune in 1877? 

WFQ: which class did Tilak obtain in his Bachelor 

of Arts in Mathematics from Deccan College of 

Pune in 1877. 

To change IFQ to WFQ we need to perform 

changes like WhatWhich ; insert class ; Add 

preposition  in before possessive noun.  

We assign value 3 for 16th feature which indicates 

the number of modification required to make WFQ 

from given IFQ.  
A too-long answer phrase leads to the for-

mation of a wrong Wh-question, as it may contain 

sub-phrases or may lead to the formation of vague 

questions, since very little information remains in 

hand for formulating the questions. For example, 

with  “It is an elected government with 288 MLAs 

elected to the legislative assembly for a 5-year 

term”  as a base sentence and “with 288 MLAs 

elected to the legislative assembly for a 5-

year term”  as an answer phrase the choice of a 

question is  “Who is it an elected government 

with?” lead to the formation of Wrong Wh-

question. 

The system generated ranks (R) labeled A to E 

(where A is the best, and E is not acceptable) as 

follows: A is 4 to 5, B is 3 to 4, C is 2 to  3, D is 1 

to 2, E is 0 to 1  (upper bound is included, lower 

bound excluded).  For classification we used J48 

classifier, to classify the test data of 54 questions 

into defined five classes (A-E). 

Systems performance is evaluated by calculat-

ing Precision and F1 measure using formula men-

tioned below. 

Precision (PPV) = TP /(TP + FP) 

F1= 2TP/(2TP+FP+FN) 

Study results shows average precision value for all 

classes is 0.934 and F1-score as 0.944.  

Towards the conclusion of our experiment, we 

manually modified each IFQ such that its vector 

representation will yield an optimum value and 

computed its rank by applying H&S metric as well 

as our metric. There were 4, 13, 18 and 20 ques-

tions were of the ranks up to 2, 3, 4 and 5 respec-

tively. It revealed that the ranks of all but the 

question numbers 5 and 41 have been upgraded to 

5. Rank of question number 5 and 41 were upgrad-

ed to 4. Answer phrase in these cases has been a 

pronoun phrase, following this. In the absence of 

background knowledge resolution of the pronoun 

reference is a challenge while framing a WFQ of 

rating 5. 

6. Conclusion 

This study reveals that researching AQGs is worth 

for their enhancement. HSAQG generated ques-

tions are free from the 6 types of infirmities, name-

ly, correct verb tense, Subject-Auxiliary Verb 

movement, leading conjunction phrase, Appositive 

phrase, question form is negative. Our linear re-

gression model with 16 features is simple and ef-

fective for ranking a question for its well-formed-

ness. The inputs generated by it are worth looking 

while designing an AQQE. AQQE is a challenge 

that has immediate applications. 

References 

Agarwal, M., & Mannem, P. (2011a, June). Auto-

matic gap-fill question generation from text 

books. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on 

Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational 

Applications (pp. 56-64). Association for Com-

putational Linguistics. 

Agarwal, M., Shah, R., & Mannem, P. (2011b, 

June). Automatic question generation using dis-

course cues. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop 

on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educa-

tional Applications (pp. 1-9). Association for 

Computational Linguistics. 

Aist G.(2001) Towards automatic glossarization: 

automatically constructing and administering 

vocabulary assistance factoids and multiple-

choice assessment. International Journal of Arti-

ficial Intelligence in Education, 12, 212-231 

Aldabe, I., de Lacalle, M. L., Maritxalar, M., Mar-

tinez, E., & Uria, L. (2006, January). Arikiturri: 

an automatic question generator based on cor-

pora and nlp techniques. In Intelligent Tutoring 

Systems (pp. 584-594). Springer Berlin Heidel-

berg. 

Ali, H., Chali, Y., & Hasan, S. A. (2010, June). 

Automation of question generation from sentenc-

es. In Proceedings of QG2010: The Third Work-

shop on Question Generation (pp. 58-67).  

391



 

Brown, J. C., Frishkoff, G. A., & Eskenazi, M. 

(2005, October). Automatic question generation 

for vocabulary assessment. In Proceedings of the 

conference on Human Language Technology and 

Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-

cessing (pp. 819-826). Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics. 

Chali, Y., & Hasan, S. A. (2012). Towards Auto-

matic Topical Question Generation. 

In COLING (pp. 475-492). 

Chen, W. (2009). Aist, G., Mostow, J.: Generating 

questions automatically from informational text. 

In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Ques-

tion Generation (AIED 2009) (pp. 17-24). 

Chen, C. Y., Liou, H. C., & Chang, J. S. (2006, 

July). Fast: an automatic generation system for 

grammar tests. In Proceedings of the 

COLING/ACL on Interactive presentation ses-

sions (pp. 1-4). Association for Computational 

Linguistics. 

Heilman, M., & Smith, N. A. (2009). Question 

generation via overgenerating transformations 

and ranking. (No. CMU-LTI-09-013). 

CARNEGIE-MELLON UNIV PITTSBURGH 

PA LANGUAGE TECHNOLOGIES INST. 

Heilman, M., & Smith, N. A. (2010b, June). Good 

question! statistical ranking for question genera-

tion. In Human Language Technologies: The 

2010 Annual Conference of the North American 

Chapter of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics (pp. 609-617). Association for Com-

putational Linguistics. 

Heilman, M., & Smith, N. A. (2010c, June). Rating 

computer-generated questions with Mechanical 

Turk. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 

Workshop on Creating Speech and Language 

Data with Amazon's Mechanical Turk (pp. 35-

40). Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Heilman, M., & Smith, N. A. (2009, July). Ranking 

automatically generated questions as a shared 

task. In The 2nd Workshop on Question Genera-

tion (Vol. 1, pp. 30-37). 

Heilman, M. (2011). Automatic factual question 

generation from text (Doctoral dissertation, Car-

negie Mellon University). 

Hoshino, A., & Nakagawa, H. (2005, June). A re-

al-time multiple-choice question generation for 

language testing: a preliminary study. 

In Proceedings of the second workshop on 

Building Educational Applications Using 

NLP (pp. 17-20). Association for Computational 

Linguistics.  

Kunichika, H., Katayama, T., Hirashima, T., & 

Takeuchi, A. (2004). Automated question gener-

ation methods for intelligent English learning 

systems and its evaluation. In Proc. of ICCE. 

Liske, H. (2011, June). A framework for automated 

generation of examination questions from web 

based semantically treated search results. 

In Proceedings of the 12th International Confer-

ence on Computer Systems and Technolo-

gies(pp. 510-515). ACM.  

Liu, M., Calvo, R. A., & Rus, V. (2010, January). 

Automatic question generation for literature re-

view writing support. In Intelligent Tutoring Sys-

tems(pp. 45-54). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

Liu, M., & Calvo, R. A. (2011, January). Question 

taxonomy and implications for automatic ques-

tion generation. In Artificial Intelligence in Edu-

cation (pp. 504-506). Springer Berlin 

Heidelberg.  

Liu, M., Calvo, R., Aditomo, A., & Pizzato, L. A. 

(2012). Using wikipedia and conceptual graph 

structures to generate questions for academic 

writing support. Learning Technologies, IEEE 

Transactions on, 5(3), 251-263. 

Liu, M., Calvo, R. A., & Rus, V. (2012). G-Asks: 

An intelligent automatic question generation sys-

tem for academic writing support. Dialogue and 

Discourse: Special Issue on Question Genera-

tion, 3(2), 101-124. 

Mannem, P., Prasad, R., & Joshi, A. (2010, June). 

Question generation from paragraphs at UPenn: 

QGSTEC system description. In Proceedings of 

QG2010: The Third Workshop on Question 

Generation (pp. 84-91).  

Mitkov, R., An Ha, L., & Karamanis, N. (2006). A 

computer-aided environment for generating mul-

tiple-choice test items. Natural Language Engi-

neering, 12(02), 177-194. 

Pal, S., Mondal, T., Pakray, P., Das, D., & Bandy-

opadhyay, S. (2010). Qgstec system description–

juqgg: A rule based approach. In Proceedings of 

the Third Workshop on Question Generation, 

pp.76-79 

Prasad, R., & Joshi, A. (2008, September). A dis-

course-based approach to generating why-

questions from texts. In Proceedings of the 

Workshop on the Question Generation Shared 

Task and Evaluation Challenge (pp. 1-3).  

392



 

Rus, V., & Lester, J. (2009, July). The 2nd Work-

shop on Question Generation. In AIED (p. 808). 

Salgaonkar A. and Divate M.(2014c) Ill-Formed to 

Well Formed Question Generator. In ICCI’14, 

Mumbai. 

Wolfe, J. H. (1976, February). Automatic question 

generation from text-an aid to independent 

study. In ACM SIGCUE Outlook (Vol. 10, No. 

SI, pp. 104-112). ACM. 

Appendix (source Wikipedia) 

Paragraph1: 

The University of Mumbai offers Bachelors, Mas-

ters and Doctoral degrees apart from diplomas and 

certificates in many disciplines. The University of 

Mumbai is one of the largest universities in the 

world in terms of the number of students. In 2011 

the total number of enrolled students was 5,49,432. 

It has 711 affiliated colleges. The University of 

Mumbai was established in 1857 by Dr John Wil-

son (after whom Wilson College in Mumbai is 

named), according to ``Wood's dispatch'', drafted 

by Sir Charles Wood in 1854.The name of the 

University has been changed from ``University of 

Bombay'' to ``University of Mumbai'' as per a ga-

zette of the Government of Maharashtra dated Sep-

tember 4,1996. 

Paragraph 2:  

The Government of Maharashtra is the government 

for the state of Maharashtra in Western India. Ma-

harashtra has a bicameral legislature i. e. it consists 

of two houses-- Vidhan Sabha (legislative assem-

bly) and VidhanParishad (legislative council).It is 

an elected government with 288 MLAs elected to 

the legislative assembly for a 5-year term. The 

leader of the majority in assembly becomes the 

Chief Minister and selects the cabinet members. As 

is the case in a Parliamentary system, the govern-

ment is formed by the party, alliance or group of 

assembly members who command the majority.  

Paragraph 3 : 

Based on REN21's 2014 report, renewables con-

tributed 19 percent to our global energy consump-

tion and 22 percent to our electricity generation in 

2012 and 2013, respectively. n 2011, the Interna-

tional Energy Agency said that "the development 

of affordable, inexhaustible and clean solar energy 

technologies will have huge longer-term benefits. 

Renewable energy replaces conventional fuels in 

four distinct areas: electricity generation, hot wa-

ter\/space heating, motor fuels, and rural energy 

services. Wind power is growing at the rate of 30% 

annually, with a worldwide installed capacity of 

282,482 megawatts (MW) at the end of 2012, and 

is widely used in Europe, Asia, and the United 

States. Renewable energy is generally defined as 

energy that comes from resources which are natu-

rally replenished on a human timescale such as 

sunlight, wind, rain, tides, waves. 

Paragraph4  

Tilak was one of the first and strongest advocates 

of “Swaraj” (self-rule) and a strong radical in Indi-

an consciousness. Tilak was born in a Chitpavan 

Brahmin family in Ratnagiri headquarters of the 

eponymous district of present-day Maharashtra 

(then British India) on 23 July 1856. He obtained 

his Bachelor of Arts in first class in Mathematics 

from Deccan College of Pune in 1877. In 1879 he 

obtained his LL.B degree from Government Law 

College. Following this, on 22 June 1897, Com-

missioner Rand and another British officer, Lt. 

Ayerst were shot and killed by the Chapekar broth-

ers and their other associates. 

Paragraph 5: 

Venus Express is outfitted with a camera that can 

take images in infrared and visual spectrums as 

well as a device called the Flux Gate Magnetome-

ter, which searches for lightning signal 

Paragraph 6: 

Solar technologies are broadly characterized as 

either passive solar or active solar depending on 

the way they capture, convert and distribute solar 

energy. 

393


