



















































Seeing is Correcting: curating lexical resources using social interfaces


Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Linked Data in Linguistics (LDL-2015), pages 20–29,
Beijing, China, July 31, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics and Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing

Seeing is Correcting:
curating lexical resources using social interfaces

Livy Real
IBM Research

livyreal@gmail.com

Fabricio Chalub
IBM Research

fcbrbr@gmail.com

Valeria de Paiva
Nuance Communications

valeria.depaiva@gmail.com

Claudia Freitas
PUC-RJ

maclaudia.freitas@gmail.com

Alexandre Rademaker
IBM Research and FGV/EMAp

alexrad@br.ibm.com

Abstract

This note describes OpenWordnet-PT, an automat-
ically created, manually curated wordnet for Por-
tuguese and introduces the newly developed web
interface we are using to speed up its manual
curation. OpenWordNet-PT is part of a collec-
tion of wordnets for various languages, jointly de-
scribed and distributed through the Open Multi-
Lingual WordNet and the Global WordNet Asso-
ciation. OpenWordnet-PT has been primarily dis-
tributed, from the beginning, as RDF files along
with its model description in OWL, and it is freely
available for download. We contend the creation
of such large, distributed and linkable lexical re-
sources is on the cusp of revolutionizing multilin-
gual language processing to the next truly seman-
tic level. But to get there, there is a need for user
interfaces that allow ordinary users and (not only
computational) linguists to help in the checking and
cleaning up of the quality of the resource. We
present our suggestion of one such web interface
and describe its features supporting the collabora-
tive curation of the data. This showcases the use
and importance of its linked data features, to keep
track of information provenance during the whole
life-cycle of the RDF resource.

1 Introduction

Lexical knowledge bases are organized reposito-
ries of information about words. These resources
typically include information about the possible
meanings of words, relations between these mean-
ings, definitions and phrases that exemplify their
use and maybe some numeric grades of confi-
dence in the information provided. The Princeton
wordnet model (Fellbaum, 1998), with English as
its target language, is probably the most popular
model of a lexical knowledge base. Our main goal
is to provide good quality lexical resources for
Portuguese, making use, as much as possible, of
the effort already spent creating similar resources
for English. Thus we are working towards a Por-
tuguese wordnet, based on the Princeton model
(de Paiva et al., 2012).

Linguistic resources are very easy to start work-
ing on, very hard to improve and extremely diffi-
cult to maintain, as the last two tasks do not get
the recognition that the first one gets. Given this
intrinsic barrier, many well-funded projects, with
institutional or commercial backing cannot keep
their momentum. Thus it is rather pleasing to see
that a project like ours, without any kind of official
infra-structure, has been able to continue devel-
opment and improvement so far, re-inventing its
tools and methods, to the extent that it has been
chosen by Google Translate to be used as their
source of lexical information for Portuguese1.

This paper reports on a new web interface2 for
consulting, checking and collaborating on the im-
provement of OpenWordnet-PT. This is the auto-
matically created, but manually verified wordnet
for Portuguese, fully compatible and connected
to Princeton’s paradigmatic WordNet, that we are
working on. It has been surprising how a simple
interface can make content so much more perspic-
uous. Thus our title: if seeing is believing, new
ways of seeing the data and of slicing it, accord-
ing to our requirements, are necessary for curating,
correcting and improving this data.

Correcting and improving linguistic data is a
hard task, as the guidelines for what to aim for
are not set in stone nor really known in advance.
While the WordNet model has been paradigmatic
in modern computational lexicography, this model
is not without its failings and shortcomings, as far
as specific tasks are concerned. Also it is easy and
somewhat satisfying to provide copious quantita-
tive descriptions of numbers of synsets, for differ-
ent parts-of-speech, of triples associated to these
synsets and of intersections with different subsets

1http://translate.google.com/about/
intl/en_ALL/license.html

2http://wnpt.brlcloud.com/wn/

20



of Wordnet, etc. However, the whole commu-
nity dedicated to creating wordnets in other lan-
guages, the Global WordNet Association3, has not
come up with criteria for semantic evaluation of
these resources nor has it produced, so far, ways of
comparing their relative quality or accuracy. Thus
qualitative assessment of a new wordnet seems,
presently, a matter of judgement and art, more
than a commonly agreed practice. Believing that
this qualitative assessment is important, and so far
rather elusive, we propose in this note that hav-
ing many eyes over the resource, with the ability
to shape it in the directions wanted, is a main ad-
vantage. This notion of volunteer curated content,
as first and foremost exemplified by Wikipedia,
needs adaptation to work for lexical resources.
This paper describes one such adaptation.

2 OpenWordnet-PT

The OpenWordnet-PT (Rademaker et al., 2014),
abbreviated as OpenWN-PT, is a wordnet orig-
inally developed as a syntactic projection of
the Universal WordNet (UWN) of de Melo and
Weikum (de Melo and Weikum, 2009). Its
long term goal is to serve as the main lexicon
for a system of natural language processing fo-
cused on logical reasoning, based on represen-
tation of knowledge, using an ontology, such as
SUMO (Pease and Fellbaum, 2010).

OpenWN-PT was built using machine learn-
ing techniques to create relations between graphs
representing lexical information coming from ver-
sions (in multiple languages) of Wikipedia entries
and open electronic dictionaries. For details, one
can consult (de Melo and Weikum, 2009). Then a
projection targeting only the synsets in Portuguese
was produced. Despite starting out as a projec-
tion only, at the level of the lemmas in Portuguese
and their relationships, the OpenWN-PT has been
constantly improved through linguistically moti-
vated additions and removals, either manually or
by making use of large corpora.

The philosophy of OpenWN-PT is to maintain
a close connection with Princeton’s wordnet since
this minimizes the impact of lexicographical de-
cisions on the separation or grouping of senses
in a given synset. Such disambiguation decisions
are inherently arbitrary (Kilgarriff, 1997), thus the
multilingual alignment gives us a pragmatic and
practical solution. The solution of following the

3http://globalwordnet.org/

work in Princeton is practical, as WordNet remains
the most used lexical resource in the world. It is
also pragmatic, since those decisions will be more
useful, if they are similar to what other wordnets
say. Of course this does not mean that all decisions
will be sorted out for us. As part of our process-
ing is automated and error-prone, we strive to re-
move the biggest mistakes created by automation,
using linguistic skills and tools. In this endeav-
our we are much helped by the linked data phi-
losophy and implementation, as keeping the align-
ment between synsets is facilitated by looking at
the synsets in several different languages in paral-
lel. For this we make use of the Open Multilingual
WordNet’s interface (Bond and Foster, 2013).

This lexical enrichment process of OpenWN-
PT employs three language strategies: (i) trans-
lation; (ii) corpus extraction; (iii) dictionaries.
Regarding translations, glossaries and lists pro-
duced for other languages, such as English, French
and Spanish are used, automatically translated
and manually revised. The addition of corpora
data contributes words or phrases in common use
which may be specific to the Portuguese language
(e.g. the verb frevar, which means to dance frevo,
a typical Brazilian dance) or which do not appear
via the automatic construction, for some reason.
(One can conjecture that perhaps the word is too
rare for the automatic methods to pick it up: an ex-
ample would be the adjective hidrogenada, which
is in use in every supermarket of Brasil. The verb
hydrogenate is in the English wordnet, the verb ex-
ists exactly as expected in Portuguese hidrogenar,
but the automatic methods did not find it nor the
derived adjective.) The first corpora experiment
in OpenWN-PT was the integration of the nomi-
nalizations lexicon, the NomLex-PT (Freitas et al.,
2014). Use of a corpus, while helpful for specific
conceptualizations in the language, brings addi-
tional challenges for mapping alignment, since it
is expected that there will be expressions for which
there is no synset in the English wordnet. Dictio-
naries were used both for the original creation of
Portuguese synsets but also indirectly through the
linguists’ use of PAPEL (Gonçalo Oliveira et al.,
2008) to construct extra pairs of words of the form
(verb, nominalization).

3 Current status

The OpenWN-PT currently has 43,925 synsets, of
which 32,696 correspond to nouns, 4,675 to verbs,

21



5,575 to adjectives and 979 to adverbs. While it is
not as comprehensive as Princeton’s, the Finnish,
or the Thai wordnets, it is still more than twice
the size of the Russian wordnet, bigger than the
Spanish and just a little smaller than the French
wordnet. But as discussed in the introduction, the
quality of these resources is much harder to com-
pare.

Besides downloading it, the data on Portuguese
can be retrieved via a SPARQL endpoint 4. The
multilingual base can be consulted and compared
with other wordnets using the Open Multilingual
Wordnet (OMWN) interface 5 and changing pref-
erences to the desired languages, assuming the
lexical item is found 6.

The ability of comparing senses in several lan-
guages was already useful when judging mean-
ings in Portuguese. However, before the new in-
terface was implemented, we did not the ability
to compare a word with the collection of other
words with the same meaning, or with different
shades of meaning, appearing both in English and
Portuguese. This all changed, since we started
developing a new search and editing interface in
September 2014.

4 Challenges of lexical enrichment

We set ourselves the task of building a wordnet
for Portuguese, based on the Princeton wordnet
model. This is not the same as building the Prince-
ton wordnet in Portuguese. We do not propose to
simply translate the original wordnet, but mean to
create a wordnet for Portuguese based on Prince-
ton’s architecture and, as much as possible, linked
to it at the level of the synsets.

The task of building a wordnet in Portuguese
imposes many challenges and choices. Even the
simple translation of a lexical resource, such as
NomLex (Catherine Macleod, 1998) for compar-
ison and further extension of our wordnet, re-
quires different techniques and theoretical deci-
sions. One example might help: the synsets au-
tomatically provided by OpenWN-PT tend to have
relatively high register words, especially ones with
Latin or Greek roots and present in several Euro-
pean languages. Thus we do not get many collo-

4http://logics.emap.fgv.br:10035/
repositories/wn30

5http://compling.hss.ntu.edu.sg/omw
6Since we do not have control over the update processes

of OMWN the reader should be aware that OMWN might be
not up-to-date with the current OpenWN-PT version.

quialisms or everyday words from the translation
dictionaries that are the sources for our wordnet.
Worse, even when there is more than one possi-
ble translation of an English word, there is no way
to make sure that the automatic process gets the
most used variant in Portuguese. Thus we have to
compensate and complete our synsets and many
choices are necessary. These lexical choices have
direct consequences on the type and quality of the
resource been built.

This section discusses some of the problems and
issues we have when trying to deal with the mis-
takes we perceive in OpenWordnet-PT and prin-
cipally how to deal with senses in wordnet that
do not have a clearly corresponding sense in Por-
tuguese.

Our most important decisions so far were re-
lated to (i) which variants of Portuguese to treat,
(ii) how to deal with mistakes, ungrammaticali-
ties and other problems in our entries, (iii) how to
deal with senses in wordnet that apparently do not
have a straightforward corresponding sense in Por-
tuguese and (iv) how to add senses in Portuguese
that do not seem to exist in English (or at least in
the Princeton’s version).

We have decided that OpenWN-PT should, in
principle, include all variants of Portuguese. First
because European Portuguese and Brazilian Por-
tuguese are not that different, then because there
is a single Wikipedia/Wiktionary in Portuguese
but mostly because it is more complicated to de-
cide which words are used where, than to be in-
clusive and have all variants. Thus senses that
can be expressed through words that have differ-
ent spellings on different Portuguese dialects (e.g.
gênio, génio) should include all these variants.

First, to clean up our knowledge base, we still
have to remove some Spanish, Galician or Catalan
words that are easily misjudged as Portuguese by
the automatic processing. We also have to make
sure that the part of speech (POS) classification is
preserved: many times the popularity driven auto-
matic process prefers the noun meaning of a verb
that can be both, or conversely. For example in the
noun synset 06688274-n the automatic process-
ing chose the verb creditar ‘to credit’ instead of
the related noun crédito ‘credit’. We also have sev-
eral problems with the lemmatization and capital-
ization of entries, as criteria for the use of capitals
are different in English and Portuguese and our en-
tries were not lemmatized beforehand. We follow

22



the Portuguese dictionary traditions and mostly
only list the masculine singular form of nouns and
adjectives.

Much more complicated than the cleaning up
task is the issue (iii) of Princeton wordnet’s con-
cepts that do not have a exact, single word corre-
spondent in Portuguese. Several, related problems
can be seen here. The original WordNet has many
multi-word expressions as part of its synsets. The
proverbial kick the bucket (and one of its corre-
sponding idiomatic Portuguese expressions bater
as botas – literally click the boots) comes to mind.
Thus we do not have a problem with the idea of
using expressions, but we do have a problem in de-
ciding which kinds of expressions should be con-
sidered in Portuguese. For one example, we do not
have a verb corresponding to to jog in Portuguese.
People use correr which means to run, but this is
not quite right. For one, running is faster than jog-
ging, so jogging is a slow running, and then jog-
ging is for fun or exercise, as WordNet tells us.
The Anglicism fazer jogging is also very used in
Brazil and forces us to think about how ‘truly Por-
tuguese’ should our entries be.

Another kind of example of English synsets
that have no exact Portuguese words at the mo-
ment, but it is easier to deal with, is a synset like
08139795-n, which corresponds to the United
States Department of the Treasury. This is a
named organization. Should it be in a Portuguese
wordnet? Which instances of entities should a
wordnet carry? All the names of countries and
cities and regions of the world? There are spe-
cialized resources like GeoNames that might be
much better equipped for that. Which famous peo-
ple and companies and organizations should a dic-
tionary or a thesaurus have? Again encyclope-
dic resources like Wikipedia, DBpedia or Wiki-
data seem much more appropriate. This is what
we call amongst ourselves the A-Box problem, in
a reference to the way Description Logics classify
statements. Having translations for all these A-
box instances causes us no problem, but not hav-
ing them is not a big issue either, if we have other
sources of information to rely on.

For a third, perhaps harder example, consider
the synset 13390244-n, which uses a specific
word (a ‘quarter’) for the concept of “a United
States or Canadian coin worth one fourth of a dol-
lar”. We have no reason to have this concept in
a Portuguese wordnet and we have no word for it

in Portuguese. But we can use a commom expres-
sion, such as moeda de 25 centavos [de dolar],
for it. Although ‘25 cents coin’, strictly speaking,
might not be the same concept as ‘quarter’. This
will depend on which notion of equality of con-
cepts you are willing to use, a much harder dis-
cussion.

For now, for the general problem of what to
do with synsets that have no exact corresponding
word or synset, we have no clear theoretical deci-
sions or guidelines in place, yet. These problems
are still being decided, via a lazy strategy of clean-
ing up what is clearly wrong first, and collecting
subsidies for the more intricate lexicographic de-
cisions later on. Some of these discussions and
decisions were described in (de Paiva et al., 2014).

We are not yet working on the Portuguese
senses that do not seem to have a corresponding
synset in Princeton’s wordnet (issue (iv) above).
An example might be jogo de cintura, which
means a property of someone who can easily adapt
his/her aims and feelings to a certain situation (the
literal meaning is more like “[have] hip moves”).
We will add in these new synsets, once we finish
the first version of a cleaned up OpenWN-PT that
we are completing at the moment. For the time
being, we are simply collecting interesting exam-
ples of Portuguese words that do not seem to have
a direct translation, such as avacalhar, encafifar.

But apart from phenomena that have to be
dealt with in a uniform way, we have also one-
off disambiguation problems, like the verb to
date=datar, that in Portuguese is only used to put
a date (on to a document, a monument or a rock),
when in English it also means to go out with. Thus
the automatic processing ended up with a synset
meaning both “finding the age of” and “going out
with”, 00619183-v, which is a bad mistake. To
see and check this kind of situation, it was decided
that the interface would allow linguists to accept
or remove a word, a gloss and examples of the use
of the synset.

5 The New Interface

The need for an online and searchable version of
OpenWN-PT arises for two reasons: (i) to have
an accessible tool for end users, (ii) to improve
our strategy to correct and improve the resource.
As far as being accessible to end users the open
source interface, available from GitHub 7 seems

7https://github.com/fcbr/cl-wnbrowser

23



a success: after a couple of months online, we
have gathered over 4000 suggestions from the web
interface, incorporated over 125000 suggestions
from automatic processes that are being evaluated,
and over 7000 votes have been cast. As for the so-
cial/discussion aspect, over 2600 comments have
been made on the system and we have registered
some sort of conflict in over a hundred sugges-
tions (where we have votes agreeing and disagree-
ing over the same suggestion). All this being done
by a team of five people, where usually two and
three are mostly active. More usage statistics are
being collected, but it seems clear that it is useful.
Considering (ii), our main purpose with the new
interface is to edit the entries of OpenWN-PT as
they exist. The first design decision was that be-
fore adding new synsets corresponding to the Por-
tuguese reality, we should clean up the network
from its most egregious mistakes, caused by the
automatic processing of the entries.

Figure 1 shows how a synset appears in the new
interface. Note the voting mechanism, vaguely in-
spired by Reddit. Trusted users vote for their de-
sired modifications. Here the expression sair com
has been voted to be removed, three times. There
are also links to the same synset in SUMO and
OMW.

We encourage the collaborative revision of
OpenWN-PT and have been working on guide-
lines to foster consistency of suggestions. These
describe the desired format of examples, glosses
and variations of the words in synsets. The prelim-
inary and evolving guidelines for annotators are
now available online8 and we also started docu-
menting the features of the system for end users9.

But the new interface was much more use-
ful than simply offering the possibility of local
rewrites, as it has allowed us to make faceted
search for different classes of synsets and of
words, both in English and in Portuguese.

Figure 2 shows the synsets that have no words
in Portuguese (via facets on the number of words
in English and Portuguese), which allows us to
target these synsets and to decide whether they
are simply missing a not very popular word (e.g.
00117230-v is missing the not terribly interest-
ing verb opalizar, an exact correspondent to opal-
ize) or they correspond to a sense that does not
work exactly the same way in English and Por-

8https://goo.gl/tIROu0
9https://goo.gl/yzXVR9

tuguese. For example, back to the verb to date as
in romantically going out with someone, English
seems to leave underspecified whether it is a ha-
bitual event or a single one, while in Portuguese
we use different verbs, namorar or sair, but if we
want to not commit ourselves to either kind of en-
gagement, we use the verbal expression sair com.

Regarding the technologies adopted for de-
velopment, the interface runs on the IBM
BlueMix(blu, ) cloud platform implemented in
three layers. A Cloudant(clo, ) database ser-
vice for data storage is queried and updated via
an API written in NodeJS(nod, ). The user in-
terface is coded in Common Lisp using a col-
lection of packages for web development, such
as hunchentoot, closure-template, and
yason. We have plans to increase the use of
Javascript libraries to make the interface more us-
able, responsive, and mobile-friendly.

Our principal goal in developing the web in-
terface is to provide an application that supports
the achievement of consensus in the manual revi-
sions. For this, we follow certain aspects com-
monly used in social networking websites, such
as votes and comments. Contributors can submit
suggestions and vote on already submitted sugges-
tions. While anyone can submit any suggestion,
in this initial phase only selected users can vote.
We currently specify that we need at least three
positive votes to accept a suggestion, but two neg-
ative votes are enough to reject it. A batch pro-
cess counts the votes every night and accepts/re-
jects the suggestions. Finally, another batch pro-
cess commits the accepted suggestions in the data,
removing or adding new information. This mod-
ular architecture provides good performance and
maintainability. We never delete suggestions, even
the rejected ones. This way we keep track of the
provenance of all changes in the data.

We encourage patterns of communication be-
tween users frequently associated with social net-
works such as Twitter and Reddit where users can
mention other users in comments (thus asking for
attention on that particular topic). Comments may
also contain ‘hash tags’ that are used, for instance,
to tag particular synsets for later consideration by
other users.

6 Linked Data Rationale

As it is well-known linked data, as proposed by
(Berners-Lee, 2011), has four main principles for

24



Figure 1: Synset 00619183-v while voting

Figure 2: Search for ‘All’ (*:*) occurrences of BaseConcepts & VerbSynsets

25



publishing data: (1) data should rely on URIs to
identify objects; (2) URIs should be resolvable;
(3) semantic information must be returned, using
standards such as RDF; and (4) resources in dif-
ferent datasets should be reused through links be-
tween those. Linked Data principles and technolo-
gies promote the publication of data on the Web
and through this effort guides the emergence of the
so-called Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD)
(Chiarcos et al., 2011b) in which resources and
datasets are represented in RDF format and linked
to each other. Like many other lexical resources,
e.g. Onto.PT (Gonçalo Oliveira and Gomes, 2010)
and, more recently, Princeton Wordnet (McCrae et
al., 2014), OpenWN-PT is primarily distributed as
RDF files, following and expanding when neces-
sary, the original mappings proposed by (van As-
sem et al., 2006). Both the data for the OpenWN-
PT and the vocabulary or RDF model (classes and
properties) are freely available for download as
RDF and OWL files.

Possibly the main motivation for lexical re-
sources to adopt RDF is the first of the Linked
Data principles. The use of URIs allows the easy
reuse of entities produced by different researchers
and groups. When we started the OpenWN-PT
project, there was no official RDF distribution of
Princeton Wordnet 3.0 available. We developed
our mappings to RDF starting from the original
data files and proposed patterns for the URIs to
name the original Princeton synsets and our own
OpenWN-PT synsets. Following the general con-
vention, to avoid conflict of names, we used a
domain name that we have control of. The re-
cently created official RDF distribution of Prince-
ton Wordnet 10 could now serve us better with-
out causing any huge impact on our data. That
is, without much effort we can start using the new
RDF provided by WordNet Princeton linking it
to our RDF files, fulfilling some of the general
promise of the semantic web. For instance, look-
ing at the first noun synset of Princeton Wordnet,
00001740-n: regardless of the different URIs
people assign to it, one can readily say that all of
them represent the same resource. The fragment of
Figure 3 shows the declaration of two statements
using the sameAs property of OWL ontology.

But there are other advantages of the use of
RDF, besides providing a universal way to iden-
tify entities. RDF allows us to formally specify

10http://wordnet-rdf.princeton.edu

the properties and classes that we use to model
our data. In our case, we had to suggest proper-
ties and classes to represent the extensions to the
original WordNet data model that allowed us to
embed the lexicon of nominalizations NomLex-
PT(de Paiva; Livy Real; Alexandre Rademaker;
Gerard de Melo, 2014) into OpenWN-PT. The
complete specification of our vocabulary is avail-
able at the project repository.11

We need to improve our new web interface fur-
ther as, strictly speaking, the interface does not
follow the Linked Data principles two and three:
although we do provide the RDF data and an
SPARQL endpoint for queries, the URLs of the
synsets in the interface are not the same nor are
they redirected from the URI of our RDF data.
Still, while we intend to conform to the principles
in the long run, in the mean time we already har-
vest some of linked data affordances in terms of
provenance capture and use.

Provenance can be used for many purposes,
including understanding how data was collected,
so that it can be meaningfully used; determin-
ing ownership; making judgements about infor-
mation to determine whether to trust it; verify-
ing that the process and steps used to obtain a re-
sult comply with given requirements and repro-
ducing how something was generated (Gil and
Miles, 2013). We choose to keep track of the
evolution of OpenWN-PT using the provenance
PROV (Gil and Miles, 2013) data model and make
it available in RDF together with the openWN-
PT RDF itself. Figure 4 shows our encoding
in PROV data model format of a subset of the
current possible suggestions that contributors can
make to openWN-PT. The contributors are the ac-
tors and they are modeled as foaf:Person in-
stances. The prov:Actitivites are the pos-
sible suggestions of modifications in the data and
the prov:Entity are the items that can be mod-
ified in openWN-PT. Although not present in the
figure, the PROV data model allows us to also rep-
resent the set of suggestions made by one single
automated process.

6.1 Testing and Verifying

To investigate how well the voting mechanism is
coping with the main issues of end users collab-
orative work, we have tested it for two weeks

11http://github.com/arademaker/
openWordnet-PT/

26



prefix wn30pt: <http://arademaker.github.com/wn30-br/instances/>
prefix wn30en: <http://arademaker.github.com/wn30/instances/>
prefix wn30pr: <http://wordnet-rdf.princeton.edu/wn30/>
prefix owl: <http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#>

wn30pt:synset-00001740-n owl:sameAs wn30en:synset-00001740-n .
wn30en:synset-00001740-n owl:sameAs wn30pr:00001740-a .

Figure 3: Linking resources using RDF

wnlog:AddSense rdf:type prov:Activity .
wnlog:RemoveSense rdf:type prov:Activity .
wn30:WordSense rdf:type prov:Entity .
wn30:Synset rdf:type prov:Entity .

:aword rdf:type wn:Word .
:aword wn30:lexicalForm "ente"@pt .
:asense rdf:type wn:WordSense .
:asense wn30:word :aword .

:s1 prov:used wn30pt:synset-00001740-n .
:s1 prov:used :asense .
:s1 rdf:type wnlog:AddSense .
:s1 prov:atTime "2015-04-15"ˆˆxsd:dateTime .
:s1 prov:wasAssociatedWith :a1 .

:s2 prov:used wn30pt:synset-00001740-n .
:s2 prov:used :anothersense .
:s1 prov:atTime "2015-04-15"ˆˆxsd:dateTime .
:s2 rdf:type wnlog:RemoveSense .
:s2 prov:wasAssociatedWith :a1 .

:a1 rdf:type prov:Agent, foaf:Person .
:a1 foaf:name "Alexandre Rademaker" .
:a2 rdf:type prov:Agent, foaf:Person .
:a2 foaf:name "Livy Real" .

Figure 4: Preserving provenance information in the RDF

27



with three Portuguese native speakers who are re-
searchers interested in language. After two weeks
of part-time work, over 2400 votes were cast,
2240 suggestions and 110 comments were made,
and we identified over 80 new requirements both
for functionality and usability—a testimony, we
reckon, of the potential of the tool.

These numbers, although preliminary, show
how much the new interface helped us to quickly
edit and correct existing synsets. Also, we were
pleasantly surprised to realize that, during these
two weeks, we had two uknown users, not from
the team, collaborating with us, by suggesting en-
tries on the new interface. Since we have not an-
nounced the suggestions facility at all, so far, this
seems to indicate the easiness of use of the tool.
Hence we would like to conclude that there is a
need for interfaces that allow ordinary users, not
only computational linguists to help on the con-
struction, checking, cleaning up and verification
of the quality of (lexical) resources. Just like Wik-
pedia, we hope to tap into this potential good will.

7 Future Work

We still need to complete our main task, the check-
ing of words, glosses and examples from many
English synsets and this is our most pressing work.
The theoretical and practical decisions on how to
integrate the Portuguese senses that are missing
from English are major tasks that will require care-
ful thinking, as these choices will have a huge im-
pact not only on the eventual shaping of OpenWN-
PT, but also on our other work with Portuguese
NLP.

It seems to us clear that the main design choice
of creating a lexical resource for Portuguese by au-
tomated methods, complemented by manual cura-
tion, following Princeton’s model, was the right
decision. The curation process is not trivial, but it
would not be facilitated by starting manually. Nei-
ther do we believe that more could be achieved us-
ing only automated methods. Keeping the close
alignment with Princeton’s wordnet is beneficial
in many ways, not least of them, because it allows
us to connect to the linked open data community
and the ontologies it supports. We are still inves-
tigating the benefits of using a lexical model such
as lemon (Chiarcos et al., 2011a) and of a possible
alignment with it.

References
Tim Berners-Lee. 2011. Linked data-design issues.

Technical report.

Bluemix. http://www.bluemix.net.

Francis Bond and Ryan Foster. 2013. Linking and
extending an open multilingual wordnet. In Pro-
ceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 1352–1362, Sofia, Bulgaria, August.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Adam Meyers Leslie Barrett Ruth Reeves Cather-
ine Macleod, Ralph Grishman. 1998. Nomlex: A
lexicon of nominalizations. In Proceedings of EU-
RALEX’98, Liege, Belgium.

Christian Chiarcos, Sebastian Hellmann, and Sebas-
tian Nordhoff. 2011a. S.: Towards a linguistic
linked open data cloud: The open linguistics work-
ing group. TAL, pages 245–275.

Christian Chiarcos, Sebastian Hellmann, and Sebastian
Nordhoff. 2011b. Towards a linguistic linked open
data cloud: The open linguistics working group.
TAL, 52(3):245–275.

Cloudant. http://www.cloudant.com.

Gerard de Melo and Gerhard Weikum. 2009. Towards
a universal wordnet by learning from combined evi-
dence. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM
2009), pages 513–522, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Valeria de Paiva, Alexandre Rademaker, and Ger-
ard de Melo. 2012. OpenWordNet-PT: An open
brazilian wordnet for reasoning. In Proceedings
of 24th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, COLING (Demo Paper).

Valeria de Paiva, Cláudia Freitas, Livy Real, and
Alexandre Rademaker. 2014. Improving the verb
lexicon of openwordnet-pt. In Laura Alonso Ale-
many, Muntsa Padró, Alexandre Rademaker, and
Aline Villavicencio, editors, Proceedings of Work-
shop on Tools and Resources for Automatically Pro-
cessing Portuguese and Spanish (ToRPorEsp), São
Carlos, Brazil, oct. Biblioteca Digital Brasileira de
Computao, UFMG, Brazil.

Valeria de Paiva; Livy Real; Alexandre Rademaker;
Gerard de Melo. 2014. Nomlex-pt: A lexicon of
portuguese nominalizations. Proceedings of LREC
2014.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database (Language, Speech, and
Communication). The MIT Press.

Cláudia Freitas, Valeria de Paiva, Alexandre Rade-
maker, Gerard de Melo, Livy Real, and Anne
de Araujo Correia da Silva. 2014. Extending a lex-
icon of portuguese nominalizations with data from

28



corpora. In Jorge Baptista, Nuno Mamede, Sara
Candeias, Ivandré Paraboni, Thiago A. S. Pardo, and
Maria das Graças Volpe Nunes, editors, Computa-
tional Processing of the Portuguese Language, 11th
International Conference, PROPOR 2014, São Car-
los, Brazil, oct. Springer.

Yolanda Gil and Simon Miles. 2013. Prov model
primer. Technical report. http://www.w3.
org/TR/prov-primer/.

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira and Paulo Gomes. 2010.
Onto.PT: Automatic Construction of a Lexical On-
tology for Portuguese. In Proceedings of 5th Eu-
ropean Starting AI Researcher Symposium (STAIRS
2010), volume 222 of Frontiers in Artificial Intelli-
gence and Applications, pages 199–211. IOS Press.

Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira, Diana Santos, Paulo Gomes,
and Nuno Seco. 2008. PAPEL: A dictionary-
based lexical ontology for Portuguese. In Proceed-
ings of Computational Processing of the Portuguese
Language - 8th International Conference (PROPOR
2008), volume 5190 of LNCS/LNAI, pages 31–40,
Aveiro, Portugal, September. Springer.

Adam Kilgarriff. 1997. I don’t believe in word senses.
Computers and the Humanities, (31):91–113.

John McCrae, Christiane Fellbaum, and Philipp Cimi-
ano. 2014. Publishing and linking wordnet using
lemon and rdf. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop
on Linked Data in Linguistics.

NodeJS. https://nodejs.org.

Adam Pease and Christiane Fellbaum. 2010. For-
mal ontology as interlingua: the SUMO and Word-
Net linking project and global WordNet linking
project. In Ontology and the Lexicon: A Natural
Language Processing Perspective, Studies in Nat-
ural Language Processing, chapter 2, pages 25–35.
Cambridge University Press.

Alexandre Rademaker, Valeria De Paiva, Gerard
de Melo, Livy Maria Real Coelho, and Maira Gatti.
2014. Openwordnet-pt: A project report. In Pro-
ceedings of the 7th Global WordNet Conference,
Tartu, Estonia, jan.

Mark van Assem, Aldo Gangemi, and Guus Schreiber.
2006. RDF/OWL representation of WordNet. W3c
working draft, World Wide Web Consortium, June.

29


