



















































Recovering discourse relations: Varying influence of discourse adverbials


Proceedings of the EMNLP 2015 Workshop on Linking Models of Lexical, Sentential and Discourse-level Semantics, pages 22–31,
Lisboa, Portugal, 18 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Recovering discourse relations: Varying influence of discourse adverbials

Hannah Rohde Anna Dickinson Chris Clark Annie Louis Bonnie Webber
University of Edinburgh

[hannah.rohde, bonnie.webber]@ed.ac.uk
[anna.y.dickinson, chrisclark272, annieplouis]@gmail.com

Abstract

Discourse relations are a bridge between
sentence-level semantics and discourse-
level semantics. They can be signalled
explicitly with discourse connectives or
conveyed implicitly, to be inferred by a
comprehender. The same discourse units
can be related in more than one way, sig-
nalled by multiple connectives. But mul-
tiple connectives aren’t necessary: Multi-
ple relations can be conveyed even when
only one connective is explicit. This paper
describes the initial phase in a larger ex-
perimental study aimed at answering two
questions: (1) Given an explicit discourse
adverbial, what discourse relation(s) do
naive subjects take to be operative, and (2)
Can this be predicted on the basis of the
explicit adverbial alone, or does it depend
instead on other factors?

1 Introduction

Semantics comes both explicitly and implicitly
from a text. One bridge between sentence-level
semantics and discourse semantics consists of re-
lations between sentences and/or clauses, called
variously discourse relations (Prasad et al., 2014),
coherence relations (Kehler, 2002) or rhetorical
relations (Mann and Thompson, 1988). Such re-
lations between what we will call here discourse
spans can be signaled explicitly via discourse con-
nectives or specific lexico-syntactic contructions,
or conveyed implicitly, via inference on the part
of a comprehender. But when does the latter hap-
pen? Previously, it was assumed that relations are
conveyed implicitly when they are not signalled
explicitly. But consider Ex. 1a-b, each with two
explicit connectives conveying distinct relations:

(1) a. Let’s eat dinner now because otherwise
we’ll miss the film.

b. I can’t walk 5 miles, so instead I’ll take a
taxi.

In Ex. 1a, because signals the REASON for eating
dinner now, while otherwise signals the CONDI-
TION under which we’ll miss the film. In Ex. 1b,
so signals the RESULT of my inability to walk so
far, while instead signals the CHOSEN ALTERNA-
TIVE to taking a taxi.1

However, both relations may still be conveyed,
even if only one is signalled explicitly, as in
Ex. 2a–c:

(2) a. Let’s eat dinner now. Otherwise we’ll
miss the film.

b. I can’t walk 5 miles. Instead I’ll take a
taxi.

c. I can’t walk 5 miles, so I’ll take a taxi.

d. Let’s eat dinner now because we’ll miss
the film.

So it is not the case that implicit discourse rela-
tions only arise when discourse relations are not
signalled explicitly. (Ex. 2d shows that a CHOSEN
ALTERNATIVE is not achieved with the single con-
nective because.)

The potential availability of multiple concurrent
discourse relations raises important questions for
both Language Technology (LT) and psycholin-
guistics: When a discourse relation is signalled
with an explicit connective, should a LT system
also look for a distinct implicit relation? From
the perspective of psycholinguistics, implicit co-
occurring relations raise fundamental questions
about how comprehenders infer discourse rela-
tions and which contexts allow such relations to be
understood without an explicit linguistic signal.

1The sense labels used here (in small caps) are short forms
of the labels used in the PDTB 2.0 (Prasad et al., 2008; Prasad
et al., 2014).

22



Despite multiple explicit connectives being ob-
served in Catalan and Spanish (Cuenca and Marin,
2009) as well as Turkish (Zeyrek, 2014) and En-
glish, questions about multiple relations in the pre-
sense of only a single connective have not yet been
addressed (Section 2). To address them, we have
embarked on a large crowd-sourcing experiment,
the first phase of which is described in Sections 3–
5. Section 6 discusses our results to date, with fur-
ther phases described in Section 7.

2 Background

This is not the first work to call attention to mul-
tiple co-occurring connectives. Webber and col-
leagues (1999) used them to argue that discourse
spans could be related by both adjacency relations
and anaphoric relations. Similary, in the context
of Catalan and Spanish oral narrative, Cuenca and
Marin (2009) used them to argue for different pat-
terns and degrees of discourse cohesion. Oates
(2000) considers how multiple discourse connec-
tives should be used in Natural Language Genera-
tion, noting that the order in which they occur cor-
relates with the hierarchy of discourse connectives
presented in (Knott, 1996). Fraser (2013) con-
siders the order in which multiple CONTRASTIVE
connectives co-occur, describing their patterning
in terms of general contrastive discourse mark-
ers and specific contrastive discourse markers. For
Turkish, Zeyrek (2014) describes patterns of mul-
tiple co-occuring connectives that signal CON-
TRASTIVE and/or CONCESSIVE relations.

These efforts have all been directed at providing
an account of the existence of multiple connectives
and their patterning. As for the phenomenon il-
lustrated in Ex. 2a–c, the only work we are aware
of is an MSc project supervised by the first co-
author (Rohde). This study, by Xi Jiang (2013),
involved four discourse adverbials (after all, in-
stead, in fact, in general) that can occur alone or
following a conjunction. Jiang presented partici-
pants in a crowd-sourcing experiment with a set of
fill-in-the-gap passages such as the following
(3) Logically, she should be dead / instead

/ she feels fine, caring for her daughters and
walking a pedometer-measured two miles a
day.

(4) He suspected he shouldn’t say that /
instead / he lied.

asking the participants to either insert one of five
conjunctions (and, because, but, or, so) into the

gap or choose None.2 In half the passages (10 per
adverbial), the author had used one of these con-
junctions before the adverbial (which Jiang then
removed), and in the other half (including Ex. 3–
4), the author had used no conjunction before the
adverbial. The only criteria used in selecting these
passages were brevity (i.e., could the passage be
read quickly?) and clarity (i.e., did the passage
make sense when presented out of context?).

Jiang’s study was aimed at answering two ques-
tions: (1) When the author had used an explicit
conjunction before the discourse adverbial, did
participants always fill the gap with the same con-
junction; and (2) where the original passage lacked
an explicit conjunction, did participants choose to
omit an explicit conjunction (i.e., did they chose
None).

Each of the 80 passages (20 per adverbial) was
annotated by the same 52 participants. Jiang’s re-
sults showed some interesting patterns. In the gap
preceding after all, participants tended to insert
because, indicating that they interpreted the con-
tent of the second span as a REASON for the con-
tent of the first span, independent of whether the
original text contained because or a different con-
junction or None. In contrast, in the gap preced-
ing instead, the choice made by participants var-
ied from passage to passage: For instance, they
reliably inserted but in Ex. 3 and so in Ex. 4, even
though the original text contained no conjunction.

The data that Jiang collected suggested that
the answer to both of her questions was no, but
stopped there. One reason is that the response
None was ambiguous: Participants could have
used it to mean “I can’t insert any of these con-
junctions to express the sense I get”, or “The sense
I get cannot be expressed with a conjunction”, or
“I don’t get any additional sense”. Secondly, in
using only brevity and clarity as her criteria for se-
lecting passages from COCA, Jiang did not assess
whether all the conjunction-less passages she se-
lected might have been similar in terms of how
their clauses/sentences related and hence would
all draw the same response from participants. Fi-
nally, Jiang only considered four adverbs, so could
not draw more general conclusions. The current,
much larger enterprise attempts to avoid these
problems.

2All passages were taken from the Corpus of Contem-
porary American English (COCA) corpus.byu.edu/
coca/.

23



Figure 1: The distribution of 〈conjunction〉 im-
mediately preceding instead tokens in Google
NGRAMS, with or without a comma after the con-
junction, excluding cases where instead was fol-
lowed by of.

3 Task Definition

We have embarked on a large-scale study of dis-
course adverbials, attempting to gather evidence
that will help answer two specific questions:

1. Given an explicit discourse adverbial in a
passage, what discourse relation(s) do naive
subjects take to be operative?

2. Can the relation(s) be predicted on the basis
of the explicit adverbial alone, or does it de-
pend on the arguments to the relation or on
everything in the passage?

Note that the discourse relations that subjects take
to be operative may corroborate the sense con-
veyed by the discourse adverbial or they may be
distinct.

In this paper we describe Phase I of the study,
carried out between August 2014 and June 2015.
We began with a survey of Google NGRAMs to
first establish the overall frequency and preferred
conjunction(s) of a wide range of adverbials. In
the long term, our study aims to examine both
common and rarer adverbials (see Section 7) and
those with a single preferred co-occurring con-
junction and those with a flatter distribution. As
Figures 1 and 2 show, the distribution of conjunc-
tions is neither uniform for a given adverbial nor
equivalent across adverbials. Since all four adver-
bials (after all, instead, in general and in fact) used
in (Jiang, 2013) had different distributions, we de-
cided to target the same adverbials in our Phase I
study.

Also following (Jiang, 2013), we wanted to
see whether subjects responded differently to pas-

Figure 2: The distribution of 〈conjunction〉 im-
mediately preceding after all tokens in Google
NGRAMS.

sages in which the author explicitly used a pair of
connectives (i.e. 〈conjunction〉–〈adverbial〉) com-
pared with those in which the author only used an
explict adverbial. The former we call explicit pas-
sages and the latter, implicit passages.

4 Phase I Experiment

Each participant in Phase 1 saw 50 passages, each
containing a gap between two spans of text, the
second beginning with a discourse adverbial, as in
Ex. 3–4. With expicit passages, we replaced the
conjunction with a gap, while with implicit pas-
sages, we inserted a gap before the adverbial. For
each passage, participants were instructed to fill
in the gap with the word of their choice (from a
randomly ordered list of the six conjunctions and,
because, before, but, or, so) that “best reflects the
meaning of the connection” between the spans.
They also had the option of choosing either None
at all (for cases where they felt that no conjunction
was possible) or Other word or phrase (for cases
where they felt that only some option other than
the six presented conjunctions was appropriate).
These were intended to correct for the ambiguity
of None in Jiang’s study.

At a coarse sense level, all six conjunctions are
relatively unambiguous: Table 1 shows the fre-
quency of their main sense in the Penn Discourse
TreeBank (The PDTB Research Group, 2008). As
such, there are grounds for believing that the ex-
periment targeted the participants’ inferred rela-
tion through choosing a conjunction that realizes
it, even if the sense is only a coarse one.

24



# tokens sense label overall %
and 3000 CONJUNCTION 91.0%
because 858 REASON 99.5%
before 326 PRECEDENCE 99.0%
but 3308 COMPARISON3 90.7%
or 98 ALTERNATIVE 86.7%
so 263 RESULT 99.6%

Table 1: Proportion of explicit tokens of each con-
junction having its most frequent sense label

4.1 Interface
Working with a group of researchers and a pi-
lot group of participants, we iteratively designed
and evaluated an interface and a set of instructions
aimed at encouraging participants to choose a con-
junction that identified the sense of the connec-
tion between the two spans of text in a passage —
the span before the gap and the span following it.
Instructions for the task could be reviewed when
necessary by clicking on a button labelled “Show
Instructions”, to the right of the heading “Trial”
(Figure 3).

During pilot testing, it emerged that participants
sometimes chose None at all when it sounded
more fluent and less awkward to them than did an
explicit conjunction. In order to avoid this, we ex-
plicitly instructed participants to choose the con-
junction that best conveyed the sense of the con-
nection, “even if the resulting text sounds awk-
ward”, but also offered them the opportunity to
record whether they would in fact use the chosen
conjunction, or whether it sounded odd to them in
that context (Figure 4).

To avoid order effects, the stimuli were pseudo-
randomised for each participant such that each
participant only saw each excerpt once, they never
encountered more than three of the same adver-
bial in a row, and for explicit passages, they never
saw excerpts expecting the same conjunction more
than three times in a row. In addition, the list of
conjunctions appeared in a different order for each
participant, to avoid the risk of skewing the results,
should participants prefer conjunctions presented
at the top of the list.

After a participant had read the instructions,
three practice items were presented.

4.2 Stimuli
Of the 50 passages used in Phase 1, 38 repli-
cated those previously used in (Jiang, 2013). Of
the remaining twelve, eight came from a large
set of possible stimuli we collected from the New

York Times Annotated Corpus (NYTAC) (Sand-
haus, 2008) for use in later phases of the experi-
ment, while four were “catch trials”, intended to
ensure participants were paying attention. Table 2
shows the number of explicit passages for each of
the four adverbials (where the explicit conjunction
before the adverbial was deleted, leaving a gap)
and implicit passages (where a gap was simply in-
serted before the adverbial).

explicit implicit
after all 7 5
in fact 7 4
in general 7 5
instead 6 5

Table 2: Explicit/implicit passages per adverbial

The 38 excerpts from Jiang were chosen based
on the responses they had received during her
study. For example, for the instead implicits, two
showed a range of responses, one showed partici-
pant agreement on but, one showed agreement on
because, and one showed agreement on so. The
eight new stimuli from NYTAC (two per adver-
bial) were longer and more complex than those
used in (Jiang, 2013). The purpose of these stim-
uli, besides providing more data, was to identify
participants who were discouraged or confused by
these passages, since later phases of the experi-
ment would use stimuli drawn only from NYTAC.

4.3 Participants

Seventy participants, all with addresses in the
United States, completed the trial through Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk. Demographic data col-
lected in a short questionnaire before the main trial
showed that participants were aged 20-67 (mean
37), 71% read newspapers at least twice a week,
and half were female. All were English speakers.
Each participant was paid $8 for their contribution.

5 Phase 1 Results

All participants paid attention to the task, as indi-
cated by their selection of sensible responses for
the four catch trials, while they varied in how long
the task took them and how often they agreed with
the choices made by other participants. As we re-
quired fewer participants to complete Phase 2 of
the task, we reduced the participant number based
on their performance in Phase 1. Specifically, we
removed data from 12 participants with very short
completion rates and high rates of disagreement

25



Figure 3: Screen shot of passage presentation

Figure 4: Screen shot of a participant being asked to indicate whether or not their choice of a conjunction
that fits with respect to its sense — in this case, “but” — sounds natural

26



with other participants, as well as 3 trials in which
a participant selected the response before, which
was intended for use in only the catch trials. The
resulting dataset of responses from 58 participants
comprises 2665 judgments over the 46 target pas-
sages (ignoring the four catch trials). The results
reported below are raw counts, and do not yet take
account of potential participant bias (Passonneau
and Carpenter, 2014).

Considering the dataset as a whole, we can ask
how often a participant’s response matched the au-
thor’s original choice. (Note that this can only be
assessed on explicit passages – that is, ones where
the author expicitly used a pair of co-occurring
connectives, cf. Section 3). Table 3 shows the
pattern of participant responses for passages for
which the authors themselves had included an ex-
plicit conjunction before the adverbial. Recall
that participants always saw a gap before the dis-
course adverbial, regardless of the author’s origi-
nal choice to use or not use a conjunction, mean-
ing the explicit and implicit passages were indis-
tinguishable.

AND BECAUSE BUT OR SO
and 189 14 81 5 33
because 60 105 60 2 9
but 68 48 497 7 9
or 2 0 2 35 0
so 125 1 25 2 56
other 3 1 8 2 0
none at all 17 4 23 5 9

Table 3: Confusion matrix for explicit passages.
Rows show participant responses (participants’ se-
lected conjunctions in lower case) for passages
whose authors had used the explicit conjunctions
in the columns (in CAPS).

The values on the diagonal in Table 3 show
a high degree of convergence between partici-
pant and author choices: The largest value for
any column and any row is the value indicating
participant∼author agreement. A conjunction like
and notoriously underspecifies the relation sense
since it is compatible with many senses. The re-
sults in Table 3 allow us to ask what more specific
senses participants infer in cases in which the orig-
inal author used and. Although participants over-
all favor ‘and’ for author ‘AND’ (189 instances out
of 464 ‘AND’ trials), they also show a preference
for the inference of causality with their selection
of so (125 instances out of the 464 ‘AND’ trials).

Table 4 shows the pattern of responses for pas-

sages in which the author did not include a con-
junction. In only a small number of cases (69 in-
stances out of 1158 ‘NONE’ trials) did a partici-
pant choose None at all. Therefore, in answer to
question (1) from Section 3, participants are able
to reliably select an explicit conjunction that real-
izes the relation(s) they take to be operative. The
next section considers participants’ behavior for
each of the 4 adverbials in turn.

author=NONE
and 275
because 404
but 252
or 1
so 147
other 10
none 69

Table 4: Response distribution (implicit passages)

5.1 Variation across adverbials for explicit
passages

To address the second question raised in Section 3,
we analyzed participant responses to each adver-
bial. Tables 5-7 show the responses for after all, in
fact, in general and instead respectively, when the
original author included an explicit conjunction.

AND BECAUSE BUT
and 18 6 30
because 9 51 51
but 25 0 128
or 0 0 0
so 0 0 3
other 1 0 3
none 5 1 17

Table 5: Explicit after all response distribution.
Participant responses in lower case, versus author
choice in CAPS. (Six explicit after all passages —
1 AND, 1 BECAUSE, 4 BUT)

For after all (Table 5), participants assigned
a meaning of because not only for author BE-
CAUSE but frequently for author BUT and AND.
This is particularly odd for BECAUSE and BUT,
since however underspecified one might take these
two conjunctions to be, the senses they convey are
still different. This suggests that the adverbial it-
self may be biasing the inferred relation.

For in fact (Table 6), the responses track the au-
thors with two notable exceptions. First, the re-
sponses show that author BUT and author SO pas-
sages are frequently labelled by participants with

27



AND BECAUSE BUT OR SO
and 53 8 27 5 29
because 1 54 4 2 1
but 1 48 74 7 6
or 0 0 0 35 0
so 0 1 4 2 15
other 0 1 5 2 0
none 3 3 2 5 7

Table 6: Explicit in fact response distribution.
Participant responses in lower case versus author
choice in CAPS. (Seven explicit in fact passages
— 1 AND, 2 BECAUSE, 2 BUT, 1 OR, 1 SO)

the less specific conjunction and. This may reflect
the fact that the conjunction that most frequently
appears left-adjacent to in fact is and, according
to our study of the Google NGRAM corpus (cf.
Section 3). Second, cases of author BECAUSE
are split closely between responses of because and
but. The alternation between “because” and “but”
responses is surprising (as already noted above),
given that they are not typically understood to be
synonyms or even hyponyms or hypernyms. Nor
does this variation appear to simply reflect a sce-
nario in which, of the two BECAUSE passages,
one favored because while the other favored but:
Rather, each BECAUSE passage (such as Ex. 5)
received a mix of because and but responses.

(5) Americans’ big-is-better mentality is a shame
in the case of artichokes in fact the
small ones are much easier to clean, cook
more quickly and can be purchased sponta-
neously because they don’t take any more
time than any other vegetables.

AND BUT SO
and 102 23 4
because 50 4 8
but 36 85 3
or 2 0 0
so 33 1 41
other 2 0 0
none 7 3 2

Table 7: Explicit in general response distribution.
Participant responses in lower case versus author
choice in CAPS. (Seven in general passages — 4
AND, 2 BUT, 1 SO)

For in general (Table 7), the responses track the
author, suggesting that the adverbial itself is not
biasing the inferred relation, but that responses de-
pend on properties of the adjacent clauses or the
larger context.

AND BUT
and 16 1
because 0 1
but 6 210
or 0 2
so 92 17
other 0 0
none 2 1

Table 8: Explicit instead response distribution.
Participant responses in lower case versus author
choice in CAPS (Six instead passages — 4 AND,
2 BUT)5

Like the data for in fact, the data for instead (Ta-
ble 8) highlight a link between and and so, but in
the opposite direction. For in fact, author SO re-
ceived many and responses, whereas for instead,
it was the reverse: Author AND received many so
responses. This is in keeping with the observa-
tion that and is underspecified but is compatible
with, and often implicates, a temporal or causal
relationship between the eventualities denoted by
the adjacent clauses (Gazdar, 1979). With in fact,
participants are selecting a less specific conjunc-
tion (and) rather than the more specific but or so,
whereas for instead, they are selecting the more
specific so. It is possible that this can be explained
as a frequency-induced bias: Compared with in
fact, our Google NGRAM estimates show instead
to have proportionally more co-occurrences with
so, potentially leading participants to posit “so in-
stead” for passages whose author had used AND.

5.2 Variation across adverbials for implicit
passages

As noted earlier, Jiang’s (2013) study leaves open
the question of how to interpret a None response
from a participant: Does it mean the participant
believed there was no relation to infer, or that none
of the available conjunctions were appropriate, or
that there was an inferred relation but the result-
ing passage simply sounded awkward? Our ex-
periment was designed to eliminate this ambigu-
ity. That is, None can be understood to convey
“no relation to infer”, given that participants could
choose Other if they wanted to fill in an alterna-
tive conjunction or they could mark the meaning
they inferred but then tag it as awkward with the
“would not say” button. Note that in Jiang’s study,
15.7% of the responses were None. In our study,
the proportion was comparable, with 15.2% of re-
sponses being one of our variants of None, i.e.

28



None (7.7%), Other (1.0%) or marked as some-
thing the participant would not say (6.4% of re-
sponses).

Our data on implicit passages therefore pro-
vides a clearer picture of how frequently partici-
pants assign a conjunction even when the author
had used no conjunction. The results in Table 9
show that no adverbial favors None in these cases:
after all had only 26/348 judgments; in fact, only
20/231; in general, only 13/290, and instead, only
10/290.

after all in fact in general instead
and 50 87 118 20
because 245 35 86 38
but 16 83 50 103
or 1 0 0 0
so 4 3 21 119
other 5 3 2 0
none 26 20 13 10

Table 9: Response distribution for implicit pas-
sages by adverbial (20 unique passages: 6 “after
all”, 4 “in fact”, 5 “in general”, 5 “instead”)

Table 9 also confirms some of the behavior
observed in the responses to explicit passages.
First, after all shows a preference for the re-
sponse because, whereas in fact, in general and
instead all show more variability. This variabil-
ity suggests that participants are responding to
the content of the conjoined arguments to iden-
tify the sense, rather than associating the adverbial
with one preferred connective. According to our
Google NGRAM estimates, after all differs from
the other three adverbials insofar as because is one
of its most frequent co-occurring conjunctions. In
contrast, in fact, in general and instead rarely co-
occur with because. So participant behavior may
reflect their sensitivity to the affinity of after all
for because.

Finally, we can check how consistent partic-
ipants were in selecting their response to each
implicit passage. For each passage, we identify
the most frequent response and the proportion of
participants who selected that response. For all
passages, the most frequent response was nei-
ther None nor Other. Table 10 shows the mean
agreement for each adverbial, collapsed across
passages, revealing whether different adverbials
demonstrate different degrees of inter-annotator
consistency. Table 10 shows that the agreement
rate for two adverbials (after all and instead) is
higher than for the other two: After all consistently

favored because, while instead showed more vari-
ability in inferred conjunctions but nevertheless
had a similar agreement rate. So while the four
adverbials have different degrees of overall inter-
annotator consistency on implicit passages, none
of them shows random selection over the five non-
None/non-Other responses, which would yield an
agreement rate of just over 0.2.

after all in fact in general instead
0.706 0.581 0.503 0.717

Table 10: Participant agreement rates by adverbial

6 Discussion

We draw two conclusions from Phase 1 of our
study: (1) It is possible for naive subjects to infer
an implicit conjunction alongside an explicit dis-
course adverbial, even for passages in which the
original author used only an explicit adverbial, and
(2) subjects do so reliably and systematically, de-
pending on the adverb. Our subjects had the op-
tion on each trial to decline to add a conjunction,
but they did not. Rather, they endorsed meaning-
bearing conjunctions and did so in a way that is
not explainable from the adverbial alone. In other
words, it is not the case that any of these four ad-
verbials is uniformly associated with a single con-
junction whose meaning is linked directly to that
of the adverbial itself. That would not explain the
fact that, across passages, different conjunctions
were endorsed as plausible insertions for the same
adverbial. What’s more, the selection of a con-
junction for a given passage shows a strong de-
gree of consistency, particularly for after all and
instead.

The second point is that discourse adverbials
themselves are not indiscriminate with regard to
the conjunction that they appear to favor. The
analysis of after all showed that participants se-
lected a causal interpretation (because) more often
than would be expected based on the conjunction
provided by the original author and with a bias that
was more pronounced than in passages with any
other adverbial. This highlights potential differ-
ences among adverbials (either individually or by
class): Not all adverbials may be compatible with
all conjunctions. Even where variation is permit-
ted, the adverbial may bring its own preference to
bear on the inference of an additional co-occuring
relation. This point was made by Jiang (2013) as

29



well, and our data are in keeping with the range
of behavior she reports across these four adver-
bials. The new study goes beyond prior work by
ensuring that participants who preferred to com-
municate that none of the available conjunctions
should be inserted had recourse to three distinct
responses: a stylistic rejection of the selected con-
junction (“does it sound okay?”), an option to in-
sert an alternative conjunction (Other), or simply
the response None at all (to reject insertion of any
explicit connective to link the two spans of text).

So how do participants identify the conjunc-
tion they insert into these passages? One hypoth-
esis might be that the purported lexical seman-
tics of the adverbial is what determines its co-
occurrences with conjunctions. Under that ac-
count, instead might be expected to favor a con-
junction that expresses contrast, i.e., but. The dis-
tribution of responses for explicit passages with
instead shows that but was indeed the preferred re-
sponse when the author chose to use but. However,
when the author used and, participants favored so,
which generally conveys RESULT. For implicit
passages with instead, the response choice but was
likewise frequent, but not as frequent as so. On the
other hand, the results for after all do suggest that
the inference of because is common when that ad-
verbial is present. This pattern is there for the ex-
plicit passages, and is even more evident for the
implicit passages (for which 245 of 348 responses
were because). This finding could suggest that af-
ter all either conveys a single sense itself or is used
frequently in contexts in which a REASON rela-
tion is operative. The other adverbials show no
such preference, implying that it is properties of
the clauses themselves and the rest of the discourse
that allow a consistent meaning to be identified for
each passage.

7 Future work

Building on the results of Phase 1, we have be-
gun to run a larger Phase 2 study with twenty ad-
verbials, using 976 excerpts. The 58 participants
whose results are reported here for Phase 1, have
been invited to complete further Amazon Turk
hits. In the longer term, we hope to explore the
other common case of non-adjacent co-occuring
discourse connectives, as in

(6) They cut few trees in the summer,
when they prefer to feed more on fresh
grasses, tubers, and saplings, but au-

tumn, however, is a period of intensive
logging for beavers. (hawriver.org/
peaceful-coexistence-with-beavers)

and to extend the research cross-linguistically.

Acknowledgments

This research has been supported by the Nuance
Foundation. The authors would also like to ac-
knowledge advice and support from researchers
on the Penn Discourse TreeBank and helpful com-
ments from our three anonymous reviewers.

References
M.J. Cuenca and M.J. Marin. 2009. Co-occurrence of

discourse markers in Catalan and Spanish oral nar-
rative. Journal of Pragmatics, 41(5):899–914.

Bruce Fraser. 2013. Combinations of contrastive dis-
course markers in english. International Review of
Pragmatics, 5:318–340.

G. Gazdar. 1979. Pragmatics: Implicature, Presuppo-
sition, and Logical Form. Academic Press, London.

Xi Jiang. 2013. Predicting the use and interpretation
of implicit and explicit discourse connectives. Mas-
ter’s thesis, Linguistics and English Language, Uni-
versity of Edinburgh. MSc in English Language.

Andrew Kehler. 2002. Coherence, Reference, and the
Theory of Grammar. CSLI Publications, Stanford.

Alistair Knott. 1996. A Data-driven Methodology for
Motivating a Set of Coherence Relations. Ph.D. the-
sis, Department of Artificial Intelligence, University
of Edinburgh.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical Structure Theory: Toward a functional
theory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Sarah Oates. 2000. Multiple discourse marker oc-
currence: Creating hierarchies for natural language
generation. In Proceedings, ANLP-NAACL 2000
Student Research Workshop, pages 41–45, Seattle
WA.

Rebecca Passonneau and Bob Carpenter. 2014. The
benefits of a model of annotation. Transactions
of the Association of Computational Linguistics,
2(1):311–326.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse TreeBank 2.0.
In Proceedings, 6th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 2961–
2968, Marrakech, Morocco.

30



Rashmi Prasad, Bonnie Webber, and Aravind Joshi.
2014. Reflections on the penn discourse treebank,
comparable corpora and complementary annotation.
Computational Linguistics, 40(4):921–950.

Evan Sandhaus. 2008. New York Times corpus: Cor-
pus overview. LDC catalogue entry LDC2008T19.

The PDTB Research Group. 2008. The Penn Dis-
course TreeBank 2.0 Annotation Manual. Avail-
able at http://www.seas.upenn.edu/˜pdtb/, or as part
of the download of LDC2008T05.

Bonnie Webber, Alistair Knott, and Aravind Joshi.
1999. Multiple discourse connectives in a lexical-
ized grammar for discourse. In Third International
Workshop on Computational Semantics, pages 309–
325, Tilburg, The Netherlands.

Deniz Zeyrek. 2014. On the distribution of
contrastive-concessive discourse connectives ama
(but/yet) and fakat (but) in written Turkish. In
P. Suihkonen and L.J. Whaley, editors, On Diversity
and Complexity of Languages Spoken in Europe and
North and Central Asia.

31


