
























 

LTCKnowHow: Empowering the Social Enterprise in the Language 

Industry 

Dr Adriane Rinsche 

The Language Technology Centre 

www.ltcinnovates.com 

 

Description 
The “KnowHow” project, partly funded by the EU Research Executive Agency project scaled 
up the existing OrganiK Knowledge Management platform (http://www.organik-project.eu) 
from the research prototype it was into an industrial-grade knowledge management platform 
as a service (KM-PaaS) that supports social business applications. LTC’s role as a project 
partner was to produce a final product, which will support the social enterprise in the lan-
guage industry (LI) and produced LTCKnowHow 
 
LTCKnowHow is a standalone platform as a service which captures knowledge assets, such 
as user guides, process manuals, product descriptions as well as discussion comments and 
other informal contributions company-wide and uses intelligent information processing com-
ponents to improve the collaboration among customers, internal staff and external LSPs. Us-
ing the content analyzer, recommender, and semantic search components, knowledge as-
sets from customers and external LSPs can be intelligently captured, filtered, stored, and 
reused.  
 
Users access a flexible structure of workspaces for a particular topic such as a project, cli-
ent, internal company procedures, R&D problem or support query amongst the many other 
possible sources of information that can be stored in the system. Using this platform, users 
can discuss and share knowledge in a user friendly environment. All posted content is 
searchable using groundbreaking semantic features and a content recommender system, 
which suggest useful content based on the users’ browsing activities.  
 
LTC has implemented the system across its entire business functions and is engaging in tri-
als to evaluate and quantify the outcome of the initial project objectives in order to deliver a 
unique product tailored to the LI market. By using LTC KnowHow companies in the Lan-
guage Industry can expect: 
 

• Faster and even more reliable average project quality and delivery times. Question-
answering functionality is improved for stakeholders in the production process. Easily 
accessible knowledge assets can help resolve problems such as subject context and 
specific terminology, while bottlenecks in project management can also be identified 
and removed. Furthermore, the smooth operations resulting from social collaboration 
within the enterprise will reduce the risk of severe project delays, while keeping pro-
ject managers and stakeholders better informed to support other service benefits. 

• Increased customer satisfaction. Customer support issues are both managed clearly 
and solved quicker. Through efficient problem solving, the information that is made 
available is both presented quickly and is relevant. The visibility of the process and 
collaboration also increases value. 

• Increased intelligence for R&D and new product development. By interacting more 
closely with customers, suppliers and partners, all stakeholders will be able to con-
tribute interactively to product enhancements and new product development. 

224



• Improved operations management. Information discovery and retrieval will help boost 
operational efficiency. General operational policies and guidelines are at users’ fin-
gertips and changes and updates can be communicated clearly whilst operational 
uncertainties are discussed and resolved centrally.  

 

225


