



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and E Sherly. Proc. of the 12th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 144–151,
Trivandrum, India. December 2015. c©2015 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

punct - An Alternative Verb Semantic Ontology Representation

Kavitha Rajan
Language Technologies Research Centre

IIIT-Hyderabad
Gachiblowli. Telangana.

kavitha@reseach.iiit.ac.in

Abstract

The goal is to build a verb ontology based
on Indian grammatical tradition. We pro-
pose here an ontological structure to rep-
resent verbs in a language, which can be
adapted across languages. This is an on-
going work and presently the method has
been applied to develop ontologically in-
formed etymon in English.

1 Introduction

In an ontology based classification, the main cri-
teria for class identification and membership are
provided by extra-linguistic events or situations
expressed by verb meanings (Lenci, 2010). Since
ontology based classifications are concept depen-
dent, they can be used as inter-lingual verb re-
sources (Boas, 2005). The approach put forward
here is an attempt to explore the feasibility of
arriving at an ontological classification of verbs
based on overlapping verb senses. This work is
an extension of ‘Understanding Verbs Based on
Overlapping Verbs Senses (Rajan, 2013)’. In the
prior work a new approach for inter-lingual on-
tological classification of verbs was put forward.
This method looks into the inherent meaning of
each verb and identifies seven meaning primitives.
It is inspired by Conceptual Dependency(CD) the-
ory (Schank, 1972; Schank, 1973; Schank, 1975)
and the Indian grammatical traditional thinking of
Niruktakāras: “all content words are either verbal
roots (activities) or derived from verbal roots”.

2 Why Verbs ?

According to Indian Grammatical Tradition, verbs
occupy a central role in a language. Consider the
following simple sentence (in Sanskrit):

devadattaH pacati
‘Devadatta is cooking’.

According to Yāska (c.6th-5th centuries BCE);
Nirukta (Sarup, 1920) 1.1:

The principal meaning signified by the above ut-
terance is the act of cooking - ‘pacati’ and not
the subject - ‘devadattaH’ (who is predicted to
be cooking).

In Pān. ini’s derivational system, by means of which
utterances (vākya) and their components are ac-
counted for, items assigned the name dhātu ‘verb,
root’ rank as core elements of utterances that
are actually usable and serve as a starting point
of derivation of such utterances. In the above
sentence, cook ‘pac’ is called the dhātu (root
verb) and hence the starting point of derivation.
Pān. iniyas, like Patan̄jali (second century BCE) un-
equivocally speak of the meaning of dhātvarthas
(dhātu + artha) ‘verb meanings’ as kriyā ‘act, ac-
tion’.

In Sanskrit, verb is called ‘kriyā’ and kriyā
stands for action or activity. But verb consists of
both ‘action(kriyā)’ and ‘state(bhāva)’ verbs. The
explanations put forward by grammarians in order
to accomodate the concept of ‘state’ into the defi-
nition of verb, that is, transition from kriyā-based
to bhāva-based definition is given in the following
paragraphs.

Bhartr.ihari is the first Pān. iniya to formulate the
technical definition of kriyā as given in Pān. ini’s
grammar.

According to Bhartr.ihari (5th century CE):

Every verb has ‘sense of sequence’ and ‘state’ in
it. Hence, every verb projects a ‘sense of hap-
pening’, making this sense ‘omnipresent’ in all
verbs.

Basic meaning of Sanskrit word bhāva is ‘state,
condition’. Word bhāva in P.2.3.37 (Joshi, 1991)
is an instance of “a particular state or condition in
which an item finds itself as a result of something
happening, and also the happening, occurrence it-
self”.144



So, we can use word ‘bhāva’ to mean ‘happen-
ing’. We have already seen that ‘sense of happen-
ing’ is omnipresent in all verbs. That is, ‘bhāva’ is
omnipresent or universal in all verbs.

From Indian grammatical tradition we have
adopted the concept of ‘universal verb’. Our orig-
inal contribution is that we have defined an ‘onto-
logical structure’ to represent ‘universal verb’ and
have used it to represent the 7 primary verb senses
‘(puncts1)’ which we have identified. The struc-
ture of bhāva and the identification of 7 puncts are
explained in the next two sections.

The goal of this work is to classify concept
‘verb/activity’ and not the lexical category ‘verb’
across languages. Verbs belonging to specific lan-
guages are collected for this work but they repre-
sent ’concepts’. For example ’run’ is a concept
meaning ’to go quickly by moving the legs more
rapidly than at a walk and in such a manner that
for an instant in each step all or both feet are off
the ground2’. Even if all languages do not have
parts of speech they will surely have concepts like
’run’, ’eat’, etc.

3 Ontological Form of Happening

Structure of happening (see Figure 1) consists of
two states: initial/state1 and final/state2, and the
context within which the change in state occurs.

‘Context’ consists of ontological at-
tributes.
Ontological attributes are: space, loca-
tion, time, manner, reason which in turn
have sub-attributes.
The Sub-attributes of ‘space’ are :
direction - linear, curvilinear, down
‘location’ are: source, destination
‘time’ are: frequency, duration
‘manner’ are: mode, speed
‘reason’ are: purpose, cause, etc.

These are called ontological attributes as they are
concepts and they can be represented across lan-
guages. To explain this point we have taken a sam-
ple verb ’run’ in English and its Hindi counterparts
’bhāgana’ and ’dauḋana’ and shown the mapping
in Table 1.

1an element held in Whitehead’s philosophy of nature to
be analogous to a point in a geometric system - Merriam Web-
ster

2http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/run

Table 1: Ontological attribute mapping among
verbs in English and Hindi(Indian language)

English Run Hindi daud. anā bhāganā
move / do 1 sthāna parivar-

tan karanā /
karanā

1 1

Direction(linear): 1 diśā(sīdhā): 1 1
move along 1 sātha sātha

sthāna parivar-
tan karanā

1 1

Speed: 1 raftār: 1 1
fast 1 teja 1 1
Mode: 1 rīti(pran. āli): 1 1
putting one foot
in front of the
other allowing
each foot to
touch the ground
before lifting up
the next

1 ek paira ke Age
dōsarā paira is
tarah rakhana
tāki ek paira
jamīna par
chūne ke bā da
hi dūsarā chuye

1 1

Cause: 0 kāran. a: 0 1
danger āpatti
fear bhaya
some reason 0 kuch kāran. a 0 1

Happening or bhāva can be defined as change
of state in a context. Bhāva has a formal structure
and has been named ‘punct’ (Singh, 2001).

Figure 1: Structure of punct

The formal structure of bhāva/punct is:

〈e1|e2, C〉

where e1 stand for entity/state1, e2 for
entity/state2, and C represents context /
feature-space.

The formal structure is a recursive form as its con-
text itself is made out of other formal structures.
The two states in this structure are contiguous 3.
By adding a formal structure as form of contigu-
ity, change transfers to two contiguous but differ-
ent states and state transforms into combinatory
context of happening. Every ‘change of state’
has a location, presence of force or absence of
force, result, context and the context itself involves
‘change of state’ in some other context.

3Take a verb ‘cook - prepare a dish’. The initial and final
states are related to each other.145



4 The seven puncts

Two works WordNet (Miller, 1990) and Nirukta
(Sarup, 1920) were influential in restricting the
number of overlapping verb senses to 7. The
WordNet has identified 8 common verbs (have,
make, set, get, take, be, run, go). Let us take
each verb and analyse it in detail and see how they
were modified into 7 primitive verbs senses. The
7 senses are given names following the head word
(Levin, 1993) style of nomenclature.

The verbs ‘make’, ‘set’, ‘take’ and ‘get’ are ac-
tion verbs. Actions are done by an actor. These
actions can take place only if an agent is involved
in initiating them, ‘My grandmother made a dress
for me.’, ‘Catherine set a chair by the bed.’, ‘He
took seven wickets in the second innings.’, ‘She
got a cake for me.’. So the ‘sense of agent’ which
is known as sense of ‘doer’ (Sanskrit, sādhya —
sādhaka4 bhāva) is common5 and is also the pri-
mary verb sense in these four verbs. Since ‘do-ing’
sense is present in all 4 verbs. Here ‘do’ is a head
word (Levin, 1993) to represent all types of agent
(both animate and in-animate) initiated actions.

The verb ‘have/has’ represents possession. Pos-
session can be of three types 1) when a person
himself obtains an object, like the verb ‘take’, ’He
took seven wickets in the second innings.’ 2) when
the agent is the recipient of an object, like the verb
‘get’, ‘I got a letter from him the other day.’ and
3) possessing a quality, like the verb ‘have’,‘She
has got blue eyes.’. Since, ‘have’, ‘get’ and ‘take’
have the verb sense ‘possession’ in common all
the three verbs were grouped under the sense of
‘have’ (Sanskrit, grāhya — grāhaka bhāva). As
an agent should initiate the actions of transferring
possessions in the verbs ‘take’ and ‘get’ they have
possession as the secondary verb sense.

The verb ‘be’ represents state. Verbs like
‘have’, ‘set’ are state verbs. Sentence like - ‘He
has property. shows that the concerned person is
in possession of some property. Having something
in possession is a continuous ‘state’ until it is lost
or given away. ‘The village was set among olive
groves on a hill.’, shows the fixed position(state)
of a village. The sense of state forms an integral
part of the structure of verb. So, ‘be (is) (Sanskrit,
ādhāra — ādheya bhāva) is a primitive verb sense.

4Category system followed in vaiśes.ika(system founded
by sage kan. āda circa 150 A.D). The 7 primitives are 7 such
categories.

5If a sense is ‘common’, it means that it is found in many
verbs. The identification process is explained in this section

The verbs ‘run’ and ‘go’ have sense of ‘move-
ment’ in the form of linear displacement in them.
Verb ‘make’, ‘My grandmother made a dress for
me.’, has movement in the form of change from
initial(raw) to final(finished) state. Verb ‘take’ has
movement in the form of change in the position of
an object and its ownership, ‘Someone must have
sneaked in here and taken it.’. All the different
types of movements or changes are together rep-
resented by the verb sense ‘move’ (Sanskrit, pūrva
— apara bhāva).

The verbs ‘take’ and ‘get’ have a sense of sepa-
ration of a part from a whole. Both these verbs re-
sult in change in the location of objects being pos-
sessed or change in the initial and final states of the
agent or recipient. Change in location means sepa-
ration from the initial position, ‘The Soviet forces
took more than 30,000 Romanian prisoners and all
their equipment.’. Change in state means adding
or removing or modifying the existing state to a
new one, ‘Women have fought long and hard to get
into positions that men hold within the leadership
of the church.’. The verb sense ‘cut’ (Sanskrit,
amśa — amśi bhāva) is used to represent this.

The verbs ‘make’, ‘take’, ‘set’ and ‘get’ act on
limited set of objects. ‘Make’ means to produce
something, often using a particular substance or
material6. But we can make only a restricted num-
ber of objects, ‘Shall I make some coffee?’. In or-
der to explain this sense of restriction or limited-
ness the verb sense ‘cover’ (Sanskrit, āropya —
āropaka bhāva) was included as a primitive verb
sense.

One of the definitions of the verb ‘make’ is ‘to
bring into existence by shaping or changing ma-
terial, combining parts, etc.7’. For this the doer
needs to have knowledge as to how this process
has to be done, ‘She makes all her own clothes.’.
Hence, the verb sense ‘know’ (Sanskrit, jnāna —
jnyeya bhāva) was included as a primitive verb
sense.

Using the above mentioned method we have
identified 7 mutually exclusive primitive verb
senses (puncts) (see Table 2). Using such primi-
tive verb senses and assuming that each verb has
these senses we can analyze inherent meaning of
different verbs. These seven8 primitive senses are

6http://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/british/make 1
7http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/make
8s.at. bhāva vikār of v̄ārs.yāyan. i(Sarup,1920) six types of

bhāva are: origin, existence, modification, increase, decay,
and destruction has influenced the identification of seven146



also known as bhāva-s according to Indian gram-
matical tradition. This bhāva-s constitutes prim-
itive meaning senses implicit in the meaning of
each verb. Term bhāva means happening and this
sense overlaps with all verbs. This is also a tra-
ditional Indian linguistic claim. These senses are
mutually interwoven through their context. For
example: The word ‘cover’ has the verb sense
‘cover (wrap/wrapped)’ as primary and ‘move (be-
fore/after)’ as secondary verb sense in it. Verbs
can have senses ranging from one to all seven in
them, but the 7 senses (know, move, do, have, is,
cut, cover) are mutually exclusive and are logical
structures (Refer Table 2).

The context (C) of each bhāva-s is made of:

C - [ontological: attributes (feature-
space), bhāva (recursive), and any other
information which can contribute to
meaning disambiguation.]

5 Application

5.1 Annotation Process

Each verb can have all the seven meaning primi-
tives in it. Overlap of verb meaning is illustrated
best when meaning of a verb is explicated using
another verb or verbs. On analysis, one can see
that there is an order in which the verbs are used
for explication. This order helps in finding the
primary, secondary, tertiary, etc. meaning senses.
The order can be found by using two methods.
The methods are explained below using two
verbs: dance and confuse.

Example 1:
First Method:

Verbs are mostly polysemous. We collect all
the possible meanings of each verb from various
resources like dictionaries. Then, we analyse each
meaning and place them in different classes (cell
in matrix) according to the order of the meaning
primitives. The meaning primitives are identified
by analysing the inherent meanings of the verbs
by posing a series of questions.

Take verb ‘dance’.

Step 1. If a verb is polysemous,

Verb ‘dance’ has two meanings. Meaning 1: (Of
a person) move quickly and lightly

primitives / puncts in this work.

Table 2: puncts and explanations
Primitives (Elementary
Bhāva-s/puncts)

Explanation

Know:Sense of know-
ing

Know/Knower

(Sanskrit,
jnāna—jnyeya bhāva)

Conceptualize, construct or transfer infor-
mation between or within an animal.

(object of ‘know’ / the
process involved in
knowing that object)

E.g. “forget” - to forget something one
has to know about it. Forget is a process
having state change from knowing to not
knowing over a period of time. So,this
particular verb has “knowing” as primary
sense and change of state/“move” as sec-
ondary sense.

Move:Sense of Move
/change /process
(Sanskrit,
pūrva—apara bhāva)
(state at the beginning
of a process / state at the
end of the process)

Before/After
Every process has a movement in it. The
movement maybe a change of state or a
change in location.
E.g. “fall” - change of position from a
higher state to lower state physically or
in abstract sense. Actions like falling of
leaves do not have a sense of agency, the
fall happens on its own. So the word has
the sense of ‘pure movement’.

Do : Sense of agency
(Sanskrit,
sādhya—sādhaka
bhāva)
(something to be
accomplished /accom-
plished)

Agent/Action
A process which can be accomplished
only with a doer.
E.g. “cook” - has a sense of someone do-
ing cooking. The process of cooking in-
volves change of state from raw to cooked
by a doer. So, it has ‘doing’ sense as pri-
mary and ‘move’ sense secondary to it.

Have : Sense of posses-
sion or having
(Sanskrit,
grāhya—grāhaka
bhva)
(something that is the
object of grasping /to
grasp)

Grip/Grasp
Possessing, obtaining or transferring a
quality or thing.
E.g. “like” - To like something one must
have prior ‘knowledge’ about it. Liking is
something you “have or possess”. Hence
‘have’ is primary sense and “knowing” is
secondary sense.

Be : Sense of state of
being
(Sanskrit,
ādhāra—ādheya
bhāva)
(location/attribute)

Locus/Locatee
Continuously having or possessing a qual-
ity.
E.g. - “confuse” (I am confused). It is a
state and it is located in me. ‘Be / is’ is
the primary state and to get confused you
must know and have contradictory opin-
ion about the object. So, sense of ‘know’
is secondary.

Cut : Sense of part and
whole
(Sanskrit, amśa—amśi
bhāva)
(part of an object or
process/whole to which
the part belongs)

Part/Whole
Separation of a part from whole or join-
ing of parts into a whole. Processes which
causes pain. Processes which disrupt the
normal state.
E.g. - “break” It has a sense of a thing be-
ing divided into parts. ‘Cut’ sense is pri-
mary to it and breaking is ‘done’ by some-
one so has a sense of agency ‘do’ as the
secondary sense.

Cover : Sense of as-
cribe and ascription
(Sanskrit,
āropya—āropaka
bhāva)
(to be attributed/the one
to which it is attributed)

Wrap/Wrapped
Processes which pertain to a specific ob-
ject or category. It is like assigning a
boundary.
E.g. - “guarantee” - when you guarantee
you are putting a kind of cover (ascription)
on that object so it has ‘cover’ as primary
sense and someone has to do it, and so has
‘doing’ as secondary sense.

147



Meaning 2: Move rhythmically to music, typi-
cally following a set sequence of steps

Step 2. Take one meaning at a time. Let us take
verb ‘dance’ as in meaning 1.

Step 3. Take a simple sentence in which dance is
used in the particular meaning.

‘She danced happily into the room.’

Step 4. Instead of ‘dance’ substitute the meaning
and rewrite the sentence.

She did + (move quickly and lightly ) + happily
into the room.

Step 5. Keep rewriting the sentence using prim-
itives like ‘do’, ‘move’, ‘have’ etc.. so that
you can re-write the entire sentence using them.
While using primitives see in which order the
primitives can be written too.

She DO+past + (MOVE) + quickly and lightly +
happily + into the room.

Step 6. In this particular sentence, dance means
a type of movement which is done by a person
(doer). Hence, ‘move’ is primary meaning prim-
itive and ‘do’ is secondary meaning primitive.

Hence we write it as : MOVE/DO

Second method is by nominalising verbs in a sim-
ple sentence. For example:

She danced into the room.

Step 1. She did the act of dancing into the room.

Step 2. She did the act of moving into the room
dancing.

Step 3. She ‘DO+past’ (moving into the room)
MOVE+ing as if dancing.

Hence we write it as : MOVE/DO

Example 2:
First method for verb ‘confuse’:
Confuse means ‘Make (someone) bewildered or
perplexed’

The flood of questions confused me.

Step 1. The flood of questions made me bewil-
dered or perplexed.

Step 2. The flood of questions DID the process
of creating bewilderment or perplexity in me.

Step 3. The flood of questions DO the act of cre-
ating a STATE of bewilder- ment or perplexity in
me.

Step 4. The flood of questions DO the act of cre-
ating a ‘STATE’of Inability to deal with or un-
derstand some- thing in me.

Step 5. The flood of questions DO the act of cre-
ating a ‘IS’ of Inability to deal with or KNOW
about something in me.

Hence we write it as : IS/KNOW/DO

In this sentence ‘confused’ is a state. Confusion is
always about some information / knowledge and
so is about ‘know’. This particular state occurs

only in an animate being and hence ‘DOer’ sense.
the order is decided looking at the dependencies of
the various senses. Confusion is a state and hence
‘IS’ is primary. The state is about an informa-
tion so, ‘KNOW’ is secondary. This state occurs
in an animate being and so ‘DO’er sense is tertiary.

Second method for verb ‘confuse’

You confuse me

Step 1. you create confusion in me

Step 2. You create confused (state of Knowl-
edge) about something (object of knowledge)in
me

Step 3. You ‘DO’ creation of Confused (‘STATE’
of ‘KNOW’ ledge) about something (object of
‘KNOW’ledge) in me.

Hence we write it as : IS/KNOW/DO

In the last sentence ‘do’ is the tertiary sense,
‘know’ is the secondary sense and ‘is’ state of
knowledge is the primary sense of verb ‘con-
fuse’.
Hence we write it as : IS/KNOW/DO

The annotation work consisted of identification of
primary and secondary puncts and ontological at-
tributes. Though almost all puncts can be found in
every verb, presently we have restricted the iden-
tification to two. The verbs were grouped and rep-
resented in the form of a two-dimensional 7x7 ma-
trix. The rows and the columns stand for the pri-
mary and secondary primitive senses respectively.
All verbs in a row were grouped together and on-
tological attributes of 7 separate groups (7 rows)
were identified. Ontological attributes consists of
concepts like space, location, time, manner, etc.

Manual annotation was done first for all verbs
(2500) in Sanskrit then for verbs in English (3750
- excluding all types of compounds). For Sanskrit,
the verb list was collected from many sources.
More than 3000 verbs including variations in ac-
centuation were collected from various resources
(Apte, 2008; Capeller, 1891; Kale, 1961; Bruno,
1922; Palsule, 1955; Palsule, 1961; Varma, 1953;
Williams, 2008) and a new typed list was created
in Devanagari script. List was created as such
a complete list of Sanskrit verbs was not avail-
able online. The list was then annotated manually
by one person and cross checked by three San-
skrit experts. For English, the verb list was cre-
ated from various resources like - Levin’s verb list
(Levin, 1993) and verbs added to this list as ex-
tensions (Dang, 1998; Kipper, 2000; Korhonen,
2004). Meanings of all the verbs in English were148



obtained from various online dictionaries (Mer-
riam Webster9, Oxford10, Dictionary.com11, Cam-
bridge Advanced Learners Dictionary12). The list
was then manually annotated by the same person
who had annotated the Sanskrit verbs and the an-
notation was cross-checked by three annotators.

5.2 Ontology Population: Using English and
Sanskrit Verbs

Ideally meaning of a verb involves all seven layers
of puncts. However, if we take two or three layers
of primitive verb senses in a verb, they would be
sufficient to identify meanings of most verbs. We
took just the first two senses to demarcate mean-
ing of verbs. The primary and secondary senses of
all verbs in English and Sanskrit were identified.
They were classified into a two-dimensional 7x7
matrix.

As mentioned in section 3, meaning of a verb
also includes context which in turn includes onto-
logical attributes13. The approach has similarities
with work on use of clustering for finding verb se-
mantics (Sun, 2009).

Ontological attributes14 of a verb is the set of all
‘meaning components (non-linguistic)’ which can
be used to define its meaning exhaustively and also
help in distinguishing it from other verbs. Also,
verbs very close in meaning, no matter how close
they are, can be distinguished based on the dif-
ferences in their meaning component set (even if
they differ by one component, they differ in mean-
ing). Thus, it is an ontological and computational
resource of verbs. For example, ‘Leave’, ‘depart’
and ‘abandon’ are 3 verbs having ‘move’ sense as
primary, cut sense as secondary, and do sense as
tertiary. That means all the 3 verbs belong to the
same cell / class. In order to differentiate between
the 3 verbs in the same class, we identify the on-
tological attributes.

The process used for identifying ontological at-
tributes is explained below. Collect all possible
meanings of all three verbs. Isolate the meanings

9http://www.merriam-webster.com/
10http://oald8.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/
11dictionary.reference.com/browse/
12http://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/british/
13Verbs with similar overlapping verb senses can be dif-

ferentiated by the ontological attributes were concluded upon
by introspection (looking at meanings of verbs in different re-
sources) and based on the concept that there are no synonyms
in languages.

14http://www.ei.sanken.osakau.ac.jp/main/documents/
OnProperty.pdf

which have move as primary verb sense.

Table 3: Identification of ontological Attributes

Verb Meaning Ontological attributes
1) Leave go away from,

depart from per-
manently, go
away from a
place without tak-
ing (someone or
something)

move away + from
somewhere/ something/
someone + perma-
nently/short time + ac-
cidentally/intentionally

2)
Depart

Leave, especially in
order to start a jour-
ney.

move away + from
somewhere/ something/
someone + perma-
nently/short time +
intentionally

3)
Aban-
don

Leave (a place or
vehicle) empty or
uninhabited, with-
out intending to re-
turn

move away + from
somewhere/ some-
thing/ someone +
intentionally + perma-
nently(forever)

From the above three meanings, we see that
the meaning components similar in all three verbs
are: direction - move away, source - from some-
where /something / someone, mode - intentionally.
Meaning components which are different are: du-
ration forever (abandon), for short time / perma-
nently (leave, depart), mode - accidentally (leave).
Using the method explained above ontological at-
tributes were identified for motion verbs in En-
glish. The types and number of subtypes of mo-
tion verbs is given in Table 4.

6 Conclusion

Verbs can be searched based on its features and if
the particular verb is absent in a language, verbs
with neighbouring features can be searched. Fea-
ture space will be same across languages. That is,
if we know the feature space of verb ‘fall’ in En-
glish, using the same feature space we can obtain
the verb ‘fall’ in Hindi or Sanskrit or any other lan-
guage. In a sentence if we can identify the feature
space of a verb in a particular context15 then it can
be replaced by verb in another language which has
similar feature space. Feature space of each verb
will be unique. This method will help in resolving
a major problem of translation which is identifica-
tion and translation of verb in a sentence.

15A verb can have different meanings. Hence one verb will
be placed in different cells in the punct matrix if it has more
than one meaning and the feature space of verbs in different
cells will be different. So if a verb has two meanings, the
feature space of the two verbs will be different.149



Acknowledgements

This work was done under the guidance of Prof.
Navjyoti Singh, Center for Exact Humanities,
IIIT-H and Dr. Dipti Misra Sharma, Language
Technologies Research Center, IIIT-H. This work
was done with the support of Chinmaya Interna-
tional foundation.

References
Anna Korhonen and Ted Briscoe. 2004. Extended

Lexical-Semantic Classification of English Verbs.
Proceedings of the HLT/NAACL workshop on com-
putational lexical semantics, 38–45.

Lin Sun and Anna Korhonen. 2009. Improving Verb
Clustering with Automatically Acquired Selectional
Preferences. Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 638–647, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009.

Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tion, A Preliminary Investigation. The University of
Chicago Press.

Bruno Liebich. 1922. Materialien zum Dhatupatha.
Winter C Heidelberg.

Carl Capeller. 1891. Sanskrit-English Dic-
tionary. (http://www.sanskrit-lexicon.uni-
koeln.de/scans/MWScan/tamil/index.html), Online;
accessed 2009 - 2010.

Gajanan B. Palsule. 1955. A Concordance of San-
skrit Dhātupāthas. Deccan College Dissertation Se-
ries Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona.

Gajanan B. Palsule. 1961. The Sanskrit Dhātupāthas:
A critical study. University of Poona, Pune.

George A. Miller and Richard Beckwith and Christiane
Fellbaum and Derek Gross and Katherine Miller.
1990. WordNet: An on-line lexical database. In-
ternational Journal of Lexicography, 3, 235–244.

Karin Kipper and Hoa Trang Dang and Martha Palmer.
2000. Class-Based Construction of a Verb Lexi-
con. Proceedings of the Seventeenth National Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence and Twelfth Con-
ference on Innovative Applications of Artificial In-
telligence, 691–696. AAAI Press.

Lakshman Sarup. 1920. The Nighantu and Nirukta:
The Oldest Indian Treatise on Etymology, Philology
and Semantics. Computer Models of Thought and
Language. First Edition. Publisher: Motilal Banar-
sidass, New Delhi.

George A. Miller and Richard Beckwith and Christiane
Fellbaum and Derek Gross and Katherine Miller.
1990. WordNet: An on-line lexical database. In-
ternational Journal of Lexicography, 3, 235–244.

Monier M. Williams. 2008 revision. Sanskrit-
English Dictionary. University Press, Ox-
ford, 1964. (http://www.sanskrit-lexicon.uni-
koeln.de/monier/), Online; accessed 2009 - 2010.

Moreshvar R. Kale. 1961. A higher Sanskrit grammar,
for the use of schools and colleges. Motilal Banarsi-
dass, New Delhi.

Siddheshwar Varma. 1953. Vishveshvaranand indo-
logical Series, 5. Hoshiarpur : Vishveshvaranand
Institute.

Vaman S. Apte. 2008 revision. The Practical Sanskrit-
English Dictionary. Poona, Prasad Prakashan, 1957
- 1959. (http://www.aa.tufs.ac.jp/ tjun/sktdic/), On-
line; accessed 2009 - 2010.

Alessandro Lenci 2010. Carving verb classes from
corpora. Raffaele Simone and Francesca Masini,
Word Classes Amsterdam Philadelphia: John Ben-
jamins.

Hideyo Ogawa 2005. Process and Language: study
of the Mahabhasya ad A1.3.1 bhuvadayo dhatavah.
Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, first edition.

Kavitha Rajan 2013. Understanding verbs based
on overlapping verbs senses. In Proceedings of
the ACL Student Research Workshop.August 4-9.
Sofia,Bulgaria., pages 5966

Hans C. Boas 2005. From Theory to Practice: Frame
Semantics and the Design of FrameNet. Semantis-
ches Wissen im Lexikon. Langer, S. and Schnor-
busch, D. Tübingen: Narr., pages 129-160.

Shivaram Dattatray Joshi and J.A.F. Roodbergen and
Sahitya Akademi 1991. The As.t.ādhyāyı̄ of Pāṅini
with Translation and Explanatory Notes.,v.7 Sahitya
Akademi

Hoa Trang Dang and Martha Palmer and Joseph Rosen-
zweig 1998. Investigating regular sense extensions
based on intersective Levin classes. Proceedings of
the 36th Meeting of the ACL and the 17th COLING
pages 293-299.

Roger C. Schank. October, 1972. Conceptual Depen-
dency: A Theory of Natural Language Understand-
ing. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 3(4):552–
631.

Roger C. Schank. 1973. Conceptualizations underly-
ing natural language. Computer Models of Thought
and Language. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.

Roger C. Schank. 1975. The Primitive ACTs of Con-
ceptual Dependency. Proceedings of the 1975 work-
shop on Theoretical issues in natural language pro-
cessing, TINLAP75, 34–37.

Navjyoti Singh 2001. Comprehensive Schema of En-
tities: Vaiśes.ika Category System. Science Philoso-
phy Interface, 5(2). 1–54.

150



Table 4: Feature-space of motion verbs consisting of ontological attribute set
Main Class of
Ontological
Attributes

Sub-Attributes Sub-Sub-Attributes

Space Direction (linear) 24 (backward, backwards, after, along, through, across, over, back — forth,
side to side, forwards, forward, to, towards, from, in front, with, away,
further away, behind, in , into, out of, up, upward)[prepositions]

Direction (down) 1 (down) [prepositions]

Direction (curvilinear) 3 (around, about, direction-less) [prepositions]

Path 12 (circle, long way, along a path, direction-less, across a surface, straight
line, winding course, zigzag course, long distance, over mountains /
hills / forest, over difficult surface , in the direction you want it to move)
[locations]

Location Source 11 (observer, one side of something, position, point, somewhere, line, a
fixed point, something, someone , a place , closed place) [locations]

Object on which acted
on

4 (something, someone, own body, group of people) [locations]

Destination 17 (source of difficulty, source of anger, to somewhere, countryside, per-
son, animal, goal, to a large area, destination, to previous place, to a
particular place, to another place, speaker, location near / familiar to
speaker, person being spoken to, point, position, lower value, direction-
less) [locations]

Relative position 1 (previous position) [locations]

Place of action 9 [locations]

Time Frequency 2 (repeatedly, continuously) [positions]

Duration 4 (forever, short time , over a period of time, permanently) [adverbs]

Manner Mode 100 (awkwardly, easily, closely, unwillingly, accidentally, intentionally, car-
rying load, smoothly, violently, noisily etc.) [adverbs]

Speed 16 (quickly, very fast, regular(adj) step(v), easy and comfortable speed,
very slowly, suddenly, slowly, fast, speed, swiftly, quick, more quickly
than normal, very quickly, extremely quickly, moderately fast, rapidly)
[adverbs]

Reason Purpose 7 (hunting, make move, to go in a particular direction or have a particular
result, or to allow or cause this, to get information secretly, try to catch
or kill them, go where they go, to hold)

Cause 5 ((after)hitting a surface, force, by momentum / force of gravity by out-
side forces, rebound)

Because 20 (strike, due to some reason, feeling tired / bored, tired, from danger
, from fear, show annoyance, to start new journey, being frightened,
playfully, due to injury / pain, for pleasure and relaxation, for pleasure,
to escape, to look important, attract attention, old age, to show place to
someone, make certain that they arrive safely or that they leave a place
as a part of public celebration)

Effect of(verb) action 1 ((leave behind) pain)

151


