
























Sõjakooli Sõnastik 
Estonian-English Reversible Smart Phone Dictionary 

 of Military Terms and Relevant Vocabulary 

 Epp Leete, MA, Translator, Head of Translation and Editing Group 
Estonian National Defence College 

https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=mobi.lab.wardict 
 

Description 
 The smart phone dictionary for Android phones and tablets is being developed by a team 
that includes a translator, terminologist, English teachers, native speakers of English (a lin-
guist and a person with a military background), and servicemen as needed. As of April 2015 
there are about 1200 entries.

Entries come from two main sources: translations and curricula of the ENDC. All entries 
are harmonized with language and subject matter experts before entering them in the diction-
ary, e.g. firearm parts were synchronized with a firing instructor, terminologist and English 
native speaker before teaching the subject in English classes. In this way, in addition to mak-
ing specialised vocabulary available, a more harmonized use of specialised language is en-
sured both in English and Estonian.   
 
Features: 
 Military terms and relevant general vocabulary (environment, medicine), phrases; 
 Fields: education, structure of the ENDC and EDF, weaponry, equipment, R&D, admin-

istration and services, general military (flexible, can be added or deleted anytime); 
 Entry fields in L1 and L2: word/term, abbreviation, definition, field, source (for defini-

tion), note;   
 Works offline and renews every two weeks; 
 Can be linked to MemoQ and other translation environments.  

Word or Term? 
Although the difference between a term and a word is very clear in theory, it is less clear 

in reality. As a general rule, a word becomes a term when defined or explained.  
In order to decide whether a linguistic unit is a term or not, the needs of potential users 

(servicemen, students, employees) are taken into account. For example, densely forested does 
not have to be defined in a military setting, although it should probably be clearly defined in a 
dictionary of forestry in order to distinguish it from other types of forested areas.  

Points of Discussion 
Considering the hard work that definition compilation entails, very often notes are added 

instead of definitions, e.g. trigger  (in a pistol, assault rifle); trigger bar (in a pistol):  here a 
note indicates which weapons have a particular part instead of defining it. 

The terms that signify basic military concepts (e.g. ammunition, pistol, assault rifle) are 
not defined, as potential users are expected to know the meaning (compared with civilians 
who might not be able to distinguish between pistol and assault rifle (calling them both weap-
on), or armoured personnel carrier, infantry fighting vehicle, and even main battle tank (call-
ing them all tank)).   

One issue to be settled with regard to linking the dictionary to a translation environment is 
how to handle single/multiple L1 entries with multiple L2 equivalents, e.g. branch, arm and 
service arm for relvaliik; or loomevargus, plagiaat for  intellectual property theft, plagiarism, 
without creating separate entries for one and the same concept.    

219


