



















































Diagnostics for Constituents: Dependency, Constituency, and the Status of Function Words


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 251–260,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

Diagnostics for Constituents: Dependency, Constituency,  
and the Status of Function Words 

 
Timothy Osborne 
Zhejiang University  

 Hangzhou 
China 

tjo3ya@yahoo.com 

   

 

Abstract 

This contribution delivers two messages: 1) 
that the tests for constituents that are widely 
employed in linguistics and syntax textbooks 
are more congruent with dependency-based 
syntax than with constituency-based syntax 
and 2) that these same tests support the 
conventional analysis of function words, that 
is, the analysis that takes most function words 
(auxiliary verbs, adpositions, subordinators) to 
be heads over the content words with which 
they cooccur. The latter issue is important at 
present, since a recent annotation scheme is 
choosing to subordinate all function words to 
the content words with which they coocur. 

1  Two messages 

Most English language textbooks on syntax and 
linguistics rely on tests for constituents to intro-
duce the concept of syntactic structure. Tests 
such as coordination, proform substitution, topi-
calization, answer fragments, clefting, 
VP-ellipsis, pseudoclefting, etc. are used to 
demonstrate the presence of constituents, and 
thus, the presence of sentence structure. The tests 
show that words are being grouped together into 
phrases, and smaller phrases are grouped into 
ever larger phrases, until the largest phrase, the 
sentence, is reached. The tests are very widely 
employed, so widely that they enjoy a prominent 
spot in the syntactician’s toolbox; they are basic 
tools with which the syntactician works. 
   An interesting aspect of most tests for consti-
tuents, however, is that they identify much less 
syntactic structure than most constituency 
grammars assume. In this respect the data deli-
vered by the tests are relatively congruent with 
dependency grammars (DGs), since by its very 
nature dependency-based syntax posits much less 
syntactic structure than constituency-based syn-
tax. Interestingly, the DGs currently in existence 

rarely draw attention to this fact, that is, they 
rarely draw attention to the fact that the depen-
dency-based understanding of syntactic struc-
tures is strongly supported by the basic tests that 
are, ironically, so widely employed by constitu-
ency grammars.  
   Tests for constituents can also be employed to 
shed light on debates about the best hierarchical 
analysis of various syntactic structures, for in-
stance concerning the hierarchical status of func-
tion words. The tests are consistent with the tra-
ditional DG analysis of function words, namely 
that auxiliary verbs are heads over content verbs 
and prepositions are heads over their nouns. 
   This contribution draws attention to the two 
points just mentioned. It delivers two messages: 
1) most commonly used tests for constituents are 
much more consistent with dependency-based 
syntax than with constituency-based syntax and 
DGs can and should draw attention to this fact, 
and 2) the tests reveal that auxiliary verbs are 
heads over content verbs and prepositions are 
heads over their nouns. 
  The data examined in this contribution are li-
mited to English. This is due mainly to the fact 
that the most widely employed tests for consti-
tuents are employed in English language text-
books, applied to the syntactic structures of Eng-
lish. Section 6 below reflects on this aspect of the 
tests, considering the extent to which they can be 
employed in other languages. 

2   Constituents 

The term constituent is associated with constitu-
ency grammars, the morphological relatedness of 
the two words, constituent and constituency, be-
ing obvious. In this respect the first message de-
livered in this manuscript might seem contrary to 
basic terminology, this terminology suggesting 
that dependency and constituency are distinct 
principles of syntactic organization and that the 
constituent unit is not compatible with depen-

251



dency syntax in general. I view the terminology 
in this area as a historical accident, and this ac-
cident has, in m view, played out to the detriment 
of DG, since it has obscured the fact that depen-
dency syntax is actually more consistent with the 
data delivered by diagnostics for constituents 
than constituency syntax.  
   The dependency vs. constituency terminology 
as it is understood and employed today is per-
haps due most to Hays’ (1964) seminal article 
Dependency theory: A formalism and some ob-
servations. This early article seems to be most 
responsible for introducing and establishing the 
dependency concept and for contrasting depen-
dency with constituency. Hays employed both 
terms, dependency and constituency, whereby he 
was emphasizing that the dependency formalism 
was distinct from the constituency formalism. 
The constituent concept at that time had already 
been long established; it goes back at least as far 
as Bloomfield (1933: 160ff.), and it is associated 
perhaps most with the immediate constituent 
analysis developed by Wells (1948).   
   The noteworthy aspect of Hays (1964) article 
is the terminology that he used when describing 
dependency trees. It is instructive to consider 
exactly what he wrote in this area: 

“A SUBTREE is a connected subset of a 
tree. A complete subtree consists of some 
element of a tree, plus all others connected 
to it, directly or indirectly, and more re-
mote from the origin of the tree… 
  An IC [immediate constituent] structure 
and a dependency structure, both defined 
over the same string, correspond relation-
ally if every constituent is coextensive 
with a subtree and every complete subtree 
is coextensive with a constituent. (Two 
structural entities are coextensive if they 
refer to the same elements of a terminal 
string.)” (p. 520) 

The noteworthy aspect of this passage is the term 
complete subtree. Hays chose to denote a given 
word plus all the words that that it dominates a 
complete subtree.  
   Hays did not simply call the relevant unit a 
constituent. In other words, Hays was introduc-
ing a distinct terminology across dependency- 
and constituency-based systems. Had he em-
ployed the term constituent for both types of 
structures, the nature of the dependency vs. con-
stituency debate might be quite different today 
than it is, since the terminology would have 
aided the comparison and evaluation of the two 

competing approaches to syntactic structures. 
   Other dependency grammarians who fol-
lowed Hays realized that constituents can be ac-
knowledged in both dependency and constituen-
cy-based systems. Hudson (1984: 92) wrote the 
following in this regard: 

“The general connection between depen-
dency structure and constituent structure 
is that a constituent can be defined as 
some word plus all the words depending 
on it, either directly or indirectly (in other 
words, that word plus all the dependency 
chains leading up to it).” 

Starosta (1988: 105) picked up on Hudson’s 
point; Starosta wrote:  

“…and a constituent is any word plus all 
its direct or indirect dependents”  

Hellwig (2003: 603) is more explicit with his 
statements in this area: 

“Contrary to other dependency grammars, 
the notion of constituent is endorsed in 
DUG [Dependency Unification Grammar]. 
However, it is a specific constituent 
structure that results from dependency 
analysis. Let us define a constituent as the 
string that corresponds to a node in the 
dependency tree together with all the 
nodes subordinated to that node (directly 
or mediated by other nodes). Then, any 
dependency tree can be dispersed into 
smaller trees until nodes with no depen-
dents are reached. Each of these trees cor-
responds to a constituent of the sentence 
or phrase in question.” 

The three passages just cited agree that constitu-
ents can be acknowledged in dependency-based 
structures. 
   Had Hays (1964) used the term constituent to 
denote the complete subtrees of dependency hie-
rarchies, the realization may have long set in by 
now that dependency-based syntax is much more 
consistent with most tests for constituents than 
constituency-based syntax. 

3   Tests for constituents 

The most widely employed tests for constituents 
in syntax textbooks are listed next, the order 
given reflecting the frequency of use: 

1.  Coordination 
2.  Topicalization 

252



3.  Proform substitution 
4.  Answer fragments 
5.  Clefting 
6.  VP-ellipsis 
7.  Pseudoclefting  

Coordination is the most widely employed of 
these tests. There are, however, major problems 
with coordination as a diagnostic for constituents, 
since phenomena such as right node raising 
(RNR) (e.g. [Fred likes], but [Sue dislikes], the 
Chinese beer) and so-called non-constituent 
conjuncts (e.g. Fred sent [Sue to the store] and 
[Jim to the post office]) appear to involve the 
coordination of nonconstituent strings. Due to 
such problems, coordination is not employed 
below. 
   The other six diagnostics, however, are more 
consistent about the strings that they suggest are 
and are not constituents. They too are very 
widely employed. Just how widely is docu-
mented with the following lists of syntax and 
linguistics textbooks that use them: 

Topicalization 
Allerton 1979:114, Radford 1981:213, Bur-
ton-Roberts 1986:17, Radford 1988:95, Haegeman 
1991:35, Napoli 1993: 148, Borsley 1991:24, Ouhalla 
1994:20, Fabb 1994:4, Haegeman and Guéron 
1999:46, Fromkin et al. 2000:151, Lasnik 2000:10, 
Börjars and Burridge 2001:26, van Valin 2001:11, 
Poole 2002:32, Adger 2003:65, Sag et al. 2003:33, 
Eggins 1994:72, Radford 2004:72, Kroeger 2005:31, 
Haegeman 2006:79, Culicover 2009:84, Müller 
2010:6, Sobin 2011:31, Sportiche et al. 2014:68. 

Proform substitution 
Allerton 1979:113, Radford 1981:64, Radford 
1988:98, Thomas 1993:10, Fabb 1994:3, Ouhalla 
1994:19, Radford 1997:109, Haegeman and Guéron 
1999:46, Fromkin et al. 2000:155, Lasnik 2000:9, 
Börjars and Burridge 2001:24, van Valin 2001:111, 
Poole 2002:29, Eggins 1994:131, Radford 2004:71, 
Tallerman 2005:142, Haegeman 2006:74, Kim and 
Sells 2008:21, Culicover 2009:81, Carnie 2010:20, 
Müller 2010:5, Sobin 2011:32, Carnie 2013:98, Spor-
tiche et al. 2014:50 

Answer fragments 
Radford 1981:72, Burton-Roberts 1986:16, Radford 
1988:91, Haegeman 1991:28, Radford 1997:107, 
Haegeman and Guéron 1999:46, Börjars and Bur-
ridge 2001:25, Eggins 1994:134, Kroeger 2005:31, 
Tallerman 2005:125, Haegeman 2006:82, Kim and 
Sells 2008:20, Carnie 2010:18, Müller 2010:6, Sobin 
2011:31, Carnie 2013:98, Sportiche et al. 2014 

Clefting 
McCawley 1988:64, Akmajian et al. 1990:150, Bors-
ley 1991:23, Napoli 1993:148, McCawley 1998:64, 
Haegeman and Guéron 1999:49, Börjars and Bur-
ridge 2001:27, Adger 2003:67, Sag et al. 2003:33, 

Tallerman 2005:127, Haegeman 2006:85, Kim and 
Sells 2008:19, Carnie 2013:98, Sportiche et al. 
2014:70 

VP-ellipsis 
Radford 1981:67, 1988:101, Ouhalla 1994:20, Rad-
ford 1997:110, McCawley 1998: 67, Fromkin et al. 
2000:158, Adger 2003:65, Kroeger 2005:82, Taller-
man 2005:141, Payne 2006:163, Culicover 2009:80: 
Sobin 2011:58 

Pseudoclefting 
Borsley 1991:24, McCawley 1998: 64, Haegeman 
and Guéron 1999:50, Kroeger 2005:82, Haegeman 
2006:88, Payne 2006:160, Culicover 2009:89, Carnie 
2013:99, Sportiche et al. 2014:71 

A large majority of these sources overlook DG 
entirely, only four of them have anything to say 
about DG: Borsley (1991:30f.) briefly mentions 
DG in passing; van Valin (2001: 86–109) grants 
DG more space – he devotes a chapter to it; Sag 
et al. (2003:535f.) grant DG less than a page; and 
Carnie (2010:175–8, 268f.) devotes about four 
pages to DG.  

4    Using the tests 

To illustrate what the tests reveal about syntactic 
structures, the following two analyses of the sen-
tence Larry likes to drink expensive beer are 
used: 

(1)         V 
      N        Par 
                    V   
                                    N 
                             A 

 a.  Larry  likes  to  drink  expensive  beer. 
           .S 
      N        .VP 
           V        ParP 
                Par        VP 
                    .V          NP 
                             A      N 

 b.  Larry  likes  to  drink  expensive  beer. 

Using the concept of the constituent unit estab-
lished above (i.e. a complete subtree), there are 
six constituents in the dependency tree (1a) (6 
nodes = 6 constituents) and there are eleven con-
stituents in tree (1b) (11 nodes = 11 constituents). 
These constituents are listed as follows: 

253



6 constituents in (1a) 
Larry, expensive, expensive beer, drink 
expensive beer, to drink expensive beer, 
and Larry likes to drink expensive beer 

11 constituents in (1b) 
Larry, likes, to, drink, expensive, beer, 
expensive beer, drink expensive beer, to 
drink expensive beer, likes to drink expen-
sive beer, and Larry likes to drink expen-
sive beer 

Thus the constituency tree (1b) assumes five 
more constituents than the dependency tree (1a).  
   A pertinent observation here concerns the 
status of phrases in the competing analyses. The 
phrasal constituents in the constituency tree (1b), 
those labeled with …P, are also constituents in 
the dependency tree (1a), the one exception be-
ing the VP likes to drink expensive beer, which is 
not a constituent in (1a). However, four of the 
sub-phrasal constituents shown in (1b) (likes, to, 
drink, and beer) are not constituents in the de-
pendency tree (1a). These observations point to a 
key difference in how phrases are understood 
across dependency and constituency structures. 
Most sub-phrasal constituents in constituency 
structures are not constituents in dependency 
structures to begin with, whereas most phrasal 
constituents in constituency structures are also 
constituents in dependency structures. 
   Most constituency tests easily identify nouns 
like Larry and noun phrases like expensive beer 
as constituents. This point is illustrated next by 
focusing on expensive beer: 

       
(2)  a.  …but expensive beer Larry does like to 

Topicalization 

        drink. 

       
    b.  Larry likes to drink it.  

Proform substitution 

       (it = expensive beer) 

       
    c.  What does Larry like to drink?  

Answer fragments 

       – Expensive beer. 

       
    d.  It is expensive beer that Larry likes to 

Clefting 

       drink. 

       
    e.  What Larry likes to drink is expensive 

Pseudoclefting 

       beer. 

The tests also converge identifying the nonfinite 
VP drink expensive beer as a constituent: 

       
(3)  a. ?…but drink expensive beer Larry does 

Topicalization 

         like to. 

       
    b.  Larry does like to do so.  

Proform substitution 

       (do so = drink expensive beer) 

       
    c.  What does Larry like to do?  

Answer fragments 

       – Drink expensive beer.    

       
    d. *It is drink expensive beer that Larry  

Clefting 

       likes to. 

       
    e.  Sam likes to drink expensive beer, and 

VP-ellipsis 

       Larry also likes to dr ink expensive beer . 

       
    f.  What Larry likes to do is drink  

Pseudoclefting 

       expensive beer. 

Five of the six tests converge, agreeing that drink 
expensive beer should have the status of a con-
stituent. Concerning clefting, the reason why it 
contradicts the other five tests is an open ques-
tion. 
   The message currently being established is 
more easily arrived at if the points of agreement 
and disagreement are acknowledged across the 
two analyses. The dependency- and constituen-
cy-based analyses in trees (3a–b) agree with re-
spect to six of the constituents shown. These six 
constituents are therefore not controversial, so 
the discussion can skip to the other five consti-
tuents, i.e. to the five constituents where the two 
analyses disagree. The constituency tree views 
likes, to, drink, beer, and likes to drink expensive 
beer as constituents, whereas the dependency 
tree views them as non-constituents.  
   The six constituency tests are almost un-
animous in rejecting the status of these five 
strings as constituents. This point is illustrated 
first with the finite verb likes: 

       
(4)  a. *…and likes Larry to drink expensive 

Topicalization 

         beer. 

       
    b. *Larry does/so/does so to drink expensive 

Proform substitution 

       beer. (does/so/does so = likes) 

       
    c.  What does Jim feel about drinking  

Answer fragments 

       expensive beer?  – *Likes.    

254



       
    d. *It is likes that Larry to drink expensive  

Clefting 

       beer. 

       
    e. *Jim likes to drink expensive beer,  

VP-ellipsis 

       and Larry likes to drink expensive beer. 

       
    e. *What Larry does concerning drinking  

Pseudoclefting 

       expensive beer is likes. 

The six tests converge; they agree that likes 
should not have the status of a constituent.  
   A second example solidifies the message. The 
tests agree that the finite VP string likes to drink 
expensive beer should not have the status of a 
constituent 

       
(5)  a.  *…and likes to drink expensive beer  

Topicalization 

       Larry. 

       
    b.  ?Sid does so. 

Proform substitution 

       (do so = likes to drink expensive beer) 

       
    c.  What does Larry do? 

Answer fragments 

       – *Likes to drink expensive beer. 

       
    d.  *It is likes to drink expensive beer that  

Clefting 

        Larry does. 

       
    e.  *Jim likes to drink expensive beer, and 

VP-ellipsis 

        Larry likes to dr ink expensive  
        beer , too. 

       
    f.  *What Larry does is likes to drink  

Pseudoclefting 

        expensive beer. 

An analysis in terms of VP-ellipsis is not availa-
ble for example (5e), although one in terms of 
stripping is available – the star indicates badness 
of VP-ellipsis. The six tests mostly converge; 
they mostly agree that the finite VP string likes to 
drink expensive beer should not have the status 
of a constituent. 
   There is no reason to belabor the point. The 
reader can extend the tests for him- or herself to 
the other three strings for which there is disa-
greement (to, drink, and beer). The tests further 
support the dependency tree (1a); they agree that 
these strings should not be granted the status of 
constituents. 
   To summarize, the tests point to the mea-
ningfulness of phrases: phrases can serve as top-

ics, they can be replaced by proforms, they can 
be clefted and pseudoclefted, they can appear as 
answer fragments, and they can be elided. The 
tests contradict the existence of sub-phrasal con-
stituents. Sub-phrasal constituents are an artifact 
of constituency-based syntax. Phrase structure 
grammars must posit their existence to maintain 
a constituency-based approach to syntactic 
structures. The fact that many of the most widely 
employed tests for constituents do not support 
their existence is a big problem for constituen-
cy-based syntax in general. 

5    Function words 

The message just delivered in the preceding sec-
tion should not be controversial among DGs. The 
fact that dependency-based syntax is more con-
gruent with empirical tests for syntactic struc-
tures should be a welcome insight. There are, 
though, points of disagreement among DGs 
where the tests can help. In particular, the tests 
can help decide points of contention when DGs 
disagree about the best analysis for a given 
structure. Indeed, the tests provide guidance 
concerning the status of many function words in 
the syntactic hierarchy. This contribution now 
focuses on the status of function words. 
   There is, namely, some disagreement con-
cerning the best analysis of function words 
among DGs. Certainly the dominant position in 
most of the theoretically-oriented DG literature is 
that auxiliary verbs are heads over content verbs, 
adpositions are heads over their nouns, and sub-
ordinators are heads over their verbs.1

   The USD position in this area does receive 
some support from Matthews (1981) and from 
the Prague school, both of which also subordi-
nate auxiliary verbs to content verbs in surface 
syntax. Matthews and the Prague school disagree 
with USD concerning the status of adpositions 

 More re-
cently, a quite different approach to dependen-
cies has been put forth. The Universal Stanford 
Dependencies (USD) (de Marneffe et al. 2014) is 
now advocating an annotation scheme that con-
sistently subordinates function words to content 
words. Thus according to this annotation scheme, 
auxiliary verbs are dependents of main verbs, 
adpositions are dependents of nouns, and subor-
dinators are dependents of verbs. 

                                                           
1 The following linguists and sources all pursue the con-
ventional analysis: Kunze 1975, Starosta 1988, Lobin 1993, 
Engel 1994, Jung 1995, Heringer 1996, Groß 1999, Eroms 
2000, Hellwig 2003, Mel’čuk 1988, 2009, Hudson 1976, 
1984, 1990, 2007, 2010. 

255



and subordinators, however, since they position 
adpositions above their nouns and subordinators 
above their verbs. 
   In any case, the diagnostics for constituents 
discussed and illustrated above can shed light on 
the status of function words. In particular, they 
deliver strong support for the more traditional 
stance; they hence contradict the USD annotation 
scheme. The critique of USD presented below 
must be understood in a broader context, though. 
USD parsing actually advocates more than one 
annotation scheme; it advocates the unorthodox 
one just mentioned, which subordinates all func-
tion words to their associated content words, as 
well as two others, one of which is more tradi-
tional in that it positions most function words 
above the content words with which they 
co-occur. The points about function words estab-
lished in the following two sections are directed 
at the former, more prominent annotation scheme 
of USD. 

5. 1  Auxiliary verbs 

The traditional approach and the USD approach 
are contrasted with the following trees: 

(6)           has             
       Fred       eaten     – Traditional analysis 

   a.   Fred  has   eaten. 

                  eaten      
       Fred  has            – USD analysis 

   b.   Fred  has   eaten. 

The analysis in (6a) shows eaten as a constituent, 
whereas the analysis in (6b) shows has as a con-
stituent.  
   The six tests mostly converge in support of 
the a-analysis. They mostly agree that eaten is a 
constituent: 

       
(7)  a.  …and eaten Fred certainly has. 

Topicalization 

       
    b.  Fred has done so. (done so = eaten) 

Proform substitution 

       
    c.  What has Fred done? – Eaten.  

Answer fragments 

       
    d.  *It is eaten that Fred has. 

Clefting 

       
    f.  Sue has eaten, and Fred has eaten, too. 

VP-ellipsis 

       
    g.  What Fred has done is eaten. 

Pseudoclefting 

Five of the six tests agree that eaten should be 
viewed as a constituent. Concerning clefting, the 
reason why it disagrees with the other five tests 
is an open issue that is not addressed here. 
   The six tests are also unanimous in their 
agreement that has is not a constituent: 

       
(8)  a.  *…and has Fred eaten. 

Topicalization 

       
    b.  *Fred does so eaten. (does so = has) 

Proform substitution 

       
    c.  What concerning Fred and eating?  

Answer fragments 

       – *Has.  

       
    d.  *It is has that Fred eaten. 

Clefting 

       
    e.  *Sue has eaten, and Fred has eaten, too. 

VP-ellipsis 

       
    f.  *What Fred eaten is has. 

Pseudoclefting 

Note that the example of topicalization should 
maintain the declarative force of the original 
sentence – the star therefore indicates that the 
sentence cannot be construed as a statement. 
Based on these results, one can conclude that the 
six tests for constituents provide no evidence for 
the status of has as a constituent.  

5.2  Prepositions 

The six tests strongly support the subordination 
of nouns to prepositions. This point is established 
with the following two competing analyses of a 
simple sentence containing a preposition: 

(9)         works           – Traditional analysis 
     Tom         in            
                         office 
                     his  

  a.  Tom  works  in  his  office. 

           works           – USD analysis 
     Tom                office   
                  in  his  

  b.  Tom  works  in  his  office. 

The traditional analysis in (9a) takes his office to 
be a constituent, whereas the USD analysis takes 
his office to be a non-constituent. 
   Five of the six tests agree that his office is a 
constituent: 

256



       
(10) a. …but his office Tom does work in. 

Topicalization 

       
    b.  Tom works in there/it.  

Proform substitution 

       (there/it = his office) 

       
    c.  What (room) does Tom work in?  

Answer fragments 

       – His office.  

       
    d.  It is his office that Tom works in. 

Clefting 

       
    e.  The room Tom works in is his office. 

Pseudoclefting 

VP-ellipsis is not applicable in this case because 
no verb is involved. The other five tests agree 
that his office should be viewed as a constituent.  
   The USD analysis shown with (10b) takes the 
preposition in alone to be a constituent. The tests 
are unanimous, however, insofar as in alone is 
not a constituent: 

        
(11)  a. *…but in Tom works his office.. 

Topicalization 

        
     b. *Tom works there his office.  

Proform substitution 

        (there = in) 

        
     c.  What does Tom do concerning working 

Answer fragments 

        and his office? – *In.   

        
     d. *It is in that Tom works his office. 

Clefting 

        
     e. *Where Tom works his office is in. . 

Pseudoclefting 

Based on these results, there is no motivation for 
granting the preposition in the status of a consti-
tuent. 
   In sum, the five applicable diagnostics clearly 
support the traditional analysis of prepositions: 
they are heads over their nouns.  

5.3   Subordinators and determiners 

Reaching a conclusion about the hierarchical 
status of subordinators and determiners using the 
six tests for constituents is much more difficult to 
do, because the tests typically do not support any 
analysis at all, at least not when applied to Eng-
lish sentences. In this respect other considera-
tions must be accessed to help determine the 
hierarchical status of these two additional types 
of function words.  

   Concerning subordinators (e.g. after, because, 
before, if, that, when, where, whether, why, etc.), 
the fact that a couple of them also serve as pre-
positions is an indication that they should receive 
a similar analysis as prepositions; the subordina-
tors before, after, with, and for also serve as sim-
ple prepositions. Thus since there is strong evi-
dence supporting the status of prepositions as 
heads over their nouns, the same sort of analysis 
can be extended to these subordinators, and then 
by analogy to subordinators in general.  
   Concerning determiners, however, the debate 
concerning their status in the syntactic hierarchy 
is ongoing. This debate has split the syntax world 
into two camps since the 1980s: determiner 
phrase (DP) vs. noun phrase (NP). For the most 
part, the six tests for constituents do not shed 
much light on this debate, since they in general 
fail to identify either determiners or their nouns 
as constituents. 
   There are, however, a couple of limited cases 
that one can interpret as evidence in favor of the 
traditional NP analysis, a point now illustrated 
here using the sentence Susan’s house is beauti-
ful: 

        
(12)  a.  Her house is beautiful.   

Proform substitution 

        (her = Susan’s) 

        
     b.  Whose house is beautiful? – Susan’s. 

Answer fragment 

These two examples demonstrate that proform 
substitution and answer fragments can be inter-
preted as identifying the determiner Susan’s as a 
constituent. The other four tests (topicalization, 
clefting, VP-ellipsis, and pseudoclefting) do not 
support these results, however. Furthermore, the 
answer fragment in (12b) can be seen as involv-
ing noun ellipsis (N-ellipsis); the noun house has 
been elided, leaving just the determiner. This 
observation weakens any conclusion about the 
constituenthood of the determiner Susan’s based 
on (12b). 
   In sum then, the hierarchical analysis of pre-
positions can be extended to subordinators, since 
there is much overlap in the forms and distribu-
tions of these two classes of function words. 
Concerning determiners, however, the tests de-
liver only rather weak evidence for the position 
that they are dependents of their nouns.  

257



6.  Other languages 

An objection can be raised against the reasoning 
produced above. This objection points to the 
English-centered focus of the diagnostics dis-
cussed. The data produced have been from Eng-
lish alone. This fact raises the concern that the 
conclusion may not extend to other languages, 
and thus the diagnostics for constituents may not 
be very insightful from a cross-linguistic pers-
pective. This objection is conceded here, but only 
in part. 
   There are a couple of points to keep in mind 
when assessing the objection. The first is that the 
most prominent schools of syntax internationally 
have been founded and are/were led primarily by 
native speakers of English (e.g. Noam Chomsky, 
Ivan Sag, Carl Pollard, Joan Bresnan, Ronald 
Langacker, etc.). The arguments and insights of 
these linguists are produced primarily in English, 
using examples primarily from English. Thus the 
syntax of English has had and continues to have 
a far greater influence on our understanding of 
syntax on the international stage in general than 
that of any other language. In this regard, the fact 
that tests for constituents developed for English 
sentences contradict the syntactic theories of the 
schools of syntax just alluded to should carry a 
lot of weight.   
   The second point to keep in mind concerns 
the sources that are using the tests. The textbooks 
that employ the tests are intended for students of 
linguistics. These texts are then used around the 
world in numerous countries by students of Eng-
lish in language departments at colleges and 
universities. Thus often the first exposure to syn-
tactic theory that aspiring linguists receive comes 
in the form of textbooks written in English, using 
primarily English examples. This situation is 
suggestive of the great influence that these texts 
are having on the development of syntactic 
theory internationally. The message, then, is 
again that the tests as applied to English are hav-
ing a disproportionate influence on the develop-
ment and direction of syntactic theory in general. 
   The third point to consider is the extent to 
which the tests are in fact applicable to other 
languages. Some of the tests employed above 
should be valid for many other languages. This is 
particularly true of proform substitution and an-
swer fragments. Most if not all languages have 
proforms, and these proforms can be used to 
identify syntactic structure in a manner similar to 
how proform substitution has been employed 
above. Similarly, most if not all languages allow 

question-answer pairs and the answer fragments 
that are produced can deliver important clues 
about syntactic structure no matter the language. 
   Ideally, each language needs to develop its 
own inventory of diagnostics for syntactic struc-
ture, based on its idiosyncrasies. Certainly some 
of the diagnostics above can be adopted directly 
into other languages (proform substitution, an-
swer fragments), and others can perhaps be 
adapted in one way or another so that they can 
also be employed (clefting, pseudoclefting, ellip-
sis). When a given diagnostic does not seem to 
provide insights about syntactic structure, one 
should ask why this is so. The fact that the diag-
nostic is not helpful can then serve as an indica-
tor about what is going on with the particular 
syntax of that language. 

7.  Concluding points 

To conclude this contribution, two further objec-
tions that come to mind against the reasoning 
developed above are briefly countered. The first 
of these concerns the fact that diagnostics for 
constituents are fallible; at times the results they 
deliver are contradictory. This is perhaps most 
evident with determiners in English. Dependen-
cy- and constituency-based theories of syntax 
alike view determiners as constituents, yet most 
of the tests above fail to identify them as such. 
While this point must be conceded, at no time 
has the presentation above claimed that the di-
agnostics are infallible. Indeed, the tests are at 
times quite fallible. But what this contribution 
has claimed is that most diagnostics for consti-
tuents consistently fail to identify sub-phrasal 
strings as constituents. Since this is precisely 
what dependency-based models predict, the de-
pendency models are preferable in this area. On 
the whole, they make much more accurate pre-
dictions about sentence structure with much less 
effort. 
   The second further objection that can be 
raised against the messages delivered above 
concerns the critique of the USD annotation 
scheme. No attempt has been made here to refute 
the main motivation for the USD scheme, this 
motivation being uniformity of annotation across 
diverse languages. Subordinating function words 
to content words establishes hierarchies of con-
tent words that are directly linked to each other, 
and these hierarchies are then relatively consis-
tent across diverse languages. While this objec-
tion must also be conceded, this concession 
should not be misinterpreted, since this contribu-

258



tion never intended to refute this supposed 
strength of the USD annotation scheme.   
   The authors of the USD scheme claim that 
USD embodies “linguistic quality” (de Marneffe 
et al. 2014: 4589) – as opposed to accuracy of 
parsing. The message delivered above is that di-
agnostics for constituents contradict this claim to 
linguistic quality. Indeed, the diagnostics reveal 
the opposite, namely that the USD scheme can-
not claim linguistic quality concerning the tests. 
Given the prominent role that the tests play in 
modeling syntactic structures, the lack of linguis-
tic quality is in fact a major drawback of the 
USD approach. 
 
References 
David Adger. 2003. Core Syntax: A Minimalist Ap-

proach. Oxford University Press.  

Adrian Akmajian, Richard Demers, Ann Farmer, and 
Robert Harnish. 1990. An Introduction to Lan-
guage and Communication, 3rd edition. The MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA.   

David Allerton. 1979. Essentials of Grammatical 
Theory: A Consensus View of Syntax and Mor-
phology. Routledge & Kegan Paul, London. 

Carl Baker. 1978. Introduction to Genera-
tive-Transformational Syntax. Prentice-Hall. 

Kersti Börjars and Kate Burridge. 2001. Introducing 
English Grammar. Arnold, London. 

Robert Borsley. 1991. Syntactic Theory: A Unified 
Approach. Edward Arnold, London. 

Noel Burton-Roberts. 1986. Analysing Sentences: An 
Introduction to English Syntax, 2nd edition. Long-
man, London. 

Andrew Carnie. 2010. Constituent Structure, 2nd edi-
tion. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. 

Andrew Carnie. 2013. Syntax: A Generative Introduc-
tion, 3rd edition. Wiley-Blackwell, Malden, MA.  

Noam Chomsky. 1957. Syntactic Structures. Mouton 
Publishers, The Hague. 

Elizabeth Cowper. 1992. A Concise Introduction to 
Syntactic Theory: The Government-Binding Ap-
proach. The University of Chicago Press, Chica-
go. 

Peter Culicover. 2009. Natural Language Syntax. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. 

Peter Culicover and Ray Jackendoff. 2005 Simpler 
Syntax. Oxford University Press, New York. 

Ulrich Engel. 1994. Syntax der deutschen Sprache, 3rd 
edition. Erich Schmidt Verlag, Berlin.  

Hans-Werner Eroms. 2000. Syntax der deutschen 
Sprache. de Gruyter, Berlin. 

Nigel Fabb. 1994. Sentence Structure. Routledge, 
London. 

Victoria Fromkin (ed.). 2000. Linguistics: An Intro-
duction to Linguistic Theory. Basil-Blackwell, 
Malden, MA. 

Thomas Groß. 1999. Theoretical Foundations of 
Dependency Syntax. Iudicium, Munich.  

Liliane Haegeman. 2006. Thinking Syntactically: A 
Guide to Argumentation and Analysis. Blackwell 
Publishing, Malden, MA.  

Liliane Haegeman and Jacqueline Guéron. 1999. Eng-
lish Grammar: A Generative Perspective. Black-
well Publishers, Oxford, UK. 

Peter Hellwig. 2003. Dependency Unification Gram-
mar. In: Vilmos Ágel et al. (eds.), Dependency 
and Valency: An International Handbook of Con-
temporary Research, 593–635. Walter de Gruyter, 
Berlin.   

Hans Heringer. 1996. Deutsche Syntax: Dependentiell. 
Stauffenburg, Tübingen. 

Rodney Huddleston and Geoffrey Pullum. 2002. The 
Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. 
Cambridge University Press. 

Richard Hudson. 1984. Word Grammar. Basil 
Blackwell, Oxford, UK. 

Richard Hudson. 1990. An English Word Grammar. 
Basil Blackwell, Oxford, UK. 

Richard Hudson. 2007. Language Networks: The New 
Word Grammar. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
UK. 

Wha-Young Jung. 1995. Syntaktische Relationen im 
Rahmen der Dependenzgrammatik. Buske Verlag, 
Hamburg. 

Samuel Keyser and Paul Postal. 1976. Beginning 
English Grammar. Harper & Row, New York. 

Jong-Bok Kim and Peter Sells. 2008. English Syntax: 
An Introduction. CSLI Publications, Stanford. 

Paul Kroeger. 2005. Analyzing Grammar: An Intro-
duction. Cambridge University Press. 

Jürgen Kunze. 1975. Abhängigkeitsgrammatik. Studia 
Grammatica 12. Akademie Verlag, Berlin.   

Howard Lasnik with Marcela Depiante and Arthur 
Stepanov. 2000. Syntactic Structures Revisited: 
Contemporary Lectures on Classic Transforma-
tional Theory. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.  

Henning Lobin. 1993. Koordinationssyntax als pro-
zedurales Phänomen. Studien zur deutschen 
Grammatik 46. Gunter Narr Verlag, Tübingen. 

259



Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Natalia 
Silvaire, Katrin Haverinen, Filip Ginter, Joakim 
Nivre, Christopher D. Manning. 2014. Universal 
Stanford Dependencies: A cross-linguistic typolo-
gy. LREC 14, 4585–92. 

James McCawley. 1998. The Syntactic Phenomena of 
English, 2nd edition. University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory and 
Practice. State University of New York Press, Al-
bany.  

Stefan Müller. 2010. Grammatiktheorie. Stauffenberg 
Verlag, Tübingen. 

Donna Napoli. 1993. Syntax: Theory and Problems. 
Oxford University Press, New York. 

Jamal Ouhalla. 1994. Transformational Grammar: 
From Rules to Principles and Parameters. Edward 
Arnold, London.  

Thomas Payne. 2006. Exploring Language Structure: 
A Student’s Guide. Cambridge University Press. 

Geoffrey Poole. 2002. Syntactic Theory. Pelgrave, 
New York. 

Paul Postal. 1974. On Raising: One Rule of English 
Grammar and its Theoretical Implications. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, MA.  

Radford, Andrew. 1988. Transformational Grammar: 
A First Course. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 

Andrew Radford. 1997. Syntactic Theory and the 
Structure of English: A Minimalist Approach. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Andrew Radford. 2004. English Syntax: An Introduc-
tion. Cambridge University Press. 

Ian Roberts. 1997. Comparative Syntax. Arnold, 
London. 

Ivan Sag, Thomas Wasow, and Emily Bender. 2003. 
Syntactic Theory, 2nd edition. CSLI Publications, 
Stanford. 

Nicholas Sobin. 2011. Syntactic Analysis: The Basics. 
Wiley-Blackwell, Malden, MA.  

Dominque Sportiche, Hilda Koopman, and Edward 
Stabler. 2014. An Introduction to Syntactic Analy-
sis and Theory. Wiley Blackwell, Malden, MA. 

Stanley Starosta. 1988. The Case for Lexicase: An 
Outline of Lexicase Grammatical Theory. Pinter 
Publishers, London. 

Maggie Tallerman. 2005. Understanding Syntax, 2nd 
edition. Hodder Education, London. 

Linda Thomas. 1993. Beginning Syntax. Blackwell, 
Oxford, UK.  

Robert van Valin. 2001. An Introduction to Syntax. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 

260


