



















































Beyond Sentiment: Social Psychological Analysis of Political Facebook Comments in Hungary


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis (WASSA 2015), pages 127–133,
Lisboa, Portugal, 17 September, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Beyond Sentiment: Social Psychological Analysis of Political Facebook 
Comments in Hungary 

 
 

Márton Miháltz,  
Tamás Váradi 

Research Institute  
for Linguistics, Hungarian 

Academy of Sciences 
Benczúr utca 33, Budapest 

H-1068 Hungary 
mmihaltz@gmail.com 

varadi.tamas 
@nytud.mta.hu 

István Csertő, Éva Fülöp,  
Tibor Pólya 

Institute of Cognitive  
Neuroscience And Psychology,  

Hungarian Academy of Sciences 
Magyar tudósok körútja 2. 
Budapest, H-1117 Hungary 
{cserto.istvan,  

fulop.eva, 
polya.tibor} 
@ttk.mta.hu 

Pál Kővágó 
 

Institute of Psychology, 
University of Pécs 
Ifjúság útja 6, Pécs 
H-7624 Hungary 
kovago.pal 
@ttk.mta.hu 

 
  

 

Abstract 

This paper presents the methodology and 
results of a project for the large-scale 
analysis of public messages in political 
discourse on Facebook, the dominant so-
cial media site in Hungary. We propose 
several novel social psychology-
motivated dimensions for natural lan-
guage processing-based text analysis that 
go beyond the standard sentiment-based 
analysis approaches. Communion de-
scribes the moral and emotional aspects 
of an individual’s relations to others, 
while agency describes individuals in 
terms of the efficiency of their goal-
orientated behavior. We treat these by 
custom lexicons that identify positive and 
negative cues in text. We measure the 
level of optimism in messages by exam-
ining the ratio of events talked about in 
the past, present and future by looking at 
verb tenses and temporal expressions. 
For assessing the level of individualism, 
we build on research that correlates it to 
pronoun dropping. We also present re-
sults that demonstrate the viability of our 
measures on 1.9 million downloaded 
public Facebook comments by examining 
correlation to party preferences in public 
opinion poll data. 

1 Introduction 

Social media (SM) is becoming an increasingly 
important channel for communications in poli-
tics. In Hungary, Facebook is the dominant SM 
platform, with 4.27M registered Hungarian users 
(59.2% penetration of 7.2M people with internet 
access, which represents 43% of the total popula-
tion)1. No political party or politician can afford 
to miss the opportunity of extending their influ-
ence by regularly publishing status update mes-
sages (posts) on their Facebook pages that are 
potentially accessible by all Facebook users (i.e., 
marked as “public”). Most political actors enable 
discussions (commenting) on their pages, which 
means other users are able to publicly respond to 
(post comments about) the original posts or to 
each other’s responses. This constitutes a vast 
and vivid source of political or politics-inspired 
discussions, debates, expressions of sentiment, 
support or dissent. Most importantly, the partici-
pating social media users also happen to be real-
life voters. 

In this paper, we present a set of tools and re-
sources that enable the collection and analysis of 
Hungarian public Facebook comments written in 
response to public posts published on the pages 
of Hungarian politicians and political organiza-
tions. Besides the identification of relevant enti-
ties and sentiment polarity in these messages, our 
investigations focused on methods for detecting 
and quantifying psychological and sociopsy-
                                                
1 Source: http://www.internetworldstats.com/europa.htm 

127



chological phenomena including agency and 
communion, optimism/pessimism and individual-
ism/collectivism. These indicators are based on 
previous results in the area of social psychology 
research. The main contribution of this paper is 
the proposal of these new, social psychology-
motivated dimensions for the analysis of atti-
tudes expressed in social media that go beyond 
the standard sentiment (emotional polarity) 
analysis approaches. With these we hope to get 
better answers to questions like: what are the 
trends in the reactions to SM messages of politi-
cal actors, and how do these correlate to real-life 
political actions and events, such as elections and 
votes? How do political communication and dis-
cussions shape the psychological states and so-
cial values of various SM user groups, such as 
supporters of political powers? 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: 
the next section presents our data sources and the 
methods of our analysis with respect to social 
psychology and the challenges presented by 
processing social media language. We then pre-
sent preliminary empirical results that demon-
strate the viability of our proposed approach by 
examining correlation with a real-life political 
event, general elections in Hungary in 2014. 

2 Methods 

There were three major election events in Hun-
gary in 2014: general elections for seats in the 
National Assembly (Hungarian Parliament) in 
April, elections for seats in the European Parlia-
ment in May, and municipal elections in Octo-
ber. In order to focus on the debates surrounding 
these events, we collected the names of nomi-
nated and elected representatives and their politi-
cal organizations involved in these campaigns 
(sources used: valasztas.hu (official election 
data) and Hungarian Wikipedia.) Using these 
names, we identified 1341 different Facebook 
pages that belong to Hungarian political organi-
zations (parties, their regional and associated 
branches etc.) and politicians (candidates and 
elected representatives etc.) of years 2013 and 
2014. We used both official pages (administered 
by the agents of the political actors the pages are 
about) and fan pages (administered by independ-
ent communities). 

We used the Facebook Graph API to collect 
public posts and the associated public comments 
from these sources dated between October 2013 
and September 2014 once a week. One week af-
ter each harvest, another script was used to check 

for new comments that arrived to already down-
loaded posts. In total, our corpus contains 141K 
Facebook posts and 1.9 million comments from 
226K users, constituting over 46 million running 
words. 

In order to be able to analyze sentiment and 
the other sociopsychological measures we had to 
first process the comment messages using the 
following pipeline: segmentation and tokeniza-
tion, morphological analysis, part-of-speech tag-
ging and lemmatization. This was followed by 
the extraction of relevant entities and the identi-
fication of their party affiliations using custom 
lexicons compiled into finite state automatons 
using the open source NooJ2 tool (Silberztein 
2005), which uses finite state automata compiled 
from custom grammars to annotate text. We also 
used NooJ to annotate expressions of sentiment 
and other sociopsychological phenomena using 
custom lexicons and grammars. The following 
sections give details about the background and 
development of these components. 

2.1 Social Psychological Analysis 
Scientific Narrative Psychology (SNP) is a com-
plex approach to text-based theory building and 
longitudinal, quantitative assessment of psycho-
logical phenomena in the analysis of self and 
group narratives in the field of social, personality 
and clinical psychology (László 2008). Our 
methods for the sociopsychological content 
analysis of Facebook comments in this project 
builds on earlier work extending it to the domain 
of SM discourse in politics. 

Current approaches to analyzing attitudes in 
social media messages mainly focus on one psy-
chological viewpoint, emotional polarity (senti-
ment analysis), as in (Ceron et al. 2014; Chen et 
al. 2010; Costa et al. 2015; Hammer et al. 2014; 
O’Connor et al. 2010; Sobkowicz, Kaschesky 
and Bouchard 2012; Tumasjan et al. 2010). In 
addition to also measuring sentiment, we extend 
this framework by proposing several new aspects 
that offer insights into further psychological and 
social phenomena which might be important in-
dicators in the assessment or prediction of the 
attitudes and behavior of online communities. In 
addition, while the majority of previous work on 
analyzing social media focuses on Twitter, such 
as (Asur et al. 2010; Balahur 2013; Costa et al. 
2015; Habernal et al. 2013; Kouloumpis et al. 
2011; Lietz et al. 2014; Sidorenko et al. 2013; 
Tumasjan et al. 2010), we use public comments 

                                                
2 http://nooj4nlp.net/ 

128



from Facebook, which is the dominant SM chan-
nel in Hungary. 

According to social psychology theory social 
value judgments can be described along two 
lines (Abele and Wojciszke 2007; Abele et al. 
2008). Agency describes an individual in terms of 
the efficiency of their behavior oriented to their 
personal goals (motivation, competence and con-
trol). Communion describes the moral and emo-
tional aspects of an individual’s relations to other 
group members, individuals or groups (coopera-
tion, social benefit, honesty, self-sacrifice, affec-
tion, friendship, respect, love etc.). Both types 
have positive and negative dimensions, and can 
be used to describe social behavior, for example 
when relating to a political organization one sup-
ports or opposes. Our agency and communion 
NooJ component annotates comments using lexi-
cons that contain 650 different expressions. 

Individuals differ in the way past, present or 
future events dominate their thinking. When a 
person’s thinking is dominated by the past, they 
are likely to view the world unchangeable. 
Thinking dominated by the present indicates the 
importance of realistically attainable goals, while 
future-dominated thinking usually sees open pos-
sibilities. We assume that optimistic people tend 
to talk more about the future and less about the 
past, while pessimists talk more about the past 
and less about the present, which is supported by 
previous studies (Habermas et al. 2008; Kunda 
1999). This bears significance in situations when 
a person may choose to focus on any of the three 
temporal aspects. As an example, when making 
political decisions one might focus on either 
prior events leading up to the decision, on carry-
ing out the decision itself or on the implied fu-
ture consequences. Our NooJ grammar for opti-
mism/pessimism annotates expressions of time 
using morphological information (verb tenses) 
and by recognizing some temporal expressions. 
Based on these, we calculated an optimism indi-
cator (higher value, higher degree of optimism) 
using the ratio of present and future expressions 
to all expressions (past, present, future). 

Individualism represents the importance of the 
category of the self when thinking about the 
world: individualistic societies keep the actions 
of the individual in focus, while collectivist so-
cieties focus on the actions of groups. Studies 
have shown a correlation between the us-
age/omission of personal pronouns (pronoun 
drop) and the levels of individualism in societies 
(Kashima and Kashima 1999). We extend this 
idea by assuming that pronoun drop can be used 

to compare the level of individualism between 
groups within a society as well. Our individual-
ism/collectivism NooJ grammar relies on only 
part-of-speech and morphological information to 
annotate personal pronouns and verbs or nouns 
with personal inflections. By calculating the ratio 
between the former and the latter we estimated 
the rate of actually versus potentially appearing 
pronouns which yielded a measure of individual-
ism (higher score indicating higher degree of 
individualism). 

We also measured sentiment in the comments 
by means of a NooJ automaton we created for 
the annotation of positive and negative emotions 
using a lexicon of 500 positive and 420 negative 
nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, emoticons and 
multi-word expressions.  It also uses a number of 
rules to treat elements of context that might af-
fect polarity (e.g. negation). 

To facilitate the creation of the custom lexi-
cons for the NooJ grammars above, we created a 
sample corpus that contains 176K comments 
from 569 different Hungarian politics-related 
Facebook pages, totaling 5.45M words. The cor-
pus was analyzed using our standard NLP tools. 
The lexicons for sentiment, agency and commun-
ion were constructed by 6 independent human 
annotators who coded words in the sample cor-
pus that occurred with a frequency of 100 or 
more (about 3500 total) for each category. In the 
cases where at least 4 annotators agreed, a sev-
enth annotator made the final decision. 

2.2 Adapting NLP Tools to Social Media 
All of the NLP tools that were used for preproc-
essing the comments were developed for a lin-
guistic domain (using standard language texts, 
mostly newswire) that is different from the lan-
guage used in Facebook comments. The latter 
has a high tendency for phenomena like typos 
and spelling errors, non-standard punctuation 
use, use of slang expressions, emoticons and 
other creative uses of characters, substitution of 
Hungarian accented characters by their unac-
cented variants etc. For this reason, our readily 
available tools suffered from degradation in per-
formance. To overcome this problem, we em-
ployed a two-fold approach: we applied normali-
zations to the input and also extended our tools 
to adapt them to the SM language domain. 

To properly investigate the problems arising 
from processing SM language, we created a cor-
pus of 1.2 million Facebook comments (29M 
running words total), which was analyzed by the 
vanilla NLP tools. Unknown types with a fre-

129



quency of 15 or higher (about 14,000 types) were 
manually inspected (with reference to their con-
texts) to yield an overview of common problems 
that showed regularity and lists of unknown, fre-
quent and important words and expressions. 

Based on these findings, our tokenizer was 
augmented by pre- and post-processing routines 
that resolved some of the issues arising from 
non-standard use of spaces and punctuation. We 
also used lists to normalize commonly mis-
spelled words and slang expressions. Unknown 
but frequent and important words were added to 
the morphological analyzer’s lexicon using 
analogous known words in the same morpho-
logical paradigms, which enabled the analysis of 
arbitrary inflected forms of these words.  

For the identification of relevant named enti-
ties (names of persons (politicians) and organiza-
tions (parties)) we tested a maximum entropy 
classifier tool trained to resolve Hungarian 
named entities (Varga and Simon 2007). How-
ever, because of its low performance on Face-
book comments, we made a decision to use cus-
tom, domain-specific, lexicon-based NE recogni-
tion, which relies on names, name variants, nick-
names and party affiliations of relevant political 
actors collected from the development corpus 
described above. 

2.3 Evaluation 
In order to evaluate the reliability of our named 
entity, sentiment and social psychological anno-
tations, we constructed two gold standard sets of 
336 and 672 Facebook comments. Each set con-
tained messages from all political parties’ Face-
book pages in the same distribution as in the 
complete 1.9M comment corpus (FIDESZ-
KDNP 25.2%, EGYÜTT-2014 19.3%, JOBBIK 
19.2%, MSZP 16.6%, DK 12.5%, PM 4.2%, 
LMP 2.9%). In the smaller set, three human 
annotators annotated each comment for the 
political affiliations of named entities (persons 
and organizations), while in the larger set they 
identified expressions of sentiment, agency, 
communion and the linguistic markers used by 
our optimism and individualism measures. Table 
1 shows the results of evaluating the annotations 
produced by our system against these gold 
standards.  

Annotation Type Precision Recall F1 
Party affiliations 98.36 57.14 72.29 
Pos. sentiment 82.56 74.50 77.38 
Neg. sentiment 67.03 53.68 59.62 
Pos. agency 70.59 69.43 52.83 
Neg. agency 65.79 25.51 36.76 
Pos. communion 65.75 38.40 48.48 
Neg. communion 96.39 41.45 57.97 
Individualism:  
pers. pronouns 

35.20 65.63 45.82 

Individualism: 
inflections 

77.27 94.74 85.12 

Optimism: past 78.90 93.97 85.78 
Optimism: present 31.40 92.54 46.88 
Optimism: future 32.80 67.03 44.04 

 
Table 1: Evaluation of annotations against 

the gold standards 
 

The results show that while the performance 
of the annotations of party affiliations and senti-
ment, agency and communion expression are 
generally acceptable, there are serious issues 
with the annotations of linguistic markers for 
individualism and optimism. Preliminary inves-
tigations revealed problems with the manual cod-
ing of some markers in the gold standard sets, we 
are currently working on identifying these issues 
in order to be able to re-annotate the gold stan-
dard and repeat evaluation measurements for our 
optimism and individualism indicators. 

We also evaluated the performance of senti-
ment analysis based on our sentiment annota-
tions. We assigned a sentiment score to each sen-
tence in each comment by subtracting the num-
ber of negative sentiment expressions from the 
number of positive sentiment expressions, and 
normalized by the number of words in the sen-
tence. We then mapped this score to a 3-value 
sentiment polarity indicator: -1 if the sentiment 
score was negative, 0 if it was 0 (neutral), or 1 if 
it was positive. We also calculated sentiment po-
larity for each sentence in each comment in the 
gold standard set to compare against our auto-
matically obtained polarity indicators (Table 2). 
Our system performed well above the baseline 
method, which worked by assigning the most 
frequent polarity value (neutral) observed in the 
gold standard. 

 

130



 #Sent. Acc. 
All sentences in GS 1295 - 
Neutral polarity (baseline) 920 71.04 
Correctly identified polarity 1096 84.63 

 
Table 2: Accuracy of sentiment polarity rec-

ognition 
 

3 Experiments 
We conducted several experiments to test the 
viability of our proposed agency, communion, 
optimism and individualism measures. We exam-
ined how well these could indicate changes in 
public attitude towards major political powers in 
the context of the April 2014 parliamentary elec-
tions in Hungary. We processed our corpus of 
1.9 million Facebook comments using the above 
tools to calculate scores and indicators for each 
comment. We grouped comments for each politi-
cal party’s Facebook pages, aggregated results 
for each month and compared them to the results 
of a traditional public opinion survey3. We used 
monthly party popularity (support) data available 
from confident voters. Since we did not have any 
information available about the party preferences 
of our Facebook comment authors, we operated 
under the simple assumption that the majority of 
commenters communicating on a given party’s 
Facebook page are the supporters of that party. 
This means that indicators measured from the 
comments posted at the Facebook page of a 
given political party were assumed to character-
ize the attitudes of the supporters of that party. 

To assess our optimism and individualism in-
dicators, we first correlated their values to party 
popularities. We expected that higher degrees of 
individualism would indicate higher responsibil-
ity for party choices, which would imply higher 
party popularity rates. We found nearly signifi-
cant positive correlation for individualism (r=.22, 
p=.052). However, for our optimism indicator we 
measured negative correlation (r=-.22, p=.055) 
with party popularity, which did not support our 
hypothesis that a higher rate of optimism would 
indicate a higher ability to make party choices. 
This might be explained by the assumption that 
past events also play an important role in politi-
cal preferences. 

We also examined how values of our opti-
mism and individualism measures behaved be-
fore and after the parliamentary elections in 

                                                
3 http://www.tarki.hu/hu/research/elect/gppref_table_03.html 

April 2014. Both indicators showed notable 
changes in the time period immediately follow-
ing the elections. Individualism levels increased, 
which might be explained by the decline of the 
significance of cooperation and unity after elec-
tions within politically organized groups. The 
levels of optimism also showed a change after 
the elections, but only increased on pages related 
to the winning party (FIDESZ-KDNP), and de-
creased on the pages of all other parties. This 
might be explained by the different experiences 
of success and failure: success leads to higher 
optimism, while defeat leads to decrease in opti-
mism. 

Our hypotheses about the relationship between 
party popularities and agency/communion were 
based on two observations in social psychology. 
First, the phenomenon of intergroup bias refers 
to a pattern when members of a group tend to 
overrate their own group while devaluing outside 
groups in situations of intergroup competence or 
conflict. Second, while people judge members of 
outside groups primarily through the aspect of 
communion, they tend to evaluate themselves 
and other members of their own groups via the 
aspect of agency. Based on these, we expected to 
find significant negative correlation between 
both positive agency and negative communion 
on the one hand and party popularity on the 
other: low or decreasing support represents a 
threatening situation to group identity that leads 
to compensation manifesting in the overrating of 
one’s in-group and the devaluation of out-
groups. 

In the 6-month period preceding the parlia-
mentary elections, we found negative correlation 
between positive agency (number of identified 
positive agency expressions normalized by total 
number of tokens in the comments in the time 
period) and party popularity (r=-.429, p=.05). 
We also found strong negative correlation (r=-
.677, p=.05) between party popularity and 
agency polarity score (difference of positive and 
negative agency normalized by sum of positive 
and negative agency) in the same period. After 
the elections, while there was no correlation be-
tween party popularity and agency, there was a 
high rate of negative correlation with negative 
communion (r=-.574, p=.01) and communion 
polarity score (r=-454, p=.05). This also sup-
ported our initial hypothesis: the lower the popu-
larity of a given party the stronger the devalua-
tion of other parties through negative commun-
ion linguistic content. This might serve to protect 

131



threatened identity and build group cohesion in 
parties with less than expected success. 

We also found that average positive agency 
was higher than average negative agency in the 
whole time period, the difference being signifi-
cant (p=.001, using Student’s t-test). Average 
negative communion was also significantly 
(p=.001) higher than average positive commun-
ion. Looking at the changes between before and 
after elections the rate of average positive agency 
showed significant decrease (p=.01). This might 
be linked to the fact that acquiring and keeping 
power is a more crucial issue in the tense compe-
tition before elections than in the subsequent pe-
riod. 

4 Conclusion 
We presented our experiments to collect and ana-
lyze Facebook comments in Hungarian politics 
using novel sociopsychological measures that 
extend the possibilities for the assessment of atti-
tudes expressed in text beyond sentiment analy-
sis. We found that our proposed indicators for 
agency and communion are valid tools from a 
psychological perspective and can be useful for 
detecting changes in opinion on social media 
sites of political groups. While our individualism 
and optimism measures showed mixed results, 
they also show potential to bring new sides to 
SM text analysis in politics. 

All the resources (complete corpus of 1.9M 
comments with full annotation, ontology of rele-
vant political actors) and the source codes of our 
tools to process them are available for down-
load4. 

 

5 Acknowledgements 
We wish to thank the thorough work of the con-
ference reviewers. Special thanks to Anikó Han-
nák for her helpful suggestions. Work described 
in this paper was supported by the TrendMiner 
project, which was co-funded by the FP7-ICT 
programme of the European Commission (pro-
ject reference nr. 287863). 

 

References  
Abele, A. E. and Wojciszke, B. 2007. Agency And 

Communion From The Perspective of Self Versus 
Others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy 93:751-763. 

                                                
4 http://corpus.nytud.hu/trendminer 

Abele, A. E.; Cuddy, A. J. C.; Judd, C. M.; and Yzer-
byt, V. Y. 2008. Fundamental Dimensions of So-
cial Judgment. European Journal of Social Psy-
chology 38:1063-1065. 

Asur, S.; Huberman, B.A. 2010. Predicting the Future 
with Social Media. Web Intelligence and Intelligent 
Agent Technology 492-499. 

Balahur, A. 2013. Sentiment Analysis in Social Media 
Texts. Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Com-
putational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment 
and Social Media Analysis, 120-128. 

Ceron, Andrea; Curini, Luigi and M Iacus, Stefano. 
2014. Every tweet counts? How sentiment analysis 
of social media can improve our knowledge of citi-
zens’ political preferences with an application to 
Italy and France. New Media & Society 16:340-
358. 

Chen , Bi, Leilei Zhu, Daniel Kifer, and Dongwon 
Lee. 2010. What Is an Opinion About? Exploring 
Political Standpoints Using Opinion Scoring 
Model. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth AAAI 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence 1007–1012. 

Costa, Jean M. R., Rahmtin Rotabi, Elizabeth L. 
Murnane and Tanzeem Choudhury. 2015. It is not 
only about Grievances - Emotional Dynamics in 
Social Media during the Brazilian Protests. Pro-
ceedings of the Ninth International AAAI Confer-
ence on Web and Social Media 594-597. 

Csertő, I., and László, J. 2013. Intergroup evaluation 
as an indicator of emotional elaboration of collec-
tive traumas in national historical narratives. Soci-
ology Study 3: 207-­‐224. 

Habermas, T.; Ott, L. M.; Schubert, M.; Schneider, 
B.; and Pate, A. 2008. Stuck in the Past: Negative 
Bias, Explanatory Style, Temporal Order, and 
Evaluative Perspective in Life Narratives of Clini-
cally Depressed Individuals. Depression and Anxi-
ety 25: 1091-4269. 

Habernal, I.; Ptáček, T and Steinberger, J. 2013. Sen-
timent Analysis in Czech Social Media Using Su-
pervised Machine Learning. Proceedings of the 4th 
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Sub-
jectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, 65-
74. 

Hammer, Hugo Lewi, Per Erik Solberg and Lilja 
Øvrelid. 2014. Sentiment classification of online 
political discussions: a comparison of a word-based 
and dependency-based method. Proceedings of the 
5th Workshop on Computational Approaches to 
Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis 
90–96. 

Kashima, E. S., and Kashima, Y. 1998. Culture and 
language: The case of cultural dimensions and per-
sonal pronoun use. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psy-
chology 29:461-486. 

132



Kouloumpis, E; Wilson, T.; and Moore, J. 2011. 
Twitter sentiment analysis: The good the bad and 
the omg!. ICWSM 11:538-541. 

Kunda, Z. 1999. Social Cognition. Making Sense of 
People. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 

László, J. 2008. The Science of Stories: An introduc-
tion to Narrative Psychology. London, New York: 
Routledge. 

László, J.; Csertő, I.; Fülöp, É.; Ferenczhalmy, R.; 
Hargitai, R.; Lendvai, P.; Péley, B.; Pólya, T.; 
Szalai, K.; Vincze, O.; and Ehmann, B. 2013. Nar-
rative Language as an Expression of Individual and 
Group Identity: The Narrative Categorical Content 
Analysis. SAGE Open 3:1-12. 

Lietz, H.; Wagner, C.; Bleier, A. and Strohmaier, M. 
When Politicians Talk. 2014. Assessing Online 
Conversational Practices of Political Parties on 
Twitter. International AAAI Conference on We-
blogs and Social Media 285-294. 

O'Connor, B.; Balasubramanyan, R.; Routledge, B. 
R.; and Smith, N. A. 2010. From Tweets to Polls: 
Linking Text Sentiment to Public Opinion Time 
Series. ICWSM 11:122-129. 

Sidorenko, W.; Sonntag, J.; Krüger, N.; Stieglitz, S. & 
Stede, M. 2013. From newspaper to microblog-
ging: What does it take to find opinions? Proceed-
ings of the 4th Workshop on Computational Ap-
proaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Me-
dia Analysis 81-86. 

Silberztein M. 2005. NooJ: a Linguistic Annotation 
System for Corpus Processing. HLT/EMNLP 2005 
10-11. 

Sobkowicz, P.; Kaschesky, M.; and Bouchard, G. 
2012. Opinion Mining in Social Media: Modeling, 
Simulating, and Forecasting Political Opinions in 
The Web. Government Information Quarterly 29: 
470-479. 

Tumasjan, A.; Sprenger, T. O.; Sandner, P. G.; and 
Welpe, I. M. 2010. Predicting Elections with Twit-
ter: What 140 Characters Reveal about Political 
Sentiment. ICWSM 10:178-185. 

Varga, D.; E. Simon. 2007. Hungarian named entity 
recognition with a maximum entropy approach. 
Acta Cybernetica 18(2):293-301. 

133


