



















































Checking a structured pathology report for completeness of content using terminological knowledge


Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (Louhi), pages 103–108,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Checking a structured pathology report for completeness of content
using terminological knowledge

Sebastian Busse
Department Informatics and Media

University of Applied Sciences
Brandenburg, Germany

busses@fh-brandenburg.de

Abstract

Structuring of information helps people
to gain a quick overview of complex is-
sues and facilitates the transfer of large
amounts of data. In the medical field,
such data are transferred using defined
standards (HL71, DICOM2) or in conjunc-
tion with terminology systems (ICD-103,
LOINC4, SNOMED CT5). This paper fo-
cuses on the structuring of diagnostic re-
ports in the field of anatomic pathology.
It describes how to make the content of
these reports semantically understandable
for machines. Finally, it will be shown
that structured pathology reports can be
checked for completeness of content in a
computerized way by using terminologi-
cal knowledge. For this purpose, an ontol-
ogy has been designed that describes the
subdomain of reporting a radical prostate-
ctomy specimen.

1 Introduction

The advantage of a structured report against an un-
structured free text is that it can be divided into
subareas with definable context. For each disease
occurring in the field of pathology, it can be deter-
mined how to investigate it and how to structure
and encode the description of the examination re-
sults. Supporting the pathologist in documenting
his observations, could help to avoid missing data
in the report.

1Health Level Seven: http://www.hl7.org
2Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine:

http://medical.nema.org
3International Statistical Classification of Dis-

eases and Related Health Problems 10th Revision:
http://apps.who.int/classifications/icd10/browse/2015/en

4Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes:
https://loinc.org

5Systematized Nomenclature Of Medicine Clinical
Terms: http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct

In conjunction with medical terminologies, a
suitable report structure improves the addressabil-
ity of particular contents for machines. There are
different approaches on mapping the clinical terms
occurring in free texts of documentations to med-
ical terminologies, such as SNOMED CT, by us-
ing text mining methods (Stenzhorn et al., 2009;
Spasic et al., 2005; Allones et al., 2014). Extract-
ing machine-readable facts out of raw text facili-
tates the electronic exchange of the report infor-
mation between information technology (IT) sys-
tems (Bouhaddou et al., 2008; White and Carolan-
Rees, 2013). Moreover, the structuring of reports
allows a software-controlled search for defined el-
ements. This simplifies searching stored reports
for specific study criteria or diagnoses (Brown and
Soenksen, 2010).

Currently, such a workflow seems not to be fea-
sible in practice. The problem is that existing
medical terminologies do not adequately contain
all the observations and specimen collection pro-
cedures that are required to be available for the
pathology domain (Daniel et al., 2011).

This paper describes how terminological knowl-
edge covering the scope of reporting a radical
prostatectomy specimen can be arranged for the
purpose of checking particular pathology reports
for their completeness of content.

2 Materials and methods

2.1 The pathology structured report

The IHE6 Anatomic Pathology working group cre-
ated a technical framework that contains the spec-
ification of Anatomic Pathology Structured Re-
ports (APSR) (Daniel and Macary, 2011). This
specification defines the APSR content profile,
which is the result of a joint initiative from IHE
and HL7 Anatomic Pathology working groups.

6Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise:
http://www.ihe.net

103



Furthermore, it serves as a trial implementation
describing the realization of the APSR content
profile using the HL7 Clinical Document Archi-
tecture (CDA) (Dolin et al., 2006).

Such a CDA-based APSR basically consists of a
header and a body. The header contains informa-
tion about the context of the treatment order, the
patient data and the examining pathologist. The
body contains various hierarchical structured sec-
tions. Each section describes its content in the
form of human-readable text. In addition, some
sections contain entry elements, which convert the
human-readable information from the text element
in machine-readable data. Therefore, each entry
element references a particular concept, which is
described semantically within a terminology. The
address that references a concept is called URI
(uniform resource identifier). According to these
specifications, an APSR contains both human- and
machine-readable information.

This way, an APSR references its content to
concepts of terminologies. That has the advantage
of being able to identify a specific content by a
unique URI in every report and hence give a se-
mantic meaning to this content.

2.2 The terminological knowledge base

Terminologies help to structure concepts of a spe-
cific subject area in a certain language by using a
common vocabulary that is as consensual as pos-
sible. (Roche et al., 2009)

The aim of checking a report for its complete-
ness of content includes the need to determine
what content is required. The CAP (College of
American Pathologists) offers some cancer pro-
tocols7, which specify the content of pathology
reports for different cancer types. Moreover, the
ICCR group (International Collaboration on Can-
cer Reporting) has published five datasets8 for re-
porting different types of cancer. These deter-
mine which information is required in a report and
which information is just considered to be recom-
mended.

Daniel and Macary (2011) created a termi-
nology called PathLex9, which covers the scope
of anatomic pathology observations and speci-

7CAP cancer protocols: http://www.cap.org/web/home/
resources/cancer-reporting-tools/cancer-protocol-templates

8ICCR cancer datasets:
http://www.iccr-cancer.org/datasets

9PathLex - OID : 1.3.6.1.4.1.19376.1.8.2.1,
http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/PATHLEX

men collection procedures. The aim of Path-
Lex is to achieve semantic consistency of stan-
dard messages and document structures within and
across standards (HL7, DICOM). That means to
guarantee that various information systems create
equally structured clinical information which are
both human- and machine-readable. Therefore, a
unified knowledge base is needed that adopts the
knowledge of existing terminology systems - such
as SNOMED CT and ICD-O10 - and fills critical
knowledge gaps using newly defined concepts.

PathLex is an “interface terminology” (Daniel
et al., 2011). In clinical settings, such termi-
nologies support clinicians in entering informa-
tion into computer programs by providing a sys-
tematic collection of clinically oriented phrases
(terms such as “Gleason Score” or “Margin sta-
tus”). In the opposite way, interface terminolo-
gies facilitate the presentation of electronically
stored, machine-readable patient information as
human-readable text that the clinician can read
easier (Rosenbloom et al., 2006). Accordingly,
PathLex provides a range of flexible “patholo-
gist friendly” phrases, but raises no claim to be
a complete, all-encompassing semantic represen-
tation for the contained concepts in relation to the
entire medical knowledge in reality.

As an interface terminology, the strategy of
PathLex regarding the semantic interoperability
is to derive concepts out of the phrases used by
pathologists and then linking them to reference
terminologies. Mapping interface terminologies
to standard reference terminologies rather than
identifying one or more interface terminologies
to serve as standards is a commonly admitted
strategy towards semantic interoperability (Rosen-
bloom et al., 2009). Newly defined concepts
that do not appear in any reference terminology
so far must be explained with the aid of known
concepts and relations. The known concepts are
linked to their representations in existing refer-
ence terminologies. In this way, PathLex could
comprehensively represent the knowledge base of
the anatomic pathology domain and serve as an
aid in semantically structuring regarding the cre-
ation process of pathology reports. Currently, the
mapping of PathLex concepts to the reference ter-
minology SNOMED CT is solely realized by an
algorithm of the National Center for Biomedi-

10International Classification of Diseases for Oncology:
http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/adaptations/oncology/en

104



cal Ontology (NCBO) called LOOM, which au-
tomatically relates two terms based on close lex-
ical match between their preferred names or the
preferred name of a term and a defined synonym
of another. The lexical match involves remov-
ing white-space and punctuation from the con-
sidered labels. Due to the existing concepts in
SNOMED CT, that has the effect that the map-
ping is well advanced for some pathological ob-
servations (for example, in the area of histologi-
cal observations), whereas it can not possibly ex-
ist for others where there are no predefined con-
cepts with the required lexical match, let alone the
corresponding meaning, available in the reference
terminology (for example, the TNM classification
of tumors) (Daniel and Macary, 2011). According
to the BioPortal website11, the LOOM algorithm
generated 340 mappings from PathLex concepts to
SNOMED CT concepts. The APSR content pro-
file uses PathLex to encode textual observations in
order to define templates for sharing and exchang-
ing the reports (Daniel et al., 2012).

2.3 Methods

In order to obtain the ability of checking whether
a pathology report is complete in terms of content,
it is necessary to determine the required contents.
Therefore, the ICCR prostate cancer dataset12 was
used to identify the contents that are required and
the ones that are considered to be recommended.

The next step was to structure the report and
find a possibility to reference its contents to the
concepts of terminology systems. In this paper,
the IHE Anatomic Pathology CDA-based APSR
structure was used to construct five invented ex-
ample reports13 with the properties as shown in
Table 1.

In order to check these reports for completeness
of content in a computerized way, it was necessary
to describe the content requirements in machine-
readable code. That can be achieved by using a
suitable terminology.

As explained in Section 3, PathLex could not
be used to describe the desired properties seman-
tically correct. For this reason, the content of

11Mappings of PathLex concepts:
http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/PATHLEX/?p=
mappings

12ICCR Prostate Cancer Dataset: http://www.iccr-
cancer.org/datasets/published-datasets/urinary-male-
genital/prostate-cancer-radical-prostatectomy-specimen

13Pathology report examples: http://sourceforge.net/
projects/pathlexprostate/files/PathologyReportExamples

Structured
report

Missing
required
contents

Missing
recommended
contents

Example 1 0 0
Example 2 0 4
Example 3 2 0
Example 4 4 2
Example 5 All (17) All (6)

Table 1: Properties regarding the completeness of
content of the five constructed example reports.

the ICCR prostate cancer dataset was used to de-
velop an adapted ontology that was named Path-
LexProstate14 and can be seen as a terminolog-
ical knowledge base containing the concepts of
the dataset. PathLexProstate was created using
the free, open-source ontology editor Protégé15

and is saved in the functional-style syntax of the
Web Ontology Language (OWL) 2 as defined by
Motik et al. (2009).

The contents contained in the entry elements of
the five example reports were linked to the appro-
priate concepts of PathLexProstate.

2.4 Evaluation procedure

Finally, an evaluation procedure was designed to
check the example reports for completeness of
content. Therefore, the contents of an example
report and the concepts of the PathLexProstate
knowledge base are read in. The ontology spec-
ifies which contents are required and which ones
are recommended, whereas the entry elements of
the CDA-based report state which contents are
included. The evaluation procedure compares
these inputs and then draws a conclusion about
the report completeness in terms of content. As
defined in the ICCR dataset and described by
Kench et al. (2013), a report does not need to con-
tain any recommended content to be counted as
complete, but at least it has to contain all the re-
quired contents.

3 Results

In order to check pathology reports for complete-
ness of content, it is initially necessary to struc-
ture the human-readable free text of these reports

14PathLexProstate v1.0: http://sourceforge.net/projects/
pathlexprostate/files/PathLexProstate

15Protégé: http://protege.stanford.edu

105



into sections, which can then be addressed by ma-
chines. The IHE Anatomic Pathology APSR con-
tent profile describes a possible variant of such
a structuring. In the specified CDA-based docu-
ments, the contents which are included in the text
element of each section are defined in the particu-
lar entry elements by referencing them to concepts
described in terminology systems.

The analysis of PathLex has revealed that this
interface terminology is not ready to be used
as a part of the desired pathology report con-
formance check as far as their completeness in
terms of content is considered. Although the map-
ping of PathLex concepts to the reference termi-
nology SNOMED CT is already performed 340
times, there are structural issues that could lead to
semantically wrong interpretations of some con-
cepts. PathLex does not contain any Properties.
This means that the relationships between the de-
fined classes are not shown. The only exception
is the default is-a-relationship, which defines a
class as a subclass of another. However, these
is-a-relations are not always semantically correct.
Consequently, there can be no hierarchical classi-
fication of the concepts contained in PathLex.

Moreover, a representation of a pathology re-
port needs to be added to the knowledge base.
That has the advantage that this representation can
then be related to the concepts which are repre-
senting the particular required report contents.

For these reasons, the ontology PathLexProstate
was created. Figure 1 shows the class named
“ICCR Prostate Cancer Report” in the center of
the image, which represents the concept of pathol-
ogy reports as specified by the ICCR prostate can-
cer dataset. The solid line with the arrow in the di-
rection of the ICCR report class displays that this
is a subclass of the class “Pathology report”. This
expresses that every single ICCR prostate cancer
report is a pathology report. The broken lines
display the relations of the ICCR report concept
with the concepts of the desired report contents.
According to the ICCR prostate cancer dataset,
there are 17 required (dark gray broken lines) and
6 recommended (light gray broken lines) classes
surrounding the center of the image. In total,
PathLexProstate contains 118 classes and two ob-
ject properties (“Contains required information
about” and “Contains recommended information
about”) besides the default subclass relationship.

Using PathLexProstate and the evaluation pro-

Figure 1: Representation of the ICCR prostate
cancer report in PathLexProstate

cedure described in Subsection 2.4, the complete-
ness check could be carried out correctly for all
the five example reports as they were previously
specified (see Table 1). As expected, a lack of re-
quired contents always led to a negative test result
by displaying the missing concepts as errors and
stating that the considered report is not complete
in terms of content, whereas the presence or ab-
sence of recommended contents had no effect on
the result of the completeness check. Neverthe-
less, the absence of a recommended concept was
correctly displayed as a warning in any case. Serv-
ing as a proof, Figure 2 shows the result of the
evaluation procedure of the report example 2. As
stated in Table 1, this report includes all the re-
quired concepts, whereas four recommended ones
are missing. In conclusion, this report is correctly
detected as being “complete in terms of content”.

Figure 2: Result of the evaluation procedure re-
garding the report example 2.

106



4 Discussion

In summary, it can be said that the developed on-
tology PathLexProstate can be used as termino-
logical knowledge base for checking pathology
prostate cancer reports for completeness in terms
of content according to the ICCR prostate cancer
dataset.

The described method needs a CDA-based
structured report and a suitable terminological
knowledge base to perform the evaluation proce-
dure.

Working with the IHE APSR content profile for
structuring a pathology report and then referenc-
ing its contained contents to terminologies as de-
scribed in Subsection 2.1, offers the possibility to
gain machine-readable reports.

The terminological knowledge needs to contain
the classes that represent the required report con-
tents. Additionally, the specific report has to be
defined as a class and its relations to the needed
report contents must be specified. Consequently,
the development of such a knowledge base re-
quires initially the help of domain experts, who
have to determine the contents that have to be in-
cluded in a complete report. The problem is that
there are many different guidelines determining
report requirements and the majority of them do
not serve as worldwide standard. The CAP and
the ICCR formed cancer report templates, which
are already internationally accepted (Srigley et al.,
2009; Baskovich and Allan, 2011; Kench et al.,
2013). For this reason, the ICCR prostate can-
cer dataset was chosen to determine the minimum
dataset of pathology reports in this field and then
create the terminological knowledge base Path-
LexProstate. Including more organizations while
defining report templates, could lead to worldwide
acceptance and consistent minimum datasets for
the future.

Currently, medical terminologies do not contain
any information about report contents that are con-
sidered as recommended or even required for com-
pleteness of content. PathLexProstate tries to of-
fer an example on coding these determinations for
the scope of pathology reports of radical prostate-
ctomy specimens.

The described report conformance check should
be seen as a supporting method and not as a bar-
rier that strictly forces any content in pathology
reports. It can be used to help pathologists during
the process of documenting their observations by

mentioning potential content-related gaps in the
report in order to avoid missing data. Neverthe-
less, it should not forbid writing or saving a pathol-
ogy report, even if it is detected as being incom-
plete. The conformance check is just planned to
warn the clinician if useful data could have been
forgotten to enter.

Moreover, the conformance check could be
used for filtering existing pathology reports based
on content-related requirements. This can be inter-
esting for re-use purposes, such as scientific stud-
ies, in the future.

Although the described method can check for
completeness, the semantic plausibility of report
contents has not been verified so far. The devel-
oped ontology should be seen as an interface ter-
minology. Mapping the contained classes to a ref-
erence terminology, such as SNOMED CT, could
help extending the semantic expressiveness of the
concepts covered in PathLexProstate.

References
Jose L. Allones, Diego Martinez and Maria Taboada.

(2014). Automated Mapping of Clinical Terms into
SNOMED-CT. An Application to Codify Procedures
in Pathology. J Med Syst. 2014 Oct; 38(10): 134.

Brett W. Baskovich and Robert W. Allan. (2011).
Web-based synoptic reporting for cancer checklists.
J Pathol Inform. 2011 Mar; 2: 16.

Omar Bouhaddou, Pradnya Warnekar, Fola Parrish,
Nhan Do, Jack Mandel, John Kilbourne and
Michael J. Lincoln. (2008). Exchange of Com-
putable Patient Data between the Department of Vet-
erans Affairs (VA) and the Department of Defense
(DoD): Terminology Mediation Strategy. J Am Med
Inform Assoc. 2008 Mar-Apr; 15(2): 174-183.

Philip J. B. Brown and Peter Soenksen. (2010). Evalu-
ation of the Quality of Information Retrieval of Clin-
ical Findings from a Computerized Patient Database
Using a Semantic Terminological Model. J Am Med
Inform Assoc. 2000 Jul-Aug; 7(4): 392-403.

Christel Daniel and Francois Macary. (2011).
IHE Anatomic Pathology Technical Framework
Supplement - Anatomic Pathology Structured Re-
ports (APSR) - Trial Implementation, Rev. 1.1.
http://www.ihe.net/Technical_
Framework/upload/IHE_PAT_Suppl_
APSR_Rev1-1_TI_2011_03_31.pdf.

Christel Daniel, Francois Macary, Marcial Garcia Rojo,
Jacques Klossa, Arvydas Laurinavicius, Bruce A.
Beckwith and Vincenzo Della Mea. (2011). Re-
cent advances in standards for collaborative Dig-
ital Anatomic Pathology. Diagn Pathol. 2011
Mar 30; 6 Suppl 1: S17.

107



Christel Daniel, David Booker, Bruce Beckwith,
Vincenzo Della Mea, Marcial Garcia-Rojo, Lori
Havener, Mary Kennedy, Jacques Klossa, Arvy-
das Laurinavicius, Francois Macary, Vytenis Punys,
Wendy Scharber and Thomas Schrader. (2012).
Standards and Specifications in Pathology: Image
Management, Report Management and Terminol-
ogy. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2012; 179: 105-
122.

Robert H. Dolin, Liora Alschuler, Sandy Boyer, Calvin
Beebe, Fred M. Behlen, Paul V. Biron and Am-
non Shabo (Shvo). (2006). HL7 Clinical Document
Architecture, Release 2. J Am Med Inform Assoc.
2006 Jan-Feb; 13(1): 30-39.

James G Kench, Brett Delahunt, David F Grif-
fiths, Peter A Humphrey, Thomas McGowan, Kiril
Trpkov, Murali Varma, Thomas M Wheeler and
John R Srigley. (2013). Dataset for reporting of
prostate carcinoma in radical prostatectomy speci-
mens: recommendations from the International Col-
laboration on Cancer Reporting. Histopathology.
2013 Jan; 62(2): 203-218.

Boris Motik, Peter F. Patel-Schneider, Bijan Parsia,
Conrad Bock, Achille Fokoue, Peter Haase, Rinke
Hoekstra, Ian Horrocks, Alan Ruttenberg, Uli Sat-
tler and Mike Smith. (2009). OWL 2 Web Ontology
Language: Structural Specification and Functional-
Style Syntax. http://www.w3.org/2009/
pdf/REC-owl2-syntax-20091027.pdf.

Christophe Roche, Marie Calberg-Challot, Luc Damas
and Philippe Rouard. (2009). Ontoterminology: A
new paradigm for terminology. International Con-
ference on Knowledge Engineering and Ontology
Development, 2009 Oct, pp.321-326.

S. Trent Rosenbloom, Randolph A. Miller, Kevin B.
Johnson, Peter L. Elkin and Steven H. Brown.
(2006). Interface Terminologies: Facilitating Direct
Entry of Clinical Data into Electronic Health Record
Systems. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2006 May-Jun;
13(3): 277-288.

S. Trent Rosenbloom, Steven H. Brown, David
Froehling, Brent A. Bauer, Dietlind L. Wahner-
Roedler, William M. Gregg and Peter L. Elkin.
(2009). Using SNOMED CT to Represent Two In-
terface Terminologies. J Am Med Inform Assoc.
2009 Jan-Feb; 16(1): 81-88.

Irena Spasic, Sophia Ananiadou, John McNaught and
Anand Kumar. (2005). Text mining and ontologies
in biomedicine: Making sense of raw text. Brief
Bioinform. 2005 Sep; 6(3): 239-251.

John R. Srigley, Tom McGowan, Andrea MacLean,
Marilyn Raby, Jillian Ross, Sarah Kramer and Carol
Sawka. (2009). Standardized synoptic cancer
pathology reporting: A population-based approach.
J Surg Oncol. 2009 Jun 15; 99(8): 517-524.

Holger Stenzhorn, Edson Jose Pacheco, Percy Nohama
and Stefan Schulz. (2009). Automatic Mapping
of Clinical Documentation to SNOMED CT. Stud
Health Technol Inform. 2009; 150: 228-232.

Judith White and Grace Carolan-Rees. (2013). Cur-
rent state of medical device nomenclature and tax-
onomy systems in the UK: spotlight on GMDN and
SNOMED CT. JRSM Short Rep. 2013 Jun 5;
4(7): 1-7.

108


