



















































At the Lexicon-Grammar Interface: The Case of Complex Predicates in the Functional Generative Description


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 191–200,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

At the Lexicon-Grammar Interface: The Case of Complex Predicates in
the Functional Generative Description

Václava Kettnerová and Markéta Lopatková
Charles University in Prague

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Czech Republic

{kettnerova,lopatkova}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract

Complex predicates with light verbs have
proven to be very challenging for syntactic
theories, particularly due to the tricky dis-
tribution of valency complementations of
light verbs and predicative nouns (or other
predicative units) in their syntactic struc-
ture. We propose a theoretically adequate
and economical representation of complex
predicates with Czech light verbs based
on a division of their description between
the lexicon and the grammar. We demon-
strate that a close interplay between these
two components makes the analysis of the
deep and surface syntactic structures of
complex predicates reliable and efficient.

1 Introduction

Description of a language system is usually di-
vided into two basic components – a grammar and
a lexicon. The grammar consists of general pat-
terns of a natural language rendered, in the form of
formal rules which are applicable to whole classes
of language units. The lexicon, on the other hand,
represents an inventory of language units with
their specific properties. Nevertheless, linguistic
theories can substantially differ from each other in
the distribution of information between the gram-
mar and the lexicon.

Valency, which forms the core of a dependency
structure of a sentence, constitutes a fundamen-
tal example of a phenomenon bridging between
the grammar and the lexicon. Valency struc-
ture of verbs is so varied that it cannot be de-
scribed by rules; it must be listed in lexical entries
in a lexicon, see the highly elaborated lexicons,
e.g., (Mel’čuk and Zholkovsky, 1984), (Apresjan,
2011). However, if a verb is a part of a com-
plex predicate, its valency structure is involved in
a complex structure the formation of which is typ-

ically regular enough to be described by rules in
the grammar.

In this paper, we focus on lexicalized co-
occurrence relations, namely on complex pred-
icates composed of light verbs and predicative
nouns (CPs) where two syntactic elements serve
as a single predicate, e.g., ‘to make a request’, ‘to
give a presentation’, ‘to get support’, ‘to take a
shower’.1 We demonstrate that an adequate and
economical description of CPs requires a close co-
operation of the grammar and the lexicon: On the
basis of the lexical representation of CPs, gram-
matical rules generate well-formed (both deep and
surface) dependency structures.

The objective of this contribution is to further
elaborate and modify – in light of recent inves-
tigations – the theoretical results given in (Ket-
tnerová and Lopatková, 2013). Namely, the lex-
ical information provided by the VALLEX lexi-
con (Lopatková et al., 2008) on diatheses and the
grammatical rules in the grammatical component
are applied to the description of CPs in marked
structures of diatheses (e.g., passive structures)
with the aim to gain all surface syntactic manifes-
tations of the CPs.

The paper is structured as follows: first we
discuss related work on CPs (Sect. 2); then we
briefly introduce the Functional Generative De-
scription (FGD) (Sgall et al., 1986) used as the
theoretical background and the VALLEX lexicon
(Sect. 3) and describe the lexical representation of
CPs (Sect. 4); finally, we provide the enhancement
of the grammatical component of FGD with for-
mal rules for the generation of the syntactic struc-
tures with CPs (Sect. 5).

2 Related Work

There is a variety of approaches to complex pred-
icates with light verbs (also called light verb con-

1Causative constructions of the type ‘to make sb do some-
thing’ are not considered here as CPs.

191



structions) and their characteristics, as well as
to the range of issues involved in the notion of
complex predicates. Despite the diversity in the
treatment of complex predicates in different the-
oretical frameworks, there is a general agree-
ment that the crucial issue to be resolved is that
two syntactic elements function as a single pred-
icate; this fact is corroborated by the presence
of a single ‘Agens’/‘Bearer of action or proper-
ty’/‘Experiencer’. This key characteristic of com-
plex predicates of the given type is accounted for
by the mechanisms called argument fusion (Butt,
1998), argument transfer (Grimshaw and Mester,
1988), or argument composition (Hinrichs and
Nakazawa, 1990) formulated within different the-
ories.

All these mechanisms try to account for the
fact that (i) light verbs, despite being depleted of
semantic participants (denoting only general se-
mantic scenario), have valency complementations,
and that (ii) semantic participants (contributed
to CPs primarily by predicative nouns) are usu-
ally expressed as complementations of light verbs
(Alonso Ramos, 2007).

If a lexicographic representation aims at a de-
scription of syntactic behavior of CPs (not only
at compiling an inventory of collocations of pred-
icative nouns and light verbs, as e.g., (Vincze
and Csirik, 2010), (Paul, 2010)), the above given
mechanisms should be reflected in the lexicon. To
our knowledge, the most complex representation
of CPs is provided in the Explanatory Combi-
natorial Dictionary of Modern Russian (Mel’čuk
and Zholkovsky, 1984) where the collocational
potential is captured by means of lexical functions
(Mel’čuk, 1996). The generation of well-formed
syntactic structures with CPs is then based on the
interplay of the lexical representation and gram-
matical rules (Alonso Ramos, 2007).

In Czech theoretical linguistics, there is
only a limited number of studies devoted to
CPs (Macháčková, 1994), (Cinková, 2009),
(Radimský, 2010), and (Kolářová, 2010); none of
them presents a mechanism aspiring to provide
a thorough explanation of syntactic behavior of
CPs. Moreover, the only existing lexical resource
with information on syntactic properties of light
verbs – PDT-Vallex – provides only partial infor-
mation that does not make it possible to establish
the deep and surface syntactic structures of the re-
sulting CPs (Urešová, 2011).

3 FGD Framework

In this paper, we elaborate the representation of
CPs within the Functional Generative Descrip-
tion, a stratificational and dependency-oriented
theoretical framework (Sgall et al., 1986). One
of the core concepts of FGD is that of valency
(Panevová, 1994): at the layer of linguistically
structured meaning (called the tectogrammatical
layer), valency provides the structure of a depen-
dency tree. The valency theory of FGD has been
applied in several valency lexicons. The most
elaborate one of these is the VALLEX, Valency
Lexicon of Czech Verbs, which forms a solid basis
for the lexical component of FGD.

VALLEX lexicon
The VALLEX lexicon2 has resulted from an at-
tempt to document valency behavior of Czech
verbs (Lopatková et al., 2008). Over time,
VALLEX has undergone many quantitative and
qualitative extensions. Recent developments have
focused on the linguistic phenomena that – despite
representing productive grammatical processes in-
volving changes in the valency structure of verbs
– are lexically conditioned, esp. diatheses.

For the purposes of the representation of
phenomena at the lexicon-grammar interface,
VALLEX is divided into a lexical part and a gram-
matical part. The lexical part provides lexical
representation of individual lexical units of verbs
whereas the grammatical part represents formal
representation of rules of the overall grammatical
component of FGD that are directly connected to
the valency structure of verbs.

The central organizing concept of the lexical
part of VALLEX is the concept of lexeme. The
lexeme associates a set of lexical forms represent-
ing the verb in an utterance, with a set of lexical
units of a verb, corresponding to its senses.

Each lexical entry of a verb is described by a set
of attributes (see Fig. 2 below). The core attribute
frame contains a valency frame that is modeled
as a sequence of valency slots, each corresponding
to a single valency complementation of the verb;
each slot consists of (i) a functor – a syntactico-
semantic label reflecting the type of dependency
relation of the given valency complementation, (ii)
an indication of obligatoriness, and (iii) a list of
possible morphemic forms specifying the usage of
a lexical unit in the active voice.

2http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/vallex

192



Of all the remaining attributes of lexical units
currently employed in VALLEX, we shall further
discuss the attribute diat, the value of which is
a list of all applicable diatheses (as their appli-
cability is lexically conditioned and thus has to
be captured in the lexical part of VALLEX). In
the grammatical part, grammatical rules describ-
ing individual types of diatheses are formulated.
When these rules are applied to the relevant lexi-
cal units (as indicated by the attribute diat), all
possible surface syntactic manifestations of a lex-
ical unit in the marked structures of diatheses can
be obtained (Kettnerová et al., 2012).

4 Lexical Representation of CPs

A CP, as a multiword lexical unit, is formed as
a combination of a predicative noun with an ap-
propriate light verb. It is primarily the predicative
noun that contributes its semantic participants. Its
ability to select different light verbs (and thus to
create different CPs) makes it possible to embed
the event expressed by the predicative noun into
different general semantic scenarios and thus to
perspectivize it from the point of view of differ-
ent semantic participants. In this process, a crucial
role is played by the referential identity of nomi-
nal and verbal valency complementations within
the CP (as it is demonstrated in Sect. 4.2.1).

As a consequence, CPs can be described as a
combination of the information from the valency
frames of both the light verb and the predicative
noun. Further, we propose to enhance VALLEX
with three special attributes lvc, map and caus
to capture possible combinations of these two syn-
tactic elements into a single predicate (Sect. 4.2).

4.1 Valency Frames

It is widely acknowledged that both predicative
nouns and light verbs have their own valency
potentials, i.e., they have their own sets of va-
lency complementations (Alonso Ramos, 2007),
(Macháčková, 1994). As a result, both light verbs
and predicative nouns should be represented by
their respective valency frames in the valency lex-
icon.

4.1.1 Predicative Nouns
Valency frames of predicative nouns underlie
their deep dependency structures, both in nominal
structures and as the nominal components of CPs,
see examples (2) and (6) and the valency frame of

the noun pokyn ‘instruction’ in (1).3

(1) pokynPN ‘instruction’:
ACTgen,pos ADDRdat PATk+dat,inf

(2) Pokyn PN státnı́ho zástupce N:ACT:gen žalob-
cům N:ADDR:dat (posuzovat přı́pad jako krá-
dež) N:PAT:inf přišel právě včas.
‘The instructionPN of the public prosecu-
torN:ACT to the prosecutorsN:ADDR (to regard
the case as a theft)N:PAT came just in time.’

Valency complementations of predicative nouns
are endowed with semantic participants. For ex-
ample, the noun pokyn ‘instruction’ is character-
ized by the participants ‘Speaker’, ‘Recipient’,
and ‘Information’, which are mapped onto ACTor,
ADDRessee, and PATient, respectively.

4.1.2 Light Verbs
Valency frames of light verbs constitute the deep
dependency structure of the verbal component of
CPs.

Formally, valency frames of Czech light verbs
are prototypically identical to the valency frames
of their full verb counterparts.4 Hence we consider
them to be inherited from the latter. The only reg-
ular difference between the valency frames of light
verbs and their full verb counterparts is the func-
tor CPHR ‘Compound PHRaseme’, indicating the
valency position of the predicative noun.

Generally, valency complementations of a full
verb correspond to its semantic participants; how-
ever, light verbs are deprived of semantic partici-
pants (Alonso Ramos, 2007).5

For example, the valency frame of the light verb
udělitpf ‘to give, to grant’ (4) is identical to the
valency frame of the full verb (3), compare exam-
ples (5) and (6).

(3) udělit ‘to give’:
ACTnom ADDRdat PATacc

(4) udělitLV ‘to give’:
ACTnom ADDRdat CPHRacc

(5) Prezident V:ACT:nom udělil umělcům V:ADDR:dat
medaile V:PAT:acc.

3As the information on obligatoriness is not relevant here,
we omit it from the valency frames.

4These findings are in line with the analysis of their mor-
phological characteristics, which are also prototypically iden-
tical with the properties of their full counterparts (Butt, 2010).

5The only exception – causative light verbs – is addressed
in Sect. 4.2.2.

193



‘The PresidentV:ACT has awarded
medalsV:PAT to the artistsV:ADDR.’

(6) Státnı́ zástupce V:ACT:nom udělil LV žalob-
cům V:ADDR:dat pokyn V:CPHR:acc posuzovat
přı́pad jako krádež.
‘The public prosecutorV:ACT has given an
instructionV:CPHR to regard the case as a
theft to the prosecutorsV:ADDR.’

Despite the absence of semantic participants of
light verbs, their valency complementations are
not semantically depleted: they acquire their se-
mantic content from the semantic participants of
predicative nouns via coreference with nominal
valency complementations, as proposed, e.g., by
(Butt, 1998), here Sect. 4.2.1. Then only seman-
tically specified valency complementations are in-
herited from valency frames of full verb counter-
parts of light verbs (Kettnerová and Lopatková,
2013).6

4.1.3 Linking Valency Frames:
Attribute lvc

For obtaining the deep dependency structure of a
CP, the appropriate valency frames of the predica-
tive noun and the light verb (with which the noun
combines within the predicate) must be linked. In
the VALLEX lexicon, the special attribute lvc,
attached to individual valency frames of predica-
tive nouns and (for convenience) also to those of
light verbs, provides the list of references, see Fig.
1 and 2 below.

4.2 Lexical Mapping

The formation of well-formed deep and surface
dependency structures with CPs requires a mech-
anism to account for the distribution of nominal
and verbal valency complementations in the re-
sulting syntactic structures. In this section, we
show that for these purposes, additional informa-
tion on the coreference of valency complementa-
tions (and thus on the mapping of semantic par-
ticipants) has to be recorded as a part of lexical
entries of predicative nouns and light verbs. This
information is provided by two special attributes
map (Sect. 4.2.1) and caus (Sect. 4.2.2).

6However, the cases in which the number of valency com-
plementations in the valency frame of a light verb is reduced
are rather rare in Czech (e.g., within the CP přijmout zod-
povědnost ‘to accept responsibility’, the valency frame of the
light verb does not inherit the ORIGin complementation as it
lacks semantic specification).

4.2.1 Nominal Participants: Attribute map

As stated above, whereas the valency complemen-
tations of a predicative noun are semantically sat-
urated by its semantic participants, the valency
complementations of the light verb are semanti-
cally unspecified. To acquire semantic content, the
verbal complementations enter in coreference re-
lations with the nominal complementations. Pairs
of nominal and verbal valency complementations
within CPs thus exhibit referential identity (they
refer to the same nominal semantic participant).
This referential identity of verbal and nominal va-
lency complementations represents a substantial
characteristic of CPs.

For example, the CP udělit pokyn ‘to give an in-
struction’ can be characterized by three semantic
participants given by the noun: ‘Speaker’, ‘Re-
cipient’, and ‘Information’. These participants are
mapped onto the nominal valency complementa-
tions ACTor, ADDRessee, and PATient, see (1).
The valency frame of the light verb in (4) com-
prises three complementations: one (CPHR) is
occupied by the predicative noun and the remain-
ing two (ACTor and ADDRessee) represent com-
plementations that are not semantically specified
by the light verb; however, they gain their seman-
tic capacity via coreference with nominal ACTor
and ADDRessee, see (7) specifying the referential
identity.

(7) udělit pokyn ‘to give an instruction’:

‘Speaker’N ⇒ ACTN ⇔ ACTV
‘Recipient’N ⇒ ADDRN ⇔ ADDRV
‘Information’N ⇒ PATN

Due to the referential identity, all the valency com-
plementations within this CP are semantically sat-
urated. The event denoted by the predicative noun
is perspectivized from the point of view of the
‘Speaker’, corresponding to the verbal ACTor (ex-
pressed in the active structure in the most promi-
nent subject position, see also example (6).

Changes in the referential identity

The referential identity of the valency complemen-
tations may differ for different combinations of
the same predicative noun combined with different
light verbs (Kolářová, 2010), (Radimský, 2010).

For example, the referential identity within the
CP udělit pokyn ‘to give an instruction’ (7) dif-
fers from that of the predicate přijmout pokyn

194



‘to receive an instruction’ (10). Within the lat-
ter, the same set of semantic participants are em-
ployed, i.e., ‘Speaker’, ‘Recipient’, and ‘Informa-
tion’. However, the verbal ACTor and ORIGin
gain their semantic specification via coreference
with the nominal ADDRessee and ACTor, respec-
tively, see (1), (8) and (10).

(8) přijmoutLV ‘to receive’:
ACTnom CPHRacc ORIGod+gen

(9) Žalobci V:ACT:Recip přijali LV od státnı́ho
zástupce V:ORIG:Speak pokyn V:CPHR (posuzo-
vat přı́pad jako krádež) N:PAT:Info .
‘The prosecutorsV:ACT:Recip have received
the instructionV:CPHR (to regard the case
as a theft)N:PAT:Info from the public
prosecutorV:ORIG:Speak .’

(10) přijmout pokyn ‘to receive an instruc-
tion’:
‘Speaker’N ⇒ ACTN ⇔ ORIGV
‘Recipient’N ⇒ ADDRN ⇔ ACTV
‘Information’N ⇒ PATN

The referential identity of valency complementa-
tions, provided in (10), reflects changes in the se-
mantic specifications of verbal valency comple-
mentations (see example (9) illustrating the map-
ping) and also the change in the perspective from
which the event expressed by the noun is viewed:
in this case, the event is portrayed from the per-
spective of the ‘Recipient’ as the participant cor-
responding to the verbal ACTor.

Attribute map
As referential identity has a direct influence on the
syntactic structure of CPs, see Section 5, this in-
formation has to be provided in the lexical part of
the language description.

As it is the predicative noun that selects an ap-
propriate light verb, the attribute map – giving a
list of pair(s) of referentially identical nominal and
verbal valency complementations – is assigned to
valency frames of predicative nouns. More than
one attribute map (distinguished by numeral in-
dexes) can appear in a lexical unit of a predica-
tive noun to account for the possible differences
in referential identity of valency complementa-
tions within several CPs with the same predica-
tive noun. Each attribute map is accompanied by
a set of references to light verbs provided in the at-
tribute lvc that comply with the given referential
identity of valency complementations. The lexical

entry is exemplified on the predicative noun pokyn
‘instruction’ in Fig. 1.

Figure 1: Simplified VALLEX lexical entry of the
noun pokyn ‘instruction’.

4.2.2 Verbal Participant ‘Causator’:
Attribute caus

Typically, it is the predicative noun that deter-
mines the number and roles of semantic par-
ticipants characteristic of a CP. Light verbs of
causative type, which are endowed with the se-
mantic participant ‘Causator’, represent the only
exception. With these verbs, ‘Causator’ is con-
tributed to CPs by the verb (in addition to the
semantic participants provided by the predicative
nouns).

Figure 2: Simplified VALLEX lexical entry of the
verb udělovat/udı́letimpf , udělitpf ‘to give’.

For example, the CP udělit právo ‘to grant a
right’, see example sentence (12), is character-
ized by three semantic participants: ‘Causator’,
‘Bearer’, and ‘Theme’. ‘Causator’, provided by

195



the light verb udělit ‘to grant’ (with the valency
frame given in (4)), is mapped onto the verbal
ACTor whereas ‘Bearer’ and ‘Theme’ given by
the predicative noun právo ‘right’ correspond to
the nominal ACTor and PATient, respectively, see
the valency frame of the noun in (11). As the ver-
bal ACTor is saturated by the semantic participant
‘Causator’, only ADDRessee is not semantically
saturated; this ADDRessee acquires its semantic
specification from the predicative noun via coref-
erence with the nominal ACTor, see their referen-
tial identity in (13). As a result, all valency com-
plementations are semantically specified.

(11) právoPN ‘right’:
ACTgen,pos PATgen,na+acc,inf

(12) . . . král Vladislav Jagellonský V:ACT:Caus
udělil LV městečku V:ADDR:Bearer právoV:CPHR
(pořádat dva výročnı́ trhy) N:PAT:Theme .
‘. . . king Ladislaus JagiellonV:ACT:Caus
granted the rightV:CPHR (to hold
two market fairs)N:PAT:Theme to the
townV:ADDR:Bearer .’

(13) udělit právo ‘to grant a right’:
‘Causator’V ⇒ ACTV
‘Bearer’N ⇒ ACTN ⇔ ADDRV
‘Name’N ⇒ PATN

Changes in the mapping of ‘Causator’
The semantic participant ‘Causator’ may be
mapped not only onto the verbal ACTor but also
onto another valency position of a light verb. Then
the change in the mapping of ‘Causator’ brings
about further changes in the referential identity of
nominal and verbal complementations.

For example, within the CP zı́skat právo ‘to ob-
tain a right’, see (15), the ‘Causator’ contributed
by the light verb zı́skat ‘to obtain’ maps onto the
verbal ORIGin, see the valency frame of this light
verb in (14). In this case, it is the verbal ACT-
or that gains semantic content from the nominal
ACTor (16). As a consequence, all the valency
complementations within the CP zı́skat právo ‘to
obtain a right’ are semantically saturated.

(14) zı́skatLV ‘to obtain’:
ACTnom CPHRacc ORIGod+gen

(15) . . . od krále Vladislava Jagellon-
ského V:ORIG:Caus městečko N:ACT:Bearer
zı́skalo LV právo V:CPHR (pořádat dva
výročnı́ trhy) N:PAT:Theme .

‘. . . from king Ladislaus Jagiell-
onV:ORIG:Caus , the townV:ACT:Bearer ob-
tained the rightCPHR (to hold two market
fairs)N:PAT:Theme .’

(16) zı́skat právo ‘to obtain a right’:
‘Causator’V ⇒ ORIGV
‘Bearer’N ⇒ ACTN ⇔ ACTV
‘Name’N ⇒ PATN

Attribute caus
The mapping of ‘Causator’ onto valency com-
plementations is relevant for both deep and sur-
face structure formation, therefore it is captured
by a special attribute caus assigned to valency
frames of light verbs of causative type. This
attribute lists the verbal valency complementa-
tion onto which ‘Causator’ is mapped, see the
light verb udělovat/udı́letimpf , udělitpf ‘to give’ in
Fig. 2.

5 Grammatical Rules for CPs

The grammatical part of the VALLEX lexicon
contains meta-rules describing the formation of
deep (Sect. 5.1) and surface dependency structures
of CPs (Sect. 5.2). These meta-rules are instanti-
ated on the basis of the information stored in the
lexical part of the lexicon.

5.1 Deep Syntactic Structure

The meta-rule for formation of the deep syntac-
tic structure of a CP exploits a valency frame
of a predicative noun and a valency frame of a
light verb with which the noun combines (their
compatibility is identified by the attribute lvc).
Moreover, information on the referential identity
of nominal and verbal valency complementations
within a CP, given in the attribute map, as well as
information on verbal ‘Causator’, given in the at-
tribute caus (if applicable), is necessary for the
identification of coreferences in the dependency
tree of the CP.

For example, the deep dependency structure of the
CP udělit pokyn ‘to give an instruction’ is com-
posed of the valency frame of the predicative noun
pokyn ‘instruction’ and that of the light verb udělit
‘to give’ given above in (1) and (4), respectively.
Further, the deep structure of this CP is charac-
terized by coreferential links, reflecting the refer-
ential identity of the complementations, see (7),
Fig. (17) (and Tab. 1 left part).

196



(17)

On the other hand, the valency structure of the
CP přijmout pokyn ‘to receive an instruction’ re-
sults from the valency frames of the predicative
noun pokyn ‘instruction’ and that of the light verb
přijmout ‘receive’, given in (1) and (8), respec-
tively, and from the referential identity provided
in (10), see Fig. (18).

(18)

5.2 Surface Syntactic Structure
For the formation of the surface syntactic struc-
ture of a CP, its deep dependency structure is used
(Sect. 5.1). In addition to the mapping of indi-
vidual nominal and verbal complementations pro-
vided by the attribute map (Sect. 4.2.1), also the
mapping of the verbal ‘Causator’, provided by the
attribute caus (Sect. 4.2.2), is necessary.

Theoretical analysis has revealed that with CPs
in Czech, each semantic participant is typically ex-
pressed in the surface sentence just once.7 Despite
the fact that semantic participants are contributed
– with the exception of the verbal ‘Causator’ – by
predicative nouns, Czech CPs have a strong ten-
dency to express them in the surface structure as
complementations of light verbs8 (Macháčková,
1994). We propose the following rules for the for-
mation of the surface syntactic structure with CPs:
All valency complementations from the valency
frame of the light verb are expressed in the surface
structure, namely:

(i) the valency complementation filled by the
predicative noun (the CPHR functor);

(ii) the valency complementation corresponding
to ‘Causator’ (the attribute caus);

7The only exception is represented by the semantic partic-
ipant mapped onto nominal ACTor; under certain conditions,
this participant can be expressed twice, both as a verbal and
as a nominal complementation (e.g., PetrV :ACT:Bearer nevedl
svůjN :ACT:Bearer život zrovna št’astně. ‘Peter did not lead his
life very happily.’).

8Rich morphology of Czech provides reliable clues for the
identification of surface structure via morphemic cases.

(iii) valency complementations that are referen-
tially identical with a nominal complementa-
tion (the attribute map).

Only the following valency complementations
from the valency frame of the predicative noun are
expressed in the surface structure:
(iv) valency complementations that are not ref-

erentially identical with any verbal comple-
mentation (i.e., those not listed in the at-
tribute map).

For example, within the CP udělit pokyn ‘to
give an instruction’ characterized by the deep
dependency tree (17) the predicative noun fills
the CPHR verbal position (i); two verbal va-
lency complementations are expressed in the
surface structure (iii), namely the ACTV and
ADDRV (referentially identical with the ACTN
and ADDRN , referring to ‘Speaker’ and ‘Recip-
ient’, respectively); from the valency frame of
the noun, only the PATN (referring to ‘Informa-
tion’) is expressed on the surface (iv); the two re-
maining nominal complementations, ACTN and
ADDRN , are unexpressed in the surface structure
(as they are referentially identical with ACTV and
ADDRV ), see Tab. 1 column 4.

5.2.1 Unmarked (Active) Form

Morphemic forms of valency complementations
of light verbs listed in the lexical part of the lexi-
con correspond to the active form. Thus the rules
given above directly establish the surface syntactic
structure of CPs in the active form.

For example, the surface structure of a sentence
with the CP udělit pokyn ‘to give an instruction’
with the light verb in the active form can be ob-
tained directly from morphemic forms recorded
in the valency frames (1) and (4), see Tab. 1 col-
umn 5, and Fig. 3, displaying the surface syntactic
tree of sentence (19) in relation to its deep depen-
dency tree.

(19) Státnı́ zástupce V:ACT:Sb udělil LV:active
žalobcům V:ADDR:Obj pokyn V:CPHR:Obj (posu-
zovat přı́pad jako krádež) N:PAT:Atr.
‘The public prosecutorV:ACT:Sb has
given the prosecutorsV:ADDR:Obj the
instructionV:CPHR:Obj (to regard the
case as a theft)N:PAT:Atr.’

197



CP Deep map & caus Surface active pass rcp-pass deagent
Light verb ACTV + Sb:nom Obj:instr,od+gen Obj:od+gen -∗

ADDRV + Obj:dat Obj:dat Sb:nom Obj:dat
CPHRV + Obj:acc Sb:nom Obj:acc Sb:nom

Predicat. noun ACTN ACTN ⇔ ACTV -
ADDRN ADDRN ⇔ ADDRV -
PATN + Atr:k+dat,inf Atr:k+dat,inf Atr:k+dat,inf Atr:k+dat,inf

Table 1: The deep (left part) and surface (right part) structures of the CP udělit pokyn ‘to give an instruc-
tion’. (∗The surface expression is blocked by the deagentive diathesis.)

Figure 3: The simplified deep (above) and sur-
face (below) dependency trees of sentence (19).
The vertical arrows show the surface syntactic
manifestations of valency complementations. The
nominal valency complementations unexpressed
in the surface structure (due to their referential
identity with the verbal ones) are in the gray field.

5.2.2 Marked (Passive) Forms: Interplay of
the Rules

The deep structure of a CP also serves as the basis
for generating marked surface structures of diathe-
ses. In this case, the rules for the formation of sur-
face structures of CPs (Sect. 5.2 above) interplay
with those for the formation of marked forms of
diatheses (Vernerová et al., 2014).

In Czech, five types of diathesis (passive, resul-
tative, recipient-passive, deagentive, and disposi-
tional) were determined (Panevová et al., 2014).
Diatheses are accompanied by changes in the mor-
phological category of verbal voice and they are
prototypically associated with shifts of valency
complementations in the surface structure (while
the deep structure is preserved). These shifts are

indicated by changes in morphemic forms of the
involved valency complementations and are regu-
lar enough to be captured by formal rules. These
rules can be exemplified, e.g., by the rule for the
recipient-passive diathesis:
Rcp-pass d.
verb form replace(active →

→ AuxVdostat + past participle)
ACT replace(nom → od+gen)
ADDR replace(dat → nom)

The light verb and its full verb counterpart pro-
totypically enter the same type of diatheses; the
applicability of individual diatheses is provided by
the attribute diat attached to the full verb.
For example, the light verb udělit ‘to give,
grant’ can create the following marked struc-
tures (Fig. 2): passive (pass (20)), resulta-
tive (res), recipient-passive (rcp-pass (21)),
deagentive (deagent (22)), and dispositional
(disp) diathesis.

(20) Žalobcům V:ADDR:dat byl od státnı́ho
zástupce V:ACT:od+gen udělenpass po-
kyn V:CPHR:nom (posuzovat přı́pad jako
krádež) N:PAT:inf .
‘The instructionV:CPHR (to regard the
case as a theft)N:PAT was given to
the prosecutorsV:ADDR by the public
prosecutorV:ACT.’

(21) Žalobci V:ADDR:nom dostali od státnı́-
ho zástupce V:ACT:od+gen udělenrcp-pass
pokyn V:CPHR:acc (posuzovat přı́pad jako
krádež) N:PAT:inf .
‘The prosecutorsV:ADDR have been given
the instructionV:CPHR (to regard the case as
a theft)N:PAT by the public prosecutorV:ACT.’

(22) Žalobcům V:ADDR:dat se udělildeagent po-
kyn V:CPHR:nom (posuzovat přı́pad jako
krádež) N:PAT:inf .
‘The instructionV:CPHR (to regard the
case as a theft)N:PAT was given to the
prosecutorsV:ADDR.’

198



Valency frames describing the marked struc-
tures of diatheses of a given CP can be generated
on the basis of the rules for deriving the marked
structures of diatheses (stored in the grammatical
part of the VALLEX lexicon), applied to the deep
and surface active structures of the CP. The deep
dependency structure of the CP (i.e., the num-
ber and the type of its verbal and nominal va-
lency complementations) is preserved whereas the
surface syntactic expression of the verb and its
complementations is changed as prescribed by the
rule describing the respective diathesis (the sur-
face form of the nominal valency complementa-
tions remains unchanged).

For example, the marked structure of the recipient-
passive diathesis of the CP udělit pokyn ‘to give an
instruction’, as in (21), is underlain by the valency
frame obtained by the application of the above
given rule to the valency frame corresponding to
the active form of the light verb in (4), see Tab. 1
column 7.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we have focused on complex predi-
cates consisting of a light verb and a predicative
noun. We have proposed their theoretically ad-
equate and economical description based on the
interplay between the grammatical and the lexi-
cal components of the language description. The
special attributes lvc, map and caus, comply-
ing with the logical structure of the VALLEX lex-
icon as well as with the main tenets of the Func-
tional Generative Description, were designed. The
information provided in these attributes identi-
fies recurrent patterns of light verb collocations
(similarly as lexical functions into which it can
be easily transferred), while grammatical rules in
the grammatical component generate their well-
formed (both deep and surface) dependency struc-
tures. We have shown how the proposed rules
combine with the rules describing diatheses.

At present, a large-scaled lexicographic repre-
sentation of light verbs is still missing despite the
fact that these phenomena are widespread in the
language (Kettnerová et al., 2013). We expect that
the lexicon enriched with the information on light
verbs will form a solid basis for their future inte-
gration into NLP applications which can substan-
tially contribute to verifying the results of the pro-
posed theoretical analysis.

Acknowledgments
The work on this project was supported by the
grants of GAČR No. P406/12/0557 and GA15-
09979S. This work has been using language
resources distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN
project of the MŠMT No. LM2010013.

References
Margarita Alonso Ramos. 2007. Towards the Synthe-

sis of Support Verb Constructions. In L. Wanner, ed-
itor, Selected lexical and Grammatical issues in the
Meaning–Text Theory, pages 97–137. J. Benjamins,
Amsterdam.

Valentina Apresjan. 2011. Active dictionary of the
Russian language: Theory and practice. In I. Bo-
guslavsky and L. Wanner, editors, Meaning-Text
Theory 2011, pages 13–24, Barcelona. Universitat
Pompeu Fabra.

Miriam Butt. 1998. Constraining argument merger
through aspect. In E. Hinrichs, A. Kathol, and
T. Nakazawa, editors, Complex Predicates in Non-
derivational Syntax, Syntax and Semantics, pages
73–113. Academic Press, San Diego.

Miriam Butt. 2010. The Light Verb Jungle: Still Hack-
ing Away. In M. Amberber, B. Baker, and M. Har-
vey, editors, Complex Predicates in Cross-Linguistic
Perspective, pages 48–78. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Silvie Cinková. 2009. Words that Matter: Towards
a Swedish-Czech Colligational Dictionary of Basic
Verbs. Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics,
Prague.

Jane Grimshaw and Armin Mester. 1988. Light Verbs
and Θ-Marking. Linguistic Inquiry, 19(2):205–232.

Erhard Hinrichs and Tsuneko Nakazawa. 1990. Sub-
categorization and VP structure in German. In
S. Hughes and J. Salmons, editors, Symposium on
Germanic Linguistics, Amsterdam. J. Benjamins.

Václava Kettnerová and Markéta Lopatková. 2013.
The Representation of Czech Light Verb Construc-
tions in a Valency Lexicon. In E. Hajičová,
K. Gerdes, and L. Wanner, editors, Proceedings of
DepLing 2013, pages 147–156, Praha. Matfyzpress.

Václava Kettnerová, Markéta Lopatková, and Eduard
Bejček. 2012. The Syntax-Semantics Interface of
Czech Verbs in the Valency Lexicon. In Euralex
International Congress 2012, pages 434–443, Oslo.
University of Oslo.

Václava Kettnerová, Markéta Lopatková, and Eduard
Bejček et al. 2013. Corpus Based Identification of
Czech Light Verbs. In K. Gajdošová and A. Žáková,
editors, Slovko 2013, pages 118–128, Lüdenscheid.
RAM-Verlag.

199



Veronika Kolářová. 2010. Valence deverbativnı́ch sub-
stantiv v češtině (na materiálu substantiv s dativnı́
valencı́). Karolinum Press, Prague.

Markéta Lopatková, Zdeněk Žabokrtský, and Václava
Kettnerová et al. 2008. Valenčnı́ slovnı́k českých
sloves. Karolinum Press, Prague.

Eva Macháčková. 1994. Constructions with Verbs and
Abstract Nouns in Czech (Analytical Predicates). In
S. Čmejrková and Fr. Štı́cha, editors, The Syntax
of Sentence and Text, pages 365–375. J. Benjamins,
Amsterdam.

Igor A. Mel’čuk and Alexander K. Zholkovsky. 1984.
Explanatory Combinatorial Dictionary of Modern
Russian. Wiener Slawistischer Almanach, Vienna.

Igor A. Mel’čuk. 1996. Lexical Functions: A Tool
for the description of lexical relations in a lexicon.
In L. Wanner, editor, Lexical Functions in Lexicog-
raphy and Natural Language Processing, pages 37–
105. J. Benjamins, Amsterdam.

Jarmila Panevová et al. 2014. Mluvnice současné
češtiny 2, Syntax na základě anotovaného korpusu.
Karolinum Press, Prague.

Jarmila Panevová. 1994. Valency Frames and the
Meaning of the Sentence. In P. A. Luelsdorff, edi-
tor, The Prague School of Structural and Functional
Linguistics, pages 223–243. J. Benjamins, Amster-
dam.

Soma Paul. 2010. Representing Compound Verbs in
Indo WordNet. In GWC-2010, Mumbai. The Global
Wordnet Association.

Jan Radimský. 2010. Verbo-nominálnı́ predikát s kat-
egoriálnı́m slovesem. Editio Universitatis Bohemiae
Meridionalis, České Budějovice.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects. Reidel, Dordrecht.

Zdeňka Urešová. 2011. Valence sloves v Pražském
závislostnı́m korpusu. Ústav formálnı́ a aplikované
lingvistiky, Prague.

Anna Vernerová, Václava Kettnerová, and Markéta
Lopatková. 2014. To pay or to get paid: Enrich-
ing a valency lexicon with diatheses. In LREC 2014,
pages 2452–2459, Reykjavı́k. ELRA.

Veronika Vincze and János Csirik. 2010. Hungarian
Corpus of Light Verb Constructions. In COLING
2010, pages 1110–1118, Beijing.

200


