
























Abu-MaTran: Automatic building of Machine Translation

FP7-PEOPLE-2012-IAPP

http://www.abumatran.eu

List of partners

Dublin City University, Ireland (coordinator)

Prompsit Language Engineering SL, Spain

Universitat d'Alacant, Spain

University of Zagreb, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Croatia

Athena Research and Innovation Center in Information Communication 

& Knowledge Technologies, Greece

Project duration: January 2013 — December 2016

Summary
Abu-MaTran seeks to enhance industry–academia cooperation as a key aspect to tackle one

of Europe’s biggest challenges: multilingualism. We aim to increase the hitherto low indus-

trial adoption of machine translation by identifying crucial cutting-edge research techniques

(automatic acquisition of corpora and linguistic resources, pivot-language techniques, lin-

guistically augmented statistical translation and diagnostic evaluation), making them suit-

able for commercial exploitation. We also aim to transfer back to academia the know-how

of industry to make research results more robust. We work on a case study of strategic in-

terest for Europe: machine translation for the language of a new member state (Croatian)

and related languages. All the resources produced will be released as free/open-source soft -

ware, resulting in effective knowledge transfer beyond the consortium. The project has a

strong emphasis  on dissemination,  through the organisation of  workshops that  focus on

inter-sectoral knowledge transfer. Finally, we have a comprehensive outreach plan, includ-

ing the establishment of a Linguistic Olympiad in Spain, open-day activities and the parti -

cipation in the Google Summer of Code.

At EAMT 2015 we will present the results of the second milestone of the project (December

2014).  To mention just a few: (i) MT systems for  English–Croatian based on free/open-

source software and web crawled and publicly available data, both generic and specific for

the  tourism domain,  (ii) tools developed in the project (e.g. web crawling of parallel data

and paradigm guessing) and (iii) outcomes of the project's dissemination activities (e.g. soft-

ware management for researchers, data creation for RBMT systems and establishment of a

linguistics Olympiad).

227


