






















Talebob - an interactive speech trainer for Danish

Peter Juel Henrichsen
DanCAST - Danish Center for Applied Speech Technology

Copenhagen Business School
pjh.ibc@cbs.dk

Abstract

Talebob ("Speech Bob") is an interactive 
language  learning  tool  for  pupils  (10+ 
years)  helping  them  practice  their 
pronunciation of simple, highly frequent 
phrases in Danish. Talebob's feedback is 
based  on  acoustic  measurements  (for 
pitch and intensity), presented to the user 
as helpful instructions for improvement. 
Talebob  is  currently  being  tested  in 
schools  in  Nuuk,  Hafnarfjörður  and 
Tórshavn  where  Danish  is  taught  as  a 
second language (L2);  we present  some 
preliminary results. We conclude with a 
discussion  of  the  didactic  relevance  of 
Talebob and computer-assisted language 
learning  in  general,  exploiting  the  IT-
curiosity of modern pupils.

1  Introduction

Talebob  -  presented  to  the  public  for  the  first 
time in this paper - is an internet-based language 
learning tool  assisting Nordic  pupils  train their 
spoken Danish. Talebob helps students (from 10 
years) practice the pronunciation of short phrases 
frequently  occurring  in  everyday  conversation. 
Such informal phrases are often rich in function 
words  (such as pronouns, connectives, adverbs 
and  prepositions).  Their  pronunciation  may  be 
highly conventionalized and are often in conflict 
with the general and productive rules of Danish 
pronunciation.  For  this  reason  they  are  often 
difficult  to master for the L2 learner, who will 
nevertheless  be  confronted  with  them  in  any 
informal  conversation.  Many  Greenlandic, 
Faroese,  and  Icelanding  children  report  the 
Danes to be unexpectedly difficult to understand 
at their first encounter, even after several years 
of  Danish  studies,  especially  because  the 
informal  phrases  occur  so  frequently. 
Unfortunately,  West-Nordic  teachers  of  Danish 
report  that  no  teaching  materials  are  available 
training this particular aspect of spoken Danish.

Talebob is  meant  as  a remedy.  It  is  conceived 
and designed by Danish computational linguists 
in  cooperation  with  Icelandic  researchers  in 
didactics  and  West-Nordic  school  teachers. 
Talebob  (ver.  1)  is  currently  being  tested  in 
public  schools  in  Nuuk,  Hafnarfjörður  and 
Tórshavn.  Early  experiments  are  also  being 
carried out in Denmark with adult L2-learners.

Sections 2-5 below cover the technological and 
linguistic aspects of Talebob's design (front-end, 
back-end, and system architecture). In section 6 
we report from the practical test sessions (mainly 
in Iceland) and discuss the linguistic properties 
and  cross-language  portability  of  Talebob.  We 
conclude  in  section  7  with  some  remarks  on 
Talebob (and interactive language learning tools 
in  general)  as  an  approach  to  screening  large 
populations of pupils.

A note for the reader: Pronouns he/she are used 
randomly  for  the  generic  pupil  and  teacher. 
Example  phrases  are  quoted  in  Danish  and 
(being  highly  idiomatic)  translated  only  when 
strictly necessary.

2  Talebob as a CALL tool

Talebob is a tool for computer-assisted language 
learning  (CALL),  and  it  can  be  seen  as  a 
technically  updated  continuation  of  the  classic 
language  lab.  Many  readers  will  probably 
remember from their school days the setup with 
study booths equipped with a cassette deck for 
recording  and  playback,  enabling  oral 
communication with the language teacher  on a 
one-to-one  basis.  The  language  lab  (e.g. 
Thorborg  (2003,  2006))  stimulated  the  pupil's 
spoken language production and in this respect 
was  a  huge  improvement  over  L2  exercises 
based  on  rehearsed  dialogues.  Of  course  the 
attention from the teacher was a scarce resource, 
and each pupil could not expect more than a few 
minutes of personal instruction during a lesson.

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 79



One of our main goals with Talebob is to take the 
language lab a step further towards interactivity 
such that each language production will yield an 
informed comment,  either  an appreciation  or  a 
constructive correction. In other words, Talebob 
should give the pupil a feeling of being heard.

3  Talebob's front-end  (hello, pupil!)

School children are used to computer games with 
a visual side approaching virtual reality. Rather 
than competing on graphics we wanted to attract 
our  users  through  a  carefully  designed 
interactivity  offering  meaningful  replies  on  all 
contacts.  Talebob  should  thus  behave  as  an 
attentive listener and competent evaluator.

The Talebob challenge consists of 30 tasks, each 
focused  on  a  specific  Danish  phrase  such  as 
greeting  formulae  (godmorgen),  common 
requests (gi'r  du en kop kaffe?),  and emotional 
expressions  (er  du  rigtig  klog?!).  Common  to 
such phrases is that their communicative effects 
may change radically with the smallest twists of 
the  pronunciation.  An  inconspicuously  looking 
phrase like "tak skal du have"  (thank you) may 
be  perceived  as  being  ironic,  impressed,  tired, 
cordial,  hateful,  or  just  plainly  informative 
depending on subtle prosodic modifications (e.g. 
changing the relative weight of the main stresses 
slightly). Being able to control such details is an 
intrinsic part of one's L1 competence, but is often 
difficult  for  L2  learners  to  acquire.  Talebob 
allows the pupil to repeat each phrase as many 
times  as  needed,  informed  by  Talebob's 
feedback. The phrase prompts are produced by a 
native  speaker  aiming  for  an  'ecological' 
pronunciation that no Dane would object to.

For each Talebob-task the pupil

1. selects a phrase,

2. listens to the phrase prompt (using the 
Lyt-Til-Frasen button),

3. reproduces the prompt orally (using 
Optag/Stop buttons for recording), 
mimicking it closely wrt. articulation, 
prosody, and tempo,

4. compares prompt and own production 
auditorily (pressing Lyt-Til-Optagelsen),

5. repeats steps 2-4 until entirely satisfied, 
then presses Send for evaluation,

6. consults the returned Talebob comment 
(either a success message sending the 
pupil to the next task, or a try-again 
advising the pupil how to improve)

Pressing  Send  invokes  the  Talebob  acoustic 
analyzer,  returning  a smiley,  either  happy, 
neutral,  or  sad.  With a  happy smiley   :-)   the 
pupil has completed the task and may continue 
with the next phrase. Level-1 is done when the 
first  five  tasks  are  completed,  level-2  has  ten 
tasks,  and  level-3  fifteen.  The  phrases  are 
ordered  progressively,  from  single  words  and 
simple phrases in level-1 (godmorgen,  værsgo!), 
frequent idioms in level-2 (hvordan går det?, tak  
i lige måde), to more expressive phrases in level-
3 (det siger du ikke?,  hellere end gerne!). When 
all  tasks  in  level-3  are  done,  the  Talebob 
challenge is passed.

Talebob's front-end is illustrated in fig. 1-3.

Figure  1.  Screenshot  (excerpt)  from  Talebob 
task-page, level 2, with one phrase passed.

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 80



Figure  2.  Screenshot  (excerpt)  from  Talebob 
return-page, level 2, not-passed.

Figure  3.  Screenshot  (excerpt)  from  Talebob 
return-page, level 2, passed.

4  Talebob's back-end  (acoustic analysis)
The two sound files  submitted  (with  the  Send 
button)  are  evaluated  in  the  Talebob  back-end 
application. The acoustic analysis compares the 
prompt version (P) and the user's own production 
(U) sampling both files for F0 (pitch in Hz) and 
INT  (intensity  in  dB),  being  uanimously 
considered as  the  most  relevant  parameters  for 
acoustic-phonetic  evaluation.1 The  linguistic 
evaluation  is  focused on  the  concordance  of  P 
and U wrt.  speech tempo,  global  prosody,  and 
articulation.

The speech tempo factor (STF) is determined as 
the ratio of durations for P and U,

STF = duration(P) : duration(U)

1 F0 and  INT  are  measured  using  the  Praat  toolkit 
(www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat),  window  size  5  ms,  filter 
settings =  Pitch (ac)... 0.005 75 15 yes 0.03 0.45 0.01 0.4  
0.14 600; Intensity...  75 0.005 yes.  We also experimented 
with HNR (harmonicity-to-noise ratio) and various spectral 
filterings,  but  found  them  to  be  too  noise  sensitive. 
Classrooms are not quiet places!

STF is calculated from INT data. First the zero 
level for INT in U is estimated, corresponding to 
'no speech'  in the given signal  (this  calibration 
can be tricky, especially for noise-prone samples, 
and is always a matter of heuristics).  Then the 
zero  level  (0  dB  after  calibration)  is  used  to 
delimit the speech production in U. By definition 
the  optimum  value  for  STF is  1.0,  and 
productions  approaching  this  value  will  trigger 
the comment "Meget  fint  taletempo" (excellent  
speech  tempo).  Lesser  or  greater  values  return 
instructions  to  speak  faster  or  slower, 
respectively.

Prosody and articulation analyses are based on 
F0 measurements. Only the 'sonorant' parts of P 
and U are sampled - that is, the segments of the 
speech  signals  where  a  pitch  value  can  be 
meaningfully estimated, thus excluding obstruent 
sounds  and  moments  of  silence  (e.g.  between 
words).  All  frequency  data  are  stored  as 
logarithmic  values  (more  convenient  for 
statistical  use).  Many  of  Talebob's  users  are 
children, and their speech productions will often 
be  higher-pitched  than  the  phrase  prompt  on 
average.  This  global  difference  in  pitch  is  of 
course  irrelevant  to  the  Talebob evaluation,  so 
the F0 dataset for U is normalized (each sample 
multiplied  with  a  derived  constant)  equalizing 
the average pitch of U and P.

After  these  preparatory  steps,  the  prosodic 
evaluation is done. The calculation is based on 
10  qualified  datapoints  for  each  (normalized) 
dataset U and P, in a procedure best explained by 
an example.  Say 130 valid  pitch samples were 
derived from P; the first datapoint for P (call it 
f1,P) is then derived as the mean value for the first 
13 samples; the 2nd datapoint (f2,P) for samples 
14..26, et cetera, up to (f10,P) and (f10,U).  Finally 
the prosodic deviation (ProsDev) of U wrt. P is 
calculated by summation of 'errors',

ProsDev = |f1,P-f1,U| + |f2,P-f2,U| + .. + |f10,P-f10,U|

This particular ProsDev formula was designed to 
meet  two  special  requirements.  Firstly  it 
abstracts  away  any  temporal  incongruities 
between U and P (already addressed by the STF 
score);  secondly  it  copes  well  with  the 
unpredictable number of valid F0 samples for U 
(sometimes  as  few  as  15-20  for  short  speech 
productions in noisy surroundings, while P may 
produce  3-4  times  more),  preserving 
commensurability.  For  low  ProsDev values, 
Talebob  returns  a  praising  comment  "Dit 

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 81



tonefald  er  fint",  and  otherwise  an  instruction 
how to improve, e.g. "Prøv at tale mere livligt" 
(try speaking more lively).

The articulation is evaluated (ArtEval) along the 
same lines,  but  focusing  on local  incongruities 
rather  than  the  phrase  as  a  whole.  First  30 
qualified  datapoints  are  derived  following  the 
procedure above, using numerical interpolation if 
necessitated  by  data  sparseness.  Error  analyses 
(calculated as for ProsDev, mutatis mutandis) are 
done for datapoints 1..10, 11..20, and 21..30,

 
ArtEval (a,b )=∑

n=a

b

( F n,P−F n,U )
,

F being is  the  30-point  dataset  (otherwise  as  f 
above).  The  results  for  ArtEval(1,10), 
ArtEval(11,20),  and  ArtEval(21,30)  represents 
the first, middle, and last part of the utterance as 
reflected in the returned comments: "Prøv at tale 
tydeligere i de første/midterste/sidste ord" (try to 
speak  more  clearly  in  the  first/middle/final/all  
words).  Such a  message  is,  admittedly,  a  very 
blunt  linguistic  description,  but  faced  with  the 
impatience and limited academic vocabulary of 
pupils, we had to prioritize didactive effect over 
descriptive accuracy.

Summing up, feedback from Talebob consists in 
three comments, one for each of the evaluation 
criteria (tempo, prosody, and pronunciation), and 
in  addition  a  smiley  representing  the  overall 
performance.  The  happy smiley  ('task 
completed')  is  given  when  each  of  the  three 
evaluation results has met a (pre-set) acceptable 
limit, the sad smiley is given if none of the limits 
are met, and the medium smiley otherwise.

See  the  discussion  below  on  the  linguistic 
relevance and scientific testability of the Talebob 
acoustic-phonetic design.

4.1  An example - phrase "hej med dig"

The graphs in fig. 4 and 5 both cover the phrase 
hej med dig in three speech productions, (i) the 
prompt, (ii) an Islandic pupil (boy, 7th grade) on 
2nd attempt, and (iii) same pupil on 5th attempt. 
Notice that INT graphs are continuous, intensity 
being defined everywhere, while F0 graphs are 
interruped  at  non-sonorant  passages  (e.g.  the 
stopped [d] in dig).

The  huge  difference  in  speech  tempo  between 

2nd and 5th attempt is easily appreciated in fig. 
4.  The  very  slow  tempo  in  #2  (2nd  attempt) 
triggered the Talebob comment "Du taler alt for 
langsomt" (you speak much too slowly); the pupil 
sped up and - as seen - eventually matched the 
prompt's tempo in #5. His pronunciation had also 
become  more  fluent,  without  the  unwarranted 
separation of hej and med (cf. the INT dip around 
t=0.45" in the #2 graph, absent from both #5 and 
the  prompt).  Concerning  the  prosodic  contour, 
notice that the F0 envelope for #2 and #5 (cf. fig. 
5)  both  match  the  prompt  quite  closely  when 
abstracting away from the different  tempi:  two 
stable  pitch  inclinations  with  an  intervening 
resetting, corresponding to the two stress groups 
in  the  (most  common)  Danish  pronunciation. 
Consequently,  ProsDev is relatively low in both 
cases, having Talebob praise the pronunciation in 
both  cases:  "Meget  fint  tonefald"  (very  good 
tone-of-voice).  At  the  same  time,  though,  the 
ArtEval-based  analysis  shows  a  'lack'  of  pitch 
modulation in #2 (preceived as mumbling,  and 
producing  a  relatively  poor  ArtEval  value),  in 
this case triggering the comment for #2: "Prøv at 
tale  tydeligere"  (try  to  pronounce  the  words  
more  clearly).  Through  his  next  attempts,  the 
pupil improved his pronunciation gradually, and 
by #5, the ArtEval value passed the accept limit, 
allowing Talebob to issue a happy smiley (notice 
though  in  fig.  5  that  the  pitch  range  is  still 
somewhat limited for #5).

Figure 4. Phrase "hej med dig", intensity data; 
prompt (solid line), Icelandic pupil's 2nd/5th 
attempt (close/dispersed dots)

Figure 5. Phrase "hej med dig", pitch data; 
prompt (solid line), Icelandic pupil's 2nd/5th 
attempt (close/dispersed dots)

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 82



5  System architecture
The Talebob development had three phases. First 
an appropriate  set  of  phrases  was selected and 
recorded,  largely  recycling  materials  and 
selection  criteria  from  earlier  CALL  projects 
including  Allwood  et  al.  (2005),  Selsøe  et  al. 
(2004),  Henrichsen  (2004,  2004b).  Then  the 
back-end was programmed and tested (Perl-code 
and standard  open-source  modules).  The  front-
end, however, presented us with an unexpected 
challenge.  Nobody  could  update  us  on  the  IT 
situation  in  West-Nordic  schools,  neither  for 
hardware, software, operating system, local  IT-
assistance, or even internet connectivity. Yet we 
did not want any potential user to go down on 
equipment. Also we did not want to preclude any 
working places. Some pupils prefer to train in the 
privacy of their home while others like to share. 
We did not want to force any limitations on the 
user on purely technical grounds. This led us to 
consider three front-end/back-end architectures.

A1.  Stand-alone  (program installed on user's 
own hardware: pc, tablet, or smartphone)

PRO:
• Independent of internet connectivity
• Quick query-response cycle

CON:
• Programming/maintenance of back-end for a 

range of unknown hardware is demanding
• Technical support (from developer to pupil, 

teacher and/or local IT helpdesk) is hard due to 
physical and time-zone distance

• Monitoring of users' performance and progress 
is difficult

• System updates are hard to communicate

A2.  Browser-based 

PRO:
• Contacts between users and server can be 

logged (easier maintenance & development)
• Developers can make performance data 

available to teachers and others online
• Browser-based front-end using HTML5 and 

CSS is hardware independent (well, almost!)

CON:
• Stands or falls with user's connectivity
• 100% server uptime is mandatory
• HTML5 audio, especially for recording, is 

currently not fully supported in all browsers

A3.  Internet-based,  but dedicated front-end

The advantages are the same as for  A2,  and in 
addition  the  HTML5  problem can  be  avoided. 
Also  we  do  not  need  to  instruct  users  to 
download this or that internet-browser. The main 
hurdle  is  that  users  have to  install  a  dedicated 
program  prior  to  their  first  positive  Talebob 
experience.

Even if A2 seemed to us to be the best alternative 
overall,  we settled on  A3 for  practical  reasons. 
Many potential users are Explorer fans and did 
not  care  to  install  a  new  browser  with  better 
HTML5  support,  such  as  Chrome,  Firefox,  or 
even IE 9+.

As the developer team had some experience with 
Unity4  (www.unity4.com),  in  particular  its 
strong  audio  support  and  graphics  drivers,  we 
settled for this programming workbench. Unity4 
is  freely available  (in  the  open-source version) 
and  so  does  not  compromize  Talebob  as  a 
shareable application. Unity4 programs compile 
to  all  common  operating  systems  (even  older 
versions) including Linux,  Mac,  Win,  Android, 
etc.  The  flip  side  of  the  coin  is  that  potential 
Talebob users have to  download an executable 
(via  Dropbox,  as  explained  in  the  Taleboblen 
homepage,  www.taleboblen.hi.is),  unzip  it,  and 
invoke  it  using  their  own  operating  system. 
Simple  as  these procedures  may be  for  skilled 
IT-users,  they  showed  to  be  problematic  for 
many  language  teachers  and  even  local  IT-
helpdesks. We intend to launch a purely browser-
based  Talebob-version  in  the  near  future,  as  a 
supplement to the current version.

For  an  interesting  discussion  on  CALL design 
principles for tools training spoken language, see 
Appel (2012). González (2012) and Mbah (2013) 
have  experimented  with  minimalistic  CALL 
applications for English teaching.

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 83



6  Talebob meets the world
Before launching our test programme in Iceland, 
Greenland, and the Faroese Islands we wanted to 
assess  Talebob's  competence  as  a  Danish 
language teacher, so we evaluated Talebob with 
a panel of native Danish speakers (18 pupils aged 
9-18),  in  surroundings  chosen  to  match  the 
typical Talebob user's (school, car, living room). 
16 out  of  18 panel  members completed the 30 
phrases  in  less  than 50 attempts,  meaning  that 
most tasks were completed on the first attempt. 
This seemed to be a satisfactory result.

For comparison, our current log of L2 users at 
the  time  of  writing  shows  an  average  of  84 
attempts  for  the  Talebob challenge  as  a  whole 
(2.80 attempts  per  phrase),  with  a  global  best-
score of 55 attempts. Danes and non-Danes thus 
seem to be clearly distinguished, suggesting that 
Talebob's  automatic  feedback  is  linguistically 
non-arbitrary as well as didactically useful.

6.1   The case of Iceland

Table  1  summarizes  all  contacts  made  to  the 
Talebob back-end during our (still ongoing) test 
period.  For  technical  and  practical  reasons, 
Greenland and the Faroes have only been able to 
access Talebob systematically for a considerably 
shorter time than Iceland. We therefore have to 
postpone  cross-country  comparisons  to  a  later 
paper.2 

The pupils taking part in the experiment were not 
urged to finish the Talebob challenge. They were 
simply invited by their teacher to try it out. It's 

2The cross-country study could be an interesting 
one  given  the  extremely  different  attitudes 
towards  Danish  as  an  L2  encountered  in  the 
West-Nordic area. Running a risk of premature 
generalization,  we  observe  that  Greenlandic 
pupils are highly motivated learners (being heavy 
users  of  Danish  media)  as  opposed  to  the 
Icelandic children who may have an easier time 
pronouncing  the  Danish  sounds,  but  are 
generally much less motivated anyway (Iceland 
being  in  some  respects  more  culturally  self-
sufficient).  Faroese  children  don't  seem  to 
question the necessity of learning Danish at all 
(many of them preparing for studies in mainland 
Denmark).

therefore interesting to notice that approximately 
half of the users who have taken up the Talebob 
challenge (i.e.  passed at  least  one phrase task), 
do finish the course as well. In other words, we 
don't see signs of 'early fatigue'.

When consulting the performance data,  we see 
that level-1 phrases took 2.64 attemps to pass on 
average, level-2 took 2.54, and level-3 took 3.48. 
As  level-3  puts  the  user  under  much  heavier 
demand (15 several-word phrases,  compared to 
level-1's 5 very short phrases), we conclude that 
pupils,  in  general,  are  not  scared  off  by  the 
harder struggle. Out of 19 pupils entering level-
3, almost 70% completed the level as well. This 
is  an  encouraging  result,  convincing  us  that 
Talebob - even in it's earliest version, with crude 
graphics,  canned  messages,  an  adult  prompt 
voice,  and  no  personalization  at  all  -  can  be 
appreciated as a fun and meaningful challenge by 
young children  used  to  the  far  more  advanced 
interaction of computer games.

Log-data  (TB=Talebob) All Iceland

TB contacts 2508 1888

TB phrase evaluations 2203 1773

Level-1 commenced 39 27

Level-1 passed 30 23

Level-2 passed 24 19

Level-3 passed 16 13

Smiley-1  (happy) 738 571

Smiley-2  (medium) 1355 1123

Smiley-3  (sad) 110 79

TB-eval. per Smiley-1 2.99 3.11

Table  1.  Log-data  for  Icelandic  users  as  per  18/12 
2013.  Column  'All'  includes  Faeroese  and 
Greenlandic contacts.

6.2  What's Danish about Talebob?

There  is  nothing  intrinsically  'Danish' about 
Talebob.  The  acoustic  analysis  and  scoring 
procedures do not contain any language-specific 

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 84



parts. Hence no re-programming will be needed 
when porting Talebob to new L2 scenaria, only 
an  editorial  process  of  selecting  30  (or  more) 
suitable phrases followed by a recording session 
with one or more native speakers with a flair for 
'ecological  pronunciation'.  The  technical 
integration  of  these  materials  are  fairly  trivial 
(though  some  languages  may  require  slight 
changes  in  the  acoustic  setup).  In  this  respect, 
Talebob's  simplistic  speech  evaluation  differs 
from the technologically far  more sophisticated 
CALL  tools  for  L2  conversational  training 
available in the market, such as Guiliana (2004), 
Wang (2011), de Vries (2014), and Mirzaei et al. 
(2014),  and  commercial  CALL-programs  like 
Cooori (www.cooori.com),  all including a fully-
fledged  ASR  component  (automatic  speech 
recognition).

6.3  Talebob as a scientific enterprise

Our  current  evaluation  regime  (based  on  STF, 
ProsDev,  and  ArtEval)  has  worked  well, 
providing  a  useful  compromise  between 
linguistic  precision  and  communicable  (age-
appropriate) advise. However, we are aware that 
this  particular  setup  has  not  proved itself  in  a 
strict scientific sense. Maybe different formulae 
or  new  scoring  procedures  would  allow  even 
more  useful  feedback  from  Talebob.  For 
example, we suspect  that  ProsDev and  ArtEval 
definitions  based  on  standard  deviation  rather 
than numerical distance may allow more specific 
corrections.  New  batteries  of  formulae  is 
constantly being tested - still without this being 
driven by ideal linguistic criteria, but rather as a 
pragmatic and feedback-informed activity.

Actually,  it's  not  clear  to  us  that  an  'ideal' 
configuration could be obtained at all. The most 
effective evaluation procedures, from a didactic 
point  of  view,  would  not  rely  solely  on  ideal 
linguistic  criteria,  but  include  the  personal 
profiles of the pupils (degree of motivation, prior 
knowledge  of  Danish,  own  first  language, 
general IT-experience, and more).

7  Concluding remarks

Our perhaps most significant conclusion is that 
pupil users like Talebob and spend far more time 
(at  home  and  in  school)  training  Danish 

pronunciation than ever before (Hauksdottir and 
Henrichsen,  in  prep.).  We  have  not  performed 
any objective evaluations of the didactic effects 
yet,  and so we do not know  whether Talebob 
can  actually  teach  pupils  a  better  Danish. 
Nevertheless,  teachers  in  our  test  group 
(especially Icelanders) report  that  most  of  their 
pupils  never  practiced  spoken  Danish  before 
unless  forced.  A majority  of  pupils  report  that 
they feel more confident now when using Danish 
speech  productively  (Hauksdottir  2015).  This 
seems to be an important result in itself.

Finally  we  wish  to  point  to  Talebob  as  an 
example  of  CALL-based  screening  of  large 
groups  of  pupils.  Access  to  statistical 
information  about  the  progress  of  individual 
pupils,  classes,  or  even  populations of  classes 
may of course be useful for teachers, but perhaps 
even  more  so  for  researchers  and  political 
decision-makers.

Such  considerations  are  highly  relevant  in 
Denmark  right  now,  the  2014  school  reform 
being currently implemented. For the first  time 
ever  English  is  now  taught  from  first  grade. 
Spokesmen  for  the  teachers  are  constantly 
expressing  concerns  about  the  lack  of  training 
programmes for teachers new to the challenge of 
teaching English to minors. Objective means for 
assessing  the  learning  patterns  are  frequently 
called for in the press and in the parliament. We 
believe that cleverly designed CALL-tools could 
play a decisive role in this debate.

We are  currently working preparing a  Talebob 
version  adapted  for  English  phrases,  planning 
experiments  with  first  graders  in  late  2015, 
hopefully  laying  the  ground  for  a  longitudinal 
study. We do hope that Nordic researchers and 
Danish  politicians  will  pick  up  on  this  unique 
historical opportunity.

Acknowledgments

The  presented  work  is  a  part  of  the  ongoing 
Nordic  project  "Talehjælp  til  Dansk  som 
Nabosprog"  2013-2015,  supported  by  NorFA 
and  Nordisk  Ministerråd/Nordplus.  We 
gratefully  acknowledge their  contributions.  The 
project  combines  didactic  and  computational-
linguistic  research  in  Iceland,  Denmark,  and 
Sweden with practical implementation work by 
language  teachers  in  Nuuk,  Hafnarfjörður  and 

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 85



Tórshavn (visit  http://www.taleboblen.hi.is). 
Many have thus contributed, from a geographical 
area  spanning  five  time  zones.  One,  however, 
outshines all  others: project leader and initiator 
Auður  Hauksdóttir.  Thanks  to  Auður  for  her 
many  years  as  a  powerstation  in  Nordic  L2 
didactics.

References 

Allwood, J., Henrichsen, P. J. (eds). 2005. SweDanes 
for CALL -  A corpus and computer-based student's  
aid  for  comparison  of  Swedish  and Danish  spoken  
language. NorFA CALL NET (cd med manual)

Appel,  C.,  Robbins,  J.,  Moré,  J.,  Mullen,  T.  2012. 
Task  and  Tool  Interface  Design  for  L2  Speaking  
Interaction Online. EUROCALL 2012

Giuliani, D., Mich, O., Gerosa, M. 2004.  Parling, a 
CALL  System  for  Children.   InSTIL/ICALL2004  – 
NLP  and  Speech  Technologies  in  Advanced 
Language Learning Systems

González,  J.F.  2012.  Can  Apple's  iPhone  Help  to  
Improve English Pronunciation Autonomously? State  
of the App. EUROCALL 2012

Hauksdottir,  A.,  Henrichsen,  P.J.  (in  prep.)  Dansk 
som Fremmedsprog i Vestnorden

Henrichsen,  P.  J.  2004b.  "CALL  for  the  Nordic  
Languages - tools and methods for Computer Assisted  
Language  Learning; Cph.  Studies  in  Language 
30/2004

Mbah, E.E.,  Mhab, B.M., Iloene,  M.I.,  Iloene,  G.O. 
2013.  Podcasts for Learning English Pronunciation  
in Igboland: Students' Experiences and Expectations. 
EUROCALL 2013

Mirzaei  (2014) Partial and synchronized captioning:  
A  new  tool  for  second  language  listening  
development; EUROCALL 2014.
Henrichsen,  P.  J.  2004.  The Twisted Tongue; Tools  
for Teaching Danish Pronunciation Using a Synthetic  
Voice; in  Henrichsen 2004b

Selsøe  Sørensen,  H.,  Henrichsen,  P.  J.,  Hansen,  C. 
2004.  NorFA  CALL  net:  Nordisk  Netværk  om 
Computerstøttet  Unvervisning  i  Nordiske  Sprog; 
Nordisk  Sprogteknologisk Forskningsprogram 2000-
2004, Samfundslitteratur Press, 224pp

Thorborg, L. 2003.  Dansk Udtale - Øvebog. Synope, 
ISBN 87-988509-4-6 (cd and book)

Thorborg,  L.  2006.  Dansk  Udtale  i  49  Tekster. 
Synope, ISBN 87-91909-01-5 (cd and book)

de  Vries,  B.  P.,  Cucchiarini,  C.,  Bodnar,  S..  2014. 
Automatic  Feedback  on  Spoken  Dutch  of  Low-
Educated  Learners:  An  ASR-based  CALL  study. 
Proceed. of EUROCALL 2014 (to appear)

Wang,  H.,  T.  Kawahara  and  Y.  Wang.  2011. 
Improving  Non-native  Speech  Recognition 
Performance  by  Discriminative  Training  for  
Language Model in a CALL System; INTERSPEECH 
2011, 27-31

Proceedings of the 20th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics (NODALIDA 2015) 86


