



















































Reconstructions of Deletions in a Dependency-based Description of Czech: Selected Issues


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 131–140,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

Reconstructions of Deletions in a Dependency-based
Description of Czech: Selected Issues

Eva Hajičová and Marie Mikulová and Jarmila Panevová
Charles University in Prague

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics

Czech Republic
{hajicova,mikulova,panevova}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Abstract
The goal of the present contribution is
to put under scrutiny the language phe-
nomenon commonly called ellipsis or
deletion, especially from the point of view
of its representation in the underlying syn-
tactic level of a dependency based syntac-
tic description. We first give a brief ac-
count of the treatment of ellipsis in some
present day dependency-based accounts of
this phenomenon (Sect. 1). The core of
the paper is the treatment of ellipsis within
the framework of the dependency-based
formal multi-level description of language
called Functional Generative Description:
after an attempt at a typology of ellip-
sis (Sect. 2) we describe in detail some
selected types of grammatical ellipsis in
Czech (Sect. 3). In Sect. 4 we briefly sum-
marize the results of our analysis.

1 Treatment of ellipsis in dependency
based descriptions of language

There are not many treatments of ellipsis in the
framework of dependency grammar. Hudson’s
original conviction presented in his ‘word gram-
mar’ (WG, (Hudson, 1984)) was that syntactic
theory could stick firmly to the surface with de-
pendency relations linking thoroughly concrete
words. Under this assumption, such elements
as those for which transformational grammar has
postulated deletions, traces or unpronounced pro-
nouns such as PRO and pro were part of seman-
tics and did not appear in syntax. In his more re-
cent work, (Hudson, 2007), pp. 267-281 revised
this rather extreme position; he presents an anal-
ysis of examples of structures such as You keep
talking (sharing of subjects), or What do you think
the others will bring (extraction) or case agree-
ment in predicatives (in languages such as Ice-
landic and Ancient Greek, where adjectives and

nouns have overt case inflection and predicative
adjectives agree with the subject of their clause)
demonstrating that their description cannot be rel-
egated to semantics. He concludes that covert
words have the same syntactic and semantic char-
acteristics expected from overt words and, conse-
quently, he refers to them as to the ’unrealized’
words. He proposes to use the same mechanism
used in the WG theory: namely the ‘realization’
relation linking a word to a form, and the ‘quan-
tity’ relation which shows how many instances of
it are expected among the observed tokens. If the
quantity of the word is zero then a word may be
unrealized. Every word has the potential for being
unrealized if the grammar requires this. An unreal-
ized word is a dependent of a word which allows it
to be unrealized, thus the parent word controls re-
alization in the same way that it controls any prop-
erty of the dependent.

One of the crucial issues for a formal descrip-
tion of ellipsis is the specification of the extent
and character of the part of the sentence that is
being deleted and has to be restored. Already in
the papers on deletion based on the transforma-
tional type of description it has been pointed out
that the deleted element need not be a constituent
in the classical understanding of the notion of con-
stituent. A natural question offers itself whether a
dependency type of description provides a more
adequate specification in terms of a dependency
subtree. (Osborne et al., 2012) proposed a novel
unit called catena defined as a word or a com-
bination of words that is continuous with respect
to dominance. Any dependency tree or subtree
(complete or partial) of a dependency tree quali-
fies as a catena. The authors conclude that based
on the flexibility and utility of this concept, catena
may be considered as the fundamental unit of syn-
tax and they attempt to document this view by
their analysis of different kinds of ellipsis (gap-
ping, stripping, VP ellipsis, pseudogapping, sluic-

131



ing and comparative deletion, see (Osborne and
Liang, 2015)).

The issue of ellipsis as a mismatch between
syntax and semantics is most explicitly reflected
in those dependency frameworks that work with
several levels of syntactic representation. This is
the case of the Meaning-Text Theory (MTT) of I.
Mel’čuk and the Functional Generative Descrip-
tion (FGD) of P. Sgall.

In the framework of the multilevel approach of
MTT the rules for surface syntactic ellipsis are
part of surface syntax component and they are de-
fined as ”various kinds of reductions and omis-
sions, possible or obligatory in a given context
. . . ” ( (Mel’čuk, 1988), p. 83). For the surface
syntax representation the author distinguishes be-
tween zero signs and ellipsis. Zero lexes and lex-
emes are covered by the term syntactic zeroes (op.
c., p. 312) and due to their sign character they are
reflected in the dictionary entries. On the other
hand, an ellipsis is a rule, i.e. a part of the gram-
mar, ”that eliminates certain signs in certain sur-
face contexts.” (op. c., p. 326).

2 Treatment of ellipsis in the Functional
Generative Description

In the dependency-based theory of the Functional
Generative Description (FGD) we subscribe to
(see esp. (Sgall et al., 1986)) the treatment of el-
lipsis is determined by the fact that this theoreti-
cal framework works with two syntactic levels of
the sentence, namely with a level representing the
surface shape of the sentence and the level repre-
senting the underlying, deep syntactic structure of
the sentence (so-called tectogrammatical level).1

Simplified examples of representations on these
two levels for sentence (1) are presented in Fig. 1.

(1) Jan
John

se
Refl.

rozhodl
decided

opustit
to leave

Prahu.
Prague

In the surface structure representation each ele-
ment of the sentence is represented by a node of its
own (more exactly, by the form given in the dictio-
nary) and no words are added. The dependency re-

1FGD served as a theoretical background of the annota-
tion scheme of the Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT in the
sequel; see (Bejček et al., 2013)). PDT also distinguishes
an analytic syntactic level (surface) and a tectogrammatical,
deep level. In the present contribution, we discuss deletions
from the point of view of the theoretical approach and quote
PDT only when necessary for the understanding of the point
under discussion. For the treatment of deletions in the PDT
see (Hajič et al., 2015).

Figure 1: Simplified representations of the sen-
tence (1) Jan se rozhodl opustit Prahu [John de-
cided to leave Prague.] on the surface (above) and
on the tectogrammatical (below) levels. The arrow
indicates the coreferential relation.

lations have the values such as SUBJ, OBJ, ADV
etc. In the tectogrammatical tree (TR in the se-
quel), only autosemantic lexical units are repre-
sented by a separate node of the tree; the informa-
tion carried by the function words in the surface
structure is represented in the tectogrammatical
structure by means of complex symbols attached
to the given node (e.g. the so-called grammatemes
of modality, tense, etc. or the subfunctors for the
meanings carried by the prepositions etc.). The
semantic relation between the head and its modi-
fier(s) is reflected by the functor(s), such as ACT,
PAT, ADDR, LOC, CPR, RSTR etc., which are,
if needed, supplied by more subtle syntactico-
semantic distinctions reflected by the subfunctors.

The issue of ellipsis2 concerns the relations be-
tween these two dependency trees. It is obvious
that for an adequate representation of meaning el-
ements of different dimensions absent on the sur-
face need to be included in the TR. We call these
elements ellipsis.

The phenomenon of ellipsis is caused by several
factors:

(i) by the structure of the text (discourse),

(ii) by grammatical rules or conditions,

(iii) by an obligatory grammatically determined
2In the present discussion, we use the terms ”deletion”

and ”ellipsis” as synonyms though we are aware that in some
frameworks their meanings do not overlap.

132



surface deletability of an element the pres-
ence of which is required by the grammatical
system.

Type (i) is called a textual ellipsis, as it is ba-
sically connected with the structure of discourse,3

and the types (ii) and (iii) are called systemic (or
grammatical) ellipsis; the type (iii) is referred to
here as pseudodeletion. In the case of grammati-
cal ellipsis the surface sentences (the ”remnants”)
without the elliptical elements satisfy the condi-
tions for grammatically well-formed structures;
however, in order to achieve a representation of
the meaning of the sentence these elements have
to be filled (often using artificial nodes) in the tree
even if the result of the restoration of the deletion
may be stylistically awkward or even grammati-
cally hardly acceptable in the surface shape of the
sentence. On the borderline between the types (i)
and (ii) there is the surface deletion of subject in
Czech as a language with the property of a pro-
drop language.4

3 The FGD treatment of selected types of
systemic ellipsis in Czech

As already mentioned above, one of the crucial is-
sues for a formal description of ellipsis is the spec-
ification of the extent of the part of the sentence
that has to be restored. The extent of the restora-
tions varies from type to type, from the more eas-
ily identifiable with the restoration of ellipsis in
pro-drop cases to the least identifiable structures
to be inserted in cases of deletions in coordination.
In our discussion below we will concentrate on
four types of systemic ellipsis in Czech with which
we intend to illustrate the different possibilities
and difficult points of reconstructions; we leave
aside deletions in coordinated structures, which is
a problem of its own and the discussion of which
would go beyond the limits of this contribution.

While in 3.2 – 3.4 the problem how the items
absent on the surface are to be reconstructed in
TRs (as to their structure and extent), in 3.1 the
reconstruction on TR is quite simple, it concerns
a single node and it is manifested by the morpho-

3So-called “textual ellipsis” typical for the spoken lan-
guage and dialogues is left aside here, outside a broader con-
text these sentences may be ungrammatical (as is the second
sentence in Have you finished your manuscript? Not yet com-
pletely.). Their analysis is a subject of studies on discourse
structure.

4For a detailed classification of ellipsis in Czech,
see (Mikulová, 2011).

logical categories of verb. We face here an oppo-
site problem: how to explain the conditions where
“pro-dropped” subjects are overtly expressed. In
3.1 we give only several examples with overt sub-
jects in 1st and 2nd person without their deep anal-
ysis. By this preliminary picture of the problem
we wanted to demonstrate that Czech really be-
longs to the “pro-drop” class of languages (see Ta-
ble 1).

3.1 The pro-drop parameter in Czech
Czech belongs to languages of the pro-drop type
(called sometimes zero subject or null-subject).
Surprisingly, the absence of an overt subject
in 1st and 2nd person was not described prop-
erly in traditional Czech grammatical handbooks
(cf. (Havránek and Jedlička, 1960), p. 300 and
in (Karlı́k et al., 1995), pp. 411–412.). The anal-
ysis of this phenomenon is given in more details
in contrastive studies, esp. in those comparing
Czech and Russian, because these two closely re-
lated languages differ as to their pro-drop proper-
ties.5 Since the examples with missing pronouns
of 1st and 2nd person are considered as unmarked
for Czech,6 while the overt presence of the pro-
nouns in 1st and 2nd person as marked counterex-
amples, the conditions or requirements for their
presence need to be listed. For the 1st person sg
the following issues are mentioned in the books
quoted above:

(i) the verb forms do not indicate fully the
source for the agreement categories (see (2)), (ii)
the contrasting position of the pronoun with regard
to the other element (see (3)), (iii) the stressed po-
sition of the pronoun (often at the beginning of
sentence, see (4)), (iv) the pronoun participates in
a coordination chain (see (5)), and finally (v) the
stylistic feature expressing pleasant or unpleasant
emotions (see (6)):7

(2) Já byl vždycky tak trochu pobuda.

’I have always been a kind of a lounger.’
5A detailed analysis is given in (Isačenko, 1960), Vol 2,

pp. 411f.; the author’s approach seems to be too radical as to
the difference between non pro-drop Russian contrary to the
pro-drop Slovak; he proposed to analyse Russian construc-
tions as Ja splju [I am sleeping] with obligatory subject pro-
noun ja [I] as an analytical verb form.

6In this section we do not pay an attention to the 3rd per-
son; its position on the scale of deleted elements is different
due to its role of anaphora.

7The occurrence of pronouns in marked positions in (1)
through (11) is denoted by italics; these examples are taken
over from the different parts of the Czech National Corpus,
namely SYN2010 and SYN2013PUB.

133



(3) Byli bohatı́, já jsem byl chudý.

’ [They] were rich, I was poor.’

(4) Ten článek jsem psal já.

’The article I wrote.’

(5) Můj přı́tel a já jsme odešli z policejnı́ho
úřadu.

’My friend and I left the police station.’

(6) Já
I

jsem
am

ti,
you,

Radku,
Radek,

tak
so

šťastný,
happy

že
that

už
no-longer

s
with

tebou
you

nemusı́m
need-not

hrát.
play.

’I am so happy, Radek, that I do not need
to play with you any longer.’

The ellipsis of 1st person pl and 2nd sg and pl
are not analyzed in the quoted books at all, we
present here only several examples of the marked
positions untypical for a pro-drop language:

(7) My
We

si
Refl.

na
for

něho
him

počkáme,
wait,

neuteče
he will not escape

nám.
us.

(8) Posekám
[I] will cut

ti
you

zahrádku
garden

a
and

ty
you

mi
me

za
for

to
that

vyvenčı́š
will take out

psa.
dog.

(9) Vyrozuměli jsme, že právě vy jste se s nı́m
stýkala nejčastěji ze všech.

’We have understood that exactly you have
been meeting him most frequently from all
of us.’

(10) Ty nevı́š, kdo já jsem?

’You do not know who I am?’

(11) . . . někdo plakal nad čerstvým hrobem a
my šli a položili ho do hlı́ny.

’. . . somebody wept on his fresh tomb and
we went and put him into the soil.’

In Table 1 we compare the number of sentences
with an overt pronominal subject and the number
of all sentences with the verb in the form cor-
responding to this person.8 The degree of pro-

8The number of occurrences cannot be accurate: the
forms já, ty, my, vy in nominative could occur in non-subject
positions in phrases introduced by jako [as]. Both meanings
of the pronoun vy [you], i.e. the honorific form and the sim-
ple plural form would be difficult to distinguish in the corpus
without syntactic annotation. However these occurrences are
marginal, so that they do not influence the statistics substan-
tially.

corpus SYN2005 SYN2010 SYN2013
PUB

corpus size
(# of tokens) 100M 100M 935M
Verbs in 1st

person sg
1 142 609 1 787 638 8 906 455

Pronoun já [I]
is present

77 629 74 922 244 667

non-dropped 6,8% 4,2% 2,7%
Verbs in 2nd

person sg
293 068 496 304 2 966 819

Pronoun ty
[you] is present

10 265 17 328 9 779

non-dropped 3,5% 3,5% 0,3%
Verbs in 1st

person pl
635 962 821 381 8 501 392

Pronoun my
[we] is present

18 213 19 986 153 275

non-dropped 2,9% 2,4% 1,8%
Verbs in 2nd

person pl
379 487 498 943 1 093 271

Pronoun vy
[you] is present

16 596 17 344 65 707

non-dropped 4,4% 3,5% 6,0%

Table 1: Non pro-drop vs. pro-drop sentences

dropness is demonstrated in the ’non-dropped’
rows: e.g. in the corpus SYN2005 there are 6,8%
sentences within the set of all predicates in 1st per-
son sg where the subject já [I] is present (non-
dropped).

3.2 Coreference with raising and control
verbs as “pseudo-deletions”

With regard to our aim to introduce into the deep
(tectogrammatical) representation all semantically
relevant information even though not expressed in
the surface shape of the sentence, the coreferential
units important for the interpretation of the mean-
ing of the sentence in infinitive constructions have
to be inserted. Neither speaker nor recipient are
aware of any deletion in (12) and (13) (and other
examples in this Section), both sentences are fully
grammatical.

Thus, for the interpretation of the meaning of
(12) it is necessary to know that in (12) Actor
(John) is identical with absent subject of the infini-
tive clause, see Figure 1 above, while in (13) the
Addressee (girl-friend) occupies such an empty
position. These elements (indicated in PDT by the
lemma #Cor) are needed for the completion of the
tectogrammatical structure.

Infinitive clauses with some verbs of control are
in particular contexts synonymous with the corre-
sponding embedded clauses (12b), (13b):

134



(12) a. Jan se rozhodl opustit Prahu.

’John decided to leave Prague.’
b. Jan se rozhodl, že (on) opustı́ Prahu.

’John decided that (he) would leave
Prague.’

(13) a. Jan doporučil přı́telkyni přestěhovat
se.

’John recommended to his girl-friend
to move.’

b. Jan doporučil přı́telkyni, aby se (ona)
přestěhovala.

’John recommended to his girl-friend
that (she) moved.’

Another argument for the treatment of these
structures as deletions is the fact that with some
verbs the surface shape of the sentence is am-
biguous: thus with the Czech verb slibovat [to
promise] there are two possibilities of control (the
subject of the infinitive may corefer either with the
Actor or with the Addressee of the main clause)
that have to be captured by the TR. Thus the sen-
tence (14) can be understood either as (15a) with
the Actor as the controller or as (15b) with the Ad-
dressee as the controller:

(14) Jirka slı́bil dětem jı́t do divadla.

’George promised the children to go to the
theatre.’

(15) a. Jirka slı́bil dětem, že (on) půjde do di-
vadla.

’George promised the children that
(he) will go to the theatre.’

b. Jirka slı́bil dětem, že (ony) půjdou do
divadla.

’George promised the children that
(they) will go to the theatre.’

The specificity of this type of deletion is caused
by the fact that the deleted unit – subject (Sb) of
the infinitive – cannot be expressed on the surface.

Raising and control constructions belong to
the prominent topics of the studies in gen-
erative grammar, though different terminol-
ogy and different solutions are used ((Růžička,
1999), (Przepiórkowski and Rosen, 2005), (Rosen,
2006), (Landau, 2013), to name just a few con-
tributions from the last 20 years).9 (Panevová,

9 (Růžička, 1999), p.4: ”. . . an infinitival S-complement

1996) and (Panevová et al., 2014) base the solution
on the classification of verbs of control according
to their controller (examples (12) and (13) repre-
sent group 1 and 2 with Actor (controller) – Sb
(controlee) and Addressee (controller) – Sb (con-
trolee), respectively). The other groups are rep-
resented by the Czech verbs slibovat [to promise]
with two possibilities of control (Actor - Sb or Ad-
dressee - Sb, see (15a), (15b)) and poslat [to send]
with the control Patient - Sb (see (16)).

(16) Šéf poslal asistenta roznést letáky.

’The boss sent the assistant to distribute
the leaflets.’

Our discussion indicates that we have resigned
on the difference between raising and control,10

because according to the analysis of Czech data,
the tests (such as passivization, identity or differ-
ence in theta-roles, the number of arguments of the
head verb) prominently used in generative gram-
mar for English do not function for our data in the
same way.

In this Section we wanted to document that
phenomena analyzed here and called “pseudo-
deletions” are justified to be considered as a type
of deletion, as the meaning of infinitive construc-
tions can be explained only by an establishment of
explicit pointers of the coreferential expressions
between the argument of the governing verb and
unexpressed subject of the dependent predicate.

3.3 Special types of “small clauses”

A sequence of two prepositions following one an-
other is excluded in Czech but there are expres-
sions in Czech11 classified in traditional descrip-
tions and dictionaries mostly as prepositions that
can be followed by a prepositional noun group.

(17) Kromě do katedrály půjdou turisté do
musea.12

creates the problem of reconstituting its empty sub-
ject”; (Landau, 2013), p. 9: ”. . . the interpretation of the sen-
tence [with control] indicates that there is an additional, invis-
ible argument in the embedded clause, which is coreferential
with (found/controlled by) the overt DP.”

10(Landau, 2013), p. 257 concludes his exhaustive analy-
sis of the phenomena analyzed usually under the roof of rais-
ing/control by the claim that control ”is neither a unitary phe-
nomenon nor a constitutive element of grammatical theory”,
but rather ”a heuristic label only serving to draw our attention
to a certain class of linguistic facts”.

11Equivalent expressions in other languages (e.g. in Rus-
sian), of course, exist, but as far as we know, they do not share
the properties we describe for Czech in this Section.

12The variant kromě + Genitive (kromě katedrály půjdou

135



’Besides to the cathedral the tourists will
go to the museum.’

(18) a. Mı́sto do Uppsaly přijel Jan do Trond-
heimu.

’Instead at Uppsala John arrived at
Trondheim.’

b. Mı́sto,
Instead of

aby
that

(Jan)
(John)

přijel
arrived

do
at

Uppsaly,
Uppsala,

přijel
arrived

Jan
John

do
at

Trondheimu.
Trondheim.

In our proposal the double functions concen-
trated in “small clauses” introduced by kromě,
mı́sto [besides, instead of] are differentiated by
means of the addition of the missing predicate
with the lexical label repeating the lexical value
of the governing predicate. The adverbials do kat-
edrály (in (17)), do Uppsaly (in (18)) depend on
the restored node with their proper function of Di-
rection. The expanded representation for (18a) is
paraphrased in (18b).

We deal here with examples (17) and (18) in de-
tail, because they document clearly that the (lexi-
cally parallel) predicate is missing on the surface.
However, there are examples where the preposi-
tion mı́sto [instead of] is used with its “regular”
case rection (Genitive), being sometimes synony-
mous with the small clause with double preposi-
tions, e. g. (19), (20):

(19) Mı́sto zavřeného musea(Genitive) navštı́vı́
turisté katedrálu.
’Instead of closed museum(Genitive) the
tourists will attend a cathedral.’

(20) Mı́sto manžela(Genitive) doprovodı́
matku na ples syn.
’Instead of her husband(Genitive) her son
will accompany mother to the ball.’

There are two possible approaches how to rep-
resent (19) and (20) on TR: In the former case, the

. . . [besides the cathedral they will go . . . ] where the expres-
sion kromě can function as a proper preposition governing
genitive case exists in Czech, too, but it is not applicable in
all contexts. E.g. Kromě s přı́telem půjde Marie do divadla
se sestrou [lit. Besides with the boy-friend Mary will go to
the theatre with her sister] cannot be changed into *Kromě
přı́tele půjde Marie do divadla se sestrou.[*Besides the boy-
friend Mary will go to the theater with her sister.]

expressions mı́sto muzea/mı́sto manžela [instead
of museum/instead of husband] could be repre-
sented as adjuncts of SUBST(itution) directly de-
pendent on the predicate (visit or accompany, re-
spectively). In the latter case, in order to achieve
a symmetric representation of (18) on the one side
and (19), (20) on the other, the restored version
(with a repeated predicate) will be used. We pre-
ferred the latter solution which helps to eliminate
an ambiguity such as in (21) paraphrased in (22a)
and (22b):

(21) Mı́sto profesorky kritizoval studenta
děkan.
’Instead of the (lady)professor-Gen-F the
dean criticized the student.’

(22) a. Mı́sto
Instead of

aby
that

kritizoval
he-criticized

profesorku
the (lady)professor-Acc-F

,
,
kritizoval
criticized

děkan
the dean

studenta.
the student-Acc-F

’Instead of critizing the lady-
professor, the Dean critized the
student.’

b. Mı́sto
Instead of

aby
that

studenta
the student-Acc-F

kritizovala
criticized

profesorka
(lady)professor-Nom-F

,
,

kritizoval
criticized

ho
him

děkan.
the dean.

’Instead of the student having been
criticized by the lady-professor, he
was criticized by the Dean.’

In the primary meanings of these two sentences
in their restored (expanded) versions the noun
profesorka [lady-professor] after the preposition
mı́sto [instead of] has the function of the subject
(Actor) in (22b), while in (22a) profesorka [lady-
professor] has the function of object (Patient).

There are additional problems connected with
the expression kromě. This Czech expression has
two meanings corresponding approximately to be-
sides (inclusion) and with exception (exclusion).
At the same time, both have the same syntactic
properties. Sentences (23a) and (24a) and their
proposed expansions (23b) and (24b) illustrate the
two different meanings of structures with kromě.

136



(23) a. (Tento přı́mořský hotel nabı́zı́
vynikajı́cı́ služby.) Kromě v moři tam
můžete plavat (i) v bazénu.

’(This seaside hotel offers excellent
services.) Besides in the sea you can
swim there (also) in the pool.’

b. Kromě toho,
Besides that

že
that

tam
there

můžete
you-can

plavat
swim

v
in

moři,
sea,

můžete
you-can

tam
there

plavat
swim

(i)
(also)

v
in

bazénu.
pool.

For (24a) we propose the extended tectogram-
matical representation as paraphrased in (24b):

(24) a. Kromě v pondělı́ můžete navštı́vit mu-
seum denně od 10 do 18 hodin.

’With the exception on Mondays you
can visit the museum daily from 10
AM till 6 PM.’

b. Kromě toho, že nemůžete navštı́vit
museum v pondělı́, můžete navštı́vit
museum denně od 10 do 18 hodin.

’With exception of the fact that you
cannot visit the museum on Monday,
you can visit the museum daily from
10 AM to 6 PM.’

The restored versions of the small clauses serve
also as the means how to remove the ambigui-
ties in kromě-phrases.13 If in the extended ver-
sion with the restored predicate both predicates
are positive or both are negated, the kromě-phrases
mean inclusion (called Addition in (Panevová et
al., 2014)); if one of them is positive and the other
negated, the phrases express an exclusion (called
Exception in (Panevová et al., 2014)). Unfortu-
nately, such a clear-cut criterion does not exclude
all possible ambiguities. There are tricky contexts
where the ambiguity could be removed only by a
broader context or by the situation, see (25) and its
two possible expansions in (26a) and (26b):

(25) Vydala jsem výkřik, který kromě Artura
musel slyšet kdekdo.

’I have given a scream which besides
Arthur must have been heard by every-
body.’

13For a detailed analysis of these constructions including
other peculiarities occurring in Czech see (Panevová et al.,
2014).

(26) a. Vydala jsem výkřik, který kromě
toho, že ho slyšel Artur, musel slyšet
kdekdo.

’I have given a scream which in ad-
dition to that it was heard by Arthur
must have been heard by everybody.’

b. Vydala jsem výkřik, který kromě
toho, že ho neslyšel Artur, musel
slyšet kdekdo.

’I have given a scream which in addi-
tion to that it was not heard by Arthur
must have been heard by everybody.’

The restructuring proposed for the type of sen-
tences analyzed in this Section by means of an ad-
dition of the predicate corresponding to the gov-
erning predicate seems to be helpful from two
points of view: One concerns the introduction of
the means for splitting two functions conflated in
the small clauses and the other is reflected in a
more subtle classification of the list of adverbials
adding an Addition and Exception as two new se-
mantic units (functors) on tectogrammatical level.

3.4 Deletions in structures with comparison

Comparison structures are a very well known
problem for any description pretending on restora-
tion of elements missing in the surface shape to
reach a complete representation of syntax and se-
mantics of the sentences. In FGD two types of the
comparison are distinguished: one is connected
with the meaning of equivalence (introduced usu-
ally by the expression jako [as]; the subfunctor
used in PDT has the label ’basic’), the other ex-
presses the meaning of difference (it is introduced
usually by the conjunction než [than]; the subfunc-
tor used is called ’than’). There are some compar-
ison structures where the restoration of elements
missing on the surface seems to be easy enough
from the point of view of semantics and from the
point of view of the extent of the part inserted in
the TR (see (27a), and its restored version (27b)).

(27) a. Jan čte stejné knihy jako jeho ka-
marád.

’John reads the same books as his
friend.’

b. Jan čte stejné knihy jako (čte) jeho ka-
marád.

’John reads the same books as his
friend (reads).’

137



Most comparisons are, unfortunately, more
complicated, see the following examples and the
arguments for the necessity of their extension:

(28) a. Jan se choval na banketu jako v hos-
podě.

’John behaved at the reception as in
the pub.’

b. Jan se choval na banketu (stejně), jako
se (Jan) chová v hospodě.

’John behaved at the reception (in the
same way) as (John) behaves in the
pub.’

In ex. (28a) we encounter a similar problem to
the one we analyzed in Sect. 3.3. when discussing
the modification of substitution, addition and of
exception: in the comparison structure two se-
mantic functions are conflated (comparison-basic
and locative meaning in (28a)). Thus an artifi-
cial predicate sharing in this case the same value
as the governing predicate (with the syntactic la-
bel comparison-basic) must be added into the ex-
tended representation. It serves as the head for the
locative adverbial, too.

For many modifications of comparison, how-
ever, even a more complex reconstruction of com-
parison ”small clauses” is needed. For an ade-
quate interpretation of the surface shape of (29a)
not only the shortened comparison structure with
locative has to be expanded but also an “opera-
tor” indicating similarity of the compared objects
is missing. For the identification of the similarity
the expression as stejný/stejně [same/identically],
podobný/podobně [similar/similarly] are used and
this operator has to be added into the correspond-
ing TR, see ex. (29b).

(29) a. Požadavky jsou u Komerčnı́ banky
jako u České spořitelny.

’The requirements are at Commercial
Bank as at Czech Saving Bank.’

b. Požadavky
Requirements

jsou
are

u
at

Komerčnı́
Commercial

banky
Bank

(stejné)
(same)

jako
as

(jsou požadavky)
(are requirements)

u
at

České spořitelny
Czech Saving Bank

[#Some].
[#Some].

An adequate description of the type of compari-
son exemplified by ex. (29) (see Figure 2) requires

Figure 2: Deep structure of (29)

to add not only an artificial predicate the head of
which copies the lemma of the main predicate, but
also an operator indicating the type of comparison
(#Equal, here with the meaning stejný [the same]).
The artificial lemma #Some is used to stand for
the lexically underspecified adjective/adverbial for
both types of comparison, see (29b) and (30b).

While the extension of (29a) would be accept-
able (at least semantically) in the form Požadavky
jsou u Komerčnı́ banky stejné jako (jsou stejné) u
České spořitelny [The requirements are at Com-
mercial Bank the same as (are the same) at
Czech Saving Bank], such type of extension is not
acceptable with the comparison-than type (con-
nected with the comparison of objects which are
not similar), see (30). This sentence requires an
artificial extension because the operators used for
this type of comparison as jiný/jinak [different],
rozdı́lný [different] have no semantic counterpart
to be filled in the extended representation. The
extension by the adjective nějaký [some] is given
here by the fact that jiný has no single lexical coun-
terpart for the expression of the Ministry situation
in (30) (if the situation there is different, the ap-
propriate adjective is actually unknown, it is un-
derspecified).

(30) a. Situace v armádě je jiná než na minis-
terstvu.

’The situation in the army is different
than at the Ministry.’

b. Situace v armádě je jiná než (je situ-
ace) na ministerstvu [#Some].

’The situation in the army is different
than (the situation) at the Ministry is
[#Some].

Our experience with the analysis of data in PDT
indicates that the relations between the extension

138



of comparison modifications and the extent of
their complete structure on the deep level differ
very significantly, so that a more detailed classi-
fication would be useful.

4 Summary

We have analyzed four types of elided construc-
tions in Czech and proposed their representation
on the deep (tectogrammatical) level of syntac-
tic description within a formal dependency-based
description. From the point of view of the bi-
nary relation of the governor and its dependent,
either the governor or the dependent may be miss-
ing and has to be reconstructed. A reconstruction
of a dependent is e.g. the case of deletions con-
nected with the pro-drop character of Czech ([I]
came late), or in cases of a deleted general argu-
ment (John sells at Bata [what][to whom]), while a
governor has to be reconstructed mostly in coordi-
nated structures (John likes Bach and Susan [likes]
Beethoven; We know when [she came] and why she
came). In some types of deletions, the reconstruc-
tion concerns an introduction of a rather complex
structure which is, however, needed for an appro-
priate semantic interpretation of the surface shape
of the sentence, as illustrated by the comparison
phrases and structures representing Addition and
Exception. Our analysis focused on several types
of the so-called systemic ellipsis, i.e. such that is
given by grammatical rules or conditions or by a
grammatically determined surface deletability; we
have left aside textual ellipsis such as coordina-
tion, which is conditioned mostly by the context
or by situation.

Surface deletions reflect the openness of the lan-
guage systems to compress the information. How-
ever, for the description of meaning of such com-
pressed structures more explicit means for an ade-
quate and unambiguous description are needed.

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge the detailed
remarks and suggestions by the three anony-
mous reviewers. We are deeply indepted to
Barbora Hladká for her invaluable technical as-
sistance. The work on this contribution was sup-
ported by the grant of the Czech Grant Agency
P406/12/0557 and has been using language re-
sources developed and/or stored and/or distributed
by the LINDAT/CLARIN project of the Min-
istry of Education of the Czech Republic (project

LM2010013).

References
Eduard Bejček, Eva Hajičová, Jan Hajič, Pavlı́na

Jı́nová, Václava Kettnerová, Veronika Kolářová,
Marie Mikulová, Jiřı́ Mı́rovský, Anna Nedoluzhko,
Jarmila Panevová, Lucie Poláková, Magda
Ševčı́ková, Jan Štěpánek, and Šárka Zikánová.
2013. Prague Dependency Treebank 3.0.
https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt3.0.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Marie Mikulová, Jiřı́
Mı́rovský, Jarmila Panevová, and Daniel Zeman.
2015. Deletions and node reconstructions in a
dependency-based mutlilevel annotation scheme.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 9041:17–31.

Bohuslav Havránek and Alois Jedlička. 1960. Česká
mluvnice [Czech Grammar]. Praha:SPN.

Richard A. Hudson. 1984. Word Grammar. Basil
Blackwell Oxford [Oxfordshire] ; New York.

Richard A. Hudson. 2007. Language Networks: The
New Word Grammar. Oxford University Press.

Aleksandr V. Isačenko. 1960. Grammatičeskij stroj
russkogo jazyka v soposstavlenii so slovackim. SAV:
Bratislava.

Petr Karlı́k, Marek Nekula, and Zdenka Rusı́nová, edi-
tors. 1995. Přı́ručnı́ mluvnice češtiny [Handbook of
Grammar of Czech]. Nakladatelstvı́ Lidové Noviny,
Praha.

Idan Landau. 2013. Control in Generative Grammar.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Igor Mel’čuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory and
Practice. State University of New York Press.

Marie Mikulová. 2011. Významová reprezentace
elipsy. Studies in Computational and Theoretical
Linguistics. Ústav formálnı́ a aplikované lingvistiky,
Praha, Czechia.

Timothy Osborne and Junying Liang. 2015. A sur-
vey of ellipsis in chinese. In Proceedings of the
Third International Conference on Dependency Lin-
guistics, Depling 2015, Uppsala, Sweden. Compu-
tational Linguistics group at Uppsala University in
collaboration with Akademikonferens.

Timothy Osborne, Michael Putnam, and Thomas Groß.
2012. Catenae: Introducing a novel unit of syntactic
analysis. Syntax, 15(4):354–396.

Jarmila Panevová, Eva Hajičová, Václava Kettnerová,
Markéta Lopatková, Marie Mikulová, and Magda
Ševčı́ková. 2014. Mluvnice současné češtiny 2,
Syntax na základě anotovaného korpusu [Grammar
of present-day Czech 2. Syntax of the basis of an
annotated corpus], volume 2. Karolinum Praha,
Prague.

139



Jarmila Panevová. 1996. More remarks on con-
trol. In Eva Hajičová, Oldřich Leška, Petr Sgall,
and Zdena Skoumalová, editors, Prague Linguistic
Circle Papers, volume 2, pages 101–120. Amster-
dam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publ. House.

Adam Przepiórkowski and Alexandr Rosen. 2005.
Czech and Polish raising/control with or without
structure sharing. Research in Language, 3:33–66.

Alexandr Rosen. 2006. O čem vypovı́dá pád doplňku
infinitivu [What the case of the complement of the
infinitive tells us]. In František Čermák and Renata
Blatná, editors, Korpusová lingvistika: Stav a mode-
lové přı́stupy, pages 254–284. Nakladatelstvı́ Lidové
Noviny, Praha.

Rudolf Růžička. 1999. Control in Grammar and Prag-
matics. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins
Publ. House.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajičová, and Jarmila Panevová. 1986.
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects. Dordrecht:Reidel Publishing
Company and Prague:Academia.

140


