



















































CoMAGD: Annotation of Gene-Depression Relations


Proceedings of the 2015 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2015), pages 104–113,
Beijing, China, July 30, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

CoMAGD: Annotation of Gene-Depression Relations 

Rize Jin1      Jinseon You1      Jin-Woo Chung1      Hee-Jin Lee1    

Maria Wolters2      Jong C. Park1* 

1School of Computing 

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 

291 Daehak-ro, Daejeon, Republic of Korea 

{rizejin, jsyou, jwchung, heejin, park}@nlp.kaist.ac.kr 

2School of Informatics 

University of Edinburgh 

Edinburgh, UK 

maria.wolters@ed.ac.uk 

 

Abstract 

Clinical depression is a mental disorder 

involving genetics and environmental 

factors. Although much work studied its 

genetic causes and numerous candidate 

genes have consequently been looked into 

and reported in the biomedical literature, 

no gene expression changes or mutations 

regarding depression have yet been 

adequately collected and analyzed for its 

full pathophysiology. In this paper, we 

present a depression-specific annotated 

corpus for text mining systems that target 

at providing a concise review of 

depression-gene relations, as well as 

capturing complex biological events such 

as gene expression changes. We describe 

the annotation scheme and the conducted 

annotation procedure in detail. We discuss 

issues regarding proper recognition of 

depression terms and entity interactions 

for future approaches to the task. The 

corpus is available at 

http://www.biopathway.org/CoMAGD.  

1 Introduction 

Clinical depression, or major depressive disorder, 

is a mental disorder of the central nervous system 

with a pathophysiology involving the neocortex. 

Genetics and environmental factors are known to 

contribute to the development of mood disorders 

(Nestler et al., 2002). Many biomedical research 

efforts studied the causative factors of genetics in 

                                                 
* Corresponding author 

depression, with consequent rapid accumulation 

of candidate genes (Kao et al., 2011; Piñero et al., 

2015). However, the accumulated information is 

not yet comprehensive enough to explain the role 

of genes involved in depression.  

DisGeNET (Piñero et al., 2015) is a platform 

for discovering associations of genes and complex 

diseases including depression, defining gene-de-

pression relations as simple binary relations that 

consist of geneId, geneSymbol, geneName, dis-

easeId, diseaseName, and score, where the score 

is a measure of relevancy based on the supporting 

evidence. DEPgenes (Kao et al., 2011) gives a pri-

oritizing system that uses combined score to rank 

candidate genes for depression. Although 

DEPgenes is a nearly comprehensive candidate 

gene resource for depression in terms of its vol-

ume (5,055 candidate genes), its representation 

concepts are even simpler than DisGeNET and 

thus not quite adequate for the full understanding 

of depression-related phenomena.  

In order to fully understand how a particular 

gene acts in depression, we need detailed infor-

mation about gene expression changes or muta-

tions and also how the depression level is changed 

along with the change in the gene. In this regard, 

we anticipate that text mining systems, which can 

identify and analyze both genes and depression 

changes comprehensively from text, would facili-

tate research on depression much further. Further-

more, if the mined information is annotated and 

then made available for reuse, key resources 

would be identified and constructed more effec-

tively (McDonald and Kelly, 2012; Winnenburg 

104



et al., 2008). Such effort of making relevant cor-

pora has already been made in the studies of genes 

(Kim et al., 2008; Poux et al., 2014) and of com-

plex diseases such as cancers (Lee et al., 2013; 

Lee et al., 2014; Pyysalo et al., 2013), but has not 

yet been applied to depression. 

In this paper, we present a depression-specific 

annotated corpus, CoMAGD, for future text min-

ing systems that target specifically at providing 

comprehensive information of depression-gene 

relations as well as capturing complex infor-

mation such as gene changes and biological 

events. For this purpose, we follow a multi-fac-

eted annotation scheme for cancers (Lee et al., 

2013) while tuning it extensively to depression. In 

this revised scheme, a piece of annotation is com-

posed of four concepts that together express two 

events, gene expression changes and depression 

level or antidepressant effect changes, and the re-

lationship between these two events. We antici-

pate that the present corpus and text mined results 

based on this corpus would contribute meaning-

fully to the successful exploration of the underly-

ing functional correlation between genes and clin-

ical depression.  

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 

Section 2 shows the corpus annotation. Section 3 

gives details of inter-annotator agreement. 

Section 4 discusses issues about proper 

recognition of depression terms and entity 

interactions for future approaches to the task, 

before closing the paper in Section 5. 

2 Corpus Annotation  

2.1 Data collection and pre-processing 

We collected PubMed IDs (PMIDs) that contain 

depression related terms in any of the three fields 

title, abstract, and keyword, using the query “de-

press* OR dysthymia OR cyclothymia”, and ran-

domly selected 500 abstracts among them. The 

500 abstracts were then segmented into sentences. 

We extracted only the sentences that contain at 

least one pair of gene and depression/antidepres-

sant related terms. BANNER (Leaman and Gon-

zalez, 2008) and Moara (Neves et al., 2010) were 

used to identify and normalize gene names. For 

depression and antidepressant terms, the system 

used dictionary-based longest matching. The dic-

tionary consists of 303 entries of depression and 

antidepressant related terms collected from NCI 

Thesaurus and other relevant articles. The entries 

were then edited by a domain expert in mental 

health.  

For the sentences that contain more than one 

pair, we made their copies, matching the number 

of depression-gene pairs. We call each of these 

copies a co-occurrence. For example, if there are 

three gene names and two depression related 

terms in a sentence, the system makes six co-oc-

currences for this sentence. 

We then tokenized, part-of-speech tagged, and 

parsed the co-occurrences, using the Charniak-

Johnson parser (Charniak and Johnson, 2005) 

with a biomedical parsing model (McClosky, 

2010). The resulting phrase structures were then 

converted into dependency structures with the 

Stanford conversion tool (Marneffe et al., 2006). 

We identified mentions of gene expression 

changes, using the Turku event extraction system 

(Björne et al., 2009). Most of the processes above 

are included in a preprocessed dataset, or EVEX 

(Landeghem et al., 2012); however, we modified 

the system and utilized some part of the system 

separately where necessary. 

Finally, we performed manual work to validate 

automatically identified co-occurrences in order 

to produce confirmed annotation units, such as 

manually constructing predicates (i.e., ‘depres-

sion of [non-human subjects]’) to filter out false 

positives from the dictionary matching outputs of 

depression-related terms and manually eliminat-

ing false relations (hypothesis sentences). 

2.2 A multi-faceted annotation scheme 

We modify a multi-faceted annotation scheme of 

(Lee et al., 2013), originally designed to represent 

ternary relations among genes, cancers and gene 

changes, in order to address relations not only be-

tween depression and genes, but also between an-

tidepressants and genes, so as to provide more de-

tails and enable further insights for follow-up 

studies such as prioritizing depression candidate 

genes and designing effective treatments and ther-

apy. For example, one may assign a lower weight 

to a gene if the gene shows expression changes 

only in antidepressant studies. We also introduce 

directed causal relations between genes and de-

pression/antidepressants. Identification of the 

cause and effect not only reflects the methodolo-

gies of individual studies, but also provides the 

facts. While the undirected causality claim usually 

is interpreted as a necessary and sufficient clause, 

we find that it could result in false conclusions, 

105



especially in the studies of depression. For exam-

ple, depression may decrease the expression level 

of a particular gene; however, increasing the ex-

pression level of that gene may not necessarily re-

duce the symptom. One reason is that the genetic 

factor is not the only cause of depression. It is also 

believed that, compared to oncogenesis, much 

more genes act together and render a person to be-

come vulnerable to depression (Belmaker and 

Agam, 2008). As such, a more fine-grained anno-

tation of causal directions will be essential for 

more complex diseases such as depression. In an 

answer to these needs, we use a flexible schema 

for annotating concepts and ever-changing met-

rics and facts in genetic studies of depression. The 

flexibility would allow the schema to exploit the 

location information as well, as studies show that 

genes may respond differently to the same antide-

pressant if they are in different parts of a body. 

More details will be discussed in Section 4.  

2.3 Annotation concept  

The proposed corpus contains four core annota-

tion concepts: Change in Gene Expression (CGE), 

Change in Depression Level (CDL), Change in 

Antidepressant Effect (CAE), and Causality 

Claim (CC). CGE captures whether the expres-

sion level of a gene is ‘increased’ or ‘decreased’. 

CDL/CAE captures the way how the depression 

level/antidepressant effect changes together with 

a gene expression level change. If information 

about such changes is not provided in the sentence, 

Concept Value Definition 

Change in Gene Expression 

(CGE) 

increased Expression level of the gene is increased 

decreased Expression level of the gene is decreased 

Change in Depression Level 

(CDL) 

or 

Change in Antidepressant 

Effect 

(CAE) 

increased 
The depression level/antidepressant effect is increased as 

CGE 

decreased 
The depression level/antidepressant effect is decreased as 

CGE 

unidentifiable 

The information about whether or not CGE accompanies 

the depression level/antidepressant effect change is not 

provided 

Causality Claim 

(CC) 

none 
CGE accompanied by CDL/CAE is reported but the cau-

sality between the two is not claimed 

g2x The causality is claimed as CGE causes CDL/CAE 

x2g The causality is claimed as CDL/CAE causes CGE 

Table 1: Annotation concept values and their definitions 

 

Sentence CGE CDL CC 

Example 1. In particular, we found decreased NF-L, PSD95, and SAP102 tran-

scripts in bipolar disorder, and [decreased]e [SAP102]g levels in [major 

depression]d. [PMID: 15054476] 

dec. uni. non. 

Example 2. In conclusion, chronic forced swim stress was a good animal model 

of [depression]d, and it induced depressive-like behavior and [de-

creased]e [P-Erk2]g in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex in rats. 

[PMID: 17050000] 

dec. inc. x2g 

Sentence CGE CAE CC 

Example 3. [Fluoxetine]a substantially [inhibits]e [CYP2D6]g and probably 

CYP2C9/10, moderately inhibits CYP2C19 and mildly inhibits 

CYP3A3/4. [PMID: 9068931] 

dec. uni. x2g 

Example 4. [Inhibition]e of [neuronal nitric oxide synthase]g in the rat hippo-

campus induces [antidepressant-like]a  effects. [PMID: 9068931] 
dec. inc. g2x 

Gene names, depression related terms, antidepressant related terms, and the keywords for gene expression change are noted 

in matching square brackets and marked with subscripts ‘g’, ‘d’, ‘a’, and ‘e’, respectively. 

Table 2: Examples of annotated co-occurrences 

 

106



we assign ‘unidentifiable’. CC captures whether 

the causality between the gene expression change 

and the CDL/CAE is claimed in the sentence or 

not, with values ‘none’, ‘x2g’, and ‘g2x’. Each 

concept is assigned with one of the pre-specified 

values to complete a facet of annotation. Table 1 

shows the pre-specified values and the definitions 

of the respective values. Three of the four con-

cepts together complete a piece of annotation that 

express information about a gene’s expression 

level change with a change in depression level or 

antidepressant effect.  

Table 2 shows examples of the annotated sen-

tences and Table 3 shows the DTD schema of the 

corpus. As mentioned earlier, we collected sen-

tences from PubMed that describe gene expres-

sion changes in depression/antidepressants. Each 

sentence was presented to the annotators as one or 

more copies with markings for a gene term, key-

words for gene expression change, and a depres-

sion/antidepressant-related term. The annotators 

read the sentence with such markings and selected 

proper values for the annotation concepts. Note 

that the four annotation concepts are semantically 

orthogonal, in that the value of a concept can be 

identified without knowing the values of the other 

concepts. 

2.4 Corpus statistics  

The corpus consists of 210 annotation units, 

where an annotation unit is simply a mention of 

gene expression change that co-occurs with at 

least one depression or antidepressant related term 

in a sentence. These annotation units are derived 

from 106 different sentences, which in turn are ex-

tracted from 73 PubMed abstracts. The corpus 

contains 82 gene types, 5 depression terms, and 20 

antidepressant terms (cf. Table 4). 

Tables 5 and 6 show the distribution of annota-

tion concept values and the distribution of the an-

notated genes, respectively. The values of CGE 

show a uniform distribution, whereas the others 

show skewed distributions. In particular, for val-

ues of CDL/CAE, ‘unidentifiable’ is frequently 

chosen (89% for CDL, 87% for CAE). The value 

distribution of the concept CC associated with 

<?xml version="1.0" ?> 

<!DOCTYPE gene_depression_corpus [ 

 <!ELEMENT gene_depression_corpus (annotation_unit+)>  

 <!ELEMENT annotation_unit (sentence, annotation+)> 

 <!ATTLIST annotation_unit type (depression | antidepressant) #REQUIRED > 

 <!ELEMENT sentence (#PCDATA)> 

 <!ATTLIST sentence pmid CDATA #REQUIRED > 

 <!ELEMENT annotation (gene, expression_change_keyword_1,  

    expression_change_keyword_2, depression_term+, CGE, CDL, CC)> 

 <!ATTLIST annotation id CDATA #REQUIRED> 

 <!ELEMENT gene (#PCDATA)> 

 <!ATTLIST gene offset CDATA #REQUIRED > 

 <!ELEMENT expression_change_keyword_1 (#PCDATA)> 

 <!ATTLIST expression_change_keyword_1 offset CDATA #REQUIRED  

    type (Negative_regulation | Positive_regulation) #REQUIRED> 

 <!ELEMENT expression_change_keyword_2 (#PCDATA)> 

 <!ATTLIST expression_change_keyword_2 offset CDATA #REQUIRED  

    type (None | Gene_expression) #REQUIRED> 

 <!ELEMENT depression_term (#PCDATA)> 

 <!ATTLIST depression_term offset CDATA #REQUIRED> 

 <!ELEMENT CGE EMPTY> 

 <!ATTLIST CGE value (increased | decreased) #REQUIRED> 

 <!ELEMENT CDL EMPTY> 

 <!ATTLIST CDL value (increased | decreased | unidentifiable) #REQUIRED> 

 <!ELEMENT CC EMPTY> 

 <!ATTLIST CC value (x2g | g2x | none) #REQUIRED> 

]> 

 

Table 3: The XML DTD of the corpus 

 

107



CAE also exhibits dominance of a single value, or 

‘x2g’. We compared the genes in our corpus with 

previous studies: 58% (48) and 95% (79) of our 

annotated genes (83) are included in DisGeNET 

and DEPgenes, respectively. Note that DEPgenes 

only published 169 core genes that exhibit a high 

chance to be associated with depression from 

5,055 candidate genes. 

3 Inter-annotator agreement 

We annotated the sentence units through two 

main annotation phases (cf. Table 7) and revised 

annotation guidelines after each annotation phase. 

Table 8 shows the IAA values obtained from each 

annotation phase as well as from the whole cor-

pus. We measured IAAs in three different ways, 

using simple IAA (the proportion of annotations 

in common between two annotators over the total 

number of annotations provided by either annota-

tor), Cohen’s kappa, and G-index. IAA values 

from the final phase show that adequate agree-

ment among the annotators is achieved. The over-

all IAA values, obtained from the whole corpus, 

also suggest internal consistency. We resolved all 

disagreements in the published corpus.  

3.1 Disagreements  

We identify the following as the major sources for 

conflicts between the annotators: simple mistakes, 

subjective readings, the use of reasoning, and the 

judgements by using prior knowledge. Disagree-

ment rate is greatly reduced in the second annota-

tion phase, as we revised the guidelines after the 

completion of the first phase. 

Simple mistakes are inevitable in manual anno-

tations, contributing a small number of conflicts 

to all the four annotation concepts. In detail, sim-

ple mistakes take up 1% (1 out of 142), 8% (11 

out of 142), and 24% (34 out of 142) of the disa-

greements on CGE, CDL/CAE, and CC values, 

respectively, in Phase 1, and  9% (6 out of 67), 0% 

(0 out of 67), and 3% (2 out of 67) in Phase 2. 

Disagreements also arise from subjective read-

ings, contributing to most of the disagreements on 

CC values.  

Example 5. [CRF]g is [increased]e during anxi-

ety, [depression]d and pain as well as functional 

disorders of the pelvic viscera. [PMID: 

15538210] 

For the annotation unit above, one annotator 

subjectively interpreted the preposition ‘during’ 

as implying a causal relation and assigned ‘x2g’ 

to CC, but the other interpreted the word as having 

its literal meaning and assigned ‘none’ to CC. Af-

ter annotator meeting, the annotators agreed to in-

clude instructions on such subjectivity issues in 

the annotation guidelines, and the IAA values on 

CC show significant improvement in the second 

annotation phase. Subjective readings induce dis-

agreements on CAE values as well.  

Example 6. BACKGROUND: Indirect evi-

dence suggests that loss of brain-derived neu-

rotrophic factor (BDNF) from forebrain regions 

contributes to an individual's vulnerability for 

depression, whereas [upregulation]e of [BDNF]g 

in these regions is suggested to mediate the ther-

apeutic effect of [antidepressants]a. [PMID: 

16697351] 

For the annotation unit in Example 6, one an-

notator interpreted the verb ‘mediate’ as convey-

ing the meaning of ‘positive regulation’ and as-

 Type Count 

Depress. 

Depression 48 

Major depression 17 

Bipolar disorder 14 

Dysthymia 14 

Mood disorder 4 

Antidep. 

Antidepressant 47 

Fluoxetine 31 

Electroconvulsive therapy 4 

Imipramine 4 

Mirtazapine 4 

Citalopram 3 

Escitalopram 3 

Trazodone 3 

Lithium 2 

SSRI 2 

Carbamazepine 1 

Chlorpromazine 1 

Fluvoxamine 1 

Haloperidol 1 

Papaverine 1 

Perphenazine 1 

Quetiapine 1 

Reboxetine 1 

Sertraline 1 

Venlafaxine 1 

Table 4: Statistics of depression/antidepressant re-

lated terms 

108



signed ‘increase’ to CAE. However, the other an-

notator interpreted the word as conveying only the 

meaning of ‘regulation’ with no directionality and 

assigned ‘unidentifiable’ to CAE. After annotator 

meeting, the CAE value of the annotation unit 

above was set to ‘increase’.  

 Example 7. Repeated treatment with antide-

pressant drugs, [imipramine]a (Imi) and fluoxe-

tine (Flu), significantly reduced the plasma cor-

ticosterone concentration and [enhanced]e the 

[BDNF]g and CREB levels. [PMID: 16519925] 

For the annotation unit above, one annotator in-

terpreted the phrase ‘repeated treatment’ as con-

veying the meaning of ‘enhance’ and assigned ‘in-

crease’ to CAE. However, the other annotator ar-

gued that the nature of the antidepressant drugs 

did not change and assigned ‘unchanged’ to CAE. 

Another cause of disagreements was the use of 

reasoning and prior knowledge during annotation. 

Example 8. In the current paper, we propose 

that the rapid [decrease]e in [insulin]g level dur-

ing the postpartum period may be one of the 

causes of [postpartum mood disorders]d. [PMID: 

16321476] 

For the annotation unit in Example 8, one an-

notator claimed that there is no association be-

tween the gene insulin and the depression mood 

disorders, as he did not find any explicitly stated 

piece of information. The other annotator, how-

ever, assigned ‘decreased’ to CGE, as he inferred 

that the mood disorders co-occurs with insulin in 

postpartum period. After annotator meeting, the 

annotators agreed on ‘decreased’, and added an 

instruction that allows the inference using logical 

reasoning to the annotation guidelines. 

 
CGE CDL/CAE CC 

Inc. Dec. Inc. Dec. Uni. Non. g2x x2g 

Depress. 54(56%)  43(44%) 4(4%) 7(7%) 86(89%) 56(58%) 8(8%) 33(34%) 

Antidep. 61(54%) 52(46%) 15(13%) 1(1%) 97(86%) 1(1%) 9(8%) 103(91%) 

Total 115(55%) 95(45%) 19(9%) 8(4%) 183(87%) 57(27%) 17(8%) 138(65%) 

Table 5: Distribution of the annotation concept values 

 

 
Gene 

inc. dec. 

Depress. 

inc. PRKCAd, MAPK3d, MAPK1d ALB, TNFd,p, IL2d, IL1Bd,p, MAPK1d 

dec. MAPK1d, BDNFd,p, LEPd, SLC6A4d,p  

uni. 

DLG4, NEFLd, DLG3, GFAPd,p, AVPd, 

ESR1d,p, NR3C1d,p, TRP, CRHR1d, 

S100A10d,p, INSd, BDNFd,p, GRM2d, 

GRIA3d, SV2A, IGFBP2d, PENK, 

HTR1Ad,p, CD19, CD8d, GRIN2Ap, GRIN1p 

PDLIM5d,p, CRHd,p, IL6d,p, CAMK2Ap, 

CAMK2B, IL1Bd,p, TNFd,p, IFNA1d, 

IL2d, AVPd, PDYNp, FCGR3A, CD4d, 

CD8d, DRD4d,p, PCNTd 

Antidep. 

inc.  TNFd,p 

dec. CHRM1, NOS1d,p, CYP2D6dp 
HTR1Ad,p, NR3C1d,p, BDNFd,p, 

PLCG1d 

uni. 

HTR3Ap, IL1Bd,p, HTR2Ad, TNFd,p, 

HTR1Ad,p, FOSd, FZD3d, ABCB1d,p, 

PLA2G4Ap, IL6d,p, CACNA1G, CACNA1I, 

CACNA1H, GSK3Ad, SLC6A3d,p, 

SLC6A4d,p, KCNK2d, Defa5, VIM, TRA, 

BRCA1d, CKB, ACTB, GFAPd,p, PDE4Ad, 

CREB1d,p, CCNA2, CKS1B, BAX 

FOSd, IL6d,p, HTR2Ad, ALBd, 

ADRA2Ad,p, HTR1Ad,p, BDNFd,p, 

PDE4Ad, ABCB1d,p, IGF1d, 

S100A10d,p, HTR1Bd,p, CREB1d,p, 

PRLd, PLA2G4Ap, SYPd, NCAM1d, 

NTRK2d,p, PLCG1d, SPRd, Hspa9, 

RASEF, PDIA3, SLC6A4d,p, 

CDKN1A, CDKN1B, BCL2d, 

MAPK1d 

Genes marked with superscripts d and p are validated with DisGeNET (Piñero et al., 2015) and DEPgenes (Kao et al., 

2011), respectively. The reader is referred to the published corpus for more details. 

Table 6: Distribution of the annotated genes 

 

109



Example 9. All [antidepressants]a [increased]e 

[c-fos mRNA]g in the central amygdala, as previ-

ously shown, while c-fos was also increased in 

the anterior insular cortex and significantly de-

creased within the septum. [PMID: 15812568] 

One annotator considered the phrase “All anti-

depressants increased c-fos mRNA” a universal 

affirmative, and just modified the antidepressant 

term as the universal quantifier, “All antidepres-

sants”. However, the other annotator anchored on 

the pre-annotated keyword “antidepressants”. Af-

ter annotator meeting, the annotators agreed to 

specify the quantification type of a term and check 

the scope of that quantifier.  

As we refined annotation guidelines after Phase 

1, the disagreements among the annotators were 

greatly reduced. In Phase 2, almost all the disa-

greements were found due to simple errors. Com-

pared to the values from Phase 1, IAA values on 

CDL/CAE and CC from Phase 2 show 13.6% and 

50.0% increases in terms of G index, respectively.  

3.2  Annotation guidelines  

The initial annotation guidelines were taken from 

Lee et al. (2013). After each annotation phase in 

this work, the annotators held meetings to resolve 

the disagreements and to revise the guidelines. Ta-

ble 9 shows the final version of guidelines. 

4 Discussion 

In this section, we show suggestions to further au-

tomating some of the processes described in the 

 

#  Instruction 

1 
Annotators should annotate the sentences only if the gene exhibits changes in its expression level 

and this has relations with the depression or anti-depressant related term  

2 
Annotators can annotate the relations between CGE and CDL/CAE utilizing linguistic clues and 

textual evidence 

3 Annotators can infer omitted fact utilizing reasoning 

4 Annotators should interpret the sentences from an ‘objective point of view’  

5 
Annotators need not consider gene expression level changes in healthy people and people with a 

past history of clinical depression 

6 
Annotators should not infer information using their prior experience or knowledge about proper-

ties of various kinds of depression 

7 
Annotators should not infer information (i.e., the effects of antidepressants) using their prior 

knowledge about the functions of genes 

8 Annotators should not infer information by using inductive reasoning 

9 Annotators need not consider the certainty level of propositions. 

10 Annotators need consider universal propositions and particular propositions 

11 Annotators should not annotate relations between genes and mania in bipolar disorder 

Table 9: Annotation guidelines 

 # Phase # Units #Depression #Antidepressant #Genes Data source 

Phase 1 142 75 67 47 PubMed abstracts 

Phase 2 68 22 46 42 PubMed abstracts 

Total/Unique 210/106 97/5 113/20 89/82 PubMed abstracts 

Table 7: The annotation phases 

 

 CGE  CDL/CAE CC 

Simple Kappa G Simple Kappa G Simple Kappa G 

Phase 1  1 1 1 0.92 0.69 0.88 0.76 0.47 0.64 

Phase 2  0.91 0.81 0.82 1 1 1 0.97 0.93 0.96 

Total  0.95 0.91 0.91 0.96 0.85 0.94 0.87 0.7 0.8 

Table 8: IAA values 

 

110



previous section, especially those of extracting 

depression-gene relations. 

 ML-based event relation recognition 

Example 10. OBJECTIVE: To examine 

whether the pathogenesis of [depression]d is as-

sociated with altered [activation]e and expres-

sion of [Rap-1]g, as well as expression of Epac, 

in depressed suicide victims. [PMID: 16754837] 

Example 10 shows that there are co-occur-

rences whose depression and gene name pairs 

were identified as correct but whose relation was 

nonetheless incorrect. The present co-occurrence 

has a relation of study description rather than that 

of gene expression change event. Besides training 

to come up with the event relation classifier, we 

can also build a system that automatically filters 

out false relations (i.e., hypothesis sentences) 

based on the previous work such as topic-classi-

fied relation recognition (Chun et al., 2006; Kili-

coglu and Bergler, 2008) and deep-syntactic par-

ser (Ballesteros et al., 2014; Hara et al., 2005; 

Masseroli et al., 2006; Skounakis et al., 2008). 

 Location and contrasting information 

Example 11. Animal studies demonstrate that 

some antipsychotics and [antidepressants]a [in-

crease]e neurogenesis and [BDNF]g expression 

in the hippocampus, which is reduced in volume 

in patients with depression or schizophrenia. 

[PMID: 16652337] 

Example 11, and Example 9 too, show that lo-

cation information turn out to be important in 

studies of depression and genes may respond dif-

ferently to the same antidepressant in different 

parts of a body. Many annotation units do not ex-

plicitly provide such location information. How-

ever, missing such information will lead to con-

flicts and even paradoxes among annotated or 

mined results.  

Although the annotation concepts of the pre-

sented corpus are originally designed to represent 

relations between gene changes and depres-

sion/antidepressant changes, they must be made to 

accept other concepts and constantly changing 

metrics in genetic studies of depression. In this re-

gard, we should extend the annotation scheme to 

include parts of a body as the location and their 

hierarchical relationship information. 

 Pronouns, acronyms, and appositions 

Other difficulties we faced during recognition 

were in dealing with grammatical constructions 

such as pronouns, acronyms, and appositions. 

They may have coped better by using the full re-

solved forms of pronouns and acronyms for anno-

tation, which in turn require the access of preced-

ing sentences or the whole abstract in the worst 

case. We also found that text mining tools we used 

extract both the appositive phrase and the phrase 

in apposition, but it would be better to utilize only 

appositives. For example, for the following phrase, 

we should not annotate the word “Tricyclic anti-

depressants” an antidepressant related term, or 

annotate “serotonin reuptake” a gene.  

“Tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin 

reuptake inhibitors, and serotonin-noradrenaline 

reuptake inhibitors, as well as the immediate 

precursor of serotonin” 

Instead, we should identify the three apposi-

tives as antidepressant related terms, even if they 

were not included in the dictionary. 

 Sense ambiguity of ‘depression’ 

We also see that using simple dictionary-based 

matching for detecting depression-related terms 

produces many ambiguous terms, some of which 

are not related to the mental disorder at all. In par-

ticular, the term ‘depression’ could also be used in 

a situation where a certain amount, value, or func-

tion is lowered or decreased, among others. We 

notice that such cases are frequently observed in 

biomedical texts as exemplified below: 

Example 12. Lack of enteral stimulation with 

PN impairs mucosal immunity and [reduces]e 

[IgA]g levels through [depression]d of GALT cy-

tokines (IL-4 and IL-10) and GALT specific ad-

hesion molecules. [PMID: 16926565] 

Example 13. LTA causes cardiac [depression]d 
by [activating]e myocardial TNF-alpha synthe-

sis via [CD14]g and induces coronary vascular 

disturbances by activating Cox-2-dependent 

TXA2 synthesis. [PMID: 16043646] 

In our initial dataset that has 1,251 occurrences 

of depression-related terms obtained via the sim-

ple dictionary-based matching, the term ‘depres-

sion’ is found 730 times, which amounts to more 

than half of the entire occurrences. Our corpus sta-

tistics in Table 4 also show that ‘depression’ is the 

most frequent depression-related term. This 

means that not a few of such terms still have po-

tential sense ambiguities. Although we manually 

filtered out false positive examples in our corpus, 

this issue is still important since it could hinder the 

performance of extracting depression-related 

111



terms in a fully pipelined system. Although a few 

named entity recognizers for biomedical text have 

been developed (Leaman and Gonzalez, 2008; 

Campos et al., 2013), none of these tools are ca-

pable of recognizing terms referring to depression, 

especially identifying ‘depression’ as the mental 

disorder, to the best of our knowledge. 

It is anticipated that the disambiguation of the 

term ‘depression’ can be addressed with the con-

ventional methods of word sense disambiguation 

with various features such as context information 

or external knowledge resources. Our data analy-

sis suggests that local semantic features would be 

effective in many cases, among others. In particu-

lar, the following three types of syntactic con-

struction could act as strong indicators for false 

positives: (1) prepositional phrases, (2) prenomi-

nal modifiers, and (3) coordinate constructions. 

First, prenominal modifiers often signal the con-

text where some activity or amount is decreased, 

such as the physical malfunction (“cardiac depres-

sion”), the object or cause of inhibition (“Orx-B-

induced depression”, “AMPAR depression”), and 

the degree of decrease (“significant depression”, 

“moderate depression”). Second, prepositional 

phrases provide information about the location or 

inhibition of a biological process (“depression in 

synapses”, “depression of synaptic transmission”, 

“depression of gamma interferon”). Last, coordi-

nate constructions allow for exploiting the seman-

tic similarity (“depression and anxiety” vs. “long-

term potentiation and depression”). All of these 

features are highly local; syntactic dependencies 

do not cross the boundary of noun phrases. 

Another possible approach would be to employ 

the document topic features by assuming that if 

the abstract of a document discusses the mental 

disorder, the term ‘depression’ in the abstract is 

also likely to refer to the mental disorder. In order 

to figure out what kind of terms are best indicative 

of documents that discuss the depressive disorder, 

we collected a set of 5,000 Medline abstracts that 

contain unambiguous domain-specific terms in 

our depression term dictionary such as ‘depres-

sive disorder’, ‘bipolar disorder’, and ‘antidepres-

sant’, and also collected another set of 10,000 ab-

stracts that do not contain any of those terms in-

cluding ‘depression’. The chi-square statistics are 

employed to measure the discriminative power of 

terms found in each set of abstracts. Table 10 

shows the 10 top-ranked terms for each of two 

types of term: terms that partially match one of the 

terms in our depression term dictionary (on the 

left column) and terms that are not found in the 

dictionary (on the right column). It is shown that 

many of the terms in the latter set are used in the 

context of diagnosis or treatment of depression. 

One of the possible methods is to use terms of this 

kind as features for training a binary classifier that 

determines whether a given document containing 

‘depression’ discusses the mental disorder or not. 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented a depression-specific 

corpus in support of the development of advanced 

text mining systems that target specifically at 

providing a comprehensive information of depres-

sion-gene relations. The annotation scheme of 

current version can express two events, gene ex-

pression changes and depression level or antide-

pressant effect changes, and the relationship be-

tween these two events. The presented corpus 

shows a high inter-annotator agreement. We also 

discussed several issues in the domain of depres-

sion and made suggestions to extend the annota-

tion scheme further to resolve conflicts and some-

times paradoxes in the acquired knowledge for de-

pression. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Re-

search Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded 

by the Korea government (MSIP) (No. NRF-

2014R1A2A1A11052310). 

  

Terms in our  

dictionary 

Terms not in our 

dictionary 

Term Score Term Score 

major 3414 treatment 807 

antidepressant 2533 reuptake 504 

disorder 1957 serotonin 475 

depressive 1615 MDD 464 

bipolar 986 psychiatric 450 

mood 874 rating 356 

disorders 695 diagnostic 340 

unipolar 523 DSM-IV 312 

tricyclic 441 criteria 301 

depressed 409 patients 296 

Table 10: Discriminative terms for documents  

related to the depressive disorder 

 

112



References 

M. Ballesteros, B. Bohnet, S. Mille, L. Wanner. 2014. 

Deep-Syntactic Parsing. In Proceedings of the 24th 

International Conference on Computational Lin-

guistics. 1402-1413 

R. H. Belmaker, G. Agam. 2008. Major depressive dis-

order. New England Journal of Medicine, 358:55-68. 

J. Björne, J. Heimonen, F. Ginter, A. Airola, T. 

Pahikkala, T. Salakoski. 2009. Extracting complex 

biological events with rich graph-based features sets. 

In Proceedings of the BioNLP’09 Shared Task on 

Event Extraction Association for Computational 

Linguistics, 10-18. 

D. Campos, S. Matos, J. L. Oliveira. 2013. Gimli: open 

source and high-performance biomedical name 

recognition. BMC Bioinformatics, 14:54. 

E. Charniak, M. Johnson. 2005. Coarse-to-fine n-best 

parsing and MaxEnt discriminative reranking. In 

Proceedings of the 43rd ACL, 173-180. 

H. Chun, Y. Tsuruoka, J. Kim, R. Shiba, N. Nagata, T. 

Hishiki, J. Tsujii. 2006. Automatic recognition of 

topic-classified relations between prostate cancer 

and genes using MEDLINE abstracts. BMC Bioin-

formatics, 7(Suppl 3):S4. 

Hee-Jin Lee, Sang-Hyung Shim, Mi-Ryoung Song, 

Hyunju Lee, Jong C. Park. 2013. CoMAGC: a cor-

pus with multi-faceted annotations of gene-cancer 

relations. BMC Bioinformatics, 14:323. 

Hee-Jin Lee, Tien Cuong Dang, Hyunju Lee, Jong C. 

Park. 2014. OncoSearch: cancer gene search engine 

with literature evidence. Nucleic Acids Research, 

42(W1):W416-W421. 

T. Hara, Y. Miyao, J. Tsujii. 2005. Adapting a proba-

bilistic disambiguation model of an HPSG parser to 

a new domain. In Proceedings of IJCNLP, 199-210. 

C. F. Kao, Y. S. Fang, Z. Zhao, P. H. Kuo. 2011. Pri-

oritization and evaluation of depression candidate 

genes by combining multidimensional data re-

sources. PLoS ONE, 6(4):1-9. 

H. Kilicoglu, S. Bergler. 2008. Recognizing specula-

tive language in biomedical research articles: a lin-

guistically motivated perspective. BMC Bioinfor-

matics, 2008, 9(Suppl 11):S10. 

J. Kim, T. Ohta, J. Tsujii. 2008. Corpus annotation for 

mining biomedical events from literature. BMC Bi-

oinformatics, 9:10. 

S. V. Landeghem, K. Hakala, S. Rnnqvist, T. Salakoski, 

Y. Peer, F. Ginter. 2012. Exploring biomolecular lit-

erature with EVEX: connecting genes through 

events, homology and indirect associations. Ad-

vances in Bioinformatics, 2012:582765. 

R. Leaman, G. Gonzalez. 2008. BANNER: an execut-

able survey of advances in biomedical named entity 

recognition. In Proceedings of the Pacific Sympo-

sium on Biocomputing, 652-663. 

M. C. D. Marneffe, B. MacCartney, C. D. Manning. 

2006. Generating typed dependency parses from 

phrase structure parses. In Proceedings of the LREC, 

449-454. 

M. Masseroli, H. Kilicoglu, F. Lang, T. Rindflesch. 

2006. Argument-predicate distance as a filter for en-

hancing precision in extracting predications on the 

genetic etiology of disease. BMC Bioinformatics, 

7:291. 

D. McClosky. 2010. Any domain parsing: automatic 

domain adaptation for natural language parsing. 

PhD Thesis, Brown University, Department of 

Computer Science. 

D. McDonald, U Kelly. 2012. The value and benefits 

of text mining. UK JISC, [Online. Available: 

http://www.jisc.ac.uk/reports/value-and-benefits-

of-text-mining]. 

E. J. Nestler, M. Barrot, R. J. DiLeone, A. J. Eisch, S. 

J. Gold, L. M. Monteggia. 2002. Neurobiology of 

depression. Neuron, 34:13-25. 

M. Neves, J. M. Carazo, A. Pascual-Montano. 2005. 

Moara: a Java library for extracting and normalizing 

gene and protein mentions. BMC Bioinformatics, 11: 

157-169. 

J. Piñero, N. Queralt-Rosinach, À . Bravo, J. Deu-Pons, 

A. Bauer-Mehren, M. Baron, F. Sanz, L. I. Furlong. 

2015. DisGeNET: a discovery platform for the dy-

namical exploration of human diseases and their 

genes. Database, 2015:bav028. 

S. Poux, M. Magrane, C. N. Arighi, A. Bridge, C. 

O'Donovan, K. Laiho, The UniProt Consortium. 

2014. Expert curation in UniProtKB: a case study on 

dealing with conflicting and erroneous data. Data-

base, 2014:bau016. 

S. Pyysalo, T. Ohta, S. Ananiadou. 2013. Overview of 

the Cancer Genetics (CG) task of BioNLP Shared 

Task 2013. In Proceedings of the BioNLP Shared 

Task 2013 Workshop, 58-66. 

M. Skounakis, M. Craven, S. Ray. 2003. Hierarchical 

hidden Markov models for information extraction. 

In Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Joint 

Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 427-433. 

R. Winnenburg, T. Wachter, C. Plake, A. Doms, M. 

Schroeder. 2008. Facts from text: can text mining 

help to scale-up high-quality manual curation of 

gene products with ontologies? Briefings in Bioin-

formatics, 9(6):466-78. 

113


