


















































My title


Extending a Dutch Text-to-Pictograph Converter to English and Spanish

Leen Sevens, Vincent Vandeghinste, Ineke Schuurman, Frank Van Eynde

Centre for Computational Linguistics
KU Leuven, Belgium

firstname@ccl.kuleuven.be

Abstract

We describe how a Dutch Text-to-Pictograph translation sys-

tem, designed to augment written text for people with Intellec-

tual or Developmental Disabilities (IDD), was adapted in or-

der to be usable for English and Spanish. The original system

has a language-independent design. As far as the textual part

is concerned, it is adaptable to all natural languages for which

interlingual WordNet [1] links, lemmatizers and part-of-speech

taggers are available. As far as the pictographic part is con-

cerned, it can be modified for various pictographic languages.

The evaluations show that our results are in line with the perfor-

mance of the original Dutch system. Text-to-Pictograph trans-

lation has a wide application potential in the domain of Aug-

mentative and Alternative Communication (AAC). The system

will be released as an open source product.

Index Terms: Augmentative and Alternative Communication,

Pictographic Languages, Text-to-Pictograph Translation

1. Introduction

In our daily lives, we are constantly confronted with pic-

tographs. Think of traffic signs, signs in buildings that direct

visitors to the elevators, the meeting rooms, the toilets, and the

emergency exits, or signs for telling people that dogs need to be

kept on a leash (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Pictographs in our daily lives.

Similar pictographs are used as a form of Augmentative

and Alternative Communication (AAC). AAC assists people

with severe communication disabilities to be more socially ac-

tive in interpersonal interaction, learning, education, commu-

nity activities, employment, volunteering, and care manage-

ment. Schools, institutions, and sheltered workshops use spe-

cific pictographs that are related to everyday activities and ob-

jects to allow accessible written communication between chil-

dren or adults with Intellectual or Developmental Disabilities

(IDD) and their caregivers, in an offline setting.

It is undeniable that current technological advances influ-

ence our lives in various aspects. Not being able to access or

use information technology is a major form of exclusion. In or-

der to reduce social isolation, there is an acute need for digital

picture-based communication interfaces that enable contact for

people with IDD. Adding pictographs to text can provide help in

reading and understanding the text. It is estimated that between

two and five million people in the European Union could ben-

efit from symbols or symbol-related text as a means of written

communication [2].

The Dutch Text-to-Pictograph translation system that is de-

scribed in Vandeghinste et al. [3] is used in the WAI-NOT1 com-

munication platform. WAI-NOT is a Flemish, non-profit orga-

nization that gives people with severe communication disabili-

ties the opportunity to familiarize themselves with computers,

the internet, and social media. The website makes use of an

email client that automatically augments written text with a se-

ries of Beta2 or Sclera3 pictographs. WAI-NOT’s first transla-

tion system would rely on a simple one-on-one match between

the input words and the pictograph file names, usually leading

to erroneous translations and leaving many words untranslated.

Vandeghinste et al. [3] improved this engine by introducing lin-

guistic analysis. Their Text-to-Pictograph translation system

was made as language-independent as possible.

Within the framework of Able to Include,4 which aims to

improve the living conditions of people with IDD, we built En-

glish and Spanish versions of this system. English and Spanish

being a Germanic and a Romance language, respectively, we

show that the engine manages to generalize well over different

European language families.

After a discussion of related work (section 2), we introduce

the Beta and Sclera pictograph sets (section 3), followed by an

explanation of how existing links between WordNets can be

used to automatically connect pictographs to words in source

languages other than Dutch (section 4). In the remainder of this

paper, we describe the system’s general architecture (section 5).

The evaluations (section 6) show that our results are in line with

the performance of the Dutch system. Section 7 shows that the

Text-to-Pictograph system has a wide application potential in

the domain of AAC. Finally, we describe our conclusions and

future work (section 8).

2. Related work

Pictographic communication has grown from local initiatives,

some of which have scaled up to larger communities. Across

Europe, many pictograph sets are in place, such as Blissym-

bolics,5 PCS,6 Pictogram,7, ARASAAC,8 Widgit,9 Beta, and

Sclera.

1http://www.wai-not.be/
2https://www.betasymbols.com/
3http://www.sclera.be/
4http://abletoinclude.eu
5http://blissymbolics.org/
6http://www.mayer-johnson.com/category/symbols-and-photos
7http://www.pictogram.se/
8http://www.catedu.es/arasaac/
9https://widgit.com/

110
SLPAT 2015, 6th Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 110–117,

Dresden, Germany, 11 September, 2015. c©2015 The Association for Computational Linguistics



Many of the problems that written languages encounter can

be overcome by the use of pictographic languages. For instance,

they can be understood across language barriers10 [4] and there

is less ambiguity involved. Pictographic communication sys-

tems for remote, online communication include Messenger Vi-

sual, an instant messaging service [5], Communicator [6], Pic-

tograph Chat Communicator III [7], and VIL, a Visual Inter Lin-

gua [4]. Mihalcea and Leong [8] argue that the understanding

of graphical sentences is similar to that of target language texts

obtained by means of machine translation. Leemans [4] shows

that an appropriately designed iconic language, built according

to a set of fixed principles, leads to no difference in the recogni-

tion rate of icons for people of western and non-western culture,

yielding an average rate of about 79%. None of these above-

mentioned authors, however, consider users with IDD when de-

signing the system.

Other pictograph-based communication systems are specif-

ically designed for people with IDD. Patel et al. [9] introduce

Image-Oriented Communication Aid, an interface using the

Widgit symbol set, allowing users to build picture-supported

messages on a touch screen computer. Motocos [10] are image

exchange devices that are designed for children with autism, in-

cluding audio cues for easier understanding of the image cards.

The mobile application PhotoTalk [11] aids people with aphasia

by providing a digital photograph management system in sup-

port of verbal communication. Nevertheless, all these systems

require face-to-face communication in an offline setting.

The use of online information technology systems as a way

to enhance the quality of life of people with IDD is a recent de-

velopment. For accessible, remote communication, Keskinen et

al. [2] introduce SymbolChat, a platform for picture-based in-

stant messaging, where the interaction is based on touch screen

input and speech output. The Text-to-Pictograph conversion

system described in Vandeghinste et al. [3] applies shallow lin-

guistic analysis to Dutch input text and automatically generates

sequences of Beta and Sclera pictographs, allowing people with

IDD to read messages independently. Only few other publi-

cations related to the task of translating texts for pictograph-

supported communication can be found in the literature, such

as Goldberg et al. [12] and Mihalcea and Leong [8], but these

systems do not translate the whole sentence or are not focused

on IDD.

3. Pictographic languages

Mihalcea and Leong [8] note that complex and abstract con-

cepts (such as democracy) are not always easy to depict. Some

characteristics of natural languages may not be present in the

pictographic languages.11 Usually, no distinction between sin-

gular and plural is made. Tense, aspect, and inflection infor-

mation is removed, and so are the auxiliaries and the articles.12

Pictographic languages are simplified languages, that are often

specifically designed for people with IDD.

Although experiments with the Pictogram set [13] have re-

vealed that many pictographs are difficult and wrongly inter-

preted, a correct interpretation is easily accepted and remem-

bered without any problem. By giving people with speech and

language disorders the opportunity to familiarize themselves

10Although cultural differences remain.
11We use the term pictographic language in order to refer to the com-

bination of individual pictographs, that belong to a specific pictograph
set, into a larger meaningful structure.

12There are some exceptions. Beta, for instance, contains the Dutch
articles.

with the pictographs, they learn to interpret the symbols more

easily. However, a deliberate effort is needed.

The Text-to-Pictograph translation system currently gives

access to two pictograph sets, Sclera and Beta (see Figure 2).

Sclera pictographs13 are mainly black-and-white pic-

tographs, although colour is sometimes used to indicate per-

mission (green) or prohibition (red). Over 13,000 pictographs

are available and more are added upon user request. Sclera pic-

tographs often represent complex concepts, such as a verb and

its object (such as to feed the dog) or compound words (such as

carrot soup). There are hardly any pictographs for adverbs or

prepositions.

The Beta set14 consists of more than 3,000 coloured pic-

tographs. Easy recognition being one of the main objectives,

Beta is characterized by its overall consistency and the use of

different types of arrows and dashes (pointing to an object, in-

dicating changes in space or time or depicting actions). Beta

hardly contains any complex pictographs. Most of the pic-

tographs represent simplex concepts.

Figure 2: Example of a sentence being translated into Sclera and

Beta pictographs. Tense information is removed. The Sclera

translation contains a complex pictograph, namely carrot soup.

4. Linking pictographs to other WordNets

WordNets, lexical-semantic databases, are an essential compo-

nent of the Text-to-Pictograph translation system. For the orig-

inal Dutch system, Cornetto [14, 15] was used. Its English

and Spanish counterparts are Princeton WordNet 3.0 [1]15 and

the Spanish Multilingual Central Repository (MCR) 3.0 [16].16

WordNets contain synsets (groupings of synonyms that have an

abstract, usually numeric identifier, see Figure 3) and are de-

signed in such way that each synset is connected to one or more

lemmas.

Vandeghinste and Schuurman [17] manually linked 5710

Sclera pictographs and 2760 Beta pictographs to Dutch synsets

in Cornetto.17 An essential step in building Text-to-Pictograph

translation systems for other languages is making sure that the

pictographs are connected to (sets of) words in those languages.

13Freely available under Creative Commons License 2.0.
14The coloured pictographs can be obtained at reasonable prices,

while their black-and-white equivalents are available for free.
15http://wordnet.princeton.edu/
16http://adimen.si.ehu.es/web/MCR/
17As a Cornetto license can no longer be obtained, the au-

thors will transfer these links to the Open Source Dutch WordNet
(http://wordpress.let.vupr.nl/odwn/).

111



Figure 3: An example of a lemma, rock, having different mean-

ings and belonging to different synsets. Two synsets are shown

here.

Manually linking thousands of pictographs all over again would

be a very time-consuming procedure. Instead, by transferring

the connections automatically (see Figure 4), this process can

be sped up drastically.

Sevens et al. [18] note that connections between WordNets

are an important resource in knowledge-based multilingual lan-

guage processing. The already mentioned Cornetto database for

Dutch, used to build the Dutch Text-to-Pictograph translation

system, contains connections to the English Princeton WordNet.

We describe how we automatically connected Beta and Sclera

pictographs to synsets in Princeton WordNet 3.0 in section 4.1.

Many WordNets nowadays contain high-quality links be-

tween the source language’s synsets and Princeton WordNet

3.0, which is often viewed as the central WordNet. Prince-

ton WordNet 3.0 now also plays this central role in our Text-

to-Pictograph translation system. Having obtained the links

between Beta and Sclera pictographs and Princeton WordNet

3.0, it becomes possible to automatically assign pictographs

to synsets in any WordNet that has decent connections with

Princeton WordNet,18 allowing us to quickly build Text-to-

Pictograph translation systems for many other languages. For

example, with the English pictograph connections in place, a

mapping between the pictographs and Spanish synsets in MCR

3.0 became possible. This process is described in section 4.2.

Figure 4: Making Princeton WordNet 3.0 the central WordNet

of the Text-to-Pictograph translation system and transferring the

links to the MCR 3.0 for Spanish.

4.1. Connecting pictographs to Princeton WordNet 3.0

Cornetto’s equivalence relations establish connections between

Dutch and English synsets in Princeton WordNet. These re-

lations have originally been established semi-automatically by

18A full list can be found on http://globalwordnet.org/wordnets-in-
the-world/

Vossen et al. [19], filling the database with more than 80000

links between Dutch and English synsets.

Sevens et al. [18] showed that a considerable amount of

the original links were highly erroneous, making them not yet

very reliable for multilingual processing. By using these equiv-

alence relations, we would risk assigning pictographs to unre-

lated synsets in Princeton WordNet 3.0. In the case of a Dutch

synset being wrongly connected to an English synset, writing

a message in English would allow the system to generate pic-

tographs that depict another concept. Therefore, we used the

filtered,19 more reliable connections that were established by

Sevens et al. [18].

As a result, it became possible to automatically assign a

large amount of Sclera and Beta pictographs to English synsets

in Princeton WordNet 3.0. However, 154 (5.58%) Beta pic-

tographs and 288 (5.04%) Sclera pictographs still had to be

connected manually, either because the original equivalence re-

lation was rejected by the filtering algorithm, or because the

Dutch compound word corresponded to multiple words in En-

glish and forced us to treat the pictograph as a complex picto-

graph20 in English (such as the Dutch word vanillesuiker, mean-

ing vanilla sugar in English). In some rare cases, no equivalent

English concept existed in the WordNet for an existing Dutch

concept (for instance, the fictional character Zwarte Piet or typi-

cal kinds of food such as choco, which can roughly be translated

as chocolate spread).

4.2. Connecting pictographs to the Spanish MCR 3.0

The MCR 3.0 integrates in the same EuroWordNet framework

WordNets from five different languages, namely English, Cata-

lan, Spanish, Basque, and Galician. Words in one language are

connected to words in any of the other languages through Inter-

Lingual-Indexes. Sevens et al. [18] showed that the links be-

tween English and Spanish synsets were correctly established,

making it possible for us to create highly reliable connections

between Beta and Sclera pictographs and Spanish synsets. This

exact same process can be done for any language’s WordNet

that establishes reliable links to Princeton WordNet 3.0.

5. The Text-to-Pictograph translation
system for English and Spanish

In this section, we describe how a textual message is converted

into a sequence of Sclera or Beta pictographs [3] (see Figure 5),

with an application to English and Spanish. The source text first

undergoes shallow linguistic analysis (section 5.1). For further

processing, two routes can be taken. The semantic route is only

applied to content words (nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs) that

are present in the WordNets. It consists of linking the source

text to synsets in the databases (section 5.2) and retrieving the

pictographs that are connected to these synsets (section 5.3).

The direct route (section 5.4), which runs in parallel with the

semantic route, contains specific rules for appropriately dealing

with pronouns, and it uses a dictionary for parts-of-speech that

are not present in the WordNets. The system contains a hand-

ful of parameters (section 5.5), which were tuned beforehand

(section 5.6). Finally, as explained in section 5.7, an optimal

sequence of pictographs is selected.

19Filtering was done by using large bilingual dictionaries.
20A pictograph that is connected to multiple synsets instead of just

one synset. For example, the pictograph depicting vanilla sugar is con-
nected to both the synset that contains the lemma vanilla and the synset
that contains the lemma sugar.

112



Figure 5: Architecture of the translation engine.

5.1. Shallow linguistic analysis

The source text undergoes shallow linguistic processing, con-

sisting of several sub-processes (see Figure 6). This process is

analogous to the linguistic processing step in the original Dutch

tool.

Figure 6: An example of shallow linguistic processing.

First, tokenization is applied to split the punctuation signs

from the words, with the exception of the hyphen/dash and the

apostrophe, as they often belong to the word.

As the targeted users have different levels of illiterateness,

basic spelling correction (one deletion, one insertion, one sub-

stitution)21 aids in finding the correct variant of words that do

not appear in the lexicon22 and the list of first names.23

Next, part-of-speech tagging is applied. For English, we

used HunPos [20], an open source tagger, using the English

training data (with Penn Treebank tags24) made available on its

website.25 For Spanish, part-of-speech tagging (with TreeTag-

ger tags26) and lemmatization are done in one step with Tree-

21We are currently designing a spelling corrector that is specifically
tailored towards Dutch text written by people with IDD. Our approach
does not rely on the use of parallel corpora (erroneous text - corrected
text). Therefore, it can also prove to be useful for spelling correction in
other languages.

22http://www.anc.org/SecondRelease/frequency2.html (for English)
and http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/frqc/internet-es-forms.num (for Spanish)

23http://www.quietaffiliate.com/free-first-name-and-last-name-
databases-csv-and-sql (for English and Spanish)

24http://www.cis.upenn.edu/ treebank
25https://code.google.com/p/hunpos/downloads/list
26http://www.cis.uni-muenchen.de/ schmid/tools/TreeTagger/data/spanish-

Tagger [21].27 TreeTagger is available for a large variety of

European languages.

The Text-to-Pictograph translation system works on the

sentence level. Although most messages sent by the users only

contain one sentence, sentence detection is applied. Segmenta-

tion is based on full stops, which will eventually correspond to

line breaks in the resulting pictographic representation.

The next step is lemmatization, which requires a language-

specific treatment. For English, we built a lemmatizer based

on a list of English token/part-of-speech combinations and their

lemma.28 As mentioned before, for Spanish, part-of-speech tag-

ging and lemmatization are done with TreeTagger.

One additional adaptation concerns the treatment of the

Spanish pro-drop phenomenon (which occurs in all Romance

languages, with the exception of French), meaning that personal

pronouns in subject position are usually omitted (unless empha-

sis is given). Translating such a message into pictographs would

leave us with no subject, as the pictographic representations of

words are based on the lemma form and do not retain any gram-

matical information. However, person information can be in-

ferred from the verb in the source sentence. We wrote a set

of rules that explicitly adds the personal pronouns in the mes-

sage before converting it into a series of pictographs.29 When

a matching personal pronoun is already found within a window

of three words (since adverbs or pronouns can appear between

the subject and the verb), these rules are not applied (see Figure

7).

Figure 7: An example of a pro-drop rule. The tags correspond to

finite lexical verb, finite estar (to be), finite haber (to have), and

finite ser (to be). The token has to end on -mos, which indicates

a first person plural form. Nosotros and nosotras correspond to

the English pronoun we.

5.2. Semantic analysis

The first step in the semantic analysis consists of the detection

of words with a negative polarity, such as not/no and no/ningún.

When such a word is found, the system looks for its head (a verb

or a noun) and adds the value negative to its polarity feature.

For each word in the source text, the system returns all pos-

sible WordNet synsets (see section 4). The synsets are filtered,

tagset.txt
27http://www.cis.uni-muenchen.de/ schmid/tools/TreeTagger/
28http://www.anc.org/
29When the verb is a third person singular or plural, these rules are

not applied, as its subject could be a noun phrase. This problem can
be solved by applying deeper grammatical analysis. Gender informa-
tion (he, she, it), however, cannot be inferred from the verb alone and
requires deeper semantic knowledge.

113



keeping only those where the part-of-speech tag of the synset

matches the part-of-speech tag of the word.

Certain links between lemmas and synsets can be disabled

in order to remove unwanted, often sexual meanings of common

words, which are not appropriate for some groups of users (such

as one meaning of the word member).

5.3. Retrieving the pictographs

The WordNet synsets described in section 5.2 are used to con-

nect pictographs to natural language text. This way, the lexical

coverage of the system is greatly improved, as pictographs are

connected to sets of words that have the same meaning, instead

of just individual words. Additionally, if a synset is not covered

by a pictograph, the links between synsets can be used to look

for alternative pictographs with a similar meaning. For instance,

the hyperonymy relation can be used if no pictograph is found

for a concept that is too specific (such as rabbit for cottontail,

see Figure 8). The antonymy relation, indicating that synsets are

the opposite of each other, selects a pictograph of the antonym,

along with a negation pictograph (such as not sick for recov-

ered). The XPos relation concerns similar words with a differ-

ent part-of-speech tag (such as the adjective female for woman).

However, using pictographs through synset propagation (mak-

ing use of the WordNet relations) is controlled by parameters or

penalties for not using the proper concept (see section 5.5).

Figure 8: When a specific word, such as cottontail, does not

have a pictograph connected to its synset, WordNet relations

will be used to find a similar concept and display its pictograph

instead. The synset for rabbit and coney (a synonym of rabbit)

is found.

5.4. The direct route

The English and Spanish WordNets contain nouns, verbs, ad-

jectives, and adverbs. To deal with pronouns and words that

have a part-of-speech tag that is not covered by the WordNets,

the direct route is introduced.

To make sure that personal and possessive pronouns are

covered, they are given an explicit treatment. Person, gender,

and number information can be obtained during the part-of-

speech tagging process, resulting in correct pictograph trans-

lations.

The dictionary provides a direct link between the to-

ken/lemma/tag and the names of the pictographs. The tag field

and either the lemma or token field can be left underspecified.

For instance, in Sclera, there is a direct link between the lemma

hey and the pictograph hallo-zeggen-2.png (to say hello), while

the verb miss needs an additional verb tag to avoid confusion

with the noun. The dictionary is used to cover any words that

are missing from the database, because their part-of-speech tag

is not included in the WordNet database (such as various types

of greetings), or because the concept is too recent (such as

tablet), among other things.

5.5. The parameters

For every word in the sentence, the system checks whether one

or more pictographs can be found for it and whether the use of

these pictographs is subject to a penalty. Penalties correspond

to parameters that were tuned beforehand.

The first set of parameters (hyperonym penalty, antonym

penalty, and XPos penalty) concern the maximum distance

(threshold parameter) allowed between the original text and the

pictographic message in terms of synset relations (see section

5.3).

The second set of parameters is related to the numeric fea-

tures of the pictographs (no number and wrong number), as

some pictographs make a distinction between singular or plu-

ral concepts (such as oog.png, depicting one eye, and ogen.png,

depicting two eyes).

The last set of parameters determines the behaviour as to

the route to take. An out-of-vocabulary parameter penalizes for

leaving a content word untranslated, while the direct route pa-

rameter is a negative penalty (i.e. a bonus) for choosing the

direct route over the semantic route.

Furthermore, the use of complex pictographs, which reunite

multiple concepts within one pictograph (see section 3), will be

preferred by the system over the separation of those concepts.

The shorter the pictographic translation is, the higher it will be

scored by the system (see section 5.7).

5.6. Tuning the parameters

The parameters that are mentioned in section 5.5 are tuned for

every natural language/pictographic language pair. Ideally, tun-

ing would be based on emails or text messages written by peo-

ple with IDD. These messages are usually short, tend to refer

to everyday life and very often contain spelling mistakes, like

tweets.30 As we did not have a large corpus of messages written

by the targeted users at our disposition, we selected 75 English

tweets and 75 Spanish tweets based on the following criteria:

the messages should contain at least 8 words, they have to re-

fer to personal experiences (no citations or lyrics), and they are

allowed to contain spelling mistakes or lack punctuation marks.

The tweets were retrieved by searching for messages containing

the hash tags #school/#escuela, #love/#amor, #family/#familia,

#happy/#feliz, and #sad/#triste.

For both languages, we manually translated, to the best of

our ability, all tweets into Beta and Sclera pictographs. We built

a local hill climber that varies the parameters (see section 5.5)

when running the Text2Picto script on each of the four test sets

(from English and Spanish to Beta and Sclera). The BLEU met-

ric [22] was used as an indicator of relative improvement. In

order to maximize the BLEU score, we ran five trials of a local

hill climbing algorithm for each natural language/pictographic

language pair. We did this until BLEU converged onto a fixed

score after several thousands of iterations. Each trial was run

with random initialization values, while varying the parameters

between certain boundaries and with a granularity (size of the

parameter steps) of one in order to cover different areas of the

search space. From these trials, we took the best scoring param-

eter values for all four language/pictographic language pairs.

30https://twitter.com/

114



With proper names Without proper names

Condition Precision Recall F-Score Recall F-Score

Sclera

Baseline 71.37% 61.25% 65.92% 62.25% 66.50%

Add frequent concepts 93.30% 71.95% 81.25% 73.04% 81.94%

Rel. improv. 30.73% 17.47% 23.26% 17.33% 23.22%

Beta

Baseline 75.08% 70.63% 72.78% 71.71% 73.36%

Add frequent concepts 82.56% 85.07% 83.80% 86.14% 84.31%

Rel.improv. 9.96% 20.45% 15.14% 20.12% 14.93%

Table 1: Manual evaluation of the English system

5.7. Selecting the optimal path

An A* algorithm31 calculates the optimal pictographic sequence

for the source text. Its input is the pictographically annotated

source message, together with the pictographs’ penalties, de-

pending on the number and kind of synset relations the system

had to go through to connect them to the words.

The algorithm starts with a queue containing an empty path

that still has all the input words left to process. In every step, the

currently best scoring pictograph path is extended. We check

whether there are any pictographs, with their corresponding

penalties, connected to the next word that has to be processed.32

New paths are thus created by adding the retrieved pictograph to

the list of the already matched pictographs. All possible paths

are added to the queue. The queue is sorted by lowest estimated

cost and the best scoring path is extended. This process is re-

peated until the first queue element no longer has any words left

to process.

When encountering words that have their antonym feature

set to negative (see section 5.2), we insert the negation picto-

graph.

6. Evaluation

At the time of our evaluation, we did not yet have a corpus of

messages written by people at IDD at our disposition. An evalu-

ation set was built using the selection procedure as described in

section 5.6. A total of 50 English tweets and 50 Spanish tweets

were retrieved.

After having obtained the system’s output translations for

every message from the evaluation set, we performed a man-

ual verification with one judge, who removed untranslated non-

content words (such as just, although, and it in English). This

allowed calculating the recall. For each of the translated words,

she judged whether the pictograph generated was the correct

pictograph, in order to calculate precision. As proper names oc-

cur rather frequently in online environments, we have calculated

recall and F-score with and without proper names, in the latter

case removing all proper names from the output. Precision re-

mains the same in both conditions. In the case where proper

names are included, they are not converted into pictographs, af-

fecting recall negatively. In applications, similar to an option

that is currently available in the WAI-NOT environment, proper

names occurring in the contact lists of the users can be con-

verted into the photographs that are attached to user profiles,

resulting in more personalized messages.

Using the automatic pictograph connections that Sevens et

al. [18] created by using the links between Cornetto synsets

and Princeton WordNet synsets and the links between Prince-

31A pathfinding algorithm that uses a heuristic to search the most
likely paths first.

32If a complex pictograph is retrieved, the system checks whether the
other synsets that belong to that complex pictograph are connected to
any of the remaining words to process. If this is the case, the word that
is linked to that synset is removed from the list of words to process.

With proper names Without proper names

Condition Precision Recall F-Score Recall F-Score

Sclera

Baseline 73.84% 57.63% 64.74% 58.30% 65.16%

Add frequent concepts 93.31% 82.17% 87.38% 83.14% 87.93%

Rel. improv. 26.37% 42.58% 34.97% 42.61% 34.95%

Beta

Baseline 83.48% 60.83% 70.38% 61.26% 70.66%

Add frequent concepts 94.64% 86.01% 90.12% 86.83% 90.57%

Rel.improv. 13.37% 41.39% 28.05% 41.74% 28.18%

Table 2: Manual evaluation of the Spanish system

ton WordNet synsets and Spanish MCR synsets, a baseline sys-

tem could be built. This system, which is not subject to any

post-editing actions in the WordNet databases, leaves us with F-

Scores of 66.50% and 73.36% for Sclera and Beta, respectively,

for English text without proper names. For Spanish, F-Scores

of 65.16% and 70.66% are obtained. A decent baseline sys-

tem was thus created by making use of the previously available

WordNet relations.

To improve the English and Spanish systems, we added

or edited the 500 most frequently used words according to the

Dutch WAI-NOT corpus,33 in order to cover the specific vocab-

ulary that the target group uses to address their peers or care-

givers. For each one of these words, we translated them into En-

glish and Spanish and checked whether the right pictograph was

connected to its synset. If this was not the case, we disabled the

erroneous pictographs or created new pictograph connections.

Sometimes, the pictograph dictionary (direct route) was used

to add missing words to the database, such as different types

of greetings. As a result, the English system currently yields

F-Scores of 81.94% and 84.31% for Sclera and Beta, respec-

tively, while the Spanish system reaches F-Scores of 87.93%

and 90.57%, both for text in which proper names are omitted.

These results are comparable to the manual evaluations for

Dutch [3]. The authors obtain F-Scores of 87.16% and 87.27%

for Sclera and Beta translations of Dutch IDD text, respectively.

7. Application potential

The Text-to-Pictograph translation system will be released as an

open source product, allowing developers to build pictograph-

supported AAC applications and web browser extensions.

The pictographs are not meant to replace written text. They

can be used as a stepping stone towards a better comprehension

of written content.

Since textual content on the web, in particular long or dif-

ficult words, is sometimes very challenging for the target group

to deal with, a Text-to-Pictograph translation system in the form

of a web browser extension could be a welcome addition for

many users. Web browser extensions are programs that extend

the functionality of a web browser. For instance, by hovering

over a difficult word, the program could show the pictographic

representation of that word. This idea has already been imple-

mented by the creators of Widgit, although their Point system34

does not make use of semantic networks to simplify extension

to additional languages.35

The system offers the possibility for family members, care-

givers, and teachers to build pictographic messages more eas-

ily. Browsing large databases to find the appropriate icons is

a long and tedious job, that can be facilitated by automatically

translating a textual message into a series of pictographs. This

33A corpus containing more than 40000 e-mails sent by users with
IDD and their caregivers. Most e-mails are about their everyday life.

34https://widgit.com/products/online.htm
35We thank the anonymous reviewers for this observation.

115



way, pictograph-supported instructions, schedules and menus

will become easier to construct. Text-to-Pictograph transla-

tion will also allow the family members and caregivers to send

pictographic e-mails to the target group, making it simpler to

communicate in an online setting, where the use of written text

would normally cause big difficulties.

Within the Able to Include framework, a mobile app is cur-

rently being developed to address a variety of scenarios in which

pictographs offer support. The tool will also integrate text-

to-speech and text simplification technologies. The user can

choose a technology (or a combination of technologies, such as

text simplification followed by translation into pictographs) that

he or she feels most comfortable with.

While our system is initially focused on users with IDD

(since the tool was developed on the request of WAI-NOT, a

website for people with disabilities), its general architecture can

be reused in various other contexts, such as education, language

learning for non-native speakers, and translation into sign lan-

guages.

8. Conclusions and future work

We have shown how the Dutch Text-to-Pictograph translation

system can be extended towards other languages. To imple-

ment new languages, only a few components are required: de-

cent connections between the source language’s WordNet and

the Princeton WordNet 3.0 (as we have shown for Spanish), a

language-specific part-of-speech tagger and lemmatizer, a new

set of parameters to optimize the system’s performance and pos-

sibly some additional rules to deal with language-specific prop-

erties.

Future work will consist of improving the English and

Spanish systems. Proper word sense disambiguation will have

to be applied, as the system currently only takes the most fre-

quent sense for a given word. We will look into possibilities

for better spelling correction, specifically tailored towards text

written by people with cognitive disabilities, and simplifica-

tion of the pictographic output. Finally, the inverse relation,

pictograph-to-text translation, will also be taken care of, allow-

ing users to create textual messages by selecting a series of pic-

tographs [23].

In collaboration with Faculty of Psychology and Educa-

tional Sciences of KU Leuven and our Able to Include partners,

the pictograph translation system will be tested by the target

group. The results will give us better insights concerning the

usability of the engine.

Analysis of text written by English and Spanish users with

IDD will reveal which concepts are missing from the databases

and we will continue to improve the coverage of the system.

9. References

[1] G. Miller, R. Beckwidth, C. Fellbaum, D. Gross, and K. Miller,
“Introduction to WordNet: An On-line Lexical Database,” In-
ternational Journal of Lexicography, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 235–244,
1990.

[2] T. Keskinen, T. Heimonen, M. Turunen, J. Rajaniemi, and
S. Kauppinen, “SymbolChat: A Flexible Picture-based Commu-
nication Platform for Users with Intellectual Disabilities,” Inter-
acting with Computers, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 374–386, 2012.

[3] V. Vandeghinste, I. Schuurman, L. Sevens, and F. Van Eynde,
“Translating Text into Pictographs,” Natural Language Engineer-
ing, Accepted.

[4] P. Leemans, VIL: A Visual Inter Lingua. Dissertation. Worcester
Polytechnic Institute., 2001.

[5] P. Tuset, J. Barbern, P. Cervell-Pastor, and C. Janer, “Designing
Messenger Visual, an Instant Messenging Service for Individu-
als with Cognitive Disability,” in IWAAL 1995 – Proceedings of
3rd International Workshop on Ambient Assisted Living, 1995, pp.
57–64.

[6] T. Takasaki and Y. Mori, “Design and Development of a Pic-
togram Communication System for Children around the World,”
in IWIC 2007 – Proceedings of the 1st International Conference
on Intercultural Collaboration, 2011, pp. 193–206.

[7] J. Munemori, T. Fukada, M. Yatid, T. Nishide, and J. Itou, “Pic-
tograph Chat Communicator III: a Chat System that Embodies
Cross-Cultural Communication,” in KES 2010 – Proceedings of
the 14th International Conference on Knowledge-Based and In-

telligent Information and Engineering Systems: Part III, 2012,
pp. 473–482.

[8] R. Mihalcea and C. Leong, “Toward Communicating Simple Sen-
tences Using Pictorial Representations,” Machine Translation,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 153–173, 2009.

[9] R. Patel, S. Pilato, and D. Roy, “Beyond Linear Syntax: an Image-
Oriented Communication Aid,” ACM Journal of Assistive Tech-
nology: Outcomes and Benefits, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 57–66, 2004.

[10] G. Hayes, S. Hirano, G. Marcu, M. Monibi, D. Nguyen, and
M. Yeganyan, “Interactive Visual Supports for Children with
Autism,” Personal Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 663–
680, 2010.

[11] M. Allen, J. McGrenere, and B. Purves, “The Field Evaluation of
a Mobile Digital Image Communication Application Designed for
People with Aphasia,” ACM Transactions on Accessible Comput-
ing, vol. 1, no. 1, 2008.

[12] A. Goldberg, X. Zhu, C. Dyer, M. Eldawy, and L. Heng, “Easy
as ABC? Facilitating Pictorial Communication via Semantically
Enhanced Layout,” in CoNLL 2008 – Proceedings of the Twelfth
Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, 2008.

[13] K. Falck, The Practical Application of Pictogram, Lycksele, 2001.

[14] P. Vossen, I. Maks, R. Segers, and H. van der Vliet, “Integrating
Lexical Units, Synsets, and Ontology in the Cornetto Database,”
in LREC 2008 – Proceedings of the 6th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation, 2008.

[15] H. van der Vliet, I. Maks, P. Vossen, and R. Segers, “The Cornetto
Database: Semantic issues in Linking Lexical Units and Synsets,”
in EURALEX 2010 – Proceedings of the 14th EURALEX 2010
International Congress, 2010.

[16] A. G. Agirre, E. Laparra, and G. Rigau, “Multilingual Central
Repository Version 3.0: Upgrading a Very Large Lexical Knowl-
edge Base,” in LREC 2012 – Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, 2012.

[17] V. Vandeghinste and I. Schuurman, “Linking Pictographs to
Synsets: Sclera2Cornetto,” in LREC 2012 – Proceedings of the
9th International Conference on Language Resources and Evalu-

ation, 2014, pp. 3404–3410.

[18] L. Sevens, V. Vandeghinste, and F. Van Eynde, “Improving the
Precision of Synset Links Between Cornetto and Princeton Word-
Net,” in LG-LP 2014 – Proceedings of the COLING Workshop
on Lexical and Grammatical Resources for Language Processing,
2014.

[19] P. Vossen, L. Bloksma, and P. Boersma, The Dutch Wordnet. Eu-
roWordNet Paper, Amsterdam, 1999.

[20] P. Halácsy, A. Kornai, and C. Oravecz, “HunPos - an Open Source
Trigram Tagger,” in ACL 2007 – Proceedings of the 45th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Com-

panion Volume, Proceedings of the Demo and Poster Sessions,
2007, pp. 209–212.

[21] H. Schmid, “Improvements in Part-of-speech Tagging with an Ap-
plication to German,” in SIGDAT 1995 – Proceedings of the ACL
SIGDAT-Workshop, 1995.

116



[22] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W. Zhu, “Evaluation of Ma-
chine Translation,” in ACL 2002 – Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2002,
pp. 311–318.

[23] L. Sevens, V. Vandeghinste, I. Schuurman, and F. Van Eynde,
“Natural Language Generation from Pictographs,” in ENLG 2015
– Proceedings of the 15th European Workshop on Natural Lan-

guage Generation, 2015.

117


	Extending a Dutch Text-to-Pictograph Converter to English and Spanish
	Leen Sevens, Vincent Vandeghinste, Ineke Schuurman and Frank Van Eynde


