



















































Dependency-based analyses for function words - Introducing the polygraphic approach


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 181–190,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

Dependency-based analyses for function words 
Introducing the polygraphic approach 

 
Sylvain Kahane 

Modyco  
Université Paris Ouest & CNRS 

sylvain@kahane.fr 

Nicolas Mazziotta 
Institut für Linguistik/Romanistik 

Universität Stuttgart 
nicolas.mazziotta@ulg.ac.be 

  

Abstract 

This paper scrutinizes various depend-
ency-based representations of the syntax 
of function words, such as prepositions. 
The focus is on the underlying formal 
object used to encode the linguistic 
analyses and its relation to the corre-
sponding linguistic theory. The poly-
graph structure is introduced: it consists 
of a generalization of the concept of 
graph that allows edges to be vertices of 
other edges. Such a structure is used to 
encode dependency-based analyses that 
are founded on two kinds of morphosyn-
tactic criteria: presence constraints and 
distributional constraints.  

1 Introduction 

The general purpose of this paper is to show 
that dependency-based structures can theoreti-
cally be grounded, by making explicit theoreti-
cal motivations over the data encoded by the 
formal structure. To a certain extent, this con-
tradicts the following assumption by Mel’čuk 
(1988:12): “By its logical nature, dependency 
formalism cannot be “proved” or “falsified”. 
[…] Dependency formalism is a tool proposed 
for representing linguistic reality, and, like any 
tool, it may or may not prove sufficiently use-
ful, flexible or appropriate for the task it has 
been designed for; but it cannot be true or 
false.” To achieve its goal, this paper focuses 
on descriptive options available in depend-
ency-based frameworks to handle function 
words (especially prepositions). The choice of 
a particular dependency structure depends on 
various decisions (practical, formal, or theo-
retical decisions). Diverse concurrent struc-
tures can be assigned to the same sentence, 
depending on the semantics underlying the 
very concept of dependency, as well as the 

general formal constraints the linguist chooses 
to meet. 

This study consists of two parts. The first 
part (sections 2-5) reviews the treatment of 
function words in various dependency-based 
models, namely Tesnière (1934, 2015), Mean-
ing-Text Theory (henceforth MTT) (Mel’čuk 
1988) and Stanford Dependency schemes 
(henceforth SD) (de Marneffe & Manning 
2008). 

The second part (sections 6 and 7) proposes 
an alternative approach to describing function 
words in a dependency-based analysis.  Sev-
eral theoretical motivations are chosen as the 
bases of the description, prior to selecting any 
formal constraint on the mathematical structure 
encoding the descriptions (except for the fact 
that we want to represent relations between 
linguistic objects by dependencies). From this 
stance it becomes necessary to introduce for-
mal structures that are more general than either 
trees or graphs, that can be called polygraphs. 

In the conclusion (section 8), the expressive 
power of polygraphs is compared with the 
power of the traditional structures presented in 
the first part. 

2 Proposed representations 

This section compares different dependency-
based representations of constructions involv-
ing function words (mainly prepositions).  

2.1 Sample data 

The discussion is illustrated by the following 
examples (some examples are in French, when 
it behaves in a different way than English): 
(1)   Mary talked to Peter. 
(2)   le chien de Pierre  

        ‘Peter’s dog’ 
(3)   Marie part après Noël.  

        ‘Mary leaves after Christmas. 
(4)     I know Mary and Peter. 

Our selection is motivated by the fact that 
these examples illustrate various behaviors of 

181



prepositions: in (1), to is an empty word, a 
marker of government, while in (3), après 
‘after’ is a content word, part of an adjunct. 
Example (2) is intermediate: de ‘of’ can be 
analyzed as a marker of government (if it is 
considered that every dog has a master, and 
Pierre is an argument of the noun chien ‘dog’), 
as well as a content word expressing posses-
sion. In (4), and is not a preposition of course, 
but this construction deserves to be compared 
with the previous ones. 

Figure 1 presents the representation of the 
analysis of these utterances in several frame-
works:  

a) MTT’s surface syntactic structure 
(SSyntS) (Mel’čuk 1988; Mel’čuk & 
Milićević 2014);  

b) Universal Stanford Dependency scheme 
(USD) (de Marneffe et al. 2014);  

c) Kern’s representation (1883), later de-
velopped independently by Debili 
(1982);  

d) Collapsed Stanford Dependency (CSD) 
(de Marneffe & Manning 2008);  

e) MTT’s Semantic Structure (SemS) 
(Mel’čuk 1988; Mel’čuk 2012-2015);  

f) Tesnière’s stemma (Tesnière 2015);  
g) Interpretation of Tesnière’s stemmas as 

polygraphs (Kahane's opinion in Kahane 
& Osborne 2015; Mazziotta 2014). 

2.2 Modeling options 

MTT considers 7 levels of representations 
and has even a deep-syntactic structure be-
tween the two structures we present. MTT 
makes a clear distinction between criteria to 
define surface syntax dependencies and seman-
tic dependencies (Mel’čuk 1988; 2009). 

The Stanford team also considers several 
kinds of representation, which mix semantic 
goals (to privilege relations between content 
words) and syntactic goals (to have a word-
based structure representing phrases). 

To these widely used representations, we 
add the representation proposed by Kern 
(1883) and later developed independently by 
Debili (1982), which prefigures CSD. 
Kern/Debili’s aim was similar to CSD, that is, 
to obtain similar dependencies for the nomina-
tion of Mary and to nominate Mary (nomi-
nate/nomination → Mary). 

Finally, we recall the structures proposed by 
Tesnière (1934, 2015), which, though often 
quoted, are not so well known. It is important 
to note that Tesnière’s stemma was theoreti-

cally grounded but that his graphical represen-
tation remains mathematically undefined. This 
opens the possibility of several interpretations 
and a posteriori formalizations (an alternative 
interpretation of the so-called transfer opera-
tion is discussed in section 5).  

Each of the representations in Figure 1 will 
now be surveyed. Section 3 describes tree-like 
structures in which all words are nodes in the 
tree. Section 4 describes tree-like structures in 
which function words are labels over branches. 
Finally, section 5 discusses Tesnière's stemma 
and its “retroformalization” and introduces the 
concept of polygraph. 

3 Tree-based analyses 

Most authors posit that the syntactic structure 
must be a tree, be it a dependency or a phrase 
structure tree. In most cases, this decision is 
not overtly motivated. The underlying motiva-
tions are often practical (a tree is a simple 
structure and many algorithms can handle it 
efficiently), pedagogical (a tree is easy to ex-
plain and to draw) or cultural (trees are wide-
spread and have been used for centuries). From 
the theoretical point of view, it is much more 
difficult to motivate the choice: most of the 
time the principles adopted to define the syn-
tactic structure force it to be a tree without any 
real justification.1 

3.1 Tree-object 

In phrase-structure grammar, one obtains a 
tree as soon as one considers that every unit 
has at most a unique possible decomposition 
and, for instance, that the analysis Peter + 
thinks that it is possible invalidates any other 
decomposition (such as Peter thinks + that it is 
possible) (Gleason 1969:130). In dependency 
grammar, you obtain a tree as soon as you 
consider that every unit has a unique governor, 
and thus a unique connection with the latter. 

                                                             
1 SSyntS is based on the general assumption that the 
syntactic structure must be a tree. The recurrent justifica-
tion given by Mel’čuk is: “A linguistic model must en-
sure the correspondence between two formal objects of a 
very different nature: the semantic network, a multidi-
mensional graph, and the morphological/phonological 
string, a unidimensional graph. […] The correspondence 
between the dimensionality n and the dimensionality 1 
must de done through an object of dimensionality 2. The 
simplest bidimensional graph is what is called a depend-
ency tree.” (transl. from Mel’čuk & Milićević 2014: 31-
34). 

182



 

SSyntS 
(Mel’čuk) 

USD 
(Stanford) 

Kern/ 
Debili 

CSD 
(Stanford) 

SemS 
(Mel’čuk) 

Tesnière 
(original) 

Tesnière 
(polygraph) 

Peter 

to Mary 

talks 
subj iobj 

prep
c 

Noël 

après Marie 

part 
subj circ 

prep
c 

Pierre 

de 

chien 

com
p 

prep
c 

and 

Mar
y 

I 

kno
w subj dobj 

coord 

Peter 

cc 

to 

Peter Mary 

talks 
nsubj nmod 

case 

après 

Noël Marie 

part 
nsubj nmod 

case 

de 

Pierre 

chien 

nmod 

case 

and 

Mary I 

know 
subj dobj 

conj 

Peter 

cc 

to 

Peter Mary 

talks 
subj après 

Noël Marie 

part 
subj de 

Pierre 

chien 

prep-to 

Peter Mary 

talks 
nsub
j 

prep-après 

Noël Marie 

part 
nsubj prep-de 

Pierre 

chien 

Mar
y 

I 

know 
nsubj 

dobj dobj 

Peter 
conj-and 

3 

to Peter Mary 

talks 
1 

Mari
e 

part 
1 

Adj 
Pierre 

chie
n 

Mary I 

kno
w 1 

2 
and Peter 

2 

de 
Adv 

Noël après 

3 

to        Peter Mary 

talks 
1 

Mari
e 

part 
1 

de        Pierre 

chien 

Mary I 

know 

1 

and 
Peter 

2 

après       Noël 

‘Peter’ ‘Mary
’ 

‘talk
’ 1 2 

‘Noël’ 

‘après
’ 

‘Marie’ 

‘partir’ 

‘Pierre’ 

‘appartenir’ 

‘chien’ 

1 

2 

set ‘and’ ‘I
’ 

‘know’ 

‘Peter’ ‘Mary
’ 

1 2 

1 2 1 2 

2 

Figure 1. Dependency-based representations of function words 

183



A tree is defined as a connected directed 
graph where all nodes but one appear exactly 
once as the second element of an ordered pair 
(and an indefinite number of times as the first 
element). The only exception, called the root 
of the tree only appears as the first element of 
pairs. In a labeled tree, each pair can be as-
signed a specific type. A tree is a formal struc-
ture, i.e. a meaningless form. Drawing a tree 
does not make it meaningful: it is the linguistic 
theory underlying the structure of the tree that 
achieves this purpose. The choice between one 
tree or the other is a matter of theoretical 
stance. 

3.2 Making the tree meaningful: MTT 

Defining the meaning of a tree consists in ex-
plaining what linguistic criteria are used to 
justify three parameters: 1) the grouping of 
words into a common pair; 2) the ordering of 
that pair;2 3) the labeling of that pair. 

To be able to go beyond mere intuitions, one 
has to investigate tests that allow one to select 
the most appropriate hierarchy. The most ex-
plicit attempt to give a meaning to a depend-
ency tree is Mel'čuk's  linguistic criteria for 
SSyntS (Mel’čuk 1988).  

The MTT framework posits several levels of 
syntactic analysis, that are part of a multidi-
mensional modular approach involving 
phonological, morphological, surface-syntax 
and deep-syntax, as well as semantic analysis. 
The aforementioned criteria appear at the sur-
face-syntax level, which encodes two-word 
phrases (criteria A) and identify the main word 
in each phrase, that is, preferably, the one con-
straining the syntactic distribution of the 
phrase (criterion B1).  

A phrase is mainly defined by Mel’čuk in 
terms of (potential) prosody, that is the possi-
bility for these two words to be isolated to-
gether. This is in particular the case if the two 
words can stand alone and form an utterance 
together. This use of the term phrase is differ-
ent from the one imposed in linguistics by 
generativists. For instance, in Peter reads a 
book, Peter reads is clearly a phrase, which 
can form a perfect utterance. This notion of 

                                                             
2 By definition, the elements of a pair are not hierar-
chized: a pair is a simple set of two elements. Ordering a 
pair means structuring it by giving precedence to one of 
its elements. Ordering has a meaning in a dependency-
based approach: by declaring one element as the first one, 
one formally encodes that it is the governor of the other 
(which, conversely, is its dependent). 

phrase is not far from what Saussure (1916) 
called a syntagme. Criteria B explains which of 
the two words of a phrase is the head of the 
phrase and governs the other word. For 
Mel’čuk, the head of a phrase is the word 
which mainly determines the passive valency 
of the phrase, that is, which determines in what 
syntactic context the phrase can be inserted. 
This approach consequently demotes lexical 
words as dependents and promotes function 
words as governors. The precedence of lexical 
words is highlighted at other levels of the lin-
guistic description (deep-syntax and seman-
tics).  

In (1), to Peter forms a phrase because it can 
stand alone (Who are you talking to? To Pe-
ter). The preposition is the head because it 
characterizes to Peter as a possible comple-
ment of talk. The same reasoning can be ap-
plied to de Pierre ‘of Peter’ and après Noël 
‘after Christmas’ in (2) and (3). In the same 
way, and Peter is a phrase of (4) because it can 
form a separate utterance (I know Mary. And 
Peter.) contrary to Mary and. Moreover and 
characterizes and Peter as a conjunct phrase. 

While in SSyntS, relations are between 
words, in SemS, relations are between seman-
tic units, that is, mainly meanings of lexical 
units. Empty words are eliminated. For in-
stance, in SemS of (1), ‘Mary’ and ‘Peter’ are 
the two arguments of ‘talk’, which is indicated 
by arrows from the predicate to its arguments. 
The empty preposition to, which is imposed by 
the subcategorization of talk, is absent from 
the structure. On the contrary, in (3), ‘after’ is 
a content word, formalized as a binary predi-
cate (X is after Y) expressing the temporal 
succession of two events (Mary’s leaving and 
Christmas). The same formalization is pro-
posed here for de ‘of’ in (2) which is analyzed 
as a binary predicate expressing a possessive 
relation between the dog and its master (le 
chien appartient à Pierre ‘the dog belongs to 
Peter’). The case of coordination is more com-
plex. Although and is treated similarly to the 
preposition at the syntactic level, it functions 
completely differently at the semantic level. 
The semantic role of ‘and’ is to form an addi-
tive set with ‘Mary’ and ‘Peter’ and it is this 
set that I know. 

3.3 Making the tree meaningful: SD 

Let us now compare MTT and SD. It was 
clearly demonstrated by Zwicky (1985) that 
the identification of the head in a binary rela-

184



tion can rely on different criteria that can 
sometimes be contradictory. The major conse-
quence of this fact is that favoring one crite-
rion or another excludes a specific tree. The 
difference between MTT's analysis and SD's 
can be understood according to this theoretical 
contrast. 

Nevertheless, the SD framework uses less 
clearly-defined criteria and does not analyze 
syntax in the same way, providing an analysis 
which, from MTT's point of view, merges sev-
eral modules of description. This leads to trees 
where function words are governed by lexical 
words.  

The main goal of SD schemes is to propose 
a universal representation, favoring the relation 
between content words, which is similar to 
SemS. While the representation proposed by 
USD for (1) is easily justifiable,3 the represen-
tation for (3) becomes quite problematic be-
cause après ‘after’ is a content word and there 
is clearly a semantic relation between Mary’s 
leaving and ‘après’. 

On the other hand, all words appear in USD 
and it is claimed that USD is a surface syntac-
tic representation. Indeed syntactic arguments 
are sometimes used to justify certain analyses. 
For instance, de Marneffe et al. (2014) choose 
to reject the small clause analysis of We made 
them leave because “the small clause as a unit 
fails a considerable number of constituency 
tests”.  But if USD is supposed to represent 
phrases, USD’s structure for (4) cannot be 
defended, because Mary and is not a possible 
phrase. In conclusion, the choices of SD seem 
to be partly arbitrary and they are not falsifi-
able, because they are not grounded on explicit 
criteria. 

4 Function words as labels 

Some frameworks consider function words as 
“markers” over a syntactic relation. The con-
ception that grammatical markers work as 
specifications over relations is developed in 
                                                             
3 In fact, even the representation for (1) is problematic 
because due to preposition stranding, to can form a unit 
with talk in several constructions:  
(i) the girl Peter talked to 
(ii) Mary talked to Peter Monday and John Tuesday 
(iii) We talked to and bantered with many students. 
(streetpastors.org) 
Note that none of these constructions would be possible 
with Fr. parler à ‘talk to’ because French do not accept 
preposition stranding. Does it mean that the syntactic 
representation of à in parler à and to in talk to should be 
different? 

Lemaréchal's work (mainly 1997). The basis of 
this idea is that dependencies (and syntactic 
relations in general) can work without the use 
of any grammatical marker: this is called a 
minimal relation (Fr. relation minimale). 
When one or several markers are present, they 
stack over this minimal relation. By doing so, 
they function as additional constraints on the 
distribution of the dependent, which they spec-
ify (hence the term specification). In Lemaré-
chal's view, specifications can be non-
segmental (prosody, word order, etc.). This 
conception assumes that specifications are 
added to relations.  

Such a statement corresponds very well with 
the syntactic representation proposed by 
Kern/Debili, where the preposition labels the 
dependency it marks. For instance, in 
Kern/Debili’s representation of (1), to labels 
the dependency between talked and Peter. 
From a mathematical point of view, such a 
dependency is no longer a binary edge but a 
ternary edge: three words are linked by the 
same relation.4 The representation types the 
three positions opened by this edge (that is, the 
three vertices): talked is the governor, Peter is 
the dependent, and to is a marker. (See section 
7 for a third, polygraphic interpretation.) 

The same graphical convention was used by 
Tesnière (1934) for coordination: the coordi-
nate conjunction and is placed over the edge 
linking the two conjuncts — see our poly-
graphic interpretation of (4). Tesnière (1959) 
places the conjunction between the conjuncts, 
but he posits that the conjunction does not 
occupy a node, contrary to the conjuncts (see 
stemma 249 and Ch. 136, §6). Two interpreta-
tions of his stemma for (4) are possible: and is 
connected to both Mary and Peter,5 or Mary, 
Peter and and are connected in a single ternary 
relation, where they assume a specific role 
according to their grammatical class (and the 
spatial position in the stemma). 

Collapsed SDs operate in a similar way: the 
function word becomes part of the labeling of 
the relation it marks. But in the case of CSD 
the structure is declared as a tree and the func-
tion word is “dereified” (it is not a node any 

                                                             
4 A structure with n-ary edges is called a hypergraph 
(Bergé 1973). A graph is a particular case of hypergraph, 
where all edges are binary. 
5 However, this former interpretation seems unlikely 
(Mazziotta 2014: 146). 

185



longer, but a typed edge).6 However, this im-
plies the introduction of dozens of very spe-
cific syntactic relations, one for each function 
word. 

5 Tesnière’s transfer and polygraphic 
analyses 

5.1 Tesnière's transfer 

For Tesnière, most prepositions are transla-
tives, i.e. grammatical tools that allow a unit of 
one syntactic category to occupy a position 
usually devoted to a unit of another syntactic 
category. The combination of a translative with 
a unit in order to change its category is called 
transfer (Fr. translation). Transfer is illustrated 
by (2): the preposition de ‘of’ transfers the 
noun Peter into an adjective, thus allowing de 
Pierre to modify the noun chien ‘dog’ asadjec-
tives do (gros chien noir ‘big black dog’). In 
his stemmas, Tesnière (2015) represent this 
operation by using a special T-like shape. This 
notation has three positional slots:  one for the 
translative, one for the transferred word and 
the category of the phrase after the transfer on 
top (see figure 1). 
When transfer does not change the part of 
speech of the main content word, but merely 
changes its function (Tesnière 2015: ch. 172), 
it may be qualified as “functional” and Tes-
nière no longer uses the T-like notation. Thus, 
the use of Fr. à allowing a noun to become an 
indirect complement expressing the recipient 
(je donne une pomme à Jean 'I give an apple to 
Jean') is not depicted as a classical transfer. 
See our representation for (1) in figure 1. 

Tesnière made it clear that translatives and 
coordinate conjunctions do not share the same 
syntactic properties. From a theoretical per-
spective, he considered coordination to be 
orthogonal to subordination: the former adds 
elements that are at the same hierarchical level, 
whereas the latter creates the hierarchy. The 
geometric configuration of his stemmas is 
motivated by this theoretical choice. The con-
juncts are placed equi-level and the coordinate 
conjunction is placed between them (see sec-
tion 4). Conjuncts are treated as co-heads and 
are both connected to the governor of the co-
ordinated phrase. 

                                                             
6 This analysis can also compared with LFG's f-structure 
where function words are stored in special feature associ-
ated with the relation between the content words (Kaplan 
& Bresnan 1982). 

5.2 Polygraphic analyses 

Tesnière’s stemmas lead to various interpre-
tations. In section 4, we already discussed 
whether coordination involves a ternary edge 
or not. The T-like notation is also the source of 
debate (see Kahane & Osborne 2015: l-lxii). 
The translative combines with the transferred 
word in a way that is not represented with a 
vertical line, as subordination would be. Plac-
ing the two elements equi-level probably 
means that Tesnière considers this combination 
to be exocentric. Following Kahane (in Kahane 
& Osborne 2015) and Mazziotta (2014: 142), 
we represent transfer by a horizontal link. As a 
result, in figures 1 and 2a, the relation between 
chien and the transferred phrase it governs is 
expressed by a line between chien and the 
other line between de and Pierre. This repre-
sentation is based on the idea that a two-word 
phrase and the connection link between these 
two words are in essence the same unique ob-
ject. This formalizes Tesnière's well-known 
and insightful view of syntactic relations: they 
consist of objects as much as words do (Tes-
nière 2015: ch. 1, §5). 

 
    (a)                          (b) 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 2. Interpretations of Tesnière’s transfer 

The formal object underlying the suggested 
representation of transfer can be defined from 
a mathematical perspective. Such an object 
allows some edges to have other edges as ver-
tices in addition to nodes and will be called a 
polygraph (Kahane & Mazziotta 2015, follow-
ing Burroni 1993; Bonfante & Guiraud 2008). 
As was already the case with the tree-object, 
the polygraph-object is meaningless per se. It 
is the theoretical grounding on the transfer 
concept that gives it a semiosis.  

Transfer could also be encoded in a tree 
(Osborne in Kahane & Osborne 2015); see 
fig. 2b.  As long as they convey the same 
amount of information, the depicted polygraph 
and its corresponding tree can be automatically 
converted into one another — i.e. they are 
formally equivalent. They have the same 
meaning, and the choice between one or the 
other can be motivated neither by formal nor 
by linguistic reasons. A polygraph is neverthe-

de          Pierre 

chien 

de             Pierre 

chien 

186



less more powerful because it does not need to 
add extra nodes to express the same amount of 
information. Moreover, the tree-based interpre-
tation relies on three kinds of linguistic objects 
(words, phrases and relations), whereas the 
polygraph only needs two (words and rela-
tions). The iconic correspondence of the poly-
graph is direct: a node is equivalent to a word 
and an edge is equivalent to a relation. In the 
tree, one needs additional typing for the nodes 
to part words from phrases. 

The next sections investigate how poly-
graphs can be used to express some properties 
of function words. 

6 Presence constraints 

When formalizing a linguistic analysis, one is 
deemed to provide:  

1. a formal description of the mathemati-
cal object that encodes the analysis; 

2. interpretation rules that govern the as-
sociation between this structure as a 
semiotic device expressing the analy-
sis.  

The motivations underlying these choices 
should be expressed as well, since they are 
important from an epistemological perspective 
or to make it possible to evaluate the efficiency 
of the description.  

In the scope of this paper, the chosen 
mathematical object is the aforementioned 
polygraph. How its interpretation rules help 
contrast function words according to their spe-
cific behaviors will be shown in this section 
and the next one, and is based on two theoreti-
cal motivations. 

Some motivations can be stated prior to de-
fining the phenomena at study. It is well ac-
cepted that a syntactic theory has to acknowl-
edge the existence of phrases, i.e. syntactic 
constructions that can stand alone and be used 
as a speech turn under certain conditions, and 
thus become autonomous and form an utter-
ance (criteria A of Mel'čuk 1988). Since the 
term phrase is widely preempted for some-
thing else by generativists, one can adopt an-
other point of view and see these units as 
manifestations of presence constraints: some 
pairs of words must be grouped with other 
words to occur together, whereas others can 
stand alone. 

Theoretical motivation 1. Presence con-
straints must be encoded. 

6.1 Linguistic theoretical analysis 

As a basis for this discussion, we will inves-
tigate the following sample material: (5) and 
(6) are in French, (7) is in Old French 
(Moignet 1988: 95), and (8) is in English. 
(5)   a. Marie parle à Pierre.  

     ‘Mary talks to Peter.’  
 b. *Marie parle à.  
 c. *Marie parle Pierre. 
(6)   a. Marie vient après Noël.  

     ‘Mary comes after Christmas.’  
 b. Marie vient après.  
     ‘Mary comes afterwards.’  
 c. *Marie vient Noël. 
(7)  a. le message de la roïne  

 ‘the message of the queen’  
 b. *le message de  
 c. le message la roïne  
 ‘the message of the queen’  
(8)   a. I know that you lie.  

 b. I know that.  
 c. I know you lie. 

In (5), Marie parle and à Pierre can stand 
alone. It is also possible to consider that parle 
à Pierre can form a prosodic unit and stand 
alone when the verb is in another (non-finite) 
form. On the contrary neither parle à, nor 
parle Pierre have this kind of autonomy.  

Encoding presence constraints automatically 
unveils their hierarchy. If one encodes pres-
ence constrains in (6), identifying the group 
Marie vient après as well as the group après 
Noël automatically identifies après as the gov-
ernor, i.e. the word that must be present inside 
après Noël. On the contrary, in (5), since parle 
à and parle Pierre are not acceptable, whereas 
à Pierre is, both the preposition and the noun 
must be present.  

It should be stressed that the preposition can 
also be optional. Such is the case in the so-
called “absolute oblique” (Fr. cas régime ab-
solu, Buridant 2000: §§59 sqq.) in Old French 
(7). Acknowledging the structure le message la 
roïne and de la roïne, but refusing *le message 
de achieves the description.7 Examples of such 
a structure are not seldom. Lat. decedere (de) 
provinciā ‘leave (from) one’s province’ is 
similar, except that the optional expression of 
the preposition has a more obvious semantic 
value8. Fr. Marie habite (à) Paris ‘Mary lives 

                                                             
7 Note that the article is not compulsory in Old Fr. This 
issue will not be investigated here (see Mazziotta 2013). 
8 The clause usually appears with the preposition, but 
“verbs compounded with ā, ab, dē, etc., (1) take the 
simple ablative when used figuratively; but (2) when 
used literally to denote actual separation or motion, they 

187



in Paris’ displays the same feature: the locative 
preposition à is also optional.  

The possibility for two words to be used in-
dependently or conjointly in the same con-
struction is illustrated by (8). It is generally 
considered that that in I know that and I know 
that you lie are two different words, namely a 
pronoun and a conjunction. The hypothesis 
favored here is, on the contrary, that there exist 
two uses of the same lexical unit: the conjunc-
tion is described as a weakened form of the 
pronoun. In this sentence, that and you lie co-
occupy the same position: they can appear 
alone as well as they can form a group and 
appear together.9 

6.2 Encoding and representation 

It is strikingly clear that the reciprocal con-
straints over the presence of the function word 
and the structure following it can be of four 
types, given that at least one of them is pre-
sent: either both of them must be expressed 
(5), or only the function word (6), or only the 
following phrase (7), or one or the other (8). 
These four possibilities are theoretically pre-
dicted in Hjelmslev (1953) from a very general 
point of view. A formalism encoding presence 
constraints must therefore allow to distinguish 
between these possibilities. 

The classical stance consists of encoding the 
structures by edges between nodes: for in-
stance, to and Peter are nodes connected by a 
single edge between them. In (6), since vient 
après as well as après Noël are acceptable, the 
structure can be encoded by a “chain” of nodes 
linked by two edges, which is easily achieved 
in a graph.10 The same convention can be used 

                                                             
usually require a preposition”. (Greenough et al. 1903: 
302) 
9 To our knowledge, co-occupation is an overlooked 
phenomenon that should be investigated further. We have 
a quite similar situation in French where the subordinat-
ing conjunction is also a pronoun, more exactly the weak 
form of the interrogative pronoun quoi:
(i) Tu sais quoi ?  ‘You know what?’ 
(ii) Que sais-tu?   ‘What do you know?’ 
(iii) Je sais que tu mens.  ‘I know that you lie.’ 
However, que is not optional in (iii). Note that Gustave 
Guilleaume's followers (Moignet 1981: ch. 11 a.o.) sug-
gest that the different uses of the forms que and quoi are 
instances of a unique lexical unit (Fr. vocable in 
Guilleaume's terminology).  
10 A similar structure is defined in Gerdes & Kahane 
(2011) and called the connection structure. They use an 
alternative mode of representation of edges based on 
bubbles rather than lines. (See Bergé 1973 for the equiva-
lence between the two modes of representation.) 

to encode (7). However, the graph object is not 
sufficient when a word or a group of words A 
can form a group with a group B, but no part 
of B can form a group with A. One needs a 
polygraph to encode the group B as a vertex of 
the edge representing the group A, which is the 
most direct way to achieve a formal descrip-
tion of such a configuration.11 Thus, in (5), A = 
talks can form an acceptable independent con-
struction with B = to Peter, but neither to nor 
Peter alone can be grouped with A. Therefore, 
there is an edge between talks and the edge 
between to and Peter (see figure 3). 

    (a) 
 
 

 
    (b)                               (c) 
 
 
 
 

 

    (d) 
 
 
 

Figure 3. Presence constraints12 

7 Distributional constraints 

It also appears that the forms (lexical choice) 
of the function words can depend on the syn-
tactic context of the group they appear in. I.e., 
their form is affected by their distribution. 

Theoretical motivation 2. Form constraints 
affecting function words must be encoded. 

7.1 Linguistic theoretical analysis 

In Fr. Marie va à Paris ‘Mary goes to 
Paris’, the form à ‘toward/to’ is constrained by 
the use of the verb va (and expresses the desti-
nation of the movement). In Old Fr. le message 
de la bone roïne ‘the message of the good 
                                                             
11 It is possible to reify the edge as a node (as is often 
done in RDF), but the resulting structure contains more 
elements for the same amount of information. 
12 A presence-constrained structure could be called a 
“phrase structure”. It is encoded in a non-directed poly-
graph. Polygraph are displayed here with the main verb 
on top in order to be as close as possible to a traditional 
dependency tree for the sake of simplicity. It must never-
theless be made clear that the hierarchization of the poly-
graph corresponds to other constraints that remain to be 
discussed. 

Peter to Mary 

talks 

Noël 

après Marie 

part 

de 

roïne 

message 

that I 

know 

lie you 

188



queen’, the preposition de ‘of’ is bound to the 
N + de + N construction that expresses a 
“genitive” relation. By contrast, the lexical 
choice of bone ‘good’ is not constrained by 
any relation or construction. Reevaluating the 
idea that function words may label relations or 
work as specifications over them (sec. 4), it 
seems reasonable to state that the form of a 
word can be constrained by the relation it is 
bound to at least as much as the words it con-
nects with. In this case, function words specify 
the relation. For instance, in (1), the use of the 
preposition to is bound to the use of the lexical 
unit talk because only the second argument of 
talk can be introduced by such a preposition 
(for instance the subject cannot be: *To Mary 
talked to Peter). Only one particular type of 
dependent can, which implies that the use of 
the preposition is specific to this particular 
relation. 

This descriptive option reformulates the 
Mel'čukian passive valency criterion (see sec-
tion 3 supra): the fact that de is bound to the 
dependency between de la roïne and its gover-
nor message is equivalent to the fact that not 
only roïne but also de controls the distribution 
of de la roïne. Indeed, la roïne and de la roïne 
do not have the same distribution: both can 
complement a noun, but only la bone roïne can 
be the subject of a verb. 

Coordination as observed in (4) is also in-
teresting. Any one of the conjuncts can be 
grouped with their common governor to form 
an acceptable utterance. It is a case very simi-
lar to co-occupation in (8), but for the presence 
of the coordinating conjunction. This conjunc-
tion is not compulsory (we consider that sen-
tences such as I know Mary, Peter are accept-
able), but it needs both the second conjunct 
and the coordination relation to be present. 
(See Mel'čuk 1988: 41, Gerdes & Kahane 2015 
and Mazziotta 2013 for alternate theoretical 
stances in a dependency framework.) 

7.2 Encoding and representation 

With the expressing power of the polygraph 
structure, the relation between the function 
word and the relation that constrains it can be 
encoded as such. This introduces specification, 
a secondary dependency, between the function 
word and the primary dependency that binds it 
(figure 4). It encodes the fact that in le mes-
sage de la bone roïne, both de and bone can 
group with roïne to form an acceptable utter-
ance, but only de is bound to the relation be-

tween message and roïne. The representation 
proposed here contrasts a lexical dependent 
such as bone ‘good’ with the function word. 
The difference between primary dependency 
edges (dependency edges for short) and secon-
dary dependency edges (specification edges) is 
expressed structurally by the type of the gov-
erning vertex. Specification edges are defined 
as having another edge as a governor. 

The intricate set of relations at work with 
coordination structures can easily be encoded 
in a polygraph as well. Comparing figure 3 
with figure 4 makes the similarity between 
coordination and co-occupation visible. 
 
(a)                              (b) 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

                    (c) 
 
 
 
 

Figure 4. Distributional constraints 

8 Conclusion 

This paper has compared different depend-
ency-based representations of the surface syn-
tax organization, focusing on prepositions and 
function words. Several classical representa-
tions have been described (sections 2-5), as 
well as new representations (sections 6 and 7). 

The main theoretical advantage of the stance 
adopted here is that it separates different primi-
tive motivations into two sets of non-
interfering linguistic relations: a relation 
grouping elements according to presence con-
straints  (section 6), and a relation of co-
presence between a word and another relation 
(section 7). Both motivations correspond to a 
specific set of relations, namely dependency 
relations and specification relations. 

On the practical side, such an approach 
leads to much less complex structures for ana-
lyzing constructions where specification can be 
optional. On the computational side, it be-
comes possible to compute these sets sepa-
rately (in a sequential or parallel process 
queue). 

de             bone 

roïne 

message 

I 

know 

Mary Peter 

and 

de          Pierre 

chien 

189



Another important feature of the present ar-
gumentation is that a priori formal constraints 
on the underlying mathematical object have 
been set to a minimum. Tree-based formaliza-
tions only envisage the relation of a function 
word in terms of stand-alone binary relations 
with other words. It has been shown that rela-
tions can involve secondary relations (specifi-
cations), i.e. relations over previously stated 
primary relations (dependencies). The net-
works of relations one needs to introduce when 
formalizing a particular property are naturally 
more complex than a tree. 

The decision to build a dependency tree 
rather than a more complex structure can have 
practical, pedagogical or theoretical motiva-
tions. Using dependency trees because of 
pedagogical or practical motivations is not an 
issue. However, one has to admit that the theo-
retical arguments for a tree-based structure 
remain tenuous and poorly motivated in the 
literature. 

Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank Brigitte Antoine, 
Marie Steffens and Elizabeth Rowley-Jolivet for 
proofreading and Timothy Osborne for contents 
corrections and suggestions. 

References 
Bergé C. 1973. Graphs and hypergraphs. North-

Holland, Amsterdam. 

Bonfante G., Guiraud Y. 2008. Intensional proper-
ties of polygraphs. Electronic Notes in Theoreti-
cal Computer Science, 203(1), 65–77. 

Buridant C. 2000. Grammaire nouvelle de l'ancien 
français. Paris: Sedes. 

Burroni A. 1993. Higher-dimensional word prob-
lems with applications to equational logic. Theo-
retical computer science, 115(1), 43–62.  

de Marneffe M.-C., Manning C. D. 2008. The Stan-
ford typed dependencies representation. Pro-
ceedings of Workshop on Cross-framework and 
Cross-domain Parser Evaluation, COLING. 

de Marneffe M.-C. et al.  2014. Universal Stanford 
Dependencies: A cross-linguistic typology. Pro-
ceedings of LREC. 

Debili F. 1982. Analyse syntaxico-sémantique fon-
dée sur une acquisition automatique de relations 
lexicales-sémantiques, Thèse de doctorat d’état, 
Université Paris Sud, Orsay. 

Gerdes K., Kahane S. 2011. Defining dependencies 
(and constituents). Proceedings of Depling. 

Gerdes K., Kahane S. 2015. Non-constituent coor-
dination and other coordinative constructions 
as Dependency Graphs, Proceedings of Depling. 

Gleason H. A. 1969. An Introduction to Descriptive 
Linguistics, Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 

Greenough J. B. et al. 1903. New Latin grammar 
for schools and colleges, founded on compara-
tive grammar. Boston & London: Ginn & Co. 

Hjelmslev L.  1953. Prolegomena to a theory of 
language, transl. of Omkring sprogteoriens 
grundlæggelse (1943) Copenhagen: Munks-
gaard. 

Kahane S., Mazziotta N. 2015. Syntactic Poly-
graphs - A Formalism Extending Both Constitu-
ency and Dependency, Proceedings of MOL. 

Kahane S., Osborne T. 2015. Translators’ Introduc-
tion. In Tesnière 2015, ixxx-lxxiii. 

Kaplan R. M., Bresnan J. 1982. Lexical-functional 
grammar: A formal system for grammatical rep-
resentation, in Bresnan J. (ed.), Formal Issues in 
Lexical-Functional Grammar, 29-130. 

Kern, F. 1883. Zur Methodik des deutschen Unter-
richts. Nicolai. 

Lemaréchal A. 1997. Zéro(s). PUF, Paris. 

Mazziotta N. 2013. Grammatical markers and 
grammatical relations in the simple clause in Old 
French. Proceedings of Depling. 

Mazziotta N. 2014. Nature et structure des relations 
syntaxiques dans le modèle de Lucien Tesnière. 
Modèles linguistiques, 69, 123-152. 

Mel’čuk I. 1988. Dependency syntax: theory and 
practice. State University of New York, Albany. 

Mel’čuk I. 2009. Dependency in natural language. 
In A. Polguère, I. Mel’čuk (eds.), Dependency in 
linguistic description, Benjamins, 1-110. 

Mel’čuk I. 2012-2015. Semantics: From Meaning 
to Text, 3 volumes, Benjamins. 

Mel’čuk I. Milićević J. 2014. Introduction à la 
linguistique, volume 2, Hermann, Paris. 

Moignet G. 1981. Systématique de la langue fran-
çaise. Paris : Klincksieck. 

Moignet G. 1988. Grammaire de l'ancien français. 
Paris: Klincksieck. 

Saussure F. 1916. Cours de linguistique générale. 

Tesnière L. 1934. Comment construire une syntaxe. 
Bulletin de la Faculté des Lettres de Strasbourg, 
7, 219–229. 

Tesnière L. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe structurale, 
Klincksieck. [transl. by Osborne T., Kahane S. 
2015. Elements of structural syntax, Benjamins.] 

Zwicky A. M. 1985. Heads. Journal of linguistics, 
21(1), 1-29. 

190


