



















































How Constructions Mean


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2015, page 44,
Denver, Colorado, May 31 – June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

How Constructions Mean
(Invited Talk Abstract)

Paul Kay
ICSI, UC Berkeley

paulkay@berkeley.edu

Laura A. Michaelis
Department of Linguistics

University of Colorado Boulder
Laura.Michaelis@Colorado.EDU

One of the major motivations for a construction-
based approach to syntax is that a given rule of syn-
tactic formation can often be associated with more
than one semantic specification. For example, a
pair of expressions like purple plum and alleged
thief call on different rules of semantic combina-
tion. The first involves something related to inter-
section of sets: a purple plum is a member of the
set of purple things and of the set of plums. But an
alleged thief is not a member of the intersection of
the set of thieves and the set of alleged things. In-
deed, that intersection is empty, since only a propo-
sition can be alleged and a thief is never a propo-
sition. Constructional approaches recognize as in-
stances of compositionality cases in which two dif-
ferent meanings for the same syntactic form are li-
censed by two different collections of form-meaning
licensors, i.e., by two different collections of con-
structions. Construction-based grammars are nev-
ertheless compositional in the usual sense: if you
know the meanings of the words and you know all
the rules that combine words and phrases into larger
formal units, while simultaneously combining the
meanings of the smaller units into the meanings of
the larger ones, then you know the forms and mean-
ings of all the larger units, including all the sen-
tences. Constructional approaches focus on the fact
that there are many such rules, and especially on
the rules that assign meanings to complex structures.
Such approaches do not draw a theoretical distinc-
tion between those rules thought to be in the core and
those considered peripheral. The construction gram-
marian conceives of a language as a continuum of
generality of expressions; a construction grammar

models this continuum with an array of construc-
tions of correspondingly graded generality (Fillmore
et al. 1988).

This paper surveys the various ways meanings can
be assembled in a construction-based grammar, with
a focus on the continuum of idiomaticity, a gradi-
ent of lexical fixity stretching from frozen idioms,
like the salt of the, earth, in the doghouse and un-
der the weather, on the one hand, to fully produc-
tive rules on the other, e.g., the rule licensing Kim
blinked (the Subject-Predicate construction). The
semantics of constructions is the semantics to be dis-
covered along the full length of this gamut. Mean-
ings discussed include: literal meaning, the mean-
ings of constructions that regulate argument expres-
sion, context indexation, less commonly recognized
illocutionary forces, metalinguistic commentary and
topic-focus alignment. We conclude that the seam-
less integration of relatively idiomatic constructions
with more productive ones in actual sentences un-
dermines the notion of a privileged core grammar.

44


