



















































Predicting Prepositions for SMT


Proceedings of SSST-9, Ninth Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 55–56,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Predicting Prepositions for SMT

Marion Weller1,2, Alexander Fraser2, Sabine Schulte im Walde1

1 IMS, University of Stuttgart – (wellermn|schulte)@ims.uni-stuttgart.de
2 CIS, Ludwig-Maximilian University of Munich – fraser@cis.uni-muenchen.de

Introduction The translation of prepositions is a
difficult task for machine translation; a preposition
must convey the source-side meaning and also meet
target-side constraints. In our approach, we move the
selection of prepositions out of the translation system
into a post-processing component. During transla-
tion, we use an abstract representation of prepositions
as a place-holder that serves as a basis for the gen-
eration of prepositions in the post-processing step:
all subcategorized elements of a verb are considered
and allotted to their respective functions – as PPs
with an overt preposition or as NPs with an “empty”
preposition, e.g. to call for sth.→ ∅ etw. erfordern.
The language model and the translation rules often
fail to correctly model subcategorization in standard
SMT systems because verbs and their subcategorized
elements are often not adjacent.

We use a morphology-aware SMT system which
first translates into a lemmatized representation with
a component to generate fully inflected forms in a
second step, see Toutanova et al. (2008) and Fraser et
al. (2012). The inflection step requires the modeling
of the grammatical case of noun phrases, which corre-
sponds to determining the syntactic function. Weller
et al. (2013) describe modeling case in SMT; we ex-
tend their setup to cover the prediction of prepositions
in both PP and NPs (i.e., the “empty” preposition).
The presented work is similar to that of Agirre et al.
(2009), but is applied to a fully statistical MT system.
A detailed presentation of our work including a full
literature survey can be found in Weller et al. (2015).

Methodology To build the translation model, we
use an abstract target-language representation in
which nouns, adjectives and articles are lemmatized,

and prepositions are substituted with place-holders.
Additionally, “empty” place-holder prepositions are
inserted at the beginning of noun phrases. To obtain
a symmetric data structure, “empty” place-holders
are also added to source-side NPs. When generat-
ing surface forms for the translation output, a phrase
with a place-holder preposition can be realized as a
noun phrase (empty preposition) or as a prepositional
phrase by generating the preposition’s surface form.

Figure 1 illustrates the process: for the English
input with the extra null-prepositions (column 1),
the SMT system outputs a lemmatized representa-
tion with place-holder prepositions (column 2). In a
first step, prepositions and case for the SMT output
are predicted (column 3). Then, the three remaining
inflection-relevant morphological features number,
gender and strong/weak are predicted on “regular”
sentences without place-holders, given the preposi-
tions from the previous step (column 4). In the last
step, fully inflected forms are produced based on
features and lemmas (column 5).

Abstract Representation and Prediction Features
Initial experiments showed that replacing preposi-
tions by simple place-holders decreases the transla-
tion quality. As an extension to the basic approach
with plain place-holders, we thus experiment with en-
riching the place-holders such that they contain more
relevant information and represent the content of a
preposition while still being in an abstract form. For
example, the representation can be enriched by an-
notating the place-holder with the grammatical case
of the preposition it represents: for overt preposi-
tions, case is often an indicator of the content (e.g.
direction/location), whereas for NPs, case indicates

55



input lemmatized SMT output prep morph. feat. inflected gloss
∅ −→ PREP ∅-Acc –
what welch<PWAT> Acc Acc.Fem.Sg.Wk welche which
role Rolle<+NN><Fem><Sg> Acc Acc.Fem.Sg.Wk Rolle role
∅ −→ PREP ∅-Nom –
the die<+ART><Def> Nom Nom.Masc.Sg.St der the
giant riesig<ADJ> Nom Nom.Masc.Sg.Wk riesige giant
planet Planet<+NN><Masc><Sg> Nom Nom.Masc.Sg.Wk Planet planet
has gespielt<VVPP> – – gespielt played
played hat<VAFIN> – – hat has
in −→ PREP bei-Dat – bei for
the die<+ART><Def> Dat Dat.Fem.Sg.St der the
development Entwicklung<+NN><Fem><Sg> Dat Dat.Fem.Sg.Wk Entwicklung development
of −→ PREP ∅-Gen –
the die<+ART><Def> Gen Gen.Neut.Sg.St des of-the
solar system Sonnensystem<+NN><Neut><Sg> Gen Gen.Neut.Sg.Wk Sonnensystems solar system

Figure 1: Overview of the morphology-aware translation system: prediction of prepositions, morphological features
and generation of inflected forms. German cases: Acc-Accusative, Nom-Nominative, Dat-Dative, Gen-Genitive.

the syntactic function. Other variants contain infor-
mation of the governing verb/noun, and whether the
represented preposition is functional.

For the prediction of prepositions, we combine
the following feature types into a linear-chain CRF:
target-side context (lemmas, POS-tags), source-side
context (the aligned phrase), projected source-side in-
formation (relevant target-side words obtained based
on source-side parses) and target-side subcategoriza-
tional preferences (distributional subcategorization
information). These features address both functional
and content-bearing prepositions, but do not require
an explicit distinction between the two categories.

Experiments and Discussion We compare the ap-
proach of generating prepositions on the target-side
with a morphology-aware SMT system with no spe-
cial treatment for prepositions. When using “plain”
place-holders, there is a considerable drop in BLEU
(16.81) in comparison to the baseline (17.38). The an-
notation of case on the place-holders, the best of the
abstract representation variants, leads to an improve-
ment (17.23), but still does not surpass the baseline.
Additionally, we assess the translation accuracy of
prepositions. To allow for an automatic evaluation,
we restrict the evaluation to cases where the relevant
parts, namely the governing verb and the noun gov-
erned by the preposition, are the same in reference
and MT output. While there is a minor improvement
over the baseline, the difference is very small.

Our approach aims at assigning subcategorized
elements to their respective functions and to inflect
them accordingly which allows to handle structural

differences in source and target language. While the
systems fail to improve over the baseline, our ex-
periments show that a meaningful representation of
place-holders during translation is a key factor. In
particular, the annotation of case helps, which can be
considered as a “light” semantic annotation. Thus,
the addition of more semantically motivated informa-
tion might lead to a more meaningful representation
and remains an interesting idea for future work.

Acknowledgements This project has received fund-
ing from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme under grant agreement No 644402,
the DFG grants Distributional Approaches to Semantic
Relatedness and Models of Morphosyntax for Statistical
Machine Translation and a DFG Heisenberg Fellowship.

References
Eneko Agirre, Aitziber Atutxa, Gorka Labaka, Mikel Ler-

sundi, Aingeru Mayor, and Kepa Sarasola. 2009. Use
of Rich Linguistic Information to Translate Preposi-
tions and Grammatical Cases to Basque. In EAMT.

Alexander Fraser, Marion Weller, Aoife Cahill, and Fa-
bienne Cap. 2012. Modeling Inflection and Word-
Formation in SMT. In EACL.

Kristina Toutanova, Hisami Suzuki, and Achim Ruopp.
2008. Applying Morphology Generation Models to
Machine Translation. In ACL.

Marion Weller, Alexander Fraser, and Sabine Schulte
im Walde. 2013. Using Subcategorization Knowledge
to Improve Case Prediction for Translation to German.
In ACL.

Marion Weller, Alexander Fraser, and Sabine Schulte im
Walde. 2015. Target-Side Generation of Prepositions
for SMT. In EAMT.

56


