



















































MetaNet: Deep semantic automatic metaphor analysis


Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Metaphor in NLP, pages 40–49,
Denver, Colorado, June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

MetaNet: Deep semantic automatic metaphor analysis  

 

 

Ellen Dodge and Jisup Hong Elise Stickles 
International Computer Science Institute University of California, Berkeley 

1947 Center Street Ste. 600 1203 Dwinelle Hall 

Berkeley, CA 94704 Berkeley, CA 94720-2650 
edodge@icsi.berkeley.edu 

jhong@icsi.berkeley.edu 

elstickles@berkeley.edu 

 

Abstract 

This paper describes a system that makes use 

of a repository of formalized frames and met-

aphors to automatically detect, categorize, and 

analyze expressions of metaphor in corpora. 

The output of this system can be used as a ba-

sis for making further refinements to the sys-

tem, as well as supporting deep semantic 

analysis of metaphor expressions in corpora. 

This in turn provides a way to ground and test 

empirical conceptual metaphor theory, as well 

as serving as a means to gain insights into the 

ways conceptual metaphors are expressed in 

language.  

1 Introduction 

Recognition of the ubiquity of metaphor in lan-

guage has led to increased interest in automatic 

identification of metaphoric expressions in lan-

guage. Typical approaches to metaphor analysis in 

linguistics comprise (a) theory-driven introspective 

top-down methods, and (b) bottom-up corpus ap-

proaches with an emphasis on analyzing how met-

aphors are used in discourse. Computational 

approaches tend to focus on the task of metaphor 

detection (i.e. determining whether a particular 

expression metaphoric or not) rather than attempt-

ing to identify and analyze which conceptual met-

aphors are being expressed.  

The MetaNet approach described here bridges 

the two linguistic methodologies above by provid-

ing (a) a linguist-friendly interface for formally 

representing conceptual metaphor theoretic anal-

yses and principles, and (b) an automatic metaphor 

detection system that applies those analyses and 

principles to identify metaphoric expressions with-

in large-scale corpora. What results is an integrated 

system that connects the output of the metaphor 

detection process to rich information that enables 

further semantic analysis. This serves as a means 

for advancing and refining conceptual metaphor 

theory, and increasing our understanding of how 

metaphors are used in language. 

  

1.1 Related work 

Our work addresses two important criticisms that 

have been directed toward much previous linguis-

tic work in conceptual metaphor analysis. One is-

sue is that such analyses are often idiosyncratic, 

with methods of analysis and representations of 

metaphor varying from analyst to analyst; to ad-

dress this, metaphor study needs rigorous meth-

odological analyses that can be replicated 

(Pragglejaz 2007, Kövecses 2011). Another criti-

cism is that metaphor theorists often take a top-

down approach that relies on analysis of data gath-

ered from introspection; this tends to limit discov-

ery of new metaphors, and focus analysis on those 

metaphors the analyst has already identified or vet-

ted from the literature. This contrasts with a bot-

tom-up, corpus-based approach espoused by 

Stefanowitsch (2006), Deignan (2005), Martin 

(2006), and others, who argue that identifying as 

many metaphors as possible in a corpus leads to a 

clearer picture of the full inventory of metaphoric 

expressions, as well as providing a measure of 

their relative frequency of use. Furthermore, such a 

method can serve to verify theories based on pre-

viously-identified metaphors, as well as aiding the 

discovery of previously-unidentified metaphors.  

Various computational approaches have been 

applied to the task of metaphor detection. Among 

the first systems, Fass (1991) used selectional pref-

40



erence violations as a cue for nonliteralness, and 

then relied on comparisons to a knowledge base for 

further disambiguation. Gedigian et al. (2006)’s 

system achieved high accuracy at classifying verbs 

in PropBank annotated texts, though only from a 

limited domain for a small range of source domain 

frames, using features consisting of the verb plus 

its argument filler types expressed as WordNet 

synsets. In a larger-scale system, Shutova et al. 

(2010) used unsupervised clustering methods to 

create noun and verb clusters that represent target 

and source concepts, respectively. Mappings be-

tween them, established by metaphoric seed ex-

pressions, were then used to generate novel target-

source expressions. Similarly, Mohler et al. 

(2013)’s system builds semantic signatures that 

map text to areas in a multidimensional conceptual 

space and represent associations between concepts.  

These are compared to known metaphoric ones to 

detect novel metaphoric expressions. Other sys-

tems, such as Turney et al. (2011) and Tsvetkov et 

al. (2014) determine metaphoricity based on lexi-

cal features such as abstractness/concreteness, im-

ageability, and supersenses derived from WordNet. 

Our approach to metaphor detection differs 

from previous approaches in its deliberate depend-

ence on formalization of a particular theory of 

metaphor and the correctness and completeness of 

a conceptual metaphor repository expressed in that 

formalism. By design, we expect the system to 

succeed at identifying metaphoric expressions to 

the extent that the formalism and the repository are 

consistent and correct. The approach thus inte-

grates top-down linguistic and bottom-up computa-

tional approaches to metaphor identification and 

annotation, combining the strengths of each. A 

significant outcome is that in addition to detecting 

metaphors in text, our system also yields semantic 

information about each of these expressions, in-

cluding identification of source and target domains 

and links to underlying conceptual metaphors.  

1.2 System overview  

There are three key components in our system: (1) 

a repository of formalized metaphors, frames, met-

aphor constructions, and metaphoric relational pat-

terns; (2) an automated metaphor extraction system 

that utilizes information from the repository to 

identify expressions of metaphor in text and anno-

tate them for additional semantic information; and 

(3) computational tools to evaluate, analyze, and 

visualize the extracted metaphor data. Together, 

these are used to form a ‘cycle’ of analysis, in 

which analysis of extracted data serves as a means 

to refine and expand the repository, which in turn 

improves metaphor extraction results. The system 

is currently in development for analysis of Ameri-

can English, Mexican Spanish, and Russian. 

 

2 Improvements to Extraction Based on For-
malization of Metaphor Theory 

Since Lakoff and Johnson’s first book on concep-

tual metaphor theory (1980), the field has come to 

recognize the hierarchical and taxonomic nature of 

metaphors and the concepts that comprise their 

source and target domains. For example, consider 

the phrases poverty infects society and crime is 

plaguing the nation, which instantiate the specific 

metaphors POVERTY IS A DISEASE and CRIME IS A 

DISEASE, respectively. However, they inherit much 

of their semantics from a more general metaphor, 

SOCIAL PROBLEMS ARE AFFLICTIONS; this in turn 

inherits from a yet more general metaphor, 

NEGATIVELY EVALUTED CONDITIONS ARE 

PHYSICALLY HARMFUL, as shown in Figure 1.  

 

 
Figure 1. Metaphor inheritance network 

 

It is also clear that the semantic domains of 

these metaphors are  themselves hierarchically re-

lated: poverty and crime are social problems, 

which are negative conditions; meanwhile, disease 

is a type of physical affliction, which in turn is 

something that causes physical harm. These do-

mains are represented in our system as semantic 

frames (Fillmore 1976) similar to those instantiated 

in FrameNet (Ruppenhofer et al., 2010), which 

constitute conceptual gestalts that describe particu-

lar situations or events along with their participants 

and other basic conceptual structures. By develop-

ing a system that formally represents these struc-

tures and relations in an ontology of frames and 

metaphors, we enable the possibility of a rigorous 

41



system of representation that can be computation-

ally implemented and leveraged for improved met-

aphor detection. 

2.1 Repository of metaphors and frames 

The MetaNet project represents an effort to formal-

ly represent and categorize metaphors and frames 

that comprise their source and target domains, and 

relations between them. Frames are coherent, con-

ceptual gestalts organized in a hierarchical struc-

ture. These range from experiential universal 

structures such as Motion Along a Path and Verti-

cality, to more specific situations such as Physical 

Restraints and Disease; they also include less phys-

ically concrete culturally-based frames like Pov-

erty and Corruption. More-specific frames 

incorporate the semantics and internal structure of 

the more-general frames they inherit from, forming 

a complex network of related concepts. Relations 

between frames define how elements of a parent 

frame are incorporated by the child frame. For in-

stance, the ‘subcase of’ relation indicates that the 

child fully inherits and elaborates the structure of 

the parent frame. In addition to traditional ontolog-

ical relations, we also include relations specific to 

frame semantics and metaphor theory. A fragment 

of this network is illustrated in Figure 2.  
 

 
 

Figure 2. Non-metaphoric frame network pattern 

 

Sub-networks like the group of Physical Afflic-

tion frames in Figure 2 are further grouped togeth-

er to form families of frames, which define 

collections of broader, but still coherent, conceptu-

al domains. 

In addition to relations between frames, struc-

ture within frames is also represented in the reposi-

tory. This includes such elements as participant 

roles, aspectual and causal structures, relationships 

between roles, and lexical units that evoke the 

frame. Figure 3 illustrates partial frame representa-

tions of the Poverty and Disease frames. Internal 

frame structure not only enables improved analysis 

by requiring the analyst to consider the details of 

each frame, but also provides additional infor-

mation in metaphor detection. As the detection 

system identifies the frames that contribute to the 

identified metaphor, the detailed semantics of 

those concepts can be accessed via these frame 

entries. 

Metaphors are essentially representations of 

mappings between frames. The structure of the 

source domain frame maps onto the structure of the 

target domain frame (Figure 3); hence, in POVERTY 

IS A DISEASE, the impoverished people of the Pov-

erty frame are understood as the patient experienc-

ing the disease in the Disease frame. Specifically, 

the roles of the Disease frame map onto their coun-

terparts of the Poverty frame. 

 

 
Figure 3. Metaphor structure 

 

Furthermore, just as frame-frame relations de-

fine how one frame incorporates the semantics of 

another, metaphor-metaphor relations define the 

hierarchy of metaphors (Figure 1). The result is a 

complex, lattice-like inheritance network of con-

cepts and metaphors. 

The computational architecture used for this 

purpose is a Wiki, based on the Semantic Me-

diawiki format (Krötzsch et al. 2006). Linguists 

trained in conceptual metaphor theory create frame 

and metaphor entries as individual pages, specify-

Physical 
Affliction 

subcase of 

subcase of subcase of 

 

Treating A  
Physical Affliction Disease 

Cancer Polio 

incorporates as a role 

42



ing for each metaphor its source and target domain 

frames, role-to-role mappings, and relations be-

tween that metaphor and others in a network. Ini-

tially the repository was seeded from metaphors 

previously identified in the past 30 years of meta-

phor literature; including comprehensive analysis 

of primary metaphors provides broad coverage of 

conceptual metaphors that are applicable to many 

target domains. For example, the metaphor MORE 

IS UP can be found in such varied expressions as 

prices skyrocketed, she had high hopes, and study-

ing boosted his GPA. Following this initial stage, 

additional metaphors are added as analysts find 

them via focused study of particular target do-

mains; however, the system can identify metaphor-

ic language even in the absence of specific 

metaphors by utilizing the frame network to find 

more general-level metaphors, as will be shown in 

section 3.2.  
 

2.2 Metaphor constructions 

Previous research has demonstrated that metaphors 

tend to be expressed in certain regular construc-

tional patterns (Croft 2002; Sullivan 2007, 2013). 

For example, the noun phrase poverty trap has the 

source domain lexeme trap modified by the target 

domain lexeme poverty; these noun-noun metaphor 

constructions consistently appear in this dependen-

cy relation. In contrast, the reverse construction 

with the source modifying the target is not ob-

served in corpus data (Sullivan 2013). Building on 

this research, our project has defined a set of 

grammatical constructions that represent several 

different types of frequently occurring patterns. In 

each, the construction specifies which construc-

tional element evokes the source domain, and 

which evokes the target domain (Table 1). The 

source term fills different slots in these various 

patterns; the source may appear not only as a verb, 

but also as a noun or adjective. As described in 

section 3.1, these constructions enable us to link a 

broad range of potentially metaphoric expressions 

(e.g. lexical units, expressed in some construction-

al pattern) to the frames and conceptual metaphors 

in our repository. However, while this process 

eliminates much data that is not metaphoric, it does 

not positively identify expressions that are meta-

phoric: for example, the same noun-noun pattern 

that identifies poverty trap also returns the literal 

expression bear trap. Hence, disambiguating be-

tween these two types of expressions requires a 

second step of metaphoricity evaluation. 

 

Constructional pattern Examples 

T-subj_S-verb poverty infects 

T-subj_S-verb-conj  poverty infects and maims 

T-subj-conj_S-verb  homelessness and poverty 

infect 

S-verb_T-dobj  escape poverty 

S-verb_T-dobj-conj  escape despair and pov-

erty  

S-verb_Prep_T-noun  slide into poverty / 

pull up out of poverty  

S-noun_of_T-noun trap of poverty 

T-noun_poss_S-noun poverty's undertow 

S-noun_prep_T-noun path to poverty  

T-noun_mod_S-noun  poverty trap 

S-adj_mod_T-noun burdensome poverty 

T-noun_cop_S-noun-adj 

  

poverty is a disease / 

poverty is burdensome  

Table 1. Constructional Patterns 

 

3 Metaphor Extraction and Identification 

Our automatic metaphor identification system di-

vides into two main phases. In the first, we use a 

set of manually defined metaphoric constructional 

patterns to identify candidate expressions with ex-

plicitly realized potential target and source ele-

ments. In the second, we identify the frames that 

are evoked by these elements, and use our concep-

tual network of frames and metaphors, along with 

a set of patterns of relationships between nodes in 

the network, to determine the likelihood of a can-

didate expression being metaphoric. These phases 

are presented in detail below. 

 

3.1 Matching constructional patterns 

The first step in the process is to identify potential-

ly metaphoric expressions in the corpus; the sys-

tem can search for metaphors for a particular target 

domain family, metaphors that make use of a par-

ticular source domain family, or simply all the 

metaphoric expressions in the data. This search is 

performed by making use of the metaphoric con-

structional patterns as described in section 2.2. 

They are represented as SPARQL queries that 

43



specify document structural constraints, including 

grammatical constraints. To search texts for con-

structional matches, we construct Resource De-

scription Framework (RDF) models of each 

sentence in terms of an ontology defined in the 

Web Ontology Language (OWL). The ontology 

defines the classes Document, Sentence, and 

Word, and properties, some of which are shown in 

Table 2 and with their domain and range.  

 
 Domain Range 
inDocument Sentence Document 

inSentence Word Sentence 

follows Word Word 

precedes Word Word 

dep Word Word 

hasIdx Sentence,Word integer 

hasForm Word string 

hasLemma Word string 

hasPOS Word string 

    Table 2. Document properties 

 

The resulting RDF representation of the input 

text constitutes a graph structure in which words, 

sentences, and documents are nodes in the graph. 

Properties serve to characterize nodes in terms of 

string or integer information, such as form, lemma, 

part of speech (POS), or position, as well as in 

terms of a node’s relation to other nodes. Such re-

lations, with respect to Word nodes, include order-

ing relations and grammatical dependency 

relations. While Table 2 shows only the root of the 

dependency relations, dep, the ontology includes a 

grammatical relations hierarchy that represents a 

merger of the hierarchies used by the Stanford (De 

Marneffe et al., 2006), RASP (Briscoe et al., 

2006), and Spanish Freeling (Lloberes et al., 2010) 

dependency parsers.  

Generating this representation requires that 

NLP tools such as lemmatizers, POS taggers, and 

dependency parsers be available for the language 

in question. Because dependency parsing is the 

most computationally expensive step in this pro-

cess, in cases where the metaphor extraction is be-

ing run only for certain target or source domains, a 

preprocessing step identifies sentences of interest 

based on the presence of a word from those do-

mains. 

In order to search large volumes of text using 

SPARQL constructional pattern queries, docu-

ments are converted to RDF and uploaded to an 

OpenRDF Sesame triplestore. Constructional pat-

tern matching queries are run in succession over 

each document, with queries written so that each 

match result includes a sentence index, as well as 

the lemma and word index of the potentially meta-

phoric lexical elements. Documents are processed 

in parallel to the extent possible given hardware 

limitations.  With six compute servers each provid-

ing 16 cores and running a local triplestore, we 

were able to run metaphor detection on a pre-

processed 500 million word subset of the English 

Gigaword corpus (Graff & Cieri 2003) in 6 hours. 

 

3.2 Evaluating metaphoricity 

The preceding phase of the metaphor extractor re-

turns pairs of words that are related to each other 

by a constructional pattern where one word may be 

the source domain of a metaphor, and the other 

word may be the target domain of that metaphor. 

While the constructional patterns represent a nec-

essary constraint on metaphoric expression, they 

are not sufficient to guarantee metaphoricity. 

Hence, the second phase of metaphor detection 

makes use of the network of frames and metaphors 

instantiated in the metaphor repository in order to 

disambiguate between metaphoric and non-

metaphoric expressions in the pool of candidates.  

The content of the wiki repository (as described 

in Section 2.1) is converted to an RDF representa-

tion, also in terms of an OWL-defined ontology, 

and loaded into a triplestore repository. Entries for 

candidate lexical items in the repository are associ-

ated with the frames that they evoke; if the lexical 

items for English are not already present in the sys-

tem, FrameNet (https://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu), 

WordNet (https://wordnet.princeton.edu), and 

Wiktionary (https://www.wiktionary.org) data are 

used to expand the search for the most relevant 

frame present in the system. After these frames are 

identified, the system performs searches through 

the network to determine how the frames are relat-

ed to one another. If a repository search of the 

chain of relations that connect the frames includes 

codified metaphoric mappings, the extractor rec-

ognizes the candidate expression as metaphoric. 

The likelihood that an expression is metaphoric 

is determined by attempting to match the relational 

network between the two frames against a set of 

pre-defined patterns, which are expressed in 

44



SPARQL and stored in the Semantic MediaWiki, 

along with the constructional patterns. These pat-

terns fall into two basic types. 

The first type are relational configurations that 

constitute negative evidence for metaphoricity—

i.e. they suggest that the expression is not meta-

phoric. For example, if the potential source and 

target lexical units evoke the same frame, the sys-

tem could conclude that the expression is not met-

aphoric. Similarly, the system can also disregard 

cases where the frames are too closely related at 

some point in the network, e.g., if the candidate 

target lemma evokes a frame that is inherited by 

the candidate source frame. For example, in the 

phrases to cure a disease and to cure polio, cure 

evokes the Treating a Physical Affliction frame, in 

which one of the roles is the physical affliction 

being treated. The potential target lemmas disease 

and polio evoke the Disease and Polio frames, 

which inherit from Physical Affliction as shown in 

Figure 2. The constructional pattern matching 

phase of the system would identify the expressions 

as candidates, with cure as the source word in both 

cases, and with disease and polio as the target 

words for each phrase. The system, however, is 

able to exclude these on the basis of a rule that de-

fines a known non-metaphoric network pattern, 

TargetIsRoleInSource, where the frame 

evoked by the potential target term either directly 

or recursively inherits from a frame that is incorpo-

rated as a role into the frame evoked by the poten-

tial source term. 

The second type of network relational patterns 

are a set of rules that constitute positive evidence 

for metaphoricity. For example, if the two lemmas 

evoke frames that are defined as target and source 

frames of a specific conceptual metaphor in the 

network, then that expression is positively evaluat-

ed as a metaphor.  

However, it is not necessary that the evoked 

frames are immediately related to a metaphor entry 

in the repository. It is not unusual for specific met-

aphoric mappings not to be present in the concep-

tual network. This can be due to practical 

limitations as is often the case with manually cre-

ated resources, or for principled reasons—for ex-

ample, in cases where specific metaphors can be 

predicted from general ones, or for novel exten-

sions that can be interpreted using general meta-

phors. In those cases, the system is often still able 

assess metaphoricity on the basis of general map-

pings defined at a higher level. For example, in the 

phrase to cure poverty, poverty evokes the Poverty 

frame and cure the Treating a Physical Affliction 

frame. In the conceptual network, Poverty is de-

fined as a subcase of Social Problem. Furthermore, 

Treating a Physical Affliction incorporates the 

Physical Affliction frame as a role within it. In this 

case, although the more specific metaphor 

ADDRESSING POVERTY IS TREATING A DISEASE is 

not present in the repository network, the system 

can still identify the candidate pair cure poverty as 

metaphoric on the basis of the higher-level meta-

phoric mapping SOCIAL PROBLEMS ARE PHYSICAL 

AFFLICTIONS, as illustrated in Figure 4. 

 

 
Figure 4. Structures accessed by phrase cure poverty. 

 

Consequently, the system is often able to be re-

silient in the case of specific level gaps in the con-

ceptual network as in the example above. 

In addition, the relational patterns are assigned 

scores that represent the level of confidence that a 

linguistic expression with a matching frame and 

metaphor network pattern would actually be meta-

phoric or non-metaphoric. These scores are used to 

produce a metaphoricity score for each candidate 

expression.  Although the scores presently as-

signed to the relational patterns are based on intui-

tion, plans are underway to determine them 

empirically. 

 

4 Analysis and Evaluation of Data 

The extraction process generates a set of annotated 

sentences that can be used to both evaluate and 

refine the system, and to perform various kinds of 

corpus-based analysis.  Annotation information 

includes the lemma, POS, frame, and frame family 

for both the source and the target terms, as well as 

45



the name of the conceptual metaphor identified 

during the metaphor evaluation process. The pur-

pose for which the extraction is being performed 

will affect which types of input are used (gold 

standard data vs. corpora). 

 

4.1 System evaluation and improvements us-
ing gold standard 

To evaluate the accuracy of the metaphor extractor, 

linguists collected attested sentences and annotated 

metaphoric expressions for the target domains 

Government, Bureaucracy, Democracy, Poverty, 

Taxation, and Wealth; they annotated all in-

domain metaphoric expressions in the sentences 

where both the target and source were explicitly 

realized. Sentences were manually annotated for 

source and target word forms, source and target 

frames, and the constructional pattern used to ex-

press the metaphor. The metaphor extractor was 

run on these collected gold standard sentences, and 

the output compared to the annotations entered by 

the linguists. Table 3 shows the number of annota-

tions in the gold standard, the recall (percentage of 

gold standard examples that were identified), and 

the precision (percentage of extracted examples 

that were correct) of the system for three lan-

guages. 

 

Lang. Anno. Recall Precision 

English 301 0.86 (258/301) 0.85 (258/305) 

Spanish 122 0.88 (107/122) 0.86 (107/125) 

Russian 148 0.41 (60/148) 0.90 (60/67) 
 

Table 3. Performance over gold standard data 

 

As shown in Table 3, the system exhibits signif-

icantly lower recall for Russian than for the other 

languages. One of the reasons for this is that our 

instantiation of the conceptual network of frames 

and metaphors is not as well developed for Russian 

as for English and Spanish, containing significant-

ly fewer metaphors and frames, as well as lexical 

units (LUs) which belong to them.
1
  For example, 

Table 4 below shows the number of metaphors, 

frames, LUs, and the total number of frame-frame 

relations of the types used for metaphoricity evalu-

                                                           
1
 As linguists continue to work on the repository, these 

numbers will grow. 

ation.  These relations include ‘incorporates as a 

role,’ ‘subcase of,’ and ‘makes use of.’  

 

 

 Metaphors Frames LUs Rels 

English 787 656 4308 838 

Spanish 547 467 3521 506 

Russian 127 303 1674 273 

  Table 4. Summary of repository content 

 

It should be noted, however, that all the sys-

tems, including Russian, identified metaphoric ex-

pressions with a high degree of precision. Since the 

functioning of the metaphor detector depends on 

the correctness of conceptual metaphor theory, of 

its formalization in our system, and of the meta-

phor, frame, constructional pattern, and metaphor 

relational pattern representations in the repository, 

this result provides positive indication as to the 

validity in general of these aspects of the system.  

The metaphor detector thus in some sense imple-

ments the predictions of the formalized theory. 

This has the added benefit that results contrary 

to expectation provide invaluable data for refining 

the system.  For example, it is widely accepted that 

the government is often conceptualized a kind of 

physical structure, e.g. foundation of government, 

the government collapsed overnight, etc. The met-

aphor detector, based on representations captured 

in the repository, searching through a large corpus, 

turned up volumes of expressions such as govern-

ment building and government house that are not 

metaphoric.  This becomes a starting point of in-

vestigation to correct some aspect of the content of 

the repository, of the theory, or of its formaliza-

tion. 

 

4.2 Corpus-based analysis of metaphor 

When corpora are used as input to the extraction 

system, the extraction results can be used to per-

form various kinds of corpus-based linguistic anal-

yses. Such analyses can help provide an empirical 

basis for, and suggest refinements and improve-

ments of, Conceptual Metaphor Theory. For in-

stance, instead of relying on intuitions about how a 

given target domain is metaphorically conceptual-

ized, it is possible to search a corpus and identify 

which source domain lemmas and frames are used, 

and with what relative frequency.  

46



The richness of the extracted data and the struc-

tural relations identified via our repository enable 

us to analyze data at varying levels of specificity. 

For instance, a search of the English Gigaword 

corpus (Graff & Cieri 2003) for metaphor expres-

sions with the target domain ‘poverty’ revealed 

several interesting patterns. Firstly, at the very 

general level of frame families, we observe that the 

most frequently occurring source terms were either 

location/motion related (e.g. being at a location, 

translational motion, motion impediments) or in-

volved physical harm (e.g. disease, physical com-

bat, or other harmful encounters). Figure 5 shows 

the relative frequency of these frame families.  

 

 
Figure 5. Most frequently occurring source families 

within poverty data. 

 

At a somewhat more specific level, we can ex-

amine which specific frames within one of these 

families are being evoked. Figure 6 looks within 

the Translational Motion family, and shows the 

number of extracted metaphor expressions that 

evoke each of the frames within that family.   

 
Figure 6. Number of extracted metaphor expressions 

that evoke various translational motion frames 

 

Looking at a yet more specific level, we can ex-

amine which lexical items are used to evoke a giv-

en frame. Figure 7, below, shows this data for the 

Downward Motion frame. 

 

 
Figure 7. Number of different lexical units in extracted 

data that evoke the Downward Motion frame.  

 

It is also possible to search for the conceptual 

metaphor that was discovered during the meta-

phoricity evaluation phase of the extraction pro-

cess.  For instance, Downward Motion lexemes 

such as fall and slip are used in expressions of the 

conceptual metaphor BECOMING IMPOVERISHED IS 

MOTION DOWNWARDS (e.g. the young family 

fell/slipped into poverty).   
 

5 Conclusions  

Our system moves beyond detection of metaphor, 

and enables us to perform many kinds of semantic 

analyses of metaphors in text. This affords the lin-

guistic analyst additional insight into the conceptu-

al structures characteristic of naturally-occurring 

language. Importantly, the different elements of the 

system each form part of a cycle, enabling an itera-

tive development process, wherein extracted data 

informs linguistic analysis, improving the meta-

phor repository, or the theory, which in turn im-

proves the quality of the extractor output. The 

resultant MetaNet metaphor repository and the ex-

tracted data can serve as valuable resources both 

for metaphor analysts and for the computational 

community at large.  

 

 

 

47



Acknowledgments 

The MetaNet Analysis and Repository teams: 

George Lakoff, Eve Sweetser, Oana David, Karie 

Moorman, Patricia Lichtenstein, Kristina Despot, 

Luca Gilardi, Collin Baker, Jim Hieronymous, et 

al. 

Supported by the Intelligence Advanced Re-

search Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department 

of Defense US Army Research Laboratory contract 

number W911NF-12-C-0022. The U.S. Govern-

ment is authorized to reproduce and distribute re-

prints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding 

any copyright annotation thereon. 

Disclaimer: The views and conclusions contained 

herein are those of the authors and should not be 

interpreted as necessarily representing the official 

policies or endorsements, either expressed or im-

plied, of IARPA, DoD/ARL, or the U.S. Govern-

ment. 

 

References  
 

Briscoe, T., Carroll, J., & Watson, R. (2006, July). 

The second release of the RASP system. In Pro-

ceedings of the COLING/ACL on Interactive 

presentation sessions (pp. 77-80). Association 

for Computational Linguistics. 

Deignan, A. (2005). Metaphor and corpus linguis-

tics. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benja-

mins. 

De Marneffe, M. C., MacCartney, B., & Manning, 

C. D. (2006). Generating typed dependency 

parses from phrase structure parses. 

In Proceedings of LREC (Vol. 6, No. 2006, pp. 

449-454). 

Feldman, J., Dodge, E. & Bryant, J. (2009). Em-

bodied Construction Grammar. In Heine B., 

Narrog H., (eds). The Oxford Handbook of Lin-

guistic Analysis. Oxford: Oxford U Press, 111–

38. 

Fillmore, C. J. 1976. Frame semantics and the na-

ture of language. In Origins and Evolution of 

Language and Speech, ed. by Stevan R. Har-

nad, Horst D. Steklis, & Jane Lancaster, 20-32. 

Annals of the NY Academy of Sciences, Vol. 

280. 

Graff, D. & Cieri, C. (2003). English Gigaword 

LDC2003T05. Web Download. Philadelphia: 

Linguistic Data Consortium. 

Kövecses, Z. (2011). Methodological issues in 

conceptual metaphor theory. In S. Handl & H-

J. Schmid (Eds.), Windows to the Mind: Meta-

phor, metonymy and conceptual blending (pp. 

23-40). Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 

Krötzsch, M., Vrandečić, D., & Völkel, M. (2006). 

Semantic mediawiki. In The Semantic Web-

ISWC 2006 (pp. 935-942). Springer Berlin Hei-

delberg. 

Lakoff, G. (1993). The Contemporary Theory of 

Metaphor. In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and 

Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University 

Press, 202–251. 

Lakoff, G. (1993b). How metaphor structures 

dreams: The theory of conceptual metaphor ap-

plied to dream analysis. Dreaming, 3(2), 77. 

Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We 

Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in 

the flesh: The embodied mind and its challenge 

to western thought. Basic books. 

Lakoff, G. (2008). The neural theory of metaphor. 

The Cambridge handbook of metaphor and 

thought, 17-38. 

Lakoff, G. (2014). Mapping the brain’s metaphor 

circuitry: metaphorical thought in everyday rea-

son. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 958.  

Lloberes, M., Castellón, I., & Padró, L. (2010, 

May). Spanish FreeLing Dependency Grammar. 

In LREC (Vol. 10, pp. 693-699). 

Martin J. H.. (2006). “A corpus-based analysis of 

context effects on metaphor comprehension”. In 

Anatol Stefanowitsch and Stefan Th. Gries 

(Eds.), Corpus-Based Approaches to Metaphor 

and Metonymy (pp. 214-236). Berlin and New 

York: Mouton de Gruyter.  

Mason, Z. J. (2004). “CorMet: A computational, 

corpus-based conventional metaphor extraction 

system.” Computational linguistics, 30(1), 23-

44. 

Mohler, M., Bracewell, D., Hinote, D., & Tomlin-

son, M. (2013). Semantic signatures for exam-

ple-based linguistic metaphor detection. 

Meta4NLP 2013, 27. 

Pragglejaz Group. (2007). MIP: A method for 

identifying metaphorically used words in dis-

course. Metaphor and Symbol, 22(1), 1–39. 

Ruppenhofer, J., Ellsworth, M., Petruck, M. R., 

Johnson, C. R., & Scheffczyk, J. (2010). 

FrameNet II: Extended theory and practice. 

48



Berkeley, California: International Computer 

Science Institute 

Shutova, E., Sun, L., & Korhonen, A. (2010, Au-

gust). Metaphor identification using verb and 

noun clustering. In Proceedings of the 23rd In-

ternational Conference on Computational Lin-

guistics (pp. 1002-1010). Association for 

Computational Linguistics. 

Stefanowitsch, Anatol. (2006). “Words and their 

metaphors: A corpus-based approach”. In Ana-

tol Stefanowitsch and Stefan Th. Gries (Eds.), 

Corpus-Based Approaches to Metaphor and 

Metonymy (pp. 63-105). Berlin and New York: 

Mouton de Gruyter.  

Sullivan, K. S. (2007). Grammar in Metaphor: A 

Construction Grammar Account of Metaphoric 

Language. PhD dissertation, University of Cali-

fornia Berkeley. 

Sullivan, K. S. (2013). Frames and Constructions 

in Metaphoric Language. Amster-

dam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing. 

Turney, P. D., Neuman, Y., Assaf, D., & Cohen, 

Y. (2011). Literal and metaphorical sense identi-

fication through concrete and abstract context. 

In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on the 

Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-

cessing (pp. 680-690). 

Wilks, Y., Galescu, J. A., Allen, J. & Dalton, A. 

(2013). Automatic Metaphor Detection using 

Large-Scale Lexical Resources and Convention-

al Metaphor Extraction. In Proceedings of the 

First Workshop on Metaphor in NLP (pp. 33-

44), Atlanta, Georgia, 13 June 2013. Association 

for Computational Linguistics.   

 

49


