



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and E Sherly. Proc. of the 12th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 178–182,
Trivandrum, India. December 2015. c©2015 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Morphological Analyzer for Gujarati using Paradigm based approach 

with Knowledge based and Statistical Methods 

 
Jatayu Baxi   Pooja Patel Brijesh Bhatt 

Computer Engineering  

Department 

Computer Engineering 

Department 

Computer Engineering 

Department 

Dharmsinh Desai 

University 

Dharmsinh Desai 

University 

Dharmsinh Desai 

University 

Nadiad Nadiad Nadiad 
jatayubaxi.ce@ddu.ac

.in 

poopa-

tel2912@gmail.com 

brij.ce@ddu.ac.

in 

 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

Morphological Analyzer is a tool which performs 

syntactic analysis of a word and finds root form of 

input inflected word form. Morph analyzer serves 

as a pre-processing tool for many NLP applica-

tions. Significant amount of work has been done in 

this area for many Indian languages but not much 

work has been reported for Gujarati language. We 

present Morph analyzer for Gujarati language. The 

Morph analyzer is developed using a hybrid ap-

proach that combines statistical, knowledge based 

and paradigm based approach. We present detailed 

study of different approaches. We demonstrate a 

significant improvement in overall accuracy and 

achieve 92.34% and 82.84% accuracy with 

knowledge based hybrid method and statistical 

hybrid method respectively. 

1 Introduction to Morph Analyzer 

Morphology is a branch of linguistics that carries 

out study of words, their internal structure and 

their meanings.  A morpheme is the smallest 

grammatical unit in a language. 

Developing an accurate Morph analyzer is 

a challenging task, particularly for highly inflec-

tional and agglutinative language. In order to de-

velop Morph analyzer for Gujarati, we studied 

inflections of Gujarati language and identified var-

ious grammatical paradigms. We have identified 8 

paradigms for Noun , 3 paradigms for verb and 3 

paradigms for Adjectives. Paradigm based ap-

proach suffers when a word falls into more than 

one paradigm because of common inflections. We 

reduce this problem by consulting knowledge base 

‘wordnet’ and by performing corpus based statisti-

cal analysis of a word. 

The rest of the paper is organized as fol-

lows: Section 2 discusses survey and comparison 

of existing approaches. Section 3 describes para-

digm construction process and various paradigms. 

Section 4 discusses   hybrid method used to build 

Morph analyzer for Gujarati and section 5 shows 

experiment and evaluation. 
 

2 Related Work  

Morphological analyzer has been a continuously 

evolving area of research. A lot of work 

has been done for English language. However it re-

mains challenging task to develop Morph 

analyzer for highly agglutinative and inflectional 

languages 

The first Morphological analyzer system is 

KIMMO(Karttunen, Lauri, 1983) which follows 

two level morphology approach. This approach is 

suitable for languages with less degree of inflec-

tion. For higher degree of inflection, the model 

does not perform well. Some unsupervised meth-

ods for developing Morph analyzer have also been 

tried. Hammarstorm and Borin,2003 presented 

survey based on various Unsupervised Learning 

Techniques for Morphological analyzer. The input 

to such algorithm is raw Natural Language text 

data. This approach requires large training corpus 

178



 

and hence in absence of sufficient corpus, the ma-

chine learning efficiency would be less. Niraj As-

wani et al,2010 used unsupervised Method that 

takes both prefixes as well as suffixes into account. 

Given  a corpus and a dictionary, this method can 

be used to obtain a set of suffix-replacement rules 

for  deriving an inflected word’s root form. This 

system is basically built for Hindi but some exper-

iments are done on Gujarati language also. Akshar 

Bharti et al, 2001 presented an algorithm for unsu-

pervised learning of morphological analysis and 

morphological generation for inflectionally rich 

languages. The method depends on variety of word 

forms present in the existing corpus. 

Beesley, 2003 proposed concept of Finite 

state Morphology. and this approach was used to 

build Morphological analyzers for high inflectional 

languages, as language can be easily represented 

by Finite state machine. In this approach, XFST is 

used as an interface. It is an interface which gives 

access to finite state operations. The interface of 

XFST includes a lookup operation and generation 

operation. Hence this approach can be used for 

Generation and Analysis of Morphology. 

Considerable amount of work has been 

done for the languages such as Hin-

di,Marathi,Tamil,Malayalam,Bangla also. Based 

on FST approach proposed by Bessley, (Akshar 

Bharti) proposed paradigm based approach for 

building Morphological analyzer. In this approach, 

the language expert provides different tables of 

word forms covering the words in the language. 

Set of roots covered by particular table have simi-

lar inflectional behaviour. This approach also re-

quires dictionary with root of the word and the 

paradigm to which the root belongs. (Jyoti Pawar 

et al, 2012) discusses work in which the morpho-

logical analyzer for Konkani has been developed 

using FSA based approach with Word paradigm 

model. Unlike traditional method, they have se-

quenced morphemes. (Harshada Gune et al, 2010) 

developed paradigm based Finite state Morpholog-

ical analyzer for Marathi. 

(Rajendra Rajeev, 2011) developed Mor-

phological analyzer using suffix stripping approach 

for Malayalam language. The finite state transducer is 

used to sequence the morphemes and to validate the 

ordering. In this system the Suffix stripping method 

with sandhi rules are used that does not require any 

lookup tables. 

As far as work for Gujarati language is 

concerned (kashyap Popat et al, 2010) have devel-

oped lightweight stemmer for Gujarati language 

using hand crafted suffix rules. List of hand crafted 

Gujarati suffixes which contains the postpositions 

and the inflectional suffixes for nouns, adjectives 

and verbs are created for use in this approach. 

(kartik Suba et al, 2011) developed Inflec-

tional and derivational stemmer. The inflectional 

stemmer is built using hybrid approach and deriva-

tional stemmer is built using rule based approach. 

Four lists of suffixes which contain postpositions 

and inflectional suffixes respectively for nouns, 

verbs, adjectives and adverbs are created. 
 

3 Paradigm Construction 

Gujarati is morphologically rich language. Based 

on various grammatical features, single root may 

generate multiple word forms Words can be cate-

gorized into paradigms based on the similarity in 

grammatical features and word formation process. 

It is observed that for a particular grammatical fea-

ture there are some similarities in word formation 

process. 

A Paradigm defines all word forms that 

can be generated from given stem along with 

grammatical feature set associated with each word 

form. For paradigm construction, sample corpus of 

inflected words is taken. A list is prepared for all 

possible suffixes from the sample data. The words 

which take similar set of suffixes are grouped into 

single paradigm. For example word સ્ત્રી(Stri) and 
છત્રી(chaatri) both take same inflection for plural 
transformation (સ્ત્રીઓ and છત્રીઓ) so we group 
them under single paradigm. For all the words be-

longing to same paradigm, the rule to form root 

word and set of possible suffixes to generate other 

word forms remains same. 

Gujarati nouns inflect in gender and num-

ber and case. Gujarati has three genders and two 

numbers. Table 1 shows 7 paradigms identified for 

Gujarati noun. The first column shows paradigm 

ID, Second column shows suffix list which is used 

to detect this paradigm, third column shows one 

inflected word belonging to that paradigm and fi-

nal column shows corresponding root word. We 

179



 

observe from table 1 that same suffix may belong 

to more than one paradigm. 
Id Suffix Example Root Word 

1 ◌ો,◌ી,◌ુ,◌ા 
◌ાઓ,◌ીઓ 

છોકરાઓ 
(Chokrao) 

છોકરુું 
(Chokru) 

2 ◌ો,◌ી,◌ા ˆ દિકરો 
(Dikro) 

દિકરો 
(Dikro) 

3 ◌ો,◌ી,◌ુ,◌ા કટકો 
(Katko) 

કટકો 
(Katko) 

4 ◌ો વાક્યો 
(Vaakyo) 

વાક્ય 
(Vaaky) 

5 ◌ી,◌ીઓ સ્ત્રીઓ 
(Strio) 

સ્ત્રી(Stri) 

6 ◌ો,◌ા મદિના 
(Mahina) 

મદિનો 
(Mahino) 

7 ◌ો,◌ા એકતા 
(Ekta) 

એકતા 
(Ekta) 

Table 1: Noun Paradigms 

 
Id Suffix Example Root Word 

1 ◌ો,◌ી,◌ુ સારો 
(Saro) 

સારુું (Saru) 

2 No Inflec-

tion 
સરસ 
(Saras) 

સરસ 
(Saras) 

3 ◌ી વ્યભિચારી 
(Vyabhichari) 

વ્યભિચારી  
(Vyabhichari) 

Table 2: Adjective Paradigms 

Table 2 shows various paradigms for ad-

jectives. Adjectives can be classified into variant 

and non-variant adjectives based on the inflections 

that they take. A non-variant adjective 

do not inflect with gender. 

Gujarati verb inflect in gender, number, 

case and tense. Verb and adjective require gender 

agreement with Noun. Table 3 shows various 

paradigms for verb. We observe that unlike 

Hindi, Gujarati verbs inflect in gender for only 

past tense. For present and future tense, verb 

does not inflect with gender 

4 Implementation 

In this section we describe paradigm based, 

knowledge based and statistical approach. 

We also propose ways to merge these approaches. 

 

 

Id Suffix Example Root Word 

1 આડે, આડી, આડશે, 
અડયા, એ, ઈશ, જો, 
ઓ, વુું, તો, તી. 

જમાડ્ુું 
(Jamadyu) 

જમ્ુું 
(Jamvu) 

2 આવવુું, વ્્ુું, આવશે, 
આવ્યા, એ, ઈશ, જો, 
ઓ, વુું, તો, તી. 

કરશે 
(Karshe) 

ક્ુું 
(Karvu) 

3 ધુું, વ્્ુું, આવશે, 
આવ્યા, ય, જો, વ, વુું, 
તો, તી, ◌ુ 

ખાધુું 
(Khadhu) 

ખાવુું 
(Khavu) 

Table 3: Verb Paradigms 

4.1 Paradigm Based Method 

We define paradigms for various part of speech 

for Gujarati language. Paradigm building 

methodology is covered in the next section 

in brief. Each paradigm consists of rules to 

obtain root word, various inflections possible 

with that paradigm and a representing word 

for that paradigm. An inflected word is given 

as an input to the system. The system checks 

suffix and determines one or more matching 

paradigm for input word. It is possible that 

the same rule is present in more than one 

paradigm. For each matched paradigm system 

applies rule to generate root word and gives 

root word as output. 

It is possible that a single inflected word is 

mapped with more than one root word. So 

to eliminate this multiple output we incorporate 

two different methods knowledge based 

and statistical method. 

4.2 Knowledge Based Method 

Whenever an inflected word gives more than 

one Root word as an output using paradigm 

based method, We consult Gujarati Wordnet 

knowledge base and select best output. Gujarati 

wordnet contains around 81000 words 

in root form. Out of all multiple outputs, correct 

output is matched with wordnet and it is 

chosen as correct output. The success of this 

approach lies in the coverage of various root 

words in the dictionary. 

 

180



 

4.3 Statistical Method 

Statistical approach focuses on disambiguating 

multiple outputs based on heuristic developed on 

length of an inflected word and transformation 

process for generating root word. In this method 

we construct probability table which contains 

transformation rules along with its probability 

which is determined using 

set of training words. Snapshot of this table is 

shown in Table 4. For example if an inflected word 

ends with ◌ી  then according to Table 4 it has two 
possible transformations ◌ી - > ◌ ુ+ ◌ું and ◌ી -> ◌ી. 
Training data suggests that probability of rule 2 is 

higher than rule 1 so in this case transformation 1 

would be selected for root word generation. 

 
Sr 

No 

Suffix Possible Trans-

formation 

Probability ( % ) 

1 ◌ો ◌ો - > ◌ો 90.3 
  ◌ો- > ◌ ુ+ ◌ું 32.6 
  ◌ો- >No Suffix 2.36 
2 ◌ી ◌ી- > ◌ી 82.36 
  ◌ી- > ◌ ુ+ ◌ું 12.28 

Table 4: Statistical Method 
 

5 Experiment Setup 

For our experiment we have prepared Gold set 

of data which consists of 200 Nouns, 200 verbs 

and 100 Adjectives. Input to Morph analyzer 

is inflected word and Output is root word. We 

have root word information about this Gold 

data which is manually prepared by Linguists. 

We compare the result produce by our system 

with actual root word in the Gold data. Analysis of 

the result is based on factors like How 

many words are mapped to correct paradigm, 

How many words are not mapped to correct 

paradigm , How Many Words belongs to Multiple 

Paradigm, which category gives good result in the 

system. From these parameters we 

analyze accuracy of our system and analyze 

how various part of speech affects accuracy of 

the system. 

 

We classify outputs into 2 different catego-

ries: 

 Correct: Words for which only one output 
is generated which is correct output. 

 Incorrect: Words for which one output is 
generated and which is incorrect. 

Due to the fact that same rule can be part 

of multiple paradigms, for many words we get 

multiple outputs. For all those words we apply 

knowledge based and statistical methods for 

output enhancements and evaluate accuracy 

of the system after applying each of the above 

method. 

6 Result Analysis 

Simple rule based method has problem of multiple 

paradigm output. For the words giving 

multiple outputs we apply knowledge based 

method and statistical method for removing 

incorrect outputs. Table 5 and Table 6 summarize 

results obtained after applying knowledge based 

and statistical methods. Table 7 

shows accuracy of both knowledge based and 

statistical methods. It can be seen that problem of 

multiple outputs in case of simple rule 

based technique can be handled by knowledge 

based and statistical methods. 
 

POS  Correct Incorrect Accuracy 

Noun 197 3 98.5 

Verb 179 21 89.5 

Adjective 89 11 89 

Table 5: Results: Knowledge Based Method 
 

POS  Correct Incorrect Accuracy 

Noun 154 46 77 

Verb 149 51 74.5 

Adjective 97 3 97 

Table 6: Results: Statistical Method 

Following points were observed as a part 

of error analysis. 

 For Rule based approach, same suffix rule 
may apply to different categories so num-

ber of words correctly classified is less and 

degree of multiple outputs is more. 

 For Knowledge based method, the reason 
for error is that some words may not be 

present in wordnet dictionary so 

knowledge based approach fails to remove 

ambiguity from such words. 

181



 

 

Approach Accuracy 

(%) 

Rule Based 58.26 

Knowledge 

Based 

92.34 

Statistical 82.84 

Table 7: Approach wise Accuracy 

 

 Statistical Methods do not depend on any 
dictionary but they are probabilistic. So 

depend upon training data used, accuracy 

may vary. 

7 Conclusion and Future Scope 

In this paper we presented a Gujarati morphologi-

cal analyzer. We choose paradigm based 

approach for our implementation and analyze 

results obtained for gold set of words. We incorpo-

rate two output enhancement methods 

knowledge based method and statistical methods. 

We prepared gold set of words and tested 

them with our system and analyzed results. 

We conclude that after removing multiple outputs 

system gives average accuracy of 92.34 for 

knowledge based method and 82.84 for statistical 

method. The limitation of current system 

is that it cannot handle derivational morphology. 

References  

M.F.Porter 1972. An algorithm for suffix stripping, vol-

ume 1. Program,14:130-137 

Gulsen Eryigit and Adali Esref 2004. An affix stripping 

morphological analyzer for turkish, 

volume 1. IASTED International Multi- Conference 

on Artificial Intelligence and Applications,pages 

299–304, Innsbruck, Austria. 

Lauri Karttunen and Kenneth R. Beesley 2003. 

Finite State Morphology 

Akshar Bharti Natural Language Processing - A 

Paninian Perspective 

Harald Hammarstorm and Lars Borin 2004. Unsuper-

vised learning of morphology, volume 1. 

Computational Linguistics June, 37:309–350, 

June 2011. 

Jyoti Pawar Shilpa Desai and Pushpak Bhattacharya 

2012. Automated paradigm selec-tion 

for fsa based konkani verb morphological analyzer, 

COLING 2012, Mumbai,India, 10-14 Dec, 

2012. 

Harshada Gune Mugdha Bapat and Pushpak 

Bhattacharyya 2010. A paradigm-based finite 

state morphological analyzer for marath, Workshop 

on South Asian and South East Asian NLP 

(part of COLING 2010), Beijing, China, August 

2010. 

Kashyap Popat Pratik Patel and Pushpak Bhattacharyya 

2010. Hybrid stemmer for gujarati, 

International Conference on Computational Linguis-

tics (COLING), pages 51–55, Beiging, August 2010. 

Dipti Jiandani Kartik Suba and Pushpak Bhattacharyya 

2011. Hybrid inflectional stemmer and rule-based 

derivational stemmer for gujarati, IJCNLP 2011 

Workshop on Segmentation and Morphology for 

South Asian Languages, Chiang Mai,Thailand, No-

vember 2011. 

Niraj Aswani and Robert Gaizauskas 2010. eveloping 

morphological analysers for south asian 

languages: Experimenting with the hindi and 

gujarati languages, Proceedings of the Seventh Inter-

national Conference on Language Resources and 

Evaluation (LREC’10), Valletta, 

Rajendran N Rajeev R and Elizabeth Sherly 2011. 

A suffix stripping based morph anal-yser for 

malayalam language, Dravidian Studies a Research 

Journal, pages 61–72. 

George Cardona 1965. A Gujarati Reference 

Grammar 

Colin Masica 1991. The Indo-Aryan Languages 

Malta, may 2010. European Language Resources 

Association (ELRA). ISBN 2-9517408-6-7. 

W.S. Tisdall 1892. A Simplified Grammar of the 

Gujarati Language 

Brijesh Bhatt, Dinesh Chauhan, Pushpak Bhattacharyya, 

C.K. Bhensdadia and Kirit Patel. 

2012. Introduction to Gujarati Wordnet International 

Conference on Global Wordnets (GWC 

2011),Matsue,Japan. 

Karttunen, Lauri. 1983. KIMMO: A general morpholog-

ical processor In: Linguistic Forum 22, 

(1983) 163–186 

Nikhil Kanuparthi,Abhilash Inumella and Dipti 

Misra Sharma. 2012. Hindi Derivational Morpholog-

ical Analyzer Proceedings of the Twelfth 

Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Computa-

tional Morphology and Phonology 

(SIGMORPHON2012) , pages 10–16 

Akshar Bharti, Rajeev Sangal, S.M.Bendre, Pavan Ku-

mar, Aishwarya 2001. Unsupervised 

improvement of Morphological Analyzer for inflec-

tionally Rich Languages Proceedings of the 

Sixth Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim 

Symposium 

 

182


