



















































Fighting Words and Antagonistic Worlds


Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Metaphor in NLP, pages 87–94,
Denver, Colorado, June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Fighting Words and Antagonistic Worlds 

 

 Tony Veale 

School of Computer Science and Informatics 

University College Dublin 

Belfield, Dublin D4, Ireland. 

Tony.Veale@UCD.ie 

  

  

 

 

  

Abstract 

Metaphor is a fundamentally antagonistic 

way of viewing and describing the world. 

Metaphors ask us to see what is not there, 

so as to remake the world to our own lik-

ing and to suit our own lexicons. But if 

metaphors clash with the world as it is, 

they can also clash with each other. Each 

metaphor represents a stance from which 

to view a topic, and though some stances 

are mutually compatible, many more are 

naturally opposed to each other. So while 

we cringe at a clumsily mixed metaphor, 

there is real value to be had from a deliber-

ate opposition of conceptual metaphors. 

Such contrasts reveal the limits of a partic-

ular worldview, and allow us to extract 

humorous insight from each opposition. 

We present here an automatic approach to 

the framing of antagonistic metaphors, 

embodied in a metaphor-generating Twit-

terbot named @MetaphorMagnet. 

1 Two-Fisted Metaphors 

The imagination often takes flight on the wings of 

metaphor. For metaphor allows us to make the fan-

tastical seem real and the banal seem fresh and 

newly interesting. For example, consider this im-

aginary scenario, as packaged in a pithy tweet: 

What if ‪#TheXMen were real? ‪#NoamChomsky 

could be its ‪#ProfessorCharlesXavier: smart yet 

condescending, and scowling too 

This counterfactual injects some much-needed 

pizzazz into the banalities of modern politics and 

intellectual posturing, by reimagining a famously 

dour academic activist as the real-world equivalent 

of a much-loved comic-book character. This coun-

terfactual is, at its heart, a metaphor: we can con-

struct a bridge from Chomsky to Xavier only be-

cause we believe them to share deep similarities. If 

the metaphor implies much more than this set of 

properties actually conveys, this is because it also 

sparks the imagination of its audience. We are lead 

to imagine Chomsky as the cerebral hero of a bat-

tle between good and evil, in which he leads his 

own academic version of the X-Men, loyal stu-

dents with a zealous sense of mission. 

Now consider this follow-up tweet, which is de-

signed to further stoke a reader’s imagination: 

If #NoamChomsky is just like #Professor-

CharlesXavier, smart yet condescending, then who 

in #TheXMen is #GeorgeLakoff most like? 

Metaphors are systematic, and lead us to project 

coherent systems of relational structure from one 

domain to another (see Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; 

Gentner et al., 1989). In this way we invent hybrid 

worlds that combine elements of reality and fanta-

sy, in which each mapping, such as Chomsky to 

Xavier, can prompt others, such as Lakoff to his 

mutant counterpart (Magneto, perhaps?). 

The real world is not a comic book, and there is 

something mischievously silly about describing a 

serious scholar and activist as a fictional creation 

with super-powers. Yet metaphors work well as 

jokes when they make a virtue of the differences 

that separate ideas. As Pollio (1996) put it, “split 

reference yields humour if the joined items (or the 

act joining them) emphasize the boundary or line 

separating them; split reference yields metaphor if 

the boundary between the joined items (or the act 

joining them) is obliterated and the two items fuse 

to form a single entity. So by dialing up the antag-

onism – between domains, between reality and 

87



fantasy, or between people and ideas – a metaphor 

can yield a witty, eye-catching and thought-

provoking text that is worth sharing on a platform 

such as Twitter. This point is worth stressing, as 

the above tweets were generated by an automated 

Twitterbot, named @MetaphorMagnet, whose an-

tagonism-stoking generative processes are the sub-

ject of this paper. 

 If metaphor can give you wings, it can also 

give you fists with which to pummel a contrary 

point of view. Every conceptual metaphor offers a 

potted world-view that encourages us to reason in 

certain ways, and thus speak in related ways, about 

our experiences. But like proverbs, or indeed ideo-

logies, we can often pick and choose the ones that 

suit us best. Reasonable people can disagree about 

how best to categorize a situation, as no metaphor 

is ever objectively right or true, just potentially apt 

in a particular context. Thus, thinkers on different 

ends of the political spectrum offer antagonistic 

metaphors to frame the same goals, needs or prob-

lems, and by advancing their own conceptual 

frames they actively seek to undermine those of 

their opponents. Just as every proverb has a con-

verse that is equally compelling (e.g., many hands 

make light work vs. too many cooks spoil the 

broth), there is conceptual sport to be had in find-

ing the most apt anti-metaphor for a given figura-

tive viewpoint. The following tweet thus frames 

two antagonistic views of love:   

To some beatniks, love is a sparkling rainbow. To 

others, it is a flat bed. 

  ‪#Love=‪#Rainbow  ‪#Love=‪#Bed 

This tweet nicely captures the antagonism that ex-

ists between competing perspectives on #Love. 

The first is expansive, and views love as a many-

splendored thing; the second is more reductive, 

and views love as just a means to an end: sex. By 

attributing these views to different members of the 

same category of person – beatniks – the tweet 

suggests that this conflict of ideas is also a conflict 

between otherwise similar people. 

 This paper explores the automated generation 

of antagonistic metaphors. By elevating simple 

contrasts into a contest of ideas, @Metaphor Mag-

net creates metaphors that also work as witty 

provocations to think differently, or at least to ap-

preciate the limits of received wisdom. This auto-

mated system seeks its inspiration in attested usage 

data and uses a variety of knowledge-rich services 

to produce elaborate, well-reasoned metaphors that 

hinge upon meaningful contrasts. In the sections 

that follow, we describe how this harmonious mar-

riage of explicit knowledge and raw usage data is 

used to sow disharmony at the level of ideas and 

package the results as tweets. 

2 Competing Points of View 

A divergent problem is one that admits many po-

tential solutions, each of them valid in its own way 

(Guilford, 1967). Though one may be privileged 

over others by its conventionality – e.g. the use of 

a brick as a building block, or of a paper clip to 

bind papers – there is no single, objectively cor-

rect answer. Conversely, a convergent problem is 

one that admits just one objectively-acceptable 

correct answer, relative to which all others are 

seen as deficient or just plain wrong. By this 

standard, metaphor is a divergent approach to the 

conveyance of meaning, while literal language – to 

the extent that any text can be truly literal – is con-

siderably more convergent. 

 A cornerstone of divergent thinking is diver-

gent categorization: this allows us to categorize a 

familiar object or idea in atypical ways that permit 

new and unusual uses for it (Torrance, 1980). Such 

categorization is, in turn, central to the act of fig-

urative description. Consider the metaphor divorce 

is war, whose interpretation requires us to find a 

non-trivial category – one a good deal more specif-

ic than event – to embrace these very different-

seeming concepts (Glucksberg, 1998). To see how 

people categorize, we need only see how they 

speak. On the Web, we see descriptions of both 

war and of divorce, in separate texts, as traumatic 

events, serious conflicts, immoral acts, and as bad 

things in general. Such descriptions often come in 

standardized linguistic containers, such as the 

“A_Bs such as Cs” pattern of Hearst (1992), in-

stances of which are easily harvested from the 

Web. The Thesaurus Rex Web service of Veale & 

Li (2013) offers up its resulting system of Web-

harvested categorizations as a public service that 

can be exploited by 3
rd

-party metaphor systems. 

Thesaurus Rex can be used for the interpretation of 

metaphors by permitting another system to explore 

specific unifying categories for distant ideas, such 

as divorce & war, but it can also be used in the 

generation of metaphors. So if looking for a meta-

88



phor for creativity, Thesaurus Rex suggests the 

category special ability, leading a metaphor gener-

ator to consider other members of this category as 

possible vehicles, such as x-ray vision, superior 

strength, magic or prophecy. @MetaphorMagnet 

thus uses Thesaurus Rex to package diverse ideas 

into a single tweet, as in: 

 ‪#Take5 of the ‪#Shallowest things:  

1. Toilet Bowls 

2. Rock Stars 

3. Cookie Sheets 

4. Soup Bowls 

5. Rush Limbaugh 

#TheRepublicans  

Divergent thinking typically arises when we go 

off-script to imagine unconventional possibilities 

for a familiar object or idea. Raskin (1985) puts 

the concept of a script at the centre of his computa-

tional theory of jokes, the Semantic Script Theory 

of Humour (SSTH), arguing that most joke narra-

tives are compatible with two competing scripts at 

once. The primary script, which listeners are lulled 

into applying based on a normative reading of a 

narrative, is activated as the result of convergent 

thinking; the secondary script, which the joker 

downplays at first and which listeners only per-

ceive when a big “reveal” is delivered at the end, 

is a result of divergent thinking and an ability to 

find novel uses for familiar situations. Metaphors 

rely on categories the way jokes rely on scripts. 

Thus, while the category immoral act will embrace 

acts that are clearly immoral, such as murder, tor-

ture, bribery and fraud, in the right circumstances 

it can also be used to embrace the outlier ideas 

divorce, drug use and even dancing.  

 Nonetheless, the closest equivalent to a script 

in metaphor is the Conceptual Metaphor (CM). 

Conceptual Metaphors, as described in Lakoff & 

Johnson (1980), are the cognitive deep structures 

that underpin whole families of related linguistic 

metaphors. The Life is a Journey CM, for exam-

ple, is the fountainhead of figures of speech such 

as “go off the rails”, “hit the skids”, “crash and 

burn”, “smooth sailing” and “on the rocks.” So 

just as trips to many kinds of restaurant can all be 

understood using a generic Restaurant script (i.e. 

enter-sit-order-eat-pay-leave), a CM such as Life 

is a Journey facilitates a generic level of reasoning 

about life’s events. And just as a script has slots 

for various roles, props and locations, a CM has its 

own schematic structure with slots to fill, such as 

Source, Path, Goal and Vehicle. A CM such as 

Life is a Journey thus allows us to impose the 

schematic structure of a Journey onto our mental 

structure of a Life, to understand Life as something 

with a starting point, a destination, a path to follow 

and a means of conveyance. 

Carbonell (1981), Martin (1990) and Barnden 

(2008) each build and exploit an explicit represen-

tation of conceptual metaphors, while Mason 

(2004) uses statistical methods to extract conven-

tional metaphors – CMs that are so entrenched in 

the way we speak that their uses in language can 

often seem literal – from text corpora. Shutova 

(2010) uses statistical clustering to identify possi-

ble target ideas – such as Democracy and Mar-

riage – for a given source idea such as Mechanism. 

This allows her system to recognize “fix a mar-

riage” and “the functioning of democracy” (or vice 

versa) as figurative uses of a Mechanism schema 

because they each use verbs that typically take 

mechanisms as their objects. But whether one 

views CMs as real cognitive structures or as useful 

statistical generalizations, CMs serve as script-like 

bundles of norms and roles that shape the genera-

tion and interpretation of metaphors.  

In any case, CMs are so often paraphrased in the 

metaphor literature using copula statements of the 

form X is a Y that candidate CMs are easily har-

vested from a source of Web n-grams, not just be-

cause the metaphor literature is itself part of the 

Web, but because lay speakers have over-used 

many of these forms to the point of cliché. So the 

Google n-grams (Brants & Franz, 2006) is not just 

a source of CM paraphrases such as “Life is a 

Journey” (freq=12,688) but of colorful variations 

on these themes as well, such as “Life is a High-

way” (freq=2,443), “Life is a Rollercoaster” 

(freq=3,803), “Life is a Train” (freq=188), “Life is 

a Maze” (freq = 180), “Life is a Pilgrimage” 

(freq=178) and “Life is a River” (freq=119). If one 

doubts that metaphor is a divergent phenomenon, 

one need only look at the Google n-grams, which 

attests that people also speak as though “Life is a 

Game” (freq=8,763), “Life is a Circus” 

(freq=598), “Life is a Banquet” (freq=102), and 

even that “Life is a Sitcom” (freq=180). 

These short linguistic expressions typically sit 

on the figurative continuum somewhere between 

proverbs and clichés, as such phrases must have a 

minimum Web frequency of 40 to ever find their 

89



way into the Google n-grams. Like clichés, these 

phrases crystalize a wealth of received wisdom, 

but just like proverbs they offer just one potted 

view on a topic, one that is easily countered by an 

apt choice of counter-proverb or anti-metaphor, as 

we shall show in coming sections. 

3 Grudge Matches 

Google 4-grams are a rich source of copula meta-

phors such as “Life is an Adventure” (freq= 1,317) 

and “Life is an Illusion” (freq=95), while the 3-

grams also offer up gems such as “Life is Rubbish” 

(freq=8,489), “Life is Love” (freq=889) and “Life 

is War” (freq=44,490). Many of these n-grams 

give linguistic form to established CMs, but many 

more occupy a questionable area between resonant 

metaphor and random, overheard phrase. So a 

computational system must exercise  careful selec-

tivity in deciding which n-grams are worthy of 

elaboration into a novel linguistic form and which 

are best discarded as unreliable noise.   

A good starting point is affect, as those copula 

n-grams that assert the identity of polarized ideas 

with antagonistic sentiments, such as faith and ag-

gression, make for provocative metaphors. So con-

sider the 4-gram “faith is an aggression” 

(freq=44), whose frequency is high enough to sug-

gest it is well-formed, but low enough to suggest it 

resides in the long-tail of public opinion. Most 

sentiment lexica will view faith as a strong posi-

tive idea and aggression as a strong negative, so 

these ideas make for a bold juxtaposition, as pack-

aged in this tweet from @MetaphorMagnet: 

Remember when faiths were practiced by kind 

priests? Now, faith is an aggression that only un-

kind aggressors exhibit. 

Notice that the original motivating 4-gram “faith is 

an aggression” sits at the centre of the tweet. 

@MetaphorMagnet seeks its inspiration from the 

Google n-grams, to find some interesting snippet 

of text that may, with reasoned elaboration, blos-

som into a fuller form that is worthy of tweeting. 

Viewed in this way, an n-grams database is like a 

crowded railway station, buzzing with fleeting 

morsels of overheard conversations. When one’s 

interest is finally piqued by a particular fragment, 

one has no choice but to complete it oneself. 

 Yet reasoned elaboration demands knowledge 

over which a system can reason, and the tweet 

above showcases several pieces of stereotypical 

knowledge: that priests are often kind and practice 

faiths, while aggressors are often unkind and ex-

hibit aggression. Knowledge of stereotypical prop-

erties is sourced as needed from Thesaurus Rex 

and from a database of typical associations mined 

on the Web by Veale & Hao (2007), while rela-

tional knowledge – linking e.g. priests to their 

faiths via specific actions – is sourced from yet 

another public Web service, Metaphor Eyes, as 

presented in Veale & Li (2011). The relational tri-

ples provided by Metaphor Eyes, mined from WH-

questions commonly found in Web query logs 

(e.g. “why do priests wear white collars?”), can 

also be used to generate simple analogies, though 

the most provocative analogies are often antago-

nistic disanalogies. Consider an analogical tweet 

that @MetaphorMagnet tags as an #irony: 

‪#Irony: When some anglers use "pointed" hooks 

the way salespersons use pointless gimmicks. 

 ‪#Angler=‪#Salesperson ‪#Hook=‪#Gimmick 

Each of @MetaphorMagnet’s tweets strives for a 

balance of similarity and dissimilarity. The analog-

ical similarity here derives from a parallelism in 

the action of two agents – each use something – 

while the dissimilarity derives from a specific con-

trast between the objects so used. Though the con-

trast of pointed and pointless is mere wordplay, it 

is may be enough to spark more profound process-

es of meaning construction in the reader. To spur 

the reader into engaging these processes, the sys-

tem explicitly hashtags the tweet as ironic, and 

puts the positive side of the contrast, pointed, in 

scare quotes. The reader is thus prompted to view 

the dissimilarity as merely superficial, and to read 

a deeper meaning into what is essentially a super-

ficial similarity. The reader, if not the system, is 

left with the image of a bad fisherman, for whom 

pointed hooks are just pointless gimmicks. The use 

of ironic scare quotes to signal fakeness or insin-

cerity is made more explicit in this tweet: 

#Irony: When some jewelers sell "valuable" di-

amonds the way tinkers sell valueless junk. #Jew-

eler=#Tinker #Diamond=#Junk 

So @MetaphorMagnet strives to sow antagonism 

even in the presence of unifying similarity, by for 

example, choosing to mold this similarity into the 

most negative comparisons. Consider another of 

the system’s rendering strategies in this tweet: 

90



Tourist. noun. A creep who would rather enjoy 

bizarre excursions than bizarre perversions. 

 #Tourist= #Creep 

Once again the similarity here hinges on a rather 

generic shared relationship: tourists enjoy excur-

sions and creeps enjoy perversions. The contrast is 

primarily one of affect: tourist has mildly positive 

sentiment as a lexical concept, while creep has an 

especially strong negative sentiment. And though 

bizarre is a stereotypical property of the concept 

perversion, the Google 2-gram “bizarre perver-

sion” (freq=111) attests that speakers often apply 

the property bizarre to excursions too.  

 A system may go further and use hashtags to 

imply a similarity that borders on identity, as in: 

 Would you rather be: 

 1. A guardian supervising an innocent child? 

 2. A jailer supervising a culpable offender? 

 ‪#Guardian=‪#Jailer 

So while antagonistic views on the world stress the 

conflict between two opposing situations, we can 

provoke deeper antagonism still by asserting these 

situations to be almost identical beneath the sur-

face. Yet the screenwriter’s maxim of show,‪don’t 

tell applies as much to tweets as it does to films, so 

it helps if we can do more than just tell of identity 

and actually show near-identicality in action. This 

requires some imagination, and perhaps more 

space than a single tweet will permit. Fortunately, 

bots are not limited to single tweets, and can issue 

two in quick succession if need be: 

When it comes to the devotees they lead, some 

swamis can be far from mellow and can even  

seem authoritarian. 

‪#Swami=‪#Warlord    ‪#Devotee=‪#Rebel 

Authoritarian swamis lead hardened devotees the 

way warlords lead rebels.  

‪#Swami=‪#Warlord ‪    #Devotee=‪#Rebel 

So tweets, like movies, can have sequels too. 

4 Counter-Punches and Anti-Metaphors 

Metaphors are underspecified and often highly 

context-dependent, and so many of the potential 

CMs that are harvested from the Google n-grams 

are not amenable to computational interpretation. 

Indeed, many – though suggestive – are not truly 

CMs in any accepted sense, and the 4-gram “love 

is a bed” is more Conceptual Metonymy than 

Conceptual Metaphor, a conflation of bed with sex 

that underpins euphemisms such as “in the sack”, 

“between the sheets” and “sleep together”. A CM-

like paraphrase will always mean more to humans 

who experience the world first-hand than to ma-

chines with basic symbolic representations. So a 

possible CM in isolation, such as the 4-gram “idea 

is a gift” (freq=94) or “idea is a contradiction” 

(freq=72), may present few computational oppor-

tunities to provoke deep thoughts, but opportuni-

ties for meaning construction abound if candidate 

CMs are placed into antagonistic juxtapositions, as 

in this @MetaphorMagnet tweet: 

To some thinkers, every idea is a comforting gift. 

To others, every idea is a disturbing contradiction. 

#Idea=#Gift #Idea=#Contradiction 

The ubiquity of most CMs makes them bland and 

uninteresting as linguistic statements to anyone but 

a metaphor theorist, and so they can resemble plat-

itudes more than true insights. But computational 

systems like @MetaphorMagnet can make generic 

CMs seem interesting again, by undermining their 

generality and revealing their limits. The key is 

antagonistic contrast, either between rival CMs or 

between a CM and literal language.  Consider the 

conceptual metaphor that underpins the expression 

“pack of girls.” The word “pack” is literally used 

to denote a group of animals, yet its figurative ex-

tension to people is so ubiquitous in speech that 

we often overlook the hidden slur. This tweet re-

minds us that it is, indeed, an insult: 

To join and travel in a pack: This can turn pretty 

girls into ugly coyotes. ‪#Girl=‪#Coyote 

The Google n-grams furnish the 3-grams “pack of 

coyotes” (freq=2120) and “pack of girls” (freq 

=745”). This is as close as the system comes to the 

underlying CM, but it is enough to establish a par-

allel that facilitates a provocative contrast. Ulti-

mately, the only pragmatics that @Metaphor 

Magnet needs is the pragmatics of provocation. 

5 And In The Red Corner … 

The notion that one CM can have an antagonistic 

relationship to another is itself just a metaphor, for 

antagonism is a state of affairs that can only hold 

between people. So to dial up the figurative antag-

onism to 11 and turn it into something approaching 

91



the real thing, we might imagine the kinds of peo-

ple that espouse the views inherent to conflicting 

CMs, and thereby turn a contest of ideas into an 

intellectual rivalry between people.  

 On Twitter, the handles we choose can be as 

revealing as the texts we write and re-tweet, and so 

the creation of an online persona often begins with 

the invention of an apt new name. For instance, we 

might expect a beatnik (to recall our earlier figura-

tive tweet from @MetaphorMagnet) with the han-

dle @rainbow_lover to agree with the general 

thrust of the CM Love is a Rainbow. Conversely, 

what better handle for an imaginary champion of 

the metaphor Love is a Rainbow than 

@rainbow_lover? To condense a CM into a repre-

sentative Twitter handle such as this, we can look 

to the Google 2-grams for suggestions. Consider 

the CM Alcohol is a Drug; while many may see 

this as literal truth, it is mined as a likely CM by 

@MetaphorMagnet from the Google 4-gram “Al-

cohol is a Drug” (freq=337). The system learns 

from the Metaphor Eyes service that addicts abuse 

drugs, and finds the Google 2-gram “alcohol ad-

dict” (freq=1250) to attest to the well-formedness 

of the name @alcohol_addict. It now has an imag-

inary champion for this CM, which it elaborates 

into the following tweet: 

I always thought alcohol was drunk by bloated  

alcoholics. But .‪@alcohol_addict says alcohol 

is a drug that only focused addicts abuse. 

The same strategy – in which a CM is condensed 

into an attested 2-gram that integrates aspects of 

the source and target ideas of the metaphor – is 

used twice in the following tweet to name rival 

champions for two antagonistic views on life: 

.‪@life_lover says life is a relaxing pleasure 

.@abortion_patient says it is a traumatic suffering 

  ‪  #Life=‪#Pleasure ‪#Life=‪#Suffering 

Notice that in the examples above, ‪@life_lover 

and @alcohol_addict turn out to be the names of 

real Twitter users, while no Twitter user has yet 

adopted the handle @abortion_patient. When the 

system invents a plausible handle for the imagi-

nary champion of a metaphorical viewpoint, we 

should not be surprised if a human has already 

taken that name. However, as the names fit the 

viewpoints, we do not expect an existing Twitter 

user such as @alcohol_addict to take umbrage at 

what is a reasonable inference about their views. 

Indeed, names such as @alcohol_addict already 

incorporate a good deal of caricature and social 

pretense, and it is in this spirit of make-believe that 

@MetaphorMagnet re-uses them as actors. 

6 The Judges’ Decision 

Mark Twain offered this advice to other (human) 

writers: “Get your facts first, then you can distort 

them as you please.” It is advice that is just as ap-

plicable to metaphor-generating computational 

systems such as @MetaphorMagnet that seek to 

use their uncontentious knowledge of stereotypical 

ideas to generate provocative comparisons. Many 

of @MetaphorMagnet’s facts come from its vari-

ous knowledge sources, such as the Web services 

Thesaurus Rex and Metaphor Eyes, as well as a 

large body of stereotypical associations. But many 

more are not “facts” about the world but observa-

tions of what people say on the Web. One might 

wonder then if a random sampling of 

@MetaphorMagnet’s outputs would yield tweets 

that are as comprehensible and interesting as the 

examples we have presented in this paper. 

  A notable benefit of implementing any meta-

phor-generating system as a Twitterbot is that all 

of the system’s outputs – its hits and its misses – 

are available for anyone to scrutinize on Twitter. 

Nonetheless, it is worth quantifying the degree to 

which typical users find a system’s outputs to be 

meaningful, novel and worth sharing with others. 

We thus sampled 60 of @MetaphorMagnet’s past 

tweets and gave these to paid volunteers on 

CrowdFlower.com to rate along the dimensions of 

comprehensibility, novelty and retweetability. 

Judges were paid a small fee per judgment but 

were not informed of the mechanical origin of any 

tweet; rather, they were simply told that each was 

taken from Twitter for its figurative content. 

 We solicited 10 ratings per tweet, though this 

number of ratings was eventually reduced once the 

likely scammers – unengaged judges that offer 

random or unvarying answers or which fail the 

simple tests interspersed throughout the evaluation 

– were filtered from the raw results set. For each 

dimension, judges offered a rating for a given 

tweet on the following scale: 1=very low; 

2=medium low; 3=medium high; 4=very high. The 

aggregate rating for each dimension of each tweet 

92



is then calculated as the mean rating from all judg-

es for that dimension of that tweet. 

 For the dimension of comprehensibility, over 

half (51.5%) of tweets are deemed to have very-

high aggregate comprehensibility, while 23.7% are 

deemed to have medium-high comprehensibility. 

Only 11.6% of the system’s tweets are judged to 

have very low comprehensibility, and just 13.2% 

have medium low comprehensibility. 

For the dimension of novelty, almost half of 

@MetaphorMagnet’s tweets (49.8%) are judged to 

exhibit very high aggregate novelty, while only 

11.9% are judged to exhibit very low novelty. 

For the dimension of retweetability, for which 

judges were asked to speculate about the likeli-

hood of sharing a given tweet with one’s followers 

on Twitter, 15.3% of tweets are deemed to have 

very high retweet value on aggregate, while 15.5% 

are deemed to have very low retweet value. Most 

tweets fall into the two intermediate categories: 

49.9% are deemed to have medium low retweet 

value, while 27.4% are deemed to have medium 

high retweet value. Though based on speculative 

evaluation rather than actual retweet rates, these 

numbers accord with our own informal experience 

of the bot on Twitter, as thus far its own designers 

have favorited approx. 27% of the bot’s ~7500 

tweets to date. It should also be noted that a 15.3% 

retweet rate would be considered rather ambitious 

for most Twitter users, and is thus perhaps an 

overstatement in the case of @MetaphorMagnet 

too. We thus see this as a speculative but nonethe-

less encouraging result. 

@MetaphorMagnet currently has approx. 250 

human followers (as of March 1
st
, 2015), though it 

has not yet attracted enough followers to facilitate 

a robust empirical analysis of their rates of favorit-

ing or retweeting. If and when it attracts sufficient 

followers to permit such an analysis, we may no 

longer need to look to crowdsourcing platforms to 

evaluate the system’s outputs, and may actually 

obtain a finer granularity of insight into the kinds 

of metaphors, oppositions and rendering strategies 

that humans most appreciate.  

7 Lucky Punches 

@MetaphorMagnet uses a variety of knowledge 

sources to formulate its observations and an even 

wider range of linguistic forms to package them 

into pithy tweets. Yet in every case it employs the 

same core strategy: identify a semantic contrast in 

a knowledge-base; employ semantic reasoning to 

elaborate a plausible but antagonistic scenario 

around this central contrast; and use attested Web 

n-grams to render this scenario in a provocative 

linguistic form. Though each stage is distinct from 

an abstract design view, they are all conflated in 

practice, so that e.g. Web n-grams are also used to 

inspire the system by suggesting the contrasts, jux-

tapositions and conceptual metaphors that appear 

most worthy of elaboration. 

 The use of raw n-grams that a system can only 

superficially understand constitutes a leap of faith 

that often pays off but sometimes does not. Con-

sider how the 4-gram “design is the heart” 

(freq=151) provides half of the following tweet:  

.@design_scientist says design is a united collaboration 

.@design_lover says it is a divided heart 
 #Design=#Collaboration #Design=#Heart 

While a human reader might understand divided 

heart as a poetic allusion to divided loyalties – 

which is nicely antagonistic to the notion of a unit-

ed collaboration – @MetaphorMagnet has an alto-

gether more literal understanding of the stereotypi-

cal heart, which it knows to be divided into various 

chambers. That the above juxtaposition works well 

is thus as much a matter of raw luck as deliberate 

effort, though as the old saying puts it, “the harder 

I work the luckier I get.” @MetaphorMagnet 

works hard to earn its frequent good fortune, and 

so any risk that raw n-grams bring to the genera-

tion process is more than compensated for by the 

unforeseeable resonance that they so often bring 

with them. 

For more detail on the internal workings of 

@MetaphorMagnet, readers are directed to the on-

line resource to RobotComix.com. 

 Acknowledgements 

The author is grateful to the European Commis-

sion for funding this work via the WHIM project 

(The What If Machine; grant number 611560). The 

author is also grateful for the support of Science 

Foundation Ireland (SFI) via the CNGL Centre for 

Global Intelligent Content. 

  

93



References 
 

Barnden, J. A. (2008). Metaphor and artificial intelli-

gence: Why they matter to each other. In R.W. 

Gibbs, Jr. (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of Meta-

phor and Thought, 311-338. Cambridge, UK: Cam-

bridge University Press 

Brants, T. and Franz, A. (2006). Web 1T 5-gram Ver. 1. 

Linguistic Data Consortium. 

Carbonell, J. G. (1981). Metaphor: An inescapable phe-

nomenon in natural language comprehension. Report 

2404. Pittsburgh, PA. Carnegie Mellon Computer 

Science Dept. 

Torrance, E. P. (1980). Growing Up Creatively Gifted: 

The 22-Year Longitudinal Study. The Creative Child 

and Adult Quarterly, 3, 148-158 

Gentner, D., Falkenhainer, B. and Skorstad, J. (1989). 

Metaphor: The Good, The Bad and the Ugly. In The-

oretical Issues in NLP, Yorick Wilks (Ed.) Hillsdale, 

NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Glucksberg, S. (1998). Understanding metaphors. Cur-

rent Directions in Psychological Science, 7:39-43. 

Guilford, J.P. (1967). The Nature of Human Intelli-

gence. New York: McGraw Hill. 

Hearst, M. (1992). Automatic acquisition of hyponyms 

from large text corpora. In Proc. of the 14
th

 Interna-

tional Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp 

539–545. 

Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live 

By. University of Chicago Press. 

Martin, J. H. (1990). A Computational Model of Meta-

phor Interpretation. New York: Academic Press. 

Mason, Z. J. (2004). CorMet: A Computational, Cor-

pus-Based Conventional Metaphor Extraction Sys-

tem, Computational Linguistics, 30(1):23-44. 

Pollio, H. R.  (1996). Boundaries in Humor and Meta-

phor. J. S. Mio and A. N. Katz (Eds.), Metaphor: 

Implications and Applications. Mahwah, New Jer-

sey: Laurence Erlbaum Associates, 231–253.  

Raskin, V. (1985). Semantic Mechanisms of Humor. 

Dordrecht.  

Shutova, E. (2010). Metaphor Identification Using Verb 

and Noun Clustering. In the Proc. of the 23
rd

  COL-

ING, the International Conference on Computational 

Linguistics. 

Veale, T. and Hao, Y. (2007). Comprehending and 

Generating Apt Metaphors: A Web-driven, Case-

based Approach to Figurative Language. In Proc. of 

the 22
nd

 AAAI conference of the Association for the 

Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. 

Veale, T. and Li, G. (2011). Creative Introspection and 

Knowledge Acquisition: Learning about the world 

thru introspective questions and exploratory meta-

phors. In Proc. of the 25
th

 AAAI Conf. of the Assoc. 

for Advancement of A.I., San Francisco. 

Veale, T. and Li, G. (2013). Creating Similarity: Lateral 

Thinking for Vertical Similarity Judgments. In Pro-

ceedings of ACL 2013, the 51
st
 Annual Meeting of 

the Association for Computational Linguistics, Sofia, 

Bulgaria, August 2013. 

94


