



















































Automatic Classification of WordNet Morphosemantic Relations


Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, pages 59–64,
Hissar, Bulgaria, 10–11 September 2015.

Automatic Classification of WordNet Morphosemantic Relations

Svetlozara Leseva, Maria Todorova, Tsvetana Dimitrova, Borislav Rizov,
Ivelina Stoyanova, Svetla Koeva

Department of Computational Linguistics,
Institute for Bulgarian Language, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences

Abstract
This paper presents work in progress on
a machine learning method for classifica-
tion of morphosemantic relations between
verb and noun synsets. The training data
comprises 5,584 verb–noun synset pairs
from the Bulgarian WordNet, where the
morphosemantic relations were automati-
cally transferred from the Princeton Word-
Net morphosemantic database. The ma-
chine learning is based on 4 features (verb
and noun endings and their respective se-
mantic primes). We apply a supervised
machine learning method based on a deci-
sion tree algorithm implemented in Python
and NLTK. The overall performance of the
method reached F1-score of 0.936. Our
future work focuses on automatic iden-
tification of morphosemantically related
synsets and on improving the classifica-
tion.

1 Introduction

Following the observations that for languages with
rich derivational morphology wordnets can re-
cover vast amount of semantic information (Bilgin
et al., 2004; Pala and Hlaváčková, 2007; Koeva et
al., 2008; Barbu Mititelu, 2013), in recent years
one of the main lines of research on wordnets has
been focused on deciphering semantic information
from derivational morphology and encoding it in
and across wordnets. This paper investigates a ma-
chine learning method for classification of mor-
phosemantic relations already identified between
verb and noun synset pairs.

The morphosemantic relations as defined within
the Princeton WordNet (PWN) (Agent, Under-
goer, Instrument, Event, etc.) link verb–noun pairs
of synsets containing derivationally related liter-
als (Fellbaum et al., 2009). As semantic and mor-
phosemantic relations refer to concepts, they are

universal, and such a relation must hold between
the relevant concepts in any language, regardless
of whether it is morphologically expressed or not.

All verb and noun synsets in the PWN have
been classified into semantic primes, such as per-
son, animal, cognition, change, etc. (Miller
et al., 1990), and corresponding labels, such
as noun.person, noun.animal, noun.cognition,
verb.cognition, verb.change have been assigned to
them. Like the morphosemantic relations, the se-
mantic primes are language independent. More-
over, there is a very strong relationship between
the semantic primes of morphosemantically re-
lated synsets and the morphosemantic relation ex-
isting between them. Additional information that
may be used to classify a morphosemantic relation
comes from the semantics of derivational affixes.

We use the semantic primes and the derivational
affixes of Bulgarian verb-noun pairs which are
derivationally and morphosemantically linked in
the Bulgarian WordNet (BulNet) (Koeva, 2008) as
features in a machine learning method for an auto-
matic classification of morphosemantic relations.

2 Related Work

Morphological descriptions in general lexical-
semantic resources, such as wordnets (Fellbaum,
1999), Jeux de Mots (Lafourcade and Joubert,
2013) or Wolf (Sagot and Fišer, 2008) have been
very popular in recent years.

The expression of morphosemantic relations
through derivational means has been investigated
in the wordnets of Turkish (Bilgin et al., 2004),
Czech (Pala and Hlaváčková, 2007), Polish (Pi-
asecki et al., 2012a; Piasecki et al., 2012b), Bul-
garian (Koeva, 2008; Dimitrova et al., 2014), Ser-
bian (Koeva et al., 2008), Romanian (Barbu Mi-
titelu, 2012), among others. The work on the
generation and/or identification of derivatives in
a wordnet has been applied for wordnet expan-
sion with new relations and synsets, and/or for

59



the transfer of these relations and synsets to other
wordnets (Bilgin et al., 2004; Koeva et al., 2008;
Piasecki et al., 2012a).

The proposal in this paper draws also on re-
search by Stoyanova et al. (2013) and Leseva et al.
(2014), who suggest approaches to filtering mor-
phosemantic relations assigned automatically to
derivationally related synsets.

3 Linguistic Motivation

In the context of wordnets, morphosemantic re-
lations hold between synsets containing literals
that are derivationally related. In the wordnet
structure these relations express knowledge addi-
tional to that conveyed by semantic relations, such
as synonymy, hypernymy, etc. This paper uses
the inventory of morphosemantic relations from
the Princeton WordNet morphosemantic database1

which includes 17,740 links connecting 14,877
unique synset pairs by means of morphosemantic
relations.

The Princeton WordNet specifies 14 types
of morphosemantic relations between verbs and
nouns many of which may be related to seman-
tic roles such as agent, instrument, location, etc.,
though the correspondence is not always straight-
forward (e.g., By-means-of). The relations are:
Agent, By-means-of (inanimate Agents or Causes
but also Means and possibly other relations), In-
strument, Material, Body-part, Uses (intended
purpose), Vehicle (means of transportation), Loca-
tion, Result, State, Undergoer, Destination, Prop-
erty, and Event (linking a verb to a deverbal noun
denoting the same event). These relations have
been assigned between pairs of verb and noun
synsets containing at least one derivationally re-
lated verb–noun pair of literals. For example, the
noun teacher:2 (’a person whose occupation is
teaching’) is the Agent of teach:2 (’impart skills
or knowledge to’), the noun machine:4 (’any me-
chanical or electrical device that transmits or mod-
ifies energy to perform or assist in the performance
of human tasks’) is the Instrument of the verb ma-
chine:2 (’turn, shape, mold, or otherwise finish by
machinery’).

A morphosemantic relation points to two
types of linguistic information: (i) a (possibly)
language-dependent derivational means through
which literals from the respective synsets are re-

1http://wordnetcode.princeton.edu/standoff-files/
morphosemantic-links.xls

lated, and (ii) largely language-independent se-
mantic relation of a particular type. Currently,
not all pairs of verb and noun synsets containing
derivationally related literals in the PWN 3.0 have
been assigned a morphosemantic relation – only
7,905 out of 11,751 noun synsets derivationally
related to a verb synset and 7,962 out of 8,934
verb synsets derivationally related to a noun synset
have a morphosemantic relation. Moreover, in the
cases where derivation is used along with other
types of word formation (e.g., compounding), the
synsets are not related via a derivational relation,
e.g., bookbinder:1 ’a worker whose trade is bind-
ing books’ has not been linked neither derivation-
ally, nor by means of a morphosemantic relation
to bind:8. Finally, as the linguistic generalisations
behind the morphosemantic relations have been
made on the basis of the English derivational mor-
phology, the proposed set of types and instances
of relations is not exhaustive for other languages.
At the same time these relations are valid in other
languages, even though they might not be morpho-
logically expressed. These considerations suggest
directions for research into morphosemantic rela-
tions.

As reported by Leseva et al. (2014) for Bul-
garian, the derivational patterns associated with
the morphosemantic relations exhibit considerable
polysemy. For example, out of 45 derivational pat-
terns associated with the Agent relation, only 13
are monosemous. The combination of the deriva-
tional suffix and the semantic prime of the noun
can be a very strong indicator for some relations.
For instance, a noun with the suffix -tel and the se-
mantic prime noun.person (as in uchitel ’teacher’)
is an Agent, while a noun.artifact with the suffix
-tel (as in dvigatel ’engine, motor, machine’) is
an Instrument. Thus, even though many suffixes
are ambiguous, in many cases the ambiguity can
be resolved by the semantic primes. In the PWN
3.0, there are 1,142 combinations of verb–noun se-
mantic primes within the 14,877 morphosemanti-
cally linked verb–noun synset pairs. Some of the
combinations are very indicative of the morphose-
mantic relation, e.g., verb.contact – noun.person:
Agent – 313, Undergoer – 6; verb.change –
noun.substance: Result – 51; Event – 1.

4 Training Data for Machine Learning

The PWN morphosemantic relations have been
transferred onto the corresponding synset pairs in

60



the Bulgarian WordNet (Koeva et al., 2010). An
algorithm for recognising derivationally related
pairs of literals, which uses string similarity and
heuristics, has been applied on the mophoseman-
tically related synset pairs in the Bulgarian Word-
Net. Similarity is established if at least one of the
following conditions is met: i) one of the literals
is a substring of the other; ii) the two literals have
a common beginning (estimated to be at least half
the length of the shorter literal); iii) the two lit-
erals have a Levenshtein distance smaller than a
certain threshold. Verb–noun literal pairs found to
be similar have been assigned a derivational rela-
tion – prefix, suffix, or conversion (Dimitrova et
al., 2014). The derivational relations have been
validated manually, resulting in 6,135 relations be-
tween 5,584 unique synset pairs.

In order to improve the consistency of the
dataset and to reduce noise, we have performed
certain procedures on the wordnet structure: i)
manual inspection and disambiguation of mor-
phosemantic relations in case of multiple relations
assigned to a synset pair; ii) validation of the con-
sistency of the semantic primes of nouns and verbs
belonging to the same natural class and the se-
mantic primes’ shift in the hypernym–hyponyms
paths; iii) consistency check of the type of the
assigned morphosemantic relation against the se-
mantic primes.

4.1 Disambiguation of Morphosemantic
Relations

We have identified 450 cases of multiple relations
assigned between pairs of synsets, which represent
50 different combinations of two (rarely three) re-
lations. We assume that two unique concepts are
linked by a unique semantic relation, thus we keep
only one relation per pair of synsets. We have dis-
tinguished several cases of multiple relation as-
signment, which served as a point of departure
when deciding which of the relations must be pre-
served.

(I) One of the relations excludes the other on
semantic and (frequently) syntactic grounds. Con-
sider the assignments: <Agent, Destination>,
<Agent, Undergoer>. Except in a reflexive inter-
pretation, an entity cannot be an Agent (the doer),
on the one hand, and a Destination (recipient) or
an Undergoer (patient or theme), on the other.
The type of relation is signalled by the synset
gloss and usually by the affix. In other cases,

such as <Agent, Event>, <Agent, Instrument>,
the choice of relation depends on the semantic
prime, e.g., a noun with the prime noun.artifact
or noun.act cannot be an Agent, and vice versa–a
noun.person cannot be an Instrument or an Event.

(II) One of the relations implies the other, e.g.,
<Instrument, Uses>, as an Instrument is used for
a certain purpose. The more informative relation
(in this case Instrument) has been preferred.

(III) There is no strict distinction between the
relations, e.g., <Result, Event>, <Result, State>,
<State, Event>, <Property, State>. In such
cases, the choices are motivated on the basis of se-
mantic information from the synsets, such as the
gloss, the literals or the semantic primes. Defini-
tions are very helpful as often they give additional
information which points to the type of morphose-
mantic relation, e.g., ’the act of...’, ’a state of...’,
etc. especially where the semantic prime is more
specific. Certain combinations of semantic primes
have been empirically established to strongly
suggest the type of relation, e.g., noun.state–
verb.change points to Result, noun.state–verb.state
– to State. The primes noun.act and noun.event on
their own have been found to be very indicative of
Events. These generalisations are made after in-
specting the triples noun.prime–morphosemantic
relation–verb.prime.

(IV) Where other indications are lacking, we
have taken into account which of the relations is
more typical for a given semantic prime and/or
for the synsets in the local tree (hypernyms, hy-
ponyms, sisters).

4.2 Validation of Semantic Primes

At certain nodes in some hypernym–hyponym
paths the semantic prime changes so that the hy-
ponyms of these nodes have a different seman-
tic prime. This may affect the homogeneity
of the prime–relation correspondences. For in-
stance, half of the Body-part relations involve the
prime noun.body, and the rest – noun.animal or
noun.plant. The respective nouns denote body
parts or organs of animals or plants and are con-
sistent with the definition of the prime noun.body.

We have performed a series of consistency
checks on the semantic primes in chains of the
type A > B > C1, . . . , Cn where A is the im-
mediate hypernym of B, and B is the immediate
hypernym of C1, . . . , Cn. Five types of inconsis-
tencies were discovered: i) the leaves (terminal

61



hyponyms) have a different semantic prime from
their immediate hypernym (the majority of the in-
stances, 1,175 out of 1,628 for the nouns, 1,043
out of 1,607 for the verbs); ii) the non-terminal
node B has a different semantic prime from A,
and C1, . . . , Cn have the prime of B (382 cases
for nouns, 374 for verbs); iii) some Cs have the
semantic prime of A, others – of B (10 cases for
nouns, 43 for verbs); iv) some Cs have the se-
mantic prime of A, some – of B, and others – a
third (different) one (43 cases for nouns, 133 for
verbs); v) A and C1, . . . , Cn have the same se-
mantic prime and B has a different one (7 cases
for nouns, 14 cases for verbs).

All the cases have been manually inspected.
The majority of the shifts in the semantic primes
reflect specificities of the hypernym–hyponym
paths, e.g., solid:18 (noun.substance) > food:3;
solid food:1 (noun.food). Cases of systematic in-
consistency include noun.animal or noun.plant in-
stead of noun.body; noun.animal or noun.plant in-
stead of noun.substance, and so forth. We have de-
cided to keep the assigned primes and to consider
assigning the primes inherited from the hypernyms
in addition to the original primes.

4.3 Cross-check of Semantic Primes with
Morphosemantic Relations

We have looked at the correspondences between
the type of morphosemantic relations and the se-
mantic primes of the nouns since their correla-
tion is stronger compared to the semantic primes
of the verbs. Two types of validation for consis-
tency were carried out: i) given a noun semantic
prime, which morphosemantic relations are found
for the synsets of this prime and what is their fre-
quency distribution (i.e., to what extent are they
typical for a given prime); ii) given a morphose-
mantic relation, which noun semantic primes are
found for the synsets which bear this relation and
what is their frequency distribution. These checks
enabled us to establish clearer criteria for the rela-
tion – semantic prime label correspondences and
to reduce noise in the data. For example, the
nouns linked via the relation Agent belong to 17
semantic primes, but some of them are unsuitable,
such as: noun.act, e.g., scamper:1; scramble:2;
scurry:1 (’rushing about hastily in an undignified
way’) – an Agent of scurry:2; scamper:2; skit-
ter:4; scuttle:1 (’to move about or proceed hur-
riedly’); noun.feeling, e.g., temper:9; mood:1; hu-

mor:7; humour:7 (’a characteristic (habitual or
relatively temporary) state of feeling’) – an Agent
of humor:1; humour:1 (’put into a good mood’);
noun.food dinner:1 (’the main meal of the day
served in the evening or at midday’) – an Agent
for dine (’have supper; eat dinner’). The unsuit-
able relations have been discarded based on the
nature of the relationship between the synsets, tak-
ing into account the semantic prime of the noun.

As a result of this type of validation, we
have been able to reduce the nominal se-
mantic primes associated with a morphose-
mantic relation, in some cases significantly:
Agent from 17 to 4 (noun.person, noun.animal,
noun.plant, noun.group); Instrument – from 9
to 5 (noun.artifact, noun.cognition, noun.object,
noun.substance, noun.communication); Mate-
rial – from 6 to 4 (noun.artifact, noun.body,
noun.food, noun.substance); State – from 10
to 5 (noun.artifact, noun.body, noun.substance,
noun.food); Body-part – from 4 to 3 (noun.body,
noun.animal, noun.plant) but noun.body subsumes
the other two; Destination is associated primarily
with noun.person (i.e., Recipients), to the excep-
tion of noun.artifact (1 relation) and noun.group
(2 relations); Vehicle is associated only with
noun.artifact. The other 7 relations – Event,
Result, Attribute, By-means-of, Uses, Location,
Undergoer – show greater diversity of semantic
primes and few of them could be discarded.

5 Machine Learning Task

We propose a machine learning method for au-
tomatic classification of morphosemantic rela-
tions for verb–noun synset pairs already identified
as morphosemantically and derivationally related.
The training is performed on a set of 5,584 labeled
data instances: verb–noun synset pairs from Bul-
Net with assigned relations (see 4).

Each data instance is represented by a combina-
tion of 4 features for the machine learning: i) verb
ending (with 172 values), ii) noun ending (with
294 values), iii) verb synset semantic prime (with
15 values), and iv) noun synset semantic prime
(with 25 values).

The endings are the substrings of symbols from
the end of the word backwards which minimally
differentiate a noun and a verb, i.e., -sha and -satel
for pisha ’write’ and pisatel ’writer’, respectively;
--ya and -ach for gotvya ’to cook’ and gotvach ’(a)
cook’, respectively; etc. The endings may include

62



a suffix or an inflection and part of the word’s base,
e.g., in pisha – pisatel, -sha – -satel: -sh- is a root
consonant and -a – the inflection; -s- is a root con-
sonant, -a- is a connecting vowel, and -tel is the
noun suffix.

This is a basic classification task which uses the
set of 14 morphosemantic relations in the PWN
3.0. We apply a supervised machine learning
method based on a decision tree algorithm imple-
mented in Python and NLTK.2 The decision tree
classifier is considered suitable for the task be-
cause each pair of verb–noun synsets is assigned
a single relation. Also, it performs well on large
datasets in reasonable time. Moreover, we empir-
ically confirmed that this algorithm outperformed
SVM and Naive Bayes on the particular dataset.

6 Results

The evaluation is based on 10-fold cross-
validation. The overall F1 score of the morphose-
mantic relations classifier based on machine learn-
ing is 0.936. Table 1 shows the precision, recall
and F1 score of the method’s performance across
different types of morphosemantic relations.

Relation Total Prec Recall F1
has vehicle 3 1.000 1.000 1.000
has agent 748 0.997 0.996 0.997

has location 78 0.987 0.987 0.987
has event 3,580 0.984 0.947 0.966

has instrument 90 0.978 0.889 0.933
has body part actor 5 1.000 0.833 0.917
involves property 84 0.750 0.969 0.860
has destination 5 1.000 0.714 0.857
has undergoer 164 0.720 0.922 0.821

has state 189 0.695 0.821 0.837
has uses 123 0.691 0.850 0.771

has result 272 0.695 0.844 0.769
by means of 239 0.715 0.803 0.759
has material 10 0.000 0.000 0.000

Table 1: Evaluation of the method’s performance
across different morphosematic relations.

The experiment shows that the combination of
the pair of semantic primes and the verb and noun
endings is a relatively reliable predictor of the type
of morphosemantic relation to be assigned with F1
score ranging between 0.759 and 0.997 depending
on the relation (results for relations with a low fre-
quency in the training data are unreliable).

The analysis of the errors helped us identify the
clearly defined and consistent relations (such as
has agent, has location), as well as those that are

2http://www.nltk.org/ modules/nltk/classify/

broadly defined and thus harder to identify both
by the machine learning algorithm and by human
experts (has uses, has result, by means of).

7 Conclusion and Future Work

Our current research is focused on testing the per-
formance of the method in a controlled setting
on the set of derivationally related synsets in the
PWN which have not been assigned a morphose-
mantic relation yet. In such a way we will expand
the dataset and enhance the density of synset rela-
tions in BulNet. More detailed feature engineering
with expert evaluation based on various features
will also be tested.

The main task for our future work is to de-
velop methods for automatic assignment of mor-
phosemantic relations to synsets that are deriva-
tionally related but are not connected in the re-
spective wordnet. The major challenge is given
a set of derivationally related synsets in the entire
wordnet, to distinguish those literal pairs (and re-
spectively – synsets) that are semantically related
from those that formally coincide.

An envisaged direction of research along these
lines is to employ WordNet-based similarity mea-
sures3 to evaluate similarity between: a) verb and
noun glosses from the semantically disambiguated
corpus of glosses of the Princeton WordNet;4 b)
examples of the usage of the verbs and nouns from
semantically anotated corpora such as the Sem-
Cor5 and BulSemCor (Koeva et al., 2010). The
semantic similarity approach takes into account:
a) the use of the verb in the noun’s gloss, or vice-
versa, which would mean that one is defined by
means of the other; b) the presence of the verb’s
hypernym (on one or more steps) in the noun’s
gloss, or vice-versa; c) the occurrence of the verb
and the noun in semantically related context; etc.
Further, other components of the WordNet’s struc-
ture and synset description can be applied to verify
the type of the relation, including the structure of
the gloss, the presence of other relations, etc.

Although our work is focused on Bulgarian
and primarily uses BulNet, the results, i.e., the
morphosemantic relations, are transferrable across
languages and can be used to enhance wordnets for
other languages with semantic content.

3http://wn-similarity.sourceforge.net/
4http://wordnet.princeton.edu/glosstag.shtml
5http://www.gabormelli.com/RKB/SemCor Corpus

63



References
Verginica Barbu Mititelu. 2012. Adding morpho-

semantic relations to the Romanian Wordnet. In
Proceedings of the Eight International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2012), pages 2596–2601.

Verginica Barbu Mititelu. 2013. Increasing the ef-
fectiveness of the Romanian Wordnet in NLP ap-
plications. Computer Science Journal of Moldova,
21(3):320–331.

Orhan Bilgin, Ozlem Cetinoglu, and Kemal Oflazer.
2004. Morphosemantic relations in and across
Wordnets – a study based on Turkish. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second Global Wordnet Conference
(GWC 2004), pages 60–66.

Tsvetana Dimitrova, Ekaterina Tarpomanova, and
Borislav Rizov. 2014. Coping with derivation
in the Bulgarian WordNet. In Proceedings of the
Seventh Global Wordnet Conference (GWC 2014),
pages 109–117.

Christiane Fellbaum, Anne Osherson, and Peter E.
Clark. 2009. Putting semantics into WordNet’s
”morphosemantic” links. In Proceedings of the
Third Language and Technology Conference, Poz-
nan, Poland. [Reprinted in: Responding to Informa-
tion Society Challenges: New Advances in Human
Language Technologies. Springer Lecture Notes in
Informatics], volume 5603, pages 350–358.

Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1999. WordNet: an Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.

Svetla Koeva, Cvetana Krstev, and Dusko Vitas. 2008.
Morpho-semantic relations in Wordnet – a case
study for two Slavic languages. In Proceedings
of the Fourth Global WordNet Conference (GWC
2008), pages 239–254.

Svetla Koeva, Svetlozara Leseva, Ekaterina Tarpo-
manova, Borislav Rizov, Tsvetana Dimitrova, and
Hristina Kukova. 2010. Bulgarian sense-annotated
corpus – results and achievement. In Proceedings
of the 7th International Conference of Formal Ap-
proaches to South Slavic and Balkan Languages
(FASSBL-7), pages 41–49.

Svetla Koeva. 2008. Derivational and morphosemantic
relations in Bulgarian Wordnet. Intelligent Informa-
tion Systems, pages 359–368.

Mathieu Lafourcade and Alain Joubert. 2013.
Bénéfices et limites de l’acquisition lexicale dans
l’expérience jeuxdemots. In Ressources Lexicales:
Contenu, construction, utilisation, valuation. Lin-
guisticae Investigationes, Supplementa 30, pages
187–216.

Svetlozara Leseva, Ivelina Stoyanova, Borislav Rizov,
Maria Todorova, and Ekaterina Tarpomanova. 2014.

Automatic semantic filtering of morphosemantic re-
lations in WordNet. In Proceedings of CLIB 2014,
Sofia, Bulgaria, pages 14–22.

George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane. Fell-
baum, Derek Gross, and Katherine Miller. 1990. In-
troduction to Wordnet: an on-line lexical database.
International journal of lexicography, 3(4):235–
244.

Karel Pala and Dana Hlaváčková. 2007. Derivational
relations in Czech WordNet. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Balto-Slavonic Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 75–81.

Maciej. Piasecki, Radoslaw Ramocki, and Marek
Maziarz. 2012a. Automated generation of deriva-
tive relations in the Wordnet expansion perspective.
In Proceedings of the 6th Global Wordnet Confer-
ence (GWC 2012), pages 273–280.

Maciej Piasecki, Radoslaw Ramocki, and Pawel
Minda. 2012b. Corpus-based semantic filtering in
discovering derivational relations. In A. Ramsay
and G. Agre, editors, Applications – 15th Interna-
tional Conference, AIMSA 2012, Varna, Bulgaria,
September 12-15, 2012. Proceedings. LNCS 7557,
pages 14–22. Springer.

Benoit Sagot and Darja Fišer. 2008. Building a free
french WordNet from multilingual resources. In
Proceedings of the Ontolex 2008 Workshop, Mar-
rakech, Morrocco.

Ivelina Stoyanova, Svetla Koeva, and Svetlozara Le-
seva. 2013. Wordnet-based cross-language identifi-
cation of semantic relations. In Proceedings of the
4th Biennal International Workshop on Balto-Slavic
Natural Language Processing, pages 119–128.

64


