



















































Annotating the Implicit Content of Sluices


Proceedings of LAW IX - The 9th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 178–187,
Denver, Colorado, June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Annotating the Implicit Content of Sluices

Pranav Anand & Jim McCloskey
Department of Linguistics

University of California, Santa Cruz
1156 High St., Stevenson Academic

Santa Cruz, CA 95064
{panand,mcclosk}@ucsc.edu

Abstract
This paper reports on an effort to develop a
linguistically-informed annotation scheme for
sluicing (Ross, 1969), ellipsis that leaves be-
hind a wh-phrase. We describe a scheme for
annotating the elided content, both in terms of
a free text representation and its degree of cor-
respondence with its antecedent. We demon-
strate that we can achieve reasonable IAA (α
between .78 and .88 across eight annotation
types) and describe some of the novel patterns
that have arisen from this effort.

1 Introduction
Ellipsis is one of the central concerns of modern
linguistic theory. Despite its importance, as noted
by Bos & Spenader (2011), large-scale annotated
corpora of elliptical phenomena are rare. Bos &
Spender’s own work is part of small group of pa-
pers attempting to annotate elliptical phenomena
systematically. Much of this work has focused on
studying Verb Phrase Ellipsis (VPE), which occurs
when a verb phrase is replaced by an auxiliary, as
in I avoided meat, although I didn’t have to <avoid
meat>.1 Here, we consider sluicing (Ross, 1969), a
distinct variety of ellipsis in which all but the inter-
rogative phrase of a content question is elided, leav-
ing behind the Sluice , or wh-remnant, subject to
an available Antecedent :

(1) It’s clear that
the University has to change , but
in what ways <the University has to
change> is less clear.

1We follow the convention of indicating the implicit content
of ellipsis inside angle brackets.

One of the central debates in the study of ellipsis
concerns the various syntactic and semantic mis-
matches between antecedents and elliptical content,
and an animating goal in our research is uncover-
ing a theory-neutral representation of elliptical con-
tent that can help sort out the ranges of mismatches.
We choose sluicing as our initial target for annotat-
ing implicit content for several reasons: it is cross-
linguistically common (unlike VPE), it is well stud-
ied (which means that we have the makings of a
rich annotation system), and it interacts with many
other linguistic areas (e.g., the syntax and semantics
of questions, discourse dynamics, lexical argument
structure).
We describe an effort to extract 4100 sluicing ex-

amples from the New York Times subset of the Gi-
gaword Corpus (Graff et al., 2005). We have cur-
rently annotated 417 instances in our corpus, and
have achieved interannotator α values between .75
and .86 across eight annotators and eight annotation
types. We begin in Section 2 with an overview of the
theoretical landscape of sluicing and some discus-
sion of previous corpus work. Section 3 lays out our
annotation scheme and section 4 provides evaluation
of the procedure that led to this scheme. In section
5 we discuss some qualitative observations on the li-
censing of sluicing that have arisen so far from our
annotation. Finally, in section 6 we conclude with
areas for future development.

2 Background

2.1 Theoretical Landscape
Following Chung et al. (1995), the literature recog-
nizes two central kinds of sluices. In merger sluices
(as in (2a)), the antecedent contains a correlate

178



phrase which corresponds to the wh-phrase of the
sluice. There are also sprouting sluices, in which the
context contains no correlate, as in (2b).

(2) a. They’ve made an offer to one of the cand-
idates , but I’m not sure which one .

b. They were firing, but at what was unclear.

Whether or not the distinction between merger cases
and sprouting cases is more than terminological has
been a major point of contention: Chung et al.
(1995) argue that merger sluices (but not sprouting)
are not subject to syntactic island restrictions, a claim
Merchant (2001) disputes but which Yoshida et al.
(2013) provide experimental evidence for.
At a more basic level, though, the central ques-

tion in research on sluicing is what, if anything,
is the content of the ellipsis site. At one pole,
anaphoric theories argue that ellipsis sites have no
internal structure, and that resolving elliptical con-
tent is a species of anaphora resolution (Hardt,
1993; Darymple et al., 1991; Schieber et al., 1999;
Ginzburg and Sag, 2000; Culicover and Jackend-
off, 2005; Barker, 2013). At the other, parallelism
theories assume that there is syntactic content to
ellipsis sites that is somehow parallel to (or recy-
cled from) the linguistic structure of the antecedent
(Williams, 1977; Fiengo and May, 1994; Chung
et al., 1995; Ross, 1969; Merchant, 2001; Crae-
nenbroeck, 2010). While originally it was thought
that parallelism should be defined in purely seman-
tic terms, evidence has steadily accumulated that the
availability of sluicing is sensitive to the morphosyn-
tactic structure of the antecedent. First, unlike VPE
(Kehler, 2002), sluicing does not tolerate voice mis-
matches (Merchant, 2001; Chung, 2005; Chung et
al., 2011; Anderbois, 2010; Chung, 2013; Merchant,
2007):

(3) a. The candidate was abducted but we don’t
know who by/by who.

b. Somebody abducted the candidate, but we
don’t know by who *(he was abducted).

Similarly, bare nominal wh-phrases cannot be
sluiced in certain cases in which the antecedent
clause lacks a crucial preposition (Chung, 2005):

(4) a. They’re jealous but it’s unclear who *(of).

b. Last night he was very afraid, but he
couldn’t tell us what *(of).

Nevertheless, the morphosyntactic requirements for
parallelism are not absolute, allowing at least formis-
matches in finiteness or syntactic category like those
below (Merchant, 2001):

(5) a. I can’t play quarterback; I don’t know how.
b. I remembermeeting him but I don’t remem-

ber when.

This conundrum — the simultaneous sensitivity
of parallelism to fine-grained lexical and syntactic
structure, alongside its blindness to finiteness or lex-
ical category — highlights how little we still know
about the range of potential mismatches. In our re-
search, we aimed to create an annotation scheme that
would allow us to bring to light the full variation per-
mitted.

2.2 Related Work
As far as we know, there are precisely seven system-
atic corpus annotations of ellipsis, four focusing on
verb phrase ellipsis (essentially, VPE and a hand-
ful of similar verbal processes, like pseudogapping
and comparative deletion) (Hardt, 1997; Nielsen,
2005; Bos and Spenader, 2011; Shahabi and Bap-
tista, 2012) and three on sluicing (Fernández et al.,
2005; Beecher, 2008; Nykiel, 2010).
The first large-scale study of verbal ellipsis is due

to Hardt (1997). 644 cases of VPE were extracted
from the Penn Treebank, whose antecedents were
then annotated by two coders. Hardt estimates that
the tree patterns he looks for have a recall of less
than 50%. As a result, two subsequent corpus-driven
efforts have involved significant manual examina-
tion. Nielsen (2005) read through one million words
across two corpora (444K words from the BNC,
680K words from the Penn Treebank), and uncov-
ered 1510 instances of VPE. In addition to coding
VPE antecedents, he provides text corresponding to
an intuitive paraphrase of the ellipsis site and clas-
sifies the kind of mismatch between the antecedent
and paraphrase according to thirteen criteria (e.g.,
tense mismatch, comparatives, inversion, split an-
tecedents, inferred antecedent). In a similar effort,
Bos & Spenader (2011) examined the entire WSJ
portion of the Penn Treebank, focusing on modals

179



and auxiliaries that “trigger” VPE. They find 580 in-
stances of VPE and related phenomena, which they
code for antecedent as well as: the morphosyntac-
tic category of the antecedent, the trigger, and 34
strings connecting the antecedent and elision site.
The bilingual VPE corpus of Shahabi & Baptista
(2012) is markedly different from the three efforts
already mentioned. They examine the Tehran En-
glish Persian Parallel Corpus (Pilevar-Taher et al.,
2011), an automatically aligned English-to-Persian
parallel corpus drawn from Open-subtitles that com-
prises 3.7 million words in each language. Using a
trigger-based search like Bos & Spenader, they find
10,515 instances of VPE in English; they then show
that one can straightforwardly quantify the relative
poverty of verbal elliptical processes in Persian by
determining how many VPE cases are resolved in
Persian.
In the case of sluicing, there are three principal

efforts, all with very particular and divergent aims.
Nykiel (2010), for example, is interested in tracing
the relative rates of sprouting and merger in 1689
sluices across five eras of English, from Old English
to Present Day English. Beecher (2008) focuses on
the particular question of which prepositions support
swiping (sluicing in which the wh-expression and a
preposition undergo inversion, e.g., by who). Us-
ing a list of ten question embedding predicates and
38 prepositions from the OED, he uses the Google
Search API to extract expressions of the form “pred-
icate who/what P”, which he then culls to 3000
sluices. Finally, Fernandez et al. (2005) focuses on
‘root’ sluices that are isolated sentences (e.g, Who?
Why?). Using regular expressions, they extract 5343
root sluices from the BNC, which the authors then
annotated a portion of for antecedent and sluice type,
inspired by Ginzburg and Sag (2000): those asking
about an indefinite correlate, those requesting clarifi-
cation on a presupposition, and statements of general
confusion.
What should emerge from this overview is that

while there is clearly important antecedent work in
this area, the kind of systematic, exhaustive corpus
we intend here is novel. Consider the issue of rep-
resentation. All of the corpora above mark the an-
tecedent and ellipsis site, but the ways they relate
the two, if at all, are idiosyncratic. Both Nykiel
and Fernandez et al. classify how the sluice wh-

expression integrates with the antecedent, but nei-
ther of them provides a way of locating other po-
tential (mis)matches. Nielsen additionally provides
a text-based resolution and a category for the kind
of mismatch, but the categories are quite broad and
designed to be mutually exclusive. In addition, as
Nielsen alone annotated these sluices, it is unclear
whether resolving ellipsis sites in plain text can be
done reliably across several annotators. Our goal, in
some sense, is to unify all of these efforts.

3 Annotation Scheme Development

3.1 Introduction
The central research questions of this project are
the representation schema we will use for resolving
sluices and how we will notate mismatch. The rep-
resentation schema is a tricky eye to thread. On the
one hand, as we have seen, the range of representa-
tion assumptions is fairly broad. Bos & Spenader no-
tably refrain from following Nielsen in resolving the
ellipsis site, precisely because of the theoretical com-
mitments that any choice brings. However, choosing
not to resolve in turn means that one cannot catalog
mismatches. Instead, our aim is to adopt the mini-
mal representational commitments we must in order
to document mismatches.

3.2 Data Selection
Our data comes from the New York Times subset of
the English Gigaword Second Edition corpus (Graff
et al., 2005). We first parsed the subset with the
Stanford parser and then extracted all verb phrases
whose final child was a wh-phrase. This yielded
5100 verb phrases. One author manually culled this
to 4100 sluices (eliminated expressions were 40% id-
ioms, 40% parsing errors, 15% repetitions we could
not remove automatically, and 5% sluicing-like con-
structions we put aside for the moment). As a final
quality check, the other author manually examined
all 52,000 wh-phrases in a random 80th of the NYT
subcorpus and discovered only one additional sluice.
Table 1 shows the distribution of the extracted

sluices by embedding predicate and wh-remnant; for
clarity, we only break out the top 7 remnants (95% of
data) and top 8 predicates (80% of data). While why
sluices are 44% of the data, somewhat surprisingly,
20% of the data came from degree sluices (I know

180



oth. which where what when how how much why
oth. 58 40 50 67 70 75 132 250 742
figure 1 1 14 1 73 90
ask 4 3 1 1 6 9 79 103
specify 7 21 1 1 13 16 54 5 118
explain 5 1 10 1 189 206
understand 4 5 2 211 222
see 18 2 2 37 3 181 243
say 84 44 49 15 123 47 387 116 865
know 102 33 45 115 146 161 218 728 1548

283 138 151 202 353 371 807 1832 4137

Table 1: Distribution of Sluices by Embedding Predicate and wh-remnant. Oth. designates all predicate or remnant
types not listed.

he’s hurt, but I don’t know how bad.). As we discuss
in section 5.3, these proved particularly challenging
to annotate.

3.3 Scheme Development Procedure
Our annotation scheme was developed on 417 sluice
instances over seven rounds of annotation and dis-
cussion. Sampling was biased to encourage diver-
sity in wh-remnant type: we chose 50 examples ran-
domly from each of the top seven remnant cate-
gories (why, how much, how, when, what, where,
and which; see Table 1 for frequency breakdowns)
and 67 randomly from the remaining data. In the
first round, the authors first collaboratively annotated
4 sluices chosen for diversity of wh-remnant (why,
what kind, how much, what color) and constructed
an initial scheme. In addition to identifying the an-
tecedent, like Nielsen, we resolved the ellipsis site
with plain text. We also constructed taxonomies for
the types of mismatch, the kind of implicit argument
in cases of sprouting, and, in the case of merger, the
varieties of correlates. We found that a context win-
dow radius of five sentences was sufficient to per-
form these tasks; crucially, even when the antecedent
was nearby, determining the proper antecedent scope
and ellipsis resolution often involved understanding
the larger questions under discussion in the text. We
then each annotated 33 sluices, and adjusted the tax-
onomies. For the remaining rounds, we recruited six
annotators: five advanced undergraduate linguistics
students (all with at least two courses in syntax and
semantics) and one graduate linguistics student. All
eight of us then annotated, in sequence, 40 sluices,
followed by two additional rounds of 100 sluices, and

one round of 140 sluices. We met weekly to com-
pare and discuss problematic cases, revising the an-
notation scheme and reannotating all previous mate-
rial. By round 5, annotators reported being able to
annotate 15-20 annotations per hour. Although we
considered using the automatic parses in annotation,
we found the parsetrees too error-prone to adequately
help with the fine-grained constituency analysis we
required and elected to use text spans alone.
Annotation was conducted on a modified version

of the brat web-based annotation tool (Stenetorp et
al., 2012). Existing tools render the annotation of
elided content difficult, since those that allow inser-
tion of new markables (e.g., MMAX2 (Mueller and
Strube, 2006)) completely alter the document, mak-
ing inter-annotator comparison difficult. We have
minimally modified brat to accept and display a free
text paraphrase, but we aim in subsequent versions
of this project to allow it to accept new content that
can be further annotated as well (i.e, for mismatches
with the antecedent).

3.4 Final Annotation Scheme

Our current annotation scheme codebook and
a sample of our gold standard annotations
in stand-off annotation format are available at
http://ohlone.ucsc.edu/SCEC for browsing. Each
sluice example is annotated with four obligatory
tags: the antecedent , the sluiced expression –
including a plain-text paraphrase of the elided
content – the main predicate of the antecedent
clause, and the correlate , if there is one. The cor-
relate and sluice are also tagged with the taxonomic

181



Mandatory Tags

sluice : sluice site.

– text: Free text paraphrase of elided material
– type [Degree, Manner, Reason, Temporal,
Locative, Classificatory, Possessive, Passive,
PP, Focus, Other]

– island: whether sluice ‘crosses’ an island
– Mismatches [Finiteness, Tense, Person, Case,
Subject Overtness, Additional Words, Other]

antecedent : intuitive fill for Ellipsis Site

predicate : main predicate for clause in A .

Correlate : material in A replaced or elabo-
rated on by wh-phrase.

– type [Indefinite, Definite, Pronoun, Strong
Quantifier, wh-phrase, Name, Disjunction,
Temporal/Locative, Degree/Extent]

Optional Tags

Ellipsis Antecedent : A is elided

Alternative Antecedent : Secondary A

E-Type : Indefinite in A that is anaphoric in ES

Ignore : Material not retained in ES

Figure 1: Abridged Sluicing 1.5 Tagset

features mentioned above (type of sluice, type of
correlate, and morphosyntactic mismatches). Figure
1 summarizes these features.
In addition, each sluice example may addition-

ally bear six optional tags. Two correspond to cases
where there are several possible antecedents. In the
case of Alternative Antecedent we observed sev-
eral cases of antecedent “sandwiching”, in which the
sluice is buttressed by roughly synonymous potential
antecedents, as in (6). Ellipsis Antecedent is used in
cases where the antecedent for a sluice is itself ellip-
tical (in all cases we have encountered, VPE).

(6) We lost our focus a little bit somewhere. I
don’t know where. But we lost it . [27861]

Two additional tags deal with interpretive differences
between Antecedent and elided content. EType
marks indefinite material in the Antecedent that is in-
terpreted anaphorically in the ellipsis site, as in (7).
Ignore marks material that is semantically active in
the Antecedent but does not seem to be carried over
to the elided content at all, such as parenthetical ma-
terial (8a) or additive particles (8b).

(7) She said that she would issue
a written ruling as soon as possible,
but did not say when. [35291]

(8) a. First, though, they must teach. And, be-
fore that, figure out how. [36311]

b. He said McDonald also owed federal
taxes, but he would not say how much.
[5912]

4 Analysis of Annotation Scheme
Development

Table 2 provides a condensed measure of interan-
notator agreement over the tags across the rounds.2
Because all of the tags are text spans, we use Krip-
pendorff’s continuum metric (Krippendorff, 1995)
(a special case of Krippendorff’s α (Krippendorff,
2014) for spans). In general, IAA rates drop in
Round 3, as the additional annotators were intro-
duced, and then rises.
Most of the agreement gains come from conven-

tions about boundaries (e.g., when ignored material
at clause-edge should be marked Ignore vs. excluded
from the Antecedent, what the predicates of cop-
ula and existential sentences are). In addition, the
gains for Antecedent in Round 5 are largely due to
the introduction of the Elided and Alternative An-
tecedent tags, which served to resolve a disagree-
ment about what ‘the’ antecedent was in such unclear

2Note that the IAA rates have been computed for the novel
instances in each round.

182



cases. EType’s rise involved actual instruction of the
annotators about the pragmatics of EType interpreta-
tions. Finally, Correlate increases are due both to im-
plicit learning (e.g., what counted as the “real” cor-
relate in an expression), but also due to a growing
insight on our part about the complexity of degree
sluices (see section 5.3). Agreement on the taxo-
nomic features on Sluice and Correlate, not shown
here for reasons of space, were consistently above
95% accuracy.

Round

Tag 2 3 4 5 6

Sluice .83 .75 .78 .88 .86
Ante .83 .67 .73 .78 .88
Pred .92 .56 .85 .85 .85
Corr .72 .58 .60 .74 .78
Elided .94 .94
AltAnte .66 .78
EType .21 .32 .67 .80 .87
Ignore .43 .74 .78
Text 62.4 48.2 50.4 84.2 84.2
Instances 33 40 100 100 140

Table 2: Inter-Annotator Agreement by Annotation
Round. IAA for the first 8 span categories is calculated
in Krippendorff’s continuum metric and IAA for the free
text paraphrases is in BLEU:3. Numbers are computed for
new instances annotated in each round, which is provided
at the bottom of the table.

4.1 Minimal Tampering and Maximal
Omission

A significant portion of our discussions focused on
the procedure for resolving the elided content. We
found that many of the mismatch types were only
clearly apparent on comparison of the free text para-
phrase with the antecedent. However, the fact that
paraphrases were free text gave annotators a great
deal of latitude to modify the form of the antecedent
– e.g., introducing an embedding predicate to pre-
serve finiteness or paraphrasing away material to cir-
cumvent an island violating structure.
Two best practices arose during the process that

increased consistency. First, we adopted a princi-
ple of “Minimal Tampering”, where annotators were
asked to modify the Antecedent text minimally; this

was most successful after Round 3, where annota-
tors were given the ability to alter a copy of the An-
tecedent (as opposed to constructing a paraphrase de
novo). However, these paraphrases were often un-
natural and prolix, because letter of the law Minimal
Tampering required an annotator to overtly express
material that is more naturally dropped in a typical
conversational setting. For example, consider the
temporal adjunct Thursday in (9a) and the locative
adjunct in the region in (9b). Should these be explic-
itly mentioned, and if so, how should the paraphrase
be structured (e.g., where should in the region go?
with the wh-remnant or in its original location in the
Antecedent?). Similarly, in (9c), the DP thousands
upon thousands of people is an EType expression.
Should that be expressed in the free-text paraphrase
as them, those people, those thousands upon thou-
sands of people?

(9) a. But Thursday the market for other Califor-
nia municipal bonds recovered a bit. “It’s
difficult to say how much, because liquid-
ity is relatively low and trading is sporadic,”
said Ian MacKinnon , senior vice president
of fixed-income for the Vanguard Group of
mutual funds . [35463]

b. Among the proposals are new power plants
in the region, although the report does not
specify where. [143606]

c. There was always something new improved
equipment, innovative means of transmis-
sion, original shows coming down the net-
work line from New York and Chicago and
above all, the knowledge that thousands
upon thousands of people clustered around
a box that sat like a shrine in their living
rooms, listening. It didn’t really matter to
what. [36225]

We adopted Minimal Tampering in part to make
links between the Antecedent and ellipsis more au-
tomatically recoverable, but after several rounds of
unsuccessful additional conventions, we realized by
round 5 that a more anaphorically reasonable ap-
proach was easier for annotators to reliably imple-
ment. We thus introduced a principle of ‘Maximal
Correlate Omission’, which instructed annotators to
preserve as little of the Correlate as they could. In the

183



end, this meant that many of the stylistic differences
in this kind of redundant content were removed. Cor-
respondingly, there is a spike in agreement rates for
Text in Table 2 after round 5 (IAA for paraphrases is
provided in BLEU:3 score (Papineni et al., 2002)).

4.2 Unresolved issues
Two issues proved too difficult to annotate reliably.
First, because there is controversy in the literature
about whether sprouting occurs with ‘core’ argu-
ments or only adjuncts, we attempted in Round 3 to
mark cases of sprouting with their FrameNet roles.
However, this task proved too costly for the anno-
tators; fully 30% of the predicates we considered
lacked a clear FrameNet entry, and for the remainder,
it was often unclear which frame was best suited to
the data.3 This led us to adopt the streamlined sluice
type shown in Table 1. In addition, wh-remnants
that coordinated phrases with distinct types and/or
grammatical functions proved too challenging for us
to annotate with current tools, since they interacted
with the Antecedent in different ways. For exam-
ple, in (10), the phrases link to different Correlates:
how many picks up on the amount introduced by the
vague partitive a bunch and whom targets the quan-
tificational DP itself.

(10) To those who have faulted him for not lob-
bying aggressively for permanent trade re-
lations for China , he said he had called
“a bunch” of members of Congress , but
would not say how many or whom .
[89868]

5 Qualitative Results

Even though our current set of annotated examples
is 10% of our extracted data, we are encouraged by
the fact we have already encountered phenomena of
real theoretical interest, but which one might have
feared would be relatively rare – amnestied island-
violations, for instance, as in (11) (note that the

3An anonymous reviewer asks why we chose FrameNet over
Propbank, which is considerably less articulated. As our initial
intent was to characterize precisely what the role was, not sim-
ply whether it was core, we believed that FrameNet’s specificity
would be a benefit. The reviewer is right that Propbank may be
good enough for the core-distinction, and we plan on following
up on this idea.

elided content is ungrammatical, as expected if this
is an island amelioration):

(11) The handover took place at a British em-
bassy in one of the newly independent
Baltic states. Which one <the handover
took place at a British embassy in> has
never been confirmed.

In particular, several kinds of mismatch between
antecedent and ellipsis site have turned up which
have gone undiscussed or underdiscussed in previous
work. Here we offer some examples, as an illustra-
tion of the potential for discovery that we think our
resource holds out.

5.1 Modal mismatches
Since Merchant (2001), it has been known that a fi-
nite clause can antecede a nonfinite sluice, triggering
attendant realis differences, as in (5a) above. But we
have also found many (40) examples of the reverse
pattern, where a non-finite (or modal) antecedes a
sluice. In 30 of these cases, the precise modality in-
tended inside the sluice is difficult to pin down. In
(12), for example, is the intended modal here a sim-
ple future, or a future-oriented modal (if so, of what
flavor?)? For the moment, we are simply annotat-
ing these cases with the expression modal, but our
eventual goal is to understand why this previously
unnoticed kind of vagueness is tolerated in sluicing.

(12) “I want to return (to Peru) some day , but
I don’t know when < I modal return to
Peru> . . . ” [117524]

(13) Texas A&M coach Tony Barone un-
abashedly predicted that ... the Aggies
could be better than a year ago. He just
forgot to say when <the Aggies modal be
better than a year ago>. [88489]

5.2 Compound Correlates
Several of our novel phenomena emerged originally
as cases of annotator confusion, including the follow-
ing:

(14) Despite my inclination toward procrasti-
nation, I am determined to send holiday
cards this year. It doesn’t much matter
which holiday. [106579]

184



This example emerged as a problem during annota-
tion precisely because it is unclear what the shape
of the analysis is—what the elided content is, what
the Antecedent is, how they correspond—and yet all
annotators agreed it is grammatical. Three analy-
ses of the elided content are possible: that the wh-
remnant is sprouted off holiday cards; that it is ex-
tracted from the compound nominal holiday cards,
violating numerous constraints on extraction; or that
it is extracted from an elided cleft ‘pseudo-sluice’ (as
in (15c)).

(15) a. It doesn’t much matter which holiday <I
send holiday cards for>

b. It doesn’t much matter which holiday <I
send [__ cards]>

c. It doesn’t much matter which holiday <it
is that I send holiday cards for>

Of these options, both the sprouting and compound
nominal cases are empirically novel. If sprouting, it
should be as ill-formed as *They’re jealous but it’s
unclear who. If the compound analysis is correct,
there are issues for the analysis both of compounds
and of correlates.

5.3 Degree Expressions
Among our most vexing (and interesting) cases for
annotation were degree sluices, underdiscussed in
the theoretical literature, but very common in our
data. A degree wh-remnant (like how much) may
have no overt Correlate, as in (16), or may have as
correlate a vague indefinite extent, as in (17).

(16) a. They said this would save the government
money, though they could not yet say how
much <this would save the government
money>. [2753]

b. The review, Gilligan acknowledged, de-
layed the issuance of the notice about
Strandflex, but she said she could not es-
timate by how much <the review delayed
the issuance of the notice about Strand-
flex>. [60122]

(17) a. The Atlanta-based company said Thurs-
day that operating profit would be “sub-
stantially below” analysts’ estimates but
didn’t specify howmuch <operating profit

would be below analysts’ estimates>.
[104088]

b. But Thursday the market for other Califor-
nia municipal bonds recovered a bit. “It’s
difficult to say how much <the market for
other California municipal bonds recov-
ered>, because . . . ” [35463]

For our annotators, the question was: what is the cor-
relate in cases like (17)? The apparent answer is that
the correlates are the vague indefinite extent expres-
sions substantially and a bit. But these elements are
optional and in their absence sluicing with howmuch
remains possible, much as in (16b). But that in turn
suggests that the ‘real’ correlates for such cases are
not substantially or a bit, but rather implicit degree
expressions which are further restricted by substan-
tially or a bit. However, if all of that is reasonable,
it suggests an account for cases like (16) in which
there are also implicit degree correlates—over ex-
tents saved, or delayed by.
There is a practical question of annotation here.

But as is often the case, annotation dilemmas high-
light theoretical puzzles. Cases like those in (16)
would naturally be taken to be sprouting cases, while
those in (17), because there is an overt indefinite,
would naturally be taken to be cases of merger. But
that bifurcation obscures important (semantic) com-
monalities between the two kinds of cases, and sug-
gests oncemore how useful sluicing can be as a probe
for implicit content. And since such cases suggest
that at least some apparent cases of sprouting need to
be analyzed in terms of implicit correlates, they force
the question again of whether or not such interpreta-
tions are generally correct—a position which would
in turn have important ramifications for theories of
implicit content more generally. Vexation for anno-
tators often signals phenomena of particular theoret-
ical interest.

6 Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a novel,
linguistically-informed annotation scheme for
tackling the elided content of sluices and have
shown that the system can produce annotations with
a high degree of reliability. We have also demon-
strated that even in the small amount of data we
have examined, patterns outside those traditionally

185



talked about are already cropping up. We view the
current scheme as stable and are annotating the
remainder of our data in earnest. Looking ahead,
one crucial question we are still considering is the
representational schema for elided content. One
key limitation of our present toolkit is the inability
to mark correspondences between parts of the
overt text and parts of the (annotator-generated)
elided content. This has made the annotation of,
for example, coordinated sluices, impossible and
many other tasks cumbersome. In the future, we
plan on adapting brat to allow us to relate parts of
the Antecedent and elided content directly, building
something akin to a word alignment corpus for ellip-
sis. Such a method could prove both powerful and
reasonably theory-neutral across a range of elliptical
constructions. We also are considering incorporat-
ing further syntactic and semantic annotation (e.g,
lightweight syntactic or semantic dependencies)
as an additional layer of representation that can
be marshaled to (in)validate various theories of
sluicing and ellipsis more generally.

Acknowledgments

We would like to first thank our three anonymous
reviewers for helpful comments. We have benefited
from conversations with: Sandy Chung, Amy Rose
Deal, Dan Hardt, Bill Ladusaw, Jason Merchant,
Craige Roberts, Bern Samko, and Matt Wagers.
This work has been funded by a UCSC Institute
for Humanities Research Grant to the Santa Cruz
Ellipsis Consortium and a UCSC Committee on
Research grant to Jim McCloskey. Finally, this work
would not have been possible without the diligent,
incisive labor of annotation-wrangler Bern Samko
and our undergraduate annotators at various stages
of this project: Philip King, Chelsea Miller, Emma
Peoples, Nick Primrose, Michael Titone, Danny de
la Vega, Tony Zavala, Jasmine Embry, Jack Haskins,
Lily Ng and Rachelle Boyson.

References
Scott Anderbois. 2010. Sluicing as anaphora to issues.

Presented at SALT 20, University of British Columbia
and Simon Fraser University, April 29–May 1, 2010.

Chris Barker. 2013. Scopability and sluicing. Linguistics
and Philosophy, 36:187–223.

Henry Beecher. 2008. Pramatic inference in the interpre-
tation of sluiced Prepositional Phrases. In San Diego
Linguistic Papers, volume 3, pages 2–10. Department
of Linguistics, UCSD, La Jolla, California.

Johan Bos and Jennifer Spenader. 2011. An annotated
corpus for the analysis of vp ellipsis. Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, 45(4):463–494.

Sandra Chung, William Ladusaw, and James McCloskey.
1995. Sluicing and logical form. Natural Language
Semantics, 3:239–282.

Sandra Chung, William Ladusaw, and James McCloskey.
2011. Sluicing(:) between structure and inference. In
Rodrigo Gutiérrez-Bravo, Line Mikkelsen, and Eric
Potsdam, editors, Representing Language: Essays in
Honor of Judith Aissen, pages 31–50. California Dig-
ital Library eScholarship Repository. Linguistic Re-
search Center, University of California Santa Cruz,
Santa Cruz, California.

Sandra Chung. 2005. Sluicing and the lexicon: The point
of no return. In Rebecca Cover and Yuni Kim, edi-
tors, BLS 31, Proceedings of the Thirty-First Annual
Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, pages 73–
91. Department of Linguistics, UC Berkeley, Berkeley,
Calif.

Sandra Chung. 2013. Syntactic identity in sluicing: How
much and why. Linguistic Inquiry, 44:1–44.

Jereon van Craenenbroeck. 2010. The Syntax of Ellip-
sis: Evidence from Dutch Dialects. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.

Peter Culicover and Ray Jackendoff. 2005. Simpler Syn-
tax. Oxford University Press, Oxford and New York.

Mary Darymple, Stuart M. Schieber, and Fernanda C. N.
Pereira. 1991. Ellipsis and higher-order unification.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 14:399–452.

Raquel Fernández, Jonathan Ginzburg, and Shalom
Lappin. 2005. Automatic bare sluice disambiguation
in dialogue. In Proceedings of the IWCS-6 (Sixth
International Workshop on Computational Semantics),
pages 115–127, Tilburg, the Netherlands, January.
Available at:
http://www.dcs.kcl.ac.uk/staff/lappin/recent_papers_
index.html.

Robert Fiengo and Robert May. 1994. Indices and Iden-
tity. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Jonathan Ginzburg and Ivan Sag. 2000. Interrogative
Investigations: The Form, Meaning and Use of English
Interrogatives. CSLI Publications, Stanford, Calif.

David Graff, Junbo Kong, Ke Chen, and Kazuaki
Maeda. 2005. English gigaword second edition
ldc2007t07. Technical report, Linguistic Data Consor-
tium, Philadelphia.

186



Daniel Hardt. 1993. Verb Phrase Ellipsis: Form, Mean-
ing and Processing. Ph.D. thesis, University of Penn-
sylvania.

Daniel Hardt. 1997. An empirical approach to vp ellipsis.
Computational Lingusitics, 23(4):525–541.

Andrew Kehler. 2002. Coherence in Discourse. CSLI
Publications, Stanford, Calif.

Klaus Krippendorff. 1995. On the reliability of unitizing
continuous data. In P. V. Marsden, editor, Sociological
Methodology 1995, volume 25. Blackwell, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.

Klaus Krippendorff. 2014. Content Analysis: An Intro-
duction to its Methodology. Sage Publications, Thou-
sand Oaks, California, 3rd edition.

Jason Merchant. 2001. The syntax of silence: sluicing,
islands, and the theory of ellipsis. Oxford University
Press, Oxford and New York.

Jason Merchant. 2007. Voice and ellipsis. Manuscript,
University of Chicago, available at http://home.
uchicago.edu/~merchant/publications.html.

ChristophMueller andMichael Strube. 2006. Multi-level
annotation of linguistic data with mmax2. In Corpus
Technology and Language Pedagogy: New Resources,
New Tools, New Methods.

Leif Arda Nielsen. 2005. A corpus-based study of verb
phrase ellipsis identification and resolution.

Johanna Nykiel. 2010. Whatever happened to Old En-
glish sluicing. In Robert A. Cloutier, Anne Marie
Hamilton-Brehm, and Jr. William A. Kretzschmar, ed-
itors, Studies in the History of the English Language V:
Variation and Change in English Grammar and Lexi-
con: Contemporary Approaches, pages 37–59. Walter
de Gruyter.

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei
jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. pages 311–318.

Mohammad Pilevar-Taher, Heshaam Faili, and Abdol-
Hamid Pilevar. 2011. TEP: Tehran English-Persian
parallel corpus. In Alexander Gelbukh, editor, Com-
putational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing,
volume 6609 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 68–79. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

John R. Ross. 1969. Guess who? In Robert Binnick,
Alice Davison, Georgia Green, and Jerry Morgan, ed-
itors, CLS 5: Papers from the Fifth Regional Meet-
ing of the Chicago Linguistic Society, pages 252–286.
Chicago Linguistic Society, Chicago, Illinois.

Stuart Schieber, Fernanda Pereira, and Mary Dalrymple.
1999. Interaction of scope and ellipsis. In Shalom
Lappin and Elabbas Benmamoun, editors, Fragments:
Studies in Ellipsis and Gapping, pages 8–31. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.

Mitra Shahabi and Jorge Baptista. 2012. A corpus-based
translation study on English-Persian verb phrase ellip-
sis. ICAME Journal, 36:95–112.

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topić, Tomoko
Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi Tsujii. 2012.
brat: a web-based tool for NLP-assisted text annota-
tion. In Proceedings of the Demonstrations Session at
EACL 2012. Project Website: http://brat.nlplab.org/
about.html.

Edwin Williams. 1977. Discourse and logical form. Lin-
guistic Inquiry, 8:101–139.

Masaya Yoshida, Jiyeon Lee, and Michael Walsh Dickey.
2013. The island (in)sensitivity of sluicing and sprout-
ing. In Jon Sprouse and Norbert Hornstein, editors,
Experimental Syntax and Island Effects, pages 360–
376. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New
York.

187


