



















































Secondary Connectives in the Prague Dependency Treebank


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 291–299,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

Secondary Connectives in the Prague Dependency Treebank 

 
Magdaléna Rysová 

Charles University in Prague 
Faculty of Arts 

Institute of Czech Language 
and Theory of Communication 

Czech Republic 
magdalena.rysova@post.cz 

 

Kateřina Rysová 
Charles University in Prague 

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics 
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics 

Czech Republic 
katerina.rysova@post.cz 

  

Abstract 

The paper introduces a new annotation of 
discourse relations in the Prague Dependency 
Treebank (PDT), i.e. the annotation of the so 
called secondary connectives (mainly 
multiword phrases like the condition is, that is 
the reason why, to conclude, this means etc.). 
Firstly, the paper concentrates on theoretical 
introduction of these expressions (mainly with 
respect to primary connectives like and, but, 
or, too etc.) and tries to contribute to the 
description and definition of discourse 
connectives in general (both primary and 
secondary). Secondly, the paper demonstrates 
possibilities of annotations of secondary 
connectives in large corpora (like PDT). The 
paper describes general annotation principles 
for secondary connectives used in PDT for 
Czech and compares the results of this 
annotation with annotation of primary 
connectives in PDT. In this respect, the main 
aim of the paper is to introduce a new type of 
discourse annotation that could be adopted 
also by other languages. 

1 Introduction 

In the paper, we introduce a new annotation of 
discourse relations in the Prague Dependency 
Treebank (PDT) enriched by the so called 
secondary connectives (i.e. especially by the 
multiword phrases like hlavním důvodem je “the 
main reason is”, závěr zní “the conclusion is”, to 
kontrastuje s tím “this contrasts with” etc.). 

We present how it is possible to annotate such 
variable (i.e. inflectional and modifiable) 
structures on big data according to general 
annotation principles. We believe that our 
methods may be used also for other languages to 
enrich the discourse annotations of similar 
corpora. 

2 Theoretical Background – Discourse 
Connectives in General Overview 

Many theoretical approaches of discourse 
analysis (see projects like Penn Discourse 
Treebank – Prasad et al., 2008 or Potsdam 
Commentary Corpus – Stede and Neumann, 
2014) are based on detection and annotation of 
discourse connectives in texts. However, there is 
not a general agreement on definition as well as 
terminology concerning these expressions (called 
besides discourse connectives also pragmatic 
connectives – van Dijk, 1979, discourse particles 
– Fischer, 2006 etc.). In this paper, we use the 
term discourse connectives following the Prague 
tradition.  

Very generally, discourse connectives may be 
defined as language expressions signaling 
discourse relations within a text. Most of the 
authors would agree on typical examples like 
and, but, or, when, so, because, yet etc., i.e. on 
the central or most frequent discourse 
connectives. However, the authors differ in 
dealing with less typical examples like for this 
reason, this follows etc., i.e. in (mostly) 
multiword phrases allowing variation and 
inflection (impossibility of inflection is, e.g., one 
of the criteria used for delimitation of 
connectives in Potsdam Commentary Corpus – 
Stede and Neumann, 2014).  

From part-of-speech perspective, some authors 
define discourse connectives as subordinating 
and coordinating conjunctions, prepositional 
phrases and adverbs (e.g. Prasad et al., 2008, 
2010, 2014; Fraser, 1999), others (like Hansen, 
1998; Aijmer, 2002; Schiffrin, 1987) add also 
particles and nominal phrases. 

In this paper, we would like to contribute to 
this discussion on discourse connectives, to 
present our definition used in PDT and to bring a 

291



new division of discourse connectives based on a 
large corpus study. 

2.1 Delimitation of Connectives 
in the Prague Dependency Treebank 

During the annotation of authentic Czech texts 
from PDT, we have met many different 
possibilities of signaling discourse relations – 
from one-word, frozen conjunctions like a “and” 
or ale “but” to multiword phrases like stručně 
řečeno “simply speaking”, vzhledem k této 
situaci “considering this situation”, díky této 
zkušenosti “thanks to this experience” etc. All of 
these expressions somehow contribute to the 
structuring of discourse, but we felt a need to 
differentiate such wide group of expressions into 
subgroups taking into account mainly two 
aspects: i) semantically, the suitability of the 
given expression (in its connective meaning1) 
for different contexts, ii) grammatically, the 
phase of grammaticalization of the given 
expression. 

 
i) Semantic delimitation of connectives 
The suitability for different contexts divides the 
expressions into two groups. The first contains 
expressions that are (in their connective 
meaning) appropriate for many different 
contexts, the second includes expressions that are 
context dependent – see Examples 1, 2 and 3: 
 
(1) Celý den pršelo. Proto nepůjdu na výlet. 
“It was raining the whole day. Therefore, I will 
not go for a trip.” 
 
(2) Chce se stát slavnou herečkou. Kvůli tomu 
udělá cokoli. 
“She wants to be a famous actress. Because of 
this, she is able to do anything.” 
 
(3) Ředitel firmy uzavřel řadu podezřelých 
obchodů. Kvůli této činnosti byl vyšetřován 
policií. 
“Director of the company has entered into a 
series of suspicious transactions. Because of this 
activity, he was investigated by the police.” 
 
In Examples 1, 2 and 3, there are three 
expressions signaling a discourse relation of 

                                                           
1 We are aware that expressions like and, for, on the other 
hand etc. have also other (non-connective) meanings. 
However, these other meanings are not in our interest – we 
evaluate only expressions in their connective function. 

reason and result2: proto “therefore”, kvůli tomu 
“because of this”3 and kvůli této činnosti 
“because of this activity”. However, only the 
first two are suitable also for the other given 
contexts (i.e. we may say, e.g., Therefore / 
Because of this, he was investigated by the 
police. but not It was raining the whole day. 
*Because of this activity, I will not go for a 
trip.).  

In this respect, we consider proto “therefore” 
and kvůli tomu “because of this” suitable as 
connecting expressions for more contexts (i.e. 
more “universal”) than the expression kvůli této 
činnosti “because of this activity”. Generally, we 
call this suitability a universality principle 
according to which we define discourse 
connectives. In other words, the expressions like 
proto “therefore” and kvůli tomu “because of 
this” are discourse connectives in our approach, 
whereas expressions like kvůli této činnosti 
“because of this activity” are not, as they signal 
discourse relations only in a limited set of 
contexts (these expressions have of course also 
the compositional function in the text, but – 
unlike discourse connectives – they are very far 
from possible grammaticalization). We call these 
expressions (like kvůli této činnosti “because of 
this activity”) free connecting phrases.  
 
ii) Grammatical delimitation of connectives 
(primary vs. secondary connectives) 
Within discourse connectives, we distinguish two 
categories (mainly in terms of 
grammaticalization) – primary connectives and 
secondary connectives (as in M. Rysová and 
K. Rysová, 2014).  

Primary connectives are mainly grammatical 
(or functional) words whose primary function is 
to connect two units of a text (they mostly 
belong to conjunctions and structuring 
particles4). Thus they do not have a role of 

                                                           
2 The relation of “reason and result” is in PDT delimited as 
a causal relation in broader sense (i.e. including both 
“cause” and “consequence”). The terminology of reason and 
result was adopted from PDTB (see Prasad et al., 2008). 
3 We understand the whole structure because of this as a 
secondary connective, as *because of itself is an 
ungrammatical structure and needs to combine with an 
anaphoric expression to gain a discourse connecting 
function. At the same time, there are some present-day 
primary connectives that historically arose from similar 
combination of a preposition and demonstrative pronoun 
(e.g. Czech connective proto “therefore” from the 
preposition pro “for” and demonstrative pronoun to “this”). 
4 We define conjunctions (following the traditional Czech 
grammar) as grammatical words with primary connecting 
function (like ale “but”, nebo “or”, a “and” etc.), structuring 

292



sentence elements and in this sense, they do not 
affect the sentence syntax. Primary connectives 
are mostly one-word, lexically frozen 
expressions. Examples of primary connectives 
are ale “but”, a “and”, zatímco “whereas”, 
protože “because”, když “when”, nebo “or” etc. 

Secondary connectives are mainly multiword 
structures functioning as connectives only in 
certain collocations. Most of them have a key 
word signaling given type of discourse relation 
(the cores may be nouns like condition, reason, 
difference etc., verbs like to mean, to explain, to 
cause etc., prepositions like due to, because of, 
despite etc.). Secondary connectives contain (in 
contrast to primary) some lexical word or words 
and have a role of sentence elements (z tohoto 
důvodu “for this reason”), sentence modifiers 
(obecně řečeno “generally speaking”) or they 
may form a separate sentence (Důvod je 
jednoduchý. “The reason is simple.”). Secondary 
connectives are not yet grammaticalized, 
although they exhibit several features typical for 
the process of grammaticalization (e.g. 
weakening of singular and plural distinction, 
gradual loss of the individual lexical meaning 
and gaining the primary connecting function as a 
whole structure etc.). Examples of secondary 
connectives are podmínkou je “the condition is”, 
to znamená “this means”, to je důvod, proč “this 
is the reason why”, kvůli tomu “because of this”, 
z těchto důvodů “for these reasons” etc.  

The main difference between primary and 
secondary connectives thus lies in 
grammaticalization – i.e. primary connectives 
are grammaticalized expressions (although 
sometimes the grammaticalization is not fully 
completed, which causes discrepancy among 
certain parts of speech, especially conjunctions, 
adverbs and particles). From diachronic point of 
view, primary connectives arose from other parts 
of speech and very often from combination of 
several words and gradually became 
grammaticalized (e.g. English present-day 
primary connective because arose from bi cause 
“by cause”, originally a phrase often followed by 
a subordinate that-clause; it is used as one word 
probably from around 1400 /see Harper, 2001/). 

                                                                                        
particles as grammatical words expressing a relation of a 
speaker to the structure of a text (like jen “only”, také “too” 
etc.). 

3 Discourse Annotation in the Prague 
Dependency Treebank 

The annotation of secondary connectives was 
carried out on the data of the Prague Dependency 
Treebank (PDT). PDT contains almost 50 
thousand of sentences from the Czech newspaper 
texts. The advantage of this corpus is that it is 
annotated on more language levels at once – it 
contains annotation on morphological, 
syntactical and syntactico-semantic layers, as 
well as the annotation of discourse phenomena 
(i.e. coreference and discourse relations).  

Discourse relations have been annotated in 
two phases – firstly expressed by primary 
connectives, secondly by secondary connectives. 

3.1 Annotation of Primary Connectives 
in the Prague Dependency Treebank 

The annotation of primary connectives has been 
finished in 2012. The annotation has been carried 
out on the data of the Prague Dependency 
Treebank 2.5 (Bejček et al., 2012) and has been 
published as the Prague Discourse Treebank 1.0 
(see Poláková et al., 2012). The annotation 
follows the Penn Discourse Treebank style 
(Prasad et al., 2008, 2014), i.e. discourse 
relations (both inter- and intra-sentential) are 
annotated between two pieces of a text called 
discourse arguments (defined as abstract objects 
according to Asher, 1993). The annotation was 
limited only to such primary connectives that 
expressed discourse relations between two verbal 
arguments containing predication (e.g. clauses, 
sentences or whole paragraphs). The annotated 
relation was then assigned one semantic type out 
of 23 types of relations.5 

In this phase of annotation, the annotators 
were also asked to mark all candidates to 
secondary connectives. Their notes then served 
as a basis for creating a list of such structures 
used in the second phase of annotation. 

3.2 Annotation of Secondary Connectives 
in the Prague Dependency Treebank 

In the next phase, the first discourse annotation 
in the Prague Dependency Treebank has been 
extended by secondary connectives. It contains 

                                                           
5Concession, condition, confrontation, conjunction, 
conjunctive alternative, correction, disjunctive alternative, 
equivalence, exemplification, explication, pragmatic 
condition, pragmatic contrast, pragmatic reason, 
generalization, gradation, opposition, asynchronous, 
purpose, reason and result, restrictive opposition, 
specification, synchronous, other. 

293



annotation of both inter- and intra-sentential 
discourse relations.  

The annotation of secondary connectives in 
PDT was based on the list of potential secondary 
connectives collected during the first discourse 
annotation in 2012. All the key words of the 
collected candidates (like důvod “reason”, 
podmínka “condition”, znamenat “to mean” etc.) 
have been automatically detected in the whole 
PDT data and then manually sorted (as not all 
tokens of e.g. the word podmínka “condition” 
have a function of secondary connective) and 
annotated by human annotators (see Rysová and 
Mírovský, 2014). 

The secondary connectives were annotated on 
the whole PDT data (i.e. almost 50 thousand of 
sentences).  

Besides the secondary connectives, the new 
annotation includes also the free connecting 
phrases (see Section 2.1), as their annotation on 
big data may allow us to study discourse 
connectives in deeper and contrastive context. 
For example, we may see the ratio of universal 
and non-universal phrases in PDT from which 
we may learn whether the multiword connecting 
phrases have a tendency to gradually loosen the 
bonds to the concrete contexts and to stabilize on 
one, context independent form. In other words, 
we may learn how far from primary connectives 
the majority of multiword structures lies.  
 

A significant difference between the 
annotations of primary and secondary 
connectives is that unlike the first annotation in 
2012, the extended annotation of secondary 
connectives contains discourse relations between 
both verbal and nominal arguments (as said 
above, the annotation of primary connectives 
concentrated only on arguments expressed by 
verbal propositions or clauses) – see Example 4: 
 
(4) Koncert nezačal včas. Důvodem byl pozdní 
příchod houslisty. 
“The concert has not begun on time. The reason 
was the late arrival of the violinist.” 
(= because the violinist has arrived late) 
 
In Example 4, there is a discourse relation of 
reason and result expressed by the secondary 
connective the reason was between two 
discourse arguments – the first is represented by 
the whole clause (The concert has not begun on 
time.), the second argument is nominal (i.e. 
expressed by the nominal phrase the late arrival 
of the violinist). In this case, the secondary 

connective cannot be replaced by the primary 
one – we cannot say something like *protože 
pozdní příchod houslisty “*because the late 
arrival of the violinist”. We may see that 
secondary connectives are not yet fully 
grammaticalized, which means that they may 
have a function of various sentence elements, 
including (among others) subject (the reason) 
and predicate (was). Therefore, some of the 
secondary connectives may be followed by the 
nominalized discourse argument.  

We think that the difference between 
arguments expressed by a verbal or nominal 
phrase is purely syntactic (the late arrival of the 
violinist vs. the violinist has arrived late). 
Semantically, the meaning remains almost the 
same. For this reason, we have annotated all 
discourse arguments according to their semantics 
(not syntactic representation)6. 

4 Results and Evaluation 

In this part of the paper, we present the main 
results and characteristics of secondary discourse 
connectives gained from the annotation in PDT 
with respect to their comparison with primary 
connectives. 

4.1 Evaluation of Annotations – Inter-
Annotator Agreement 

The inter-annotator (I-A) agreement of 
secondary connectives annotation was measured 
on 500 sentences annotated (simultaneously) by 
two human annotators.7 We have focused on two 
main aspects of their annotation: 1. the overall 
agreement on existence of the discourse relation 
(i.e. to which extent the annotators agreed on the 
fact that there is a discourse relation in the given 
place of a text expressed by a secondary 
connective); 2. the agreement on semantic types 
of discourse relations expressed by secondary 
connectives (like condition, concession etc.). At 
the same time, we have compared the results of 
the inter-annotator agreement of secondary 
connectives with the primary connectives 
(Poláková et al., 2013) – see Table 1.8 

Table 1 demonstrates that the I-A agreement is 
for primary and secondary connectives 
comparable. The I-A agreement on the existence 
                                                           
6 However, we have marked them (technically) differently 
for easier analysis of final results. 
7 Many thanks to Jiří Mírovský for his kind measuring 
of the I-A agreement. 
8The existence of discourse relation is measured by 
connective-based F1-measure, types of discourse relations 
by simple ratio (or Cohen‘s κ). 

294



of relation is higher for primary connectives 
(F1: 0.83 vs. 0.70). This is not so surprising due 
to the significantly bigger heterogeneity of 
secondary connectives (we deal with nominal, 
verbal, prepositional phrases etc.) in comparison 
with lexically frozen (i.e. grammaticalized) 
forms of primary connectives (the secondary 
allow a bigger degree of variation in terms of 
inflection, modification etc.). Therefore, the 
annotation of secondary connectives is for the 
human annotators more difficult. 

 
Type of Inter-

Annotator 
Agreement 

Primary 
Con 

Secondary 
Con 

Existence of relation 
(F1) 

0.83 0.70 

Types of discourse 
relations 

0.77 0.82 

Types of discourse 
relations (Cohen’s κ) 

0.71 0.78 

Table 1. Inter-Annotator Agreement. 
 

On the other hand, the agreement on semantic 
types of discourse relations is slightly higher for 
secondary connectives – see simple ratios 0.77 
(0.71 C. k.) vs. 0.82 (0.78 C. k.). This may be 
explained by the fact that most of the secondary 
connectives contain a transparent key word (like 
condition, reason, result, concession, contrast 
etc.) that refers directly to one of the individual 
semantic types of relations (although this 
relationship is not so straightforward in all 
cases).  

In this respect, primary connectives seem to be 
more easily identifiable in authentic PDT texts 
and secondary connectives, on the other hand, 
signal more transparently the individual semantic 
types of discourse relations. 

Altogether, the I-A agreement for the 
annotation of secondary connectives in PDT 
seems satisfactory (i.e. comparable with similar 
discourse annotation of primary connectives). 

4.2 Primary vs. Secondary Connectives in 
Numbers 

At the current stage, PDT data contain altogether 
21,416 annotated discourse relations. Within this 
number, there are 20,255 tokens of primary 
connectives and 1,161 of secondary connectives 
– see Table 2 (the results are measured on the 
whole PDT data). In other words, primary 
connectives form 94.6 % and secondary 
connectives 5.4 % within the whole number of 
explicit discourse relations in PDT. Therefore, 

the terms primary and secondary connectives 
seem suitable also in terms of frequency – 
explicit discourse relations are signaled primarily 
by primary connectives. However, the number of 
secondary connectives in PDT is not 
insignificant and discourse annotation would be 
incomplete without them. 

 
  Tokens in PDT  % 
Primary Con 20,255 94.6 
Secondary Con 1,161 5.4 
Total 21,416 100 

Table 2. Discourse Annotation in PDT. 
 
The results of annotation also demonstrate that 

the majority of secondary connectives (924 
within 1,161, i.e. 76 %) expresses discourse 
relations between two verbal (or clausal) 
arguments. The reason is that not all secondary 
connectives (e.g. prepositional phrases) allow 
nominalization of the second argument. 
Nominalization appears only with a set of similar 
structures like výjimkou je “the exception is”, 
důvodem je “the reason is”, podmínkou je “the 
condition is”, vysvětlením je “the explanation is” 
etc. – see Example 4. Such secondary 
connectives contain the predicate already within 
their structure (mostly the verb to be) so they do 
not demand another finite verb in the argument 
and may be followed only by the nominal phrase. 
(The results of annotation also revealed that 
nominalization of the second argument even 
predominates in these structures – in 80 %. Thus 
the structure of the secondary connective has a 
direct influence on the syntactic realization of the 
second argument in these cases.) 

As said above, the extended discourse 
annotation captures not only the secondary 
connectives but also the free connecting phrases 
(functioning as discourse indicators only in a 
limited set of contexts, like kvůli jeho pozdnímu 
příchodu “due to his late arrival”, kvůli tomuto 
nárůstu “due to this increase”, kvůli tomuto 
rozhodnutí “due to this decision” that may be 
mostly substituted by universal kvůli tomu “due 
to this” but not vice versa). Currently, PDT 
contains 1,161 tokens of secondary connectives 
and 151 of free connecting phrases (i.e. 88 % vs. 
12 %). We may see that there is a strong 
tendency for multiword discourse phrases to 
gradually fix on one stable form and to gain a 
status of a universal connective. 

295



4.3 Semantic Types of Discourse Relations 

Distribution of the individual semantic relations 
(presented in Table 3) is for primary and 
secondary connectives similar, i.e. very 
numerous relations are relations of conjunction, 
reason and result and condition. The relations 
with the lowest (or very low) numbers are the 
pragmatic relations (i.e. pragmatic contrast, 
pragmatic reason and pragmatic condition). 

On the other hand, primary and secondary 
connectives significantly differ in case of 
opposition and explication. The relation of 
opposition is the second most numerous relation 
expressed by primary connectives (with 3,171 
tokens) whereas with secondary connectives, it 
occurred only in 13 cases. So the relation of 
opposition is almost exclusively expressed by 
primary connectives (in 99.6 %), which 
demonstrates that Czech does not have many 
multiword alternatives to signal this type of 
discourse relation. 

On the other hand, the relation of explication 
is the fourth most numerous relation within 
secondary connectives (with 67 relations) 
whereas in case of primary connectives, it is in 
the middle (with rather low tokens within 
primary connectives).  

However, the percentage of the individual 
relations clearly demonstrates that primary 
connectives prevail significantly in all cases 
(their percentage in comparison to secondary 
connectives is higher than 90 % in most of the 
relations). 

Slightly higher percentage (within secondary 
connectives) occurs only in three types of 
relations: explication (22.7 %), exemplification 
(16.9 %) and generalization (16.7 %). However, 
generally, the primary connectives prevail in all 
the relations very clearly. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 3. Primary vs. Secondary Connectives – Types of Discourse Relations in PDT. 

Type of Relation Total Primary Con 
Primary 
Con % 

Secondary 
Con 

Secondary 
Con % 

conjunction 7,730 7,386 95.5 344 4.1 
opposition  3,184 3,171 99.6 13 0.4 
reason and result 2,927 2,583 91.4 344 8.6 
condition 1,451 1,351 93.1 100 6.9 
concession 918 874 95.2 44 4.8 
asynchronous 860 816 94.9 44 5.1 
confrontation 666 632 94.9 34 5.1 
specification 649 625 96.3 24 3.7 
gradation 459 443 95.6 20 4.4 
correction 456 439 97.1 13 2.9 
purpose 419 412 98.3 7 1.7 
explication 295 261 77.3 67 22.7 
restrictive opposition 294 266 90.5 28 9.5 
disj. alternative 271 228 96.3 10 3.7 
synchronous 226 225 99.6 1 0.4 
exemplification 177 147 83.1 30 16.9 
generalization 120 100 83.3 20 16.7 
equivalence 110 99 90 11 10 
conj. alternative 90 88 97.8 2 2.2 
pragmatic contrast 50 50 100 0 0 
pragmatic reason 44 41 93.2 3 6.8 
pragmatic condition 17 16 94.1 1 5.9 
other 3 2 66.7 1 33.3 
Total 21,416 20,255 94.6 1,161 5.4 

296



4.4 New Semantic Types of Discourse 
Relations for Secondary Connectives  

Another lesson we have learnt from the 
annotation of secondary connectives is that we 
cannot simply adopt the existing annotation 
principles created for the primary connectives. 
Secondary connectives are much more 
heterogeneous group than primary connectives 
(concerning lexical, syntactic as well as semantic 
aspects – see Rysová, 2012). Therefore, we can 
expect that it will project also to their annotation 
in large corpora and that the existing annotation 
principles will need to be modified and to react 
on all the differences.  

As for types of discourse relations, we may 
expect that secondary connectives may express 
some new semantic relations (that are not in the 
classification of discourse relations formulated 
for primary connectives). Therefore, the human 
annotators were asked to mark all occurrences of 
secondary connectives expressing such “new” 
relations. Altogether, the remarks referred to 
three new relations: a) entailment or deduction 
of results (expressed, e.g., by secondary 
connectives výsledkem je “the result is”; z toho 
vyplývá “it follows”); b) the relation of 
conclusion (e.g. závěrem je “the conclusion is”, 
dojít k závěru “to come to a conclusion”); c) the 
relation of regard (e.g. v tomto ohledu “in this 
respect”, v tomto směru “in this regard”). The 
common feature of these relations is that they 
refer mostly to a larger piece of the text (e.g. to 
the whole previous paragraph etc.). In our 
opinion, these semantic relations cannot be 
included within any relation formulated for 
primary connectives and the existing 
classification should be extended. 

4.5 Inter- and Intra-Sentential Discourse 
Relations 

As said above, the PDT discourse annotation 
contains both inter- and intra-sentential relations 
(i.e. both I would like to go on a trip. But it is 
raining. and I would like to go on a trip but it is 
raining.). Therefore, we have analyzed whether 
primary and secondary connectives prefer one of 
these ways of expression. The ratio of inter- and 
intra-sentential relations expressed by primary 
and secondary connectives is presented 
in Table 4. 

 
 
 

  Intra % Inter % Total 
Primary 
Con 

14,195 70 % 6,060 30 % 20,255 

Secondary 
Con 

432 37 % 729 63 % 1,161 

Total 14,627 68 % 6,789 32 % 21,416 
Table 4. Inter- and Intra-Sentential Relations 
 
Table 4 demonstrates that primary connectives 

prefer intra-sentential discourse relations (in 
70 %) while secondary connectives inter-
sentential relations (in 63 %). Thus we may see 
that this is another crucial aspect in which 
primary and secondary connectives significantly 
differ.  

We have carried out a further analysis and 
concentrated on the possible connection between 
the way of expressing discourse relations 
(i.e. inter- or intra-sentential) and the semantic 
types of given relations. We tried to examine 
whether this connection may give us some 
possible explanation why the authors prefer 
secondary connectives rather than primary 
connectives in certain contexts. We found out 
that in all the semantic types of relations (like 
reason and result, opposition etc.) prevail in both 
inter- and intra-sentential relations primary 
connectives except for two – the inter-sentential 
relations of purpose and condition prefer the 
expression by secondary connectives (in 86 % 
for purpose and 62 % for condition). This 
generally means that if the text contains either 
the inter-sentential relation of purpose or 
condition, there is a relatively high probability 
(at least in case of purpose) that they will be 
expressed by secondary (rather than primary) 
connectives. 

5 Conclusion 

In the paper, we have introduced the annotation 
of the so called secondary connectives 
(i.e. expressions like the condition is, to 
conclude, for these reasons etc.). 

From theoretical point of view, we define 
discourse connectives as (mostly) universal 
indicators of discourse relations that may have 
different surface forms. According of their 
realization, we distinguish primary and 
secondary connectives. Primary connectives are 
expressions with universal status of discourse 
indicators that are grammaticalized (i.e. lexically 
frozen). They are functional words (i.e. mainly 
conjunctions and structuring particles) that are 

297



not integrated into clause structure as sentence 
elements like but, and, or, because etc. 
Secondary connectives are mainly multiword 
phrases containing a lexical word or words that 
are not yet fully grammaticalized; therefore, 
these structures are much more variable 
(concerning modification, inflexion etc.). The 
secondary connectives may be sentence elements 
(because of this), sentence modifiers (simply 
speaking) or they form a separate sentence (The 
reason is simple.).  

In the paper, we demonstrated how it is 
possible to include secondary connectives into 
corpus annotations. The overall inter-annotator 
agreement on existence of a discourse relation is 
0.70 (F1) and on the type of a discourse relation 
0.82 (0.78 C. k.), which is very similar to 
primary connectives in PDT.  

Altogether, PDT contains 1,161 tokens of 
secondary connectives, which is 5.4 % within all 
explicit discourse connectives in PDT (thus the 
attribute secondary seems suitable for them also 
in terms of frequency). 

We have compared primary and secondary 
connectives also in terms of semantic types of 
discourse relations they express. The distribution 
of the individual semantic relations is very 
similar for both primary and secondary 
connectives (with some exceptions like the 
relation of opposition occurring very 
predominantly with primary connectives). 
However, the annotation has taught us that the 
classification of relations formulated for primary 
connectives cannot be simply adopted for 
secondary connectives – during the annotation, 
we have observed three “new” semantic types 
(that were not included into the classification for 
primary connectives): a) entailment or 
deduction of results (e.g. it follows); b) the 
relation of conclusion (e.g. the conclusion is); 
c) the relation of regard (e.g. in this respect). 
These three types of relation refer mostly to 
larger pieces of text like a whole paragraph.  

The results of annotation also demonstrate that 
primary and secondary connectives differ in 
terms of inter- and intra-sentential relations. 
Whereas primary connectives prefer the intra-
sentential relations (in 70 %), secondary 
connectives mostly the inter-sentential relations 
(in 63 %). So primary and secondary connectives 
do not differ only from syntactic, lexical and 
semantic point of view, but also in the way how 
they structure the text.  

At the current stage, the Prague Dependency 
Treebank contains the most detailed annotation 

of secondary connectives (as far as we know, 
done on the largest data) that could be adopted 
also for other languages in other corpora 
focusing mostly on the annotation of primary 
connectives. In the paper, we tried to 
demonstrate that discourse annotation including 
secondary connectives is more complete and that 
similar analysis may lead to better understanding 
of discourse. 

Acknowledgement 

This paper was supported by the project 
“Discourse Connectives in Czech” (n. 36213) 
solved at the Faculty of Arts at the Charles 
University in Prague from the resources of the 
Charles University Grant Agency in 2013–2015. 

The authors acknowledge support from the 
Czech Science Foundation (project 
n. P406/12/0658) and from the Ministry of 
Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech 
Republic (project n. LH14011 and LM2010013). 

This work has been using language resources 
developed, stored and distributed by the 
LINDAT/CLARIN project of the Ministry of 
Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech 
Republic (project LM2010013).  

The authors gratefully thank to Jiří Mírovský 
from the Charles University in Prague for his 
kind measuring the figures on the PDT data for 
this paper. 

References 

Karin Aijmer. 2002. English Discourse Particles. 
Evidence from a corpus. Studies in Corpus 
Linguistics 10. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins, ISBN 90-272-2280-0. 

Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects 
in Discourse. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, ISBN 0-7923-2242-8. 

Eduard Bejček et al. 2012. Prague Dependency 
Treebank 2.5 – a revisited version of PDT 2.0. In: 
Proceedings of Coling 2012, Bombay, India, 
pp. 231–246.  

Teuen A. van Dijk. 1979. Pragmatic Connectives. In: 
Journal of Pragmatics 3. North-Holland Publishing 
Company, pp. 447–456. 

Kerstin Fischer, eds. 2006. Approaches to Discourse 
Particles. Studies in Pragmatics 1. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier, ISBN-10: 0080447376, ISBN-13: 978-
0080447377. 

Bruce Fraser. 1999. What are discourse markers? 
Journal of Pragmatics 31 (7). Elsevier, pp. 931–
952. 

298



Maj-Britt Mosegaard Hansen. 1998. The Function of 
Discourse Particles: A study with special reference 
to spoken standard French. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. ISBN 9789027250667. 

Douglas Harper. 2001. Online Etymology Dictionary. 
<http://www.etymonline.com>. 

Lucie Poláková et al. 2013. Introducing the Prague 
Discourse Treebank 1.0. In: Proceedings of the 6th 
International Joint Conference on Natural 
Language Processing, Copyright © Asian 
Federation of Natural Language Processing, 
Nagoya, Japan, ISBN 978-4-9907348-0-0, pp. 91–
99. 

Lucie Poláková et al. 2012. Prague Discourse 
Treebank 1.0. Data/software, ÚFAL MFF UK, 
Prague, Czech Republic. 

Rashmi Prasad et al. 2008. The Penn Discourse 
Treebank 2.0. In: Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation (LREC 2008), Marrakech, 
Morocco, pp. 2961–2968. 

Rashmi Prasad, Aravind Joshi, Bonnie Weber. 2010. 
Realization of Discourse Relations by Other 
Means: Alternative Lexicalizations. In: 
Proceedings of Coling 2010, Tsinghua University 
Press, Beijing, China, pp. 1023–1031.  

Rashmi Prasad, Bonnie Webber and Aravind Joshi. 
2014. Reflections on the Penn Discourse 
TreeBank, Comparable Corpora and 
Complementary Annotation. Computational 
Linguistics 40 (4), pp. 921–950. 

Magdaléna Rysová. 2012. Alternative Lexicalizations 
of Discourse Connectives in Czech. In: 
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012), 
European Language Resources Association, 
Istanbul, Turkey, ISBN 978-2-9517408-7-7, pp. 
2800–2807.  

Magdaléna Rysová, Jiří Mírovský. 2014. Use of 
Coreference in Automatic Searching for Multiword 
Discourse Markers in the Prague Dependency 
Treebank. In: Proceedings of The 8th Linguistic 
Annotation Workshop (LAW-VIII), Copyright © 
Dublin City University (DCU), Dublin, Ireland, 
ISBN 978-1-941643-29-7, pp. 11–19.  

Magdaléna Rysová, Kateřina Rysová. 2014. The 
Centre and Periphery of Discourse Connectives. In: 
Proceedings of the 28th Pacific Asia Conference on 
Language, Information and Computing, Copyright 
© Department of Linguistics, Faculty of Arts, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand, 
ISBN 978-616-551-887-1, pp. 452-459.  

Deborah Schiffrin. 1987. Discourse markers. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 
9780521357180. 

Manfred Stede, Arne Neumann. 2014. Potsdam 
Commentary Corpus 2.0: Annotation for discourse 
research. In: N. Calzolari et al. (eds.), Proceedings 
of the 9th International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14). Reykjavík: 
European Language Resources Association 
(ELRA), pp. 925–929. 

 

299


