




































Taking the Danish Speech Trainer from CALL to ICALL

Peter Juel Henrichsen

DanCAST - Danish Center for Applied Speech Technology

Copenhagen Business School

pjh.ibc@cbs.dk

Abstract

Talebob  (Speech  Bob)  is  a  newly 

developed  interactive  CALL-tool  for 

training  Danish  speech  with  special 

regard  to  the  pronunciation  of  highly 

idiomatic  phrases.  Talebob  is  currently 

being tested in primary schools in Nuuk, 

Hafnarfjörður  and  Tórshavn  (where 

Danish is taught as a L2). The purpose of 

the  current  paper  is  twofold.  We  first 

introduce  Talebob  in  its  publicly 

available  version,  commenting  on  its 

linguistic,  technical,  and  didactic 

principles.  Secondly,  we  present  our 

current  plans  and  goals  for  the  next 

version of Talebob focusing on linguistic 

and  educational  perspectives.  Taking 

Talebob  II  as  a  point  of  departure,  we 

wish to invite a discussion of ICALL as a 

means of modernizing the L2 educational 

programmes in the Nordic area.

1  Introduction

“Modern children crave to be watched and heard 

continuously”, “Today's youth bore too easily”, 

“The very ability to concentrate is crumbling in 

the young generation”. Such opinions are often 

encountered  in  the  Nordic  newspapers  these 

years.  Justified  or  not,  one  can  also  turn  the 

criticism upside down and develop new didactic 

tools  exploiting  the  alledged  impatience 

reconstrued  as  a  capacity  to  communicate 

continuously.

This  was  our  point  of  departure  when  we 

designed the interactive speech trainer Talebob 

(Speech  Bob).  Talebob  is  an  internet-based 

language learning tool  developed as an aid for 

Nordic  pupils  helping  them  train  their  spoken 

Danish with  special  regard to  one of  the  most 

cumbersome  aspects,  the  highly  idiomatic 

pronunciation  of  certain  phrases  that  occur  in 

almost any informal conversation.

Many students of Danish report that, even though 

they have acquired what  they believed to  be a 

decent  conduct  of  Danish,  they nontheless  feel 

helpless at their  first  encounter with the Danes 

habitually speaking very fast,  in a style loaded 

with  reductions,  lenisions,  assimilations  and 

ligatures. Consider a few examples.

“det er jo ikke noget at snakke om”

(8 lexical syllables, full vowels underlined)

[djoJgnåD:snagCm]1

(4 phonetic syllables, full vowels underlined)

This often heard phrase (literaly: that is nothing 

to  talk  about,  meaning:  it's  not  a  problem)  is 

routinely uttered in four phonetic syllables only, 

and with a highly predictable prosodic contour. If 

pronounced  in  accordance  with  the  productive 

rules of Danish phonetics, reproducing all of the 

phonological vowels (as a typical rule-based TTS 

voice  does),  this  phrase  would  probably  be 

perceived by the native Dane as a composition of 

several  independent  semanitic  units  in  various 

relations, a speech act (snakke om), a predicative 

modifier  (jo),  and  a  negated  quantifier  (ikke 

noget), in short, a fully fledged proposition to be 

compositionally evaluated.

Consider an other example, “tak skal du have” 

(literally: thanks shall you have, meaning: thank 

you),  along  with  its  highly  idiomatic 

pronunciation patterns.

[t'Agsgaduh,a:?]   unmarked-polite, mildly grateful
[t'Agsgaduha]    impressed (no gratitude involved)
[tAgsgad'uh,a:?]   repulsed, sullen (anti-grateful)

1Here (and in the following) phonetic renderings are 

shown in SAMPA compliant format, cf. 

http://www.phon.ucl.ac.uk/home/sampa/danish.htm

Peter Juel Henrichsen 2015. Taking the Danish Speech Trainer from CALL to ICALL. Proceedings of the
4th workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at NODALIDA 2015. NEALT Proceedings
Series 26 / Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings 114: 11–20.

11



Many  Greenlandic,  Faroese,  and  Icelanding 

children  report  the  Danes  to  be  unexpectedly 

difficult  to  understand  at  their  first  encounter, 

even  after  several  years  of  Danish  studies, 

especially because the informal phrases occur so 

frequently. Unfortunately, West-Nordic teachers 

of Danish report  that  no teaching materials  are 

available training this particular aspect of spoken 

Danish.

Talebob is  meant  as  a remedy.  It  is  conceived 

and designed by Danish computational linguists 

in  cooperation  with  Icelandic  researchers  in 

didactics  and  West-Nordic  school  teachers. 

Talebob  (ver.  1)  is  currently  being  tested  in 

public  schools  in  Nuuk,  Hafnarfjörður  and 

Tórshavn.  Early  experiments  are  also  being 

carried out in Denmark with adult L2-learners.

Talebob was designed to help language students 

(9+ years of age) practice the pronunciation of 

such  frequent  phrases,  often  rich  in  function 

words  (pronouns,  connectives,  adverbs  and 

prepositions). As mentioned, their pronunciation 

patterns  are  typically  highly  conventionalized 

and  are  often  in  conflict  with  the  general  and 

productive rules of Danish pronunciation. 

In the following, we first present Talebob in its 

current  version  and  then  reflect  on  how  to 

develop the tool further. Sections 2-5 cover the 

technological and linguistic aspects of Talebob's 

design  (front-end,  back-end,  and  system 

architecture). In section 6 we reflect on various 

linguistic  aspects  of  Talebob,  in  current  and 

future versions. We conclude in section 7 with 

some  remarks  on  Talebob  (and  interactive 

language  learning  tools  in  general)  as  an 

approach  to  screening  large  populations  of 

pupils.

Example  phrases  are  quoted  in  Danish  and 

(being  highly  idiomatic)  translated  only  when 

necessary.

2  Talebob as a CALL tool

Talebob is a tool for computer-assisted language 

learning  (CALL),  and  it  can  be  seen  as  a 

technically  updated  continuation  of  the  classic 

language  lab.  Many  readers  will  probably 

remember from their school days the setup with 

study booths equipped with a cassette deck for 

recording  and  playback,  enabling  oral 

communication with the language teacher on a 

one-to-one  basis.  The  language  lab  (e.g. 

Thorborg  2003,  2006)  stimulated  the  pupil's 

spoken language production and in this respect 

was  a  huge  improvement  over  L2  exercises 

based  on  rehearsed  dialogues.  Of  course  the 

attention from the teacher was a scarce resource, 

and each pupil could not expect more than a few 

minutes of personal instruction during a lesson.

One of our main goals with Talebob is to take the 

language lab a step further towards interactivity 

such that each language production will yield an 

informed comment,  either  an appreciation  or  a 

constructive correction. In other words, Talebob 

should give the pupil a feeling of being heard.

3  Talebob's front-end

School children are used to computer games with 

a visual side approaching virtual reality. Rather 

than competing on graphics we wanted to attract 

our  users  through  a  carefully  designed 

interactivity  offering  meaningful  replies  on  all 

contacts.  Talebob  should  thus  behave  as  an 

attentive listener and competent evaluator.

The Talebob challenge consists of 30 tasks, each 

focused  on  a  specific  Danish  phrase  such  as 

greeting  formulae  (godmorgen),  common 

requests (gi'r  du en kop kaffe?),  and emotional 

expressions  (er  du  rigtig  klog?!).  Common  to 

such phrases is that their communicative effects 

may change radically with the smallest twists of 

the  pronunciation.  An  inconspicuously  looking 

phrase like "tak skal du have"  (thank you) may 

be  perceived  as  being  ironic,  impressed,  tired, 

cordial,  hateful,  or  just  plainly  informative 

depending on subtle prosodic modifications (e.g. 

changing the relative weight of the main stresses 

slightly). Being able to control such details is an 

intrinsic part of one's L1 competence, but is often 

difficult  for  L2  learners  to  acquire.  Talebob 

allows the pupil to repeat each phrase as many 

times  as  needed,  informed  by  Talebob's 

feedback. The phrase prompts are produced by a 

native  speaker  aiming  for  an  'ecological' 

pronunciation that no Dane would object to.

Proceedings of the 4th workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at NODALIDA 2015

12



For each Talebob-task the pupil

1. selects a phrase,

2. listens to the phrase prompt (using the 

Lyt-Til-Frasen button),

3. reproduces the prompt orally (using 

Optag/Stop buttons for recording), 

mimicking it closely wrt. articulation, 

prosody, and tempo,

4. compares prompt and own production 

auditorily (pressing Lyt-Til-Optagelsen),

5. repeats steps 2-4 until entirely satisfied, 

then presses Send for evaluation,

6. consults the returned Talebob comment 

(either a success message sending the 

pupil to the next task, or a try-again 

advising the pupil how to improve)

Pressing  Send  invokes  the  Talebob  acoustic 

analyzer,  returning  a smiley,  either  happy, 

neutral,  or  sad.  With a  happy smiley   :-)   the 

pupil has completed the task and may continue 

with the next phrase. Level-1 is done when the 

first  five  tasks  are  completed,  level-2  has  ten 

tasks,  and  level-3  fifteen.  The  phrases  are 

ordered  progressively,  from  single  words  and 

simple phrases in level-1 (godmorgen,  værsgo!), 

frequent idioms in level-2 (hvordan går det?, tak  

i lige måde), to more expressive phrases in level-

3 (det siger du ikke?,  hellere end gerne!). When 

all  tasks  in  level-3  are  done,  the  Talebob 

challenge is passed.

Talebob's front-end is illustrated in fig. 1-3.

4  Talebob's back-end  (acoustic analysis)

The  two  sound  files  submitted  (with  the  Send 

button)  are  evaluated  in  the  Talebob  back-end 

application. The acoustic analysis compares the 

prompt version (P) and the user's own production 

(U) sampling both files for F0 (pitch in Hz) and 

INT  (intensity  in  dB),  being  unanimously 

considered as the most relevant parameters for 

Figure  1.  Screenshot  (excerpt)  from  Talebob  

task-page, level 2, with one phrase passed.

Figure  2.  Screenshot  (excerpt)  from  Talebob  

return-page, level 2, not-passed.

Figure  3.  Screenshot  (excerpt)  from  Talebob  

return-page, level 2, passed.

acoustic-phonetic  evaluation,  both  relating 

directly to phonetically features like stress, tone, 

sonority,  occlusion,  etc.2 The  linguistic 

evaluation  is  focused on  the  concordance  of  P 

2 F0 and  INT are  measured  using  the  Praat  toolkit 

(www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat), window size 5 ms, filter 

settings = Pitch (ac)... 0.005 75 15 yes 0.03 0.45 0.01  

0.4  0.14  600;  Intensity...  75  0.005  yes.  We  also 

experimented with HNR (harmonicity-to-noise ratio) 

and various spectral filterings, but found them to be 

too noise sensitive. Classrooms are not quiet places!

Proceedings of the 4th workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at NODALIDA 2015

13



and U wrt.  speech tempo,  global  prosody,  and 

articulation.

The speech tempo factor (STF) is determined as 

the ratio of durations for P and U,

STF = duration(P) : duration(U)

STF is calculated from INT data. First the zero 

level for INT in U is estimated, corresponding to 

'no speech'  in the given signal  (this  calibration 

can be tricky, especially for noise-prone samples, 

and is always a matter of heuristics).  Then the 

zero  level  (0  dB  after  calibration)  is  used  to 

delimit the speech production in U. By definition 

the  optimum  value  for  STF is  1.0,  and 

productions  approaching  this  value  will  trigger 

the comment "Meget  fint  taletempo" (excellent  

speech  tempo).  Lesser  or  greater  values  return 

instructions  to  speak  faster  or  slower, 

respectively.

Prosody and articulation analyses are based on 

F0 measurements. Only the sonorant parts of P 

and U are sampled - that is, the segments of the 

speech  signals  where  a  pitch  value  can  be 

meaningfully estimated, thus excluding obstruent 

sounds  and  moments  of  silence  (e.g.  between 

words).  All  frequency  data  are  stored  as 

logarithmic  values  (more  convenient  for 

statistical  use).  Many  of  Talebob's  users  are 

children, and their speech productions will often 

be  higher-pitched  than  the  phrase  prompt  on 

average.  This  global  difference  in  pitch  is  of 

course  irrelevant  to  the  Talebob evaluation,  so 

the F0 dataset for U is normalized (each sample 

multiplied  with  a  derived  constant)  equalizing 

the average pitch of U and P.

After  these  preparatory  steps,  the  prosodic 

evaluation is done. The calculation is based on 

10  qualified  datapoints  for  each  (normalized) 

dataset U and P, in a procedure best explained by 

an example.  Say 130 valid  pitch samples were 

derived from P; the first datapoint for P (call it 

f1,P) is then derived as the mean value for the first 

13 samples; the 2nd datapoint (f2,P) for samples 

14..26, et cetera, up to (f10,P) and (f10,U).  Finally 

the prosodic deviation (ProsDev) of U wrt. P is 

calculated by summation of 'errors',

ProsDev = |f1,P-f1,S| + |f2,P-f2,S| + .. + |f10,P-f10,S|

This particular ProsDev formula was designed to 

meet  two  special  requirements.  Firstly  it 

abstracts  away  any  temporal  incongruities 

between U and P (already addressed by the STF 

score);  secondly  it  copes  well  with  the 

unpredictable number of valid F0 samples for U 

(sometimes  as  few  as  15-20  for  short  speech 

productions in noisy surroundings, while P may 

produce  3-4  times  more),  preserving 

commensurability.  For  low  ProsErr values, 

Talebob  returns  a  praising  comment  "Dit 

tonefald  er  fint",  and  otherwise  an  instruction 

how to improve, e.g. "Prøv at tale mere livligt" 

(try speaking more lively).

The articulation is evaluated (ArtEval) along the 

same lines,  but  focusing  on local  incongruities 

rather  than  the  phrase  as  a  whole.  First  30 

qualified  datapoints  are  derived  following  the 

procedure above, using numerical interpolation if 

necessitated  by  data  sparseness.  Error  analyses 

(calculated as for ProsDev, mutatis mutandis) are 

done for datapoints 1..10, 11..20, and 21..30,

 

ArtEval (a,b )=∑
n=a

b

( F n,P−F n,U )
,

F being is  the 30-point  dataset  (otherwise as  f 

above).  The  results  for  ArtEval(1,10), 

ArtEval(11,20),  and  ArtEval(21,30)  represents 

the first, middle, and last part of the utterance as 

reflected in the returned comments: "Prøv at tale 

tydeligere i de første/midterste/sidste ord" (try to 

speak  more  clearly  in  the  first/middle/final  

words),  a  somewhat  vague instruction perhaps, 

but  faced  with  the  impatience  and  limited 

vocabulary  of  pupils  we  had  to  prioritize 

didactive effect over descriptive accuracy.

Summing up, feedback from Talebob consists in 

three comments, one for each of the evaluation 

criteria (tempo, prosody, and pronunciation), and 

in  addition  a  smiley  representing  the  overall 

performance.  The  happy smiley  ('task 

completed')  is  given  when  each  of  the  three 

evaluation results has met a (pre-set) acceptable 

limit, the sad smiley is given if none of the limits 

are met, and the medium smiley otherwise.

See  the  discussion  below  on  the  linguistic 

relevance and scientific testability of the Talebob 

acoustic-phonetic design.

Proceedings of the 4th workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at NODALIDA 2015

14



4.1  An example - phrase "hej med dig"

The graphs in fig. 4 and 5 both cover the phrase 

hej med dig in three speech productions, (i) the 

prompt, (ii) an Islandic pupil (boy, 7th grade) on 

2nd attempt, and (iii) same pupil on 5th attempt. 

Notice that INT graphs are continuous, intensity 

being defined everywhere,  while F0 graphs are 

interruped at unvoiced passages (e.g. the stopped 

[d] in dig).

The  huge  difference  in  speech  tempo  between 

2nd and 5th attempt is easily appreciated in fig. 

4.  The  very  slow  tempo  in  #2  (2nd  attempt) 

triggered the Talebob comment "Du taler alt for 

langsomt" (you speak much too slowly); the pupil 

sped up and - as seen - eventually matched the 

prompt's tempo in #5. His pronunciation had also 

become  more  fluent,  without  the  unwarranted 

separation of hej and med (cf. the INT dip around 

t=0.45" in the #2 graph, absent from both #5 and 

the  prompt).  Concerning  the  prosodic  contour, 

notice that the F0 envelope for #2 and #5 (cf. fig. 

5)  both  match  the  prompt  quite  closely  when 

abstracting away from the different  tempi:  two 

stable  pitch  inclinations  with  an  intervening 

resetting, corresponding to the two stress groups 

in  the  (most  common)  Danish  pronunciation. 

Consequently,  ProsDev is relatively low in both 

cases, having Talebob praise the pronunciation in 

both  cases:  "Meget  fint  tonefald"  (very  good 

tone-of-voice).  At  the  same  time,  though,  the 

ArtEval-based  analysis  shows  a  'lack'  of  pitch 

modulation in #2 (preceived as mumbling,  and 

producing  a  relatively  poor  ArtEval  value),  in 

this case triggering the comment for #2: "Prøv at 

tale  tydeligere"  (try  to  pronounce  the  words  

more  clearly).  Through  his  next  attempts,  the 

pupil improved his pronunciation gradually, and 

by #5, the ArtEval value passed the accept limit, 

allowing Talebob to issue a happy smiley (notice 

though  in  fig.  5  that  the  pitch  range  is  still 

somewhat limited for #5).

5  System architecture

The Talebob development had three phases. First 

an appropriate  set  of  phrases  was selected and 

recorded,  largely  recycling  materials  and 

selection  criteria  from  earlier  CALL  projects 

including  Allwood  et  al  (2005),  Selsøe  et  al 

(2004), Henrichsen (2004, 2004b, 2014). Then 

Figure 4. Phrase "hej med dig", intensity data; 

prompt (solid line), Icelandic pupil's 2nd/5th 

attempt (dispersed/close dots)

Figure 5. Phrase "hej med dig", pitch data; 

prompt (solid line), Icelandic pupil's 2nd/5th 

attempt (dispersed/close dots)

the back-end was programmed and tested (main 

programs written in Perl using the standard open-

source  modules  only,  enhanced  with  Unix 

system calls). The front-end, however, presented 

us with an unexpected challenge. Nobody could 

update  us  on  the  IT  situation  in  West-Nordic 

schools,  neither  for  hardware,  software, 

operating  system,  local  IT-assistance,  or  even 

internet  connectivity.  Yet  we did not  want any 

potential user to go down on equipment. Also we 

did  not  want  to  preclude  any  working  places. 

Some pupils prefer to train in the privacy of their 

home while others like to share. We did not want 

to  force  any  limitations  on  the  user  on  purely 

technical grounds. This led us to consider three 

front-end/back-end  architectures  (presented  as 

A1, A2, and A3).

Proceedings of the 4th workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at NODALIDA 2015

15



A1.  Stand-alone  (program installed on user's 

own hardware: pc, tablet, or smartphone)

PRO:

• Independent of internet connectivity
• Quick query-response cycle

CON:

• Programming/maintenance of back-end for a 
range of unknown hardware is demanding

• Technical support (from developer to pupil, 
teacher and/or local IT helpdesk) is hard due to 

physical and time-zone distance

• Monitoring of users' performance and 
progress is difficult

• System updates are hard to communicate

A2.  Browser-based 

PRO:

• Contacts between users and server can be 
logged (easier maintenance & development)

• Developers can make performance data 
available to teachers and others online

• Browser-based front-end using HTML5 and 
CSS is (fairly) hardware independent

CON:

• Stands or falls with user's connectivity

• 100% server uptime is mandatory
• HTML5 audio, especially for recording, is 
currently not fully supported in all browsers

A3.  Internet-based,  but dedicated front-end

The advantages are the same as for  A2,  and in 

addition  the  HTML5  problem can  be  avoided. 

Also  we  do  not  need  to  instruct  users  to 

download this or that internet-browser. The main 

hurdle being that users have to install a dedicated 

program  prior  to  their  first  positive  Talebob 

experience.

Even if A2 seemed to us to be the best alternative 

overall,  we settled on  A3 for  practical  reasons. 

Many potential users are Explorer fans and did 

not  care  to  install  a  new  browser  with  better 

HTML5  support,  such  as  Chrome,  Firefox,  or 

even IE 9+.

As the developer team had some experience with 

Unity4  (www.unity4.com),  in  particular  its 

strong  audio  support  and  graphics  drivers,  we 

settled for this programming workbench. Unity4 

is  freely available  (in  the open-source version) 

and  so  does  not  compromize  Talebob  as  a 

shareable application. Unity4 programs compile 

to  all  common  operating  systems  (even  older 

versions) including Linux,  Mac,  Win,  Android, 

etc.  The  flip  side  of  the  coin  is  that  potential 

Talebob users  have to download an executable 

(via  Dropbox,  as  explained  in  the  Taleboblen 

homepage,  www.taleboblen.hi.is),  unzip  it,  and 

invoke  it  using  their  own  operating  system. 

Simple as  these  procedures  may be for  skilled 

IT-users,  they  showed  to  be  problematic  for 

many  language  teachers  and  even  local  IT-

helpdesks. We intend to launch a purely browser-

based  Talebob-version  in  the  near  future,  as  a 

supplement to the current version.

For  an  interesting  discussion  on  CALL design 

principles for tools training spoken language, see 

Appel et al (2012). González (2012) and Mbah et 

al  (2013)  have  experimented  with  minimalistic 

CALL applications for English teaching.

6  Linguistic reflections

In  our  paper  accepted  for  presentation  at  the 

NODALIDA 2015 main session we report on our 

practical  evaluations  of  Talebob  as  a  didactic 

tool:  How  we  evaluated  the  soundness  and 

relevance of the linguistic feedback returned by 

the  Talebob  backend,  and  how  Talebob  was 

received  by  the  pupils  in  the  three  regions 

(Greenland,  Iceland,  and  the  Faroes).  Some 

preliminary  quantitative  results  are  also 

presented.

6.1  Talebob as a scientific enterprise

Our current  evaluation scheme (based on  STF, 

ProsDev,  and  ArtEval)  has  worked  well, 

providing  a  useful  compromise  between 

linguistic  precision  and  communicable  (age-

appropriate) advise. However, we are aware that 

Proceedings of the 4th workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at NODALIDA 2015

16



this  particular  setup  has  not  proved  itself  in  a 

strict scientific sense. Maybe different formulae 

or  new  scoring  procedures  would  allow  even 

more  useful  feedback  from  Talebob.  For 

example,  we suspect that  ProsDev and  ArtEval 

definitions  based  on  standard  deviation  rather 

than numerical distance may allow more specific 

corrections.  New  batteries  of  formulae  are 

constantly being tested - still without this being 

driven by ideal linguistic criteria, but rather as a 

pragmatic and feedback-informed activity.

Actually,  it's  not  clear  to  us  that  an  'ideal' 

configuration could be obtained at all. The most 

effective evaluation procedures, from a didactic 

point  of  view,  would  not  rely  solely  on  ideal 

linguistic  criteria,  but  include  the  personal 

profiles of the pupils (degree of motivation, prior 

knowledge  of  Danish,  own  first  language, 

general IT-experience, and more).

6.2  From CALL to ICALL

Having  described  the  actual  features  and 

functions  of  Talebob  in  its  present  form,  the 

following  sections  are  more  speculative.  We 

wish  to  invite  a  discussion  of  three  potential 

developments:  how  to  enhance  the  feeling  of 

naturalness  and  relevance  to  the  speech 

productions;  how  to  plan  the  portation  of 

Talebob to other L2 scenaria; and how to exploit 

ICALL  tools  in  general  (Talebob  being  an 

example) for screening larger populations of L2 

learning pupils. 

6.3  Productive expressivity

Talebob is,  of course, a low-knowledge system 

with  very  little  in-built  language  competence. 

Inspired by the special focus of NLP4CALL we 

reflect  upon  how  to  induce  an  amount  of 

linguistic  'intelligence'  in  Talebob  without 

compromising  the  low-knowledge  style  tenet 

(we'll return to this point shortly).

After  having  passed  level  3,  users  should  feel 

comfortable  with  the  Talebob  feedback  cycle. 

The new prosodic awareness could be developed 

further  by  having  the  user  engage  in  a  'real' 

dialogue, exploring a kind of interactivity where 

the  choice  and  production  of  a  phrase  (as 

opposed  to  another  realization  of  the  same 

lexical word sequence) have direct consequences 

for the continuation of the game (and score!).

By way of illustration, consider again the phrase 

tak skal du have repeated here for convenience.

  p1.   [t'Agsgaduh,a:?] polite, mildly grateful
  p2.   [t'Agsgaduha] impressed, shocked
  p3.   [tAgsgad'uh,a:?] repulsed, sullen

As opposed to the game levels 1-3, Talebob now 

takes the initative presenting an assertion among 

a1-a3 (randomly chosen).

  a1:- her er din kaffe 
(your coffee, here you are)

  a2:- jeg har lige set en trafikulykke

(I just witnessed a traffic accident)

  a3:- du skal da bare betale den ødelagte dør

(why don't you just pay for that broken door)

The user responds to the assertion by selecting 

one  of  the  prosodic  renderings  P1-P3  of  the 

target  phrase  and  then  uploads  his  speech 

production.

Talebob  performs  an  acoustic  comparison 

between the user input and the canned versions, 

deciding the closest  match and,  hence,  how to 

continue the conversation in a coherent manner.

Coherent discourse

  T:-  her er din kaffe (here is your coffee)

  U:-  tak skal du ha'  [neutral-polite, mildly grateful]

  Ta:-  bruger du mælk og sukker? (milk or suger?)

or

  Tb:-  var der andet? (you want anything else?)

Anomalous user input

  T:-  her er din kaffe (here is your coffee)

  U*:-  tak SKAL du ha'!  [impressed/chocked]

  T*a:-  er der noget galt? [is something wrong?]

or

  T*b:-  gør du nar af mig? [are you making fun?]

Likewise  for  the  other  predictable  dialogue 

paths.  Probably  only  a  subset  of  the  phrases 

included in the current Talebob will be suitable 

for this new “stimulus-response” scheme, calling 

for new selection criteria in the compilation of 

the  phrasicon  (phrase  selection).  Single-  and 

Proceedings of the 4th workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at NODALIDA 2015

17



multi-word  interjections  ('ja',  'nej',  'nå'3,  'okay', 

'klart',  'hold  kæft',  'er  det  sandt?',  etc) 

immediately spring to mind. As a side-effect of 

this construction work, we -- the linguists -- will 

probably also learn our own language better!

We  consider  using  TTS  for  presenting  the 

priming assertions, adding still  more realism to 

the dialogue training. We will  need a synthetic 

voice  giving  us  full  prosodic  control.  For  this 

reason  we  opt  for  a  diphone  voice,  since  the 

(more  modern)  unit-selection  based  voices 

typically achieve their naturalness by sacrificing 

the prosodic control of the output. The TTS can 

be  tried  at  http://lab.homunculus.dk/Talebob  .   

With the TTS-enhancement, one could have even 

the priming assertion itself change its triggering 

potential  (i.e.  the  adequate  response)  as  a 

function of it's prosodic contour alone.

6.4  A portation tool kit

There  is  nothing  intrinsically  'Danish' about 

Talebob;  the  acoustic  analysis  and  scoring 

procedures  have  no  language-specific  parts. 

Indeed, any user utterance with a pitch envelope 

similar to the reference utterance would achieve 

a high score, regardless of the lexical content of 

the utterance. This can be seen as a strength or a 

weakness  in  a  broader  NLP  perspective,  and 

indeed  our  academic  discussion  partners  have 

expressed a wide range of opinions about  this. 

Suffice  it  to  say  that  we  have  not,  until  now, 

encoutered  any  'cheating'  among  pupil  users, 

rather  the  opposite:  judging  from  our  own 

evaluation of the recorded sound productions, all 

pupil  users  without  exception  appear  to  have 

worked  on  improving  not  only  their  prosodic 

performance  (which  is  monitored  by  Talebob), 

but also their phonetic accuracy (which is not). 

This  benign  placebo effect  is,  in  our  view,  an 

important observation in its own right, sharing in 

effect the evaluation burden between the CALL 

tool  (which  can  never  compete  with  a 

professional  language  teacher  anyway)  and the 

learner himself (who may not even be aware of 

his  self-monitoring).  In  order  to  quantify  the 

placebo  effects,  we  would  need  to  perform  a 

3 The many semantic facets of the Danish 

interjection 'nå' [n'C] is ingeniously protraited in 

the famous song, by Poul Henningsen

controlled experiment with two user groups, one 

using  a  mock-version  of  Talebob  producing 

random feedback,  and one control  group using 

Talebob as is.  We have not performed such an 

experiment, but it might be an interesting one.

As  said,  the  value  of  low-  or  no-knowledge 

CALL tools is a controversial issue. However, in 

one respect, Talebob's linguistic ignorance is an 

undisputable  advantage.  When porting  Talebob 

to new L2 teaching scenaria, hardly any software 

modifications  will  be  needed,  only an editorial 

process of selecting 30 (or more) suitable phrases 

followed by a recording session with one or more 

native  speakers  with  a  flair  for  'ecological 

pronunciation'. The technical integration of these 

materials is fairly trivial (though some languages 

may require slight changes in the acoustic setup). 

In  this  respect,  Talebob's  simplistic  speech 

evaluation  differs  from  the  technologically  far 

more  sophisticated  CALL  tools  for  L2 

conversational  training available  in  the market, 

such  as Cooori  (www.cooori.com),  Wang 

(2011),  de  Vries  (2014),  and  Mirzaei  et  al 

(2014),  all  including  a  fully-fledged  ASR 

component (automatic speech recognition).

We are currently taking the first steps towards a 

tool  kit  allowing any L2 teacher,  perhaps with 

some  general  IT  experience,  to  compile  a 

localized  Talebob  version  for  use  in  his  own 

classroom. As illustrated in figure 6 below, the 

necessary  activities  are  concentrated  on  (i) 

compiling the phrasicon (based on a manual of 

selection  criteria),  (ii)  producing  the  speech 

prompts  (in  accordance  with  certain 

pronunciation  principles),  (iii)  adjusting  the 

Commentary  (the  repertoire  of  eventual  feed-

back messages), (iv) generating the two essential 

executives  (the  front-end  and  back-end),  (v) 

installing the BE (back-end application) on one's 

local web-server and, finally (vi) distributing the 

FE (front-end aplication) to the pupils or other 

end-users.

Proceedings of the 4th workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at NODALIDA 2015

18



Figure 6.  Using the Talebob Portation Tool Kit.

 

6.5  ICALL-based monitoring

In this concluding section we touch on ICALL 

tools  for  societal  use  in  a  broader  perspective 

(with  Talebob  as  an  example)  as  a  means  of 

gathering  data  not  only  relevant  to  didactic 

practices  and  research,  but  to  basic  linguistic 

research  as  well,  and  even  (potentially)  to 

political bodies, providing them with quantitative 

data for longitudinal studies of larger populations 

of students.

Until  now we have mainly tested Talebob as a 

didactic  tool  to  enhance  the  spoken  language 

teaching in a classroom setting. However, as we 

do  log  all  user  productions  and  shall  continue 

doing so for new versions, Talebob is not only 

useful  as a  didactic tool,  but  as  a generator of 

substantial  amounts  of  experimental  data  of  a 

linguistic data type that can otherwise be difficult 

to elicit, exhibiting the pronunciation patterns of 

L2 learners  in  great  detail.  To  our  knowledge, 

no-one  has  produced  a  quantitatively  based 

comparative study of the pronunciation patterns 

of Danish students. We are currently compiling 

data for such a paper, charting the pronunciation 

habits (and skills) as a function of their own first 

language,  their  prior  exposure  to  Danish,  their 

gender  and  age,  self-declared  degree  of 

motivation, etc.

We thus wish to point to Talebob as an example 

of  CALL-based  screening  of  large  groups  of 

pupils. Access to statistical information about the 

progress of individual pupils,  classes, and even 

populations  of  classes  may be  useful  even  for 

political  decision-makers.  Such  considerations 

are  highly  relevant  in  Denmark right  now,  the 

2014  school  reform  currently  being 

implemented. For the first  time ever English is 

now  taught  from  first  grade  in  Denmark. 

Spokesmen  for  the  teachers  are  constantly 

expressing  concerns  about  the  lack  of  training 

programmes for teachers new to the challenge of 

teaching English to minors. Objective means for 

assessing  the  learning  patterns  are  frequently 

called  for  in  the  press  and  in  parliament.  We 

believe that cleverly designed CALL-tools could 

play a decisive role in this debate.

We are preparing a Talebob version adapted for 

English phrases, planning  experiments with first 

graders during 2015 hopefully laying the ground 

for a longitudinal study. We do hope that Nordic 

researchers and Danish politicians will  pick up 

on this unique historical opportunity.

Proceedings of the 4th workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at NODALIDA 2015

19



7  A concluding remark 

After  having  tested  Talebob  extensively  for 

almost  six  months  now  with  L2  learners  of 

Danish  in  three  countries,  our  most  significant 

overall opservation is that pupil users generally 

like Talebob and spend far more time (at home 

and  in  school)  training  Danish  pronunciation 

than ever before (Hauksdottir and Henrichsen (in 

prep.)).  We  have  not  yet  performed  any 

quantitative evaluations of the didactic effects, so 

we do not  know whether Talebob can actually 

teach  pupils  a  better  Danish.  Nevertheless, 

teachers in our test group (especially Icelanders) 

report  that  most  of their  pupils  never practiced 

spoken Danish before unless forced. A majority 

of  pupils  report  that  they  feel  more  confident 

now  when  using  Danish  speech  productively 

(Hauksdottir  and  Henrichsen  (in  prep.)).  This 

result  alone,  we  feel,  have  made  Talebob  a 

worthwhile enterprise.

Acknowledgments

The  presented  work  is  a  part  of  the  ongoing 

Nordic  project  "Talehjælp  til  Dansk  som 

Nabosprog"  2013-2015,  supported  by  NorFA 

and  Nordisk  Ministerråd/Nordplus.  We 

gratefully  acknowledge their  contributions.  The 

project  combines  didactic  and  computational-

linguistic  research  in  Iceland,  Denmark,  and 

Sweden with practical implementation work by 

language  teachers  in  Nuuk,  Hafnarfjörður  and 

Tórshavn (visit  http://www.taleboblen.hi.is). 

Many have thus contributed, from a geographical 

area  spanning  five  time  zones.  One,  however, 

outshines all  others: project leader and initiator 

Auður  Hauksdóttir.  Thanks  to  Auður  for  her 

many  years  as  a  powerstation  in  Nordic  L2 

didactics.

References 

de  Vries,  B.  P.,  Cucchiarini,  C.,  Bodnar,  S..  2014. 

Automatic  Feedback  on  Spoken  Dutch  of  Low-

Educated  Learners:  An  ASR-based  CALL  study. 

Proceed. of EUROCALL 2014 (to appear).

Mbah, E.E., Mhab, B.M., Iloene, M.I., Iloene, G.O. 

2013.  Podcasts for Learning English Pronunciation  

in Igboland: Students' Experiences and Expectations. 

EUROCALL 2013.

González,  J.F.  2012.  Can  Apple's  iPhone  Help  to  

Improve English Pronunciation Autonomously? State  

of the App. EUROCALL 2012

Appel,  C.,  Robbins,  J.,  Moré,  J.,  Mullen,  T.  2012. 

Task  and  Tool  Interface  Design  for  L2  Speaking  

Interaction Online. EUROCALL 2012

Hauksdottir, A., Henrichsen, P.J. (in prep.) Danskfaget  
i Vestnorden og det Digitale Læremiddel Taleboblen

Thorborg,  L.  2006.  Dansk  Udtale  i  49  Tekster. 

Synope, ISBN 87-91909-01-5 (cd and book)

Thorborg, L. 2003.  Dansk Udtale - Øvebog. Synope, 

ISBN 87-988509-4-6 (cd and book)

Selsøe  Sørensen,  H.,  Henrichsen,  P.J.,  Hansen,  C. 

2004.  NorFA  CALL  net:  Nordisk  Netværk  om 

Computerstøttet  Unvervisning  i  Nordiske  Sprog; 

Nordisk  Sprogteknologisk Forskningsprogram 2000-

2004, Samfundslitteratur Press, 224pp.

Wang,  H.,  T.  Kawahara  and  Y.  Wang.  2011. 

Improving  Non-native  Speech  Recognition  

Performance  by  Discriminative  Training  for  

Language Model in a CALL System; INTERSPEECH 

2011, 27-31

Mirzaei  (2014) Partial and synchronized captioning:  

A  new  tool  for  second  language  listening  

development; EUROCALL 2014.

Henrichsen, P.J. 2004. The Twisted Tongue; Tools for  

Teaching  Danish  Pronunciation  Using  a  Synthetic  

Voice; in Henrichsen (2004b)

Henrichsen,  P.J.  2004b.  "CALL  for  the  Nordic  

Languages - tools and methods for Computer Assisted  

Language  Learning; Cph.  Studies  in  Language 

30/2004

Allwood,  J.  and  Henrichsen,  P.J.  (eds).  2005. 

SweDanes for CALL - A corpus and computer-based  

student's aid for comparison of Swedish and Danish  

spoken  language. NorFA  CALL  NET  (cd  with 

manual).

Proceedings of the 4th workshop on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning at NODALIDA 2015

20


