



















































Rhetorical Figure Detection: the Case of Chiasmus


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages 23–31,
Denver, Colorado, June 4, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Rhetorical Figure Detection: the Case of Chiasmus

Marie Dubremetz
Uppsala University

Dept. of Linguistics and Philology
Uppsala, Sweden

marie.dubremetz@lingfil.uu.se

Joakim Nivre
Uppsala University

Dept. of Linguistics and Philology
Uppsala, Sweden

joakim.nivre@lingfil.uu.se

Abstract

We propose an approach to detecting the
rhetorical figure called chiasmus, which in-
volves the repetition of a pair of words in re-
verse order, as in “all for one, one for all”.
Although repetitions of words are common in
natural language, true instances of chiasmus
are rare, and the question is therefore whether
a computer can effectively distinguish a chias-
mus from a random criss-cross pattern. We
argue that chiasmus should be treated as a
graded phenomenon, which leads to the de-
sign of an engine that extracts all criss-cross
patterns and ranks them on a scale from pro-
totypical chiasmi to less and less likely in-
stances. Using an evaluation inspired by in-
formation retrieval, we demonstrate that our
system achieves an average precision of 61%.
As a by-product of the evaluation we also con-
struct the first annotated corpus of chiasmi.

1 Introduction

Natural language processing (NLP) automates dif-
ferent tasks: translation, information retrieval, genre
classification. Today, these technologies definitely
provide valuable assistance for humans even if they
are not perfect. But the automatic tools become in-
appropriate to use when we need to generate, trans-
late or evaluate texts with stylistic quality, such as
great political discourse, novels, or pleadings. In-
deed, one is reluctant to trust computer assistance
when it comes to judging the rhetoric of a text. As
expressed by Harris and DiMarco (2009):

Too much attention has been placed on
semantics at the expense of rhetoric (in-

cluding stylistics, pragmatics, and senti-
ment). While computational approaches
to language have occasionally deployed
the word ‘rhetoric’, even in quite cen-
tral ways (such as Mann and Thompsons
Rhetorical Structure Theory (1988)), the
deep resources of the millenia-long re-
search tradition of rhetoric have only been
tapped to a vanishingly small degree.

Even though the situation has improved slightly dur-
ing the last years (see Section 2), the gap underlined
by Harris and DiMarco in the treatment of tradi-
tional rhetoric is still important. This study is a con-
tribution aimed at filling this gap. We will focus on
the task of automatically identifying a rhetorical de-
vice already studied in the first century before Christ
by Quintilian (Greene, 2012, art. antimetabole), but
rarely studied in computational linguistics: the chi-
asmus.

Chiasmi are a family of figures that consist in re-
peating linguistic elements in reverse order. It is
named by the classics after the Greek letter χ be-
cause of the cross this letter symbolises (see Fig-
ure 1). If the name ‘chiasmus’ seems specific to
rhetorical studies, the figure in itself is known to ev-
erybody through proverbs like (1) or quotations like
(2).

(1) Live not to eat, but eat to live.

(2) Ask not what your country can do for you; ask
what you can do for your country.

One can talk about chiasmus of letters, sounds,
concepts or even syntactic structures as in (3).

23



Figure 1: Schema of a chiasmus.

(3) Each throat was parched, and glazed each
eye.

Strictly speaking, we will only be concerned with
one type of chiasmus: the chiasmus of identical
words (also called antimetabole) or of identical lem-
mas, as exemplified in (4) and (5), respectively.

(4) A comedian does funny things,
a good comedian does things funny.

(5) A wit with dunces and a dunce with wits

From now on, for the sake of simplicity, we will re-
strict the term ‘chiasmus’ to exclusively chiasmus of
words that share identity of lemma.

We see different reasons why NLP should pay at-
tention to chiasmi. First, it may be useful for a lit-
erary analysis: tools for supporting studies of liter-
ature exist but mostly belong to textometry. Thus,
they mainly identify word frequency and some syn-
tactic patterns, not figures of speech. Second, the
chiasmus has interesting linguistic properties: it ex-
presses semantic inversion thanks to syntax inver-
sion, as in (2) above. Horvei (1985, p.49) points out
that chiasmus can be used to emphasize antagonism
as in (6) as well as reciprocity as in (7).

(6) Portugal has no rivers that flow into Spain, but
Spain does have rivers that flow into Portugal.

(7) Hippocrates said that food should be our
medicine and medicine our food.

To see whether we can detect such interplay of se-
mantics and syntax is an interesting test case for
computational linguistics.

Chiasmus is extremely rare. To see this, one can
read a book like River War by Winston Churchill.

Indeed, despite the fact that this book comes from
a politician recognized for his high rhetorical abil-
ities and despite the length of the text (more than
one hundred thousand words) we could find only one
chiasmus:

(8) Ambition stirs imagination nearly as much as
imagination excites ambition.

Such rareness is a challenge for our discipline. NLP
is accustomed to treating common linguistic phe-
nomena (multiword expressions, anaphora, named
entities), for which statistical models work well.We
will see that chiasmus is a needle in the haystack
problem. For the case of chiasmus, we have a
double-fold challenge: we must not only perform
well at classifying the majority of wrong instances
but above all perform well in finding the infrequent
phenomenon.

This paper will promote a new approach to chias-
mus detection that takes chiasmus as a graded phe-
nomenon. According to our evaluation, inspired
from information retrieval methodology, our system
gets up to 61% average precision. At the end of this
paper the reader will have a list of precise features
that can be used in order to rank chiasmus. As a
side effect we provide a partially annotated tuning
set with 1200 extracts manually annotated as true or
false chiasmus instances.

2 Related Work

The identification of chiasmus is not very common
in computational linguistics, although it has some-
times been included in the task of detecting figure of
repetition (Gawryjolek, 2009; Harris and DiMarco,
2009; Hromada, 2011). Gawryjolek (2009) pro-
poses to extract every pair of words repeated in re-
verse order in the text, but this method quickly be-
comes impractical with big corpora. When we try it
on a book (River War by Churchill, 130,000 words)
it outputs 66,000 inversions: as we shall see later, we
have strong reason to believe that only one of them
is a real chiasmus.

At the opposite end of the spectrum, Hro-
mada (2011) makes a highly precise detection by de-
tecting three pairs of words repeated in reverse order
without any variation in the intervening material as
illustrated in (9), but thus he limits the variety of chi-

24



asmus pattern that can be found and limits the recall
(Dubremetz, 2013).

(9) You don’t need [intelligence] [to have] [luck],
but you do need [luck] [to have] [intelligence].

In our example, River War, the only chiasmus of
the book (Sentence (8)) does not follow this pat-
tern of three identical words. Thus, with Hromada’s
algorithm we obtain no false positive but no true
positive either: we have got an empty output. Fi-
nally, Dubremetz (2013) proposes an algorithm in
between, based on a stopword filter and the occur-
rence of punctuation, but this algorithm still has low
precision. With this method we found one true in-
stance in River War but only after the manual anno-
tation of 300 instances. Thus the question is: can
we build a system for chiasmus detection that has a
better trade-off between recall and precision?

3 A New Approach to Chiasmus Detection

To make progress, we need to move beyond the bi-
nary definition of chiasmus as simply a pair of in-
verted words, which is oversimplistic. The repeti-
tion of words is an extremely common phenomenon.
Defining a figure of speech by just the position of
word repetitions is not enough (Gawryjolek, 2009;
Dubremetz, 2013). To become a real rhetorical
device, the repetition of words must be “a use of
language that creates a literary effect”.1 This ele-
ment of the definition requires us to distinguish be-
tween the false positives, or accidental inversions
of words, and the (true) chiasmi, that is, when the
inversion of words explicitly provokes a figure of
speech. Sentence (10) is an example of false posi-
tive (here with ‘the’ and ‘application’). It contrasts
with Sentence (11) which is a true positive.

(10) My government respects the application of
the European directive and the application of
the 35-hour law.

(11) One for all, all for one.

However, the distinction between chiasmus and ac-
cidental inversion is not trivial to draw. Some cases

1Definition of ‘rhetorical device’ given by Princeton word-
net: https://wordnet.princeton.edu/

are obvious for every reader, some are not. For in-
stance, it is easy to say that there is chiasmus when
the figure constitutes all the sentence and shows a
perfect symmetry in the syntax:

(12) Chuck Norris does not fear death, death fears
Chuck Norris.

But how about cases where the chiasmus is just one
clause in a sentence or is not as symmetric as our
canonical examples:

(13) We are all European citizens and we are all
citizens of a European Union which is under-
pinned.

The existence of borderline cases indicates the
need for a detector that does not only eliminate the
most flagrant false positives, but above all estab-
lishes a ranking from prototypical chiasmi to less
and less likely instances. In this way, the tool be-
comes a real help for the human because it selects
interesting cases of repetitions and leaves it to the
human to evaluate unclear cases.

A serious bottleneck in the creation of a system
for ranking chiasmus candidates is the lack of an-
notated data. Chiasmus is not a frequent rhetorical
figure. Such rareness is the first reason why there
is no huge corpus of annotated chiasmi. It would re-
quire annotators to read millions of words in order to
arrive at a decent sample. Another difficulty comes
from the requirement for qualified annotators when
it comes to literature-specific devices. Hammond et
al. (2013), for example, do not rely on crowd sourc-
ing when it comes to annotating changing voices.
They use first year literature students. Annotating
chiasmi is likely to require the same kind of annota-
tors which are not the most easy to hire on crowd-
sourcing platforms. If we want to create annotations
we have to face the following problem: most of the
inversions made in natural language are not chiasmi
(see the example of River War, Section 2). Thus, the
annotation of every inversion in a corpus would be
a massive, repetitive and expensive task for human
annotators.

This also explains why there is no large scale eval-
uation of the performance of the chiasmus detectors
through literature. To overcome this problem we
can seek inspiration from another field of compu-
tational linguistics: information retrieval targeted at

25



the world wide web, because the web cannot be fully
annotated and a very small percentage of the web
pages is relevant to a given request. As described al-
ready fifteen years ago by Chowdhury (1999, p.213),
in such a situation calculating the absolute recall
is impossible. However, we can get a rough esti-
mate of the recall by comparing different search en-
gines. For instance Clarke and Willett (1997, p.186),
working with Altavista, Lycos and Excite, made a
pool of relevant documents for a particular query by
merging the outputs of the three engines. We will
base our evaluation system on the same principle:
through our experiments our different “chiasmus re-
trieval engines” will return different hits. We anno-
tate manually the top hundreds of those hits and ob-
tain a pool of relevant (and irrelevant) inversions. In
this way both precision and recall can be estimated
without a massive work of annotation effort. In ad-
dition, we will produce a corpus of annotated (true
and false) instances that can later be used as training
data.

The definition of chiasmus (any pair of inversion
that provokes literary effect) is rather floating (Ra-
batel, 2008, p.21). No clear discriminative test has
been stated by linguists. This forces us to rely our
annotation on human intuition. However, we keep
transparency of our annotation and evaluation by
publishing all the chiasmi we consider positive as
well as samples of false and borderline cases (see
Appendix).

4 A Ranking Model for Chiasmus

A mathematical model should be defined for our
ranking system. The way we compute the chiasmus
score is the following. We define a standard linear
model by the function:

f(r) =
n∑

i=1

xi · wi

Where r is a string containing a pair of inverted
words, xi is a set of feature values, and wi is the
weight associated with each features. Given two in-
versions r1 and r2, f(r1) > f(r2) means that the
inversion r1 is more likely to be a chiasmus than r2.

4.1 Features
We experiment with four different categories of fea-
tures that can be easily encoded. Rabatel (2008),

Horvei (1985), Garcı́a-Page (1991), Nordahl (1971),
and Diderot and D’Alembert (1782) deliver exam-
ples of canonical chiasmi as well as useful observa-
tions. Our features are inspired by them.

1. Basic features: stopwords and punctuation

2. Size-related features

3. N-gram features

4. Lexical clues

We group in a first category what has been tested
in previous research (Dubremetz, 2013). They are
indeed expected and not hard to motivate. For in-
stance, following the Zipf law, we can expect that
most of the false positives are caused by the gram-
matical words (‘a’, ‘the’, etc.) which justifies the use
of a stopword list. As well, even if nothing forbids
an author to make chiasmi that cross sentences, we
hypothesize that punctuation, parentheses, quotation
marks are definitely a clue that characterises some
false positives, for instance in the false positive (14).

(14) They could use the format : ‘Such-and-such
assurance , reliable ’ , so that the citizens will
know that the assurance undertaking uses its
funds well .

We see in (14) that the inversion ‘use/assurance’ is
interrupted by quotation marks, commas and colon.

The second feature type is the one related to size
or the number of words. We can expect that a too
long distance between main terms or a huge size dif-
ference between clauses is an easy-to-compute false
positive characteristic as in this false positive:

(15) It is strange that other committees can
apparently acquire secretariats and well-
equipped secretariats with many staff, but that
this is not possible for the Women’ s Commit-
tee.

In 15, indeed, the too long distance between ‘secre-
tariats’ and ‘Committee’ in the second clause breaks
the axial symmetry prescribed by Morier (1961,
p.113)

The third category of features follows the intuition
of Hromada (2011) when he looks for three pairs of

26



inverted words instead of two: we will not just check
if there are two pairs of similar words but as well if
some other words are repeated. As we see in (16),
similar contexts are a characteristic pattern of chi-
asmi (Fontanier, 1827, p.381). We will evaluate the
similarity by looking at the overlapping N -grams.

(16) In peace, sons bury their fathers; in war, fa-
thers bury their sons.

The last group consists of the lexical clues. These
are language specific and, in contrast to stopwords in
basic features, this is a category of positive features.
We can expect from this category to encode features
like conjunction (Rabatel, 2008, p.28) because they
underline the axial symmetry (Morier, 1961) as in
(17).

(17) Evidence of absence or absence of evidence?

We capture negations as well. Indeed, Fontanier
(1827, p.160) stresses that prototypical chiasmi are
used to underline opposition. As well Horvei (1985)
concludes that chiasmi often appear in general atmo-
sphere of antagonism. We can observe such nega-
tions in (1), (6), (9), and (12).

4.2 Setting the Weights

As observed in Section 3, there is no existing set of
annotated data. This excludes traditional supervised
machine learning to set the weights. So, we pro-
ceeded empirically, by observation of our successive
results on our tuning set. We make available on the
web the results of our trainings.

5 Experiments

5.1 Corpus

We perform experiments on English. We choose
a corpus of politics often used in NLP: Europarl.2

From this corpus, we take two extracts of two mil-
lion words each. One is used as a tuning corpus to
test our hypotheses on weigths and features. The
other one is the test corpus which is only used for
the final evaluation. In Section 5.3 we only present
results based on this test corpus.

2Europarl English to Swedish corpus 01/1997-11/2011

5.2 Implementation

Our program3 takes as an input a text file and gives
as output the chiasmus candidates with a score that
allows us to rank them: higher scores at the top,
lower scores at the bottom. To do so, it tokenises
and lemmatises the text with TreeTagger (Schmid,
1994). Once this basic processing is done it extracts
every pair of repeated and inverted lemmas within a
window of 30 tokens and passes them to the scoring
function.

In our experiments we implemented twenty fea-
tures. They are grouped into the four categories de-
scribed in Section 4.1. We present all the features
and weights in Table 1 using the notation from Fig-
ure 2.

5.3 Evaluation

In order to evaluate our features we perform four ex-
periments. We start with only the basic features.
Then, for each new experiment, we add the next
group of features in the same order as in Table 1
(size, similarity and lexical clues). Thus the fourth
and last experiment (called ‘+Lexical clues’) accu-
mulates all the features. Each time we run an experi-
ment on the test set, we manually annotate as True or
False the top 200 hits given by the machine. Thanks
to this manual annotation, we present the evaluation
in a precision-recall graph (Figure 3).

0 20 40 60 80 100

0
20

40
60

80
10

0

Recall %

P
re

ci
si

on
 %

+Size
+Ngram
+Lexical clues

Figure 3: Precision-Recall graphs for the top two hundred
candidates in each experiment. (The ‘basic’ experiment
is not included because of too low precision.)

3Available at http://stp.lingfil.uu.se/~marie/chiasme.htm.

27



In prehistoric times︸ ︷︷ ︸
CLeft

women︸ ︷︷ ︸
Wa

resembled︸ ︷︷ ︸
Cab

men︸︷︷︸
Wb

, and︸︷︷︸
Cbb

men︸︷︷︸
W ′b

resembled︸ ︷︷ ︸
Cba

women︸ ︷︷ ︸
W ′a

.

Figure 2: Schematic representation of chiasmus, C stands for context, W for word.

Feature Description Weight
Basic

#punct Number of hard punctuation marks and parentheses in Cab and Cba −10
#softPunct Number of commas in Cab and Cba −10
#centralPunct Number of hard punctuation marks and parentheses in Cbb −5
isInStopListA Wa is a stopword −10
isInStopListB Wb is a stopword −10
#mainRep Number of additional repetitions of Wa or Wb −5

Size
#diffSize Difference in number of tokens between Cab and Cba −1
#toksInBC Position of W’a minus position of Wb −1

Similarity
exactMatch True if Cab and Cba are identical 5
#sameTok Number of identical lemmatized tokens in Cab and in Cba 1
simScore #sameTok but normalised 10
#sameBigram Number of bigrams that are identical in Cab and Cba 2
#sameTrigram Number of trigrams that are identical in Cab and Cba 4
#sameCont Number of tokens that are identical in CLeft and Cbb 1

Lexical clues
hasConj True if Cbb contains one of the conjunctions ‘and’, ‘as’, ‘because’,

‘for’, ‘yet’, ‘nor’, ‘so’, ‘or’, ‘but’
2

hasNeg True if the chiasmus candidate contains one of the negative words
‘no’, ‘not’, ‘never’, ‘nothing’

2

hasTo True if the expression “from . . . to” appears in the chiasmus candidate
or ‘to’ or ‘into’ are repeated in Cab and Cba

2

Table 1: The four groups of features used to rank chiasmus candidates

Precision at
candidate

+Size +Ngram +Lex. clues

10 40 70 70
50 18 24 28
100 12 17 17
200 7 9 9
Ave. P. 34 52 61

Table 2: Average precision, and precision at a given top
rank, for each experiment.

In Figure 3, recall is based on 19 true positives.
They were found through the annotation of the 200
top hits of our 4 different experiments. On this graph

the curves end when the position 200 is reach. For
instance, the curve of ‘+Size’ experiment stops at
7% precision because at candidates number 200 only
14 chiasmi were found. The ‘basic’ experiment is
not present because of too low precision. Indeed,
16 out of the 19 true positives were ranked by the
‘basic’ features as first but within a tie of 1180 other
criss-cross patterns (less than 2% precision).

When we add size features, the algorithm outputs
the majority of the chiasmi within 200 hits (14 out
of 19, or a recall of 74%), but the average precision
is below 35%(Table 2). The recall can get signifi-
cantly better. We notice, indeed, a significant pro-
gression of the number of chiasmi if we useN -gram

28



similarity features (17 out of 19 chiasmi). Finally
the lexical clues do not permit us to find more chi-
asmi (the maximum recall is still 90% for both the
third and the fourth experiment) but the precision
improves slightly (plus 9% for ‘+Lexical clues’ ex-
periment Table 2).

We never reach 100% recall. This means that 2 of
the 19 chiasmi we found were not identifiable by the
best algorithm (‘+Lexical clues’). They are ranked
more highly by the non-optimal algorithms. It can
be that our features are too shallow, but it can be as
well that the current weights are not optimal. Since
our tuning is manual, we have not tried every com-
bination of weights possible.

Chiasmus is a graded phenomenon, our manual
annotation ranks three levels of chiasmi: true, bor-
deline, and false cases. Borderline cases are by def-
inition controversial, thus we do not count them in
our table of results.4 Duplicates are not counted ei-
ther.5

Comparing our model to previous research is
not straightforward. Our output is ranked, unlike
Gawryjolek (2009) and Hromada (2011). We know
already that Gawryjolek (2009) extracts every criss-
cross pattern with no exception and thus obtains
100% recall but for a precision close to 0% (see Sec-
tion 2). We run the experiment of Hromada (2011)
on our test set.6 It outputs 6 true positives for a total
of only 9 candidates. In order to give a fair com-
parison with Hromada (2011), the 3 systems will be
compared only for the nine first candidates (Table 3).

+Lex.
clues

Gawryjolek
(2009)

Hromada
(2011)

Precision 78 0 67
Recall 37 0 32
F1-Score 59 0 43

Table 3: Precision, recall, and F-measure at candidate
number 9. Comparison with previous works.

4We invite our reader to read them in Appendix B and at
http://stp.lingfil.uu.se/~marie/chiasme.htm

5For example, if the machine extracts both: “All for one,
one for all”, “All for one, one for all” we take into account
only the second case even if both extracts belong to a chiasmus.

6Program furnished by D. Hromada in the email
of the 10th of February. We provide this regex at
http://stp.lingfil.uu.se/~marie/chiasme.htm.

Finally, the efficiency: our algorithm takes less
than three minutes and a half for one million words
(214 seconds). It is three times more than Hro-
mada (2011) (78 seconds per million words) but still
reasonable.

6 Conclusion

The aim of this research is to detect a rare linguistic
phenomenon called chiasmus. For that task, we have
no annotated corpus and thus no possibility of super-
vised machine learning, and no possibility to evalu-
ate the absolute recall of our system. Our first con-
tribution is to redefine the task itself. Based on lin-
guistic observations, we propose to rank the chiasmi
instead of classifying them as true or false. Our sec-
ond contribution was to offer an evaluation scheme
and carry it out. Our third and main contribution
was to propose a basic linear model with four cat-
egories of features that can solve the problem. At
the moment, because of the small amount of positive
examples in our data set, only tentative conclusions
can be drawn. The results might not be statistically
significant. Nevertheless, on this data set, this model
gives the best F-score ever obtained. We kept track
of all annotations and thus our fourth contribution
is a set of 1200 criss-cross patterns manually anno-
tated as true, false and borderline cases, which can
be used for training or evaluation or both.

Future work could aim at gathering more data.
This would allow the use of machine learning tech-
niques in order to set the weights. There are still lin-
guistic choices to make as well. Syntactic patterns
seem to emerge in our examples. Identifying those
patterns would allow the addition of structural fea-
tures in our algorithm such as the symmetrical swap
of syntactic roles.

A Chiasmi Annotated as True

1. Hippocrates said that food should be our
medicine and medicine our food.

2. It is much better to bring work to people than
to take people to work.

3. The annual reports and the promised follow-up
report in January 2004 may well prove that this
report, this agreement, is not the beginning of
the end but the end of the beginning.

29



4. The basic problem is and remains: social State
or liberal State? More State and less market
or more market and less State ?

5. She wants to feed chickens to pigs and pigs to
chickens.

6. There is no doubt that doping is changing
sport and that sport will be changed due to
doping, which means it will become absolutely
ludicrous if we do nothing to prevent it.

7. Portugal and Spain are in quite unequal posi-
tions, given that we are a downstream country,
in other words, Portugal has no rivers that flow
into Spain, but Spain does have rivers that flow
into Portugal.

8. Mr President, some Eurosceptics are in favour
of the Treaty of Nice because federalists
protest against it. federalists are in favour of
it because Eurosceptics are opposed to it.

9. Companies must be enabled to find a solution
to sending their products from the company to
the railway and once the destination is reached,
from the railway to the company.

10. That is the first difficulty in this exercise, since
each of the camps expects first of all that we
side with it against its enemy, following the old
adage that my enemy ’s enemy is my friend,
but my enemy ’s friend is my enemy.

11. It is high time that animals were no longer
adapted to suit their environment, but the en-
vironment to suit the animals.

12. That is, it must not be a matter of Europe
following the Member States or of Member
States following Europe.

13. I would like to say once again that the Euro-
pean Research Area is not simply the Euro-
pean Framework Programme. The European
Framework Programme is an aspect of the Eu-
ropean Research Area.

14. We also need to clarify another point, i.e. that
we are calling for an international solution be-
cause this is an international problem and in-

ternational problems require international so-
lutions.

15. Finally, I would like to discuss this commit-
ment from all in the sense that, as Bertrand
Russell said, in order to be happy we need
three things: the courage to accept the things
that we cannot change, enough determination
to change the things that we can change and
the wisdom to know the difference between the
two.

16. Perhaps we should adapt the Community poli-
cies to these regions instead of expecting the
regions to adapt to an elitist European policy.

17. What is to prevent national parliamentarians
appearing more regularly in the European Par-
liament and European parliamentarians more
regularly in the national parliaments ?

18. In my opinion, it would be appropriate if the
European political parties took part in na-
tional elections, rather than having national
political parties take part in European elec-
tions.

19. The directive entrenches a situation in which
protected companies can take over unpro-
tected ones, yet unprotected companies can-
not take over protected ones.

B Chiasmi Annotated as Borderline Cases

Random sample out of a total of 10 borderline cases.

1. also ensure that beef and veal are safer than
ever for consumers and that consumer confi-
dence is restored in beef and veal.

2. If all this is not helped by a fund , the fund is
no help at all.

3. Both men and women can be victims , but the
main victims are women [...].

4. The Commission should monitor the agency
and we should monitor the Commission.

5. The more harmless questions have been an-
swered , but the evasive or inadequate answers
to other questions are unacceptable.

30



C Chiasmi Annotated as False

Random sample out of 390 negative instances.

1. the charging of environmental and resource
costs associated with water use are aimed at
those Member States that still make excessive
use of and pollute their water resources , and
therefore not

2. at 3 p.m. ) Council priorities for the meet-
ing of the United Nations Human Rights Com-
mission in Geneva The next item is the Coun-
cil and Commission statements on the Council
priorities for the meeting of

3. President , the two basic issues are whether we
intend to harmonise social policy and whether
the power of the Commission will be extended
to cover social policy issues . I will start

4. of us within the Union agree on every issue ,
but on this issue we are agreed . When we are

5. appear that the reference to regulation 2082/
90 may be a departure from the directive and
that the directive and the regulation could be
considered to

References
Gobinda Chowdhury. 1999. The internet and informa-

tion retrieval research: a brief review. Journal of Doc-
umentation, 55(2):209–225.

Sarah J. Clarke and Peter Willett. 1997. Estimating the
recall performance of Web search engines. Proceed-
ings of Aslib, 49(7):184–189.

Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond D’Alembert. 1782. En-
cyclopédie méthodique: ou par ordre de matières, vol-
ume 66. Panckoucke.

Marie Dubremetz. 2013. Vers une identification
automatique du chiasme de mots. In Actes de
la 15e Rencontres des Étudiants Chercheurs en
Informatique pour le Traitement Automatique des
Langues (RECITAL’2013), pages 150–163, Les Sables
d’Olonne, France.

Pierre Fontanier. 1827. Les Figures du discours. Flam-
marion, 1977 edition.

Mario Garcı́a-Page. 1991. El “retruécano léxico” y sus
lı́mites. Archivum: Revista de la Facultad de Filologı́a
de Oviedo, 41-42:173–203.

Jakub J. Gawryjolek. 2009. Automated Annotation and
Visualization of Rhetorical Figures. Master thesis,
Universty of Waterloo.

Roland Greene. 2012. The Princeton Encyclopedia of
Poetry and Poetics: Fourth Edition. Princeton Univer-
sity Press.

Adam Hammond, Julian Brooke, and Graeme Hirst.
2013. A Tale of Two Cultures: Bringing Literary
Analysis and Computational Linguistics Together. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Lin-
guistics for Literature, pages 1–8, Atlanta, Georgia,
June. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Randy Harris and Chrysanne DiMarco. 2009. Construct-
ing a Rhetorical Figuration Ontology. In Persuasive
Technology and Digital Behaviour Intervention Sym-
posium, pages 47–52, Edinburgh, Scotland.

Harald Horvei. 1985. The Changing Fortunes of a
Rhetorical Term: The History of the Chiasmus. The
Author.

Daniel Devatman Hromada. 2011. Initial Experiments
with Multilingual Extraction of Rhetoric Figures by
means of PERL-compatible Regular Expressions. In
Proceedings of the Second Student Research Workshop
associated with RANLP 2011, pages 85–90, Hissar,
Bulgaria.

William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243–281.

Henri Morier. 1961. Dictionnaire de poétique et de
rhétorique. Presses Universitaires de France.

Helge Nordahl. 1971. Variantes chiasmiques. Essai de
description formelle. Revue Romane, 6:219–232.

Alain Rabatel. 2008. Points de vue en confrontation dans
les antimétaboles PLUS et MOINS. Langue française,
160(4):21–36.

Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tag-
ging Using Decision Trees. In Proceedings of Interna-
tional Conference on New Methods in Language Pro-
cessing, pages 44–49, Manchester, Great Britain.

31


