



















































The Role of Expectedness in the Implicitation and Explicitation of Discourse Relations


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Discourse in Machine Translation (DiscoMT), pages 41–46,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

The Role of Expectedness  
in the Implicitation and Explicitation of Discourse Relations 

 
Jet Hoek 

UiL-OTS, Utrecht University 
Trans 10, NL-3512 JK 

Utrecht, The Netherlands 
j.hoek@uu.nl 

Jacqueline Evers-Vermeul 
UiL-OTS, Utrecht University 

Trans 10, NL-3512 JK 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
j.evers@uu.nl 

Ted J.M. Sanders 
UiL-OTS, Utrecht University 

Trans 10, NL-3512 JK 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 

t.j.m.sanders@uu.nl

Abstract 
Translation of discourse connectives varies 
more in human translations than in machine 
translations. Building on Murray’s (1997) 
continuity hypothesis and Sanders’ (2005) 
causality-by-default hypothesis we investigate 
whether expectedness influences the degree of 
implicitation and explicitation of discourse 
relations. We manually analyze how source 
text connectives are translated, and where 
connectives in target texts come from. We 
establish whether relations are explicitly 
signaled in the other language as well, or 
whether they have to be reconstructed by 
inference. We demonstrate that the amount of 
implicitation and explicitation of connectives in 
translation is influenced by the expectedness of 
the relation a connective signals. In addition, 
we show that the types of connectives most 
often added in translation are also the ones 
most often deleted.  

 
1 Introduction 

Discourse relations that hold between text 
segments can be explicitly signaled through 
connectives, but can also remain unmarked. For 
example, the causal relation in (1a) is explicitly 
encoded by the connective because. In its 
implicit counterpart in (1b), this causal relation 
has to be reconstructed by inference.  
 
(1) a. Mike opened his umbrella because it was      

    raining. 
b. Mike opened his umbrella. It was raining. 
 

In translation, connectives are very volatile items 
and can be added or removed between source 
text (ST) and target text (TT) (Halverson, 2004; 
Zufferey and Cartoni, 2014). Human translators 
more often leave out or reformulate a connective 
(up to 18%) than statistical machine translation 
models (up to 8%) (Meyer and Webber, 2013). 
In addition, when connectives are left out of 
machine translation (MT) output, this is not 

always justified and can result in translations that 
do not correspond to the original texts (cf. Li et 
al., 2014; Steele and Specia, 2014). 

Specific deletions or additions of connectives 
in human translations have often been attributed 
to differences in linguistic resources between the 
languages in a translation pair (e.g. Becher, 
2011; Hansen-Schirra et al., 2007). Other studies, 
however, have proposed that the deletion or 
addition of a connective is (also) dependent on 
the type of discourse relation a connective 
signals (e.g. Halverson 1996; Hoek and Zufferey, 
2015). This study represents a first step in an 
effort to identify the factors that influence 
whether a connective can be left out of a 
translation without changing the interpretation of 
a fragment, or whether a connective should be 
translated into a target text by means of a 
comparable target language connective or 
another linguistic construction that expresses the 
same meaning. This knowledge can eventually 
be used to create MT systems that can translate 
explicit relations into implicit relations and vice 
versa in an idiomatic and fluent way that 
approaches the output of human translators. 

Discourse-annotated corpora that include both 
implicit and explicit relations reveal that certain 
types of relations are easier to convey implicitly 
than others (Asr and Demberg, 2012; Das and 
Taboada, 2013; Versley, 2013). Causal relations, 
as in (1), for instance, appear more often without 
a connective or a cue phrase than negative 
relations, as in (2), or conditional relations, as in 
(3). The question marks in the b-sentences 
indicate that it is difficult to arrive at the negative 
or conditional interpretation, respectively, of the 
relations in the a-sentences. 

(2) a. Ann is happy, although she lost the race. 
b. ??Ann is happy. She lost the race. 

(3) a. If he wants to be rich someday, he 
 should get off the couch. 
b. ??He wants to be rich someday. He 
 should get off the couch. 

41



In this paper, we pursue the idea that the types of 
discourse relations that are often implicit 
correspond to the types of relations people 
expect in a discourse. According to the 
continuity hypothesis (Murray, 1997) and the 
causality-by-default hypothesis (Sanders, 2005), 
continuous and causal relations are generally the 
expected types. These hypotheses are 
corroborated by processing studies (e.g. 
Koornneef and Sanders, 2013; Kuperberg et al., 
2011; Mak and Sanders, 2013; Sanders and 
Noordman, 2000) and corpus-based research. 
Asr and Demberg (2012) for instance 
demonstrate that the implicit relations in the 
Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB, Prasad et al. 
2008) are often continuous and/or causal. 

If types of discourse relations differ in their 
degree of expectedness, and thereby in their 
degree of implicitness in monolingual texts, this 
should affect translation. In other words: we 
hypothesize that a discourse relation’s potential 
to remain implicit (because of its expectedness) 
influences how often that type of relation is 
implicitated or explicitated in translation. For 
expected types of relations, which are often 
implicit in the ST, there are many instances at 
which translators can choose (either deliberately 
or subconsciously) to add a connective. 
Conversely, when an expected relation is 
explicitly marked in the ST, there will often be 
the option of leaving out the connective in the 
TT. What this predicts, then, is that markers of 
the types of relations that are most often added in 
translation will also be the ones most often 
deleted, regardless of language pair or translation 
direction. In this study, we test these predictions 
by comparing additions and deletions of 
connectives in two language pairs (English-
Dutch and English-German) from the Europarl 
Direct corpus1 (Koehn, 2005; Cartoni et al., 
2013), and determining how the (interpretation 
of the) discourse relation in the ST or TT is 
conveyed in the other language.  
 
2 Method 

We define implicitness and explicitness as 
monolingual concepts that refer to whether the 
interpretation of, in this case, a discourse relation 
is explicitly encoded, as in (1a), or if it has to be 

1 The Europarl Corpus is a version of the original Europarl 
corpus that only includes ST fragments that were originally 
uttered in that language, e.g. all fragments in the EN-DU 
part of the corpus were originally uttered in English. The 
corpus is aligned per language pair. 

reconstructed by inference, as in (1b). We use 
implicitation and explicitation to refer to shifts 
in implicitness or explicitness between ST and 
TT. In case of implicitation, the TT is more 
implicit than the ST. In case of explicitation, the 
TT is more explicit than the ST. 

For this study, we compared three types of 
discourse relations: causal, negative, and 
conditional relations. Causal relations are among 
the expected types of relations, while negative 
and conditional relations are not. We therefore 
expect more implicitations and explicitations of 
causal relations than of negative or conditional 
relations. We selected prototypical connectives 
signaling these relation types in all three 
languages in our corpus, see Table 1.  
 

 

Table 1. Connective selection per language and 
type of relation 
 

We automatically extracted English ST 
fragments containing because, although, and if 
from the Europarl Direct corpus, along with their 
translations in Dutch and German. We also 
extracted Dutch and German TT fragments 
containing omdat, hoewel, and als, and weil, 
obwohl, and wenn, respectively, along with the 
corresponding English ST fragments. We 
randomly selected 250 instances of each 
connective and made sure these were used to 
mark a discourse relation. In total, we had 3000 
ST-TT fragment pairs.  
 
2.1 Annotation 

For all connectives we determined how they 
were translated, or what they were a translation 
of. In the analysis we used the categories explicit, 
paraphrase, underspecified connective, syntax, 
and implicit. 

In explicit cases, the connective corresponds to 
a similar connective or cue phrase in the other 
language. In the paraphrase category the type of 
relation is still explicitly encoded in the text, but 
with different linguistic means, as in (4). We 
coded a fragment as implicit if it contained a 
relation not marked by means of any connective 
or cue phrase. (5) is an example of implicitation, 
since the relation is explicitly encoded in the ST, 
but implicit in the TT. The implicitness is 
indicated with the Ø symbol. 

 English Dutch German 
Causal because omdat weil 
Negative although hoewel obwohl 
Conditional if als wenn 

                                                           

42



(4) (ep-96-07-03) 
TT Hoewel “although” wij wegens de politieke 

situatie in Italië zelf aanvankelijk twijfels 
hadden, heeft het voorzitterschap toch 
opmerkelijke resultaten geboekt. 

ST Despite the initial doubts we had due to the 
domestic political situation, there were some 
significant achievements … 

(5) (ep-98-02-20) 
ST Insofar as the POSEIMA programme is 

concerned, we have to admit that you could 
not think of a more complicated or indirect 
or inefficient way to aid islands or remote 
regions, because in the first place there is no 
guarantee whatsoever that this money is 
going to the aid of the people who need it or 
for whom it was intended. 

TT Voor wat betreft het POSEIMA-programma 
kunnen we alleen maar toegeven dat dit wel 
de ingewikkeldste, minst directe en meest 
inefficiënte manier is die je kunt bedenken 
om hulp te bieden aan eilandregio’s en 
plattelandsgebieden. Ø Ten eerste bestaat er 
geen enkele garantie dat het geld inderdaad 
bij de mensen terechtkomt die het nodig 
hebben en voor wie het ook is bedoeld. 

In the Dutch TT in (4), the connective hoewel 
“although” expresses a negative relation. The 
English ST does not contain this negative 
relation, but uses despite plus a noun phrase to 
explicitly indicate contrast. 

In addition, connectives in a ST or TT that 
were less specific than the corresponding 
connectives in the other text were considered 
underspecified connectives. In these cases, 
neither the original nor the translation contains 
an implicit discourse relation. See for example 
(6), where the original temporal relation is 
marked with a more specific causal connective in 
the German translation. Hence, the translation 
can be seen as a case of explicitation. 
 
(6)  (ep-98-05-27) 
TT Wir haben diesen Änderungsantrag im 

Namen von Herrn Wynn vorgelegt, um die 
Frage der Personalplanung für den 
Bürgerbeauftragten noch bis zur ersten 
Lesung offen zu lassen, weil “because” wir 
dann den gesamten Personalbedarf genauer 
einschätzen können. 

ST We have tabled this amendment in Mr 
Wynn’s name in order to leave the matter of 
staffing for the Ombudsman open until the 
first reading when one will have a clearer 
view of the overall need concerning staff. 

Furthermore, we distinguish a syntax category, in 
which the syntax of the fragment is dramatically 
different from the corresponding fragment 
containing the connective and the relation 
disappears altogether, as in (7). 
 
(7)  (ep-00-03-14) 
TT Een aantal Britse leden van het Europees 

Parlement zijn benaderd door 
belangengroepen van landbouwers, omdat 
“because” deze bang zijn dat de 
verbrandingsrichtlijn ook van toepassing zal 
zijn op alle verbrandingsinstallaties op 
boerenbedrijven. 

ST A number of United Kingdom MEPs have 
been contacted by farming interests, who are 
very worried that the incineration directive 
will apply to all on-farm incinerators in the 
United Kingdom. 

 
In (7) the causal relation signaled by omdat 
“because” in the Dutch TT is absent in the 
English ST. The second clause in the Dutch 
causal relation corresponds to a relative clause in 
the English ST, which does not explicitly signal 
causality. Instead, it has to be inferred by readers 
or listeners that the content of the relative clause 
presents the reason why farming interest groups 
have been contacting MEPs. 

Two trained annotators, the first and second 
author of this paper, annotated the first 50 
fragments for each connective for each language 
pair and translation direction (6x50 fragments). 
After establishing that there was a good inter-
annotator agreement (κ = 0.84) and discussing 
the fragments that were disagreed on, one 
annotator finished the annotation of the 
remaining fragments. 

On the basis of the annotations, we established 
for each ST-TT fragment pair whether it 
constituted a case of implicitation or 
explicitation. The categories underspecified 
connective, syntax, and implicit were considered 
to be instances of implicitation if they showed up 
in the TT equivalents of ST connectives, and 
instances of explicitation if they showed up in 
the ST equivalents of TT connectives. The 
categories explicit and paraphrase were grouped 
together as explicit-to-explicit translations. 
Statistical analysis was thus conducted on two 
categories instead of five. 
 
2.2 Data analysis 
Log-linear analysis was used to estimate the 
probability of occurrence of implicitations/ 

43



explicitations. The null model estimates the 
average probability. This model was compared to 
more complex models in which the probability 
was estimated as a function of our variables and 
the interactions between them: relation type 
(causal vs. negative vs. conditional), marking 
(implicit in the other language vs. explicit in the 
other language), language pair (EN-DU vs. EN-
GE), and direction (ST→TT vs. TT→ST). 
 
3 Results 

The model in which all variables and several 
interactions were included was the best model. It 
retained a main effect of marking (χ2 (1) = 
3051.65, p < .001), two-way interactions of 
relation type and marking (χ2 (2) = 82.91, p < 
.001), and of marking and direction (χ2 (1) = 
6.23, p = .01), plus a three-way interaction of 
language pair, marking, and direction (χ2 (1) = 
10.38, p = .001). 

The two-way interaction between relation type 
and marking indicates that the amount of 
implicitation and explicitation of connectives in 
translation is influenced by the type of relation 
they signal. This relationship is visualized in 
Figure 1. As we hypothesized, causal relations 
were more often implicit than negative relations 
(z = 6.21, p < .001), which in turn showed more 
implicitation than conditional relations (z = 4.72, 
p < .001). 

Taken together, the three-way interaction 
between language pair, marking, and direction, 
and the two-way interaction between marking 
and direction indicate the following. The 
English-German pairs adhere to the two-way 
interaction: the number of explicitations (explicit  
in TT, implicit in ST) was higher than the 
number of implicitations (explicit in ST, implicit 
in TT). This implies that connectives in German 
translations stem relatively frequently from an 
underspecified connective, another syntax or an 

implicit relation, while English ST connectives 
are hardly implicitated when translated into 
German TT. 

For English-Dutch, this directional difference 
does not hold: the number of implications from 
ST to TT is higher than in German (z = 2.53, p = 
.01). This can also be derived from Figure 1, 
which illustrates that for EN-DU the overall 
number of implicitations is comparable to the 
overall number of explicitations. Crucially, the 
three-way interaction does not involve relation 
type, which means that the difference between 
EN-DU and EN-GE was not affected by the type 
of relation. 
 
4 Discussion and conclusion 

Our results show that the expectedness of 
discourse relations, as defined on the basis of the 
continuity hypothesis and the causality-by-
default hypothesis, affects translation. Causal 
connectives, which are expected in discourse, are 
both more often added and deleted in translation 
than relations that are not expected, in this case 
negative and conditional connectives. We also 
found that negative connectives were more often 
added and deleted than conditional connectives.  

Since this study included only English-Dutch 
and English-German translations, and Dutch and 
German are closely related languages, it may be 
possible that the implicitation and explicitation 
patterns we found are generalizable only within 
the language family. However, in an earlier study 
in which we only looked at the translations of ST 
connectives we also included English-French and 
English-Spanish translations (Hoek and 
Zufferey, 2015). Here we found identical 
implicitation patterns for French and Spanish 
(both of which belong to a different language 
family) as for Dutch and German. This suggests 
that our results are also generalizable across 
language families. 

Figure 1. Percentage of implicit translations/originals per type of relation, per language pair 

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14

      TTDU→STEN STEN→TTDU    TTGE→STEN   STEN→TTGE 

 

44



Our finding that negative connectives were 
more often added and deleted than conditional 
connectives is not predicted by the continuity 
hypothesis or the causality-by-default hypo-
thesis, but it seems to be corroborated by corpus 
studies. Conditional relations hardly ever seem to 
be implicit in monolingual corpora, while this is 
less rare for negative relations (e.g. Asr and 
Demberg, 2012; Das and Taboada, 2013). We 
will address the difference between negative and 
conditional relations in further research. 

We found more explicitations than 
implicitations for English-German translations, 
but not for English-Dutch translations. The 
observation that translation pairs and translation 
directions can differ in the overall number of 
connectives that are added or deleted has also 
been made in corpus-based studies (e.g. Becher, 
2011; Cartoni et al., 2011). This effect did not, 
however, interact with the relative frequencies of 
implicitation or explicitation of relation types. 

It should be noted the frequency of 
implicitations (3.6%) that we found was much 
lower than the frequency reported by Meyer and 
Webber (2013) (up to 18%). This can probably 
be attributed to our relatively broad definition of 
the explicit category paraphrase, which for 
instance included verbs expressing causality (e.g. 
make, cause) and the subjunctive in German, 
since this explicitly encodes conditionality. If we 
were to include all paraphrases in our 
implicitations, we would arrive at a higher 
percentage of 11.2%. 

The potential to remain implicit appears to 
influence how often a relation is implicitated or 
explicitated in translation. To improve the 
quality and naturalness of machine translation, it 
therefore seems crucial to distinguish between 
deletions and additions of connectives in which 
the relation in the other language is implicit and 
those in which the relation is marked by different 
linguistic means, and to incorporate factors that 
influence whether a relation can be left implicit 
or whether it should be explicitly signaled into a 
machine translation model.  
 
Acknowledgments 

We are grateful to the Swiss National Science 
Foundation (SNSF) for the funding of this work 
under its Sinergia program, grant n. CRSII2_ 
147653 (MODERN project, see www.idiap.ch/ 
project/modern/). 

 

References 

Fatemeh T. Asr and Vera Demberg. 2012. 
Implicitness of discourse relations. 
Proceedings of COLING. Mumbai, India. 

Viktor Becher. 2011. When and why do 
translators add connectives? Target, 23(1):26–
47. 

Bruno Cartoni, Sandrine Zufferey and Thomas 
Meyer. 2013. Using the Europarl corpus for 
linguistics research. Belgian Journal of 
Linguistics, 27:23–42. 

Bruno Cartoni, Sandrine Zufferey, Thomas 
Meyer and Andrei Popescu-Belis. 2011. How 
comparable are parallel corpora? Measuring 
the distribution of general vocabulary and 
connectives. Proceedings of the 4th Workshop 
on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, 
78–86. Portland, Oregon. 

Debopam Das and Maite Taboada. 2013. Explicit 
and implicit coherence relations: A corpus 
study. Proceedings of the 2013 Annual 
Conference of the Canadian Linguistic 
Association. Victoria, Canada. 

Sandra Halverson. 1996. Norwegian-English 
translation and the role of certain connectives. 
Translation and Meaning, part 3: Proceedings 
of the Maastricht Session of the 2nd 
International Maastricht-Lodź Duo 
Colloquium on ‘Translation and Meaning’, 
128–139. Maastricht, the Netherlands.  

Sandra Halverson. 2004. Connectives as a 
translation problem. In Harald Kittel, Armin 
Paul Frank, Norbert Greiner, Theo Hermans, 
Werner Koller, José Lambert and Fritz Paul. 
(Eds.), An International Encyclopedia of 
Translation Studies, 562–572. Berlin/New 
York: Walter de Gruyter. 

Silvia Hansen-Schirra, Stella Neuman and Erich 
Steiner. 2007. Cohesive explicitness and 
explicitation in an English-German translation 
corpus. Languages in Contrast 7(2):241–265. 

Jet Hoek and Sandrine Zufferey. 2015. Factors 
influencing the implicitation of discourse 
relations across languages. Proceedings 11th 
Joint ACL-ISO Workshop on Interoperable 
Semantic Annotation (ISA-11), 39–45. 
London, United Kingdom. 

Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus 
for statistical machine translation. Proceedings 

45



of the 10thMachine Translation Summit, 79–
86. Phuket, Thailand. 

Arnout W. Koornneef and Ted J. M. Sanders. 
2013. Establishing coherence relations in 
discourse: The influence of implicit causality 
and connectives on pronoun resolution. 
Language and Cognitive Processes, 
28(8):1169–1206. 

Gina R. Kuperberg, Martin Paczynski and Tali 
Ditman. 2011. Establishing causal coherence 
across sentences: An ERP study. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 23:1230–1246. 

Junyi Jessy Li, Marine Carpuat and Ani 
Nenkova. 2014. Assessing the discourse 
factors that influence the quality of machine 
translation. Proceedings of the 52nd Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 283–288. Baltimore, MD, USA. 

Willem M. Mak and Ted J. M. Sanders. 2013. 
The role of causality in discourse processing: 
Effects of expectation and coherence relations. 
Language and Discourse Processes, 
28(9):1414–1437. 

Thomas Meyer and Bonnie Webber. 2013. 
Implicitation of discourse connectives in 
(machine) translation. Proceedings of the 1st 
DiscoMT Workshop at ACL 2013, 33–42. 
Sofia, Bulgaria. 

John D. Murray. 1997. Connectives and narrative 
text: The role of continuity. Memory and 
Cognition, 25:227–236. 

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni 
Miltsakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi and 
Bonnie Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse 
Treebank 2.0. Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008), 
2961–2968. Marrakech, Morocco. 

Ted J. M. Sanders. 2005. Coherence, causality 
and cognitive complexity in discourse. 
Proceedings/Actes SEM-05, First 
International Symposium on the Exploration 
and Modelling of Meaning, 105–114. 

Ted J. M. Sanders and Leo G. M. Noordman. 
2000. The role of coherence relations and their 
linguistic markers in text processing. 
Discourse Processes, 29:37–60. 

David Steele and Lucia Specia. 2014. 
Divergences in the usage of discourse markers 
in English and Mandarin Chinese. 
Proceedings of the 17th International 
Conference on Text, Speech and Dialogue, 
189–200. Brno, Czech Republic. 

Yannick Versley. 2013. A graph-based approach 
for implicit discourse relations. Computational 
Linguistics in the Netherlands Journal, 3:148–
173. 

Sandrine Zufferey and Bruno Cartoni. 2014. A 
multifactorial analysis of explicitation in 
translations. Target, 26:361–384. 

 

46


