



















































The Bare Necessities: Increasing Lexical Coverage for Multi-Word Domain Terms with Less Lexical Data


Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2015, pages 60–64,
Denver, Colorado, May 31 – June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Bare Necessities:
Increasing Lexical Coverage for Multi-Word Domain Terms

with Less Lexical Data

Branimir Boguraev, Esme Manandise, Benjamin Segal
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center

1101 Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA.
{bran, esme, bpsegal}@us.ibm.com

Abstract

We argue that many multi-word domain terms
are not (and should not be regarded as) strictly
atomic, especially from a parser’s point of
view. We introduce the notion of Lexical Ker-
nel Units (LKUs), and discuss some of their
essential properties. LKUs are building blocks
for lexicalizations of domain concepts, and as
such, can be used for compositional derivation
of an open-ended set of domain terms. Ben-
efits from such an approach include reduction
in size of the domain lexicon, improved cover-
age for domain terms, and improved accuracy
for parsing.

1 Introduction

Knowledge about collocations and multi-word ex-
pressions (MWEs) can be beneficial for parsing, ul-
timately improving a parser’s accuracy (Nivre and
Nilsson, 2004; Korkontzelos and Manandhar, 2010;
Wehrli, 2014). Typically such knowledge is made
present by treating collocations and MWEs as sin-
gle lexical and syntactic units (Baldwin and Kim,
2010; Escartı́n et al., 2013; Fotopoulou et al., 2014).
This practice is also reflected in domain adapta-
tion, where domain-specific lexicons hold colloca-
tions and MWEs with ‘domain terms’ status.

In the medical domain, terminological and lexi-
cal resources list collocations and MWEs as varied
as history of trauma to toes of both feet and morn-
ing after pill as single “words with spaces” (Sag et
al., 2002). As mandated by the lexicon-parser inter-
face, such domain terms parse as single lexical units,
which improves parser performance by reducing the

lexical, structural, and distributional complexity of
these noun phrases. This simplification is intuitively
appealing. However, when closely-related, or simi-
lar, multi-word domain terms such as day after pill
or history of trauma to toes of left foot are unlisted in
the terminology lexica, the potential for parse error
resurfaces. Relying on explicitly listed terms alone
compromises parser accuracy.

We present here an approach to lexicon enrich-
ment, which mitigates the inherent incompleteness
of such lists, inevitably arising during processes of
populating domain term banks. In our work on ex-
tracting domain-specific terms from a medical ter-
minology resource,1 we observe certain composi-
tional properties of a large subset of such domain-
specific terms.2 In particular, this subset is open-
ended: through generative patterns, even if some
such domain terms are not in the lexicon, a mech-
anism can be construed which can license them
as terms (virtual entries in the lexicon). These
patterns operate on smaller expressions, which ex-
hibit a much more atomic status than the terms
proper, and enable—through compositionality—the
dynamic generation and interpretation of the longer
domain terms. Such smaller expressions we call lex-

1Proper domain multi-word terms are derived from the Uni-
fied Medical Language System (UMLS) (NIH, 2009) knowl-
edge bases (KBs), which contain medical concepts, relations,
and definitions, spread over millions of concepts and terms from
over 160 source vocabularies. Not all entries in UMLS qual-
ify for ‘term’ status; term extraction proper is, however, out-
side of the scope of this paper. The UMLS-derived terminology
lexicon—close to 56 million tokens comprising over 8 million
terms—is the source data of our analysis.

2We focus on noun phrases of varying structural complexity.

60



ical kernel units (LKUs).
For example, in the set of medical domain terms

history of spastic paraplegia, spastic paraplegia
with retinal degeneration, and family history of spas-
tic paraplegia with Kallmann’s syndrome, we see re-
peated patterns of behavior of the same multi-word
expression, spastic paraplegia: it can be governed
by history of ; it co-occurs with the preposition with;
an instance of history of is pre-modified by the noun
family.

Spastic paraplegia is a lexical kernel unit. Re-
garding it as a ‘kernel’ for an open-ended set of ex-
pressions like the ones above—and deploying ap-
propriate generative patterns and devices—we argue
that a newly-encountered word grouping like family
spastic paraplegia with neuropathy can be licensed
as a domain-specific term, available to a parser, even
if the term is a virtual one, absent from the static
domain-dependent terminology lexicon.

This paper discusses the nature and some practi-
cal consequences of LKUs. Given that ours is very
much work in progress, the intent is to hint at an
algorithmic procedure for the identification and ex-
traction of LKUs from an externally provided ter-
minology lexicon. Additionally, the paper aims to
show the ability afforded by LKUs to transform
a finite, static, lexicon of domain collocations and
multi-word expressions to an open-ended, dynamic
(or virtual) lexicon which can better support parsing.
While not in a position to present a formal evaluation
of the benefit of an LKU lexicon, we offer examples
of how such a lexicon benefits a parser.

2 Mining LKUs from terminology lexica

The essence of what makes lexical kernel units
atomic can be illustrated by an analysis of sample
subsets3 of domain terms from which LKU status
for certain word sequences can be inferred.

Consider the subset of term entries containing
(not necessarily consecutively) the words in the
multi-word expression spastic paraplegia:

a. spastic paraplegia syndrome,
b. spastic congenital paraplegia,
c. infantile spastic paraplegia,

3We will not discuss here the process of deriving such sub-
sets from the terminology lexicon.

d. familial spastic paraplegia with Kallmann’s
syndrome,

e. familial spastic paraplegia with neuropathy and
poikiloderma,

f. familial spastic paraplegia, mental retardation, and
precocious puberty,

g. slowly progressive spastic paraplegia,
h. hereditary x linked recessive spastic paraplegia,
i. onset in first year of life of spastic paraplegia.

Spastic and paraplegia appear in domain terms of
varying length and with different noun phrase struc-
tures; additionally, the two words may or may not
be adjacent. In the entries d.–f., spastic paraplegia
shares the adjective familial on its left; but it can also
co-occur with other adjectives as pre-modifiers, in-
fantile, hereditary, and progressive among them (b.–
c. and g.–h.) Further, the phrases to the right of spas-
tic paraplegia in entries d.–f. are of different phrase
types. For instance, in entries d.–e., spastic paraple-
gia, is immediately adjacent to the preposition with.

Looking at the examples together, it is intuitively
clear that variability around (an LKU) phrase exists
across all the elements of the term subset; further-
more, this variability can be captured by a relatively
small number of patterns.

To reinforce the confidence with which spastic
paraplegia can be putatively assigned lexical kernel
unit status, these patterns can be put to the test by a
broader search, against the terminology lexicon. A
pattern like [LKU [with NP]] (see Section 3) in-
spired by the domain entries d. and e., can be tested
with the query string spastic paraplegia with.

Such search returns, among many, the domain
terms spastic paraplegia with amyotrophy of dis-
tal muscle wasting, spastic paraplegia with men-
tal handicap, spastic paraplegia with mental retar-
dation, and spastic paraplegia with amyotrophy of
hands and feet (although the terminology lexicon
does not list either spastic paraplegia with amyotro-
phy of hands or spastic paraplegia with amyotrophy
of feet as domain terms).

As another example, of an LKU with different
profile and distributional properties, consider the
[noun]-of collocation instantiated by history of. In
the terminology lexicon, there are 7,087 domain
terms with the anchor history of. A few are:

a. current social history of patient,
b. current history of allergies,

61



c. family history of alcohol abuse,
d. history of current illness,
e. history of domestic violence at home,
f. history of falling into a swimming pool,
g. history of freckles,
h. past medical history of drug abuse,
i. personal history of alcohol abuse,
j. past personal history of allergy to other anti-infective

agents.

A cursory analysis of the semantic and syntac-
tic composition of the above domain terms reveals
that they are unexceptional (even though statistically
salient in the domain). Looking at all examples to-
gether, an important question to consider is whether
the variability in the terms is expressed by the con-
texts around history of or around history alone. A
search keyed off the word history and based on a
pattern with prepositional placeholder [history
[prep]] returns, among many, the domain terms
history in family of hypertension, medical history re-
lating to child, and current history with assessment
of changing moles. Clearly, in addition to of, his-
tory sanctions prepositional collocations in, relating
to, and with. This is supporting evidence that LKU
status can be attributed to history; it is also indica-
tive of the kind of lexical (collocational) knowledge
that needs to be associated with the LKU entry for
history.

3 Capturing the essence of domain terms

The examples above suggest that spastic paraplegia
and history function as building blocks from which
an open-ended set of larger domain terms can be
compositionally built, and interpreted. The many
multi-word domain terms found in the terminology
lexicon that contain spastic paraplegia and history
can be informally represented with the following
patterns:

a. [[adjective* and/or noun*]
spastic paraplegia [with [noun]]]

b. [[adjective* and/or noun*] history
[[in | of | with] [noun]]]

These capture the essence of multi-word expres-
sions and collocations that can have many do-
main term instantiations—including ones beyond
the closed sets which prompted the patterns (Sec-
tion 2). The free slots, noun and adjective, must

be filled by collocations with the appropriate part of
speech, some of which can be LKUs themselves.

The many variations—potentially an open-ended
set—of domain terms are thus collapsed into a sin-
gle pattern, anchored by a putative LKU, and aug-
mented with linguistic and usage information (part-
of-speech, semantic types, collocation preferences,
etc...) extracted from the terminology lexicon.

It may be tempting to collapse the patterns, and
seek generalizations covering sets of LKUs: re-
placing the kernel units spastic paraplegia and his-
tory with a place-holder would have pattern a. to
be subsumed by pattern b. This would be counter-
productive, however: it would allow for over-
generation, as well as fail to distinguish between
frame-specific lexical knowledge to be associated
with the individual LKUs (e.g. we would not want
spastic paraplegia to allow for the full set of prepo-
sitional complements compatible with history).

The lexical knowledge discovered during this
LKU extraction and captured in the domain terms
patterns eventually ends up in LKU entries. For in-
stance, from the patterns above, the preposition col-
locations would induce appropriately specified lex-
ical frames. These would allow for uniform treat-
ment, by a parser, of similar noun phrases—even if
some of them lack ‘domain term’ status: e.g. both
spastic paraplegia with retinal degeneration (a term,
and therefore a single syntactic unit) and spastic
paraplegia with no retinal degeneration (not desig-
nated a term, but inferred as such), would keep the
with- PP attached to spastic paraplegia.

4 Some characteristics of LKUs

Lexical kernel units can be single- or multi-word
sequences, as exemplified by the earlier analyses
of spastic paraplegia and history. The degree to
which LKUs by themselves are representative of
a domain varies. However, what is more impor-
tant is that through composition, they combine with
other words or LKUs to construct larger, domain-
specific, terms (consider, for example, history of
spastic paraplegia). It is through analysis of such
terms that an LKU lexicon is compiled.

Multi-word LKUs tend to be invariable and func-
tion as domain-specific, atomic, language units. A
large subset of such LKUs have some of the linguis-

62



tic features of MWEs. Two characteristics are par-
ticularly descriptive.

First, LKUs can display various degrees of se-
mantic and syntactic opaqueness (e.g. popcorn lung
or airway morbidity), as well as transparency (small
intestine or airway passage).

Second, substitutability of a word within the LKU
word sequence by another of the same or similar cat-
egory may be barred. Popcorn lung and popcorn dis-
ease symptom cannot be substituted by *maize lung
or *edible corn disease symptom.

As atomic units at the kernel of larger, composi-
tionally built domain terms, it is much more reveal-
ing to look at what determines the exocentric pull
(or valency) of LKUs, than analyzing their internal
structure. LKUs determine the range and type of the
larger phrases that can be construed around them.

While they serve as atoms for the creation of
novel, longer domain expressions which can reflect
a more general property of grammar as in popcorn
lung disease symptom and airway morbidity disor-
der, the pool of words which LKUs can use to cre-
ate longer domain units can be small and is highly
domain-specific. Many collocations and novel cre-
ations are constrained by the semantics of the do-
main. In the medical and clinical domains, we do
not see *popcorn lung morbidity, *popcorn lung re-
habilitation, or *popcorn lung remission.

Finally, they need not operate in text as stand-
alone words. For instance, the LKU Silver Russell
does not function in domain texts as an individual
noun compound. Silver Russell only functions as
an LKU in longer domain terms as in Silver Russell
dwarfism or Silver Russell syndrome.

5 Parsing with LKUs

The LKU notion allows for the creation of a domain-
specific lexicon with a minimal number of entries
that describe the nature of a given domain. As we
saw in Section 2, there are thousands of domain
terms anchored by collocations of the LKU history
with prepositions of, in, or with, with variations both
to the left (family history of ..., medical history of ...,
and so forth) and right (history of panic disorder ...,
history of falling into ..., history of drug and alco-
hol abuse ..., and so forth) of the anchor. Even so,
it is unrealistic to expect that all instances of similar

terms can be discovered for capture in a terminol-
ogy lexicon. We also saw, however, that very simple
patterns can be very expressive. Leveraging the con-
textual information captured in, for instance, pattern
(b.; Section 3), as part of the lexical representation
of the LKU entry for history, makes such discovery
unnecessary, even for terms as complex in structure
as the examples above.

When a lexical kernel unit becomes a part of the
domain-dependent lexicon, none of the terms which
were analyzed to derive it needs to be listed in that
lexicon. Thus the 7,087 domain terms anchored by
history+of (Section 2) can be replaced by a single,
one-token, LKU entry (history) in the domain lex-
icon. This same entry would also account for the
extra domain terms anchored by history+in and his-
tory+with.

While not in any way a formal evaluation, a pre-
liminary, small scale experiment to determine im-
pact of LKUs on parser4 performance shows im-
provements, in particular in the area of coordina-
tion (itself a long-standing challenge to parsing). We
created two domain lexicons (DLs): DL1 included
all well-formed terms from the terminology lexicon
with the words history and spastic paraplegia,; DL2
listed history and spastic paraplegia as LKU entries,
while it eliminated the 7,000+ domain terms from
the lexicon. Randomly extracted segments from
medical corpus were parsed, in alternative regimes,5

with DL1, and then with DL2.
Consider the segment Bupropion has two abso-

lute clinical contraindications (i.e., current or past
history of seizures). DL1 contains an entry for past
history of seizures (but not one for current history
of seizures). The parse derived with DL1 is wrong:
current gets a ‘noun’ analysis, coordinated with the
noun phrase past history of seizures. The correct
analysis—a coordinated node joining current and
past, and pre-modifying history—is achieved, how-
ever, with DL2, whose atomic history LKU allows
a granular structured interpretation of what DL1 de-
clares to be a single multi-word unit.

Another example illustrates the benefits of captur-
ing the word-specific collocations within the repre-

4We use the English Slot Grammar (ESG) parser (McCord,
1990; McCord et al., 2012).

5We skip over how the parser interprets LKU entries, dy-
namically creating virtual domain terms anchored by the LKUs.

63



sentation of an LKU. In the DL1 parse of segment
Familial hereditary spastic paraplegias (paralyses)
are a group of single-gene disorders, the adjective
familial pre-modifies both the noun hereditary spas-
tic paraplegia (listed as a term in DL1) and the ma-
terial in parentheses.6 With the LKU-enabled DL2,
ESG is instructed by the lexical information associ-
ated with the LKU spastic paraplegia (pattern (a.);
Section 3) to treat both familial and hereditary as
sister pre-modifiers to spastic paraplegia in particu-
lar.

6 Conclusion

Lexical kernel units give an embodiment to an in-
tuition concerning the compositional aspects of do-
main terms in a conventional terminology lexicon.
To the best of our knowledge, no attempts have been
made to question the ‘term entries are atomic’ as-
sumption.

We propose a view where lexical kernel units pro-
vide a more uniform partitioning of a terminology
lexicon, teasing out its prominent lexical colloca-
tions. Once captured into an LKU lexicon, lexical
kernel units allow for a granular view into that do-
main; this, in itself, is beneficial to a parser. Also,
by virtue of being relevant to domain concepts, they
allow for a degree of open-endedness of such a lexi-
con: in effect, they underpin a compositional mech-
anism to domain term identification and interpreta-
tion. Thanks to a pattern-driven generative device,
instead of parsing with a fixed size terminology lexi-
con, we leverage a process aiming to license domain
terms ‘on demand’.

Pilot experiments to date show that LKUs have
a positive impact on parsing. Future work will ar-
ticulate an algorithm and heuristics for identifying
and extracting LKUs from terminological lexica and
other resources. In particular, we will address the
questions of generating the sets of terms indicative
of LKUs, abstracting the pattern specifications for
LKU-to-term derivations, and deriving fully instan-
tiated (canonical) LKU lexicon entries. We will also
conduct an extensive contrastive evaluation of LKU-
based parsing of medical corpora.

6ESG analyzes most parenthetical, appositive, constructions
as coordinations around the opening parenthesis.

Acknowledgments

We thank three anonymous reviewers for in-depth,
and helpful, comments.

References
Timothy Baldwin and Su Nam Kim. 2010. Multiword

expressions. Handbook of Natural Language Process-
ing, Second Edition. Morgan and Claypool.

Carla Escartı́n, Gyri Losnegaard, Gunn Samdal, and Pe-
dro Garcı́a. 2013. Representing multiword expres-
sions in lexical and terminological resources: an anal-
ysis for natural language processing purposes. In Elec-
tronic lexicography in the 21st century: thinking out-
side the paper: Proceedings of the eLex 2013 Confer-
ence, Tallinn, Estonia, pages 338–357.

Aggeliki Fotopoulou, Stella Markantonatou, and Voula
Giouli. 2014. Encoding MWEs in a conceptual lexi-
con. EACL 2014, page 43.

Ioannis Korkontzelos and Suresh Manandhar. 2010. Can
recognising multiword expressions improve shallow
parsing? In Human Language Technologies: The
2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the ACL, pages 636–644. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Michael C. McCord, J. William Murdock, and Branimir
Boguraev. 2012. Deep parsing in Watson. IBM Jour-
nal of Research and Development, 56(3):3.

Michael C. McCord. 1990. Slot grammar: A sys-
tem for simpler construction of practical natural lan-
guage grammars. In R. Studer, editor, Natural Lan-
guage and Logic: Proc. of the International Scientific
Symposium, Hamburg, FRG, pages 118–145. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.

NIH. 2009. Unified Medical Language Sys-
tem (UMLS). http://www.nlm.nih.gov/
research/umls/, July. US National Library of
Medicine, National Institute of Health.

Joakim Nivre and Jens Nilsson. 2004. Multiword units in
syntactic parsing. Proceedings of Methodologies and
Evaluation of Multiword Units in Real-World Applica-
tions (MEMURA).

Ivan A Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann Copes-
take, and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword expres-
sions: A pain in the neck for NLP. In Computational
Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, pages 1–
15. Springer.

Eric Wehrli. 2014. The relevance of collocations for
parsing. EACL 2014, page 26.

64


