



















































From mutual dependency to multiple dimensions: remarks on the DG analysis of functional heads in Hungarian


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 151–160,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

From mutual dependency to multiple dimensions:  

remarks on the DG analysis of “functional heads” in Hungarian 

 

András Imrényi 

Jagiellonian University, Krakow 

Department of Hungarian Philology 

Poland 
imrenyi.andras@gmail.com 

 

  

Abstract 

This paper addresses the question if the Fo-

cus0 and Neg0 functional heads posited by 

phrase structural, generative accounts of 

Hungarian should also be recognized in a 

dependency-based description of the lan-

guage. It is argued that the “identificational 

focus” of a Hungarian clause indeed be-
haves like a “derived main predicate” (cf. É. 

Kiss 2007), as suggested by two-clause 

paraphrases and the fact that its assertion 

can be independently negated. In DG, Hud-

son’s (2003) “mutual dependency” based 

analysis of wh-questions provides a way of 

capturing this intuition; however, it does so 

by lifting the acyclicity constraint on de-

pendency hierarchies (Nivre 2004: 9). To 

avoid this potentially problematic move, I 

propose an alternative whereby the primacy 
of the finite verb and the primacy of other 

(focussed, interrogative or negative) expres-

sions can be linked to separate dimensions 

of description. The concept of dimensions 

adopted in the paper is formally similar to 

XDG’s related notion (Debusmann et al. 

2004). In content, however, it is closer to 

Halliday’s (1994, 2004) understanding of 

the term. 

1 Introduction 

Under the influence of Tesnière (1959/2015) 

and Valency Theory, modern Dependency 

Grammar (DG) has characteristically taken a 

highly verb-centred approach to clause struc-
ture, in which the lexical verb plays an espe-

cially prominent role. Since the lexical verb 

evokes the “theatrical performance” whose 
“actants” and “circumstants” are expressed by 

other elements (Tesnière 1959/2015: 97), it is 

naturally viewed as the root of a dependency 

tree. Two concessions have been made, how-
ever, in many specific versions of DG. Firstly, 

it is usual to regard finite auxiliaries as heads 
taking non-finite lexical verbs as complements 

(Mel’čuk 1988, Hudson 1990, Eroms 2000, 

Gross–Osborne 2009, etc.). Secondly, com-
plementizers such as that or if, and even wh-

elements, have been argued to be the roots of 

embedded clauses (cf. Osborne 2014, and ref-
erences therein). These developments can be 

seen as signs of convergence toward modern 

phrase structure grammar (PSG), in which the 

functional projections IP and CP have been 
firmly established – in the wake of PSG’s con-

vergence toward DG with its consistent elimi-

nation of exocentric structures (S, S’). 
From the perspective of English grammar, 

no further concessions may seem necessary. 

For Hungarian, however, the phrase structural, 
generative tradition has introduced a range of 

functional projections beyond IP and CP, nota-

bly such phrases as FocusP and NegP (É. Kiss 

2002: 86, 132). Given the “weak equivalence” 
between (specific kinds of) phrase structural 

and dependency-based representations (Gaif-

man 1965), this raises the question whether the 
functional heads Focus0 and Neg0 should be 

recognized in DG as well.  

In the present paper, I will argue for the 

view that the finite verb is not invariably the 
highest-ranked element of a simple sentence, 

or at least not in every aspect of meaning and 

structure. More specifically, I will propose a 
multi-dimensional analysis whereby both the 

primacy of the verb and the primacy of other 

elements can be expressed simultaneously. The 
concept of dimension adopted in the paper is 

formally similar to XDG’s related notion (cf. 

Debusmann et al. 2004: 2). In content, how-

ever, it is closer to Halliday’s (1994, 2004) 
understanding of the term. In particular, the 

dimensions will be said to construe comple-

mentary aspects of clausal meaning such as i. 
the nature of the grounded process and its par-

151



ticipants and circumstances, and ii. illocution-

ary force and polarity. 

The paper is structured as follows. I will 

first give a brief overview of the phenomena 
that have prompted Hungarian generative lin-

guists to posit FocusP and NegP as functional 

projections on top of VP (section 2). Next I 
consider Hudson’s (2003) unorthodox proposal 

within DG, according to which wh-elements 

are not only dominated by but also dominate 
finite verbs, with the two elements thus stand-

ing in “mutual dependency” (section 3). This 

will be followed in section 4 by my own analy-

sis, which assigns the primacy of the verb and 
the primacy of interrogative (or other) ele-

ments to two separate dimensions. Finally, 

summary and conclusions follow in section 5. 

2 The rationale for FocusP and NegP 

In this section, I will look at some patterns of 

Hungarian that provide empirical support for 
the FocusP and NegP projections introduced 

by generative linguists. The presentation will 

proceed from basic to more complex patterns, 
and remain largely descriptive, glossing over 

many theory-internal details of generative 

grammar. This also applies to the evaluation of 

empirical evidence, which is to be as theory-
neutral as possible, or to assume a DG perspec-

tive. 

To begin, let us observe in (1) below a neu-
tral positive declarative sentence which lacks 

both focusing and negation.
1
 

(1)  Mari meghívta Jánost. 
  Mary.NOM PV.called.3SG.DEF John.ACC 

 ‘Mary invited John.’ 

At the core of (1) is the predicate meghívta, 

which consists of the preverb (PV) meg and the 
inflected verb hívta ‘called.3SG.DEF’, where 

DEF stands for ‘definite object’. The predicate 

as a whole has the idiomatic meaning ‘in-
vited.3SG.DEF’. Importantly, meghívta does not 

simply “evoke” an invitational event. Rather, it 

has all the functional ingredients of a sche-
matic positive declarative clause expressing 

the occurrence of such an event. Thus, it can 

also be used by itself in appropriate contexts 

(cf. (2B)). 

                                                        
1 In this context, the term “neutral” means that the clause 
replies to the question “What happened?” or “What is the 
situation?”, presupposing no prior knowledge about the 
event denoted by the verb. 

(2) A:  Mari meghívta Jánost? 

  ‘Did Mary invite John?’  

 B:  Igen, meghívta. 

  ‘Yes, she invited him.’
2
 

Both participants of the event are coded 

morphologically by the predicate. As a special 

feature of Hungarian, the verb’s inflection ex-
presses not only the person and number of the 

subject but also the definiteness (contextual 

accessibility) of the object.
3
 In (1), the two par-

ticipants are elaborated further by the depend-

ents Mari ‘Mary.NOM’ and Jánost ‘John.ACC’. 

This is a par excellence example of micro- and 

macro-valency at work (cf. László 1988, Ágel–
Fischer 2010: 245). 

By using (1), the speaker is stating that an 

invitational event took place with Mary and 
John as participants. Clauses with a different 

function include the following, in which the 

occurrence of the invitational event is presup-
posed (3) or denied (4) rather than stated. In 

both cases, the predicate appears in inverted 

order (verb + preverb). 

(3) JÁNOST hívta meg Mari. 
 ‘It is John who Mary invited.’ 

(4)  Mari nem hívta meg Jánost. 

  Mary.NOM not called.3SG.DEF PV John.ACC 
 ‘Mary did not invite John.’ 

Sentence (3) expresses that out of a range of 

possible options, it was (none other than) John 

who Mary invited. Hence, a special function 
can be attributed to the accented preverbal 

element JÁNOST, which has been mostly re-

ferred to as “exhaustive identification” in the 
generative literature (É. Kiss 2002: 78). More 

specifically, É. Kiss (2007) suggests that this 

expression acts as a derived main predicate, 
which seems plausible given the following 

pseudo-cleft paraphrase: 

(3’) Akit Mari meghívott, az János. 

   whom M.NOM PV.called.3SG, that J.NOM 
   ‘Whom Mary invited is John.’ 

                                                        
2 The idea that the Hungarian verbal predicate has the 

function of a schematic clause is proposed by Imrényi 
(2013a), following similar suggestions by Brassai 
(1863/2011: 102) and Havas (2003: 17). Here, it is of-
fered as a descriptive generalization with strong support 
from data like (2B). Subsequent parts of the section fol-
low more closely the generative tradition. 
3 On the Hungarian “object conjugation”, see also Tes-
nière (1959/2015: 136). 

152



In generative analyses, the preverbal ele-

ment performing exhaustive identification is 

usually assumed to occupy (move into) the 

Specifier of a Focus Phrase (FP), where “fo-
cus” is to be interpreted as “identificational 

focus” rather than “information focus”, cf. É. 

Kiss (1998). Some theorists have argued that 
focus movement into Spec-FP is accompanied 

by the movement of V into Focus0 (Bródy 

1990). To keep matters simpler, however, I 
adopt É. Kiss’s (2002: 86) proposal by which 

no head movement occurs, and only provide a 

maximally schematic representation: 

(5) [FP JÁNOST [VP hívta meg Mari]]. 

É. Kiss (2002: 83–84) justifies the constitu-

ency [Focus [V XP*]] by coordination and 

deletion tests, with no separate justification for 
the head–complement relation between Focus0 

and the VP. However, given the available theo-

retical options, it only seems natural to handle 
focusing by substitution rather than adjunc-

tion,
4
 given that VP-internal linear order is 

heavily influenced by the presence or absence 

of a focussed element. In addition, it seems 
correct to claim that (3) is a sharply different 

type of linguistic unit than (1), which is suita-

bly expressed by its unique phrasal category 
label (FP as opposed to VP). 

Although in its immediately preverbal use, 

the negative particle nem ‘not’ behaves very 

similarly to the identificational focus in Spec-
FP, it is standardly assumed to project a NegP 

(see (6) below, cf. É. Kiss 2002: 132). One 

reason is that nem ‘not’ can intervene between 
the focus and the verb, which no other element 

is capable of (cf. (7)). Secondly, it may also 

have scope over the predication expressed by 
the focussed expression, as seen in (8). Theo-

retically, even two negations are grammatical, 

although patterns like (9) have a low likelihood 

of occurrence in real-world situations. 

(6) [Mari [NegP nem [VP hívta meg Jánost]]]. 

 ‘Mary didn’t invite John.’ 

(7) [FP JÁNOST [NegP nem [VP hívta meg Mari]]]. 
 ‘It is John who Mary didn’t invite.’ 

(8) [NegP Nem [FP JÁNOST [VP hívta meg Mari]]]. 

 ‘It is not John whom Mary invited.’ 

                                                        
4 The adjunction configuration would mean that the fo-
cussed expression attaches to the VP to derive another 
VP:  [VP JÁNOST [VP hívta meg Mari]]. 

(9) [NegP Nem [FP JÁNOST [NegP nem [VP hívta 

meg Mari]]]]. 

 ‘It is not John whom Mary didn’t invite.’ 

The behaviour of nem ‘not’ and the English 
translations strongly suggest that the “identifi-

cational focus” of a Hungarian clause is indeed 

a predicate ranked higher than the verb. Note 
especially the fact that the English equivalents 

of (7), (8) and (9) include two finite verbs, and 

thus two clauses, either of which can host ne-
gation. Hence, it is hard to avoid the conclu-

sion that the nem of (8), and the first nem of 

(9), are directly related to the identificational 

focus rather than the verb – not only in terms 
of linear order but also with regard to hierar-

chical structure. In (9), it would be especially 

awkward to link two instances of nem directly 
to the verb. 

Whereas (1) is a neutral sentence answering 

the question “What happened?”, (3) is a non-
neutral one replying to “Who did Mary in-

vite?”. In Hungarian, the latter question 

matches the structure of its answer, and the 

interrogative pronoun is also in Spec-FP under 
the standard generative analysis (cf. (10)). In 

this case, the unmarked English translation 

does not involve two clauses, although a 
marked two-clause option is also available. 

(10) [FP KIT [VP hívott meg Mari]]? 

  whom called.3SG PV Mary.NOM   

  ‘Who did Mary invite?’ /  
  ‘Who is it that Mary invited?’ 

As additional support for the FP projection, 

note that it is the identificational focus and the 
interrogative pronoun to which their constructs 

can be reduced in appropriate contexts. The 

phenomenon illustrated in (12) is known in the 
literature as sluicing (Ross 1969). 

(11) A: KIT hívott meg Mari? 

 ‘Who did Mary invite?’  

        B: JÁNOST hívta meg. 
 ‘John.’ 

(12) A: Mari meghívott valakit. 

 Mary.NOM PV.called.3SG somebody.ACC 
 ‘Mary invited somebody.’ 

        B: KIT hívott meg? 

 ‘Whom?’ 

To conclude this section, Hungarian iden-

tificational foci do seem to act as predicates 

153



ranked higher than the finite verb. Without this 

assumption, it is hard to see how the structure 

and meaning of (9) could be explained. From a 

DG perspective, however, it is difficult to rank 
the identificational focus (or the interrogative 

pronoun) higher than the verb, as e.g. JÁNOST 

in (3) is clearly the object of hívta meg, ex-
pressing the INVITEE (PATIENT) participant of 

the invitational event. In what follows, I con-

sider two proposals by which certain expres-
sions may be both higher and lower than the 

verb in the sentence hierarchy. First I discuss 

Hudson’s (2003) account based on “mutual 

dependency” between wh-elements and verbs 
(section 3), then present my own approach re-

lying on multiple dimensions (section 4). 

3 Hudson’s (2003) analysis based on 
mutual dependency 

In his 2003 paper, Hudson makes the unor-
thodox proposal that English wh-elements are 

not only dominated by finite verbs but also 

dominate them, in what he calls “mutual de-
pendency” (henceforth MD). The following 

illustration is taken from Hudson (2003: 632, 

633). 

(13) a.       b. 
     s     c

      

 Who     came?       Who  came? 

On the one hand, who is uncontroversially 

analysed as the subject of came (13a). On the 

other, Hudson also argues for a separate de-

pendency going in the opposite direction, with 
came treated as the complement of who (13b). 

In this very specific respect, Hudson’s account 

is somewhat similar to generative models 
which assume that wh-elements are in Spec-CP 

in English (or Spec-FP in Hungarian). In par-

ticular, note that the latter approach entails a 
(possibly empty) functional head with an inter-

rogative feature that takes the rest of the clause 

as its complement. 

Ever since Tesnière (1959/2015: 198), de-
pendency grammarians have been content with 

analyses that subordinate wh-elements to 

verbs. This may even seem self-evident, given 
that wh-elements carry the same grammatical 

functions (and are marked by the same cases in 

morphologically rich languages) as corre-
sponding referential expressions. One would 

presume, therefore, that there must be compel-

ling reasons for any alternative, let alone one 

that goes far beyond the phenomenon itself, 

violating the acyclicity constraint of DG (cf. 

Nivre 2004: 9). In this section, I give an over-
view of Hudson’s key arguments for his pro-

posal before turning to the more problematic 

aspects of his MD-based account. 
Hudson’s first argument rests on the phe-

nomenon of sluicing (Ross 1969), illustrated 

below. 

(14) a. Pat: I know he’s invited a friend. Jo: 

Oh, who [has he invited]? 

        b. I know he’s invited a friend, but I’m 

not sure who [he’s invited]. 

As Hudson remarks, “Taking the verb as the 

pronoun’s complement allows us to explain 

this pattern as an example of the more general 
anaphoric reconstruction of optional comple-

ments” (2003: 632), as exemplified by I 

wanted to see her, and I tried [to see her], but 
I failed [to see her]. 

 It is interesting to note that Osborne (2014) 

also employs sluicing as evidence for the root 

status of wh-elements in embedded clauses. As 
he puts it, “the sluiced (=elided) material of 

sluicing qualifies as a constituent (=a complete 

subtree) if the wh-word is taken to be the root 
of the embedded question” (286). At the same 

time, he rejects the root status of wh-elements 

in main clauses (Osborne, p.c.). One advantage 

of Hudson’s approach is that it provides a uni-
fied account of why sluicing works the same 

way in both contexts, also subsuming these 

under a more general phenomenon. 
A second argument specifically concerns 

subordinate clauses. As Hudson observes, 

“The verb must depend on the pronoun in a 
subordinate clause because the pronoun is 

what is selected by the higher verb” (2003: 

633), as demonstrated by (15). 

(15)  a. I wonder *(who) came. 
         b. I am not sure *(what) happened. 

One could question the force of this argu-

ment by pointing at independent differences 
between matrix and subordinate wh-clauses 

(e.g. with regard to word order), which may 

suggest that any evidence exclusive to subor-
dinate clauses has little to no bearing on matrix 

ones. However, the word order difference be-

tween matrix and subordinate wh-clauses is far 

from universal (English and German attest it, 

154



but not Hungarian or Italian, for example). 

From an evolutionary perspective, it seems 

more important that dependent wh-clauses 

evolve from independent ones, which implies 
that there are fundamental structural similari-

ties between the two. Hudson’s account is 

more in line with this perspective, as it assigns 
analogous hierarchical structures to matrix and 

subordinate wh-questions, confining their dif-

ferences to the linear axis. 
Thirdly, as Hudson observes, “The pronoun 

selects the verb’s characteristics – its finiteness 

(tensed, infinitive with or without to) and 

whether or not it is inverted. The characteris-
tics selected vary lexically from pronoun to 

pronoun, as one would expect if the verb was 

the pronoun’s complement” (2003: 633). The 
following data serve as illustrations. 

(16) a. Why/When are you glum? 

 b. Why/*When be glum? 

(17)  a. Why are you so glum? 

 b. *Why you are so glum? 

 c. *How come are you so glum? 

 d. How come you are so glum? 

(18)  I’m not sure what/who/when/*why to 

visit. 

In conclusion, Hudson uses standard as-
sumptions to motivate his non-standard analy-

sis. Taken individually, some of the arguments 

may be contested; as pieces of converging evi-

dence, however, they make a fairly strong case 
for the head status of wh-elements. The ac-

count also makes plausible generalizations, 

e.g. over sluicing and other kinds of ellipsis, or 
over matrix and subordinate wh-questions. 

Thus, it results in simplifications in certain 

areas of the grammar – at the cost of lifting a 
ban on dependency hierarchies. 

Nevertheless, it seems fair to say that the 

proposal has attracted few followers in the 

broader DG community. One trivial reason 
may be that it presupposes Word Grammar-

style diagrams; in approaches working with 

straight edges and different heights for heads 
and dependents, MD is impossible to render 

visually on a single representation. More im-

portantly, the constraint that dependency hier-
archies are directed acyclic graphs is central to 

DG, giving it both mathematical elegance and 

advantages in computational processing (con-

straining the number of possible analyses for a 

sentence, and allowing for simpler parsing al-

gorithms). As long as MD seems like an ex-

ceptional device to handle a special phenome-

non, there is little incentive for DG linguists to 
abandon this constraint, since such a move 

may well create more problems than it solves.
5
 

In the following section, however, I will 
show that the essence of Hudson’s proposal 

can be maintained with no violation of the 

acyclicity constraint. Further, I will use evi-
dence from Hungarian to demonstrate that the 

configuration is not so exceptional as Hud-

son’s analysis might suggest. The proposal will 

also build bridges between DG and other 
frameworks, notably Construction Grammar 

and Halliday’s Functional Grammar. 

4 A multi-dimensional account of “fo-
cusing” and negation 

As seen in the previous section, Hudson’s 
(2003) proposal amounts to the lifting of a ba-

sic constraint on dependency structures. It im-

plies that these structures need not take the 
form of directed acyclic graphs, since “loops” 

do occasionally occur. An alternative interpre-

tation is also available, however. In particular, 

the links going in opposite directions may be 
assigned to two separate dimensions of de-

scription, with the result that each dimension 

may fully conform to the acyclicity constraint. 
In the present section, I first discuss the con-

cept of dimensions on a theoretical plane, then 

propose a multi-dimensional account of the 

Hungarian phenomena reviewed in section 2. 
Due to space limitations, the presentation will 

be necessarily brief and programmatic. A de-

tailed exposition is currently only available in 
Hungarian (Imrényi 2013a). 

The notion that a single clause may have 

multiple syntactic representations (in parallel, 
rather than as steps of a serial derivation) is 

fairly common in modern grammatical theo-

ries. Perhaps the best known framework is 

Lexical Functional Grammar (Bresnan 2001). 
In the DG tradition, Functional Generative De-

scription (Sgall et al. 1986) follows a similar 

path with its distinction between analytic and 
tectogrammatical layers of syntax. More re-

cently, the concept has also surfaced in the 

form of Extensible Dependency Grammar 
(XDG), whose basic tenet is the following: 

                                                        
5 Computational linguists may also discard MD as super-
fluous from a practical perspective, since full parsing can 
be achieved without the extra link posited by Hudson. 

155



An XDG grammar allows the characterisa-

tion of linguistic structure along several 

dimensions of description. Each dimension 

contains a separate graph, but all these 
graphs share the same set of nodes. Lexicon 

entries synchronise dimensions by specify-

ing the properties of a node on all dimen-
sions at once. (Debusmann et al. 2004: 2) 

XDG adopts a componential model of lan-

guage, whereby syntax and semantics are in-
dependent, albeit interfacing, modules. How-

ever, the above formulation is also compatible, 

at least in principle, with the view that dimen-

sions are inherently symbolic, capturing com-
plementary aspects of a clause’s meaning and 

form. 

Under these assumptions, link types on 
each dimension have both semantic and formal 

relevance, a familiar example being “subject”, 

which associates semantic properties (partici-
pant roles as required by specific construc-

tions
6
) with matching morphology or word 

order. More generally, dimensions may serve 

the purpose of separating sets of constructions 
(in the sense of Construction Grammar/CxG) 

whose workings are by and large independent. 

For example, CxG classifies a construct such 
as What did you give Mary? as instantiating 

the Ditransitive Construction (Goldberg 1995: 

141) and the Nonsubject Wh-Interrogative 

Construction (Michaelis 2012: 35) at the same 
time. Under the present proposal, these con-

structions (accounting for different aspects of 

the above construct’s meaning and form) be-
long to different dimensions, each of which 

takes the form of a graph. 

The next issue to consider is the nature of 
complementary aspects of clausal meaning. At 

this point, it is worth recalling Halliday’s ap-

proach to dimensions, which adopts a primar-

ily semantic perspective. As Halliday (1994) 
puts it, 

                                                        
6 Langacker (e.g. 2005: 132) argues for a schematic con-
ceptual definition of subjects across constructions. I side 
with Croft (2001: 170), however, and assume that the 

semantics of subjecthood must be defined construction-
specifically. For example, the subject of a transitive verb 
will be the Agent or Experiencer, but that of a corre-
sponding passive verb will be the Patient or Theme. The 
subjects of weather verbs and raising verbs need not be 
“meaningless” either (contra Hudson 2007: 131), as they 
can be seen as coding global aspects of constructional 
meaning (cf. Imrényi 2013b: 125). 

the clause is a composite entity. It is consti-

tuted not of one dimension of structure but 

of three, and each of the three construes a 

distinctive meaning. I have labelled these 
’clause as message’, ’clause as exchange’ 

and ’clause as representation’ (Halliday 

1994: 35). 

In brief, Halliday’s first dimension con-

cerns how the clause “fits in with, and contrib-

utes to, the flow of discourse” (Halliday 2004: 
64) with its theme–rheme articulation. The 

second dimension addresses how the clause is 

“organized as an interactive event involving 

speaker, or writer, and audience” (2004: 106), 
and describes the clause in terms of the speech 

functions offer, command, statement and ques-

tion. Finally, the third dimension highlights 
how the clause “construes a quantum of 

change as a figure, or configuration of a proc-

ess, participants involved in it and any atten-
dant circumstances” (Halliday 2004: 106). 

In Imrényi (2013a), I proposed a similar ac-

count of Hungarian clause structure with three 

dimensions of description (D1, D2, D3) more 
or less corresponding to Halliday’s ones in 

reversed order. For a verb-based construct, the 

following basic questions are at issue in each 
of the dimensions: 

 D1: What grounded process is evoked by 
the clause? What are its participants and 

circumstances?
7
 

 D2: What is the speaker doing by using the 
clause? What is the illocutionary force and 
polarity associated with the pattern?

8
 

 D3: How is the information contextual-
ized? What reference points (cf. Langacker 

2001) or mental space builders (cf. Fau-
connier 1985) “situate” or “frame” the in-

formation in order to aid its processing, in-

terpretation and evaluation? 

                                                        
7 I consider finite auxiliaries to dominate non-finite lexi-
cal verbs. It is their “catena” (Osborne–Gross 2012: 174) 
which is at the centre of D1, evoking the grounded proc-
ess (for “grounding”, see Langacker 2008, Chapter 9).   
8 Although illocution and polarity may seem logically 

independent, Croft (1994) finds that “the posi-
tive/negative parameter (…) is comparable in typological 
significance to the declarative–interrogative–imperative 
speech act distinction” (466). One reason may be the 
central, prototypical status of positive declarative sen-
tences, with respect to which both non-positive and non-
declarative ones are interpreted as deviations, cf. Gold-
berg (2006: 179). 

156



The three dimensions can be thought of as 

complementary layers of analysis with formal 

as well as semantic import (in Hungarian, D1 

is primarily coded by morphology, while D2 
and D3 by word order and prosody). Further, 

in contrast with Debusmann et al. (2004), the 

dimensions are conceived as overlapping 
rather than sharing precisely the same set of 

nodes. A given node may serve specific func-

tions on more dimensions at once, or else its 
function may be restricted to just one of them. 

For example, as Halliday (2004: 60) suggests, 

interpersonal adjuncts such as perhaps “play 

no role in the clause as representation” (corre-
sponding to my D1 dimension). 

Let us now return to the data first presented 

in section 2, and see what a multi-dimensional 
approach has to offer. 

(19) Mari meghívta Jánost. 

       ‘Mary invited John.’ 
(20) JÁNOST hívta meg Mari. 

        ‘It is John who Mary invited.’ 

(21) Mari nem hívta meg Jánost. 

       ‘Mary didn’t invite John.’ 
(22) JÁNOST nem hívta meg Mari. 

       ‘It is John who Mary didn’t invite.’ 

(23) Nem JÁNOST hívta meg Mari. 
        ‘It is not John whom Mary invited.’ 

(24) Nem JÁNOST nem hívta meg Mari. 

        ‘It is not John whom Mary didn’t invite.’ 

In each example above, the proposed analy-
sis acknowledges the primacy of the verbal 

predicate in the ‘clause as representation’ (D1), 

as it is this element that evokes the grounded 
process whose participants are elaborated by 

Mari and Jánost. Thus, they all share the fol-

lowing schematic structure: 

 (25)       meghívta / hívta meg
9
 

 

 Mari subject  Jánost object  

In D2, however, the verbal predicate is only 
central by default. As proposed above, this 

dimension is concerned with the clause’s illo-

cutionary force and polarity. The neutral posi-
tive declarative clause in (19) has the function 

of stating the occurrence of an invitational 

event, and the same meaning is construed 
schematically by meghívta ‘he/she invited 

                                                        
9 In a more detailed analysis, meghívta would be repre-
sented as two nodes linked by a dependency, forming a 
“catena” in the sense of Osborne–Gross (2012: 174). 

him/her’. Hence, the verbal predicate makes a 

key contribution to the clause not only in D1 

(by evoking an invitational event) but also in 

D2 (by being crucial to the clause’s speech 
function as a positive statement expressing that 

event’s occurrence). 

In (20), by contrast, the speech function of 
the clause is to identify a participant of an invi-

tational event whose occurrence is presup-

posed. This function is an alternative to the 
previous one, as a single clause cannot be used 

to state the occurrence of an event and to iden-

tify a participant at the same time. I assume 

that the former function, viz. stating the occur-
rence of an event, is linked by default to the 

verbal predicate (cf. (19)). In cases like (20), 

this default function is overridden by a prever-
bal element which endows the clause with the 

function of identifying a participant. The over-

riding relation between JÁNOST and the verbal 
predicate is coded by word order (precedence, 

adjacency, inversion) and prosody (with the 

overrider receiving extra stress, and the over-

ridden having its stress reduced or eliminated). 
In the proposed representation, the links 

above and below the string of words belong to 

two different (acyclic) dimensions. 

 D1   object     subject 

 

(26) JÁNOST hívta meg Mari. 

 
 D2 overriding 

In (21), it is the negative particle nem ‘not’ 

which prevents the verbal predicate from de-
termining the clause’s speech function. As 

suggested above, the predicate functions by 

default as a schematic positive declarative 
clause expressing the occurrence of an event 

(meghívta meaning ‘he/she invited him/her’). 

This interpretation cannot be “projected” to the 

clause level in the context of negation, as the 
negative particle overrides the default positive 

polarity associated with the predicate. I assume 

that nem ‘not’ only participates in the D2 di-
mension of the clause; it has no role in the 

‘clause as representation’ (D1). In the dia-

grams, overriders are marked by capital letters. 

 D1 subject     object 

 

(27) Mari NEM hívta meg       Jánost. 

 
 D2     overriding 

157



Finally, (22), (23) and (24) feature chains 

of overriding relations. 

 D1     object    subject 

 
(28) JÁNOST   NEM    hívta meg Mari. 

 

 D2    overr.    overriding 

 D1            object      subject 

 

(29) NEM  JÁNOST    hívta meg Mari. 
 

 D2  overr.      overriding 

 D1                  object       subject 

 
(30) NEM JÁNOST NEM hívta meg  Mari. 

 

 D2 overr.  overr.  overriding 

In (28), nem overrides the verbal predi-

cate’s default positive polarity, and derives a 

pattern with the function of denying an invita-
tional event’s occurrence (nem hívta meg). 

This in turn is overridden by JÁNOST, so that 

the function of the clause is not that of denying 

the invitational event’s occurrence but rather to 
identify the person who was not invited. In 

(29), JÁNOST overrides the default function of 

the verbal predicate, and derives a pattern with 
the function of identifying a participant 

(JÁNOST hívta meg). This identification is in 

turn overridden by negation. Finally, (30) in-

volves a chain of three overriding relations. 
Elements which are not characterized on 

D2 are regarded as elaborators corresponding 

to a schematic substructure of the predicate’s 
meaning (cf. Langacker 2008: 198). For exam-

ple, Mari in the above examples corresponds 

to the schematic 3SG subject which is part of 
the predicate’s specification. Thus, when the 

predicate is overridden, any elaborators are 

also in the scope of this operation. 

In a more detailed analysis, it can be shown 
that the overriders and overridden elements of 

D2 are not necessarily single words; rather 

they are catenae in terms of D1.
10

 For example, 
JÁNOST hívta meg Mari ‘It is John who Mary 

invited’ and JÁNOS BARÁTJÁT hívta meg 

Mari ‘It is John’s friend who Mary invited’ 
have analogous structures. Whereas in the 

                                                        
10 As defined by Osborne–Gross (2012: 174), “a catena is 
a word or a combination of words that is continuous with 
respect to dominance.” 

former, a single word fulfils an overriding role 

(cf. (26)), the latter sees a multi-word catena of 

D1, János barátját ‘John’s friend.ACC’ corre-

spond to a single node of D2. In the diagram 
below, this node is represented as a bubble (cf. 

Kahane 1997). 

 D1   possessor      obj        subj   
 

(31) JÁNOS BARÁTJÁT  hívta meg   M. 

 
 D2      overriding 

Since single words also count as catenae, the 

following constraint may apply to mappings 

between D1 and D2: 

(32) A D2 node is a catena of D1. 

Finally, let us take stock, and see what ad-

vantages or disadvantages the new account 
has. A key advantage seems to be that it cap-

tures the intuition of Hudson (2003) while re-

specting the acyclicity constraint on depend-
ency structures. Secondly, it has a principled 

basis in clausal semantics, drawing on Halli-

day’s (1994, 2004) insights in this area. Most 

importantly, though, it allows one to account 
for a range of complex patterns that would be 

difficult to handle with a single dimension. 

One pertinent example is (9), which contains 
two independent negations in the same clause, 

only one of which can be plausibly linked to 

the verbal predicate. Note also that the analysis 

provides a unified functional account of vari-
ous inverting constructions of Hungarian. The 

negative particle nem, identificational foci and 

interrogative pronouns trigger inversion, over-
riding the verbal predicate’s default lineariza-

tion (preverb + verb) as they are also overrid-

ers of its default function on D2. 
The price paid for all this is the addition of 

an extra layer of structure. However, since the 

dimensions are analogous and simple (each 

taking the form of a graph), the complexity 
involved is still manageable. Overall, the ac-

count supports approaches to syntax which 

avoid cramming all information into a single 
representation, opting instead for interacting 

dimensions of meaning and structure. 

5 Summary and conclusions 

This paper has considered the question if the 

“functional heads” Focus0 and Neg0 should be 

accommodated in a DG analysis of Hungarian. 

158



It has been suggested that the “identificational 

focus” of a Hungarian clause should indeed be 

analysed as a derived main predicate, as pro-

posed by É. Kiss (2007), in view of the fact 
that it can be independently negated. However, 

this requires a DG analysis whereby the focus-

sed expression is both higher and lower than 
the verb in the syntactic hierarchy. 

While Hudson’s (2003) mutual dependency 

analysis is based on a fair amount of converg-
ing evidence, it lifts a ban on “loops” in de-

pendency structures, which may raise theoreti-

cal and practical problems. Therefore, I have 

offered an alternative account by which the 
primacy of the finite verb and the primacy of 

identificational foci and other (e.g. interroga-

tive and negative) expressions can be linked to 
separate dimensions of description. The con-

cept of dimensions adopted in the paper is 

formally similar to XDG’s related notion (De-
busmann et al. 2004). In content, however, it is 

rather different, with each dimension con-

ceived as having symbolic (formal as well as 

semantic) import. 
The D1 dimension is concerned with the 

question as to what grounded process is being 

evoked, and what its participants and circum-
stances are. Here, the central role is invariably 

played by the verb or a catena of verbal ele-

ments. The D2 dimension, for its part, ad-

dresses speech function (illocutionary force 
and polarity). Since the Hungarian verbal 

predicate does not merely “evoke” a process 

but rather functions as a schematic positive 
declarative clause by default, it is central to D2 

as well, at least in a basic type of clauses. 

However, identificational foci and the negative 
particle nem ‘not’, among others, induce shifts 

in the speech function of the clause, overriding 

the verbal predicate’s  dominance in D2. The 

proposal accounts for a variety of patterns on 
the left periphery of Hungarian clauses by 

means of chains of overriding relations. On the 

semantic side, it follows Halliday (1994), who 
distinguishes between the ‘clause as message’, 

the ‘clause as exchange’ and the ‘clause as rep-

resentation’. 
As a result of the close association between 

Valency Theory and Dependency Grammar, 

DG has traditionally focussed on the ‘clause as 

representation’, i.e. the question as to what 
process is being evoked by the verb, and what 

its participants and circumstances are. The pre-

sent proposal has made the case for treating 
matters of speech function (illocutionary force 

and polarity) as an equally important facet of 

clausal meaning, to be addressed in a separate 

structural dimension. The account invites more 

detailed explorations along these lines, and 
supports convergence between DG and other 

theories, notably Construction Grammar and 

Halliday’s Functional Grammar. 

Acknowledgements 

The research reported here was supported by 

the Hungarian Scientific Research Fund 
(OTKA), under grant number K100717. 

References  

Ágel, Vilmos and Klaus Fischer. 2010. Dependency 

Grammar and Valency Theory. In: Heine, Bernd 

and Heiko Narrog (eds.), The Oxford Hand-

book of Linguistic Analysis. OUP, Oxford. 
223–255. 

Brassai, Sámuel. 2011 [1860–1863]. A magyar 

mondat.  Tinta, Budapest. 

Bresnan, Joan. 2001. Lexical Functional Syntax. 
Blackwell, Oxford. 

Bródy, Mihály. 1990. Some remarks on the focus 
field in Hungarian. UCL Working Papers in 
Linguistics, Vol. 2. University College Lon-
don. 

Croft, William. 1994. Speech act classification, 
language typology and cognition. In: Tsoha-

tzidis, Savas L. (ed.), Foundations of speech 

act theory: Philosophical and linguistic per-
spectives. Routledge, London & New York. 
460–77. 

Croft, William. 2001. Radical Construction 
Grammar: Syntactic Theory in Typological 
Perspective. OUP, Oxford. 

Debusmann, Ralph, D. Duchier, A. Koller, M. 

Kuhlmann, G. Smolka and S. Thater. 2004. A 

Relational Syntax-Semantics Interface Based on 

Dependency Grammar. Proceedings of the 
20

th
 International Conference on Computa-

tional Linguistics. Geneva. 

É. Kiss, Katalin. 1998. Identificational Focus ver-
sus Information Focus. Language 74: 245–273. 

É. Kiss, Katalin. 2002. The syntax of Hungarian. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

É. Kiss, Katalin. 2007. Topic and focus: two struc-
tural positions associated with logical functions 

in the left periphery of the Hungarian sentence. 

Interdisciplinary Studies on Information 
Structure 6: 69–81. 

159



Eroms, Hans-Werner. 2000. Syntax der 
deutschen Sprache. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin 
& New York. 

Fauconnier, Gilles. 1985. Mental spaces: Aspects 
of meaning construction in natural lan-

guage. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.  

Gaifman, Haim. 1965. Dependency systems and 

phrase-structure systems. Information and 
Control 8 (3): 304–337. 

Goldberg, Adele. 1995. Constructions: a Con-
struction Grammar approach to argument 

structure. University of Chicago Press, Chi-
cago. 

Goldberg, Adele. 2006. Constructions at work: 

the nature of generalization in language. 
OUP, Oxford. 

Gross, Thomas and Timothy Osborne. 2009. To-
ward a practical Dependency Grammar theory of 

discontinuities. SKY Journal of Linguistics 22:  
43–90. 

Halliday, M. A. K. 1994. An introduction to 
Functional Grammar. 2nd edition. Arnold, 
London. 

Halliday, M. A. K. 2004. An introduction to 

Functional Grammar. Third edition. Revised 
by Christian Matthiessen. Arnold, London. 

Havas, Ferenc. 2003. A tárgy tárgyában. Mondatti-
pológiai fontolgatások. In: Oszkó Beatrix and 

Sipos Mária (eds.), Budapesti Uráli Műhely 

III. MTA Nyelvtudományi Intézet, Budapest. 7–
44.  

Hudson, Richard. 1990. English Word Grammar. 

Blackwell, Oxford. 

Hudson, Richard. 2003. Trouble on the left periph-

ery. Lingua 113: 607–642. 

Hudson, Richard. 2007. Language networks. The 
new Word Grammar. OUP, Oxford. 

Imrényi, András. 2013a. A magyar mondat 
viszonyhálózati modellje. [A relational net-
work model of Hungarian sentences.] Akadémiai 

Kiadó, Budapest. 

Imrényi, András. 2013b. The syntax of Hungarian 

auxiliaries: a dependency grammar account. In: 

Hajičová, Eva, Kim Gerdes and Leo Wanner 

(eds.), DepLing 2013. Charles University in 
Prague, Matfyzpress, Prague. 118–127. 

Kahane 1997. Bubble trees and syntactic represen-
tations. In: Becker, T. and H.-U. Krieger (eds.), 

Proceedings of MOL'5. DFKI, Saarbrücken. 
70–76. 

Langacker, Ronald. 2001. Topic, subject, and pos-
sessor. In: Simonsen, Hanne Gram and Rolf 

Theil Endresen (eds.), A cognitive approach to 

the verb. Morphological and constructional 

perspectives. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin & 
New York. 11–48. 

Langacker, Ronald. 2005. Construction grammars: 
cognitive, radical, and less so. In: Ruiz de Men-

doza Ibáñez, Francisco J., Peña Cervel, M. San-

dra (eds.), Cognitive Linguistics: internal dy-

namics and interdisciplinary interaction. 
Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin. 101–162. 

Langacker, Ronald. 2008. Cognitive grammar: a 
basic introduction. OUP, Oxford. 

László, Sarolta. 1988. Mikroebene. In: Mrazovic, 

Pavica and Wolfgang Teubert (eds.), Valenzen 
im Kontrast. Heidelberg. 218–233. 

Mel’čuk, Igor. 1988. Dependency Syntax: The-

ory and Practice. The SUNY Press, Albany, 
N.Y. 

Michaelis, Laura A. 2012. Making the case for 

Construction Grammar. In: Boas, Hans and Ivan 

Sag (eds.), Sign-based Construction Gram-

mar. Center for the Study of Language and In-
formation. 31–69. 

Nivre, Joakim. 2004. Dependency grammar and 
dependency parsing. Vaxjo University. 

Osborne, Timothy and Thomas Gross. 2012. Con-
structions are catenae: construction grammar 

meets dependency grammar. Cognitive Lin-
guistics 23 (1): 165–216. 

Osborne, Timothy. 2014. Type 2 rising. A contribu-

tion to a DG account of discontinuities. In: 

Gerdes, Kim, E. Hajičová and L. Wanner (eds.), 

Dependency linguistics. Recent advances in 

linguistic theory using dependency struc-
tures. John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 273–298. 

Ross, John R. 1969. Guess who? In: Binnick, 

Robert, Alice Davison, Georgia Green and Jerry 

Morgan (eds.), Papers from the 5
th
 regional 

meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society. 
Chicago Linguistic Society, Chicago. 252–286. 

Sgall, P., E. Hajičová and J. Panevová. 1986. The 

Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and 

Pragmatic Aspects. Reidel, Dordrecht. 

Tesnière, Lucien. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe 

structurale. Klincksieck, Paris. 

Tesnière, Lucien. 1959/2015. Elements of struc-
tural syntax. Translated by T. Osborne and S. 
Kahane. John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 

 

160


