



















































A Game-Based Setup for Data Collection and Task-Based Evaluation of Uncertain Information Presentation


Proceedings of the 15th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 112–113,
Brighton, September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

A game-based setup for data collection and task-based evaluation of
uncertain information presentation

Dimitra Gkatzia, Amanda Cercas Curry, Verena Rieser and Oliver Lemon
Interaction Lab

Heriot-Watt University
EH14 4AS, Edinburgh

{d.gkatzia,ac293,v.t.rieser,o.lemon}@hw.ac.uk

Abstract
Decision-making is often dependent on
uncertain data, e.g. data associated with
confidence scores, such as probabilities. A
concrete example of such data is weather
data. We will demo a game-based setup
for exploring the effectiveness of different
approaches (graphics vs NLG) to commu-
nicating uncertainty in rainfall and temper-
ature predictions (www.macs.hw.ac.uk/
InteractionLab/weathergame/ ). The
game incorporates a natural language ex-
tension of the MetOffice Weather game1.
The extended version of the game can be
used in three ways: (1) to compare the
effectiveness of different information pre-
sentations of uncertain data; (2) to col-
lect data for the development of effective
data-driven approaches; and (3) to serve as
a task-based evaluation setup for Natural
Language Generation (NLG).

1 Introduction
NLG technology achieves comparable results to
commonly used data visualisation techniques in
terms of supporting accurate human decision-
making (Gatt et al., 2009). In this paper, we
present a task-based setup to explore whether
NLG technology can also be used to support
decision-making when the underlying data is un-
certain. The Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change (IPCC) (Manning et al., 2004) and
the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO)
(Kootval, 2008) list the following advantages of
communicating risk and uncertainty: information
on uncertainty has been shown to improve deci-
sion making; helps to manage user expectations;
promotes user confidence; and is reflective of the
state of science. Results by Stephens (2011) fur-
ther show that, although people prefer reports us-

1http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/news/
releases/archive/2011/weather-game

Figure 1: Screenshot of the Extended Weather
Game (graphs and text version).

ing percentages (e.g. 10% chance of rain), this
does not necessarily equate with understanding,
i.e. making the right decision based on this infor-
mation. One possible explanation is low “risk lit-
eracy” (Cokely et al., 2012), i.e. a reduced ability
to accurately interpret and act on numerical infor-
mation about risk and uncertainty.

In this research, we aim for a better understand-
ing of how to effectively translate numerical risk
and uncertainty measures into “laymen’s” terms
using natural language, following the recommen-
dations of the WMO (Kootval, 2008). For exam-
ple, the relative risk of 1 in 1000 could be de-
scribed as exceptionally unlikely. We expect that
through the use of language we will improve un-
derstanding and thus decision-making for users
with low risk literacy (as measured by the Berlin
literacy test2).

2 The Weather Game
Recruiting users to perform evaluations is a la-
borious task and many studies suffer from under-
powered evaluations. Therefore, we use a crowd-
sourcing technique known as “game with a pur-
pose”, which has been shown to assist in recruit-

2http://www.riskliteracy.org/
researchers/

112



ing more participants and collecting more accurate
results (Venhuizen et al., 2013).

We build upon a previous study by Stephens
(2011) called the Weather Game, which was con-
ducted in collaboration with the MetOffice. The
game starts by asking demographic questions such
as age, gender and educational level. Then, the
game introduces the “ice-cream seller” scenario,
where given the temperature and rainfall forecasts
for four weeks for two locations, users have to
choose where to send the ice-cream seller in or-
der to maximise sales. These forecasts describe
predicted rainfall and temperature levels in three
ways: (a) through graphical representations (orig-
inal game), (b) through textual forecasts and (c)
through combined graphical and textual forecasts.
The textual format is generated with NLG tech-
nology as described in the next section. Users are
asked to initially choose the location to send the
seller and then they are asked to state how confi-
dent they are with their decision. Based on their
decisions, the participants are finally presented
with their “monetary gains”, i.e. the higher like-
lihood of sunshine, the higher the monetary gains.

3 NLG Extension for the Weather Game
We developed two NLG systems (WMO-based
and NATURAL) using SimpleNLG (Gatt and Re-
iter, 2009), which generate textual descriptions of
rainfall and temperature data addressing the uncer-
tain nature of forecasts in two ways:

1. WMO-based: uses the guidelines recom-
mended by the WMO (Kootval, 2008) for re-
porting uncertainty. Consider for instance a
forecast of sunny intervals with 30% proba-
bility of rain. This WMO-based system will
generate the following forecast: “Sunny in-
tervals with rain being possible - less likely
than not.” (Figure 1).

2. NATURAL: imitates forecasters and their
natural way of reporting weather. For the pre-
vious example, this system will generate the
following forecast: “Mainly dry with sunny
spells”.

4 Future Work
The Extended Weather Game is used in two ways:

• Firstly, to explore what type of information
presentation can assist in decision making
under uncertainty. The participants are pre-
sented with three main categories of informa-
tion presentation: (1) graphical representa-

tions, (2) textual representations and (3) both.
• Secondly, we plan to use the information de-

rived from the previous step, to develop an
optimisation system, that is able to choose the
right format of uncertain information presen-
tation dependent on the data. We will then
use the same setup to evaluate our optimisa-
tion approach.

5 Conclusions
This demo paper describes an NLG extension of
the MetOffice Weather Game to be used for task-
based evaluation and data collection for uncertain
information presentation. At ENLG, we will demo
the Extended Weather Game and we will discuss
initial findings.

Acknowledgements
This research received funding from the EPSRC
GUI project “Generation for Uncertain Infor-
mation” (EP/L026775/1) and EPSRC DILiGENt
- “Domain-Independent Language Generation”
(EP/M005429/1).

References
Edward T. Cokely, Mirta Galesic, Eric Schulz, Saima

Ghazal, and Rocio Garcia-Retamero. 2012. Mea-
suring risk literacy: The berlin numeracy test. Judg-
ment and Decision Making, 7(1):25–47.

Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. SimpleNLG: A re-
alisation engine for practical applications. In ENLG.

Albert Gatt, Francois Portet, Ehud Reiter, James
Hunter, Saad Mahamood, Wendy Moncur, and So-
mayajulu Sripada. 2009. From Data to Text in the
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: Using NLG Technol-
ogy for Decision Support and Information Manage-
ment. AI Communications, 22: 153-186.

Haleh Kootval, editor. 2008. Guidelines on Communi-
cating Forecast Uncertainty. World Meteorological
Organsation.

Martin Manning, Michel Petit, David Easterling, James
Murphy, Anand Patwardhan, Hans-Holger Rogner,
Rob Swart, and Gary Yohe. 2004. IPCC Work-
shop on Describing Scientific Uncertainties in Cli-
mate Change to Support Analysis of Risk and of Op-
tions.

Liz Stephens, Ken Mylne, and David Spiegelhalter.
2011. Using an online game to evaluate effective
methods of communicating esemble model output
to different audiences. In American Geophysical
Union, Fall Meeting.

Noortje Venhuizen, Valerio Basile, Kilian Evang, and
Johan Bos. 2013. Gamification for word sense
labeling. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Computational Semantics (IWCS
2013) – Short Papers, pages 397–403.

113


