



















































Generating Recit from Sensor Data: Evaluation of a Task Model for Story Planning and Preliminary Experiments with GPS Data


Proceedings of the 15th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 86–89,
Brighton, September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Generating récit from sensor data: evaluation of a task model for story
planning and preliminary experiments with GPS data

Belén A. Baez Miranda Sybille Caffiau Catherine Garbay François Portet
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, LIG, F-38000 Grenoble, France

FirstName.LastName@imag.fr

Abstract

Automatic story generation is the subject
of a growing research effort which has
mainly focused on fictional stories. In this
paper, we present some preliminary work
to generate récits (stories) from sensors
data acquired during a ski sortie. In this
approach, the story planning is performed
using a task model that represents domain
knowledge and sequential constraints be-
tween ski activities. To test the validity of
the task model, a small-scale user evalua-
tion was performed to compare the human
perception of récit plans from hand writ-
ten or automatically generated récits. This
evaluation showed no difference in story
plan identification adding credence to the
eligibility of the task model for represent-
ing story plan in NLG. To go a step further,
a basic NLG system to generate narrative
from activities extracted from GPS data is
also reported.

1 Introduction
Stories are a common construct used by humans
to share their experience (with physicians, friends,
relatives. . . ) by which they tell what happened.
In this paper, we focus on human activity stories
that we call “activity récits” with the aim of gener-
ating these from real ambient data. According to
(Adam, 2011), a récit is a set of events related to
facts that have been effectively experienced, ob-
served or captured. Our problem statement lays
onto the narrative structure, the récit plan.

Computational Narratology (CN) is the study of
narratives from the point of view of computation
and information processing (Mani, 2013). Most of
the current researches in CN are related to creativ-
ity, where the stories emerge from a set of prede-
fined parameters, trying to imitate literary genres
like fairy tales (Riedl and Young, 2010). However,
we are interested in stories depicting human activ-
ity from real ambient data for which we have no
control and little knowledge. In this paper, we fo-
cus on a ski touring application. Figure 1 shows an

10.00, awful weather, we went to
Chamechaude, a usual destination in case
of bad weather. In order to add some more
climbing, we start 100 m below the Col
de Porte, down the lift. The weather is
not beautiful, objectively not very cold
but we slip under a fine rain that freezes
a bit. We climb quickly and we warm up
quickly. Above the rain stopped and I even
have the feeling it was too hot in the humid
atmosphere! We took only a few breaks, and
I do not remember having eaten or drunk
anything [. . . ] [Translated from French]

Figure 1: Example narrative and its corresponding
raw data captured along a ski touring activity (two
persons involved P1 and P2)

application to ski touring where skiers, alone or in
groups, use special devices such as GPS (Global
Positioning System), heart rate monitor, tempera-
ture etc. After their journey, they may share their
experience, observations, and other evaluative ele-
ments (weather conditions, terrain and key places
to visit) on websites such as www.skitour.fr.

The final goal of the research is to be able to
generate a coherent and faithful story from the
sensor raw data. In this paper, we present work
about two research questions (among many oth-
ers) linked to this final goal:

1. What kind of model can ensure story repre-
sentation and coherence? How can we eval-
uate it?

2. Is GPS data sufficient to generate initial sto-
ries?

The first question has been partially studied in
(Baez Miranda et al., 2014) where a task model
approach was chosen to abstract and structure
knowledge about a ski activity. However, this
model was not evaluated. This paper thus reports
an experiment in which the validity of the task
model for récit plan, is evaluated by comparing
the perception of the story plan using texts auto-
matically generated from predefined task model
instances (hand made) with human textual produc-
tions. This experiment is described in Section 2.

86



Figure 2: Steps for the récit generation for the task model evaluation.

The second question, though on a completely dif-
ferent aspect than the first one, is linked to an in-
herent problem in any system based on sensors.
What kind of information can be inferred from
them? Is this information sufficient? Since, ski
touring corpus texts are mainly structured by the
route, we report an initial basic data-to-text system
that generates texts from GPS data in Section 3.

2 Evaluation of récit plan

To represent the story plan and cope with the pre-
cise case of human activity, we propose to use the
notion of task model (Caffiau et al., 2010), which
has been used previously by (Cavazza et al., 2002)
for fictional but interactive stories. As presented
in (Baez Miranda et al., 2014), this task model is
core to our approach to story generation. In the
approach, raw data is firstly captured and inter-
preted. The resulting interpretations are structured
and linked together in a second step, according to
the task model. One sequence of the task model is
then identified as the story plan and used to drive
the generation stage. This aim to result in an ac-
tivity récit that emerges directly from the sensor
data but is organised according to the task model
expressing the human activity.

To evaluate the temporal perception of the
récit, we followed the steps depicted in Figure 2.
Several ski tour récits from www.skitour.fr were
collected and annotated by the authors using a
schema based on the task model. Then, the an-
notations were used as input to the task model.
This story plan was then linearised into text using
chronological order. Note, that to evaluate only
the task model and to avoid side effect due to data
processing, no raw data was used in this process.
For more detail about the process, the reader is re-
ferred to (Baez Miranda et al., 2014).

18 French speakers (12 men and 6 women) aged
between 19 and 38 were asked to rebuild chrono-
logical sequences of ski touring activities after
reading separately three récits. The text selection
was performed based on the text size, complex-
ity of the ski touring sortie; clarity of the descrip-

tion of the sortie, linguistic quality, and finally the
number of protagonists of the sortie and the level
of expertise shown in the narration of the sortie.
The duration of the experiment was 25 min in av-
erage. Each text was presented to each partici-
pant (within participants design) in either two ver-
sions, (i) the original human written one from the
collected corpus of ski touring récits and (ii) the
generated text based on the task model. The ex-
periment consisted in sorting cards of basic ac-
tivity into the sequence of the actual sortie using
adhesive tape and a paper-made timeline. Once
the reading was finished, the reader choose the
cards corresponding to the events encountered in
the text. Then, all the cards were arranged on the
timeline according to the chronological order per-
ceived during the lecture. The participants did not
know whether the text presented was generated au-
tomatically or not.

The distance between the participant’s answers
and the reference story plan was computed using
an edit distance similar to the Word Error Rate
(WER). An ANOVA performed on the distance
value showed a significant effect of text (human
vs. computer) (F(1,18) = 7.583, p=0.0131). A
participant effect was also found (F(17,18)=2.281,
p=0.0457). Regarding the size of the partici-
pant’s sequences, a difference between the human
texts and the generated ones was found (F(1,48) =
5.604, p = 0.022) and a text effect (F(1,18)=3.666,
p=0.033), that appears significant when the text
is taken as factor. It seems thus that the gener-
ated texts induce significantly less errors during
the activity identification than the original ones
(F(1,18)=8.993, p=0.00771).

Regarding the distance, the generated texts
present a chronological order more explicit and
that may explain why participants were able to
perceive easier the structure of the events sequence
and to reconstruct the path. In human texts, the
chronological order is more implicit because of the
text configuration, which can include many satel-
lite details or events omissions, like ellipses.

However, it could be possible to find that some
activities were identified in the human texts but not

87



Figure 3: The basic GPS-to-récit system.

in the generated ones. This could be explained by
many reasons, such as a possible lack of cover-
age during the task model construction; activities
not identified during the corpus analysis or the fact
that, due to the presence of ambiguity in human
texts, the participants did not distinguish the activ-
ities correctly. Improvements in the task model
and in the collection and analysis of the corpus
would thus be needed in order to make the ap-
proach more robust.

These results show that task model is an eligi-
ble support to abstract activity events and structure
then. In our approach, instances of task model
(récit plan) emerge from ambient sensor data, in
the next section, we present a preliminary exper-
iment to extract human activities events (concrete
tasks in task model) from GPS data.

3 Generating Récits from real data: The
case of the GPS traces

In ski touring, the most important component of
the story is the progress of the tour in the followed
track. As a matter of fact, the goal of the sor-
tie (e.g., peak, lake, col, etc.) is very often also
the goal of the story, although other goals can be
found in the human authored corpus (e.g., doing
the sortie in the shortest time). The first step is
thus to extract the movement and break activities.

To do so, a basic system sketched in Figure 3,
has been designed to process the successive geo-
graphic localisations provided by a GPS device.
First, GPS data from one sortie is temporally seg-
mented based on the altitude. Then, these seg-
ments are abstracted into activities. The selection
of activities is then performed using the task model
so as to obtain a sequence of activities which is
valid with respect to the model1. Then each activ-
ity of the sequence is lexicalised and a simple GRE
is performed. Sentence planning is performed us-
ing rigid syntactic patterns which are unified with
the lexicalised tasks and then realised as text.

3.1 Corpus collection
A small “parallel corpus” was formed through
voluntary skiers, involving (i) acquired numerical

1Note that this selection is very crude at the moment since
not all types of activity can be retrieved from the GPS data.

data and (ii) narratives written by the skiers af-
ter their sortie. Physiological and actimetric data
were specifically collected for this sortie using
a smartphone running the RecordMe application
(Blachon et al., 2014) and physiological sensors.
These data involve time, location, altitude, heart
and breath rate, etc. Extracts of numerical and
textual data are shown in Figure 1. This corpus
is composed of 5 records (three of which are of
couple of skiers) but will grow in the near future.

3.2 Processing
The GPS segmentation consists in aggregating
altitude points into segments of points that can
be approximated by a straight line with a low
amount of error. The Douglas-Peucker algo-
rithm (Douglas and Peucker, 1973) was used for
its simplicity. At the end of the process, a list
of segments is obtained each of them being la-
belled as having either a positive, null or
negative dénivelée2. All successive segments
with the same dénivelée label are then merged.

Then, the segments are classified based on
the average speed of the segment into ‘ascend-
ing’, ‘moving forward’, ‘descending’ or ‘break’3.
These segments populate an ontology (Baez Mi-
randa et al., 2014) and are then enriched with links
to the next and previous activities, the start and end
time, the dénivelée, the average speed as well as
the set of participants performing them.

Other important information is Point of Inter-
est. These are encountered along the way (e.g.,
the Achard lake, the chairlift). These provide:
first, an alternative description since ski tour sor-
tie are rarely described by latitude and longitude
but by using natural geographical description (See
(Turner et al., 2010) for reference) ; second, sub-
goals to the récit structure since some POIs are
main steps to reach the final goal. POI can be
extracted using services such as OpenStreetMap
which collects information about POI all over the
world. For instance a query about the area of
the ‘Croix de Chamrousse’ 4 gives the results pre-
sented in Figure 4. From this, every natural ele-
ments can be retrieved and associated to the tasks
through co-occurrence links.

The abstraction of segments into tasks is for the
moment very crude as it consists only of classifi-
cation based on speed and slope (e.g., a speed of
15km/h in a descending segment is a ‘descent’ ski
activity). Activity selection is then performed fol-
lowing the chronological order and the task model.

2a dénivelée is a difference in altitude between the starting
point and the ending point

3‘ascending’, ‘moving forward’, ‘descending’ are specific
cases of the task ‘moving forward’

4Chamrousse is a famous ski resort in the French Alps

88



<osm version="0.6" >
<node lat="45.1258501" lon="5.9025905">
<tag k="ele" v="2253"/>
<tag k="name" v="Croix de Chamrousse"/>
<tag k="natural" v="peak"/></node>

<node lat="45.1255687" lon="5.9001744">
<tag k="aerialway" v="pylon"/></node>
...

cat s
actor {P1,P2}
activity descent
locomotion_mode ski
goal {station}
source {Chamrousse_Peak}
time {10:21}
duration {22:32}

Figure 4: OpenStreetMap description and seman-
tic representation

For each activity, if the addition of this activity to
the set of selected activities makes a valid scenario
wrt the model, the activity is added. In any case,
the segments containing the main goal of the sortie
and the start and end ones should be included into
the set of selected activities.

Each activity is translated into a semantic frame.
For instance, a descending activity for participant
P1 can be represented by the structure in Fig-
ure 4. This structure is then matched to prede-
fined set of syntactic structures which constrain
lexical choices. The sentence could then be re-
alised as “Departing from Chamrousse. At 08:16
P1 mounts to Col des 3 Fontaines during 1:52. At
10:08 he has a break to Croix de Chamrousse dur-
ing 0:13 [...]”. The realisation is performed using
simpleNLG (Gatt and Reiter, 2009).

4 Future work

The project is at its initial phase and there are
many improvements to perform. One of the most
important task for the text generation part is to
adopt a more structured approach to microplanni-
fication. We are working on re-implementing the
micro-planner used in the BabyTalk project (Portet
et al., 2009). On the macro-planner side, the rea-
soning must be more integrated so that a dynamic
planning is performed and missing data is taken
into account. An important challenge is to han-
dle several narrative threads since several skiers
can participate to the sortie. Regarding the data
processing, the next step will be to include more
signals such as physiological ones that can inform
about the physiological state of the skier along the
track (tired, resting, etc.). This will permit more
adaptation of the output toward either sport-like
récit (focusing on performance) or leisure one (fo-
cusing on where skiers have been).

On the coherence side, to improve and to pro-
duce a more natural text, we need to explore other
aspects such as temporality. Currently, the story
plan from the task model can produce a sequence
of events linked in causal way by establishing pre-
conditions and effects during the task model con-
struction. However, this is not reflected in the gen-

erated texts. So, we need to add discourse con-
nectors that indicate this causal links. Rendering
simultaneous tasks is also an important feature to
add to the model. The task model can express this,
but it is not yet reflected in the generated text.

Finally, generating an activity récit from sensor
data raises specific issues, in particular regarding
the paucity of data. Inferencing and reasoning pro-
cesses are then needed to cope with this lack of
information and keep the récit consistent.

References
Jean-Michel Adam. 2011. Genre de récits. Narrativité

et généricité des textes. Academia.

Belén A. Baez Miranda, Sybille Caffiau, Catherine
Garbay, and François Portet. 2014. Task based
model for récit generation from sensor data: an early
experiment. In 5th International Workshop on Com-
putational Models of Narrative, pages 1–10.

David Blachon, François Portet, Laurent Besacier, and
Stéphan Tassart. 2014. RecordMe: A Smartphone
Application for Experimental Collections of Large
Amount of Data Respecting Volunteer’s Privacy. In
UCAmI 2014, pages 345–348, Belfast, UK.

S Caffiau, D L Scapin, P Girard, M Baron, and F Jam-
bon. 2010. Increasing the expressive power of task
analysis: Systematic comparison and empirical as-
sessment of tool-supported task models. Interacting
with Computers, 22(6):569–593.

Marc Cavazza, Fred Charles, and Steven J. Mead.
2002. Character-based interactive storytelling.
IEEE Intelligent Systems, 17(4):17–24.

David H Douglas and Thomas K Peucker. 1973. Algo-
rithms for the reduction of the number of points re-
quired to represent a digitized line or its caricature.
Cartographica, 10(2):112–122.

Albert Gatt and Ehud Reiter. 2009. Simplenlg: A re-
alisation engine for practical applications. In Pro-
ceedings of ENLG-2009.

Inderjeet Mani. 2013. Computational Modeling of
Narrative, volume 18. Morgan & Claypool.

François Portet, Ehud Reiter, Albert Gatt, Jim Hunter,
Somayajulu Sripada, Yvonne Freer, and Cindy
Sykes. 2009. Automatic generation of textual sum-
maries from neonatal intensive care data. Artificial
Intelligence, 173(7-8):789–816.

M. O. Riedl and R. M. Young. 2010. Narrative plan-
ning: Balancing plot and character. Journal of Arti-
ficial Intelligence Research, 39:217–268.

Ross Turner, Somayajulu Sripada, and Ehud Reiter.
2010. Generating approximate geographic descrip-
tions. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Generation: Data-oriented Methods and Empirical
Evaluation, pages 121–140.

89


