



















































Towards a multi-layered dependency annotation of Finnish


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 48–57,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

Towards a multi-layered dependency annotation of Finnish

Alicia Burga1, Simon Mille1, Anton Granvik3, and Leo Wanner1,2
1 Natural Language Processing Group, Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain

2 Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA)
3 HANKEN School of Economics, Centre for Languages and Business Communication

firstname.lastname@upf.edu, anton.granvik@hanken.fi

Abstract

We present a dependency annotation
scheme for Finnish which aims at respect-
ing the multilayered nature of language.
We first tackle the annotation of surface-
syntactic structures (SSyntS) as inspired
by the Meaning-Text framework. Ex-
clusively syntactic criteria are used when
defining the surface-syntactic relations
tagset. Our annotation scheme allows for
a direct mapping between surface-syntax
and a more semantics-oriented represen-
tation, in particular predicate-argument
structures. It has been applied to a corpus
of Finnish, composed of 2,025 sentences
related to weather conditions.

1 Introduction

The increasing prominence of statistical NLP ap-
plications calls for creation of syntactic depen-
dency treebanks, i.e., corpora that are annotated
with syntactic dependency structures. However,
creating a syntactic treebank is an expensive and
laborious task—not only because of the annotation
itself, but also because a well-defined annotation
schema is required. The schema must accurately
reflect all syntactic phenomena of the annotated
language, and, if the application for which the an-
notation is made is “deep” (as deep parsing or deep
sentence generation), also foresee how each of the
syntactic phenomena is reflected at the deeper lev-
els of the linguistic description.

For Finnish, there are two well-known syntac-
tic dependency-based treebanks: the Turku De-
pendency Treebank (TDT), and the FinnTree-
Bank. TDT, the most referenced corpus in Finnish
(Haverinen et al., 2014), contains 15,126 sen-
tences (204,399 tokens) from general discourse
and uses a tagset of 53 relations (although just 46
are used at the syntactic layer), which is an adapta-
tion of the Stanford Dependency (SD) schema for

English (de Marneffe and Manning, 2008). The
FinnTreeBank (Voutilainen et al., 2012) contains
19,764 sentences (169,450 tokens), mostly ex-
tracted from a descriptive Finnish grammar, which
are annotated using a reduced tagset of only 15 re-
lations.1

In what follows, we present an alternative anno-
tation schema that is embedded in the framework
of the Meaning-to-Text Theory (MTT) (Mel’čuk,
1988). This schema is based on the separation
of linguistic representations in accordance with
their level of abstraction. Subsequently, we distin-
guish between surface-syntactic (SSynt) and deep-
syntactic (DSynt) annotations, and argue that this
schema more adequately captures the syntactic
annotation of Finnish. We designed our anno-
tation scheme empirically, through various itera-
tions over an air quality-related corpus of 2,025
sentences (35,830 tokens), which we make pub-
licly available. However, since this paper focuses
on the principles which underlie our annotation
schema, rather than on the quality of the annotated
resource itself, we do not provide an evaluation of
the annotation quality.

The next section outlines our annotation scheme
for Finnish and discusses the main syntactic cri-
teria for the identification of the individual rela-
tion tags. Section 3 shows how the presented an-
notation can be projected onto a deep-syntactic
annotation, while Section 4 details the principal
differences between the TDT annotation schema
and ours, before some conclusions are presented
in Section 5.

2 A surface-syntactic annotation of
Finnish

Our annotation schema for Finnish follows the
methodology adopted for the elaboration of the

1According to KORP -https://korp.csc.fi- the FTB with all
its versions joined contains 4,386,152 sentences (76,532,636
tokens). However, the limited number of relations makes an
in-depth analysis and/or comparison difficult.

48



schema of the Spanish AnCora-UPF treebank
(Mille et al., 2013). Taking into account a series
of clearly cut syntactically-motivated criteria, a
tagset of Finnish syntactic dependencies has been
established. In what follows, we first present the
SSynt relation tagset, and then discuss some of the
main criteria applied for the identification of se-
lected tags.

2.1 The SSynt dependency tagset

The SSynt annotation layer is language-
dependent, and thus captures the idiosyncrasies
of a specific language. An example of a Finnish
surface-syntactic structure (SSyntS) is shown in
Figure 1.

Figure 1: SSyntS of the sentence Tyttö jonka näin
eilen ennusti, että huomenna sataa vettä. ‘The girl whom I
saw yesterday predicted that tomorrow it will rain’.

The Finnish SSynt tagset contains 36 relations,
which are presented and described in Table 1 along
with their distinctive syntactic properties. For
comparison, consider the Spanish tagset, shown in
Table 2.

As can be observed, many labels in the Finnish
and Spanish tagsets are identical (e.g., clitic,
modif, relat). This uniformity of labels across lan-
guages is one of the major motivations behind the
Universal Stanford Dependencies (de Marneffe et
al., 2014). We also think that using the same la-
bels across languages facilitates the understanding
of the annotations but, unlike in the USD proposal,
we make the different syntactic characteristics en-
coded by identical relations in different languages
explicit. Some prominent examples of relations
with the same label in both tagsets, but with dif-
ferent definitions are subj, obl obj and copul. The
relation subj refers in both tagsets to the element
that agrees with the verb in person and number, but
in Finnish the relation is also defined with respect
to the case: the dependent of this relation takes the
case assigned by the verb. In Spanish, given that
nominal phrases do not carry case (or, at least, they
do not show any case marker), the case assign-
ment is not used for the definition of the relation.

DepRel Distinctive properties
adjunct mobile sentential adverbial
adv mobile verbal adverbial
appos right-sided apposed element
attr genitive complement of nouns
aux non finite V governed by auxiliary verbs
aux phras multi-word marker
bin junct relates binary constructions

clitic non-independent adjacent morphemeattached to its syntactic governor
compar complement of a comparative element

conj complement of a non-coordinating Conj(right-sided)

compl non-removable adjectival object agreeingwith another verbal actant

compos relates a nominal head with prefixedmodifiers in compound nouns

copul
non-locative complement of the
copula olla; agrees with subject in number;
its canonical order is to the right

coord relates the first element of a coordinationwith the coord. conjunction (recursive)

coord conj complement of a coordinating Conj(right-sided)

det non-repeatable first left-side modifierof noun

dobj
verbal dependent with case partitive,
genitive, nominative or accusative
(for pronouns); no agreement with verb

hyphen reflects the orthographic necessity ofhyphenating compounds
juxtapos for linking two unrelated groups

modal relates modal auxiliaries (which requiregenitive subjects) and main verb

modif element modifying a noun; agrees in caseand number
noun compl non-genitive complement of nouns

obj copred relates the main verb with a predicativeadjective that modifies an object

obl obj verbal dependent with locative case(adessive, ablative, elative, illative, allative)

postpos left-sided complement of an adpositionor of an adverb acting as such

prepos right-sided complement of an adpositionor of an adverb acting as such
punc for punctuation signs

quasi coord for coordinated elements with no connector;(e.g. specifications)
relat right-sided finite verb modifying a noun
relat expl adjunct-like finite clause
restr invariable & non-mobile adverbial unit

sequent for numerical or formulaic elementsbelonging together (right-side)

subj
verbal dependent that controls number
agreement on its governing verb;
acquires the case assigned by the verb

subj obj
subject-like element governed by passive,
existential-possessive and impersonal
verbs, with some object properties

subj copred relates the main verb with a predicativeadjective that modifies the subject

verb junct right-sided verbal particle that givesthe expression a particular meaning

Table 1: Dependency relations used at the Finnish
surface-syntactic layer.

49



DepRel Distinctive properties
abbrev abbreviated apposition

abs pred non-removable dependent of an Nmaking the latter act as an adverb
adv mobile adverbial
agent promotable dependent of a participle
analyt fut Prep a governed by future Aux
analyt pass non-finite V governed by passive Aux
analyt perf non-finite V governed by perfect Aux
analyt progr non-finite V governed by progressive Aux
appos right-sided apposed element
attr right-side modifier of an N
aux phras multi-word marker
aux refl reflexive Pro depending on a V
bin junct for binary constructions
compar complement of a comparative Adj/Adv

compl1 non-removable adjectival object agreeingwith subject

compl2 non-removable adjectival object agreeingwith direct object
compl adnom prepositional dependent of a stranded Det
conj complement of a non-coordinating Conj

coord between a conjunct and the elementacting as coordination conjunction
coord conj complement of a coordinating Conj

copul cliticizable dependent of a copulaagrees with subject in number and gender
copul clitic cliticized dependent of a copula;
det non-repeatable left-side modifier of an N

dobj verbal dependent that can be promotedor cliticized with an accusative Pro

dobj clitic accusative clitic Prodepending on a V

elect non-argumental right-side dependentof a comparative Adj/Adv or a number
iobj dependent replaceable by a dative Pro
iobj clitic dative clitic Pro depending on a V
juxtapos for linking two unrelated groups

modal non-removable, non-cliticizable infinitiveverbal dependent
modif for Adj agreeing with their governing N
num junct numerical dependent of another number

obj copred adverbial dependent of a V, whichagrees with the direct object

obl compl right-side dependent of a non-V elementintroduced by a governed Prep

obl obj prepositional object that cannot bedemoted, promoted or cliticized
prepos complement of a preposition

prolep for clause-initial accumulation ofelements with no connectors
punc for non-sentence-initial punctuations
punc init for sentence-initial punctuation

quant numerical dependent which controls thenumber of its governing N

quasi coord for coordinated elements with theno connector
quasi subj a subject next to a grammatical subject
relat right-sided finite V that modifies an N
relat expl adverbial finite clause
sequent right-side coordinated adjacent element

subj dependent that controls agreement onits governing V

subj copred adverbial dependent of a Vagreeing with the subject

Table 2: Dependency relations used at the Spanish
surface-syntactic layer.

obl obj refers in Spanish to those verbal objects
that are introduced by a preposition and cannot be
demoted, promoted or cliticized. In Finnish, due
to its case-inflected nouns, obl obj is defined as
the relation that links verbs with objects contain-
ing locative cases. Finally, copul is defined in both
tagsets as the complement of copular verbs, which
agrees with the subject in number. However, in
the case of Spanish this element can cliticize, but
in Finnish it cannot.

In contrast, such relation labels as appos, coord
or relat share exactly the same properties across
the two languages.

2.2 Syntactic criteria
The syntactically-motivated criteria described in
(Burga et al., 2014) were used for creating the
Finnish SSynt tagset. In this section, some
remarks about Finnish idiosyncrasies related to
these criteria are detailed.
• Agreement: Two elements are involved in

agreement if they share some morphological fea-
tures, such as number, person or case. If such
agreement arises because one element transmits
those features to the other, we conclude that those
elements are syntactically related. On the other
hand, if an element that admits morphological
variation does not vary according to its gover-
nor/dependent, we can conclude that no agreement
is involved in the dependency relation between the
two. However, as already pointed out for Spanish
(Burga et al., 2014), one has to be careful when
analyzing agreement, because it depends not only
on the licensing from the syntactic relation, but
also on the Part-of-Speech (PoS) of each element.
Thus, if the element to which the morphological
feature(s) is (are) transmitted from another has a
PoS that does not allow any morphological vari-
ation –or is lexically invariable, despite having a
PoS that admits variability– , the agreement will
not be visible. Then, to evaluate if agreement actu-
ally exists, one needs to use the prototypical head
and dependent for each relation.2 When apply-
ing this criterion, it is also important to keep in
mind that different syntactic relations allow differ-
ent types of agreement, namely: i) head transmits
features to dependent (e.g., modif ) (1a); ii) depen-
dent transmits features to head (e.g., subj) (1b);
and iii) dependent transmits features to a sibling

2This point is important because the non-visibility of
agreement can cause a wrong division of relations, as hap-
pens in the TDT annotation scheme (see Section 4).

50



(e.g., copul) (1c).

(1) Possible agreement transmissions:
a. from head to dependent:

märät kädet
wet (NOM,PL) hand (NOM, PL)

modif

b. from dependent to head:

He laulavat.
They (3,PL) sing (3,PL)

subj

c. between two siblings:

Pojat ovat väsyneitä.
The boys (PL) are tired (PL)

subj copul

• Governed Adposition / Conjunction /
Grammeme: Some relations require the presence
of a preposition, a subordinating conjunction, or
a grammeme (as, e.g., verbal finiteness or case).
In Finnish, differently from English or Spanish,
adpositions and inflected nouns are both admitted
as alternative ways of expressing the same mean-
ing.3 However, beyond the way the meaning is
conveyed at the surface, some units (namely the
functional elements) are governed and some units
(namely the content elements) are not. The gov-
erned elements in Finnish are mostly grammemes
(case features), although it is also possible to find
specific examples with governed adpositions. In
the annotation scheme presented in this paper, this
criterion is used for establishing the tagset (e.g.,
the relation subj does not require a particular case
– the acquired case depends on the verbal head –
whereas the relation attr requires genitive in the
dependent), but does not imply a different analysis
of configurations with governed and non-governed
elements.

(2) Governed grammeme:

pitoisuuksia verrataan raja-arvoihin.
concentrations compare thresholds

(PAR) (PASS) (ILL)
Concentrations are compared to the threshold values.

subj obj obl obj

(3) Governed adposition:

HY tekee yhteistyötä Aalto-yliopiston kanssa.
HY makes collaboration U.Aalto with

(PAR) (GEN)
U.Helsinki collaborates with U.Aalto.

subj dobj
noun compl

postpos

3This is the reason behind the TDT treating both kinds of
configurations in the same way (see Section 4).

(4) Non-governed grammeme:

Mies käveli rannalla.
man (NOM) walked beach (ADE)

The man walked on the beach.

subj adv

(5) Non-governed adposition:

Mies käveli rantaa pitkin.
man (NOM) walked beach (PAR) along

The man walked along the beach.

subj
adv

postpos

In (2–5), we display examples that illustrate gov-
erned and non-governed cases and adpositions. In
(2), the case ILL of raja-arvo ‘threshold values’ is
governed by the verb vertaa ‘compare’, and this
requirement is what defines the type of relation
holding between the verb and the inflected noun
(obl obj). In (3), the postposition kanssa is re-
quired by the predicate tehdä yhteistyötä ‘collabo-
rate’, which motivates the relation noun compl.4

On the other hand, the adessive case in ranta
‘beach’ in (4) and the adposition pitkin ‘along’ in
(5) are not required by any element. As a conse-
quence, they contribute by themselves to the se-
mantics of the sentences – which should be re-
flected at the deep-syntactic layer.
• Linearization / Canonical order:5 By lin-

earization/canonical order we make reference to
the required (or preferred) direction between gov-
ernor and dependent within a specific dependency
relation. Although Finnish is a language with a
quite flexible word order, there are certain syntac-
tic relations that require a rigid linearization (e.g.,
appos) or, at least, prefer a certain order between
head and dependent (e.g., dobj, copul).

As these criteria contribute to the definition of
SSynt relations, they also serve, along with some
features of the elements involved, to distinguish
different syntactic configurations. For instance,
the verb olla ‘to be’ is used in copulative, loca-
tive, and existential configurations. Therefore, we
need some criteria to identify each of these uses.

In a copulative sentence, the subject is the ele-
ment that agrees in person and number with the

4As the predicate comprises two elements, and the predi-
cate itself is a noun, the relation is noun compl. However, if
the predicate were composed by just one verbal element, the
relation received by the adposition would be the same as in
(2), obl obj.

5Thanks to a reviewer for providing some important
Finnish judgments that have contributed to clarify this sec-
tion.

51



verb and carries nominative case. The comple-
ment of the copula, on the other hand, is “the el-
ement that says something about the subject”. It
can be of four different types: i) a non-nominal el-
ement (such as an adjective), ii) a nominal element
in a case different from nominative, iii) a nomi-
nal element in nominative that does not agree with
the verb in person and/or number, and iv) a nomi-
nal element in nominative that also agrees with the
verb in person and/or number.

In cases i–iii), the two previous criteria – agree-
ment and governed grammeme – are enough for
detecting subjects and complements of the copula.
However, in cases where the two elements related
to the verb are nominal elements that agree with
the copula and are in nominative case, as in (6),
linearization helps to determine which element is
the subject (i.e., the element appearing before the
copula) and which one is the complement of the
copula (i.e., the element appearing after the cop-
ula). 6 Thus, as observed, (6a) and (6b) do not
carry the same meaning: they are not exchange-
able and (6b) is not the result of exchanging direc-
tions over the relations of (6a).

(6) Copulative:

a.

Poika on Hannes.
boy (NOM) is Hannes (NOM)

The boy is Hannes.

subj copul

b.

Hannes on poika.
Hannes (NOM) is boy (NOM)

Hannes is a boy.

subj copul

The copul relation, thus, conveys a rigid lin-
earization when combined with certain morpho-
logical features, and therefore this criterion should
explicitly intervene in the definition of the relation.

In the same way, locative sentences containing
olla require the relation adv to be right-sided (7),
opposite to existential sentences, which require it
to be left-sided (8). Again, this distinction only
applies in cases where the non-locative element is
non-definite. If it is definite (e.g., a definite mod-
ifier is explicitly added), no existential interpreta-
tion is possible and therefore the distinction be-
tween locative and existential vanishes.

6Even if it is possible to find sentences with the two nom-
inal elements at the same side of the copula, they are not in-
terpreted as neutral copulative sentences, but are communica-
tively marked.

(7) Locative:

Pallo on pöydällä.
ball (NOM) is table (ADE)

The ball is on the table.

subj adv

(8) Existential:

Pöydällä on pallo.
table (ADE) is ball (NOM)

There is a ball on the table.

adv subj obj

3 Towards a deep-syntactic annotation

Since we approach linguistic description in a mul-
tilayered way, our annotation scheme aims at ob-
taining not only the Surface-Syntactic layer, but
also a shallow semantics-oriented layer, referred to
as Deep-Syntactic (DSynt) layer in the Meaning-
Text Theory. An example of a DSynt structure for
Finnish is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2: DSyntS of the sentence Tyttö jonka näin eilen
ennusti, että huomenna sataa vettä. ‘The girl whom I saw
yesterday predicted that tomorrow it will rain’.

The main differences between a Surface-
Syntactic structure (SSyntS) and a Deep-Syntactic
structure (DSyntS) are the following:

(i) a SSyntS contains all the words of a sen-
tence, while in a DSyntS all functional ele-
ments (such as governed adpositions or aux-
iliaries) are removed, so that only meaning-
bearing (content) elements are left; Figure 2,
for instance, does not contain the subordinat-
ing conjunction että present in Figure 1;

(ii) the SSynt tagset is language-idiosyncratic
whereas in the DSyntS relations between
the content elements are generic and
predicate-argument oriented (thus, language-
independent); for instance, subj and dobj
in Figure 1 map to argumental relations in
Figure 2 (respectively I and II), while relat
and adv are mapped to the non-argumental
relation ATTR.

In other words, during the mapping between
surface- and deep-syntax, functional elements and

52



predicate-argument relations have to be identi-
fied. Thanks to the existence of dedicated tools
such as the graph-transducer MATE (Bohnet et al.,
2000), the mapping of the SSynt-annotation onto
the DSynt-annotation is facilitated. For instance,
Mille et al. (2013) describe how they obtain the
DSynt annotation of a Spanish treebank. To make
the mapping straightforward, predicate-argument
information is included in the tags of surface-
syntactic annotation, enriching surface-syntactic
relations with semantic information. Thus, for in-
stance, instead of simply annotating the relation
obl obj when this relation is identified, specify-
ing the argument number in the label is also re-
quired: obl obj0 corresponds to the first argument,
obl obj1 to the second argument, obl obj2 to the
third argument, etc. Then, their mapping grammar
simply converted the labels and removed func-
tional elements, before removing the predicate-
argument information from the superficial annota-
tion. For Finnish, instead, we followed another ap-
proach: we included a valency dictionary in which
we store subcategorization information, i.e., the
distribution of the arguments of a lemma and re-
quired functional elements associated with each of
the arguments7. For illustration, see a sample en-
try of such a lexicon in Figure 3.

Figure 3: Sample lexicon entry for ennustaa ‘to predict’.

The entry for ennustaa ‘to predict’ states that
this word is a verb (PoS = V) and that it has two
possible government patterns (gp): one with three
arguments and one with two arguments. Consider
HSY ennustaa pölyämisen jatkuvan ‘HSY predicts
the dust to continue’ for the first and Metla ennus-
taa, että koivu kukkii . . . ‘Metla predicts that the
birch will be in bloom . . . ’ for the latter.

Thanks to this lexicon, rules can check in the
input SSyntS if a word has a dependent of the type
described in its entry, and perform the adequate
mapping. For instance, if a dependent of ennustaa
is a noun in the nominative case with the depen-

7As, e.g., in (Gross, 1984), and the Explanatory Combi-
natorial Dictionary (Mel’čuk, 1988).

dency subj, the latter will be mapped to I in the
DSyntS. A nominal dependent in the genitive case
with a dependency dobj would be mapped to the
second argument (II), while a nominalized verb
in genitive receiving the dependency compl would
be mapped to its third argument (III). In the lexi-
con, governed conjunctions are also described, as
in the description of the second argument of the
second governed pattern: in this case, if ennustaa
has a dependent dobj which is the conjunction että,
which itself introduces a finite verb, not only will
dobj be mapped to second argument (II), but the
governed (functional) element will be removed, so
that II will link both content words of the substruc-
ture, i.e., ennustaa and the dependent verb.

The lexicon currently contains more than 1400
entries, including about 300 verbs, 750 nouns, 220
adjectives, 50 adverbs and 100 prepositions, post-
positions and conjunctions.8

One great advantage of this method is that this
resource is not only useful for obtaining lexical
valency information from syntactic structures, but
also in the framework of rule-based text genera-
tion, that is, for the exact opposite mapping (pro-
ducing syntactic relations and functional elements
from abstract predicate-argument structures (Wan-
ner et al., 2014)).9

4 Comparison with the TDT annotation
scheme

In this section, we present a contrastive analysis of
the TDT annotation scheme, the most referenced
scheme for Finnish, with respect to its treatment
of certain phenomena.

The last version of TDT (Haverinen et al., 2014)
contains two layers of annotation. The first layer
(the base-syntactic layer) contains 46 relations and

8The lexicon furthermore contains additional information
about the entries which is not related to subcategorization,
such as morphological invariability, as well as the values for
some lexical functions.

9A number of other annotations have resemblance with
DSyntSs; cf. (Ivanova et al., 2012) for an overview of deep
dependency structures. In particular, DSyntSs show some re-
semblance, but also some important differences, with Prop-
Bank structures, mainly due to the fact that the latter concern
phrasal chunks and not individual nodes. The degree of “se-
manticity” of DSyntSs can be directly compared to Prague’s
tectogrammatical structures (Hajič et al., 2006), which con-
tain autosemantic words only, leaving out synsemantic ele-
ments such as determiners, auxiliaries, (all) prepositions and
conjunctions. Collapsed SDs (de Marneffe et al., 2006) differ
from the DSyntSs in that they collapse only (but all) preposi-
tions, conjunctions and possessive clitics, they do not involve
any removal of (syntactic) information, and they do not add
semantic information compared to the surface annotation.

53



uses the SD scheme adapted to Finnish. The sec-
ond layer inserts additional dependencies over the
first layer. This second layer tries, on the one
hand, to cover more semantic phenomena (con-
junct propagation for coordinations, and external
subjects), but, on the other hand, it aims at cov-
ering some syntactic phenomena–gaps resulting
from the first layer annotation–such as describing
the function of relative pronouns.10

In the following, we present the principal char-
acteristics of the pure-syntactic first layer annota-
tion of TDT, focusing on the most relevant dif-
ferences between TDT and the annotation scheme
presented in this paper.

• Many relations in the TDT annotation
scheme are based on the PoS and internal
morphological processes of the dependent
and/or the governor, rather than on particu-
lar syntactic properties of the relations them-
selves. Even if it cannot be denied that
some PoS carry restrictions that others do
not, it is important to recognize when those
restrictions are imposed by morpho-syntactic
factors and, therefore, should not be con-
fused with pure syntactic restrictions. Thus,
the TDT annotation scheme distinguishes be-
tween two different relations advmod and
nommod for verbal modifiers (9), but the dis-
tinction is based only on the PoS of the de-
pendent.11

(9) Distinguishing relations using PoS:
a. The dependent is an adverb:

Hän käveli kotiin hitaasti.
He walked home slowly.

advmod

b. The dependent is a noun:

Maljiakko oli pöydällä.
The vase was on the table.

nommod

Not only is the PoS information duplicated in
the annotation, but in those cases in which it
is difficult to decide if a word is a noun or an
adverb (e.g., pääasiassa ‘mainly’ (adverb) /
‘main thing’ (noun)), if a wrong PoS tag is
chosen, the annotation error directly propa-
gates to the syntactic annotation, as Haveri-

10The authors explain that this information is omitted in
the first layer because of treeness restriction (Haverinen et
al., 2014, p.505).

11In this section, we have tried to use the examples pre-
sented in (Haverinen, 2012), but in some cases these exam-
ples have been shortened/adapted according to format restric-
tions.

nen et al. (2013) point out. If the syntactic
behavior is not different when a dependent is
an adverb or a noun, only one syntactic rela-
tion should be needed.

Given that the TDT tagset sub-specifies some
dependency tags according to the PoS of the
elements involved, it is perfectly possible to
choose an annotation that links heads and
dependents that belong to different clauses
(without being a relative configuration), as in
(10). Such analysis is not syntactically accu-
rate, given that it completely ignores the syn-
tactic independence of each clause.

(10) Edge between independent clauses:

Tulen heti, kun pääsen.
I will come right away, when I can.

advmod

In contrast, we keep the syntactic indepen-
dence of each clause, and relate one to each
other through the relation adv (11).12

(11) Clause independence respected:

Tulen heti, kun pääsen.
I will come right away, when I can.

adv
adv conj

• When adapting the SD scheme to Finnish,
some relations in the TDT annotation were
ruled out for being considered “semantic in
nature” (Haverinen et al., 2014, p.504). Nev-
ertheless, the analysis of some other phenom-
ena – and the consequent definition of depen-
dencies related to them – still has a more se-
mantic justification than a syntactic one. A
first example of this observation, also related
to the previous point, is the division of the
genitive modifiers of nouns into three differ-
ent relations: poss (12a), gsubj (12b) and
gobj (12c). Although it is argued that such
a division responds to the desire of obtaining
a higher granularity of the scheme (Haveri-
nen et al., 2014, p.507), the relation division
actually depends on the semantics of the gov-
ernor and not on the syntactic properties of
these constructions. Thus, in (12a), Matin
is a genitive modifier of the noun penaali
‘pencilcase’; in (12b), due to the seman-
tics of the head, maljakon ‘vase’ is consid-
ered a “subject-like” modifier of särkyminen

12Another way to analyze this sentence is considering a
relative configuration, the subordinating clause being a spec-
ification of heti ‘right away’ / ‘this moment’.

54



‘breaking’; and in (12c), perunan ‘potato’
is considered a nominal modifier of viljely
‘growing’, but it is actually analyzed as a
genitive object of the verb viljellä ‘to grow’.
The annotation scheme assumes, as (12b) and
(12c) show, that the nominalization process
undergone by the verb makes it transmit not
only its semantics, but also its syntactic prop-
erties. As expected, when the annotation con-
cerns genitive modifiers of nouns, the annota-
tion errors propagate (Haverinen et al., 2013).

(12) Distinguishing modifiers of nouns:

a.

Matin penaali
Matti’s pencilcase

poss

b.

maljakon särkyminen
vase (GEN) breaking

gsubj

c.

perunan viljely
potato (GEN) growing (N)

gobj

In the annotation schema presented in this pa-
per, the three constructions are parallel and
use the relation attr.

Another clear example of the prevalence of
semantics over syntax in TDT is the treat-
ment of copular verbs. They are treated in
a specific way (13), different from any other
verb (14), due to the semantic link between
the subject and the complement of the copu-
lar verb. 13

(13) TDT analysis, copulative sentences:

Huivi on punainen.
the scarf (3,SG) is (3,SG) red

The scarf is red.

cop
nsubj-cop

(14) TDT analysis of non-copulative:

Poika potkaisee palloa.
the guy (3,SG) kicks (3,SG) the ball

The guy kicks the ball.

nsubj dobj

13The TDT annotation faces a problem of not resulting in
a tree when, instead of a subject noun, a participial modifier
appears. Thus, in those cases, they treat a copulative configu-
ration as any other verbal construction, which weakens their
original analysis (Haverinen, 2012, Section 5.13).

In both sentences, the verb agrees with the
preverbal element in person and number,
which is the morphological marker of the
syntactic phenomenon of being a subject.
However, the analysis assigned to each sen-
tence does not capture such parallelism. The
difference between both sentences concerns
the second verbal complement: in copulative
sentences, if its PoS licenses agreement, this
element agrees with the subject in number; in
non-copulative sentences, such an agreement
does not happen. Therefore, two different re-
lations hold between the verb and this com-
plement, as (15) and (16) show.

(15) Our analysis of copulative sentences:

Huivi on punainen.
the scarf (3,SG) is (3,SG) red

The scarf is red.

subj copul

(16) Our analysis of non-copulative:

Poika potkaisee palloa.
the guy (3,SG) kicks (3,SG) the ball

The guy kicks the ball.

subj dobj

Finally, the prevalence of semantics over
syntax in TDT is exemplified through the
treatment of subjects, auxiliaries and content
verbs. The TDT annotation schema takes
the content verb as head of the sentence, and
makes the subject hold on it (17).

(17) TDT treatment of auxiliaries:

Hän saattoi lähteä jo.
he may (impf.) leave already
He may have left already.

aux
nsubj

If syntactic properties are prioritized in the
course of the definition of the annotation
schema, the subject relation should link the
subject and the auxiliary (18), given that
agreement holds between these two elements.
Consequently, the auxiliary should head the
relation between the two verbs. In the same
way, the negative auxiliary should be also
treated as the element heading the subject and
the content verb.

(18) Our treatment of auxiliaries:

Hän saattoi lähteä jo.
he may (impf.) leave already
He may have left already.

auxsubj

55



• Given the semantic motivation for annotating
differently similar syntactic phenomena (or
vice versa), we would expect the TDT anno-
tation schema to allow for a direct mapping
from surface-syntax to deeper linguistic lev-
els (or, in more concrete terms, to a predicate-
argument structure, which we refer to as “se-
mantics”). However, this is not the case.

As detailed in Section 2.2, case markers
and adpositions can be either functional or
meaning-bearing, and each of them should
be treated differently. TDT, however, treats
as the same, on one hand, case markers and
adpositions (Haverinen, 2012, p.2) and, on
the other hand, elements that are purely func-
tional and those ones that do convey a con-
tent. The examples in (19) show TDT’s
parallel treatment of case markers and ad-
positions (compare (19a) to (19b)), and of
governed and non-governed elements (com-
pare (19b) to (19c)). As can be observed,
the same syntactic analysis is offered to sen-
tences that differ in syntax: in (19a), the
adessive case of pöytä ‘table’ is required for
expressing a locative meaning with the verb
olla, whereas in (19b), the genitive case is
required by the adposition and not by the
verb or the configuration itself. On the other
hand, non-governed elements (such as päällä
‘on top of’ in (19b)) are treated in the same
way as governed elements (such as kanssa
‘with’ in (19c)).

(19) TDT treatment of adpositions:
a.

Maljiakko oli pöydällä.
The vase was on the table

nommod

b.

Maljiakko oli pöydän päällä.
The vase was table on top of

nommod adpos

c.

HY tekee yhteistyötä Aalto-yliopiston kanssa.

U.H. collaborates U.Aalto. with

subj nommod adpos

One problem of treating functional and con-
tent elements in the same way is the difficulty
in reaching an actual abstract structure which
contains only content words. (20) is an ex-
pansion of (19c) where, apart from the gov-
erned adposition, there is a translative case

(-ksi), expressing purpose, which is not re-
quired by the predicate. In an abstract struc-
ture corresponding to (20), the governed ad-
position should not appear, unlike the non-
governed case.

(20) HY tekee yhteistyötä Aalto-yliopiston
kanssa uudenlaisen digitaalisen oppimisen
tukemiseksi.
‘The university of Helsinky collaborated with
the University Aalto to promote a new way of
digital learning.’

Another example of the difficulty of getting
an appropriate mapping between syntax and
semantics is the treatment of relative pro-
nouns: in the first layer of annotation, all rel-
ative pronouns receive the same relation from
the subordinate verb (i.e., rel), without taking
into account the syntactic function of the pro-
noun within the subordinate clause (21).

(21) TDT treatment of relative pronouns:

a.

auto, joka ohitti meidät
the car that (NOM) passed us

rcmod
rel

b.

mies, jonka näin eilen
the man that (GEN) I saw yesterday

rcmod
rel

Even though a case can indicate the func-
tion occupied by the element to which it is
attached, it is not enough for obtaining a di-
rect mapping to semantics. First of all, many
times, cases themselves are not enough for
indicating such function, but their combin-
ability with the involved verbs is also needed.
Secondly, and more importantly, the same
cases are used by elements that occupy dif-
ferent semantic slots. Thus, for instance,
both subjects and objects accept the same
set of cases (nominative, partitive and gen-
itive), which clearly blurs a direct mapping
to predicate-argument structures. In our syn-
tactic annotation scheme, rel would be anno-
tated as a subject in (21a), and as object in in
(21b).

5 Conclusions

In this paper, we presented an annotation schema
for Finnish that can be considered an alternative

56



to the SD-oriented schema used in the TDT tree-
bank. We justify and present a syntactically moti-
vated tagset for Finnish, and the creation of a lexi-
con which facilitates the annotation of a deep syn-
tactic (semantics-oriented) representation which
captures lexical valency relations between con-
tent lexical items. Having two distinct levels for
capturing syntactic and semantic information, has
been shown to allow for developing different NLP
applications in the parsing and the natural lan-
guage generation fields (Ballesteros et al., 2014;
Ballesteros et al., 2015).

The corpus annotated following the SSynt and
DSynt annotation schemata described in this paper
are made available upon request.

Acknowledgements

The work described in this paper has been carried
out in the framework of the project Personalized
Environmental Service Configuration and Deliv-
ery Orchestration (PESCaDO), supported by the
European Commission under the contract number
FP7-ICT-248594.

References
M. Ballesteros, B. Bohnet, S. Mille, and L. Wanner.

2014. Deep-syntactic parsing. In Proceedings of
COLING, Dublin, Ireland.

M. Ballesteros, B. Bohnet, S. Mille, and L. Wanner.
2015. Data-driven sentence generation with non-
isomorphic trees. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT,
Denver, CO, USA.

B. Bohnet, A. Langjahr, and L. Wanner. 2000. A de-
velopment environment for an MTT-based sentence
generator. In Proceedings of INLG.

A. Burga, S. Mille, and L. Wanner. 2014. Looking
behind the scenes of syntactic dependency corpus
annotation: Towards a motivated annotation schema
of surface-syntax in Spanish. In Computational
Dependency Theory. Frontiers in Artificial Intelli-
gence and Applications Series, volume 258. Ams-
terdam:IOS Press.

M.C. de Marneffe and Ch. Manning. 2008. The
Stanford typed dependencies representation. In
Proceedings of the workshop on Cross-Framework
and Cross-Domain Parser Evaluation (COLING),
Manchester, UK.

M.C de Marneffe, B. MacCartney, and Ch. Manning.
2006. Generating typed dependency parses from
phrase structure parses. In Proceedings of the 5th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC), pages 449–454, Genoa, Italy.

M.C. de Marneffe, T. Dozat, N. Silveira, K. Haveri-
nen, F. Ginter, J. Nivre, and Ch. Manning. 2014.
Universal Stanford dependencies: A cross-linguistic
typology. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), pages 4585–4592, Reykjavik, Iceland.

M. Gross. 1984. Lexicon-grammar and the syntactic
analysis of French. In Proceedings of the 10th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING) and the 22nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
pages 275–282, Stanford, CA, USA.

J. Hajič, J. Panevová, E. Hajičová, P. Sgall, P. Pa-
jas, J. Štěpánek, J. Havelka, M. Mikulová, and
Z. Žabokrtský. 2006. Prague Dependency Treebank
2.0. Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia.

K. Haverinen, F. Ginter, V. Laippala, S. Kohonen,
T. Viljanen, J. Nyblom, and T. Salakoski. 2013. A
dependency-based analysis of treebank annotation
errors. In K. Gerdes, E. Hajı́čova, and L. Wanner,
editors, Computational Dependency Theory. IOS
Press.

K. Haverinen, J. Nyblom, T. Viljanen, V. Laippala,
S. Kohonen, A. Missilä, T. Salakoski, and F. Ginter.
2014. Building the essential resources for Finnish:
the Turku Dependency Treebank. In Proceedings of
LREC, Reykjavik, Iceland, September.

K. Haverinen. 2012. Syntax Annotation Guidelines for
the Turku Dependency Treebank. Technical Report
1034, Turku Centre for Computer Science, Turku,
Finland.

A. Ivanova, S. Oepen, L. Øvrelid, and D. Flickinger.
2012. Who did what to whom? A contrastive study
of syntacto-semantic dependencies. In Proceedings
of the 6th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 2–
11, Jeju, Republic of Korea.

I. Mel’čuk. 1988. Semantic description of lexical units
in an explanatory combinatorial dictionary: Basic
principles and heuristic criteria. International Jour-
nal of Lexicography, 1(3):165–188.

I. Mel’čuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory and
Practice. State University of New York Press, Al-
bany.

S. Mille, A. Burga, and L.Wanner. 2013. AnCora-
UPF: A multi-level annotation of Spanish. In Pro-
ceedings of DepLing, Prague, Czech Republic.

A. Voutilainen, K. Muhonen, T. Purtonen, and
K. Lindén. 2012. Specifying treebanks, outsourc-
ing parsebanks: Finntreebank 3. In Proceedings of
LREC, Istanbul, Turkey.

L. Wanner, H. Bosch, N. Bouayad-Agha,
G. Casamayor, Th. Ertl, D. Hilbring, L. Johansson,
K. Karatzas, A. Karppinen, I. Kompatsiaris, et al.
2014. Getting the environmental information
across: from the web to the user. Expert Systems.

57


