



















































Putting Feelings into Words: Cross-Linguistic Markers of the Referential Process


Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality, pages 80–88,
Denver, Colorado, June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Putting Feelings into Words: Cross-Linguistic Markers of the
Referential Process

Sean M. Murphy
New York Psychoanalytic

Society and Institute
247 East 82nd Street

New York, NY 10028, USA
smurphy1@gmail.com

Bernard Maskit
Mathematics Department
Stony Brook University

Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
daap@optoline.net

Wilma Bucci
Derner Institute

Adelphi University
Garden City, NY 11530, USA

wbucci@optonline.net

Abstract

The use of language to convey emotional
experience is of significant importance to
the process of psychotherapy, the diagno-
sis of problems with emotion and memory,
and more generally to any communication
that aims to evoke a feeling in the recipi-
ent. Bucci’s theory of the referential pro-
cess (1997) concerns three phases whereby
a person activates emotional, or bodily ex-
perience (Arousal Phase), conveys the im-
ages and events associated with it (Symbol-
izing Phase), and reconsiders them (Reor-
ganizing Phase). The Symbolizing Phase
is the major focus of this study and is
operationalized by a measure called refer-
ential activity (RA) based on judges’ rat-
ings of the concreteness, specificity, clarity
and imagery of language style. Computa-
tional models of RA have previously been
created in several languages, however, due
to the complexity of modeling RA, dif-
ferent modeling strategies have been em-
ployed for each language and common fea-
tures that predict RA across languages
are not well understood. Working from
previous computational models developed
in English and Italian, this study speci-
fies a new model of predictors common to
both languages that correlates between r
= .36 and.45 with RA. The components
identified support the construct validity of
the referential process and may facilitate
the development of measures in other lan-
guages.

1 Introduction

Emotional states are generally accompanied by
the retrieval of specific images and events. Simi-
lar methods are used to activate emotional states
in both research and clinical contexts. For exam-
ple, appraisal researchers may ask a participant
to describe an experience of being angry at one-
self in as much vivid detail as possible (Ellsworth
and Tong, 2006). Prompting retrieval of images
and events also underlies imaginal exposure in
treatments for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
(PTSD) and other anxiety disorders (Powers et
al., 2010).

Bucci (1997) theorized that the process of
putting sensory, visceral and emotional experi-
ences into words requires connection of symbols
(words) to non-verbal and non-discrete, analogic
(or subsymbolic) information through what she
terms the referential process.

1.1 The referential process.

Arousal Phase: According to the theory, in
the Arousal Phase, material that cannot yet be
described or thought of in verbal terms is acti-
vated. This may include bodily sensations, or
plans for motor action. The speaker is often un-
sure of what to talk about and may shift loosely
from association to association. Language may
have greater disfluency (e.g. ‘um’, ‘uh’), more
false starts, or non-sequiturs. The proportion of
disfluency in a text is used as a major indicator
of the Arousal Phase.
Symbolizing Phase: As the activated material
is processed it coalesces into a prototypic im-

80



age or plan for action. This is the preliminary
part of the Symbolizing Phase, when the mate-
rial is brought into symbolic form but is not yet
expressed in language. The latter part of this
phase is the expression of this material in words
by telling about an image, or event. The lan-
guage of this phase will tend to be more specific,
will focus on describing a single idea or frame,
will refer more to the concrete or sensate prop-
erties of things, and will tend to evoke imagery
in the listener, or reader. This style of language
has been operationalized by referential activity
(RA), which is understood as the connection of
words to nonverbal experience, including bod-
ily and emotional experiences that are subsym-
bolic. This measure is the focus of the current
study and will be discussed in greater detail be-
low along with computational models of referen-
tial activity.
Reorganizing Phase: Once symbolically ex-
pressed, such ideas are open for reflection and
reorganization which takes place during the Re-
organizing Phase. The restructuring that oc-
curs during this phase encourages psychological
development, and can begin the referential pro-
cess anew by raising new questions, thoughts or
feelings in response to the revelations that have
occurred. The language of this phase is marked
by references to cognitive processes, logical oper-
ations and reasoning. Such references are oper-
ationalized by a dictionary of ‘Reflection’ words
(REF) which is used as a measure of the reor-
ganizing phase and is discussed in greater detail
below and in Maskit et al. (2015, this confer-
ence).

1.2 Referential activity (RA).

Referential activity was first operationalized by
Bucci through a scoring system whereby judges
rate language segments on dimensions of con-
creteness, specificity, clarity and imagery. Each
scale is scored from zero to ten. The four dimen-
sions are significantly inter-correlated for most
speakers and most texts and are understood as
reflecting different aspects of the same general
dimension. For this reason, the average of the
four scales is taken as the overall referential ac-
tivity (RA) score of the segment (Bucci et al.,

2004). Using these four scales, raters are able to
achieve excellent inter-rater reliability with stan-
dardized item alphas exceeding .90 (Bucci et al.,
2004, p. 24). The RA scales (as defined above)
have been used in many studies (e.g. Appelman,
(2000); Bucci, (1984); Dodd & Bucci, (1987);
Fretter, Bucci, Broitman, Silberschatz, & Cur-
tis, J., (1994); Horowitz, et al. (1993); Jepson
& Bucci (1999); Langs, Bucci, Udoff, Cramer,
& Thomson, (1993); Watson, J., (1996); also
see Samstag, (1997) for a review of dissertations
utilizing these scales).

1.3 The referential process and
psychotherapy process.

In order to function well in life we need to be
able to connect our sensory and emotional ex-
periences to the people and events of our life so
that we can make the best possible judgments
regarding how to respond. We need to take in
new information and modify our understanding
of the world and our relationships as we and our
life situations change.

In talk therapies, Bucci argues that psycholog-
ical change occurs through the referential pro-
cess. In the Arousal Phase, activation of a prob-
lematic experience can be gradually tolerated as
the relationship develops between therapist and
patient. In the Symbolizing Phase, the person
talks about an episode of life, a dream or fan-
tasy that is connected to this problematic expe-
rience. The representation of the experience in
share-able symbolic form allows for new infor-
mation to be brought in and connected with it.
Once shared, there is an opportunity for a Reor-
ganizing Phase where the meaning of the events
may be reconsidered and further explored.

1.4 Clinical studies of the referential
process.

Clinical studies have demonstrated that mea-
sures of the referential process are meaningful
predictors of good psychotherapy process and
outcome. Bucci and Maskit (2007) showed that
the referential activity of a series of sessions in
a single case design of a psychoanalytic treat-
ment had strong correlations with the process
ratings of expert clinicians who read and scored

81



these sessions. Higher RA in therapist process
notes, understood as indicating greater emo-
tional engagement of the therapist, was associ-
ated with better treatment outcome as assessed
by independent raters (Bucci et al., 2012). Mar-
iani et al. (2013) found that RA (measured by
the Italian Weighted Referential Activity Dictio-
nary IWRAD) increased over the course of three
psychotherapy treatments that showed improve-
ment in personality functioning.

1.5 RA as an indicator of episodic
memory capability and impairment.

In their 2008 paper, Nelson, Moskowitz and
Steiner found a robust correlation (rs(53) =
.69, p < .001) between a measure of narrativ-
ity and the WRAD in a sample of high school
students talking about their most stressful time.
In their paper, Nelson et al. (2008) noted the
similarity between the ”story-now grammar” of
narratives (Clark, 1996; Fleischman, 1990) and
Tulving’s concept of episodic memory as ”time
travel” (1972). Maskit et al. (2014) directly
compared WRAD with measures of episodic
memory strength using data provided by Schac-
ter and scored by Addis, Wong and Schacter
(2008), and also found strong correlations be-
tween the two measures. In line with these
findings WRAD has been shown to differenti-
ate populations with impairments in episodic
memory such as participants with Schizophre-
nia (Lewis et al., 2009) and with Alzheimer’s de-
mentia (Nelson and Polignano, 2009) from non-
clinical controls.

1.6 Previous computational models of
referential activity.

The first computerized model of RA was the
Computerized Referential Activity (CRA) of
Mergenthaler and Bucci (1999), based on mod-
eling very high and very low RA scale scores.
The technique used to develop this measure was
refined to develop the second generation com-
puter model, the Weighted Referential Activity
Dictionary (WRAD) (Bucci and Maskit, 2006).
The WRAD was developed through a process
of modeling the frequency with which words ap-
peared in texts at several levels of RA as scored

by judges, producing a weighted dictionary. In
comparison to the CRA the WRAD represents
an improvement in the correlation between com-
puterized and judge based RA scoring in six of
the seven samples utilized to model and test the
dictionary. Correlations between WRAD and
judges scoring of RA ranged between r = .38
and r = .60 in these samples. A detailed expla-
nation of the modeling procedure for the WRAD
dictionary may be found in Bucci and Maskit
(2006).

The WRAD is a weighted dictionary with
weights lying between −1, for words used more
frequently in low RA speech, and +1 for words
used more frequently in high RA speech. The
WRAD comprises 697 frequently used items,
primarily function words, including personal
pronouns such as ‘she’, conjunctions such as
‘and’, and articles such as ‘the’. Because of the
dominance of such extremely frequent function
words, the dictionary covers approximately 85%
of the tokens used in the sample from which the
dictionary was derived.

The structure of the Italian language is differ-
ent from that of English; thus modeling strate-
gies based on a restricted number of core types
was less successful when modeling referential ac-
tivity in Italian. (See Mariani, Maskit, Bucci
and De Coro, 2013). This led to a model that
includes a much larger number of types (9596).
The IWRAD covers approximately 97% of the
tokens used in the sample from which the dictio-
nary was derived and correlates between r = .24
and r = .91 with samples used to develop and
test the model.

1.7 The need for understanding
common predictors of RA across
languages.

Successful computational models have been
built for referential activity (RA) in several lan-
guages including: English (Bucci and Maskit,
2006); Italian (Mariani et al., 2013); Span-
ish (Roussos and O’Connel, 2005) and German
(Ehrman, 1997); however, each model was built
separately and without a common basis. The
current study seeks to identify a model that may
be applied across languages based on a common

82



definition of the features associated with refer-
ential activity.

We address this question by identifying those
predictors in English and Italian that are most
strongly associated with RA scores and have
shared meaning. We hope that this model will
be validated in other languages and develop into
a generalized model that may be applied across
languages. The value of such a model is twofold.
First, there is pragmatic value as we receive re-
quests from psychotherapy researchers who are
working in various languages for which no com-
putational model exists.1 Second, the develop-
ment of a generalized model provides a unique
opportunity to study the construct validity of
the referential process. To the degree that we
can describe how the process of putting feelings
into words plays out across languages we will
have a more accurate description of this basic
psychological process.

2 Methods and Results

2.1 Spoken corpora.

This study utilized segments from the same
corpora that were used to build the English
(N=763 segments) and Italian (N=936 seg-
ments) Weighted Referential Activity Dictionar-
ies. The segments in the English sample had an
average length of 163 words (SD 115) and in the
Italian sample had an average length of 83 words
(SD 60). Both corpora included psychotherapy
and other spoken narrative material such as in-
terviews, monologues, early memories and sto-
ries told to pictures. These materials were reli-
ably segmented and scored for referential activ-
ity by judges following instructions from Bucci
et al. (2004) and in Italian following a trans-
lation of this manual by De Coro and Caviglia
(2000). All of the texts were scored for the four
RA scales by at least two trained raters who had
achieved high inter-rater reliability. The average
of the scales was taken as the RA score. Detailed
descriptions of the composition of these samples
and scoring procedures may be found in Bucci &

1We have received requests for measures of referential
activity in: Bulgarian, French, German, Hebrew, Man-
darin, Norwegian, Polish and Portuguese.

Maskit (2006), for the English sample and Mar-
iani et al. (2013), for the Italian sample.

For the current study both the English and
Italian corpora were subdivided into training,
testing and validation subsets. The training sub-
set (English N=362, Italian N=472) was used to
develop the model in this study and the test sub-
set (English N=209, Italian N=272) was used to
test interim models. The validation subset (En-
glish N=192, Italian N=192) was reserved for
final validation of the model.

2.2 The Discourse Attributes Analysis
Programs (DAAP) and (IDAAP).

The Discourse Attributes Analysis Program
(DAAP) is a computer-based text analysis sys-
tem designed by Bernard Maskit, whose features
include the use of both weighted and unweighted
dictionaries. The Italian version of the software
differs mainly in its ability to handle accented
letters from a variety of text formats. The En-
glish version of the software is publicly available
at: https://github.com/DAAP/DAAP09.6

2.3 Existing referential process
dictionaries.

The phases of the referential process are oper-
ationalized by three main measures: disfluency
(Arousal Phase), referential activity (Symboliz-
ing Phase), and reflection (Reorganizing Phase).
In addition there are several other dictionary
based measures that are routinely used in stud-
ies of the referential process. These dictionaries
were created using standard procedures for com-
puterized text analysis that involve compiling
word lists for a large source of texts and selecting
items based on agreement among judges follow-
ing the conceptual definitions of the dictionaries
which follow below. The dictionaries listed be-
low were created independently in English and
Italian except where otherwise indicated.

Disfluency (DF): A limited set of six items
that people use when struggling to communi-
cate such as ‘um’, ‘uh’, ‘hmmm’, etc. Disfluent
language is also associated with cognitive load
and effort in speech planning (Bortfeld et al.,
2001). In addition to matching types in the dis-
fluency dictionary DAAP also counts incomplete

83



words (indicated by transcribers using a dash),
repeated words and repeated two word phrases
as disfluencies.

Reflection (REF): A dictionary of 1436 words
that concern how people think and communi-
cate thoughts. This dictionary includes words
referring to cognitive or logical functions, e.g.,
‘assume’, ‘think’, ‘plan’.

Affect (AFF): Words that concern how peo-
ple feel and communicate feelings directly such
as, ‘angry’, ‘sad’, and ‘happy’. The global mea-
sure of these words is the ‘Affect Sum’ dictionary
(AFFS 2452 words). These are further classi-
fied as ‘Positive’ (AFFP; 620 words), ‘Negative’
(AFFN; 1470 words) and ‘Mixed’ affect (AFFZ;
362 words) words. The definitions of positive
and negative affect are self explanatory; mixed
affect words are words that seem to have an
affective or emotional loading, but are neither
positive, nor negative, e.g., ‘anticipate’, ‘over-
whelmed’, ‘serious’.

Sensory Somatic (SENS): A set of 1936 words
pertaining to bodily and or sensory experience,
e.g., ‘dizzy’, ‘eye’, ‘face’, ‘listen’.

Negation (NEG): A limited set of 26 items
that people use when negating in communica-
tion. e.g., ‘no’, ‘not’, ‘never’; this may be seen
as a function of the logic mode. This dictionary
was not created independently in Italian.

2.4 Test of automated translation of
existing dictionaries.

In order to test how well dictionaries might work
in direct translation by automated means, all of
the dictionaries described above in English and
Italian were translated using Google Translate
(through Google Sheets). The translated dictio-
naries were then run on the corpora described
above using the English and Italian versions of
the DAAP. Tables 1 and 2 show the correlations
of the native language to the translated dictio-
naries.

The translation of the dictionaries used here,

2Since there are core differences in typical words used
as disfluencies in English, such as, ‘like’, and Italian, such
as ‘boh’ the full dictionary in each language was com-
pared to a common subset of lexical items, e.g., ‘uh’ and
‘um’.

Dictionary Correlation
Negative Affect .75∗∗∗

Positive Affect .33∗∗∗

Mixed Affect .69∗∗∗

Affect Sum .66∗∗∗

Reflection .44∗∗∗

Sensory Somatic .62∗∗∗

Disfluency2 .66∗∗∗

WRAD & IWRAD-T -.10∗∗

Note: N=763; ∗p<.05; ∗∗p<.01; ∗∗∗p<.001

Table 1: Pearson’s correlations of English DAAP dic-
tionaries with translated Italian DAAP dictionaries
(translated using Google Translate).

Dictionary Correlation
Negative Affect .27∗∗∗

Positive Affect .57∗∗∗

Mixed Affect .34∗∗∗

Affect Sum .40∗∗∗

Reflection .33∗∗∗

Sensory Somatic .40∗∗∗

Disfluency .23∗∗

IWRAD & WRAD-T .16∗∗∗

Note: N=936; ∗p<.05; ∗∗p<.01; ∗∗∗p<.001

Table 2: Pearson’s correlations of Italian DAAP dic-
tionaries with translated English DAAP dictionaries
(translated using Google Translate).

based largely on content words including nouns,
verbs and adjectives, showed moderate to strong
correlations both from and to Italian. Though
manual translation would likely show stronger
results, these results indicate that even auto-
mated translation of these dictionaries shows
good correspondence with the dictionaries cre-
ated by native speakers. The two computational
models of RA, which are more dominated by
function words, though strongly correlated with
Judges’ RA in both languages (English r(761) =
.53, p < .001; Italian r(934) = .73, p < .001)
were only weakly correlated and in the opposite
of the expected direction in Italian (as shown
in Tables 1 and 2). The translated dictionar-
ies were also weakly related to judge scored
RA (English r(761) = −.03, p = .363; Italian
r(934) = .04, p = .130). The difficulty of trans-

84



lating these dictionaries based on style rather
than content underscore the need for the cur-
rent study.

2.5 New model development.

In order to develop a more universal model
of referential activity, impact scores were cre-
ated for the current English and Italian WRAD
dictionaries by multiplying the WRAD weight
for each dictionary term by the frequency with
which it occurred in the corpus from which
the dictionary was derived. These lists were
then sorted by this impact score and compared.
Words in the top 50 of both lists that had shared
translated meaning were selected. Finally, the
word ‘uno’ (ranked 97) was added as the mascu-
line of ‘una’ (ranked 13), the word ‘mia’ (ranked
86) was added as the feminine of ‘mio’ (ranked
44) and the word ‘ed’ (ranked 99) was added as
an additional translation of the English ‘and’.
Table 3 below shows the selected words along
with the proportion of the corpus each repre-
sents.3

2.6 New ‘Universal Weighted
Referential Activity Dictionary’
(UWRAD) regression model.

All types4 in Table 3 were entered into a re-
gression model predicting the RA score for the
Italian training set along with the following dic-
tionaries translated to Italian from English using
Google Translate: SENS, DF, REF, NEG, and
AFFS. All entries that were significant at the
.10 level or better were retained, all others were
dropped. This left ‘and’, ‘to’, ‘he / she’, ‘the’,
‘was’, SENS and NEG in the final model shown
in Table 4.

2.7 New model performance.

Table 5 shows the correlations of the UWRAD
model with judge scored referential activity in
each of the sub-samples of the two corpora.

3The number 50 was an arbitrary choice intended to
include a high proportion of the positive predictors of RA
in both languages.

4She / He was added as a single type all others were
kept separate.

English Proportion Italian Proportion
and 4.3% e 2.7%

ed 0.1%
poi 0.6%

the 3.2% il 1.1%
le 0.6%
gli 0.4%
lo 0.5%
i 0.5%
la 1.6%

a 1.9% un 1.8%
una 1.2%
uno 0.2%

my 0.8% mio 0.5%
mia 0.6%

all 0.3% tutti 0.2%
from 0.2% da 0.6%
to 2.9% a 1.8%

al 0.3%
per 1%

in 1.3% in 1.2%
she 2.1% lei 0.4%
he 1.2% lui 0.5%
they 0.7% sono 1%
me 0.6% mi 1.6%

me 0.5%
there 0.5% là 1.6%

l̀ı 0.2%
was 1.6% era 0.6%

ero 0.2%
had 0.6% aveva 0.2%

avevo 0.2%
22% 24%

Table 3: Predictors of RA with shared translated
meaning. These types were selected by comparing
the top 50 positive predictors of referential activity
in English and Italian from previous computational
models.

As for the UWRAD’s relation to other in-
dices of the referential process, the model cor-
related r(761) = −.38, p < .001 with Reflec-
tion in English and r(934) = −.28, p < .001
in Italian. UWRAD also correlated r(761) =
−.16, p < .001 with Disfluency5 in English and

5Disfluency was modified for this comparison as dis-
cussed above by removing all language specific indicators.

85



Dependent variable:

RA Score

and 8.370∗∗∗

(2.240)

to 6.780∗∗

(2.580)

he / she 6.880†
(3.910)

the 8.470∗∗∗

(2.060)

was 16.300∗∗

(6.120)

Sensory Somatic 6.120∗

(2.430)

Negation −12.900∗∗∗
(2.140)

Constant 4.140∗∗∗

(0.180)

Observations 472
R2 0.197
Adjusted R2 0.185
Residual Std. Error 1.320 (df = 464)
F Statistic 16.200∗∗∗ (df = 7; 464)

Note: † p<.10; ∗p<.05; ∗∗p<.01; ∗∗∗p<.001
Table 4: ‘Universal Weighted Referential Activity’
(UWRAD) model.

r(934) = −.23, p < .001 in Italian. This pat-
tern of correlations, which is typically observed
in studies of the referential process, indicate
that the Arousal, Symbolizing and Reorganiz-
ing phases are distinct from one another6 and
thus provide support for the construct validity

6Correlations of Reflection and Disfluency were
r(761) = −.02, p = .567 and r(934) = .02, p = .571,
suggesting that these dimensions are orthogonal.

Sample Correlation
English (N=736) .43∗∗∗

Training (n=362) .41∗∗∗

Testing (n=209) .44∗∗∗

Validation (n=192) .45∗∗∗

Italian (N=936) .41∗∗∗

Training (n=472) .44∗∗∗

Testing (n=272) .38∗∗∗

Validation (n=192) .36∗∗∗

Note: ∗p<.05; ∗∗p<.01; ∗∗∗p<.001

Table 5: Pearson’s correlations of the ‘Uni-
versal Weighted Referential Activity Dictionary’
(UWRAD) with judge scored RA for all subsets in
English and Italian

of the UWRAD as developed here.

3 Discussion

This study identified a single model comprised
of seven common components that accounted for
13% to 20% of the variance in judges’ scores of
referential activity in two languages. As this
model was able to function in translation be-
tween English and Italian, which have quite
different lexical structures, it holds promise to
translate into other languages as well. Future
research will explore this modeling strategy in
additional languages by comparing the model
identified here to the scoring of referential ac-
tivity by native speakers in similar corpora to
those utilized here. Future research will also test
this model for stability in additional samples of
English and Italian.

While this study shows promise to facilitate
the development of computational models of ref-
erential activity in other languages it also rep-
resents an opportunity to better understand the
construct of referential activity. We believe that
the components identified by this model sup-
port the idea that referential activity represents
the language of scene construction. As evidence,
the model makes use of definite object references
(‘the’) sensate and experience near content (Sen-
sory Somatic), the movement of actors and ob-
jects (‘to’) and orientation in time (‘was’), all of
which are consistent with the detailed descrip-
tion of images and events. A higher density of

86



‘and’ suggests that such texts may be similarly
dense in details and events which require con-
nection to one another in the context of a scene.

The inclusion of the third person singular an-
imate pronouns ‘he’ and ‘she’ is consistent with
an emphasis on concrete immediate experience
with other people as opposed to internal reflec-
tion and consideration which may be more likely
to involve a more reflective or abstract point
of view. Similarly, negations as strong negative
predictors of RA suggest that when speakers are
using high RA language they are not engaged in
reconsideration and qualification involving logi-
cal operations.

Scene construction is consistent with the idea
of the Symbolizing Phase of the referential pro-
cess which suggests that our felt experience is
most effectively conveyed by telling about the
events and images that give rise to a feeling so
that others may become engaged in the event
in their own bodily, sensory and emotional ex-
perience. This basic function is central to com-
municating emotional experience to others, and
to making sense of our own experience. Such
a dimension is necessarily important for under-
standing emotion in interpersonal communica-
tion in clinical contexts such as psychotherapy
and the diagnosis of problems with memory and
emotion, and in non-clinical contexts such as in-
spiration in political speech, clarity in effective
teaching, or connection in interpersonal relation-
ships.

References

Donna Rose Addis, Alana T Wong, and Daniel L
Schacter. 2008. Age-related changes in the
episodic simulation of future events. Psychologi-
cal science, 19(1):33–41, January.

Eva Appelman. 2000. Attachment experiences
transformed into language. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 70(2):192–202.

H Bortfeld, S. D. Leon, J. E. Bloom, M. F. Schober,
and S. E. Brennan. 2001. Disfluency rates in con-
versation: Effects of age, relationship, topic, role,
and gender. Language and Speech, 44(2):123–147,
June.

Wilma Bucci and Bernard Maskit. 2006. A weighted
dictionary for referential activity. In James G.

Shanahan, Yan Qu, and Janyce Wiebe, editors,
Computing attitude and affect in text: Theory and
applications, volume 20 of The Information Re-
trieval Series. Springer-Verlag, Berlin/Heidelberg.

Wilma Bucci and Bernard Maskit. 2007. Beneath
the surface of the therapeutic interaction: the
psychoanalytic method in modern dress. Jour-
nal of the American Psychoanalytic Association,
55(4):1355–1397, December.

Wilma Bucci, R. Kabasakalian-McKay, and The RA
Research Groups. 2004. Scoring Referential Ac-
tivity instructions for use with transcripts of spo-
ken texts.

Wilma Bucci, Bernard Maskit, and Leon Hoffman.
2012. Objective measures of subjective experi-
ence: the use of therapist notes in process-outcome
research. Psychodynamic psychiatry, 40(2):303–
40, June.

Wilma Bucci. 1984. Linking words and things: Ba-
sic processes and individual variation. Cognition,
17(2):137–153, July.

Wilma Bucci. 1997. Psychoanalysis and cognitive
science: A multiple code theory. Guilford Press,
New York, NY, US.

Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Using language. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

A. De Coro and G. Caviglia. 2000. La valutazione
dell’Attivita‘ Referenziale.

Michael Dodd and Wilma Bucci. 1987. The rela-
tionship of cognition and affect in the orientation
process. Cognition, 27(1):53–71, October.

Susanne Ehrman. 1997. Computer measures of the
cycles model: The german version. Ph.D. thesis,
Adelphi University.

Phoebe C Ellsworth and Eddie M W Tong. 2006.
What does it mean to be angry at yourself?
Categories, appraisals, and the problem of lan-
guage. Emotion (Washington, D.C.), 6(4):572–86,
November.

Suzanne Fleischman. 1990. Tense and narrativ-
ity: From medieval performance to modern fiction.
Austin: University of Texas Press.

Polly Fretter, Wilma Bucci, Jessica Broitman,
George Silberschatz, and John Curtis. 1994. How
the Patient’s Plan Relates to the Concept of
Transference. Psychotherapy Research, 4(1):58–
72, January.

Mardi J. Horowitz, Charles Stinson, Deborah Cur-
tis, and Mary Ewert. 1993. Topics and signs: De-
fensive control of emotional expression. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61(3):421–
430.

87



Lisa Jepson and Wilma Bucci. 1999. Object rela-
tions and referential activity in physically abused
adolescents. Adolescence, 34:780–792.

Robert J. Langs, Wilma Bucci, Andrea L. Ud-
off, Gail Cramer, and Lenore Thomson. 1993.
Two methods of assessing unconscious communi-
cation in psychotherapy. Psychoanalytic Psychol-
ogy, 10(1):1–16.

Katie Lewis, Sean Murphy, and Yuko Hanakawa.
2009. Uncovering episodic memory through lin-
guistic measures in schizophrenia. In Poster ses-
sion at the Association for Psychological Science
Annual Convention, San Francisco.

Rachele Mariani, Bernard Maskit, Wilma Bucci, and
Alessandra De Coro. 2013. Linguistic measures
of the referential process in psychodynamic treat-
ment: the English and Italian versions. Psy-
chotherapy research: Journal of the Society for
Psychotherapy Research, 23(4):430–47, January.

Bernard Maskit, Wilma Bucci, and Sean Murphy.
2014. Computer based measures of referential ac-
tivity and their use as measures of episodic mem-
ory.

Bernard Maskit, Wilma Bucci, and Sean Murphy.
2015. A computer program for tracking the evolu-
tion of a psychotherapy treatment. In Computa-
tional Linguistics and Clinical Psychology Work-
shop at NAACL HLT 2015.

Erhard Mergenthaler and Wilma Bucci. 1999. Link-
ing verbal and non-verbal representations: Com-
puter analysis of referential activity. British Jour-
nal of Medical Psychology, 72(3):339–354, Septem-
ber.

Kristin Nelson and Michael Polignano. 2009. Ref-
erential activity in negative episodic ’flashbulb’
memories from patients. In Poster session at
the Association for Psychological Science Annual
Convention, San Francisco, CA.

Kristin L. Nelson, Damian J. Moskovitz, and Hans
Steiner. 2008. Narration and Vividness as
Measures of Event-Specificity in Autobiographi-
cal Memory. Discourse Processes, 45(2):195–209,
March.

Mark B Powers, Jacqueline M Halpern, Michael P
Ferenschak, Seth J Gillihan, and Edna B Foa.
2010. A meta-analytic review of prolonged ex-
posure for posttraumatic stress disorder. Clinical
psychology review, 30(6):635–41, August.

Andres Roussos and Manuela O’Connel. 2005. Con-
strucción de un diccionario ponderado en español
para medir la Actividad Referencial. Revista del
Instituto de Investgaciones de la Facultad de Psi-
coloǵıa / UBA, 10.(2):99–119.

Nicolas Samstag. 1997. A meta-analysis of referen-
tial activity. Dissertation Abstracts International:
Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 57(9-B),
5.

Endel Tulving. 1972. Episodic and semantic mem-
ory. In Organization of memory, volume 1, pages
381–403.

J C Watson. 1996. The relationship between vivid
description, emotional arousal, and in-session res-
olution of problematic reactions. Journal of con-
sulting and clinical psychology, 64:459–464.

88


