



















































Across Languages and Genres: Creating a Universal Annotation Scheme for Textual Relations


Proceedings of LAW IX - The 9th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 168–177,
Denver, Colorado, June 5, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Across Languages and Genres:
Creating a Universal Annotation Scheme for Textual Relations

Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski
Saarland University

Universitat Campus A2.2
66123 Saarbrucken
e.lapshinova

@mx.uni-saarland.de

Anna Nedoluzhko
Charles University in Prague

Malostranske nam. 25,
CZ-11800 Prague 1

nedoluzko
@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Kerstin Anna Kunz
University of Heidelberg

Ploeck 57a
DE-69117 Heidelberg
kerstin.kunz

@iued.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
The present paper describes an attempt to cre-
ate an interoperable scheme using existing an-
notations of textual phenomena across lan-
guages and genres including non-canonical
ones. Such a kind of analysis requires anno-
tated multilingual resources which are costly.
Therefore, we make use of annotations al-
ready available in the resources for English,
German and Czech. As the annotations in
these corpora are based on different con-
ceptual and methodological backgrounds, we
need an interoperable scheme that covers ex-
isting categories and at the same time allows a
comparison of the resources. In this paper, we
describe how this interoperable scheme was
created and which problematic cases we had
to consider. The resulting scheme is supposed
to be applied in the future to explore contrasts
between the three languages under analysis,
for which we expect the greatest differences in
the degree of variation between non-canonical
and canonical language.

1 Aims and Motivation

The aim of the present study is to create a scheme
which will allow us to use existing annotations of
textual phenomena, and which will be applicable
to multiple languages and genres, including non-
canonical ones. The annotations were created within
two separate projects: German-English Contrasts in
Cohesion (GECCo, Lapshinova and Kunz (2014))
whose focus was on English and German on the one
hand, and the Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT
3.0, Bejček et al. (2013)) with the analysis of Czech,
on the other hand.

The resulting scheme will serve our overarching
goal to unify the two approaches in a joint analysis
of contrasts between English, German and Czech on
the level of discourse. We assume that the greatest
differences between these languages lie in the de-
gree of variation between non-canonical and canon-
ical language (here we especially mean spoken lan-
guage). Previous findings on lexico-grammatical
and also cohesive phenomena have evidenced that
there is more variation between written and spo-
ken dimensions in German than in English, even
though they are closely related, cf. Mair (2006)
or Kunz et al. (forthcoming). Studies with respect
to spoken and written Czech (see, e.g., Cvrček et
al. (2010)) suggest that the differences between writ-
ten and spoken language are even more pronounced
in Czech than in German, at least with respect to
lexico-grammar, hence we expect that this also holds
for the level of text/ discourse.

We therefore suggest that if we draw a line of dif-
ferences between spoken and written English, Ger-
man and Czech, we would observe a continuum
in the degree of variation between these languages,
as seen in Figure 1. The graph also reflects the
above assumption that the differences are less pro-
nounced between English and German than if we
compare English and German with Czech. The rea-
sons for this lie in the linguistic heritage of these lan-
guages (English and German have a common West-
Germanic origin while Czech is a Slavic language)
and in sociolinguistic factors that influenced their
evolution (for example, Czech purism at the begin-
ning of the 20th century, described, e.g., in Havránek
and Weingart (1932)). To our knowledge, there is no

168



Figure 1: Differences between spoken and written En-
glish, German and Czech

research testing these assumptions. We believe that
a cross-language analysis based on the interoperable
scheme proposed in this work will help to fill this
gap.

However, this kind of study requires corpora that
are annotated for textual phenomena. As the cre-
ation of such corpora is a time-consuming task, we
decide to take advantage of existing resources, i.e.
corpora, which already contain annotations of these
phenomena. However, while capturing the same
phenomena, the annotations in the corpora at hand
were created in the frame of two different projects
(GECCo and PDT, see Section 2). Moreover, both
existing annotation schemes only account for the
systemic peculiarities and realizational options of
the languages analysed and hence are not general
enough to permit a comparison across Germanic and
Slavic languages. For this reason, we need to unify
the categories in these schemes to create an inter-
operable one which can be applicable to multiple
languages and text registers, including spoken ones.
The scheme will allow us to profit from the exist-
ing annotated resources and at the same time will
enable the contrastive analysis of the languages in-
volved. We believe that the resulting scheme will
find application not only in our research, but also in
further linguistic studies and in cross-language NLP
applications. It is beyond the scope of this paper to
include the contrastive language analysis, which will
follow from the unified scheme in our future work.

2 Theoretical Background

In this section, we describe the frameworks for the
analysis of English, German and Czech. They were
used in the development of the resources at hand
(which are described later in Section 3) and will
serve as a basis for our interoperable scheme.

2.1 Frameworks for the analysis of English and
German

The analysis of textual phenomena in GECCo is
based on the definition of cohesion. The con-
cept was established by Halliday and Hasan (1976)
for English, in the frame of Systemic Functional
Linguistics. It concerns textual relations between
linguistic expressions across grammatical domains.
Additionally, the categories under analysis are based
on the conceptualisations of de Beaugrande and
Dressler (1981), who consider cohesion as an ex-
plicit linguistic signal on the text surface to establish
coherence or textuality. Cohesion always involves a
linguistic trigger (cohesive device) that links up to
other linguistic expressions in the same text. The
main categories used in the analysis include corefer-
ence to create relations of identity, comparative ref-
erence, substitution and ellipsis to create relations of
comparison between referents belonging to the same
type, conjunction for logico-semantic relations be-
tween propositions, and lexical cohesion for similar-
ity between different types of referents. The adapta-
tion of these categories and their subcategories to the
bilingual comparison of English and German have
been described in Kunz et al. (forthcoming). For
coreference, ellipsis and lexical cohesion, not only
cohesive devices were considered, but also the lin-
guistic expressions they tie up with as well as the
cohesive relations. The relations may contain more
than just two linguistic expressions and form cohe-
sive chains that stretch over longer passages of text.

2.2 Framework for the analysis of Czech

In the framework for the analysis of Czech, the fol-
lowing textual phenomena are included: ellipses, in-
formation structure, grammatical and textual coref-
erence, bridging relations (associative anaphora) and
discourse relations. Their definition is based on
Functional Generative Description as described in
Sgall et al. (1986). The approach uses syntactic as
well as semantic criteria for text analysis and con-
siders three layers of text representation: morpho-
logical, analytical and tectogrammatical (deep syn-
tactic). At the tectogrammatical layer, the mean-
ing of the sentence is represented as a dependency
tree structure, in which nodes represent autoseman-
tic words and are labelled with a large set of at-

169



tributes. This layer of representation is especially
important for elliptical constructions, as they are
captured here in reconstructions (Mikulová, 2014).
Besides that, the tectogrammatical layer also covers
information on structural attributes (in terms of con-
textually bound or contextually non-bound nodes).
The approach to textual phenomena exceeding the
sentence boundary is two-fold for the Czech frame-
work. On the one hand, the conception of dis-
course relations is based on the Penn-style discourse
lexically-grounded approach, as described in Prasad
et al. (2008). According to this approach, only
those relations that are signaled by explicit mark-
ers (connectives) are considered as discourse rela-
tions. However, in contrast to the Penn-style ap-
proach, the set of connectives is an open list, see
Poláková et al. (2013), and the treatment of coref-
erence and bridging relations includes both explicit
and implicit categories. Language expressions that
refer to the same discourse entity are considered to
be coreferent. As for bridging relations, their defini-
tion has been taken from Clark (1975).

3 Data and Experiment

As already mentioned in Section 1, we aim to take
advantage of the existing corpora annotated for tex-
tual phenomena to avoid the time-consuming cre-
ation of such resources. The existing German and
English data are annotated with the GECCo frame-
work described in 2.1, whereas the data for Czech
are annotated in the PDT style described in section
2.2 above. The current section provides a brief de-
scription of these resources at hand.

3.1 GECCo - German and English corpora

The GECCo corpus annotated for textual phenom-
ena with the framework described in 2.1 represents
a continuum of different text types (registers in the
sense of Systemic Functional linguistics) from writ-
ten to spoken discourse. More precisely, it includes
English and German texts of ten registers, eight of
which represent written discourse and include fic-
tional texts, political essays, instruction manuals,
popular-scientific texts, letters to shareholders, pre-
pared political speeches, tourism leaflets and texts
from corporate websites. This part contains not
only original texts, but also their translations in both

directions. The registers of spoken discourse in-
clude recorded and transcribed interviews and aca-
demic speeches described in Lapshinova-Koltunski
et al. (2012), as well as transcriptions of television
talkshows, texts from internet forums, medical con-
sultations and sermon texts. The total number of
words contained in the corpus comprises ca. 1,6
Mio (including translations). The corpus is anno-
tated on several levels, which include morpholog-
ical, syntactical, structural and textual information
(i.e. information on cohesion as described above).
The information on the latter was annotated with
the help of semi-automatic procedures described by
Lapshinova-Koltunski and Kunz (2014). These re-
sult from an integration of the systemic peculiarities
of English and German and at the same time account
for textual variation in terms of canonical written
and non-canonical spoken language. The rich anno-
tation allows capturing information about the struc-
tural and syntactic features of cohesive devices (and
also antecedents) and about how they are mapped
onto information structure. Moreover, it yields in-
formation about chain features, e.g. number of el-
ements in chains, distance between chain elements
and number of different chains.

3.2 Prague Dependency Treebanks

There is a number of corpora annotated according
to the Prague annotation scenario described in sec-
tion 2.2 above. These include PDT 3.0 – Prague De-
pendency Treebank (Bejček et al., 2013), PCEDT
2.0 – Prague English Dependency Treebank (Hajič
et al., 2012) and PDTSL – Prague Dependency
Treebank of Spoken Language (Hajič et al., 2009).
All these corpora consist of original texts (Czech
and English respectively) extracted from newspa-
per articles (PDT), Wall Street Journal (PCEDT) and
transcribed and reconstructed spontaneous dialogue
speech in Czech and English. PCEDT 2.0 also con-
tains translations from English into Czech. The to-
tal number of words in written corpora comprises
ca. 3,2 Mio (including translations) and spoken
corpora for English and Czech total ca. 770 thou-
sand tokens. The written corpora are annotated with
morphological, analytical and tectogrammatical in-
formation, whereas each sentence is represented as
a dependency tree structure. The tectogrammati-
cal layer of PDT 3.0 also contains annotation of

170



information structure attributes and the following
discourse phenomena: extended (nominal) textual
coreference, bridging relations, discourse connec-
tives and the discourse units linked by them, and se-
mantic relations between these units, see Poláková
et al. (2013) for details.

3.3 Experiment settings

The creation of an interoperable scheme requires
a comparison of the underlying annotations. We
therefore annotate the same data set on the basis of
both conceptions, and identify those categories that
cover the same phenomena. For this, we have se-
lected texts in English (both originals) belonging to
two different genres – journalism and fiction and an-
notated them in accordance with the guidelines of
the Prague and GECCo conceptions. Journalistic
texts represent written discourse, whereas the fic-
tional texts we selected are closer to spoken lan-
guage and other non-canonical genres, e.g., inter-
net blogs or tweets. They are partially narrative and
partially dialogic, and hence contain turns, but also
reformulations, elaboration and other spoken lan-
guage features. We believe that this data constel-
lation ensures a good base for our future analysis
(aimed at comparison of spoken vs. written dimen-
sions). We decide for texts in English, as English
data is available in both underlying resources, hence
allowing us to unify the annotated categories after-
wards. The journalistic sample contains texts ex-
ported from PCEDT 2.0 (see section 3.2), with a size
of around 100 sentences. A sample of fictional texts
of the same size was exported from the GECCo cor-
pus described in 3.1. For the sake of convenience,
we used different annotation tools for the two differ-
ent frameworks – TrEd (Pajas and Štěpánek, 2008)
for the framework described in 2.2, as it allows
visualisation of trees, and MMAX2 (Müller and
Strube, 2006) for the framework described in 2.1, as
this enables visualisation of longer cohesive chains.
The annotations were carried out manually by four
trained annotators. Then, the parallelly created an-
notations were compared and analysed qualitatively
and quantitatively. The results of this analysis are
presented in section 4 below.

4 Analyses

4.1 Overall comparison
Both GECCo and PDT frameworks include annota-
tions of ellipses, coreference relations and discourse
connectives. The category of lexical cohesion in the
German-English framework (see section 2.1) can be
partially mapped to bridging relations in the Czech
framework (see 2.2), although lexical cohesion is
much more lexically grounded than bridging. Sub-
stitution is the only phenomenon which is asymmet-
ric in the frameworks. It is not covered by the defini-
tion of textual relations in the framework for Czech,
as this device is common for English and (less so)
for German but not relevant at all for Czech. We pro-
vide a mapping of the phenomena available in both
frameworks in Table 1.

GECCo PDT
coreference coreference
lexical cohesion bridging
ellipsis ellipsis

(in dependency trees)
connectives, relations connectives, arguments,

relations
substitution -

Table 1: Mapping of the phenomena

We count the occurrences of these categories in
the experimental dataset and compare absolute num-
bers for both frameworks, see Figure 2. The num-
bers in Figure 2 reveal the preferences for certain
types of relations in the two approaches involved. At
the same time, we are able to observe the similarities
between the types.

Figure 2: Overall annotation statistics

What is most evident from the figure is that the

171



number of discourse relations expressed by con-
nectives1 annotated in both approaches is very sim-
ilar. This is mainly due to the fact that the typol-
ogy of discourse relations of the main categories is
similar in both approaches. Neglecting the termi-
nology, there are four main relations in both ap-
proaches: temporal, causal, adversative and addi-
tive. In GECCo, also modal DSDs are distinguished
(such as well, sure, of course, surely, etc.). They
are especially frequent in spoken genres. How-
ever, they only provide a rather vague link to the
two arguments, as they primarily carry an emotional
meaning. For this particular reason, this type of
textual devices is not included in the PDT frame-
work, where a DSD always requires a clear linkage
of two arguments, and in which the scope of dis-
course arguments is taken into account. If modal
DSDs were substracted, the number of connectives
for the German-English framework would slightly
change. However, it does not change the comparison
considerabely. The other difference observed in the
approach to discourse relations is that, in the Penn-
style, the four main categories are further differen-
tiated into more detailed relations, whereas in the
German-English framework, only the general cate-
gories are considered.

The numbers for the other textual phenomena re-
veal more differences. For example, the frequen-
cies of ellipses and coreference relations annotated
within the PDT framework prevail over those of the
other types. This is justified by the representation of
the phenomena according to the framework: Apart
from textual ellipses (Did she open the door? No,
she did not [open the door]), it also contains var-
ious grammatical types of elliptical constructions,
e.g. structural ellipses (ellipses of governing verbs
and nouns), different kinds of anaphoric zeros (Their
reaction was 0 to do nothing and 0 ride it out), in-
cluding arguments with control constructions (Peter
want to [Peter] sleep), general arguments (Jane sells
at Bata [what] [to whom]), etc. These are recon-
structed on the deep syntactic level. The GECCo
approach is based on signals to textual cohesion, and
therefore, ellipses are annotated only in the case of
textual relations across grammatical domains. Be-

1hereinafter referred to as discourse-structuring devices
(DSDs).

sides, anaphoric zeros are not reconstructed in syn-
tactic structures.

For our contrastive analysis, we will consider
cases of textual ellipsis only, which are expected to
contribute especially to the differences between spo-
ken and written language. We expect textual ellipsis
to be more common in spoken genres, as our previ-
ous analyses for English and German have already
evidenced, cf. Kunz et al. (forthcoming). Example
(1) demonstrates a case of textual ellipsis considered
in both approaches.

(1) He’d never even bothered to read it. But Tru-
man had [].

The difference here lies in the representation of the
missing element. In the GECCo approach, this case
is annotated as verbal ellipsis. The missing parts of
the verbal phrase could either be bothered to read it
or read it. In the PDT approach, the whole verbal
phrase is reconstructed in the dependency tree, see
Figure 3, connected to the antecedents of verbs by
the arrows of grammatical and textual coreference.
Note that this type of ellipsis, where only the opera-
tor is kept (termed as lexical ellipsis by Hallidday &
Hasan (1976)), is available in English, but neither in
German nor Czech.

Figure 3: Ellipsis in the dependency tree representation
(PDT-style)

The differences in the annotations of coreference
are due to the diverging definitions of coreferring ex-
pressions. In GECCo, only the mentions with an ex-
plicit marker, the cohesive device (e.g. definite arti-
cles, pronouns, demonstratives, etc.), are taken into
account. This implies, for instance, that relations be-
tween named entities or between nominal construc-

172



tions in plural which are not introduced by a deter-
miner are excluded from the annotation of corefer-
ence. They are, however, annotated as devices of
lexical cohesion (see below). Moreover, as a cohe-
sive relation to the antecedent is indicated by a co-
hesive device, only this explicit marker is annotated
but not the other elements of the anaphoric nominal
phrase. Hence, if an anaphoric expression consists
of a definite article and a nominal head, the former
is annotated as corerential device and the noun as
lexical cohesion (see the and manuscript in example
(2)). In the PDT approach, both implicit and explicit
relations of coreference are annotated, including in-
definite NPs. In addition, the whole anaphoric ex-
pression is annotated as one coreferential element,
as illustrated in example (2).

(2) Twenty years I have been working on [this
book],” and he leaned over to rap [[the]
[manuscript]] with a thick proprietary fin-
ger,” and you can sit home in Peterskill and
read it when it’s published.

Lexical repetitions (which belong to the level of lex-
ical cohesion in GECCo) are also annotated as coref-
erent if they refer to the same discourse entity.

We assume that the differences in the annotation
of coreference are also related to the contrasts that
we observe for bridging/lexical cohesion, see Fig-
ure 2. Although there is a partial intersection of sets
of the relations, the different conceptions are clearly
seen in the annotations: in lexical cohesion, lexico-
semantic properties of mentions in text are impor-
tant. The semantic relations (e.g., meronymy, hy-
ponymy, synonymy, etc.) assigned to the mentions
are based on the context-free sense relations into
which lexical words or patterns can enter, whereas
their contextual meaning and referential properties
are neglected. By contrast, bridging relations are
based on the information instantiated in the text,
which means that only those conceptual relations are
considered which hold between entities mentioned
in the same discourse. Nevertheless, we noticed that
relations not marked as lexical cohesion are com-
pensated by the annotation of coreference relations
in GECCo, and taken together, they are comparable
to the relations of bridging and coreference in the
PDT framework. For example, repetitions, which

are a subcategory of lexical cohesion, are marked
as coreference relations in the PDT framework (see
above).

Summing up, there are numerous similarities and
overlaps in the categories of textual phenomena
in both approaches, despite of the differences dis-
cussed earlier. This leads us to conclude that tex-
tual phenomena are reflected in both approaches in
a very similar way although they are annotated with
diverging terminology that stems from different the-
oretical backgrounds. The following section (4.2) il-
lustrates in more detail some of the cases which are
especially interesting for a cross-lingual analysis of
spoken and written language.

4.2 Case studies

Coreference and bridging / lexical cohesion The
interplay between coreference and bridging or lex-
ical cohesion is especially interesting if we com-
pare spoken and written genres, as we expect cer-
tain preferences due to contextual settings (short-
time memory, presence of all speech participants in
the communication situation, etc.). In Table 2, we
demonstrate the statistics (numbers are counted for
one journalistic text consisting of 43 sentences) for
coreference chains identified with both annotation
schemes.

GECCo-style PDT-style
coref.chains 23 46
aver.chain length1 3,48 4,20
aver.chain length2 6,25 7,05

Table 2: Annotation statistics for coreference chains

We compare the total number of chains and the
average chain length2 which are higher in the PDT
framework than in the GECCo approach for German
and English. This coincides with the results that we
observed in Section 2 above, as the total number of
coreference elements is much lower in the GECCo
framework.

If we go into detail and analyse the subtypes of
anaphora, we find some fine-grained differences in
the annotation. For example, event anaphora are an-
notated in both frameworks. However, the largest

2aver.chain length1 is used for all chains, whereas
aver.chain length2 indicates statistics for chains containing
more than two elements.

173



scope of the antecedent of this anaphora type is lim-
ited to the extension of a sentence in the tree-based
approach while cohesion-based annotations also in-
clude larger textual antecedents.

The above mentioned (see Section 4.1) overlap
between coreference and bridging can be illustrated
by the example in (3). The relation in (3-a) is cov-
ered by a combination of comparative reference and
lexical cohesion in the GECCo framework, and by
contrastive bridging in the PDT framework. At the
same time, comparative reference also includes such
cases as (3-b) and (3-c), combined with lexical co-
hesion in (3-b) and coreference and lexical cohesion
in (3-c). Both are cases of bridging anaphora and
common textual coreference in the PDT framework.

(3) a. a presentation – a better presentation,
an example – other examples

b. some case – such/similar cases.
c. one hand – the same hand

Another illustration of this overlap can be seen in
(4), where she, her children, her war-damaged hus-
band and their are marked as a bridging relation
(type subset - set) in one approach, whereas she,
her, her and their are annotated as coreference in the
other, their with a split antecedent.

(4) Although [she] was kind and playful to [her]
children, she was dreadful to [her war-
damaged husband]; she openly brought her
lover into [their] home.

The relation between The World War II and that in
(5) shows how coreference signaled by a demonstra-
tive pronoun in the GECCo approach may coincide
with the bridging relation in the PDT approach. In
the latter, an explicit anaphor is marked as signalling
a bridging and not a coreference relation since it is
not entirely clear whether the event (The World War
II in (5)) is identical with that time.

(5) [The World War II] remained one of the most
tragic events in the history. But at [[that]
time] nobody thought about it.

A minor difference between the approaches can be
found within the field of event anaphora annotation.
In the PDT approach, an antecedent can be explic-
itly annotated only when it is not longer than one

sentence. In the GECCo approach, the scope of the
antecedent is annotated independently of the size of
the antecedent.

Discourse relations As already mentioned above,
the greatest similarities between the two approaches
were observed in terms of the total number of iden-
tified discourse relations in both schemes. The dif-
ferences are discovered here on the level of types of
relations involved. For example, the connective and
in (6) is assigned a reason-result relation in the PDT
framework, while the GECCo framework considers
it as an additive conjunction.

(6) William Gates and Paul Allen in 1975 devel-
oped an early language-housekeeper system
for PCs, [and] Gates became an industry bil-
lionaire six years after IBM adapted one of
these versions in 1981.

In Table 3, we demonstrate the number of re-
lations identified per approach and per text genre,
as we suppose that the detected differences can be
genre-sensitive.

GECCo-style PDT-style
journ. fict. journ. fict.

temporal 6 11 5 5
contin./caus. 9 6 19 4
comp./adver. 16 10 15 17
expan./addit. 22 24 19 22
modal 7 4 - -

Table 3: Annotation statistics for discourse connectives

For instance, both frameworks identify approxi-
mately the same number of temporal relations in the
journalistic texts. Yet, deviating numbers for this re-
lation are obtained for the fictional texts. The same
tendency is observed for relations of contrast (adver-
sative). In case of contingency or causal relations,
the situation is different: the number of relations co-
incide here for fiction rather than journalism.

5 Resulting Scheme and Discussion

Summarising all the cases analysed in the data
that were annotated with both frameworks, we cre-
ate an intersection scheme, covering all overlap-
ping categories. This scheme is illustrated in Ta-
ble 4. The main categories here are labelled as

174



IDENTITY, NON-IDENTITY, ELLIPSIS and DIS-
COURSE RELATIONS. These general categories
also include subclasses on a more fine-grained level,
e.g. METONYMY or CONTRAST, which can be
derived from the existing annotation. For the time
being, we exclude the categories without correspon-
dence, i.e. which exist in one approach but not in the
other.

As can be seen from the table, the annotation
schemes based on both frameworks can be merged
even though there are differences in the terminology
used for specific features, in the level of granularity
and in the method of annotation.

However, without the categories we had to ex-
clude because there was no correspondence between
the two approaches, we cannot cover all the cases of
textual phenomena. For instance, modal discourse
markers, which are especially important for spo-
ken genres cannot be captured by our interoperable
scheme for the time being.

One of the main reasons for the incompatibility of
the excluded categories lies in the nature of the phe-
nomenon itself: the GECCo approach takes a lin-
guistic signal into account, while the PDT frame-
work includes a more abstract level of coherence.
This is especially reflected in the relations of IDEN-
TITY which are not marked by a referring item, e.g.
definite article, pronoun, etc. In turn, the GECCo
framework captures more semantic relations, e.g.
hyponomy, synonymy, etc. that are purely based on
sense relations and not on relations between instan-
tiated referents, thus allowing a more fine-grained
view on the thematic progression in a text, see Fig-
ure 4.

As already stated above, the conceptual dissim-
ilarities discovered in this study seem to result, at
least partially, from the systemic differences be-
tween Germanic and Slavic languages with respect
to the language devices available for expressing tex-
tual phenomena. For instance, English uses a very
closed class of explicit markers for establishing a
relation of comparison, labeled as substitution (the
shirt – the red one). German is more heterogeneous
with respect to the linguistic items available, while
Czech has no corresponding structures and makes
use of ellipsis instead. We expect that these differ-
ences will be even more apparent when integrating
the analysis of non-canonical spoken varieties into

our trilingual study.
Our future work will include the application of the

resulting scheme to our contrastive analysis of natu-
rally occurring texts of English, German and Czech.
We are particularly interested in comparing the tex-
tual phenomena realized in texts with plain written
style with those occurring in non-canonical texts that
are produced spontaneously, with a high degree of
interaction between varying numbers of speech par-
ticipants, such as talkshows or private conversation.
Moreover, we intend to investigate language produc-
tion in between spoken and written, such as forums,
blogs or interviews. We expect that the most signif-
icant differences between languages and genres are
tied to varying contextual configurations of mode,
e.g. number of speech participants, private vs. pub-
lic conversation, time laps between production and
reception). They may be reflected in textual phe-
nomena with respect to their overall number, the de-
gree of explicitness, as well as the type of textual
categories that are preferred. Moreover, we intend
to examine variation in the degree of dependence of
these textual phenomena on lexicogrammatical con-
straints or pragmatic peculiarities. The scheme de-
veloped in this paper is a first step towards unifying
different frameworks that result from separate analy-
ses of Germanic languages and a Slavic language. It
therefore reflects a level of generalisation that is ap-
plicable to trilingual analysis, which will, however,
be broken into more delicate subcategories to permit
an identification of fine-grained contrasts.

6 Acknowledgement

This work was made possible by a grant on
Short Term Scientific Missions received within the
Textlink Action (ISCH COST Action IS1312)3. We
also acknowledge support from the Grant Agency
of the Czech Republic (grant P406/12/0658). This
work has been using language resources developed
and stored and distributed by the LINDAT/CLARIN
project of the Ministry of Education, Youth and
Sports of the Czech Republic (project LM2010013).
The project GECCo has been supported through a
grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(German Research Society).

3http://textlinkcost.wix.com/textlink

175



Czech framework German-English framework
coreference with pronouns coreference with pers. and demo. heads

(except extended reference)
pronouns with arrows to segments and
events

extended reference

IDENTITY NP coreference coreference with pers./ dem. modifiers or
def.art.+hyperonymy/ repetition/ synonymy

coreference of NEs repetitions of named entities
coreference with the word same comp.reference with the word same
coreference with demonstrative local and
temporal adverbs (tam, tehdy)

coreference with demonstrative local and
temporal adverbs

contextual relations of MERONYMY be-
tween lexical items

contextual relations of MERONYMY be-
tween lexical items

NON-IDENTITY bridging CONTRAST with comparative
adjective

comparative reference excluding cases with
the word same

bridging CONTRAST without comparative
adjective

antonyms in lex.coh

temporal temporal
DISCOURSE contingency causal
RELATIONS comparison (contrast) adversative

expansion additive
ELLIPSIS textual ellipsis (nominal, verbal, clausal) cohesive ellipsis (nominal, verbal, clausal)

Table 4: Categories for the language- and genre-insensitive scheme

Figure 4: Coreferential and lexical relations in both approaches

References
Robert-Alain de Beaugrande and Wolfgang Ulrich

Dressler. 1981. Einführung in die Textlinguistik.
Niemeyer, Tübingen.

Eduard Bejček, Eva Hajičová, Jan Hajič, Pavlı́na
Jı́nová, Václava Kettnerová, Veronika Kolářová, Marie
Mikulová, Jiřı́ Mı́rovský, Anna Nedoluzhko, Jarmila
Panevová, Lucie Poláková, Magda Ševčı́ková, Jan
Štěpánek, and Šárka Zikánová. 2013. Prague depen-
dency treebank 3.0.

Herbert H. Clark. 1975. Bridging. In Theoretical Issues
in Natural Language Processing, pages 169–174.

Václav Cvrček, Vileém Kodýtek, Marie Kopivová, Do-
minika Kovářı́ková, Petr Sgall, Michal Šulc, Jan
Táborský, Jan Volı́n, and Martina Waclawičová. 2010.
Mluvnice současné češtiny/Grammar of Contempo-
rary Czech/. Karolinum, Prague.

Jan Hajič, Petr Pajas, David Mareček, Marie Mikulová,
Zdeňka Urešová, and Petr Podveský. 2009. Prague

dependency treebank of spoken language (PDTSL)
0.5.

Jan Hajič, Eva Hajičová, Jarmila Panevová, Petr Sgall,
Ondřej Bojar, Silvie Cinková, Eva Fučı́ková, Marie
Mikulová, Petr Pajas, Jan Popelka, Jiřı́ Semecký,
Jana Šindlerová, Jan Štěpánek, Josef Toman, Zdeka
Urešová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. 2012. Announc-
ing Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank 2.0.
In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012), Is-
tanbul, Turkey. European Language Resources Associ-
ation.

M.A.K. Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. Cohesion in
English. Longman, London, New York.

Bohuslav Havránek and Miloš Weingart. 1932. Spisovná
čeština a jazyková kultura / Standard Czech and lan-
guage culture. Melantrich, Prague.

Kerstin Kunz, Stefania Degaetano-Ortlieb, Ekaterina
Lapshinova-Koltunski, Katrin Menzel, and Erich

176



Steiner. forthcoming. Gecco – an empirically-
based comparison of english-german cohesion. In
G. De Sutter, I. Delaere, and M.-A. Lefer, edi-
tors, New Ways of Analysing Translational Behaviour
in Corpus-Based Translation Studies. Mouton de
Gruyter. TILSM series.

Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski and Kerstin Kunz.
2014. Annotating cohesion for multillingual analysis.
In Proceedings of the 10th Joint ACL - ISO Workshop
on Interoperable Semantic Annotation, Reykjavik, Ice-
land, May. LREC.

Ekaterina Lapshinova-Koltunski, Kerstin Kunz, and Mar-
ilisa Amoia. 2012. Compiling a multilingual spo-
ken corpus. In Tommaso Raso Heliana Mello, Mas-
simo Pettorino, editor, Proceedings of the VIIth GSCP
International Conference: Speech and corpora, pages
79–84, Firenze. Firenze University Press.

Christian Mair. 2006. Twentieth-Century English: His-
tory, Variation and Standardization. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge.

Marie Mikulová. 2014. Semantic representation of el-
lipsis in the prague dependency treebanks. In Pro-
ceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics and Speech Processing ROCLING
XXVI (2014), pages 125–138, Taipei, Taiwan. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics and Chinese Lan-
guage Processing (ACLCLP), Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing
(ACLCLP).

Christoph Müller and Michael Strube. 2006. Multi-level
annotation of linguistic data with MMAX2. In Sabine
Braun, Kurt Kohn, and Joybrato Mukherjee, editors,
Corpus Technology and Language Pedagogy: New Re-
sources, New Tools, New Methods, pages 197–214. Pe-
ter Lang, Frankfurt a.M., Germany.

Petr Pajas and Jan Štěpánek. 2008. Recent advances in
a feature-rich framework for treebank annotation. In
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 673–680, Manch-
ester, UK. Coling-2008 Organizing Committee.

Lucie Poláková, Jiřı́ Mı́rovský, Anna Nedoluzhko,
Pavlı́na Jı́nová, Šárka Zikánová, and Eva Hajičová.
2013. Introducing the prague discourse treebank 1.0.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing, pages 91–
99, Nagoya, Japan. Asian Federation of Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Asian Federation of Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

Rashmi Prasad, Nikhil Dinesh, Alan Lee, Eleni Milt-
sakaki, Livio Robaldo, Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie
Webber. 2008. The penn discourse treebank 2.0. In
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008),

pages 2961–2968, Marrakech, Morocco. European
Language Resources Association.

Petr Sgall, Eva Hajicova, and Jarmila Panevovǎ. 1986.
The meaning of the sentence in its semantic and prag-
matic aspects. Reidel, Dordrecht.

177


