




































Determining the Most Frequent Senses Using
Russian Linguistic Ontology RuThes

Natalia Loukachevitch
Lomonosov Moscow State University

Moscow, Russia
louk_nat@mail.ru

Ilia Chetviorkin
Lomonosov Moscow State University

Moscow, Russia
Ilia2010@yandex.ru

Abstract

The paper describes a supervised 
approach for the detection of the most 
frequent senses of words on the basis of 
RuThes thesaurus, which is a large 
linguistic ontology for Russian. Due to 
the large number of monosemous 
multiword expressions and the set of 
RuThes relations it is possible to 
calculate several context features for 
ambiguous words and to study their 
contribution to a supervised model for 
detecting frequent senses.

1 Introduction

The most frequent sense (MFS) is a useful 
heuristic in lexical sense disambiguation when 
the training or context data are insufficient. In 
sense-disambiguation (WSD) evaluations the 
first sense labeling is presented as an important 
baseline (Agirre et al., 2007), which is difficult 
to overcome for many WSD systems (Navigli, 
2009).

Usually MFS is calculated on the basis of a 
large sense-tagged corpus such as SemCor, 
which is labeled with WordNet senses (Landes et 
al., 1998). However, the creation of such corpora 
is a very labor-consuming task. Besides 
Princeton WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), only for 
several other national wordnets such corpora are 
labeled (Perolito and Bond, 2014). In addition, 
the MFS of a given word may vary according to 
the domain, therefore the automatic processing 
of documents in a specific domain can require re-
estimation of MFS on the domain-specific text 
collection. The distributions of lexical senses 
also can depend on time (Mitra et al., 2014).

Therefore automatic calculation of the most 
frequent sense is studied in several works 
(Mohammad and Hirst, 2006; McCarthy et al., 

2004; McCarthy et al., 2007). One of the 
prominent approaches in this task is to use 
distributional vectors to compare contexts of an 
ambiguous word with sense-related words 
(Koeling et al., 2005; McCarthy et al., 2007). In  
such experiments mainly WordNet-like resources 
are studied. In (Mohammad,  Hirst, 2006), the 
Macquarie Thesaurus serves as a basis for the 
predominant sense identification.

In this paper we present our experiments 
demonstrating how unambiguous multiword 
expressions can help to reveal the most frequent 
sense if they are allowed to be included in a 
thesaurus. The experiments are based on newly-
published Thesaurus of Russian language 
RuThes-lite, which has been developed since 
1994 and was applied in a number of tasks of 
natural language processing and information 
retrieval (Loukachevitch and Dobrov, 2014). 

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2
compares our study with related works. In 
Section 3, we describe the main principles of 
RuThes-lite linguistic ontology construction. 
Section 4 is devoted to the manual analysis of  
the distribution of word senses described in 
RuThes, which is performed on the basis of 
Russian news flow provided by Yandex news 
service. Section 5 describes the experiments on 
supervised prediction of the most frequent sense 
of an ambiguous word.

2 Related Work

It was found in various studies that the most 
frequent sense is a strong baseline for many NLP 
tasks. For instance, only 5 systems of the 26 
submitted to the Senseval-3 English all words 
task outperformed the reported 62.5% MFS 
baseline (Snyder and Palmer, 2004).

However, it is very difficult to create sense-
labeled corpora to determine MFS, therefore 
techniques for automatic MFS revealing were 
proposed. McCarthy et al. (2004, 2007) describe

Natalia Loukachevitch and Ilia Chetviorkin 2015. Determining the most frequent senses using Russian lin-

guistic ontology RuThes. Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for

Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015. NEALT Proceedings Series

27 / Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings 112: 21–27.

21



an automatic technique for ranking word senses 
on the basis of comparison of a given word with 
distributionally similar words. The distributional 
similarity is calculated using syntactic (or linear) 
contexts and the automatic thesaurus 
construction method described in (Lin, 1998).
WordNet similarity measures are used to 
compare the word senses and distributional 
neighbors. McCarthy et al. (2007) report that 
56.3% of noun SemCor MFS (random baseline –
32%), 45.6% verb MFS (random baseline –
27.1%) were correctly identified with the 
proposed technique.

In (Koeling et al., 2005) the problem of 
domain specific sense distributions is studied. 
They form samples of ambiguous words having a 
sense in one of two domains: SPORTS and 
FINANCE. To obtain the distribution of senses 
for chosen words, the random sentences 
mentioning the target words in domain-specific 
text collections are extracted and annotated.

Lau et al. (2014) propose to use topic models 
for identification of the predominant sense. They 
train a single topic model per target lemma. To 
compute the similarity between a sense and a 
topic, glosses are converted into a multinomial 
distribution over words, and then the Jensen –
Shannon divergence between the multinomial 
distribution of the gloss and the topic is 
calculated.

Mohammad and Hirst (2006) describe an 
approach for acquiring predominant senses from 
corpora on the basis of the category information 
in the Macquarie Thesaurus.

A separate direction in WSD research is  
automatic extraction of  contexts for ambiguous 
words based on so called "monosemous 
relatives" (Leacock et al., 1998;  Agirre and 
Lacalle, 2004; Mihalcea 2002)  that are related 
words having only a unique sense. It was 
supposed that extracted sentences mentioning 
monosemous relatives are useful for lexical 
disambiguation. These approaches at first 
determine monosemous related words for a given 
ambiguous word, then extract contexts where the 
relatives were mentioned, and use these contexts
as automatically annotated data to train WSD 
classifiers.

In our case we use monosemous relatives in
another way: to determine the most frequent 
senses of ambiguous words. We conduct our 
research for Russian and this is the first study on 
MFS prediction for Russian.

3 RuThes Linguistic Ontology

One of the popular resources used for natural 
language processing and information-retrieval 
applications is WordNet thesaurus (Fellbaum, 
1998). Several WordNet-like projects were also 
initiated for Russian (Balkova et al., 2008; 
Azarowa, 2008; Braslavski et al. 2013). However,
at present there is no large enough and 
qualitative Russian wordnet. But another large 
resource for natural language processing –
RuThes thesaurus, having some other principles 
of its construction, has been created and 
published. The first publicly available version of 
RuThes (RuThes-lite) contains 96,800  unique 
words and expressions and is available from 
http://www.labinform.ru/ruthes/index.htm.

RuThes Thesaurus of Russian language is a 
linguistic ontology for natural language 
processing, i.e. an ontology, where the majority 
of concepts are introduced on the basis of actual 
language expressions. RuThes is a hierarchical 
network of concepts. Each concept has a name, 
relations with other concepts, a set of language 
expressions (words, phrases, terms) whose 
senses correspond to the concept, so called
ontological synonyms. 

Ontological synonyms of a concept can 
comprise words belonging to different parts of 
speech (stabilization, stabilize, stabilized); 
language expressions relating to different 
linguistic styles, genres; idioms and even free 
multiword expressions (for example, 
synonymous to single words).

So a row of ontological synonyms can include 
quite a large number of words and phrases. For 
instance, the concept がばぷぎゑぞだぎ
でどづんがんぞごぎ (wound in the soul) has more than 
20 text entries (several English translations may 
be as follows: wound, emotional wound, pain in 
the soul etc.).

Besides, in RuThes introduction of concepts 
based on multiword expressions is not restricted 
and even encouraged if this concept adds some 
new information to knowledge described in 
RuThes. For example, a concept such as 
げんでぞばどЬ げん づばずぎぜ  (falling asleep at the 
wheel) is introduced because it denotes a specific 
important situation in road traffic, has an 
"interesting" text entry £íïÖÜöá çÜ çëñ½я
Ñçó¢ñÖóя (falling asleep while driving). Also,
this concept has an "interesting" relation to 
concept がだづだぐぞだ-どづんぞでぢだづどぞだぎ
ぢづだごでぷぎでどゑごぎ (road accident)
(Loukachevitch and Dobrov, 2014).  The word 

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

22



"interesting" means here that the synonym and 
the relation do not follow from the  component 
structure of phrase £íïÖÜöá £í ëÜ¿ñ½.

Thus, RuThes principles of construction give 
the possibility to introduce more multiword 
expressions in comparison with WordNet-like
resources.

An ambiguous word is assigned to several 
concepts – this is the same approach as in 
WordNet. For example, the Russian word 
¡íëöóÖí (picture) has 6 senses in RuThes and
attributed to 6 concepts. ぱごずЬぜ (moving picture)

 ぢづだごげゑぎがぎぞごぎ ぐごゑだぢごでご (piece
of painting)

 とんづどごぞん (だぢごでんぞごぎ) (picture as 
description)

 とんづどごぞん でぢぎとどんとずé (scene as a 
part  of a play)

 げづぎずごべぎ (ゑごが)  (sight, view)
 とんづどごぞん ぢだずだぐぎぞごé, 

でだでどだéぞごé (picture as general
circumstances)

The relations in RuThes are only conceptual, 
not lexical (in contrast to antonyms or 
derivational links in wordnets). The main idea 
behind the RuThes set of conceptual relations is 
to describe the most essential, reliable relations 
of concepts, which are relevant to various 
contexts of concept mentioning. The set of 
conceptual relations includes the class-subclass 
relation, the part-whole relation, the external 
ontological dependence, and the symmetric 
association (Loukachevitch and Dobrov, 2014).

Thus, RuThes has considerable similarities 
with WordNet including concepts based on 
senses of real text units, representation of lexical 
senses, detailed coverage of word senses. At the 
same time, the differences include attribution of 
different parts of speech to the same concepts, 
formulating names of concepts, attention to 
multiword expressions, a set of conceptual 
relations. A more detailed description of RuThes 
and RuThes-based applications can be found in 
(Loukachevitch and Dobrov, 2014).

4 Manual Analysis of Sense 
Distribution

To check the coverage of lexical senses
described in RuThes we decided to verify their 
usage in a text collection. At this moment we do 

not have the possibility to create a sense-tagged 
corpus based on RuThes senses. In addition, as it 
was indicated in (Petrolito and Bond, 2014), in 
sense-labeling most time and efforts are spent on 
adding new word senses to a source resource. 
Another problem of a sense-labeled corpus is 
that it fixes the described sets of senses, and it is 
impossible to automatically update them for a 
new version of a thesaurus.

To verify the coverage of lexical senses 
described in RuThes, the most important issue is 
to check that at least frequent senses have been 
already described. With this aim, it is not 
necessary to label all senses of a word in a large 
text collection, it is enough to check out senses in 
a randomly selected sample of word usages in 
contemporary texts as it was made in (Koeling, 
2005). In addition, from this analysis we obtain 
manual estimation of MFS.

We decided to check RuThes senses on news 
texts and articles through Yandex news service1.
We based our evaluation on a news collection 
because news reports and articles are one of the 
most popular documents for natural language 
processing, such as categorization, clustering, 
information extraction, sentiment analysis. 
Besides, the news collection comprises a lot of 
other text genres as legal regulations or literature 
pieces. Finally, this collection contains recently 
appeared senses, which can be absent in any 
fixed collection such as, for example, Russian 
national corpus (Grishina and Rakhilina, 2005)
and dictionaries.

Yandex.news service collects news from more 
than 4,000 sources (including main Russian 
Newspapers), receiving more than 100,000 news 
articles during a day. The news flow from 
different sources is automatically clustered into 
sets of similar news. When searching in the 
service, retrieval results are also clustered. 
Usually three sentences from the cluster
documents (snippets) are shown to the user.

For a given ambiguous word, linguists
analyzed snippets in Yandex news service, which 
returns the most recent news reports and 
newspaper articles containing the word.
Considering several dozens of different usages of 
the word in news, the linguists estimated the 
distribution of senses of the word, which later
would allow defining the most frequent sense of 
the word. In news snippets, repetitions of the 

                                                          

1 http://news.yandex.ru/

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

23



same sentences can be frequently met – such 
repetitions were dismissed from the analysis.
Table 1 presents the results of the analysis for 
Russian ambiguous words äëÜçñïöó (provesti),
¡íëöóÖí (kartina), and ïöëñ¿¡í (strelka). The 
sense distributions for these three words have
quite different behavior. Word äëÜçñïöó has a 
single predominant sense; word ¡íëöóÖí has
two main senses with approximately similar 
frequencies. Word ïöëñ¿¡í has three enough 
frequent senses.

Because of insufficient amount of data under 
consideration, the experts could designate several 
senses as the most frequent ones if they saw that 
the difference in the frequencies does not allow 
them to decide what a sense is more frequent. 
For example, for word ¡íëöóÖí two main senses 
were revealed: ぱごずЬぜ (moving picture) and
ぢづだごげゑぎがぎぞごぎ ぐごゑだぢごでご (piece of 
painting) (Table 1).

Word Name of concept 
corresponding to 
senses of the word

Number 
of 
contexts

ぢëÜçñïöó
(provesti)

9 senses

ぢづだゑぎでどご, 
だづゎんぞごげだゑんどЬ, 
ばでどづだごどЬ
(organize)

19

ぢづだずだぐごどЬ 
ずごぞごù, ぢばどЬ
(build road, pipe)

1

とíëöóÖí
(kartina)

6 senses

ぢづだごげゑぎがぎぞごぎ 
ぐごゑだぢごでご (piece
of painting)

10

ぱごずЬぜ (moving 
picture)

10

でöëñ¿¡í
(strelka)

7 senses

でどづぎずとん づぎと
(river spit)

8

でどづぎずとん ぢづごゐだづん
(pointer of the 
device)

6

げぞんと でどづぎずとご
(arrow sign)

4

ぐぎずぎげぞだがだづだぐ-
ぞんé でどづぎずとん 
(railroad point)

1

でどづぎずとん ぞん ぶんでんび
(clock hand)

1

Table 1. Sense distribution of several Russian 
ambiguous words in the news flow (20 different 
contexts  in current news flow were analyzed)

In total, around 3,000 ambiguous words with 
three or more senses described in RuThes 

(11,450 senses altogether) were analyzed in such 
a manner. As a result of such work, about 650 
senses (5.7%) were added or corrected. So the 
coverage of senses in RuThes was enough 
qualitative and improved after the analysis.

Certainly, the distribution of word senses in 
news service search results can be quite 
dependent on the current news flow; in addition, 
the subjectivity of individual expertise can 
appear. Therefore for 400 words the secondary 
labeling was implemented, which allows us to 
estimate inter-annotator (and inter-time) 
agreement. 200 words from these words had 
three senses described in RuThes, other 200 
words had four and more described senses.

The table 2 demonstrates that for 88% of the 
words, experts agreed or partially agreed on MFS 
for the analyzed words (Kappa=0.83). The partial 
agreement means in this case that experts agreed 
on prominent frequency of at least one sense of a 
word and indicated other different senses as also 
prominent. For example, for word ¡íëöóÖí, the 
first expert indicated two main senses (moving 
picture and piece of painting) with equal 
frequencies. The second expert revealed that the 
piece of painting sense is much more frequent 
than other senses. Therefore we have here partial 
agreement between experts and suppose that the 
most frequent sense of a word is the piece of 
painting sense.

Number of words analyzed by two 
experts

400

Number of words for that
experts agreed on MFS

216

Number of words for that 
experts partially agreed on MFS

125

Number of words for that 
experts did not agreed on MFS

49

Table 2. The agreement in manual estimation of the 
most frequent senses for ambiguous words described 
in RuThes.

5 Supervised Estimation of Most 
Frequent Sense

The described in the previous section expert 
annotation of the most frequent senses was 
performed only for ambiguous words with three 
or more senses described in RuThes. Besides,
RuThes contains about 6,500 words with two
senses, which were not analyzed manually. In 
addition, MFS can vary in different domains;
natural language processing of documents in a 

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

24



specific domain can require re-estimation of 
MFS on the domain collection.

Therefore we propose a method for supervised 
estimation of MFS based on several features 
calculated on the basis of a target text collection. 
To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to 
apply a supervised approach to MFS estimation. 
In addition, in contrast to previous works our 
method of MFS estimation is essentially based 
on unambiguous text entries of RuThes, 
especially on multiword expressions, which were 
carefully collected from many sources.

The automatic estimation of the most frequent 
sense was performed on a news collection of two
million documents. Computing features for the 
supervised method we used several context types 
of a word: the same sentence context, the 
neighbor sentence context, full document context.

From the thesaurus, we utilize several types of 
conceptual contexts of an ambiguous word w:

 one-step context of word w attached to
concept C (ThesConw1) that comprises 
other words and expressions attached to 
the same concept C and concepts directly 
related to C as described in the thesaurus;

 two and three-step contexts of word w
attached to C (ThesConw2(3)) comprising 
words and expressions from the concepts 
located at the distance of maximum 2 (3)
relations to the initial concept C (including 
C); the path between concepts can consist 
of relations of any types,

 one-step thesaurus context including 
only unambiguous words and expressions: 

UniThesConw1 .

From these text and thesaurus contexts we 
generate the following features for ambiguous 
word w and its senses Cw:

 the overall collection frequency of 
expressions from UniThesConw1 – here we 
estimate how often unambiguous relatives
of w were met in the collection – Freqdoc1
and logarithm of this value logFreqdoc,
Table 3 depicts frequencies of 
monosemous relatives of word ¡íëöóÖí
in the source collection,

 the frequency of expressions from 
UniThesConw1 in texts where w was 
mentioned – FreqdocW1,

 the overall frequency and the maximum 
frequency of words and expressions from 
ThesConwi co-occurred with w in the same 
sentences – FreqSentWmaxi and 
FreqSentWsumi (i=1, 2, 3),

 the overall frequency and the maximum 
frequency of words and expressions from 
ThesConwi occurred in the neighbor 
sentences with w – FreqNearWmaxi and 
FreqNearWsumi ((i=1, 2, 3).

All real-valued features are normalized by 
dividing them by their maximal value. 

Monosemous 
relatives of word 
¡íëöóÖí

sense of 

¡íëöóÖí

document 
frequency

ぱó¿á½ (film) moving
picture

45285

½Ü¿áöâó¿á½
(cartoon)

moving

picture

4097

ÑÜ¡Ü½ñÖöí¿áÖ▲ú 
âó¿á½ 
(documentary film)

moving

picture

3516

¢óçÜäóïá 
(painting)

piece of

painting

3200

ïéñ½¡í âó¿á½í 
(shooting a film)

moving

picture

2445

¡óÖÜâó¿á½ (mШЯТО) moving
picture

1955

äëÜó£çñÑñÖóñ 
óï¡Üïïöçí (Кrt 
work)

piece of

painting

1850

êÜÑÜ¢ñïöçñÖÖ▲ú 
âó¿á½ (ПТМtТШЧ 
movie)

moving

picture

1391

ó£Üßëí£óöñ¿áÖÜñ 
óï¡ÜïïöçÜ (ЯТsЮКХ 
art)

piece of
painting

1102

ëñ¢óïïñë 
¡íëöóÖ▲ (director 
of the movie)

moving
picture

978

Üßàíя ¡íëöóÖí 
(general picture)

general

circums-

tances

932

Table 3. Document frequencies of monosemous 
relatives of word ¡íëöóÖí in the source collection of 

2 mln. documents

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

25



We conduct our experiments on two sets of 
ambiguous words with three or more senses. The 
first set (Set1) consists of 330 words of 400 
words that were analyzed by two linguists. They 
agreed with each other on one or two the most 
frequent senses. We used this set to train 
machine learning models. We apply the trained 
model to the second set of ambiguous words –
2532 words (Set2), for which only one expert 
provided MFS. Both sets include words of three 
parts of speech: nouns, verbs and adjectives.

The Table 4 presents accuracy results of MFS 
detection for single features. One can see that 
many single features provide a quite high level of 
accuracy.

Feature Accuracy
Freqdoc1 42.4%
FreqdocW1 46.4%
FreqSentWsum1 41.2%
FreqSentWmax1 43.3%
FreqSentWsum2 48.2%
FreqSentWmax2 48.2%
FreqSentWsum3 47.0%
FreqSentWmax3 47.6%
FreqNearWsum1 43.0%
FreqNearWmax1 44.2%
FreqNearWsum2 39.7%
FreqNearWmax2 46.7%
FreqNearWsum3 38.8%
FreqNearWmax3 43.3%
Supervised algorithm 50.6%
Random 23.5%

Table 4. Accuracy of MFS prediction for single 
features and the supervised algorithm for Set1

To combine the features regression-oriented 
methods implemented in WEKA machine 
learning package were utilized. The best quality 
of classification using labelled data was shown 
by the ensemble of three classifiers: Logistic 
Regression, LogitBoost and Random Forest. 
Every classifier ranged word senses according to 
probability of this sense to be the most frequent 
one. We averaged probabilities of MFS 
generated by these methods. We obtained 50.6% 
accuracy of MFS prediction, the random baseline 
for this set is very low – 23.5% (Table 4). Our 
estimation is based on ten-fold cross validation.

To check the robustness of the obtained 
supervised model we applied it to the Set2. Table 
5 describes the accuracy results for the best 
single features and the supervised method. The 
average level of results is higher than on the Set1, 

because Set2 contains the larger share of 3-sense 
words.

Feature Accuracy
FreqSentWsum1 53.7%
FreqSentWsum2 57.4%
FreqSentWmax2 53.7%
FreqSentWsum3 54.6%
FreqNearWsum2 53.7%
Supervised algorithm 
trained on Set1

57.8%

Random 33.4%

Table 5. Accuracy of MFS prediction for words from 
Set2 including accuracy of the best single features and 
accuracy of the supervised algorithm trained on Set1

We can see that simple context features give 
the accuracy results comparable with those 
described in (McCarthy et al., 2004; McCarthy et 
al., 2007), which have similar levels of random 
baselines (see Section 2). At this moment 
machine-learning combination of features did not 
demonstrate the significant growth in accuracy 
but the machine-learning framework allows
adding distributional features utilized in the 
above-mentioned works.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we describe a supervised 
approach to detecting the most frequent senses of 
ambiguous words on the basis of thesaurus of 
Russian language RuThes. The approach is based 
on monosemous relatives of ambiguous words, 
in particular multiword expressions, described in 
RuThes. To check the proposed approach two 
linguists manually estimated the most frequent 
senses for 3,000 ambiguous words described in 
RuThes with three or more senses.

Our approach demonstrates its quality, which 
is quite comparable to the state-of-art 
distributional approaches, but our approach is 
based on simpler context features.

We found that some simple features (such as  
frequency of 2-step monosemous relatives of a  
word in sentences with this word –
FreqSentWsum2) provide high level of prediction 
of the most frequent sense. 

We believe that in combination with other
distributional features of words proposed in 
previous works it is possible to achieve better
results in future experiments on MFS prediction. 

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

26



Acknowledgments

This work is partially supported by Russian 
Foundation for Humanities grant N15-04-12017.

References 

Eneko Agirre, and Oier Lopez De Lacalle. 2004. 
Publicly Available Topic Signatures for all 
WordNet Nominal Senses. Proceedings of LREC-
2004.

Eneko Agirre, Lluís Màrquez, and Richard 
Wicentowski., Eds. 2007. Proceedings of the 4th 
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations 

(SemEval). Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Prague, Czech Republic.

Irina Azarowa. 2008. RussNet as a Computer Lexicon 
for Russian. Proceedings of the Intelligent 
Information systems IIS-2008: 341-350.

Valentina Balkova, Andrey Suhonogov, and Sergey 
Yablonsky. 2008. Some Issues in the Construction 
of a Russian WordNet Grid. Proceedings of the 
Forth International WordNet Conference, Szeged, 
Hungary: 44-55.

Pavel Braslavski, Dmitrii Ustalov, and Mikhail 
Mukhin. 2014. A Spinning Wheel for YARN: User 
Interface for a Crowdsourced Thesaurus.  
Proceedings of EACL-2014, Sweden.

Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic 
Lexical Database. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Elena Grishina, and Ekaterina Rakhilina. 2005. 
Russian National Corpus (RNC): an overview and 
perspectives. AATSEEL- 2005.

Rob Koeling, Diana McCarthy, and John Carroll. 
2005. Domain-specific sense distributions and
predominant sense acquisition. Proceedings 
EMNLP-2005, Vancouver, B.C., Canada: 419-426.

Shari Landes, Claudia Leacock, and Randee Tengi. 
1998. Building semantic concordances. In 
Fellbaum, C. (ed.)  WordNet: An Electronic 

Lexical Database. Cambridge (Mass.): The MIT 
Press. 

Jey Han Lau, Paul Cook, Diana McCarthy, Spandana 
Gella, and Timothy Baldwin. 2014. Learning Word 
Sense distributions, Detecting Unattested Senses 

and Identifying Novel Senses Using Topic Models.  
In Proceedings of  ACL-2014, pages 259-270.

Claudia Leacock, George Miller, and Martin
Chodorow. 1998. Using corpus statistics and 
WordNet relations for sense identification. 
Computational Linguistics, 24(1): 147-165.

Dekang Lin. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering 
of similar words. Proceedings of the 36th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics and 17th International Conference on 

Computational Linguistics, V(2):  768-774. 

Natalia Loukachevitch and Boris Dobrov. 2014. 
RuThes Linguistic Ontology vs. Russian Wordnets.
In Proceedings of Global WordNet Conference 

GWC-2014.

Diana McCarthy, Rob Koeling, Julie Weeds, and John 
Carroll. 2004. Finding predominant word senses in 
untagged text. In Proceedings of ACL-2004.

Diana McCarthy, Rob Koeling, Julie Weeds, and John
Carroll. 2007. Unsupervised acquisition of 
predominant word senses. Computational 
Linguistics, 33(4): 553-590.

Rada Mihalcea. 2002. Bootstrapping large sense 
tagged corpora. In Proceedings of LREC-2002.

Sunny Mitra, Ritwik Mitra, Martin Riedl, Chris 
Biemann, Animesh Mukherjee, and Pawan Goyal. 
2014. That's sick dude!: Automatic identification 
of word sense change across different timescales. 
Proceedings of ACL-2014. 

Saif Mohammad and Graeme Hirst. 2006. 
Determining word sense dominance using a 
thesaurus. Proceedings of EACL-2006: 121-128.

Roberto Navigli. 2009. Word sense disambiguation: 
A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 41(2), 
10.

Benjamin Snyder and Martha Palmer. 2004. The 
English all-words task. In Mihalcea, R. and 
Chklowski, T., editors, Proceedings of SENSEVAL-

3: Third International Workshop on Evaluating 

Word Sense Disambiguating Systems:  41-43.

Tommaso Petrolito and Francis Bond. 2014. A Survey 
of WordNet Annotated Corpora. In Proceedings 
Global WordNet Conference, GWC-2014: 236-245. 

Proceedings of the workshop on Semantic resources and semantic annotation for Natural Language Processing and the Digital Humanities at NODALIDA 2015

27


