



















































Enhanced Twitter Sentiment Classification Using Contextual Information


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis (WASSA 2015), pages 16–24,
Lisboa, Portugal, 17 September, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Enhanced Twitter Sentiment Classification Using Contextual Information

Soroush Vosoughi
The Media Lab

MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139

soroush@mit.edu

Helen Zhou
The Media Lab

MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139

hlzhou@mit.edu

Deb Roy
The Media Lab

MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
dkroy@media.mit.edu

Abstract

The rise in popularity and ubiquity of
Twitter has made sentiment analysis of
tweets an important and well-covered area
of research. However, the 140 character
limit imposed on tweets makes it hard to
use standard linguistic methods for sen-
timent classification. On the other hand,
what tweets lack in structure they make up
with sheer volume and rich metadata. This
metadata includes geolocation, temporal
and author information. We hypothesize
that sentiment is dependent on all these
contextual factors. Different locations,
times and authors have different emotional
valences. In this paper, we explored this
hypothesis by utilizing distant supervision
to collect millions of labelled tweets from
different locations, times and authors. We
used this data to analyse the variation of
tweet sentiments across different authors,
times and locations. Once we explored
and understood the relationship between
these variables and sentiment, we used a
Bayesian approach to combine these vari-
ables with more standard linguistic fea-
tures such as n-grams to create a Twit-
ter sentiment classifier. This combined
classifier outperforms the purely linguis-
tic classifier, showing that integrating the
rich contextual information available on
Twitter into sentiment classification is a
promising direction of research.

1 Introduction

Twitter is a micro-blogging platform and a social
network where users can publish and exchange
short messages of up to 140 characters long (also
known as tweets). Twitter has seen a great rise in
popularity in recent years because of its availabil-
ity and ease-of-use. This rise in popularity and the

public nature of Twitter (less than 10% of Twitter
accounts are private (Moore, 2009)) have made it
an important tool for studying the behaviour and
attitude of people.

One area of research that has attracted great at-
tention in the last few years is that of tweet sen-
timent classification. Through sentiment classifi-
cation and analysis, one can get a picture of peo-
ple’s attitudes about particular topics on Twitter.
This can be used for measuring people’s attitudes
towards brands, political candidates, and social is-
sues.

There have been several works that do senti-
ment classification on Twitter using standard sen-
timent classification techniques, with variations of
n-gram and bag of words being the most common.
There have been attempts at using more advanced
syntactic features as is done in sentiment classifi-
cation for other domains (Read, 2005; Nakagawa
et al., 2010), however the 140 character limit im-
posed on tweets makes this hard to do as each arti-
cle in the Twitter training set consists of sentences
of no more than several words, many of them with
irregular form (Saif et al., 2012).

On the other hand, what tweets lack in structure
they make up with sheer volume and rich meta-
data. This metadata includes geolocation, tempo-
ral and author information. We hypothesize that
sentiment is dependent on all these contextual fac-
tors. Different locations, times and authors have
different emotional valences. For instance, peo-
ple are generally happier on weekends and cer-
tain hours of the day, more depressed at the end
of summer holidays, and happier in certain states
in the United States. Moreover, people have differ-
ent baseline emotional valences from one another.
These claims are supported for example by the an-
nual Gallup poll that ranks states from most happy
to least happy (Gallup-Healthways, 2014), or the
work by Csikszentmihalyi and Hunter (Csikszent-
mihalyi and Hunter, 2003) that showed reported

16



happiness varies significantly by day of week and
time of day. We believe these factors manifest
themselves in sentiments expressed in tweets and
that by accounting for these factors, we can im-
prove sentiment classification on Twitter.

In this work, we explored this hypothesis by uti-
lizing distant supervision (Go et al., 2009) to col-
lect millions of labelled tweets from different lo-
cations (within the USA), times of day, days of
the week, months and authors. We used this data
to analyse the variation of tweet sentiments across
the aforementioned categories. We then used a
Bayesian approach to incorporate the relationship
between these factors and tweet sentiments into
standard n-gram based Twitter sentiment classifi-
cation.

This paper is structured as follows. In the next
sections we will review related work on sentiment
classification, followed by a detailed explanation
of our approach and our data collection, annota-
tion and processing efforts. After that, we describe
our baseline n-gram sentiment classifier model,
followed by the explanation of how the baseline
model is extended to incorporate contextual in-
formation. Next, we describe our analysis of the
variation of sentiment within each of the contex-
tual categories. We then evaluate our models and
finally summarize our findings and contributions
and discuss possible paths for future work.

2 Related Work

Sentiment analysis and classification of text is a
problem that has been well studied across many
different domains, such as blogs, movie reviews,
and product reviews (e.g., (Pang et al., 2002; Cui
et al., 2006; Chesley et al., 2006)). There is also
extensive work on sentiment analysis for Twitter.
Most of the work on Twitter sentiment classifica-
tion either focuses on different machine learning
techniques (e.g., (Wang et al., 2011; Jiang et al.,
2011)), novel features (e.g., (Davidov et al., 2010;
Kouloumpis et al., 2011; Saif et al., 2012)), new
data collection and labelling techniques (e.g., (Go
et al., 2009)) or the application of sentiment clas-
sification to analyse the attitude of people about
certain topics on Twitter (e.g., (Diakopoulos and
Shamma, 2010; Bollen et al., 2011)). These are
just some examples of the extensive research al-
ready done on Twitter sentiment classification and
analysis.

There has also been previous work on measur-

ing the happiness of people in different contexts
(location, time, etc). This has been done mostly
through traditional land-line polling (Csikszent-
mihalyi and Hunter, 2003; Gallup-Healthways,
2014), with Gallup’s annual happiness index be-
ing a prime example (Gallup-Healthways, 2014).
More recently, some have utilized Twitter to mea-
sure people’s mood and happiness and have found
Twitter to be a generally good measure of the pub-
lic’s overall happiness, well-being and mood. For
example, Bollen et al. (Bollen et al., 2011) used
Twitter to measure the daily mood of the pub-
lic and compare that to the record of social, po-
litical, cultural and economic events in the real
world. They found that these events have a sig-
nificant effect on the public mood as measured
through Twitter. Another example would be the
work of Mitchell et al. (Mitchell et al., 2013), in
which they estimated the happiness levels of dif-
ferent states and cities in the USA using Twitter
and found statistically significant correlations be-
tween happiness level and the demographic char-
acteristics (such as obesity rates and education lev-
els) of those regions.

In this work, we combined the sentiment anal-
ysis of different authors, locations, times and
dates as measured through labelled Twitter data
with standard word-based sentiment classification
methods to create a context-dependent sentiment
classifier. As far as we can tell, there has not
been significant previous work on Twitter senti-
ment classification that has achieved this.

3 Approach

The main hypothesis behind this work is that the
average sentiment of messages on Twitter is dif-
ferent in different contexts. Specifically, tweets in
different spatial, temporal and authorial contexts
have on average different sentiments. Basically,
these factors (many of which are environmental)
have an affect on the emotional states of people
which in turn have an effect on the sentiments peo-
ple express on Twitter and elsewhere. In this pa-
per, we used this contextual information to better
predict the sentiment of tweets.

Luckily, tweets are tagged with very rich meta-
data, including location, timestamp, and author in-
formation. By analysing labelled data collected
from these different contexts, we calculated prior
probabilities of negative and positive sentiments
for each of the contextual categories shown below:

17



• The states in the USA (50 total).
• Hour of the day (HoD) (24 total).
• Day of week (DoW) (7 total).
• Month (12 total).
• Authors (57710 total).
This means that for every item in each of these

categories, we calculated a probability of senti-
ment being positive or negative based on histori-
cal tweets. For example, if seven out of ten his-
torical tweets made on Friday were positive then
the prior probability of a sentiment being positive
for tweets sent out on Friday is 0.7 and the prior
probability of a sentiment being negative is 0.3.
We then trained a Bayesian sentiment classifier us-
ing a combination of these prior probabilities and
standard n-gram models. The model is described
in great detail in the ”Baseline Model” and ”Con-
textual Model” sections of this paper.

In order to do a comprehensive analysis of sen-
timent of tweets across aforementioned contex-
tual categories, a large amount of labelled data
was required. We needed thousands of tweets for
every item in each of the categories (e.g. thou-
sands of tweets per hour of day, or state in the
US). Therefore, creating a corpus using human-
annotated data would have been impractical. In-
stead, we turned to distant supervision techniques
to obtain our corpus. Distant supervision allows
us to have noisy but large amounts of annotated
tweets.

There are different methods of obtaining la-
belled data using distant supervision (Read, 2005;
Go et al., 2009; Barbosa and Feng, 2010; Davidov
et al., 2010). We used emoticons to label tweets
as positive or negative, an approach that was in-
troduced by Read (Read, 2005) and used in multi-
ple works (Go et al., 2009; Davidov et al., 2010).
We collected millions of English-language tweets
from different times, dates, authors and US states.
We used a total of six emoticons, three mapping
to positive and three mapping to negative senti-
ment (table 1). We identified more than 120 pos-
itive and negative ASCII emoticons and unicode
emojis1, but we decided to only use the six most
common emoticons in order to avoid possible se-
lection biases. For example, people who use ob-
scure emoticons and emojis might have a differ-
ent base sentiment from those who do not. Using

1Japanese pictographs similar to ASCII emoticons

the six most commonly used emoticons limits this
bias. Since there are no ”neutral” emoticons, our
dataset is limited to tweets with positive or nega-
tive sentiments. Accordingly, in this work we are
only concerned with analysing and classifying the
polarity of tweets (negative vs. positive) and not
their subjectivity (neutral vs. non-neutral). Below
we will explain our data collection and corpus in
greater detail.

Positive Emoticons Negative Emoticons
:) :(
:-) :-(
: ) : (

Table 1: List of emoticons.

4 Data Collection and Datasets

We collected two datasets, one massive and la-
belled through distant supervision, the other small
and labelled by humans. The massive dataset was
used to calculate the prior probabilities for each
of our contextual categories. Both datasets were
used to train and test our sentiment classifier. The
human-labelled dataset was used as a sanity check
to make sure the dataset labelled using the emoti-
cons classifier was not too noisy and that the hu-
man and emoticon labels matched for a majority
of tweets.

4.1 Emoticon-based Labelled Dataset
We collected a total of 18 million, geo-tagged,
English-language tweets over three years, from
January 1st, 2012 to January 1st, 2015, evenly di-
vided across all 36 months, using Historical Pow-
erTrack for Twitter2 provided by GNIP3. We cre-
ated geolocation bounding boxes4 for each of the
50 states which were used to collect our dataset.
All 18 million tweets originated from one of the
50 states and are tagged as such. Moreover, all
tweets contained one of the six emoticons in Ta-
ble 1 and were labelled as either positive or nega-
tive based on the emoticon. Out of the 18 million
tweets, 11.2 million (62%) were labelled as posi-
tive and 6.8 million (38%) were labelled as nega-
tive. The 18 million tweets came from 7, 657, 158
distinct users.

2Historical PowerTrack for Twitter provides complete ac-
cess to the full archive of Twitter public data.

3https://gnip.com/
4The bounding boxes were created using

http://boundingbox.klokantech.com/

18



4.2 Human Labelled Dataset
We randomly selected 3000 tweets from our large
dataset and had all their emoticons stripped. We
then had these tweets labelled as positive or neg-
ative by three human annotators. We measured
the inter-annotator agreement using Fleiss’ kappa,
which calculates the degree of agreement in clas-
sification over that which would be expected by
chance (Fleiss, 1971). The kappa score for the
three annotators was 0.82, which means that there
were disagreements in sentiment for a small por-
tion of the tweets. However, the number of tweets
that were labelled the same by at least two of the
three human annotator was 2908 out of of the 3000
tweets (96%). Of these 2908 tweets, 60% were la-
belled as positive and 40% as negative.

We then measured the agreement between the
human labels and emoticon-based labels, using
only tweets that were labelled the same by at least
two of the three human annotators (the majority
label was used as the label for the tweet). Table
2 shows the confusion matrix between human and
emoticon-based annotations. As you can see, 85%
of all labels matched ( 1597+8221597+882+281+148 = .85).

Human-Pos Human-Neg
Emot-Pos 1597 281
Emot-Neg 148 882

Table 2: Confusion matrix between human-
labelled and emoticon-labelled tweets.

These results are very promising and show that
using emoticon-based distant supervision to label
the sentiment of tweets is an acceptable method.
Though there is some noise introduced to the
dataset (as evidenced by the 15% of tweets whose
human labels did not match their emoticon la-
bels), the sheer volume of labelled data that this
method makes accessible, far outweighs the rela-
tively small amount of noise introduced.

4.3 Data Preparation
Since the data is labelled using emoticons, we
stripped all emoticons from the training data. This
ensures that emoticons are not used as a feature
in our sentiment classifier. A large portion of
tweets contain links to other websites. These links
are mostly not meaningful semantically and thus
can not help in sentiment classification. There-
fore, all links in tweets were replaced with the
token ”URL”. Similarly, all mentions of user-

names (which are denoted by the @ symbol) were
replaced with the token ”USERNAME”, since
they also can not help in sentiment classification.
Tweets also contain very informal language and
as such, characters in words are often repeated for
emphasis (e.g., the word good is used with an ar-
bitrary number of o’s in many tweets). Any char-
acter that was repeated more than two times was
removed (e.g., goooood was replaced with good).
Finally, all words in the tweets were stemmed us-
ing Porter Stemming (Porter, 1980).

5 Baseline Model

For our baseline sentiment classification model,
we used our massive dataset to train a negative and
positive n-gram language model from the negative
and positive tweets.

As our baseline model, we built purely linguis-
tic bigram models in Python, utilizing some com-
ponents from NLTK (Bird et al., 2009). These
models used a vocabulary that was filtered to re-
move words occurring 5 or fewer times. Probabil-
ity distributions were calculated using Kneser-Ney
smoothing (Chen and Goodman, 1999). In addi-
tion to Kneser-Ney smoothing, the bigram mod-
els also used “backoff” smoothing (Katz, 1987), in
which an n-gram model falls back on an (n − 1)-
gram model for words that were unobserved in the
n-gram context.

In order to classify the sentiment of a new tweet,
its probability of fit is calculated using both the
negative and positive bigram models. Equation 1
below shows our models through a Bayesian lens.

Pr(θs |W ) = Pr(W | θs) Pr(θs)Pr(W ) (1)

Here θs can be θp or θn, corresponding to the
hypothesis that the sentiment of the tweet is pos-
itive or negative respectively. W is the sequence
of ` words, written as w`1, that make up the tweet.
Pr(W ) is not dependent on the hypothesis, and
can thus be ignored. Since we are using a bigram
model, Equation 1 can be written as:

Pr(θs |W ) ∝
∏̀
i=2

Pr(wi | wi−1, θs) Pr(θs)

(2)

This is our purely linguistic baseline model.

19



6 Contextual Model

The Bayesian approach allows us to easily inte-
grate the contextual information into our models.
Pr(θs) in Equation 2 is the prior probability of a
tweet having the sentiment s. The prior probabil-
ity (Pr(θs)) can be calculated using the contextual
information of the tweets. Therefore, Pr(θs) in
equation 2 is replaced by Pr(θs|C), which is the
probability of the hypothesis given the contextual
information. Pr(θs|C) is the posterior probability
of the following Bayesian equation:

Pr(θs | C) = Pr(C | θs) Pr(θs)Pr(C) (3)
Where C is the set of contextual vari-
ables: {State,HoD,Dow,Month,Author}.
Pr(θs|C) captures the probability that a tweet is
positive or negative, given the state, hour of day,
day of the week, month and author of the tweet.
Here Pr(C) is not dependent on the hypothesis,
and thus can be ignored. Equation 2 can therefore
be rewritten to include the contextual information:

Pr(θs |W,C) ∝
∏̀
i=2

Pr(wi | wi−1, θs)

Pr(C | θs) Pr(θs)
(4)

Equation 4 is our extended Bayesian model for
integrating contextual information with more stan-
dard, word-based sentiment classification.

7 Sentiment in Context

We considered five contextual categories: one spa-
tial, three temporal and one authorial. Here is the
list of the five categories:

• The states in the USA (50 total) (spatial).
• Hour of the day (HoD) (24 total) (temporal).
• Day of week (DoW) (7 total) (temporal).
• Month (12 total) (temporal).
• Authors (57,710 total) (authorial).
We used our massive emoticon labelled dataset

to calculate the average sentiment for all of these
five categories. A tweet was given a score of−1 if
it was labelled as negative and a score 1 if it was
labelled as positive, so an average sentiment of 0
for a contextual category would mean that tweets
in that category were evenly labelled as positive
and negative.

7.1 Spatial

All of the 18 million tweets in our dataset origi-
nate from the USA and are geo-tagged. Naturally,
the tweets are not evenly distributed across the 50
states given the large variation between the popu-
lation of each state. Figure 1 shows the percentage
of tweets per state, sorted from smallest to largest.
Not surprisingly, California has the highest num-
ber of tweets (2, 590, 179), and Wyoming has the
lowest number of tweets (11, 719).

Figure 1: Percentage of tweets per state in the
USA, sorted from lowest to highest.

Even the state with the lowest percentage of
tweets has more than ten thousand tweets, which
is enough to calculate a statistically significant av-
erage sentiment for that state. The sentiment for
all states averaged across the tweets from the three
years is shown in Figure 2. Note that an aver-
age sentiment of 1.0 means that all tweets were
labelled as positive, −1.0 means that all tweets
were labelled as negative and 0.0 means that there
was an even distribution of positive and negative
tweets. The average sentiment of all the states
leans more towards the positive side. This is ex-
pected given that 62% of the tweets in our dataset
were labelled as positive.

It is interesting to note that even with the noisy
dataset, our ranking of US states based on their
Twitter sentiment correlates with the ranking of
US states based on the well-being index calculated
by Oswald and Wu (Oswald and Wu, 2011) in
their work on measuring well-being and life satis-
faction across America. Their data is from the be-
havioral risk factor survey score (BRFSS), which
is a survey of life satisfaction across the United
States from 1.3 million citizens. Figure 3 shows
this correlation (r = 0.44, p < 0.005).

20



Figure 2: Average sentiment of states in the USA,
averaged across three years, from 2012 to 2014.

Figure 3: Ranking of US states based on Twitter
sentiment vs. ranking of states based on their well-
being index. r = 0.44, p < 0.005.

7.2 Temporal

We looked at three temporal variables: time of
day, day of the week and month. All tweets are
tagged with timestamp data, which we used to ex-
tract these three variables. Since all timestamps
in the Twitter historical archives (and public API)
are in the UTC time zone, we first converted the
timestamp to the local time of the location where
the tweet was sent from. We then calculated the
sentiment for each day of week (figure 4), hour
(figure 5) and month (figure 6), averaged across
all 18 million tweets over three years. The 18
million tweets were divided evenly between each
month, with 1.5 million tweets per month. The
tweets were also more or less evenly divided be-
tween each day of week, with each day having
somewhere between 14% and 15% of the tweets.
Similarly, the tweets were almost evenly divided

between each hour, with each having somewhere
between 3% and 5% of the tweets.

Some of these results make intuitive sense. For
example, the closer the day of week is to Fri-
day and Saturday, the more positive the sentiment,
with a drop on Sunday. As with spatial, the av-
erage sentiment of all the hours, days and months
lean more towards the positive side.

Figure 4: Average sentiment of different days of
the week in the USA, averaged across three years,
from 2012 to 2014.

Figure 5: Average sentiment of different hours of
the day in the USA, averaged across three years,
from 2012 to 2014.

7.3 Authorial
The last contextual variable we looked at was au-
thorial. People have different baseline attitudes,
some are optimistic and positive, some are pes-
simistic and negative, and some are in between.
This difference in personalities can manifest itself
in the sentiment of tweets. We attempted to cap-
ture this difference by looking at the history of

21



Figure 6: Average sentiment of different months in
the USA, averaged across three years, from 2012
to 2014.

tweets made by users. The 18 million labelled
tweets in our dataset come from 7, 657, 158 au-
thors.

In order to calculate a statistically significant
average sentiment for each author, we need our
sample size to not be too small. However, a large
number of the users in our dataset only tweeted
once or twice during the three years. Figure 7
shows the number of users in bins of 50 tweets.
(So the first bin corresponds to the number of users
that have less than 50 tweets throughout the three
year.) The number of users in the first few bins
were so large that the graph needed to be logarith-
mic in order to be legible. We decided to calcu-
late the prior sentiment for users with at least 50
tweets. This corresponded to less than 1% of the
users (57, 710 out of 7, 657, 158 total users). Note
that these users are the most prolific authors in our
dataset, as they account for 39% of all tweets in
our dataset. The users with less than 50 posts had
their prior set to 0.0, not favouring positive or neg-
ative sentiment (this way it does not have an im-
pact on the Bayesian model, allowing other con-
textual variables to set the prior).

As it is not feasible to show the prior average
sentiment of all 57, 710 users, we created 20 even
sentiment bins, from −1.0 to 1.0. We then plot-
ted the number of users whose average sentiment
falls into these bins (Figure 8). Similar to other
variables, the positive end of the graph is much
heavier than the negative end.

Figure 7: Number of users (logarithmic) in bins of
50 tweets. The first bin corresponds to number of
users that have less than 50 tweets throughout the
three years and so on.

Figure 8: Number of users (with at least 50 tweets)
per sentiment bins of 0.05, averaged across three
years, from 2012 to 2014.

8 Results

We used 5-fold cross validation to train and eval-
uate our baseline and contextual models, ensur-
ing that the tweets in the training folds were not
used in the calculation of any of the priors or in
the training of the bigram models. Table 3 shows
the accuracy of our models. The contextual model
outperformed the baseline model using any of the
contextual variables by themselves, with state be-
ing the best performing and day of week the worst.
The model that utilized all the contextual variables
saw a 10% relative and 8% absolute improvement
over the baseline bigram model.

Because of the great increase in the volume
of data, distant supervised sentiment classifiers
for Twitter tend to generally outperform more
standard classifiers using human-labelled datasets.
Therefore, it makes sense to compare the perfor-
mance of our classifier to other distant supervised

22



Model Accuracy
Baseline-Majority 0.620
Baseline-Bigram 0.785
Contextual-DoW 0.798
Contextual-Month 0.801
Contextual-Hour 0.821
Contextual-Author 0.829
Contextual-State 0.849
Contextual-All 0.862

Table 3: Classifier accuracy, sorted from worst to
best.

classifiers. Though not directly comparable, our
contextual classifier outperforms the distant super-
vised Twitter sentiment classifier by Go et al (Go
et al., 2009) by more than 3% (absolute).

Table 4 shows the precision, recall and F1 score
of the positive and negative class for the full con-
textual classifier (Contextual-All).

Class Precision Recall F1 Score
Positive 0.864 0.969 0.912
Negative 0.905 0.795 0.841

Table 4: Precision, recall and F1 score of the full
contextual classifier (Contexual-All).

9 Discussions

Even though our contextual classifier was able
to outperform the previous state-of-the-art, dis-
tant supervised sentiment classifier, it should be
noted that our contextual classifier’s performance
is boosted significantly by spatial information ex-
tracted through geo-tags. However, only about one
to two percent of tweets in the wild are geo-tagged.
Therefore, we trained and evaluated our contextual
model using all the variables except for state. The
accuracy of this model was 0.843, which is still
significantly better than the performance of the
purely linguistic classifier. Fortunately, all tweets
are tagged with timestamps and author informa-
tion, so all the other four contextual variables used
in our model can be used for classifying the senti-
ment of any tweet.

Note that the prior probabilities that we cal-
culated need to be recalculated and updated ev-
ery once in a while to account for changes in the
world. For example, a state might become more
affluent, causing its citizens to become on average

happier. This change could potentially have an ef-
fect on the average sentiment expressed by the cit-
izens of that state on Twitter, which would make
our priors obsolete.

10 Conclusions and Future Work

Sentiment classification of tweets is an important
area of research. Through classification and anal-
ysis of sentiments on Twitter, one can get an un-
derstanding of people’s attitudes about particular
topics.

In this work, we utilized the power of distant
supervision to collect millions of noisy labelled
tweets from all over the USA, across three years.
We used this dataset to create prior probabilities
for the average sentiment of tweets in different
spatial, temporal and authorial contexts. We then
used a Bayesian approach to combine these pri-
ors with standard bigram language models. The
resulting combined model was able to achieve
an accuracy of 0.862, outperforming the previ-
ous state-of-the-art distant supervised Twitter sen-
timent classifier by more than 3%.

In the future, we would like to explore addi-
tional contextual features that could be predictive
of sentiment on Twitter. Specifically, we would
like to incorporate the topic type of tweets into
our model. The topic type characterizes the na-
ture of the topics discussed in tweets (e.g., break-
ing news, sports, etc). There has already been ex-
tensive work done on topic categorization schemes
for Twitter (Dann, 2010; Sriram et al., 2010; Zhao
and Jiang, 2011) which we can utilize for this task.

11 Acknowledgements

We would like to thank all the annotators for their
efforts. We would also like to thank Brandon Roy
for sharing his insights on Bayesian modelling.
This work was supported by a generous grant from
Twitter.

References

Luciano Barbosa and Junlan Feng. 2010. Robust sen-
timent detection on twitter from biased and noisy
data. In Proc. COLING 2010, pages 36–44. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009.
Natural language processing with Python. O’Reilly
Media, Inc.

23



Johan Bollen, Huina Mao, and Alberto Pepe. 2011.
Modeling public mood and emotion: Twitter sen-
timent and socio-economic phenomena. In Proc.
ICWSM 2011.

Stanley F Chen and Joshua Goodman. 1999. An
empirical study of smoothing techniques for lan-
guage modeling. Computer Speech & Language,
13(4):359–393.

Paula Chesley, Bruce Vincent, Li Xu, and Rohini K
Srihari. 2006. Using verbs and adjectives to
automatically classify blog sentiment. Training,
580(263):233.

Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Jeremy Hunter. 2003.
Happiness in everyday life: The uses of experience
sampling. Journal of Happiness Studies, 4(2):185–
199.

Hang Cui, Vibhu Mittal, and Mayur Datar. 2006.
Comparative experiments on sentiment classifica-
tion for online product reviews. In AAAI, volume 6,
pages 1265–1270.

Stephen Dann. 2010. Twitter content classification.
First Monday, 15(12).

Dmitry Davidov, Oren Tsur, and Ari Rappoport. 2010.
Enhanced sentiment learning using twitter hashtags
and smileys. In Proc. COLING 2010, pages 241–
249. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Nicholas A Diakopoulos and David A Shamma. 2010.
Characterizing debate performance via aggregated
twitter sentiment. In Proc. SIGCHI 2010, pages
1195–1198. ACM.

Joseph L Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale
agreement among many raters. Psychological bul-
letin, 76(5):378.

Gallup-Healthways. 2014. State of american well-
being. Well-Being Index.

Alec Go, Lei Huang, and Richa Bhayani. 2009. Twit-
ter sentiment analysis. Entropy, 17.

Long Jiang, Mo Yu, Ming Zhou, Xiaohua Liu, and
Tiejun Zhao. 2011. Target-dependent twitter sen-
timent classification. In Proc. ACL 2011: Human
Language Technologies-Volume 1, pages 151–160.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Slava Katz. 1987. Estimation of probabilities from
sparse data for the language model component of
a speech recognizer. Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, IEEE Transactions on, 35(3):400–401.

Efthymios Kouloumpis, Theresa Wilson, and Johanna
Moore. 2011. Twitter sentiment analysis: The good
the bad and the omg! Proc. ICWSM 2011.

Lewis Mitchell, Morgan R Frank, Kameron Decker
Harris, Peter Sheridan Dodds, and Christopher M
Danforth. 2013. The geography of happiness:

Connecting twitter sentiment and expression, de-
mographics, and objective characteristics of place.
PloS one, 8(5):e64417.

Robert J Moore. 2009. Twitter data
analysis: An investor’s perspective.
http://techcrunch.com/2009/10/05/twitter-data-
analysis-an-investors-perspective-2/. Accessed:
2015-01-30.

Tetsuji Nakagawa, Kentaro Inui, and Sadao Kurohashi.
2010. Dependency tree-based sentiment classifi-
cation using crfs with hidden variables. In Proc.
NAACL-HLT 2010, pages 786–794. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Andrew J Oswald and Stephen Wu. 2011. Well-being
across america. Review of Economics and Statistics,
93(4):1118–1134.

Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up?: sentiment classification us-
ing machine learning techniques. In Proc. EMNLP
2002-Volume 10, pages 79–86. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Martin F Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix strip-
ping. Program: electronic library and information
systems, 14(3):130–137.

Jonathon Read. 2005. Using emoticons to reduce de-
pendency in machine learning techniques for senti-
ment classification. In Proceedings of the ACL Stu-
dent Research Workshop, pages 43–48. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Hassan Saif, Yulan He, and Harith Alani. 2012. Al-
leviating data sparsity for twitter sentiment analysis.
CEUR Workshop Proceedings (CEUR-WS. org).

Bharath Sriram, Dave Fuhry, Engin Demir, Hakan Fer-
hatosmanoglu, and Murat Demirbas. 2010. Short
text classification in twitter to improve information
filtering. In Proc. ACM SIGIR 2010, pages 841–842.
ACM.

Xiaolong Wang, Furu Wei, Xiaohua Liu, Ming Zhou,
and Ming Zhang. 2011. Topic sentiment analysis
in twitter: a graph-based hashtag sentiment classifi-
cation approach. In Proc. CIKM 2011, pages 1031–
1040. ACM.

Xin Zhao and Jing Jiang. 2011. An empirical compari-
son of topics in twitter and traditional media. Singa-
pore Management University School of Information
Systems Technical paper series. Retrieved Novem-
ber, 10:2011.

24


