


















































My title


Synthesizing the finger alphabet of Swiss German Sign Language and

evaluating the comprehensibility of the resulting animations

Sarah Ebling1, Rosalee Wolfe2, Jerry Schnepp3, Souad Baowidan2,

John McDonald2, Robyn Moncrief2, Sandra Sidler-Miserez1, Katja Tissi1

1University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
2DePaul University, Chicago, IL, USA

3Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, OH, USA
ebling@cl.uzh.ch, {wolfe,jmcdonald}@cs.depaul.edu, schnepp@bgsu.edu,

{rkelley5,sbaowida}@mail.depaul.edu, sandysidler@gmail.com, katja.tissi@hfh.ch

Abstract

This paper reports on work in synthesizing the finger alpha-
bet of Swiss German Sign Language (Deutschschweizerische
Gebärdensprache, DSGS) as a first step towards a fingerspelling
learning tool for this language. Sign language synthesis is an
instance of automatic sign language processing, which in turn
forms part of natural language processing (NLP). The contribu-
tion of this paper is twofold: Firstly, the process of creating a set
of hand postures and transitions for the DSGS finger alphabet
is explained, and secondly, the results of a study assessing the
comprehensibility of the resulting animations are reported. The
comprehension rate of the signing avatar was highly satisfactory
at 90.06%.

1. Introduction

Sign languages are natural languages and, as such, fully devel-
oped linguistic systems. They are often the preferred means of
communication of Deaf1 signers.

Sign languages make use of a communication form known
as the finger alphabet (or, manual alphabet), in which the let-
ters of a spoken language2 word are fingerspelled, i.e., dedi-
cated signs are used for each letter of the word. The letters
of the alphabet of the most closely corresponding spoken lan-
guage are used, e.g., English for American, British, and Irish
Sign Language; German for German, Austrian, and Swiss Ger-
man Sign Language, etc. Figure 1 shows the manual alphabet of
Swiss German Sign Language (Deutschschweizerische Gebär-
densprache, DSGS). Some fingerspelling signs are iconic, i.e.,
their meaning becomes obvious from their form. Most manual
alphabets, like the one for DSGS, are one-handed, an exception
being the two-handed alphabet for British Sign Language.

Tools for learning the finger alphabet of a sign language
typically display one still image for each letter, thus not ac-
counting for all of the salient information inherent in finger-
spelling [3]: According to Wilcox [4], the transitions are more
important than the holds for perceiving a fingerspelling se-
quence. The transitions are usually not represented in sequences
of still images.

1It is a widely recognized convention to use the upper-cased word
Deaf for describing members of the linguistic community of sign lan-
guage users and the lower-cased word deaf when referring to the audi-
ological state of a hearing loss [1].

2Spoken language refers to a language that is not signed, whether it
be represented in spoken or written form.

More recently, 3D animation has been used in finger-
spelling learning tools. This approach “has the flexibility to
shuffle letters to create new words, as well as having the po-
tential for producing the natural transitions between letters” [3].
The difference between an animation and a still-only represen-
tation is shown in Figure 2 for the example of the American
Sign Language (ASL) fingerspelling sequence T-U-N-A [5].

This paper reports on the work in synthesizing the finger al-
phabet of DSGS as a first step towards a fingerspelling learning
tool for this language. Sign language synthesis is an instance
of automatic sign language processing, which in turn forms part
of natural language processing (NLP) [6]. The contribution of
this paper is twofold: Firstly, the process of creating a set of
hand postures and transitions for the DSGS finger alphabet is
explained, and secondly, the results of a study assessing the
comprehensibility of the resulting animations are reported. The
comprehension rate of the signing avatar was highly satisfactory
at 90.06%.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion 2 gives an overview of previous work involving linguistic
analysis (Sections 2.1 to 2.3) and synthesis (Section 2.4) of fin-
gerspelling. Section 3 explains how we produced a set of hand
postures and transitions for DSGS fingerspelling synthesis. Sec-
tion 4 presents the results of the study assessing the comprehen-
sibility of synthesized DSGS fingerspelling sequences.

2. Fingerspelling

2.1. Domains of use

Fingerspelling is often used to express concepts for which no
lexical sign exists in a sign language. Apart from that, it may
serve other purposes: In ASL, fingerspelling is sometimes ap-
plied as a contrastive device to distinguish between “the every-
day, familiar, and intimate vocabulary of signs, and the distant,
foreign, and scientific vocabulary of words of English origin”
[7]. Fingerspelling is also used for quoting from written texts,
such as the Bible. In Italian Sign Language, fingerspelling is
used predominantly for words from languages other than Ital-
ian [7].

Padden and Gunsauls [7], looking at 2164 fingerspelled
words signed by 14 native ASL signers, found that nouns are by
far the most commonly fingerspelled parts of speech, followed
by adjectives and verbs. Within the noun category, occurrences
of fingerspelling were evenly distributed among proper nouns
and common nouns.

10
SLPAT 2015, 6th Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 10–16,

Dresden, Germany, 11 September, 2015. c©2015 The Association for Computational Linguistics



A B C D E F G H

I J K L M N O P

Q R S T U V W X

Y Z Ä Ö Ü SCH CH

Figure 1: Finger alphabet of DSGS [2]

Figure 2: Still images vs. animation: fingerspelling sequence T-U-N-A in American Sign Language [5]

2.2. Frequency of use and speed

Frequency of use and speed of fingerspelling vary across sign
languages. ASL is known to make heavy use of the finger al-
phabet: 10 to 15% of ASL signing consists of fingerspelling [7].
Native signers have been shown to fingerspell more often (18%
of the signs in a sequence of 150 signs) than non-native signers
(15% of the signs). Within the first group, native signers with a
more advanced formal education (college or postgraduate level)
have been demonstrated to use more fingerspelling (21% of the
signs in a sequence of 150 signs) than native signers at the high
school level (15% of the signs) [7].

In ASL, fingerspelled words continue to be used even af-
ter lexical signs have been introduced for the same concepts
[7]. Some fingerspelled words have also been lexicalized in this
language: For example, the sign FAX is performed by signing
-F- and -X- in the direction from the subject to the object. This
is different from the fingerspelled word F-A-X, which is not
reduced to two fingerspelled letters and does not exhibit direc-
tionality [7].

Compared to 10 to 15% in ASL, British Sign Language
(BSL) has been shown to contain only about 5% fingerspelling
[8]. In BSL, fingerspelled words are typically abandoned once
lexicalized signs have been introduced for a concept.

In DSGS, fingerspelling is even less common than in BSL.

As Boyes Braem and Rathmann [9] pointed out, “few DSGS
signers are as yet as fluent in producing or reading finger-
spelling”.3 Until recently, DSGS signers used mouthings to ex-
press technical terms or proper names for which no lexical sign
existed, which partly accounts for the heavy use of mouthing
in this language [11].4 Nowadays, fingerspelling is used more
often in these cases, particularly by younger DSGS signers. In
addition, it is applied with abbreviations.

Keane and Brentari [13] reported fingerspelling rates be-
tween 2.18 and 6.5 letters per second (with a mean of 5.36
letters per second) based on data from different studies. The
speed of ASL fingerspelling is known to be particularly high
[7], whereas fingerspelling in DSGS is much slower: Accord-
ingly, in a recent focus group study aimed at evaluating a DSGS
signing avatar, the seven participants, all of them native signers
of DSGS, found the default speed of fingerspelling of the avatar
system to be too high [14].

3This observation is repeated in Boyes Braem et al. [10].
4According to Boyes Braem [12], 80 to 90% of signs in DSGS are

accompanied by a mouthing.

11



2.3. Comprehensibility

A few studies have looked at the comprehensibility of finger-
spelling sequences produced by human signers. Among them
is that of Hanson [15], who presented 17 Deaf adult signers (15
of which were native signers) with 30 fingerspelled words and
non-words each. The participants were given ten seconds to
write the letters of the item presented and decide whether it was
a word or a non-word.

Geer and Keane [16] assessed the respective importance
of holds and transitions for fingerspelling perception. 16 L2
learners of ASL saw 94 fingerspelled words. Each word was
presented exactly twice. Following this, the participants were
asked to type its letters on a computer. The findings of the study
complement those of Wilcox [4] introduced in Section 1: Ironi-
cally, the motion between the letters, which is what experts uti-
lize [4], confuses language learners. It is therefore imperative
that study tools help language learners learn to decode motion.

2.4. Synthesis

There are three essential elements required for realistic finger-
spelling synthesis. These are

• Natural thumb motion. Early efforts relied on related
work in the field of robotics, however, this proved inad-
equate as an approximation of the thumb used in many
grasping models does not accurately reflect the motions
of the human thumb [17].

• Highly realistically modelled hand with a skeletal defor-
mation system. Early systems used a segmented hand
comprised of rigid components, and lacked the webbing
between thumb and index finger, and the ability to de-
form the palm.

• Collision detection or collision avoidance. There is
no physicality to a 3D model, so there is no inherent
method to prevent one finger from passing through an-
other. Collision detection or avoidance systems can pre-
vent these types of intersections and add to the realism
of the model.

An early effort used VRML [18] to allow users to create the
hand postures representing individual letters of a manual alpha-
bet. Users could type text and see a segmented hand interpolate
between subsequent hand postures. All of the joint coordinates
were aligned with world coordinates and did not reflect the natu-
ral anatomy of the hand. There were no allowances for collision
detection or avoidance.

McDonald [19] created an improved hand model that not
only facilitated thumb behavior, but for all of the phalanges in
the hand. This was coupled with Davidson’s [20] initial work
on collision avoidance to produce a set of six words which were
tested by Deaf high school students. Although they had few
problems in identifying the words, test participants found the
appearance of the hand off-putting because it was segmented
and lacked webbing between the thumb and index finger.

Adamo-Villani and Beni [21] solved this problem by cre-
ating a highly realistic hand model with a skeletal deformation
system, allowing the webbing to stretch and wrinkle as does
a human hand. In 2006, Wolfe et al. [5] integrated the natu-
ral thumb movement and a highly realistic hand model with an
enhanced system of collision avoidance. The collision system
involved an exhaustive search of all possible letter transitions
and correcting any that generated collisions through manual an-
imation.

In 2008, Adamo-Villani [22] confirmed that manually-
created animations for fingerspelling are more “readable” than
ones generated through motion capture. The research described
in this section focused exclusively on ASL, but several groups
have explored animating manual alphabets for other signed lan-
guages. In 2003, Yeates [23] created a fingerspelling system for
Auslan (Australian Sign Language) that utilized a segmented
hand; similarly van Zijl [24] and Krastev [25] generated fin-
gerspelling using the International Sign Alphabet. In addition,
Kennaway [26] explored fingerspelling for BSL.

While only a small body of work has dealt with the compre-
hensibility of fingerspelling produced by human signers, even
fewer studies have investigated the comprehensibility of syn-
thesized fingerspelling. Among them is the study of Davidson
et al. [20], who presented fluent ASL users with animated fin-
gerspelling sequences at three different speeds to validate their
animation approach.

3. Creating a set of hand postures and
transitions for DSGS fingerspelling synthesis

Section 2.2 discussed the increasing use of fingerspelling in
DSGS. To our knowledge, only one fingerspelling learning tool
for DSGS exists.5 This tool displays one illustration for each
letter of a fingerspelling sequence as mentioned in Section 1.
Ours is the first approach to synthesizing the finger alphabet of
DSGS as a first step towards a learning tool for this language.

Synthesizing the DSGS manual alphabet consisted of pro-
ducing hand postures (handshapes with orientations) for each
letter of the alphabet and transitions for each pair of letters. Fig-
ure 1 showed the finger alphabet of DSGS. Note that it features
dedicated signs for -Ä-, -Ö-, and -Ü- as well as for -CH- and
-SCH-.

Because of the similarity between the ASL and DSGS man-
ual alphabets, our work built on a previous system that synthe-
sized the manual alphabet of ASL [5]. In addition to the five
new letters or letter combinations cited above, the DSGS man-
ual alphabet contains four handshapes, -F-, -G-, -P-, and -T-,
that are distinctly different from ASL. Further, the five letters
-C-, -M-, -N-, -O-, and -Q- have a similar handshape in DSGS,
but required smaller modifications, such as a different orienta-
tion or small adjustments in the fingers. Hence, the DSGS finger
alphabet features 14 out of 30 hand postures that needed modi-
fication from the ASL manual alphabet. All hand postures were
reviewed by native signers.

Like ASL, there was also the issue of collisions between the
fingers during handshape transitions. Here, we again leveraged
the similarity between ASL and DSGS manual alphabets. The
previous ASL fingerspelling system identified the collection of
letter pairs, such as the N→A transition in T-U-N-A in Figure 2,
which caused finger collisions under naïve interpolation. To re-
move the collisions, they created a set of transition handshapes
that are inserted in-between two letters to force certain fingers
to move before others to create the clearance needed to avoid
collision. Such a handshape can be seen in the eighth frame of
the second row in Figure 2. Details of this method can be found
in Wolfe et al. [5]. Because of the overlap between the DSGS
and ASL manual alphabets, along with the fact that most of the
new or modified hand postures had handshapes that were gen-
erally open, in the sense of Brentari’s hanshape notation [27], it

5http://www.gebaerden-sprache.ch/

fingeralphabet/lernen-sie-das-fingeralphabet/

index.html

12



was possible to use the exact same set of transition handshapes
as the original ASL system.

4. Assessing the comprehensibility of
synthesized DSGS fingerspelling sequences

The aim of the study presented here was to assess the com-
prehensibility of animated DSGS fingerspelling sequences pro-
duced from the set of hand postures and transitions described in
Section 3.

4.1. Study instrument and design

We conducted the study online using a remote testing system,
LimeSurvey6. This approach has advantages over to face-to-face
testing because it affords a large recruitment area and allows
participants to complete the survey at any time. The survey
was accessible from most web browsers and compatible across
major operating systems.

Any person with DSGS fingerspelling skills was invited
to participate in the study. The call for participation was dis-
tributed via an online portal for the DSGS community7 as well
as through personal messages to persons known to fulfill the
recruitment criteria.

Participants accessed the study through a URL provided
to them. The first page of the website presented information
about the study in DSGS (video of a human signer) and German
(video captions that represented a back-translation of the DSGS
signing and text). Participants were informed of the purpose of
the study, that participation was voluntary, that answers were
anonymous, that items could be skipped, and that they could
fully withdraw from the study at any time. Following this, they
filled out a background questionnaire, which included questions
about their hearing status, first language, preferred language,
and age and manner of DSGS acquisition. No personally iden-
tifyable information was kept.

A detailed instruction page followed, on which the partici-
pants were informed that they were about to see 22 fingerspelled
words signed by either a human or a virtual human (sign lan-
guage avatar). Following this, the participants’ task was to type
the letters of the word in a text box. Figure 3 shows a screenshot
of the study interface for each of these cases. The videos of the
human signer had been resized and cropped so as to match the
animations.

The participants were told that the fingerspelled words they
were going to see were names of Swiss towns described in
Ebling [14]. In contrast to the studies discussed in Section 2.3,
an effort had been made to include only fingerspelled words
that denote concepts for which no well-known lexical sign ex-
ists in DSGS. This was deemed an important prerequisite for
a successful study. The items had been chosen based on the
following criteria:

• They were names of towns with train stations that were
among the least frequented based on a list obtained from
the Swiss Federal Railways;

• The town names were of German or Swiss German ori-
gin;

• The town names in the resulting set of items varied with
respect to their length (number of letters); and

6https://www.limesurvey.org/en/
7http://www.deafzone.ch/

Figure 3: Study interface: screenshots

• In the resulting set of items, each letter of the DSGS fin-
ger alphabet occurred at least once (with the exception of
-X-, which did not occur in any of the town names that
met all of the above criteria).

The 20 study items had an average length of 7 letters, with a
maximum of 12 (W-E-R-T-H-E-N-S-T-E-I-N) and a minimum
of 3 (T-Ä-SCH). The study items were assigned to participants
such that each item appeared as either a video of a human signer
or as an animation. Each participant saw 10 videos and 10 an-
imations and items were presented in random order. The study
items were preceded by two practice items that were the same
for all participants: The first was a video of a human signer
fingerspelling S-E-O-N, the second an animation of R-H-Ä-Z-
Ü-N-S.

The human signer was a female native DSGS signer (Deaf-
of-Deaf) who had been asked to sign at a natural speed but with-
out using mouthings. This resulted in an average fingerspelling
rate of 1.76 letters per second. The same rate was used for the
animations. Note that it is below the minimum rate of 2.18
reported by Keane and Brentari [13] (cf. Section 2.2), which
again points in the direction of a lower speed of fingerspelling
in DSGS.

The participants were informed that they could view a video
as many times as they wanted. Limiting the number of viewings

13



was felt to exert undue pressure. This approach was different
from the study of Geer and Keane [16] (Section 2.3), who al-
lowed subjects to view a video exactly twice, and Hanson [15],
who presumably showed each video once. Not restricting the
number of viewings in the present study also meant that there
was no limit to the response time for an item. The response time
was recorded as metadata.

Once participants had completed the main part of the study,
they were asked to provide feedback on the following aspects:

• Appropriateness of the rate of fingerspelling;

• Comprehensibility of the individual letters and transi-
tions between letters; and

• General feedback on the fingerspelling sequences shown

On the final page, participants were thanked for their con-
tribution and given the possibility to leave their e-mail address
if they wanted to receive information on the results of the study.
If provided, the e-mail address was not saved together with the
rest of the data to ensure anonymity. All data was stored in a
password-protected database.

The entire study was designed so as to take a maximum
of 20 minutes to complete. This was assessed through a pilot
study with three participants, in which the average time spent to
complete the study was 17 minutes.

4.2. Results and discussion

The study remained online for one week. During this time, 65
participants completed it, of which 31 were hearing, 24 Deaf,
and 6 hard-of-hearing. 4 participants indicated that they did
not fall into the three categories proposed for hearing status,
referring to themselves as “using sign and spoken language”,
“deafened”, “CODA” (child of Deaf adult), and “residual hear-
ing/profoundly hard-of-hearing”. The average time taken to
complete the entire survey was 20 minutes and 12 seconds.

For the 20 main study items (excluding the two practice
items), 1284 responses were submitted. In relation to the 1300
possible responses (20 items × 65 participants), this meant that
a total of 16 responses had been skipped.8 They were treated as
incorrect responses.

For each of the 1284 responses given, we determined
whether it was correct, ignoring umlaut expansions (ä→ae,
etc.) and differences in case. Table 1 displays the compre-
hension rates: The mean percentage of correct responses was
93.91% for sequences fingerspelled by the human signer and
90.06% for sequences fingerspelled by the avatar. Also dis-
played are the binomial confidence intervals at a confidence
level of 95%. They indicate a 95% confidence that the compre-
hension rate of the signing avatar is above 87.75% and below
92.37%. This result is highly satisfactory.

Comprehension rates below 100% for human signing have
been reported in previous studies [28, 29]. We surmise that in
this case, they were due at least partly to the fact that mouthings
were absent from the signing performances. While this was
a methodological decision made to ensure that what was be-
ing measured was core fingerspelling comprehension, several
participants alluded to the lack of mouthings in the post-study
questionnaire.

A comprehension rate of 100% was obtained for three se-
quences fingerspelled by the human signer (Realp, Reutlingen,

8Recall that participants were given the option of not responding at
any point in the study.

and Sedrun) and also for three sequences produced by the sign-
ing avatar (Bever, Hurden, and Mosen).

To obtain information about individual letters that may have
been hard to comprehend with the signing avatar, we performed
a confusion analysis. The results show that three letters were
mistaken for other letters more often in sequences fingerspelled
by the signing avatar than in sequences fingerspelled by the hu-
man signer: -F- (confused with -T- and -B-), -P- (confused with
-G- and -H-), and -R- (confused with -U-). One letter, -H-, was
confused more often in sequences fingerspelled by the human
signer than in sequences fingerspelled by the signing avatar; it
was mistaken with -G-, -L-, and -U-.

A confusion analysis between pairs of letters was also per-
formed to obtain pointers to transitions that potentially needed
to be improved. Comprehension was lower for four transitions
with the signing avatar than with the human signer: F-I (mis-
taken for T-I and B-I), L-P (mistaken for L-G and L-H), L-R
(mistaken for L-U), and R-I (mistaken for U-I). This overlaps
with the qualitative feedback in the post-study questionnaire
that asked for letters and transitions that were particularly hard
to understand: Several participants mentioned the avatar’s tran-
sitions into -G-, -I-, -P-, and -Q- as well as the transitions be-
tween -D- and -Q- and -L- and -P-. In addition, 12 out of 65
participants deemed the hand orientation of -Q- inaccurate.

In the general comments section, a number of participants
remarked that the fingerspelling of the human signer was easier
to understand than that of the signing avatar; some participants
noted that this was due to the hand appearing too small in the an-
imations. On the other hand, multiple participants commented
on the quality of the signing avatar as being “surprisingly good”.
Repeated mention was made of the impression that short finger-
spelled sequences were easier to understand than longer ones,
regardless of whether they were signed by a human or an avatar.

One participant encouraged the introduction of speed con-
trols for the signing avatar. In the post-study questionnaire rat-
ing of the speed of fingerspelling, the majority of the partici-
pants (number of responses: 62) deemed the speed appropriate
(56.45%), followed by 35.48% who rated it as being too fast.
4.84% classified it as too slow, and 3.23% deemed it much too
fast. No participant rated the speed as being much too slow. The
numbers are summarized in Table 2.

5. Conclusion and outlook

We have presented the first work in synthesizing the finger al-
phabet of DSGS, an application of natural language processing.
We have reported on the process of creating a set of hand pos-
tures and transitions as well as on a study assessing the compre-
hensibility of the resulting animations. The results showed that
the comprehension rate of the signing avatar was highly satis-
factory at 90.06%. Three of the sequences fingerspelled by the
avatar yielded a comprehension rate of 100%.

The speed of fingerspelling chosen for the signing avatar
was rated as appropriate by the majority of the participants. At
the same time, a lower yet substantial number of participants
rated it as being too high, which suggests that introducing speed
controls would be beneficial.

The results of the study also offered pointers to aspects of
the signing avatar that would benefit from further improvement,
such as the hand postures of a number of letters as well as the
transitions between some letters.

While the primary aim of the study was to assess the com-
prehensibility of the newly-created DSGS fingerspelling anima-
tions, the data obtained provides a wealth of information that

14



Comprehension Confidence interval Confidence interval

rate (%) lower bound (%) upper bound (%)

Human signer 93.91 92.05 95.76
Signing avatar 90.06 87.75 92.37

Table 1: Percentage of correct responses

Rating Responses (%)

much too slow 0.00
too slow 4.84
appropriate 56.45
too fast 35.48
much too fast 3.23

Table 2: Speed of fingerspelling: rating

can be used to inform other research questions. For exam-
ple, we intend to investigate the individual effects of the vari-
ables hearing status, age of DSGS acquisition, and speed-of-
fingerspelling rating on the comprehension scores.

The work presented in this paper represents the first step to-
wards a fingerspelling learning tool for DSGS. As a next step,
we will complete the development of the tool interface. Fol-
lowing this, we are going to conduct a study that assesses the
usability of the interface.

6. References

[1] G. Morgan and B. Woll, Eds., Directions in sign language
acquisition – Trends in language acquisition research.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2002.

[2] P. Boyes Braem, “A multimedia bilingual database for the
lexicon of Swiss German Sign Language,” Sign Language
& Linguistics, vol. 4, pp. 133–143, 2001.

[3] J. Toro, J. McDonald, and R. Wolfe, “Fostering Better
Deaf/Hearing Communication through a Novel Mobile
App for Fingerspelling,” in ICCHP 2014, Part II, LNCS
8548, K. M. et al., Ed., 2014, pp. 559–564.

[4] S. Wilcox, The Phonetics of Fingerspelling. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins Publishing, 1992.

[5] R. Wolfe, N. Alba, S. Billups, M. Davidson, C. Dwyer,
D. G. Jamrozik, L. Smallwood, K. Alkoby, L. Carhart,
D. Hinkle, A. Hitt, B. Kirchman, G. Lancaster, J. Mc-
Donald, L. Semler, J. Schnepp, B. Shiver, A. Suh, and
J. Young, “An Improved Tool for Practicing Finger-
spelling Recognition,” in Conference 2006 International
Conference on Technology and Persons with Disabilities,
Northridge, California, March 2006, pp. 17–22.

[6] E. Sáfár and J. Glauert, “Computer modelling,” in Sign
Language. An International Handbook, R. Pfau, M. Stein-
bach, and B. Woll, Eds. Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter
Mouton, 2012, ch. 44, pp. 1075–1101.

[7] C. Padden and D. Gunsauls, “How the Alphabet Came
to Be Used in a Sign Language,” Sign Language Studies,
vol. 4, pp. 10–33, 2003.

[8] M. Brennan, “Making Borrowing Work in British Sign
Language,” in Foreign Vocabulary in Sign Languages:
A Cross-Linguistic Investigation of Word Formation,
D. Brentari, Ed. Mahwah, N.J.: Erlbaum, 2001, pp. 49–
85.

[9] P. Boyes Braem and C. Rathmann, “Transmission of sign
language in Northern Europe,” in Sign languages, ser.
Cambridge language surveys, D. Brentari, Ed. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010, pp. 19–45.

[10] P. Boyes Braem, T. Haug, and P. Shores, “Gebärden-
spracharbeit in der Schweiz: Rückblick und Ausblick,”
Das Zeichen, vol. 90, pp. 58–74, 2012.

[11] P. Boyes Braem, Einführung in die Gebärdensprache und
ihre Erforschung, 3rd ed., ser. Internationale Arbeiten zur
Gebärdensprache und Kommunikation Gehörloser. Ham-
burg: Signum, 1995, vol. 11.

[12] ——, “Functions of the Mouthing Component in the
Signing of Deaf Early and Late Learners of Swiss Ger-
man Sign Language,” in Foreign Vocabulary in Sign Lan-
guages: A Cross-Linguistic Investigation of Word Forma-

tion, D. Brentari, Ed. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2001, pp.
1–47.

[13] J. Keane and D. Brentari, The Oxford Handbook of Deaf
Studies in Language: Research, Policy, and Practice.
Oxford University Press, forthcoming, ch. Fingerspelling:
Beyond Handshape Sequences.

[14] S. Ebling, “Evaluating a Swiss German Sign Language
Avatar among the Deaf Community,” in Proceedings of
the Third International Symposium on Sign Language

Translation and Avatar Technology, Chicago, IL, 2013.

[15] V. Hanson, “When a Word Is Not the Sum of Its Letters:
Fingerspelling and Spelling,” in Teaching American Sign
Language as a Second/Foreign Language: Proceedings

of the Third National Symposium on Sign Language Re-

search and Teaching, F. Caccamise, M. Garretson, and
U. Bellugi, Eds., 1981, pp. 176–185.

[16] L. Geer and J. Keane, “Exploring Factors that Contribute
to Successful Fingerspelling Comprehension,” in Pro-
ceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Lan-

guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14), N. Calzo-
lari, K. Choukri, T. Declerck, H. Loftsson, B. Maegaard,
J. Mariani, A. Moreno, J. Odijk, and S. Piperidis, Eds.
Reykjavik, Iceland: European Language Resources Asso-
ciation (ELRA), may 2014.

[17] M. Girard, “Constrained optimization of articulated ani-
mal movement in computer animation,” in Making Them
Move. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1991, pp. 209–
232.

[18] S. A. Su and R. K. Furuta, “VRML-based representations
of ASL fingerspelling on the World Wide Web,” in Pro-
ceedings of the third international ACM conference on As-

sistive technologies, 1998, pp. 43–45.

15



[19] J. McDonald, J. Toro, K. Alkoby, A. Berthiaume,
R. Carter, P. Chomwong, and J. C. et al., “An improved
articulated model of the human hand,” The Visual Com-
puter, vol. 17, pp. 158–166, 2001.

[20] M. J. Davidson, K. Alkoby, E. Sedgwick, R. Carter,
J. Christopher, B. Craft, and J. F. et al., “Improved Hand
Animation for American Sign Language,” in Technology
And Persons With Disabilities Conference, 2001.

[21] N. Adamo-Villani and G. Beni, “Automated finger
spelling by highly realistic 3d animation,” British journal
of educational technology, vol. 35, pp. 345–362, 2004.

[22] N. Adamo-Villani, “3d rendering of american sign lan-
guage finger-spelling: a comparative study of two anima-
tion techniques,” International Journal of Human and So-
cial Sciences, vol. 3, p. 24, 2008.

[23] S. Yeates, H. Eun-Jung, and R. Owens, “An animated
Auslan tuition system,” Machine Graphics And Vision,
vol. 12, pp. 203–214, 2003.

[24] L. van Zijl and L. Raitt, “Implementation experience with
collision avoidance in signing avatars,” in Proceedings
of the 3rd international conference on Computer graph-

ics, virtual reality, visualisation and interaction in Africa.
ACM, 2004, pp. 55–59.

[25] A. Krastev, A. Lekova, M. Dimitrova, and I. Chavdarov,
“An interactive technology to support education of chil-
dren with hearing problems,” in Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on Computer Systems and Tech-

nologies. ACM, 2014, pp. 445–451.

[26] R. Kennaway, “Experience with and Requirements for a
Gesture Description Language for Synthetic Animation,”
in Gesture-Based Communication in Human-Computer
Interaction, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
A. Camurri and G. Volpe, Eds. Berlin/Heidelberg:
Springer, 2004.

[27] D. Brentari, A Prosodic Model of Sign Language Phonol-
ogy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.

[28] M. Kipp, A. Heloir, and Q. Nguyen, “Sign language
avatars: Animation and comprehensibility,” in Proceed-
ings of IVA 2011, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
H. Vilhjálmsson, S. Kopp, S. Marsella, and K. Thórisson,
Eds., vol. 6895. Reykjavik, Iceland: Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, 2011, pp. 113–126.

[29] WebSourd, “DictaSign Deliverable D7.4: Prototype eval-
uation synthesis,” DictaSign project, Tech. Rep., 2011.

16


	Synthesizing the finger alphabet of Swiss German Sign Language and evaluating the comprehensibility of the resulting animations
	Sarah Ebling, Rosalee Wolfe, Jerry Schnepp, Souad Baowidan, John McDonald, Robyn Moncrief, Sandra Sidler-Miserez and Katja Tissi


