



















































Curse or Boon? Presence of Subjunctive Mood in Opinionated Text


Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 101–106,
London, UK, April 15-17 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Curse or Boon? Presence of Subjunctive Mood in Opinionated
Text

Sapna Negi and Paul Buitelaar
Insight Centre for Data Analytics

National University of Ireland
Galway

firstname.lastname@insight-centre.org

Abstract
In addition to the expression of positive and negative sentiments in the reviews, customers often

tend to express wishes and suggestions regarding improvements in a product/service, which could
be worth extracting. Subjunctive mood is often present in sentences which speak about a possibility
or action that has not yet occurred. While this phenomena poses challenges to the identification of
positive and negative sentiments hidden in a text, it can be helpful to identify wishes and suggestions.
In this paper, we extract features from a small dataset of subjunctive mood, and use those features
to identify wishes and suggestions in opinionated text. Our study validates that subjunctive features
can be good features for the detection of wishes. However, with the given dataset, such features did
not perform well for suggestion detection.

1 Introduction

In the context of Sentiment Analysis, presence of a variety of linguistic phenomena poses challenges
for the identification of underlying sentiment in an opinionated text. Subjunctive mood is one such
phenomena (Liu et al. (2013); Bloom (2011)). It is a commonly occurring language phenomenon in
Indo-European languages, which is a verb mood typically used in subordinate clauses to express action
that has not yet occurred, in the form of a wish, possibility, necessity etc. (Guan, 2012). Oxford dic-
tionary defines it as, Relating to or denoting a mood of verbs expressing what is imagined or wished or
possible. Sentiment terms present in such sentences may not necessarily contribute to the actual senti-
ment of the sentence, for example ‘I wish it tasted as amazing as it looked’ is not positive. While this is
considered as a challenge for sentiment analysis, we adopt a different perspective, and discover benefits
of the presence of subjunctive mood in opinionated text.
Apart from the expression of criticism and satisfaction in customer reviews, reviews might include sug-
gestions for improvements. Suggestions can either be expressed explicitly (Brun, 2013), or by expressing
wishes regarding new features and improvements(Ramanand et al., 2010) (Table 1). Extraction of sug-
gestions goes beyond the scope of sentiment analysis, and also complements it by providing another
valuable information that is worth analyzing. Table 1 presents some examples of occurrence of subjunc-
tive mood collected from different forums on English grammar1. There seems to be a high probability of
the occurrence of subjunctive mood in wish and suggestion expressing sentences. This observation can
be exploited for the tasks of wish detection (Ramanand et al., 2010), and suggestion extraction (Brun,
2013). To the best of our knowledge, subjunctive mood has never been analysed in the context of wish
and suggestion detection.
We collect a sample dataset comprising of example sentences of subjunctive mood, and identify features
of subjunctive mood. We then employ a state of the art statistical classifier, and use subjunctive features
in order to perform two kind of tasks on a given set of sentences: 1. Detect wish expressing sentences,
and 2. Detect suggestion expressing sentences.

1http://grammar.about.com/od/rs/g/subjuncterm05.htm

101



Description Examples
Suggestion bearing wishes in product
reviews

I wanted a dvd player that had basic features and would be able
to play dvd or format discs that I had made myself.
I wish canon would work out some way for that issue.

Direct suggestions in product reviews They should improve their user interface.
Wishes in political discussions I wish someone said that to teddy at the meeting yesterday.

Perhaps I should have stopped at 8 or 9 years old.
I would like to know if you re a purist or a hypocrite.

Sentences containing subjunctive mood I wish it were summer.
I suggest that Dawn drive the car.
But if it weren’t so big, it wouldn’t be nearly so fun.

Table 1: Examples of Suggestions, Wishes, and Subjunctive Mood

2 Related work

Mood and Modality: Modality is a grammatical category that allows the expression of aspects related
to the attitude of a speaker towards his statement, in terms of degree of certainty, reliability, subjectivity,
sources of information, and perspective (Morante and Sporleder, 2012). Subjunctive mood originated
from the typological studies of modality (Palmer, 1986; Dudman, 1988; Portner, 2009). Some works
equate its presence with ‘counterfactuality’(Palmer, 1986), while some do not (Anderson, 1951). Other
concepts like ‘event modality’, ‘irrealis’ (Palmer, 1986), have definitions similar to that of subjunctive
mood.
Benamara et al. (2012) studied modality and negation for French language, with an objective to examine
its effect on sentiment polarity. Narayanan et al. (2009) performed sentiment analysis on conditional sen-
tences. Our objective however is inclined towards wish and suggestion detection, rather than sentiment
analysis.
Wish Detection: Goldberg et al. (2009) performed wish detection on datasets obtained from political
discussion forums and product reviews. They automatically extracted sentence templates from a corpus
of new year wishes, and used them as features with a statistical classifier.
Suggestion Detection: Ramanand et al. (2010) pointed out that wish is a broader category, which might
not bear suggestions every time. They performed suggestion detection, where they focussed only on sug-
gestion bearing wishes, and used manually formulated syntactic patterns for their detection. Brun (2013)
also extracted suggestions from product reviews and used syntactico-semantic patterns for suggestion
detection. None of these works on suggestion detection used a statistical classifier.
None of these works aligned the problem of wish and suggestion detection with subjunctive mood, or
identified features related to it. Wish and suggestion detection remain young problems, and our work
contributes towards the same.

3 Datasets

Following are the datasets which we use for our experiments.

• Wish Detection
Oxford dictionary defines the noun wish as, A desire or hope for something to happen. Goldberg
et al. (2009) follow this definition of wish and provide manually annotated datasets, where each
sentence is labelled as wish or non-wish. Following two datasets are made available:
a. Political Discussions: 6379 sentences, out of which 34% are annotated wishes.
b. Product Reviews: 1235 sentences, out of which 12% are annotated as wishes.
Table 1 presents some examples from these datasets.
Ramanand et al. (2010) worked on product review dataset of the wish corpus, with an objective
to extract suggestions for improvements. They considered suggestions as a subset of wishes, and

102



thus retained the labels of only suggestion bearing wishes. They also annotated additional product
reviews, but their data is not available for open research.

• Suggestion Detection
Product reviews (new): We re-annotated the product review dataset from Goldberg et al. (2009),
for suggestions. This also includes wishes for improvements and new features. Out of 1235 sen-
tences, 6% are annotated as suggestions. Table 1 presents some examples from this dataset.
Annotation Details: We had 2 annotators annotate each sentence with a suggestion or non-suggestion
tag. We support the observation of Ramanand et al. (2010) that wishes for improvements and new
features are implicit expression of suggestions. Therefore, annotators were also asked to anno-
tate suggestions which were expressed as wishes. For inter-annotator agreement, a kappa value of
0.874 was obtained. In the final dataset, we only retained the sentences where both the annotators
agree.

Subjunctive Feature Extraction
Subjunctive Mood Dataset (new): Since we did not come across any corpus of subjunctive mood, we
collected example sentences of subjunctive mood from various grammar websites and forums2, which
resulted in a sample dataset of 229 sentences. Table 1 shows examples from this dataset. We use this
dataset for manual and automatic identification of features of subjunctive mood.

4 Approach

We use a statistical classifier to detect wishes and suggestions in corresponding datasets. We obtain the
following set of features from the subjunctive mood dataset.

Lexical Features:

• Condition indicator ‘if’: This is a binary feature, whose value depends on the presence and
absence of ‘if’ in a sentence.

• Suggestion and Wish Verbs: We collect some suggestion and wish indicator verbs observed in the
subjunctive mood dataset. We then expand this set of verbs by using VerbNet 3.2 (Schuler, 2005).
VerbNet is a wide coverage verb lexicon, which places verbs into classes whose members have
common syntactic and semantic properties. We collect all members of the VerbNet verb classes
advice, wish, want, urge, require; 28 different verbs were obtained. Ramanand et al. (2010) also
used a similar but much smaller subset {love, like, prefer and suggest} in their rules.

Syntactic Features:

• Frequent POS sequences: This is a set of 3,4 length sequences of Part Of Speech (POS) tags,
which are automatically extracted from the subjunctive mood dataset. Words in the sentences
are replaced by their corresponding POS tag, and top 200 sequences are extracted based on their
weight. The weight of each sequence is a product of Term Frequency (TF) and Inverse Document
Frequency (IDF). In order to apply the concept of TF and IDF to POS tag sequences, every 3
and 4 length tag sequence occurring in the corpus is treated as a term. We separate tags within a
sequence with an underscore. An example of a sequence of length 3 would be PRP VB PRP ie.
Personal Pronoun Base form of Verb Personal pronoun.

• Frequent Dependency Relations: These are a set of dependency relations (Marneffe and Man-
ning, 2008). Using the same method as the part of speech tags, we identify 5 most frequent de-
pendency relations which occur in the subjunctive mood dataset. In order to apply the concept of
TF/IDF, each dependency relation occurring in the corpus is treated as a term. The top 5 relations
were: advmod, aux, ccomp, mark and nsubj.

2http://grammar.about.com/od/rs/g/subjuncterm05.htm

103



Data Experiment Features Precision Recall AUC
Politics Ours unigrams 0.73 0.65 0.76

subjunctive 0.70 0.34 0.63
unigrams,subjunctive 0.75 0.67 0.78

Goldberg et.al (2009) templates n/a n/a 0.73
unigrams,templates n/a n/a 0.80

Products Ours unigrams 0.78 0.21 0.60
subjunctive 0.59 0.31 0.64
unigrams,subjunctive 0.82 0.25 0.62

Goldberg et.al (2009) templates n/a n/a 0.47
unigrams,templates n/a n/a 0.56

Table 2: Results of Wish Detection and Comparison with Goldberg et. al. 2009

Data Features Precision Recall AUC

products
unigrams 0.29 0.02 0.51
subjunctive 0.29 0.11 0.54
unigrams,subjunctive 0.33 0.02 0.51

Table 3: Results of Suggestion Detection

We also obtain classification results of the combination of these features with the standard unigram fea-
tures (Table 2, 3).
To obtain the part of speech and dependency information, we use Stanford Parser 3.3.1 (Klein and Man-
ning, 2003). Word stemming is not performed. We use the LibSVM implementation of SVM classifier
(EL-Manzalawy and Honavar, 2005). The parameter values of SVM classifiers are: SVM type = C-SVC,
Kernel Function = Radial Basis Function. Features are ranked using the Info- Gain feature selection al-
gorithm (Mitchell, 1997). Top 1000 features are used in all the experiments ie. the size of feature vector
is not more than 1000.

5 Subjunctive Feature Evaluation

Goldberg et al. (2009) evaluated their approach using a 10 fold cross validation on their datasets. In
order to compare subjunctive features against their wish template features, we also perform 10 fold cross
validation on their wish datasets (politics and products). The evaluation metrics include Precision, Recall,
and Area Under Curve (AUC) for the positive class. AUC was also used by Goldberg et al. (2009).
To the best of our knowledge, statistical classification based approach have not yet been employed to
detect suggestions in reviews. Our experiment which uses subjunctive features for suggestion detection,
is the first in this regard.

Results and Discussion

Table 2 compares the AUC values obtained with unigrams, subjunctive features, a combination of both,
and the results from Goldberg et al. (2009) for wish detection. Table 3 compares the AUC values ob-
tained with unigrams, subjunctive features, and a combination of both for suggestion detection. Table 4
presents some of the top features used by the classifier.

Wish Detection:
Unigrams vs Subjunctive: One probable reason for the better performance of subjunctive features over
unigrams in the case of product dataset, could be the small size of the dataset. In the case of politics
dataset, similar reason (big dataset) can be attributed for the better performance of unigrams over sub-
junctive features.

104



Classification Data Unigrams Subjunctive
Wish Politics hope, please, wish, hopefully, I,

you, should, want, your, all
hope, want, nsubj, wish,
MD VB VBN, advmod,
PRP VBP IN, PRP VBP PRP,
VB DT NN, PRP VBP DT

Products hope, wish, hoping, now, would,
hopefully, sell, should, want, get

hope, wish, want, MD VB VBN,
aux, ccomp, RB PRP MD,
RB PRP MD VB, if, nsubj

Suggestion Products if, you, your, now, recommend, I ,
better, waste, display, want

if, IN PRP VBP,IN PRP VB,
recommend, suggest,
DT NN VBZ, PRP VBP DT,
PRP MD VB, IN PRP VB DT,
NN PRP MD

Table 4: Top 10 Unigram and Subjunctive features used by the Classifier

Wish templates vs Subjunctive: The wish templates of Goldberg et al. (2009) perform better than our
subjunctive features for the politics data. However, subjunctive features perform much better with prod-
uct data as compared to the wish templates (Table 3). This may lead to the conclusion that wish templates
need larger training corpus, since they failed for the smaller dataset of product reviews (AUC less than
0.5). One additional benefit of subjunctive features could be that subjunctive mood appears in many
languages, and thus such features can be easily extended to multi-lingual wish detection.

Suggestion Detection:
Subjunctive features perform better than unigrams in this case too. An overall decrease in classifier
performance for the task of suggestion detection can be attributed to the fact that not all wishes are sug-
gestions, and therefore are not tagged in this dataset. Some of these untagged wishes would contain
subjunctive mood, which reduced the performance of subjunctive features, as compared to the task of
wish detection.

6 Conclusion

From the results of feature evaluation, we conclude that subjunctive features are not effective for sug-
gestion detection, but are considerably effective for the task of wish detection. This work contributes
towards both, analysis and methodology for wish detection. On the analysis part, we validate that a con-
siderable amount of wishes in opinionated text contain subjunctive mood. On the methodology part, we
use subjunctive mood features as effective features for the detection of wishes. We also provide datasets
for this kind of study.
Since we only deal with 2 domains here, further experiments can be performed over data from different
domains. In the continuation of this work, we intend to extend the datasets and explore more syntactic
and semantic features for wish and suggestion detection.

Acknowledgement

This work has been funded by the the European Union’s Horizon 2020 programme under grant agreement
No 644632 MixedEmotions, and Science Foundation Ireland under Grant Number SFI/12/RC/2289.

References

C. Brun and C. Hagege (2013). Suggestion Mining: Detecting Suggestions for Improvements in Users
Comments.

105



Anderson, A. R. (1951). A note on subjunctive and counterfactual conditionals. JST 12.

Benamara, F., B. Chardon, Y. Mathieu, V. Popescu, and N. Asher (2012). How do negation and modality
impact on opinions? In Proceedings of the Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in
Computational Linguistics, ExProM ’12, pp. 10–18. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bloom, K. (2011). Sentiment analysis based on appraisal theory and functional local grammars. Ph. D.
thesis, Illinois Institute of Technology.

Dudman, V. H. (1988). Indicative and subjunctive. Analysis, 113–122.

EL-Manzalawy, Y. and V. Honavar (2005). WLSVM: Integrating LibSVM into Weka Environment.

Goldberg, A. B., N. Fillmore, D. Andrzejewski, Z. Xu, B. Gibson, and X. Zhu (2009). May all your
wishes come true: A study of wishes and how to recognize them. In Proceedings of Human Lan-
guage Technologies: The 2009 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, NAACL ’09, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, pp. 263–271. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Guan, X. (2012). A study on the formalization of english subjunctive mood. Academy Publisher.

Klein, D. and C. D. Manning (2003). Accurate unlexicalized parsing. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual
Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics - Volume 1, ACL ’03, Stroudsburg, PA, USA,
pp. 423–430. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Liu, Y., X. Yu, Z. Chen, and B. Liu (2013). Sentiment analysis of sentences with modalities. In Proceed-
ings of the 2013 International Workshop on Mining Unstructured Big Data Using Natural Language
Processing, UnstructureNLP ’13, New York, NY, USA, pp. 39–44. ACM.

Marneffe, M.-C. D. and C. D. Manning (2008). Stanford typed dependencies manual.

Mitchell, T. M. (1997). Machine Learning (1 ed.). New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, Inc.

Morante, R. and C. Sporleder (2012). Modality and negation: An introduction to the special issue.
Computational Linguistics 38(2), 223–260.

Narayanan, R., B. Liu, and A. Choudhary (2009). Sentiment analysis of conditional sentences. In
Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP
’09, pp. 180–189. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Palmer, F. R. (1986). Mood and Modality. Cambridge University Press.

Portner, P. (2009). Modality. Oxford University Press.

Ramanand, J., K. Bhavsar, and N. Pedanekar (2010, June). Wishful thinking - finding suggestions and
’buy’ wishes from product reviews. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Compu-
tational Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text, Los Angeles, CA, pp. 54–61.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Schuler, K. K. (2005). Verbnet: A Broad-coverage, Comprehensive Verb Lexicon. Ph. D. thesis, Philadel-
phia, PA, USA. AAI3179808.

106


