



















































Bridging Sentential and Discourse-level Semantics through Clausal Adjuncts


Proceedings of the EMNLP 2015 Workshop on Linking Models of Lexical, Sentential and Discourse-level Semantics, pages 64–69,
Lisboa, Portugal, 18 September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Bridging Sentential and Discourse-level Semantics through Clausal
Adjuncts

Rashmi Prasad1, Bonnie Webber2, Alan Lee3, Sameer Pradhan4, Aravind Joshi3
1Department of Health Informatics and Administration, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee

prasadr@uwm.edu
2School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh

Bonnie.Webber@ed.ac.uk
3Institute for Research in Cognitive Science, University of Pennsylvania

{aleewk,joshi}@seas.upenn.edu
4Boulder Language Technologies

pradhan@bltek.com

Abstract

It is in PropBank’s ARGM annotation of
clausal adjuncts that sentential semantics
meets discourse relation annotation in the
Penn Discourse TreeBank. This paper
discusses complementarities between the
two annotation systems: How PropBank
ARGM annotation can be used to seed an-
notation of additional discourse relations
in the PDTB, and how PDTB annotation
can be used to refine or enrich PropBank
ARGM annotation.

1 Introduction

Discourse relations between abstract objects, such
as facts, events, propositions, etc. (Asher, 1993),
can hold either across sentences (i.e., inter-
sententially), or within a single sentence (i.e.,
intra-sententially), as in Ex. 1–4. (Italics and bold-
face highlight the two related abstract objects, re-
spectively, and relation signals, when present, are
underlined.)

(1) The federal government suspended sales of U.S. sav-
ings bonds because Congress hasn’t lifted the ceiling
on government debt.

(2) The House has voted to raise the ceiling to $3.1 trillion,
but the Senate isn’t expected to act until next week
at the earliest.

(3) Now, we regard this as a largely phony issue, but
the “long term” is nonetheless a big salon topic all
around the Beltway.

(4) The U.S. wants the removal of . . .barriers to invest-
ment; Japan denies there are real barriers.

Researchers working on discourse parsing have
commented that intra-sentential (intra-S) dis-
course relations are, in general, easier to rec-
ognize than ones whose arguments are found in
separate sentences (Joty et al., 2012; Lin et al.,

2012; Feng, 2014). They are also quite useful
in Language Technology applications that exploit
sentence-level relations. Thus, there is particular
value in improving the quality of recognizers ca-
pable of determining what, if any, discourse rela-
tions hold between intra-S units.

Taking abstract objects to be expressed (ar-
guably) typically as clauses headed by verbs or
other predicates, the Penn Discourse Treebank
(PDTB) (Prasad et al., 2008) includes annotations
of intra-S discourse relations but, as noted by
Prasad et al. (2014), they are significantly under-
annotated in the corpus. At the same time, Prasad
et al. (2014) point to possible overlaps between
intra-S discourse relations in the PDTB and a
subset of verb-argument annotations in PropBank
(Palmer et al., 2005). The PropBank annotations
of particular interest here are those in which the
arguments are clausal adjuncts, labeled ARGM,
and further assigned a semantic role. For exam-
ple, the PropBank annotation of the verb suspend
in Ex. 1 is shown in (5), with the adjunct clause
annotated as ARGM and assigned the role CAU
(causal). The PDTB annotation for the same ex-
ample, shown in (6), marks because as the connec-
tive, ‘Contingency.Cause.Reason’ as the sense, the
adjunct clause as Arg2 (defined as the argument at-
tached to the connective), and the matrix clause as
Arg1 (defined as the non-Arg2 argument).

(5) PropBank: Verb = suspend
Arg0 = The federal government
Arg1 = sales of U.S. savings bonds
ARGM-CAU = because Congress hasn’t lifted the ceil-
ing on government debt

(6) PDTB: Connective = because
Arg1 = The federal government suspended sales of U.S.
savings bonds
Arg2 = Congress hasn’t lifted the ceiling on govern-
ment debt
Sense = Contingency.Cause.Reason

64



TEMPORAL CONTINGENCY COMPARISON EXPANSION TOTAL

ARGM-ADV (2235) 222 1067 907 157 2353
ARGM-CAU (657) 14 650 0 0 664
ARGM-TMP (2503) 2258 523 73 23 2877
ARGM-PNC (66) 0 65 1 0 66
ARGM-MNR (13) 0 5 1 7 13
TOTAL (5475) 2494 2310 982 187 5973

Table 1: Correspondences between PropBank ARGM- roles and PDTB senses

Given possible overlaps between the PDTB
and PropBank, this paper addresses the following
questions: (1) To what extent can the PropBank
clausal ARGM annotations be taken as convey-
ing information relevant for intra-S discourse re-
lations (Section 2), and can they be useful for in-
creasing the number of intra-S discourse relations
annotated in the PDTB (Section 3)?; and (2) Can
PDTB annotations be useful for enriching Prop-
Bank in any way (Section 4)? Section 5 concludes
the paper.

2 PropBank ARGM Roles and Discourse
Relations

The PDTB 2.0 (the current version of the cor-
pus) lacks extensive annotation of intra-S rela-
tions. Annotations of intra-S relations are pro-
vided primarily for relations that are signaled by
explicit connectives (subordinating conjunctions
(Ex. 1), coordinating conjunctions (Ex. 2), and ad-
verbials (Ex. 3)). The only implicit relations cur-
rently annotated are those between clauses con-
nected by a punctuation such as the semi-colon or
colon (Ex. 4). Among the relations that are miss-
ing are implicit relations linking adjunct clauses
that are not subordinated by any explicit form, as
in Ex. 7, and adjunct clauses introduced by prepo-
sitional subordinators like by, for, with, without,
to, as in Ex. 8-9.

(7) Second , they channel monthly mortgage payments into
semiannual payments, reducing the administrative
burden on investors.

(8) To avoid this deficit, Mr. Lawson inflated the pound in
order to prevent its rise.

(9) Critics say South Carolina is paying a price by stress-
ing improved test scores so much.

These types of unannotated relations involv-
ing adjunct clauses in the PDTB have, on the
other hand, been annotated in PropBank, as de-
scribed in Section 1. Hence, a natural question
to ask is whether the semantic roles of such ad-
junct clauses in PropBank can be used to fill in

the gap when annotations of intra-S discourse re-
lations are not present in the PDTB for these
clauses, thus avoiding duplicate annotation efforts.
To explore this possibility, we considered a par-
allel case: the annotation of adjunct clauses in-
troduced by explicit connectives in the PDTB,
such as those in Ex. 1, which have been an-
notated in the corpus. We investigated the ex-
tent of the overlap between PropBank and PDTB
annotations in such cases. Using the underly-
ing syntactic annotations of the Penn Treebank
(PTB) (Marcus et al., 1993), 11534 clausal ad-
juncts with either of the following six roles were
extracted from PropBank:1 ARGM-ADV (adver-
bial), ARGM-CAU (causal), ARGM-MNR (man-
ner), ARGM-PNC (purpose), ARGM-PRD (sec-
ondary predication), and ARGM-TMP (temporal).
Other roles (ARGM-MOD/DIR/EXT/DIS/LOC)
were excluded because we did not see them as rep-
resenting discourse relations. The 11534 ARGMs
were then aligned with the PDTB and 48% (5475)
were found to contain an explicit subordinating
form annotated as a discourse connective in the
PDTB. Except for ARGM-PRD, all the discourse-
relevant ARGM roles were observed in this set
(Table 1). We then looked at the correspondence
between the roles assigned to these ARGMs in
PropBank and the senses annotated for the connec-
tives in the PDTB. Because the PDTB sense clas-
sification is hierarchical and contains many fine-
grained relations, we simplified the comparison by
considering only the four top level classes of the
PDTB – Temporal (TEMP), Contingency (CONT),
Comparison (COMP), and Expansion (EXP). The
correspondences are shown in Table 1. The num-
bers in parentheses in the first column represent
the total number of ARGM instances annotated
with the role shown.

There are several observations to make from
Table 1. First, based on the definitions of the
ARGM roles in PropBank and those of the senses

1For this part of the work, we used PropBank-I.

65



in the PDTB, we would expect PropBank ARGM-
CAU to align with PDTB Contingency, and Prop-
Bank ARGM-TMP to align with PDTB Tempo-
ral. This is largely borne out for ARGM-CAU,
with 99% of the instances labeled as Contingency
in PDTB. ARGM-TMP, while showing a greater
association with non-Temporal PDTB senses, nev-
ertheless corresponds to PDTB Temporal 90% of
the time. While the current PDTB sense classifi-
cation does not include Purpose and Manner rela-
tions, PDTB guidelines followed a convention to
label Purpose connectives such as so that as ‘Con-
tingency.Cause.Result’, so we would expect to
see ARGM-PNC aligned with Contingency. This
is largely borne out as well, with only one in-
stance labeled otherwise. Manner relations, on
the other hand, are not addressed in the exist-
ing PDTB guidelines at all, which may explain
the variable sense annotation of the ARGM-MNR
cases in the PDTB. In contrast to the previous four
ARGM roles, however, the ARGM-ADV role,
which constitutes 41% of all the roles, fails to pro-
vide semantically meaningful alignment with the
PDTB senses. According to the PropBank guide-
lines (Bonial et al., 2010), ARGM-ADV is used
for syntactic elements which clearly modify the
event structure of the verb in question, but which
cannot be classified as any of the other roles. As
the table shows, this role is ambiguous among all
four sense classes in the PDTB, although we see a
much higher proportion of Contingency and Com-
parison than Temporal and Expansion.

The second observation from Table 1 is that the
total number of PDTB senses associated with an
ARGM role (last column) is in some cases more
than the total number of instances for that ARGM
role (first column). Altogether, the table shows a
total of 5973 PDTB senses associated with a to-
tal of 5475 PropBank ARGM roles. This is due
to the fact that the PDTB allows multiple relations
to be inferred between abstract objects, whereas
PropBank only allows a single role to be assigned
to any given ARGM. Notably, however, multiple
PDTB senses do not appear at all for ARGM-PNC
and ARGM-MNR, and appear in only seven in-
stances for ARGM-CAU. ARGM-TMP had the
most instances (374) with multiple senses, while
ARGM-ADV had 118.

What these observations suggest is that while
the correspondence between PropBank clausal
ARGM roles and PDTB senses is not exact, they

can still be leveraged to some extent. On the one
hand, relations with the ARGM-ADV role would
need to be manually annotated for the PDTB
sense. But on the other hand, the high degree of
correspondences seen for other roles suggest the
possibility of their straightforward mapping from
PropBank to PDTB. The possibility of multiple
senses in the PDTB would require further anno-
tation, but this may be needed for only the Tem-
poral sense. And here too, there may be less effort
required since the annotator would not need to rea-
son about the Temporal sense but only consider the
possibility of inferring a second sense.

We must note that the semantics of the relation
is not the only kind of correspondence to consider
between PropBank and the PDTB. Mismatches
in alignment can also arise between PDTB argu-
ments and PropBanks semantic role structure, in
large part because the PropBank annotation is tied
directly to the syntactic trees in the PTB. Ex. 10
shows a sentence containing a when-clause an-
notated as ARGM-TMP in PropBank and with a
Temporal sense in the PDTB. But the relation be-
tween the when-clause and its other argument is
different between the two corpora. In the PDTB,
where annotation is done over the raw text spans,
the Arg1 of the connective excludes he says, and
the temporal relation is annotated between the
winning and awarding events. In contrast, in Prop-
Bank, the when-clause is taken to modiy the verb
say. Hence, we cannot use PropBank’s projected
clause to automatically annotate the Arg1 of the
corresponding PDTB relation as this would be in-
consistent with the PDTB guidelines.
(10) When Mr. Green won a $240,000 verdict in a land

condemnation case against the state in June 1983,
he says Judge O’Kicki unexpectedly awarded him an
additional $100,000.

Given the difference in annotation practice, the
extent of such mismatches between the PDTB
and PropBank is expected to be the same as that
between the PDTB and the PTB (Dinesh et al.,
2005). Nevertheless, since the majority of seman-
tic conflicts are due to attribution verbs, one can
reduce the annotation effort by automatically high-
lighting instances with attribution verbs, in con-
texts that may lead to inconsistent semantics.

3 Using PropBank to Seed New PDTB
Annotations

Despite the partial correspondence described
above, PropBank is richly annotated with clausal

66



adjunct tokens that in PDTB would be Arg2 of
a discourse relation. Therefore, in preparing the
next version of the PDTB, we have used these
PropBank tokens to seed the corpus with new an-
notations of intra-S relations. Our search for new
tokens uses the latest version of the PropBank
layer of the OntoNotes v5.0. corpus, since this
PropBank version contains additional tokens for
copular verbs and their argument structure, as well
as modifications to tokens from PropBank-I. How-
ever, since only about 75% of the PTB is included
in OntoNotes, the remaining 25% was taken from
PropBank-I. Clausal adjuncts identified from these
two versions of PropBank were then divided (us-
ing the syntactic trees in the PTB) into those that
had an explicit subordinating form and those that
did not. The former set was filtered to retain to-
kens not already annotated in PDTB 2.0. Most of
these contain subordinators as the connecting ele-
ments (as in Ex. 8-9) that we will consider as sig-
nals of explicit intra-sentential discourse relations.
The latter set yielded free adjuncts (Ex. 7), both
present participles and past participles.

Altogether, over 5000 tokens signaling potential
intra-sentential relations have been seeded in this
way for further annotation, semi-automatically or
manually. In the set comprising free adjuncts,
approximately 75% were found to be assigned
the ARGM-ADV role in Propbank while approxi-
mately 19% are assigned the similarly underspec-
ified ARGM-PRD role. This leaves only 6% as-
signed to the Purpose, Causal, Manner and Tem-
poral roles which, as discussed above, have strong
correspondences with PDTB senses. Because of
this, the annotation of free adjuncts is being done
manually. The annotation guidelines extend di-
rectly from those used in annotating PDTB 2.0
while some new senses and refinements have also
been introduced, including the addition of Purpose
and Manner senses.

Unlike the free adjuncts, we see less underspec-
ification with adjuncts that are subordinated by
some explicit form. Adjuncts with the Purpose
role are the most frequent, at 50%, followed by
ARGM-MNR (26%). ARGM-ADV continues to
appear in this set, although less frequently (18%).
All other roles account for the remaining 6% of
the tokens. We expect that these tokens can be an-
notated semi-automatically. As noted earlier, be-
cause the PDTB senses are in some cases more
refined than Propbank roles (for example the Tem-

ARGM-ADV 58.11
ARGM-CAU 60.67
ARGM-TMP 76.42
ARGM-PRP2 52.40
ARGM-MNR 62.10
Overall 77.44

Table 2: Performance of ASSERT on ARGMs in
OntoNotes v5.0.

poral sense, is further distinguished between Tem-
poral.Synchrony and Temporal.Asynchrony) and
because the argument spans needs to be consistent
with PDTB guidelines, each token will need to be
looked at manually. But the overall time and effort
spent on annotation will be reduced while consis-
tency with an existing complementary annotation
layer is enhanced.

4 On Enrichment of ARGM Roles in
PropBank

The focus in PropBank is on the predicate ar-
gument structure of verbs, and while some of
the clausal adjunct arguments such as ARGM-
ADV, ARGM-CAU, ARGM-MNR, ARGM-PNC
and ARGM-TMP can signal intra-sentential dis-
course relations, distinguishing subtle discourse-
specific nuances for such adjuncts was not its pri-
mary goal. It is therefore not surprising to find as
a semantic role, ARGM-ADV, which was devised
to capture adverbials that could not clearly be la-
beled with one of the more specific adjunct roles.
However, many semantic role labeling methods
that utilize PropBank-style annotations do try to
differentiate between the various ARGM roles.
Of interest then are the performance results of
semantic role labelers on the task of predicting
ARGM roles. As shown in Table 2, although the
overall F1-score of a semantic role labeler AS-
SERT (Pradhan et al., 2004) on PropBank is in
the high 70s (across a diverse set of genres anno-
tated in the OntoNotes v5.0 test set (Pradhan et
al., 2013)), the F1-scores for all ARGM roles, ex-
cept for ARGM-TMP, is in the low 60s or below
60.

As discussed in Section 2, both ARGM-ADV
and ARGM-TMP exhibit the most variability in
PDTB senses, the former in terms of the number
of PDTB senses associated with it in significant
proportions, and both in terms of how often they

2ARGM-PRP is the label to which ARGM-PNC was
changed, over the course of the OntoNotes project.

67



are associated with multiple PDTB senses. There-
fore, it might be worth enriching these ARGM
roles, and possibly others such as ARGM-CAU,
in PropBank with the sense distinctions found for
them in the PDTB. Not only would this allow se-
mantic role labelers to learn the finer distinctions
that are currently lumped into a coarse-grained
category, it would also make for a better inte-
grated resource. We can compare this overloading,
primarily of ARGM-ADV, with similar overload-
ing of numbered arguments Arg2..Arg5 in Prop-
Bank. A study by Yi et al. (2007) demonstrated
that refining these numbered arguments with a
more fine-grained set of thematic roles, using a
mapping from VerbNet (Schuler, 2005), improves
classifier performance. In the case of Arg2 (the
largest of these numbered argument classes), the
F1-score improved by an absolute 10% points. We
feel optimistic that through the proposed PDTB-
informed refinement, we can get a significant per-
formance boost in the prediction of ARGMs cur-
rently labeled as ARGM-ADV and possibly for
other ARGM types as well. We plan to explore
this in our future work. The finer distinctions
could potentially also allow for prediction of mul-
tiple equally plausible labels, thus allowing more
accurate evaluation of semantic role labelers that
might, for example, learn to annotate some in-
stances as ARGM-CAU rather than ARGM-TMP
but are currently being needlessly penalized.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

A complete and well-defined annotation of
intra-sentential discourse relations can have far-
reaching benefits for Language Technology appli-
cations. We have explored the possibility of lever-
aging the sentential semantics represented in Prop-
Bank for closing the gap in the PDTB annotations
of such relations. We have also suggested the con-
verse benefit of the PDTB discourse-level seman-
tics for enriching Propbank semantic roles, with
beneficial consequences for the semantic role la-
beling methods that utilize PropBank.

In future work, we plan to examine another
PropBank annotated element (ARGM-DIS) as a
further source for seeding the PDTB. ARGM-DIS
is meant to be used to annotate words or phrases
that “connect a sentence to a preceding sentence”
(Bonial et al., 2010). While many of these are
either irrelevant to the PDTB, such as vocatives
(“Guys”), interjections (“Well”, “of course”), par-

entheticals (“not to be crass”), and attitudinal
phrases (“Clearly”, “Maybe”), or already sys-
tematically annotated in the PDTB (coordinating
conjunctions, discourse adverbials and attributive
phrases (“he said”)), among the over 6500 tokens
of ARGM-DIS annotated in PropBank, some may
be alternative lexicalizations of the discourse rela-
tions annotated in the PDTB (Prasad et al., 2010),
including “after all”, “at the very least”, and “in
effect”. Those we will examine as possible seeds
for inter-sentential and intra-sentential relations.

The current study was limited to arguments of
verb predicates. However, we plan to also consider
arguments of eventive noun predicates as anno-
tated in NomBank (Meyers et al., 2004). We also
plan to explore the use of PDTB–Propbank over-
laps to identify annotation inconsistencies in one
or the other corpus, following recent work on an-
notation consistency control (Frank et al., 2012).

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by NSF grants
IIS-1422186 and IIS-1421067.

References
Asher, N. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects in Dis-

course. Kluwer, Boston MA.

Bonial, C., Babko-Malaya, O., Choi, J., Hwang, J., and
Palmer, M. 2010. PropBank annotation guidelines
(version 3.0). Technical Report, Center for Compu-
tational Language and Education Research, Univer-
sity of Colorado at Boulder.

Dinesh, N., Lee, A., Miltsakaki, E., Prasad, R., Joshi,
A., and Webber, B. 2005. Attribution and the (non)-
alignment of syntactic and discourse arguments of
connectives In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop
on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation II: Pie in the Sky,
pages 29–36.

Feng, V. W. 2014. RST-style discourse parsing and
its applications in discourse analysis. PhD the-
sis, Department of Computer Science, University of
Toronto.

Frank, A., Bögel, T., Hellwig, O., and Reiter, N. 2012.
Semantic annotation for the digital humanities: Us-
ing Markov Logic Networks for annotation consis-
tency control. In Linguistic Issues in Language
Technology, 7(1), pages 1–21.

Joty, S., Carenini, G., and Ng, R. 2012. A novel dis-
criminative framework for sentence-level discourse
analysis. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and Computational Natural Language Learning
(EMNLP/CoNLL), pages 904–915.

68



Lin, Z., Ng, H. T., and Kan, M.-Y. 2012. A PDTB-
styled end-to-end discourse parser. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 20(02), pages 151–184.

Marcus, M., Santorini, B., and Marcinkiewicz, M. A.
1993. Building a large scale annotated corpus of
English: The Penn TreeBank. Computational Lin-
guistics, 19(2), pages 313–330.

Meyers, A., Reeves, R., Macleod, C., Szekely, R.,
Zielinska, V., Young, B., and Grishman, R. 2004.
The NomBank project: An interim report. Proceed-
ings of the HLT/NAACL Workshop: Frontiers in cor-
pus annotation, pages 24–31.

Palmer, M., Gildea, D., and Kingbury, P. 2005. The
Proposition Bank: An annotated corpus of semantic
roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1), pages 71–
105.

Pradhan, S., Ward, W., Hacioglu, K., Martin, J., and
Jurafsky, D. 2004. Shallow semantic parsing using
Support Vector Machines. In Proceedings of the Hu-
man Language Technology Conference/North Amer-
ican chapter of the Association of Computational
Linguistics (HLT/NAACL), pages 233–240.

Pradhan, S., Moschitti, A., Xue, N., Ng, H. T.,
Björkelund, A., Uryupina, O., Zhang, Y., and Zhong
Z. 2013. Towards robust linguistic analysis us-
ing OntoNotes. In Proceedings of the 17th Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL), pages 143–152.

Prasad, R., Dinesh, N., Lee, A., Miltsakaki, E.,
Robaldo, L., Joshi, A., and Webber, B. 2008. The
Penn Discourse TreeBank 2.0. In Proceedings of
the 6th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC), pages 2961–2968.

Prasad, R., Joshi, A,, & Webber, B. 2010. Realization
of discourse relations by other means: Alternative
Lexicalizations. In Proceedings of the 23rd Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING): Posters, pages 1023–1031.

Prasad, R., Webber, B., and Joshi, A. 2014. Reflec-
tions on the Penn Discourse Treebank, comparable
corpora and complementary annotation. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 40(4), pages 921–950.

Schuler, K. K. 2005. VerbNet: A broad-coverage,
comprehensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. Thesis, Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania.

Yi, S. T., Loper, E., and Palmer, M. 2007. Can seman-
tic roles generalize across genres? Proceedings of
HLT/NAACL 2007, pages 548–555.

Weischedel, R., Palmer, M., Marcus, M., Hovy,
E., Pradhan, S., Ramshaw, L., Xue, N., Taylor,
A., Kaufman, J., Franchini, M., El-Bachouti, M.,
Belvin, R., and Houston, A. 2013. OntoNotes re-
lease 5.0. Technical report. Linguistic Data Consor-
tium, https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2013T19.

69


