



















































Imagisaurus: An Interactive Visualizer of Valence and Emotion in the Roget's Thesaurus


Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis (WASSA 2015), pages 85–91,
Lisboa, Portugal, 17 September, 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

Imagisaurus: An Interactive Visualizer
of Valence and Emotion in the Roget’s Thesaurus

Saif M. Mohammad
National Research Council Canada

saif.mohammad@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca

Abstract

The form of a thesaurus often restricts
its use to word look ups and finding re-
lated words. We present Imagisaurus, an
online interactive visualizer for the Ro-
get’s Thesaurus, which not only provides
a way for word lookups but also helps
users quickly grasp the nature and size of
the thesaurus taxonomy. Imagisaurus con-
nects thesaurus entries with a large valence
and emotion association lexicon. Easy-to-
use sliders give the user fine control over
depicting only those categories with the
desired strength of association with posi-
tive or negative sentiment, as well as eight
basic emotions. A second interactive vi-
sualization is used to explore the emotion
lexicon. Both the Roget’s Thesaurus and
the emotion lexicon have tens of thousands
of entries. Our visualizers help users better
understand these lexical resources in terms
of their make up as a whole.

1 Introduction

The Roget’s Thesaurus (Roget, 1852) was created
by Peter Roget in 1852 and originally included
about 15,000 English words. Since then a num-
ber of newer versions of the thesaurus have been
published, and each has included more terms than
the previous version. Roget’s taxonomic struc-
ture, which is inspired by philosophical work of
Leibniz on symbolic thought (Leibniz and Parkin-
son, 1995; Leibniz, 1923), groups words into
six classes: words expressing abstract relations,
words relating to space, words relating to matter,
words relating to the intellectual faculties, words
relating to the voluntary powers, and words relat-
ing to the sentient and moral powers. These six
classes are further partitioned into thirty nine sec-
tions, which are in-turn divided into one thousand

categories. Each category lists about 20 to 200 re-
lated words and expressions. These categories can
be thought of as coarse concepts.

Widely used by writers, lexicographers, stu-
dents, and the lay person, the thesaurus is most
commonly accessed to identify a word or phrase
that best captures what one wants to communi-
cate. Researchers in many fields find use for the
thesaurus, for example those exploring literary, so-
cial science, psychological, and cognitive theories
involving word usage. Not surprisingly, there is a
vast and growing body of work in Computational
Linguistics that makes use of the Roget’s The-
saurus, including Masterman (1957), Morris and
Hirst (1991), Yarowsky (1992), Mohammad and
Hirst (2006), Mohammad (2008), and Grefenstette
(2012). However, despite its substantial range and
scope of use, manual access to information in the
thesaurus is often restricted to looking up a word
and finding its neighbors. Existing online por-
tals for the Roget’s Thesaurus present a very tradi-
tional, non-interactive, text-only interface.1

We present an online interactive visualizer for
the Roget’s Thesaurus, which we call Imag-
isaurus.2 Imagisaurus allows users to access in-
formation about words, classes, sections, and cat-
egories through four separate sub-visualizations
that are linked to each other. Clicking on a unit
selects it and filters information in all other sub-
visualizations, showing information that is rele-
vant only to the selection. The hierarchical struc-
ture of the thesaurus is shown in proportion to the
size of its components—where size is defined to
be the number of words included in the thesaurus
unit (category, section, etc.). This allows users to
determine which thesaurus units are more popu-
lous. Additionally, Imagisaurus links the Roget’s

1http://www.roget.org
http://machaut.uchicago.edu/rogets

2Imagisaurus: http://www.purl.com/net/imagisaurus
Imagisaurus currently uses the copyright-free Project
Gutenberg version of the thesaurus (Roget, 1911).

85



Thesaurus with a large emotion lexicon and lets
users interactively discover categories strongly as-
sociated with various affect categories: positive
and negative valence (sentiment), as well as emo-
tions of joy, sadness, fear, trust, disgust, antici-
pation, anger, and surprise. Easy-to-use sliders
give the user fine control over depicting only those
categories with the desired strength of association
with an affect category.

Word–Affect association lexicons, such as the
NRC Emotion Lexicon, are themselves large se-
mantic resources used not only by computational
linguists, but also by researchers in psychology,
marketing, advertising, and public health. Thus
we developed a second online interactive visual-
ization for the NRC Emotion Lexicon.

Both the Roget’s Thesaurus and the emotion
lexicon have tens of thousands of entries. Thus ob-
taining a feel for them by manually reading every
entry is prohibitive. Our visualizers, created us-
ing the visualization tool Tableau, help users bet-
ter understand these lexical resources in terms of
their make up as a whole.3 Both visualizers are
made available online and are free to use.4

2 Affect Associations

Many words such as good and delighted express
affectual states such as positive sentiment, nega-
tive sentiment, joy, anger, and so on. Apart from
literal, denotative, meaning, words also have asso-
ciations with sentimental, emotional, cultural, and
social overtones. For example, skinny and slender
primarily convey information about girth, but ad-
ditionally skinny is associated with a slight nega-
tive sentiment, whereas slender is associated with
positive sentiment. Similarly, party is associated
with joy whereas test results is associated with an-
ticipation.5 The Roget’s Thesaurus groups related
terms within the same category, and this means
that a category can include terms associated with
many affect categories.

The thesaurus itself makes no claims on the af-
fect associations of its constituent words (denota-
tive or connotative). However, recently large re-
sources have been created that capture the affect

3http://www.tableau.com
4Imagisaurus: http://www.purl.com/net/imagisaurus

Emotion Lexicon Viz.: http://www.purl.com/net/EmoLexViz
5Some of these connotations may be cultural, for exam-

ple, dating may be seen unfavorably in some cultures, how-
ever, many connotations add to the denotative meanings of
words and are commonly known.

associations of thousands of words: The General
Inquirer (GI) has sentiment labels for about 3,600
terms (Stone et al., 1966). Hu and Liu (2004)
manually labeled about 6,800 words and used
them for detecting sentiment of customer reviews.
Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW)
has pleasure (happy–unhappy), arousal (excited–
calm), and dominance (controlled–in control) rat-
ings for 1034 words.6 The WordNet Affect Lex-
icon (WAL) (Strapparava and Valitutti, 2004, )
has a few hundred words annotated with associ-
ations to the six Ekman emotions. The NRC Emo-
tion Lexicon has association labels for over 14,000
words with positive and negative sentiment, as
well as the set of eight Plutchik emotions (Mo-
hammad and Turney, 2010; Mohammad and Tur-
ney, 2013).7 These labels were compiled through
crowdsourcing. Lexicons for word–affect associ-
ations are used in automatic classification systems
as well as systems that track affectual words in text
(for example in literary analysis and for assessing
well-being in social media posts).

We use the NRC Emotion Lexicon in Imag-
isaurus because of its large coverage and associa-
tions with both sentiment and emotions. However,
other affect lexicons can also be plugged into the
same visualization design.

3 Imagisaurus

Figure 1 shows a screenshot of Imagisaurus. (The
tooltip info box, which shows information about
the taxonomic unit over which the mouse pointer
is hovering, can be ignored for now.) Observe that
there are four sub-visualizations: Index, Classes,
Sections, and Categories. On the top right cor-
ner is a legend showing the colors in which the
six thesaurus classes are shown. (The colors were
chosen somewhat at random, the only requirement
being that they be easily distinguishable.) Below
the legend are ten sliders corresponding to affect
densities of ten affect categories (two sentiments
and eight emotions).

The Index shows the index of the thesaurus,
that is, it lists all the words in the thesaurus in
alphabetical order along with the categories they
are included in. The hierarchical structure of the
thesaurus, in terms of its classes, sections, and
categories, is shown through the three treemap
visualizations—one for each level of the hierar-

6http://csea.phhp.ufl.edu/media/anewmessage.html
7www.purl.com/net/NRCemotionlexicon

86



Figure 1: Screenshot of Imagisaurus when one moves the mouse pointer over one of the boxes in the
Categories treemap. The tooltip info box pops up showing information pertaining to what is being
hovered on—in this case category number 394 (savoriness).

chy. A treemap is a kind of visualization that parti-
tions a large box representing one level into many
smaller boxes pertaining to the descendant nodes.

If the box size permits, the name and number of
the taxonomic unit is printed in it. For example,
the name–number information for all classes and
some sections is printed in the default view. This
information is not shown for most of the categories
in the default view, but as described ahead, when
certain selections are made to reduce the number
of categories, then this information appears even
for the categories. Hovering over any box will al-
ways give the corresponding name-number infor-
mation through a tooltip info box.

We describe each of the four sub-visualizations
in the subsections below.

3.1 Index

The Index lists the words in alphabetical order.
Users can scroll down the list to quickly locate
the word they are interested in. They can then
see which thesaurus categories the word is listed
in (second column, Catnum), and also the cor-
responding section number (Secnum), and Class
number (Classnum). Clicking on the word fil-
ters out information in all four sub-visualizations,
leaving information pertaining only to the chosen
word. For example, Figure 2 shows a screenshot of
the treemaps for when the user clicks on the Index
entry abandon. Observe that the three treemaps
now show a blowup of information relevant only
the chosen word: specifically, the classes, sec-
tions, and categories abandon is listed in.

87



Figure 2: Filtered view in Imagisaurus when one
clicks on the word abandon in the index.

3.2 Classes

The Classes treemap shows the six thesaurus
classes as boxes. The size of each box is propor-
tional to the number of words in the class. The
treemap places the biggest boxes on the top left
and the smallest boxes on the bottom right. This
allows users to instantly gain a rough estimate of
how large each class is. One can see for example
that Section 5 has the most words and Section 4
the least. When selections are made in one of the
other sub-visualizations and the Classes treemap
filters to show relevant information (as in Figure
2 for example), one can then examine the sizes of
the now-relevant classes. (For example, in Figure
2, one can now see the relative sizes of the three
classes that list abandon.)

3.3 Sections

The Sections treemap shows all (or a selection)
of sections in the Roget’s Thesaurus. (Clicking
on a particular class filters the Sections treemap
to show only the relevant sections.) The sections
are first grouped by class, and then within each

Figure 3: The Sections and categories Treemaps
when one clicks on the Section 38 (moral).

of these groups they are ordered as per number
of words in the sections. This allows users to
quickly determine which sections are more dom-
inant within a class. Clicking on a section fil-
ters information as one would expect. Figure 3
shows how the Sections treemap and the Cate-
gories treemap appear when one clicks on section
38 (moral). Observe that the Categories treemap
now shows only those categories that are within
section 38. The Index also filters to show rows for
only those words that are listed in section 38.

3.4 Categories

The Categories treemap shows all (or a selection)
of categories in the thesaurus. (Clicking on a class
or section filters the categories treemap.) The cat-
egories are first grouped by class, and then within
each of these groups they are ordered as per num-
ber of words in the categories. This allows users
to determine which categories are more populous.
Hovering on top of a category reveals a tooltip info
box that shows not only the category name and
number, but also the number of words in the cate-
gory and a list of all these words. Recall that Fig-
ure 1 shows an example of this tooltip info box.
Clicking on a category filters information in the
Index to show only the rows for the words in the
chosen category. The Class and Section treemaps
show the class and section of the category.

88



Figure 4: Categories treemap with the anger den-
sity slider set to range 0.7–1.

Figure 5: Categories treemap with the sadness
density slider set to range 0.7–1.

3.4.1 Identifying Affectual Categories
We now discuss how the Roget’s Thesaurus is
linked with the NRC Emotion Lexicon to display
categories that have strong associations with vari-
ous sentiments and emotions.

For each category cat, we calculate affect den-
sity for affect aff using the formula shown below:

Affect Density (cat,aff) =
NumAssociated

NumTotal
(1)

where NumAssociated if the number of words in
cat associated with aff and NumTotal is the num-
ber of words in cat that are listed in the NRC Emo-
tion Lexicon. Thus, for example, if a category has
50 words, 40 of which are listed in the NRC Emo-
tion Lexicon, and 30 of these are associated with
positive sentiment, then the category has a positive
affect density of 30/40 = 0.75.

We calculated affect densities for both senti-
ments and all eight emotions covered in the NRC
Emotion Lexicon. For each of these affects, Imag-
isaurus shows density sliders on the far right. Both

Figure 6: Categories treemap with surprise den-
sity and positive density sliders both set to > 0.4.

Figure 7: Categories treemap with surprise den-
sity and negative density sliders both set to > 0.4.

the lower end (to the left) and the upper end (to the
right) of the slider can be moved with the mouse
pointer. Adjusting a slider filters the Categories
treemap to show only those categories with affect
densities within the range of the slider. For exam-
ple, Figure 4 shows the Categories treemap as it
appears when the lower end of the anger density
slider is moved to 0.7 and the upper end is left at
1. One can compare it to Figure 5 which shows the
categories with sadness density between 0.7 and 1.
Observe that the former shows categories such as
resentment, attack, and ambush, whereas the lat-
ter shows categories such as adversity, hopeless-
ness, and death. One can even manipulate multi-
ple sliders to create multiple filters that apply at
the same time. For example, Figure 6 shows cat-
egories with surprise and positive densities each
greater than 0.4. We see categories such as won-
der, humorist, and perfection. On the other hand,
Figure 7 shows categories with surprise and nega-
tive densities each greater than 0.4. We see cate-
gories such as alarm, untimeliness, and ambush.

89



Figure 8: An interactive visualizer for the NRC Emotion Lexicon.

4 Visualizing words–affect associations

We developed a second online interactive visu-
alization to explore word–emotion and word–
sentiment associations directly in the NRC Emo-
tion Lexicon. Figure 8 shows a screenshot of this
visualization. The treemap on the left shows the
various affect categories. The sizes of the boxes
in the treemap are proportional to the number of
words associated with the corresponding affect.
Observe that, word associations with negative sen-
timent are more frequent than associations with
positive. The associations with fear, anger and
trust are much more frequent compared to asso-
ciations with joy and surprise. On the right are
two index views for word–sentiment and word–
emotion associations respectively. Clicking on a
word in one of the index views, filters information
in all of the other sub-visualizations to show infor-
mation relevant to that word. Clicking on a box
in the treemap, filters information in all other sub-
visualizations to show information relevant only to
the chosen affect category.

5 Summary and Future Work

We developed an online interactive visualizer for
the Roget’s Thesaurus called Imagisaurus. Imag-
isaurus allows users to access information about
thesaurus words, classes, sections, and categories
through four separate sub-visualizations that are
linked to each other. The structure of the the-
saurus is shown in proportion to the size of its

components—where size is defined to be the num-
ber of words included in the thesaurus unit (cat-
egory, section, etc.). Clicking on a unit se-
lects it and filters information in all other sub-
visualizations. We also link the thesaurus with
an emotion lexicon such that manipulating simple
sliders allows users to view categories associated
with affect categories. With its intuitive and easy-
to-use interface that allows interactive exploration
of the Roget’s Thesaurus, we believe Imagisaurus
will benefit researchers, practitioners, and the lay
persons alike. We also developed a second visu-
alization to explore the NRC Emotion Lexicon.
Both visualizers are made freely available online.

This work explores the Roget’s Thesaurus and
the NRC Emotion Lexicon, but the same frame-
work can be used to explore other lexical resources
too: for example, other thesauri in English and
other languages; semantic networks such as Word-
Net and VerbNet; versions of the NRC Emotion
Lexicon in other languages; and sentiment lexi-
cons such as the NRC Hashtag Sentiment lexicon
and Sentiment 140 Lexicon (Mohammad et al.,
2013; Kiritchenko et al., 2014).8 Our future work
will extend previous work on visualizing litera-
ture (Mohammad and Yang, 2011; Mohammad,
2012) by incorporating interactivity among sub-
visualizations and by capturing affectual informa-
tion associated with characters and plot structure.

8http://www.purl.com/net/lexicons

90



References
Gregory Grefenstette. 2012. Explorations in auto-

matic thesaurus discovery, volume 278. Springer
Science & Business Media.

Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summa-
rizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the 10th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’04, pages
168–177, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

Svetlana Kiritchenko, Xiaodan Zhu, and Saif M. Mo-
hammad. 2014. Sentiment analysis of short infor-
mal texts. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research
(in press).

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and George Henry Radcliffe
Parkinson. 1995. Philosophical writings. Every-
man.

GW Leibniz. 1923. Calculus ratiocinator. Samtliche
Schriften und Briefe. Reichel, Darmstadt.

Margaret Masterman. 1957. The thesaurus in syntax
and semantics. Mechanical Translation, 4(1-2):35–
43.

Saif Mohammad and Graeme Hirst. 2006. Distribu-
tional measures of concept-distance: A task-oriented
evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2006 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 35–43. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Saif M. Mohammad and Peter D. Turney. 2010. Emo-
tions evoked by common words and phrases: Us-
ing mechanical turk to create an emotion lexicon. In
Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on
Computational Approaches to Analysis and Genera-
tion of Emotion in Text, LA, California.

Saif M. Mohammad and Peter D. Turney. 2013.
Crowdsourcing a word–emotion association lexicon.
Computational Intelligence.

Saif Mohammad and Tony Yang. 2011. Tracking
Sentiment in Mail: How Genders Differ on Emo-
tional Axes. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on
Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sen-
timent Analysis (WASSA 2.011), pages 70–79, Port-
land, Oregon. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Saif Mohammad, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Xiaodan
Zhu. 2013. NRC-Canada: Building the state-of-the-
art in sentiment analysis of tweets. In Proceedings
of the International Workshop on Semantic Evalua-
tion, SemEval ’13, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, June.

Saif Mohammad. 2008. Measuring semantic distance
using distributional profiles of concepts. Ph.D. the-
sis, University of Toronto.

Saif M. Mohammad. 2012. From once upon a time
to happily ever after: Tracking emotions in mail and
books. Decision Support Systems, 53(4):730–741.

Jane Morris and Graeme Hirst. 1991. Lexical cohe-
sion computed by thesaural relations as an indicator
of the structure of text. Computational linguistics,
17(1):21–48.

Peter Mark Roget. 1852. Roget’s Thesaurus of English
Words and Phrases. Longman Group Ltd., Harlow,
Essex, England.

Peter Mark Roget. 1911. Roget’s Thesaurus of English
Words and Phrases. TY Crowell Company.

Philip Stone, Dexter C. Dunphy, Marshall S. Smith,
Daniel M. Ogilvie, and associates. 1966. The Gen-
eral Inquirer: A Computer Approach to Content
Analysis. The MIT Press.

Carlo Strapparava and Alessandro Valitutti. 2004.
Wordnet-Affect: An affective extension of WordNet.
In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2004), pages 1083–1086, Lisbon, Portugal.

David Yarowsky. 1992. Word-sense disambiguation
using statistical models of Roget’s categories trained
on large corpora. In Proceedings of the 14th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING-92), pages 454–460, Nantes, France.

91


