



















































Proceedings of the...


D S Sharma, R Sangal and E Sherly. Proc. of the 12th Intl. Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 203–208,
Trivandrum, India. December 2015. c©2015 NLP Association of India (NLPAI)

Logistic Regression for Automatic Lexical Level Morphological
Paradigm Selection for Konkani Nouns

Shilpa Desai
Department of Computer
Science and Technology

Goa University
sndesai@gmail.com

Jyoti Pawar
Department of Computer
Science and Technology

Goa University
jyotidpawar@gmail.com

Pushpak Bhattacharyya
Department of Computer
Science and Engineering

IIT-Patna
pb@cse.iitp.ac.in

Abstract

Automatic selection of morphological
paradigm for a noun lemma is neces-
sary to automate the task of building
morphological analyzer for nouns with
minimal human interventions. Mor-
phological paradigms can be of two
types namely surface level morpholog-
ical paradigms and lexical level mor-
phological paradigms. In this pa-
per we present a method to automat-
ically select lexical level morphologi-
cal paradigms for Konkani nouns. Us-
ing the proposed concept of paradigm
differentiating measure to generate a
training data set we found that logis-
tic regression can be used to automat-
ically select lexical level morphological
paradigms with an F-Score of 0.957.

1 Introduction

Morphological analysis is required for many
NLP applications such as Spell Checkers,
Text to Speech Systems, Rule Based Machine
Translation, etc. Finite State Transducers
(FSTs) are ideal for developing Morphologi-
cal Analyzer for a language because they are
computationally efficient, inherently bidirec-
tional and can also be used for word genera-
tion. FST based Morphological Analyzers are
based on word and paradigm model, wherein
a word lemma is mapped to a correspond-
ing Morphological Paradigm. A Morpholog-
ical Paradigm is used to generate all possi-
ble word forms for a given word lemma. To
develop a FST based Morphological Analyzer
two resources namely Morphological Paradigm
List and Morphological Lexicon are required.
Morphological Paradigm List is prepared re-
ferring to grammar books, morphology related

linguistics thesis in Konkani and elaborate dis-
cussions with linguists. Lemmas1 in the lan-
guage are then mapped to appropriate Mor-
phological Paradigms to create a Morpholog-
ical Lexicon. Mapping of lemmas to Mor-
phological Paradigms is time consuming when
done manually.

Automating creation of Morphological Lex-
icon requires automatic mapping of lemmas
to morphological paradigms. Morphological
Paradigms can be defined at two level surface
level and lexical level. At surface level two
different morphological paradigms will gen-
erate a different Inflection Set for a given
lemma whereas at lexical level two different
morphological paradigms could generate same
Inflection Set for a given lemma. Thus au-
tomatically choosing a correct morphological
paradigm at the lexical level cannot be based
on Suffix Evidence Value as in previous used
methods (Carlos et al., 2009).

In this paper, we present the use of lo-
gistic regression for Automatic Lexical Level
Paradigm Selection designed to facilitate the
development of Morphological Lexicon. Here
we propose the concept of paradigm differen-
tiating measure (pdm) which has been used to
map lemmas to Lexical Level Morphological
Paradigms.

2 Related Work

Automatic mapping of word to a paradigm
have been done earlier for other languages.
An n-gram-based model has been developed
(Sanchez et al., 2012; Linden and Tuovila,
2009) to select a single paradigm in cases
where more than one paradigm generates the
same set of word forms. These systems use
POS information or some additional user in-

1Citation form of words203



put from native language speakers to map
words to paradigms, instead of a corpus alone.

Lexicon acquisition methods (Carlos et al.,
2009; Clement et al., 2004; Forsberg et al.,
2006; Mohammed et al., 2012) exist for many
languages that extract lemmas from a corpus
and map them to morphological paradigms.
Functional Morphology has been used to de-
fine morphology for languages like Swedish
and Finnish, and tools based on Functional
Morphology, namely Extract (Forsberg et al.,
2006) which suggest new words for a lexicon
and map them to paradigms, have been devel-
oped. To be able to use a tool like Extract,
the morphology of the language has to be fit-
ted into the Functional Morphology definition.

3 Terminology and Notations Used
Definition (Root, Stem, Base, Prefix
and Suffix): A Root is the basic part of a lex-
eme2 which cannot be further analyzed, using
either inflectional or derivational morphology.
Root is that part of word-form that remains
when all derivational and inflectional affixes
have been removed. A Stem is that part of
the word form that remains when inflectional
suffixes have been removed. A Base (bi) is
that part of the word form to which affixes of
any kind can be added. It is a generic term
which could refer to a Root or a Stem. A Pre-
fix is a bound morpheme that is attached at
the beginning of a Base. A Suffix si ∈

∑∗ is a
bound morpheme that is attached at the end
of a Base.
Definition (Rule) An ordered 3-tuple (α, β,
γ) is said to be a Rule used to convert a string
xi to a string yi where α=”ADD/DELETE”
is an operation performed on input string xi;
β=position at which the operation specified in
α is to be performed on string xi; γ=zi is the
argument for the operation to be performed.
Example: If xi=धांवप(dhaa.Nvapa)3 and
Rule= (”DELETE”, ”END”, ”प(pa)”) where
α= ”DELETE”; β=”END”; γ=”प(pa)” with
respect to above Definition yi=धांव(dhaa.Nva).
Definition (Base Formation Rule
(BFR)): An ordered n-tuple of Rules

2Lexeme is the basic unit of meaning. It is an ab-
stract unit of morphological analysis in linguistics, that
roughly corresponds to a set of forms taken by a single
word

3धांवप(dhaa.Nvapa) (to run)

which is used to convert lemma li to base bi
is said to be a Base Formation Rule BFR.
Example: If li=भास(bhasa)4 and BFR=
((”DELETE”, ”END”, ”स(sa)”),(”ADD”,
”END”, ”श(sha)”)) with respect to above
Definition bi=भाश(bhasha).
Definition (Morphological Paradigm):
An ordered tuple (ϕ, {(ψ1, ω1,γ1 ),...,(ψn, ωn,
γn)}) where

• ϕ=pi, a unique identifier for the ith
paradigm,

• ψj=BFR the Base Formation Rule corre-
sponding to the jth Base,

• ωj = Sk a set of (suffix5, grammatical fea-
ture) ordered pairs corresponding to the
jth Base and

• γj = A boolean flag which is set to 1 if cor-
responding suffixes uniquely identify the
paradigm i.e. corresponding (ψj , ωj) form
the paradigm differentiating measure6.

• n is the total number distinct bases for
the paradigm,

is said to be a Morphological Paradigm which
is used to generate the Inflectional Set i.e.
all the inflectional word forms, for the input
lemma.
Example: When the paradigm is given by

• ϕ=P11,

• ψ1= ((”DELETE”, ”END”,
”स(sa)”),(”ADD”, ”END”, ”श(sha)”)) is
the BFR corresponding to the first Base.

• ω1 = {(◌े(e), singular oblique case),
(◌ेक(eka), singular oblique accusative
case), (◌ेकूच (ekaUch), singular oblique
accusative case with emphatic clitic), ...
}.

• γ1 = 1

• ψ2= (”DELETE”, ”END”, ”∅”) is the
BFR corresponding to the second Base.

4भास(bhasa) (language)
5Here suffix could be made up of more than one

suffix concatenated with each other
6paradigm differentiating measure has been defined

in the following subsection.204



• ω2 = {(◌ो(o), plural direct case), (◌ोच
(och), plural direct case with emphatic
clitic), ...}

• γ2 = 0

• n=2,

If the input lemma = भास(bhaasa), then the
first Base is भाश(bhaasha) and the second
Base is भास(bhaasa). The word forms gen-
erated by the above paradigm are as fol-
lows: {भाशे (bhaashe), भाशेक (bhaasheka), भा-
शेकूच (bhaashekaUch), ... भासो (bhaaso), भासोच
(bhaasoch), ...}
Definition (Inflectional Set) A set Wpilj of
all possible word forms generated by a Mor-
phological Paradigm with pi as paradigm iden-
tifier, for a lemma lj is said to be the In-
flectional Set for lemma lj with respect to
paradigm pi.
Example: If pi=P10, a verb Morphologi-
cal Paradigm and lj=walk with respect to
above Definition Wpilj ={walk, walks, walking,
walked}.

4 Types of Morphological
Paradigms:

A Morphological Paradigm is used to generate
the inflectional word forms for a given input
lemma. At the Surface Level, a Morpholog-
ical Paradigm generates a set of word forms
which can be expressed in an abstract man-
ner as {bi.sj : where bi is the Base; sj is the
Suffix}. At the Lexical Level, a Morpholog-
ical Paradigm generates a set of word forms
which can be expressed in an abstract manner
as {li+grammatical features : where li is the
lemma}.
Example: If the input lemma li=dance, Word
forms generated at Surface Level are {danc-
ing, danced, dances, ...} where bi=danc. Word
forms generated at Lexical Level are {dance
+ present continuous, dance + past perfect,
dance + present, ...}.
Morphological Paradigms can differ from each
other either at the Surface Level or at the Lex-
ical Level
Surface Level difference between Mor-
phological Paradigms: Two Morphological
Paradigms are said to differ at surface level
when they generate different set of word forms

at the Surface Level for a given input lemma.
Surface level difference implies that at least
one of the following two conditions is true.

• ∃ at least one BFR that is not the same
amongst them.

• ∃ at least one suffix which is not the same
amongst them.

Lexical Level difference between Mor-
phological Paradigms: Two distinct Mor-
phological Paradigms are said to differ at lex-
ical level when they generate same set of word
forms at the Surface Level. Lexical level dif-
ference implies the following condition is true

• ∃ at least one word form which has dif-
ferent grammatical features in the two
paradigms.

Each Morphological Paradigm is unique either
at the Surface or Lexical level. We refer to
the feature which makes the Morphological
Paradigm unique as paradigm differentiating
measure and is defined as follows
Definition (Paradigm Differentiating
Measure) The ordered tuple (ψj , ωj) with
respect to Morphological Paradigm Definition
above is called paradigm differentiating mea-
sure if it occurs only once across all possible
paradigms.
Example 1: If set A and B represent two
sets of word forms generated by two different
paradigms p1 and p2 respectively which differ
at the surface level, for a given lemma. Let set
A and B be given as follows:
A= { (b1.s1,f1), (b1.s2,f2), (b1.s3,f3),
(b1.s4,f4), (b1.s5,f5)}
B= { (b1.s1,f1), (b1.s6,f2), (b1.s3,f3),
(b1.s4,f4), (b1.s5,f5)}
where bj is a base obtained using ψj , sj is the
suffix obtained using ωj and fj is the corre-
sponding grammatical feature.
From set A and B we observe that the word
forms differ only at the second entry namely
(b1.s2,f2) ∈ A and (b1.s6,f2) ∈ B hence the
corresponding (ψ1, ω2) in p1 and (ψ1, ω2) in
p2 are the paradigm differentiating measure.
Example 2: If set C and D represent two
sets of word forms generated by two different
paradigms p1 and p2 respectively which differ
only at the lexical level, for a given lemma.
Let set C and D be given as follows:205



C= { (b1.s1,f1), (b1.s1,f2), (b1.s3,f3),
(b1.s4,f4), (b1.s5,f5)}
D= { (b1.s1,f1), (b1.s3,f2), (b1.s3,f3),
(b1.s4,f4), (b1.s5,f5)}
where bj is a base obtained using ψj , sj is the
suffix obtained using ωj and fj is the corre-
sponding grammatical feature.
From set C and D we observe that the word
forms are same at surface level but correspond-
ing grammatical features differ only at the sec-
ond entry namely (b1.s1,f2) ∈ A and (b1.s3,f2)
∈ B hence the corresponding (ψ1, ω2) in p1 and
(ψ1, ω2) in p2 are the paradigm differentiating
measure.

5 Lexical Level Morphological
Paradigm Selection for Konkani
Nouns

A Konkani noun lemma can be mapped to
more than one Morphological Paradigm. The
noun Morphological Paradigms are such that
they all differ from each other either at the sur-
face level or at the lexical level. It is not possi-
ble to implement a Rule Based System to map
noun lemmas to Morphological Paradigms due
to ambiguity in paradigm selection presented
next.

5.1 Ambiguity in Paradigm Selection
for Konkani Nouns

Ambiguity in Paradigm Selection for Konkani
Nouns exists due to the following reasons
1. Formative Suffix attachment: There
is no known linguistic rule7 to decide which
Formative Suffix is to be attached to the Base
to obtain the Inflectional Set. This gives
rise to ambiguity in choosing the appropriate
paradigm.
Example: When noun lemma does not end
with a vowel as in case of the noun lemma
पाल(paala)(lizard); then three possible forma-
tive suffixes could be attached which gives rise
to three possible Stems namely पाला, पाली, पाले
(paalaa, paalI, paale). Amongst these three
possible Stems only पाली (paalI) is the correct
choice. However no linguistic rule can be used
to arrive at the correct stem thus causing an
ambiguity in choosing a correct paradigm for
the input noun lemma.

7Linguistic rule based on noun lemma ending char-
acters alone in absence of knowledge of nouns gram-
matical gender

2. Multiple paradigm for single noun
lemma: A single noun lemma could be
mapped to more than one noun paradigm.
This gives rise to another ambiguity is
paradigm selection.

Example: For noun lemma
मराठी(maraThI)(marathi language or marathi
speaking person); the same lemma will map to
two different paradigms for the two different
senses namely marathi language and marathi
speaking person. In such a case simply
computing Suffix Evidence Value SEV is not
enough to resolve ambiguity.

3. Lexical level differences in paradigms:
Some paradigm differ only at lexical level and
generate the same Inflectional Set at surface
level. This is another ambiguity challenge
faced for paradigm selection.

Example: For noun lemma पान(paana)(leaf );
the same lemma will map to two different
paradigms which are same at the surface level.
This is because a single form in such paradigm
have two different grammatical features as in
case of पाना(paanaa) which could be singular
oblique form or direct plural form which is a
type of ambiguity.

5.2 Problem Statement

Given a set of noun lemmas LXN = {li :
i = 1 to n, where n is number of lemmas
which map to same surface level morphological
paradigms}; a set of Lexical Noun Paradigm
List PLNL= {(pi, {(BFRj , sl,gl, pdml)}) : pi
is the paradigm identifier, BFRj is the Base
Formation Rule, sl is the stem formative suffix
corresponding to the lth suffix group, gl is the
group identifier corresponding to the lth suf-
fix group, pdml is the paradigm differentiating
measure flag corresponding to the lth stem for-
mative suffix, i = 1 to q, where q is number of
noun paradigms in L, j = 1 to r, where r is
number of Bases corresponding to the ith noun
paradigm and l = 1 to s, where s is number
of Noun Suffix Groups corresponding to the
jth Base of ith noun paradigms} and Lexical
Training Data Set generate Lexical Level Noun
Morphological Lexicon set LXNM ={(li,pj) :
li ∈ LXN , and pj ∈ PLNL}206



5.3 Design of Lexical Level Noun
Morphological Paradigm Selection

A training data set is prepared for each Lexical
Level Paradigm. The features used in the data
set are listed in Table 1.

Table 1: Data Set Features for Lexical Level
Paradigm Selection.
Name Feature Description
PID The paradigm identifier.
FreqDSF Number of times the direct

singular form of the noun oc-
curs in the corpus

FreqSOF Number of times the oblique
singular form of the noun oc-
curs in the corpus.

FreqPOF Number of times the oblique
plural form of the noun occurs
in the corpus.

These features were chosen after observ-
ing that, in Konkani Lexical Level Paradigms,
for one paradigm, the Direct Singular Form
(DSF) and Direct Plural Form (DPF) are the
same while for the other paradigm, Direct
Plural Form (DPF) and Plural Oblique Form
(POF) were the same. In general, these fea-
tures correspond to those word forms that
have multiple grammatical roles i.e. those
word forms which cause ambiguity. The intu-
ition behind choosing these features was that,
if in one paradigm a particular word form
has multiple grammatical roles, than its corre-
sponding relative frequency should differ from
the other paradigm where it has a single gram-
matical role.
Example: Let pi and pj be two paradigms

which are same at surface level but differ at
lexical level. Let li be the input lemma. In
paradigm pi, let the word form wi have two
grammatical roles as in case of Konkani word
फातर(phaatara) (stone) which is both Direct
Singular Form (DSF) and Direct Plural Form
(DPF). In paradigm pj , let the same word
form wi have only one grammatical role which
is Direct Singular Form (DSF) and has a dif-
ferent form wj for Direct Plural Form (DPF)
which is also Plural Oblique Form (POF).
Thus in the data set for paradigm pi, frequency
of DSF and POF will follow a different pattern

when compared to frequency of DSF and POF
in pj .

To select appropriate machine learning
model for the training data set various ma-
chine learning algorithms were tested on the
training data set. The best performing model
namely Logistic Regression was chosen as the
learning model as it works well on numeric
data, is simple and performed better than
other machine learning classifiers as illustrated
in Table 2. We created a training data set with
356 noun lemmas and assigned the paradigm
identifier manually. This was used as a train-
ing model to pick lexical level paradigm for
the input lemma. The algorithm for the Lexi-
cal Level Morphological Paradigm Selection is
illustrated in Figure 1.

Algorithm: Lexical Level Morphological
Paradigm Selection
Input: Noun lemma li, Lexical Training
Data Set TDS, set of unique corpus words
WC , Lexical Noun Paradigm List (PLNL),
Pruned Relevant paradigm set RP , Surface
Noun Paradigm List (PLNS)
Output:Relevant paradigm set with lexical
paradigms RP .

/* Select appropriate Lexical Level
Paradigm */
For each pi ∈ RP

If pi ∈ PLNL
/* Compute corresponding Feature

Set FS for Lexical Level Paradigm*/
FS = computeFeatureSet(li,WC , pi,

PLNS)
Rpi = applyLogisticRegression(TDS,FS)
Replace pi with Rpi in RP

End If
End For

Figure 1: Algorithm: Lexical Level Morpho-
logical Paradigm Selection for Konkani Noun.

6 Experimental Results and
Evaluation

The goal of the experiment was to identify a
machine learning model to automatically as-
sign lexical level morphological paradigms to
noun lemmas. To choose the model for lexi-
cal level paradigm assignment, we ran various207



classification algorithms on our development
data sets created with features listed in Table 1
using 10 fold cross validation to determine the
best training model. The performance of ma-
chine learning classifiers on our data set are
tabulated in Table 2. Here Precision, Recall
and F-score are the weighted average values
generated.

Table 2: Model Selection for Lexical Level
Paradigm Selection.
Algorithm Precision Recall F-Score

Bayesian Classifiers
Naive
Bayes

0.796 0.815 0.785

Bayes Net 0.787 0.806 0.79

Function Classifiers
Logistic 0.94 0.941 0.94
Multilayer-
Perceptron

0.821 0.834 0.822

RBFNetwork 0.806 0.82 0.79
SimpleLogistic 0.958 0.958 0.957
SMO 0.839 0.798 0.723

Instance-Based Classifiers
B1 0.84 0.846 0.842
KStar 0.828 0.834 0.807

Ensemble Classifiers
AdaBoost 0.915 0.916 0.912
Bagging 0.937 0.938 0.938
Random
Sub Space

0.898 0.896 0.887

Decorate 0.952 0.952 0.951
Logit Boost 0.932 0.933 0.93

Rule-Based Classifiers
PART De-
cision List

0.94 0.941 0.94

Ridor 0.94 0.941 0.94
ZeroR 0.61 0.781 0.685

Decision Tree Classifiers
Random
Forest

0.928 0.93 0.928

Logistic
Model Tree

0.977 0.978 0.977

REPTree 0.936 0.935 0.936

Analyzing the performance of the various
classifiers from Table 2, We observe that Lo-

gistic Regression based models namely Sim-
pleLogistic and Logistic Model Tree outper-
form other models. Hence Logistic Regression
was chosen as a training model to select rele-
vant lexical level morphological paradigm.

7 Conclusion
In this paper we present a method to auto-
matically select a lexical level morphological
paradigm for a Konkani noun lemma. We de-
fine paradigm differentiating measure and use
the same to select features and prepare the
training data set. The data set thus created
in used to identify logistic regression as an ap-
propriate model to select lexical level morpho-
logical paradigms for Konkani nouns with an
F-score of 0.957.

References
Carlos Sujay Cohan, Choudhury Monojit and Dan-

dapat Sandipan. 2009. Large-Coverage Root
Lexicon Extraction for Hindi. Proceedings of
the 12th Conference of the European Chapter
of the ACL (EACL 2009), Athens, Greece.

Clement Lionel, Sagot Benoit and Lang Bernard.
2004. Morphology Based Automatic Acquisition
of Large-coverage Lexica. Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’04), Lisbon,
Portugal.

Markus Forsberg, Harald Hammarström and
Aarne Ranta. 2006. Morphological Lexicon Ex-
traction from Raw Text Data. Advances in Natu-
ral Language Processing, 5th International Con-
ference on NLP, FinTAL 2006, Turku, Finland.

Lindén Krister and Tuovila Jussi. 2009. Corpus-
based paradigm selection for morphological en-
tries. Proceedings of NODALIDA 2009.

Attia Mohammed, Samih Younes, Shaalan Khaled
and Genabith Josef. 2012. The Floating Arabic
Dictionary: An Automatic Method for Updating
a Lexical Database through the Detection and
Lemmatization of Unknown Words. Proceedings
of COLING 2012, Mumbai, India.

Vícor M. Sánchez-Cartagena, Miquel Esplá-Gomis,
Felipe Sánchez-Martínez and Juan Antonio
Pérez-Ortiz. 2012. Choosing the correct
paradigm for unknown words in rule-based ma-
chine translation systems. Proceedings of the
Third International Workshop on Cambridge
University Free/Open-Source Rule-Based Ma-
chine Translation, Gothenburg, Sweden.

208


