



















































A Light Lexicon-based Mobile Application for Sentiment Mining of Arabic Tweets


Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Arabic Natural Language Processing, pages 18–25,
Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c©2014 Association for Computational Linguistics

A Light Lexicon-based Mobile Application  

for Sentiment Mining of Arabic Tweets 

 

Gilbert Badaro, Ramy Baly, Rana Akel, Linda Fayad, Jeffrey Khairallah,  

Hazem Hajj, Wassim El-Hajj, Khaled Bashir Shaban* 

American University of Beirut, Lebanon 
{ggb05;rgb15;rba09;laf05;jbk07;hh63;we07}@aub.edu.lb 

*Qatar University, Qatar 
khaled.shaban@qu.edu.qa 

 

 

Abstract 

Most advanced mobile applications re-

quire server-based and communication.  

This often causes additional energy con-

sumption on the already energy-limited 

mobile devices.  In this work, we provide 

to address these limitations on the mobile 

for Opinion Mining in Arabic. Instead of 

relying on compute-intensive NLP pro-

cessing, the method uses an Arabic lexi-

cal resource stored on the device. Text is 

stemmed, and the words are then 

matched to our own developed ArSenL. 

ArSenL is the first publicly available 

large scale Standard Arabic sentiment 

lexicon (ArSenL) developed using a 

combination of English SentiWordnet 

(ESWN), Arabic WordNet, and the Ara-

bic Morphological Analyzer (AraMorph). 

The scores from the matched stems are 

then processed through a classifier for 

determining the polarity. The method 

was tested on a published set of Arabic 

tweets, and an average accuracy of 67% 

was achieved. The developed mobile ap-

plication is also made publicly available. 

The application takes as input a topic of 

interest and retrieves the latest Arabic 

tweets related to this topic. It then dis-

plays the tweets superimposed with col-

ors representing sentiment labels as posi-

tive, negative or neutral. The application 

also provides visual summaries of 

searched topics and a history showing 

how the sentiments for a certain topic 

have been evolving. 

1 Introduction 

With the growth of social media and online 

blogs, people express their opinion and sentiment 

freely by providing product reviews, as well as 

comments about celebrities, and political and 

global events. These texts reflecting opinions are 

of great interest to companies and individuals 

who base their decisions and actions upon them 

(Feldman, 2013; Taboada et al., 2011).  In par-

ticular, there is an increased interest in easy ac-

cess to Arabic opinion from mobiles.  In fact, 

around “10.8 million tweets come from the Arab 

region every day. 73.6% of all the tweets from 

the region are now in Arabic” (Radcliffe, 2013). 

There have been many attempts to build sen-

timent analysis engines and several applications 

for performing opinion mining for English texts. 

Most opinion mining approaches in English are 

based on SentiWordNet (ESWN) (Esuli and Se-

bastiani, 2006; Baccianella & al., 2010) for ex-

tracting word-level sentiment polarity. Some re-

searchers used the stored positive or negative 

connotation of the words to combine them and 

derive the polarity of the text (Esuli and Sebas-

tiani, 2005). 

Recently, special interest has been given to opin-

ion mining from Arabic texts, and as a result, 

there has also been interest in developing Arabic 

lexicons for word-level sentiment evaluation. 

The availability of a large scale Arabic based 

SWN is still limited (AlHazmi et al., 2013; Ab-

dul-Mageed and Diab, 2012; Elarnaoty et al., 

2012; Elarnaoty et al., 2012). In fact, there is no 

publicly available large scale Arabic sentiment 

lexicon similar to ESWN.  Additionally, there 

are limitations with existing Arabic lexicons in-

cluding deficiency in covering the correct num-

18



ber and type of lemmas. Moreover, few applica-

tions exist for performing opinion mining in Ar-

abic. 

Sophisticated opinion mining models requires 

highly computational natural language pro-

cessing tools. As an example for the Arabic lan-

guage, MADAMIRA (Pasha et al., 2014) is a 

tool that performs tokenization, POS tagging and 

sense disambiguation by lemmatizing a given 

sentence in Arabic. However, the tool cannot be 

integrated in a mobile application without using 

a server. 

Hence, in this work, we propose a method for 

opinion mining of Arabic tweets on mobile de-

vices without the need for reliance on compute-

intensive NLP tools. We propose a computation-

ally light method that uses a lexicon-based ap-

proach for Arabic tweets. Our newly developed 

large-scale sentiment lexicon, ArSenL, is lever-

aged for the method. ArSenL was created by 

matching Arabic WordNet (AWN) (Black et al., 

2006) and lemmas in AraMorph lexicon to 

ESWN. Each lemma entry in the lexicon has 

three scores derived from the mapping with 

ESWN: positive, negative, and objective. The 

sum of the three scores is 1. Ideally, one should 

use NLP tools to process text and produce lem-

mas that can be matched to ArsenL. However, to 

keep processing light on the mobile, we produce 

a stemmed version of ArSenL, and then use word 

stems for matching.  This design reduces the en-

ergy and performance costs caused by in-

put/output and transmission operations on the 

mobile. A mobile application is designed and 

implemented to automatically analyze Arabic 

tweets, extract sentiments related to the tweets, 

and provide a visualization summary of the re-

sults. The user inputs a keyword of interests to 

him/her and the output displays a summary of the 

tweets’ sentiments. The method is deigned to use 

limited computational and storage resources 

while achieving acceptable accuracy.  

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 

A literature review is presented in section 2 cov-

ering work that involved developing opinion 

mining methods based on lexical resources. In 

section 3, we detail the method, with descriptions 

of ArsenL and the developed application. Section 

4 includes an evaluation of the sentiment model 

and a description of the developed mobile appli-

cation. In section 5, we conclude our work and 

outline possible extensions. 

2 Literature Review 

There have been numerous efforts for creating 

sentiment lexicons in English and Arabic to per-

form sentiment mining. The primary target for 

these resources is to aid in automated analysis of 

sentiment content in text. 

In fact, the Arabic language in social media 

presents several challenges for sentiment mining 

as detailed by El-Beltagy & Ali (2013). First, the 

unavailability of colloquial Arabic parsers makes 

the morphological analysis task harder. Moreo-

ver, there is no publicly available sentiment lexi-

con for Arabic. Entity name recognition and 

handling idiomatic Arabic expressions in differ-

ent dialects are also additional challenges for 

Arabic sentiment mining. For more information 

on Arabic morphological complexity and dialec-

tal variations, see Habash (2010). 

 Denecke (2008) and Ohana and Tierney 

(2009) developed a lexicon sentiment model 

based on the success of the work of Esuli and 

Sebastiani, in 2006 who introduced ESWN as a 

resource that assigns for each synset in the Eng-

lish WordNet (EWN) scores for objectivity, posi-

tivity, and negativity. The model of Denecke 

(2008) is proposed to work with multilingual 

applications where the document is first translat-

ed from a foreign language into English and the 

three sentiment scores are then extracted based 

on ESWN. The scores are then used as features 

for the sentiment model. The processing of the 

document includes stemming and part of speech 

tagging. 

While Denecke (2008) and Ohana and Tierney 

(2009) relied on ESWN to develop their senti-

ment mining model, Abdul-Mageed et al. (2011) 

used manually annotated adjective lexicon (SI-

FAAT (Abdul-Mageed and Diab, 2012) to de-

velop an opinion mining model for Arabic. The 

model uses morphological features and polarity 

labels of the adjectives matched to SIFAAT. As 

an extension to their work on lexicon based opin-

ion mining models, Abdul-Mageed and Diab 

(2014) extended the lexicon to create SANA, a 

subjectivity and sentiment lexicon for Arabic. 

SANA has a mix of lemmas and inflected forms, 

many of which are not diacritized. However, 

SANA was not tested in the context of an opin-

ion mining model. 

As another attempt to create a lexicon-based 

approach for sentiment mining, Alhazmi et al. 

(2013) linked the Arabic WordNet to ESWN 

through the provided synset offset information. 

19



The efficiency of the lexicon for sentiment min-

ing was not evaluated. 

While the previous approaches were mainly 

based on the availability of sentiment lexical re-

sources, El-Halees (2011) developed a three 

steps opinion-mining model for Arabic docu-

ments. First, the documents are passed through a 

classification model that is based on lexical re-

sources. This part classifies the majority of the 

document. The resultant classified documents are 

used as training set for maximum entropy meth-

od which then classifies some other documents. 

Finally, a K-nearest method is employed to clas-

sify the remaining documents using the output of 

the previous two classification models. 

Using ESWN, Mukherjee et al. (2012) devel-

oped TwiSent which collects tweets and classi-

fies them as positive, negative or objective. Be-

sides detecting the sentiment of the tweet, 

TwiSent addresses four known problems for 

tweets: spams, structural anomalies, entity speci-

fications and pragmatics. Addressing these inputs 

improved sentiment classification by 10 % com-

pared to other sentiment mining applications that 

were trained on the same tweets’ set. Moreover, 

this work is only limited to the English language. 

Davidov et al. (2010) describe a technique that 

transforms hashtags and smileys in tweets into 

sentiments. The described process is divided into 

two parts: identifying sentiment expressions, and 

determining the polarity of the identified expres-

sions. Each tweet is divided into 4 different 

groups: words, punctuation, n-grams, and pat-

terns. Then for each group a separate technique 

is applied to detect a positive or a negative sen-

timent. Although this approach analyzes hashtags 

and smileys which are multilingual, it is still 

mainly designed for the English language. 

Last but not least, Aly & Atia (2013) presents 

a LABR: Large Arabic Book Reviews dataset 

consisting of 63K book reviews with rating from 

1 to 5. The authors present baseline approaches 

for performing sentiment mining and set bench-

marks for future research and approaches in sen-

timent mining. 

In summary, while previous methods exist for 

English sentiment mining, none exist for real-

time sentiment mining on mobile for Arabic.  

Additionally, those methods that do exist, and 

only for English, often rely on extensive compu-

tations making them infeasible for extensive use 

on a mobile.  In this work, we provide a method 

that uses a recently developed Arabic sentiment 

lexicon, and requires minimal computations for 

the mobile. 

3 Proposed Approach 

In this section we describe the method, the Ara-

bic sentiment lexicon, and the developed mobile 

application.  

3.1 Method Overview 

The processing steps of the model are shown in 

Figure 1. The pre-processing steps include: 

Tweet tokenization, hashtag removal, stemming, 

sentiment scores inference for the stemmed 

words, and then sentiment classification. The 

scores are then used to derive three aggregate 

features containing the sum of positive scores, 

the sum of negative scores, and the sum of objec-

tive or neutral scores.  In this paper, we use ob-

jective and neutral interchangeably. These pre-

processing steps are further detailed here.   

Removing Hashtags: This step is essential to 

clean the data from hashtags and keep their cor-

responding words for sentiment analysis given 

their importance in the sentiment of the tweet. 

 

Figure 1. Efficient sentiment mining model in Arabic 
for mobile use. 

Stemming: Each tokenized tweet is stemmed 

to match it to a stemmed version of ArSenL. 

Lemmatization would have produced higher ac-

curacy, however it would have required more 

computations. As a result, we used stemming to 

keep the processing light. Khoja’s stemmer 

(1999) was utilized in the implementation. 

Getting the Score of Tweets: Each stemmed 

word is matched to the stemmed version of Ar-

SenL in order to retrieve the corresponding sen-

timent scores. If a word in the tweet did not have 

any match in ArSenL, a zero score is assigned 

20



for each of the positive, the negative and the ob-

jective scores of the word. The sentiment scores 

are then summed for each tweet. It is worth not-

ing that we tried using an average score per tweet 

instead of the sum but the sum gave better accu-

racy results. 

3.2 Arabic Sentiment Lexicon 

For the Arabic Sentiment lexicon, we generate a 

stemmed version of ArSenL (Badaro et al., 

2014). ArSenL was developed based on extend-

ing other existing resources in Arabic and Eng-

lish: English WordNet (EWN) (Miller et al., 

1990), Arabic WordNet (AWN), English Senti-

WordNet (ESWN) and AraMorph were used.  

The lemma entries in the Arabic resources were 

linked to the English synsets. The validated ver-

sion was demonstrated to outperform the other 

version as well as state-of-the-art lexicons for 

Arabic sentiment.  

A public interface to browsing ArSenL is 

available at http://www.oma-project.com. Ar-

SenL can also be downloaded for research use. 

The interface allows the user to search for an 

Arabic word. The output shows the different 

scores for the Arabic word along with the corre-

sponding sentiment scores. A snapshot of the 

homepage is shown in Figure 2. The scores are 

the sentiment scores that were extracted from 

ESWN after establishing the linking across dif-

ferent resources as detailed in Badaro et al work. 

Further details can be found in Badaro et al. pa-

per. 

3.3 Features and Mining Model 

3.3.1 Training Data 

A corpus of 2300 manually annotated Arabic 

Tweets (~30k words) is utilized (Mourad and 

Darwish, 2013). The dataset was randomly sam-

pled from Twitter out of 65 million unique 

tweets in Arabic. It was annotated by two native 

Arabic speakers. In case of disagreement, the 

two annotators discussed the issue of the tweet to 

resolve it. In case the disagreement remains, the 

tweet was dropped. 

3.3.2 Features 

The features used to build the classification 

model were only restricted to the sum of senti-

ment scores per tweet as retrieved from ArSenL. 

We made the features simple in order to reduce 

the processing and computation efforts given that 

our aim is to design an energy efficient sentiment 

model for mobile. 

3.3.3 Classification Model 

To predict the sentiment of a tweet, we decided 

to use decision trees as a classification model for 

ease of results’ interpretation. The design is an 

ensemble classifier consisting of three binary 

classifiers: positive/not positive, negative/not 

negative and objective/not objective as shown in 

Figure 3. In order to train each classifier, an 

equal number of tweets is used for each class. 

The results of the three classifiers are then evalu-

ated against custom developed rules that com-

bine the results of the three classifiers in order to 

assign the correct sentiment label for a given 

tweet: positive, negative or neutral sentiment.  

 

 

 

 
Figure 2. Homepage of the lexicon interface and 

snapshots of examples searched through the interface. 
Positive, negative and objective scores are represented 
in green, red and gray respectively. 

21



For example, a tweet classified as positive, not 
negative and objective by the three binary 
classifiers respectively will be labeled as a 
positive tweet. These rules were chosen to 
achieve higher accuracy, and are shown in Figure 
3 and the input to the rules are the results of the 
three binary classifiers. The classification model 
is shown in Figure 3. 

3.4 Mobile Application Development 

3.4.1 Application Architecture 

A 3-tier architecture shown in Figure 4 is used 

for the design of the application. The design is 

divided into three main components. The user 

interface is the component where the model takes 

as input the topic of interest and where the tweets 

are displayed after being classified as positive, 

negative or objective. The logic part consists of 

the processing performed in order to match the 

stemmed tweets to the stemmed lemmas in Ar-

SenL and extract sentiment scores. The senti-

ment scores are fed to the classification model 

described above. The Data component represents 

all the sources of data that the application makes 

use of: the tweets accessed through an API, fil-

tered tweets based on the input topic, ArSenL 

and the classification model. No additional serv-

ers are required to perform sentiment classifica-

tion. Thus, the energy is reduced since there is no 

need for I/O communication with a remote server 

or for server-level computations. The mobile ap-

plication was developed for Android OS mobiles 

and was titled “شو رأين؟” meaning what is their 

opinion. It is available for download through 

http://www.oma-project.com. An example re-

ported in Table 1 to illustrate the different steps 

of the architecture in Figure 4. Below, we de-

scribe the steps involved in retrieving the senti-

ment of a tweet. 

3.4.2 Fetching Tweets 

There is a search box at the top of the main page 

in which the user enters the keyword of interest. 

Based on the keyword entered, recent tweets are 

fetched using Twitter API with Arabic filtering 

so that all fetched tweets are in Arabic. The user 

has the option to fetch more tweets by clicking 

on the “Show More” button. The fetched tweets 

are then stored in an array list for further pro-

cessing and then deriving the related sentiment. 

 
Figure 3. Three-way ensemble decision trees senti-

ment classifier. 

 

Figure 4. A 3-tier architecture of the mobile applica-

tion. 

3.4.3 User Interface Displaying Results 

3.4.3.1 Detailed Tweets View 

The fetched tweets are processed and labeled as 

positive, negative or objective as described. The 

tweets are displayed to the user and colored ac-

cording to their sentiment label: green color for 

positive sentiments, red color for negative opin-

ions and gray color for objective tweets. A snap-

shot of the interface is shown in Figure 5, show-

ing classified tweets for the topic “لبنان” (Leba-

non). These tweets reflect the latest tweets avail-

able on Twitter. 

22



3.4.3.2 Summary Charts 

Instead of looking at each tweet separately, a 

summary overview on the sentiments towards a 

specific topic can be accessed through the visual 

summaries available in the application. A pie 

chart is used to visualize the summary of the re-

cently analyzed tweets, showing the distribution 

of the sentiment labels with the three colors 

green, red and gray. A sample snapshot of the 

visualization is shown in Figure 6. 
 

Tweet  لبنان بلد جميل(Lebanon is a beautiful 

country) 

Tokens لبنان بلد جميل 

Stems لبن بلد جمل 

Scores (Positive, 

Negative, Objec-

tive) 

0.75,0,0.25 0,0,1 0,0,1 

Positive/Not Posi-

tive 

Positive 

Negative/Not Nega-

tive 

Not Negative 

Objective/Not Ob-

jective 

Objective 

Final Classification Positive 

Table 1. Example of a processed and classified tweet. 

3.4.3.3 Most Hashtag Used 

Since hashtags are essential features in tweets 

and are usually highly correlated with the topic 

of the tweet, the design of the application allows 

the user to see the most used hashtags corre-

sponding to the searched topic. A snapshot of 

this view in the application is shown in Figure 7. 

3.4.3.4 History Fragments 

Another important feature in the application is 

the availability of the history track. This option 

allows the user to keep track of the evolution of 

sentiment distributions regarding a specific topic 

through time. A snapshot reflecting the history 

fragment is shown in Figure 8. 

4 Evaluation 

In this section we evaluate three items: the sen-

timent model developed for identifying the sen-

timents of Arabic tweets, and the mobile applica-

tion performance. 

4.1 Accuracy of Sentiment Model 

As described in section 3, an ensemble model is 

used to assess the sentiment of the tweet using 

three decision trees. The model was developed us-
ing WEKA data mining tool. The features of the 

model were the sums of the three sentiment scores per 

tweet. The dataset which consists of 2300 manu-

ally annotated Arabic Tweets (~30k words) is 

utilized (Mourad and Darwish, 2013) to train the 

model and construct the trees. The model was 

optimized with custom rules to achieve a high 

accuracy in prediction. A 5-fold cross validation 

was used to evaluate the developed sentiment 

model. Accuracy measure is used to evaluate the 

system. Each classifier is evaluated separately 

and trained using the same number of tweets per 

class to avoid any bias or over fit in the model. 

The results are shown in Table 2. 

 
Figure 5. Snapshot of analyzed tweet on “لبنان” Leba-

non topic. 

 

 
Figure 6. Snapshot of quick summary pie chart of 

sentiment distributions for the topic “لبنان” Lebanon. 

23



 

 
Figure 7. Most occurring hashtags for the topic 

 .Lebanon ”لبنان“

 

Figure 8. History scores displayed by date of 
search for the topic “لبنان” Lebanon. 

 

Model Accuracy (%) 
Positive/Not Positive 61.2  

Negative/Not Negative 72.9  

Objective/Not Objective 67.8  

Full System 67.3 

Table 2. Accuracy percentages for each classifier and 

for the full system. 

An average accuracy of 67.33% was achieved for 

the full system. 

4.2 Mobile Application Performance 

The performance of the application was also 

evaluated. At first 20 tweets were being retrieved 

and processed but the response time was relative-

ly long. Hence, we made the application fetch 10 

tweets at a time. More tweets can be retrieved by 

pressing on the “Show More” button as seen in 

Figure 5. All other processing and computations 

were done using mobile resources. In this way, 

we achieved our target of creating a sentiment 

mining application fully runnable on mobile. 

Moreover, the user interface of the application 

has been updated several times to optimize per-

formance and user-friendliness based on users’ 

feedback. 

5 Conclusion 

We presented in this paper a light lexicon-based 

mobile application for sentiment mining of Ara-

bic Tweets. A 3-tier architecture was designed to 

classify tweets as positive, negative or objective. 

The mobile application was designed to mini-

mize energy consumption of the mobile by hav-

ing an algorithm with minimal computational 

needs and no remote communication for compu-

tation. As an essential resource for the develop-

ment of the mobile application, a stemmed ver-

sion of ArSenL was generated. Different visuali-

zations options are presented to the user. An en-

semble classifier was developed based on manu-

ally annotated corpus of Arabic tweets and an 

average accuracy of 67.3% was achieved for sen-

timent classification through the mobile applica-

tion. As future work, we consider enhancing the 

processing by integrating further intelligence in 

the classification model to retrieve negations. We 

are also considering developing the application 

for other mobile platforms. 

6 Acknowledgments 

This work was made possible by NPRP 6-716-1-

138 grant from the Qatar National Research 

Fund (a member of Qatar Foundation). The 

statements made herein are solely the responsi-

bility of the authors. 

Reference 

Abdul-Mageed, M., Diab, M. and Korayem, M. 

(2011). Subjectivity and sentiment analysis of 

modern standard Arabic. In Proceedings of the 49th 

Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-

tion Linguistics: Human Language Technologies: 

short papers- Volume2. Association for Computa-

tional Linguistics. 

Abdul-Mageed, M., & Diab, M. (2012). Toward 

building a large-scale Arabic sentiment lexicon. In 

Proceedings of the 6th International Global Word-

Net Conference (pp. 18-22). 

Abdul-Mageed, M., & Diab, M. (2014). SANA: A 

Large Scale Multi-Genre, Multi-Dialect Lexicon 

24



for Arabic Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis. In 

Proceedings of the Language Resources and Eval-

uation Conference (LREC). Reykjavik, Iceland. 

Alhazmi, S., Black, W., & McNaught, J. (2013). Ara-

bic SentiWordNet in Relation to SentiWordNet 

3.0. 2180-1266, 4(1), 1-11. 

Aly, M. A., & Atiya, A. F. (2013, August). LABR: A 

Large Scale Arabic Book Reviews Dataset. In ACL 

(2) (pp. 494-498). 

AraMorph. (n.d.). Retrieved May 19, 2015, from 

http://sourceforge.net/projects/aramorph/ 

Baccianella, S., Esuli, A., & Sebastiani, F. (2010, 

May). SentiWordNet 3.0: An Enhanced Lexical 

Resource for Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Min-

ing. In LREC (Vol. 10, pp. 2200-2204). 

Badaro, G., Baly, R., Hajj, H., Habash, N., & El-Hajj, 

W. (2014). A Large Scale Arabic Sentiment Lexi-

con for Arabic Opinion Mining. ANLP 2014, 165. 

Black, W., Elkateb, S., & Vossen, P. (2006). Introduc-

ing the Arabic wordnet project. In Proceedings of 

the third International WordNet Conference 

(GWC-06). 

Davidov, D., Tsur, O., & Rappoport, A. (2010, Au-

gust). Enhanced sentiment learning using twitter 

hashtags and smileys. In Proceedings of the 23rd 

International Conference on Computational Lin-

guistics: Posters (pp. 241-249). Association for 

Computational Linguistics. 

Denecke, K. (2008, April). Using sentiwordnet for 

multilingual sentiment analysis. In Data Engineer-

ing Workshop, 2008. ICDEW 2008. IEEE 24th In-

ternational Conference on (pp. 507-512). IEEE 

Elarnaoty, M., AbdelRahman, S., & Fahmy, A. 

(2012). A Machine Learning Approach for Opinion 

Holder Extraction in Arabic Language. Interna-

tional Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applica-

tions, 3(2). 

El-Beltagy, S. R., & Ali, A. (2013, March). Open is-

sues in the sentiment analysis of Arabic social me-

dia: A case study. In Innovations in Information 

Technology (IIT), 2013 9th International Confer-

ence on (pp. 215-220). IEEE. 

El-Halees, A. (2011). Arabic opinion mining using 

combined classification approach. 

Esuli, A., & Sebastiani, F. (2005). Determining the 

semantic orientation of terms through gloss classi-

fication. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM interna-

tional conference on Information and knowledge 

management (pp. 617-624). ACM. 

Esuli, A., & Sebastiani, F. (2006). Sentiwordnet: A 

publicly available lexical resource for opinion min-

ing. In Proceedings of LREC (Vol. 6. pp. 417-422). 

Feldman, R. (2013). Techniques and applications for 

sentiment analysis. Communications of the ACM, 

56(4), 82-89. 

Graff, D., Maamouri, M., Bouziri, B., Krouna, S., 

Kulick, S., & Buckwalter, T. (2009). Standard Ar-

abic Morphological Analyzer (SAMA) Version 

3.1, 2009. Linguistic Data Consortium 

LDC2009E73. 

Habash, Nizar. Introduction to Arabic Natural Lan-

guage Processing, Synthesis Lectures on Human 

Language Technologies, Graeme Hirst, editor. 

Morgan & Claypool Publishers., 2010.   

Khoja, S., & Garside, R. (1999). Stemming arabic 

text. Lancaster, UK, Computing Department, Lan-

caster University. 

Mourad, A., & Darwish, K. (2013, June). Subjectivity 

and sentiment analysis of modern standard Arabic 

and Arabic microblogs. In Proceedings of the 4th 

Workshop on Computational Approaches to Sub-

jectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis (pp. 

55-64). 

Mukherjee, S., Malu, A., AR, B., & Bhattacharyya, P. 

(2012, October). TwiSent: a multistage system for 

analyzing sentiment in twitter. In Proceedings of 

the 21st ACM international conference on Infor-

mation and knowledge management (pp. 2531-

2534). ACM. 

Ohana, B., & Tierney, B. (2009, October). Sentiment 

Classification of reviews using SentiWordNet. In 

9th. IT & T Conference (p.13). 

Pasha, Arfath, Mohamed Al-Badrashiny, Mona Diab, 

Ahmed El Kholy, Ramy Eskander, Nizar Habash, 

Manoj Pooleery, Owen Rambow and Ryan M. 

Roth. MADAMIRA: A Fast, Comprehensive Tool 

for Morphological Analysis and Disambiguation of 

Arabic.  In Proceedings of the Language Resources 

and Evaluation Conference (LREC), Reykjavik, 

Iceland, 2014. 

Radcliffe, D. (2013). Twitter takes off in Saudi – and 

other news of social media in the Arab world. Brit-

ish Broadcasting Corporation. 

Taboada, M., Brooke, J., Tofiloski, M., Voll, K., & 

Stede, M. (2011). Lexicon-based methods for sen-

timent analysis. Computational linguistics, 37(2), 

267-307. 

 

25


