



















































Universal and Language-specific Dependency Relations for Analysing Romanian


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 28–37,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

Universal and Language-specific Dependency Relations for Analysing 

Romanian 

Verginica Barbu Mititelu 

Research Institute for Artifi-

cial Intelligence “Mihai 

Drăgănescu” 

Romanian Academy 

Romania 

vergi@racai.ro 

Cătălina Mărănduc 

Faculty of Computer 

Science, 

“Al. I Cuza” University, 

Romania 

catalina.maranduc@info.

uaic.ro 

Elena Irimia 

Research Institute for 

Artificial Intelligence 

“Mihai Drăgănescu” 

Romanian Academy 

Romania 

elena@racai.ro 

   

Abstract 

This paper is meant as a brief description of 

the Romanian syntax within the dependency 

framework, more specifically within the 

Universal Dependency (UD) framework, 

and is the result of a volunteer activity of 

mapping two independently created Roma-

nian dependency treebanks to the UD speci-

fications. This mapping process is not trivi-

al, as concessions have to be made and solu-

tions need to be found for various language 

specific phenomena. We highlight the spe-

cific characteristics of the UD relations in 

Romanian and argument the need for other 

relations. If they have already been defined 

for (an)other language(s) in the UD project, 

we adopt them.  

1 Introduction 

The context of the work presented below is the 

creation of various language resources for 

Romanian. Throughout time, several resources 

have been created, which are available on the 

Meta-Share platform (http://ws.racai.ro:9191/). 

Nevertheless, the need for a syntactically anno-

tated corpus was underlined in (Trandabăț et 

al., 2012). In the last years, two treebanks for 

Romanian were created. Although using dif-

ferent sets of relations, they both adopted the 

dependency grammar formalism and were cre-

ated in complete awareness of each other.  

Perez (2014) and Mărănduc and Perez 

(2015) reported on a treebank of (now) 5800 

sentences, with 121 657 words and an average 

of 21 words per sentence. The sentences be-

long to all functional styles and cover different 

historical periods (the translated English 

FrameNet, Orwell’s “1984”, some Romanian 

belletristic texts, Wikipedia and Acquis Com-

munautaire documents, political texts, etc.). 

They are annotated with dependency relations, 

but using a set of Romanian traditional gram-

mar labels for the syntactic relations (such as 

prepositional attribute, adjectival attribute, di-

rect complement, secondary complement, etc.). 

We refer to this corpus as UAIC-RoTb (the 

Romanian treebank created at "Al. I. Cuza" 

University of Iași).  

Irimia and Barbu Mititelu (2015) report on a 

treebank (created at RACAI and further re-

ferred to as RACAI-RoTb) of (now) 5000 sen-

tences. This corpus contains 5 sub-sections, 

covering the following genres: journalistic 

(news and editorials), pharmaceutical and 

medical short texts, legalese, biographies and 

critical reviews, fiction. From each such sub-

section of the Romanian balanced corpus 

(ROMBAC, Ion et al., 2012), the most fre-

quent 500 verbs were selected and 2 sentences 

(with length varying from 10 to 30 words), 

illustrating the usage of each verb (so a total of 

10 sentences per verb), were designated to be 

part of the treebank. They are annotated with 

dependency relations, but using a reduced set 

of labels, created with an eye to the UD set, 

but treating functional words as heads, differ-

entiating among more types of objects (direct, 

indirect, secondary and prepositional) and dis-

regarding the morpho-syntactic realizations of 

subjects and objects (so making no distinction 

between subjects or objects realized as nouns 

and subjects or objects realized as subordinate 

clauses, nor between subjects in active or in 

passive sentences).  

Our effort now is to create a reference de-

pendency Romanian treebank following the 

principles of the UD project by converting the 

annotation of these two treebanks into the UD 

style. The conversion process has not started 

yet, so we cannot report on any data about its 

performance. However, each team (the UAIC 

28



and the RACAI one) has mapped the set of 

relations in their treebank to the UD set. For 

most of the situations, the two teams agree on 

the UD relations meant to describe various 

syntactic phenomena. However, there are cases 

when different solutions were given, as will be 

signalled below. 

On the one hand, we will discuss below the 

UD relations from the perspective of their 

morpho-syntactic realization in Romanian, 

thus emphasizing language characteristics 

(section 3). On the other hand, we will de-

scribe language-specific constructions and 

bring arguments in favour of the treatment we 

propose (section 4). What we consider lan-

guage-specific constructions are not necessari-

ly constructions occurring only in Romanian. 

When they have been described for other lan-

guages as well, we will, in fact, add one more 

language argument supporting the respective 

relation. 

2 Related work 

Our effort of converting the treebanks in the 

UD annotation style is not singular. On the 

contrary, it aligns with the increasing number 

of such volunteer initiatives meant to offer 

treebanks for different languages consistently 

annotated, that could further help the develop-

ment of multilingual parsers. 

The 28 languages involved in this project 

now are Amharic, Ancient Greek, Basque, 

Bulgarian, Catalan, Chinese, Croatian, Czech, 

Danish, English, Finish, French, German, 

Greek, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, 

Irish, Italian, Latin, Japanese, Korean, Persian, 

Romanian, Slovenian, Spanish, and Sweden. 

We can notice the world wide interest for this 

topic, both for spoken and for dead languages. 

The desideratum in the UD project is to 

have consistent annotations of treebanks for 

different languages. Consequently, all teams 

adopt the same relations for syntactic analysis. 

Nevertheless, language specific phenomena 

benefit of close attention and, besides the uni-

versal set of relations, extensions are also pos-

sible in order to accommodate all linguistic 

phenomena. For example, the Czech, English, 

Finnish, Greek, Irish, and Swedish teams have 

already proposed some extensions, for a cor-

rect annotation of the reflexive marker of pas-

sive voice (Czech), of the possessive nominal 

constructions (English, Finnish, Irish, Swe-

dish), of relative clauses (English, Finnish, 

Greek, Irish, Swedish), etc. 

3 Universal dependency relations in 
Romanian  

Our intention of automatically converting the 

two treebanks (UAIC-RoTb and RACAI-

RoTb) to the UD annotation style was motivat-

ed by the need for a bigger, unified, harmoni-

ous, conformant to international standards re-

source. In the conversion process, we con-

fronted various problems connected to the rep-

resentation of language phenomena within the 

new formalism. The way we decided to deal 

with them is described below. 

For marking the syntactic relations between 

parts of speech in Romanian, we have used the 

inventory of relations from the UD project 

(http://universaldependencies.github.io/docs/u/

dep/index.html, an adapted version of the rela-

tions described in de Marneffe, 2014):  

Relation label Description 

root the head of a sentence 
nsubj nominal subject 

nsubjpass passive nominal subject 
csubj clausal subject 

csubjpass clausal passive subject 
dobj direct object 

iobj indirect object 

ccomp clausal complement 
xcomp open clausal complement 

nmod nominal modifier 
advmod adverbial modifier 

advcl adverbial clause modifier 
neg negation 

appos apposition 

amod adjectival modifier 
acl clausal modifier of a 

noun (adjectival clause) 
det determiner 

case case marking 
vocative addressee 

aux auxiliary verb 
auxpass passive auxiliary 

cop copula verb 

mark subordinating conjunc-

tion 

expl expletive 
conj conjunct 

cc coordinating conjunction 
discourse discourse element 

compound relation for marking 

29



compound words 

name names 
mwe multiword expressions 

that are not names 
foreign text in a foreign language 

goeswith two parts of a word that 

are separated in text  

list used for chains of compa-

rable elements 

dislocated dislocated elements 
parataxis parataxis 

remnant remnant in ellipsis 
reparandum overridden disfluency 

punct punctuation 

dep unspecified dependency 

Table 1. UD relations used for annotating the 

Romanian treebank. 

We do not use the nummod relation, as we 

treat numerals as either nouns or adjectives. 

We will highlight below the specific character-

istics of some of these relations in the analysis 

of Romanian and what decision regarding an-

notation they involved. 

3.1. Root 

In our treebank the predicate of a sentence 

can be a verb, an adverb (what Romanian tra-

ditional grammar calls a predicative adverb) 

(1, 2), an interjection (3), a noun (4) or an ad-

jective (5). When such a predicate is the head 

of a sentence, it is marked as root. Although 

cases when an adverb or an interjection is the 

root of a sentence are not mentioned on the UD 

website, we consider them possible in sentenc-

es similar to the ones exemplified for Romani-

an. 

(1) Jos mafia! 
Down mafia! 

“Down with the mafia!” 

(2) Poate că întârzie. 
Maybe that is_late 

“He may be late.” 

(3) Marș afară! 
Shoo out! 

“Get out!” 

(4) Maria este sora mea.  
Mary is sister-the my  

“Mary is my sister.” 

(5) Maria este înaltă.  
“Mary is tall.” 

If verbs, adverbs and interjections are com-

monly treated as predicates in Romanian lin-

guistics, the last two are the result of adopting 

from UD the analysis of the copula fi “be” as 

being in cop relation with what traditional 

grammar analyses as a predicative. 

Another situation when the root is not a 

predicate is represented by elliptical sentences, 

which lack a predicate, and thus their root is 

the head of the phrase they contain: in the Bi 

sentence below it is the noun parc. In case 

more than one argument or adjunct of the 

missing root are present, the head of the first 

one (in linear order) is the root of the sentence 

and all the others are attached to it by the rela-

tion they would have been attached to the ver-

bal root if it had been present: 

(6) A: Unde pleci? 
Where leave-you? 

“Where are you going?” 

B: i) În parc. 

In park 

“To the park.” 

ii) În parc, cu Dan. 

In park, with Dan 

“To the park, with Dan.” 

3.2. Cop 

In UD the copula be is linked by means of the 

relation cop to the predicative noun or adjec-

tive functioning as the root of the sentence. 

However, when the predicative is a clause, be 

is the root of the sentence and the clause pre-

dicative is ccomp. We adopted the same anal-

ysis for its Romanian equivalent, fi, in spite of 

the inconsistency in the analysis of this verb.  

On the other hand, we can notice an incon-

sistent treatment of copular verbs in UD. Thus, 

the verb be is in cop relation to the root, 

whereas other copular verbs are analysed as 

roots: here is an example with become from 

the English treebank in its first release on the 

UD website (file en-ud-dev.conllu): 

(7) John has become an engineer. 
root (become) 

xcomp (become, engineer)  

In Romanian, the verb deveni “become” is al-

ways traditionally analysed as copular, where-

as all the other copular verbs can also be pre-

dicative for some of their meanings. We illus-

trate this with însemna, which is predicative in 

(8a) and copular in (8b), according to the tradi-

tional grammar analysis: 

30



(8) a) Copilul a însemnat tema. 
Child-the has marked homework-the 

“The child marked the homework.” 

b) Răspunsul lui a însemnat diplomație. 

Answer-the his has meant diplomacy 

“His answer meant/was_a_proof_of di-

plomacy.” 

In (8a) tema is the direct object and in (8b) 

diplomație is the predicative, not a direct ob-

ject, as it does not pass the test specific to di-

rect objects: substitution with an Accusative 

personal pronoun. Although the sentences may 

seem syntactically similar, they are different 

and traditional syntactic analysis captures the 

difference by assigning a distinct syntactic 

function to the two nouns following the verb.  

Our solution for copular verbs (except fi, 

whose analysis is presented above), in line 

with other languages in the project, is to mark 

them as roots and treat them as regular raising 

verbs, so they take (i.e., their predicative is 

analysed as) an xcomp dependent. Conse-

quently, the distinction between the two mor-

phological values of such verbs (predicative 

and copular) is reflected in the different types 

of relation linking its second argument. 

3.3. Subject 

Subject is the only relation for which subtypes 

were created in UD in order to differentiate 

between active and passive sentences, on the 

one hand, and phrasal and clausal realization, 

on the other. Thus, four subtypes are used: 

nsubj, nsubjpass, csubj, csubjpass, 

which we adopted.  

In Romanian, the nominal subject is some-

times doubled by a pronominal one, marking a 

certain illocutionary attitude of the speaker: 

threat, promise, and reassurance (see 9). As 

Romanian is a pro-drop language, the nominal 

subject may be omitted (10). Irrespective of 

the presence or absence of the nominal subject, 

the pronoun has a clitic behaviour in such ex-

amples (Barbu, 2003).  

The analysis we propose within UD is the 

following: the nominal, when present, is 

marked as nsubj, while the pronoun in Nom-

inative case is marked as expl, with și as 

advmod. The analysis of the pronominal dou-

bling subject does not depend on the presence 

or absence of the nominal subject. 

(9) Tata vine și el imediat. 

Father-the comes and he immediately 

“Father will also come immediately.” 

(10) Vine și el imediat. 
Comes and he immediately 

“He will also come immediately.” 

3.4. Objects 

Direct, indirect, secondary objects. The 

Grammar of Romanian Language (GRL) de-

scribes three types of objects: direct, indirect 

and secondary. The last one is an object in the 

Accusative case, co-occurring with a direct 

object, also in Accusative. When only one Ac-

cusative object occurs with a verb, that object 

is always a direct one (see 12b). While the di-

rect object may co-occur with either the indi-

rect or the secondary object, the other two can 

never co-occur: 

(11) Fata a dat nume păpușilor. 
Girl-the has given names dolls-the-to 

“The girl gave names to the dolls.” 

(12) a) Bunica i-a învățat pe copii o poezie. 
Grandmother-the them-has taught PE 

children a poem 

“Grandmother taught the children a po-

em.” 

b) Bunica a învățat o poezie. 

Grandmother-the has learned a poem 

“Grandmother has learned a poem.” 

Within UD, we analyse the direct object in 

(11) (nume) as dobj and the indirect object 

(păpușilor) as iobj. As in UD there is no la-

bel for the secondary object, in (12a) the direct 

object (copii) is analyzed as iobj and the 

secondary object (poezie) as dobj, adopting 

the Czech convention, supported by the seman-

tic roles distribution in the sentence: the ani-

mate object is the addressee, and the non-

animate is the patient. 

Thus, unlike traditional grammar, when it is 

not the only object of the verb, the Accusative 

object is either direct or indirect, depending on 

the co-occurring object: when there is a Dative 

and an Accusative object, the Dative is iobj, 

and the Accusative is dobj; when two Accu-

satives co-occur, the [+Animate] one is iobj, 

and the [-Animate] one is dobj. So, an auto-

matic analysis needs access to a word sense 

disambiguation tool or to a dictionary. 

Object doubling. A characteristic of Roma-

nian direct and indirect objects is their obliga-

tory doubling by a clitic, when certain charac-

31



teristics hold: for the direct object: definite-

ness, pre-verbal occurrence, co-occurrence 

with the preposition pe, pronominal realiza-

tion; for the indirect object: [+Human], pre-

verbal occurrence. 

Thus, the direct object can have the types of 

realizations presented under (13), while the 

indirect object those under (14): 

(13) a) Ascult muzică. 
Listen-I music. 

“I am listening to music.” 

b) Îl ascult pe Ion/el. 

Cl.3.sg.masc.Acc. listen-I PE John/him. 

“I am listening to John/him.” 

c) Îl ascult. 

Him listen-I 

“I am listening to him.” 

(14) a) Dau de mâncare pisicii. 
Give-I of food cat-the-to 

“I give food to the cat.” 

b) Le dau de mâncare copiilor/lor. 

Cl.3.pl.Dat. give-I of food children-the-

to/to-them 

“I give the children/them food.” 

c) Le dau de mâncare. 

To-them give-I of food 

“I give them food.” 

When the direct or indirect object is not dou-

bled, it is analysed as dobj and iobj, respec-

tively, no matter if it is realised by a noun or a 

pronoun (see examples a) and c) under (13) 

and (14)). In the b) examples, the clitic is ana-

lysed as expl and it doubles a dobj or 

iobj, respectively. 

3.5. Adverb modifiers 

Adverbs can modify nouns (15), verbs (16), 

adjectives (17) and other adverbs (18) in Ro-

manian and for all these cases we use the label 

advmod.  

(15) Cititul noaptea nu este sănătos. 
Reading-the at-night not is healthy 

“Reading at night is not healthy.” 

(16) Citesc noaptea. 
Read-I at-night 

“I read at night.” 

(17) o casă chiar frumoasă 
a house really beautiful 

“a really beautiful house” 

(18) Scrie chiar ordonat. 
Writes really neatly 

“He writes really neatly.” 

However, with some verbs, the adverb repre-

sents an obligatory dependent, without which 

the sentence is ungrammatical: 

(19) Copilul se poartă *(frumos). 
Child-the refl.cl.3.sg. behaves beautiful-

ly 

“The child behaves himself.” 

As a consequence, in Romanian we use the 

advmod label both for non-core dependents 

and for core ones. 

3.6. Subordinate clauses 

Subordinate clauses are introduced by relative 

elements (and indefinites formed from rela-

tives) or subordinating conjunctions. The rela-

tive elements are pronouns, adjectives or ad-

verbs. The major difference between relatives 

(and indefinites) and conjunctions concerns 

their syntactic role within the clause they in-

troduce: the former have a syntactic function in 

the subordinated clause, whereas the conjunc-

tions lack it. As a consequence, we adopted the 

UD solution of treating them in different ways: 

relatives (and indefinites) establish a relation 

of whatever kind (nsubj, dobj, iobj, 

advmod, amod, etc.) with the head of the 

subordinated clause (20); the subordinating 

conjunction is only a marker of the syntactic 

subordination and establishes the relation 

mark with the head of the subordinated clause 

(21). 

(20) Știu cine a venit. 
Know-I who has come 

“I know who has come.” 
nsubj(venit, cine) 

ccomp(Știu, venit) 

(21) Știu că vine târziu. 
Know-I that comes late 

“I know that (s)he comes late.” 
mark(vine, că) 

ccomp(Știu, vine) 

This way, we ensure, in fact, a consistent way 

of choosing the element in the subordinated 

clause meant to participate to the subordinating 

relation: the head of the subordinate clause. 

A consistent annotation is ensured also for 

the relative elements, which can also function 

as interrogative elements in questions: they 

32



always establish a syntactic relation with the 

head of the clause: 

(22) Cine a venit? 
“Who has come?” 

The conjunctive mood is formed with the 

conjunction să. It can occur both in main 

clauses (23) and in subordinate ones (24).  

(23) Să mergem! 
SĂ go-we 

“Let’s go!” 

(24) Vreau să mergem. 
Want-I SĂ go-we. 

“I want us to go.” 

Our solution is to analyse both such occurrenc-

es in the same way, i.e. să is mark for the 

verb, in spite of the UD definition of the mark-

er as a “word introducing a finite clause subor-

dinate to another clause” (cf. 

http://universaldependencies.github.io/docs/u/d

ep/mark.html). 

4 Language-specific constructions 

In this section we describe constructions from 

Romanian for which the UD relations are not 

appropriate.  

4.1. Agent complement 

An agent complement may occur in construc-

tions with the verb in the passive voice (25) or 

with non-finite verbs (26) or adjectives (27) 

with a passive meaning: 

(25) Cartea a fost cumpărată de Ion. 
Book-the has been bought by John 

“The book was bought by John.” 

(26) Aceasta este calea de urmat de_către 
orice om integru. 

This is way-the of followed by any man 

honest 

“This is the way to follow for any hon-

est man.” 

(27) Avea un comportament inacceptabil 
de_către colegii săi. 

Had-he a behaviour unacceptable by 

colleagues-the his 

“He had an unacceptable behaviour by 

his colleagues.” 

Besides the prepositional phrase (headed by 

the simple preposition de or by the compound 

preposition de_către
1
), the agent complement 

may also be realized by a subordinate relative 

clause: 

(28) A fost angajat de cine a avut încrede-
re în el. 

Has been hired by who has had trust in 

him. 

“He was hired by who trusted him.” 

In line with other languages displaying this 

syntactic specificity in the UD project (Swe-

dish), we support the proposal of creating a 

subtype of the nmod relation: nmod:agent. 

We highlight the fact that in such cases nmod 

is also a core dependent of the head. For the 

last example, when the agent is realized as a 

subordinate clause (28), we propose 

ccomp:agent. 

4.2. Prepositional object 

This is a verb argument (i.e., it is part of the 

verb subcategorization frame) introduced by a 

preposition selected by the verb: 

(29) Mă gândesc la Maria. 
Refl.cl.1.sg.Acc. think of Mary 

“I am thinking of Mary.” 

Prepositions are not heads in UD. So, the nom-

inal is annotated as nmod on the verb and the 

preposition as case on the noun. However, 

nmods are defined as non-core dependents of 

a predicate in UD. Thus, annotating the prepo-

sitional objects as nmod implies treating them 

in exactly the same way as we treat adverbials 

realized by a prepositional phrase. In the fol-

lowing example, la problemă is the preposi-

tional object and la masa is the time adverbial, 

in traditional grammar terms. 

(30) Mă gândesc la problemă la masa de 
prânz. 

Refl.cl.1.sg.Acc. think of problem at 

meal-the of noon 

“I am thinking at the problem at lunch.” 

However, if nmods functioning as adverbials 

are optional, prepositional objects are obligato-

                                                           
1
 In the pre-processing phase, compound preposi-

tions are recognised (given their presence in our 

electronic lexicon) and marked as one token 

(using the underscore). 

33



ry for the grammatical correctness of the sen-

tence: 

(31) Mă bazez *(pe voi). 
Refl.cl.1.sg.Acc. count-I *(on you) 

“I count *(on you).” 

That is why we are not satisfied with this anal-

ysis of prepositional objects in which they are 

not distinguished from dependents which are 

not obligatory and we propose to redefine the 

nmod relation so that it covers both core and 

non-core dependents. In line with this redefini-

tion, in RACAI-RoTb we introduce the 

nmod:pmod subtype of nmod to account for 

the obligatory prepositional objects of predi-

cates, a phenomenon present in other lan-

guages, as well. However, in UAIC-RoTb such 

cases are analysed as iobj, given the occur-

rence in language of two parallel structures for 

indirect object: one with the noun in Dative 

case and another with the preposition la and 

the noun in Accusative. The latter structure is 

the norm for phrases containing a quantifier or 

a numeral in the standard language (32), but it 

witnesses an extension to all kinds of nouns in 

colloquial speech (33): 

(32) Le spun o poveste la trei copii. 
“I tell a story to three children.” 

(33) Le spun o poveste la copii. 
“I tell a story to the children.” 

4.3. Possession 

There are several ways of expressing posses-

sion in Romanian: sentences with the verb 

avea “to have” or its synonyms, genitive nouns 

or personal pronouns, possessive adjective 

(which we link by means of the amod:poss 

relation to the head nominal, see (4) above, 

where mea is in amod:poss relation with its 

head, sora) and pronouns and dative personal 

pronouns. We focus here on genitive and da-

tive constructions, as the others do not raise 

any special problems. 

The genitive constructions (involving nouns 

or personal pronouns) may have a possessive 

meaning (34) or not (35): 

(34) Trecutul castelului este necunoscut. 
Past-the of-castle-the is unknown 

“The past of the castle is unknown.” 

(35) Reconstrucția castelului a început. 
Rebuilding of-castle-the has started 

“The rebuilding of the castle has start-

ed.” 

And this is the case in other languages as well: 

see Finish (http://universaldependencies. 

github.io/docs/fi/dep/nmod-poss.html, ac-

cessed on April 7). The subtype nmod:poss 

is used to annotate all these constructions, in 

spite of the semantic differences between 

them. And this is the way in which such cases 

are dealt with in UAIC-RoTb, as well. Howev-

er, the RACAI-RoTB team uses only the label 

nmod, leaving the possessive value of geni-

tives not specified. 

As far as the possessive dative is concerned, 

it is always realised by a pronominal clitic on 

the verb: 

(36) Mi-am pierdut fularul (*meu). 
Cl.1.sg.Dat-have-I lost scraf-the (*my) 

“I have lost my scarf.” 

The co-occurrence of the possessive adjective 

(meu) in such constructions makes them pleo-

nastic.  

For the clitic analysis the RACAI-RoTb 

team decided to use the nmod:poss relation 

to link it to the verb. The UAIC-RoTb team 

opted for the iobj relation for such cases. 

4.4. Reflexive pronouns 

Reflexive pronouns can have various semantic 

values: 

 reflexive value: see examples (29), 
(30) and (31) above; 

 reciprocal value:  

(37) Doi copii se bat. 
Two children SE fight 

“Two children are fighting.” 

 passive value: 

(38) Se bat albușurile cu zahăr. 
SE beat whites with sugar 

“Egg whites are beaten with sugar.” 

 pronominal value: 

(39) Ion se spală. 
John SE washes 

“John is washing himself.” 

 impersonal value: 

(40) Se înnoptează. 
SE gets_dark 

“It is getting dark.” 

34



For the reflexive, reciprocal and impersonal 

value, when the reflexive pronoun (either in 

Accusative or in Dative case) has no syntactic 

function and is a mere marker of the reflexive, 

reciprocal or impersonal voice of the verb, ac-

cording to traditional grammar, we adopt the 

relation compound:reflex, a subtype of 

the compound relation, to link the pronoun to 

the verb, as proposed for Czech.  

For the passive value, when the occurrence 

of the pronoun blocks the occurrence of the 

passive auxiliary (fi), we propose the relation 

auxpass:reflex, a subtype of the 

auxpass relation, to link the pronoun to the 

verb. 

For the pronominal value, we need no other 

relation, as the pronoun has a syntactic func-

tion: dobj or iobj (in (37) it is a dobj). 

4.5. Participles 

The Romanian participle has some characteris-

tics that make it similar to adjectives (it in-

flects for number, for gender and for case and 

can modify a noun) and others that prove its 

verbal nature (it can take arguments): 

(41) poezii recitate de meseni la comanda 
lui Charles 

poems recited by diners at order-the 

def.art.masc.sg.Genit. Charles 

“poems recited by diners at Charles’ or-

der” 

 
Fig. 1. The arguments of the participle reci-

tate. 

Given the participle possibility of having ar-

guments, we decided to analyse the participles 

that determine a noun as establishing the acl 

relation to that noun. 

4.6. Putting semantics into adverbials 

UAIC-RoTb contains semantic information 

about the adjuncts occurring therein: they ex-

press time, place, manner, instrument, excep-

tion, purpose, cause, etc. They are morpholog-

ically realised as adverbs, noun phrases, prepo-

sitional phrases (containing a noun) or subor-

dinate clauses. Considering potential further 

processing of the treebank for various applica-

tions, a part of the semantic information was 

preserved, namely the time adjuncts. They are 

annotated as advmod:time, nmod:time or 

advcl:time, respectively. 

4.7. Infinitive or conjunctive? 

A specific syntactic feature is the verb mood 

selected for expressing the clausal argument of 

a verb. UAIC-RoTb has an incipient parallel 

treebank containing 250 sentences of the novel 

“1984” by G. Orwell, annotated in English, 

French and Romanian, which allows us to 

compare the syntax of the three languages. In 

English and in French the second verb is an 

infinitive directly related to the first one or re-

lated by means of a preposition: 

(42) Il cesse de parler / He ceases to speak / 
El încetează să vorbească.  

In Romanian the conjunctive mood is selected, 

which has the conjunction să as a marker. The 

structure with the second verb in the infinitive 

with preposition is possible in Romanian but 

less frequent and either obsolete or formal. 

(43) Noi încetăm (de) a vorbi. 

The Romanian subjunctive has inflexion for 

person and number: 

(44) Nous cessons de parler. / We cease to 
speak. / Noi încetăm să vorbim.  

Thus, in Romanian we can have either two 

clauses (when the second verb is in the con-

junctive mood) or only one (when the second 

verb is in the infinitive mood), in traditional 

grammar terms. Both cases correspond to Eng-

lish and French structures with a non-finite 

verb. However, this issue disappears as the 

dependency grammar treats all verbs identical-

ly, i.e. as heads of clauses, irrespective of their 

finite or non-finite form. 

4.8. The verb a putea “can” 

The problem of the mood of the second verb in 

Romanian gets more complicated if we com-

pare the structures containing modal verbs in 

the three languages.  

(45) We must eat. /Il faut manger. 
/Trebuie să mâncăm.  

35



In the languages that have modal verbs, they 

take short infinitive. In Romanian, among the 

potential modal verbs, only a putea “can” dis-

plays this syntactic behaviour, as well as the 

usual one, with the second verb at the subjunc-

tive mood.  

(46) Putem scrie. / Putem să scriem. 
“We can write”.  

Romanian does not have modal verbs. Howev-

er, there are a number of syntactic phenomena 

that make us conclude that a putea is the only 

verb in the process of transition to the status of 

modal verb.  

The constructions with the verb a putea fol-

lowed by a short infinitive are synonymous 

and commutable with those where it is fol-

lowed by a conjunctive (see 46). Statistically, 

the infinitive is more frequent than the con-

junctive: out of 150 examples containing this 

verb in UAIC-RoTb, 33% contain a conjunc-

tive, 24% contain no following verb (so, they 

are statistically irrelevant), and 43% contain a 

short infinitive without any preposition.  

There are a lot of dependents of the verb a 

putea that are advanced one level up in the 

tree: originally, they are arguments of the in-

finitive verb occurring after a putea: 

(47) Problema țărănească nu se poate re-
zolva. 

Problem-the rustic not SE can solve 

“The peasants’ problem cannot be 

solved”. 

The subject problema belongs to the subcate-

gorization frame of the verb rezolva. However, 

its number agreement with the verb poate 

proves its new syntactic status, that of subject 

of poate. Se is the passive maker of the verb 

rezolva, although raised on poate.  

Other core-dependents are also raised on the 

verb a putea: here is an example with an indi-

rect object: 

(48) Nu-mi putea da o cameră. 
Not-to-me could-he give a room 

“He could not give me a room.” 

We consider that a putea should be analysed as 

aux when followed by an infinitive, and as a 

root when followed by a subjunctive. 

5 Conclusion 

The Universal Dependency grammar project 

offers the material for a comparative and con-

trastive study of the languages involved in it. 

The same phenomenon can be studied in vari-

ous languages and similarities, as well as dif-

ferences highlighted. 

During our process of automatically con-

verting the annotation of the two Romanian 

treebanks into UD annotation, we had to find 

solutions for various language phenomena and 

they were either of the type “use a UD label to 

cover more situations than those presented 

within the UD project” or of the type “postu-

late a new label, a subtype of a relation exist-

ing in UD”. 

One of the results of our working methodol-

ogy is the heterogeneity of the syntactic rela-

tions covered by a UD label: see the case of 

nmod presented above. Another result is the 

blurring of the very clear border between some 

syntactic functions: see the case of direct ob-

ject, indirect object and secondary object.  

References  

Blanca Arias, Núria Bel, Mercè Lorente, Montser-

rat Marimón, Alba Milà, Jorge Vivaldi, Muntsa 

Padró, Marina Fomicheva, Imanol Larrea. 2014. 

Boosting the Creation of a Treebank. In Calzola-

ri, Nicoletta, Choukri, Khalid; Declerck, Thierry 

(et al.) (eds.) Proceedings of the Ninth Interna-

tional Conference on Language Resources and 

Evaluation (LREC'14): May 26-31, 2014 Rey-

kjavik, Iceland. [s.l.]: ELRA. p. 775-781. 

Verginica Barbu. 2003. Construcții cu subiect dub-

lu în limba română actuală. O perspectivă 

HPSG. In G. Pană Dindelegan, Aspecte ale 

dinamicii limbii române actuale. Editura Univer-

sității din București, p. 73-79. 

GRL – V. Guțu Romalo (ed.). 2005. The Grammar 

of Romanian Language. Romanian Academy 

Publishing House, second volume. 

Radu Ion, Elena Irimia, Dan Ștefănescu, Dan Tufiș 

2012. ROMBAC: The Romanian Balanced An-

notated Corpus. In Proc. LREC'12 Istanbul, Tur-

key. 

Elena Irimia and Verginica Barbu Mititelu. 2015. 

Building a Romanian Dependency Treebank. 

Corpus Linguistics 2015, Lancaster, UK, 21-24 

July 2015. 

Igor Mel’čuk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory 

and Practice. The SUNY Press, Albany, N.Y. 

36



Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Atanas 

Chanev, Gül¸sen Eryigit, Sandra Kübler, Sveto-

slav Marinov, and Erwin Marsi. 2007. Malt-

parser: A languageindependent system for data-

driven dependency parsing. Natural Language 

Engineering, 13:95–135. 

Montserrat Marimon and Nuria Bel. 2014. 

Dependency structure annotation in the IULA 

Spanish LSP Treebank. Language Resources 

and Evaluation. Amsterdam: Springer 

Netherlands. 

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Timothy Dozat, Na-

talia Silveira, Katri Haverinen, Filip Ginter, 

Joakim Nivre, Christopher D. Manning. 2014. 

Universal Stanford Dependencies: A cross-

lingustic typology, Proceedings of LREC 2014: 

4585-4592. 

Cătălina Mărănduc and Augusto-Cenel Perez. 2015. 

A Romanian dependency treebank, CICLing 

2015, Cairo, 14-20 April. 

Augusto-Cenel Perez. 2014. Resurse lingvistice 

pentru prelucrarea limbajului natural. PhD the-

sis, “Al. I Cuza” University, Iasi. 

Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey 

Leech, Jan Svartvik. 1985. A Comprehensive 

Grammar of the English Language. Longman. 

Lucien Tesnière. 1959. Éléments de syntaxe 

structurale. Klincksieck, Paris. 

Diana Trandabăț, Elena Irimia, Verginica Barbu 

Mititelu, Dan Cristea, Dan Tufiș. 2012. The Ro-

manian Language in the Digital Age. Limba 

română în era digitală. In White Papers Series 

(Rehm, Georg and Uszkoreit, Hans). Springer-

Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

37


