



















































Natural Language Generation from Pictographs


Proceedings of the 15th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 71–75,
Brighton, September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Natural Language Generation from Pictographs

Leen Sevens, Vincent Vandeghinste, Ineke Schuurman, Frank Van Eynde
Centre for Computational Linguistics

KU Leuven, Belgium
firstname@ccl.kuleuven.be

Abstract

We present a Pictograph-to-Text transla-
tion system for people with Intellectual
or Developmental Disabilities (IDD). The
system translates pictograph messages,
consisting of one or more pictographs, into
Dutch text using WordNet links and an n-
gram language model. We also provide
several pictograph input methods assisting
the users in selecting the appropriate pic-
tographs.

1 Introduction

Being unable to access ICT is a major form of so-
cial exclusion. For people with IDD, the use of
social media or applications that require the user
to be able to read or write, such as email clients, is
a huge stumbling block if no personal assistance
is given. There is a need for digital communica-
tion interfaces that enable written contact for peo-
ple with IDD.

Augmentative and Alternative Communication
(AAC) assists people with communication disabil-
ities to be socially active in the digital world. Pic-
tographically augmented text is a specific form of
AAC that is often used in schools, institutions, and
sheltered workshops to allow accessible commu-
nication. Between two and five million people in
the European Union could benefit from symbols
or symbol-related text as a means of written com-
munication (Keskinen et al., 2012).

Within the Able to Include framework,1 a EU
project aiming to improve the living conditions of
people with IDD, we developed a Pictograph-to-
Text translation system. It provides help in con-
structing Dutch textual messages by allowing the
user to input a series of pictographs and translates
these messages into NL. English and Spanish ver-
sions of the tool are currently in development. It

1http://abletoinclude.eu/

can be considered as the inverse translation engine
of the Text-to-Pictograph system as described by
Vandeghinste et al. (Accepted), which is primar-
ily conceived to improve comprehension of textual
content.

The system converts Sclera2 and Beta3 input
messages into Dutch text, using WordNet synsets
and a trigram language model. After a discus-
sion of related work (section 2), we describe some
characteristics of pictograph languages (section
3), followed by an overview of the different pic-
tograph input methods (section 4). The next part
(section 5) is dedicated to the architecture. We
present our preliminary results for Pictograph-to-
Dutch translation in section 6. Finally, we con-
clude and discuss future work in section 7.

2 Related work

Our task shares elements with regular machine
translation between natural languages and with
Natural Language Generation (NLG). Jing (1998)
retrieves the semantic concepts from WordNet
and maps them to appropriate words to produce
large amounts of lexical paraphrases for a spe-
cific application domain. Similar to our approach,
Liu (2003) uses statistical language models as a
solution to the word inflection problem, as there
may exist multiple forms for a concept constituent.
The language model re-scores all inflection forms
in order to generate the best hypothesis in the out-
put. Our solution is specifically tailored towards
translation from pictographs into text.

A number of pictograph-based input interfaces
can be found in the literature. Finch et al. (2011)
developed picoTrans, a mobile application which
allows users to build a source text by combining
pictures or common phrases, but their application
is not intended for people with cognitive disabili-
ties. The Prothèse Vocale Intelligente (PVI) sys-

2http://www.sclera.be/
3https://www.betasymbols.com/

71



tem by Vaillant (1998) offers a limited vocabulary
of pictographs, each one corresponding to a sin-
gle word. PVI searches for predicative elements,
such as verbs, and attempts to fill its semantic
slots, after which a tree structure is created and
a grammatical sentence is generated. Fitrianie and
Rothkrantz (2009) apply a similar method, requir-
ing the user to first select the pictograph represen-
tation of a verb and fill in the role slots that are
made available by that verb. Their system does not
take into account people with cognitive disabili-
ties. Various pictograph chat applications, such as
Messenger Visual (Tuset et al., 1995) and Picto-
graph Chat Communicator III (Munemori et al.,
2010), allow the user to insert pictographs, but
they do not generate NL.

The Pictograph-to-Text translation engine dif-
fers from these applications in that it is specifically
designed for people with cognitive disabilities,
does not impose any limits on the way in which
pictograph messages are composed and generates
NL output where possible. Furthermore, the sys-
tem’s architecture is as language-independent as
possible, making it very easy to add new target
languages.

3 Pictograph languages

Many pictograph systems are in place. Although
differences exist across pictograph sets, some fea-
tures are shared among them. A pictograph of
an entity (noun) can stand for one or multiple in-
stances of that entity. Pictographs depicting ac-
tions (verbs) are deprived of aspect, tense, and
inflection information. Auxiliaries and articles
usually have no pictograph counterpart. Pic-
tograph languages are simplified languages, of-
ten specifically designed for people with IDD.
The Pictograph-to-Text translation system cur-
rently gives access to two pictograph sets, Sclera
and Beta (see Figure 1).

Sclera pictographs4 are mainly black-and-white
pictographs. They often represent complex con-
cepts, such as a verb and its object (such as to feed
the dog) or compound words (such as carrot soup).
There are hardly any pictographs for adverbs or
prepositions.

The Beta set5 is characterized by its overall con-
sistency. Beta hardly contains any complex pic-

4Freely available under Creative Commons License 2.0.
5The coloured pictographs can be obtained at reasonable

prices. Their black-and-white equivalents are available for
free.

tographs. Most of the pictographs represent sim-
plex concepts.

Figure 1: Example of a Beta and a Sclera se-
quence. Pictographs can correspond to different
words and word forms in a NL, as shown for En-
glish in this example. The Sclera sequence con-
tains a complex pictograph, namely the jumping
dog.

4 Pictograph input methods

The Pictograph-to-Text translation engine relies
on pictograph input and the user should be able to
efficiently select the desired pictographs. We have
developed two different input methods. The first
approach offers a static hierarchy of pictographs,
while the second option scans the user input and
dynamically adapts itself in order to suggest ap-
propriate pictographs. Usability tests will have to
be performed with the target audience.

The static hierarchy of pictographs consists of
three levels. The structure of the hierarchy is based
on topic detection and frequency counts applied to
69,636 email messages sent by users of the WAI-
NOT communication platform.6

The second method is a dynamic pictograph
prediction tool, the first of its kind. Two differ-
ent prototypes have been developed, which will
eventually be merged. The first model relies on
n-gram information. The WAI-NOT email corpus
was translated into pictographs (285,372 Sclera
pictographs and 284,658 Beta pictographs) in or-
der to enable building a language model using the

6http://www.wai-not.be/ uses the Text-to-Pictograph en-
gine to augment emails with sequences of Sclera or Beta pic-
tographs, allowing people with communicative disabilities to
familiarize themselves with information technology.

72



SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002). The second model
relies on word associations within a broader con-
text: The system identifies the most frequent lem-
mas in the synset (see section 5.1) of each entered
pictograph and retrieves a list of semantically sim-
ilar words from DISCO,7 an application that al-
lows to retrieve the semantic similarity between
arbitrary words and phrases, along with their sim-
ilarity scores. Pictographs that are connected to
these words are presented to the user.

5 Natural Language Generation from
Pictographs

The main challenge in translating from pictograph
languages to NL is the fact that a pictograph-for-
word correspondence will almost never provide
an acceptable output. Pictograph languages of-
ten lack pictographs for function words. A single
pictograph often encodes information correspond-
ing to multiple words with multiple inflected word
forms in NL.

Section 5.1 describes how the bridge between
Sclera and Beta pictographs and natural language
text was built. The system’s general architecture
is outlined in section 5.2. It introduces a set of
parameters, which were tuned on a training corpus
(section 5.3). Finally, as explained in section 5.4,
an optimal NL string is selected.

5.1 Linking pictographs to natural language
text

Pictographs are connected to NL words through a
semantic route and a direct route.

The semantic route concerns the use of Word-
Nets, which are a core component of both the Text-
to-Pictograph and the Pictograph-to-Text trans-
lation systems. For Dutch, we used the Cor-
netto (Vossen et al., 2008) database. Vandeghin-
ste and Schuurman (2014) manually linked 5710
Sclera and 2746 Beta pictographs to Dutch synsets
(groupings of synonymous words) in Cornetto.

The direct route contains specific rules for ap-
propriately dealing with pronouns (as pictographs
for pronouns exist in Sclera and Beta) and contains
one-on-one mappings between pictographs and in-
dividual lemmas in a dictionary.

5.2 Architecture of the system

When a pictograph is selected, its synset is re-
trieved, and from this synset we retrieve all the

7http://www.linguatools.de/disco/

synonyms it contains. For each of these synonyms,
we apply reverse lemmatization, i.e. we retrieve
the full linguistic paradigm of the lemma, together
with its part-of-speech tags. For Dutch, we created
a reverse lemmatizer based on the SoNaR corpus.8

Each of these surface forms is a hypothesis for
the language model, as described in section 5.4.
For nouns, we generate additional alternative hy-
potheses which include an article, based on part-
of-speech information.

5.3 Tuning the parameters

The Pictograph-to-Text translation system con-
tains a number of decoding parameters. Threshold
pruning determines whether a new path should be
added to the existing beam, based on the probabil-
ity of that path compared to the best path. His-
togram pruning sets the beam width. The Cost
parameter estimates the cost of the pictographs
that still need processing (based on the amount of
pictographs that still needs processing). Eventu-
ally, Reverse lemmatizer minimum frequency sets
a threshold on the frequency of a token/part-of-
speech/lemma combination in the corpus, limiting
the amount of possible linguistic realizations for a
particular pictograph. For Dutch, frequencies are
based on occurrence within the SoNaR corpus.

These parameters have to be tuned for every pic-
tograph language/NL pair. For Dutch, our tun-
ing set consists of 50 manually translated mes-
sages from the WAI-NOT corpus. We ran five tri-
als of local hill climbing on the parameter search
space, with random initialization values, in order
to maximize BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002). BLEU
is a commonly used metric in Statistical Machine
Translation. We did this until BLEU converged
onto a fixed score. From these trials, we took the
optimal parameter settings.

5.4 Decoding

We performed Viterbi-decoding based on a tri-
gram language model, trained with the SRILM
toolkit on a very large corpus. The Dutch train-
ing corpus consists of Europarl (Koehn, 2005),
CGN (Oostdijk et al., 2003), CLEF (Peters and
Braschler, 2001), DGT-TM (Steinberger et al.,
2012) and Wikipedia.9

8http://tst-centrale.org/producten/corpora/sonar-corpus/
9http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/

73



6 Preliminary results

We present results for Sclera-to-Dutch and Beta-
to-Dutch. The test set consists of 50 Dutch mes-
sages (975 words) that have been sent with the
WAI-NOT email system and which were manu-
ally translated into pictographs (724 Sclera pic-
tographs and 746 Beta pictographs).10 We have
evaluated several experimental conditions, pro-
gressively activating more features of the system.

The first condition is the baseline, in which
the system output equals the Dutch pictograph
names.11 The next condition applies reverse
lemmatization, allowing the system to generate al-
ternative forms of the Dutch pictograph names.12

We then added the direct route, which mostly in-
fluences pronoun treatment. The following con-
dition adds the semantic route, using Cornetto
synsets, allowing us to retrieve all word forms that
are connected to the same synset as the pictograph.
Finally, we let the system generate alternative hy-
potheses which also include articles.

Table 1 shows the respective BLEU,
NIST (Doddington, 2002), and Word Error
Rate (WER) scores for the translation of messages
into Sclera and into Beta. We use these metrics to
present improvements over the baseline. As the
system translates from a poor pictograph language
(with one pictograph corresponding to multiple
words and word forms) into a rich NL, these
scores are not absolute.13 Future work will consist
of evaluating the system with human ratings by
our target group.

7 Conclusion

These first evaluations show that a trigram lan-
guage model for finding the most likely combina-
tion of every pictograph’s alternative textual rep-
resentations is already an improvement over the
initial baseline, but there is ample room for im-
provement in future work.

10In future work, we will also evaluate pictograph mes-
sages that are created by real users. We thank one of the
anynomous reviewers for this suggestion.

11Note that Beta file names often correspond to Dutch lem-
mas, while Sclera pictographs usually have more complex
names, including numbers to distinguish between alternative
pictographs for depicting the same concept. This explains
why the Sclera baseline is lower.

12The Sclera file names are often too complex to generate
variants for the language model.

13For instance, the system has no means of knowing
whether the user is talking about a chicken or a hen, or
whether the user eats or ate a pizza.

Condition BLEU NIST WER
Sclera
Baseline 0.0175 1.5934 76.4535
Rev. lem. 0.0178 1.6852 76.8411
Direct 0.0420 2.2564 66.9574
Synsets 0.0535 2.5426 65.9884
Articles 0.0593 2.8001 67.4419
Beta
Baseline 0.0518 2.767 70.4457
Rev. lem. 0.0653 3.0553 70.3488
Direct 0.0814 3.3365 63.0814
Synsets 0.0682 3.1417 61.4341
Articles 0.0739 3.4418 63.1783

Table 1: Evaluation of Pictograph-to-Dutch con-
version.

The Pictograph-to-English and Pictograph-to-
Spanish translation systems are currently in devel-
opment.

It is important to note that we assume that the
grammatical structure of pictograph languages re-
sembles and simplifies that of a particular NL.
Nevertheless, the users of pictograph languages
do not always need to introduce pictographs in
the canonical order or could omit some of them.
Future work will look into generation-heavy and
transfer approaches for Pictograph-to-Text transla-
tion. In the generation-heavy approach, the words
conveyed by the input pictographs will be consid-
ered as a bag of words. All their possible per-
mutations will be evaluated against a language
model (Vandeghinste, 2008). In the transfer sys-
tem, the input sentence will be (semantically) ana-
lyzed by a rule-based parser. A number of transfer
rules convert the source language sentence struc-
ture into the sentence structure of the target lan-
guage, from which the target language sentence is
generated, using language generation rules. Both
methods can be combined into a hybrid system.

User tests will reveal how both the static hier-
archy of pictographs and the dynamic prediction
tools can be improved.

References
G. Doddington. 2002. Automatic Evaluation of

Machine Translation Quality Using N-gram Co-
occurrence Statistics. In HLT-02, pages 138–145.

A. Finch, K. Tanaka-Ishii, W. Song, and E. Sumita.
2011. picoTrans: Using Pictures as Input for Ma-
chine Translation on Mobile Devices. In IJCAI-11,
pages 2614–2619.

S. Fitrianie and L. Rothkrantz. 2009. Two-
Dimensional Visual Language Grammar. In TSD-
09, pages 573–580.

74



H. Jing. 1998. Usage of WordNet in Natural Language
Generation. In COLING-ACL-98.

T. Keskinen, T. Heimonen, M. Turunen, J.P. Rajaniemi,
and S. Kauppinen. 2012. SymbolChat: A Flexible
Picture-based Communication Platform for Users
with Intellectual Disabilities. Interacting with Com-
puters, 24(5):374–386.

P. Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for
Statistical Machine Translation. In MT Summit-05,
pages 79–86.

F.-H. Liu, L. Gu, Y. Gao, and M. Picheny. 2003. Use
of statistical N-gram models in Natural Language
Generation for Machine Translation. In ICASSP-03,
pages 636–639.

J. Munemori, T. Fukada, M. Yatid, T. Nishide, and
J. Itou. 2010. Pictograph Chat Communicator III:
a Chat System that Embodies Cross-Cultural Com-
munication. In KES-10, pages 473–482.

N. Oostdijk, W. Goedertier, F. Van Eynde, L. Boves,
J. P. Martens, M. Moortgat, and H. Baayen. 2003.
Experiences from the Spoken Dutch Corpus Project.
In LREC-02, pages 340–347.

K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W. Zhu. 2002.
Evaluation of Machine Translation. In ACL-02,
pages 311–318.

C. Peters and M. Braschler. 2001. European Re-
search letter: Cross-language System Evaluation:
the CLEF Campaigns. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology,
52(12):1067–1072.

R. Steinberger, A. Eisele, S. Klocek, S. Pilos, and
P. Schlüter. 2012. DGT-TM: A Freely Available
Translation Memory in 22 Languages. In LREC-12,
pages 454–459.

A. Stolcke. 2002. SRIL: An Extensible Language
Modeling Toolkit. In ICSLP-02.

P. Tuset, J.M. Barbern, P. Cervell-Pastor, and C. Janer.
1995. Designing Messenger Visual, an Instant Mes-
senging Service for Individuals with Cognitive Dis-
ability. In IWAAL-95, pages 57–64.

P. Vaillant. 1998. Interpretation of Iconic Utterances
Based on Contents Representation: Semantic Anal-
ysis in the PVI System. Natural Language Engi-
neering, 4(1):17–40.

V. Vandeghinste and I. Schuurman. 2014. Linking Pic-
tographs to Synsets: Sclera2Cornetto. In LREC-14,
pages 3404–3410.

V. Vandeghinste, I. Schuurman, L. Sevens, and F. Van
Eynde. Accepted. Translating Text into Pic-
tographs. Natural Language Engineering.

V. Vandeghinste. 2008. A Hybrid Modular Machine
Translation System. LoRe-MT: Low Resources Ma-
chine Translation. LOT, Utrecht.

P. Vossen, I. Maks, R. Segers, and H. van der Vliet.
2008. Integrating Lexical Units, Synsets, and On-
tology in the Cornetto Database. In LREC-08.

75


