




































 

 

PrepNet.Br: a Semantic Network for Prepositions 

Débora D. Garcia
1
, Bento Carlos Dias da Silva

2
 

 
1
Programa de Pós-Graduação em Linguística (PPGL) 

Universidade Federal de São Carlos (UFSCar) - São Carlos, SP – Brazil 

2
Departamento de Letras Modernas (DLM) 

Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP) - Araraquara, SP – Brazil 

{deboradom@gmail.com, bento.silva@gmail.com} 

Abstract. This article presents the idea of the PrepNet.Br, a semantic network 

consisting of synsets of prepositions to be built for Brazilian Portuguese along 

the lines of the French PrepNet [Saint-Dizier 2005]. This enterprise is of 

relevance to the linguistic description of the class of prepositions as well as to 

Natural Language Processing resource-building. The construction of this 

network also brings a linguistic analysis alternative to the traditional one, 

investigating the polysemic nature of prepositions within a cognitive view of 

language. 

1. Introduction 

In the last decades, many studies have been made about nouns, verbs and adjectives, 

both in Linguistics and Computational Linguistics. The study of prepositions, however, 

has been more modest due to its high degree of polysemy, which makes it difficult to 

predict their semantics and their realizations across different languages [Saint-Dizier 

2006]. For example, while in Portuguese the same preposition can occur in three distinct 

contexts - Você mora no (em+o) campo; Você conhece pessoas na (em+a) festa; and  

Você entra em férias -, in English, we have three different prepositions (in, at and on) in 

the very same contexts - You live in the country; You meet people at the party; and You 

go on holiday” [Taylor 1995], respectively.  

 An accurate model of preposition usage is crucial to avoid repeatedly making 

errors in terms of parsing and generation. This paper outlines the idea of a semantic 

network of prepositions to be built for Brazilian Portuguese – the PrepNet.Br – that 

aims to do a better characterization of this part of speech.  

2. Prepositions and different approaches 

In previous studies about prepositions, the biggest challenge has always been to define 

its semantic value, since there is a tradition that excludes or limits the inherent 

significance of these items to the syntax.  

 For example, traditional grammars usually describe prepositions as grammatical 

items that receive some kind of meaning only in context. This perspective assumes that 

the native speaker must master the prepositions one by one, because their use is 

idiomatic and therefore "must be memorized". This results in an unsystematic 

characterization of prepositions, in which there is no agreement regarding its semantics.   

Proceedings of Symposium in Information and Human Language Technology. Natal, RN,
Brazil, November 4–7, 2015. c©2015 Sociedade Brasileira de Computação.

75



 

 

 However, the facility that the native speakers learn how to use prepositions in 

every new context indicates that its usage is highly structured by human mind and the 

alleged flexibility in the use of prepositions would be guided by some (mental) logic, 

not just memorization. 

 As a consequence of this perception, there are new studies that look to the 

plurality of meanings that each preposition takes in different contexts from a semantic 

point of view. To the cognitive framework, for example, prepositions do have a certain 

kind of meaning – their meaning is probably more complex than the meanings of other 

lexical categories – and the many uses of a preposition are considered “extensions of its 

core meaning”. Thus, prepositions have been discussed as polysemous items. [Castilho 

2010]. 

The cognitive framework supports the idea of a lexicon-grammar continuum, 

where "all the prepositions, regardless of their degree of grammaticalization, can 

introduce adjuncts, expressing various relations and senses"
1
 [Ilari et.al. 2008]. For 

example, the prepositions “de” (Portuguese) and “on” (English), instantiate either 

grammatical items (Eu dependo de você / I depend on you) or lexical items, which bear 

semantics (Maria é de São Paulo / Maria is from São Paulo (Source), and O jornal está 

sobre o tapete / The newspaper is on the mat (Spatial Location)).  

Once presented the view that prepositions are not only grammatical items, we 

introduce the idea of the PrepNet.Br: a semantic network of prepositions whose 

structure aims to represent their meanings and usage in terms of a particular 

computational linguistic representation. 

3. A network of prepositions 

From a technological point of view, prepositions have great importance to enrich 

and assist Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications, since they encode essential 

meanings for understanding the propositions (the logical and conceptual meanings of 

sentences). For example, prepositions conceptualize location (put the book on the shelf), 

instrumentality (cut the meat with a knife), origin-goal (traveled from São Paulo to 

Rio de Janeiro), recipient (the wine given to his friend), time interval (arrive between 

noon and 1 p.m.) and space location (it was between the table and the wall). These 

concepts are vital to precise language understanding. 

 A PrepNet network is a computational linguistic resource for NLP stemming 

from Saint-Dizier (2005, 2006): a repository of prepositions from different languages 

with a formal specification of their syntactic and semantic behaviors. This idea has three 

motivations: (i) to construct a system similar to wordnets [Miller; Fellbaum 1991] and 

with the possibility to complement them; (ii) to assign thematic roles [Bakker; 

Siewierska 2002; Jackendoff 1991], and, above all, (iii) to reach a more complete and 

robust conceptual description of prepositions. Saint-Dizier (2005) believes that a 

PrepNet should be the starting point for a better characterization of prepositions, 

necessary before analyzing their interaction with verbs, for example. 

                                                 
1
 Original version (portuguese): “todas as preposições, independentemente de seu grau de 

gramaticalização, podem funcionar como introdutoras de adjuntos, expressando as relações e os sentidos 

mais variados”. 

PrepNet.Br: a Semantic Network for Prepositions.

76



 

 

In a PrepNet, the different uses of a preposition should be organized around a 

small number of general senses. That is, the meaning of each preposition is analyzed in 

terms of its primary (core) sense, which may be the source for further analysis in terms 

of metaphorical senses. It is known that there is no full synonymy between two or more 

words, and therefore there is no complete overlap between two or more preposition 

meanings. However, when we consider that each preposition presents a set of semantic 

possibilities, partial coincidences between them are possible [Borba 1971]. Therefore, it 

is quite feasible to organize prepositions in terms of synsets (sets of cognitive 

synonyms), à la wordnets. 

In his papers, Saint-Dizier (2005, 2006) presents an initial classification for 

French prepositions, however it seems not to have progressed beyond the preliminary 

stages. Inspired by his idea and taking the liberty to carry out formal and 

methodological changes, we propose the PrepNet.Br. Figure 1 illustrates the analysis we 

are working on: the description of the contents and layout of Portuguese (Brazil) and 

English preposition synsets, which provides their grammar and semantics, and the 

alignment of the “equivalent synsets” of both languages. 

 

 Language: Portuguese (Brazil) Language: English 

Linguistic Level  

 
Synset: {a1, para, em1} 

 
Sample sentences 
Ele foi levado para a cela individual. 
Só podia sair para ir ao banheiro. 
(...) então a gente vai no chá, neh? 

 
Synset: {to1} 

 
Sample sentences 
He went to the shop. 
He walked to the house. 
He goes to school at eight o'clock. 

Conceptual- 
Semantic  Level 

Gloss: “spatial direction” 
Image Schema: DYNAMIC PATH Schema (“goal”): The FIGURE is at the final location 
of a path. 
Spatial Axis: Horizontal 
Semantic Feature: /GOAL/ 
Family: Localization 
Facet: Goal 
Modality: ? 
Evoked Frame: Goal: “A Landmark (in combination with the image schema evoked 
by particular targets) serves to pick out the final location of a Trajector in a 
construed or actual motion event.” 
 Inherits from: Locative_relation, Trajector-Landmark 
 Used by: Source_Path_Goal 

Figure 1 – A preliminary version of a PrepNet.Br synset and its English equivalent. 

From Saint-Dizier’s proposal, we kept (I) the essential notion of synset (enriched 

by short definitions and sample sentences illustrating the use of the synset members); 

(II) the description of prepositional senses in two levels (linguistic and conceptual); and 

(III) the characterization of semantic features in terms of “semantic family”, “facets” 

and “modalities of a facet” (three levels proposed by the author). The changes proposed 

for the PrepNet.Br were the inclusion of (i) the semantic-conceptual classification of 

PrepNet.Br: a Semantic Network for Prepositions.

77



 

 

prepositions presented in Ilari et al (2008), in terms of Image Schema and Spatial Axes; 

and (ii) frames from FrameNet [Fillmore 1982; Ruppenhofer 2010].
2
 

The organization of prepositions in terms of synsets is backed up by the 

hypothesis that prepositions that share semantic features, i.e. share the same meaning in 

certain contexts, are synonymous. The semantic consistency of a synset is guaranteed by 

checking whether their constituent prepositions are interchangeable in sample sentences, 

assuming that the user's intuition guides the validation. 

Finally, we outline the strategy to discover and align Brazilian Portuguese and 

English synsets. When English prepositions express a meaning specified by a synset of 

Brazilian Portuguese prepositions, we verify if those prepositions are interchangeable in 

different sentences taken from corpora, and then a synset with these English 

prepositions is proposed. In Figure 1 it was possible to construct the English synset 

{to1} and align it to the Portuguese synset {a1, para, em}, since the prepositions to1 

can be replaced in the English sentence “I take them to school and go to work”, which is 

equivalent to the Brazilian Portuguese sentence “Eu os levo para a escola e vou 

trabalhar”. However, care must be taken with cases such as this: the pair of sentences 

“Temos que escolher entre duas alternativas”/“We must choose between two 

alternatives” and  “Temos que escolher entre três alternativas”/“We must choose 

among three alternatives” reveals two possibilities worth exploring, either one synset 

for Brazilian Portuguese and two synsets for English ({entre1} = {among}; 

{between)}), where {entre1} is considered a generalization of both English synsets or 

two distinct synsets for both languages ({entre1.1}={between}, which is used in 

speaking of two discrete entities, and {entre1.2}={among}), which is used in speaking 

of three or more entities collectively. A choice that calls for deeper analysis.   

4. Final words 

With those descriptive and analytical elements, Garcia (2013) carried out the analysis of 

a set of Brazilian Portuguese spatial prepositions and the systematization of their 

characteristics in terms of synsets, resulted in the construction of 13 synsets aligned to 

14 English synsets. At this first stage, prepositional phrases and metaphorical senses 

were set aside. 

 By presenting the conception of a PrepNet.Br, this short paper aims to contribute 

to the first steps towards a more accurate computational-linguistic description of 

prepositions and to launch out the idea of a prepositional network to add to Brazilian 

Portuguese NLP resources.    

                                                 
2
It is worth mentioning that including the description of preposition semantics in terms of frames allows 

further structural and conceptual connections between PrepNets and FrameNets. 

PrepNet.Br: a Semantic Network for Prepositions.

78



 

 

References 

Bakker, D.; Siewierska, A. (2002) Adpositions, the lexicon and expression rules. In 

Mairal Usón, R.; Perez Quintero, M. J. (editors), New perspectives on 

argument structure in functional grammar. Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter (pp. 125-77). 

Borba, F. S. (1971) Sistemas de preposições em português. PhD Thesis. Faculdade de 

Filosofia, Letras e Ciências Humanas, Universidade de São Paulo, 1971. 

Castilho, A. T. (2010) Nova gramática do português brasileiro. São Paulo, Contexto. 

Fillmore, C.J. (1982) Frame semantics. In Linguistics in the Morning Calm. Seoul:  

South Korea: Hanshin Publishing Co., (pp. 111 -137). 

Garcia, D. D. (2013). Construção exploratória de uma PrepNet para o português do 

Brasil: uma incursão linguístico-computacional no universo das preposições 

indicativas de espaço. Master Thesis. Faculdade de Ciência e Letras, Universidade 

Estadual Paulista. 

Ilari, R.; et al. (2008) As preposições. In Ilari, R.; Neves, M. H. M. (Orgs.) Gramática 

do português culto falado no Brasil. Vol. II - Classes de Palavras e Processos de 

construção. Campinas, Editora da Unicamp, (pp. 623-808). 

Jackendoff, R. (1991) Semantic structures. Cambridge, The MIT Press 

Miller, G. A.; Fellbaum, C. (1991) Semantic networks of English. In Cognition. 

Amsterdam, v. 41, (pp. 197-229). 

Ruppenhofer, J.; Ellsworth, M.; Petruck, M.; Johnson, C.; Scheffczyk, J. (2010) 

FrameNet II: Extended Theory and Practice. 

Saint-Dizier, P. (2005). PrepNet: A framework for describing prepositions: Preliminary 

investigation results. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on 

Computational Semantics (IWCS’05) (pp. 145-157). 

Saint-Dizier, P. (Ed.). (2006). Syntax and semantics of prepositions (Vol. 29). Springer 

Science & Business Media.  

Taylor, J. R. (1995) Linguistic Categorization. In Prototypes in Linguistic Theory. 

Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

PrepNet.Br: a Semantic Network for Prepositions.

79


