



















































Topic Transition Strategies for an Information-Giving Agent


Proceedings of the 15th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG), pages 146–155,
Brighton, September 2015. c©2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

Topic Transition Strategies for an Information-Giving Agent

Nadine Glas
Institut Mines-Télécom, Télécom ParisTech,

CNRS, LTCI
46 Rue Barrault, 75013 Paris, France
glas@telecom-paristech.fr

Catherine Pelachaud
CNRS, LTCI, Télécom ParisTech

46 Rue Barrault, 75013 Paris, France
pelachaud@

telecom-paristech.fr

Abstract
We have explored how a conversational
agent can introduce a selected topic in an
ongoing non-task oriented interaction with
a user, where the selected topic has little
to do with the current topic. Based on
the reasoning process of the agent we have
constructed a set of transition strategies to
introduce the new topic. We tested the ef-
fects of each of these strategies on the per-
ception of the dialogue and the agent.

1 Introduction

The choice of the dialogue topics that an agent
initiates in non-task oriented human-agent inter-
action is important for several aspects of the in-
teraction such as the coherence of the interaction
(Macias-Galindo et al., 2012) and the user’s en-
gagement (Glas and Pelachaud, 2015). Multiple
efforts are oriented towards the selection of the ap-
propriate topic at a specific point in the interaction.
However, how the selected topic can or should be
introduced by the agent has not been given much
consideration in non-task oriented dialogue.

In this work we will explore the latter aspect
by looking at utterances that may be used to ini-
tiate a transition from one topic to another. We
shall call these utterances transition strategies. By
comparing a selection of transition strategies we
try to answer two questions: 1) What strategies
have the potential of keeping/making the dialogue
coherent? And 2) what effect do the use of the
different transition strategies have on the percep-
tion of the conversational agent? The answers to
these questions will serve to automatically gener-
ate agent strategies to connect one topic to another
in non-task oriented dialogue.

2 Domain

This research is performed for the French project
‘Avatar 1:1’ that aims at developing a human-sized

virtual agent in a museum. The goal of the agent
is to engage human visitors in interaction about
the artworks of the museum. In this information-
giving chat (Glas and Pelachaud, 2015) each art-
work that is discussed is defined as a topic of the
interaction. The discussion of an artwork’s char-
acteristic corresponds to a subtopic (Glas et al.,
2015).

Previously, we found out that the topic of the in-
teraction has an important influence on the user’s
level of engagement (Glas and Pelachaud, 2015).
We had human users talk with a virtual agent that
addressed several topics, correponding to differ-
ent artworks. The users indicated that they were
more engaged when the agent talked about art-
works for which the users have a stronger prefer-
ence (defined here as degree of liking) than when
the agent talked about less preferred topics (Glas
and Pelachaud, 2015). We are therefore work-
ing on an engagement driven topic manager that
dynamically selects topics for the ongoing inter-
action taking into account the user’s preferences
(Glas et al., 2015). In the present work we are
interested in agent strategies that may be used to
connect the newly selected topic to the current
topic of interaction. This is necessary as the top-
ics are primarily selected according to their poten-
tial of engaging the user instead of their coherence
with respect to the previous topic. Where other di-
alogue systems look at what topic is coherent at
a specific point in the interaction (e.g. Macial-
Galindo et al., 2012; Breuing and Wachsmuth,
2012; Wong et al., 2012), we are looking at possi-
ble strategies to introduce a topic coherently.

3 Related Work

3.1 Transition Strategies in Theory

Literature about transition strategies outside task-
oriented applications can be found in the do-
mains of conversational analysis and social sci-

146



ences, where they are studied from an observa-
tional (detection) point of view. Downing (2000)
distinguishes two forms of introducing a topic: by
means of an informative statement, and by ask-
ing a question. By informing the speaker assigns
him/herself the role of topic supplier, whereas by
questioning or eliciting a topic this role is offered
to an interlocutor in the discourse.

Similarly, Button and Casey (1985) define two
global ways of introducing a topic that is not re-
lated to the prior topic in a conversation: by a
topic initial elicitor that is used to elicit a candi-
date topic from the next speaker while being mute
with respect to what that topic may be, and by
topic nominations that are oriented to particular
newsworthy items. Two sequence types that may
be used for topic nomination are itemised news
enquires and news announcements. An itemised
news inquiry is oriented to a recipient’s newswor-
thy item where a news announcement is oriented
to a speaker’s newsworthy item.

Maynard and Zimmerman (1984) identified
four topic initiation strategies in dyadic human-
human conversations. For acquainted parties:
displaying prior experience and using setting
talk, and for unacquainted parties: categorisation
question-answer pairs (e.g. year in school, aca-
demic major, etc.) and question-answer pairs in-
volving activities that are related to the categories.

Hobbs (1990) focuses on three coherence rela-
tions that he claims are responsible for most of
the so-called topic drift in dialogue: parallelism,
explanation and metatalk. Parallelism between
two segments occur when the two segments assert
propositions from which we can infer that identi-
cal properties hold of similar entities, or that simi-
lar properties hold for identical entities. An expla-
nation occurs when one segment functions as the
explanation of a previous segment and metatalk
asserts a relation between some segment and the
goals of the conversation.

3.2 Transition Strategies in Dialogue Systems

To our knowledge, existing dialogue systems that
explicitly consider different strategies to introduce
a particular topic have been developed exclusively
for task oriented interaction, in particular in the
form of task interruption strategies. In this context
McFarlane (2002) defines four primary methods:
immediate, negotiated, mediated, and scheduled
interruption. Yang et al. (2008) found out that

dialogue partners usually use discourse markers
and prosody cues to signal task switching. Guided
by these works Heinroth et al. (2011) looked at 4
different task switching strategies: unassisted im-
mediate topic shift, discourse markers combined
with prosody cues, and two full sentence initialis-
ing topic shifts to produce a more natural dialogue
flow and to increase the timespan the user has for
task switching: explanation and negotiation strate-
gies. The explanation strategy explains what task
is about to be started and the negotiation strategy
asks for permission to switch a task. They evalu-
ated the use of these four strategies on several di-
mensions and found that the explanation strategy
showed high scores regarding efficiency and user-
friendless and supports the user to memorise the
tasks. Other strategies showed advantages such as
being less irritating.

3.3 Guidelines for Topic Transitions

The above mentioned research demonstrates that
there does not exist one overall taxonomy of tran-
sition strategies that can be used as a recipe for
transition strategy generation in non-task oriented
dialogue. This lack shows the need of our own re-
search towards transition strategies and makes us
fall back to the following generally accepted ideas
about topic switching: According to Clark (1996)
a topic can be described as a joint project as it is
jointly established during ongoing conversations.
Svennevig (2000) adds that every spoken contri-
bution may raise new potential topics whose actual
realisation depends on the co-participant’s accep-
tance by picking up one of these topics within his
or her reply. To conclude, Sacks (1971, April 5
in: Levinson, 1983:313) made an overall remark
that what seems to be preferred for a topic shift is
that if A has been talking about X, B should find
a way to talk about Z (if Z is the subject he wants
to introduce) such that X and Z can be found to be
natural fellow members of some category Y. In the
current work we try to collect more precise indi-
cations about how to generate transition strategies
in non-task oriented dialogue.

4 Methodology

In order to find out what strategies a conversational
agent can use to initiate topic transitions in non-
task oriented dialogue we follow Heinroth et al.
(2011) (Section 3.2) by testing a set of potential
transition strategies with respect to their effects on

147



Speaker Dialogue about ”Luncheon on the Grass” by Claude Monet Subtopic
[...]

Agent: Claude Monet was a French painter. He lived his entire life at Giverny, a beautiful village north
of Paris.

Artist

User: Yes I know. I visited Giverny last year.
Agent: This painting was made around 1865. Period
User: Yes, I’ve read so too.

Table 1: An example of a dialogue fragment preceding a topic switch initiated by a transition strategy.
In the experiment this dialogue fragment (translated) serves as the context of scenario 1 (Section 4.3).

the perception of the dialogue and the agent. In
the subsections below we respectively discuss the
steps to achieve this: the specification of the con-
text of the transition strategies (Section 4.1), the
design of the transition strategies themselves (Sec-
tion 4.2), the setup of the experiment to test the set
of strategies (Section 4.3), and the questionnaire
that will be used for this (Section 4.4).

4.1 Context of the Transition Strategies

The strategies that have been mentioned in previ-
ous work vary with respect to the context. Some
strategies work for topics that are interesting for
the listener and others for those that are inter-
esting for the speaker (Button and Casey, 1985).
Some strategies are used by acquainted parties
and others by unacquainted parties (Maynard and
Zimmerman, 1984). Explanation strategies in the
sense of Hobbs (1990), as well as metatalk only
work for a specific set of topics.

These constraints imply that the strategies that
can be used to introduce a topic in a conversation
depend on the relation between the current topic
of the dialogue and the new topic that is to be in-
troduced. The first step in generating transition
strategies is thus to define this relation. In the con-
text of project Avatar 1:1 (Section 2) we are look-
ing at strategies that an agent can employ in inter-
action with an unacquainted user to make the tran-
sition between two discussion phases about two
different artworks. In the current work we will fo-
cus on what seems the most extreme case, namely
the transition between discussion phases of two
very different artworks: Artworks that have noth-
ing in common except from the fact that they are
both artworks in the same museum. In this way we
test if the agent’s topic manager can indeed be al-
lowed the flexibility to select any given artwork of
the museum as next topic of the discussion. Such
flexibility helps finding (initiating) the topic that
engages the user most (Glas et al., 2015).

To be more precise, in Table 1 we give an exam-
ple of a dialogue fragment that proceeds the mo-
ment at which the new topic, corresponding to a
very different artwork than the one discussed, is
to be introduced. As the timing of introducing a
new topic may have an influence on the percep-
tion of the topic switch (Clark, 1996) we limit this
research to a topic switch that occurs after the con-
versation has addressed respectively the artist and
the period of the former discussed artwork.

4.2 Design of Potential Transition Strategies

Due to the nature of the context we are dealing
with, the potential transition strategies to introduce
a discussion phase of another artwork are limited
to the following categories from the literature: ex-
planations in the sense of Heinroth et al. (2011),
informative statements (Downing, 2000), itemised
news enquires and news announcements (Button
and Casey, 1985), categorisation question-answer
pairs and question-answer pairs involving activi-
ties (Maynard and Zimmerman, 1984), and paral-
lelism (Hobbs, 1990). It is however not prescribed
how we could generate formulations for each of
these detection-based categories for the context we
are looking at. We thus base the manual creation
of a set of potential transition strategies that be-
long to one or multiple of these categories, on the
general guideline by Sacks (1971, Section 3.3).

According to Sacks (1971) we need to find a
way to let the former (current) and the next (se-
lected) topic be members of some category Y. We
try to do this by (indirectly) referring to an ele-
ment that is used in the agent’s reasoning process
to talk about the next topic. The agent disposes
of a knowledge base that holds information about
certain artworks from the museum. From this set
of artworks it selects dynamically a new topic of
discussion with the goal of maximising the user’s
engagement level, taking into account the charac-
teristics of the artworks (e.g. period, artist), the

148



Nr. Strategy Element in Topic Man-
ager

Orien-
tation

1. Pol(PrefA(i)) == Pol(PrefA(j)) Preferences Agent (i, j) Agent
E.g. I also like the Balloon Dog by Jeff Koons

2. (PrefA(j) > PrefA(i)) Preferences Agent (i, j) Agent
E.g. Personally, I prefer the Balloon Dog by Jeff Koons

3. AssociationA(i, j) Associations Agent (i, j) Agent
E.g. This work reminds me of the Balloon Dog by Jeff Koons

4. (Pol(PrefU(i)) == +)→ (Pol(PrefU(j)) == +) Preferences User (i, j) User
E.g. If you like this work, maybe you also like the Balloon Dog by Jeff
Koons

5. (PrefU(j) > PrefA(i))? Preferences User (i, j) User
E.g. Maybe you prefer the Balloon Dog by Jeff Koons.

6. ExperienceA(i) + ExperienceA(j) i, j in Knowledge Base Agent
E.g. I’ve also seen the Balloon Dog by Jeff Koons

7. ExperienceU(i) + ExperienceU(j)? i, j in Knowledge Base User
E.g. Have you also seen the Balloon Dog by Jeff Koons?

8. ∃ (j) ∧ (j 6= i) i, j in Knowledge Base Object
E.g. Another artwork is the Balloon Dog by Jeff Koons

9. ∃ (j) ∧ (Artist(j) 6= Artist(i)) Characteristics(i, j) in Object
E.g. An artwork from another artist is the Balloon Dog by Jeff Koons Knowledge Base

10. ∃ (j) ∧ (Period(j) 6= Period(i)) Characteristics(i, j) in Object
E.g. An artwork from another period is the Balloon Dog by Jeff Koons Knowledge Base

Table 2: Potential transition strategies to connect the discussion phases of two very different artworks
(translated). i is the current topic of the interaction and j is the one to be introduced. A = Agent, U =
User, Pol = Polarity, Pref = Preference.

preferences of the user and the agent for an art-
work (degree of liking), and the agent’s associ-
ations (Glas et al., 2015). The set of potential
transition strategies that we created by referring to
these elements is listed in Table 2. For each of
the strategies we formulated an agent utterance to
realise the strategy.

Strategies 9 and 10 that insist on the (in this
case contrasting) characteristics of the artworks
are added as a reference to the strategies that we
would use for the transition between artworks that
have characteristics in common (the category Y).

4.3 Experimental Setup

Inspired by the existing literature we have created
a set of potential transition strategies for the con-
text we are looking at. In order to verify if each of
these strategies is suitable to be generated by the
agent to switch the topic in the information-giving
chat with the user we perform an empirical study.
By means of an online questionnaire we test the
effect that the different transition strategies have
on the perception of the dialogue and the agent.

To this end we present each participant with 2
different dialogue fragments (i.e. contexts) con-
sisting of agent utterances and simulated user in-

puts (as e.g. Macias-Galindo et al., 2012). Each
scenario is followed by 3 randomly assigned tran-
sition strategies, displayed next to each other. We
do not show the utterances that may follow the
transition strategies. In this way we do not show
an acceptance or rejection of the topic by the user
(Clark, 1996; Svennevig, 2000). Directly after
each of the 3 transition strategies we ask the par-
ticipants to answer several questions (Section 4.4).
Appendix A shows a fragment of the website for
this experiment. We use a written setup to allow
the participants to consider multiple strategies at
the same time in the same context, enabling cross-
comparison and rereading as much as desired. Be-
sides, in this way the judgements are not disturbed
by unnatural text-to-speech realisations.

As mentioned before, the dialogue fragment
that represent the former topic in the context and
the topic that is addressed in the transition strate-
gies (next topic) are about very different artworks.
We test 2 topic pairs for each participant (i.e. 2
different scenarios) to anticipate possible effects
that are due to individual characteristics of a par-
ticular context. Scenario 1 consists of the dis-
cussion of a painting by Monet (shown in table
1) followed by transition strategies introducing a

149



statue by Jeff Koons (listed in Table 2). Scenario
2 consists of the discussion of a painting by Mon-
drian followed by transition strategies introducing
David, the statue by Michelangelo. The alterna-
tion of agent-user utterances, the number of utter-
ances and the order of the subtopics are the same
in both context fragments. The order in which the
scenarios are presented to the participants is ran-
dom. Pictures of the artworks next to the ques-
tionnaire make sure that all the participants know
what the artworks look like (Appendix A).

4.4 Questionnaire

For each of the 3 selected transition strategies
we ask questions on a scale from 1-9 (shown in
Appendix A) (following Bickmore and Cassell,
2005). The first 3 questions relate to the percep-
tion of the dialogue and serve to answer the first
question we try to answer (Section 1): What strate-
gies have the potential of keeping/making the di-
alogue coherent? We ask respectively if the par-
ticipant finds the dialogue natural (Nakano and
Ishii, 2010; Bickmore and Cassell, 2005), coher-
ent (Macias-Galindo et al., 2012), and smooth (Hi-
gashinaka et al., 2008; Nakano and Ishii, 2010).

The following 5 questions serve to answer our
second question (Section 1): What effect do the
use of the different transition strategies have on the
perception of the conversational agent? We ask
respectively to what extent the participants find
the agent friendly, warm, fun (in French “stimu-
lant”), competent and informed (in French “cul-
tivé) (Bickmore and Cassell, 2005). These mea-
sures are related to 2 important social aspects,
warmth and competence (Fiske et al., 2007).

5 Results

83 subjects filled out the questionnaire: 56 female,
all native speakers of French, aged 19-69. In the
subsections below we show the results of the ex-
periment specified for the two issues we are look-
ing at: the perception of the dialogue and the per-
ception of the agent.

5.1 Dialogue Perception

For each strategy, the perception of the dialogue
has been questioned for the two scenarios and
on three dimensions: naturalness, coherence, and
smoothness. For each of these dimensions the re-
sults show no significant difference between the
two scenarios (Kruskal-Wallis). This means that

we can take the data for both scenarios together,
as shown in Figures 1, 2, and 3.

For all three dimensions the scores differ sig-
nificantly among the strategies (Kruskal-Wallis
p < 0.01). Regarding the level of naturalness
and smoothness, Kruskal-Wallis multiple compar-
isons show that the significant differences are due
to the strategies 9 and 10 that score significantly
lower than some others, indicated by the horizon-
tal brackets in the graphs. Regarding the coher-
ence of the dialogue, strategy number 10 leads to
a significantly lower level than other strategies.

Figure 1: Naturalness for each strategy, p < 0.01.

Figure 2: Coherence for each strategy, p < 0.01.

Only strategies 1 to 7 show a higher mean than
the average level (4.5 on a scale of 9) on the di-
mensions of naturalness and smoothness. With re-
spect to the level of coherence, except from strate-
gies the 8, 9 and 10, strategy 3 also scores lower
than average (mean).

As mentioned in Section 4.2 the strategies
are either oriented towards the agent, the user,
or the (characteristics) of the object (artwork).
The strategies from the latter group lead to sig-
nificantly lower levels of naturalness, coherence

150



Figure 3: Smoothness for each strategy, p < 0.01.

and smoothness in comparison to the strategies
with another orientation (both scenarios, Kruskal-
Wallis p < 0.01). There is no significant differ-
ence in the scoring of the strategies that are agent
oriented versus the ones that are user oriented with
respect to the perception of the dialogue.

5.2 Agent Perception

Questions 4 to 8 are about the way the partici-
pants of the experiment perceive the social com-
petence (Fiske et al., 2007) of an agent that would
use the transition strategies in the context in which
they are presented. The results show that be-
tween the two scenarios, the participants find the
agent not significantly different with respect to its
level of friendliness and knowledge (“informed”)
(Kruskal-Wallis). For these dimensions we can
thus analyse the data for both scenarios together.
Figure 4 and 5 specify the distributions of these
dimensions for every strategy. The level of friend-
liness differs significantly among the strategies
(Kruskal-Wallis p < 0.01), which is due to strate-
gies 8, 9, and 10 (Kruskal-Wallis multiple com-
parisons). However, only strategy 10 scores below
average for the level of friendliness (mean < 4.5).
For all strategies the agent is not perceived sig-
nificantly different with respect to its knowledge
(“informed”) and all of the strategies score above
average on this dimension (mean < 4.5).

In contrast to the agent’s level of friendliness
and knowledge (“informed”), for the dimensions
of warmth, fun and competence, some strategies
are significantly differently judged among both
scenarios (Kruskal-Wallis p < 0.05). Figure 6, 7
and 8 show the distribution of the results specified
for both scenarios. The circled numbers indicate
the strategies that are judged differently between

Figure 4: Friendliness for each strategy, p < 0.01.

Figure 5: Agent being informed for each strategy.

both scenarios. On the dimension of warmth, strat-
egy number 8 scores significantly higher in the
second scenario (Monet-Koons) than in the first
(Mondian-Michelangeloo). Together with strategy
6, strategy 8 also scores higher in the second sce-
nario with respect to the level of fun that the partic-
ipants perceived in the agent. Further, in the sec-
ond scenario strategies 4 and 6 score higher on the
dimension of competence than in the first scenario.

With respect to the agent’s perceived level of
warmth as well as fun, in scenario 1, strategies 8, 9
and 10 score significantly lower than other strate-
gies (Kruskal-Wallis p < 0.01). In this scenario
strategies 6, 8 and 10 also score below average
(mean < 4.5). For scenario 2 strategy 10 scores
significantly lower than other strategies (Kruskal-
Wallis p < 0.01) and falls below average.

Scenario 1 shows significant differences be-
tween the scorings of the agent’s perceived level
of competence (Kruskal-Wallis p < 0.01). Multi-
ple comparisons (Kruskal-Wallis) do not indicate
a specific pair of strategies that is responsible for
this difference. Strategy 3 is the only strategy that

151



Figure 6: Warmth for each strategy, p < 0.01. Be-
tween scenarios strategy 8 differs p < 0.05.

Figure 7: Fun for each strategy, p < 0.01. Be-
tween scenarios strategies 6, p < 0.05, and 8,
p < 0.01, differ.

scores below average (mean < 4.5). In scenario
2 the strategies show no significant differences or
scorings below average.

Comparing the strategies that are oriented to-
wards the agent with those that oriented towards
the user (Table 2) does not lead to a significant dif-
ference with respect to the perception of the agent
(both scenarios, Kruskal-Wallis). The strategies
that are not oriented towards the agent or user, but
refer to the (characteristics) of the object (artwork)
lead to significantly lower levels of friendliness,
warmth and fun in comparison with the strategies
that are oriented towards the interaction partici-
pants (both scenarios, Kruskal-Wallis p < 0.01).

Within the group of strategies that are agent or
user oriented, we can make another grouping ac-
cording to the element of the agent’s reasoning
process that is referred to: preferences (1,2,4,5),
associations (3) and the presence of an artwork in
the agent’s knowledge base (6,7). A comparison
between these groups leads to one significant re-

Figure 8: Competence for each strategy, p < 0.01
for scenario 1. Between scenarios strategies 4, p <
0.05, and 6, p < 0.01, differ.

sult: in scenario 1, strategies that use preferences
score significantly higher on competence than the
strategies from the other groups (Kruskal-Wallis
p < 0.01, Kruskal-Wallis multiple comparisons).

6 Discussion

The results show that the transition strategies that
insist on contrasting characteristics of the artworks
such as a different artist (strategy 9) or period
(strategy 10) lead to scores below average (4.5 on
a scale of 9) with respect to the level of natural-
ness, coherence and smoothness. On the level of
naturalness and smoothness the difference with the
other strategies is significant. This demonstrates
that even when the artist and period of the former
artwork have been discussed just before the tran-
sition strategies, making transition strategies that
are based on (referring back to) the earlier dis-
cussed characteristics (subtopics), does not guar-
antee a natural, coherent and smooth dialogue.

The fact that strategy 8, that presents another
artwork as just being another artwork, scores be-
low average on naturalness and coherence, shows
that ”being an artwork” is not a category that
can sufficiently bind both topics (”category Y” by
Sacks, 1971 in Levinson, 1983). This can have
several reasons: The transition strategy may not
succeed in presenting the former and latter art-
work in being natural fellow members of some
category Y, in this case being an artwork. Cate-
gory Y may need to be a more restrictive (distinc-
tive) category than one to which all topics belong
(all topics are artworks) in order to bind two spe-
cific topics. Or, making both topics natural fellow
members of some category Y may not be sufficient

152



in general to establish a natural and coherent dia-
logue.

A reason why strategy 3 that is based on the as-
sociations of the agent, scores bad on coherence
but well on naturalness and smoothness may be
due to the fact that the participants can find the
association itself incoherent. Due to the contrast-
ing characteristics of the artworks the participants
may find it incoherent that the first artwork re-
minds the agent of the second. However, given
that the strategy is considered natural and smooth
implies that it might be a suitable strategy to con-
nect the discussions of two similar artworks.

The same explanation can be given for the low
scoring of this strategy (3) with respect to the per-
ception of the agent’s level of competence (sce-
nario 1). When the agent associates two artworks
that do not seem alike the agent is perceived less
competent than average.

The strategies that lead to low scores on natu-
ralness, coherence and smoothness of the dialogue
(8, 9 and 10) also score relatively low with respect
to the perception of friendliness, fun and warmth
of the agent. This gives us reasons to suspect that
both aspects are related: when a dialogue is not
considered natural, coherent or smooth, the agent
is not considered as very friendly, fun and warm.

The participants do not perceive the agent sig-
nificantly more or less informed when it uses cer-
tain transition strategies instead of others. This
shows that referring explicitly to the characteris-
tics of the artworks such as its artist (9) or period
(10) does not make the agent look more informed
than when the strategies refer to more subjective
aspects of the agent’s reasoning process, such as
its preferences or associations.

On the contrary, strategies that refer to the pref-
erences of the interaction participants score signif-
icantly higher with respect to the agent’s level of
competence than the strategies that use other vari-
ables from the agent’s reasoning process.

With respect to the consequences of the transi-
tion strategies on the perception of the dialogue
the results have shown no significant difference
among both scenarios. The effects on the percep-
tion of the dialogue that are discussed in this Sec-
tion seem thus generalisable for the domain we
are looking at (Section 4.1). However, for some
transition strategies the perception of the agent
is judged significantly differently among the two
scenarios. For example, strategy 6, a statement of

the fact that the agent has seen some other artwork,
has in some contexts a negative influence on the
agent’s level of fun and competence, where this is
not the case in other contexts. In the two scenarios
that were used for this experiment the type of in-
formation, the utterance types, and the number of
utterances are equal. Therefore, further research
will be needed to show what exactly the underly-
ing reason is that the same strategies lead, in a dif-
ferent scenario, to a difference in the perception of
the agent.

7 Conclusion

In this work we have looked at how a selected
topic of discussion can be introduced by an agent
in an ongoing non-task oriented dialogue. In the
context we are looking at, each topic consists of
the discussion of an artwork from a museum. In-
spired by social and conversational analytic litera-
ture we first constructed a set of candidate transi-
tion strategies. We then checked the consequences
of each of these transition strategies on the percep-
tion of the dialogue and the agent.

We have found that the strategies that score well
on all dimensions and all tested circumstances are
those that ask for the experience of the user, and
those that refer to the preferences of the interaction
participants. Whether the preference is the agent’s
or the user’s, and whether or not the new topic is
preferred over the current one, transition strate-
gies that integrate any type of preference main-
tain the coherence of the dialogue while maintain-
ing/establishing a positive perception of the agent.
The fact that certain transition strategies can con-
nect topics about very different artworks while
maintaining positive perceptions of the dialogue
and the agent, shows that the agent’s topic man-
ager can indeed be allowed to select any topic re-
quired to engage the user at any moment in the
conversation (Glas et al., 2015).

We plan to use the observations we obtained
in this study by automatically generating appro-
priate transition strategies for the conversational
agent whenever the topic manager initiates a topic
switch. The automatic generation of the transition
strategies could be performed by means of tem-
plates where the object names and characteristics
can be generated from the agent’s knowledge base.
In the future we would like to explore the effects
of the timing of the topic switch on the percep-
tion of the topic transition (Clark, 1996). Lastly,

153



we would like to consider the agent’s non-verbal
behaviour with respect to topic switching. Non-
verbal behaviour plays an important role in topic
switching (Kendon, 1972) and in the perception of
verbal behaviour in general (Sidner et al., 2005).

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Sophie Rosset and An-
drew Kehler for valuable discussion, and Brice
Donval and Caroline Langlet for technical sup-
port. We would also like to thank all the partici-
pants of the experiment. This research is partially
funded by the French project Avatar 1:1, ANR
MOCA, and the Labex SMART (ANR-11-LABX-
65) supported by French state funds managed by
the ANR, within the Investissements d’Avenir pro-
gram under reference ANR-11-IDEX-0004-02.

References

Timothy Bickmore and Justine Cassell. 2005. Social
dialongue with embodied conversational agents. In
Advances in natural multimodal dialogue systems,
pages 23–54. Springer.

Alexa Breuing and Ipke Wachsmuth. 2012. Let’s
talk topically with artificial agents! providing agents
with humanlike topic awareness in everyday dia-
log situations. In Proceedings of the 4th interna-
tional conference on agents and artificial intelli-
gence (ICAART), volume 2.

Graham Button and Neil Casey. 1985. Topic nomina-
tion and topic pursuit. Human studies, 8(1):3–55.

Herbert H Clark. 1996. Using language, volume 1996.
Cambridge university press Cambridge.

Angela Downing. 2000. Talking topically. CIRCLE
of Linguistics Applied to Communication (CLAC),
3:31–50.

Susan T Fiske, Amy JC Cuddy, and Peter Glick.
2007. Universal dimensions of social cognition:
Warmth and competence. Trends in cognitive sci-
ences, 11(2):77–83.

Nadine Glas and Catherine Pelachaud. 2015. User en-
gagement and preferences in information-given chat
with virtual agents. In Workshop on Engagement in
Social Intelligent Virtual Agents. Forthcoming.

Nadine Glas, Ken Prepin, and Catherine Pelachaud.
2015. Engagement driven topic selection for an
information-giving agent. In Workshop on the Se-
mantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue (SemDial),
pages 48–57.

Tobias Heinroth, Savina Koleva, and Wolfgang Minker.
2011. Topic switching strategies for spoken dia-
logue systems. In INTERSPEECH, pages 2077–
2080.

Ryuichiro Higashinaka, Kohji Dohsaka, and Hideki
Isozaki. 2008. Effects of self-disclosure and em-
pathy in human-computer dialogue. In Spoken
Language Technology Workshop, 2008. SLT 2008.
IEEE, pages 109–112. IEEE.

Jerry R Hobbs. 1990. Topic drift. Conversational or-
ganization and its development, 38:3–22.

Adam Kendon. 1972. Some relationships between
body motion and speech. Studies in dyadic commu-
nication, 7:177.

Stephen C Levinson. 1983. Pragmatics (Cambridge
textbooks in linguistics). Cambridge University
Press.

Daniel Macias-Galindo, Wilson Wong, John Thangara-
jah, and Lawrence Cavedon. 2012. Coherent topic
transition in a conversational agent. In Proceedings
of the 13th Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association (InterSpeech),
Oregon, USA.

Douglas W Maynard and Don H Zimmerman. 1984.
Topical talk, ritual and the social organization of
relationships. Social psychology quarterly, pages
301–316.

Daniel McFarlane. 2002. Comparison of four primary
methods for coordinating the interruption of people
in human-computer interaction. Human-Computer
Interaction, 17(1):63–139.

Yukiko I Nakano and Ryo Ishii. 2010. Estimat-
ing user’s engagement from eye-gaze behaviors in
human-agent conversations. In Proceedings of the
15th international conference on Intelligent user in-
terfaces, pages 139–148. ACM.

Candace L Sidner, Christopher Lee, Cory D Kidd, Neal
Lesh, and Charles Rich. 2005. Explorations in en-
gagement for humans and robots. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 166(1):140–164.

Jan Svennevig. 2000. Getting acquainted in conversa-
tion: a study of initial interactions, volume 64. John
Benjamins Publishing.

Wilson Wong, Lawrence Cavedon, John Thangarajah,
and Lin Padgham. 2012. Flexible conversation
management using a bdi agent approach. In Intel-
ligent Virtual Agents, pages 464–470. Springer.

Fan Yang, Peter A Heeman, and Andrew Kun. 2008.
Switching to real-time tasks in multi-tasking dia-
logue. In Proceedings of the 22nd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics-Volume 1,
pages 1025–1032. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

154



Appendix A. Website for the experiment

Figure 9: A screenshot of the website for the online experiment. The order of the scenarios and the
selection of transition strategies differ among participants.

155


