



















































Using Parallel Texts and Lexicons for Verbal Word Sense Disambiguation


Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Dependency Linguistics (Depling 2015), pages 82–90,
Uppsala, Sweden, August 24–26 2015.

Using Parallel Texts and Lexicons for Verbal Word Sense Disambiguation

Ondřej Dušek Eva Fučíková Jan Hajič
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics

Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
Malostranské nám. 25

11800 Prague 1, Czech Republic
{odusek,fucikova,hajic,popel,sindlerova,uresova}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz

Martin Popel Jana Šindlerová Zdeňka Urešová

Abstract

We present a system for verbal Word
Sense Disambiguation (WSD) that is able
to exploit additional information from par-
allel texts and lexicons. It is an exten-
sion of our previous WSD method (Dušek
et al., 2014), which gave promising re-
sults but used only monolingual features.
In the follow-up work described here, we
have explored two additional ideas: using
English-Czech bilingual resources (as fea-
tures only – the task itself remains a mono-
lingual WSD task), and using a “hybrid”
approach, adding features extracted both
from a parallel corpus and from manually
aligned bilingual valency lexicon entries,
which contain subcategorization informa-
tion. Albeit not all types of features proved
useful, both ideas and additions have led
to significant improvements for both lan-
guages explored.

1 Introduction

Using parallel data for Word Sense Disambigua-
tion (WSD) is as old as Statistical Machine Trans-
lation (SMT): Brown et al. (1992) analyze texts in
both languages before the IBM SMT models are
trained and used, including WSD driven purely by
translation equivalents.1 A combination of parallel
texts and lexicons also proved useful for SMT at
the time (Brown et al., 1993). In our previous ex-
periments (Dušek et al., 2014), we have shown that
WSD based on a manually created valency lexi-
con (for verbs) can achieve encouraging results.
Combining the above ideas and previous findings
with parallel data and a manually created bilingual
valency lexicon, we have moved to add bilingual

1Given the “automatic” nature of the word senses so de-
rived, no figures on the WSD accuracy within the IBM Can-
dide SMT system had been given in the Brown et al. (1992)
paper.

features to improve on the previous results on the
verbal WSD task. In addition, we have opted for a
new machine learning system, the Vowpal Wabbit
toolkit (Langford et al., 2007).2

In Section 2, we present the annotation frame-
work and the lexicons used throughout this paper.
Section 3 describes our experiments, Section 4
summarizes relevant previous works and Section 5
concludes the paper.

2 Verbal word senses in valency frames

2.1 Prague dependency treebanks and
valency

The Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT 2.0/2.5)
(Hajič et al., 2006) contains Czech texts with rich
annotation.3 Its annotation scheme is based on
the formal framework called Functional Genera-
tive Description (FGD) (Sgall et al., 1986), which
is dependency-based with a “stratificational” (lay-
ered) approach: The annotation contains inter-
linked surface dependency trees and deep syn-
tactic/semantic (tectogrammatical) trees, where
nodes stand for concepts rather than words. The
notion of valency in the FGD is one of the core
concepts on the deep layer; for the purpose of our
experiments, it is important that the deep layer
links each verb node (occurrence) to the corre-
sponding valency frame in the associated valency
lexicon, effectively providing verbal word sense
labeling.

The parallel Prague Czech-English Dependency
Treebank 2.0 (PCEDT 2.0) (Hajič et al., 2012) has
been annotated using the same principles as the
PDT, providing us with manually disambiguated
verb senses on both the Czech and the English
side. The texts are disjoint from the PDT; PCEDT
contains the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) part of
the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993) and its

2http://hunch.net/~vw
3http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0

82



radit2 ACT(1) PAT(4;k+3;aby) ADDR(3)

help1 ACT() PAT() ADDR()

Figure 1: Valency frame examples from PDT-
Vallex and EngVallex (Czech radit = ‘give advice,
help’).

translation into Czech. Sentences have been man-
ually aligned during the human translation pro-
cess, and words have been then aligned automat-
ically using GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003). We
have used valency frame annotation (and other
features) of the PCEDT 2.0 in our previous work;
however, billingual alignment information has not
been used before.

2.2 Valency lexicons

PDT-Vallex4 (Hajič et al., 2003; Urešová, 2011)
is a valency lexicon of Czech verbs (and nouns),
manually created during the annotation of the
PDT/PCEDT 2.0.

Each entry in the lexicon contains a headword
(lemma), according to which the valency frames
(i.e., senses) are grouped. Each valency frame in-
cludes the valency frame members and the follow-
ing information for each of them (see Fig. 1):
• its function label, such as ACT, PAT, ADDR,
EFF, ORIG, TWHEN, LOC, CAUS (actor, pa-
tient, addressee, effect, origin, time, location,
cause),5

• its semantic “obligatoriness” attribute,
• subcategorization: its required surface form(s)

using morphosyntactic and lexical constraints.
Most valency frames are further accompanied by a
note or an example which explains their meaning
and usage. The version of PDT-Vallex used here
contains 11,933 valency frames for 7,121 verbs.

EngVallex6 (Cinková, 2006) is a valency lexi-
con of English verbs based also on the FGD frame-
work, created by an automatic conversion from
PropBank frame files (Palmer et al., 2005) and
subsequent manual refinement.7 EngVallex was
used for the annotation of the English part of the

4http://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/services/
PDT-Vallex

5For those familiar with PropBank, ACT and PAT typi-
cally correspond to Arg0 and Arg1, respectively.

6http://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/services/
EngVallex

7EngVallex preserves links to PropBank and to VerbNet
(Schuler, 2005) where available. Due to the refinement, the
mapping is often not 1:1.

Figure 2: PCEDT trees aligned using the CzEng-
Vallex mapping

PCEDT 2.0. Currently, it contains 7,148 valency
frames for 4,337 verbs. EngVallex does not con-
tain the explicitly formalized subcategorization in-
formation.

2.3 CzEngVallex: Valency lexicon mapping

CzEngVallex (Urešová et al., 2015a; Urešová et
al., 2015b) is a manually annotated Czech-English
valency lexicon linking the Czech and English va-
lency lexicons, PDT-Vallex and EngVallex. It con-
tains 19,916 frame (verb sense) pairs. CzEng-
Vallex builds links not only between correspond-
ing frames but also between corresponding verb
arguments. This lexicon thus provides an inter-
linked database of argument structures for each
verb and enables cross-lingual comparison of va-
lency. As such (together with the parallel corpora
to which it is linked), it aims to serve as a resource
for cross-language linguistic research. Its primary
purpose is linguistic and translatology research.

CzEngVallex is based on the treebank annota-
tion of the PCEDT 2.0, covering about 86.000
aligned verbal pairs in it. Fig. 2 shows an exam-
ple alignment between the English verb reclaim
(sense: get back by force) and its arguments. 3,288
EngVallex and 4,192 PDT-Vallex verbs occur in-
terlinked in the PCEDT 2.0 at least once, amount-
ing to 4,967 and 6,776 different senses, respec-
tively. Token-wise, over 66% of English verbs and
72% of Czech verbs in the PCEDT 2.0 have a ver-
bal translation covered by the CzEngVallex map-
ping.

83



3 Verbal WSD experiments

We are focusing here on measuring the influence
of parallel features on the WSD performance. In
order to compare our results to our previous work,
we use the same training/testing data split, i.e.,
PCEDT 2.0 Sections 02–21 as training data, Sec-
tion 24 as development data, and Section 23 as
evaluation data, and start from the same set of
monolingual features. We also include Czech
monolingual results on PDT 2.5 (default data split)
for comparison. Unlike our previous work using
LibLINEAR logistic regression (Fan et al., 2008),
we apply Vowpal Wabbit (Langford et al., 2007)
for classification.

Note that the input to our WSD system is plain
text without any annotation, and we only use the
gold verb senses from PCEDT/PDT to train the
system. All required annotation for features as
well as word alignment for parallel texts is per-
formed automatically.

3.1 Monolingual experiments

We applied the one-against-all cost-sensitive set-
ting of the Vowpal Wabbit linear classifier with
label-dependent features.8 Feature values are
combined with a candidate sense label from the
valency lexicon. If a verb was unseen in the train-
ing data or is sense-unambiguous, we used the first
or only sense from the lexicon instead of the clas-
sifier.9

The training data were automatically analyzed
from plain word forms up to the PDT/PCEDT-
style deep layer using analysis pipelines imple-
mented in the Treex NLP framework (Popel and
Žabokrtský, 2010).10 The gold-standard sense la-
bels were then projected onto the automatic an-
notation. This emulates the real-world scenario
where no gold-standard annotation is available.

The monolingual feature set of Dušek et al.

8Based on preliminary experiments on development data
sets, we used the following options for training: --passes=4
-b 20 --loss_function=hinge --csoaa_ldf=mc, i.e.,
4 passes over the training data, a feature space size of 220, the
hinge loss function and cost-sensitive one-against-all multi-
class reduction with label-dependent features.

9Cf. total accuracy vs. classifier accuracy in Tables 1
and 2.

10The automatic deep analysis pipelines for both languages
are shown on the Treex demo website at https://lindat.
mff.cuni.cz/services/treex-web/run. They include
part-of-speech taggers (Spoustová et al., 2007; Straková et
al., 2014) and a dependency parser (McDonald et al., 2005),
plus a rule-based conversion of the resulting dependency trees
to the deep layer.

(2014) includes most attributes found in the
PCEDT annotation scheme:

• the surface word form of the lexical verb and all
its auxiliaries,

• their part-of-speech and morphological at-
tributes,

• formemes – compact labels capturing mor-
phosyntactic properties of deep nodes (e.g.,
v:fin for a finite verb, v:because+fin for
a finite verb governed by a subordinating con-
junction, v:in+ger for a gerund governed by a
preposition),11

• syntactic labels given by the dependency parser,
• all of the above properties found in the neigh-

borhood of the verbal deep node (parent, chil-
dren, siblings, nodes adjacent in the word or-
der).

3.2 Using word alignment
This scenario keeps all the previous settings and
includes one more feature type – the translated
lemma from the other language as projected
through word alignment. This feature is also con-
catenated with the candidate sense label from the
lexicon. We reuse the automatic GIZA++ word
alignment from PCEDT 2.0 and project it to the
automatic deep layer annotation using rules imple-
mented in the Treex framework.

Since GIZA++ alignment can be obtained in
an unsupervised fashion, this still corresponds to
a scenario where no previous word alignment is
available. Our experience from the CzEngVallex
project (see Section 2.3), where GIZA++ align-
ment links were corrected manually, suggests that
the automatic alignment is quite reliable for verbs
(less than 1% of alignment links leading from
verbs required correction).

3.3 Combining alignment with valency
lexicon mapping

This setting includes the aligned lemma features
and adds a single binary feature that combines par-
allel data information from PCEDT 2.0 with the
CzEngVallex valency lexicon mapping (see Sec-
tion 2.3).

For each verbal sense from the PDT-Vallex and
EngVallex lexicons, we created a list of all lemmas
from the other language corresponding to senses
connected to this sense through the CzEngVallex

11See (Dušek et al., 2012) for a more detailed description
of formemes.

84



Unl-F1 Lab-F1 TotAcc ClAcc
previous 94.53 80.30 84.95 80.03
Monolingual 95.84 82.39 85.97 81.38
+ aligned lemmas* 95.84 82.59 86.18 81.65
+ val. lexicon** 95.84 82.93 86.53 82.14

Table 1: Experimental results for English
All numbers are percentages. Unl-F1 and Lab-F1 stand for
unlabeled and labeled sense detection F1-measure, respec-
tively (see Section 3.4 for details). TotAcc is the total accu-
racy (including 1st frame from the lexicon in unambiguous
verbs), ClAcc is the classifier accuracy (disregarding unam-
biguous verbs). “*” marks a statistically significant improve-
ment over the Monolingual setting at 95% level, “**” at 99%
level.12

Unl-F1 Lab-F1 TotAcc ClAcc
previous (PDT) 96.90 76.65 79.70 72.41
monoling./PDT 96.94 77.97 80.43 75.64
monoling./PCEDT 97.34 80.22 82.41 78.12
+ aligned lemmas 97.34 80.30 82.50 78.24
+ val. lexicon* 97.34 80.47 82.66 78.45

Table 2: Experimental results for Czech
See Table 1 for a description of labels. We include the perfor-
mance of our Monolingual setting on PDT 2.5 for comparison
with our previous work.

mapping, i.e., a list of “known possible transla-
tions” for this verb sense.

The new binary feature exploits the fact that the
possible translation lists are typically different for
different senses of the same verb: given a verb
token and an aligned token from the other lan-
guage, the feature is set to “true” for those can-
didate senses that have the aligned token’s lemma
on the list of their possible translations.

Since the same feature is shared for all verbs
(only its value varies), it is guaranteed to occur
very frequently, which should increase its useful-
ness to the classifier.

3.4 Results

The results of the individual settings are given in
Tables 1 and 2. The figures include the sense
detection F-measure in an unlabeled (just detect-
ing a verb occurrence whose sense must be in-
ferred) and labeled setting (also selecting the cor-
rect sense) as well as the accuracy of the sense de-
tection alone (in total and in ambiguous verbs with
two or more senses).

We can see that just using the Vowpal Wabbit
classifier with the same features provides a sub-
stantial performance boost. The aligned lemma

features bring a very mild improvement both in
English and Czech (not statistically significant for
Czech). Using the CzEngVallex mapping feature
brings a significant improvement of 0.8% in En-
glish and 0.3% in Czech labeled F1 absolute.12

The lower gain in Czech from both aligned lem-
mas and the CzEngVallex mapping can be ex-
plained by a higher ambiguity on average of the
equivalents used in English (cf. the number of dif-
ferent verbs in PCEDT used in Czech and English
in Section 2.3). The aligned English verbs are thus
not as helpful for the disambiguation of Czech
verbs as is the case in the reversed direction. In
addition, the problem itself seems to be harder for
Czech on the PCEDT data, given the higher num-
ber of senses on average and the higher number of
verbs, i.e., greater data sparsity.

The most probable cause for the low gain from
aligned lemmas is that the aligned lemma fea-
tures are relatively sparse (they are different for
each lemma and the classifier is not able to con-
nect them). On the other hand, the single bi-
nary CzEngVallex feature occurs frequently and
can thus then help even in rare verbs with a low
number of training examples. A more detailed
analysis of the results suggests that this is indeed
the case: in both languages, aligned lemma fea-
tures help mostly for more common verbs whereas
the CzEngVallex mapping feature also improves
WSD of rarer verbs.

For each language, we examined in detail a
sample of randomly selected 30 cases where our
three setups gave different results. The positive
effect brought about by the aligned lemma fea-
tures and the CzEngVallex mapping features was
evident (examples are shown in Figures 3 and 4
for English and Czech, respectively). We could
also find a few cases where the setups using par-
allel features improved even though there was no
helpful aligned translation for the verb in ques-
tion: even the non-presence of information from
the other language can be a hint to the classifier.
We have also found cases where the parallel data
information introduced noise. This was mostly
caused by a translation using an ambiguous verb
(see Figure 5), or a verb that would usually sug-
gest a different sense (see Figure 6). In addition,
we found in our samples one case of alignment er-
ror leading to misclassification and one probable

12We used paired bootstrap resampling (Koehn, 2004) with
1,000 resamples to assess statistical significance.

85



PCEDT annotation error. On the whole, the posi-
tive effects of using information from parallel data
are prevailing.

4 Related work

Within semantic role labeling (SRL) tasks, pred-
icate detection is often part of the task, whereas
WSD is not.13 Due to limited lexicon coverage,
we have used verbs only and evaluated on the
frame (sense) assigned to the occurrence of the
verb in the corpus. While the best results reported
for the CoNLL 2009 Shared task are 85.41%
labeled F1 for Czech and 85.63% for English
(Björkelund et al., 2009), they are not comparable
for several reasons, the main being that SRL eval-
uates each argument separately, while for a frame
to be counted as correct in our task, the whole
frame (by means of its reference ID) must be
correct, which is substantially harder (if only for
verbs). Moreover, we have used a newer version of
the PDT (including PDT-Vallex) and EngVallex-
annotated verbs in the PCEDT, while the English
CoNLL 2009 Shared Task is PropBank-based.14

Dependency information is also often used for
WSD outside of SRL tasks (Lin, 1997; Chen et
al., 2009), but remains mostly limited to surface
syntax.

WSD for verbs has been tackled previously,
e.g. (Edmonds and Cotton, 2001; Chen and
Palmer, 2005). These experiments, however, do
not consider subcategorization/valency informa-
tion explicitly.

Previous work on verbal WSD using the
PDT Czech data includes a rule-based tool of
Honetschläger (2003) and experiments by Se-
mecký (2007) using machine learning. However,
they have used gold-standard annotation for fea-
tures.

The closest approach to ours is by Tufiş et al.
(2004), where both a dictionary (WordNet) and a
parallel corpus is used for WSD on the Orwell’s
1984 novel (achieving a relatively low 74.93%
F1).

Generally, the hybrid approach combining man-
ually created dictionaries with machine learning
has been applied to other tasks as well; we have
already mentioned SMT (Brown et al., 1993). Dic-

13Predicate identification has not been part of the CoNLL
2009 shared task (Hajič et al., 2009), though.

14Please recall that EngVallex is a manually refined Prop-
Bank with different labeling scheme and generally m : n
mapping between PropBank and EngVallex frames.

tionaries have been used in POS tagging (Ha-
jič, 2000). More distant is the approach of, e.g.,
Brown et al. (1992) and Ide et al. (2002), where
parallel text is used for learning supervision, but
not for feature extraction; Diab and Resnik (2002)
use an unsupervised method.

We should also mention the idea of using par-
allel corpora as hidden features, a task first per-
formed by (Brown et al., 1992) for WSD and sub-
sequently in many other tasks, such as named en-
tity recognition (Kim et al., 2012), dependency
parsing (Haulrich, 2012; Rosa et al., 2012) or
coreference resolution (Novák and Žabokrtský,
2014). Cross-language annotation projection is
also a related method: see, for instance, (van der
Plas and Apidianaki, 2014).

5 Conclusions and future work

We can conclude that the “hybrid” system com-
bining the use of a parallel treebank and manually
created bilingual valency lexicon described herein
significantly outperformed the previous results,
where only monolingual data and features have
been used. We compared that to the case where
only lemmas projected through word alignment
are used (to distinguish the contribution of the par-
allel corpus alone vs. the manual lexicon), and
the lemma features alone brought a very mild im-
provement (not statistically significant for Czech).

While it shows the usefulness of manually cre-
ated lexical resources in this particular task,15 we
are planning to extend our WSD system in the fu-
ture in two ways: first, to use automatically trans-
lated texts (instead of a manually translated paral-
lel corpus), and second, to use automatically ex-
tracted valency alignments based on our Czech-
English “manual” experience with CzEngVallex.
In both cases, we would also like to test our ap-
proach on other language pairs (most likely with
English as the one of the languages due to its rich
resources). Both extensions are certainly possible,
and they would allow a fair comparison against
a truly monolingual WSD task without any addi-
tional resources at runtime, but of course it will
have to be seen whether the noise introduced by
these two automatic steps overrides the positive ef-
fects reported here.

15For POS tagging, a “hybrid” combination of a dictionary
and a statistical tagger have also proved successful (Hajič,
2000).

86



EN: But those machines are still considered novelties, [. . . ]
CS: Ale tyto stroje [. . . ] jsou stále považovány (‘believe to be’) za novinky.

• Wrongly classified as consider1 (‘think about’) in the monolingual setting, corrected as consider2
(‘believe to be’) with aligned lemmas and val. lexicon.

EN: This feels more like a one-shot deal.
CS: Ted’ to vypadá (‘looks like’) spíš na jednorázovou záležitost.

• Wrongly classified as feel4 (‘have a feeling’) in the monolingual and aligned lemma settings, cor-
rected as feel5 (‘look like’) with val. lexicon.

Figure 3: Examples of English WSD improved by information from Czech parallel texts (top: aligned
lemma features help with a verb that is relatively frequent in the training data, bottom: the CzEngVallex
mapping feature helps with a rarer verb).

CS: [. . . ] čemu lidé z televizního průmyslu říkají (‘call’) stanice „s nejvyšší spontánní znalostí“.
EN: [. . . ] what people in the television industry call a “top of mind” network.

• Wrongly classified as říkat7 (‘say’) in the monolingual setting, corrected as říkat4 (‘call’) with
aligned lemmas and val. lexicon.

CS: Jestliže investor neposkytne (‘does not provide, give, lend’) dodatečnou hotovost [. . . ]
EN: If the investor doesn’t put up the extra cash [. . . ]

• Wrongly classified as poskytnout2 (‘light verb, give (chance, opportunity etc.)’) in the monolingual
and aligned lemma settings, corrected as poskytnout1 (‘provide, lend’) with val. lexicon.

Figure 4: Examples of Czech WSD improved by information from English parallel text (top: a relatively
frequent verb, bottom: less frequent verb).

EN: Laptops [. . . ] have become the fastest-growing personal computer segment , with sales doubling
this year .

CS: Laptopy [. . . ] se staly, díky letošnímu zdvojnásobení objemu prodeje, nejrychleji rostoucím seg-
mentem mezi osobními počítači .

• Correctly classified as double3 (‘become twice as large’) in the monolingual setting, misclassified
as double2 (‘make twice as large’) with aligned lemmas and val. lexicon. The Czech word zdvojná-
sobení is ambiguous and allows both senses.

CS: Výrobek firmy Atari Corp . Portfolio [. . . ] stojí pouhých 400 $ a běží na třech AA bateriích [. . . ]
EN: Atari Corp. ’s Portfolio [. . . ] costs a mere $ 400 and runs on three AA batteries [. . . ]

• Correctly classified as běžet6 (‘work, function’) in the monolingual and aligned lemmas setting,
misclassified as běžet3 (‘move on foot’) with val. lexicon. The English translation run allows both
senses.

Figure 5: Examples of translations using ambiguous verbs which did not help in WSD (top: English,
bottom: Czech).

87



EN: “We didn’t even get a chance to do the programs we wanted to do.”
CS: „Nedali nám žádnou šanci uskutečnit plány, které jsme měli připravené.“

• Correctly classified as do6 (‘perform (a function), run (a trade)’) in the monolingual and aligned
lemmas setting, misclassified as do2 (‘perform an act’) with val. lexicon. The Czech word uskutečnit
(‘accomplish’) suggests an incorrect reading.

CS: [. . . ] například Iowa zaznamenala [. . . ] nárůst populace o 11000 lidí [. . . ]
EN: Iowa , for instance , saw its population grow by 11,000 people [. . . ]

• Correctly classified as zaznamenat5 (‘light verb, experience (rise, difficulty, gain etc.)’) in the
monolingual and val. lexicon setting, misclassified as zaznamenat1 (‘notice’) with aligned lemmas.
The English verb see would usually suggest the latter sense.

Figure 6: Examples of translations using verbs that would typically suggest a different sense than the
correct one.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Michal Novák for
his help and ideas regarding the Vowpal Wabbit
setup. The work described herein has been sup-
ported by the grant GP13-03351P of the Grant
Agency of the Czech Republic, the 7th Frame-
work Programme of the EU grant QTLeap (No.
610516), and SVV project 260 104 and GAUK
grant 2058214 of the Charles University in Prague.
It is using language resources hosted by the LIN-
DAT/CLARIN Research Infrastructure, Project
No. LM2010013 of the Ministry of Education,
Youth and Sports.

References
A. Björkelund, L. Hafdell, and P. Nugues. 2009. Mul-

tilingual semantic role labeling. In Proceedings of
CoNLL 2009: Shared Task, pages 43–48, Boulder,
Colorado, United States.

P. F. Brown, S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della Pietra, J. D.
Lafferty, and R. L. Mercer. 1992. Analysis, statis-
tical transfer, and synthesis in machine translation.
In Proceedings of the Fourth International Confer-
ence on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in
Machine Translation, pages 83–100.

P. F. Brown, S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della Pietra, M. J.
Goldsmith, J. Hajič, R. L. Mercer, and S. Mohanty.
1993. But dictionaries are data too. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Human Language Technology,
HLT ’93, pages 202–205.

J. Chen and M. Palmer. 2005. Towards robust high
performance word sense disambiguation of English
verbs using rich linguistic features. In Natural Lan-
guage Processing–IJCNLP 2005, pages 933–944.
Springer.

P. Chen, W. Ding, C. Bowes, and D. Brown. 2009.
A fully unsupervised word sense disambiguation
method using dependency knowledge. In Proceed-
ings of Human Language Technologies: The 2009
Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 28–36. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

S. Cinková. 2006. From PropBank to EngValLex:
adapting the PropBank-Lexicon to the valency the-
ory of the functional generative description. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC 2006, Genova, Italy.

M. Diab and P. Resnik. 2002. An unsupervised method
for word sense tagging using parallel corpora. In
Proceedings of the 40th ACL, pages 255–262.

O. Dušek, Z. Žabokrtský, M. Popel, M. Majliš,
M. Novák, and D. Mareček. 2012. Formemes
in English-Czech deep syntactic MT. In Proceed-
ings of the Seventh Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, page 267–274.

O. Dušek, J. Hajič, and Z. Urešová. 2014. Verbal va-
lency frame detection and selection in Czech and
English. In The 2nd Workshop on EVENTS: Defi-
nition, Detection, Coreference, and Representation,
pages 6–11, Baltimore. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

P. Edmonds and S. Cotton. 2001. Senseval-2:
Overview. In The Proceedings of the Second Inter-
national Workshop on Evaluating Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation Systems, SENSEVAL ’01, pages 1–5.

R. E Fan, K. W Chang, C. J Hsieh, X. R Wang, and
C. J Lin. 2008. LIBLINEAR: a library for large lin-
ear classification. The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 9:1871–1874.

J. Hajič, M. Ciaramita, R. Johansson, D. Kawahara,
M. A. Martí, L. Màrquez, A. Meyers, J. Nivre,
S. Padó, J. Štěpánek, P. Straňák, M. Surdeanu,
N. Xue, and Y. Zhang. 2009. The CoNLL-2009

88



shared task: Syntactic and semantic dependencies in
multiple languages. In Proceedings of CoNLL-2009,
Boulder, Colorado, USA.

J. Hajič, E. Hajičová, J. Panevová, P. Sgall, O. Bo-
jar, S. Cinková, E. Fučíková, M. Mikulová, P. Pajas,
J. Popelka, J. Semecký, J. Šindlerová, J. Štěpánek,
J. Toman, Z. Urešová, and Z. Žabokrtský. 2012.
Announcing Prague Czech-English Dependency
Treebank 2.0. In Proceedings of LREC, pages 3153–
3160.

J. Hajič. 2000. Morphological tagging: Data vs. dic-
tionaries. In Proceedings of NAACL, pages 94–101.

J. Hajič, J. Panevová, Z. Urešová, A. Bémová,
V. Kolářová, and P. Pajas. 2003. PDT-VALLEX:
creating a large-coverage valency lexicon for tree-
bank annotation. In Proceedings of The 2nd Work-
shop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, vol-
ume 9, page 57–68.

J. Hajič, J. Panevová, E. Hajičová, P. Sgall, P. Pajas,
J. Štěpánek, J. Havelka, M. Mikulová, Z. Žabokrt-
ský, M. Ševčíková Razímová, and Z. Urešová.
2006. Prague Dependency Treebank 2.0. Number
LDC2006T01. LDC, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

M. W. Haulrich. 2012. Data-driven bitext dependency
parsing and alignment. Ph.D. thesis, Copenhagen
Business School, Department of International Busi-
ness Communication.

V. Honetschläger. 2003. Using a Czech valency lexi-
con for annotation support. In Text, Speech and Di-
alogue, pages 120–125. Springer.

N. Ide, T. Erjavec, and D. Tufiş. 2002. Sense discrim-
ination with parallel corpora. In Proceedings of the
ACL-02 Workshop on Word Sense Disambiguation -
Volume 8, WSD ’02, pages 61–66.

S. Kim, K. Toutanova, and H. Yu. 2012. Multilin-
gual named entity recognition using parallel data
and metadata from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the
50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Long Papers - Volume 1, pages
694–702, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

P. Koehn. 2004. Statistical significance tests for ma-
chine translation evaluation. In Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 388–395.

J. Langford, L. Li, and A. Strehl. 2007. Vowpal Wabbit
online learning project.

D. Lin. 1997. Using syntactic dependency as local
context to resolve word sense ambiguity. In Pro-
ceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics and Eighth
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 64–71,
Madrid, Spain. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

M. P. Marcus, M. A. Marcinkiewicz, and B. Santorini.
1993. Building a large annotated corpus of English:
The Penn Treebank. COMP LING, 19(2):330.

R. McDonald, F. Pereira, K. Ribarov, and J. Hajič.
2005. Non-projective dependency parsing using
spanning tree algorithms. In Proceedings of the con-
ference on Human Language Technology and Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 523–530.

M. Novák and Z. Žabokrtský. 2014. Cross-lingual
coreference resolution of pronouns. In Proceedings
of COLING 2014, the 25th International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics: Technical Pa-
pers, pages 14–24, Dublin, Ireland, August. Dublin
City University and Association for Computational
Linguistics.

F. J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A systematic compari-
son of various statistical alignment models. Comput.
Linguist., 29(1):19–51, March.

M. Palmer, D. Gildea, and P. Kingsbury. 2005. The
proposition bank: An annotated corpus of semantic
roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1):71–106.

M. Popel and Z. Žabokrtský. 2010. TectoMT: modu-
lar NLP framework. Advances in Natural Language
Processing, pages 293–304.

R. Rosa, O. Dušek, D. Mareček, and M. Popel.
2012. Using parallel features in parsing of machine-
translated sentences for correction of grammatical
errors. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on
Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Trans-
lation, SSST-6 ’12, pages 39–48, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

K. K. Schuler. 2005. VerbNet: A Broad-Coverage,
Comprehensive Verb Lexicon. Ph.D. thesis, Depart-
ment of Computer and Information Science, Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

J. Semecký. 2007. Verb valency frames disambigua-
tion. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguis-
tics, (88):31–52.

P. Sgall, E. Hajičová, and J. Panevová. 1986. The
meaning of the sentence in its semantic and prag-
matic aspects. D. Reidel, Dordrecht.

D. J. Spoustová, J. Hajič, J. Votrubec, P. Krbec, and
P. Květoň. 2007. The Best of Two Worlds:
Cooperation of Statistical and Rule-based Taggers
for Czech. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Balto-Slavonic Natural Language Processing: In-
formation Extraction and Enabling Technologies,
pages 67–74, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

J. Straková, M. Straka, and J. Hajič. 2014. Open-
Source Tools for Morphology, Lemmatization, POS
Tagging and Named Entity Recognition. In ACL
2014, pages 13–18. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

89



D. Tufiş, R. Ion, and N. Ide. 2004. Fine-grained
word sense disambiguation based on parallel cor-
pora, word alignment, word clustering and aligned
wordnets. In Proceedings of the 20th COLING’04.

Z. Urešová, O. Dušek, E. Fučíková, J. Hajič, and
J. Šindlerová. 2015a. Bilingual English-Czech va-
lency lexicon linked to a parallel corpus. In Pro-
ceedings of LAW IX - The 9th Linguistic Annotation
Workshop, pages 124–128, Denver, Colorado. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

Z. Urešová, E. Fučíková, and J. Šindlerová. 2015b.
CzEngVallex: Mapping Valency between Lan-
guages. Technical Report TR-2015-58, Charles
University in Prague, Institute of Formal and Ap-
plied Lingustics, Prague. To appear at http://
ufal.mff.cuni.cz/techrep/tr58.pdf.

Z. Urešová. 2011. Valenční slovník Pražského závis-
lostního korpusu (PDT-Vallex). Studies in Compu-
tational and Theoretical Linguistics. Prague.

L. van der Plas and M. Apidianaki. 2014. Cross-
lingual word sense disambiguation for predicate
labelling of French. In TALN-RECITAL, 21ème
Traitement Automatique des Langues Naturelles,
Marseille, 2014.

90


