



















































The Storyline Annotation and Representation Scheme (StaR): A Proposal


Proceedings of 2nd Workshop on Computing News Storylines, pages 67–72,
Austin, TX, November 5, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics

The Storyline Annotation and Representation Scheme (StaR): A Proposal

Tommaso Caselli and Piek Vossen
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

De Boelelaan 1105 1081 HV Amsterdam (NL)
{t.caselli;p.t.j.m.vossen}@vu.nl

Abstract

This paper illustrates a proposal for the de-
velopment of an annotation scheme and a
corpus for storyline extraction and evaluation
from large collections of documents clustered
around a topic. The scheme extends existing
annotation efforts for event coreference and
temporal processing, introducing additional
layers and addressing shortcomings. We also
show how a storyline can be derived from the
annotated data.

1 Introduction

The stream of information is increasing every day
posing difficult challenges for the selection and ex-
traction of relevant information. Relevant informa-
tion can be missed in this vast amount of data, lead-
ing to inconsistencies, fragmented reports, or gaps
in the extraction and representation of complex sto-
ries. Different solutions have been proposed to deal
with this problem ranging from the generation of
multi-document extractive summaries (Barzilay et
al., 1999), to clustering of news with respect to a
topic (Swan and Allan, 2000), to the generation of
timelines to monitor relevant events in a topic (Sha-
haf and Guestrin, 2010; Nguyen et al., 2014; Bauer
and Teufel, 2015).

In this work, we want to expand on a different ap-
proach to select, organize, and represent relevant in-
formation from collections of documents clustered
around a specific topic. Following Vossen et al.
(2015), we adopt the storyline model as a repre-
sentational device to structure the information, and

aim at developing a reference corpus for a quantita-
tive and qualitative evaluation of automatically gen-
erated storylines.

A storyline is as a structured index of chronolog-
ically ordered events which overcomes representa-
tion models based on pure timelines with respect to
three aspects: i.) it is able to identify salient events
(climax events) as the central elements around which
a specific topic develops; ii.) it provides an explana-
tory model for how events connect to each other and
contribute to the development of a topic; and iii.) it
mimics a pervasive phenomenon in human life, i.e.
the use of narrative strategies to organize and make
sense of information.

Previous work in storyline generation is limited
and in most cases what is labelled as a storyline is
a timeline. The main difference is that storylines
and narrative structures exhibit some causal and ex-
planatory relation between events and some tension
towards a resolution, or climax. We have identi-
fied four main contributions (Shahaf et al., 2013;
Huang and Huang, 2013; Hu et al., 2014; Laparra
et al., 2015) in this area proposing methods to gen-
erate storyline datasets. Although each contribution
proposes its own definition of storyline, based on
the sharing of participants, time and location, one
of the commonalities of these works consists of the
use of interactions and connections between cross-
document topic threads or events which give rise to
timelines, i.e. a basic temporal ordering.

Storylines also differ from Narrative
Schemas (Chambers and Jurafsky, 2009). Nar-
rative Schemas qualify as sets of partially ordered
events with no distinction in relevance or salience

67



of their elements and, most importantly, with no
explanatory power of the ways events are connected
together, except for precedence relations. A Nar-
rative Schema looks like an un-prioritized set of
events which share some participants, thus leading
to the development of entity-centric timelines.
Furthermore, the use of entity driven relations (e.g.
co-participation) to generate the schemas often
result in non-coherent chains of events (Peng and
Roth, 2016).

The remainder of this paper will be structured as
follows: in Section 2 we will present the main as-
pects of the storyline model described in (Vossen et
al., 2015) and show how these elements have been
used to develop a proposal to annotate storylines.
Section 3 will report on the preliminary application
of the annotation scheme to a corpus presenting in-
sights on the data and interaction between different
layers of annotation ranging from event coreference
to storyline. Finally, conclusions and future work
will be reported in Section 4.

2 Annotating Storylines: A Proposal

The model described in Vossen et al. (2015) is
grounded on the narratology framework of Bal
(1997) which assumes that every narrative, regard-
less of the media and content, is a mention of a fab-
ula, i.e., a sequence of chronologically ordered and
logically connected events involving one or more ac-
tors. A fabula is a complex structure whose internal
components can be decomposed in three main ele-
ments: i.) the rising action(s), the event(s) that in-
creases the tension created by a predicament; ii.) the
climax, the event(s) which creates the maximal level
of tension; and iii.) falling action(s), the event(s)
which resolve the climax and lower the narrative ten-
sion.

These narratological concepts have been trans-
lated in the storyline model by providing a definition
and a formalization for the following basic compo-
nents:

• events, participants (actors), locations and
time-points (settings);
• the anchoring of events to time and their order-

ing (a timeline);
• bridging relations: a set of relations be-

tween events with explanatory and predictive

value(s).

The proposed annotation scheme aims at ground-
ing these concepts to linguistic elements in doc-
ument collections. The scheme has been de-
veloped to maximize compatibility with exist-
ing annotation efforts on event and temporal
processing, such as the Richer Event Descrip-
tion (RED) 1, THYME (Styler IV et al., 2014),
and TimeML (Pustejovsky et al., 2003a), and
event coreference, such as the Event CorefBank+
(ECB+) (Cybulska and Vossen, 2014b).

2.1 STaR: The Storyline Annotation and
Representation Scheme

The Storyline Annotation and Representation
Scheme (StaR) builds on and extends the ECB+
annotation scheme (Cybulska and Vossen, 2014a).
The ECB+ scheme addresses event coreference both
at the in- and cross-document levels. Event action
coreference is specified as two action mentions
which occur/hold true: i.) at the same time; ii.)
in the same location; and iii.) with the same
actors/participants. Thus, ECB+ data provides
access to the first basic elements of the storyline
model, i.e., events, participants (actors), locations,
and time.

The timeline reconstruction is done by means
of a temporal relation tag, TLINK, inheriting its
semantics from TimeML. Although largely used
and adapted to other languages, TimeML-annotated
corpora suffer from sparse annotations and poorly
connected event/time graphs. For instance, not
every event mention is properly anchored to a
temporal expression, nor are instructions on when
annotated ordering relations between events clearly
defined. In addition to this, the set of temporal
relations adopted by TimeML is very fine-grained,
with a total of 13 different values. To overcome
these shortcomings of the TimeML annotation,
we have designed our guidelines following two
principles: i.) each event mention must be an-
chored to its time of occurrence; ii.) temporal
ordering relations must be annotated only when
in presence of linguistic evidence, thus limiting
inferences. As such, no temporal relation should
be annotated on the basis of world knowledge only.

1https://goo.gl/iWUCFr

68



Furthermore, the set of temporal values has been
limited to 8 values (BEFORE, AFTER, OVERLAP,
BEFORE OVERLAP, BEGINS ON, ENDS ON,
SIMULTANEOUS, INCLUDES). We also annotate
temporal relations between events and the Docu-
ment Creation Time (DCT). The DCT represents a
special temporal anchor for actions which expresses
a broad temporal dimension (e.g. Present, Past, or
Future with respect the time the author created and
published the text).

Following the proposal in Cassidy et al. (2014),
we also annotate transitive closure relations between
pairs of events to develop highly connected event
graph. This means that in case of two pairs of events
A BEFORE B and B BEFORE C, we explicitly mark
the transitive closure relation A BEFORE C.

Finally, we extend the TLINK tag with the at-
tribute contextualModality, from the RED
scheme. It has 4 values: ACTUAL, UNCERTAIN,
HYPOTHETICAL, and GENERIC. The attribute al-
lows to represent claims of different sources con-
cerning the reality or certainty of a temporal rela-
tion. The assignment of the contextual modality val-
ues is connected to the factuality profile of the events
in the temporal relation but, at the same time, it is
assumed to be independent from this latter aspect.
The focus is on the factuality of the temporal rela-
tion itself. Consider the following examples from
two documents about the 2013 Brooklyn riot from
ECB+:

1. officers shot and killed a 16-year-old Kimani
Gray in Brooklyn because he allegedly pointed
a gun at the cops. [ecbplus19 10.xml - sentence
2]
TLINK: pointed BEFORE shot - UNCERTAIN

2. Gray pointed a .38-caliber revolver at the cops
before they opened fire [ecbplus19 4.xml -
sentence 7]
TLINK: pointed BEFORE opened fire -
ACTUAL

ECB+ cross-document event coreference annota-
tion tells us that both mentions of pointed are coref-
erential, as well as shot and opened fire. The time-
line of the events is exactly the same, as expressed
by the BEFORE relation, due to the presence of ev-
idence such as “because” and “before”. However,

the factuality of the TLINK is different in the two
sources: in example 1. the temporal relation as-
sumes an uncertain value while in example 2. is fac-
tual. Modeling these differences is a key element for
storyline generation as these disagreements can be
used to facilitate the identification of both relevant
and interesting information and account for differ-
ent perspectives on the same topic.

Bridging relations are modeled with a new link
tag PLOT LINK. The tag connects the event men-
tions in a document in order to reconstruct the tri-
partite structure of the fabula: rising actions, cli-
max, and falling action. Two values are associ-
ated to the tag: PRECONDITION, which marks
rising action relations, i.e., events which are cir-
cumstantial to, cause or enable another event, and
FALLING ACTION, which explicitly mark specu-
lations and consequence relations, i.e. events which
are the (anticipated) outcome or the effect of an-
other event. The scheme is silent and neutral with
respect to the climax event, i.e. no prior assump-
tion is done. The identification of the climax event,
or events, of the topic will emerge from the anno-
tated data and it should correspond to the event(s)
that has most incoming PRECONDITION (i.e. it is
the target element of the relation) and/or outgoing
FALLING ACTION (i.e. it is the source element of
the relation) links. PLOT LINKs must be grounded
on some evidence and not performed on the basis
of world knowledge alone. In particular, two event
mentions may stand in a PLOT LINK relation if: i.)
they share at least one participant (co-participation);
or ii.) they stand in a causal or temporal relation; or
iii.) if they stand in an entailment relation2. Re-
calling examples 1. and 2., the annotation of the
PLOT LINK is as follows:

1a source: pointed PRECONDITION target: shot
source: pointed PRECONDITION target:
killed
source: shot FALLING ACTION target: killed

2a source: pointed PRECONDITION target:
opened fire

This will result in 3 PLOT LINKs for the
event shot/opened fire (2 PRECONDITION and 1

2We assume that not all co-participation relation may stand
in an entailment relation.

69



FALLING ACTION), 1 PLOT LINKs for the event
killed, and no PLOT LINK for pointed. On the basis
of the available data, shot/opened fire qualifies as the
climax event.

3 The corpus: from ECB+ to ECBStaR

The ECB+ corpus contains 984 news articles and
43 topics, where each topic contains documents re-
porting on two different “seminal events” or topics.
For instance, topic 19 in ECB+ contains two clus-
ters of articles dealing with two different riots (one
in Greece and one in Brooklyn). ECB+ annotation is
performed through an event-centric approach. Only
sentences containing mentions of the target semi-
nal events were annotated, including any other event
mention occurring in the same sentence. This has
lead to a relevance based annotation: only a sub-
set of the sentences in a document is annotated, i.e.,
those mentioning the target topic, while the rest is ig-
nored. All event mentions in the selected sentences
are annotated, not only those explicitly referring to
the target topic. The outcome of this approach re-
sulted in 3,487 annotated event mentions, with 2,050
coreference relations (in- and cross-document).

In Figure 1 we graphically illustrate how story-
lines can be reconstructed as an outcome of the an-
notation and interaction between the different layers.
The top part of the figure contains sentences from
different articles. To simplify the representation, we
have only marked events (in bold) and temporal ex-
pressions (in italics). The bottom part of the picture
contains a representation for event coreferece, time-
line, and storyline. by creating unique representa-
tions (i.e. instance identifiers).

Each document timeline is merged together into
a unique topic/seminal event timeline based on the
event coreference data. Timeline representation fol-
lows the event-centric annotation of ECB+ but en-
riches it with time anchoring and ordering rela-
tions. In particular: i.) each event instance is as-
sociated to its correct time anchor (e.g. “2013-03-
09 E1”); ii.) ordering relations based on prece-
dence relations (i.e., BEFORE or AFTER) among in-
stances are represented with numerical indexes (e.g.
“1 2013-03-09 E1” -“2 2013-03-09 E6”). In case
other types of temporal relations hold between pairs
of events, the same numerical index is assigned to

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Storyline reconstruction and representa-
tion.

all events. The specific temporal value is not lost
and can be accessed by inspecting the binary rela-
tions between the events 3. Finally, on the basis of
the PLOT LINK annotations, a storyline can be re-
constructed. In our specific case, we have identi-
fied 2 climax events (“shot” and “march”) as both
events obtained the same score. Each climax event
is then associated to a list PRECONDITIONs and/or
FALLING ACTIONS. The connection between cli-
max events is guaranteed by the timeline data. Fur-
thermore, it is interesting to notice that climax iden-
tification is not based on the number of event men-
tions (i.e., the event with highest number of men-
tions in the document collection) but on the infor-
mation derived from PLOT LINKs.

The annotation effort to develop the ECBStaR
corpus is still at an early stage. So far, only 3 seminal
events4 for which the DCT was available have been
enriched with TLINKs and PLOT LINKs, resulting
in 33 annotated documents, 3 storylines (one per
seminal events), 1,229 TLINKs, 317 PLOT LINKs,
with 223 falling action relations, 46 precondition
relations, and 5 climax events. The first interest-
ing data concerns the amount of TLINKs. Story-
line annotation aims at creating densely connected
temporal relation graphs, to avoid shortcomings of

3This is not illustrated in the figure to facilitate the reading.
4The seminal events corresponds to the ECB+ data for topics

19, 37, and 41.

70



previous temporal annotation initiatives based on
TimeML which lacked densed connections among
the annotated data.

Concerning the PLOT LINK annotation, the large
amount of falling action relations can be explained
by taking into account two factors. The first con-
cerns the nature of news data. News is published
quickly, and often information about preconditions
are lacking or irrelevant. Furthermore, in case of
long lasting stories, such as wars, we have access to
a limited set of articles concerning a specif sub-event
(in our case the bombing in a South Sudan refugee
camp - topic 41), thus preventing the identification
of rising action relations because this information
is considered to be active in the shared knowledge
and irrelevant for the current document. The sec-
ond factor concerns the specific topic which gives
rise to the storyline. For instance, natural disaster
storylines will barely have mentions of precondition
actions as most of the time natural disasters are re-
ported as things that simply occur.

4 Conclusion and Future Work

This paper reports on a proposal of an annotation
scheme to develop a reference corpus for storylines
from large document collections. The availability of
a such a reference corpus will allow a qualitative and
quantitative evaluation of storylines, taking into ac-
count the two key dimensions: timelines and fabula,
i.e., the identification of the climax events and the
explanatory connections with other events.

One additional insight we hope to achieve with
the ECBStaR corpus is the identification of special-
ized event patterns for different storylines, thus con-
tributing to new models of knowledge template ac-
quisition.

Finally, we are planning to extend the collected
data per topic in time. In particular, we aim at har-
vesting additional documents related to each seminal
events to extend the time span of the topic and better
monitor the evolution of the story.

References
Mieke Bal. 1997. Narratology: Introduction to the the-

ory of narrative. University of Toronto Press.
Regina Barzilay, Kathleen R McKeown, and Michael El-

hadad. 1999. Information fusion in the context of

multi-document summarization. In Proceedings of the
37th annual meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics on Computational Linguistics, pages
550–557. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sandro Bauer and Simone Teufel. 2015. A methodology
for evaluating timeline generation algorithms based on
deep semantic units. In Proceedings of the 53rd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Pa-
pers), pages 834–839, Beijing, China, July. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.

Taylor Cassidy, Bill McDowell, Nathanael Chambers,
and Steven Bethard. 2014. An annotation framework
for dense event ordering. In Proceedings of the 52nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 501–506,
Baltimore, Maryland, June. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2009. Unsu-
pervised learning of narrative schemas and their par-
ticipants. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of
the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing of the AFNLP: Volume 2-Volume 2, pages 602–
610. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Agata Cybulska and Piek Vossen. 2014a. Guidelines
for ECB+ annotation of events and their coreference.
Technical Report NWR-2014-1, VU University Ams-
terdam.

Agata Cybulska and Piek Vossen. 2014b. Using a
sledgehammer to crack a nut? Lexical diversity and
event coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the
9th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC2014), Reykjavik, Iceland, May 26-31.

Po Hu, Min-Lie Huang, and Xiao-Yan Zhu. 2014. Ex-
ploring the interactions of storylines from informative
news events. Journal of Computer Science and Tech-
nology, 29(3):502–518.

Lifu Huang and Lian’en Huang. 2013. Optimized
event storyline generation based on mixture-event-
aspect model. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 726–735, Seattle, Washington, USA, Octo-
ber. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Egoitz Laparra, Itziar Aldabe, and German Rigau. 2015.
From timelines to storylines: A preliminary proposal
for evaluating narratives. In Proceedings of the First
Workshop on Computing News Storylines, pages 50–
55, Beijing, China, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Kiem-Hieu Nguyen, Xavier Tannier, and Veronique
Moriceau. 2014. Ranking multidocument event de-

71



scriptions for building thematic timelines. In Proceed-
ings of COLING‘14, pages 1208–1217.

Haoruo Peng and Dan Roth. 2016. Two discourse driven
language models for semantics. In Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
290–300, Berlin, Germany, August. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

James Pustejovsky, José Castao, Robert Ingria, Roser
Saurı̀, Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, and Graham
Katz. 2003a. TimeML: Robust Specification of Event
and Temporal Expressions in Text. In Fifth Interna-
tional Workshop on Computational Semantics (IWCS-
5).

Dafna Shahaf and Carlos Guestrin. 2010. Connect-
ing the dots between news articles. In Proceedings
of the 16th ACM SIGKDD international conference
on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 623–
632. ACM.

Dafna Shahaf, Jaewon Yang, Caroline Suen, Jeff Ja-
cobs, Heidi Wang, and Jure Leskovec. 2013. In-
formation cartography: creating zoomable, large-scale
maps of information. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge dis-
covery and data mining, pages 1097–1105. ACM.

William F Styler IV, Steven Bethard, Sean Finan, Martha
Palmer, Sameer Pradhan, Piet C de Groen, Brad Er-
ickson, Timothy Miller, Chen Lin, Guergana Savova,
et al. 2014. Temporal annotation in the clinical do-
main. Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2:143–154.

Russell Swan and James Allan. 2000. Automatic gen-
eration of overview timelines. In Proceedings of the
23rd annual international ACM SIGIR conference on
Research and development in information retrieval,
pages 49–56. ACM.

Piek Vossen, Tommaso Caselli, and Yiota Kontzopoulou.
2015. Storylines for structuring massive streams of
news. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Com-
puting News Storylines, pages 40–49, Beijing, China,
July. Association for Computational Linguistics.

72


